THE NEW HELP TO DISCOURSE OR, WIT, MIRTH, and JOLLITY. intermixed with more
serious Matters, Consisting of pleasant Astrological, Astronomical,
Philosophical, Grammatical, Physical, Chyrurgical, Historical, Moral, and
Poetical Questions and Answers.

AS ALSO Histories, Poems, Songs, Epitaphs, Epigrams, Anagrams, Acrosticks,
Riddles, Jests, Poesies, Complements, etc. With several other Varieties
intermixed;

Together with The Country Man's Guide; CONTAINING Directions for the true
knowledge of several Matters concerning Astronomy and Husbandry, in a more
plain and easy Method than any yet extant.

By W. W. Gent.

The Second Edition.

That Author best of all does write, Who mixeth Profit with Delight.

London, Printed by T. S. and sold by the Booksellers of London and
Westminster, 1680.

THE NEW HELP TO DISCOURSE.
Quest. WHat is the chief end of writing Books?

Answ. For instruction and information; whereas idle Books are no other than
corrupted Tales in Ink and Paper; or indeed Vice sent abroad with a License,
wherein two are guilty of evil, he that writes them, and he that reads them;
being in effect like the brutish sin of Adultery, wherein two are concerned in
the same sin; and therefore his resolution was good who said, That for bad
Books he would write none, lest he should thereby hurt others in the reading of
them; nor would he read any of them, for fear the Author should answer for his
sin, by being corrupted by them.

Quest. What Book of all others is the best?

Answ. The Holy Scriptures, contained in (...) Old and New Testament, wherein
the Mysteries of our Salvation are contained, being the Book of all books, and
in compa^^^on of which no book is comparable.

Qu. Of how many chapters does this Book consist?

An. In the Old Testament or Bible, there are 777. In the new Testament 260. In
the Books of Apocrypha 173. The total being 1210. And for the number of Verses
in the Old Testament, the Jewish Rabbis have computed them thus: In the Books
of the Law, Verses 5845. In the Prophets, 9294. and in Haggai 8064. Total 23203.

Q. Are there no other Books mentioned in the Old Testament, but those which we
have now at this day?

A. Yes: there were the Books of Iddo and Gad the Seers; besides, Solomon wrote
three thousand Parables, and five thousand Songs, with a Book of the Nature of
all Herbs, Trees, and Plants, from the Cedar to the Hysop upon the wall. Samuel
also writ a Book of the Office and Institution of a King. There were also
Chronicles of the Kings of Judah and Israel, besides those we have in the
Scripture, being, as is judged, written far larger; all which Were supposed to
be lost in the Jewish Captivity at Babylon.

Q. What was St. Augustine 's answer to one who demanded what God did before he
made the World?

A. That he was ordaining a Hell for such kind of Enquirers. Where the
Scripture has not a mouth to speak, we ought no^ to have a tongue to ask.

Q. What was the greatest love that ever w^ shown in this World?

A. The love of God to poor sinners, wh^ gave his only begotten Son to dye for
us of which one thus writes:

God is my gift, himself he freely gave me,
Gods gift am I, and none but God shall have me.
Q. In what things had woman the Pre-eminence of man in the Creation?

A. In these three: First, that whereas man 'was made of the dust or slime of
the earth, woman was made of that dust or slime refined. Secondly, man was made
out of Paradise, woman in Paradise. And thirdly, when God is said to be about
to make woman, he is said to build her, as being about to make a curious
Edifice, or more excellent structure than that of man.

Q. What Book next to the Holy Scripture would you chiefly desire, the rest
being taken away?

A. Theodore Beza being asked this question, answered, Plutarch, an excellent,
Author for his Lives and Morals. Another said Seneca, whose divine Sentences in
his Book are so squared by the Rules of Christianity, that St. Hierom concluded
him amongst the Catalogue of Divine Writers. Another preferred the Thesaurus
Historiarum, being a Compendium of most Histories and worthy Examples: And that
Ornament of History, Dr. Heylin, gives the preheminency to Sir Walter
Rawleigh's History of the World, which he calls Primus in Historia.

Q. St. Bernard a learned Father of the Church greatly wondered at three
Conjunctions, the like whereof never was, nor never will be: and what were they?

A.

1. Conjunction of God and man. 2. Of a Mother and a Virgin. 3. Of Faith and
the heart of man to believe the same.
The first whereof is most wonderful, that the Deity should be joined to the
Humanity, Heaven to Earth, Majesty to Infirmity. The second also very
wonderful, that a Maid should be a Mother, and yet remain a pure Virgin. The
third (though inferior to the two first) yet wonderful that a man's heart should
have power to believe the same.

Reason does marvel how Faith tell can,
That a Maid should be a Mother, God a man;
But cease so to marvel, and believe the wonder,
For Faith is above, and Reason is under.
Q. How long (according to the opinion of some men) shall the world continue
from the Creation to the end thereof?

A. The Thalmudists were of opinion that it should continue six thousand years;
of which opinion also were some of the fathers and others of our Modern
Writers; because that as God created the World in six days, and rested the
seventh; so in six thousand years, which are in account of God but as six
days, it shall again be annihilated, when shall follow an eternal Sabbath of
rest to all the Faithful. Others reckon it after this manner, two thousand
years before the Law, two thousand years under the Law, and two thousand years
under the Gospel. But this account agrees not right with the Calendar of Time,
and therefore we may conclude that those who account not right the years which
are past must needs be ignorant of those which are to come. Besides, our
Savior says, that of that day and hour the very Angels in Heaven themselves
are ignorant: Let us therefore rather labor to prepare our selves against that
day, than curiously seek to pry into such hidden and unrevealed things.

Q. In what part of the world was it where the Cock crowed so loud, that all
the men of the world heard it?

A. In Noah's Ark.

Q. What is the Anagram for the name of the Virgin Mary?

A.

MARY.

Anagramma.

ARMY.

And well her Name an Army does present,
In whom the Lord of Hosts did pitch his tent.
Q. What answer gave Queen Elizabeth, when being a prisoner in the Reign of her
Sister Queen Mary, she was by one of the Bishops demanded her opinion
concerning the real presence of Christ in the Sacrament.

A.

Christ is the Word that spoke it,
He took the Bread and brake it,
And as the Word did make it,
I do believe and take it.
Q. Who are those that cannot, will not, may not, do rightly understand the
ways of God?

A. 1 Dead men, who neither do, nor can understand his ways.

2 Wicked men, who may, but care not to understand them.

3 Fools, who desire, but have not the apprehension to do it.

4 The godly who both understand and practice the same.

Q. How many sorts of Fasts are used in the world?

A. Six. The sick man's Fast, the poor man's Fast, the misers Fast, the gluttons
Fast, the hypocrites Fast, and the godly man's Fast; all which are set down in
these following Verses.

Experience out of Observation says,
Six sorts of people keep their Fasting days,
Which if you will in order have them shown,
Then thus they are distinguished every one.
The sick man fasts because he cannot eat,
The poor man fasts because he wants meat.
The miser fasts with greedy mind to spare,
The glutton fasts to eat a greater share.
The hypocrite he fasts to seem more holy,
The righteous man to punish sinful folly.
Q. Who be those that lie most freely, and without control?

A.

1. Great men, that few dare reprove. 2. Old men, that few can gainsay. 3.
Poets, who do it Poetica Licentia. 4. Travelers that may lie by authority.
Q. What two things are those by which many persons are quite ruined, and lost
both in their Estates and Reputations?

A. Hounds and Dice; of the first of which one thus writes:

It is not poor Actaeon 's case alone,
Hounds have devoured more Masters sure than one.
And for Dice, the far worse of the two, it is almost an infallible forerunner
of misery, accompanied with cursed swearing, banning, fighting, and many other
mischiefs attendant to it, the final end of it being beggary, according as one
thus Writes:

Ludens taxillis been respi^e quid sit in illis,
Spes tua, res tua, sors tua, mors tua pendet ab illis.
In English.

He may suppose who ventureth at Dice,
Hope, health, wealth, life may be lost in a trice.
Some to evade these reasons pretend a cunning that they have in the Art, to
which I answer, That the more cunning any is in this Art, the more wicked he is
in his life, and therefore I conclude, that the best cast at Dice, is to cast
them quite away.

Q. What witty invention was that of him who having placed the Emperor and the
Pope reconciled in their Majestic Thrones, placed the States of the world
before them, and what was their several Motto's?

A.

1 A Counselor of State had this, I advise you. 2 Then a Courtier, with, I
flatter you. 3 Then a Husbandman, I feed you. 4 Then a Merchant, I match you. 5
Then a Lawyer, I fleece you. 6 Then a Soldier, I fight for you. 7 Then a
Physician, I kill you. 8 Then a Priest, I absolve you all.
Q. Who was he that in the confusion of Tongues, kept both his Language and
Religion pure and unchangeable?

An. Heber the Father of Abraham, who when all the rest of the world fell to
Idolatry, relapsed not from the truth, but kept himself free from the impiety
of Nimrod and his followers, who sought to erect a Building that should reach
to Heaven, but could not go forward with their design, being confounded with
the diversity of Languages which was sent amongst them, whereby one understood
not the other; Of which thus writes the Divine Du Bartus:

Bring me (quoth he) a Tro^el, quickly, quick;
One brings him up a Hammer: hew this Brick
Another bids, and then they cleave a Tree;
Make fast this Rope, and then they let it flee;
One calls for Planks, another Mortar lacks,
They bring, the first a Stone, the last an Ax.
Q. In what place (according to the opinion of some) shall the General Judgment
of mankind be?

A. In the Valley of Jehosaphat, because it is said in one place of the
Scripture, Behold, I will bring all Nations together in the Valley of
Jehosaphat, and plead with them there; though others with more reason do think
that the place as well as the time is unknown.

Q. Which deserves the greatest punishment, the body or soul, for the
committting of sin?

A. Some are of opinion the Soul; because without it the Body were nothing,
which actuates only what the Soul infuseth. Others would have the Body, as
being the chief organ and actor of sin: but that they are both culpable and
deserve alike punishment, is proved by this similitude. A master commits the
charge of his Orchard to be kept by two, whereof the one is blind, the other
lame: The lame man having persect sight, sees golden Apples hanging upon a
Tree, of which he informs the man that is blind; they both covet after them,
notwithstanding they are forbidden, and to attain their desires, the blind man
that was strong of his limbs, takes up the seeing Cripple on his shoulders, by
which means they accomplish their desires, pluck the Fruit, and eat thereof:
Soon after, the Master of the Orchard enters, enquires, and soon finds by whom
it was done; they were both equally culpable, and so are punished with alike
punishment, according as they had equally deserved. In like manner, both Body
and Soul lending their furtherance to sin, being alike guilty, are inseparably
punished together for ever.

Q. What ways did Philip King of Macedon use, that he might not forget his
mortality?

A. He had every morning a Page which used to awake him with these words,
Remember, Sir, that you are a man; according as writes.

Philip King of Macedon,
Was daily ro^^s'd and called upon
By a shrill Page, whose Bonjours ran,
Remember, Sir, you are a man.
Q. What said the same King Philip, when his Horse casting him on the ground,
he saw the print of his body in the dust?

A. See (said he) we covet the whole earth and how little suffices!

Q. Whether do fools profit more by wise men, or wise men by fools?

A. Cato who himself was a wise man, says, that fools are the most profitable
to wise men, who seeing their folly endeavor to avoid it; whereas fools on the
Contrary can make no profit of the wisdom of the wise, by reason of their folly.

Q. How came Beda that ancient Father of the English Church, to be called
Venerabilis?

A. Some assign this reason, that when he was old he became blind, and keeping
an unhappy Boy to guide him as he walked abroad, this Boy one day led him to
preach to a heap of stones, where concluding his Sermon with Gloria Patri, he
was by them answered, Amen, Amen, Venerabilis Beda. Others say, that at his
death an unlearned Monk going about to write an Epitaph on him, blunder'd thus
far on a Verse,

Hic sunt in Fossa -- Bedae ossa. leaving a space before the two last words,
and so went to bed, which in the morning he found supplied by an unknown hand,
with the Title of Venerabilis, so he made his verse and Beda got his name.

Q. What Persons of all others do lie in the greatest state?

A. Beggars, who have the Heavens for their Canopy.

Q. What is that which has a voice, but no Body; speaks, yet understands not
itself what it says; is often heard but never seen?

A. It is an Echo said by Ovid to be a fair Maid that pined her self away to
nothing for love.

Qu. Who are those amongst men that attempted to fly like birds?

A. Daedalus and Icarus; Also one of our British Kings (if the History of
Geoffry of Monmouth be true) who attempting to play the Fowl, or rather the
Fool, fell down and brake his neck. This King's name was Bladud. It is also
said, that of late years an Italian flew from the top of St. Mark's Tower in
Venice, and did it without hurt.

Q. What likeness have false men to countterfeit money?

A.

Man and money a mutual falsehood show,
Man makes false money, money makes man so.
Q. To what are Soldiers in peace compared unto?

A. To Chimneys in Summer; for though in hot weather we have no extraordinary
need of Chimneys, yet we do not pull them down, as knowing that Winter will
come; in like manner Soldiers are continued in Peace, either to prevent, or to
be ready if War do come.

Q. Amongst all Beasts and Birds, which are of most beautiful and various
colors, yet not without some parts of great deformity?

A. The Peacock among Birds, and the Panther among Beasts; the first has a
very goodly Train, but foul Feet. The other a gay Body, but deformed Head; and
therefore it is said, that wanting Food, and being a Beast but of slow pace,
she hides her head, whereat all the other Beasts come about her to wonder at
her Beauty, but coming within the reach of her Claws, she catches them, and
makes them become her food.

Q. To what are outside Gallants likened unto?

A. To Cinnamon trees, whose bark is better than their whole body.

Q. What was the old saying concerning Friends?

A. That it was good to have Friends, but bad to need their help, since true
friendship indeed is very rare. No such friends to be found now adays as was
Damon and Pythias; Alexander and Lodowick; Musidorus and Pyrocles. Friendship
extending now no further than profit, according as one wittily versifies.

Friends like to leaves that on the Trees do grow
In Summers prosperous state, much love will show;
But art thou in adversity, then they
Like leaves from trees in Autumn fall away.
He happy is that has a friend indeed,
But he more happy that no friend does need.
Q. What makes silver look so pale?

A. To this Diogenes the Cynick answers, that it is because so many lies in
wait for it.

Q. Why is it said, it is good to have a wolf cross the way, and bad to have a
Hare cross it?

A. By this is meant that when a Wolf crosses away from us, it is good luck
that we escape him; and if a Hare, it is bad luck that that scapes us: but for
any future things that is boded by them, I am of the opinion of Cato, who when
one would needs know what harm attended him by reason that Rats had gnawn his
Hose, he answered; That it was no strange thing to see that, but it had been
much more strange, if his Hose had eaten the Rats.

Q. Who was the two men, the one whereof was never born, but died; the other
was born but never died?

Ans. Adam and Enoch.

Q. Why do so many men praise poverty, and yet covet after riches?

A. Their actions show they mean not as they say; for although the poor are
accounted blessed, yet most of them are of Ovid's mind:

Non tamen haec tanti est, pauper ut esse velim.
Though blessings be for them in store,
To be their Heir I Would not be poor.
Q. Who was the greatest Traveller in his time?

A. Sir Francis Drake who first put a Girdle about the world; of whom a Wit in
that Age thus descants:

Drake, who the encomapss'd Earth so fully knew,
And whom at once both Poles of Heaven did view!
Should men forget thee, Sol could not forbear
To Chronicle his Fellow-Traveller.
Q. What is the most beautiful thing in the world?

A. One said, the Sun; which if so, then were blind men of all others most
miserable; but certainly virtue is most resplendent of all things, and which is
to be discerned by the eyes of the Soul, wherein blind men of all others have
the greatest help of Contemplation.

Q. What is the heaviest burden that the earth bears?

A. Sin, which is more ponderous than the biggest Mountains, or greatest Piles
of buildings; for it weighs down even to Hell.

Q. Which is the longest Letter in the Alphabet?

A. The letter L. which is more than a yard long.

Q. Which is the most unnecessary Letter in the Alphabet?

A. K. because C. is of the same sound.

Q. What three Vowels are most pernicious to Debtors?

A. These three, IOV.

Q. What two words are those that trouble the world?

A. Meum and Tuum, Thine and Mine.

Q. What are the principal causes of the greatness of Cities?

A. Although they are many in number, yet they are reduced principally to these
seven.

1. A Navigable River, by which there may be continual concourse of Merchants,
as may be seen by Venice, Amsterdam, Constantinople, and our Metropolitan City
of London, which as it is thought had it not been for the River of Thames,
would not have gone on so forward in the rebuilding, since that terrible
conflagration thereof by fire, which may be evidenced in that the buildings
toward the River side were the first begun, and are the forwardest in
finishing.

2. The Palace of the Prince; for where the Court is, there will be continually
store of Nobility and Gentry, which enriches Tradesmen by selling commodities
to them; one instance whereof we have by Madrid in Spain, which is grown from a
mean Village to a very populous City, only by the Kings Court.

3. The Residence of the Nobility, by whom beautiful Buildings and stately
Structures are raised to the great adornment thereof, as may be seen in the
Cities of Italy, where their Nobles and Gentry constantly reside, as ours do in
Towns and Villages.

4. The Seat or Tribunal of Justice, which invites Lawyers and their Clients
thither in abundance, to the great enriching thereof, as may be evidenced by
the Parliamentary Cities of France, and Spiers in Germany.

5. Universities, or public Schools of Learning, which draw thither the Sons
of several Noble persons and Gentlemen from the adjoining Counties, to the
great benefit and profit thereof, as Paris well knows, Oxford, Collen, and
several other places.

6. Immunities from Taxes and Impositions, which cause many persons to come and
inhabit in such places, their Income being thereby greatest, and their
Privileges most, as in Naples, Florence, and Venice, which being almost
desolate by a Plague, were again very suddenly peopled, by granting Immunities
to all Comers.

7. The last, but not the least, is opinion of Sanctity, as was evidenced in
former times bp the City of Canterbury, to which Pilgrims from all places come
to visit the Tomb of Thomas Becket Archbishop of Canterbury, who was there
enshrined, as witnesses Chaucer.

fro all England do they wend The Holy blissful Martyrs Tomb to see. etc.

And now also of the City of Loretto in Italy which at first was but a mean
Village, but is now grown a rich and populous City, for the opinion that the
chamber of the Virgin Mary is there, the Legend whereof here follows.

This Chamber (they say) was the same wherein the Virgin Mary was saluted by
the Angel, with those joyful tidings of the Conception of our Savior, being
then at Nazareth in Judaea, and was after the Virgins death had in great
Reverence by the Christians, where it remained untouched till all Palestine was
subdued by the Turks and Saracens, Anno 1291. then was it most miraculously
transported into Sclavonia; but that place being unworthy of the Virgins divine
presence, it was by the Angels carried over into the Sea-cost of Italy. An.
1294. but that place proving as bad as the other, being infected with Thieves
and Pirates, the Angels removed it to the little Village of Loretto, where her
miracles being quickly divulged, drew thither a great concourse of People,
insomuch that Paul the second Pope of Rome built over this chamber a most
stately Church, whither Pilgrims from all places resort to this day, to the
great enriching thereof, which by this means it is now from a poor Village
grown to be a wealthy City.

Q. Which is the chief City in England?

Ans. London, which is accounted to contain in circuit 8 miles, is enriched
with a Navigable River, the Palace of the King, diverse houses of the Nobility
and several Colleges for the Study of the Laws, the next to which is the City
of York according to the verse,

Londinum caput est and regni urbs Brittanni,
Eboracum a prima jure secundae venit.
London is Englands chiefest Town well known.
The second place York claims as its own.
Q. Who was the first builder of London?

A. The common received opinion is, that it was Brutus the Son of Silvius, and
Grandchild to Aeneas, who having by accident killed his Father, was for the
fact banished his Country, with whom accompanied him many worthy persons, to
be partakers of his fortune; who after many wanderings and adverse fortunes, at
last arrived in England, at a place called Totnes in Devonshire, as the Poet
Neckam sings.

The Gods did guide his sail and course, the winds were at command,
And Totnes was the happy shore where first he came on Land.
This Land was then inhabited with Giants, the chief of which was named
Gogmagog, with whom Corineus one of Brute's followers encountered, though he
were a Giant of twelve Cubits high, and of such puissance, that he could pull
up a great Oak at one pull, as if it had been a small Wand: when they came
together, Corineus laid by his armor, and challenged his Combatant to
Handy-gripes, who at first came upon him with such fury and violence, that he
crushed in pieces three of Corineus's ribs, where with he being mightily
enraged, redoubling his strength, threw him upon his shoulder, and so carried
him to the top of a Rock, and threw him down headlong into the Sea, where he
perished with the fall; which place is called to this day Gogm^gogs-Leap. In
reward of his valiant act, Brute bestowed upon the noble Corineus that part of
the Land which he after his name called Coriner, afterward by corruption of
speech it was called Cornubia, and now Cornwall. Brute afterward having the
Land of those Giants erected a City on the River of Thames, which he named
(after the Seat of his Ancestors) New Troy, which is the same that is now
called London, as one writes:

(...) razed Troy to rear a Troy, sit place he searched then,
And Viewing first the Northern parts, these fit, quoth he, for men
That trust as much to Flight as fight, our Bulworks are our breast,
A Trojans Courage is to him a Bulwork of unrest;
Then casting a more pleasant eye, where Thames did fairly glide,
Resolved he to erect the same upon that Rivers side;
He many Houses built therein, and closed it in with Wall,
Which Lud did after beautify, and Luds-Town did it call.
Q. What do the common Country people think of London?

Ans. Those who have never seen it, account it a very strange wonderful place.
One having a Brother living there, directed his Letter thus; To his loving
Brother T. W. living at London. Another had a great mind to see the City, only
he said, he was not acquainted with any of the Porters to open the Gates, and
let him in.

Q. Which are the Principal Rivers in England?

A. The chief is the Thamesis or Thames, compounded of the two rivers Them and
Isis, the former whereof rising somewhat beyond Tame in Buckinghamshire, and
the latter beyond Cirencester in Glocestershire, meet together about Dorcester
in Oxfordshire; the issue of which happy conjunction is the Thamesis or Thames,
the most glorious River of all Europe. The second is the Severn, which takes
its beginning in Plinlimon Hill in Mountgomery-shire, and his end about seven
miles from Bristol, washing in the mean space the walls of Shrewsbury,
Worcester, and Gloucester: this River is said to take its name from Sabrina, the
daughter of Estrild, who being taken by Queen Guendeline, was cast into this
River, and there drowned. The third River of note is Trent, so called for that
thirty kind of Fishes are found in it; or for that it receives thirty lesser
Rivulets; it has its Fountain in Strafford-shire, and gliding through the
Counties of Notingham, Lincoln, Leicester, and York, burieth its self in the
turbulent Current of the Humber. The fourth is Medway, a Kentish River, the
Common Harbor for the Royal Navy. The fifth is Tweed, the North east bound of
England, on whose fertile banks is seated the strong and impregnable Town of
Barwick. The sixth is Tine, which mightily enricheth the Town of Newcastle, by
the conveyance from thence of her plenty of Coals. These and the rest of most
principal concern, are thus comprehended in one of Mr, Drayton's Sonnets:

Our Floods, Queen Thames for Ships and (Swans is crowned,
And stately Severn for her Shore is praised,
The Crystal Trent for Fords and Fish renowned,
And Avons fame to Albions Cliffs is raised.
Carlegion Chester vaunts her holy Dee,
York many wonders of her Owse can tell,
The Peak her Dove whose banks so fertile be,
And Kent will say her Medway does excel.
Cotswal commends her Isis to the Tame,
Our Northern Borders boast of Tweeds fair Flood:
Our Western parts extol their Willies fame,
And the old Lea brags of the Danish blood.
Q. Who is the most renowned for memory that we have heard, or read of?

An. In former times Seneca, who writes of himself, that he was able to recite
two thousand words after they were once read unto him; and of late days we find
Mr. Fuller to be therein most exquisite, who is reported that he would walk any
street in London and by the strength of his memory tell how many, and what
Signs they were hanging in that street, from the one end to the other according
as they were in order: As also, if five hundred strange names were read unto
him, after the second or third hearing of them, he would repeat them
distinctly, according as they have been read unto him.

Qu. What difference is there betwixt Prophets and Poets?

An. Thus much, according to the old Verse:

Of things to come the first true Prophets are,
What the other of things past do false declare.
Qu. What creature is that which at once brings forth, nourishes her young,
and goes with young again?

An. The Hare, that fearful, but fruitful creature, who is represented as the
Emblem of good providence, because she sleeps with her eyes open.

Qu. Why do men commonly deck their Houses with Ivy at Christmas?

An. Ivy is said to be dedicated to Bacchus the God of wine and good cheer, at
which time men commonly eat and drink hard; as one writes:

At Christmas men do always Ivy get,
And in each corner of the House it set:
But why do they then use that Bacchus weed?
Because they mean then Bacchus -like to feed.
Q. Who brought up the first custom of Celebrating the Twelve days in
Christmas, with such Feasts and Sports, as are still retained in some
Gentlemen's houses?

A. The famous King Arthur one and the chief of the Worlds nine Worthies; an
Institution which the Scottish Writers of these late times very much blame, as
being a time fitter for our devotion than for our mirth.

Qu. What is it which being contained in its self, yet from it thousands do
daily spring and issue?

A. The Egg, from which is produced Fowls, Fishes, Birds, and Serpents.

Q Was the beard created before the man, or the man before the beard?

A. This seems to be a ridiculous question; for most will think that the man
must needs be created before the Beard; and yet we find it otherwise, for all
beasts were made before man was made, and amongst others the bearded Goat.

Q Whether was the Egg or Bird first?

A. Some will say the Egg, because all Birds are produced from the Egg; but we
must know that the first rank of creatures was immediately from God, without
secondary causes, and not produced by the Egg, as is since by the course of
nature.

Q. In what part of the world is it that trees bear living Creatures?

A. In the Isles of Orcades in Scotland, wherein grows a Tree that bears fruit
like unto a Fowl, which dropping down into the water, becomes a living creature
like to a Duck; to which Mr. Cleaveland alludeth in these verses:

A Scot when from the Gallow-tree got loose
Drops into Styx and turns a Soland Goose
Q. What Custom was that observed formerly in Scotland the like whereof we
hardly read: be practiced in any Country?

A. It was called Marcheta Mulieris, and took its beginning as the Scottish
Write say in the reign of Ewen the third, who i^ the fifteenth King in their
Catalogue after the first Fergus. This Ewen being a Prince much addicted, or
rather wholly given over unto lasciviousness, made a Law, That himself and his
Successors should have the Maidenhead, or first nights lodging with every
woman, whose Husband held Land immediately from the Crown: and the Lords and
Gentlemen of all them, whose Husbands were their Tenants, or Homagers. This was
it seems the Knights-service which men held their Estates by; and continued
till the days of Malcolme Comner, who married Margaret the Sister of one Edgar
Etheling, at whose request he abolished this lascivious ungodly Law, ordaining
that in the room thereof, the Tenants should pay unto their Lords a Mark in
money; which Tribute the Historians say is yet in force.

Qu. Who was the most famous whore in her time?

An. Corinthian Lais, who exacted ten thousand Drams for a nights lodging,
which made Demosthenes to cry out, Non emam tanti paenitere, I will not buy
repentance at so dear a rate, and occasioned the old verse:

Non cuivis homini contingit adire Corinthum,
It Is not fit for every man's avail,
Unto Corinth for to sail.
She was afterward for her extortions, and spoiling the trade of the other
petty whores, set upon by a company of those strumpets, and by them stoned to
death, as one writes of her.

At last a Crew of whores did set upon her,
A whore she was, and whores to death did stone her
Q. What Laws were those that were so severe, and yet were kept and continued
for the space of seven hundred years together?

A. The Laconian, or the Laws of Lacedaemonia, once a famous Commonwealth in
Greece, which Laws were compiled by Lycurgus, who going a Journey, bound the
people by oath to observe all his Laws till he returned; and being gone from
thence commanded, that when he was dead and buried, his ashes should be cast
into the Sea, by this means his Laws endured for a long time in Sparta, which
by reason thereof flourished in great prosperiry.

Q. What place is it that is accounted the middle or center of the Earth?

A. Some say Palestine, and in particular the Valley of Jehosaphat; of which
opinion are many of our ancient and modern Divines but some of our Historians
and Poets, allo^ the same to Pytho, or Pythia, a Town in Greece; of which they
say, that Jupiter desirous once to know the exact middle of the Earth, let fly
two Eagles, one from the East, the other from the West; these Eagles meeting in
this place, showed plainly that it was the Navel or mid part of the Earth.

Q. What are the causes of ebbing and flowing of the Sea?

A. Several men are of several minds Some ascribe it to the Moon, who by her
approaching to the South, does by her beams and influences make warm the Sea,
whence the rising and exhalations do proceed wherewith so swelling to empty it
self, it flows to the Shores and Havens; but descending to the Horizon and
Wane, as her beams by little and little diminish, the waters do fall and abate,
which causes her Eddy, or Ebb. Others impute it to God, and his Spirit moving
upon the waters moves the waters, which Job expresses by the similitude of
fire under a pot, saying, It is God that makes the Sea boil like a pot: which
fire is taken to be partly in the saltness of the waters, which in the night
shows like fire, and causes a moving in the same: Another reason is, for that
the Earth has more fire in it than water, which fire lies hid in the
subterraneous stones, and this fire does partly cause the motion of the Sea, an
Element of it self liquid and active, and subject to motion; which thereto when
once by this fire occasioned, the precedent part is thrust forward by the
subsequent. Others again give this reason; that the Earth being round, and the
Waters of themselves liquid and moveable, when they have run their course as
much as they can one way, then meeting with the other waters drawn by the same
attraction from other places, they then return back again, but encountering with
that huge Mountain of the Sea, are beaten back again, and so by this means
forced to continual motion.

Qu. Is the Sea higher than the Earth?

An. This is affirmed to be so; and the reasons given therefore are these:
First, because it is a body not so heavy: Secondly, it is observed by Saylors,
that their Ships fly faster to the shore than from it, whereof no reason can be
given but the height of the Water above the Land. Thirdly, to such as stand on
the shore, the Sea seems to swell into the form of a mountain, till it
puts a bound to their sight. But some then will lay how comes it to pass
that the Sea hovering thus over the Earth, does not overwhelm it? To which I
answer, that must be attributed to him only who has made the waters to stand
on a heap, who has set them a bound which they shall not pass, nor turn again
to cover the Earth.

Qu. Why is the form of Money round?

An. Because it is to run to every man, though it commonly runs up hill to the
rich. I remember I saw once the picture of a Shilling, which had upon the top
of it a pair of Wings, flying as it were from spades and oars that were
pourtrayed on the one side, to the picture of an Usurer who was deciphered on
the other side, underneath was the figure of a Snail, with the shilling on his
back creeping a slowly peace toward the Oars. The explanation of all being set
forth by these verses.

Twelve-pence here first presents him to your Eye,
Who from the Spades and Oars with wing do fly.
To the rich Usurer, who ready stands
To entertain him with a Purse in's hands;
Where long being kept at last returns as slo^
Back to the Oars, as the poor Snail does g^^
Qu. Why is Nummus Latin for Money?

An. Of Numa Pompilius, second King of the Romans, the first that caused Money
to be made; though the Jews attribute the invention thereof to Cain, as the
Grecians to Hermodice the wife of Midas, and some of the Romans to Janus. That
money was not in former Ages the only Bartery, or way of exchange, we read in
Homer, where Glaucus Golden Armor was valued at a hundred Kine, and Diomedes
Armor at ten only; which kind of bartery is to this day used amongst some of
the Irish, as at the Barbados, and Virginia it is commonly by Tobacco, or
Sugar. Our Ancestors the Britains, used brass Rings and Iron Rings for their
Instruments of Exchange; The, most usual material of Money amongst the Roman
Provinces was seldom Gold or Silver, most times Brass, sometimes Leather;
Corium forma publica percussum, as Senecae has it. This last kind of Money was
by Frederick the Second made current when he ^esieged Millain: the like is said
to have been used here in England, at the time of the Barons wars, which is
thought to be the same that is now commonly shown in the Tower, and why not?
since the Hollanders no longer ago than in the year 1574 being in their
extremities, made Money of Past-board.

But now such things we in derision hold
Nothing will pass but Silver, or fine Gold.
I shall therefore annex here certain Verses describing the person and quality
of that ^hild of chase, or Lady Pecunia, which is so ^uch sought after and
caught at by every ^e, giving you assured marks whereby to ^ow her, if you can
find her:

She is a Lady of such matchless carriage,
Wedded to none, though sought of all in marriage.
She may be kissed, yet neither washed nor clipped,
And if you woo not wary, soon o'reslipt.
She may be common, yet be honest too,
Which is far more than any Maids can do:
Who e're atchieves her, speaks her never so fair,
She Will not stay long before she take the air.
She is so proud, she will not with poor men stay,
But straight takes pet, and goes from him away.
A rich man may her for a time entreat,
And with the Usurer she will sit in the seat.
She goes in Cloth of silver, Cloth of gold,
Of several worths and values manifold:
But when she goes in golden Robes best dight,
Then she is suspected for to be most light.
She needs no Physic to recover Health,
For she is still current, and as rich in Wealth:
Some Irish Lady born we may suppose,
Because she runs so fast, and never goes.
If she be wronged in name, and ill abide it,
Of all men Justice Touchstone must decide it.
She is a Vagrant sure, else there is none,
Because she is always rambling from home,
Nothing can cause her for to take her rest,
But clip her Wings, and lock her in a Chest.
Qu. What City is that which is Founded the Waters, compassed in with waters,
and ha^^ no other walls but the Sea?

An. The City of Venice, situate in the be some of the Adriatic Sea, which
has continued unshaken or conquered since the fi^^ building 1152 years; it
has for convenience of Passage 4000 Bridges, and very near 1200^ Bo us. They
have an A^senal in which a^ kept 200 Galleys; in their Magazine of W^ they have
Armor sufficient for 100000 Soldiers, amongst which are 1000 Coats of Plate
garnished with Gold, and covered with velvet; so that they are sit for any
Prince in Christendom; there are said to be 200 Houses therein, fit to Lodge
any King whomsoever; they have several Houses stored with Masts, Sayls, and
other Tacklings, and are at this present, the chiefest Bulwark of Christendom
against the Turk.

Qu. When a Man dies, which is the last part of him that stirs, and which of a
Woman?

An.

When Man and Woman dies, as Poets sung,
His Heart's the last that stirs, of her the Tongue.
Qu. What Answer gave one to a Barber, who bragged that Kings sat bare to
their Trade?

An. He bid him that they should remember, as well, that they must stand to
Beggars whilst they did sit.

Qu. What is the common saying that is appropriated to Poland?

An. That if a man have lost his Religion, there he may find it, there being
tolerated Papists, Lutherans, Calvinists, Arrians, Anabaptists,
Antitrinitarians, and all Sects what-soever. The same saying is now applied to
Amsterdam in Holland.

Qn. What other thing is remarkable there?

An. It is a custom there, that when in the Churches the Gospel is reading, the
Nobility and Centry of that Country draw out their Swords, to signify that
they are ready to defend the same if any dare oppugn it. The same reason
questionless gave beginning to our custom of standing up at the Creed, whereby
we express how prepared and resolute we are to maintain it, although in the
late times of Rebellion, some tender Consciences holding it to be a Relic of
Popery, being more nice than wise, did undiscreetly refuse the same.

A short English Catechism.

We must believe twelve, and we must do ten,
And pray for seven, if we'll be godly men.
Qu. What strange custom is that which is reported of the Muscovia women?

An. That they love those Husbands best, which beat them most, and think
themselves neither loved nor regarded, unless they be twice or thrice a day
well-favourdly banged. To this purpose there is a story reported of a German
Shoemaker, who traveling into this Country, and here marrying a widow used
her with all kindness that a woman could (as he thought) desire, yet still she
was discontented, and the more he sought to please her, the further off was
from any content; at last learning where the fault was, and that his not
beating her was the cause of her discontent, he took such a vein in cudgelling
her sides, that in the end he killed her. I suppose it would be a very hard
matter to bring up this custom in England, or to persuade our women that their
Husbands beat them out of pure love which they bear unto them.

Qu. How comes it to pass that there be more women in the world than men?

An, Some assign this reason, because that women are freed from the Wars, which
devoureth many thousands of men, few of them pass the dangers of the Sea,
suffer imprisonment, and many other troubles and hazard of the Land to which
men are incident, and this they think to be a sufficient reason; others there
are who argue more merrily, alleging, that in the whole course of Nature, the
worst things are ever the most plentiful, hence we have more Weeds than Herbs,
more Lead than Silver, more Crows than Partridges, more Women than Men, and
therefore one thus merrily writes of that Sex:

If women were as little as they are good,
A Pescod shell would make them Gown and Hood.
And another to the like purpose.

There is not one good woman to be found,
And if one were, she merits to be crowned.
Qu. Who was the first that invented Printing?

An. He who first taught it in Europe was one John Gutthenburg a German, about
the year of our Lord 1440. at Haarlem it is said to be first practiced, and at
Menez perfected. M. C. T. de officiis was the first Book which ever was
printed, which Copy is to this (...) reserved in the public Library in
Frankford; though many are of the opinion that the Chynoys had it long before
us who print not as we use from the left hand to the right nor as the Jews from
the right to the left, but from the top of the leaf downward to the bottom:
whoever invented it, no question but it is a most noble and profitable Art, we
having that done in one day by one man, that without it many could not do in a
year by writing. Only I wish this most exquisite invention were not so much
abused and prostituted to the lust of every foolish and idle Paper-blurrer, the
treasury of Learning being never so overcharged with froth and scum, of foolish
and unnecessary Discourses, as by this means; many people having a great
ambition to be known in the world, though they get nothing thereby but only to
become Fools in print.

Qu. Who invented Guns.

An. That fatal Instrument the Gun was first found out by one Bartholdus Swart
a Franciscan Friar, and a great Alchymist, who being one time very studious to
find out some experiments in his Art, was tempering together Brimstone, dried
Earth, and certain other Ingredients in a Mortar, which he covered with a
stone. The night growing on, he took a Tinder-box to light him a candle; where
striking fire, a spark by chance flew into the Mortar, and catching hold of the
Brimstone and Saltpeter, with great violence blew up the stone. The Friar
guessing which of his Ingredients it was that produced this effect, made him an
Iron pipe, crammed it with Sulpher and stones, and putting fire to it, saw with
what great fury and noise it discharged its self; then longing to put his
invention in execution, he communicated the same unto the Venetians, who having
been often vanquished by the Gensuese, and driven almost to a necessity of
yielding to them, by the help of these Guns gave their enemies a notable
overthrow. This was about the year of our Lord 1330. being the first battle
that ever those warlike pieces had part in, which not long after put to silence
all the Engines and devices where with the Ancients were wont to make their
Batteries; of which Engine we may say as the Poet formerly did of that weapon
the Sword.

Of murdering Guns who might first Author be,
Sure a steel heart and bloody mind had he;
Mankinds destruction so to bring about,
And death with horror by near ways find out.
Qu. Where was wildfire invented?

An. At the siege of Canstantinople by Caliph Zulciman, about the year of our
Lord 730. with which the Grecians did not a little molest the Saracens Ships.
This fire we for the violence of it call Wildfire, and the Latins because the
Greeks were the inventers of it, Graecus ignis.

Qu. Who invented the Battle-Axe?

An. Penthesilea who came with a troop of brave Virago's to the aid of Priam
King of Troy, she fought with the Battle-Axe, and was slain by Pyrrhus Son to
Achilles, not long after her death was Troy taken by the Greeks, who lost of
their own men 860000. and slew of the Trojans and those that came to help them
666000. so as that of Ovid may be truly inferred.

Jam seges est ubi Troja fuit, resecandaque falce,
Luxuriat Phrygio sanguine pinguis humus.
Corn sit for siches now grows where Troy once stood,
And the Soyl's fatted with; he Phrygian blood.
Qu. By whom were the games of Dice and Chess first invented?

An. By the Lydians, a Country of Anatolia, who being sorely vexed with famine,
invented the games, that by playing at them they might beguile their hungry
bellies. Necessity thereunto informing, according to that of Persius:

Artis Magister ingeniique largitor venture.

Qu. Who were the first Inventers of Paper and Parchment?

An. Paper was first found out in Egypt, and made of thin Flakes of
Sedgy-weeds growing on the banks of Nilus called Papyri, from whence it tooks
it name. By means of this invention, Books being easier to be transcribed and
reserved, Ptolomeus Philadelphus made his excellent Library at Alexandria, and
understanding how Attalus King of Pergamum by the benefit of this Egyptian
Paper, strived to exceed him in that kind of magnificence, prohibited the
carriage of it out of Egypt. Hereupon Attalus invented Parchment, called from
the place of its invention, Pergamena, from the materials thereof being
Sheepskins, Membrana; the convenience whereof was the cause why in short time
the Egyptian Paper was quite worn out; in place whereof succeeded our Paper
made of rags. The Author of which invention our progenitors have not committed
to memory, the more is the pity, that he who found out the use of Paper, should
not have his memory perserved by Paper. In former ages men wrote in the dust,
upon stones, pencil'd upon Laurel leaves, upon barks of Trees, according to the
Poet.

In barks of Trees Shepherds their loves engraved,
Which remained in the hole, when the rind away was shaved.
Qu. Who first invented Letters?

An. Cornelius Tacitus an approved Latin Historian, ascribes it to the
Egyptians, his words are these: Primi per formas animalium Egypti, etc. The
Egyptians first of all expressed the conceptions of the mind by the shapes of
beasts; and the most ancient monuments of man's memory, are seen graven in
stones, and they say, that they are the first inventers of Letters; then the
Phoenicians because they were strong at Sea, brought them into Greece, and so
they had the glory of that which they received from others; for there goes a
report, that Cadmus sailing thither in a Phoenician ship, was the Inventer of
the Art amongst the Greeks, when they were yet unexpert and rude. Some record,
that Cecrops the Athenian, or Livius the Theban, and Palamedes the Grecian, did
find out sixteen Characters at the time of the Trojan war, and that afterward
Simonides added the rest. But in Italy the Etrurians learned them of Demaratas
the Corinthian, and the Aborigines of Evander the Arcadian: thus far Tacitus.
But Lucan the Historical Poet attributes the first invention of them to the
Phoenicians; in these verses of his Pharsalia.

Phoenices primi (fama si ereditur) ausi,
Mansuram rudibus vocem signare figuris.
Phoenicians first (as fame to us affords.)
Dared in rude Characters engrave our words.
But notwithstanding this of Tacitus and Lucan, no question but the Jews were
herein skilled before either of them, and that there was writing before the
Flood, which St. Jude does somewhat infinuate of the writing of Enoch; and
Josephus and others write that he crected two Pillars, the one of brick, and
the other of stone, wherein he wrote of the twofold destruction of the world,
the one by water, and the other by fire, which by Tradition was preserved to
the days of the Apostles.

Qu. By whom was Brachygraphy or the Art of Short-writing invented?

An. This is uncertain, Dion says that Maecenas that great Favorite of
Augustus, and Favorer of Learning, did first find out certain Rules and Figures
ad celeritatem scribendi, for the speedier dispatch of writing; and for those
less vulgar Letters, which the Latins call Ciphrae, and whereof every
exercised Statesman has peculiar to himself, they were first invented by
Julius Caesar, when he first began to think of the Roman Monarchy, and were by
him in his Letters to his more private and tried friends used; that if by
misfortune they should be intercepted, the contents of them should not be
understood. Augustus one of the greatest Politics of the world, had another
kind of obscure writing; for in his Letters of more secrecy and importance, he
always used to put the Letter immediately following in the order of the
Alphabet, for that which in ordinary writing he should have used. As for the
Art of Short-writing, or Brachygraphy aforesaid, it is grown to a great
perfection in our Age, the chief Masters whereof have been Mr. Skeleton, Mr.
Jeremiah Rich, etc.

Qu. Who were the Inventers of Ships, and Shipping?

An. No doubt but it came first from the Ark of Noah, which he had provided for
the safety of him and his, in the universal Deluge; which Ark settling on the
Mountains of Ararat, and there a long time remaining, gave the Phoenicians, a
Sea-people, a pattern whereby they might make the waters passable. The Heathen
writers which knew not Noah, attribute the Inventing of Shipping to several
persons: Strabo to Minos King of Crete: Diodorus Siculus, to Neptuno who was
therefore called The God of the Sea: Tibullus the Poet referred it to the
Tyrians, a famous flourishing Commonwealth among the Phoenicians, saying,

Prima ratem ventis credere docta Tyros.
The Tyrians first the Art did find,
To make Ships travel with the wind.
The Egyptians received this Invention from the Tyrians, and added much unto
it; for whereas first the vessels were either made of an hollow tree, or of
sundry boards joined together, and covered with beasts skins, (which kind of
Vessels are still in use in America) the Phoenicians brought them to strength
and form; but the Egyptians added Decks unto them; they also invented the
Galley of two banks on a side, which vessels by length of time grew so large,
that Ptolomy Philopater made one of no fewer than fifty banks of oars on one
side, Large Ships of burden called Circera, we owe to the Cypriots: Cock-boats
or Skiffs, to the Illyrians; Brigantines, to the Rhodians; and Fregats, or
swift Barks to the Cyrenians. As for the Tacklings, the Boetians invented the
Oar: Daedalus and his son Icarus, the Masts and Sails, which gave the Poet
occasion to feign, that those two made wings to their bodies, and fled out of
Crete; and that Icarus soaring too high, melted his wings, and was drowned: the
truth indeed being, that presuming too far on his new invention, he ran against
a Rock, and so perished. For Hippagines Ferry-boats or vessels for the
transporting of Horse, we are indebted to the Salaminians; for Grapling-hooks
to Anacharsis; for Anchors to to the Tuscans; and for the Rudder, Helm, Stern,
or Art of steering, to Typhis, who seeing that a Kite when she flew, guided her
whole body by her tail, effected that in the devices of Art, which he had
observed in the works of Nature. About the year 1300. one Flavio of Melphi in
the Kingdom of Naples found out the Compass or Pyxis Nautica, consisting of
eight Winds only, the four principal, and four collateral; and not long after
the people of Bruges and Antwerp perfected that excellent Invention; adding
twenty four other subordinate Winds, or Points, so that now they are in all to
the number of thirty two. By means of this excellent Instrument, and withal by
the good success of Columbus the Portugals Eastward, the Spaniards Westward,
and the English North-wards, have made many a glorious and fortunate Expedition.

Qu. Having thus shown by what means Navigation has arrived to the height that
now it is; next tell what Commodities are most proper to several Countries,
whither our Merchants go to traffic?

An. Our most provident and wise Creator has so ordered it, that there might
be a sociable Conversation betwixt all Countries, that there is none of them so
plentifully stockt, but has need of the Commodities of another Country; nor
is any Country so barren or destitute, but it has some one or more
Commodities to invite Merchants to traffic with them; some of which are thus
set down by the divine Poet Du Bartus in his Colonies:

Hence come our Sugars from Canary Isles,
From Candie Currants, Muscadel, and Oils.
From the Molucco's Spices, Balsamum
From Egypt, Odours from Arabia come.
From India Gums, rich Drugs, and Ivory.
From Syria Mummie; black red Ebony
From burning Chus; from Peru Pearl and Gold,
From Russia Furs, to keep the rich from cold.
From Florence Silks; from Spain Fruit, Saffron, Sacks:
From Denmark Amber, Cordage, Furs, and Flax.
From France and Florence, Linen, Wood, and Wine;
From Holland Hops; Horse from the banks of Rhine.
From England Wool; all Lands as God distributes,
To the Worlds Treasure pay their sundry Tributes.
Qu. What did our Ancients hold to be the greatest wonders in the world?

An. The Tower of Pharaoh, the walls of Babylon, the Temple of Diana at
Ephesus, the Tomb of Mausolus, and the Pyramids of Egypt, which are supposed by
some to be in part built with the same Bricks which the children of Israel did
burn. Of those Pyramids two are most famous; the first and greatest was built
by Cheops, who in this Work employed 100000 Men the space of twenty years. The
charges of Garlic, Roots, and Onions only, came to sixteen hundred Talents of
Silver. The Basis of this Pyramid contained in circuit sixty Acres of Ground,
and was in height ten thousand Foot, being made all of marble. Now when Cheops
wanted money, he prostituted his Daughter to all comers, by which dishonest
means he finished his Building; and she besides the money due unto her Sire,
(for father I cannot call him) desired for her self of every man that had the
use of her body, one stone, of whom she got so many, that with them she made
the second Pyramid, almost equal to the first, as Herodotus a Grecian Author
observes:

Stone-buildings, Cities, and Brick-works decay.
Virtue's immortal, and does live for aye.
Qu. What Trees were those that broughtforth their fruit at the instant of
their first planting?

An. The Trees which God made in the beginning of the world, which immediately
brought forth their fruit, according as God spoke the word.

Qu. What two Countries are those which are endued with these two most
excellent prerogatives, of breeding no venomous worms or hurtful Creature,
neither will any live if brought thither from foreign Countries?

An. Creta or Candie, an Island of Greece, now in the possession of the
Venetians, and our neighbor Country of Ireland; of which last, one writing
thus makes that Land to speak;

Illa ego sum Graiis Glacialis Hibernia dicta,
Cut Deus and melior rerum nascentium origo
Jus commune dedit, cum Creta altrice Tonantis,
Angues ne nostris diffundant sibila in oris.
I am that Island, which in days of old
The Greeks did call Hibernia Icie-cold:
Secured by God and Nature from this fear
(Which gift was given to Crete, Joves mother dear)
That poisonous snakes should never here be bred,
Or dare to hiss, or hartful venom shed.
Qu. What is accounted the worthiest sign of liberty above all others?

An. The covering of the head, or wearing of the Hat; as is well known to those
which are conversant in Antiquity. The Lacones a people of Peloponnesus, after
they had obtained to be made free Denizons of Lacedaemon, in sign of their
gotten Liberty, would never go into the Battle but with their Hats on. Amongst
the Africans as it is written by good Authors, the placing of a Hat on the top
of a Spear, was used as a token to incite the people to their liberty which had
been oppressed by Tyrants. But amongst the Romans we have more variety. The
taking off the Hat o^ Tarquinius Priscus by an Eagle, and the putting of it on
again, occasioned the Augur to prophecy unto him the Kingdom, which fell out
accordingly. In their Sword-plays when one of the Gladiators, had with credit
slain his adversary, they would sometimes honor him with a Palm, sometimes
with the Hat; of these the last was accounted the worthier, the Palm only
honoring the Victor, but the Hat enfranchised him on whom it was conferred.
Erasmus in his Chiliads makes the Hat to be the sign of some eminent worth in
him that wears it; on this he conjectureth that the putting on of Caps on the
heads of such as are created Doctors or Masters, had its original; which custom
is still of force in the Universities of England, the putting on of the Cap
being never performed but in the solemn Comitia, and in the presence of all
such as are either Auditors or Spectators of that days exercise.

Qu. Why have some people affirmed that women have no souls, and how is it to
be proved by Scripture that they have?

An. It is to be proved by Scripture that they have out of those words in Luke,
1. 46. My soul does magnify the Lord, etc. which were the words of a woman,
yet some envying against that Sex, and because of the faults of some few,
condemn them all; amongst others hear these verses of the Comedian:

Trust women! ah fond man, nay rather trust
The Summer winds, the Oceans constancy,
For all their substance is but levity:
Light are their waving vails, light their attires,
Light are their heads, and lighter their desires:
Let them lay on what coveriure they will
Upon themselves, of modesty and shame,
They cannot hide the woman with the same.
Trust women! ah fond man, nay rather trust
The false devouring Crocodils of Nile.
For all they work is but deceit and guile:
What have they but is fein'd, their hair is fein'd,
Their beauty fein'd, their stature fein'd, their pace;
Their gesture, motion, and their grace is fein'd,
And if that all be fein'd without, what then
Shall we suppose can be sincere within?
For if they do but weep, or sing, or smile;
Smiles, tears and tunes, are engines to beguile;
And all they are, and all they have of grace,
Consists but in the outside of a face, etc.
Qu. By what Era or computation do they in Transylvania compute their time,
besides that of the birth of our Savior Christ?

An. The transmigration of their Children; which happened the 22. of July Anno
1376. which marvelous accident is thus delivered by Verstegan, an Author of
good credit, who says; that the Country being beyond credit troubled with
Rats, a Musician whom they called the Pied Piper, undertook for a great mass of
money to destroy them: they agree, hereupon he tuneth his Pipes, and all the
Rats in the Country came after him dancing, and were drowned in a great River:
this done he asks his pay, but is denied, whereupon he strikes up a new fit
of mirth and all the Children Male and Female follow after him dancing into the
Hill Hamele^ which presently closed again; since which time the Transilvanians
permit not an^ Drum, Pipe, or other Instrument to be sounded in that place; and
established a Decree that in all writing of Contract or Bargain after the date
of our Saviors Nativity, the date also of this their Childrens Transmigration
should be added thereto.

Qu. What three Creatures are the Dutch French, and Spanish Nations compared
unto?

An. The French is said to be like a fle^ quickly skipping into a Country, and
a^ soon leping out of it: the Dutch is compared to a ^ouse, slowly mastering a
place and as slowly being driven from their hold the Spaniard is likened to a
crab, which being crept into a place almost at unawares is there so fast
rooted, that nothing but the extremity of violence can force him ou^ again.

Qu. In what things do the French, Dutch and Italians agree?

An.

The French has valor, but with Vanitatem and Levitatem.
The Dutch has honest dealing, bu^ Gulam and Ebrietatem.
The Italian discreet Carriage, bu^ Procreationem and Libidinem.
Moreover of these three Nations it thus further added,

That the Italian is wise before hand; The German wise in the Action, And the
French after it is done.
Qu. In what three properties does England exceed all other Countries?

An. For the fairest Women, the goodliest Horses, and the best breed of Dogs
whatsoever.

Qu. How many things are required in a ^oman to be perfectly beautiful?

An. It is said that all the beauties in the world serve but to make up one
perfect beauty, where one brings a good Cheek, another a comely nose, a third a
fair forehead, a fourth ruby Lips, a fifth an Alabaster neck, etc. so one is
wise till she speaks; another handsome till she goes; a third pretty till she
laughs; one has a slender body, another a winning eye, some carry loveliness,
and others Majesty in their very countenances, all which must concur to make up
one absolute beauty. And therefore it is said that when Apelles the fanious
Painter of Greece, was to pourtray the Goddess Venus, he assembled all the
chief beauties of the Country, that from the several perfections of them he
might make one excellent composition; to which one alludes in this Sonnet:

Apelles -like, when Nature did thee make,
She viewed the beauties of the Earth each one;
And from them all the best of all did take,
That thou should excelled be by none.
And thus with Venus beauty she endowed thee,
And Pallas -like she wisdom to thee gave,
The learning of Cornelia she allowed thee,
That thou no lack of any thing should have.
To thee then thou great Empress of all beauty,
I consecrate these Lines in thankful duty.
Some other there are that say, that a woman to be perfectly beautiful should
have all these endowments and oppositions, viz three hard, three soft, three
short, three long, three black, three white: which they thus distinguish, three
hard, her two breasts and buttock; three soft, her two hands and her belly;
three short, her nose, and her two feet; three long, her fingers and her side;
three black, her two eyes and her hair; three white, her two hands and her neck.

All these fair Letters in one golden Book,
What Cynick might be blamed to unclasp and look!
But now for the most part instead of these perfections, the imperfections of
women are so covered by Art, that the most piercing understanding may be
deceived, according to that of the Poet,

With Tyres and Clothes our Judgments bribed be,
And Woman is least part of what we see.
Sir Thomas Moor in his Utopian Commonwealth, tells us how there is the
Custom, for some Reverend Old-Father, to bring in naked the young man; and some
hoary Oldmatron to present naked the young woman, between whom a marriage is
motion'd, for (says he) in buying a Horse the Chapman not only vieweth his
naked carcass, but takes off also his Trappings and Saddle, lest under him
some blame might lie hidden, and why then in choosing of a wise should we take
one of whom we see no more than the face. (unius palmae spatium) and perhaps
scarce that. These are the words of Sir Thomas Moor, which though I do not like
his plot, as being too libidinous, yet no question but the hasty marriages, and
want of due acquaintance be^^re the celebration of the Nuptials, makes many to
be sped with such a fortune as is here ^escribed by the Poet:

Who takes her breakfast daily in her bed,
And spends the morn in dressing of her head,
And sits at dinner like a Virgin Bride,
And talks all day of nothing but of pride;
God in mercy may do much to save her,
But what a case is he in that shall have her?
Qu. What three Nation's parts is it said that required to the making up of an
absolute woman?

An. The Italians will tell you, that for the performance of this, there is
required, first the parts of a Dutch-woman from the Girdle downwards. Secondly,
the parts of French-woman from the Girdle to the Shoulders; over which must be
placed an English Face for a grace to all the rest; and ^et Dr. Heylin in his
Survey of France, says, that this position does not hold good in the French
women; their shoulders and backs ^ing so broad, that they hold no proportion
with their middles:

But every one our women thus does grace,
There is none like unto an English face.
Qu. In what Country is it that women have the greatest Prerogatives?

An. In England, where there are not kept to severely submiss as the French,
nor so jeaously guarded as the Italian, as being, as of a finer mould, so of a
better temper than to yield to an inordinate servility, or incontinency, which
makes them endued with so many privileges amongst us, that England is termed
by Foreigners The Paradise of women as it is by some accounted The Hell of
Horses and Purgatory of Servants. And it is a common by word among the
Italians, that there were a Bridge built over the Narrow Seas, all the women in
Europe would run into England; they having here the upper hand i^ the streets,
the uppermost place at the Table the Thirds of their Husbands Estates, an^
their equal shares in all Lands, yea, eve^ such as are holden in Knights
service; previledges wherewith women of other Countries are not acquainted. So
that we see is as well a Paradise for women, by reason ^ their privileges, as
a Paradise of women, b^ reason of their unmatchable perfections.

Qu. Who was accounted the most brave Virago woman that ever France bred?

An. Joan D' Arc, a Maid of Vancolem ^ Lorrain, whom they call La Pusille; wh^
when the English had almost overrun a France, stoutly stood up for the defense
her Country; and having obtained an A^my, marched up and down with the sam^ in
the habit of a man, giving to the Engli^^ many overthrows, and taking some of
the prime Commanders prisoners. At last s^ was taken prisoner her self at the
siege ^ Compeigne, and delivered over to the Du^ of Bedford, then Regent of
France, who se^ her unto Rouen, where she was burnt for Witch on the sixth of
July, Anno 1431. thou^^ some adjudge it extreme cruelty in the English, and
that she was rather a Saint than Witch: of which two different opinions he^ one
thus writing her Epitaph.

Here lies Joan of Arc, the which
Some count Saint, and some count Witch;
Some count Man, and some count more,
Some count Maid, and some count Whore;
Her Life's in question, wrong or right,
Her death in doubt, by Laws, or Might.
Mean time France a Wonder saw,
A Woman Rule against Salique Law.
But Reader be advised and stay
Thy Censure till the Judgment-day,
Then shall thou know, (and not before)
Whether Saint, Witch, Man, Maid, or Whore*
The Statute of this noble Virago all in Brass, being habited all in complete
Armor, stands at this day in Orleans, upon the middle of their Bridge.

Qu. Wherein does Man chiefly differ from Beasts?

An. In two things especially, Ratione and Oratione, Reason and speech.

Qu. How do Philosophers divide the parts of Life?

An. Into three; the Vegetive, the Sensitive, and the Rational: the Vegetive is
that of Plants, Trees, etc. the Sensitive is of Beasts, Fowls, Fishes, and the
like; but the Rational is only peculiar to Man; though I must confess many are
of opinion, that several beasts are endued with more than an ordinary reason,
of which they instance the Elephant, and of whom they deliver this story, That
in the great Battle betwixt Alexander the Great, and King Porus (an Indian
Emperor) the Elephant which King Porus rode on, seeing his Master strong and
lusty, rushed into the thickest of Alexanders Army; but when he perceived Porus
to grow faint, he withdrew himself, and kneeling down, received all the Arrows
shot against his Master in his own Trunk.

Qu. By what means may every man be accounted an honest man?

An. By endeavoring to be what he desires to seem.

Qu. What was an excellent Motto which comprehends it in the means whereby a
man may quickly grow rich? (Counsel I know will quickly be hearkened unto by
all.)

An. Nec habeo, nec careo, nec curo: I have not, I want not, I care not; which
he enjoys that has only content, as the Divine Poet said,

My wishes are but few, all easy to fulfill;
I make the limits of my power the bounds unt^ my will.
Qu. What are the differences or kinds Music?

An. Among the Ancients I have met with three kinds of Music, viz. First, that
of the Greeks, which consists altogether of lon^ Rules, or Spendans. This was
the gravest and saddest of the rest, called by Aristotle Moral, because it
settled the affections Boethius, whom we account the Classical Author in this
Faculty, calls it Lydian, because in much use with those of that Nation, and
now as generally received by the Italian This is the Music which Elisha called
for ^^ invite unto him the Spirit of prophecy, King. 3. 15. and this is it
which is yet sung ^ Churches, a practice which we derive from the Ancients,
though some of late have opp^sed it, and which is much commended ^^ that Doctor
of the Latin Church, St. Austin. The second kind consists of a mixture of
long and short Notes, or of the Dactylus, which is termed active, because it
raises up the affections. Boethius calls it the Dorian, because it had been
in much esteem amongst the Dorians, a Greek People: we may now call it English,
as being much used by us; and is that Music which clears the Spirits, and is
so sovereign an Antidote to an afflicted mind. The third sort is that which
consists altogether of short Notes, or Tribrachy, and is by Aristotle said to
be ravished, because it unhingeth the Affections, and stirs them up to
lasciviousness. Boethius terms it Phrygian, as being the strain of that wanton
and luxuriant people; in these days we may call it French, as being most
delighted in by the striving Spirits, and lightness of that Nation.

But the best Music, far more sweet than honey,
Is when a man's own Purse gingles with money.
Qu. In what do several Nations differ, concerning their Era, or computation
of Time, from which every reckoning takes its beginning?

An. The Christians make their Epoch the Birth of Christ, which happened in the
year of the world 3962. but this reckoning they ^sed not till the year 600.
Follow in the mean ^ime the civil Account of the Empire. The Mahumetans begins
their Hegira, or Computation, from the return of their Prophet to Mecha, after
he was driven thence by the Philarchae, Anno Christi 617. The Grecians reckoned
by Olympiads, the first of which is placed in the year of the World 3187. but
this Account perishing under the Donstontinopolitan Emperors, they reckoned by
Indictions, every Indiction containing 15 years; the first beginning whereof
was about the year of Christ 313. which among Chronologers is still used. The
Romans reckoned first from the building of their City, which was A. M. 3213.
and afterward from the 16 year of the Emperor Augustus, A. M. 1936. which
begins somewhat before our Epoch from the Birth of Christ. This reckoning
was used among the Spaniards, till the Reign of Ferdinand the Catholic. The
Jews had diverse Epochs, as the Creation of the World in the beginning of Time.
Secondly, from the universal Deluge, Anno 1565. Thirdly, from the confusion of
Tongues, Anno 1786. Fourthly, from Abraham's Journey out of Chaldea into
Canaan, Anno 2021. Fifthly, from the departure of the Children of Israel out of
Egypt, Anno 2451. Sixthly, from the year of Jubilee, Anno 2499. Seventhly, from
the building of Solomon's Temple, Anno 2432. And eighthly, the Captivity of
Babylon, Anno 3357 The most usual reckoning in England, is only that of the
Worlds Creation, and Christ's appearance in the flesh: the first seldom used
but only by Chronologers, and Writers of Histories.

Qu. Since Adam, Methusalem, and some other of the Patriarchs lived nine
hundred and odd years, why did God never suffer any man to accomplish a
thousand?

An. Some learned Persons give this reason, because a thousand years has in it
a type of perfection; and God never suffered any to fulfill it, to show that
there is no absolute perfection in this world.

Qu. What two Philosophers were those who were so eminent for two notable
qualities wherewith they were endued, the like of them not to be foundin our
modern Histories?

An. Democritus and Heraclitus; the first whereof always laughed, the other
continually wept: which two different passions are much canvased by Authors,
which of them is most suitable to humane Nature; indeed our appetites are most
greedy to desire the first, but sound reason rightly weighed will conclude for
the last: Solomon tell us, that it is better for us to go into the house of
mourning, them into the house of laughter: and that the laughter of fools is
madness. Besides, History tells us, that Agelastus, the Grandfather of Crassus,
a very wise man, was so reserved, that he never laughed in all his life but
once, which was when he saw the Ass eating of Thistles. But what need we go any
farther than (...) Holy Wtit? if we consider our blessed Savior, we cannot
find in the Scripture that he laughed, but that he wept, we read of these three
times,

1. When Lazarus was dead. 2. Over Jerusalem. 3. Upon the Cross, when he
delivered up his Spirit with cries and tears.
Qu. What four things are those which we are by Divinos advised often to
meditate upon?

An. Death, Judgment, Heaven, and Hell; to which may be added the death of
Christ, and the Temptations of the World, as one has neatly couched in these
Verses:

Mors tua, Mors Christi, Fraus Mundi, Gloria Coeli,
Et dolor inferni, sunt meditanda tibi.
Thy death, the death of Christ, the world's temptation,
Heavens joys, Hells torment, be thy meditation.
Qu. What was the Sentence, according to the opinion of some, that Christ wrote
with his Finger in the dust of the pavement of the Temple, when they brought
the Woman before him which was taken in adultery?

An. Some say it was that which he then spoke, He that is without fault, let
him throw the first stone at her: Others imagine it to be thus, Festucam in
oculo fratris cernis, trabem in tuo non vides, Thou feast the mote in thy
Brothers eye, but not the beam in thy own. But this case is doubtful, and for
such questions I like the answer of him that said, Where the Scripture has not
a Mouth to speak, do not thou have a Tongue to ask.

Qu. In what respect is our Birth and Death compared the one to the other?

An. In grief and sorrow, only herein is the difference, that the first is
most painful to our Mothers, the last to our selves.

Qu. What is Life? and what is it to Live?

An. The beginning of man's life is sorrow, the end of it sorrow, and the middle
nothing but grief and sorrow; which conjoyns both the middle and end, and makes
one complete mass of sorrow; of which one writes,

What joy to live upon the earth can be,
Where naught but grief and misery we see.
Hear therefore what old age advises youth, Young men, hear us old men; that
being young men, heard old men, and have both by relation and experience found
the truth hereof.

Qu. Which is the best way to overcome wrongs?

An. By neglecting them, according to that of the Poet,

Wrongs if neglected, vanish in short time;
But heard with anger, we confess the crime.
Qu. How many are they among other Faculties, that the whole world is governed
by?

An. Three, Divinity, Law, and Physic, as one wittily explains it in this
Verse.

Theologis animum subjecit lapsus Adami,
Et Corpus Medicis, and bona Juridicis.
Our souls, our bodies, goods by Adams Fall,
Are to Divines, Physicians, Lawyers thrall*
Much to the same purpose is that which an excellent Poet writ concerning our
humane Bodies;

Our bodies are like Shoes, which off we cast,
Physic their Cobbler is, and Death the last.
Qu. How many times was that stately Fabric at Jerusalem built?

An. Three, the first by Solomon, in providing the Materials whereof there were
thirty thousand Workmen, who wrought by the ten thousand a month in Lebanon,
seventy thousand Laborers that bear Burdens, eight thousand Quarry-men that
hewed in the Mountains; and to expedite the business, that it should not be
according to the Proverb, Church-work goes on slowly, there were no less than
three thousand and three hundred Officers and Overseers.

What manner of Fabric this was, you may read in the first of Kings, the sixth
and seventh chapters, where it is fully described: It was destroyed by
Nebuchadnezzar King of Babylon, An. Mundi 3350. After the return of the Jews
again from the Babylonian Captivity it was rebuilt, but far short of that
stateliness and grandeur which it had at first; so that the Prophet Haggai had
good occasion to say unto the People, Who is left among you that saw this House
in her first glory? is it not in your eyes in comparison of it as nothing?
Haggai 2. 5. Now besides the stateliness of the building, in five other things
it was defective: for first it wanted the Pot of Manna; which the Lord
commanded Moses to lay up before the Testimony for a memorial, Exodus 6. 22.
Secondly, the Rod of Aaron, which only amongst all the Rods of the Princes of
Israel budded, and was by God commanded to be kept before the Testimony, for a
token against the Rebels, Corath, Dathan, and Abiram, Number. 17. 10. Thirdly, the
Ark of the Covenant, which was placed in the Sanctum Sanctorum, 1 King. 6. 19.
Fourthly, the two Tables of the Law, written by Gods own Finger, which were by
Moses placed in the Ark of the Covenant, Exodus 4. 20. And fifthly, the Fire of
sacrifice which came down from Heaven, which Fire was by the Priests to be kept
continually burning.

The third Building thereof was by Herod the Ascalonite, who plucked down the
second Building, and erected it more sumptuous and magnificent than before. In
this Temple our blessed Savior and his Apostles preached Salvation to Jew and
Gentile; so that we may say the glory of this latter Temple exceeded that of
the first. It was finally destroyed by the Romans under the conduct of Titus
the Son of Vespasian, according to the words of our Savior, that that
generation should not pass away, until they should not see one stone thereof
lying upon another.

Why wonder we then that frail people die,
When such fair Monuments in ruin lie?
Qu. Which is accounted the chief Church of all Paris in France?

An. That of Nostre Dame, said to be first founded by St. Saminian, afterward
re-edified, or rather new built by Philip Augustus, Anno 1196. It is a very
fair and awful Building, adorned with very beautiful Forts, and two Towers of
especial height: At your first entrance on the right hand, is the Effigies of
St. Christopher, with our Savior on his shoulders, of a very Gigantick
stature: It has in it four ranks of Pillars, thirty in rank, and forty five
little Chapels, or Mass-closets, built between the outermost range of Pillars,
and the Walls; it is in length one hundred seventy four paces, and sixty in
breadth, and just so many high. The two Towers are seventy yards higher than
the rest of the Church, and is indeed a very beautiful Building, yet far short
of what our Church of St. Paul in London was, when it was in its glory:

Before such time age made her ruinous,
Which Reverend Laud sought to revive again,
And make her to appear fair and gorgeous,
That she as Queen of all the rest might reign,
When as at last her glory did expire,
In that sad fate of London 's dismal Fire.
Qu. What three English Churches are those that have their several Prerogatives
before any other in the Land?

An. Paul's, Westminster, and Salisbury; Paul's for her Antiquity, Westminster
for her curious Workman-ship, and Sansbury for vatiety of Pillars, Windows, and
Gates, Secondly, Paul's before the late conflagration of Fire was famous, for
the continual Society of the Living, Westminster is renowned for her Royal
Sepulcher of the Dead; and Salisbury famous for her Tripartile Calculation of
the Year, having in it as many Windows, Pillars, and Gates, as there are Days,
Hours and Months in the Year; of which Mr. Cambden the famous Antiquary thus
writes:

Mira canam. Soles quot continet annus, in una
Tam numerosa, ferunt, aede fenestra micant.
Marmoreasque tenet fusas tot ab art columnas,
Comprensas horas quot vagus annus habet:
Tot gaudet portis, quot mensibus annus abundat:
Res mira, at vera res celebrata fide.
How many days in one whole year there be,
So many windows in one Church we see;
So many Marble Pillars there appear,
As there are hours throughout the flitting year.
So many gates as Moons one year does view
Strange tale to tell, yet not so strange as true.
For our other Churches, the most renowned is; First, the Cathedral of Lincoln.
2 For a private Parish Church, that of Ratcliff in Bristol. 3 For a private
Chapel, that of Kings-Colledge in Cambridge. 4 The Minster of Ely, though now
much defaced by the injury of the late rebellious times. 5 For the curious
workman-ship of the Glass; that of Christ-Church in Canterbury. 6 For the
exquisite beauty of the Fronts, those of Wells and Peterborough. 7 For a
pleasant lightsom Church, the Abbey-Church at Bath. And 8 For an ancient and
reverend Fabric, the Minster of York: though many of these Churches which our
hotheaded Zealots pretended, were beautified by superstition, were in the late
times of rebellion, by sacrilegious ignorance, much defaced and ruined.

Qu. Who was it (according to report) that built the Church of Sopham in
Norfolk?

An. Tradition tells us, that in former times there lived in that Town a
certain Pedlar, who dreamed that if he came up to London, and stood on the
Bridge there, he should hear very joyful News, which he at first slighted; but
afterward his Dream being doubled and trebled unto him, he resolved to try the
Issue of it, and accordingly to London he came, and stood on the Bridge there
for two or three days, but heard nothing which might give him any comfort in
the least, that the profit of his journey would be equal to his pains. At last
it so happened, that a Shopkeeper there hard by, having noted his fruitless
standing, seeing that he neither sold any Wares nor asked an Alms, went to him,
and demanded his business; to which the Pedlar made answer, that being a
Countryman he dreamed adream that if he came up to London he should hear News.
And art thou (said the Shopkeeper) such a fool to take a Journey on such a
foolish Errand? why I tell thee this last night I dreamed that I was at Sopham
in Norfolk, a place utterly unknown to me; where me-thought behind a Pedlars
house, in a certain Orchard, and under a great Oak-tree, if I dug there I
should find a mighty Mass of Treasure: now think you that I am so unwise to
take so long a Journey upon me, only by the instigation of a foolish Dream! No,
no, far be such folly from me, therefore honest Countryman, I shall advise
thee to make haste home again, and not to spend thy precious time in the
expectation of the event of an idle Dream. The Pedlar, who noted well his
words, and knowing all the things he had said to concenter in himself, glad of
such joyful News, went speedily home, and dug under the Oak, where he found
an infinite Mass of Money, with part of which, the Church happening to fall
down, he very sumptuously re-edified the same; having his Statue therein to
this day cut out in stone, with his pack at his back, and his dog at his heels;
his memory being also preserved by the same form of picture in most of the
glass-windows in Taverns and Alehouses of that Town to this day.

Qu. Wherefore on the top of Church-steeples is the Cock set upon the Cross, of
a long continuance?

An. The Papists tell us, it is for our instruction; that whilst aloft we
behold the Cross, and the Cock standing thereon, we may remember our sins, and
with Peter seek and obtain mercy.

Qu. What is the cause why the Pope Christens his Bells?

An. That being by him thus sanctified, the sound of them might drive devils
out of the air, clear the Skies, chase away storms and tempests, quench fires,
and give comfort to all the dead that hear them: as the Bells themselves will
tell you, being rung to this tune:

Behold our uses are not small,
That God to praise Assemblies call;
That break the Thunder, 'wail the dead,
And cleanse the air of tempests bred,
With fear keep off the Fiends of Hell
And all by virtue of my Knell.
Qu. What three things is it wherein the Town of Saffron-walden in Essex does
excel?

An. A Magnificent House, a sumptuous Church, and a large pair of Stocks. The
House that is commonly called Audley-End House, built by Thomas Howard Earl of
Suffolk, in the time of King James, a most gallant uniform Building, little
inferior to any of the choicest Statues in Europe. The Church stands in the
middle of the Town upon a Hill, having an ascent each way unto it, which makes
it appear the more graceful: It is very large, and adorned with curious
Workman-ship, has an excellent Ring of Bells, and has from time to time been
continually kept in good repair. The Stocks are made of one entire Tree, and
will by the legs, wrists, and Thumbs, hold above forty several persons, and are
by the Inhabitants of that town shown to strangers as a great rarity.

Qu. In what place did the Ancients, commonly use to bury their dead?

An. Former Ages would not permit any dead Corpse to be buried within the walls
of their Cities. Thus we read that Abraham bought a field wherein to bury his
dead; and we find in the seventh of Luke, that the widow of Naims son was
carried out to be buried. This instance also we find to be used amongst the
Athenians, Corinthians and other of the Graecians. Amongst the Romans it was
the fashion to burn the bodies of the dead within their City, which custom
continued till the bringing in of the Laws of Athens, commonly called The Laws
of the Twelve Tables; one of which Laws runs in these words, In urbe ne
sepelito, nemo urito. After this Prohibition, their dead Corpse were first
burned in Campus Martius, and there was covered in sundry places in the fields.
The frequent Urns, or Sepulchral Stones dug up amongst us here in England,
(as of late days were many in Spittlefields near London) are sufficient
testimonies of this assertion. Besides, we may find in Appium, that the chief
reason why the rich men in Rome would not yield to that Law, called Lex Agraria
or the Law of dividing the Roman possessions equally among the people was,
because they thought it an irreligious thing that the monuments of their Fore
fathers should be sold unto others. The first that is Registered to have been
buried in the City, was Trojanus the Emperor; afterward it was granted as an
honorary to such as had deserved well of the Republic: but afterward when
Christian Religion prevailed over heathenism, Churchyards (those Dormitories of
the Saints) were consecrated, and the liberty of burying within the walls was
alike granted to all.

Qu. Which is the surest way to make a man's name immortal, either by strong
stone buildings and calling them after their own names; or like Homer, Virgil,
or Ovid, by leaving behind them some witty Poem, or Invention in Paper?

An. To this the Poet will give you a ready Answer.

Marmor a Maeonii vincunt monument a libelli;
Vivitur ingenio, caetera mortis erunt.
The Muses Works, Stone Monuments out-last,
It Is Wit keeps Life, all else death will down cast.
Qu. What death (according to History) do we find that Aristotle that great
Philosopher, and Searcher out of the Secrets of Nature, died of?

An. History tells us that he drowned himself in the River Euripus, which being
a small River betwixt Eubeo and Achata, and ebbing and flowing seven times in a
day, contrary to the nature of other Rivers, when he could not find out the
reason thereof, it is said that he threw himself therein, with these words:
Quia ego non capio te, tu capias me. If I cannot contain thee, thou shall
contain me.

Qu. Who was the first man that publicly in writing set forth a tractate of
the Antipodes?

An. Many are of opinion that the Antipodes was known to the Ancients, although
they were by them never discovered; and therefore it is said, That in former
times it was known that there were Antipodes, although the Antipodes were not
known: but the first that declared it in writing, was Virgilius Bishop of
Salizburg in Germany, which Boniface Bishop of Mentz in that Country happening
to see, and supposing that under that strange name some damnable Doctrine was
contained, made complaint first to the Duke of Bohemia, and next to Pope
Zachary, Anno 745. By whom the poor Bishop (unfortunate only in being learned
in such a time of Ignorance) was condemned of Heresy for that which now every
ordinary Seaman can demonstrate for truth.

Qu. Who first broacht the opinion of the mutability of the Earth, that it
turns round about the Center of the Sun?

An. The first that publicly declared himself of this opinion was Copernicus,
a Doctrine so strange in those times, that an able Poet thus writ to him:

Thou thinks the Earth moves round, that is a strange tale,
When thou did write this, thou were under sail.
And yet now this opinion is taken up by our ablest Astrologers, as Mr.
Vincent, Wing, Mr. Saunders, Mr. Leyburn, and others.

Qu. Why is virtue more talked of, than practiced?

An. Because every one desires the name of Virtuous, although he do not deserve
it, according to the Poet:

Virtue we praise, but practice not her good,
(Athenian-like) we act not what we know;
So many men do talk of Robin Hood,
Who never yet shot arrow from his Bow.
The old Roman built a Temple to Honor, which whosoever would come to, must
first pass through the Temple of Virtue, intimating thereby that Honor was the
reward of Virtue, and that without virtuous actions none could come to Honors
preferments.

Qu. What people lie in most state?

An. Beggars, who have the Heavens for their Canopy.

Qu. What is the right part of a Judge?

An. To hear both sides indifferently, and not to be prepossessed in any case,
for thereby though he do Justice, yet himself errs, according to the Poet;

He that does Judge, and will but one side hear,
Though he Judge right, he is no good Justicer.
Qu. What is that that bears all, forms all, nourishes all, increases all,
creates all, buries all, and receives all into her again?

An. The Earth.

Qu. Why can no man be said to be truly happy, or miserable in this life?

An. Because as the Poet said,

Unmedled Joys here to no man befall,
Who least has some, who most has never all.
Qu. Who first found out the use of weights and measures?

An. One Phidon an Argine, in the time of Arbanes the Mede, An. M. 3146.

Qu. What makes it that few people are content with their condition?

An. Because the desire of riches increases ^n the getting of them, few people
being ^ontented with that state which God has allotted to them.

The poor have little, Beggars none,
The rich too much, enough not one.
Qu. Why was Diogenes accounted an Epicure?

An. Because out of love to Wine, when it was all drunk out, he would live in
the Cask.

Qu. Why do Beggars go with hungry bellies?

An. Because it is Money rules the Roast.

Qu. What is that is spoken of in the Hebrew, Greek, and Latin Tongues?

An. That the Hebrew is most sacred, the Greek most rich, and the Latin most
copious.

Qu, How came the word Harlot first in use among the English?

An. From Arlet, King William the Conquerors Mother, whose Father Robert Duke
of Normandy, passing through Falaise a town in France, and seeing this Arlet
being a Skinners daughter, nimbly to trip it in a dance, he thought he would
not be sluggish in a bed, and therefore sent for her to accompany him that
night; to which she readily condescended, and the Duke that night begat on he^
William the Bastard, King of England; inspight to whom and disgrace to his
Mother, the English called all whores Harlots, a word yet in use with us unto
this day,

Qu. Who first brought up that use of pledging one another, being drunk unto?

An. This Custom took its original on such time as the Danes Lorded it in this
Land, who used when the English drank, to stabb them, or cut their throats: to
avoid which vill any, the party then drinking would request some of the next
sitters by, to be his surety or pledge, whilst he paid Nature his due. And hence
have we our custom of pledging one another which begun at first upon necessity,
is now grown to be a Complement, and common to all.

Qu. What two Letters are those, that at ou^ entrance into the world we all cry
out upon?

An. A and E, as the Poet explains in this verse.

Clamant A, vel E. quot quot nascunour ab Eva,

All cry out of E and A,
That are born of Eva.
Qu. What is delivered in Histories concerning the three Kings of Collen, or
the wise men that came out of the East to worship our Savior?

An. It is said that those wise men were three Kings, and that they came out of
Arabia; first in respect that Arabia is East from Jerusalem and secondly
because it is said in the 72 Psalm, The Kings of Arabia shall bring gifts.
Their bodies are said to have been translated from Palestine by Helena the
Mother of Constantine, to Constantinople, from thence by Eustasius Bishop of
Millain, unto Millain; and finally brought to Collen in Germany by Rainoldus
Bishop thereof, Anno ^ 164. where they lie interred; the first of them being
called Melchior, an old man with a long beard, who offered Gold as unto a King.
The second called Gaspar, a beard^ess young man, who offered Frankincense ^s
unto God. The third called Balthazar, a Black Moor with a spreading Beard, who
offered Myrrh, as unto a man ready for his sepulcher.

Three kings to the King of Kings, three Gifts did bring,
Gold, Incense, Myrrh; as Man, as God, as King.
Three Holy Gifts be likewise given by thee
To Christ, even such as acceptable be.
For Myrrh, tears; for Frankincense, impart.
Submissive prayers; for pure Gold, a pure heart
Qu. Wherefore did Pilate wash his hands after he had condemned our Savior?

An. Vainly thinking by that Ceremony to wash the blood off from his guilty
Conscience*

O faciles animi, qui tristia crimina, caedes, Fluminea tolli posse putatis
aqua.

Too facile souls, which think such heinous matters,
Can be abolished by the River waters.
We before spoke of the Popes Christening of Bells, now we will show you in
what manner it is done.

The Bell that is to be baptized, is so hanged that it may be washed within and
without. Then in comes the Bishop in his Episcopal Robes, attended by one of
his Deacons, and sitting by the Bell in his Chair, says with a loud voice, the
50, 53, 56, 66, 69, 85, and 12 Psalms, or some of them: then does he exercise
severally, salt and water, and having conjured these ingredients into an
Holywater, he washes with it the Bell, both on the inside and the outside,
wiping it dry with a Linen Cloth, he then reads the 145, 146, 147, 148, 149,
and 150 Psalms, then he draws a Cross on it with his right thumb dipped in
hallowed Oil, (Chrisme they call it) and then prays over it. His Prayer
finished, he wipeth out that Cross, and having said over the 48 Psalm, he
draws on it with the same Oil, seven other Crosses, saying, Sanctificetur and
consecretur, Domine, Campana ista, in nomine, etc. After another Prayer the
Bishop takes the Censor, and putting into it Myrrh and Frankincense, sets
it on fire, and puts it under the Bell, that it may receive all the fume of
it. This being done, the 76 Psalm read, and some other prayers repeated, the
Bell has received his whole and entire baptism, and is from thenceforth very
fit and able to ring out, Ding, Dong, Dong.

Qu.

Who are those that pray for all,
Defend all,
Feed all,
Devour all?
An. In the representation of an ancient picture, it was thus resolved: The
Pope with his Clergy says, I pray for you all; The Emperor with his Electors, I
defend you all: The Clown with his sack of Corn, I feed you all; at ^ast comes
Death and says, I devour you all; For,

-- Mors ultima linea rerum.

Death is a Pursivant with Eagles wings
That strikes at poor men's doors, and gates of Kings.
Further Verses upon Death.

Death is a Fisherman, the world we see
His Fish Pond is, and we the Fishes be.
He sometimes Angler-like does with us play,
And slily takes us one by one away:
Diseases are the murdering hooks, which he
Does catch us with; the bait, Mortality,
Which we poor silly Fish devour, till struck,
At last too late we feel the bitter Hook.
At other times he brings his Net, and then
At once sweeps up whole Cities full of men,
Drawing up thousands at a Draught, and saves
Only some few, to make the other Graves;
His Net some raging Pestilence: Now he
Is not so kind as other Fishers be;
For if they take one of the smaller Frye,
They throw him in again, he shall not die;
But Death is sure to kill all he can get,
And all is fish with him that comes to Net.
Qu. Why do the affections of Parents run upwards to their Children, and not
their Childrens un downward to them?

An. Experience tells us, that Parents are more tender and loving to their
Children by far, than Children are dutiful and obsequious to their Parents.
Even as the Sap in the Root of a Tree ascends into the Branches thereof, but
returns not from the branches to the Root again, but runs forth from thence
into seed; so parents love their Children, who return not that love to them
again, but their affections run forwards to a further procreation. Hence comes
it to pass, that one father with more willingness brings up ten children, than
ten children in his want, will sustain one Father. And whereas you hear of one
unnatural Parent, you shall hear of ten disobedient children.

Qu. Have the Heavens a particular influence upon the same Climate, though the
Inhabitants be changed?

An. Yes they have; for as these Caelestial bodies considered in the general,
do work upon all sublunary bodies in the general, by light, influence, and
motion; so have they a particular operation on particulars. An operation there
is wrought by them in a man, as born at such and such a minute, and again as
born under such and such a Climate. The one derived from the setting of the
Houses, and the Lord of the Horoscope at the time of his Nativity, the other
from that Constellation which governs as it were the Province of his birth,
and is the Genius, or Deus Tutelaris loci.

Qu. In what Points does the Greek and Muscovite Church differ from that of the
Romesh and the reformed?

An. In these ten.

1. Denying the Holy Ghost to proceed from the Father and the Son.

2. Denying Purgatory, but praying for the dead.

2. Believing that holy men enjoy not the presence of God before the
Resurrection.

4. Communicating in both kinds, but using leavened bread, and mingling warm
water with wine: which both together they distribute with a spoon.

5. Receiving children of seven years old to the Sacrament, because then they
begin to sin.

6. Forbiding extreme Unction, Confirmation, and fourth Marriages.

7. Admitting none to Orders but such as are married, and prohibiting marriage
to them that are actually in Orders.

8. Rejecting carved Images, but admiring the painted.

9. Observing four Lents in the year.

And tenthly, reputing it unlawful to fast on Saturdays.

The main points in which the Grecians and Muscovite differ, is in this manner
of distributing the Sacrament, and the exacting of Marriage at the Ordination
of Priests.

Qu. Wherein do the Cholchians differ from other Christians their Neighbors?

An. In three circumstances.

1. In not Baptizing their Children till the eighth year.

2. In not entering into Churches till the sixtieth year, but hearing Divine
Service without the Temple.

3. In dedicating their youth to theft and rapine; their old Age to the
difficult work of Repentance.

Qu. Whereon do the Jacobites differ from the Greek and Roman Church?

An. In four several opinions.

1. They acknowledge but one Will, Nature, and operation in Christ.

2. They use circumcision in both Sexes.

3. They sign their children with the sign of the Cross, imprinted with a
burning Iron.

4. They affirm Angels to consist of two substances, fire and light.

These Jacobites are so called from Jacobus Syrus, who lived Anno 530. the
Patriarch of this Sect is always called Ignatius, he keeps residence at
Garani in Mesopotamia, and is said to have 160000 Families under his
jurisdiction.

Qu. Of what Sect are those Christians called Melchites?

An. They are of the same Tenets with the Graecians, excepting only that that
they celebrate Divine Service as solemnly on the Saturday, as the Sunday. They
take their denomination from Melchi, which in the Syriac^ signifies a King;
because in matters of Religion the people followed the Emperors Injunctions,
and were of the Kings Religion, a^ the saying is.

Qu. What Sect of Christians are those calls Maranites?

An. They are a People found only in Moun^ Libanus: their Patriarch is always
called Peter, he has under his jurisdiction nine Bishops, and resideth
commonly at Tripolis* They held heretofore diverse opinions with the Graecians,
but in the Papacy of Clement the eighth, they received the Roman Religion,
which they do still adhere to.

Qu. What different Tenets are those of the Armenian Christians from the rest
of their Neighbors?

An. Four.

1. In receiving Infants to the Lords Table immediately after Baptism.

2. In abstaining from unclean Beasts.

3. In fasting on Christmas Day.

4. In holding their Children over the fire, as a necessary circumstance in
Baptism, because John the Baptist told the people which followed him, that
Christ should Baptize them with the Spirit, and with fire.

This Sect is very numerous, and is governed by two Patriarchs, whereof the one
has under his jurisdiction all Turcomania, a great Province in Armenia the
greater, comprehending 150000 Families, besides very many Monasteries: and the
other has under him the two Provinces of Armenia the lesser, and Cilicia,
comprehending 20000 Families or thereabouts.

Qu. What are those Christians called Georgians?

An. They are the inhabitants of Georgia and consent in most Doctrinal points
with the Grecians, only they acknowledge not the Patriarch of Constantinople,
but have a Patriarch of their own, who is for the most part resident in his
house on Mount Sinai in Palestina, and has under his jurisdiction eighteen
Bishops

Qu. What were the different opinions of the Indian Christians, before such
time they embraced the Doctrine of the Church of Rome?

An. 1. To administer the Sacrament with bread seasoned with salt.

2. In stead of Wine, to use the juice of Raisons, softened in water one night,
and so dressed forth.

3. Not to baptize their children till forty days old, unless in danger of
death.

4. To permit no Images in their Churches, but of the Cross only.

5. To debar their Priests from second marriages.

And sixthly, to paint God with three heads on one body, denoting thereby the
Trinity.

Qu. Wherein do the Copties or Christians of Egypt differ from other Christians?

An. In these four particulars.

1. They confer all sacred orders, under the Priesthood, upon Infants
immediately after Baptism, their Parents till they come to sixteen years of
age, performing their office for them.

2. They allow marriage in the second degree of Consanguinity, without any
dispensation.

3. They observe not the Lord's Day, nor any other Festivals, but only in the
Cities.

4. They embrace and read in their Liturgies a Gospel, written (as they say) by
Nicodemus.

Qu. What special Sects were amongst the Jews?

An. These four, Scribes, Pharisees, Essenes and Sadduces.

Qu. What were the Scribes?

An. Their office was double; first to read and expound the Law in the Temple
and Synagogues; and secondly to execute the office of a Judge, in ending and
composing actions.

Qu. What were the Pharisees?

An. The Pharisees owe their name to Phares, which signifies both interpretari
and separare, as being both interpreters of the Law, and Separatists from the
rest of the Jewish Church, besides the Pentateuch, or five Books of Moses, they
adhered also to traditions. They denied the sacred Trinity, and held the
fulfilling of the Law to consist in the outward Ceremonies. They relied more on
their own merits than Gods mercy, attributing most things to destiny, and
refused commerce with Publicans and Sinners.

Qu. What were the Essenes?

An. The Essenes had their name from Ascha, that is, facere; because they
wrought with their hands. They lived together as it were in Colleges, and in
it every one had their Chapel for their devotion. All their estates they
enjoyed in common, and received no man into their fellowship, unless he would
give all that he had into their Treasury; and not then under a three years
probationership.

Qu. What were the Sadduces?

An. The Sadduces received their Name from Sedec^^, which signifies Justice.
They believed not the being of Angels or Spirits, the resurrection of the body,
nor that there was a Holy Ghost: and received for Scripture only the
Pentateuch, or five books of Moses.

Qu. Wherein does (...) Fundamentals of the Mahumetan Religion consist?

An. The whole is delivered in the book of their Religion called the Alcoran,
and is but an Exposition and Gloss of these eight Commandments.

1. Every one ought to believe that God is a great God, and only God, and
Mahomet is his Prophet.

2. Every man must marry to increase the Sectaries of Mahomet.

3. Every one must give of his wealth to the poor.

4. Every one must make his prayers five times in a day.

5. Every one must keep a Lent one month in the Year.

6. Be obedient to thy parents.

7. Thou shall not kill.

8. Do unto others, as thou would be done unto thy self.

Many other Injunctions he laid upon them, as forbidding them Wine, and the
eating of Swines-flesh. Friday he ordained to be the Sabbath day, to
distinguish his Followers from Jews and Christians, who solemnize the days
following. To those who observed his Religion, and faithfully kept his Laws, he
promised Paradise, spread here and there with Silk Carpets, adorned with
verdant flowery Fields, watered with Christaline Rivers, and beautified with
trees of Gold, and Arbors of pleasure, in whose cool shade they shall spend
their time with amorous Virgins, whose mansion shall not be far distant. The
men shall never exceed the age of thirty years, nor the women of fifteen; and
both shall have their Virginities renewed as fast as lost.

Thus whereas men no knowledge have within them,
This was the only way to take to win them.
A carnal heart minds only sordid pleasure,
And never looks after Heavenly Treasure.
Many idle, ridiculous Opinions do they hold concerning the end of the world;
that at the winding of a Horn, not all flesh only, but the Angels themselves
shall die; That the Earth with an Earthquake shall be kneaded together lke a
lump of Dough: That a second blast of the same Horn, shall after forty days
restore all again: That Cain shall be the Captain or Ringleader of the Damned,
who shall have the countenances of Dogs and Swine: That they shall pass over
the Bridge of Justice laden with their sins in Satchels; that the greater
sinners shall fall into Hell, the lesser into Purgatory only. That all those
who professed and practiced any Religion should go into Paradise; the Jews
under the Banner of Moses, the Christians under the Banner of Christ. And that
himself should be metamorphosed into a great Ram, and all those of his
followers into little fleas, who should shroud themselves in his long fleece,
when he would jump into Heaven, and so convey them all thither. With a thousand
of the like fopperies.

Qu. Which Heretic in his time had the most followers?

An. Arius, a priest of Alexandria, who hatched that devilish Doctrine against
the perpetual Divinity of Christ; to beat down which Heresy, the first Council
of Nice was called, wherein was made the Nicene Creed, and the Clause, of one
substance with the Father, proved to be agreeable to the Word. Constantine
being then Emperor, sent for Arius to subscribe to the Decrees of this Council,
who went to Constantinople with his own heretical Tenets written in a paper,
and put into his bosom; where reading before the Emperor the Decrees of the
Council, he writ a Recantation of his Heresy, laying his hand on his breast,
and swearing, he meant as he had written: but though thereby he blinded the
Emperor, God manifested his hypocrisy; for passing in great triumph through
the streets of the City, a necessity of Nature enforcing him, he withdrew aside
into a House of Ease, where he voided out his Guts, and sent his soul as a
Harbinger to the Devil, to provide room for his body. However his Heresy died
not with him, but overspread so far, that one of the Fathers complained, The
whole world is turned Arian. And long time it was ere this Serpent of Error was
knocked on the head by the Hammer of Gods Word, though very powerful then in
the mouths of many faithful Ministers.

Many other Heresies might be reckoned up, which were frequent in the primitive
times, as the Nicholaitans, Donatists, etc. but we descend to speak of some
more modern.

Qu. Who was the first that broached that ridiculous Schism of the Adamites?

An. One Picardus a Native of Belgia, or the Low Countries, who coming into
Bohemia, drew a great sort of men and women unto him, pretending to bring them
to the same state of perfection that Adam was in before his fall: and having
gotten a great many disciples, they betook themselves to an Island called
Paradise, and went stark naked, having no respect unto marriage, yet would they
not accompany any woman until the man coming to Adam, said unto him, Father
Adam, I am enflamed toward this woman: and Adam made answer, Increase and
multiply. But long they had not lived in this lascivious course of Irreligion,
but Zisca that renowned Bohemian Captain hearing of them, with a selected Band
of Soldiers, entered their Fools Paradise, and put them all to the Sword, An.
Dom. 1416:

The same pretense to bring men to Paradise, though in a different way, was
once practiced by Aladine a seditious Persian, who inhabited a Valley in that
Country, which he fortified with a strong Castle. Hither he brought all the
lusty Youths, and beautiful Maidens of the adjoining Provinces; The women were
confined to their Chambers, the men to prison, where having endured much
sorrow, they were severely cast into dead sleeps, and conveyed to the women,
where they were entertained with all the pleasures youth and lust could desire,
or a sensual mind affect. To the eyes were presented curious Pictures, and
other costly Sights, the Ears were charmed with melodious Music, the Nose
delighted with odoriferous Smells, the Taste satiated with costly Viands, and
the Touch satisfied with whatsoever might be pleasing unto it, nothing was
wanting which a sensual appetite could desire to enjoy. Having lived in this
happiness a whole day, they were in a like sleep conveyed to their Irons. Then
would Aladine come unto them and inform them how they had been in Paradise, in
which place it was in his power to seat them eternally, and which he would do
if they would hazard their lives in his Quarrels. They (poor souls) thinking
all to be real, swore to perform whatsoever he requested: whereupon he
destinated them to the massacre of such Princes as he had a mind to be rid out
of the way; which for the hopes of this Paradise, they willingly put in
execution, refusing no dangers to be there the sooner. One of these was he who
so desperately wounded our King Edward the first, when he was in his Wars in
the Holy Land.

Qu. Who was the most notorious Heretic of these latter times?

An. One David George, born at Delft in Holland, who called himself King, and
Christ immortal. He fled with his wife and children Anno 1544 to Basil, where
he divulged his doctrine; the chief heads whereof were,

1. That the Law and the Gospel were unprofitable for the attaining of Heaven,
but his doctrine able to save such as received it.

2. That he was the true Christ and Messiah.

3. That he had been till that present kept in a place unknown to the Saints.

And fourthly, that he was not to restore the house of Israel by death or
tribulation, but by the love and grace of the Spirit.

He died in the year 1556. and three years after his doctrine was by them of
Basil condemned, his Goods confiscated, and his bones taken up and burned. He
bound his disciples to three things.

1. To conceal his name.

2. Not to reveal of what condition he had been.

And thirdly, Not to discover the Articles of his doctrine to any man in Basil.

Thus every age produces Heretics,
Who against Christ, and true Religion kicks.
Qu. From whence had the Sect of the Anabaptists their first original?

An. From Germany about the year 1527. being very ripe in the Province of
Helvetia, where one of them in the presence of his Father and Mother, cut off
his brothers head, and said (according to the humor of that Sect, who boast
much of dreams, visions, and enthusiasms) that God had commanded him to do it.
Since which time this Sect, like a pernicious infection, has spread it self
into many Countries, having been very baneful to England, in our late uncivil
wars.

I might instance many examples more of our late Schismatics; as of the
Ranters, Fifth-Monarchy-men, etc. but we will now turn our pen to other matters.

Qu. What women of all others are most fruitful?

An. Beggars wives, that of all others, one would think, should be most barren.

Qu. What is man's ingress and egress in this world?

An. He is born headlong into this world, and carried to the grave with his
feet foremost; of which one thus writes:

Nature which headlong into life did throng us,
With our feet forwards to our grave does bring us;
What is less ours than this our borrowed breath?
We stumble into life, we go to death.
Qu. What is that State comparable unto, wherein is most Nobles and Gentry, and
the Husbandmen are made their mere drudges?

An. Sir Francis Bacon in his History of Henry the Seventh, likens them to
Coppicewoods, in which if you let them grow too thick in the stadles, they run
to bushes or briars, and have little clean under-wood. This may be evinced by
the Country of France, which is very numerous of Nobles and Gentry, but the
poor Peasants kept in a miserable servitude; by which means although their
Cavalry or Horse be very good, yet their Infantry or Foot comes infinitely far
short of those of ours in England, where the Commons enjoy such privileges as
the French Peasants neither have, nor can hope for.

Qu. What said the Poet concerning those who first adventured to plough the
Ocean waves with a Ship?

An.

Illi robur and aes triplex,
Circa pectus erat, qui fragilem tru^i
Commisit pelago ratem.
Hard was his heart as brass, which first did venture

In a weak Ship, on the rough Seas to enter.

Qu. What King of Scotland was he, on whom the Prophecy concerning Jacobs stone
was fulfilled, that a King of that Nation should live to be crowned thereupon?

An. King James, the first of that name of England, and the sixth of Scotland,
who was Crowned at Westminster, whither the same was brought by our Edward the
first at such time as he harassed Scotland with Fire and Sword, on which stone
was this written:

If Fates go right, where ere this Stone is pight,
The Regal Race of Scots shall rule that place.
This Stone is said to be the same on which Jacob slept, when to avoid his
brothers fury he fled to Padan-aram, to Laban his mother Rebeckahs brother. Of
which stone one thus further writes:

The Stone reserved in England many a day,
On which old Jacob his grave head did lay,
And saw descending Angels whilst he slept,
Which since that time by sundry Nations kept
From age to age I could recite you how,
Could I my pen that liberty allow.
A King of Scotland ages coming on,
Should live for to be crowned upon that Stone.
Qu. What three things are those which are accounted very strange, or rather
miraculous in the Country of Scotland?

An.

1. The Lake of Mirton, part of whose waters do congeal in winter, part of them
not.

2. The Lake of Lenox twenty four miles round, in which are thirty Islands, one
of which is driven to and fro in every tempest.

3. The Deaf-stone twelve foot high, and thirty three cubits thick; of this
rare quality, that a Musket shot off on the one side, cannot be heard by a man
standing on the other.

Qu. In how many forms does a Physician appear to his Patient?

An. In these three.

1. In the form of a skilful man, when he promises help.

2. In the shape of an Angel, when he performs it.

3. In the form of a Devil, when he asks his reward.

And therefore it is the Physicians Rule.

Accipe dum dolet, Take the second Fee, while the Sick hand gives it.

But if Diseases thou have none,
Let the Physician then alone;
For he thereby may purge thy purse,
And make thy body ten times worse.
Qu. What Trade is set up at the least charge?

An. A Scriveners: for the Wing of a Goose sets up forty of them.

Qu. Of what four parts should a good History consist?

An. Of Annals, Diaries, Commentaries, and Chronologies, borrowing from them
all somewhat to beautify her self withal; especially from Annals the year, and
Diaries the day in which any remarkable business happened; from Commentaries is
derived matter, and from Chronologies consent of Times, and Coetanity of
Princes.

Qu. What is it that makes Physicians well?

An. Other men's sickness, according to the Poet:

Physicians are most miserable men,
That cannot be denied:
For they are never truly well, but when
Most men are ill beside.
Qu. What were the names of the seven wise men of Greece?

An. Bius, Solon, Chilon, Cleobules, Pitarus, and Periander, but now our age is
grown so wise, or self-conceited, that as the Poet has it,

The wise men were but seven, now we scarce know
So many fools, the world so wise does grow.
And yet I think I may safely say with another Poet,

In these two terms all people we comprize,
Some men are wise, but most are otherwise.
Qu. Into how many parts is the world divided?

An. Into four parts and four Religions, Asia, Africa, America, Europe,

Jewish, Mohammedan, Pagan, Christian hope.

Qu. Why did Godfrey of Bulloign, when he took upon him the Title of the King
of Jerusalem, yet by no means would be persuaded to he crowned King?

An. Because he judged himself unworthy to wear a Crown of Gold, where his Lotd
and Savior was crowned with thorns.

With Golden Crown it is not fit to adorn,
The servants head, where the Masters Crown was thorn.
Such was the humility of great men in former times; thus we read of Saladine,
Emperor of the Turks, that at his death he caused a black shirt to be fixed on a
spear, and carried round about his Camp with this proclamation, This black
shirt was all that Saladine Conqueror of the East, (after all his Victories and
successes) carried with him to his grave,

Who then would credence give to humane glory,
Since that the best of all is transitory.
Qu. By what means (according as it is delivered by Authors) was Constantine
the great first converted to the Christian Faith?

An. Socrates Scholastius writing thereon, says, That when Constantine was
appointed Emperor in Britain, Maxentius was by the Pretorian Soldiers chosen at
Rome, and Lycinius nominated Successor by Maximinius. Against these Constantine
marching, and being in his mind somewhat pensive, he cast his eyes up to
Heaven: where he saw in the Sky a lightsome Pillar in the form of a Cross,
wherein were engraven these words, In hoc vince. The night following our
Savior appeared to him in a Vision, commanding him to bear the figure of that
Cross in his Banners, and he should overcome his Enemies. Constantine obeyed
the vision, and was accordingly victorious, after which he not only favored
the Christians, but became himself also one of that Holy profession,

This Constantine, as most Writers agree, was the Son of Helena, daughter to
Caelus or Coylus a British Prince; and Colchester was the place where he beheld
the light, as the Poet Necham learnedly sung,

From Colchester there rose a Star,
The Rays whereof gave glorious light,
Throughout the World in Climates far,
Great Constantine, Romes Emperor bright.
Helena his Mother was she that built the Temple of the Sepulcher at Jerusalem,
and found out the Holy Cross; much ado had the good Lady to find the place
where Christ was buried, for the Jews and Heathens had raised great Hillocks
thereon, and built there a Temple to Venus. This Temple being plucked down, and
the Earth dug away, she found the three Crosses whereon our blessed Savior
and the two Thieves had suffered; to know which of these was the right Cross,
they were all carried to a woman, who had long been visited with sickness, and
now lay at the point of death. The Crosses of the two thieves did the weak
woman no good; but as soon as they laid on her the Cross on which our Lord
dyed, she leaped up, and was restored to her former health; or this Cross there
are in several places shown so many pieces, that (as one says) were they all
put together, they would break the back of Simon of Cyrene to carry them: but
these are pious frauds, and so much the more tolerable, in that they bring
great gain into the Popes Treasury.

Of the Temple thus built, was afterward instituted an Order of Knights
Templers, by Hugh of Payennes, Anno 1113. and confirmed by Pope Eugenius; their
Ensign was a red Cross, in token that they should shed their blood to defend
Christ's Temple. They were Cross-legged, and wore on their backs the figure of
the Cross, for which they were by the common people called cross-back or
crouk-back, and by corruption crook-back. Edmund Earl of Lancaster, second Son
to our Henry the third, being of this Order, was vulgarly called Edmund
Crook-back, which made Henry the fourth conceited, that this Edmund (from whom
he was descended) was indeed the eldest Son of King Henry, but that for his
crookedness and deformity, his younger Brother was preferred to the Crown
before him. These Knights in process of time grew very rich, having in all
Provinces of Europe their subordinate Governors, in which they did possess no
less than 16000 Lordships. The House of our Law Students in London, called the
Temple, was the chief House of the Knights of this order in England, where at
this day some of their Images are to be seen, with their legs across, as they
were here buried; amongst whom was William Marshal the Elder, a most powerful
man in his time, William and Gilbert his Sons, Marshals of England and Earls of
Pembroke; upon Willa^m the Elder his Tomb, some years since, was read in the
upper part Comes Pembrochia, and on his side this verse,

Miles eram Martis, Mars m^^ltos vic^rit armis. This Order, which at first was
very poor, insomuch that their common seal, was two riding upon one Horse; in
little time with insatiable greediness, they hoarded up great wealth, by
withdrawing Tithes from the Church, appropriating spiritual things to
themselves, and other bad means; which riches of theirs turned to their ruin;
for Philip the fair King of France, having a plot to invest one of his Sons
with the Title of King of Jerusalem, procured of the Pope the revenue of this
Order, which he thought to do the better, because Clement the fifth then Pope,
for the love he bare to France, had transferred his seat from Rome to Avignon.
But though he affected the one, he was deceived in the other; for this Order
being dissolved, and many of them cruelly, and (as it is thought) unjustly put
to death, the Lands thereto belonging were by a general Council given to the
Knights Hospitallers, of St. John: which said Knights of that Order in England,
(whose principal mansion was in Smithfield,) sold the aforesaid House of the
Templers, to the Students of Laws, for the yearly rent of ten pound, about the
middle of the Reign of Edward the third, in whose hand it is continued unto
this day.

Qu. What four Countries in England are those which are famoused for four
principal qualities?

An. Staffordshire, Darbyshire, Cheshire, and Lancashire.

Staffordshire for Beer and Bread,
Darbyshire for Wool and Lead,
Cheshire the Chief of Men,
And Lancashire for fair Women.
Qu: What place in England is accounted most safe in the time of War, according
as we find it proverbially said?

An.

When as wars are aloft,
Safe is he that is at Christ's Croft;
And where should this Christ's Croft be,
But betwixt Rible and Mersie?
Qu. What may be said of these four Latin words?

Quid Puer, Quid Senex.

An. Take away the first letter from Puer, or a Boy, and there remains Ver,
which signifies the Spring.

Take two first letters from Senex, for an old man, and there remains Nex,
which signifies death: and thus are both their natures expressed in both their
Names.

Ver. Nex.

Ver is the Spring, most fragrant, fresh and gay;
Nex is the Night, that does conclude life's day.
Qu. What may we think of such as are Jesters to Noblemen or Princes, or such
as are Jaok-puddings on Mountebanks stages?

An. That a fool cannot perform the place, and none but Fools will undertake it.

Qu. What Book do not married men love to learn in?

An. The Horn-book.

Qu. What be the three properties belonging to a Whore?

An. Nimble of her hand, quick of her tongue, and light of her tail.

Qu. Whether are Whores or Thieves most prejudicial to a Commonwealth?

An. Whores by far; for Thieves do only steal and purloyn from men, and the
harm they do is to embellish men's goods, and bring them to poverty, this is the
only end of men's thieving, and the prejudice that grows from robbing and
filohing: but if a man fall into the company of a Whore, she flatters him, she
inveagles him, she bewitcheth him, that he spares neither goods nor lands to
content her, that is only in love with his coin. If he be married he forsakes
his Wife, leaves his Children, despises his friends, only to satisfy his lust
with the love of a base whore, who when he has spent all upon her, and he
brought to beggary, beats him out like the prodigal Son, and for a small
reward brings him, if to the fairest end, to beg; if to the second, to the
Gallows; or at the last and worst, to the Pox, or as prejudicial diseases.

Qu. What is the Art and cunning of a Whore?

An. Their eyes are Stauls, and their hands Lime-twigs; Cyrces had never more
charms, Calipso more enchantments, nor the Sirens more subtle tunes, than they
have crafty sleights, to inveagle young Cullies to their deceitful embraces.

Qu. Who were the most famous whores in former Ages?

An. Lais, Thais, Rhodope, the Lady Rosamond, Jane shore, etc. nor must we
think our present age to be altogether free.

For thus the Poet on his word engages,
Whores are in this, as well as former ages.
Qu. What is the Character of an honest Man?

An. That his Tongue is the Interpreter of his heart, though now considering
the hypocrisy and falsehood of most men, we may say with the Poet,

The tongue was once a servant to the heart,
And what it gave she freely did impart:
But now Hypocrisy is grown so strong,
She makes the heart a servant to the tongue.
Qu. What is that which of running becomes staid, of soft becomes hard, of weak
becomes strong, and of that which is infinite becomes but one?

An. Ice.

Qu. Who were the first that brought Tobacco into England?

An. It was first brought hither by the Mariners of Sir Francis Drake, Anno
1585. but brought into more request and custom by Sir Walter Rawleigh, who is
reported to have taken two pipes thereof as he went to execution. This Drug, as
it has found many friends, so has it met with diverse enemies, who report it
not only consumptive to the purse, but that it impaireth the inward parts,
corrupts the natural sweetness of the breath, stupifieth the brain, and is so
prejudicial to the general esteem of our Contrymen, that one says of them,
Anglorum corpora qui huic plantae tantopere indulgent, in Barbarorum naturam
degenerasse videntur. The two chief vertures ascribed to it are, that it is
good against Lues Venerea, that loath some disease, the Pox; and that it
voideth Rheum: for the first like enough it is, that so unclean a disease may
be fitted with so unwholesome a medicine: for the second good quality
attributed unto it, I think it rather to consist in opinion than truth, the
Rheum which it voideth, being only that which it self ingendereth. We may as
well conclude that Bottle-Ale breaks wind, for that effect we find to follow
the drinking of it, though indeed it is only the same wind which it self
conveyed into the stomach. I confess in some respects being moderately taken,
it may be serviceable for Physic; but Tobacco is by few taken now as
medicinal, it is grown a good fellow, and fallen from a Physician to a
Complement.

He Is no good fellow that is without the POX,
Burnt Pipes, Tobacco, and his Tinder-box.
Hear his farewell to it, who once much doted on this heathenish weed.

Farewell thou Indian smoke, Barbarian Vapor,
Thou enemy to life, foe to waste paper,
Thou do diseases in the body breed,
And like a Vulture on the purse do feed,
Changing sweet breath into a stinking loathing,
And with three pipes turn two pence into nothing.
Grim Pluto first invented it I think,
To poison all the world with Hellish stink;
And though by many it has been defended,
It makes men rotten ere their life's half ended:
Base Heathenish weed, how common is it grown,
That but a few years past was scarcely known!
When for to see one take it, was a riddle,
As strange as a Baboon to tune a Fiddle:
Were it confined only to Gentlemen,
It credit were to take Tobacco then;
But Bedlams, Tinkers, Cobblers, Water-bearers,
Your common Drunkards, and most common Swearers,
Are them that use it most, which makes me muse,
That men of quality the same should use.
Things common, commmonly are most neglected
Saving Tobacco, that is still respected.
If Man's flesh be like Hogs, as it is said,
It sure by smoking thus, is Bacon made.
Then farewell smoke, good for such things as these,
Against Lice, Sore heads, Scabs, Mange, or French Disease.
Qu. What Country in all the whole world is most commended for the equal and
just manner of the Rule thereof?

An. England; wherein there is referred to the King, absolute Majesty; to the
Nobles, convenient Authority; to the People, an incorrupted Liberty: all in a
just and equal proportion, a rare mixture of government, a perfect and happy
Composition; wherein the King has his full prerogative, the Nobles all due
respects, and the people, among other blessings, perfect in this, that they are
Masters of their own purposes, and have a strong hand in the making of their
own Laws.

Qu. Who was the first that planted the Christian Religion in England?

An. Joseph of Arimathea, whose body is affirmed to be buried at Glassenbury in
Somersetshire, in which place grew a Tree, that on the 24 of December would be
bare and naked as other trees, but on the next day being Christmas day, it
would be full of blossoms, and flourishing as other trees in Summer. This
Hawthorn (for such it was) by ignorant zeal in the late times of Rebellion, was
hewn down. I have heard also of an Oak in Staffordshire, that every year on the
same day, would bring forth green leaves fresh and flourishing, though the day
before it were sear and dry; an evident argument of the truth of Christ's
appearing in the flesh: though of late, some more nice than wise, reject all
such things, accounting them no other than mere superstitions, the rags and
relics of the Smock of the Whore of Babylon.

Qu. Who first erected Charing Cross?

An. Edward the first, in honor of his wife Queen Elenor, whom he loved so
dearly, that dying in his company in the North Country, intending to bury her
in Westminster-Abbey, in every place where her Corpse rested, he erected a most
magnificent Cross, the last of which was this at the end of the Strand,
commonly called Charing Cross; which having stood the space of 350 and odd
years, it was by avaritious blinded zeal commanded to be pulled down.

Thus Charing Cross, which lasted many lives,
Was turned to Salt-sellers, and Hafts of Knives.
It being built of fine Marble, there were many useful things made of the same;
else, had not the profit thereof been more than the superstition, it might (for
ought I know) have stood there still.

Qu. What was Diogenes's opinion concerning Marriage?

An. That for young men it was too soon, for old men too late. So that by his
rule, men should not marry at all.

Qu. What was the Epitaph, or Writing upon Diogenes grave?

An. Epitaphium Diogenis Cynici, in cujus Sepulchro, pro Titulo, Canis signum
est. Dic Canis, hic cujus tumulus? Canis. At Canis hic quis? Diogenes obiit?
Non obiit sed abit.

Englished.

Diogenes Epitaph written on his Tomb, with a Dog standing over it.

Tell me Dog, whose Tomb is this?
A Dogs: What Dog? Diogenes.
Diogenes: why died he?
Because no honesty he could see.
Qu. How many Letters are there in the holy Tongue?

An. As many as there are Books in the Old Testament: of which one thus further
observes, that as two and twenty Letters forms our Voice, so two and twenty
Books contains our Faith.

Qu. What is the difference betwixt Art, Fortune and Ignorance?

An. I shall tell you in the words of the Poet.

When Fortune fell asleep, and Hate did bind her,
Art Fortune lost, and Ignorance did find her,
Since when, dull Ignorance with Fortune's store
Has been enriched, and Art has still been poor.
Qu. In what place was it, wherein there was together, a whole world of men and
Languages?

An. In Noah's Ark.

Qu. What said Budoeus concerning Plutarchs Books?

An. That if all the learning in the world were lost, it might be found again
in his Works.

Qu. What do you find to be abominable superstition in the Papists?

An. The carrying about of their breaden God, or the Host, as they call it,
being of the Sacrament reserved; which is carried of a couple of Priests under
a Canopy, ushered with Torches, and attended by a company of people which have
no other employment. Before it, goes a Bell continually tinkling, at the sound
whereof all such as are in their houses, being warned that then their God goes
by them, make some show of Reverence; those which meet it in the street, with
bended knees and elevated hands doing it honor. The Protestants of this Bell
make a use more religious, and use it as a warning, or watch-peal, to avoid
that street through which they hear it coming* This invention of the Bell has
some what in it of Turkism, it being the custom in all those Countries where
the Mahumetan Religion is professed, that at their Canonical hours, when they
hear the Cryers bawling in the Steeples, to fall prostrate on the ground
wheresoever they are, and kiss it thrice, so doing their devotion to Mahomet.
The carrying it about the streets has, no question, in it a touch of the Jew,
this Ceremony being borrowed from that of carrying about the Ark on the
shoulders of the Levites. The other main part of it which is the Adoration, is
derived from the Heathens, there never being a people but they which afforded
divine honors to things inanimate. But the people indeed I cannot blame for
this Idolatrous devotion, their Consciences being persuaded, that which they
see pass by them is the very body of their Savior. Certainly could the like
belief possess the understanding of Protestants, they would meet it with as
great devotion. The Priests and Doctors of the people therefore, are to be
condemned only, who impose and enforce this sin upon their Hearers, and
doubtless there is a reward which attends them for it. Pope Innocent about
the year 1215. in a Council at Rome, was the first ordained it, ordering that
there should be a Pix made to cover the Bread, and a Bell bought to ring before
it. The Adoration of it was enjoined by Pope Honorius, An. 1226. both
afterward increased by the new Solemn Fast of Corpus Chrisbi day; by Pope
Urban the fourth, An. 1264. and confirmed for ever with multitudes of Pardons,
in the Council of Vienna by Clement the fifth, An. 1310.

Qu. What other Popes were they which brought up as ridiculous Customs, still
used amongst them?

An. Sergius the second, was the first that changed his name, for thinking his
own name Bocca de Porco, or Swines mouth, not consonant to his dignity, he
caused himself to be called Sergius, which president his Successors have
followed, varying their names contrary to their natures: So if one be a Coward
he is called Leo; if a Tyrant, Clement; if an Atheist, Pius, or Innocens; if a
Rustic, Urbanus; and so of the rest.

Sextus the fourth brought in Beads, and our Ladies Psalter.

Sergius the third, instituted the bearing about of Candles, for the
purification of the blessed Virgin Mary.

Celestine the second, was the Inventer of that mad kind of Cursing by Bell,
Book and Candle

Sergius the fourth, was the first that on Christmas night, with diverse
Ceremonies, consecrated Swords, Roses, or the like, which afterward are sent as
a Token of love and honor to such Princes as they like best. Leo the tenth sent
a consecrated Rose to Frederick Duke of Saxony, desiring him to banish Luther.
The like did Clement the seventh to our Henry the eighth, for writing against
Luther. Paul the third sent an hallowed Sword to James the fifth of Scotland,
when he began the War with our Henry the eighth: The like did Julius the second
to our Henry the seventh in his Wars against his Rebels.

Boniface the eighth instituted the Roman Jubilee, and decreed that it should be
solemnized every hundred years; but by Clement the sixth it was brought to
fifty.

Clement the fifth first brought in Pardons, and Indulgences, and such like
trumpery.

Qu. What is the Popes chief style, wherein the number of the Beast is
reckoned, as in the thirteenth of the Revelation, and the last Verse is
manifested in these words: Here is wisdom; let him that has understanding
count the number of the beast, for it is the number of a man, and his number is
666?

An. VIcarIVs generaL Is DeI In terris.

Englished,

Gods General upon Earth.

Thus reckoned,

DCLVVIIIIII.

Qu. What is the Anagram of Roma, the Latin word for Rome?

An. Amor, or Love, which one cast into this Distich.

Hate and Debate Rome through the world has spread,
Yet Roma Amor is, if backward read:
Then is it not strange, Rome hate should foster? No;
For out of backward love all hate does grow.
Qu. What number was most fatal to Rome?

An. The sixth number according to this Verse;

Sextus Tarquintus, Sextus Nero, Sextus and iste (Scilicet Papa Alexander 6.)

Semper sub sextis perdita Roma fuit.

What other names or numbers to her won,

In the sixth still she lost, was Rome undone.

Qu. Why is Rome taken to be Babylon, mentioned in the Revelations?

An. Because it is said there, that the whore thereof sits on a beast with
seven heads, which cannot so properly be understood of any place as this, being
built upon seven hills, namely; 1 Palatinus, 2 Capitolinus, 3 Viminalis, 4
Aventinus, 5 Esquilinus, 6 Caetius, 7 Quirnialis; governed by seven Kings, viz.
1 Romulus, 2 Numa, 3. Annus Martius, 4 Tullus Hostilius, 5 Tarquin Priscus, 6
Servius Tullus, 7 Tarquin superbus; And acknowledging several sorts of Rulers,
1 Kings, 2 Consuls, 3. Decemviri, 4 Tribunes, 5 Dictators, 6 Emperors, and 7
Popes.

Qu. How many times has Rome been taken by foreign Nations?

An. Ten.

1. By the Gauls, under the conduct of Brennus, the brother of Belinus King of
Britain.

2. By Alarick King of the Goths, who conquered Rome, Campania and Naples.

3. By Genserick King of the Vandals, a people which inhabited the Country now
called Swethland.

4. By Totila King of the Goths.

5. By Odoarer King of the Heruli, who drove Augustus out of Italy, and twice
in thirteen years laid the Country desolate.

6. By Theodoricus, King of the Goths, called by Zeno the Emperor, to expel
Odoarer.

7. By Gundebald King of the Burgundians, who having ransacked all Italy,
returned home, leaving the Goths in possession of the same, who after they had
continued there seventy two years, were at last subdued by Belisarius and
Narses, two of the bravest Captains that served the Roman Emperors. This
Belisarius was a true Example of the mutability of Fortune, who having served
his Country in great Command for many years, was at last brought to that
necessity, as to stand by the high-wayside and beg, Date obolum Belisario, Give
a halfpenny to Belisarius.

8. The eight time was by the Moors and Sarazens, followers of Mahomet his Law,
Gregory the fourth being Pope.

9. By Henry the fourth Emperor of Germany, Gregory the seventh being Pope.

10. By Charles Duke of Burbon, An. 1528. in which Rome suffered more, than by
the siege and sacking of the most barbarous Nations, Clement the seventh being
then Pope.

Qu. How many Natural Languages, or Mother Tongues, which have no affinity with
others, are spoken in Europe?

An. Fourteen.

1. Irish, spoken in Ireland, and the West of Scotland.

2. British, in Wales.

3. Cantabrian, or Biscany, nigh unto the Cantabrian Ocean, and about the
Pyrenian Hills.

4. Arabique, in the Mountains of Granada.

5. Finnique, in Findland and Lapland.

Dutch (though with different Dialect) in Germany, Holland, Denmark, Swethland,
and Norway,

7. Chanchian, which the East Friezlanders (or Canchi) speak among themselves;
for to strangers they speak Dutch.

8. Slavonish, of great extent and use, especially in the Turkish Countries.

9. Illyrian, on the East side of Istria, and in the Isle of Veggin.

10. Greek.

11. Hungarian.

12. Epirotique, in the Mountainous parts of the Kingdom of Hungary.

13. Jaxygian, on the North-side of Hungary, between Danubius and Tibisius.

14. Tartarian, in the Taurica, Chersonessus, and European seats of that people.

Besides these fourteen several Languages, there is another used generally in
most countries of Europe, called the Canting tongue or Language, and spoken by
a company of stout Rouges, Vagabonds, and Gypsies, which are divided into these
eighteen sorts of the Male kind:

1 An Upright-man. 2 A Ruffler. 3 An Angler. 4 A Rogue. 5 A wild Rogue. 6 A
Prigger or Praneer. 7 A Palliard. 8 A Frater. 9 A Quire Bird. 10 An Abraham
man. 11 A Whip-Jack. 12 A Counterfeit Crank. 13 A Dummerar. 14 A Jack-man. 15 A
Patrico. 16 An Irish Toil. 17 A Swigman. 18 A Cynchin-Co.
Of all which I shall give you a short description; and first, the Upright-man
is the Chief or Prince of the rest, who commonly walks with a short Truncheon
in his hand, which he calls his Filchman, he claims a share of whatsoever is
gotten by any others, and can command any of their Morts or Doxies to leave
another man, and to lie with him.

2. Rufflers, are such as go under the pretense of maimed Soldiers, robbing
country people that come late from Markets, exacting also tribute of the other
inferior sorts of Rogues.

3. Anglers, are such as with a Rod having an Iron hook at the end of it, angle
at men's windows about midnight, where all is fish to them that comes to net; in
the day time they beg from house to house, to spy best where to plant their
designs, which at night they put in execution.

4. Rogues, whose very name denote their natures, they have fingers as nimble
as the Upright-men, have their Wenches and meeting places, where whatsoever
they get, they spend; and whatsoever they spend, is to satisfy their lust.
Their company is dangerous, their lives detestable, and their ends miserable.

5. Wild Rogues, are such as are begotten of Rogues, and marked for villains in
their swaddling Clouts, which all their lives after they put in practice.

6. Priggers or Prancers, are Horse-stealers for to Prig in the Canting
language signifies to steal; and Prancer signifies a Horse. These have their
female spies, that survey Meadows and Closes, whereby the better to take their
prey.

7. Palliards, who are also called Clapperdudgeons, are such as with their
Morts beg from door to door; who to draw the greater pity toward them, with
Spere-wort or Arsenick will draw blisters on their Legs, which at their
pleasure they can take off again.

8. Fraters, are such as with a counterfeit Patent beg for some Hospital or
Spittle-house; they are dangerous persons for any to meet alone, by reason of
the frequent robbories which they commit.

9. Quire Birds, are those who have sung in such Cages as Newgate, or some
Country Goal, who having got loose, fall to their old trade of roguing and
thieving again.

10. Abraham-men, are those we call Toma Bedlams, terrible enemies to
Poulteryware, shifting their Wenches ofter than most people shift their linen.

11. Whip-jacks, are counterfeit Mariners, who talk of nothing but fights at
Sea, Piracies, Drownings and Shipwracks; they are very expert in robbing Booths
at Fairs, which they call Heaving the Booth; they have always about them a
conterfeit License, which they call a Gybe, and the Seals to it Jarks.

12. Counterfeit Cranks, are such as counterfeit the Falling Sickness, to
kindle in men the greater compassion, foaming at their mouths, which they do by
conveying a piece of white Soap into one corner of their Jaws, that causes the
froath to come boiling forth.

13. Dummerars, are those that dissemble dumbness making a strange noise in
stead of speech, to move peoples charity toward them.

14. Jack-men, are such as can write and read whose office it is to make them
counterfeit Licenses and Passes, for which he is well rewarded of them.

15. Patricos, are their Priests, every hedge is his Parish, and every wandering
Rogue and Whore his Parishioners; the service he says is only the marying of
couples, the solemnities whereof is thus. The parties to be wedded find out a
dead Horse, or any other beast, and standing one on the one side, and the other
on the other; the Patrico bids them live together till death them part, and so
shaking hands the Wedding is then ended.

16. Irish Toyls, are such as carry Pins, Points, Laces and such like wares
about, who under the pretense of selling such commodities, commit many
villainies as it were by warrant.

17. Swig-men, are such as we call Pedlars, who carrying a pack at their back,
and are little different from the Irish Toyls.

18. Kynchin-Coes, are little boys whose parents (having been Beggars) are
dead, or else such as have run away from their Masters, and in stead of a Trade
to live by, follow this kind of life to be lousy by. These Kynchins the first
thing they do is to learn how to count and the only thing they practice, is to
creepin at Windows or Cellar doors.

Of the women kind there are only these seven several sorts.

1 Glymmerers. 2 Bawdy Baskets. 3 Autem Morts. 4 Walking Morts. 5 Doxies. 6
Dels. 7 Kynchin Morts.
1. Glymmerers, are such as travel up and down with Licenses to beg, because
their Houses have been consurned with fire; they shed great store of tears at
the mention of their losses, and tell a lamentable story, how the fire
destroyed their Barns, Stables, and outhouses, to move the people to the
greater charity. These Glymmerers are defended by the Upright-men, who never
walk along with them but kept aloof.

2. Bawdy-Baskets, are such as walk about with baskets on their arms, wherein
are Pins, Needles, Laces, etc. under pretense of selling which, they steal
Linen, Pewter, or what comes next to their hand.

3. Autem Morts, are such as are married, being always attended with children,
whom they employ to pilfer away what they can light on, which in their Language
they call, Nilling of the Ken.

4. Walking Morts, are such as pretend themselves Widows, traveling about from
County to County, making Laces upon staves, Beggars tape: or the like, they are
subtle Queans, hard-hearted, light-finger'd, cunning in dissembling, and
dangerous to meet, if any Ruffler or Rogue be in their company.

5. Doxies, are such as are neither Maids, Wives, nor Widows; they will for
good victuals, or a small piece of money prostitute their bodies, are common
pick-pockets, and oftentimes secret murderers of those infants which are
begotten of their bodies.

6. Dels, are young Wenches, ripe for the act of Generation, but as yet not
spoild of their Maiden-heads, which is commonly done by the Upright-men, and
then are they free for any of the brother hood.

7. Ky^chia Morts, are Girls of a year or two old, which the Morts their
Mothers carry at their backs in their Slates, (which in the Canting tongue are
Sheets) if they have no Children of their own they will steal the, from others,
and by some means disfigu^g, them, that by their Parents they shall never be
known.

Qu. Wherein are beggars and rich men alike?

An. In the Grave; which shade Diogenes to say, being searching in the
Charnelhouse amongst the dead skuls: that he could find no difference betwixt
the skull of King Philip and another man's.

All in the Grave alike are made,
The Scepter, and the Sith and Spade.
Qu. What would become of a great sort of men, if every one were served in
their kind?

An. A number of Tailors would be damned for keeping a Hell under their
Shop-board: many Broakers would make their Wills'at Tiburn, if the searching
for stolen Goods which they have received, should like a plague but once come
amongst them. Two parts of of the Land, should be whpped at Bridewel for
Leachery, and three parts be set in the stocks for drunkenness.

Qu. Wherein has the Beggar a privilege over great persons?

An. In that he cannot fall lower than he is; whereas the great man is subject
to that of the Poet,

In ways to greatness think on this,
That slippery all Ambition is.
Qu. What was the diet of former ages, in those days which were called the
Golden Age of the world?

An. They caught not their surfeits with eating of Capon, Partridge, and
Pheasant; their diet was, Apples, Roots, Nuts, Dates, ^igs, etc. and sometimes
for rarities, Butter, Cheese, and Eggs; and for drink instead of Sack, Claret,
Muscadine, Ippocrass, Mum, Beer or Ale, their beverage was the cool streams
distilling from some uncorrupted Fountain; a description whereof we have in the
eighth Book of Ovids Metamorphosis, concerning the entertainment, which
Philemon and Bancis gave to Jupiter and Mercury.

Ponitur hic bicolor sincerae bacca Minervae,
Intibaque, and radix, and lactis massa coacti,
Ovaque non acri leviter versata familla,
Prunaque, and in patulis redolentia mala camestris.
Hic nux, hic mixta est rugosis carica palmis;
Et de purpureis collectae vitibus uvae;
Omnes fictilibus nitidae. --
They on the table set Minerva's fruit;
The double colored Olive, Endive root;
Radish and Cheese; and to the Board there came,
A dish of Eggs rare roasted by the flame:
Next they had Nuts, course dates, and Lenten Figs,
And Apples from a basket made of twigs,
And Plums, and Grapes cut newly from the Tree,
All served in Earthen dishes, Houswifely.
Qu. What passion is most natural unto Man?

An. Love, which enters in at the eyes, and pierces the heart, many settling
their loves on such objects for which they can give no reason.

Qu. Whether is Love the cause of likeness, or likeness the cause of love?

An. Both.

Qu. What creatures are those, some living, and some dead, that rule all the
world?

An. The Sheep, the Goose, and the Be; for the Sheep yields Parchment, the
Goose Quils to write it, and the laborious Be brings Wax to seal it, as one
has wittily delivered in these verses,

The Be, the Goose, the Sheep,
Do so maintain the might
Of Monarchs, Kings, and States,
That wrong suppress not right:
The Be brings sealing Wax,
The Goose our writing Quils,
The Sheep his Parchment coat or skin,
For Deeds and dead men's Wills.
Qu. What is the general saying concerning the Italian women?

An. That they are Mag-pies at the door, Saints in the Church, Goats in the
Garden, Devils in the House, Angels in the Streets, and Sirens in the Windows.

Qu. What Passion is most prevailing over the nature of man?

An. Fear; of which we read that it has in one night turned the hair of the
head from black to white, but most memorable is that example of one, who was
pretended to be let blood to death, for being blinded, and his arms bound, the
Chyrurgions that were about him only saying, How bravery he bleeds on his arm;
How gallantly on that, although they did nothing to him, at last one saying,
Now the blood comes from his very heart; when they came to unblind him, they
found him liveless, struck stark dead with a panick fear.

Qu. Why is man called Microcosmus, or the little world?

An. As being the Epitome of the great Volume of Nature, borrowing from the
Angels, soul; from the brute Animals, sense; from Plants, life; from other
creatures, bigness: but above all inferiors is endued with that prerogative of
casting up his eyes to Heaven, to behold the excellencies of the Creation;
wherein other Creatures are deficient.

Pronaque cum spectent anim alia caetera terram,
Os homini sublime dedit, coelumque videre
Jussit, and erectos ad sydera tollere vultus.
And where all beasts look with grovelling eye,
He gave to man looks mixed with Majesty,
And willed him with bold face to view the Sky.
Qu. What Art is that which makes use of the vilest things in the world?

An. Physic, which makes use of Scorpions, Flies, Wasps, Serpents, Ear-wiggs,
Toads, and such like; nothing, though to our apprehension never so seeming
vile, but serves to some use, according to that of the Poet;

There Is naught so vile that on the Earth does live,
But to the earth some special good does give;
Nor ought so good, but strained from that fair use,
Revolts from virtue, stumbling on abuse:
Virtue it self turns Vice, being mis-apply'd;
And Vice sometimes by action's dignified.
Qu. Whether is the life of a rich covetous Citizen, that swims in wealth and
treasure, caring for none, nor beloved of any; or the lives of a Country
Yeoman or Farmer, who lives in a mediocrity betwixt poverty and riches, yet
content with his estate; which of these two is first to be preferred?

An. Better it is in the solitary woods, and in the wild fields to be a man
among beasts, than in the midst of a peopled City, to be a beast among men. In
the homely village art thou more safe, than in a fortified Castle; the stings
of Envy, nor the bullets of Treason, are never shot through those thin wall:
Sound Healths are drunk out of the wooden dish, when the Cup of Gold boyls over
with poison. The Country cottage is neither battered down by the Cannon in the
time of War, nor pestered with clamorous Suits in time of Peace. The fall of
Cedars that tumble from the tops of Kingdoms, the ruin of great Houses that
bury families in their overthrow, and the noise of shipwreck that beget even
shricks in the hearts of Cities, never send their terrors thither; that place
stands as safe from the shock of such violent storms, as the Baytree does from
lightening.

Qu. Who are the subjects that pay tribute to the Country Farmer?

An. The Meadow gives him her pasture, the Trees pay custom with their fruit,
the Plough sends him in Corn, the Ox bestows upon him his labor, and the Sheep
clothes him with his wool.

Qu. How came the famous Poet Buchanan off, when traveling into Italy, he was
for the freeness of his writing, suspected of his Religion and taken hold of by
some of the Popes Inquisitors?

An. By writing to his Holiness this Distich:

Laus tua, non tua fraus, virtus, non copia rererum,
Scandere te fecit hoc decus eximium.
Thus Englished.

Thy praise, not fraud; thy virtue, not thy store,
Made thee to climb that height which we adore.
For which Encomion he was set at liberty, and being gone out of the Popes
Jurisdiction, he sent to his Holiness, and desired according to his own true
meaning, to read the self same verses backward, which then run thus,

Eximium decus hoc fecit te scandere rerum:
Copia; non virtus, fraus tua, non tua laus.
Englished.

The height which we adore, what made thee climb?
Nor virtue, nor thy worth; rather thy crime.
Qu. What Inscription. or Motto, was that which Martin de Arsello fixing over
his Gate, by reason of false pointing of the Painter, cost him his Bishopric?

An. Porta patens esto nulli, claudaris honesto.

Where the Painter mistaking himself, made the Comma at nulli, by which it was
thus: Gate be open to none, but shut out all honest men.

The Pope riding that way, before Martin had corrected his inscription, taking
it for a a grand abuse toward him, discarded him of his bishopric, and placed
another in his house; who kept the inscription still, but only added the Comma,
and made it thus;

Porta patens esto, nulli claudaris honesto.
Adding thereto.

Ob unum punctum caret Martinus Asello.
Gate open to the good and shut out none; For one poor point, all is from
Martin gone.

The like fallacy was used to our King Edward the second, who being made a
prisoner by his Rebellious Subjects; to his Keeper was sent this verse;

To seek to shed King Edwards blood,
Refuse to fear I hold it good.
Where his Keeper making the comma at fear, when it should have been at refuse,
the unhappy Prince by that disloyal Legerdemain of words, lost his life.

Qu. In what Aenigma, or Riddle, was that Grand Traitor, Oliver Cromwell's name
included?

An.

The Heart of the Loaf, and the head of the Spring,
Is the name of the man that murdered the King.
The heart of the Loaf is the Crom, and the Head of the Spring is the Well,
which put together is Cromwell.

Qu. Which were the ten general Persecutors so famously known in the primitive
Church?

An. The first was under Nero that bloody persecutor, and enemy of mankind, who
set the City Rome on fire, and ripped up his Mothers belly to see the place of
his conception, Anno 67. The second was under Domitianus, Anno 96. The third
under Trajan, Anno 100. The fourth under Marcus Antoninus, Anno 167. The fifth
under Severus, Anno 195. The sixth under Maximinus, Anno 237. The seventh under
Decius Anno 250. The eight under Valerianus, Anno 259. The nineth under
Aurelianus, Anno 278. The tenth under Dioclesian, Anno 293. Yet notwithstanding
these cruel Persecutions, wherein (as one of the Fathers writes) there were
murdered five thousand every day in the year, excepting only the first day of
January, yet were they like Camomile, the more they were trod on, the thicker
they grew, and the blood of the Martyrs proved to be the seed of the Church.

Qu. How many were the Sybils, and what were their names?

An. They were in number ten viz 1 Persica, 2 Lybica, 3 Delphica, 4 Cumea, 5
Samis, 6 Helespontiaca, 7 Tiburtina, 8 Albunea, 9 Erythrea, 10 Cumana.

The first was of Persia, called Samberta, which among other prophecies, said,
The womb of the Virgin shall be the salvation of the Gentiles.

The second was of Lybia, one of her Prophecies were, The day shall come that
men shall see the King of all living things,

The third was Themis sir-named Delphica, because she was born and prophesied
at Delphos, where was the Oracle and Temple of Apollo; one of her Prophesies
runs thus, A Prohet shall be born of a Virgin.

The fourth was Cumea, born at Campagnia, in Italy, of whom Virgil makes
mention in his book of Aeneids, who prophesied, That God should be born of a
Virgin, and converse among sinners.

The fifth was called Samia, born in the Isle of Samos which said, He being
rich should be born of a poor Virgin; the creatures of the earth should adore
him and praise him for ever.

The sixth was called Hellespontiaca, born at Marmiso in the Territory of Troy,
she prophesied, A woman shall descend of the Jews, called Mary, and of her
shall be born the Son of God, his Kingdom shall remain for ever.

The seventh was Albunea, sir'named Tyburtina, because she was born at Tybur,
fifteen miles from Rome; one of her prophesies was this, The invisible word
shall be born of a Virgin, he shall converse among sinners, and shall of them
be despised.

The eighth was Albunea, who prophesied, The Highest shall come from Heaven,
and confirm the Counsel in Heaven, and a Virgin shall be showed in the Valleys
of the Deserts.

The ninth was the famous Erythrea, born in Babylon, who especially prophesied
a great part of our Christian Religion, in certain Verses recited by Eusebius;
the first Letters of every which Verses being put together, makes these words.
Jesus Christ, Son of God, Savior. These verses are translated into Latin by
St. Augustine, Lib. 11. Cap. 25. of The City of God, where they may be read at
large and are excellently well translated be Sir John Beaumont, where they may
be found amongst his Poems.

The tenth was called Cumana, from the name of the place where she lived; she
prophesied That he should come from Heaven, and reign here in poverty.

This last Sybil is affirmed to be she who writ the Nine Books of the Sibyls,
which were by an old woman presented to Tarquinius Superbus, demanding for the
same a great sum of money, which he being unwilling to pay, the old woman burnt
three of them before his face, requiring as much money for the other six; which
being denied, she also burned three more of them, asking as much for the three
remaining, as for the rest; which Superbus amazed, gave, and the old Trot
vanished. These books containned manifest Prophecies of the Kingdom of Christ,
his Name, his Birth, and Death. They were all afterward burned by the
Arch-traitor Stilico, so that those Prophesies which are now extant, are only
such as are extracted out of others writings, wherein mention of them was made.

Qu. What is it that may be said concerning the ubiquity of Marriage?

An. One Bed can hold a loving man and wife A whole house cannot hold them
being at strife.

Qu What is the difference between the love and lust of a Courtezan?

An. That her love is like breath on steel, soon on and soon off; but her lust
is as the Ocean, still ready for an another embraces, and prostitutes her body
to every new commer.

Qu. What is the difference betwixt saying nothing, and doing nothing?

An. The Poet will tell you in these verses.

Little or nothing said, soon mended is;
But they that nothing do, do most amiss.
Qu. What may Law in the abuse thereof, fitly be compared unto?

An. To a thicket of Brambles, into which by tempest the poor sheep being
driven from the plains, come there for refuge, and so loose their fleeces; or
like to the Spiders web, in which the little flies are caught, but the great
ones break through with ease.

Qu. Wherein did the old Romans show the love that they bear unto Virtue?

An. In erecting a Temple to Honor, into which none could come but he must
first pass through the Temple of Virtue; to signify that those that trod in
the paths of Justice and Virtue, should at last be crowned with honor and
dignity.

Qu. What is the reason that women love their ease more than men?

An.

When man lay dead-like, woman took her life,
From a crookt emblem of her nuptial strife;
And hence (her bones would be at rest) her ease
She loves so well, and is so hard to please.
Qu. Wherein consists the praises of a Country life?

An. The Countryman is thrice happy in this, that he plays not with his wings
in the golden flames of the Court, nor sets his foot into the busy throngs
of the City, nor runs up and down in the intricate mazes of the Law; but
resting contented in the Winter to sit by a country fire, and in the Summer to
lay his head on the green pillows of the Earth; where his sleep is soft
slumbers, and his waking pleasant as golden dreams; His highest ambition is to
get up unto the Mountains, where he thinks himself a petty King, the greatest
Trees standing trembling before him, to do him reverence, which he calls his
Nobles, on each side of him, he beholds ranks of Oaks* which he counts his
Guards, the Willows that bend at every blast, he accounts his flatterers, and
the Valleys humbled at his feet, he terms his slaves. No Prince in the world
keeps more skilful Musicians, the Birds are his consort, and the wind
instruments they play upon, yield ten thousand several tunes.

Thus does he rest secure, whilst he does lie,
Too low for Envy, and for scorn too high.
Qu. Who are the most proud and imperious of all others?

An. Such as have been raised from the Dunghill to some preferment, according to
that old English Proverb of ours, Set a Beggar on Horseback, and he will ride
to the Devil; With which agrees that of the Poet,

None looks to be accounted,
More than a Beggar mounted.
Qu. What is the difference of valor in several persons?

An. Some are truly valarous, and those are such who will nobly engage in a
just quarrel; others are cowardly valorous, to which alludeth the Proverb, Make
a Coward fight, and he will kill the Devil; and to this purpose we have a story
of a Gentleman that kept a Welshman to his man: It so fortuned that as they rid
abroad, they were set on by two thieves; The Gentleman defended himself for a
good space, while his man stood still looking on, but offering no help to his
master: At length the Gentleman having received some wounds, was forced to
yield and deliver up his money to the thieves, but withal requested them, that
since his man would not fight, he yet might receive some of the blows, and
therefore desired them to give him three or four good strokes over the back:
this was no sooner desired, but as readily granted, and as soon performed: But
Taffy feeling the smart of the blows, his welsh blood was soon up, he thunders
lightning and revenge upon them, soon disarms one of the thieves, and with his
sword deeply wounds the other, so that in a little space they both became the
objects of his mercy, the money they received is re-delivered, and upon their
knees they ask pardon. The third are such as are only valiant in their drink;
of which last the Poet thus writes;

Qu. Who only in his Cups will fight, is like,

A Clock that must be oiled well e're it strike.

Qu. How many veins are there in the body of a man?

An. As many as there are days in the year, according as it is set down in this
verse.

For that in us all things may vain appear,
We have a vein for each day in the year.
Qu. How many bones are there in a perfect man?

An. 284. which are thus singlely collected; i^ the head forty nine, in the
breast sixty seven in the arms and hands sixty one, in the fee^ sixty; in all
284. according to the Poet.

The bones which do support our Earthly Tower,
Are numbered, two hundred eighty four.
Qu. How many teeth has a man, according to the Poets Rule?

An. Sunt homini dentes triginta duo comedentes.

The Grinders which in time are said to cease,
Are numbered thirty two at best increase.
Qu. Which were the most famous Tyrants in their time?

An. 1. Nero, a Heathen Roman Emperor, who commanded Rome to be set on fire and
then accused the Christians for doing it, he also most unnaturally caused his
Mothers belly to be ripped up, that he might see the place of his conception.

2. Caligula, another Roman Emperor, who wished that all the people of Rome had
but one neck, that he might strike it off at a blow.

3. Phalaris, a Tyrant of Agrigentum in Sicily, for whom Perillus made a brazen
Bull, into which, those whom he intended to torture, were put, a fire being
made under it, the extremity of the heat, causing them to roar out, made the
brazen statue to bellow like a Bull; the Tyrant (only just in this) causing
Perillus to hansel it first himself, upon which Ovid thus writes,

-- Nec enim lex justior ulla,
Quam necis Artificis art perire sua.
Most just it is, a man should be tormented.
With that which first his cruel wit invented
4. Dionisius, a King of the said country of Sicily, whose Tyrannies were so
odious that there were continual execrations poured on him, only one old woman
prayed for his life, who being asked the cause, made answer, that she knew his
Grandfather to have been bad, and after by prayers, they had obtained his
death, his Son succeeded far worse than the Father: and after their curses had
also prevailed over him, came the present Tyrant worse than either: for whose
life she was resolved to pray, lest after his decease the Devil himself should
come amongst them.

Qu. Why do great persons bear themselves up high over their inferiors, seeing
we are all made of one mould?

An. Because too much familiarity breeds contempt, the Eagle scorns to meddle
with the Kite, the Lion with the Mouse; to conend with an ignoble enemy is an
act inglorious, and to conquer them almost as much dishonor, as by them to be
overcome.

Qu. Wherefore do the Jews break the Glass in which the Bride, and Bridegroom
drink?

An. To admonish them that all things in this world are transitory and brittle
as the Glass, and therefore they must be moderate in their pleasure and desires.

Qu. What custom had they of Baeotia in Greece, concerning their marriage of
the daughters?

An. When the Bride was carried home to her betrothed Husband, they used to
burn before the door the Axel-tree of the Coach in which she came thither;
giving her by that ceremony to understand, that she must restra in her self
from gadding abroad, and that being now joined to an Husband, she must frame
her self to live and tarry with him, without any hope of departure.

Qu. Wherein is a good wife compared to a Snail?

An. Because she carries her house on her head; but a bad wife makes her
husband headed like a Snail.

I know not which lead most unnatural lives,
Horn-headed husbands, or light wag-tayl'd wives.
Qu. Whether is better wealth, or wit?

An. This may be resolved by several circumstances, that folly is the most
hatefullest thing in the world; a man without wisdom is but a moving block, and
though adorned with golden trappings, his long ears will show him to be an Ass;
for folly in a man's breast like the sin of murder, will not be hid.

Qu. Why do rich men love more servently than poor men?

An. Though some do say that in Love there is no lack, yet when once wealth
Loves fuel is spent, we oftentimes see Love thereby is also extinguished,
according to that of the Poet: Love is maintained by wealth when all is spent,
Adversity then breeds the discontent.

Qu. What four things be those that be grievous to our eye sight?

An.

1. Smoke out of the moist Wood. 2. Wind in a storm. 3. An empty purse. 4. To
see our enemies fortunate, and our (...).
Qu. In what place of Europe is it where the Barrels are so much preferred
before the Bar?

An. Hamburg in Germany, in which Town are 777 Brewers, and but one Lawyer: the
reason why there is such a huge disproportion between the number of Brewers and
Lawyers, is because their differences are sooner divided over a Can than by
course of Law; thus strong beer, which in some Countries breeds quarrels, here
ends them, and where strife cease, there is little need of the Lawyer.

Qu. What man of all others is most worldly miserable?

An. He who having once sat on the top of Fortunes Wheel, is after by the
blind Goddess brought to want and penury, according to the Poet:

Adversity hurts none, but only such,
Whom whitest Fortune dandled has too much.
Qu. Of which Country were the seven Sleepers, what were their names, and how
long (according to tradition) was the time that they slept?

An. History tells us that they were born in Ephesus, and lived in the time of
the seventh persecution under Decian the Emperor, their names were 1.
Maximilian, 2. Malchus, 3. Marcianus, 4. Denis, 5. John, 6. Seraphion, and 7.
Constantius: These men to avoid the heat of the persecution fled to a Cave in
the mount of Celion, where they fell fast a sleep; which Caves mouth was
stopped up by their persecutors, and they remained sleeping therein 208 years,
until the time of Theodosius the Emperor, when it being again opened, they came
out of the same well and lively,. as if they had slept but one night.

Qu. Who is the Father of all Lies and untruths?

An. We read in the Scripture that the Devil is the Father of lies, to which we
may add as a second cause wide-mouthed tatling Fame, according to that of the
Poet:

Error by Error, tales by tales great grow;
As Snowbals do, by rouling to and fro.
To which also we may add that of Ovid.

The thing false told, grows great as it would burst,
And every one adds second to the first.
Qu. What is the Character that one gives in his censure of several Kings in
Europe?

An. That the Emperor of Germany, is Rex Regum, because he has under him such
a number of Reguli, or free Princes, the King of Spain, Rex Hominum, because of
his subjects reasonable obedience; the King of France, Rex Asinorum, because of
their infinite Taxes and impositions; and the King of England, Rex Diabolorum,
because of his subjects often insurrections against, and depositions of their
Princes.

Of the River Nilus in Egypt.

It is uncertain where this famous River has its head or Fountain, whether in
the Mountain of the Moon, or the Lake Zembre in Aethiopia interior: but certain
it is that it runs in one continual Channel, till it washes the midland of
Egypt, having in the mean space several Cataracts, which is a great fall of
the waters that makes such a hideous noise, as not only deafeth the
by-dwellers, but the Hills also are torn with the sound, as Lucan has it.

Cuncta tremunt undis, and multo murmr montus
Spumens invictis albescit fluctibus amnis.
The noise the mountains shakes, who roar in spite
To see th'unvanquisht waves clothed all in white.
Before it takes its influx into the Sea, it divides it self into seven
Channels or Mouths namely, 1. Heracleoticum, 2. Bolviticum 3. Schanitium, 4.
Patinicum 5. Mendesium, 6, Caniticum, 7. Pebusiacum. This Nilus from the 15.
day of June, swells above his banks the space of forty days, and in as many
more gathers his waters again to their proper bounds. If it flow not to the
height of fifteen Cubits, then the earth is deficient in her abundance of
increase for want of moisture; and if the waters surmount the superficies of
the earth, more than seventeen Cubits, then like a drunken man it cannot
produce its natural operations, as having its stomach (as it were) over-laid,
and surcharged with too much liquor: but if the mean be granted, no Country
can brag of such abundance; whereof the aforesaid Lucan,

Terra suis contenta bonis, non indiga mercis,
Aut Iovis, in solo tanta est fiducia Nilo.
the Earth content with its own wealth, does crave
No foreign Mars nor Jove himself, they have
Their hopes alone in Nilus fruitful wave.
During this inundation, the Beasts and Cattle live on the Hills, and in the
Towns to which they are before hand driven; and there are till decrease of the
waters fodderd As for the Towns and Villages, they stand all on the tops of the
Hills, and at the time of the Flood appear like so many Islands; commerce and
intercourse is not a jot diminished; for Skifs and the like Boats, supply the
places of Horses and Camels, transporting safely and speedily the market-men
and their commodities, from one Town to another, Now beside the fertility, a
second commodity arising from this inundation of the Nile, is the health it
brings with it; for the plague, which here often miserably rages, upon the
first day of the Flood does instantly cease* insomuch that whereas 500 die in
Caire the day before, the day following there dies not one. A third
strangeness in this River is, that keeping its waters together, it changes the
color of the Sea farther into the Mediterranean than the Sea can thence be
discerned. A fourth miracle is, that not in fruit only, but in producing live
creatures also, it is even to wonder fruitful, according to Ovid:

Namque ubi discernit madidos septemsluus agros
Nilus, and antiquo, sua flumina reddidit alveo;
Plurima Cultores versis animalia plebis
Inveniunt --
For when the seven mouthed Nile the Fields forsake
And to his ancient Channel him betakes
The tillers of the ground live Creatures find
Of sundry shapes, in the mud that is left behind
This River is in length almost 3000. miles, being the only River of Egypt, and
is for its varieties sufficiently famous all the World over.

Of the fortunate Islands.

The Air of those Islands is reported to be of that singular temperature, and
the Earth of that fruitfulness, that the Husbandmen have their Harvest in March
and April. Here all good things do abound useful or delightful for the life of
man, plenty of Fruits, store of Grapes, the Woods and Hedges bringing forth
excellent Apples of their own accord. The grass being mowed down, in five days
space will grow up to the length of a Cubit, the ground is so fertile, At
Christmas they have Summer, and all fruits ripe. The Earth yields her fruit
five or six times a year; the Mountains are always beautified with variety of
Flowers, the Trees and Hedges-rows evermore green, Dame Flora has here her
continual habitation, and Ceres therein a continual Mansion: In their sowing,
every two grains bringing forth a thousand.

Qu. How many Kings did formerly (...) in these Countries, whereof our now (...)
Sovereign King Charles the second, is the most absolute Monarch?

An. In England it self were seven, during the time of the Saxon Heptarchy;
which were,

1. The Kingdom of Kent, containing Kent only, begun by Hengist the Saxon
Captain, and ending in Baldred, having a succession of eighteen Kings, and the
continuance of two hundred forty and two years.

(...) Queens County, Weishford, and Dublin,

Scotland had formerly two Kings, whereof one was of the Scots, the other of
the Picts: Besides these there was a King of the Isles of Scotland, and one of
the Isle of Man, and Henry the sixth created Henry Beauchamp Earl of Warwick,
King of the Isle of Wight: so that reckoning seven Kings in England, three in
Wales, five in Ireland, two in Scotland, and three in the other Islands, and
you will find the whole number to amount to twenty Kingdoms.

A Discourse of Wonders, Foreign and Domestic.
And first of Foreign.
AN Artizan in the Town of Norenburg in Germany, made a wooden Eagle, which
when the Emperor Maximilian was coming thither, flew a quarter of a mile out of
the Town to meet him; and being come to the place where he was, turned back of
its own accord, and accompanied him home to his lodging.

2. There is a Lake about Armach in Ireland, into which if one thrust a piece
of wood, he shall find that part which remains in the mud, converted to Iron;
and that which continues in the water, turned to a Wherstone.

3. The Hill Aetna in Sicily, which continually vomiteth forth flames of Fire,
to the astonishment of all beholders. The reason of these flames (as is
conjectured) is the abundance of Silver and Brimstone contained in the bosom of
this Hill, which is blown by the wind, driving in at the chaps of the Earth, as
by a pair of bellows, through which chinks also, there is continually more fuel
added to the fire, the very water administering an operative virtue to the
combustible matter; as we see that water cast on coals in the Smiths Forge does
make them burn more ardently. The reason of this flame is thus rendered by the
witty Ovid in his Metamorphosis.

Is It ^ bitumine^ rap^un^t incendi^^ vices,
Luteaque exiguis ard^scunt Sulphura slammis,
Atque ubi terra cibos alimentaque debita slamma;
Non dabit, absumptis, per longum viribus annum:
Naturaeque su^m nutrim^ntum decrit edaci;
Non f^cit Aetna famem, desertaque deseret ignis.
A rozen mould these siery flames begin,
And clayje Brinstone aids the sire within;
Yet when the slymie soylconsumed, shall
Yield no more food to feed the sire withal,
And Nature shall restrain her nourishment,
The flame shall cease, hating all famishment.
4. A Lake in Aethiopia superior, of which whosoever drinks, either falls
immediately mad, or is for a long time troubled with a drowsiness; of which the
aforesaid Ovid thus recites,

Aethiopesque Lacus; quos siquis faucibus hausit,
Aut fu^i^, aut patitar mirum gravetate soporem.
Who does not know the Ethiopian Lake,
Whose waters he that drinks his thirst to slake,
Either grows mad, or does his soul oppress;
With an unheard of drowsiness.
5 The three wonders of which Spain boasts of, viz.

1. A Bridge over which the water flows, that is used to run under all other
Bridges.

2. A City compassed with fire which is called Madrid, by reason of the Wall
that is all of Flints environ it round about.

3. Another Bridge on which continually feed ten thousand Cattle, the River
Guadiana (which has his head in the Mountain Seira Molina, afterward runs
under ground the space of fifteen miles; the like does the River Lycus in
Anatolia, according to Ovid.

Sic ubi terreno Lycus est epotus hiatu,
Exsilicit procul hinc, alioque renascitur ore.
So Lycus swallowed by the gaping ground,
At a new mouth far off is rising found.
6. The Tomb of Mansolus, built by his Wife Artunesia Queen of Halicarnassus,
accounted one of the worlds seven wonders; it being five and twenty Cubits
high, and supported by six and thirty curious Pillars, of which thus writes
the witty Poet Martial:

Aere nam vacuo pendentia Mansolaea,
Laudibus immodicis Caris ad astra ferunt,
The Mansolaea hanging in the Sky,
The men of Caria's praises Deify.
7. The Temple of Diana at Ephesus; accounted also one of the worlds seven
wonders, It was two hundred years in building, being four hundred twenty five
foot long, and two hundred twenty broad: sustained with a hundred twenty seven
Pillars of Marble seventy foot high; whereof twenty seven were most curiously
graven, and all the rest of Marble polisht. It was fired seven times, and
lastly by Herostratus, the same night in which Alexander the great was born;
which made the Poets say, that Diana, who was the Goddess of Midwifery, was so
busy at the birth of that great Potentate, that she had no time to defend her
own Temple.

8. The Pyramid of Egypt, reckoned also for one of the worlds seven wonders,
which have outlived devouring time; They were built nigh to the City of
Memphis, whereof two are most famous; The first and greatest was built by
Cleops a King of that Country, who in the work employed a hundred thousand men,
the space of twenty years. The Basis of which Pyramid contained in circuit
sixty Acres of ground, and was in height a thousand foot, being made all of
Marble.

This work was begun of such a prodigious vastness, that King Cleops wanted
money to finish the same, whereupon (as Herodotus writes) he prostituted his
Daughter to all comers, by which dishonest means he perfected his building:
and she, besides the money due to her father, exacted of every man that had the
use of her body, one stone; of whom she got so many, that with them she made
the second Pyramid, almost equal to the first.

8. A Tree in Mexico in America, called Mete, which they plant and dress as we
do our vines. It has forty kinds of Leaves, which serve for many uses; for
when they be tender, they make of them Conserves, Paper, Flax, Mantles, Mats,
Shoes, Girdles, and Cordage. On these leaves grow certain prickles, so strong
and sharp, that they use them instead of Saws; from the root of this Tree
comes a juice like unto Syrup, which if you settle it will become Honey, if
you purify it, it will become Sugar: you may also make Wine and Vinegar of it.
The rind roasted, heals hurts and sores; and from the top boughs issues a
Gum, which is an excellent Antidote against poison.

1. A Tree in the Isles of Orcades in Scotland, near the Sea side, that bears
a fruit which dropping on the dry Land, putrifies away, and turns to nothing;
but falling into the water, becomes a living Creature like unto a Duck.

And by this means as Authors they have se'd,
A Soland Goose is hatched up and bred.
11. The River Styx in Arcadia, which for its poisonous nature, the Poet
feigned to be the River of Hell; on which plied Charon the Ferriman, whose
description take thus from the Poet:

Charon grim Ferriman these streams does guard,
Ugly, nasty, his huge hairy beard
Knit up in Elf-locks; staring, fiery eyed,
With Robe on heastly shoulder hung knotty'd.
12. Near unto the Lake where once stood the Cities of Sodom and Gomorrah, grow
certain Trees, which bear Apples in color, and show like unto Gold, but being
touched, fall to ashes.

13. The Psylli a people of Lybia, of so venomous a nature, that they would
poison a Snake: insomuch that when their Wives were delivered, they would throw
their Children amongst a herd of Serpents, supposing that child to be born of
an adulterous bed, the very smell of whose body would not drive away a whole
brood of the like poisonous vermin.

Other Foreign Wonders.

It is recorded by Guicciardine, L. Vives, Erasmus, and Dr. Heylin in his
Microcesmus, how that Margaret Sister to Earl Floris, the Fourth of Holland,
being the age of forty two years, brought forth at one birth three hundred
sixty three Children, whereof half were Males, half Females, and the odd one an
Hermophrodite: They were Christened in two Basins at the Church of Lo^sdunen,
by Guido suffragan to the Bishop of Utrecht, who named the Males John's, the
Females Elizabeth's; all which immediately after dyed, and with them their
Mother, the Basins are yet to be seen in the aforesaid Church.

Their runs a story concerning this miraculous accident, how that a certain
poor Beggar woman with three twin-Children came to this Countesses door, and
begged an Alms of her, which she not only denied, but also called her Harlot
and Strumpet; telling her withal, it was impossible she should have so many by
one man: which this Beggar hearing, besought God, who knew her innocence, to
manifest it unto her, by giving her so many at one birth by her Husband, as
there are days in the year; which fell out accordingly.

Much to this purpose is the story of one Jermentrudis, wife to Isenbardus Earl
of Altorse in Suevia; which Countess grievously accused one of her neighbor
women of adulteries, and had her punished, because she had not long before been
delivered of six Children at a birth. It fortuned that she her self, her
Husband being abroad in the Fields, was delivered at one birth of twelve
Children all Males, she fearing the like infamous punishment, which by her
instigation had been inflicted on the former woman, commanded the Nurse to kill
eleven of them; The Nurse going to execute the will of her Mistress, was met by
her Lord, then returning homeward; He demanded what she carried in her Lap? She
answered, Puppies; He desired to see them, she denied him. The Lord on this
growing angry, opened her Apron, and there found eleven of his own Sons, pretty
sweet babes, and of most promising countenances. The Earl examined the matter,
found out the truth, enjoined the Nurse to be secret, and put the children to a
Miller to nurse. Six years being passed over in silence, the Earl making a
solemn Feast, invited most of his wives and his own Friends. The young boys he
attired all in the same fashion, and presents them to their mother, she
misdoubting the truth, confesses her fault, is by the Earl pardoned, and
acknowledges her Children.

A like strange thing we have of one Agilmond, a King of the Lombards in the
Land of Hungary, who going forth one morning a Hunting, as he was riding by a
Fish pond, he spyed seven children sprawling for life, which some Harlots had
been dilivered of, and most barbarously thrown into the water. The King amazed
at this spectacle, put his Bore spear, or hunting-pole among them, on which one
of the childrens hands fastened, and the King softly drawing back his hand,
wafted the Child to the shore. This child he named Lamissus, from Lama, which
in their Language signified a Fishpond. He was in the Kings Court carefully
brought up, where there appeared in him such tokens of virtue and courage, that
after the death of Agilmond, he was by the Lombards chosen to succeed him.

Nor is that less strange which is reported of Claudia, a Roman Vestal Virgin,
the story whereof is this: The Romans were once told by an Oracle, that they
should be Lords of the world, if they could but get the Goddess Cybele from the
Phrygians, which was there worshipped in a City called Pesinus. Hereupon they
sent unto the Phrygians to demand it, who being willing to please a potent
Neighbor, especially the Romans being their Contrymen, as descended from
Aeneas and his Trojans, granted their request, and the Goddess is shipped for
Rome. But when it came into the River of Tyber, it there made a stand, neither
could it be again moved forward by force or slight. It happened that this
Claudia having been accused of incontinency, to clear herself, tied her Girdle
to the Ship, praying the Goddess, that if she were causelessly suspected, she
would suffer the Ship to go forward; which was no sooner said, than granted,
Claudia by her Girdle drawing the Ship to Rome, by the same clearing her self
from all imputation of Uncleanness or Incontinency.

Pharo a King of Egypt, being blind, was told by an Oracle, that if he washed
his eyes with the Urine of a woman, which being a wife had known but one man,
he should recover his sight. After many vain trials, h^ found one woman whose
Urine helped him her he married and causing all the other whom he had tried to
be gathered together in a Town called Latthus, he set fire on the same, burning
them all for their Incontinency.

Domestic Wonders.
IN the Year of our Lord 1151. and in the 33 year of the Reign of King Henry
the second, near unto Oxford in Suffolk, certain Fishers took in their Nets a
fish having the shape of a man; which Fish was kept by Bartholemew de Glanvile,
Custos of the Castle of Oxford, in the same Castle for the space of six months
and more, for a wonder; he spoke not a word, all manner of meat he would gladly
eat, but most greedy was he after raw flesh or fish: at length he stole away
from his Keeper, and ran to the Sea again.

Anno 1350. in the Reign of King Edward the third, in Oxford shire near
Chipping norton, was found a Serpent having two heads, and two faces, like
women; one face attired of the new fashion of women's attire, the other face
like the old attire, and had wings like a Batt.

Anno 1545. in the last year of King Henry the eight, one William Foxely
Pot-maker for the Mint, in the Tower of London, fell asleep the 27 of April,
who could not be awakened neither by kicking, cramping, or pinching, till the
first day of the next Term, which was full fourteen days and fifteen nights.
The cause of this his thus sleeping, could not be known, ^ough the same were
diligently enquired ^^ter by the Kings Physicians, and men of ^earning; yea,
the King himself examined ^^m, and he was in all points found as if he had ^ept
but one night, living till the year of our lord, 1587.

Anno 1552. in the Reign of King Edward ^he sixth, at Middleton eleven miles
from Oxford, a woman brought forth a child which ^ad two perfect bodies from
the Navel upwards, and were so joined together at the Navel, that when they
were laid out at ^ength, the one head and body was west, and the other east;
the legs of both the bodies were joined together in the midst, they ^ived
eighteen days, and were Female ^hildren.

In the last year of Queen Mary, within a mile of Nottingham, a rempest of
thunder as ^t came through two Towns, beat down all ^he Houses and Churches,
the Bells were cast to the outside of the Church Yard, and some webs of Lead
four hundred foot in the field writhen like a Glove; The River of Trent running
between the two Towns, the water running was with the wind carried a quarter of
a mile, and cast against trees; Trees were pulled up by the roots, and cast
twelve score off; a child was pulled out of a man's hand, and carried a hundred
foot, and then let fall and dyed: five or six men were killed: there fell some
Hailstones that were fifteen inches about.

Anno Domini 1571. in the thirteenth year of Queen Elizabeth, at Kinnaston in
Hereford shire, the Ground was seen to op^^ and certain Rocks with a piece of
groun^ removed, and went forward the space ^^ four days: it removed it self
between ^^ of the Clock in the Evening, and seven the next morning forty paces,
carrying great Trees and Sheep-coats along with it, some with threescore sheep
in them. The depth of the hole where it first broke out, is thirty foot, the
breadth of the breach was eight score yards; it overthrew in its passag^
Kinnaston Chapel, also two Highway were removed nigh a hundred yards, with
Trees and Hedge rows: the ground in all is twenty six Acres; and where Tillage
ground was, there is Pasture left in place and where was Pasture, there is
Tillage ground gone upon it.

In the seventeenth year of Queen Elizibeths Reign, the 24 of February at
Tewksbury, a strange thing happened after a Flood: In the afternoon there came
down the River Avon, a great number of Flies and Beettles, such as in the
Summer Evenings use to strike men on the face, in great heaps, a foot thick on
the water, so that to credible men's judgments, there were with a pair of Buts
length, of those Flies about an hundred Quarters: the Mills theroabout were
quite dammed up with them, for the space of four days after. and then were
cleansed by digging them out with shovels. From whence they came is yet
unknown, but the day was cold, and a hard Frost.

The twentieth of next June following in the same year, one William Lumley a
poor man in the Parish of Ernley, in the County of Worcester, being kept in
prison by a wealthy Widow,, he having a mare of two and twenty years old, with
a Foal, within three days after foaled a mare-colt, the which immediately had
an Udder, out of which was mil^ed the same day a pint of milk, and every ^ay
after gave above three pints, to the great relief of his wife and children.

Thus when that men and women cruel be
God will provide for those oppressed, we see.
We shall next tell you of a wonder in workmanship, one Mark Scaliot a
Blacksmith of London, for trial of his skill, made one Lock of Iron, Steel,
and Brass, of eleven several pieces, and one Pipe key, all clean wrought which
weighed but one Grain of Gold, He also at the same time made a Chain of Gold of
forty three Links; to which Chain the Lock and Key being fastened, and put about
a Fleas neck, she drew the same with ease; all which lock and key, chain and
flea, did weigh but one grain and a half.

Anno 1580, in the Parish of Blansdon in Yorkshire, after a great tempest of
lightning and thunder, a woman of fourscore years of age, named Alice Perin,
was delivered of a hideous Monster, whose head was like unto a Saller, the
forepart of him like a man, only he had eight legs not one like another, and a
tail of half a yard long.

The same year in the Marshes of Dengyhundred, in a place called South-Minster,
in the County of Essex, there suddenly appeared an infinite number of Mice,
which overwhelmed the said Marshes, and did gnaw and shear the grass by the
roots, spoiling and tainting the grass with their venomous teeth in such sort,
that the Cattle that grazed there on were smitten with a murrain, and dyed
thereof; which vermin could not be destroyed by the policy of men, till it came
to pass tha^ there flocked about the Marshes such a company of Owls, as all the
Shire was not able to yield; whereby the Marsh-holders were shortly delivered
from the vexation of those Mice: the like of those was once in Kent.

In Suffolk at the time of a great dearth, upon a hard Rock, grew above six
hundred quarters of Pease, without any manner of tillage; to the great relief
of poor people at that time.

Anno 1581. the four and twentieth of Queen Elizabeth, on the 17 of January, in
the Parish of Armitage, at a place called Blackmore, in Dorset-shire, a piece
of ground containing three Acres, removed it self from the place where it was
first planted, and was carried clean over another Close, where Elder and
Willow-Trees grew, the space of forty Goad, every Goad containing fifteen foot,
and stopped up a Highway that directed toward the Market Town of Cearn; and yet
the Hedges wherewith it was enclosed, environ it still, and the Trees stand
thereon bolt upright, saving an Oak of almost twenty load which was tumbled
down; the ground remaining a deep pit.

August 4. Anno 1584. At the end of the Town called Nottingham in Kent, eight
miles from London, the ground began to sink; three great Elms being swallowed
up, and driven into the Earth past man's sight.

March 17. 1586. A strange thing happened, Mr. Dorrington of Spaldwick, in the
County of Huntington Esquire had a Horse which dyed suddenly, and being ripped
up to see the cause of his death, there was found ^n a hole of the heart of the
Horse, a Worm, of a wondrous form; it lay on a round heap ^n a Kall or Skin, in
the likeness of a Toad, which being taken out, and spreed abroad, was in form
and fashion not easy to be described; the length of which worm divided into
many grains, to the number of eighty, spread from the body like the branches of
a Tree, was from the snout to the end of the longest grain seventeen inches,
having four Issues in the grains, from whence dropped forth a red water. The
body in bigness round about, was three inches and a half; the color was very
like the color of a Maycril: This monstrous worm crawling about to have got
away, was stabbed in with a dagger, and so died; which after being dried, was
shown to many persons of account for a great rarity.

Sunday December 5. in the thirty eighth year of Queen Elizabeth's Reign, a
great number of people being assembled in the Cathedral Church of Wells in
Sommersetshire; in the Sermon time before noon, a sudden darkness fell among
them, and storm and tempest followed after, with lightning and thunder, such as
overthrew to the ground them that were in the body of the Church; and all the
Church seemed to be on a ligat fire, a loathsome stench followed; some stones
were stricken out of the Bell-Tower, the Wyers and Irons of the Clock were
melted; which tempest being ceased, and the people come again to themselves,
some of them were found to be marked with strange figures on their bodies, and
their garments not perished, nor any marked that were in the Chancel.

How daily ought we then for to pray thus,
From Lightning and Tempest Lord deliver us.
Anno 1604. in the Reign of King James, John Lepton of Kepwick in the county of
York Esquire, a Gentleman of an ancient Family, and of good reputation, his
Majesty's Servant, and one of the Grooms of his most honorable privy Chamber,
performed so memorable a journey, as deserves to be recorded to future ages,
because many Gentlemen, who were good Horsemen, and diverse Physicians did
affirm, it was impossible for him to do, without apparent danger of his life.

He undertook to ride five several times betwixt London and York in six days
to be taken in one week, betwixt Monday morning and Saturday night; He began
his journey upon monday being the 26 of May in the year aoresaid, betwixt two
and three of the Clock n^ the morning, forth of Saint Martins near Aldersgate
within the City of London, and came to York the same day betwixt the hours of
five and six in the afternoon, where he rested that night; The next morning
being Tuesday about three of the clock, he took his journey forth of York, and
came to his lodging in Saint Martins aforesaid, betwixt the hours of six and
seven in the afternoon, where he rested that night. The next morning being
Wednesday, betwixt two and three of the clock, he took his journey forth of
London, and came into York about seven of the clock the same day, where he
rested that night; the next morning being Thursday, betwixt two and three of
the Clock, he took his journey forth of York, and came to London the same day,
betwixt seven and eight of the clock, where he rested that night; the next
morning being Friday, betwixt two and three of the clock, he ^ook his journey
toward York, and came thither the same day betwixt the hours of seven and
eight in the afternoon; so as he finished his appointed journey to the
admiration of all men in five days according to his promise, and upon Monday
the seven and twentieth of the same Month he went from York, and came to the
Court at Greenwich upon Tuesday the 28. to his Majesty, in as fresh and
cheerful manner as when he first began.

Anno 1608. in the fifth year of King James, upon the 19. of February, when it
should have been low water at London Bridge, quite contrary to course it was
then high water, and presently it ebbed almost half an hour, the quantity of a
foot, and then suddenly it flowed again, almost two foot higher than it did
before, and then ebbed again until it came to its course almost as it was at
first, so that the next flood began in a manner as it should, and kept its due
course in all respects as if there had been no shifting nor alteration of
Tides; all this happened before twelve a clock in the forenoon, the water being
indifferent calm.

And now we are come to our own memory, viz. the Reign of King Charles the
First; in which we find that there was a Fish taken and sold in Cambridge
Market, which had in its belly, a book of an ancient print, part whereof was
consumed, but enough left to be legibly read, as you may find in Mr. Hammond
Lestrange his History of King Charles the first.

The wonder of his time, old Thomas Parre a Shropshire man, who attained to the
age of 152 years and odd months; being afterward brought up to the Court as a
miracle of nature, but having changed his air, and diet, he soon after dyed,
and was buried in Westminster Abbey.

The Woman at Oxford which was condemned upon a supposed crime, having hanged a
good space, and being by the Soldiers knocked diverse times on the breast with
the but-end of their Muskets, to put her the sooner out of her pain; yet
afterward when she was cut down, and ready to be Anatomized, there was life
perceived in her, and by applying some things unto her she recovered her memory
and senses, was afterward found guiltless of the fact, married, and had three
or four children.

June the second Anno 1657. a Whale of a prodigious bulk being sixty foot in
length, and of a proportionable bigness, was cast on shore not far from
Green-wich, which was looked upon to be a great presage of some wonderful
matters soon after to ensue; and indeed the event proved it to be true; for not
long after, Cromwell full sore against his will, in a great wind was hurryed
away into another World.

The last, but not the least wonder, is of one Martha Tailor hear to Packwel in
Darbyshire, who from Saint Thomas day in the year ^ four Lord 1667. to the
present writing hereof being the 11. day of January 1668. has not asted any
sustenance, in all that time; she ^s still living and audible to be heard, but
more like an anatomy or Picture of death, than ^ living creature.

Qu. What other wonders are there to be found ^n our Isles of Britain?

An. In the Isle of Man are found at this day, certain Trees of Timber and
other Wood in great abundance, many fathoms under the ground, which were
thought to be brought thither and (...) in Noah's flood, and not discovered till
of late years.

At Barry Island in Glamorgan-shire, upon ^ Clift or Hole of a Rock, laying
your ear unto it, you may hear sometimes as it were ^he noise of blowing the
Bellows, others of Smiths striking at the Anvil; sometimes ^iling, clashing of
Armor, and the like: this ^s said to be by enchantment by the great Merlin,
who bound certain Spirits to work here in making of Armor for Aurelius
Am^rosius and his Britains, until his return: but he being killed, they by the
force of his harm are constrained to labor there still.

Qu. By how many several Nations has this Land been inhabited?

An. The first Inhabitants hereof were the Britains, whose offspring at this
day is the Welsh, our seeming ancient Historians de^ive them from the Trojans,
who came hither under the conduct of one Brutus; but this by Mr. Cambden and
our late Antiquaries is rejected as a fable, who by many unanswerable arguments
prove them to be descended from the Gauls; they were questionless a warlike
Nation, and stoutly with stood the Romans in their invasion of them, being at
last more over come by the treachery o^ Androge^s and others, than by the Roman
puissance.

The next were the Romans, who entered the Island under the conduct of Julius
Casar, some few years before the birth of our Savior. It continued a Roman
Province till after the year 400 when Proconsul Aetite taking with him away the
Legoniary Soldiers, to defend Gallia from the Franks and Burgundians, left
South Britain a prey to the Scots and Picts, quitting our Island of themselves,
to defend those Provinces nearer home.

The third Nation were the Saxons, a people of Germany called in by Vortiger
Kin^ of the Britains, in aid against the Scots and Picts, who then overrun
this Island; bu^ these Guests soon become their Masters, wh^ under the leading
of Hengist and Horsus, ^ planted themselves in this Island, that the n^tive
Inhabitants could never recover it from them.

These Saxons came not in all at once, b^ at seven several times, each under
their Le^ders, gaining a part from our British Monarchy, till at last they
engrossed the who^ to themselves; then was England divide^ into a Heptarchy, or
seven several Kingdom all which were united into one by Egb^ King of the
West Saxons, who was the first English Monarch.

The fourth people were the Danes, who made violent irruptions in this Island
under the Reign of King Ethelred the Saxon; and so far they prevailed, that he
was contented to pay them the yearly Tribute of 10000 pounds, which at last
they enhanced to 48000 pounds. This Tyranny Ethelred not able to endure, warily
writ to his Subjects, to kill all the Danes as they slept on St Brices night
being the 12. of November, which being executed accordingly, Swain King of
Denmark came with a Navy of three hundred and fifty sail into England, drove
Ethelred over into Normandy, and tyrannized over the English with a very high
hand, every English house maintaining one Dane, whom they called Lord, who
living idly and receiving all the profit of the English labors, gave occasion
to after-ages when they saw an idle fellow, to call him a Lurdan. And so
imperious were they that if an English man and a Dane had met on a Bridge the
English man must have gone back, and stayed till the Dane had come over They
used also when the English drank, to stab them, or cut their throats, to avoid
which villainy, the party then drinking used to request some of the next sitters
by to be his surety or pledge, whilst he paid Nature her due* and hence have we
our usual custom of pledging one another, finally after the Reign of three
Kings, the English threw off their yoke, and the Saxons were re-inthronized.

The fifth Conquest thereof was by William Duke of Normandy, Anno 1066. who
with a strong Army entered the Land, flew King Herald, and with him 66654 of his
English Soldiers. Somewhat before that time was a great Comet, which portended
as it was thought this change of Government, of which one wrote thus:

A thousand six, and sixty year,
It is as we do read,
Since that a Comet did appear,
And English men lay dead;
Of Normandy Duke William then
To England ward did sail,
Who conquered Harold and his men,
And brought this Land to bale.
A brief Epitome or Chronical-discourse of the Kings of England, since the
Norman Conquest.
William the First surnamed Conqueror, bastard Son to Robert Duke of Normandy,
who having conquered the Country, used such policies as utterly disheartened
the English from hopes of better fortune, who thereupon yielded to him, and he
having for twenty two years ruled, or rather tyrannized over the English
Nation, dyed, and was buried at Cane in Normandy.

William the second surnamed Rufus, the second son of the Conqueror, took the
Crown upon him, his eldest Brother, Robert being then busy in the Holy Land,
who when the Christians had conquered Jerusalem chose him King thereof, but he
hoping for the Crown of England refused it, but his brother William taking
possession in his absence, stoutly defended his Title, brought Duke Robert to
composition, and having reigned twelve years and eleven months wanting eight
days, he at last hunting in the new Forest, was by the glance of an arrow shot
by Sir Walter Tirrel, struck in the breast whereof he immediately dyed, and was
buried at Winchester, Anno 1100.

Henry the first, the youngest Son of the Conqueror, yet too old for his
brother Robert in policy, took the advantage of time, and stepped into his Throne
in his absence, against whom he warring, was by him taken, and had his eyes put
out; this Henry was for his learning surnamed Beauclark, he reduced the
measures of England to that proportion which we now call an Ell, he left behind
him only one Daughter, reigned thirty five years, and lies buried at Reading.

Stephen, Earl of Blois, Son to Alire Daughter to the Conqueror, usurped the
Crown; he was a man of Noble parts and hardy, passing comely of favor and
personage, he excelled in martial policy, gentleness and liberality toward
men: to purchase the peoples love, he released them of the tribute called
Darn-gelt; he had continual War against Maud the Empress, and after a
troublesome Reign of eighteen years, ten months and odd days, he dyed, and
lies buried at Font Everard.

Henry the Second, Son to Maud the Empress, Daughter to Henry the first, and to
Maud Daughter to Malcolm King of Scotland, and Margaret Sister to Edgar
Etheling; by which means the Saxon blood was restored to the Crown. This Henry
was a most magnanimous Prince, and by his fathers inheritance added many of the
French Provinces to the English Crown, as also the Duchy of Aquitain, and the
Earldoms of Guyen and Poictou by Elbiner his wife; and a great part of Ireland
by conquest, toward the latter end of his Reign he was much troubled with the
unnatural Rebellion of his Sons. He dyed the sixth day of July Anno 1189. and
Reigned twenty four years and seven months lacking eleven days.

Richard the first, for his valor and magnanimous courage, surnamed Coeur de
Lion, he with a most puissant Army warred in the Holy Land, where by his acts
he made his name very famous, overcoming the Turks in several Battles, whom he
had almost driven out of Syria, he also took the Isle of Cyprus which he
afterward exchanged for the Title of King of Jerusalem, after many worthy
achievements performed in those Eastern parts, returning homewards to defend
Normandy and Aquitain against the French, he was by a Tempest cast upon the
Coast of Austria, where he was taken prisoner, and put to a most grievous
Ransom; finally he was slain at the siege of Chaluz in France, by a shot from
an Arbalist, the use of which warlike Engine he first showed to the French,
whereupon a French Poet made these Verses in the person of Antropos.

Hoc volo, non alia Richardum mart perire,
Ut qui Francigenis Balistae, primitus usum
Tradidit; ipse sui rem primitus experiatur,
Quamque aliis docuit, in se enim sentiat artis.
It is decreed thus must great Richard die,
As he that first did teach the French to dart,
An Arbalist; it is just he first should try,
The strength, and taste the Fruits of his own Art.
In his days lived those Outlaws, Robin Hood, Little John, etc.

King John next succeeded, or rather usurped the Crown, his eldest Brothers Son
Arthur of Britain being then living; He was an unnatural Son to his Father, and
an undutiful subject to his Brother, neither sped he better in his own Reign,
the French having almost gotten his Kingdom from him, who on the Popes curse
came to subdue it, with whom joined many of his Subjects, by which the Land was
brought to much misery. Finally, after a base submission to the Popes Legate, he
was poisoned by a Monk at Sw^nested-Abby, after he had reigned seventeen years
and five months lacking eight days, and lies buried at Worcester.

Henry the third, Son to King John, against whom the rebellious Barons strongly
warred; yet however he expelled the intruding French out of England, confirmed
the Statutes of Magna Charta, and having reigned fifty six years and twenty
eight days, was buried at Westminster, of which Church he built a great part.

Edward the first, surnamed Long-shanks, who warred in the Holy Land, where he
was at the time of his Fathers death; a most Heroic magnanimous Prince, he
awed France, subdued Wales, and brought Scotland into subjection, disposing of
the Crown thereof according to his pleasure, he brought from thence the Regal
Chair, still reserved in Westminster-Abby; he was a right virtuous and
fortunate Prince, Reigned thirty four years, seven months and odd days, and
lies buried at Westminster.

Edward the second, a most dissolute Prince hated of his Nobles, and contemned
by the vulgar, for his immeasurable love to Pierce Gaveston and the two
Spencers, on whom he bestowed most of what his Father had purchased with his
Sword, as one writes in these Verses:

Did Longshanks purchase with his conquering hand,
Albania, Gascoyn, Cambria, Ireland,
That young Carnarvon his unhappy Son,
Should give away all that his Father won?
He having Reigned nineteen years, six months and odd days, was deposed, and
Edward his eldest Son Crowned King.

Edward the third, that true pattern of virtue and valor, was like a rose out
of a Bryar, an excellent Son of an evil Father; he brought the Scots again to a
formal obedience, who had gained much on the English in his Fathers life time,
laid claim to the Crown of France in right of his Mother, and in pursuance of
his Title, gave the French two great overthrows, taking their King prisoner,
with diverse others of the chief Nobility: he took also that strong and almost
impregnable Town of Callice, with many other fair possessions in that Kingdom.
Reigned fifty years, four months and odd days, and was buried at Westminster.

Richard the second, Son to Edward the black Prince, the eldest Son of King
Edward the third, an ungoverned and dissolute King; He rejected the sage advice
of his Grave Counselors, was most ruled by his own selfwill'd passions, lost
what his Father and Grandfather had gained, and at last his own life to the
Lancastrian faction: in his time was that famous, or rather infamous rebellion
of Wat Tailor and Jack Straw. He having Reigned twenty two years, three months
and odd days, was deposed and murdered at Pomfret Castle.

Henry the fourth, Son to John of Gaunt Duke of Lancaster, third Son to Edward
the third, obtained the Crown more by force than by lawful succession: he was a
wise prudent Prince, but having gotten the Crown unjustly, was much troubled
with insurrection of of the subjects, which he having quieted, surrendered to
fate, having reigned thirteen years, six months and odd days, and was buried at
Canterbury.

Henry the fifth, who from a dissolute vicious Prince, became the mirror of
Kings, and pattern of all Heroic performance, he pursued his Title to the
Crown of France; bear the French at Agin Court, and was in a Parliament of
their Nobility, Clergy and Commons, ordained Heir apparent to the French Crown,
but lived not to possess it, dying in the full carrier of his victories at
Vincent Boys in France, and was brought over into England and buried at
Westminster. He Reigned nine years, five months and odd days.

Henry the sixth, surnamed of Windsor his birthplace, of whom it was
prophesied, that What Henry of Monmouth had won, (which was his Father) Henry
of Windsor should lose. He was a very pious Prince, and upheld his State,
during the life of his Unkles, John Duke of Bedford, and Humphrey of Gloucester:
after whose deaths, the Nobility growing factious, he not only lost France to
the French but England and his life to the Yorkish faction. He having reigned
thirty eight years, was overthrown by Edward Earl of March, descended by the
Mothers side from Lionel Duke of Clarence, second Son to King Edward the third,
was arrested and sent to the Tower: where within a while after he was murdered,
and buried at Cherlsey, since removed to Windsor.

Edward the fourth, a prudent politic Prince; He after nine bloody Battles,
especially that of Tawton, in which were slain of the English thirty six
thousand on both sides was at last quietly seated in his dominions of England
and Ireland. Reigned twenty two years, one month and odd days, and was buried
at Windsor.

Edward the fifth, his Son, a King proclaimed, but before his Coronation was
murdered in the Tower.

Richard the third, brother to Edward the fourth, was Crowned King, ascending
to the same by steps of blood, murdering King Henry the sixth, and Prince
Edward his Son, 3. George Duke of Clarence his own Brother, with many faithful
servants to King Edward. 4. Edward the fifth his lawful Sovereign, with Prince
Richard his brother. 5. Henry Duke of Buckingham his great friend, and sixth
one Collingborn an Esquire, who was hanged, drawn and quartered, for making
this Verse:

The Cat, the Rat, and Lowel our Dog,
Rule all England under a Hog.
Finally, having reigned two years and two months, he was slain by Henry Earl
of Richmond, and buried at Gray Friars Church at Leicester.

Henry the seventh, who united the two Houses of York and Lancaster, by
marrying with Elizabeth the Daughter and Heir to Edward the fourth. He was a
Prince of mavelous Wisdom, Policy, Justice, Temperance and Gravity; and
notwithstanding great troubles and wars, which he had against homebred Rebels,
he kept his Realm in right good order; He builded the Chapel to
Westminster-Abby, a most accurate piece of Work, wherein he was interred after
he had reigned twenty three years and eight months.

Henry the eight, who banished the Popes supremacy out of England, won Bulloign
from the French: lived beloved and feared of his Neighbor Princes, the last of
our Kings whose name began with the Letter H. which Letter had been accounted
strange and ominous, every mutation in our State being as it were ushered in by
it, according as I find it thus versed in Albions England.

Not superstitiously I speak, but H this Letter still
Has been accounted ominous to England's good or ill.
First Hercules, Hesion, and Helen were the cause
Of war to Troy, Aeneas seed becoming so Outlaws.
Humber the Hum with foreign Arms did first the Brutes invade,
Hellen to Romes Imperial Throne the British Crown conveyed.
Hengist and Horsus first did plant the Saxons in this Isle,
Hungar and Hubba first brought Danes that swayed here long while.
At Harold had the Saxons end, at Hardy Cnute the Dane,
Henry's the first and second did restore the English Reign.
Fourth Henry first for Lancaster did Englands Crown obtain.
Seventh Henry jarring Lancaster and York unites in peace,
Henry the eighth did happily Romes irreligion cease.
King Henry having Reigned thirty seven years, nine months and odd days, dyed
and was buried at Windsor.

Edward the sixth, a most virtuous religious Prince, whose wisdom was above his
years, and whose piety was exemplary, he perfected the Reformation begun by his
father King Henry. At the age of sixteen years he departed this life, having
Reigned six years, five months and odd days, and was buried at Westminster.

Mary his Sister whom King Henry begat of Katherine of Spain, she restored
again the Mass, set at liberty those Bishops imprisoned in her brothers Reign,
and imprisoned those who would not embrace the Romish persuasion. She was very
zealous in the cause of the Pope, for not yielding to which, many godly
Bishops, and others of the Reformation suffered Mattyrdom, In her time was
Callice lost to the French, the grief whereof it was thought brake her heart,
she Reigned five years, four months and odd days, and was buried at Westminster.

Elizabeth, daughter to Henry the eighth by the Lady Ann of Bulloigne; a most
Heroic virtuous Lady, she again banished the Popes power out of England,
reduced Religion to its primitive purity, and refined the Coyns which were then
much corrupt. For the defense of her Kingdom, she stored her Royal Navy with
all warlike munition, aided the Scots against the French, the French
Protestants against the Catholics, and both against the Spaniard, whose
invincible Armado (as it was termed) she overthrew in 88. Holland found her a
fast friend against the force of Spain; the Ocean it self was at her command,
and her name grew so redoubted, that the Muscovite willingly entered into
League with her. She was famous for her Royal Government amongst the Turks,
Persians, and Tartars; which having endured forty four years, five months, and
odd days, she dyed, being aged about seventy years, and was buried at
Westminster.

King James, a Prince from his Cradle, the sixth of that name in Scotland, and
the first in England. He excelled for Learning and Religion a second Solomon,
in whose Reign during all the time thereof, our Land was enriched with those
two blessings of Peace and Plenty. He died in a good old age, notwithstanding
the Treason of the Gowries and the Powder Plot. Reigned twenty two years and
three days, and was buried at Westminster.

Charles the first, Son to King James, a most pious, prudent, virtuous Prince,
enriched with all excellencies both of mind and body: He was by his own
Subjects most barbarously murdered before his PallaceGate at Whitehall, Jan.
30. An. 1648. after he had Reigned twenty three years, ten months and 3 days.

Twit Papists now not with the Powder Plot,
This blacker deed will make the same forgot.
Charles the second, the Heir of his Fathers virtues and Crown, who having been
long detained from his right, by the prevailing sword of Rebels, was
miraculously restored to his Subjects and Kingdom, May the 29. 1660. Who God
grant long, long, long to Reign.

May they be all Rebels and Traitors reckoned,
Who wish the least hurt unto Charles the Second.
Hereafter follows the Histories of St Denis the Titulary Saint of France,
St. Romain, and some others, being after used in discourse, for the Readers
better information and delight, according as we find it in the Legend of them.
SAint Denis is said to be the same Dionisius of Areopagita, mentioned in the
Acts of the Apostles; who being converted himself, ^hirsted after the
conversion of others, and ^o that end he with Rusticus and Elutherius ^ravelled
into France, then called Gauls, where he converted many to Christianity, and
^ecame the first Bishop of Paris, making Rus^icus his Archpriest, and
Elutherius his Dea^on. Afterward in the Reign of Domitian the Emperor,
persecution growing hot, Fes^ennius Governor of Paris commanded that ^e should
bow before the Altar of Mercury, and offer Sacrifice unto him, which St. Denis
with the other two beforenamed refusing to do they were all three of them
condemned to be beheaded, which was accordingly executed on Mont-Matre, distant
about a mile from Paris. Now it came to pass that when the Executioner had
smitten off Saint Denis his head, that he caught it up, between his Arms, and
ran with it down the Hill as fast as his legs could carry him; half a mile from
the place of his Execution, he sat down and rested; and so he did nine times
in all, till he came to the place where his Church is now built, where he met
with a very old woman whom he charged to bury him in that place, and then fell
down and died, being three English miles from Mont-Matre, and there he was
buried together with Rusticus and Elutherius; who were brought after him by the
people. Afterward by the succeeding ages, when Christianity had gotten the
upper-hand of Paganism, in the nine several places where he rested, are erected
so many handsome Crosses of stone all of a making.

To the memory of this Saint, did Dagobert the first build a Church in the
place where he was buried; for so it happened that this Dagobert during the
life of Clotoyre the second his Father, had cruelly slain Sadrasegille h^^
Governor. To avoid the fury of his Father much incensed with that Unprincely
action, he was compelled to wander up and down France, hungry and thirsty. In
this miserable condition coming to the Sepulcher of S^ Denis, he laid him down
and slept, when there appeared to him an old man with a staff i^ his hand, who
told him that his Father wa^ dead, and that he should be King, and desired him
that when it came so to pass, he would build a Church there in the honor of
St. Denis; which Dagobert coming to be King accordingly did, and a Bishop was
sent for i^ all haste to bless it. But it happened the night before the Bishops
coming, that there cam^ to the Town an ugly Leper, who desired to lie in the
Church. And when he was ther^ about twelve a clock at night, our Savior came
into the Church in white Garments, and with him the Apostles, Angels, and
Martyrs with most delicious Music. And then Christ blessed the Church, and bid
the Leper tel^ the Bishop, that the Church was already blessed, and for a token
of it, he gave the Lep^^ his health, who on the next morning wa^ found to be
sound and perfectly whole.

The Legend of Saint Romain.

SAint Romain was Bishop of Roven i^ France; It happened that in his time there
was a poisonous Dragon, which had done much harm to all the country
thereabouts, many ways had been tried to destroy him but none prospered; at
last Romain being then Bishop of the Town undertook to do it; and accompanied
only with a Thief and a Murderer, he marched toward the place where the
Dragon lay; upon sight of the Dragon the Thief stole away, but the Murderer
went on, and saw the Holy man vanquish the Serpent and only with a Stole ^
which is a neck habit sanctified by his Holiness of Rome, and made much after
the manner of a Tippet) with this stole tied about the neck of the Dragon, does
the Murderer ^ead him prisoner to Roven, the people much admiring at the same,
highly extolling the Bishop, pardoned the Murderer, and burned the Dragon to
ashes. In memory of this mavelous act, King Dagobert the first, (who Reigned
in France Anno 632) granted unto Andoin or Owen, successor to St. Romain, that
from that time forwards the Chapitre of the Cathedral Church of Roven, should
every Ascension day, have the faculty of delivering any Malefactor, whom the
Laws had condemned. This that King then granted, and all the following Kings
even to this time have successively confirmed it.

Of Saint Dunstan.

SAint Dunstan was Archbishop of Canterbury in the time of Etheldred the Saxon
King; he was (according to the opinion of these times) of great sanctity of
life, being ^ sleep one day in the Church he dreamed some thing of the Devil,
whereupon he ran about pursuing him even to the top of the Church, and came
down again in his sleep without any hurt. At another time the Devil came to
tempt him in the likeness of a beautiful Damosel, but St. Dunstan caught up a
pair of tongs being red hot, and therewith so pincht the Devil by the Nose, a^
quite spoiled his countenance, and for ever taking Tobacco throw the nose
again. He also coming once into a Gentleman's house where were several
Instruments hanging up against the Wall, at his entrance in, they of their own
accord fell on playing. It is reported of him that when he Christened King
Ethelred, the child with his ordure defiled the Fount, whereupon Sr. Dunstan
said, By Gods Holy Mother, this Child if he live will prove a sloathful person,
which accordingly came to Pass, the Danes in his time overrunning England.
This Saint Dunstan flourishing about the year of our Lord 978.

Of Thomas Becket.

THomas Becket was the Son of one Gilbert Becket which Gilbert being taken
prisoner among the Sarazens, the Kings daughter of that country fell in love
with him, gained his liberty, and came over into England, where she was
baptized in the Church of S. Paul, and married to this Gilbert, who upon her
begot this Thomas, afterward made Archbishop of Canterbury by King Henry the
second, in which place he behaved himself very high; as well against the King
as against the Nobles; nor was he it seems much beloved of the Commons, for
coming one day into Town in Kent, the people cut off his Horse tail, whereupon
the Children of that Count for a long time after (as the Legend reports were
born with long tails like Horses, he was at last slain in his Cathedral Church
of Canterbury by four Knights; and after his death by the Pope Canonized for
aSaint. Many miracles are said to be by him performed, as namely, how a fellow
for stealing a Whetstone was deprived of his eyes, but praying to St. Thomas,
he had his sight again restored; nay a Bird flying out of a Cage, and being
pursued by a Hawk, and ready to be seized on, the Bird crying out only Saint
Thomas help me, the Hawk immediately fell down dead, and the Bird escaped. His
Tomb was afterward much enriched with costly gifts and visited by Pilgrims
from all places, according to what we find in Chaucer,

From every Shires end
Of England do they wend,
The Holy blissful Martyrs Tomb to seek,
Who has them helped wherein they beseke.
JESTS.
A new way to know the Father of a Child.

A Wench that lived in a Knights service was gotten with child, and brought to
bed of a goodly Boy, before it was publicly known in the house: after her
uprising, being examined before a Justice of the Peace, to know who was the
Father of the child, she said, she could not tell well her self; for there was
two of the Knights servants that had to do with her about the same time,
whereof one was a Welsh man, the other an English man: one of them she said was
the father, but which of the two she was not certain. This doubtful case put
the Justice in a great quandary, upon which of them to lay the charge of
bringing up the child, but the Clerk said he would soon decide the controversy
whose the child was; and thereupon went into the Kitchen, and toasted a bit of
Cheese, and then brought it and offered it the child, putting it to his mouth,
which made the Child to cry, refusing it as much as it could. Whereupon the
Clerk said, upon my life the Welshman is not the father of it, for if he were,
it would have eaten toasted cheese at a day old.

The King of Swedens Goose.

THe King of Swethland coming to a town of his enemies with a very little
company, they to slight his force, did hang out a Goose for him to shoot at;
but perceiving before night that these few soldiers had invaded, and set their
chiefest Holds on fire, they demanded of him what his intent was? To whom he
answered, To roast your Goose.

Upon Latin.

A Company of Country fellows disputing of Learning, and what a crooked, hard,
and intricate a thing it was to be a good Scholar: Truly says one, and so it
is; for I have heard your best Latin is in Crooked-Lane.

The Fellow and Miller.

ONe being much abused by a Miller, the fellow at last told him, that he
thought that there was nothing that he could imagine more valiant than the
Collar of a millers shirt; and being asked what reason he had to think so? he
answered, Because every morning it had a thief by the neck.

Of Women's pride.

AN ancient Tradesman living in London, had a wife who carried a very stately
^ind, and delighted very much in brave ap^rel. Upon a time walking abroad with
other women her neighbors, they espied pair of silk Stockings upon her Legs;
which made them not to let their Husbands ^e in quiet, till they also had the
like. Their ^^sbands unwilling to be at that charge, and ^t loath to displease
their wives, went to the ^^cient Gentleman, and said, Sir, the suffe^nce of
your wifes pride, has spoiled all ^rs, for since she has worn Silk Stockings,
^r wives have grown so importunate, that ^ey must needs have the like, and you
are ^e chiefest cause in suffering her to wear the ^^me. O my good neighbors
(said the Gentleman) I have great cause in doing so, for seeing I ^^nnot please
my wife above the knees, I must ^eds please her below the knees, and the only
^ay to please a woman, is to let her have her will.

A Gentleman and his Huntsman.

A Gentleman that used to hunt very much, being at the fall of a mighty Stag,
whi^st he was breaking open, he began to fall in^^ discourse with this
Huntsman, averring, ^^at not any creature upon earth had a more ^ick and tough
skin, than a well grown Stag. ^o which the Huntsman answered. Sir, if it ^e not
offensive to correct you, I am not of ^our Worships mind; for I do think many
^^ke creatures have skins tougher than any ^ag in the Forest. His Master
desirous to ^ow the reason of his opinion, asked him that creatures those were?
To which the Huntsman answered, Marry Sir, Cuckolds for I could never meet with
any Stag whose hide was so tough, but that his horns would break out, and
branch from his brows: but the skin of a Cuckolds forehead is so hate and
impenetrable, that be his horns never so wide and large, they are kept so
within, that they are never known to be outwardly visible.

On a Spanish Soldier.

A Spanish Soldier being very sick, expecting death every moment, made hi^
Will, bequeathing amongst other things hi^ Pistol, in an especial manner to his
Physician who demanding his reason for so doing? O Sir (said he) that
Instrument joined with you^ Practice, you need not to fear, but you may kill
whom you please.

On a Gallants Cloak.

ONe seeing a Gallant who had on a Cloa^ which was all plain without, and plush
within, said, that Cloak is far different from the Wearer, who is worst within,
and be^ without.

Horses to be Let.

A Country fellow riding to London, by chance casting his eyes upon a Sign
read these words: Here are Horses to be Let 1664. which was the year when the
Sign wa^ first set up, but he imagining it to be the number of the Horses;
turned to his Companion and said, so many Horses in one plac^ to be hired* I
much marvel what shift they make for stable-room.

Upon a Pint of Claret.

TWo Gentlemen coming into a Tave^ one of them called for a pint of Clare^ why
do you love Claret, said the other! for my part I Will see it burnt before I Will
drink a drop of it.

Of Rape-seed.

A Handsome young fellow having seen a Play at the Red-Bull, after it was done
came to one of the Players, and desired him ^f his leisure would permit to
accept of a bottle of Wine, for his better acquaintance, which being accepted,
the Player desired him ^o go as far as the King's Head in St. Johns^treet, and
he would, as soon as he had made himself ready attend him there. In the mean
time to keep him company, he desired ^s friend of his to go along with him,
promi^ing to come to them instantly. But staying ^ pretty space, his friend
desired to be excu^ed, he having some business to do, but enga^ed to be there
in a quarter of an hour. The ^layer comes in the mean space, and finding ^he
Gentleman alone, when his friend came, ^e began to chide him, for his absence:
He ^resently craved pardon, and begins to excuse himself, that he had been
abroad to buy Rape-seed, and that he stayed to feed his birds. ^t the word of
Rape-seed, the man rose from ^he Table in great anger, telling the Player, that
he came in courtesy to desire his acquaintance, and to bestow the Wine upon
^im, not thinking he would have called that ^ellow up to abuse him, (they
wondering that he meant) he proceeded. It Is true indeed I was arraigned the last
Sessions at ^ew-gate for a R^pe, but I thank God I came ^ff like an honest man,
l^^^le thinking to be w^^ted of it here. Both began to excuse themselves as
well as they might, pleading ignorance of the knowledge of any such thing. But
he that gave the offense, thinking the better to express his innocence; young
Gentleman, said he, to show you how far I was from any intention of wronging
you, look you here; as I have Rape-seed in one pocket for one Bird, so here is
Hemp Seed on this side for another. At which word Hemp Seed, says the young
man, why villain do the^ think I have deserved hanging? and took up the pot
to fling at his head, but his hand was stayed; and as error and mistake began
the quarrel, so wine ended it.

A Ladies Serving-man.

A Lady sending her Serving-man to the Playhouse to know what was played that
day, one of the Players told him, It Is pity she was a Whore, (a Play so called)
which the fellow misunderstanding, told them they were base rogues to call his
Lady Whore, who was as honest as any of their Mothers.

On a Play-book.

ONe having a Play-book called the Wit^ which he much valued, by chance lo^^
it, for which he fell in a very great passion one of his friends coming in the
interim, an^ asking the cause of his distemper: it was answered, that he had
lost his Wits.

An Ignorant Constable.

TWo Gentlemen of Stepny, going home wards over Moor-fields, about twelve of
the Clock at night, were staid by an impetinent Constable with many frivolous
questions, more by half to show his Office than (...) wit: one whereof was, If
they were not afraid to go home at that time of the night? They answering no:
Well said he, I shall let you pass at this time, but if you should be knocked on
the head before you get home, you cannot but report that there was a good Watch
kept in Moor-Fields.

On the Hangman

ONe hearing that the Hangman was forced to noose up the Vintners Boy at
Ratcliff-Cross, twice, before he was quite dead; said, that he thought the
Hangman thereby had so much discredited his place, that after his death an
honest man would scarcely accept of it.

On a drunken Husband.

A Fellow that was drunken, fell a beating of his wife, telling her of many
faults that she had committed; to which she answered, you tell me of a great
many crimes, but you will not stand to a word of what you speak

A Countryman and Constable.

A Simple Countryman having Term-business in London, and being somewhat late
abroad in the night, was staid by a Constable, and somewhat hardly entreated;
the poor man observing how imperiously he commanded him, asked him what he was?
to which he replied, I am the Constable, and this is my Watch; and I pray you
Sir (said the man) for whom do you watch? the Constable replied, ^ watch for
the King; for the King said the Countryman simply, then you may let me pass
quietly home to my Lodging, for I can give you a Certificate from some of my
Neighbors who are now in Town, that I am not the King, but Gaffer Jobson of
Darby-shire.

The Reversion of a house.

ONe came bragging from the Court of Aldermen, overjoyed with the obtaining of
a Suit, for says he, they have promised me the Lease of the next House that
falls. To whom one standing by replied, but had it been my case I should rather
have petitioned for a House that had stood.

The Thiefs Destiny.

A Fellow being tried for his life before a Judge, alleged for himself, that
he could not avoid it, because it was his destiny, that he should steal; If so,
said the Judge then know also, It is your destiny to be hanged.

A Spaniard whipped.

A Spanish Cavaleiro being for some faults by him committed, whipped through
the principal streets of Paris, and keeping a sober pace, was advised by a
friend to make more haste, that he might the sooner be ou^ of his pain; but he
half in choler replied, That he would not loose the least step of his pace for
all the Whipping in Paris.

The distressed Mariner.

A Mariner in a great storm prayed devoutly to the Virgin Mary, promising her,
that if she would deliver them from that danger, when he came on shore, he
would offer at her Altar a Candle as big as the Main Mast of his Ship; which
when one of h^^ Companions overheard, he jogged him o^ the elbow, telling him,
it was impossible to be done, Tush (said he) we must now speak h^ fair because
we are in trouble, but if I get safe ^^ shore, I will make her be content with
one of si^ in the pound.

Lame Verses.

ONe was telling his friend of some Verses which he made as he was riding upon
the Road on a trotting Horse; to whom the other answered, Nay if you had not
told me, I should have known by your verses what pace your Horse went.

A Medicine for the Tooth ache.

A Gentleman and a Gentlewoman sat together talking, which Gentleman had a
great pain in one of his teeth, and said thus; Mistress, I have a tooth in my
head that grieveth me sore, I would it were in your tail: to whom she answered,
in faith, Sir if your tooth were in my tail, it could do but little good: but
if there be any thing in my tail that can do your tooth good, I would it were
in it.

The Countrey-fellow and Doctor.

A Country-fellow was sent with his Fathers urine to the Doctors, and knocking
at the door, the Physician opening unto him, he presented him the Urinal; who,
as he took it from his hand, asked him withal from whence he came? to whom the
fellow made answer, I hope your Worship is wise enough to find that in the
water.

The Countrey-fellow and Judge.

A Countrey-fellow was sub-poena'd for a witness upon a Trial of an action of
defamation, at a quarter Sessions holden in the country, he being sworn, the
Judge bid him to say the very same words that he heard spoken; the fellow was
loath to speak, and hum'd and haw'd for a good space; but being urged by the
Judge, he at last spoke, My Lord, said he, you are a Rogue. The Judge seeing
the people begin the laugh, called to him, and bid him speak to the Jury, for
there were twelve of them.

A Lame Horse.

UPon a Friday in Smithfield one willing to put off a lame Horse, and therefore
not willing to have him rid, had tied him by the Bridle to the Rails, a Chapman
liking the Nagg, came somewhat near the price, because the Seller warranted him
sound of wind and limb; but before he would part with his money desirous to see
what metal he had, he rid him upon the stones, and perceived the poor Jade to
halt down right: at which the Chapman vexing, asked the other if he was not
ashamed to put a lame unserviceable Jade upon him, and warrant him sound. To
whom the other answered, I assure you, he is as sound as any Horse in England,
but that it was your fortune to try him when his foot was asleep.

The Unthrift and his Sweetheart.

A Fellow that was a great Spend-thrift told his Sweetheart that he loved her
like any thing, what thing do you mean said she: Any thing Sweetheart, quoth
he what you please. Then (replied she) do not love me like money. for then I am
sure you will not keep me.

POEMS.
A farewell to folly by Sir Kenelm Digby.

Farewell ye gilded follies, pleasing troubles;
Farewell ye honored rags, ye crystal bubles;
Fame's but a hallow echo; Gold, poor clay
Honor, the darling but of one short day;
Beauties chief Idol, but a damask Skin;
State, but a Golden Prison to live in,
And torture freeborn minds; imbroyder'd Trains,
But goodly Pageants: proudly swelling veins
And blood allied to greatness, is but loan
Inherited, not purchased, nor our own.
Fame, Riches, Honor, Beauty, Gold, Trains, Birth,
Are but the fading blessings of the earth.
I would be rich, but see man too unkind
Digs in the bowels of the richest mine.
I would be great, but yet the Sun does still
Level his beams against the rising Hill.
I would be fair, but see the Champion proud
The worlds fair eye, often setting in a Cloud.
I would be wise, but that the Fox I see
Suspected guilty, when the Fox is free.
I would be poor, but see the humble Grass
Trampled upon, by each unworthy Ass,
Rich, hated; wise suspected; scorned if poor;
Great, feared; fair, tempted; high, still envied more.
Would the world then adopt me for her heir
Would Beauties Queen entitle me the fair;
Fame speaks me Honors Minion; and could I
With Indian Angels, and a speaking eye,
Command bare heads, bowed knees, strike Justice dumb,
As well as blind, as lame, and give a tongue
To stones by Epitaphs, be called great Master
In the loose lines of every Poetaster;
Could I be more than any man that lives,
Great, wife, rich, fair, in all superlatives:
Yet I these favors would more free resign,
Than ever Fortune would have had them mine:
I count one minute of my holy leisure,
Beyond the mirth of all this earthly pleasure
Welcome pure thoughts, welcome ye careless Groves,
These are my Guests, this is the court age loves.
The winged people of the skies shall sing
Me Anthems, by my sellers gentle Spring
Divinity shall be my Looking glass,
Wherein I will adore sweet Virtues face.
Here dwells no heartless Loves, no pale faced Fears,
No short Joys purchased with eternal tears.
Here will I sit and sing my hot youths folly,
And learn to affect an holy Melancholy;
And if Contentment be a stranger, then
I Will never look for it but in Heaven again,
Humane Life Charactered by Francis Viscount St. Albanes.

THe World's a Bubble,

And the Life of Man,
Less than a span.
In his Conception wretched,

From the Womb,
So to the Tomb;
Cursed from his Cradle,

And brought up to years,
With Care and Fears.
Who then to frail Mortality shall trust,
But lines the water, and does write in dust.
Yet whiles with sorrow

Here we live oppressed,
What life is best?
Courts are but

Superficial Schools
To dandle fools:
The Rural parts

Are turned into a Den
Of savage men:
And where is a City from all vice so free,
But may be termed the worst of all the three:
Domestic Care

Afflicts the Husbands bed,
Or pains his head:
Those that love single,

Take it for a Curse,
Or do things worse:
Some wish for Children,

Those that have them, none,
Or wish them gone;
What is it then to have, or have no wife,
But single thraldom, or a double strife.
Our own affections

Still at home to please,
Is a Disease;
To cross the Seas

To any foreign Soil,
Peril or toil:
Wars with their noise affrighe us,

And when they cause,
We are worse in peace:
What then remains? but that we still should cry,

Not to be born, or being born, to die,

A Prisoners Complaint.

I La^e used to resort unto the B^ook,
To catch the fish, with either net or hook:
Where as (...) creatures did I le^rn unto me,
From danger neither land nor waters free:
For whilst on Fowls, Fishes, and Beasts we feed,
Earth, Air, and Water shall be ransacked,
The gluttenous belly to satisfy,
Thus to preserve one Creatures life, how many creatures die?
I late used to walk abroad in the fields,
To take the pleasure spring and summer yields
Whereas the Flowers denote to me;
Of our short life the mutability.
One day in pomp, next day in the dirt they lie;
This day we live, too morrow we may die.
For this our life's so short, and full of sorrow,
None can assure himself to day, he shall live till to morrow.
I once used to rise early in the morn,
To hunt the Fox that enemy to Corn:
And chase the timorous Hare, and by that way,
I had both pleasure, and sometimes a prey.
But of those Joys I am now quite bereft,
And unto me (alas) is nothing left,
But the remembrance only: poor relief,
To think on Joys that now are past, to ease my present grief.
The Description of a Chaste Mistress.

LIke the Violet, which alone
Prospers in some happy shade.
Such my Mistress lives unknown,
To no looser eye betrayed.
For she is to her self untiue,
Who delights in the public view.
Such her beauty as no Arts,
Have enricht with borrowed grace;
Her high Birth no pride imparts,
For she blushes in her place.
Folly boasts a glorious blood,
She is noblest being good,
Cautious, she knew never yet
What a wanton Courtship meant;
Nor speaks loud to boast her wit,
In her silence eloquent.
Of her self survey she takes,
But 'tween men no difference makes.
She obeys with speedy will,
Her grave Parents wise commands;
And so innocent, that ill
She nor acts, nor understands.
Women's feet run still astray,
If once to ill they know the way.
She say is by that Rock, the Court,
Where often Honor splits her Mast,
And Retir'dness thinks the Port,
Where her Fame may Anchor cast.
Virtue safely cannot sit,
Where Vice is enthroned for Wit.
She holds that days pleasure best,
Where sin waits not on delight;
Without Masque, or Ball, or Feast,
Sweetly spends a winters night.
Over that darkness whence is thrust,
Prayer and sleep often governs lust.
She her throne makes reason climb,
While wild passions captive lie;
And each article of time,
Her pure thoughts to Heaven fly.
All her Vows religious be,
And her Love she vows to me.
The Surprizal: Or Loves Tyranny.

There Is no dallying with Love,
Though he be a Child and and blind:
Then let none the danger prove,
Who would to himself be kind.
Smile he does when thou do play,
But his smiles to death betray.
Lately with the Boy I sported,
Love I did not, yet love feigned;
Had no Mistress, yet I courted:
Sigh I did, yet was not pained;
Till at last his love in jest,
Proved in earnest my unrest.
When I saw my fair One first,
In a feigned fire I burned,
But true flames my poor heart pierced,
When her eyes on mine she turned:
So a real wound I took,
For my counterfeited look.
Slighted Love his skill to show,
Struck me with a mortal dart,
Then I learned that against his Bow,
Vain are all the helps of Art.
And thus captived found that true,
Does dissembled Love pursue.
Cause his fetters I disclaimed,
Now the Tyrant faster bound me,
With more scorching Bonds in flamed,
Cause in love so cold he found me,
And my sighs more scalding made,
Cause with winds before they played.
Who love not then, o make no show:
Love's as ill deceived as Fate;
Fly the Boy, he will cog and woo,
Mock him, and he will wound the strait.
They who dally, boast in vain,
False love wants not real pain.
Choice Songs, which sometimes may be used for the sweetning of tedious
Discourse.
The Baseness of the Whores.

TRust no more a wanton Whore,
If thou love health and freedom,
They are so base in every place,
It Is pity that bread should fed 'em,
All their sense is impudence,
Which some call good conditions,
Stink they do above ground too,
Of Surgeons and Physicians.
If you are nice they have their spice,
On which they will chew to slour you:
And if you not discern the plot,
You have no Nose about you.
Together more they have in store,
For which I deadly hate 'em,
Persumed gear to stuff each ear,
And for their cheeks Pomatum.
Liquorish sluts, they feast their guts
At Chuffins cost, like Princes,
Amber Plums, and Macaroons,
And costly candied Quinces.
Potato-pies supports the Rump,
Eringo strengthens Nature,
Viper wine to heat the Chine,
They Will gender with a Satyr.
Names they own are never known
Throughout their generation,
Noblemen are kin to them,
At least by approbation:
If any dote on a Gay-coat,
But mark what there is stamped on it,
A Stone-horse wild with Tool defiled,
Two Goats, a Lion Rampant.
Truth to say, Paint and Array,
Makes them so highly prized,
Yet not one well of ten can tell,
If ere they were baptized.
And if not, then it is a blot
Past cure of Sponge or Leather,
And we may sans question say,
The Devil was their Godfather.
Now to leave them, he receive them,
Whom they most confide in,
Whom that that is, ask Tib or Sis,
Or any whom next you ride in:
If in sooth she speaks the truth,
She says excuse I pray you,
The beast you ride, where I confide,
Will in due time convey you.
A Song.

MIstake me not,
I am as cold as hot:
For though thine eyes betrays my heart over night,
Ere morn, ere morn, ere morning all is right.
Sometimes I burn,
And then do I return,
There Is nothing so unconstant as my mind,
I change, I change, I change even as the wind.
Perhaps in jest,
I said I loved the best,
But 'twas no more, than what was long before,
I Would vowed, I Would vowed I Would vowed to twenty more.
Then I prithee see,
I give no heart to thee,
For when I never could keep my own one day,
What hope, what hope, what hope had thou to stay?
A Song.

I Loved a Lass, alas my folly!
Was full of her coy of disdaining,
I courted her thus, what shall I sweet Molly
Do for thy dear loves obtaining?
At length I did dally so long with my Molly,
That Molly for all her faining,
Had got such a Mountain above her Valley,
That Molly came home complaining.
The Invitation.

Why sit you here so dull
You lively Lads that love
The pleasure of the Plains,
And sport enchanting Jove?
My merry Muse brings other News,
And time invites to go,
Fill Nectars cup, the Hare is up,
We come to sing so-ho.
My pipe is of the pure
Cane of a Winter-corn,
By force of Cynthia's lure
Transformed into a Horn.
Aurora's look has changed my Crook
Into a bended bow,
And Pan shall keep my patient sheep
While here we sing so ho.
Let us be like the Swains
That only undergoes
The pleasures of the Plains,
In place where Boreas blows.
And every night take our delight,
With our she-friend and so
Both night and day we will sport and play,
And merrily sing So Ho.
To make much of Time.

GAther your Rose-buds whilst you may,
Old time is still a flying,
And that same flower that smiles to day,
To morrow will be dying.
The glorious Lamp of Heaven, the Sun,
The higher he is getting,
The sooner will his Race be run,
And nearer to his setting.
That age is best which is the first,
When youth, and blood are warmer,
And being spent, the Worst and worst
Times still succeed the former.
Then be not coy, but use your time,
And while you may, go marry,
For having lost but once your prime,
You may for ever tarry.
The Prisoner.

When Love with unconfined wings
Hovers within my Gates,
And my divine Althea begins
To whisper at the Grates,
When I lay tangled in her hair,
And fettered to her eye,
The Gods that wander in the air,
Know no such liberty.
When flowing Cups run swiftly round,
With no allaying thames,
Our careless heads with Roses round,
Our hearts with loyal flames,
When thirsty grief in wine we steep
When Healths and Draughts go free,
Fishes that tipple in the deep
Know no such liberty.
When like committed Linnets I
With shriller throat shall sing,
The Sweetness, Mercy, Majesty,
And Glories of my King.
When I shall sing aloud how good
He is, how great should be,
^nlarged winds that curl the floods
Know no such liberty.
^tone walls do not a Prison make,
Nor Iron bars a Cage,
Minds innocent and quiet take
That for an Hermitage,
^^ I had freedom in my love,
And in my soul am free,
Angels alone that soar above,
Enjoy such Liberty.
A Song.

Earned shade of Tycho Brache, who to us
The Stars prophetic Language did impart,
And even in life their mysteries discuss,
My Mistress has overthrown my strongest art
When custom stragles from her beaten path
Then accidents must needs uncertain be;
^or if my Mistress smile, though winter has
^ockt up the rivers, Summer's warm in me.
And Flora by the miracle revived
Does even at her own beauty wondering stand;
^ut should she frown, the Northern wind arrived
^n midst of Summer, hends his frozen band,
Which does to Ice my youthful blood congeal,
^et in the midst of Ice still flames my zeal.
The Lover.

I Must confess I am in love,
Although I thought I never should:
It is with one dropped from above,
Whom Nature made of purer mould,
So sweet, so fair, so all divine.
I Would quit the world to make her mine.
Have you not seen the Stars retreat,
When Sol salutes the Hemisphere;
So shines the Beauty called great,
When fair Rosella does appear;
Where she as other women are,
I need not court her, nor despair.
But I could never bear a mind,
Willing to stoop to common faces:
Nor confidence enough could find,
To aim at one so full of graces;
Fortune and Nature did agree,
No woman should be fit for me.
Yet when her mind is firmly set,
To lend a smile to none but me,
Then shall I all my joys forget,
And smile at quondam misery.
He who has such a heavenly mate,
May think himself most fortunate.
My dear Rosella make my bliss,
Happy by your most sweet consent,
Then shall I think no life like this,
Which brings to me so much content,
And you shall by this bargain win,
Although you loose the Fort within.
What life so sweet as natural love,
It does expel all worldly care,
It makes us like the gods above,
And shows us truly what we are.
Where true love reigns, there is small odds,
^etwixt us mortals and the Gods.
Upon passionate Love.

NO man loves fiery passion can approve,
As either yielding pleasure or promotion,
^ like a mild and lukewarm zeal in love,
Although I do not like it in devotion,
^esides, man need not love unless he please,
No destiny can force man's disposition,
How then can any die of that disease,
When as himself may be his own Physician?
Some one perhaps in long Consumption dried,
And after falling into love, may die,
But I dare lay my life he never had died,
Had he been healthy at the heart as I.
Some others rather than incur the slander
Of false Apostates, may true Martyrs prove,
But I am neither Iphis, nor Leander,
I Will neither hang nor drown my self for love,
Yet I have been a Lover by report,
And I have died for love as others do,
But praised be Jove, it was in such a sort,
That I revived within an hour or two.
Thus have I loved, thus have I lived till now
And know no reason to repent me yet,
And he that any otherwise shall do,
His courage is no better than his wit.
EPIGRAMS, New and Old.
To the Reader.
THou that read'st those, if thou commendst them all,
Thou'st too much milk; if none, thou'st too much gall.
Another.
MY Book the World is, Verses are the men,
You find as few good here, as amongst them.
On Rubinus.
RUbinus is extreme in Eloquence,
For he creates rare Phrase, but never sense:
Unto his Serving man, alias his Boy,
He utters speech exceeding quaint and coy,
Diminutive, and my defective slave,
My pleasures pleasure is, that I must have
My Corpse Coverture, and immediately,
T'insconce my Person from frigidity.
His man believed all Welsh his Master spoke,
Till he rails English, Rogue, go fetch my Cloak.
On Mambrino.
MAmbrino having spent all his Estate;
Went to the wars to prove more fortunate;
Being returned, he speak such warlike words,
No Dictionary half the like affords.
He talks of Flankers, Gabions: and Scalado's
Of Courtneys, Parapets, and Palizado's,
Retreats, and Triumphs, and of Cammisado's,
Of Sallies, Half-moons, and of Ambuscado's,
I to requite the fustian terms he uses,
Reply with words belonging to the Muses,
As Spondes, Dactyles, and Hexameters,
Stops, Comma's, Accents, Types, Tropes, and Pentameters,
Madrigals, Epicediums, Elegies,
Satyrs, Iambicks, and Apostrophes,
Acrosticks, Palinodes, and Anagrams,
^glogues, Sapphicks, Lyr'ck, Epigrams.
Thus talking, and being understood by neither,
We part as wise as when we came together.
On Doctor Bond.
DOctor Bond to avoid all further strife,
Riding before, turned back to kiss his kind, wife,
And was not Doctor Bond then wondrous
Riding before to kiss his wife behind?
In Dolentem.
DOlens does show his Purse, and tells you this,
^t is more horid than a Pesthouse is;
For in a Pesthouse many mortals enter,
But in his purse one Angel dares not venture.
On Frances.
FRanks flesh is free, and yet it is not free;
Strange this may seem to some how it should be:
Franks flesh is free to any who so pleases,
Franks flesh is not free from French Diseases.
Besses Bravery.
BEss does not only hide her privy ware,
But breast and neck, where coyest maids go bare;
Yet there is one foul unbeseeming place,
Uncovered left, what call you that? her face.
Of a Dwarf, Old.
A Dwarf upon a Pismires back,
Did get him up to ride,
He deemed a tamed Elephant,
He did as then bestride:
But while he did advance himself,
To hold upon his back,
He ambled down, and had a fall,
That made his Guts cry quack.
When as the Dwarf was thus unhorst,
Each laughed both great and small,
Why laugh you Masters, quoth the Dwarf,
What? Phaeton had a fall.
On the Compter.
BEdlam, fate bless thee, thou wantst nough but wit,
And having gotten that, we are freed from it
Bridewel, I cannot any way dispraise thee,
For thou do feed the poor, and jerk the lazy
Newgate, I cannot much of thee complain,
For once a month, thou freest men out o^ pain;
But from the Compter, goodness it self defend us
To Bedlam, Bridewel, or to Newgate send us,
For there in time, Wits, Work, or Law set free;
Nothing but Money here gets liberty.
On a Prison.
A Prison is a house of care,
A grave for men alive,
A Touchstone, for to try a friend,
No place for men to thrive.
Self-Love.
WE to our selves most partial Judges be,
And faults in others, not our selves can see;
Our enemies, we would have them be halter'd,
But when we judge our selves, The Case is altered.
In Cornutum.
TOms wife is sick, and therefore he does run
In haste to fetch the Midwife, which being don't,
He runs to call the women in with speed,
To help his wife in this her extreme need.
The Child being born, then Tom about does trot,
and never leaves till he has Gossips got.
Tom, I needs must say thou have hard measure,
^o take such pains, when others had the pleasure.
Mysus and Mopsa.
MYsus and Mopsa hardly can agree,
Striving about superiority.
^he Text which says that man and wife are one,
Was the chief Argument they stood upon,
^he held they both one woman should become.
^e held they should be man, and both but one,
^o they contended daily, but the strife
Could not be ended, till both were one wife.
De Sanitate and Medico.
HEalth is a Jewel rich, which when we buy,
Physicians value it accordingly.
On Perfumes.
THey that smell least, smell best; which intimates,
They smell like Beasts, that smell like Civet-Cats.
Of Tyndarus. Old.
A Wight whose name was Tyndar, would
Have kissed a pretty Lass;
Her nose was long, (and Tyndar he
A flouting fellow was)
Wherefore unto her thus he said,
I cannot kiss you sweet,
Your Nose stands out so far, that sure
Our lips can never meet.
The maiden nipt thus by the Nose,
Straight blushed as red as fire,
And with this gird displeased, thus
She spoke to him in Ire.
Quoth she if that my Nose do let
Your lips from kissing mine,
You there may kiss me where that I
Have neither nose nor eyne.
An old Leacher.
REmbombo stradling goes in great distress
As if he had the French P -- yet confess
He will it not, nor can I think the same,
Since he in France at any time n're came:
Then since he never came whereas they grew,
Let all men be appeased, the tale's untrue.
For how should he be troubled with French sores,
Who never used any but English Whores?
The fencer and Physic Doctor.
LIe thus (the Fencer cries) thus must you guard,
Thus must you slip, thus point, thus pass, thus ward;
And if you kill him Sir, this trick learn then,
With this same trick you may kill twenty men.
Both you and he to me may come to School,
Thou do but prate, my deed shall show my Skill,
Where thou hur^stone an hundred I do kill
On Epigrams.
AN Epigram that is new, sharp, near, and witty,
Is like a VVench that is handsome, fine young, pretty,
VVhilest they are private they are much respected,
Once common, though still good, they are neglected.
On Saint George.
SAint George it is writ, his cutting morglay drew,
And with the same a burning Dragon slew;
Some say there are no Dragons, yet the story
Says he preserved a Virgin to his glory.
That Dragons were into my mind does sink,
But for a maid, I know not what to think.
Conclusion of the Epigrams.
Here Muse cast Anchor for a little while,
And to more mournful matter turn thy style.
EPITAPHS.
On a Hocus Pocus.
HEre Hocus lies with his tricks and his knocks,
Whom Death has made sure as a Juglers box;
Who many has cozened by his Leiger-de-main,
^s Presto conveyed. and here under-lain:
Thus Hocus is here, and here he is not,
While Death played the Hocus, and brought him to the pot.
On a Bald-pate.
HEre lies John Baker wrapped in mold,
Who never gave penny to have his head pol'd;
Now the Pox and the Plague light on such a device,
That undid the Barber and starved the Lice.
On a Drunkard.
HEre now into this Grave a man is thrust,
Who is by drinking drunk as dry as dust.
On Bernard.
IF Heaven be pleased when men do cease to sin,
And Hell be pleased when it a soul does win,
If men be pleased when they have lost a knave,
Then all are pleased; here is Bernard in his Grave.
On a Cobbler.
HEre lies an honest Cobbler, whom cursed fate,
Perceiving near worn out, would needs translate,
'Twas a good thrifty soul, and time has bin,
He would well liquor'd wade through thick and thin;
But now he is gone it is all that can be said,
Honest John Cobbler, is here-under-laid.
On John Tailor the water-Poet.
HEre lies the VVater-poet honest John,
Who rowed on the streams of Helicon:
Where having many Rocks and dangers past,
He at the Haven of Heaven arrived at last.
On a Man and his Wife buried together.
REader, cease thy pace and stay,
Hearken unto what we say;
As you are, such once were we,
As we are such shall you be.
Then provide whilst time ye have,
To come Godly unto your grave.
An ancient Epitaph on an Earl of Devonshire.
HOstay, who lies here?
I the good Earl of Devonshire,
And Mand my Wife that loved full dear,
We lived LXV. year.
What we spent, we had;
What we gave, we have;
What we lent, we lost.
On John Lilburn.
UNtimely, cause so late, and late because,
To some much mischief it no sooner was:
^s John departed, and is Lilburn gone?
Farewell to both, to Lilburn and to John:
Yet being dead, take this advice from me,
Let them not both in one Grave buried be;
Lay John here, and Lilburn thereabout,
For if they both should meet, they would fall out.
On Hugh Peter's.
HEre lies the first and last edition,
Of Hugh, the Teacher of Sedition;
Whose fatal thread, that thread of Life,
Was cut in two by Squire Dun's Knife:
His Jests and Drols could not him save,
To go untimely to his Grave;
Mean time Tyburn felt the loss,
That he was hanged at Charing Cross.
On William Summers, King Henry the Eights Jester.
STay Traveller, guess who lies here,
I tell the neither Lord nor Peer:
^o Knight, no Gentleman of note,
that boasts him of his ancient Coat,
Which Heralds curiously emblazon,
For men (well skilled therein) to gaze on;
^now then, that this was no such man,
and I Will express him as I can.
He that beneath this Tombstone lies,
^ome called fool, some held him wise,
^or which who better proof can bring,
^hen to be favored by a King:
and yet again we may misdoubt him,
A King has always fools about him.
Is he more Idiot than the rest,
Who in a guarded coat can jest?
Or can he wisdoms honor gain,
That is all bravery, and no brain?
Since no such things, wit truly bred,
In The habit lies not, but in the head.
But whether he was Fool or Knave,
He now lies sleeping in his Grave;
Who never in his life found match,
Unless the Cardinals fool, called Patch:
Of whom some Courtiers, who did see
Them two alone, might say, We three.
And 'tmay be feared it is a phrase,
That may be used still in these days.
Well more of him what should I say:
Both fools, and wise men turn to clay:
And this is all we have to trust,
That there is no difference in their dust.
Rest quiet then beneath this stone,
To whom late Archy was a drone.
Stultorum plenasunt omnia. On Hobson the merry Londoner.
HEre Hobson the merry Londoner do^ lie,
And if that you would know the reas^^ wh^
It was because when as his Jests grew dry,
He thereupon took pet and so did die.
On a very fat Man.
UNder this same stone,
Here fast sleeps one,
And that is not two;
Yet was without doubt
Far bigger about,
Than both I and you.
His Kidneys encreast,
So much, that his Waste
Was hooped all round;
But his Girdle Death cuts,
And down fell his Guts,
'Bout his heels to the ground.
On an Usurer.
HEre lies at least ten in the hundred,
Shackled up both hands and feet,
That at such as lent Money gratis wondered,
The gain of Usury was so sweet;
But thus being now of life bereaven,
It Is a hundred to ten, he is scarce gone to Heaven.
On a Miller.
DEath without question was as bold as brief,
When he killed two in one, Miller and thief.
On a Tailor who dyed of a Stitch.
Here Stich the Tailor in his grave does lie,
Who by a Stich did live, and by it dye.
On Death.
THe death of all men is the total sum,
The Period unto which we all must come.
He lives but a short life that lives the longest
And he is weak in death, in life was strongest.
Our life's like Cobwebs be we never so gay,
And death the Broom which sweeps us all away.
RIDDLES, or dark Propositions' oftentimes used in Discourse.
Riddle 1.
UNto the Exchange I went, some knacks there for to buy,
Within a Cloister there was pon't a Monster certainly:
Feet and hands it had full eight,
Four eyes clear of sight:
Four ears whereby to hear,
And two bodies exceeding clear,
Kesolution.

It was an Exchange woman big with Child.

Riddle 2.
I went to the wood and I got it,
I sat me down and I sought it;
I kept it still against my will,
And so by force home I brought it.
Resolution.

It was a man that had a thorn in his foot.

Riddle 3,
A Beggar once exceeding poor,
A penny praid me give him,
And deeply vowed nere to ask more,
And I nere more to give him.
Next day he begged again, I gave,
Yet both of us our oaths did save.
Resolv. He gave him but a penny.

Riddle 4.
Beyond Sea there is an Oak, and in that Oak's an Nest, and in that Nest an
Egg, and in that Egg there is a Yolk, which calls together all Christian folk.

Resolution.

The Oak is the Church, the nest is the Belfrey, the Egg is the Bell, and the
Yolk the Clapper.

Riddle. 5.
In thickest Woods I hunt with Beagles ten,
After the chase; which when I do descry,
I dispossess me of, not useful then,
And what I take not, only that keep I.
Resolution.

One scratching his head with both his hands.

Riddle 6.
I went and I went I cannot tell whether, I met and I met with I cannot tell
who, I had a gift given me I shall never forgo; and yet I came a true maid home.

Resolution.

It is a Child went to be Christened,

Riddle 7.
What is that is as white as snow,
And yet as black as any Crow;
And more plyant than a wand
Tied in a silken band
And every day a Princes Peer,
Look on it with a mirth that is clear.
Resolution.

It is a Book tied with a silken lace,
Whose paper is as white as snow,
Ink as black as any Crow,
And leaves more pliant than any wand.
Riddle 8.
My Coat is green and I can prate,
Of diverse things within my grate;
In such a prison I am set,
That has more Trap-holes than a Net.
Resolution.

A Parrot in a Cage of wyre.

Riddle 9.
There was a Bird of great renown,
Useful in City and in Town,
None work like unto him can do;
He Is Yellow, Black, Red, and Green,
A very pretty Bird I ween,
Yet he is both fierce and fell,
I count him wise that can this tell.
Resolution.

The painful Be.

Riddle 10.
I am called by the name of a man,
Yet am as little as a mouse,
When Winter comes I love to be
With my red Target near the house.
Resolution.

A Robin Red breast.

Riddle 11.
What part of Man may that part be,
That is an Implement of three,
And yet a thing of so much stead,
No woman would without it wed;
And by which thing, or had or lost,
Each marriage is quite made or crossed.
Resolution.

The heart of a man, a Triangular figure, the beginning of Love.

Riddle 11.
Two legs sat upon four legs, and eight legs run before; in came three legs
and upon eight legs fell, I count him wise that does this Riddle tell,

Resolution.

It is a Man upon a Horse, driving two sheep before him, and a Wolf that has
lost one of his legs, seizes the two Sheep.

Riddle 13.
Four and twenty white Bulls sat upon a stall,
Forth came the Red-Bull, and over-lickt them all.
Resolution.

It is ones Tongue and his Teeth.

Riddle 14.
Learning has bred me, yet I know no letter,
I have lived among books, yet am never the better;
I have eaten up the Muses, yet know not a verse.
What Student is this, I pray you rehearse?
Resolution.

A Worm bred in a Book.

Riddle 15.
It was not, it is not, nor never will be,
Hold up your hand, and you shall see.
Resolution.

It is the little finger, that was not, nor is not, nor never will be so great
as the other fingers.

Riddle 16.
All day like one that is in disgrace,
He rests in some secret place,
And seldom peepeth forth his head,
Until Day light be fully fled;
When in the maids or Good-wives hand,
The Gallant first had Grace to stand;
Whence to a hole they him apply,
Where he will both live and die.
Resolution.

A Candle.

Posies for Rings.
GOd did decree
Our unity.
Rings and true friends,
Are without ends:
We are agreed,
In time to speed.
In comely hue,
None like to you,
In thy breast,
My heart does rest.
I trust in time,
Thou will be mine.
Faithful love,
Can never remove.
No force can move
A fixed love.
It Is love alone,
Makes two but one.
My fancy is,
Endless as this.
I seek to be,
Not thine, but thee.
In thee each part
Does catch a heart,
My love to thee,
Like this shall be.
So decreed,
And so agreed,
The love I owe,
I needs must show.
As I affect thee,
So respect me,
My love for this,
Deserves a kiss.
In body two,
In heart but you,
As I to thee,
So wish to me.
When Cupid fails,
Thy eye prevails.
Where hearts agree.
No strife can be.
God above
Increase our love.
Heart and hand,
At your command.
Where this I give,
I wish to live.
Best election,
Is constant affection.
Though far apart,
Yet near in heart.
Nothing for thee,
Too dear can be.
Loves delight,
Is to unite.


As I expect so let me find,
A faithful heart a constant mind,
The sacred purpose and decree,
Is manifest in choosing thee.
My faith is given, this Pledge does show,
A work from Heaven, performed below.
The eye finds, the heart chooses,
The hand binds, and death loses.
Wit, Wealth, and Beauty, all do well,
But constant love does far excel.
Fear God, and love thou me,
That is all I crave of thee.
Be it my fortune, or my fault,
Love makes me venture this assault.
ACROSTICKS.
On these words.
If thou had granted.
I Joy had wanted.
To a proud, rich, but deformed Gentlewoman.
In danger puffed, you say I prove,
Fraught with the steam of lust, not love,
Time was you say, I prized the face,
High and renowned, as if its grace
Ore-past compare, but now I seem,
Urged unto wrath, to disesteem.
Honor's attendant unto thy praise,
And to disrobe thee of thy rays;
Disgorging thus such surfeits, you
Sound forth these words, I am untrue,
It Is true, I said three Goddesses.
Graced thy rare parts, as like to these;
Rich Juno was but like a Sow,
As foul, as fat, and so art thou:
Next wisdom was in Pallas, but
Thou like to her, art turned a slut.
Eye-pleasing Venus would admit,
Delight in bed, and you love it.
Incensed by thy wily mind,
I thus requite thee in thy kind,
Ore charged with anger, venting spleen,
Yearst to one Fool, one Slut, one Queen,
Harbound in one, I did compare thee,
Although truth known, I seemed to spare thee.
Digest me as you please, yet know,
Will never did mean, what wit did show:
And though Art taught me to be bold,
No part I loved in thee but Gold,
Take this from me, pray that a fool,
Espouse thee, so thy filth may rule.
Detain no wise man; for thy self,
No such will love thee but for thy wealth:
A cross Acrostick on two crossed Lovers.
Though crossed in our affections, still the flames
Of Honor shall secure our noble Names;
Nor shall our fate divorce our faith, or cause
The least Mislike of Loves diviner Laws.
Crosses sometimes are cures: Now let us prove,
That no strength shall Abate the power of Love.
Honor, wit, beauty, Riches wise men call,
Frail fortunes Badges: In true love lies all.
Therefore to him we yield, our Vows shall be
Paid -- Read, and written in Eternity:
That all may know when men grant no Redress.
Much love can sweeten the unhappiness.
Acrostick on Malt
Malt is the grain of which we make strong Ale,
Ale is the liquor that does make us merry,
Let but a Toast be put in it, 'twill not fail,
To make the heart light, and to sing down derry.
Another.
Malt is the grain by which a Fox we gain,
Ale is the liquor, makes our tongues run quicker;
Let these two boast, but the honor of a toast,
Then sit and tipple, 'twill your senses cripple.
Acrostick on time.
Time with his Sithe brings all to their last home.
In vain to plead, none can withstand his doom.
Monarchs by Deaths triumphant hand are made,
Equal in the grave unto the Sithe and Spade.
An Acrostick Epitaph on a virtuous Gentlewoman.
Ask thou Reader who it is lies here?
No common corpse: then list and thou shall hear.
Goodness, rare meekness, zeal, pure chastity,
Interred together in this ground do lie,
Behold her acts whilst here she made abode,
She lived beloved of men, died loved of God.
Acrostick on Death.
Death is the last end of our mortal Race;
Each hour we spend, we thither hie apace;
A little time it is in life we have,
Today w' are here, tomorrow in our Grave;
Help us then Lord, no aid but thee we crave.
ANAGRAMS.
Anagram. TOAST. A SOTT.

Exposition.
A TOAST is like a Sot, or what is most
Comparative, a Sot is like a Toast;
For when their substances in liquor sink,
Both properly are said to be in drink.
Anagram. SMOCK. MOCKS.

Exposition.
Strait-smocks to whoremasters do often prove Mocks;
Who thereupon do bann and curse Straitsmocks.
Anagram. ROUNDHEADS. HEAVENS ROD.

Exposition.
When Cavaliers by sin offended God,
The bloody Roundheads were made Heavens Rod.
Anagram. JOHN TAILOR. Water Poet. LOYAL IN HEART.

Exposition.
And well he did deserve this Anagram,
Who was unto his end a Loyal man.
Or thus:

Well was thy Anagram Loyal in Heart,
Who from thy Loyalty did never start.
Anagram. LOST. STOLE.

Exposition.
This Anagram mysterious sense may boast,
For what is stole is found in what was lost.
Anagram. JAYLER. A RAIL,

Exposition.
This does befit the Jailer wondrous trim,
He at the Prisoners Rails, and they at him.
FANCIES.
A Fancy upon words.

HE that is devoted to the -- GLASS,
The Dice, or a Lascivious -- LASS,
At his own price is made an -- ASS.
He that is greedy of the -- GRAPE,
On reason does commit a -- RAPE.
And changes habit with an -- APE.
The Lover whose devotion -- FLIES,
Up to the Sphere where bounty -- LIES,
Makes Burning-glasses of his -- EYES,
If long he to that Idol -- PRAY,
His sight by Loves inflaming -- RAY,
Is lost for ever and for -- AY.
He that loves Glass without a G,
Leave out L, and that is he.
EVANK is a word of fame,
Spell it backward, it is your name.
These Lines may be read backwards or forwards, being both ways alike.

Deer Madam Reed,
Deem if I meed.
Another to the same effect.

Lewd did I live, and Evil did I dwell.

Thoughts valued c may B. Searching Love ICVB 2 yy for me.

Qu a d tr fu stra os nguis irus isti de nere vit. H Sa m Chr vul la.

Quos anguis dirus tristi de funere stravit.
Hos Sanguis mirus Christi de vulnere lavit.
The Countrey-Mans Guide; OR, AN APPENDIX For the Use Of the Countryman.

Containing diverse necessary and useful Rules, and Instructions of the Year,
Months, and Days; With other things of delight and profit.

Being brief Explanations of many things, which to an intelligible Reader may
seem ambiguous.

Calculated by Art for the Benefit of all those, which desire to understand
what they buy or read.

London, Printed in the Year 1680.

The Country-Mans Guide.
Of a Year, what it is, with the difference betwixt the English and Gregorian
Account.
A Year is that space of time wherein the Sun runs his perambulation through
the twelve Signs of the Zodiac, containing 12 Solar months, 13 Lunar, 52
weeks, 365 days, 6 hours, and 6 minutes, which 6 hours in four years space
being added together, make one day, which we commonly call Bissextile, or
Leap-year, and is added to the Calendar on the 25 of February, making that
month every fourth year 29 days long, which at other times is but 28. This
account was thus named by Julius Caesar, the first Roman Emperor, who reduced
the year to a better method than before, and from him it was called the Julian
Account, yet still the six minutes remained un-numbred, which in tract of time
arose to some days, and therefore Gregory Pope of Rome to make the year
exactly answerable to the Suns diurnal course, casting up the days which those
minutes amounted unto, placed his Festivals exactly answerable to the Suns
progress, which in sixteen hundred years has amounted to ten days, and is from
him called the Gregorian Account, being used in all those parts beyond Sea
which acknowledge the Popes Supremacy.

Qu. From whence do the twelve Months derive their Names?

An. January is so called from Janus, who was pictured with two faces,
signifying the beginning or entrance of the year. February took its name from
Febura, March from Mars the God of War. April signifies the growth or
springing of the year. May is the Majors, and June the Juniors season. July was
so called from Julius Caesar. August, from Augustus the second Roman Emperor.
September signifies the seventh month, for the Romans before the time of
Julius Coesar reckoned their months from March; so October signifies the
eighth, November the ninth, and December the tenth; which if you reckon from
January, the account will be otherwise.

Qu. How many days is in each month?

An.

Thirty days has September,
April, June, and November,
All the rest has thirty and one,
Except it be February alone,
But every Leap year at that time,
February has twenty nine.
Of the day, with several divisions thereof.

An Artificial day consists of 12 hours, a Natural Day 24 hours. The Athenians
began their Day from Sunset; but the Jews, Chaldeans, and Babylonians, from
Sunrise: The Egyptians and Romans from midnight, of whom we took pattern to
count the hours from thence; the Umbrians from noon. The parts of a politic or
civil day, (according to Macrobius) are these; The first time of the day is
after midnight; the second in Latin Gallicinium, Cocks crow; the third
Canticinium, the space between the first Cock and Break of day; the fourth
Diluculum, the break or dawn of the day; the fifth Mane, the morning; the sixth
Meridies, noon, or Midday; the seventh Pomeridies, the afternoon; the eighth
Serum diei, Sunset: the ninth Suprema tempestas, twilight; tenth Vesper, the
Evening; the eleventh Prima Lux, Candle time; the twelfth Nox concubia,
bedtime; the thirteenth Nox intempesta, the dead time of the night.

The Jews did divide their Artificial day into four Quarters, allowing to every
Quarter three hours, accounting the first hour of the first Quarter at the
Rising of the Sun, and the third hour of the second Quarter, they called the
third hour; and the third hour of the second Quarter, they called the sixth
hour, which was midday; The third hour of the third Quarter, the ninth hour;
and the second hour of the fourth Quarter, the eleventh hour; and the twelfth
and last hour of the day, they call Even-tide.

The day is accounted with us for the payments of money between Sun and Sun;
but for Indictments of murder, the day is accounted from midnight to midnight;
and so likewise are fasting days.

The Principal Feasts and Holy Days in the whole year expounded.
SInce more buy Almanacks than understand them, and are ignorant of our
Festival days, for their better understanding I shall briefly yet plainly
anatomize and declare the meaning of them.

Sunday, or our Lords day (dies Diminicus) is a day dedicated by the Apostles
to the more particular service and honor of Almighty God, and transferred from
the Jewish Sabbath to the day following, in memory that Christ our Lord rose
from the dead, and sent down the Holy Ghost on that day; whence it is called
our Lords Day, and Sunday from the old Heathen denomination of dies Solis, the
day of the Sun, to which it was sacred though others think it took its name
from the Son of God his rising from the Grave that day, to which thus alluded
Mr. Owen in his Epigrams.

Sunday I Will call that day spite of precise,
On which the glorious Son of God did rise.
1. Jan. The Circumcision of our Lord, vulgarly called Newyears-day, was
instituted in memory of the Circumcision of our Lord on the eighth day from his
Nativity, according to the prescript of the old Law (Gen 17. 12) when he was
named Jesus, as the Angel has foretold (Luke 1. 14.) and began to shed his
infant blood by the stony knife of Circumcision. And it is called Newyears-day,
from the account of the old Romans, who began their year from that day.

6 Jan. Twelfth-day, or the Epiphany of our Lord, is a Feast Solemnized in
memory and honor of Christ's manifestation and apparition to the Gentiles by a
miraculous blazing Star, by virtue whereof three Kings were conducted to adore
him in the Manger, where they presented him as on this day, with Gold, Myrrh,
and Frankincense, in testimony of his Regality, Humanity and Divinity. The Word
Epiphany comes from the Greek, and signifies an apparition, and is called
Twelfth-day, because celebrated the Twelfth-day after Christ's Nativity,
exclusively.

2 Febr. Candlemas-day, or the Purification of the blessed Virgin, is a Feast
in memory and honor both of the presentation of our Savior Christ, and the
Purification of the Virgin Mary, in the Temple of Jerusalem, the fortieth day
after her happy Childbirth, performed according to the Law of Moses, Levit. 12.
6. And it is called Purification, from the Latin word, which signifies to
Purify; not that the blessed Virgin had contracted any thing by her Childbirth
which needed purifying, (being the mother of Purity it self) but because other
common Mothers were by this ceremonial right, freed from the Legal Impurity of
their Childbirths.

The four Sundays of Septuagesima, Sexagesima, Quinquagesima, and Quadragesima,
were days appropriated for preparation to the devotions of Lent; and take their
numeral denominations from Quadragesima-Sunday, so called, because it is about
the fortieth day before Easter.

Shrovetide signifies the time of Shrift; for in former time the people used
then to confess their sins to a Priest, the better to prepare themselves for a
holy observation of Lent, and worthy receiving the blessed Sacrament at Easter.

Ashwednesday is so called by the Romanists, from the Ceremony they have on
that day of blessing of Ashes, wherewith the Priest signify the people with a
Cross on their foreheads, saying unto them, Memento homo quia pulvis es, and in
pulverem revertes; Remember man that thou art dust, and to dust thou shall be
turned. The Ashes which they use this day, are made of the Palms, blessed the
Palm Sunday before.

Lent is called in Latin Quadragesima, because it is a Fast of forty days in
remembrance of Christ's fasting forty days and forty nights in the Wilderness,
which fast has been observed in England near one thousand years, according to
Sir Richard Baker in his Chronicle: and has been continued to these days in
the time of Reformation, not out of any superstitious end, but for the increase
of the fishing Trade, and preservation of the breed of young Cattle.

The Sea loath will, the Land does wish.
For sparing Flesh to feed on Fish.
Palm Sunday, was instituted in memory and honor of the triumphant entry of our
Savior into Jerusalem, and was so called from the Palm-Branches which the
Hebrew Children strewed under his feet, crying, Hosanna to the Son of David.
Math. 21. 15.

Maundy Thursday is a Feast in memory of our Lords last Supper, when he
instituted the blessed Sacrament of his precious body and blood. And it is
called Maundy Thursday, quasi, Mandatum or Mandat Thursday, from those words in
John 13. 34. Mandatum novum do vobis, etc. I give you a new command, (or
mandat) that you love one another, as I have loved you.

Good Friday, is that memorable day on which the great and glorious work of our
Redemption was consummated by our Savior Jesus Christ on his bloody Cross,
between ^wo Thieves at Jerusalem.

25 March. Annunciation of the blessed Virgin, is a Feast in memory of that
most happy Embassy brought to her from God by the Angel Gabriel, upon which,
through her consent, and the operation of the holy Spirit, God was incarnate in
her most sacred Womb.

Easter Day (in Latin Pascha) is a great Festival in memory and honor of our
Saviors Resurrection, or rising from the dead on the third day after he was
Crucified. Mat. ^8. 6. and it is called Easter from Oriens, the East or rising)
one of the Titles of Christ. And his name (says the Prophet) shall be called
Oriens,

Monday and Tuesday following are also kept ^oly, in memory of some of Christ's
first Ap^aritions after his Resurrection; which are ^ommemorated on these two
days, for the greater solemnity of the chief Feast.

Low-Sunday called Dominica in Albis, is the ^ctave of Easter day, and is so
named from ^he white Garments, which the Catechumeni ^^ Neophites used to wear,
which they put ^n at their Baptism, and solemnly put off with this day.

Holy Thursday, or Ascension day, is a Feast solemnized in memory of Christ's
glorious Ascension into Heaven the fortieth day after ^is Resurrection,, in the
sight of his Apostles and Disciples, Acts 2. 9, 10.

3 May. The Invention of the Holy Cross, otherwise called Holy Rood-day, is so
called from the Invention or finding out of the Cross on which our Savior
suffered, by Hellen mother to Constantine the Great, after it had been hid and
buried by the Infidels, 180 years, who erected a Statua of Venus in place of it.

Rogation Week, (which is always the next but one before Whitsunday) is so
called from Rogo to ask and pray, because then Lettanie^ were wont to be used,
to beg and supplicate the blessing of God upon the fruits of the earth. The
Belgians call it Craysweek, and we in England Gang week, from the Ganging or
going in procession and perambulation then used about the Parish, etc.

Whitsunday or Pentecost is a solemn Feast in memory and honor of the coming
of the Holy Ghost upon the heads of the Apostles in tongues as it were of fire
Acts 2. 3. Pentecost in Greek signifies the fiftieth, it being the fiftieth
after the Resurrection. And it is called Whitsunday, from the Catechumens, being
anciently clothed in White, and admitted o^ the Eve of this Feast to the
Sacrament o^ Baptism. The old Saxons called it Weed Sunday, i. e. holy Sunday;
for Wied or Wihe^ signifies holy in that Language, which also may have proved
one occasion of this name.

Trinity Sunday is the octave of Whit sunday, dedicated to the honor of the
blessed Trinity, to signify that the works of our Redemption and
Sanctification, then completed, are common to all the three Persons.

Corpus Christi day (which is always the next Thursday after Trinity Sunday) is
by the Romanists celebrated with greet solemnity, they carrying on that day the
Sacrament of the Altar about in Procession, the Priests and all ^he people
expressing their highest devotions, with music and lights, and flowers strewed
along the streets, and their best Tapestry upon the walls, etc.

10. Aug. St. Lawrence the Deacon, who in ^he Primitive times was most cruelly
broyled in a Gridiron for the faith of Christ, which Martyrdom he suffered with
incomparable ^ortitude, in the midst of his torments thus ^rying out to his
bloody Persecuter.

This side is toasted now enough,
Turn up O Tyrant great;
Assay whether roasted or raw,
Thou find'st the better meat.
Aug. 15. Is according to Tradition the day when the blessed Virgin Mary was
both Soul and Body taken up into Heaven.

Sep. 8. Is in memory of her happy birth, ^y whom the Author of all life and
safety was born into the world.

29 Sep. Michael or Michaelmas, is in commemoration of St. Michael the
Archangel, and of all the nine Orders of holy Angels; And it is called the
Dedication of St. Michael, from the dedicating of a Church in Rome to ^im by
Pope Boniface.

1 Nov. All Saints or All-hallows, is celebrated in commemoration of all the
Saints.

2 Nov. All Souls, is likewise commemora^ed for the Souls of all the faithful
departed, and these two days (All Saints and All Souls) were of so eminent
observance, that no Courts were kept on those days in Westminster Hall.

The four Sundays of Advent are those pre^eding Christmas day, and were
instituted as a commemorative of our Saviors Advent, or coming to redeem the
world by his happy birth.

Christmas Day, or the Nativity of our Savior Christ, is a most solemn Feast
yearly celebrated even from the Apostles time to this day, in memory of the
birth of our Savior at Bethlehem,

28 Dec. Holy Innocents, is a Feast in memory of those Babes which Herod slew
when he sought for our blessed Savior; in which massacre it is said that a
Child of Herod's being at nurse was murdered amongst the rest, which Augustus
hearing of, he said it was better to be Herod's Hog than his Son, because the
Jews would eat no Swines flesh.

The several Feasts of the Apostles and other Saints, were instituted by the
Church to honor God in his Saints, and for us to imitate their holy and godly
examples.

St. Peter and St. Paul are joined in one solemnity; because they were
principal and joint co-operators under Christ in the conversion of the world,
the first converting the Jews, the other the Gentiles: as also because both
were martyred at the same place, Rome and on the same day, 29 June.

The four Ember weeks (in Latin quatuo^tempora) are times of public prayer of
falting, partly instituted for the successful ordination of the Priests and
Ministers of the Church, and partly to beg and render thank to God for the
fruits and blessings of the earth. Ember comes from the Greek (...) i. e. dies,
a day, others call them Ember day from the ancient custom of eating nothing on
those days till night, and then only a Cake baked under the Embers or Ashes,
which was called Panem subcineritium, Ember bread.

Wakes or Country Feasts, used always to be observed on the Sunday next after
that Saints day, to whom the Parish Church was dedicated, and took its original
from a Letter written by Gregory the Great to Melitus Abbot, who was sent into
England with Austin the Monk, in these words. It may therefore be permitted
them (meaning the English) that on the Dedication days, or other solemn days of
Martyrs, they make them Bowers about the Churches, and (refreshing themselves,
and feasting together after a good religious sort) kill their Oxen now to the
praise of God, and increase of Charity, which before they were wont to
sacrifice to the Devil, etc. Bedes Eccl. Hist. Chap. 30. And they were called
Wakes, because on those feasts, the people were wont to awake from sleep at the
several Vigils of the Night and go to prayer, but that custom was long ago laid
aside, and the Feasting part also little or nothing regarded.

Besides these, we have three other days by act of Parliament set apart for
Religious holy Duties: viz. the fifth of November, when some bloody Papists
intended to have blown up the Parliament House with Gunpowder in the third year
of the Reign of King James; the second, the 30 of January, a day of humiliation
for the execrable murder of King Charles the first. And the third, the 29 of
May, a day of thansgiving for the happy Restoration of King Charles the second.

Qu. What is the observation that is commonly made on St. Paul's day being the
25 of January? An.

If Saint Paul's day be fair and clear,
It does betoken a happy year.
But if it chance to Snow or Rain,
Then shall be dear all kind of Grain.
And if that winds be aloft.
Then shall we hear of wars full often,
And if it do thunder that day,
Great dearth shall be, as wise men say.
Another Observation.
When our Lord does lie in our Ladies Lap,
Then O England beware a clap.
Other short Observations for each Month in the year.

January.

If the Sun shine the twelfth of January, there shall be store of wind that
year.

February.

If it thunder upon Shrove-Tuesday, it foretells wind, store of fruit, and
plenty, the Sun beams being early abroad; and so much as he shines on that
day, the like he will shine every day in Lent.

March.

So many Mists as there be in March, so many hoar Frosts there will be after
Easter.

April.

If it rain upon Ascension day (which most cammonly falls in April) it does
betoke^ scarcity of all kind of food for Cattle, but being fair, it signifies
plenty.

May.

If the Sun shine upon the twenty fifth o^ May, wine shall prosper well; also
in the end of May, if Oaks begin to bear Blossoms, i^ does foreshew great store
of Tallow and Frui^

June.

If it rain the twenty fourth day of June, Hazel-nuts will not prosper.

July.

If it be fair three Sundays before St. James' day, Corn will be good; but wet
Corn will wither.

August.

If the wind change on St. Bartholemews day at night, the following year will
not be ^ood.

September.

So many days old the Moon is on Michaelmas day, so many Floods will be that
winter.

October.

If leaves now hang upon the Trees, it portends a cold winter, or many
Catterpillers.

November.

If on the tenth of November the Heavens be cloudy, it prognosticates a wet
winter; if clear and dry a sharp winter.

December.

If Christmas Day comes in the new of the Moon, it is a token of a good year;
and so much the better, by how much it is nearer the new Moon; the contrary
happens in the decrease.

Thus each month does procure an observation,
Which may be made useful unto the Nation;
For if that we do things but rightly weigh,
We will believe what our Forefathers say,
Who by experience knew such things to be,
And so preserved them for posterity.
Qu. What is that they call the Golden Number, Epact, Circle of the Sun,
Dominical Letter, etc.

An. The Golden Number is the Revolution of 19 years, in which time all the
Lunations or Aspects betwixt the Sun and Moon return to the same place they
were in before; and is so called, either because it was sent in Golden Letters
from Alexandria in Egypt to Rome, or for that it is written in red or Golden
Letters in the Calendar.

The Epact is the number of 11 days, which the Solar year does exceed the
Lunar; the one consisting of 365 days, the other of 354, so that in every 4
years there is added a number more than 30, which being greater than the Epact
can be, (for from change to change there can be but 30 days) therefore 30 being
taken from that excess, the remainder is the Epact for the next year.

The Epact is thus found out; multiply the Golden Number of the year by 11. the
product whereof, if it be under 30 is the Epact; but if it be above 30. they
divide the product by 30. and the remainder shall be the Epact.

Qu. What is the Circle of the Sun?

An. The Circle of the Sun is a Revolution of 28 years, in which time the
Dominical Letters make all their several changes, and is called the Solar
Circle, because it comprehends all the varieties and changes that the Sunday
Letter can have.

Qu. What is the meaning of the Dominical Letter?

An. The Dominical Letter is always one of these seven, A. B. C. D. E. F. G.
and shows the Sunday Letter all the year. But in Bissextile or Leap-year,
there be two Dominical Letters, whereof the first holds from the beginning of
January to St. Mathias Eve, and the other to the years end.

The Golden Number and the Dominical Letter change the first of January, and
the Epact the first of March. Easter day never talleth lower than the 23 of
March, nor higher than the 25 of April.

Shrove sunday has his range between the first of February, and the 7 of
March; Whit-sunday between the 10 of May, and the 13 of June: and for a Rule
for Shrovetide, the Tuesday after the change of the Moon in February is always
Shrove Tuesday.

Qu. What causes the Eclipses and Full of the Moon?

An. The Eclipse of the Moon is caused by the interposition of the Earth
betwixt the Sun and her; for she being a dark body of her self, and having no
light but what she borrows by reflection from the Sun, so far as the Earth
interposes, so much of her is darkened. The cause of the Sans Eclipse is when
the Moon passes betwixt the Sun and us, and shadows some of the body thereof
from our sight, so that what part is interposed by the Moon cannot be seen by
us, by reason she is a dark body, hiding the same from our sight. The Moon
being in right opposition against the Sun, causes her to be at the full, as her
increase is by drawing nearer to opposition, and her decrease by departing
further off.

Qu. Of what substance be the Stars, what are their motions, and what causes
blazing Stars.

An. The Stars are of the same substance with the Moon, thick, aad not
transparent as the Heavens, borrowing all their light from the Sun, being
otherwise of themselves dark bodies, and shine as well in the day as the night,
though by reason of the Suns refulgent beams, they are not obvious to our
sight. And as for their motion, it is the same of the Heavens wherein they are
placed.

Shooting or blazing Stars are hot fumes of a thick substance like glue, which
being exhaled above in the air, and bovering alost until it be kindled, flies
like a squib through the Air, but if it mount to a higher place, and there be
kindled, it turns to a blazing Star.

A brief discourse of the natural cause of Airy Meteors; as Snow, Hail, Rain,
etc.
YOu must first understand that there be four Elements, viz. Fire, Air, Water,
and Earth; the Fire is hot and dry, the Air hot and moist, the Water cold and
moist, and the Earth cold and dry; These four Elements are the simples whereof
all things (under the Moon) are made, compounded and mixed.

Of Rain.

Rain is a cold vapor, and earthly humor, drawn from the Earth by the virtue
of the Sun and the rest of the Planets, into the middle Region of the Air,
where by the extremity of cold it is thickened into the body of a Cloud, which
the wind driving before it, it does dissolve, and fall upon the Earth.

Of Snow.

Snow is engendered of Rain, the Cloud congealing through extremity of cold, but
not altogether so hard as Hail; Pliny writes, that the Hail sooner melts than
Snow, and that Hail falls oftener in the day than the night.

Of Hail.

Hail is likewise engendered of Rain, which the excessive cold when the Cloud
dissolves, freezes the drops, and congeals into Ice, whereby great and
irregular stones do sometimes fall on the Earth. Stow in his Annals reports,
that in the time of King Henry the 8. Anno 1545, there fell in Lancashire
Hailstones as big as men's fists; and that which is most strange, some were of
the shape of men's faces, others were fashioned like Gun-holes, etc. In the 23
year of the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, August 12. Anno 1581. there fell a great
shower of Hailstones which were fashioned like the Rowels of spurs, and were
two or three inches about.

Of Frost and Dew.

Dew is a thin vapor, which through the faint heat of the Suns elevating it
self but a little from the Earth, presently at night descends again, which in
the Springtime is called Dew; but in the Winter by means of cold being
congealed, it is called Frost.

Of Wind.

Wind is hot and dry fumes, drawn from the Earth by the Stars, which seeking to
fly to the Sun, is by the freezing cold driven back, but from the fields fumes
another fire which carries them back again; so that thereby, together with the
confluence of other exhalations rising out of the Earth, his motion is forced
to be rather round than right: and the reason why he blows more sharply one
time than another, and in some places more than others; and sometimes not at
all, is, fumes arising out of new exhalations, and out of Floods, Fenns, and
Marshes, joining with it to increase his force: the defect or dullness whereof
may either allay or increase it: as also the Globe or rotundity of the Earth
may be the cause of the blowing of it more in one place than in another: or
Mountains, Hills, or Woods, may hinder his force from blowing in all places
eqnal: whereas upon the Plain, and broad Sea, it blows with an equal force:
and as for the stilness or ceasing thereof, it comes to pass diverse ways,
either by frost, closing, or congealing up the pores of the earth, whence it
should issue, or by the heat of the Sun, drying up fumes and vapors that should
increase it, and whereof it is engendered,

Of Earthquakes.

Earthquakes are caused by plenty of wind, which getting into the holes and
caverns of the earth, and wanting a vent, the earth closing again, causes the
shaking or Earthquake, which is more violent according to the quantity of wind
so enclosed. Anno 1580. in the 22 year of Queen Elizabeth's Reign, happened a
terrible Earthquake at London, and generally throughout all England, by
violence whereof, the great Clock-bell a^ Westminster struck against the
hammer, as diverse Clock-bells did both in City and Country: In London a piece
of the Temple Church fell down.

In the late dissolved Church called the Grey-Fryers, now called Christ-Church,
in the Sermon time, one stone falling from the Church, killed a young man
outright, and another stone, so bruised a Maid, that she lived but four days
after, the Man and the Maid being fellow Servants in one House: diverse were
bruised and run out of the Church. Some stones fell off from the Church of St.
Paul's in London, and some from the Church of St. Peter's at Westminster; diverse
Chimneys lost their tops, and Ships on the Thames, and on the Seas, were seen
to totter: this Earthquake did not continue above a quarter of an hour in
London, but in diverse parts in Kent it held them so terrible, that the people
went out of their Houses, for fear they should fall on their heads.

Of the Rainbow.

The Rainbow is only the Suns reflection on a hollow Cloud, which the edge
being repelled, and beaten back against the Sun, from thence arises much
variety of colors, by reason of the mixture of clouds, air, and fire-light
together.

If two Rain bows appear at one time, they presage Rain to ensue: but if one
Rainbow, presently after Rain, it betokens fair weather.

Of Thunder and Lightning.

When hot and dry vapors mixed with moisture, is exhaled up into the middle
Region, and there enclosed in the body of a Cloud, these two contraries not
agreeing together, break forth with great violence; so that fire and water
break out of the cloud, making a roaring noise which we call Thunder, and the
fire Lightning; the Thunder is first made, but the Lightning first seen, in
regard the sight is quicker than the hearing; which to prove, observe but at
some distance when a man is cleaving of blocks, or a Carpenter hewing a log,
and you shall see the fall of the beetle, or Ax, some little distance of time
before you hear the noise of the blow.

Now of Lightnings there be many sorts: that which is dry burns not all, but
dissipateth and disperseth its self; moist burns not likewise, but blasts and
changes the color; but the clear is of a strange property, for it melts the
sword and not sings the scabberd; it draws vessels dry without hurt to the
vessels; some rich misers have had their silver melted in their bags and
purses, and yet neither bag nor purse hurt, nay not so much as the wax that
seals the bag stirred. It breaks the bones and hurts not the flesh, and
kills the Child in the Mothers Womb, not hurting the mother, what great cause
have we to pray as it is in the Letany, from thunder and lightning, good Lord
deliver us.

What things are not burt with Lightning. It enters not past five foot into
the earth; it hurts not the Laurel-Tree, such are freed that are shadowed
with the skins of Seals, or Sea-Calves, the Eagle is likewise free: Pliny
says, Scythia by reason of cold, and Egypt by reason of the heat, have seldom
Lightning.

A Brief Deseri^tion of the World, showing what it is, and of what Parts it
consists; together with other things well worthy of observation.
THe world may not unfitly be termed a large Theater of the heavens and earth
wherein are contained all bodies both simple and mixed. The Greeks calls it
(...), the Latin Universitas, or Mandus, all signifying with us the world. It
consists of two only parts, the one Elemental, and the other Celestial.

The Elemental part contains the four Elements, as Fire, Air, Water, Earth.

The Celestial parts contains seven several Orbs for the Planets, and one for
the fixed Stars: above which is the Christalline Heaven, the first mover,
(which once in 24 hours carries the other round about the Earth) and last of
all the Empereal heaven, the habitation for Saints and Angels, with all the
rest of Gods elect. Within this celestial part, not these only are continued,
but also the Elemental part it self, and whatsoever it contains, within the
midst of his concavity, by the divine providence of God, hangs this dark and
gross body of the Earth, upon which we mortals live; and in respect of the
glorious Heavens, we should scarce so much as fix our eyes upon it: for God
has made us not as other Creatures with a dejected countenance; but os homini
sublime dedit, he has given to man a lofty and exact countenance, according to
that of the Poet

And where all Beasts look down with grovelling eye,
He gave to man looks mixed with majesty,
And bids him with expansed looks to view the Sky.
Plato the most divine amongst the Heathen, affirmed, that the chief cause why
men had eyes given them, was to behold the Heavens, an admired spectacle of
Gods Workmanship, for though there be other ends for which we have our senses,
yet without question this is one, and a main one; to consider the glorious part
of Gods creation, and to search into the obstruse Mysteries thereof, for God
has made nothing in vain, he has not made these glorious bodies only to be
gazed at, but to be searched into; there being none of the humane sciences that
draw us so near to God: so that Ptolomy not unworthily in the beginning of his
Almagest affirms, Hanc unam scientiam esse viam ac semitam ad sciendum Deum
altissimum: which being understood, cum grano salis, will not be much different
from the mind of St. Paul, Romans 1. 20. for the invisible things of God, etc.
are seen by the Creation of the World: In which place as all things created are
understood, so especially it should seem the celestial bodies to be intended:
for these with their beauty, magnitude, and multitude, and with the perpetual
stability, and wonderful variety of their invariable motions and effects, do in
a mavelous manner commend the wisdom and goodness of the glorious God, and do
exceeding much draw us to the admiration, love, and knowledge of him; according
to that excellent testimony of the kingly Prophet, The Heavens declare the
glory of God, and the Firmament shows his handy work. And again, There is
neither Speech nor Language but their Voice is heard among them, Psalm 19. 1,
2. And in Wisd. 13. 4, 5. says Solomon, But if they were astonished at their
power and virtue, let them understand by them how much mightier he is that made
them. For by the beauty and greatness of the Creatures, proportionably the
maker of them is seen. And from hence sure it is that the Sideral science is by
some not unfitly called, Natural Theology. Solid Orbs and Comets to be in the
sublunary Region, have been maintained by many, both elder and later; yet by
the infallible observations, and unparalled instruments, joined with the
unwearied assiduity, and almost invaluable expense of the Tres-noble Tyche,
they have been found altogether false.

The Heavens so framed are,
That they do all declare,
Gods Glory does excel;
The Skies and Firmament,
Bright, clear, and permanent,
His handy work does tell.
Day unto day does teach,
And of the Lord do preach,
His wondrous works relating,
Night unto night does show,
That every one might know,
His wisdom them creating.
There is no speech nor Land,
But this does understand,
Though it far distant lies.
Yet does it heart the noise,
Acknowledging the voice,
And Language of the Skies, etc.
Qu. At what time of the year (according to the opinion of many men) was the
world created?

An. That the world began in Autumn, is of late the opinion of many, both
Divines and Chronologers. And yet of old the ancient Fathers (Eusebius, Basil,
Athanasius, Ambrose, Cyril of Jerusalem, Augustine, Nazianzen, Damascen, Bid,
Psidore, etc.) were persuaded otherwise. Yea, in a Synod holden in Palestine by
Theophilus Bishop of Caesarea, it was agreed that the World was made in the
Spring: Nor is that but a great question betwixt two furious Rabbis; for
though the Rabbis (for the most part) be for Autumn; yet R. Josua maintains
the contrary, against Eleazer another great Rabbi, who contends for Autumn.
True it is that the year of Jubilee began always at Autumn: howbeit the first
month of the year was to be reckoned from the Spring, which is as Moses says
to the Israelites, Ezod. 12. 2. This shall be to you the beginning of Months:
as if he had said, though whilst you were in Egypt you followed another
reckoning, yet it was diverse from that which ye had at the first: for this is
to you the beginning of months, or the natural head of the year. Nor did the
Chaldeans with whom Abrabam lived a long time, reckon otherwise. And
successively since, Astrologers have accounted the revolutions of the world
from the vernal Equinox, at the Suns entrance into the first scruple of Aries.

Translated out of Manilius, Lib. 4.
ALl Animals that be, do grovelling lie,
Or in the Earth, the Water, or the Sky:
One rest, one sense, one belly like in all,
Which they communicate in general,
But man consists of soul and body linkt,
Of Councils capable, of voice distinct,
He into natural causes does inspect,
And knows what to devise, how to direct.
Into the world he Arts and science brings,
And searches out the hidden birth of things:
The unplow'd earth he to his will subdues,
And all it brings forth, he knows how to use.
The untamed Beasts, he does at pleasure bind,
He in the Seas untroden paths does find:
He only stands with an erected breast,
As the sole Victor over all the rest.
His Star-like eyes into the Stars inquire,
The Heavens themselves he scales (if he desire)
He seeks out Jove, his thoughts will not be tied,
The Stars from him in vain themselves do hide,
He not content to look them in the faces,
Ransacks their Houses, there most secret places.
This is the scope of man's all prying mind,
Himself he hopes amongst the Stars to find.
Of the unfortunate and fatal Days in the Year.
THe ancient Astronomers have observed certain days in every month to be held
very fatal and unfortunate, in which they accounted it ominous to begin, or
undertake any matter, which days be as follow.

January the 1, 2, 4, 5, 10, 15, 17, and 19

February the 8, 10, and 17.

March the 15, 16, and 19.

April the 16, and 21.

May the 7, 11, and 20.

June the 4, and 7.

July the 15, and 20.

August the 19, and 20.

September the 6, and 7.

October the 5.

November the 15, and 19.

December the 6, 7, and 9.

Also they will have in every change of the Moon two unfortunate days, in which
they advise no man to begin any work, or undertake any journey, because it
shall come to no good end. Which days be these.

In Jan. the 3 and 4 days of the new Moon,

In February 5 and 7,

In March 6 and 7.

In April 5 and 8.

In May 8 and 9.

In June 5 and 15.

In July 3 and 13.

In August 8 and 13.

In September 8 and 13.

In October 5 and 12.

In November 5 and 9.

In December 3 and 13.

Others there be which note out of the whole year six most unfortunate days
above all other, wherein they advise no man to bleed, or take any drink,
because the effects of the Constellation work mightily to death, and in other
respects they be right unfortunate, which days be these.

January the 3. April the 30. July the 1. August the 1. October the 2. December
the 30.


Others again there be which observe three dangerous Mundays to begin any
business, fall sick, or undertake any journey, viz.

First Monday in April, on which day Cain was born, and his Brother 6 bell slain.

Second Monday in August, on which day Sodom and Gomorrah were destroyed.

31 of December, on which day Jadas was born that betrayed Christ,

Likewise throughout England, the 28 of December being Innocents day, is called
Childermas, or Cros^-day, and is so accounted every week.

Moreover there be certain unfortunate and bad days in the year, called
Dog Days, which be very prejudicial to man's health, they begin the 19 day of
July, and end the 27 of August; the malignity of which days Pliny reports
Lib: Chap 40. of his Natural History.

Exact rules to find out the beginning and ending of the Terms, with the number
of their Returns.
HIllary Term begins always the 23 of January, and ends February the 12, and
has four Returns.

Easter Term begins always on the Wednesday fortnight after Easter; ends the
Monday after Ascension day, and has five Returns.

Trinity Term begins always the Friday after Trinity, and ends the Wednesday
fortnight after, and has four Returns.

Michaelmas Term begins October the 23. and ends November the 21. and has six
Returns.

Note that the Exchequer opens 8 days before any Term begins, except Trinity
Term before which it opens only 4 days.

Of Weights and Measures commonly used in England.
THe most common Weight used in England are Troy and Avoirdupois; by the first
is weighed Wheat, Bread, Gold, Silver, etc. which Troy-weight contains in every
pound twelve ounces, every ounce twenty penny weight, and every penny weight
twenty four grains, whereby a mark weight arises just to eighty ounces.

By the second and more common weight of Avoirdupois is weighed all kind of
Grocery ware, Physical drugs, and gross wares, as Rosin, Pitch, Hemp, etc. and
all Iron, Copper, Tin, or other metals: this weight has sixteen ounces to the
pound, and is divided into grains, scruples, drams, and ounces; so that one
pound Avoirdupois contains 16 ounces, 128 drams, 384 scruples, and 7680 grains.

How Ale and Beer it measured.

These two sorts of Liquors are measured by pints, quarts, pottles, gallons,
firkins, kilderkins, and barrels; so that a barrel of Beer contains two
kilderkins, four Firkins, thirty six gallons, seventy two pottles, 144 quarts,
and 282 pints. A Barrel of Ale is two kilderkins, four firkins, thirty two
gallons, sixty four pottles, 128 quarts, and 256 pints, so then the Barrel of
Ale is less than the Barrel of Beer, by 32 pints, and 16 quarts.

The Measure of Wine, Oil, and Honey.

A Tun of Wine is two Pipes or Butts, three Punchions, 4 Hogsheads, six
Tierces, eight Barrels, fourteen Rundlets, 152 Gallons, 504 Pottles, 1008
quarts, 2016 pints: and nore that one gallon of Wine contains 8 pound of Troy
weight.

Measures of Grain.

All kind of Grain is measured by Troy weight, of which eight pounds makes a
gallon, whereof are made pints, quarts, pottles gallons, pecks, half Bushels,
Bushels, strikes, Cornooks, quarters and Lasts, Now a Last is ten quarters,
twenty Cornooks, forty strikes, eighty Bushels, 160 half Bushels, 320 pecks,
647 gallons, 1280 pottles, 2560 quarts, and 5120 pints.

Of Iron and Lead.

Iron is counted by the pound, hundred, and Tun; of which a Tun is 200 or 224
pound. Lead is reckoned by the pound, hundred, and Fodder; a Fodder is nineteen
hundred and a half, at a 122 to the hundred; Tin, Copper, and Latten have 112
pounds to the hundred.

Of F^sh.

Ling, Cod, or Haberdine have 124 to the hundred: Herings are counted by the
hundred, thousands, and Lasts; a Last is 10000, every thousand 1200, and every
hundred, 120. to the hundred.

Of Paper and Parchment.

A Bale of Paper is ten Ream, a Ream is twenty quires, and every quire twenty
five sheets. A Roll of Parchment is five dozen, and a dozen twelve Skins.

Of Wool.

A Last of Wool is twelve sacks, a sack is two weyes; a wey is six Tod and a
half; a Tod is two stone, a stone is fourteen pound, and a clear is half a
stone; so that a Last of wool contains 312 stone, or 156 Tods.

Of Fuel.

Fuel, according to the Statute, is sized in to shids, billets, faggots and
coals, a shid is to be four foot long besides the carfe, and according as they
are marked or notche, so is the proportion or compass set which they should be
about, as if they have 1, 2, 3, 4, or 5 notches, then should they be in compass
in the midst 16, 23, 28, 33, or 38 inches, and so of the rest accordingly.

Billets are to be three foot long, whereof there should be three sorts, as the
single, a cast, and a cast of two; the first seven inches and a half about, the
next ten, and the third fourteen inches.

Faggots must be three foot long, and the band besides the knot 24 inches, and
made round, for flat faggots be much less, though all of one compass about. The
sack of coals contains four Bushels.

How things be numbered.

Sables, Martins, Minks, Jenits, Filches, and Greys, have four Skins in the
timber; Cony, Kid Lamb, Budge, and Cat, have five score to the hundred.

Goat Skins are fifty to the Kip, and tann'd-Calve skins twelve to the dozen.
Leather is numbered by Hides, Dickers, and Lasts; a Last is twenty Dickers, and
a Dicker ten Hides,

How Money is numbered in England.

The least piece of money with us is a farthing, whereof two makes a
halfpenny, four of them a penny, four pence makes a groat, twelve of them a
shilling, five shillings a Crown, six shillings eight pence a Noble, two Nobles
makes a Mark, three Nobles a Pound. The five shillings or Crown of silver
weighs just an ounce Avoirdupois.

The Measures of England.

Three barly-corns makes an inch, twelve inches a fooot, three foot a yard,
five yards and a half a perch, four pearches in breadth and ten in length, a
Rood, and four Roods make an Acre.

An English mile is 8 furlongs, 88 scores, 320 pearches, 1056 paces, 408 Else,
1560 yards, 5280 feet, 63360 inches, and 190080 barly-corns in length.

The compass of the Earth is 360 degrees, whcih makes 21700 Italian miles, 5400
common German mils, and 4320 miles of Suevia.

The Principal Rivers of England.

Thames Severn Trent Avon Tweed Dee Ouse Dane Medway Merry Humbar Weamer Tine
Weaner Isis.
Country Proverbs used in discourse
YOung men think old men to be fools, but old men know young men to be fools.

Love me and love my Hound.

Marriage and hanging go by destiny.

To day a man, to morrow a Cuckold.

He that marries a Widow and two Children, marries three Thieves.

Fair words makes fools feign.

Hot love is soon cold.

Make a Coward fight, and he will kill the Devil.

Near is my Petticoat, but nearer is my Smock,

Sorrow quits no scores,

A Ship and a Woman always trimming,

A Woman and a Glass always in danger.

Fire is a good Servant but a bad Master.

A rouling stone nere gathers moss.

To a fair day open you window.

Building and marrying of Children are two great wasters.

Dally not with money nor women.

Too much familiarity breeds contempt.

Burnt Children dread the fire, when old fools will play with the coals.

The nearer the Church, the further from God.

A Brief Chronology of the times wherein these famous men lived.
THeseus the founder of Athens Anno Mundi 2716 Romu^us the founder of Rome Anno
Mundi 3198 Homer the Father of the Poets Anno Mundi 3150 Solon the Lawgiver to
Athens Anno Mundi 3421 Plato the Philosopher Anno Mundi 3675 Diogenes the
Cynick Anno Mundi 3684 Aristotle the Philosopher Anno Mundi 3686 Alexander the
Great Anno Mundi 35^^ Marcus Tullius Cicero Anno Mundi 387^ Cato Uti^an Anno
Mundi 3890 Virgil Prince of Latin Poets. Anno Mundi 3999 Constantine the Great
Anno Domini 306 George Castriot, vulgarly called Scanderbeg Anno Domini 1453
St. Augustine Anno Domini 401 St. Anselm Bishop of Cant. Anno Domini 1280 St.
Bernard Anno Domini 1131 St. Chrysostom Anno Domini 401 Tamberlain the Great
Anno Domini 1403 Erasmus Anno Domini 1529 Martin Luther Anno Domini 1521 John
Guttenbergh that invented Printing Anno Domini 1442
FINIS.

