Anarchia Anglicana: OR, THE HISTORY OF INDEPENDENCY. THE SECOND PART. BEING A
continuation of Relations and Observations Historical and Politic upon this
present PARLIAMENT, Begun Anno 16. CAROLI PRIMI.

By THEODORUS VERAX.

PSALM. 8.8. Virum sanguinum and dolosum abominabitur Dominus.

Printed in the Year, M.DC.XL.IX.

In the 103. Page, in the Catalogue of those Persons who did actually sit upon
the Trial of King CHARLES the First. These following Names are omitted, who
ought to have been inserted.
William Say, Esquire, Col. Math. Thomlinson. John Blackston. Gilb. Millington.
Abraham Barrel. Col. Jo: Downs. Master Norton. L. Genesis Tho: Hammond. Nich:
Love. Vincent Potter. Augustine Garland. Sir Miles Lyvesey. Jo: Dixwel. Simon
Main. Daniel Blagrave. Col. Robert Lylborne. Col. Rich. Deane. Col. Huson. L.
Col. W. Goffe. Master Carewe. Jo. Ioanes.
TO THE READER.
READER, having spoken to thee in the First Part, I might have forborne thee in
this Second, did I not fear to seem guilty of the sullenness and malignity of
these times. The subject matter of my Book is a Combination or Fraction of
Pseudo-Politians, and Pseudo-Theologitians, Heretics and Schismatics, both in
Divinity and Policy; who, having Sacrificed to their Francies, Lusts, Ambition
and Avarice, both their God and Religion, their King and Country, our Laws,
Liberties and Properties, all duties Divine and Humane, are grown so far in
love with their prosperous Sins, as to entitle God himself to be Father and
Author of them from whose written Word and revealed will held forth to us in
the Scriptures as the only North Pole and Cynosure of our Actions (where they
find no warrant for their doing) the appeal to the secret will and Providence
of God, to which they most Turkishly and Heathenishly ascribe all their
enormities, only because they succeed: and, from that abyss of Gods
Providence, draw secondary Principles of Necessity and Honest intentions, to
build the Babel of their confused Designs and Actions upon; not considering
that wicked Men perform the secret will of God to their Damnation; as good Men
do the known will of their Father to their Salvation. If a Man lie sick to
death, and his Son wish him dead, this is sin in the Son, although his
desire concur with the secret will of God; because the Son ought to desire
the perservation of his Fathers life; whereto the will of God revealed in his
word obliges him: and, vivendum secundum Praecepta, non secundum Decreta Dei;
The secret will and providence of God can be no rule and law of our actions,
because we know it not, nor can search into it without presumption: We must not
therefore, altum sapere, think our selves too wise and well gifted to tie our
selves to the Scripture of God; and lust after Revelations and Inspirations;
exspecting God should rain Bread from Heaven for us, ( Manna, Exodus 16.4.) but
be wise unto sobriety. But, prosperum scelus, virtus vocatur: Thus casting off
the written word of God (unless where by an enforced interpretation they can
squeeze Atheism and Blasphemy out of it (as they do sometimes rack Treason,
Murder, and Nonsense out of our Laws and Parliament-priviledges) conducible to
their ends, they insensibly cast off God himself, and make themselves both the
supreme cause and final end, the Alpha and Omega of all their doings, whilst
they use the Hidden and unsearchable Providence of God but as a Disguise and
Visard to Mask under, like Caelius the Atheist in Martial. Prosperity is
become a snare to them, and a Topic place out of which they draw Arguments to
satisfy themselves there is no God, no Religion, but a prudentiall one to
fool the People with.

Nullos esse Deos, inane Coelum,
Affirmat Caelius, probatque,
Quod se videt, dum negat haec, beatum.
But O wretched unholied men! What are they that thus commit Burghlary in the
Sanctum Sanctorum of Gods Providence? That presume, not only to pry into but
to thrust their hands polluted with blood and rapine into Gods mysterious Arc?
Thus much for the subject matter. For the manner of my writing, I confess, as
to the style, it is not aequabile scribendi Genus, all of one weaving and
contexture: It is a History writ with a Satirique style and vein: -- Nam quis
iniqui,
Tam patiens orbis, tam ferreus ut teneat se?
It is a virtue to hate and prosecute vice. The Scripture tells us, there is a
perfect hatred, a Holy Anger. And our Chaucer tells us, The words must be of
kynne unto the deeds: otherwise, how can they be expressive enough? I detest
vitiae pulcherrime mangonizata: vice trik'd up in virtues raiment; and
prostituted under her modest dress to stir up Adulteres, quicquid agunt
homines nostri est farrago libelli. A huge Gallymaufry, an Oglio of all
villainies I here set before thee: it cannot be all of one dressing and
seasoning, it must be a mixture, a Hogo of all Relishes; like Manna in the
Wilderness, it must be applicable to all Palates: wherefore according to the
variety of every present subject matter, vel ridenti rideo, vel flenti fleo, I
become all things to all Men, I assimilate my affections and humors to every
Man's humor as well as to the present Theme; that I may take every Man by the
right hand and lead him out of this Vr of the Chaldeans, this Land of Egypt,
this House of Bondage in judgment and conscience, though not in person and
estate: which must only be the mighty handiwork of that God who is able to
divide the Red Sea, and give us a safe march through it upon dry Land.

Which that he would vouchsafe to do let us all join our hearty prayers: and
that we may instrumentally serve him in it, let us all join our heads, hearts
and hands together, since God neglects faint-hearted and cowardly prayers: Let
us not lie in the Ditch and cry, God help us. But let us help God to help us;
and keep cor unum, viam unam, in the doing of it.

The Ordinance passed 20. Aug. 1647. To null and void all Acts, etc. passed
under the force of the Apprentices.
Die Veneris 20. Aug. 1647.
An ordinance for Declaring all Votes, Orders, and Ordinances passed in one or
both Houses, since the Force on both Houses, July 26. until the 6. of this
present August. 1647. to be null and void.

WHereas there was a visible, horrid, insolent and actual force upon the
Houses of Parliament, on Monday 26. July last; whereupon the Speakers, and many
Members, of both Houses of Parliament were forced to absent themselves from the
service of the Parliament: and whereas those Members of the House could nor
return to sit in safety before Friday, the 6. August; It is therefore Declared
by the Lords and Commons in Parliament assembled, that the Ordinance of Monday,
26. July, for the Repealing and making void of the Ordinance of the 23. of the
said July, for settling of the Militia of the City of London, being gained by
force and violence; and all Votes, Orders, Ordinances passed in either, or both
Houses of Parliament, since the said Ordinance of the 26. of July, to the said
6. of August, are null and void, and were so at the making thereof, and are
hereby Declared so to be, the Parliament being under a force, and not free:
Provided always, and be it Ordered, That no Person or Persons shall be
impeached, or punished for his or their actions, by, or upon, or according to
the aforesaid Votes, Orders, or Ordinances, unless he, or they shall be found
guilty of contriving, acting, or abetting the aforesaid visible and actual
force; or being present a, or knowing of the said force, did afterward act
upon ths Votes so forced, or were guilty of entering into, or promoting the late
Engagement for bringing the KING to the City upon the Terms and Conditions
expressed in His Majesty's Letter of the 12. of May last.

JOHN BROWN. Cler. Parl.

ERATA.
Page 9. Lin. 9. r. spoken. p. 16. l. 29. r. Papir Cursor. p. 21. l. 14.
Hypothetically. p. 28 l. 9. r. without. p. 70. l. 35. r. which action. p. 82.
l. 33. r. Traiterous. p. 103. l. ult. col. 2. r. Io. Dove. p. 115. l. 7. r.
disapprovable. p. 127. l. 22. r. fear. p. 177. l. 6. r. slay. p. 224. l. 35.
r. power resides: p. 240. l. 6. r. act with them. l. ult. r. the most.

THE SECOND PART OF The History of Jndependency.
MY First part of Relations and observations Historical and Politic upon
this present Parliament, 1. The Proeme.
begun Anno Dom. 1640. anno Car. primi, 16. is divided into two parts or
Books, [The Mystery of the two Iuntoes, Presbyterian and Independent,] wherein
I show with what art (to advance their designs) the Grandees divided the
Houses into the said two Factions; which Factions entertaining the Quarrel
in earnest, their respective Grandees were forced to turn their jest into
earnest too, for upholding their Authority, with their several Parties: not
unlike Butchers, who, in a Country Market set their Dogs together by the ears
in sport, and at last own their Dogs quarrel themselves in earnest. The
second Book is, [The History of Independency,] wherein I show the Rise,
Growth, and Practices of that Party; which being full of schismatic
quicksilver, restless and stirring, and tenable by no Oaths, Principles,
Promises, Declarations, nor by any obligations or Laws divine or humane, does
now enjoy the fruits of their perfidiousnesse and treachery, a Conquest gotten
over their Adversaries by pretending, protesting, and false promising, which
they attribute to the Bounties and Mercies of God: and from the success of
their villainies argue most Turkishly his blessings over them; and as Ievvishly
arrogate to themselves to be the peculiar People and Saints of God, although he
uses them but as a Rod in his hand to scourge the sins of the other Party,
and of the whole Kingdom. It is the usual method of Gods justice not only
to punish one sin by another, but one Sinner by another; nay, a lesser Sinner
by a greater: and at last to receive the humble and corrected Sinner into
Abraham's bosom, and cast the insulting Executioner of his wrath into the
fiery furnace of his anger. In my aforesaid [History of Independency] you have
that Faction conquering: In this Continuation or Supplement of the said
History, I represent them to you triumphing, using and abusing their Victories
to the dishonor of God, destruction of the King, beggering and enslaving of
the Kingdom, depriving us of our Religion, Laws, Liberties and Estates, and
consequently, making our Wives and Children the objects of our fear, despair,
and ill boding doubts, not the objects of any comfort and joy we can take in
them, whose miseries we foresee, but cannot help. When I consider the
intricacy of this my undertaking, how perplexed it is, how entangled with
various changings, counterchangings, revolutions, revoltings, and betrayings of
Parties, (such are all Civil VVarres, but especially those where the most
unciviil and barbarous sort of men, the dregs and lees of the People swim a
top) how full of divisions, and subdivisions; in so much that they who are
Friends and hold together in one Interest or Faction, are Opposites in another.
Methinks my labor is as vain as his that attempted to take the Picture of
Proteus; or his, that endeavored to shape a Garment for the Moon: when God
brought a Confusion but of Lips and Tongues upon Babel, what Man was able to
reduce them into order again? But God has brought upon us a Confusion, a
Babel, not only of Lips and Tongues, but of Heads, Hearts, Hands, etc. What
Historian can find a method in so universal a Chaos? can dravv light out of so
palpable a darkness? Besides, I foresee my revvard to be envy, hatred,
malice, contempt, slanders, sequestration, beggary, imprisonment, and at last
an Arbittary death without any Legal Trial, proceedings, Jury, Judges, or
Court, or any known established Law to judge by; Obsequium amicos veritas
odium parit. I have already follovved truth so near at the heels (although but
a private retainer to her) that almost all my teeth are secretly stricken out:
what dare they not now do openly against me? since by murdering our King;
dis-inheriting his Posterity, subverting Monarchical Government, abolishing
the House of Lords, and perverting the House of Commons, setting up new
Representatives, with Supreme and Legislative Power, and new Courts and
Jurisdictions against all Laws, they Proclaim themselves Conquerours of
King, Parliament, and Kingdom, Victors of our Religion, Laws, Liberties, and
Properties, and Triumphers over our Persons, Wives, Children, and Estates?
since they profess their will and power, to be the only Laws and Rules of
their doings, and our sufferings. But when I consider, that as no man's
innocence, so no man's reservednesse can protect him; but that some men must die
(according to Catiline's rule) to make up the number, others to multiply
confiscations, others to satisfy private suspicions, malice and revenge, and
many must die to cement and foment this new erected Tyranny with their blood,
I thought it as easy and more honorable to die waking and vvorking for my
God, my King, and Country, than to die sleeping, and have my throat cut in a
Lethargy. I know these Schismatics thirst as much after blood, as they hunger
after money: and I am sure to be involved in the common and inevitable ruin of
my Country, why should I not rather perish for it now, them with it
hereafter? It is more manly, more noble, more Christian; Dulce and decorum est
pro patria mori; was the saying of an Heathen, why not of a Christian?
Religion, Laws, and Liberties, lie now at stake; why should not I come in
for a Gamester? it is a mixed cause, and he that dies for it is a Martyr. He
that fears Death, must be a slave to those Tyrants that carry the Svvord; he
that fears Poverty, must be a Villain to those Iudasses that bear the Purse;
but he that fears God, will borrow strength from him to contemn them both:
Thus putting my trust in God, I put Pen to Paper, and my life into the scales,
where God (I know) holds the balance: he whose providence takes notice of a
Sparrovv falling from the housetop, will vvatch over me, and either protect
me against them, or receive me from them.

Cromwell and Ireton (by advice of their thriving Iunto of Independents in the
two Houses) having mutinied the Army against their Masters the Parliament, 2.
An Introductory Repetition.

See my I. Part of the History of Independency, sect. 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 13, and
14.


found that crime could not be defended but by committing greater: wherefore
they seized the Kings Person at Holdenby to gain Authority with the People;
that they might the better subdue the Parliament to their lusts: for the better
expediting whereof, Sect. 18, 19.
they courted the City of London to sit Neuters, and let them work their
wills with the Parliament; which Mine not taking fire, they united the
scismatical Party of the City and Country to them, and all such as being
guilty of public cheats and spoils, desired the protection of the Svvord to
make good their rapines: and accounted all men else as Enemies; applying
themselves to vvooe and cajole the People; easily wrought upon as being weary
of the War, and of the Mis-government, Factions, confusions and oppressions
of their new Masters the Parliament; which indeed were very great, but
aggravated by them and their Agitators beyond the truth: and the whole weight
of them charged upon the more moderate and innocent Party, (only because they
were their Opposites) whereas had they set the saddle upon the right horse,
as sure as Judas bore the Bag, the Independents must have rid before the
Cloak bag; they being the Publicans and Sinners that handled most public
treasure. The Layers on, Exactors, Treasurers, etc. of Taxes, the far more
numerous and busy party in all Mony-Committees, and gainful Employments,
Engrossers of all great Offices; and the greatest Sharers of Public money
amongst themselves for Compensations for Losses, and Rewards for Services
pretended; and consequently, that Faction were the greatest Dilapidators of
the Commonwealth, Oppressors of the People, and Authors of confusion, though
(according to custom) by an impudent fallacy, called (Translatio criminis) the
Independent faction lay their Bastards at other Men's doors, making a show to
redress those faults in other men, which themselves are chiefly guilty of:
wherefore the better to ingratiate themselves with King and People, they
printed and published Engagements, Declarations, Remonstrances, Manifestoes,
Proposals, and Petitions of their own penning, and sent them by their
Agitators and sectary Priests into all Counties for concurrence and
Subscriptions: the better to steal the respects of the People from the
Parliament to themselves, like Absalom, they flattered the People to make
Addresses and Complaints against public Grievances to them only: Boasting
themselves for the sole Arbitrators of Peace, Restorers of Laws, Liberty, and
Property; Setlers of Religion, Maintainers of the Privileges of Parliament,
Reformers and Callers to Account of all Committees, Sequestrators, Treasurers,
etc. Deliverers of the People from that intolerable Excise, and other Taxes:
But above all, Preservers of all just Interests, and Restorers of the King to
his just Rights and Prerogatives with honor, freedom, and safety, to his
Person, (originally their own words, Book of Declarations of the Army, page
112.

Represent: of the Army at S. Albons. June, 23. 1647.

B. Decl: again, p. 64

Sir Tho: Fairfax's Letter to the Houses from Reading, July 6. 1647.

B. Decl: again, p. 75.

Proposals of the Army, Aug. 1. 1647. Putney Projects, p. 1^. 14, 4^. and my
Animadverssions upon the Armies Remonstrance delivered to the Commons, November.
20. 1648.

The second part of Englands New Chains; and the Hunting the Foxes from New
Market and Triplo heath to White hall by five small Beagles, p. 6, 7.

See my Animadversions upon the Armies Remonstrance, Nov. 20. 1648 and Putney
Projects, p. 43. and Major Huntingtons Relation in a Book caled, A plea for
King and Kingdom, in Answer to the Armies Remonst: presented November. 20. 1648.
page, 14, 15. 16. and, Second part of England's New Chains; and the said
Hunting of the Foxes, etc. And the Reasons inducing Major Robert Huntington to
lay down his Commission.


though since they Quarrel with Parliament and City for using them) and
Reducers of his Queen and Children; without which they openly profess and
Declare positively in many printed Papers to the world and the Parliament,
There can be no settled peace nor happiness to this Nation. The truth of this
Assertion was obvious to the meanest Capacities; and will suddenly be proved
by dear and lamentable experience. To all these undertakings they now hunt
directly counter, yet in pursuance of these undertakings, the Army (by their
own Authority) made Addresses to his Majesty, and presented to him more
tolerable Proposals than any he could obtain from his Parliament: They treated
with him, yea they wrought upon him underhand to neglect the Propositions
from Parliament tendered to him at Hampton Court, and to prefer the Proposals
of the Army; and then (presuming they had him fast lymed) they propounded to
him anew (as I have it from good hands) private Proposals for the Interest of
the Independent Grandees and the Army, derogatory to the Kingly Power and
Dignity, to the Laws, Liberties and Properties of the Subject, and
destructive to Religion. To which his Majesty giving an utter denial, they
began to entertain new Designs against the Kings Person, and Kingly
Gouvernment, which they ushered in by setting the Schismatic and Levelling
Party on work in City and most Counties, to obtrude upon the Houses clamorous
Petitions against further Treaties, and demanding exemplary Justice against the
King: exceedingly labored by Cromwell himself in Yorkshire both amongst the
Gentry and Soldiers, etc. (amongst these the Petition, December. 11. 1648. was
the most eminent) these men that insolently petitioned against the fundamental
Government of the Land, and Peace by Accommodation, were entertained with
Thanks; Others that petitioned for Peace by Accommodation were entertained
with Frovvns, disfranchisings, sequestrations, vvounds and death, as the
Surrey Gentlemen; this shevved with how little reality the overruling Party
in the Houses Treated with the King. 2. part of England's Chains discovered.
1. Treaty in the Isle of Wight.
In order to this Design of laying aside the King, and subverting Monarchy,
They 1. frighted his Majesty into the Isle of VVight. 2. The Parliament (that
is, the predominant Party) pursued him thither with offer of a Treaty upon
Propositions: conditionally (that before he should be admitted to Treat) he
pass 4. Dethroning Bills; of so high a nature, that he had enslaved the
People, subverted Parliaments, and had made himself but the Statue of a King
and no good Christian, had he by his Royal assent passed them into Acts of
Parliament; 1 par. Hist. Ind. sect. 62, 63, 64.
and the Parliament (or rather the Grandees) after his Royal assent, might
have made themselves Masters of all the other Propositions without his
Consent: so that this Treaty was but a flourish to dazzle the eyes of the
world. His Majesty therefore denied the 4. said Bills, and thereby preserved
the legal Interests of King, Parliament, and People; yet the Faction presently
took a pretense and occasion thereupon to lay aside the King, Ibidem, sect.
65, 66, 68, 69, 70, 71, 72, 74, 75. And my said Animadvers: p. 10. And the 2
part of Englands new Ch:
by passing 4. Votes for no more Addresses to him; and a Declaration against
him: which were not passed without many threats, and more show of force
then stood with the nature of a free Parliament, the Army lying near the
Town to back their Party: the design having been laid before hand betvveen
Sir Henry Vane Junior, Sir John ^velyn of Wilts, Nath: ^^^nnes, Solicitor
Saint John's, and a select Committee of the Army. I told you before the People
had been thoroughly instructed formerly by the Army and their Agitators, 2. part
of England's new Ch: discovered, p. 4, 5.
That there could be no peace nor happiness in England, without restoring the
King to his just Rights and Prerogatives, etc. notvvithstanding which the
People now found their hopes that way deluded by the Army and their Party;
who had cast off the King upon private discontents, the true grounds whereof
did not appear; and had obstructed all vvayes to Peace and Accommodation, and
made them dangerous and destructive to such as travailed peaceably in them,
witness the sad example of the Surrey-men, Kent, Essex; and all to perpetuate
their great Places of power and profit. The minds of the People therefore
troubled with apprehension that our old Laws and laudable form of
Government should be subverted, and new obtruded by the power of the Svvord,
suitable to the lusts and Intrests of these ambitious, covetous Men; and finding
besides evident symptoms of a new War approaching to consume that small
Remainder, which the last VVarres had left; grevv so impatient of what they
feared for the future, and felt at present (insupportable Taxes, Free Quarter,
insolency of Soldiers, Martial Law, Arbitrary Government by Committees, and
by Ordinances of Parliament changed and executed at the will and pleasure of
the Grandees, in stead of our settled and well approved Laws) that despair
thrust them head long into Arms in Wales, Kent, Essex, Pontefract, etc, and
at the same time a cloud arising in Ireland, a storm povvred in from Scotland,
and the Prince threatening a tempest from Sea; these concurrences looked so
black upon the Independent Grandees, that they gave way to a second
mock-Treaty in the Isle of VVight; 2 Treaty in the Isle of VVight.
which was the fruit of their covvardise and subtilty; as appears by
Sergeant Nickolas (a Creature of theirs) who (upon Saturday, October. 28. 1648.)
moved in the House, That the Lord Goring might be proceeded against as a new
Delinquent out of mercy, because he had Cudgelled them into a Treaty; though
now they attribute all to the Kings corrupt Party in the two Houses: the Army
likewise kept a mock-fast or day of Humiliation at Windsor to acknovvledge
their sins, and implore Gods mercy for their former disobedience to the
Parliament in not Disbanding, and their insolent Rebellion in Marching up in a
Hostile and Triumphant posture against the Parliament and City, August. 6.
1647. promising more obedience hereafter, and to acquiesce in the judgment of
the Parliament, and Declared, Decl. June 14. 1647.
That it was proper for them to act in their own sphere as Soldiers, and
leave State affairs to the Parliament: but this was done but to recover the
good opinion of the people and City, and to keep them from stirring, and to
stay the moderate Party of the two Houses from Declaring the Army Enemies,
recalling and Voting their Commissions, and established Pay void, which they
might have done with ruin to the Army and their Party in that Conjuncture of
Affairs, and with safety to themselves, and applause of all honest men of
England that had taken part with the Parliament from the beginning; had not
some Grandees of the rigid Presbyterian party (both within and without the
Houses) some cursed thing, some Achans wedge in their bosoms which
suggested, Their sins were greater than could be forgiven; and therefore
they durst not cast down the partition wall betvveen them and the King (this
Army) though it lean so hard upon them, it is ready to overvvhelme them;
War is necessary for some men of every Faction, whose crying sins peace
will lay open and naked to the scorn, derision, and detestation of the
world. How well these sanctimonious Svvord-players of the Army have observed
the Duties and Undertakings of their said Humiliation, let the world judge:
Have they not returned again with the Dog to the Vomit? have they not
cousened God, and their own Souls? Sure they fasted from sin then, that
they might sin with the more greedy appetite now; and asked God
forgiveness of the old score, that they might sin again upon a new score.
Thus you see the 2. Treaties in the Isle of VVight were begotten by fear and
(that Idol of the Independents to which they offer up all their knaveries)
necessity. They were Cocatrice Eggs laid by their Grandees when they had been
Crovv-trodden by Armies from abroad, and Tumults at home; See my 1. part sect.
65, 66, 105 106, 107. and the Conclusions there. Sect. 16, 17, 18
upon which they sat abrood only to hatch Scandals and new quarrels against
the King, Anarchy and confusion to the State, and Tyranny and oppression of the
People: to set up the Olygarchy of the Saints, or Council of State, the
Kingdom of the Brambles, which since does scratch the wool from off the
skin, the skin from off the flesh, the flesh from off the bones. I. have been
compelled to use some introductory Repetitions in this part of my discourse,
that I may give you the whole mystery of the 2. Treaties with the King in the
Isle of VVight, with the causes efficient, and final of them, under one
view; lest some one link of the chain escaping your observation, it become a
Chain of errors to you.

My first part of the History of Independency ends with that which was but
an unlucky preface to a Treaty with the King; 3. Hamilton overthrovvne. See my
1. part. sect. 136.
namely, Cromwell's menacing Letters to the Speaker of the House of Commons,
dated August 20. 1648. Relating his easy purchase of a great Victory over Duke
Hamilton, and Lieut. Genesis Bailey; wherein he relates the number of the Scottish
Forces, far differing from the former Report of Lieut. Col. Osborne a Scottish
Gentleman, made in the House of Commons, July 20. Sect. 110, 111.
(where of I have spocten in my first part) who (to take away the terror of
them) estimated Hamiltons and Langdales conjoined Forces to be but 10000. and
it was then thought a note of disaffection to report them any more; but this
Letter (for the greater glory of his sanctified Army) multiplies them to be
21000. The manner of the Fight was very strange and Exceedingly to be
suspected (especially by any man who has heard or read of Bayly's former
demeanor in his own Country at Kylsythe and Ausorte Kirk) It was little
better than a beating up of Quarters for 20. miles together (for so far the
Scots Army lay scattered in their Quarters, the Horse so far distant from
their Foot, they could bring them no seasonable relief) Sir Marmaduke Langdale
with his small Party drevv forth, and made an honorable resistance, had he
been timely and strongly seconded: on the Scottish Party the Fight began at
Preston in Lancashire, where the Duke being vvorsted, retreated to VVigon,
from thence to VVarrington thorovv Lanes and Fastnesses, where Bailey, Lieut.
General of the Scottish Foot, being strongly quartered upon a Bridge and Pass,
yielded up 6000 Foot and Arms without fighting, and so ruined his whole
Infantrey: from VVarrington the Duke fled with 4000. Horse to Namptwiche, from
thence to Vtoxeter, where his manner of yiedling himself to Colonel Wait (a
Member of the House of Commons) take out of VVaytes own report in the House,
who said, the Duke yielded simply, and without any Articles of Surrender; that
he voluntarily gave him his Sword, Scarf, Signet of Arms, and his George;
that he hung upon him so that he could not get from him, desiring him to secure
him from the rage of the Soldiers; saying, He had not come into England, but
that he was invited by a greater part of Lords, Commons, Citizens and
Covenanters then called in the last Scottish Army: presently the Bloud-hounds of
the Faction in the House sented this, and called upon Wait to know whether
he named any? Wait Ansvvered, that Hamilton was a subtle, politic Lord,
and no doubt (for the saving of his own life) would do that in more
convenient time. Hereupon a Committee (all of Canibal Saints) was presently
packed, and ordered to go down and examine the Duke, but no particulars could
they get from him: which was an honorable silence, and made amends for his
former lavish speech. It was happy the Prince did not trust himself in the
Head of this Army. Had Hamilton marched immediately to Colchester, or but to
Pontefrect, (which he might easily have done, Lambert his only Opposite still
retreating before him) the whole Country had risen with him. But he knevv the
Presbyterian party had rendered themselves contemptible, and he as much
contemned the Independents, therefore he foreslovved his march, vvilling
Cromwell and Fairfax should subdue all other Parties, and that he only might
have Arms in his hands to bring in the King upon his own terms; this over
confidence undid him: He was too much a Statesman, and too little a Soldier.

4. The insolency of the schismatic Members upon report of the Victory.
This Victory did work like Botled-Ale with Scott, Thomson, Cornelius
Holland, Sir Henry Myldmay, and many others of the light headed Saints, who
were so puffed up with the vvindinesse of it, that they began to swell with
disdain and malice against the Personal Treaty, and to threaten and insult
over all that had either petitioned for it from abroad, or spoke for it in the
House, as the only means of peace and a setlement.

5. The vviser sort subtlely continue a mock-Treaty.
But the vviser sort (more crafty to do mischief) knovving, that the people
were weary of Taxes and the Army, and had no hopes of peace but by a
Personal Treaty; and were resolved to purchase peace, although at the price
of a new War: that Colchester, Pontefract, Scarborough, and a Castle or
two in Kent were not yet reduced, the people in Wales, Kent, Essex, the
North, not yet settled in such a calm, but that a new storm might arise: a
considerable party of the Scots yet unbroken in England, and fronting Cromwell
and Lambert, under the command of Monroe, a daring, knovving, and uncorrupted
Commander; Scotland it self not yet assured to them: and above all, the Prince
of Wales with a strong Fleet at Sea, likely to raise new tempests at Land,
had he landed some men in Kent or Essex, to gather up the malcontents there
but newly scatterd and broken, and ready to adhere to any Party to defend
themselves from the fury and rapines of their Committee; Warwick but a
fresh-vvater Admiral, lying in the Thames under protection of the
Block-houses, and relying upon Land-Souldiers to awe the Mariners from
mutinying; a cloud arising in Ireland ready to break into a storm: upon these
considerations, the Caball or close Iunto of Grandees thought fit to dally on
the Treaty, the better to keep the Princ^ quiet, in expectation thereof, and
gain time to work upon his Seamen, (already corrupted with want of work
and pay) and to gull and pacify the rest of the Members and people (not
patient of a sharper remedy) until Oliver had puite finished his Northern
work, and marched nearer Londen, Colchester reduced, and the Princes Fleet
retired to Harbor to avoid VVinter; and then to break off the Treaty, and
purge the House of those Members that sought peace by an accord with the King,
under the notion of the King's corrupt Party; to blind their eyes therefore,
the Speaker Lenthall (though at this time the Foreman of Olivers shop) when
it was debated in the House, Whether a Treaty should be had with the King in
the Isle of VVight upon the Propositions of Hampton Court? The Question much
opposed, and at last put, the No's and the Yeas were equal, 57. to 57. in so
much that the Speakers voice was put in to turn the scales; he gave his voice
in the affirmative, that time follovving his conscience against his Interest,
and my Lord Say (openly in the House of Lords) said, God forbid that any man
should take advantage of this Victory to break off the Treaty: and the
Armies-Scout, from Tuesday November. 14. to November. 21. 1648. propounds three
Riddles to the Reader, 1. Why the Grandees of the Iunto that use to rule the
Army are the most active Solicitors for an Agreement of the Parliament with His
Majesty when then the Army are Acting to the contrary? 2. Why His Majesty,
stumbles only at the matters wherein the Presbyterian Interest are concerned,
when that Faction is the only visible prop to His life, Crown, Dignity, and
dying interest? 3. Why the Soldiers Petitions for Justice upon His Majesty
were ill resented, and they thought worthy to be Tried by a Council of
War, as Offenders, yet a Remonstrance was then framing by the Grandee
Officers to the same purpose, and much more against the present Authority? and
in this the General concurres.

6. New Instructions to Hammond in order to the Teaty, sect. 132.
The next thing taken into consideration in relation to the Treaty, was, the
giving new Instructions to Hammond the Head-Goaler, how to demean himself
in the Treaty; which had formerly been Voted to be in the Isle of VVight,
with honor, freedom, and safety to His Majesty: The Instructions were, 1.
That the King shouly enjoy the same liberty during this Treaty that He had at
Hampton Court. 2. That no person excepted out of mercy, none now Imprisoned by
the Parliament, nor none now in actual Arms against the Parliament should be
admitted to come to the King 3. That no foraine Agent should make any Address
to Him without leave of both Houses. Against these Instructions it was argued,
That some of them contradicted the former Votes, That the King should Treat in
Honor and Freedom, and that He should enjoy the same Liberty He had at
Hampton Court, which could not be so long as He was denied to correspond with
other Princes His Allies (with whom He Was in league and amity) by their
Ambassadors and Agents, a Royalty inseparable from the Crown, allowed Him at
Hampton Court, and to deny it was implicitly to dethrone Him. To which was
ansvvered, That this was true of a King in actual exercise of his Regal
power, which this King neither is, nor ought to be until He has given
satisfaction to His Parliament: That it was agreat condescension in them, and
below the Dignity of a Parliament to recall their Votes of Non Address, and
put the business of the Treaty thus forvvard; and if He would not accept of a
Treaty upon such conditions as the Parliament thought fit, then things would
be but where thy were. The peaceable moderate Party perceiving what
operattion the Schotish Victory had already upon the fancies of those
hotheaded Men, Knevv they must speak mannerly and modestly for fear of
correctson, and must take what they could, since they could not have what
they would. 4. That the King should give His Royal word not to remove out of
the Island during the Treaty, nor in 20. 7. The Earl of Warvvicks Letter to
Derby-ho: complaining of his Seamen.
days after, without consent of the two Houses: this was to make his
chains a link or two longer, yet the King did give His Royal word
accordingly.

Thursday, Aug. 24. a Letter came to the Committee of Safety at Derby-house
from the Earl of VVarvvicke, complaining of the perverseness of his own
Seamen, and that those with the Prince would not yet stoop to the Gods of
Gold, (his own words) That some other way must be thought of besides force
to undermine the Prince, that since they had subdued their Enemies by Land, it
would be a good preparative to work upon their Enemies by Sea with the same
Engine. You see these Saints having gotten the public Purse into their hands,
are (at the peoples costs and charges) bountiful Corrupters of other men's
faith, having none of their own.

About this time a new kind of pick-lock was invented to open the iron Chests
and Counter Boards of the City; 8. A Committee to make effectual the Sale of
Bishops-Lands; and cajole the City.
and invite them to throvv more money after that they had cast away already in
purchase of Bishops Lands; namely, a Committee to consider of a way to secure
unto the Purchasers the Money they had already disbursed upon the said Lands;
and to remove all impediments in the Sale for time to come. To which Col.
Harvey said, That he had experience in the late defection of the City; that the
Men most backvvards in the Parliaments service, were such of the Presbyterians
as had no engagement upon Bishops Lands; whereas others of the same Party that
have interest in the same Lands, are as forvvard as any the best affected. Here
you see what it is that chains the affections of the Cite to this Parliament,
and what it is that divides them amongst themselves; self-respects makes them
run along blind fold with the Grandees in any design or faction. A good
bargain makes a bad Man; Harvey needs no other president but himself, nor no
more visible monument then his exceeding cheap bargain of Fulham-house and
Manor, which has changed him from a furious Presbyter, to a Bedlam
Independent.

About this time it was Ordered, 9. A Commission into the North to enquire
what damages they have sustained by the Scottish Invasion.
That Commissions should be issued forth into the Northern Counties, to
enquire what Damages they have anny ways sustained by Hamilton's Invasion?
This device was of a tvvofold use, 1. To cut off the Scots demands for Money
due to them for their last Brotherly assistance, and otherwise. 2. To cajole
the poor Country into a belief they shall have reparations against the Scots,
and raise them into a clamorous complaint against the Scots; and at last a
deadly seude when they shall find their hopes denied by them and disappointed.
In the mean time they are patiently eaten up with Taxes and Free Quarter, and
while they look for what they shall never have, they lose what they have
already; This was the much applauded invention of Master St. John's of
Lincolns-Inne.

10. Colchester surrendered, with the sequel thereof.
About this time the nevves of the Surrender of Colchester inflamed the
Antimonarchicall faction from a Fever to a frantic Calenture. They yielded to
mercy, and within 4 hours after Sir Charles Lucas and Sir George Lisle (for
the better explanation what Independent mercy is) were shot to death; some
attribute it to an old quarrel betvveen him and General Fairfax, others think
it was done to put an affront upon the King and the Treaty: Colonel Far was
likewise condemned by the Council of War at the same time, but is
reprieved as a witness against the Earl of VVarvvicke when time serves; for
when VVarvvicke long since vvaited at the Commons Door with some Ladies to
petition for a Reprieve for the Earl of Holland, a Soldier of the Guard
insolently told him, He had more need petition for himself.

11. Instructions for the Commissioners to Treat with his Majesty.
Instructions for the Commissioners to Treat with the King were Debated: The
Independents propounded, that those Propositions that were most advantageous to
the Parliament should be first debated, and if the King did not confirm them
all, the Treaty to break off: But it was held unreasonable in any Treaty,
that one Party should bind himself before the Conclusion, and leave the other
at large, and himself in the lurch; so it was Ordered, They should be Treated
of in order as they lay, and (according to His Majesty's desire) nothing
binding to either Party until all was agreed of. The next stumbling block cast
in the way was, that seeing 40 days only were allowed for to Treat, that thy
should limit how many days (and no more) should be spent in Treating upon
every several Proposition: But this was looked upon as a cavil to make void
the Treaty, and so overruled; you see what use these men that gain by War
make of their Victories.

12. A Debate what Gentl: should be allowed to attend his Majes^y in the Treaty.
The next thing debated was, the List of such Gentlemen as were named to
attend the King in this Treaty: The moderate Party excepted against Ashburnham
(a great man with Cromwell) and Leg, as being Prisoner to the Parliament:
The Independents excepted Dr. Shelden, Hammond and Oldsworth, for the same
reason; but the next day the Speaker moved, that Leg and Ashburnham might go
to the King; and to satisfy such as had objected their Imprisonment against
them, the Independents alleged they were unduly imprisond, and moved, a
Committee might be appointed to examine the cause of their Restraint: but the
moderate alleging the same reason for the said three Doctors, and making the
same motion for them, there was no farther proceedings therein.

Thus far I have briefly set down the Preparations toward a Treaty; 13.
Master Pryns Speech in the House; proving the Kings concessions to be a ground
for a setlement.
the Treaty it self betvveen the King in the Isle of VVight, and the
Parliaments Commissioners; their Reports of the Results to the Houses; and the
Houses Debates and Votes upon them took up almost all the time until the 6.
December, 1648. (some fevv businesses of no great moment intervening) many
imperfect and partial Relations of them have been printed cum Privilegio; but
Mr. Will Pryn in his excellent Speech made in the House of Commons, 4. December.
1648, and since printed, has set down all the most material Arguments on
both sides, with great candor and ingenuity, and has confuted the Enemies to
Peace and Accommodation: if strength of Reason can confute those men that
follovv only their own Interests of power and profit, whose wills and
lusts have alvaies been their own laws, and are now become the only
Laws of this Conquered Kingdom; I love not actum agire, I refer my Reader
therefore to his Speech, and will only trouble him with some Observations
upon this Treaty.

I have said something of the Militia, 14. The Militia, and Negative Voice.
sect. 62, 63, 64, 106 and the Conclusions. 15, 16, 17.
and the Kings Negative Voice, in the 1. part of this History, especially in
the Conclusions at the latter end; I vvil only say that without them the King
cannot be a Governing King, but a bare Titular King, a picture, a shadovv,
because the protection of the People depens upon the power of the Svvord; He
cannot protect them and their Laws with the Scabbard: The Authority of the
Scepter follows the power of the Svvord; wherefore to give away one, is to
lose both; nor can the Subjects be any longer His Majesty's Subjects, but
Salves to their fellovv Subjects, when so many petty Kings (not authorized by
any law of God or Man to protect the People) shall hold the Svvord over their
Heads, and distract them with different Opinions, disagree in Commands,
according to the variety of their several lusts, factions, and interests: how
can the King according to his Coronation Oath and duty (to which God has
called him) Govern and protect his People, 1. part. sect. 40, 41, 42.
when he has given away his Svvord to a factious Parliament where one Party
tyrannizeth over the other, and threatens the other with the longest Svvord?
how absurd and impossible it is for the Subject to expect protection from one
hand, and to swear and pay Alleigannce to another hand that has divested it
self of all power to protect them; let our Laws, the practice of all Nations
and times, and the judgment of the learned Politicians tell you, whose
Maxim is, Illa optima est Respublica ubi Princeps quam maximum potest boni,
and quam minimum mali; Primo ne nova Tributo indicere, nova vectigalia
constituere possit, inconsulta Republica: Deinde legum condendarum anti
quandarumque poenes Rempublicam, non unum aliquem Magistratum esse debet
potestas; nulla enim in re gravius peccatum admittitur, nusquam graviores
turbae minantur quam hisce de rebus; That is the best form of Gouvernment,
where the King can do most good, and least evil: 1. Let Him be disabled to
raise new Taxes, and lay on new Tribute. 2. Let Him not have the sole power
to make or repeal Laws, which ought to belong to the Commonwealth; not
any one Magistrate; for no power is more hurtful to the People, nor stirs
more Commotions them these two: such is the Kingdom of England; the King has
neither the power of our purses, nor the changing of our Laws in His hands,
and if he give away his Svvord, he will be such a King of clouts as can do
neither good nor evil, like Rex Sacrificulis at Rome, ea summa potestas
dicitur, qua secundam Leges non est major neque par; such was the Dictattor at
Rome, he had no equal there; Papyp: cursor dictator, ad judged to death his
General of the Horse Fabius, for fighting against his command though
prosperously; and rejected all appeal to the Senate and Tribunes of the
People; yiedling at last only to their prayers, with this saying, Vicit
tandem imperii majestas: such is the King of England, the Commonwealth cannot
comp^ll him to grant a Pardon, or dispense justice or mercy as they please; the
Oath of Supremacy calls Him Supreme Governor in all Causes, over all Persons;
so do all our Statutes, to whom in Parliament (which is his highest sphere
of majesty) i the last appeal by Writ of Error, who is, Principium, caput
and finis Parliamenti, the beginning, head and end of the Parliament: and
therefore he only calls the Parliament, to advise with him, and dissolves it
when he is satisfied: He makes War and Peace, See the 1. part of this
History, Prolegomena, 1.
and is Protector of the Laws, and of all just Interests; only the policy of
the Law disables him to make, repeal, or alter Laws, or raise Moneys
without consent of both Houses by Bill passed; (which is but an Embrio until
he quickens it by his Royal Assent) because this way the King may do most
hurt, and vvrong to his people, (as I have already said) it being the vvisdome
of our Laws to keep the Svvord in one hand, and the purse in another.

The 1. proemiall Proposition for justifying the Parliaments Cause and
Quarrel, and condemning His own Cause and Party, 15. The 1. Proposition for
justifying the Parliaments, and condemning His own quarrel
was a bitter pill; but an earnest desire of peace svveetned it, and gilded
it over, and invited him to swallow it without chavving or ruminating upon
it: but how devilish, unchristian, and illegal a use the Faction have made of
this extorted confession, let God judge.

Their insisting upon it, that the King should take the Convenant, 16. The
Covenant endeavored to be put upon the King.
was an error in Policy, whereof the rigid Presbyterians are guilty; they
(supposing the King would take it at last) stood upon it, and intended thereby
to join the King to their Int rest and Party. The more subtle Independent
knevv the King would not, nor could not take it; and therefore complied with
the Presbyterians in obtruding it upon him, to break off the Treaty: many
things in the Covenant were vain in the Person of His Majesty, as, that He
should swear to maintain His own Person, etc. which the law of nature binds
him to without an Oath, which in this case is idle, and a profaning of Gods
name: some things in the Oath were contradictory to what the Parliaments
Propositions desired of him, as, to maintain His own Authority in defense of
Religon, Laws, and Liberties, which was impossible for Him to do unless he
kept the Militia in his own hands, and his Negative Voice also, which that
clause in the Bill of Militia, That all Bills for leavying Forces should have
the power of Acts of Parliament, without the Royal Assent, etc. would have
deprived him of, by making their Ordinances Acts of Parliament in effect,
binding to the Persons and Estates of the People in an Arbitrary way, to their
utter enslaving: To swear to Abolish Bishops, etc. was against his Coronation
Oath, To swear to extirpate Heresies, Schisms, etc. is more then the
Independents would permit; To swear to maintain the Union between the two
Nations, which the Parliament declare already to be broken by the Scots
Invasion, is vain: besides, how unjust a thing was it to impose that Oath
upon the King, when most Members of the Parliament, Army, and others, are left
at large not to take it? The Parliaments Demands, That the King should declare
against the Marquess of Ormonds proceedings to unite all the Interests of
Ireland for the service of his Majesty, was no part of the Propositions upon
which the Treaty was begun, but a subsequent request upon an emergent
occasion; and therefore I see no reason why the King should have given any
Answer to it, but only have held himself to the original Propositions, yet
he did Answer, That the whole business of Ireland was included in the Treaty,
and therefore a happy Agreement thereupon would set an end to all differences
there, which being voted unsatisfactory, and moved that a new Declaration
might be published against him; the King was enforced to put a stand to the
Marquesses proceedings by his Letter, to his great prejudice; yet these
Declarers against him do now comply with Own Roe Oneale, and have
entertained O Realy, the Popes Irish-Vicar-generall in England, to negotiate
for the Irish massacring Rebels with the Parliament: These things considered,
prove what I find in our late King Charles the 1. most excellent Book, Chap.
18. That it is a Maxim to those that are Enemies to peace, to ask something
which in Reason and Honor must be denied; that they might have some color to
refuse all the rest that is granted. More observations upon this unlucky Treaty
I will not trouble my Reader with, these being enough to show the vanity of
those Propositions; by these he may take a scantling of the rest, ex pede
Herculem. I cannot but blame the indiscretion, if not the indisposition of
those Commissioners who cavilled away so much time in the Treaty, 17. Jones
complains by Letters that Ireland was like to be lost.
until Cromwell had done his work in the North, and marched up to Town to
make the Treaty ineffectuall.

About the latter end of October. 1648. Col. Jones sent vvhining Letters from
Dublin, to the Steers-men at Darby-house; complaining that all Ireland was
like to unite and prosecute the Kings Interest, and therefore he cried for
help; but neither the said Committee, in their consultations, nor the Army in
execution of what was resolved could agree amongst themselves: the Engrossers
and Monopolizers of Olygarchy into a fevv hands, desiring to make themselves a
corporation of Tyrants, suspect an opposition from the Levellers; and would
feign turn them out of the Kingdom, into Ireland, to seek their fortunes, and
practice their Levelling Principles in a strange Land: The Levellers (more
numerous in the Army, though less numerous in the said Committee) strain
courtesy with their Betters, and would have them go first, thinking the
seeds of liberty and equality will prosper better in the soil and air of
England; While they were disputing, if Marquess Ormond had been acting (as
he had been, had not the King been necessitated to retard him, by his said
Letters, sent from the Isle of VVight during the Treaty) the King had recovered
that Kingdom entirely to himself, which had been of great advantage to him.

The 20. November. 1648. Col. Evvers, 18. The Remonst. of the Army to he House of
Commons, Nov. 20, 1648.
with seven or eight Officers more, presented at the House of Commons Bar a
thing called (by those that use to miscall things) An humble Remonstrance of
the Army: it is founded upon these five Anarchicall Principles. 1. That
themselves and their faction only (whom they call exclusively, the
VVel-affected; Godly, Honest Party, the Saints) are the People of England; all
the rest but Philistines, Amorites, or (at the best) but Gibeonites. 2. That
their Interest only is the public Interest of the People. 3. That the People
(that is, themselves) are the only competent Judges of the Peoples safety
(contrary to the Laws and practice of all Nations, which bestovv that
prerogative only upon the Supreme Magistrate) but it may be here lies hid
another subsequent principle, That they are the Supreme Magistrate, armed with
Supreme Authority, as well as with their Svvords; and hereupon, they as good
as tell the House, That if their supposed dangers be not removed, and those
remedies which they Remonstrate admitted, they shall make such appeal to God
(that is, their Svvord) as formerly they have done. 4. Principle is
consequentiall to the 3. That they may drive on their Design (upon pretense of
necessity, self-preservation, honest intentions, providence, or revelation)
against all Powers, Forms of Government, and Laws what soever, under color
of that much abused Maxim, Salus Populi Supremae Lex esto, the safety of the
People is the Supreme Law; which has been the fruitful Mother of many
Rebellions in all Ages, to serve the corrupt ends of ambitious Persons; who
usually fish in troubled waters to attain to those ends which they could
never arrive at in settled Governments. This is a Principle, or new light
discovered by Mayor Huntington, That it is lawful to pass through any forms
of Government, for accomplishment of their ends, and therefore either to purge
the Houses and support the remaining Party by power everlastingly, or put a
period to them by force: and themselves imply as much in this Remonstrance, p.
45 saying, It cannot be safe to accommodtae with the King, because if He
return, and this Parliament continue long and unlimited, He will make a Party
amongst them; He has bid fair for it among the Commons already, and the Lords
are his own out of Question; and therefore we dare not trust the King
amongst them. Again they say, That if the King come in to the Parliament, He
vvil be looked upon as the Repairer of breaches, Restorer of trade, peace,
plenty, etc. and if the Army should keep up (as it must) upon Taxes, the Houses
and Army will be looked upon as Oppressers; and the jealousies and discontents
of the People be increased against them, and make them apt to join issue with
the Kings interest, and may yield us up a sacrifice to appease the King and his
Party; out of these words, and their own practice, I conclude for them,
ergo, They may carry on their design upon necessity for self-preservation,
against the Monarchical Government, and Law of the Land, to murder the KING,
as they have since done. Again they say, If the King were returned, each
Party would strive first, and most to comply with Him, ergo, there is a
necessity to subvert the Kingdom and murder the KING. Behold what use these
covvardly Saints make of necessity, and self-preservation. 5. That they may
appeal to their Svvord against the Authority of any their Governors, in order
to public safety; which two last conclusions set the door vvide open to
Faction and Rebellion; since the People are ever floating and given to change,
and every turbulent ambitious Fellovv, is apt to raise them into a storm
against their Governors, for their fabulous assertions vvherevvith these
Saints usually guild over their foul actions, 1. That the Houses were free
when they passed the 4. Votes for Non-Addresses. 2. That they were not free
when they recalled them. 3. That the People were quiet and contented until
the recalling those 4. Votes; and afterward were untsetled, and presented
clamorous Petitions. 4. That the Army did not apply themselves to the King
until he proffered Himself to them. 5. That when they made Addresses to Him,
it was but to prevent the Presbyterian Party. But it appears, their aim
(from the beginning) was to suppress the Presbyterian, and advance their
own Party, and lay by the King, and domineer over Him and the Kingdom; for
when Cromwell had brought his Design to perfection, he said at Kingston,
That he was as fit to rule the Kingdom as Hollis. 6. And then but
hypocritically. Sect. 65, 66, 68, 69, 70, 71, 72, 73, 74, 75, 88, 89, 97, 98.
All these are sufficiently confuted in my said Animadversions, and in the said
Plea for the King and Kingdom, in Putny Projects, and in my First part of the
History of Independency. After all this tedious stuff aforesaid, they make
Propositions to the Parliament of two sorts, all founded upon the said live
Antimonarchicall Principles; The first for satisfying public Justice, (that
is, for the Hang man to teach the Judges who they shall Sentence to execution)
1. They demand, the Person of the King may be brought to speedy Justice; this
affront they put upon the Parliament when they were near conclusion of their
Treaty with Him: when He had already granted more to his Subjects than ever
any King condescended to: The Kings Supremacy; and from thence his indemnity
proved.
this is through the sides of the King to give Monarchy, the fundamental
Government, and Laws of this Land, and consequently the Liberty and Property
of the People, their Deaths-vvond. By the law of God, nature, reason, and the
Laws of all Kingdoms impunity is an inseparable prerogative of Kings, as
they are Supreme in their Dominions; See the Oaths of Allegiance, Supremacy.
Stat of Recognition, 1 Iac. Cokes Institut. 5.1. Stamford's Pleas of the
Crown, l. 1 chapter 1, 2, Stat. 25. Edw. 3, 42. E. 3. Read Mr. Pryns Memento to
the unparliamentary Iunto, his Speech in the House of Commons, 4. Dec: p. 72,
73, 74. 75, 76, 77. and my 1. part, sect. 106. The Conclusions; sect. 17. and
my Animadversions, p. 18.
the Petition of Right, 3. Caroli, Declares, That they had no power to hurt
the Kings Prerogative, much less (I think) to hurt his Person; the Laws,
are the Kings Laws; Courts the Kings Courts; Judges his Judges; Great Seal,
his Seal; the Writs, the Kings Writs; the Justice and Peace of the Land are
his, consequently the Wars his VVarres; he is the fountain of all Authority
as well as of all Honor; Thou shall not speak ill of the Governor of the
People: therefore not accuse him. The King has no Superior nor equal in
England, contrary to that false distinction of the Observator, that he is,
Major singulis, minor universis. When David would have gone forth to Battle,
his Army dissvvaded it, using these reasons, If we flee they will not care
for us, neither if half of us die, will they care for us; But thou art vvorth
ten thousand of us: here you see the King is reckoned, major universis, more
than all his Army; and yet that Army was (at that time) in effect, all the
vvel-affected of the Land; and therefore (by the Anarchicall Principle
aforesaid) the only people of the Land; for further proof hereof I appeal to
all our Laws and Statutes, how will they Try him? who shall Judge him?
who are his Peers, that he may be Legally Tried like a Freeborne man (for
sure they cannot deny him that right) according to Magna Charta, per legale
iudicium parium suorum? It is a grounded Maxim in our Laws, The King can do
no vvrong; wherefore then will they Try Him, for doing no vvrong? The policy
and civility therefore of our Laws, (and of our Parliament too, in all their
Declarations, Remonstrances, so long as they continued (in any state or degree
of innocence) alvvaies accused his Evil Counselors and Ministers, and freed
Himself, lest they gave advantages to ambitious men, Absolon-like, to
scandalize and dishonor him, and render him lovv and vilde in the eyes of the
People; to the disturbance of the peace of the King and Kingdoms, and shaking
of the Royal Throne which is alvvaies accompanied with an earthquake of the
whole Land. 1. Pet. 2.13. Here the King is called Supreme, not the People; and
though said to be an ordinance of man in some respects, yet S. Paul, Rom 13.
says, He is ordained of God: 2. Governors are distinguished, the King is
Supreme, and Governors are sent by him, and his Com^ission. Besides it appears,
Genesis 3.16. and 4.7. God gave not to all men that freedom which is supposed the
foundation of supremacy, in the people* He made them not masters of their own
liberty, for even then he laid the foundations of obedience in Abel to Cain:
Eve to Adam If a people choose a King, it is the act of every particular man, of
whom the Commonalty consists; and each individual, nor the whole Commonalty
can give him more power then himself has. But no man has power over his own
life, neither arbitrarily, nor judicially; but only over his liberty, which he
may so give away, as to make himself a subject, or a slave, this makes him so
chosen a Ruler* or Protector of them, who have parted with their liberty, and
subjected to him; and then God, (who only has power of life and death) invests
the King with power to be the Minister of God, to execute vengeance, not
bearing the Sword in vain, Rom, 13. See Dr. Hammonds Letter to the L. Fairfax,
Ian. 5. 1648.
Saint Peter bids us, Submit to every ordinance of man for the Lords sake,
whether it be to the King as supreme, or unto Governors, as those that are
sent by him. As free, and not using your liberty for a cloak of
malitiousnesse, but Fear God, Honor the King: But these rebellious Saints
abusing Christian liberty for a cloak of malitiousnesse, will (according to
their 4th Antimonarchicall Principle) make the giddy, ignorant, tumultuous,
many-headed multitude Judges of their King, and make the confused Rabble his
Superiors, thereby setting up two Superiors one contradictory to the other,
and so turn the Kingly Government into a popular Military Government, abolish
our Laws, and leave all to the power of the Svvord in an Arbitrary way, to
carry on their design: to which purpose they have lately caused their
Iourney-men, the present House of Commons, to Vote, (contrary to our known
Laws) That the Supreme Authority of this Nation is in the People of England,
and therefore in themselves as their Representative. This is a 6. Anarchicall
Principle of the Army and their Party, who vvanting reason to prove it, assert
it by the Authority of their Mock-Parliament, and must now make it good by the
Svvord to justify their proceedings against the King and People. These popular
principles are mere empty notions, whereby the Grandees dravv the Supreme
Authority thorovv the People to themselves, the better to enslave them; for the
liberty of the Commons does not consist in a licentiousness to interrupt the
Government of their Superiors, and change the Government according to their
fancies; but the liberty of the People consists in enjoying the fruits of their
labors, their goods, possessions, estates, and their personal liberty,
according to the known Laws of the Land. When Harry Martyn in Berksh:
forbade the People to stand bare at the Sessions, and do homage and fealty to
their Lords; he gulled them, and gave them that which was not their due, to
rob them of that which was their due; their Horses, Goods, Money, plundered
from them, for service of the State (forsooth) and beat them that defended
their own; so that while he flattered them to be the supreme Authority and
Lords Paramount, and the Parliament to be their Servants; he used them like
Slaves conquered by the Parliament. Besides, it is not all the People, nor the
thousandth part of them, but a fevv covetous, ambitious men, that desire to
bring the King to capital punishment, and subvert our fundamental Government
and Laws, that have usurped the power of the Kingdom into the hands of
their Faction, and now require this to keep themselves from being called to
account. The second demand tends to Dis-inherit his Posterity, viz. That the
Prince and Duke of York come in by a day appointed, and acquit themselves of
their capital Delinquency, or else to be Declared incapable of Government, and
to die without mercy, if afterward found in the Kingdom; this Summons is but
to insinuate their guilt; if they refuse to appear, as reason tells us they
must and will. This is to shut the door after Monarchy, and keep it out for
ever; in farther pursuance, they demand the Revenue of the Crown to continue
still in Hucksters hands to pay public Debts, and repair the Losses of the
People, (that is) themselves: The second sort of Propositions are, for settling
of the Kingdom upon their own Grounds and Interest, That a certain period
be set to this Parliament, by which time the Supreme trust in them may return
unto the People: that is, still to themselves and their Faction, the new
erected Committee of State, the hogen mogens at White Hall. Thus you see
having removed out of the way the King, the first and most visible legal
Authority; they vvil now put down the Parliament, the second visible
Authority of England, who are now the only Bulvvarke against the Tyranny of
the Svvord, and then (as Major White said at Putney long since) there vvil be
no visible Authority left in England but the power of the Svvord, which vvil
introduce a new Parliament, or rather fantastical new invented
Representative (destructive to Parliaments) all of their own Creatures; as
appears by their next Proposition, concerning succession of Parliaments. 2.
That none shall be capable of Electing, This is so exdlained by the Moderate
(one of the raling Pen men of the faction who has a large share in the 500. or
600 l. a year allowed to these Pamphletiers, for divulging State lies and
slanders amongst the People) who from November. 14. to November. 21. 1648.) Number
19.) defines the People of England to be only such as have not engaged for
the King; and such as shall sign to the Agreement of the People, which is to
be above Law; and all the rest are to be Disfranchised.
or being Elected, that have engaged against the public Interest, (that is,
the Interest of them and their Party, as appears by their 5. Anarchicall
Principles in the beginning of this Paragraph) nor any that oppose this
Agreement: By what Authority (but the arbitrary sway of the Svvord) shall
Freemen be Disfranchised, and lose their Birthrights for not changing the
fundamentals of Parliaments, Government, and Law, and yiedling them up to the
lusts of an Army of Rebels, that brag they have Conquered the Kingdom, and
we are their Slaves? 3, That Elections may be so distributed, as to render the
House of Commons a Representtative of the whole People, (that is, tagge and
ragge and Canting Beggars, who have nothing to give or lose, as well as
Freeholders) so farevvel Writs of Summons, and all orderly, legal forms; if
all men, without any distinction, may Elect, and be Elected, all will fall
into confusion; the Rabble will never agree, all things will tend to Riots
and Tumults; so that the better and soberer sort will, and must forbear, and
leave all in the hands of the Rascallity, and at last no Representative will
be chosen, or such an one as the People will be ashamed to own, and will
desert them, and leave them to be ordered at the pleasure of the Army. 4. Prop.
That our Kings hereafter may be Elective, and disclaim a Negative Voice: how
frequent Civil VVarres are in all Elective Kingdoms during the interregnum,
or space betvveen the death of the old, and choice of the new King, how
obnoxious to the Soldiery, let the old Emperors of Rome, those later of
Germany, the Kingdom of Poland heretofore Bohemia and Hungary tell, all
Histories are full of examples; yet if our Elective Kings shall have neither
the Militia, nor a Negative Voice in Councels, and the Crown Revenues be
otherwise disposed of (as is inferred) and their Heads exposed to the humors
ol the People, or their Representative, the Office vvil be so unvvorthy of any
wise man, that I do by these presents freely give my voice to the Lord
Fairfax, and so unfit for any honest Gentleman; that I do hereby give my voice
to Cromwell the perfidious Brevver; catch who catch can, let them agree
amongst themselves, I care not which of the two shall be set up for the new
States Scar-crovv. This Remonstrance was about a Week after seconded with a
most insolent threatening Declaration, composed altogether to terror; it was
occasioned as follovveth. About the latter end of November, the Parliament was
informed the Army was upon their march to London, vvhereupon (not without
great opposition by the Armies Party in the House, and with great caution it
should be mannerly phrased for fear of angring his insolency) a Letter was
Voted to be sent the General, forbidding his nearer approach. In comtempt
where of the Army immediately printed the said Declaration, accusing the
Parliament of Breach of Trust, Lightness, Inconstancy, Indiscretion, saying,
They would appeal from them to the People (that is, still themselves; you see
they hold one and the same Rod over King and Parliament) and threatening to
advance presently to Westminster, to do what God should enable them unto: The
same night they came to Hyde Park corner, and kept Guards there: Hereupon it
was put to the Question, That the Armies approach was prejudicial to the
freedom of Parliament? but through the covvardice of some, whose hearts now
began to melt, and the impudent restless bavvling of those cheating Saints,
that comply with the Army to keep themselves from giving Accounts, it passed
in the Negative.

19. The Kings Concessions debated; and young S. Hen: Vanes insolency.
December. 2. The Kings Answer was debated; and as a prologue to it, young Sir
Henry Vane (a VVhelpe of the old Curre) spoke thus, Mr. Speaker, By this Debate
we shall know who are our Friends, and who are our Foes; or to speak more
plainly, We shall discover who are the Kings Party in the House, and who the
Peoples: To which was Ansvvered, That since this Gentleman was so bold, to
deal thus by way of prevention, in a threatening manner; and had fore-judged
and divided the House into two parts: I hope it is as lawful for me (who am no
Grandee, nor no Gainer by our troubles) to put you in mind of another Division
of the House. Sir, you will find some desirous of peace, and they are Losers by
the War; Others are against peace, and those are Gainers by the War: My
humble motion is, that the Gainers may contribute to the Losers, that we may
all stand upon equal feet; for, till then, the Balance of the Commonwealth
will never stand right toward a Setlement. True jests bite sore. He and his
Sire oppose peace: lest the Kings Revenue being restored, they should lose a
good Trade there: the old Dog is Chairman of that Committee; the young one
is a principal Publican or Treasurer; they get constantly above 6000 l. per
annum, betvveen them; besides private cheats by paying half Debts, and taking
Acquittances for the whole; and then discounting for the whole; buying in old
sleeping Pensions for trifles, that have not been paid in many years, and
paying themselves all Arreares, Cornelius Holland is Servant to them both, and
has gotten as much wealth as makes him savvcy enough to hire William Lilly,
and other Pamphletiers to derive his Pedigree from John Holland Duke of Exeter,
although it be known he was originally a Link-boy, but he is now one of the
New Lights, an illuminated Brother. Master Pryn moved the debate of the Kings
Answer might be laid aside until it was a free Parliament not environed by
the Army: but (said M. Rich: Norton) Take heed what you say against the Army,
for they are resolved to have a free Parliament to Debate the Kings Answer, if
we refuse.

This day the General took possession of White Hall for his Quarters, 20.
The General Garrisons White Hall and the Mevves upon his own head.
as if he meant to keep out the King in defiance of the Treaty: he brought to
Town with him four Foot Regiments, and six Regiments of Horse; part
whereof quartered at White Hall, the rest in Torke House, and other great
Houses; the Horse turned the Reformado Horse Guards that attended the Houses,
and lodged in the Mewes by their order, out of their Quarters, without
applying themselves to the Houses.

Upon Monday, December. 4. 21. The House informed that the King was surprised by
the Army, and carried Prisoner to Hurst Castle.
Nevvs came to the House that by several Orders from the General, His Majesty
was seized in His Bedchamber, and hurried away Prisoner to Hurst Castle, a
Block-house out of the Isle of VVight, standing about a mile and half in the
Sea, upon a Beache full of mud, and stinking oaze upon low tides; having no
fresh water within two or three miles of it, bitter cold, and of a foggy and
pestilent air, so noisome that the Guards thereof are not able to endure it
long without shifting their Quarter. This was a torment beyond Pistol and
Poison, many spoke against the insolency of this fact, as being committed
against the life of the King, and against the honor and public faith of the
Parliament, who had Voted, He should Treat in Honor, Freedom and Safety, in
Newport in the Isle of VVight; and had accepted His Royal Word not to
withdravv out of the Island during the Treaty, nor in 20. days after; (which
were not yet expired) and now to have the Houses debates and results
fore-stalled, and the Treaty made frustrate by such an act of violence and
prevention committed upon the Person of the King, was a presumptuous and
rebellious act: It was moved therefore that it might be Declared, That his
Majesty was removed out of the Isle of VVight by his Excellencies VVarrant,
without the consent or privity of the House: But those Members that Idolize
that Bell and the Dragon, the Army, and are but Priests fatting themselves upon
the Sacrifices of that Image; insisted upon it to have two words amended in
the Question, 1. The word [Declare] would be construed to be a Declaring
against the General and Army: 2. The word [Consent] to be left out, lest it
argued a disagreement in opinion and practice betvveen the Army and the House,
as if the House dissented from it. And certainly those Gentlemen that stood
upon these niceties, could not say, it was done with their consent, for it
was hatched in the Iunto; so it was barely voted, To be done without privity
of the House, nevertheless.

22. The Debate upon the Kings Answers resumed.
The same day, they resolved to resume their last Saturdaies debate upon the
Kings Answers to the Propositions of both Houses; The first Question debated
was, Whether they were satisfactory or no? The Army Party argued, They were
not satisfactory, because the King had not granted all their Propositions in
Terminis: To this was Ansvvered, That these Propositions were not sent to His
Majesty as Bills to be passed in Terminis, without debate; but as Propositions
to be personlly Treated upon, (as the Votes of both Houses, and the
Instructions of their Gommissioners prove) now it is against the nature of all
Treaties Personal, to tie up the Parties of either side so precisely, that
they shall have no liberty to vary in any circumstance or particular; so that
if all be not precisely granted, the Condescentions shall not be satisfactory,
though all just things are yielded to; as appears by all Treaties betvveen
Nation and Nation where their first demands are never fully granted, but
alvvaies qualified and limited, if not diminished; the rule being, Iniquum
petas ut justum feras; so in all Treaties betvveen Enemies, Party and Party;
see Mr. Pryn's said Speech, December. 4. 1648. where to avoid cavils, he waves
this equivocall Question, and propunds the Question anew in these terms,
Whether the Kings final Answers to the Propositions of both Houses in this
Treaty, considered all together, be not so full and satisfactory in themselves,
that this House may, and ought accept of, and proceed upon them for the speedy
setlement of a safe and vvell-grounded Peace both in Church and Cowmon-wealth,
rather than reject them as unsatis; factory, an^ so hazard the loss of all,
and the perpetuating of our Wars and miseries? This he held in the
Affirmative, with so many strong and solid Reasons, Arguments, and Presidents
both out of Di^inity, Law, History, and policy; and with so clear a
confutation of the opposite Arguments, that no man took up the Bucklers
against him to refute him: the Arguments are too many, and too long to be here
repeated. Nor do I love to abridge that which has little or nothing in it
superfluous; or to make that short-lined by epitomizing it (such is the
laziness of men to prefer Epitomies before Large works) which I desire
should be long-lined, and pass through many hands: This Debate lasted until
Tuesday morning, 5. December. eight of the clock (the Independents hoping to tire
out and frigh away the moderate men) and then it was Resolved upon the
Question (notvvithstanding the terrors and menaces of the Army) That the
Answers of the King to the Propositions of both Houses, are a ground for the
Houses to Proceed upon, for the setlement of the peace of the Kingdom; It was
carried Affirmatively by 140 Voices, against 104. that this Question should be
put, and the Question it self was carried clearly Affirmative without
deviding the House: presently after this House appointed a Committee of 6.
Members to attend the General, to confer with him and his Officers, and
keep a good correspondency betvveen the House and the Army; who had so much
surly pride, and so little manners, as to give them leave to take a nap of
three or four hours long (after their Nights watching) before admittance,
and at last dismissed them with this churlish Answer, That the way to
correspond, was to comply with the Armies Remonstrance: The House adjourned
until Wednesday follovving.

Wednesday, December. 6. 1648. 23. The Armies treasonable violence upon the
House in securing and secluding their Members.
The Saints militant being enraged that the House had recovered so much courage
and honesty as to Vote according to their Consciences, and neglect their vvild
Remonstrance and threatening Declaration, (after some private conference in the
morning betvveen Pride, Hewson, and other Officers, and the Speaker in
Westminster Hall with the doors shut) they sent to the House of Commons a
Paper, requiring that the Impeached Members and M. G. Brown, (who they
belied to have called in Hamilton) might be secured and brought to justice; and
that the 90. and odd Members who refused to Vote against the late Scottish
Engagement, and all that Voted for recalling the 4. Votes for Non-Addresses,
and Voted for a Treaty, and concurred in Yesterdaies Vote, [That the Kings
Concessions were a Ground for the House to proceed to a Setlement:] may be
immediately suspend the House, and that all such faithful Members who are
innocent of these Votes would by Pro^estation acquit themselves from any
concurrence in them, that they may be distinguished: This is to subvert the
foundation of Parliaments, and appeal to the judgment of the many-headed
multitude without doors, and put all into Tumults. You see what kind of
Parliament the Kingdom has had ever since the Army Rebelled and Refused to
Disband; a mere Free-schoole, where Cromwell is Head-school-master, Ireton
Usher, and (that cipher) Fairfax a Prepositor; surely these men are either the
supreme Judges, or the supreme Rebels and Tyrants of the Kingdom: This Paper
was delivered in, but they scorning to stay for an Answer, (by advice of
their Independent Grandees of the Iunto) upon Wednesday morning, December. 6.
1648. Sent two or three Regiments of Horse and Foot to Westminster, set
strong Guards at the Houses doors, the Lobby stairs, and at every door leading
toward the House, admitting none but Parliament men to enter
Westminster Hall, where Col. Pride, Col. Hewson, and Hardres waller
(sometimes a Cavalier, then a violent Presbyterian, and now a tyrannical
Independent) violently seized upon diverse Knights and Burgesses upon the
Parliament stairs and elsvvhere going to the House, and forcibly carried them
away Prisoners to the Queens Court without any vvarrant shevved, or cause
assigned; and there set strict Guards upon them, M. Edward Stephens and Col.
Birche being in the House of Commons were called forth by feigned Messages
sent in by some Officers under other Men's Names, and there violently pulled out
of the door, though they called to the Speaker to take notice of the force: The
House sent the Sergeant of the Mace to command the Imprisoned Members
attendance; but the Guards would not let them come. A second time the Sergeant
was sent with his Mace upon the same Errand, but Col. Pride in the Lobby
would not let him pass: which contempt was entered in the Iournall Book.
Hereupon the House concluded not to proceed in business until their Members
were restored; and sent to the General about it: yet afterward when the
Officers had several days secured, secluded, and frighted away more of the
Members; and made the House a Conventicle of their own complexion, then the
House prevaricated and deserted their Members: About three of the clock
afternoon Hugh Peter's with a Svvord by his side, (but not the svvord of Saint
Peter) came into the Queens Court to take a List of the Prisoners Names by
order from the General (as he said) where being demanded by what Authority
they were Imprisoned? he Ansvvered, By the power of the Sword: Night being
come, the Imprisoned Members (41. in number) were conveyed away to a
Victualling House called HELL, and there kept all Night without Beds, or any
fitting accommodation; when it grevv late some of them had offers made them to
go upon their Parolls to their own Lodgings, and to appear the next morning
at White Hall; but this was but a juggling trick to make them acknovvledge the
Lord Fairfax Authority, and become voluntary Prisoners upon their own
engagement; and was therefore refused. The next morning being Thursday, the
Imprisoned Members had warning given them to meet the General and his
Council of War at White Hall, vvhither they were Guarded in Coaches,
tired out with watching and fasting: But the mechanic Council took so much
state upon them, that after six or seven hours attendance until dark night,
and no admittance nor application to them; they were led away from thence on
foot with Guards of Musketeers like Thieves and Rogues, and thorovv the
kennels like Col. Prides Dray-horses, to the Swan and King's Head, two Innes in
the Strand, and there distributed under several Sentinels: The Soldiers
making a stand with them sometimes half an hour together in the snow and
rain until they had put their Guards into a marching posture; and reviling
them, See the 2. part of Englands Chains discovered; and the Hunting of the
Foxes, etc.
that they were the men that had cousened the State of their money, and kept
back their Pay: Upon which scandalous provocation, some of them Ansvvered,
That it was the Committee of the Army, and their own Officers that had
cousened them: which some of the Foot-Souldiers then acknowledged. Besides
the 41. Imprisoned Members, the Officers standing several days with Lists of
Names in their hands at the Parliament door, have turned back from the House,
and denied entrance unto above 160. other Members, besides 40. or 50. Members
who voluntarily vvithdrevv to avoid their violence, all whom they know to be
Losers by the War, and therefore desirous of a safe and vvel-grounded peace;
so that they have made war against the majority of the House, (that is)
against the whole House; for, major pars obtinet rationem totius, by all our
Laws and Customs, The major part of the House is virtually the whole House;
which is Treason by their own Declarations and Remonstrance far higher
than that whereof they accuse the King, and for which they demand Justice
against Him: and the remaining faction of 40. or 50. engaged Members who now
pass unpresidented Acts of Parliament of the House of Commons (as they call
them (without the Lords, ought not to sit, Act, nor take upon them the style
of a House under so visible, actual, and horrid a force, both by the Laws of
the Land, and their own Ordinance, passed August 20. 1647. To null and void
all Orders, Votes, and Acts passed under the Tumult of Apprentices, from July
26. to the 6. August following; and yet the said Tumult ended the said July 26.
when it begun. See the said Ordinance herevvith printed. The Army (who now
acknovvledge no power but that of the Svvord (as Major White long since
foretold at Putney) and whose principle it is, To break the Powers of the
Earth to pieces, as William Sedgewicke in his Justice upon the Army
Remonstrance, says: And who (as Ioh: Lilburne in his Plea for Common Right, p.
6. says) have by these extraordinary proceedings overturned all the visible
supreme Authority of this Nation, now suffer only their own Party of 40. or
50. Members to sit, and do journey work under them, who are Enemies to peace
and have got well by fishing in troubled waters, and hope to get better; so
that hardly a seventh or eighth part of the Counties, Cities, and Buroughs
that ought to have Members sitting, have any body to represent them, and
therefore how they shall be bound by the Votes and Acts of this fagge end,
this Rump of a Parliament with corrupt Maggots in it, I do not see. Friday,
December. 8. a Message from the General was brought to Sir Robert Harlow that
he might go home to his house, giving his engagement not to oppose the actings
and proceedings of this present Parliament and Army: The like was offered to
diverse others: you see hereby what the offense of these Imprisoned Members is,
only a fear that they will defend the fundamental Government, the Religion,
Laws, and Liberties of the Land, the Kings Person and Authority, and the being
of Parliaments; against the Tyrannical and Treasonable practices of the Army
and their House of Commons.

The small remnant of the House of Commons sent sundry times to the General to
know why he Imprisoned their Members, 24. Reasons, proving that the remaining
faction or Iunto sitting under the force of the Army, were consenting to the
securing and secluding their Members, sect. 134, 135.
and humbly to beseech him to set them at liberty if he had nothing against
them: But all this was but prevarication and false shows: for, 1. Their base
and conditional way of demanding their Liberty [if he had nothing against
them] implies an acknowledgement of the Generals jurisdiction and conusance
over them, and an invitation of him to accuse them. 2. Their sitting and acting
under so brutish a force before their Members righted, or the honor of the
House vindicated, is a deserting and yiedling up of their Members and honor.
3. Their Voting an approbation of the matter of the General Officers
scandalous and juggling Answer to their said Demands concerning the secured and
secluded Members (as afterward they did) without hearing what the said
Members could say for themselves, is clearly a forejudging and betraying them.
4. Their late Votes, That no man shall peruse their Iournall Book of Orders,
etc. without special leave: is purposely done to bar the said Members who
cannot make any perfect Answer in confutation of the Scandals cast upon them
by the General Councels printed Libell against them, without having recourse
to the said Book, to see what Votes passed for Ireland, for the 200000 l. and
other matters. To say nothing how unusual and unjust it is to keep the
Records of the House from the view and knowledge of any man, and yet to
expect their obedience to them. 5. Their exceeding strict and severe
prohibiting the printing any Books not Licenced, and employing Soldiers to
Search all Printing Houses daily, is done in order to bar the said accused
Members from publishing an Answer in their justification. 6: Their Summoning
Mr. Pryn by order to appear at the Commons Bar, knovving him to be still a
Prisoner to the Army; shows, that the Army and they serve each others turns
against them. 7. And Lastly, the Declaration of the present House of Commons,
dated Iaen. 15. 1648. is nothing but an echo of the said Answer of the
General Council, against the said secured and secluded Members. They that are
so wickedly industrious to destroy these Gentlemen's credits, do this as a
preparative to destroy their Persons, and seize upon their Estates, for the
maintenance of a new War, (which they foresee their violent courses will
bring upon them) and for the farther enriching of themselves, and establishing
their Tyranny, which they miscall, The Liberty of the People. This violent
purge wrought so strongly upon the House, and brought it to that weakness,
that ever since it is eleven or twelve of the clock before they can get forty
Members together to make a House, of which number they sometimes fail: one
time the Members would have had the Speaker go on upon businesses with a
less number than forty; but he knovving all so done to be illegal and void,
refused; and yet (to piece up the House) they permit Mr. Blagrave. Mr. Frye,
and Humphry Edwards to sit as Members, notvvithstanding their Elections are
Voted void by the Committee of Elections: and one day an Officer of the Army
having taken some Members going to the House, and secured them in the Tobacco
Room, under Guard; The Speaker not being able to muster enough to make a
House, was feign to send to the said Officer, to lend him his said Prisoners
to make up a Free Parliament: This disgrace put upon the Imprisoned Members is
purposely intended as an Invitation to all their Enemies to come in and accuse
them; nay, it can be proved that means has been used to suborne VVitnesses
against them: besides which, the faction have made a strict inquisition into
their lives and conversations, and have hitherto met with nothing.

25. The day after the House purged, in comes Dr. Cromwell and Hen: Martyn his
Apothecary.
Thus the House being thoroughly purged, the next day in comes the Doctor Oliver
Cromwell out of the Country, bringing in under his protection that sanctified
Member Henry Martyn, who had spent much time in plundering the Country, had
often baffled the House, and disobeyed many of their Orders; sufficient to have
made an honest man a Malignant liable to Sequestration: But great is the
privilege of the Saints. It fortuned that day the case of the secured Members
was reported to the House, which Harry interrupting, desired them to take
into consideration the deserts of the Lieutenant General: which with all
slavish diligence was presently done. And the Speaker moved, that to morrow
might be a day of Humaliation to be kept in the House, to humble the Spirits of
the Godly, much overleavened with the Scottish Victory. That you may the better
understand how far they mean to be humbled, Hugh Peter's the Pulpit-Buffon
was one of their Chaplains, who in stead of delivering the Oracles of God,
delivered the Oracles of the Council of War to them, talking obscurely of
Accommodation and Moderation, and advising them to adjourne till Monday or
Tuesday (I think) that the Army might cut out work for these Iourney-men of
theirs; and might work their wills upon the City in the mean time, when no
House should be sitting for the Citizens to address their Complaints to; for
in the interim they Garrisoned Black Friars, and S. Paul's, reforming it, from
the Church of God, to a Den of Thieves; Stable of Horses, and Brothell of
Whores, and Robbed diverse Halls in London of vast sums of money by the
prerogative royal of the Saints.

The 11. day of December. 1648. 26. A Declaration of the se^ured and secluded
Members, against the violence of the Army.
the said secured Members published a printed Paper, as follovveth: A solemn
Protestation of the imprisoned and secluded Members of the Commons House:
Against the horrid force and violence of the Officers and Soldiers of the
Army, on Wednesday and Thursday last, the 6. and 7. of December. 1648.
WE the Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses of the Commons House of Parliament,
(above one hundred in number) forcibly seized upon, violently kept out of the
House by the Officers and Soldiers of the Army under Thomas Lord Fairfax,
coming thither to discharge our duties on Wednesday and Thursday last, being
the 6. and 7. of this instant December; do hereby, in our Names, and in the
Names of the respective Counties, Cities, and Buroughs for which we serve,
and of all the Commons of England, solemnly protest and declare to the whole
Kingdom, That this execrable force and open violence upon our Persons, and the
whole House of Commons, by the Officers and Army under their command in
marching up against their command, and placing strong armed Guards of Horse and
Foot upon them, without and against their Order, is the highest and most
detestable force and breach of Privilege and Freedom ever offered to any
Parliament of England; and that all Acts, Ordinances, Votes and proceedings of
the said House made since the 6. of December. aforesaid, or hereafter to be made
during our restraint and forcible seclusion from the House, and the continuance
of the Armies force upon it, are no way obligatori, but void and null to all
intents and purposes: And that all Contrivers of, Actors in, and Assistants to
this unparalleled force and treasonable armed violence, are open Enemies to,
and professed Subverters of the Privileges, Rights, and Freedom of
Parliament, and Disturbers of the peace and setlement of the Kingdom; and
ought to be proceeded against as such: and that all Members of Parliament and
Commoners of England, by their solemn Covenant and duty, under pain of
deepest perjury and eternal infamy, are obliged unanimously to oppose and
endeavor to their utmost power to bring them to exemplary and condign
punishment for this transcendent offense, tending to the dissolution of the
present, and subversion of all future Parliaments, and of the fundamental
Government and Laws of this Realm.

All which we held it our duties to declare and publish to the world, for fear
our stupid silence should give any tacit consent or approbation to this most
detestable crime, and make us guilty of betraying the Privileges, Freedom,
and Honor of this Parliament, to our perpetual reproach, and the prejudice
off all succeeding Parliaments.

Dated at Westminster, December. 11. 1648.



27. The tame Lords and insolent Commons pass and print a Declaration against
the said Declaration.
The said solemn Protestation of the secured Members being complained of, was
sufficiently barked at in the House of Commons; and the Lords fell a barking at
it too for company: and at last (that they might confute it with Authority
instead of Reason) both Houses passed this follovving Declaration against it:
The Declaration of the Lords and Commons: Against the first Declaration of the
secured and secluded Members.
THe Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament, talking into their
consideration a printed Paper, entitled [A solemn Protestation of the
Imprisoned and secluded Members, etc.] wherein amongst other things, it is
Declared, That all Acts, Ordinances, Votes, and procedings of the House of
Commons, made since the 6. of this instant December. or hereafter to be made
during their restraint and forcible seclusion from the House, and the
continuance of the Armies force upon it, are no way obligatory, but void and
null to all intents and purposes: The present visible Government is the Power
of the Sword in the hands of Rebels.

The fundamental Government of this Kingdom is destroyed by the remaining
faction in the Ho. of Commons, by their Acts, For abolishing Kingly-Government,
The House of Peers, their put^ing down Trials by Jury of 12 m^n, and setting
up illegal High Courts of Justice, their usurping the Supreme Authority, their
making Treason an Arbitrary crime, their erecting a Council of State, or
Hogens mogens, forty Tyrants in lieu of one King, their altering the style of
Writs and legal proceedings, etc. Sentence given before any person accused or
heard to speak for himself. Oh, the brutish understanding of men whose sins
and fears have intoxicated their wits!


The said Lords and Commons do thereupon judge and declare, the said printed
Paper to be false, scandalous, and seditious, and tending to destroy the
visible and fundamental Government of this Kingdom: And do therefore order
and ordain the said printed Paper to be suppressed; and that all Persons
whatsoever that have had any hand in, or given consent unto the contriving,
framing, printing or publishing thereof shall be adjudged, and hereby are
adjudged incapable to bear any Office, or have any place of trust or authority
in this Kingdom, or to sit as Members of either House of Parliament. And do
further order and ordain, That every Member of either House respectively now
absent, upon his first coming to sit in that House whereof he is a Member, for
the manifestation of his innocence, shall disavow and disclaim his having had
any hand in, or given consent unto the contriving, framing, printing or
publishing of the said Paper, or the matter therein contained.




The 12. and 13. 28. The Conventicle of Commons repeat ex tempore in a thin
House under a force, the Votes deliberately passed in a full and free House.
December. the Commons (that they might purge their Iournall Books of all
State-heresies, as well as their House of all State-Hereticks) voted this
Index expurgatorius, which in their own canting language I here present to
you.

1. Resolved, etc. That the Vote of this House, Ian. 3. 1647. for revoking the
Order, Sept. 9. 1647. for suspending Commissary Lionell Copley from being a
Member of this House; is of dangerous consequence, and tending to the
destruction of the justice and peace of the Kingdom; and is hereby repealed.
The like for the rest of the impeached Members, mutatis mutandis.

2. Resolved, etc. That the Vote of the House, June 30. 1648. whereby this
House did concur with the Lords (for opening of a way to the Treaty with His
Majesty for a safe and wel-grounded peace) That the Votes; Ian. 3. 1647.
forbidding all Addresses to be made to, or from the King, be taken off; was
highly dishonorable to the proceedings of Parliament, and apparently
destructive to the good of the Kingdom, (sure they meant the kingdom of the
Saints.) They likewise by four several Votes, revived the said 4. Votes,
Ian. 3. 1647. for no Addresses, in terminis.

3. Resolved, etc. That the Vote, July 28. 1648. That a Treaty be had in the
Isle of VVight with the King in Person by a Committee appointed by both Houses,
upon the Propositions presented to him at Hampton Court; was highly
dishonorable, and apparently destructive to the good of the Kingdom. Good
Boys, they can say their Lessons well, The House adjourned.
and apace too, when the Army whips them on; they will shortly have a jubilee
of play-daies for their pains, 40. or 50. New lights snuffed by the Council
of War, can better discover what is dishonorable, and apparently
destructive to their own Kingdom, then 340. or 244. could do at other times:
If you ask what Debates they had? they could have none: being now freed from
the contradiction of Sinners: being all Birds of a feather, taught the same
tune by the same Masters, and singing in the same cage.

29. A Protest to be entered against the Votes, That the Kings Grants were a
ground for a Setlement; a Touchstone of I. Gourdons. See the Order, Dec. 5.
1648.
Yet the unanimous recalling those Votes was not thought (by those that think
one thing and say another) a sufficient Test all were confidently for them,
that voted with them; wherefore godly John Gourdon (a Fellovv that spits
venom as naturally as a Toad) moved, That a Protestation might suddenly be
drawn up, and every Member to set his hand to it, in detestation of those
repealed Votes. A Committee was appointed accordingly. The 14. December. the
said nevv-found Shiboleth was brought in by Gourdon, which caused diverse that
were not yet mad enough for Bedlam to forbear the House, or rather
Conventicle.

30. The Militia of the Counties new settled in Independent hands.
December. 14. They repealed the Ordinance lately passed (after mature debate)
for settling the County Militias of the Kingdom, because there were some
Presbyterians in it not vvelaffected to the Army; and in that new sense,
Malignants: And ordered, that a new Ordinance, with a List of new names, of
Saints militant (sounding like a Jewish pedigree) be brought in; for (through
the indiscretion of the Presbyterians) the Independents have had the custody of
our Purses a long time, and now must keep our Svvords too, and then, Stand and
deliver, will be the only Law of the Land.

About this time Major General Brown one of the Sheriffs of London was
fetched out of the City by a Party of Horse, 31. Sheriff Brown carried away
out of the City Prisoner to S. James's.
and carried before the mechanique Council of War at White Hall, although
a Member of Parliament, and consequently one of their Masters) where he told
them, he knevv they had nothing to charge him withal, but his honest
endeavors to preserve His Majesty and His Posterity, together with the
Parliament, City, and Kingdom, with the Laws and Government thereof from
being rooted up by them, and that he feared them not. Col. Hewson (the one-eyed
Cobbler) was so savvcy as to tell him, He was too peremptory at last they
committed him Prisoner to S. James's.

And that he might not want company, 32. Sir Will. Waller, etc. removed S.
James's.
they sent a VVarrant to Capt. Lawrence, Marshal General, to remove Sir Will:
Waller, Sir John Clotworthy, Major Gen: Massey, and Commissary General Copley
from the Kings head to him.

The Marshall shevving them the VVarrant, 33. They protest against the Generals
Authority.
they Protested against the Authority, and offered the Protest to the Marshall
in vvriting, desiring him to show it to the General; which he refusing to
receive, Sir Will: Waller desired all the company to witness what
Protestation they did make in behalf of themselves, and all the Freeborn
people of England, against the violent and illegal encroachments of the
General and Council of War, against the Laws and Liberties, and read it
aloud; as follovveth, A Declaration of the taking away of Sir Will: Waller,
Sir John Clotworthy, Major Gen: Massey, and Colonel Copley, Members of the
House of Commons, from the King's Head in the Strand to S. James's: Together
with their Protestation read at their removal. With a Copy of the L.
Generals Order for the same. Tuesday, December. 12. 1648.
Marshall Lavvrence came and acquainted Sir William Waller, Sir John
Clotworthy, Major Gen: Massey, and M. Lionell Copley, Members of the House of
Commons, That he had Orders from the Lord General and Council of the Army, to
remove them from the other Prisoners to S. James's: They replied to him, That
they desidered to see his Orders: the Marshall Ansvvered, Thy were only
verbal; but the Gentlemen insisting to see a VVarrant for their remove; the
Marshall went to the General, and from him about six a clock brought an
Order; a true Copy of which follows, viz:

YOu are upon sight hereof, to remove Sir Will: Waller, Sir John Clotworthy,
Major General Massey, and Colonel Copley, from the King's Head Inn (where
they are now in Custody) to Saint James's: and for so doing, this shall be
your Warrant.

Given under my hand. December. 12. 1648. To Marshall General Lavvrence. T:
Fairfax.




This Order being shevved unto the foresaid Gentlemen, S. William Waller
produced a Paper, desiring that the same might be presented to the General;
which Marshall Lawrence refused to receive: upon which, the said Sir William
Waller, and the other three Gentlemen, desired the said Marshall and all the
Gentlemen there present, to attend and witness to that Protestation which
they did there make in behalf of themselves, and all the Commons and
Freeborn Subjects of England; so with a distinct and audible voice read
their Protestation, as follovveth, WE whose Names are hereunto subscribed,
being Members of the House of Commons, and Freemen of England, do hereby
Declare and protest before God, Angels, and Men, That the General and Officers
of the Army, being raised by the Authority of Parliament, and for defense and
maintenance of the Privileges thereof; have not, or ought to have any power or
jurisdiction to apprehend, secure, deteine, imprison, or remove our Persons
from place to place by any color or authority whatsoever; nor yet to question
or try us, or any of us by Martial Law, or ortherwise, for any offense or
crime whatsoever, which can or shall be objected against us: And that the
present Imprisonment and removal of our Persons is a high violation of the
Rights and Privileges of Parliament, and of the Fundamental Laws of the
Land, and a higher usurpation and exercise of an Arbitrary and unlawful power,
then has been heretofore pretended to, or attempted by this or any King or
other power whatsoever within this Realm; notwithstanding which, We and every
of us do Declare our readiness to submit our selves to the Legal trial of a
Free Parliament, for any crime or misdemeanour that can, or shall be objected
against us.

In witness whereof, we have hereto subscribed our Names, the 12. of
December, 1648. At the King's Head in the Strand. William Waller, John
Clotworthy. Edward Massey, Lionell Copley.





About this time, Mr. Pelham, Mr. Lane, Mr. Vaughan, 34. Four secured Members
discharged.
Sir Simon Dewes (Members secured) were set at liberty without any
engagement, although at first it was demanded they should engage not to
attempt any thing against the present actings of this Parliament and Army;
which they refused.

About December. 11. 1648. 35. The Agreement of the People published and Answered.
was delivered into the world a monstrous Beggars Brat, called [The Agreement
of the People.] It is very judiciously Ansvvered by Mr. William Ashurst; all
the Contents thereof is in the Remonstrance of the Army, 20. Nov. 1648.
whereof I have spoken already.

1. It proposes, That the People (that is, some small part of the People, the
Army and their faction) without any color of Law or Right should agree
together to take away finally the present Government by King, Lords, and
Commons, which the Kings Party heretofore charged upon the Parliament as their
Design for which they fought; vvhereupon, the Parliament to vindicate
hemselves, published many Declaratione, and passed sundry Votes, That they
would not alter the Government by King, Lords, and Commons; it also takes away
the legal right from Buroughs to choose members of Parliament; this admitted,
they may as well conspire to take away any Law, or any man's Life or Estate,
by which rule we could enjoy nothing but at the will of any number of men
that shall call themselves The People. And upon the same ground that those that
shall subscribe this Agreement may call themselves the People, may those that
shall refuse to subscribe call themselves the People, and upon far better
grounds, as being far the more numerous, and standing for defense of those
ancient Laws, which do constitute the People and Commonwealth of
England, which will breed infinite confusions and divisions: and what those
that call themselves the People now agree to, they may alter upon the next
change of humor or interest.

2. The inconveniences of the present Government have not yet been plainly
discovered, nor no Trial has been made by the present known legal power
of England; whether those inconveniences may not be removed without
subverting the present Government, and introducing so total a change as will
be very dangerous and grivous to all sorts and conditions of men.

3. In the Protestation, May 5. 1641. and the Covenant, September. 27. 1643. we
are bound to defend Parliaments, and to oppose and bring to punishment all such
as shall endeavor the subversion of Parliaments, which this Agreement clearly
does.

4. This Agreement encroacheth desperately upon the liberty of the people of
England, in the Election of this Representative; depriving them that have
constantly adhered to this Parliament as well as the Kings party (if they
cannot in conscience subscribe it) from Electing, or being Elected; yet they
shall have Laws and Taxes imposed upon them by Subscribers, who are the
least, and the least considerable party of the Kingdom; and upon whom they
confer no trust; which is to disfranchise the Nonsubscribers, and reduce
them to the condition of Conquered Slaves. It is a known Maxim in Law, Quod
omnes tangit, ab omnibus tractari debet, what concerns all men must be
debated and agreed to by all men, either personally or representatively.

5. It will raise factions and feudes betvveen the Subscribers and
Non-subscribers of the Parliament party.

6. It takes away Magistracy and Government, not only by placing such a
Supreme power over them as is disputable; nay, apparently illegal: But by
making the heady multitude (the People) supreme Judges over the said
Representative: for although it inflicts the penalty of death upon the
Resisters of their Orders; yet is with this salvo, except such Representative
shall expressly violate this Agreement, which makes every man or number of men
that shall get power into their hands Judges of it; nor is there any other
Judge designed: and (if there were) who shall judge that Judge? and sic in
infinitum, the legal supreme Trust of all public interests being taken
away, our vagabond thoughts wander in a circle, not knovving where to repose
our trust, all Judges, all Councels may err, but the rascal multitude are the
very sink of errors and corruptions. If therefore the Supreme, the
Representative have so unstable an authority, what shall the subordinate
Magistrate acting under them have?

7. It smells so much of the Jesuit, that it tolerateth Popery in private
Houses; contrary to the known Laws of the Land: Popery (like the old
Serpent) if it once get in the head, will soon insinuate the whole body,
being so well backed by potent Princes and Councels from beyond Sea. And truly
I know not what to say against Popery, where Heresy, Schism, Atheism, and
Blasphemy are openly tolerated, and exempted from the power of the civil
Magistrate, as in this Agreement.

8. It will lose Ireland; the managing of the War there being legally in
this Parliament by Act passed, not in this nevvfangled Representative.

9. It divides us from Scotland.

10. It destroys the Cause for which the Parliament so often Declared, Voted,
Protested and Convenanted that they fought, viz. Defense of Parliaments,
Religion, Laws and Liberties, and bestovves the Cause upon the King, as if He
only (from the beginning) had fought for them: which all men have reason to
believe, when they shall see the Parliament make such ill use of their
Victory, as to root them all up. And this and all other Parliament Armies were
Commissioned to preserve this Parliament; by this Authority they have their Pay
and Indemnity, without which they are Thieves, Rebels, and Murderers.

11. It demands, that there be no Lawyers nor Laws, but new Rules in
English to be made from time to time by the new Representative, who are to be
chosen and trusted only by a small faction of Subscribers, (as has been said)
according to which justice shall be administered, not by Mayors, Sheriffs,
Justices of the peace, Officers alvvaies ready, but by Hundred Courts, who are
to supply the room off all the Judges and Lawyers of the Kingdom: and all
this to lie in the breasts of 12 Men in every Hundred (of the Tribe of the Godly
be sure) who peradventure can neither vvritte nor read, nor have responsible
Estates to satisfy wrongs done: these shall do justice by providence and
revelation.

12. It destroys all great and public Interests (and therefore cannot
stand) Kings, Lords, Soldiers, Magistrates, Parliaments, Lawyers, Ministers,
who will oppose it beca^se it confounds and destroies Religion, and depriveth
the Ministry of its lot, Tithes; stopping their mouths with famine,
purposely to cast them off: and generally all men of quality and discretion
will vvithstand it; because it gives no security for enjoyment of liberty and
property, nor for increase of learning, civility, and piety; who then are left
to own and subscribe it but desperate forlorn Persons, who, because they
cannot bring their actions under the protection of our present Laws and
Government, will bring the Laws and Government to their own corrupt wills
and interests, and therefore will sign this Agreement: no obedience being
given to this Representative, but upon condition (that they kept this Agreement
(and there being no other Judges of their keeping it but the Subscribers; who
in the result of all, have the Law in their own Wills.

36. This Agreement of the People was condemned by the House of Commons, 9.
Nov. 1647.
This Agreement of the People is the same which was subscribed by 9. Regiments
of Horse, and 7 of Foot, and presented, with a Petition to the House of
Commons, November. 5. 1647. by the Agitators, Gifforde the Jesuit being then in
the Lobby with them, and very active therein. Upon reading and debate hereof,
the House then declared their judgments against it by passing these Votes: Die
Martis, 9. Nov. 1647.
A Paper directed to the Supreme Authority of the Nation, the Commons in
Parliament assembled, The just and earnest Petition, of those whose Names are
subscribed, in behalf of themselves and all the Freeborn people of England:
Together with a Paper annexed, entitled, An Agreement of the People for
present and future peace. upon grounds of Common Right, avowed. How these
Papers come now to be owned, those that opposed them violently secured by the
Army, by the connivence (at least) of the dregs of the House now sitting, let
the Saints now voting in the House examine their pockets, for (I am confident)
their consciences had no hand in the business.

Resolved, etc. That the matters contained in these Papers, are destructive to
the beings of Parliaments, and to the fundamental Government of the Kingdom.

Resolved, etc. That a Letter should be sent to the General, and those Papers
enclosed; together with the Vote of this House upon them: and that he be
desired to examine the proceedings of this business in the Army, and return
an Account thereof to this House.




The General and Council of War in pursuance of this Vote, condemned one
of the Agitators who promoted it, 37. The said Agreement damned by the General
and Council of War, and a Soldier shot by sentence for promoting it.
and shot him to death at VVare (you see what it is to do a thing
unseasonably, this Design of the Army and their Party was not yet ripe)
vvherevvith they acquainted the House; yet they kept in the same fire in the
City still, where some of their Confederates, 23. of the same Novem. sent the
same Agreement, etc. enclosed in a Letter, with a Petition into the House of
Commons; vvhere-upon the House (giving thanks to the General for the execution
done at VVare, and desiring him to examine that business to the bottom)
unanimously passed these Votes: Die Martis, 23. Nov. 1647.
A Petition directed to the Supreme Authority of England, 38. The said
Agreement condemned by the House a second time, 23. November, 1647.
the Commons in Parliament assembled, and entitled, The humble Petition of
many Freeborn People of England, sent in a Letter directed to Mr. Speaker,
and opened by a Committee thereunto appointed, was read the first and second
time.

Resolved, etc. That this Petition is a seditious and contemptuous avowing and
prosecution of a former Petition and Paper annexed, styled, An Agreement of the
People, formerly adjudged by this House to be destructive to the being of
Parliaments, and fundamental Government of the Kingdom, etc.

Resolved, etc. That Tho: Prince, Cheese monger, and Sam: Chidley, be forthwith
committed Prisoners to the Prison of the Gate House, there to remain Prisoners
during the pleasure of this House, for a seditious and contemptuous avowing and
prosecution of a former Petition and Paper annexed, styled, An Agreement of the
People, formerly adjudged by this House destructive to the being of
Parliaments, and fundamental Government of the Kingdom.

Resolved, etc. That Jeremy Ives, Tho: Tailor, and Will: Larner, be forthwith
committed Prisoners to the Prison at Nevv-gate, etc. as last aforesaid, in
Terminis.

Afterward by an Ordinance, December. 17. 1647. for Electing
Common-Councel-men, and other Officers in London, they expressly ordained, That
no Person who has contrived, abetted, persuaded, or entered into that
Engagement, entitled, [The Agreement of the People,] declared to be
destructive to the being of Parliaments, and fundamental Government of the
Kingdom; be elected, chosen, or put into the Office of the Lord Major of the
City of London, Sheriff, Alderman, Deputy of a Ward, or Common-Councel-man of
the said City, or shall have any voice in the election of any such Officers,
for the space of one whole year; and be incapable of any of the said Places:
yet now these petty Fellows keep the whole City in awe.




39. Yet this Agreement since inserted into the Remonstrance of the Army, owned
by the General and Council of War; and Nov. 20. 1648. obtruded upon the
House.
These multiplied Votes and Ordinance, laid this Agreement of the People asleep
until the beginning of November, 1648. when (to hinder the peace of this
Kingdom, and relief of Ireland) the Jesuits and Agitators prosecuted it
again in the Army, and inserted it again verbatim in the Remonstrance of the
Army, November. 20. 1648. to break off the Treaty with the King, bring him to
capital punishment, and cast the odium of all upon the Parliament: And the
General and his Council of Officers (though they had formerly shot a Soldier
to death for prosecuting it) unanimously approved it at Saint Albons, November
16. 1648. and obtruded it upon the House the 20. November. and when they found
the House so resolute in the Treaty as to proceed, they first seized the Person
of the King, and carried Him to Hurst-Castle as aforesaid; and when the House
at last closed up the Treaty with this Vote, That the Kings Answers to the
Propositions of both Houses were a ground for the Houses to proceed upon
toward a setlement: 40. Why they purged the House.
They seized upon 41. Members of Parliament, secured them, and villanously
treated them; secluded above 160. and frighted away at least 40. or 50. more,
leaving only their own Somerset House Iunto of 40. or 50. thriving Members
sitting to Vnvote in a thin House under a force, what had been voted in a full
and free House; To vote down the Kingly Office and House of Peers, to vote
the Supreme Authority to be in the People, and in the House of Commons as their
Representative, clean contrary to their three last recited Votes. To bring the
King to capital punishment before a new invented, illegal, mixed Court
(consisting of engaged Persons) erected for that purpose, that has neither
foundation by prescription nor Law, and to erect a Council or Committee of
States, out of their number (in the nature of Lords, States General, or Hogen
Mogens) with an unknown and therefore unlimited Authority, to continue in
being after the dissolution of this Parliament. So farevvel Kings, Lords, and
Commons, Religion, Laws and Liberties, and all Votes, Declarations,
Remonstrances, Protestation and Covenant, made heretofore only to gull the
People, and carry on their design.

About 19. 41. Diverse Lords do homage to the General, and wave their honors.
December. diverse Lords went to do homage to the General, to express their
good affections to him, and their concurrence with him for the common good,
and their readiness to vvave their privileges and Titles if they shall be
found burdensome to the liberty of the People, and had a gracious nod for their
pains.

About this time the Lords and Commons passed an Ordinance for electing
Common-Councel-men and Officers in London for the year following, to this
effect, 42. An Ordinance to curb the City in electing Officers.
That no Person that has been imprisoned or sequestered (rightfully or
wrongfully) or has assisted the King against the Parliament in the first or
second War, or has been aiding or assisting in bringing the Scots Army to
invade this Kingdom, or did subscribe or abett the treasonable Engagement,
1647. or that did aid, assist, or abett the late Tumult within the Cities of
London and Westminster, or the Counties of Kent, Essex, Middlesex, or Surrey,
shall he elected, chosen, or put into the Office or Place of Lord Mayor of
London, Alderman, Aldermans Deputy, Common Councel-man, or into any office or
place of trust within the City, for the year ensuing, or be capable to give
his voice for choosing any Person to any the Offices aforesaid; And, that if any
Persons comprehended under the aforesaid exceptions being chosen, shall presume
to sit in the Court of Aldermen, Common Council, or execute any of the
aforesaid Offices, he shall forfeit 200. And all such Elections to be null and
void; the Lord Mayor to take order that this Ordinance be read at all
Elections, and punctually observed: and also to afford the liberty of the Pole,
it being required by any of the Electors present. But this Ordinance not giving
full satisfaction to the Zealots, Skippon stood up, Skippon moves for an
Addition to the said Ordinance.
and looking as demurely as if he meant to say Grace, he told the House, That
the late Ordinance was not sufficient to keep Malignants out of Office in
London, for Mr. Speaker (said he) It is not enough to exclude Delinquents, or
the Abettors of the late Insurrections, etc. for there are a more dangerous
sort of men amongst them: They which promoted the Treaty, and endeavored to
have the King brought to London, except these be made incapable of Authority,
it will be a great discouragement to the Godly party of the City. So an
additionall Ordinance to this end was ordered to be brougth in; you see to
endeavor peace and setlement, is accounted by these Saints militant a
sufficient crime to forfeit a man's Brith-right.

43. The Members subscribe John Gourdons Protestation, sect. 29.
I formerly told you of John Gourdons motion, That all Members might subscribe a
Protestation against the Votes for a Treaty with the King in the Isle of
VVight, and especially against the Vote, 5. December. 1648. which declares,
That His Majesty's Answers to the Propositions of both Houses were a ground for
the two Houses to proceed to a setlement: and until such dissent or
disapprovall to forbear the House: This was done in obedience to the demands
of the Army in their Remonstrance presented 20. Sect. 23.
November. 1648. And although it be so clearly against the Orders and Privileges
of Parliament, that diverse Members formerly (and some this Parliament) have
been suspended the House, and committed to the Tovver for offering it, because
it tends to breed factions and divisions in the House, and Tumults without
doors; yet every request from an Armed man is a Command and must be obeyed.

The List of the Names of these new Protestants follovveth, and (it is hoped)
they will in time give better Reasons then (the power of the Swo^d) for it,
20. December, 1648. subscribed, The Lord L^ste, Col. Boswell, Io: Gourdon, Lord
Gray, Peregrine Pelham, Col. Jones, Col. Temple, Col. Ven, Sir Tho: Malevourer,
Sir Thomas VVrot^e, Sir Io: Bourcher, Col. Peter Temple, Humphry E wards (who
vvaited on the King to the House when he demanded the 5, Members, and his
Election is adjudged void by a Committee) Mr Tho; Challoner, Sir Gregory Norton
(who gave a man 20 l. to wait on the King in his place as Pensioner when He
demanded the 5. Members) Michael Oldsworth, Augustine Garland, Sir Io. Danvers,
Mr. Dove, Mr. Henry Smith, Mr. Frye (whose Election is voted void) Mr. Searle,
Nich: Love, John Lysle, Col. Rigby, Cornelius Holland, Col. Ludlow, Greg:
Clement, Col. Purefoy, Col. Stapeley, Mr. Dunch Mr. Cawley, Col. Downs, Io:
Carey, John Blackiston, Tho: Scot. December. 22. Col. Hutchinson, Sir Hen:
Myldmay, Sir James Harrington. December, 25. Col. Edward Harvey. Alderman
Pennington: Alderman Atkins, Dan: Blagrave (voted out of the House) Col. Moore,
Col. Millington, Mr. Prideaux, Roger Hill the little Lawyer, Dennis Bond, Col.
Harrington, Master Hodges, Mr. Valentine.

Sixteen of the imprisoned Members were about this time sent for by the
General; when they came, out came Ireton, 44. Sixteen imprisoned Members
discharged without engagement.
and finding Mr. Pryn amongst them, he chid the Martial for bringing him, and
commanded him to be taken away; but Mr. Pryn refusing to depart, Ireton
commanded him to be thrust out by head and shoulders: whereupon Mr. Pryn openly
protested, That the Army endeavored uttterly to subvert the fundamental Laws
of the Land, and Privilege of Parliament. That they had no power over him, nor
any Member of Parliament. That their late force acted upon them, and their
proceedings was illegal, and traiterous. That all men were bound to bring them
to condign punishment as Rebels and Traitors to their God, their King,
Country and Parliament. So Mr. Pryn was removed by the Marshall, and Ireton
went in once more to consult the Oracle, and at last came out again to the
Gent: telling them, It was the Generals pleasure they should be all released,
attempting nothing against the actings of this present Parliament and Army, but
(said the insolent Fellow) let that be at your peril: so the Gentlemen
expressing that they would give no engagement, were released without any.

The 22. December, both Iuntoes of four Lords, 45. A mock Fast kept by the two
Houses, and H. Peter's comic Sermon.
and twenty Commons, kept a mock Fast at Saint Margarets, Westminster; where
Hugh Peter's the Pulpit-Buffon, acted a Sermon before them; the subject of his
Sermon was, Moses leading the Israelites out of Egypt: which he applied to the
Leaders of this Army, whose design is, to lead the people out of Egyptian
bondage: But how must this be done? that is not yet revealed unto me (quoth
Hugh) and then covering his eyes with his hands, and laying down his head on
the cushion, until the People falling into a laughter, awakened him: He
started up, and cried out, Now I have it by Revelation, now I shall tell you;
This Army must root up Monarchy, not only here, but in France and other
Kingdoms round about; this is to bring you out of Egypt: this Army is that
corner stone cut out of the Mountain, which must dash the powers of the earth
to pieces. But it is objected, The way we walk in is without president; what
think you of the Virgin Mary? was there ever any president before, that a
Woman should conceive a Child without the company of a Man? this is an Age to
make examples and presidents in.

46. The Council of Wat vote a Toleration of all Religions.
December. 25. The Council of War voted a Toleration of all Religions: you see
they vote like States men, as well as their Parliament.

About this time, a Committee of Common-Councel-men came complainning to the
House of Skippons additionall Ordinance, 47. The Common Council petition
against Skippons additionall Ordinance in vain.
That none should Elect, or be Elected, or execute the Place of Lord Mayor,
Alderman, Aldermans Deputy, Common-Councell-man, etc. that had signed the
Petition for a Personal Treaty, etc. because they found the City generally
engaged in the said Petition; so that they could not find Men enough to Elect,
or be Elected: Wherefore it was referred to a Committee to think of a remedy
worse than the disease, as it proved afterward. You see the petitioning for a
Personal Treaty was so universal and public that it could not be carried on
by any private design in Conventicles and corners; as are all the bloody
Petitions for justice, justice against capital Delinquents, and the most High,
which being penned and solicited by the Army, or sectary Committee Men, and
subscribed and prosecuted by some few beggarly Schismatics without Cloakes in
the Names of whole Counties, (whom they had the impudence to belie) were
entertained in state; and they, and that well-affected County (though they
abhorred the villainy) thanked for their pains.

48. Somerset shire encouraged by the House to associate all the welaffected,
i.e. all the Anarchists and Cheaters.
25. December. The House voted a Letter to be sent by way of encouragement to the
County of Somerset, to go on with settling their association with the
welaffected, and forces of the Counties adjacent; this is to associate and Arm
all the Schismatics, Committee Men, guilty and desperate Persons,
Antimonarchists, and Anarchists, against all the peaceable and honest men of
the Kingdom.

26. December. Mr. Pryn sent a Letter to the General, 49. Mr. Pryns Letter to
the General, demanding his liberty
demanding his liberty; and seconded it with a Declaration, as follows: Mr.
Pryn's Demand of his Liberty to the General, December, 26. 1648. with his Answer
thereto. And his Declaration and Protestation thereupon.
For the Honorable Lord Fairfex, General of the present Army.
THese are to acquaint your Lordship, 50. Mr. Pryns Declaration seconding his
said Letter.
That I being a Member of the Commons House of Parliament, a Freeman of
England, a great Sufferer for, and an Assertor of the Subjects Liberties
against all Regal and Prelaticall tyranny, and no way subject to your own,
your Council of Wars, or Officers military power or jurisdiction, going to
the House to discharge my duty on the 6. of this instant December, was on the
stairs next the Commons House door, forcibly kept back from entering the House,
seized on, and carried away thence, (without any pretext of Lawful Authority
thereto assigned) by Colonel Pride, and other Officers and Soldiers of the
Army under your Command. And notwithstanding the Houses demand of my
enlargement both by their Sergeant and otherwise; ever since unjustly detained
under your Marshals custody, and tossed from place to place, contrary to the
known Privileges of Parliament, the Liberty of the Subject, and fundamental
Laws of the Land, which your are engaged to maintain against all violation.
And therefore do hereby demand from your Lordship my present enlargement, and
just liberty, with your Answer hereunto.

From the King's Head in the Strand, December. 26. 1648. William Pryn.




This was delivered to the Generals own hands at his House in Queen Street,
about three of the clock, the same day it bears date; by Doctor Bastwijcke:
Who returned this Answer by him, upon the reading thereof:

THat he knew not but Mr. Pryn was already released, and that he would send to
his Officers to know what they had against him.

Who it seems act all things without his privity, and steer all the Armies
present counsels and designs according to their absolute wills.

The public Declaration and Protestation of William Pryn of Lincolnes June,
Esquire; Against his present Restraint, and the present destructive Councels
and Jesuitical proceedings of the General, Officers, and Army.
I William Pryn, a Member of the House of Commons and Freeman of England; who
have formerly suffered 8. years Imprisonment (four of them close, three in
exile) three Pillories, the loss of my Ears, Calling, Estate, for the
vindicating of the Subjects just Rights and Liberties against the arbitrary
tyranny and injustice of King and Prelates, and defense of the Protestant
Religion here established; spent most of my strength and studies in asserting
the Peoples just freedom, and the power and privileges of Parliament, against
all Opposers, and never received one farthing (by way of damages, gift, or
recompense) or the smallest benefit or preferment whatsoever, for all my
sufferings and public services; Do here solemely declare before the most just
and righteous God of Heaven and Earth (the Searcher of all hearts) the whole
Kingdom, English Nation, and the World, that having according to the best of
my skill and judgment, faithfully discharged my trust and duty in the Commons
House, upon real grounds of Religion, Conscience, Justice, Law, prudence and
right reason, for the speedy and effectual setlement of the peace and safety
of our three distracted, bleeding, dying Kingdoms, on Monday, Dec. 4. I was on
Wednesday morning following (the 6 of this instant) going to the House to
discharge my duty, on the Parliament stairs next the Commons door, forcibly
seized upon by Col. Pride, Sir Hardresse Waller, and other Officers of the Army
(who had then beset the House with strong Guards and whole Reg: of Horse and
Foot) haled violently thence into the Queens Court, notwithstanding my
Protestation of breach of privilege, both as a Member and a Freeman, by a
mere usurped tyrannical power, without any lawful Authority, or cause
assigned; and there forcibly detained Prisoner (with other Members there
restained by them) notwithstanding the Houses double demand of my present
enlargement to attend its service by the Sergeant, and that night (contrary to
faith and promise) carried Prisoner to Hell, and there shut up all night, (with
40. other Members) without any lodging or other accommodations, contrary to the
known Privileges of Parl. the fundamental Laws of the Realm, and liberty of
the Subject; which both Houses, the 3. Kingdoms, the General with all Officers
and Soldiers of the Army, are by soleme Covenant and duty obliged inviolably to
maintain. Since which I have, without any lawful power or authority, been
removed and kept Prisoner in several places, put to great expenses, debarred
the liberty of my Person, calling; and denied that hereditary freedom which
belongs to me of right, both as a Freeman, a Member, an eminent sufferer for
the public, and a Christian, by these who have not the least shadow of
authority or justice to restrain me, and never yet objected the least cause
for this my unjust restraint.

I do therefore hereby publicly protest against all these their proceedings,
as the highest usurpation of an arbitrary and tyrannical power, the greatest
breach of faith, trust, Covenant, privileges of Parliam. and most dangerous
encroachment on the Subjects liberties and Law; of the Land, ever practiced in
this Kingdom by any King or Tyrant, especially by pretended Saints, who hold
forth nothing but justice, righteousness, liberty of conscience, and public
freedom in all their Remonstrances; whiles they are triumphantly trampling
them all under their armed iron feet. And do further hereby appeal to, and
summon them, before all the Tribunals and powers in heaven and earth for
exemplary justice against them, who cry out so much for it against others less
tyrannical, oppressive, unjust, and fedifragus to God and men than themselves.
And do moreover remonstrate, that all their present exorbitant actings against
the King. Parl. present Government, and their new modled Representative, are
nothing else but the designs and projects of Jesuits, Popish Priests and
Recusants (who bear chief sway in their Councels) to destroy and subvert our
Religion, Laws, Liberties, Government, Magistracy, Ministry, the present and
all future Parl. the King. his Posterity, and our 3. Kingdoms, yea the
General, Officers, and Army themselves, and that with speedy and inevitable
certainty; to betray them all to our foreign Popish Enemies; and give a just
occasion to the Prince and Duke, now in the Papists power, to alter their
Religion, and engage them, and all foreign Princes and Estates to exert all
their power to suppress and extirpate the Protestant Religion and Professors
of it through all the world, which these unchristian, scandalous, treacherous,
rebellious, tyrannical, Jesuitical, disloyal, bloody present Counsels and
exorbitances of this Army of Saints, so much pretending to piety and justice,
have so deeply wounded, scandalized, and rendered detestable to all pious,
carnal and moral men of all conditions. All which I am, and shall always be
ready to make good before God, Angels, Men, and our whole three Kingdoms in a
free and full Parliament, upon all just occasions? and seal the truth of it
with the last drop of my dearest blood.

In witness whereof, I have hereunto subscribed my Name: at the Sign of the
King's Head in the Strand, December. 26. 1648. William Pryn.


51. The Council of War forbid all state and ceremony to the King. From Dec.
25. to 1. January, Number. 283.
27. December. The Council of War (who manage the business in relation to the
King, says the Diurnall) ordered, That all state and ceremony should be
forborne to the King, and his Attendants lessened, to mortify him by degrees,
and work Him to their desires.

52. Cromwels Sp. in the Ho: when it was first propounded to try the King.
When it was first moved in the House of Commons to proceed capitally against
the King; Cromwell stood up and told them, That if any man moved this upon
design, he should think him the greatest Traitor in the world; but since
providence and necessity had cast them upon it, he should pray God to bless
their Councels, though he were not provided on the sudaine to give them
counsel: this blessing of his proved a curse to the King.

53. The Ordinance for electing Com: Council men confirmed.
28. December. was brought into and read in the House an Ordinance, explaining the
former Ordinance for electing Common-Councel-men, which confirmed the former
Ordinance. It was referred back again to the said Committee to consider of
taking away the illegal (as they please to miscall them) Oaths of Allegiance,
Supremacy, and other Oaths usually administered to Officers, Freemen, etc. of
the City.

The 28. December. Tho: Scot brought in the Ordinance for Trial of the King, it
was read and recommitted three several times, 54. The Ordinance for Trial of
His Majesty passed the Commons.
and the Commissioners Names inserted consisting of diverse Lords, Commons,
Aldermen, Citizens, Country Gentlemen, and Soldiers, (that the more persons of
all sorts might be engaged in so damnable and treasonable a design) and
because this Ordinance, and the proceedings thereupon had no foundation in
Divinity, Law, reason, nor practice: The Commons to give it a foundation and
ground from the authority of their Votes, declared as follows.

Resolved, Diurnall from 1. Ian. to the 8. of Ian. 1648. Numb. 286.
etc. That the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament, do declare and
adjudge, That by the fundamental Laws of the Realm, it is Treason in the
King of England for the time to come to levy War against the Parliament, and
Kingdom of England. So together with this declaratory Vote the said Ordinance
was carried up to the Lords by that Renegado Lord Gray of Grooby, Ian: 2. 1648.
55. And sent up to the Lords,
The Lords met that day far more than ordinary, 16. in number, and promising
to send an Answer by Messengers of their own.

The first Question started by some Lords (who had rather have had a thinner
House) was, 56. and Debated.
Whether it should be presently debated? which passed Affirmatively, The first
Debate was upon the said Declaratory Vote: The Earl of Manchester told them,
The Parliament of England, by the fundamental Laws of England consisted of
three Estates, 1. King. 2. Lords. 3. Commons: the King is the first and chief
Estate, He calls and dissolves Parliaments, and confirms all their Acts: and
without him there can be no Parliament; therefore it is absurd to say, The King
can be a Traitor against the Parliament. The Earl of Northumberland said, The
greatest part (at least twenty to one) of the People of England were not yet
satisfied, whether the King levied war first against the Houses, or the Houses
against Him? 57. The Zealots of the H. of Com: offended with the Lords for
casting forth the Ordin: for Trial of the King.
And if the King did leavie War first against the Houses, we have no Law to
make it Treason in Him, so to do: And for us to declare Treson by an
Ordinance, when the matter of fact is not yet proved, nor any Law extant to
judge it by, is very unreasonable: so the Lords cast off the Debate, and cast
out the Ordinance: and adjourned for seven days.

Ian. 3. The Zealots of the Commons were very angry at the Lords, and threatened
to clap a Pad-lock on the Door of their House: but at last they sent up some of
their Members to examine the Lords Book, and see what they had done; who
brought word back, that their Lordships had passed 2. Votes; 1. That they do
not concur to the said Declaratory Vote. 2, That they had rejected the
Ordinance for Trial of the King.

58. Votes passed by them thereupon.
Hereupon, the Commons resolved to rid their hands of King and Lords together;
and presently they voted, That all Members of the House of Commons, and others
appointed by order of that House, or Ordinances of both Houses of Parliament,
to act in any Ordinance wherein the Lords are joined, shall be empowred and
enjoined to sit, and act, and execute in the said several Committees of
themselves, notwithstanding the House of Peers join not with them, therein.
Upon the debate, many hot-brained men insisted upon it, That the Lords who
rejected the Ordinance should be themselves Impeached for favoring the grand
Delinquent of England, (you see the King was likely to have much justice, when
his Judges must either condemn Him, or be condemned) others thought it more
prudence to touch their Privileges, and let alone their Persons.

Die Iovis, 4. Ian. 1648. The Commons passed these 3. Votes,

A question in Divinity voted in Parliament never agreed to by Divines. This we
find de facto, in the subversion of our Religion, Laws, Liberties and
Properties, though not de jure. You see that since both Houses ravished the
Supremacy from the King, and a petty Faction from the Houses: our Laws are
first shrunk into arbitrary Ordinances of both Houses; and now into Orders of
a remaining Faction of one House.
1. That the People (that is, their own faction, according to their said
Principle) are under God the original of all just power,

2. That the Commons of England in Parliament assembled, being chosen by, and
representing the People, have the Supreme power of this Nation.

3. That whatsoever is enacted or declared for Law by the House of Commons
assembled in Parliament, has the force of Law: and all the People of this
Nation are concluded thereby, although the consent or concurrence of the King
or House of Peers be not had thereunto. This chain-shot sweeps away King,
Lords, Laws, Liberties, property, and fundamental Government of this Nation at
once; and deposites all that is, or can be near or dear unto us in scrinio
pectoris, in the bosoms and consciences of 50. or 60. factious covetous
Saints, the dregs and lees of the House of Commons sitting and acting under the
power of an Army: and yet the House of Commons never had any Power of
Judicature, nor can legally administer an Oath; but this in pursuance of their
aforesaid Principle, That they may pass through any form of Government to
carry on their Design: The Diurnall tells you, there was not a Negative Voice:
this shows under what a terror they sit, when (in things so apparently
untrue) no man durst say, No: so the said Declaratory Vote and Ordinance for
Trial of His Majesty (by a Court Martial, if the Diurnall speak true, and
yet the King no Prisoner of War) was passed only in the name and by the
Authority of the Commons: Notvvithstanding, the Order of the House, That the
Clerk should not deliver a Copy of the said Ordinance to any man, I here
present the Reader with a Copy thereof: 59. The Act for Trial of the King.
An Act of Parliament of the House of Commons, for Trial of Charles Stuart King
of England.
WHereas it is notorious that Charles Stuart the now King of England, was not
content with the many encroachments which his Predecessors had made upon the
People in their Rights and Freedom, has had a wicked Design to subvert the
ancient and fundamental Laws and Liberties of this Nation, and in their place
to introduce an Arbytrary and Tyrannical Government, and that besides all
evil ways to bring His Design to pass, He has prosecuted it with fire and
sword, Quaere, Whether the Faction do not translate these Crimes from
themselves to the King, with many others.
leavied and maintained a Civil War in the Land, against the Parliament and
Kingdom; whereby this Country has been miserably wasted, the public
Treasure exhausted, Trade decayed, thousands of People murdered, and infinite
of other mischiefs committed, sor all which high offenses the said Charles
Stuart might long since have been brought to exemplary and condign punishment.

Whereas, also the Parliament well hoping that the restraint and imprisonment
of His Person, after it had pleased God to deliver Him into their hands, would
have quieted the distempers of the Kingdom, did forbear to proceed judicially
against Him, but found by sad experience that such their remissness served
only to encourage Him, and His Accomplices in the continuance of their evil
practices, and in raising new Commotions, Rebellions, and Invasions: For
prevention of the like and greater inconveniences, and to the end no chief
Officer or Magistrate may hereafter presume Traitorously and maliciously to
imagine or contrive the enslaving or destroying of the English Nation, and to
expect impunity. Be it enacted and ordained by the Commons in this present
Parliament assembled, and it is hereby enacted and ordained, that Thomas (...)
Fairfax, General. Oliver Cromwell, Lieu. General. Com. Genesis Ireton. Major Genesis
Skippon. Sir Hardresse Waller. Col. Valentine Walton Col. Thomas Harrison Col.
Edward Whalley. Col. Thomas Pride. Col. Isaac Ewer. Col. Rich: Ingolsby. Sir.
Henry Mildmay. Sir Tho: Honywood. Thomas, Lord Gray. Philip. Lord Lisle. Will:
Lord Munson. Sir John Danvers. Sir Tho: Maleverer. Sir John Bowcher. Sir James
Harrington. Sir William Brereton. Robert Wallop. Esquire Will: Henningham, Es.
Isaac Pennington, Alderman. Thomas Atkins, Ald: Col. Rowland Wilson. Sir Peter
Wentworth. Col. Henry Martyn. Col. William Pure^oy. Col. Godfrey Bosvill. John
Trencherd, Esquire; Col. Harbottle Morley Col. John Berckslead. Col. Mat.
Tomblinson. John Blackston, Esquire; Gilb: Millington, Esquire; Sir Will: Cunstable.
Col. Edward Ludlow. Col. John Lambert. Col. Io. Hutchingson. Sir Arth:
Hazlerigge. Sir Michael Lavesley. Rich: Saloway, Esquire; Humph: Saloway, Esquire; Col.
Rob: Titchburne. Col. Owen Roe. Col. Rob: Manwaring. Col. Robert Lilburne. Col.
Adrian Scroope. Col. Richard Deane. Col. John Okey. Col. Robert Overton. Col.
John Harrison. Col. Ioh: Desborough. Col. William Goffe. Col. Rob: Dukenfield.
Cornelius Holland, Es. John Carne, Esquire; Sir Will: Armine. John Jones, Esquire;
Miles Corbet, Esquire; Francis Allen, Esquire; Thomas Lister, Esquire; Ben: Weston, Esquire;
John Gourdon, Esquire; Serj. Francis Thorp. John Nut, Esquire; Tho: Challoner, Esquire;
Col. Algern: Sidney. John Anlaby, Esquire; Col. John Moore. Richard Darley, Esquire;
William Say, Esquire; John Aldred, Esquire; John Fagge; Esquire; James Nelthrop. Eq. Sir
Will: Roberts. Col. Francis Lassels. Col. Alex: Rixby. Henry Smith Esquire; Edmond
Wild, Esquire; James Chaloner, Esquire; Josias Barnes, Esquire; Dennis Bond, Esquire; Hump:
Edwards, Esquire; Greg. Clement, Esquire; John Fray, Esquire; Tho: VVogan, Esquire; Sir Greg:
Norton. Serj. John Bradsaw. Col. Edm: Harvey. John Dove, Esquire; Col. John Venn.
John Foulks, Alder: Thomas Scot, Alder: Tho. Andrews, Ald: William Cawley,
Esquire; Abraham Burrell, Esquire; Col. Anthony Stapley. Roger Gratwicke, Esquire; John
Downs, Esquire; Col. Thomas Horton. Col. Tho. Hammond. Col. George Fenwicke. Serj.
Robert Nichols. Robert Reynolds, Esquire; John Lisle, Esquire; Nicholas Love, Esquire;
Vincent Potter. Sir Gilbert Pickering. John Weaver, Esquire; John Lenthall, Esquire;
Sir Edward Baynton. John Corbet, Esquire; Thomas Blunt, Esquire; Thomas Boon, Esquire;
Augustine Garland, Es. Augustine Skinner, Es. John Dickswell, Esquire; Col. George
Fleetwood Simon Maine, Esquire; Col. James Temple. Col. Peter Temple. Daniel
Blagrave, Esquire; Sir Peter Temple. Col. Thomas Wait. John Brown, Esquire; John
Lowrey, Esquire; Mr. Bradshaw, nominated President. Counselors assistant to this
Court, and to draw up the Charge against the KING, are, Doctor Dorislow. Master
Steel. Master Ask. Master Cook. Sergeant Dandy, Sergeant at Arms. Mr.
Philips, Clerk to the Court. Messengers and dore-keepers, are. Master VValford.
Master Radley. Master Pain. Master Powel. Master Hull. And Mr. King, Crier.
shall be, and are hereby appointed Commissioners and Judges for the hearing,
Trying, and Judging of the said Charles Stuart; and the said Commissioners, or
any 20. or more of them shall be, and are hereby Authorized and Constituted an
High Court of Justice, to meet at such convenient times and place as by the
said Commissioners, or the major part, or 20. or more of them under their hand
and seals shall be appointed and notified by public Proclamation in the great
Hall, or Palace-yard of Westminster; and to adjourne from time to time, and
from place to place, as the said High Court or the major part thereof meeting
shall hold fit, and to take order for the charging of Him the said Charles
Stuart with the Crimes above mentioned, and for the receiving His Personal
Answer thereunto, These wise men of Gotham could not tell whether VVitnesses
upon oath were necessary upon Trials of life and death. But (I confess) that
upon the defensive part, upon Indictments; VVitnesses upon oath were not to be
heard against the King, much more Accusers of the King.
and for examination of VVitnesses upon oath (if need be) coneerning the same;
and thereupon or in default of such Answer to proceed to final Sentence
according to justice and the merit of the Cause, to be executed speedily and
impartially. And the said Court is hereby Authorized and required to choose and
appoint all such Officers, Attendants, and other circumstances as they, or the
major part of them shall in any sort judge necessary or useful for the orderly
and good managing of the premises: and Thomas Lord Fairfax The General is no
Officer of justice. All welaffected Persons tag and rag invited to assist in a
Tumultuary way to destroy the King if need had been, that is, all
Antimonarchists.
the General, with all Officers of justice, and other well-affected Persons are
hereby authorized and required to be aiding and assisting unto the said
Commissioners in the due execution of the trust hereby committed unto them,
provided that this Ordinance, and the Authority hereby granted do continue for
the space of one Month from the Date of the making hereof, and no longer.




60. A new Great Seal to be made.
But at last they stumbled at a rub not foreseen; they could not use the old
Great Seal against Him, because it was the Kings Great Seal (no more could
they use any of our Laws, Courts, or Judges against Him, because they are all
the Kings) the Sculpture upon it is, Carolus Dei Gratia, neither would the
Grace of God square with their proceedings: they must therefore make a new
Great Seal; but that was long a making, and their fingers were in the fire:
they therefore proceeded without any Commission under Seal, only upon the
said Ordinance, and every Commissioner set his own hand and seal to the
public instruments of their proceedings: what need ceremonies when men are
resolved upon the substance?

61. The Jews petition the Council of War to have the Stat: of their
banishment repealed.
About this time the Hebrew Jews presented a Petition to the uncircumcised
Jews of the Council of War, That the Statute of Banishment against them
may be repealed, and they readmitted to a Synagogue and Trade amongst us; They
offer for their readmission, S. Paul's Church, and the Library at Oxford,
500000 l. but 700000 l. is demanded: Hugh Peter's and Harry Martyn solicit the
business. Upon this occasion was published this Paper ensuing.

62. A Paper published upon occasion of the Jews Petition.
The last damnable Design of Cromwell and Ireton, and their junto or Caball;
intended to be carried on in their General Council of the Army, and by
journey-men in the House of Commons, when they have engaged them desperately
in sin, past all hope of retreat by murdering the King.
MAjor White, a Member of the Army, long since at Putney fortetold, That
shortly there would be no other power in England but the power of tee
Svvord: and VVil: Sedgvvick in his Book called [justice upon the Armies
Remonstrance] says, The Principle of this Army is, To break the Powers of the
Earth to pieces: and John Lilburne in his [Plea for Common Right] page 6.
says, The Army by these extraordinary proceedings, have overturned all the
visible Supreme Authority of this Nation: that is, they have, and will, by
seizing upon the Members of Par: dissolving it, and setting up a new invented
Representative, and bring the King to capital punishment, and dis-inheriting
His Posterity, subvert the Monachicall Government, and Parliaments of this
Kingdom; the Laws and Liberties of the People, and so by bringing all to
Anarchy and confusion, put the whole Government of the Land under the
Arbitrary power of the Svvord.

In order to which, they have, and will overturne the Government of the City
of London by a Lord Mayor and Aldermen, and Governerne it by Commissioners, and
a schismatic Common Council of Anabaptists, illegally chosen; and deprive
them of their Charter of Incorporation and Franchises; and this shall be a
leading case to all the Corporations of England.

Their next design is, to Plunder, and Dis-arme the City of London, and all
the Country round about; thereby to disable them to rise when the Army
removes, but not to the use of the Soldiers, (although they greedi^y expect
the first Week in February the time appointed) from whom they will reedeeme
the Plunder at an easy rate; and so sell it in bulk to the Jews, whom they
have lately admitted to set up their banks, and magazins of Trade amongst us,
contrary to an Act of Parliament for their banishment; and these shall be their
Merchants to buy off for ready money, (to maintain such VVarres as their
violent proceedings will inevitably bring upon them) not only all Sequestered
and Plundered goods, but also the very Bodies of Men, Women, and Children,
whole Families taken Prisoners for sale, of whom these Jewish Merchants shall
keep a constant traffic with the Turks, Moors, and other Mahometans; the
Barbadus, and other English Plantations being already cloyed with Welsh,
Scottish, Colchester, and other Prisoners imposed by way of sale upon the
Adventurers: and this is the meaning of Hugh Peter's threat to the London
Ministers, That if another War followed, they will spare neither Man,
Woman, nor Child: For the better carrying on of which Design, the said
Caball, or Iunto, keep a strict correspondency with Own Roe Oneale, the
bloody Popish Antimonarchicall Rebel in Ireland, and the Popes Nuntio there.
The Antimonarchicall Marquess of Argyle in Scotland; the Parisian, Norman, and
Picarde Rebels in France; and the Rebel King of Portugal. If danger be not
held so close to your eyes that you cannot discern it, look about you
English. But this Kingdom is not to be saved by Men that will save themselves;
Nothing but a Private hand, and a Public spirit can redeem it.


63. Master Pryns second Letter to the General.
The 3. Ian. 1648. Master Pryn sent a Letter to the General, demanding what
kind of Prisoner, and whose he was? as follovveth: *To the Honorable, Thomas
Lord Fairfax, General of the present Army, these present.
My Lord,
IT is now a full Months space since I (with other Members of the Commons
House) have been forcibly apprehended and kept Prisoner by some of your
Officers and Marshall, against the Privileges of Parliament, the Liberty of
the Subject, the Laws and Statutes of the Realm, and all rules of justice,
conscience, and right reason; without the least shadovv of Authority, or any
cause at all yet made known to me, of which (were there any) neither God
nor man, ever yet made your Lordship or your Officers, Judges. I therefore
desire to know from your Lordship, what kind of Prisoner I am? and whose? If
a Prisoner of peace, neither your Lordship, nor your Officers, are any Justices
of peace, or Civil Magistrates in this place, to restrain me for any civil
crime, were I guilty of it, much less without proof or hearing, in case I
were no Member: but being neither guilty nor accused of any such crime, and a
Member too, no Magistrate can, nor ought to imprison me upon any pretext, at
least without the Houses license first obtained. If a Prisonner of War,
which I cannot probably be, being never in Arms, and apprehended near the
Commons House door, going peaceably and unarmed thither to discharge my duty;
then you, and your Officers thereby acknovvledge, That you have levied War
against the Parliament, and its Members: and what capital offense this is,
and what a punishment it deserves, I need not inform your Lordship, or your
Council, who have for this very crime, condemned and shot some to death, as
Traitors: and demanded speedy justice and execution for it upon the King
himself.

I have but one thing more to trouble your Lordship with, and that is, to
demand whose Prisoner I am? having yet seen no VVarrant nor Order from your
self, or your Officers, for my restraint, though I have often demanded it of
your Marshall: If your Lordships Prisoner, there appearing yet no legal
Authority, cause, or VVarrant, for my restraint; I must then crave so much
justice from your Lordship (being but a Subject, and not yet paramount all
Laws) to order your Attorney to give an Appearance for you in the Kings
bench, the first return of the next Term, to an action of false
Imprisonment, for this my unjust restraint; which I intend (by Gods
assistance) effectually to prosecute. If your Officers Prisoner only and not
yours, which I conceive, who yet abuse your name and authority herein, though
it be a rule in Law and Divinity too, Qui non prohibet malum quod potest;
jubet; yet I shall be so just as to set the saddle upon the right horse, and
commence my action only against such of your Officers, who have been most
active in my Imprisonment, for damage and reparations; which if there be any
justice remaining under Heaven, I doubt not but I shall recover in Gods due
time, in this public cause which so highly concerns the honor, fredome,
and Privileges of Parliament, and Subjects Liberties; for defense and
maintenance whereof, as I have hitherto spent my strength, adventured my life,
body, liberty, and estate; so shall I now again engage them all, and all the
friends and interests I have in heaven and earth, rather then they shall suffer
the least diminution, prejudice or eclipse by my stupid patience under this
unjust captivity; though I can as willingly forgive and put up private
injuries, when the public is not concerned, as any man. All which, I
thought meet to inform your Lordship of, whom I am heartily sorry to see so
much dishonored, abused, and misled by rash ill-advised Officers, and
dangerous, destructive (and I dare say jesuiticall) councels, to the
Parliaments dissipation, the Kingdoms prejudice, Irelands loss; most good
men's and Ministers grief, your best Friends astonishment, your Enemies and the
Papists triumph, our Religions scandal, and your own dishonor: which I
beseech you as an Englishman, a Christian, a Professor of piety and Religion,
a Soldier, a General, to lay sadly to your heart, as the earnest request of

From my Prison at the Sign of the King's Head in the Strand, 3 Ianu: 1648. Your
Lordships faithful Friend and Monitor, William Pryn.


*An additionall Postscript.
WE read, Luke 3.14. that when the Soldiers demanded of John Baptist, saying,
and what shall we do? he said unto them, Do violence to no man, (or put no
man in fears) neither accuse any falsely, and be content with your allowance:
not imprison, depose, or murder Kings, pull down Parliaments, imprison,
violently shut out and drive away Parliament Men, and then lay all false
accusations and scandals upon them to color your violence, subvert Kingdoms,
alter States, break all bonds of Laws, Oaths, Covenants, Obligations,
Engagements to God and Men; usurp all civil, military and Ecclesiastical
power, and the Kings Royal Palaces into your own hands, as supreme Lords
and Kings; raise what new forces, and leavie what new Taxes you please,
take up what Free-quarters and Houses, seize and plunder what public
Treasuries and moneys you please, without Commission or Authority, obey niether
God nor Man, neither Parliament nor Magistrate, and be content with nothing,
but alter and subvert all things. These are Saint Peter's new Doctrines and
Revelations, to our Officers and Soldiers now, and those Jesuits who lurk
amongst them, not John the Baptist, whose Canonical advice is now rejected as
Apocryphal, even among the Army Saints, who prefer every ignis fatuus,
though from Doway or Rome it self, before this burning and shining old light,
and are guided only by a new minted law of pretended providence or necessity
of their own forging, and not by the revealed will and law of God, the sacred
light whereof their present works of darkness dare not approach, lest they
should be reproved and condemned by them. But some 43. Actions of false
imprisonment by the imprisoned, and 150. Actions of the Case by the secluded
Members, brought against these domineering lawless Officers and Grandees of
the Army, wherein good Damages will be recovered, and some 12. Indictm: of High
Treason against them for laying violent hands upon the Kings Person, and the
Members, and leavying War against the Parliament, will teach them more
obedience, humility, and modesty than either John Baptist, Saint Paul, Saint
Peter, or Saint Peter's will do; and be like Gideon thorns and briars of
discipline to these men of Succoth, with whom no fair means will prevail;
who might have learned so much law and justice from an Heathen Soldier and
Governor Festus, Acts 25.27. It seems unto me unreasonable to send (much
more to commit) a Prisoner, and not withal to signify the crimes laid against
him; and come short of that ingenuity of the heathenish chief Captain who
seized upon Paul, thereby to appease the Tumult at Jerusalem, Acts 22.27, 29.
who as soon as ever Paul told him, he was a Roman, and Freeborn; then
straight way they departed from him who should have examined him; and the
chief Captain also was afraid, after he knew that he was a Roman, and
because he had bound him. And should not false imprisoning of a Parliament Man
and Freeborn Englishman be as formidable to our chief Captains (being a
Christian, I say, sworn and vowed to defend the Houses Privileges, and
Members Persons) as the Imprisonment of a Roman was to this chief Captain,
and they as ingenious and just as he, who shall rise up in judgment against
them, and condemn them at the last.

I shall close up all with this observation, That as the most glorious Angels
in Heaven, when they fell (through pride and ambition, as most conceive) became
the very foulest Devils in Hell; so the most resplendent seeming hypocritical
Saints when they fall through the like sins, and have power in their hands,
become the most incarnate Devils, and Monsters of treachery and tyranny upon
earth, exceeding Turks and Pagans therein, of which we have now sad experience
in our Army-Saints, who every day aggravate, and yet justify their impieties
and exorbitances, 2 Chronicles. 28.11. Now hear me therefore, and deliver the
Captives again, which ye have taken Captives of your Brethren; for the fierce
wrath of God is upon you.

Will: Pryn.




64. Another forged Letter endeavored to be fastened upon Sheriff Brown.
The Saints having nothing to say against Major Gen: Brown, (unless they
should accuse him for being true to King, Parliament, City, and Kingdom, and
to all the first declared Principles of this Parliament) fell to their old
trick to fasten another counterfeit Letter upon him: wherefore a Man coming to
S. James's (where he was then imprisoned) desired in the hearing of all
present, to speak with him in private: Major G. Brown told him He was not for
private conference, and bade him speak openly; then the Fellow presented a
Letter to him, saying, It was from the Prince: but Maj: G. Brown (remembering
the like trick put upon him before) called for the Guard to apprehend him, when
presently the Messenger threw te Letters into the fire, and the Marshall
catching them out halve burnt, affirms, He saw Charles Prince, written upon
them. Sanctified eyes may see through the spectacles of their own fantasy
what they please, to accomplish their Design, and therefore they have a new
principle or light (which as the 7. May, be added to the aforesaid 6.) that
though they have no proofs nor evidence against a man, yet if in their
consciences, they think him guilty, they may condemn him upon the testimony of
their own consciences; this is to condemn by Revelation such whose blood they
desire to suck. This supposed Messenger from the Prince was seized by the
Guard, but no proceedings against him heard of; which argues it was but a snare
set to catch the Major.

About this time (to second this device) a Man gallantly clothed, and mounted,
comes to the Bear in the Strand, 65. Another more general forgery to endanger
whom the Faction please. It will be proved that diverse VVitnesses have bee^
practiced and tampered with against, Mr. Brown and others.
gives the Hostler a Piece, and bids him have a care of his Horse; then goes
into the City, and (the plot being forelayd) was taken there with Letters
subscribed with the Princes name to diverse Citizens, and Members, against whom
they want matter of accusation. I hear no more of this matter yet, this is a
device dormant, to be awakened hereafter, if any shall oppose the present
actings of the Army and their Parliament.

Cromwell, Ireton, and Hugh Peter's have several times made it their errand to
go into the City and visit the Ministers, 66. London Ministers threatened. See
the Ministers of Londons Letter to the General, called, [A serious
Representation.] dated, Ian. 18. 1648.
giving them threatening admonitions, not to Preach any thing against the
Actings of the Army and their Parliament: But Hugh acted his part above them
all, he took some Musketeers with him to the house of Master Calamy, and
knocking at the door, a Maid asked whom he would speak with? he told her, with
her Master; she asked his name? he replied, Mr. Hugh Peter's: the Maid going up
the stairs to acquaint her Master (who was above-staires in Conference with
somes Divines) overheard Peter's say to the Soldiers, The very name of Peter's
will fright them all: Peter's being called up the stairs, told Mr. Calamy, He
was commanded by the General to warn him to come before him: Mr. Calamy
(leaving Peter's vapouring and canting Religion and nonsense to the rest of the
Divines) slipped down stairs and went to the General to know his pleasure,
telling him, He had been summoned before him by Hugh Peter's: the General said,
Peter's was a Knave, and had no such directions from him.

Since this, the Council of War (finding it difficult to stop the Ministers
mouths) have sundry times debated, 67. The C. of War consider how to shut up
the Churches doors.
How to shut up the Churches doors in the City, for Reformation of the Church,
and propagation of the Gospel: they have imprisoned Mr. Canton (a worthy
Minister) for praying for King CHARLES, and threaten to try him for his life
in the Upper Bench (forsooth) which all the Laws call, the King's Bench: and
upon their new Acts of Parliament, made by a ninth part of the Members, the
small remnant or Junto of the House of Commons; notwithstanding, by The
Directory for Public Worship, (established by both Houses) the Ministers are
enjoined to pray for the King. It is said that Monsieur Paux (one of the Dutch
Agents here) has advised Cromwell, to stop the Ministers mouths by hanging up
a dozen of them; and vouches a president for it in the Low Countries.

68. The Lords sent some Votes to the Commons for their co^currence.
Ian. 9. The Lords sat again and passed some Ordinances, which they sent
down to the Commons for their concurrence, to feel their pulse whether they
would vouchsafe to take so much notice of them, the Commons laid them aside
after some expressions of disdain.

69. Sergeant Dandy proclaims the sitting of the new H: Court of Justice.
This day Sergeant Dandy, Sergeant at Arms to the Comissioners for Trial of
His Majesty, rode into Westminster Hall with the Mace belonging to the House of
Commons upon his shoulder, and some Officers attending him, all bare, and 6.
Trumpetors on horsback before him, Guards of Horse and Foot attending in both
the Palace-yards, the 6. Trumpetors sounded on horseback in the middle of the
Hall, and the Drums beat in the Palace-yards, after which a Proclamation was
read aloud by Mr. King, one of the Messengers of the said High Court of
Justice, to this purpose; To give notice, that the Commissioners were to sit to
morrow, and that all those that had any thing to say against CHARLES STVART
King of England might be heard. The like was done in Cheapside, and at the Old
Exchange.

70. The Gr: Seal voted to be broken.
This day the remainder of the House voted their Great Seal to be broken, in
order to the making of a new one, justly putting the same affront upon their
own Seal, which they had formerly put upon the Kings. 71. Mr. Pryns Memento
to the unparliamentary Iunto.
Upon these occasions Mr. Pryn (it is said) published his Memento to the
unparliamentary Junto, therein telling the House, That being forcibly secluded
from the House by the Officers of the Armies violence, whereby he could not
speak his mind to them freely in, or as the House of Commons, yet he would
write his thoughts to them as private Persons only under a force, consulting
in the House without their fellow Members advice or concurrence, about speedy
Deposing and Executing CHARLES their lawful Sovereign, to please the
General, Officers, and Counsel of the Army, (who have usurped to themselves
the Supreme Authority both of King and Parliament) or rather the Jesuits and
Popish Priests among them.

1. By the Common Law the Stat. 25. Edw. 3. Cok. 5. Iusti. 4. 1. Stamf. Pleas
of the Crown, l. 1. c, 1, 2.
and all other Acts concerning Treason, It is High Treason for any man by overt
act to compass the death of the King, or his eldest Son, though never
executed: and so adjudged by Parliament in the Earl of Arundels Case, 21 Ric.
2. Plac. Coronae, n. 4, 6, 7.

2. In the Oath of Allegiance (which every man takes before he sits in
Parliament) you acknowledge Him to be lawful and rightful King of this
Realm; and that the Pope neither of himself, nor by any authority of the Sea
of Rome, or by any other means, with any other, has any Power or Authority to
depose the King, etc.

3. Your selves amongst other Members, Exact Collect p. 16. 19. 21. 59. 66. 83.
102. 103. 118. 123. 125. 141. 142. 143. 173. 180. 195. 219. 259. 281. 307. 380.
312. 360. 376. 457. A Collect. etc. p. 13. 18. 41. 43. 44. 49. 51. 61. 64. 96.
181. 182. 310. 321. 424. 425. 499. 599 623 696. 806. 807. 879. Appendix p. 15.
in above one hundred Remonstrances, Declarations, Petitions, Ordinances, etc.
in the name of the Parliament have professed, you never intended the least
hurt, injury, or violence to the Kings Person, Crown, Dignity, or Posterity;
but intended to Him and His Posterity more Honor, Happiness, Glory, and
Greatness than ever any of His Predecessors enjoyed. That you would make good
to the uttermost with jour lives and fortunes the Faith and Allegiance you have
always borne to him. That all Contributions, Loanes, should be employed only
to maintain the Protestant Religion, the Kings Authority, Person, Royal
Dignity, Laws of the Land, Peace of the Kingdom, and Privileges of
Parliament. That the Forces raised by the Parliament were for defense of the
Kings Person, and of both Houses. That the Parliament will ever have a care to
prevent any danger to His Person. That they are resolved to expose their lives
and fortunes for maintenance of the Kings Person, Honor, and Estate, and the
Power and Privileges of Parliament, when the King taxed the Houses for
insinuating. Exact. Collect. page 298. 695. 696. 657. 658. 991.
That if they should make the highest presidents of other Parliaments their
patterns (that is, Depose the King) there could be no cause to complain of
them: Both Houses by two Declarations protested against it, saying, That such
thoughts never entered, nor should enter into their Loyal hearts.

4. By the Protestation, Collect. of all Orders, p. 8. 13. 41. 43. 44. 49. 51.
61 64. ^6 9^. 623. 69^. 879. Appendix page 15.
they Declare in the presence of God to defend the Kings Person and Estate, and
that their Armies under Essex and Fairfax were raised for that purpose inter
alia.

5. By the National Covenant, they vowed to defend the Kings Person and
Authority in preservation of true Religion and Liberties of the Kingdom, and
that they will all the days of their lives continue in this Covenant against
all opposition.

6. You monopolize the Supreme power into your own hands, robbing both King,
Lords, and the rest of your fellow Members thereof, whom you are content should
be violently shut out by your Army, who have leavied War against the
Parliament to dissolve it; till the removal of which force, and restoring your
Members with freedom and safety, you ought not to sit or Act by your Armies
own doctrine in their Remonstrance, Aug. 18. and by the Declaration and
Ordinance of both Houses, Aug. 20. 1647. Also, 15. E. 3. n 5. 17. E. 3. n. 2.
6. 18. E. 3. n. 1. 2. 5. etc. ^ R. 2. n. 1. 2. R. 2. n 1 3. R. 2. n. 1. 4 R. 2.
n. 1. 5. R. 2. Parl: 1. n. 1. Parl. 2. n. 1. 8 H. 4. n. 28.
Sec. 21. R. 2. c. 12. 1. H. 4. c. 3. 31. H. 6. c. 1. 39 H. 6. c. 1. See the
memorable Record, 6. E. 3. Parl. apud Ebor. n. 1, 2. dorso clauso. 6 E. 3. m.
4. 6 E. 3. apud Westm' Parl. 2. n. 1, 13. E. 3. Parl. 2. n. 4. and many more
Rolls, where Parliaments when any considerable number of Members of either
House were absent, refused to sit (though under no force) till the Houses were
full.

7. You have neither Law nor president for what you do, Edw. 2. Rich. 2. were
forced by Mortimer and H. 4. to resign their Crowns in a formal way, one to
his Son, the other to his conquering Successor, neither of them to the
Parliament, and at last Deposed by a subsequent Sentence of Parliament, as
unfit to Reign, without any formal Trial.

72. The Armies party in the H: approve the matter of the Co: of Officers
accusatory Ans. against the secured Memb: without hearing them See Mr. Io:
Grere^s Ans: to that silly Sophister Io: Goodwin, called Might overcomming
right.
Ian. 11. 1648. The House read the Answer of the General Counsel of the Army,
concerning the secured and secluded Members, and (as I have formerly said)
without hearing what the said Members could say for themselves, approved the
matter of it: whereupon the secured and secluded Members, 20. Ian. 1648. (with
much ado) got printed their Vindication, against the Aspersions cast upon them
in The humble Answer of the General Counsel of the Officers of the Army,
concerning the securing and secluding of the said Members: The sum whereof is
as follows:

By the Preamble of this Answer, and by the Proposals of the 6. December. and the
late Declaration and Remonstrance therein cited, 73. The sec. and secl: Mem.
Defense aginst the scandalous An: of the C: of VV:
it appears this design to break the House by force has been long since
plotted and contrived with action. The General Council of the Army in their
said Answer, say, Is a course in it self irregular and not justifiable, but by
honest intentions and extraordinary necessity: the weakness of which Answer we
must examine, but first must state the case between us: They are an Army raised
by Ordinance of Parliament, of 15. Febr. 1644. for defense of King and
Parliament, the true Protestant Religion, the Laws and Liberties of the
Kingdom, and to be from time to time subject to such Orders and directions as
they shall receive from both Houses of Parliament: and to this end they stand
Commissioned by them, and receive pay from them to this day. And besides this
trust thus lying upon them, they are under the obligation of a solemn
Covenant, sworn to God, That they will in their place and callings, with
sincerity, reality, and constancy with their estates and lives, preserve the
Rights and Privileges of the Parliament, and the Liberties of the Kingdom,
and defend the Kings Person and Authority in defense of the true Religion, and
Liberties of the Kingdom; they being under the said trusts and Oath, march up
to Westminster (contrary to order) in a hostile way, forcibly secured,
secluded, and drove away many of the Members: the Question is, Whether this
Action be Justifiable upon pretense of Honest intentions and Necessity?

Their good intentions cannot be known but by their expressions and actions;
and they refer us to their Proposals, Declarations, and Remonstrances, where
we find their desires are: 1. To take away the Kings life. 2. To take away the
lives of the Prince, and the Duke of York; at least to dis-inherit both them
and all the Kings Children. 3. To put a period to this Parliament. 4. To set up
a new Representative of their own, which takes away all Parliaments. 5. To
have an Elective King, if any.
These are their Honest intentio^s for public good, which must come in to
justice their waging war against their Masters this Parliament: To name them,
is to confute them, as being apparently against the Laws of God and the Land,
under which they live, and which they are engaged to maintain; we shall
produce no other Witnesses to prove this but themselves. On the 15. of November.
1647. The Agreement of the People, (which is lower in demands than these which
they call, Honest intentions for public good) was condemned by the Army. The
promoting it in the Army judged mutinous and capital; Col: Rainsborough and
Major Scot complained of in the House for appearing in it, and the Paper it
self adjudged by the House, destructive to Government and the being of
Parliaments.

The second pretense or Principle is, Extraordinary Necessity for the same end.

To this we say, 1. The Army made the same plea of necessity in their
Remonstrance, June 23. 1647. upon quite contrary grounds to what they express
now, and both to justify the same violent proceedings against the Parliament,
then, when the King was seized upon by a Party of the Army (without Order from
the House) and the Army advanced against the Parliament. They say in their
Letter to the House, July 8. 1647. There have been several Officers of the Army
upon several occasions sent to his Majesty; the first, to present to Him a
Copy of the Representations; and after that same others, to tender Him a Copy
of the Remonstrance: upon both which, the Officers sent, were appointed to
clear the Sense and intentions of any thing in either, Turn back to sect. 2
and see my Aniadvers: upon the Army, 20. Nov, 1648. p. 4, 5, 6, 7.
Paper, whereupon His Majesty might make any Question. There the Army Treated
with the King, yet now they offer violence to the Parliament for Treating with
the King. Then in their Remonstrance, 25. June, 1647. they say, We clearly
profess, we do not see how there can be any peace to this Kingdom firm and
lasting without a due consideration of, and provision for the Rights, quiet,
and immunities of His Majesty's Royal Family, and His late Partakers: now they
judge the majority of the House corrupt for moving one step toward a peace
with the King, The Parliam: thought it not reasona^le the King should be sole
Judge of public necessity in case of Ship-mony. Return to sect is where I set
down 6. of their Principles.
though He has now granted more to them then all the Armies Proposals then
demanded of Him. Thus they make this general plea of necessity serve to
justify the considerations; which they are put to by making themselves Judges
of those things they have no calling to meddle with; for by what Authority are
they Judges of public Necessity?

2. This Principle (Necessity) is destructive to all Government, for as the
General Officer urges necessity for acting against the commands and Persons
of his Superiors; and arrogates to be Judge of that Necessity, the Inferior
may urge the same Necessity (in his judgment) to act against the commands of
his General. The Soldiers against their Officers: any other 20000. men in this
Kingdom against this Army, and this Army (as against this Parliament) so
against any other Representative or Government; and so in infinitum.

3. The Commons in Parliament are not accountable for the use of their trust to
any but the House; The Commons have their Authority from the Writ of Election,
though their election from the people: See the Writ, Crompton's Iurisdict: of
Courts, Tit: Parliament.
being Trustees of the People not by Delegation, but by translation: all the
power of the people being transferred to them for advising, votinq, and
assenting (according to their judgments, not according to the judgments of
those that sent them) for otherwise the parties electing, and those elected,
differing in judgment, one might protest against what the other had done, and
so make void all Acts of Parliament. But if their Acts were valid or void at
the Electors judgments, yet were the Members only accountable to them that
sent them, not to Strangers, and in no case to the Army, who are themselves but
in subordinate trust to the Parliament for their defense.

4. This violence upon the Members, is not only contrary to the Armies trust,
but against their Covenant and Protestation: the breach whereof being a morrall
evil cannot be made good by honest intentions and necessity.

The particulars of the said General Officers Answer, upon which this
pretended Necessity is grounded, are six: but we must first take notice what is
said from the end of the 2. page to the end of the 5. before we enter upon
them: the sum is, That by the endevors of some old Malignant Members, In all
new Elections there were 2. Indepe^dents chosen for one of any other
principles, Indepe^dents were the^ Commissioners for the Great Seal, ^^d
livered Writs to men of their own Party, who had the adv^ntage to keep
them, and choose their own time to deliver them: and Soldiers (under color
of keeping the peace) became great Sticklers in Elections.
and by practices used in new Elections there came in a flood of new Burgesses
that either are Malignant or Neuters. To this we say, what is done by the
majority, is the Act of the whole House; and what is done against the majority,
is done against the whole House: nor was the Ordinance for New Elections
carried on by old Malignants, unless the major part of the House were always
such, and before the new Elections. It is not hard to show that many of the
Officers of the Army came in upon the last Elections, and where chosen by those
places where they are scarce known: upon what influence therefore they came in,
let the world judge. And now for the said 6. particulars objected:

The Army betrayed Ireland by their disobedience. They would neither go for
Ireland themselves, nor suffer others to go, 1. part sect. 16. and 55.57.
1. The betraying of Ireland into the Enemies hands, by recalling the Lord Lysle
from his command there, and putting the best part of the said Kingdom and
where the Parliament had the strongest footing (Munster) into the hands of
Inchiquine a Natavi Irish; who has since Revolted from the Parliament, has
lately united with the Irish Rebels; and with them and Ormond for the King. To
this we say, the Lord Inchiquine came in and brought Munster to the Parliament,
and preserved their Interest in Ireland, in all the heat of their Wars in
England, when they had little other Interest there, This Lo: went late,
carried over 160000 l. for which he has not yet accounted, began a quarrel
with In hiquine and put him into discontent, and then returned. See the Irish
Letters and Papers to the House in print.
and less means to relieve them; the Lord Lysle was not recalled from his
Command there, but his Commission for Lord Lieutenant expiring, 15. April,
1647. on the 17. April, he hoysed sail for England: after the Lord Lysles
return for England, the Lord Inchiquine did gallant service against the
Rebels, took many strong Holds from them, and won the Battle of Knocke-knowes,
one of the greatest that ever was gotten of the Rebels. The House therefore
approved of his behavior until 3. April, 1648. when (the Army having led the
way) the Lord Inchiquine (taking distaste thereat) by way of imitation, began to
enter into Engagements and Remonstrances against the Parliament, (as it was
then constituded) for which he made the Remonstrances, Engagements, and
Declarations of the Army the Summer before, both the cause and precedent; as by
the printed Relation does appear.

2. Their endeavors to bring in the King upon His own Terms, without
satisfaction and security to the Kingdom, viz: upon His Message of the 12. of
May, 1647. and to this end to Disband this Army before any peace made or
assured. To this we say, the House of Commons upon the first notice thereof,
voted the said Engagement of the 12. of May, Treasonable; and by Ordinance, 17.
December. 1647. put an incapaciti upon such Citizens as had any hand in it; which
evidenceth, we were here in a right majority, as in other parts of their Paper
they take the Votes of the House to prove us a corrupt majority: The charge
here lying in general, and not fixed upon any particular. Concerning
Disbanding the Army; we say, the House voted 8. Regiments of Foot, 4. of Horse,
and 1. of Dragoones, to be sent out of the Army for Ireland; and resolved to
keep 10000. Foot, and 5400. Horse under Command of the Lord Fairfax for defense
of England. This was, 1. For Relieving Ireland. 2. For easing the heavy
pressures of the poor People in England. And 3. an honorable employment for
the Forces of the Army, to prevent such higst distempers as have since ensued.

3. That they endeavored to protect the 11. impeached Members from justice,
and with them to raise a new War. To this we say, See my 1. part. sect.
16.17,18. and my said Animadversions, page 2. neither were they legally
impeached. See Ardua regn^, or twelve arduous doubts written in defense of the
expulsed Memb: and the said Members Ans. to the Armies Charge.
we gave them no other protection than the Laws allowed them. For the
mispending 200000l. designed for Ireland; we say, that 80000l. thereof was paid
to Nicholas Lo^tus, and others, for service of Ireland, and above 50000l. to
the Treasurers at War for the Army; which may more reasonably be said to be
mis-imployed (because the Army had an established pay another way) than what
the Reformado Officers and Soldiers (who obeyed the Orders of the House for
Disbanding) received, who nevertheless pressed upon the House the more
earnestly for their Arreares, after the Declarations and Remonstrances
published by the Army for paying the Arreares of all the Soldiers of England.

4. Their countenancing, abetting, There was a close Inquisition of Godly
Cutthroats purposely chose to examine this Tumult; which proceeded illegally.
and used so much foul play as to accuse men upon characters of their clothes
and persons; yet malice it self could find nothing. See my 1. part. sect. 45,
46. to sect. 54. Return to sect. 2. and 5.
and partaking with the Tumult of Apprentices, and others against both Houses
of Parliament. To this we say, that we wonder they should urge the force
offered to the House then (which they declared, horrid and treasonable) to
justify the violence acted upon the House by themselves, of a much higher
nature. This is a mere fiction of the Pen-mans, which we do every one of us
for ourselves respectively deny.

5. The holding correspondency, engaging, and assisting the tumultuous
Petitioners last Spring, the rebellious Insurrections in Kent, the Revolted
Ships, Prince of Wales, with the Scots Army: We do every one of us for our
selves respectively deny these.

6. That when the Army was dispensed and engaged in several parts, etc. and
many faithful Members employed abroad upon public services; and others
through Malignant Tumults about this City, could not with safety attend the
House. Then the corrupt and Apostating Party taking advantage of these
distractions which themselves had caused: First, recalled in those Members,
etc. Then they recalled those Votes for Non-Addresses, and voted a Personal
Treaty. To this we say, that if the proceedings of the Treaty were
surreptitiously gotten in a thin House, why do they then complain in other
parts of their Paper, that the majority of the House is corrupt, Return to
sect. 2. and 5. there see the true grounds of these Tumults. See what use they
make of providence in the 2. part of Englands new Chains.
and formed to serve the Kings corrupt Interest? why did they force from the
House above 200. Members at once; the Counties never expressed so high contempt
of the Parliament, until the like had been first done by the Armies quartering
upon them?

And now let us come to that Vote of the House, 5. Dec. 1648. That the Kings
Answer to the Propositions of both Houses are a ground to proceed upon to a
setlement of Peace: of which they say, That though they advanced hither to
attend providence for opening some way to avoid the present evils designed, and
introduce the desired good into the Kingdom, yet they said nor acted nothing
in relation to the Parliament, nor any Member thereof, until by the Vote
passed, December. 5. they found the corrupt majority so resolvedly bent to
complete their Design in bringing in the King. Do they call their threatening
Declaration and Remonstrance a saying nothing? and their marching up against
the House, contrary to the Order of the House, a doing nothing in relation to
the Parliament? But by these words it appears that this Vote, 5. December. is
the very point of that necessity they now rely upon to justify their force
upon the House: For, before that passed, they say, They acted nothing, etc. we
must now state the difference between the Houses Propositions, See Mr. Pryn's
said Speech in the House, ^. December. 1648 more at large.
and the Kings Answers, and see whether the King did not grant all those
Propositions in which te maine security of the Kingdom rests.

He granted the first Proposition for taking off all Declarations; as was
desired.

And the third Proposition for the Militia, as was desired.

He assented to the Proposition for Ireland; limiting the time of the
Parliaments disposing Officers there to 20. years.

He consented to such Acts for public Debts and Public Uses, as should be
presented within 2. years, and incurred within that time.

He granted the Proposition concerning Peers, as was desired.

He granted the Disposing Offices in England, to the Parliament, for 20.
years.

He granted the taking away the Court of Wards, having 100000 l. per ann. in
lieu thereof to be raised as the Parliament should think fit.

He granted to Declare against the Marquess of Ormond's power and proceedings
after an Agreement with the Parliament.

The only difference therefore remained upon two Propositions: 1. Delinquents.
2. The Church.


For Delinquents, though He does not grant all, His Majesty consented they
shall submit to moderate Compositions, according to such proportions as they
and the two Houses shall agree.

2. He disableth them to bear Offices of Public Trust, and removes then from
the Kings, Queens, and Princes Court.

3. For such as the Houses propounded to proceed capitally against, He leaves
them to a Legal Trial; and Declares, He will not interpose to hinder it:
which satisfies the maine complaint of the Parliament, which was (in the
beginning of the War) That the King protected Delinquents from justice. And
all that the House desired in the Propositions presented to Him at Oxford,
Febr. 1642. was, That His Majesty would leave Deliquents to a Legal Trial and
Judgment of Parliament. But that His Majesty should join in an Act for taking
away the Lives or Estates of any that have adhered to Him (He truly professes)
He cannot with Justice and Honor agree thereto.

4. Nor do we see how Delinquents (being left to the Law) can escape justice,
the King having granted the 1. proemiall Proposition, and (so by a Law)
acknowledged the Parliaments Cause and War to be just.

For the Church. The Houses propound the utter abolishing of Archbishops,
Bishops, etc. The Sale of their Lands, that Reformation of Religion be settled
by Act of Parliament as both Houses have, or shall agree. The Kings Answer
takes away Church Government be Archbishops, Bishops, etc. by taking away their
Courts and Officers, and so far takes away their power of Ordination that it
can never be revived again but by Act of Parliament; so that Episcopacy is
divested of any actual being by the Law of the Land, and instead thereof the
Presbyterian Government settled for three years by a Law^ which is for so long
a time as the Houses formerly in their Ordinances presented to Him at
New Castle did themselves think fit to settle it: For the Sale of Bishops
Lands upon the Public Faith; we say, Every cheating Saint of the Faction must
have the Public Faith exactly kept, though he bought the Lands but at 2. or
3. years just value, and with such moneys as he thad formerly cheated the
State off; when other men who have lost the best part of their Estates by and
for the Parliament, for compensation whereof they have the Public Faith
engaged by Ordinances, are consumed by Taxes, and repayed with reproaches
only.
That although the Purchagers might well have afforded to have given the same
rates for their purchases (which they now give) if they might have had them
assured by Act of Parliament for 99. years, and such moderate Rents reserved
as the King intimates in his Answer; yet (in His Answer) He expresses a
farther satisfaction to be given them: upon which we should have insisted,
notwithstanding the said Vote.

5. December. 1648. We farther allege, That the King having granted the rest of
the Propositions, and so much in these 2. Delinquents, and the Church; the
National Covenant does not oblige us to make War upon this point: nothing
can make Presbytery (nor the Purchasers of Bishops Lands) more ordious, nor
endanger them more, than to make them the sole obstacle of peace, nor could any
thing more work the King to comply with our desires herein, than for us to
draw a little nearer Him.

The Considerations leading us to pass the said Vote, 5. Dec. 1648. come next
to be considered: 1. The saving of Ireland. 2. The Regaining the Revolted Navy
and freedom of the Seas. 3. The support of the Ancient Government of the
Kingdom. 4. The putting the people into a secure possession of their Laws and
Liberties. 5. The avoiding such evil consequences as were apparently to follow
a Breach with the King.


Return to sect, 71.
As 1. the Deposing the King, if not the depriving Him of life: whereupon floods
of misery will follow, and schandall to the Protestant Religion, which we (from
our hearts) detest and abhor: see the many Declarations of Parliament against
it.

2. The necessitating of the Prince to cast himself into the Arms of
foreign Popish Princes, and embrace Popish Allyances for his succor.

3. It may beget a change of Government, and a laying aside of Monarchy here:
and so a Breach with Scotland, and this Kingdom (being the more rich) likely
to be the Seat of the War.

4. The vast Debts of this Kingdom upon the Public Faith, will never be paid
in War, but increased and multiplied: multitudes of Sufferers by, and for the
Parliament like to be repayed only with new sufferings, and every years War
destroies more Families, and makes more Malignants through discontenting
pressures: until at last the Soldier seeing no hope of pay, the People no
hope of peace and case, fall together into a general and desperate
tumultuousnesse; the power of the Sword apparently thereatning a dissolution of
Government both in Church and Commonwealth.

To that scandalous Objection, which says, The corrupt majority will not lend
an ear to admit a thought toward the laying down their own power, or
rendering it back to the People from whom they received it. We say, this
Objection is unreasonable from men who endeavor to perpetuate an Army upon the
Kingdom: nor is the continuance of this Parliament singly objected, but that
they will not render it back to the People, viz: To a new Representative,
invented and made by the Army, that is, We will not render our power into the
hands of the Army.

Another Objection is, That watsoever the King granted, He might plead Force to
break it, and spoil us by policy. This Objection might have been made against
all our Treaties: If there be any Force, it is from the Army, for spoiling us
by policy. The Kings of this Land could never encroach upon our good Laws, but
by corrupt Judges and Ministers, who though they could not abrogate the Law,
made it speak against it self, and the intended good of the People; or else
by the power of Courtiers, stopping the course of justice at the Council
Table; and in other Arbitrary Courts: both which are taken away by the Kings
Concessions.

1. That the Nomination of Judges and Officers be in the Parliament.

2. That the King make no new Parliament Lords for the future to Vote there.

Another Objection is, That they had intelligence, that had they been suffered
to meet all in the House once more, For this you must take the faith of the
mysty brayned Penman, who had this (as well as many other gross Lies) by
Revelation. The Army had had the King in their power, and had the Parliament
adjourned, the sole power of the Kingdom had been left in the Army; which is
a thing aimed at by them.
it was designed to have passed some higher resolutions, to lay farther
foundations of a new quarrel, so as to carry therein the name and countenance
of Parliamentary Authority together with the Kings, upon an acceptable pretense
of Peace, to draw men in, and then to have adjourned the Parliament for a long
time, excluding all remedy in this case but by another War. To this we say,
the House immediately upon passing the Vote, 5. December. Sent a Committee to the
General to confer with him and his Officers, and keep a good correspondency
with them: To which, the General promised his readiness; howsoever it was
hindered afterward. And then they seized upon one of the Commissioners
appointed to Treat, affronted another, and left no way free for a Conference,
which shows they were resolved to do what they had designed.

The last Obj. is, That those Members that are yet detained in Custody, are
either such as have been formerly Impeached, and (in part) judged by the House
for Treason, and other Crimes, and never acquitted, and against whom they can,
and very shortly will produce new matter of no l^sse crime; or else such who
have appeared most active and united in Councels with them: against whom also
they are preparing, and shall shortly give matter of particular Impeachment. To
this we say, that when it appears what those crimes are, and what persons are
charged with them, we doubt not but they will sufficiently acquit themselves,
if things may be Legally carried in a judicial way by competent Judges not
preingaged. In the mean time we conclude, That Soldiers, whose advantages
arise by War, are not fit to judge of the Peace of the Nation.

74. A Declaration by Mr. Walker, and Mr. Pryn.
The 19. Ian. 1648. Mr. Pryn, and Mr. Walker, (two of the secured Members)
published in print their Declaration and Protestation, against the Actings and
proceedings of the Army and their Faction now remaining in the House of
Commons: as follows: A Declaration and Protestation of Will: Pryn, and Clem:
Walker, Esquires; Members of the House of Commons; Against the present Actings
and Proceedings of the General, and General Council of the Army, and their
Faction now remaining and sitting in the said House.
WHereas long since, for ease of the People, both Houses in a full and free
Parliament Voted the Disbanding of this Army: in opposition to which, some
great Officers of the said Army, (to continue their rich Commands) with some
Members of the House of Commons, (who daily enrich themselves by the troubles
of the times) secretly mutinied the Army against the Parliament. And whereas,
lately the far major part of the House of Commons, pitying the bleeding
condition, and tears of the oppressed People, Voted, and entered into a
Personal Treaty with the King: without which (by the Armies own confession in
their Remonstrance at Saint Albons, p. 64.) there can be no peace; which the
Army interrupted by obtruding upon the Commons a treasonable Remonstrance, 20.
November. 1648. tending to destroy the King, and His Posterity, and wholly to
subvert all Parliaments, Religion, Laws, and Liberties for ever; whereby the
Commons in Parliament found it absolutely necessary to prevent such pernicious
innovations, by co^cluding a safe peace with His Majesty; whereupon (after
mature debate) the House of Commons the 5. December. 1648. Voted, That the Kings
Answer to the Propositions of both Houses upon the Treaty, were a ground for
the Houses to proceed to the setlement of a safe and well-grounded Peace: Upon
which, the General, and Council of War, Wednesday morning, 6. December,
1648. Seized and Imprisoned 41 of the Members going to the House of Commons to
do their Duty, secluded above 160. other Members, besides 40. or 50. Members
who voluntarily withdrew themselves to avoid their violence, leaving only
their own engaged party of 40. or 50. Members sitting, who now pass Acts of
Parliament of the House of Commons (as they call them) without the Lords; and
comply with the said Council of War, to carry on the said Remonstrance: To
which purpose this present remnant of the Commons have unvoted in a thin House,
under the force of the Army, what was deliberately Voted in a full and free
House; whereas by their own Ordinance passed upon the Tumult of Apprentices,
20. August, 1647. to null, and make void ab initio, all Acts, Orders, Votes,
etc. passed under the said force: This remaining Party ought not to sit, act,
nor take upon them the style af a House, under so visible, actual, and horrid
a Force.

The premises considered, We, whose names are hereunto subscribed, Members of
the House of Commons, do declare and protest, That the said General,
Commissioned Officers, and General Council of the Army, by the said act of
violence, upon the major part of the House, which legally and virtually is the
whole House, have waged War, and Rebelled against the Parliament their
Masters, who raised them to defend the Privileges of Parliament, and the Kings
Person and Authority, in defense of Religion, Laws, and Liberties, and have
thereby forfeited their Commissions, and have broken and dis-continued this
Parliament; so that, until this force be removed, punished, the Honor of the
Parliament and their wronged Members vindicated, and all the Members
resummoned, all the Votes, Orders, and Actings, Passed, and to be Passed by
this nominall House of Commons, are, and will be void, ab initio, and all such
as do, or shall obey them, are and will be punishable, both by the Armies own
judgment in their Remonstrance, August 18. and by the Houses Declaration, and
the said Ordinance, 20. August, 1647.

We do farther declare and protest against this present House of Commons
illegal Acts, Order, or Ordinance, for erecting a High Court of Justice, and
usurping a power without any Law or president, to Try, Depose, and bring to
capital punishment the King, and to Dis-inherit His Posterity, or any of them,
and against the said General Council of Officers, aiding and abetting them
therein, as highly impious against the Law of God, Nations, and the Protestant
Profession, Traitors against the Stat. of Treasons, 25. Edw. 3. and against all
Laws and our Statutes; perjurious and perfidious, against the Oaths of
Allegiance, Supremacy, National Covenant, and Protestation; all the
Parliaments Declarations and Remonstrances held forth to the world; their
Treaties and promises made to the Scots when they delivered the Kings Person
into our hands; against our promises made to the Hollanders, and other Nations,
and against all the Professions, Declarations, Remonstrances, and Proposalls
made by this Army, when they made their Addresses to the King at New Market,
Hampton Court, and other places.

January 19. 1648. William Pryn. Clem: Walker.




About this time the General Council of Officers at White Hall, ordered, 75.
The Coun: of Officers order 2. Petit: for the Com: House, 1. against Tyths, 2.
against the Stat. for Banishing the Jews. 76. Col. Tichburnes Pet: and
Complaint against the Ld. Mayor, and their Orders thereupon. The like Petitio^s
were invited from most Counties, where a dozen Schismatics and two or three
Cloaks represe^ted a whole County.
That two Petitions (or mandates rather) should be drawn, and presented to
their House of Commons; One against Payment of Tithes; the other, for Repealing
the Act for Banishment of the Jews. Here you see they shake hands with the
Jews, and crucify Christ in his Ministers, as well as in his Anointed, the
King.

About this time Col: Tichburne, and some schismatic Common-Councell-men,
presented a Petition to the supreme Authority the Commons in Parliament,
demanding justice against all grand and capital Actors in the late Wars
against the Parliament from the highest to the lowest: the Militia, Navy, and
all Places of power to be in faithful hands, (that is, in their own Faction,
all others being displaced under the general notion of Disaffected) to settle
the Votes, (That the supreme Authority is in the Commons in Parliament
assembled.) They complained, That the Lord Mayor, and some Aldermen, denied to
put their Petition to the Question at the Common Council, and departed the
Court, with the Sergeant and Town-Clerke, That the Court afterward passed it
Nemine contradicente. The Commons thanked the Petitioners (for the tender of
their assistance) and Ordered, That the Petition should be entered amongst the
Acts of the Common Council, and owned them for a Common Council
notwithstanding the departure of the Lord Mayor, etc. And about four or five
days after, the Commons Ordered, See a just and solemn Protest: of the free
Citizens of London, against the Ordinance, 17. December, 1647. disabling such as
had any hand in the City Engagement to bear Offices.
That any six of the Common Council, (upon emergent occasions) might send for
the Lord Mayor to call a Common Council themselves, and any forty of them to
have power to Act as a Common Council without the Lord Mayor, any thing in
their Charter to the contrary notwithstanding. Thus you see the Votes of this
supreme thing (the House of Commons) are now become the only Laws and Reason
of all our actions.

77. An Act passed for adjournment of part of Hillary Term, and the Lords
concurrence rejected.
The 16. Ian. 1648. was passed an Act of the Commons for adjournment of Hillary
Term for forty days. This was in order to the Kings Trial, but the
Commissioners of the Great Seal, declared, That they could not agree to seal
Writs of Adjournment without the Lords concurrence, (the assent of one Lord
being requisie) their tame Lordships sent down to the Commons to offer their
readiness to join therein. But the Commons having formerly Voted, The Supreme
Power to be in themselves as the Peoples Representative, and that the Commons
in every Committee should be empowered to Act without the Lords. The Question
was put, Whether the House would concur with the Lords herein? which passed
in the Negative: so the Lords were not owned. Afterward they ordered, that the
Commoners (Commissioners for the Great Seal) should issue forth Writs without
the Lords.

78. The Agreement of the People presented to the House of Commons by the
Officers of the Army. Diurnall, from Ian. 15. to 22. 1648. nu. 286.
20. January, Lieut. General Hammond, with many Officers of the Army,
presented to the Commons from the General and Council of the Army, a thing
like a Petition, with The Agreement of the People, annexed. Mr. Speaker
thanking them, desired them to return the hearty thanks of the House to the
General and all his Army for their gallant services to the Nation; and desired
the Petition and Agreement should be forthwith printed, to show the good
affection between the Parliament and Army. I cannot blame them to brag of this
affection, being the best string to their bow. About this time some
wel-meaning man (that durst think truth in private) published his thoughts
under the Title of [Six serious Quaeries, 79. 6. Que es concerning the Kings
Trial by the new High Court of Justice.
concerning the Kings Trial, by the High Court of Justice.]

1. Whether a King of three distinct Kingdoms can be condemned and executed by
one Kingdom alone, without the concurrent consent, or against the judgment of
the other two?

2. Whether if the King be indicted or arraignd of high Treason, he ought not
to be tried by his Peers? and whether those who are now nominated to try him,
or any others in the Kingd: be his Peers?

3. Whether if the King be triable in any Court, for any Treason against the
Kingdom, He ought not to be tried only in full Parliament, in the most
solemn and public manner, before all the Members of both Houses, in as
honorable a way, as Strafford was, in the beginning of this Parliament? And
whether He ought not to have liberty and time to make His full defense, and the
benefit of his learned Counsel, in all matters of Law, that may arise, in, or
about his Trial, or in demurring to the jurisdiction of this illegal new
Court, as Strafford and Canterbury had?

4. Whether one eight part only of the Members of the Commo^s House, meeting in
the House, under the Armies force, when all the rest of the Members are
forcibly restained, secluded, or scared away by the Armies violence, and
representing not above one eight part of the Counties, Cities, and Boroughs of
the Kingdom, without the consent and against the Vote of the majority of the
Members, excluded and chased away, and of the House of Peers, by any pretext
of Authority, Law, or Justice, can erect a New great Court of Justice to Try
the King, in whom all the rest of the Members, Peers and Kingdom (being far
the major part) have a greater interest then they? Whether such an High Court
can be erected without an Act of Parl: or at least an Ordin: of both Houses,
and a Commission under the Great Seal of England? And if not, whether this can
be properly called a Court of Justice? and whether it be superior or inferior
to those who erected it? who either cannot or dare not try and codemn the King
in the Com: House; though they now style it, The Supreme Authority of the
Kingdom: and whether all who shall sit as Judges, or act as Officers in it,
toward the Deposing or taking away the Kings life, be not realy guilty of High
Treason, and all those who were aiding or assenting to the erection thereof in
such an irregular manner, by the Laws and Statutes of this Realm?

5. Whether those who are professed Enemies to the King, and by their
Remonstrances, Speeches, and actions, profess they desire his blood and seek
his life, can either in Law or Conscience be reputed competent Judges to try
him for his life? It being a just exception to any Jury-man, who is to try the
basest or poorest Felon, and a legal challence for which he must be
withdrawn; that he is a professed Enemy and Prosecutor who seeks his life, and
therefore no lawful nor indifferent Trier of him for it.

6. Whether the trial and taking away of the Kings life by such an illegal
and arbitrary High Court of Justice, as this, will not prove a most dangerous
inlet, to the absolutest tyranny and bloudiest butchery ever yet heard of, or
practiced in this, or any other Nation? and a ready way to teach us, how to
chop off one another heads, till we are all destroyed? For if they may take
away the Kings head in it without, and against all rules of Law: then by the
same or stronger reason, they may in like manner chop off the heads of any
Noblema^, Peer, Member, Gentleman, or inferior Subject for any imaginary
treason or offense, and confiscate their Estates, The Answer of the General
Council of Officers, touching the secluded Members, Ian. 3. 1648.
there being no assurance they will stop at the Kings: And if those who are
confessed to be the majority of the Com: House, and therefore excluded, or the
Prince of Wales next Heir to the Crown, or the Malignant party, or any other
Faction whatsoever which may arise, should at any time hereafter get the
upper-hand by the Peoples general adhering to them, or any divisions of the
Army, or by any means Gods providence should administer (who has thousands of
ways to pull down the proudest Tyrants, and dissipate the strongest Armies in
a moment, as he did Senacharibs, the Midianites, the Moabites, and Ammonites,
with sundry others recorded in sacred Writ, and profane Stories, and the Scots
Army but few months since) they may by like authority and president erect the
like new Court, to cut off the heads of all the Members now sitting, and of the
present General Council of the Army, and all the Commissioners acting in this
new Court; and so fall a murdering and butchering one another, till we were
all destroyed one by another, and made a spectacle of most unnatural tyranny
and cruelty to the whole world, Angels, and Men, and a prey to our common
Enemies. Upon which consideration, let every man now seriously lay his hand
upon his own breast, and sadly consider what the bloody tragical issue of
this new Phaleris Bull, may prove to him or his; and whether every Freeborn
Englishman (especially of Noblest birth, and amplest Estate) be not deeply
obliged in point of prudence and conscience to use his utmost endeavor with
hazard of life and estate, to prevent the erection of such an exorbitant and
illegal Authority, in the very rise and foundation, ere it be over-late; and
not patiently suffer a rash inconsiderate number of Hotspurs (of mean
condition and broken desperate fortunes for the most part) out of private
malice, fear, or designs to secure and enrich themselves by the ruins of
others of better fortunes and quality; to set up such a new shambles to butcher
and quarter the King, Nobles, Parliament Men, Gentlemen, and persons of all
conditions, as was never heard of among Pagans or Christians, from the Creation
to this present, and will no way suite with our English soil, already overmuch
watered with English blood; and so deeply engaged against all arbitrary and
tyrannnicall usurpations and proceedings (especially capital) in any hands
whatsoever, which have cost us so much blood and treasure to oppose and fight
against for seven years last past.

Saturday, Ian. 20. 1648. The new thing called The High Court of Justice sat:
Bradshaw being President, 80. The first days Trial of his Majesty.
who had the Mace and Sword carried before him, and 20. Gentlemen (forsooth)
with Partisans for his Guard, under the command of Colonel Fox the Tinker. An O
yes being made, and silence commanded: the said Act of the Commons for erecting
the said Court was read, and the Court called, there being about 70. of the
Commissioners present. Then the King was brought to the Bar by Col: Hacker with
Halberdeers, the Mace of the Court conducting Him to his Chair within the
Bar, where he sat. And then Pres. Bradshaw said to the King, Charles Stuart
King of England; The Commons of England assembled in Parliament being sensible
of the great calamities brought upon this Nation, and of the innocent blood
shed (which are referred to you as the Author of it) according to that duty
which they own to God, the Nation, and themselves, Prove this power and
trust: The whole Kingdom (in effect) deny it. So do all our Lavv-Books, and
the practice of all Ages.
and according to that power and fundamental trust reposed in them by the
People; have constituded this High Court of Justice, before which you are now
brought, and you are to hear your Charge upon which the Court will proceed.

Solicitor Cook. My Lord, in behalf of the Commons of England, and of all the
People-thereof, I do accuse Charles Stuart here present of High Treason and
misdemeanors, and I do in the name of the Commons of England desire the
Charge may be read unto him.

The King. Hold a little.

President. Sir, the Court commands the Charge to be read; afterward you may
be heard. The Charge was read, as follows:

The Charge against King Charles the First, January 20. 1648.
The Charge read.
THat the said CHARLES STUART, being admitted King of England, and therein
trusted with a limited Power, to Govern by, and according to the Laws of the
Land, and not otherwise: And by his Trust, Oath, and Office: being obliged to
use the power committed to him, For the good and benefit of the people, and for
the preservation of their Rights and Liberties; yet nevertheless, out of a
wicked Design, to erect and uphold in himself an unlimited and tyrannical
power, to rule according to his will, and to overthrow the Rights and Liberties
of the People; Yea, to take away, and make void the foundations thereof, and of
all redress and remedy of mis-government, which by the fundamental
Constitutions of this Kingdom, were reserved on the peoples behalf, in the
right and power of frequent and successive Parliaments, or National meetings
in Council, He, the said Charles Stuart, for accomplishment of such his
Designs, and for the protecting of himself and his Adherents, in his and
their wicked Practices to the same Ends, has traitorously and maliciously
levied War against the present Parliament, and the People therein Represented.

Particularly, upon or about the thirtieth day of June, in the year of our
Lord, one thousand six hundred forty and two, at Beverly, in the County of
York: and upon, or about the thirtieth day of July, in the year aforesaid, in
the County of the City of York: and upon, or about the twenty fourth day of
August, in the same year, at the County of the Town of Nottingham (when, and
where he set up his Standard of War:) and also on, or about the twenty third
day of October, in the same year, at Edgehill, and Keinton-field, in the
County of Warwick: and upon, or about the thirtieth day of November, in the
same year, at Braince^ord, in the County of Middlesex: and upon, or about the
thirtieth day of August, in the year of our Lord, one thousand six hundred
forty and three, at Cavesham-bridge, n^er Reading, in the County of Berks: and
upon, or about the thirtieth day of October, in the year last mentioned, at,
or near the City of Gloucester: And upon, or about the thirtieth day of
November, in the year last mentioned, at Newbury, in the County of Berks: And
upon, or about the one and thirtieth day of July, in the year of our Lord, one
thousand six hundred forty and four, at Cropredy-bridge, in the County of Oxon:
And upon, or about the thirtieth day of September, in the year last mentioned,
at Bodmin, and other places near adjacent, in the County of Cornwall: And upon,
or about the thirtieth day of November, in the year last mentioned, at Newbury
aforesaid: And upon, or about the eight day of June, in the year of our Lord,
one thousand six hundred forty and five, at the Town of Leicester: And also,
upon the fourteenth day of the same month, in the same year, at Naseby-field,
in the County of Northampton. At which several times and places, or most of
them, and at many other places in this Land, at several other times, within
the years aforementioned: And in the year of our Lord, one thousand six
hundred forty and six, He, the said Gharles Stuart, has caused and procured
many thousands of the free-people of the Nation to be slain; and by Divisions,
Parties, and Insurrections, within this Land, by invasions from foreign
parts, endeavored and procured by Him, and by many other evil ways and
means. He the said Charles Stuart, has not only maintained and carried on the
said War, both by Land and Sea, during the years before mentioned, but also
has renewed, or caused to be renewed, the said War against the Parliament,
and good people of this Nation, in this present year, one thousand six hundred
forty and eight, in the Counties of Kent, Essex, Surrey, Sussex, Middlesex, and
many other Counties and places in England and Wales, and also by Sea. And
particularly, He the said Charles Stuart, has for that purpose, given
Commissions to his Son, the Prince, and others; whereby, besides multitudes
of other Persons, many such, as were by the Parliament entrusted and employed,
for the safety of the Nation; being by Him or is Agents, corrupted, to the
betraying of their Trust, and revolting from the Parliament, have had
entertainment and commission, for the continuing and renewing of War and
Hostility, against the said Parliament and People, as aforesaid. By which
cruel and unnatural Wars by Him, the said Charles Stuart, levied,
continued, and renewed, as aforesaid, much Innocent blood of the Free-pople of
this Nation has been spilt, many Families have been undone, the Public
Treasury wasted and exhausted, Trade obstructed, and miserably decayed, vast
expense and damage to the Nation incurred, and many parts of the Land spoiled,
some of them even to desolation.

And for further prosecution of His said evil Designs, He, the said Charles
Stuart, does still continue his Commissions to the said Prince, and other
Rebels and Revolters, both English and Forraigners; and to the Earl of Ormond,
and to the Irish Rebels and Revolters, associated with him; from whom further
Invasions upon this Land are threatened, upon the procurement, and on the behalf
of the said Charles Stuart.

All which wicked Designs, Wars, and evil practices of Him, the said
Charles Stuart, have been, and are carried on, for the advancing and upholding
of the Personal Interest of Will and Power, and pretended Prerogative to
Himself and his Family, against the public Interest, Common Right, Liberty,
Justice, and Peace of the People of this Nation, by, and for whom He was
entrusted, as aforesaid.

By all which it appears, that He, the said Charles Stuart has been, and is
the Occasioner, Author, and Contriver of the said unnatural, cruel, and
bloody Wars, and therein guilty of all the treasons, murders, rapines,
burnings, spoils, desolations, damage and mischief to this Nation, acted or
committed in the said Wars, or occasioned thereby.

And the said John Cook, by Protestation (saving on the behalf of the People
of England, the liberty of Exhibiting at any time hereafter, any other Charge
against the said Charles Stuart; and also of replying to the Answers which the
said Charles Stuart shall make to the premises, or any of them, or any other
Charge that shall be so exhibited) does for the said treasons and crimes, on
the behalf of the said People of England, Impeach the said Charles Stuart, as
a Tyrant, Traitor, Murderer, and a public and implacable Enemy to the
Commonwealth of England: And pray, That the said Charles Stuart, King of
England, may be put to answer all and every the premises, That such
Proceedings, Examinations, Trials, Sentence, and Judgment may be thereupon
had, or shall be agreeable to Justice.

The King smiled often during the reading of the Charge, especially at these
words: Tyrant, Traitor, Murderer, and public Enemy of the Commonwealth.

President. Sir, you have now heard your Charge, you find that in the close of
it, it is prayed to the Court in the behalf of the Commons of England, that
you answer to your Charge, which the Court expects.


King. I would know by what power I am called hither? I was not long ago in
the Isle of Wight; how I came there is a longer story than I think fit at this
time for Me to speak: But there I entered into a Treaty with both Houses of
Parliament, with as much faith as is possible to be had of any People in the
world; I Treated there with a number of Honorable Lords and Gentlemen, an
treated honestly and uprightly, I cannot say but they did very nobly with Me:
We were upon a Conclusion of the Treaty. Now I would know by what lawful
Authority (there are many unlawful Authorities, Thieves and Robbers on the
Highway) I was brought from thence, and carried from place to place? (and I
know not what) and when I knew by what lawful Authority, I shall Answer.
Remember I am your King, your lawful King, and what sins you bring upon your
own heads, and the judgment of God upon this Land, think well upon it, think
well upon it, I say, before you go on from one sin to a greater; therefore
let Me know by what lawful Authority I am seated here? and I shall not be
unwilling to Answer. In the mean time I shall not betray My trust: I have a
trust committed to Me by God, by old and lawful descent; I will not betray it
to Answer to a new unlawful Authority.


Bradshaw Pres. If you had been pleased to have observed what was hinted to you
by the Court at your first coming hither, you would have known by what
Authority: which Authority requires you in the name of the People of England,
of whom you are Elected KING, to answer them.


King. I deny that.


Bradsh. If you acknowledge not the Authority of the Court, they must proceed.


King. I do tell them so, England was never an Elective Kingdom, but an
Hereditary Kingdom, for near these thousand years: Therefore let Me know by
what lawful Authority I am called hither? I do stand more for the Liberty of
My People then any here that come to be My pretended Judges: and therefore let
Me know by what lawful Authority, and I will Answer, otherwise I will not
Answer.


Brash. Sir, How really you have managed your trust is known: your way of
Answer is to interrogate the Court, which beseemes not you in this condition;
you have been told of it twice or thrice.


King. Here is Lieut. Colonel Cobbet, ask him, if he did not bring Me from
the Isle of Wight by force? I do not come here as submitting to the Court; I
will stand as much for the Privilege of the House of Commons, rightly
understood, as any man here whatsoever; I see no House of Lords here that may
constitute a Parliament, and (the King too) should have been. Is this the
bringing the King to His Parliament? Is this the bringing an end to the Treaty
on the public Faith? Let Me see a Lawful Authority warranted by the Word of
God, the Scriptures, or by the Constitutions of the Kingdom. I will not betray
My Trust, nor the Liberties of the People; I am sworn to keep the Peace by
that duty I owe to God, and My Country; and I will do it to the last breath in
My body. As it is a sin to with stand Lawful Authority, so it is to submit
to a Tyrannical, or any otherwise unlawful Authority.


Bradsh. Brutish.
The Court expects your final Answer, and will adjourne till Monday next; we
are satisfied with our Authority that are your Judges, and it is upon Gods
Authority, and the Kingdoms; and that peace you spoke of will be kept in doing
Justice, and that is our present work. Note.
So the Court Adjourned, and the King was conducted back; They had so contrived
it, that diverse Schismatic Soldiers, and Fellows were placed round about
the Court, to cry Justice, Justice, when the King was remanded, thinking all
the rest of the People would have bleated to the same tune, but they (almost
all) cried God bless Him, and were (some of them) well cudgelled by the
Soldiers for not saying their prayers handsomely after the mode of the Army;
one barbarous Soldier (it is confidently reported) spat in the Kings Face as
he bauled for Justice: The King only saying, My Savior suffered more for my
sake, Whether this were the first day, or afterward, I know not,
wiped it off with His Handkerchief, yet the Court took no notice of this
Affront, so far was His Majesty already fore-judged and condemned to
Sufferings.

Monday, January 22. The KING was brought again to His Trial. 81. The second
days Trial of His Majesty.



Solicitour Cook. May it please your Lordship, I did at the last Court in
behalf of the Commons of England, exhibit, and give in to this Court a Charge
of High Treason, and other High Crimes against the Prisoner at the Bar: whereof
I do accuse him in the name of the people of England, and the Charge was read
unto Him, and his Answer required: My Lord, He was not then pleased to give an
Answer, but instead of answering did dispute the Authority of this High Court;
My humble motion to this High Court in behalf of the Kingdom of England, is,
That the Prisoner may be directed to make a positive Answer either by way of
Confession, or Negation: which, if He shall refuse to do, That the matter of
Charge may be taken pro Confesso, and the Court may proceed according to
Justice.


Bradsh. Sir, you may remember at the last Court you were told the occasion of
your being brought hither, and you heard a Charge read against You, etc. You
hear likewise what was prayed in behalf of the People, That You should give an
Answer to that Charge: You were then pleased to make some Scruples concerning
the Authority of this Court, and knew not by what Authority You were brought
hither: You did diverse times propound your Questions, and were as often
Answered, That it was by Authority of the Commons of England Assembled in
Parliament, that did think fit to call You to account for those High and
Capital Misdemeanors, wherewith You were then Charged. Since that the Court
has taken into consideration what You then said, they are fully satisfied with
their own Authority, and they hold it fit You should stand satisfied therewith
too: And they do require that You do give a positive and particular Answer to
this Charge exhibited against You; they expect you should either confess or
deny. If you do deny, it is offered in the behalf of the Kingdom to be made
good against You, Without any Law, President, rational deba^e, or Arguments
to pro^e it: Oh brutish Tyranny!
Their Authority they do avow to the whole world, that the whole Kingdom are
to rest satisfied therein, and You are to rest satisfied in it; and therefore
You are to give a Positive Answer.


King. When I was here last, its true, I made that Question; and truly, if it
were only my own particular case, I would have satisfied My self with the
Protestation I made here the last time, against the Legality of this Court, and
that a King cannot be Tried by any Superior Jurisdiction upon Earth: but it is
not My case alone, it is the Freedom, and the Liberties of the People of
England, and (do you pretend what you will) I stand more for their Liberties;
for if Power without Law may make Laws, nay, alter the Fundamental Laws of
the Kingdom, I do not know what Subject he is in England that can be sure of
his Life, or any thing that he calls his own. Therefore, when I came hither, I
did expect particular Reasons to know by what Law, what Authority, you proceed
against Me here? and therefore I am a little to seek what to say to you in this
Particular, because the Affirmative is to be proved, the Negative (often) is
very hard to do. I shall tell you my Reasons as short as I can. All
proceedings against any man whatsoever --


Bradsh. Sir, I must interrupt You; what You do is not agreeable to the
proceedings of any Court of Justice: False.
You are about to enter into Argument and Dispute concerning the Authority of
this Court, before whom You appear as a Prisonner, and are Charged as a High
Delinquent; You may not Dispute the Authority of this Court, nor will any Court
give way unto it, You are to submit to it, etc.


King. Under favor; I do Plead for the Liberty of the People of England more
then you do; and therefore, if I should impose a belief upon any Man without
Reasons given, it were unreasonable --


Bradsh. Oh Bruti^ A^^me Kingdom, to be Governed by an up ^ar^ Authority
without use of Reason.
Sir I must interrupt You: You may not be permitted, You speak of Law and
Reason, and there is both against You. Sir, The Vote of the Commons of England
Assembled in Parliament, is the reason of the Kingdom, and they are those that
have given You that Law, according to which you should have Ruled and Reigned;
Sir, It will be taken notice of, that you stand in contempt of the Court, and
Your contempt will be recorded accordingly.


King. I do not know how a King can be a Delinquent, but by all Laws that
ever I heard, all men may put in Demurrers against any proceedings as Illegal:
and I do demand that, if you deny that, you deny Reason.


Bradsh. Overrule a Demurrer without Argument: If a man may not Demurre to the
Jurisdiction of any Court, that Court may enlarge its bounds, and become a
Corporation of Tyrants.
Sir, Neither You, nor any Man are permitted to Dispute that Point, You are
concluded; You may not demurre to the Jurisdiction of the Court, if You do, I
must let You know, that they overrule Your demurrer, they sit here by the
Authority of the Commons of England; and all Your Predecessors and You, are
responsible to them.


King. I deny that, show Me one President.


Bradsh. Sir, You ought not to interrupt while the Court is speaking to you:
this point is not to be debated by you, if you offer it by way of Demurrer, to
the Jurisdiction of the Court, they have considered of their Jurisdiction, they
do affirm their own Jurisdiction.


King. I say Sir, by your favor, That the Commons of England were never a
Court of Judicature: I would know how they came to be so?


Bradsh. Sir, you are not to be permitted to go on in that Speech, and these
discourses.

Then the Clerk of the Court read, as follows:

Charles Stuart, King of England, you have been accused in the behalf of the
People of England, of High Treason, and other high Crimes, the Court has
determined that you ought to answer the same.


King. I will Answer the same so soon as I know by what Authority you do
this?


Bradsh. If this be all that you will say, then Gentlemen, you that brought the
Prisoner hither, take charge of Him back again.


King. I do require that I may give My Reasons why I did not Answer, and give
Me time for that.


Bradsh. Sir, It Is not for Prisoners to require.


King. Prisoners! Sir, I am not an ordinary Prisoner.


Bradsh. The Court have affirmed their Jurisdiction, if You will not Answer, We
shall give order to Record your default.


King. You never heard my Reasons yet.


Bradsh. Sir, Your Reasons are not be heard against the highest Jurisdiction.


King. Show Me that Jurisdiction where Reason is not to be heard? Reasons are
not to be heard against a remaining faction of the Commons of England.



Bradsh. Sir, we show it you here, the Commons of England, and the next time
you are brought, You will know more of the pleasures of Court, and it may be,
their final Determination.


King. Show Me where ever the House of Commons was a Court of Judicature of
that kind.


Bradsh: Sergeant, take away the Prisoner.


King. Well Sir, Remember that the King is not suffered to give in His Reasons,
for the liberty and freedom of all His Subjects.


Bradsh: Sir, You are not to have liberty to use this language, how great a
Friend You have been to the Laws and Liberties of the People, let all England
and the world judge.


King. Sir, under favor, it was the Liberty, Freedom, and Laws of the Subject
that ever I took -- defended My self with Arms, I never took up Arms
against the People, but for the Laws.


Bradsh: The command of the Court must be obeyed, no Answer will be given to
the Charge.

So the King was guarded forth to Sir Robert Cottons, and the Court adjourned
to the Painted-Chamber, Tuesday twelve a Clock.

82. The 3d days Trial of His Majesty.
Tuesday, Ianuarij 23. The Court sat again, seventy three Commissioners
present.


The King brought into the Court, sits down.

Solicit: Cook. May it please your Lordship my Lord President, This is now the
third time that by the great grace and favor of the Court, the Prisoner has
been brought to the Bar, before any Issue joined in this Case. My Lord, I did
at the first Court exhibit a Charge against Him, containing the highest
Treason that ever was wrought on the Theater of England, That a King of England
trusted to keep the Law, that had taken an Oath so to do, that had Tribute
paid Him for that end, should be guilty of a wicked Design to subvert and
destroy our Laws, and introduce an Arbitrary and Tyrannical Government in
defiance of the Parliament and their Authority; set up His Standard for War,
against his Parliament and People: and I did humbly pray in behalf of the
People of England, That He may speedily be required to make an Answer to the
Charge; but, my Lord, in stead of making any Answer, He did then dispute the
Authority of this High Court; your Lordship was pleased to give Him a further
day to put in His Answer, which day being yesterday; I did humbly move, That He
might be required to give a direct and positive Answer, either by denying, or
confessing of it; But, my Lord, He was then pleased to demur to the
Jurisdiction of the Court, which the Court did then overrule, and command Him
to give a direct and positive Answer: My Lord, besides this great delay of
Justice, I shall now humbly move your Lordship for speedy Judgment against
Him; I might press your Lordship upon the whole, That according to the known
rules of the Laws of the Land, that if a Prisoner shall stand contumacious in
contempt, and shall not put in an Issuable Plea, guilty or not guilty of the
Charge given against him, whereby he may come to a fair Trial, that by an
implicit Confession it may be taken, pro confesso; as it has been done to
those who have deserved more favor, than the Prisoner at the Bar has done.
But besides, my Lord, I shall humbly press your Lordship upon the whole fact,
You see the remnant of the Ho: of Comm had fore judged the K ng before they
erected this new Court to sentence Him; and claim a Jurisdiction, as well as
a Supreme Authority.
That the House of Commons, the Supreme Authority and Jurisdiction of the
Kingdom, they have declared, That it is notorious that the matter of the
Charge is true; as it is in truth my Lord, as clear as crystal, and as the
Sun that shines at noonday; which if your Lordship and the Court be not
satisfied in, I have notwithstanding on the Peoples behalf, several Witnesses
to produce; and therefore I do humbly pray, (and yet I do confess, it is not
so much I, as the Innocent blood that has been shed: (the cry whereof is very
great) for Justice and Judgment) and therefore I do humbly pray, that speedy
Judgment be pronounced against the Prisoner at the Bar.


Bradshaw. Sir, You have heard what is moved by the Council on behalf of the
Kingdom against you; you were told over and over again, That it was not for
you, nor any other man to dispute the Jurisdiction of the Supreme and highest
Authority of England, from which there is no appeal, and touching which there
must be no dispute; yet you did persist in such carriage as you gave no manner
of obedience, nor did you acknowledge any Authority in them; nor the high Court
that constituted this high Court of Justice. Sir, I must let you know from the
Court, that they are very sensible of these delays of Yours, and that they
ought not (being thus Authorized by the Supreme Court of England) be thus
trifled vvithall, and that they might in Justice, and according to the rules of
Justice, take advantage of these delays, and proceed to pronounce Judgment
against you, yet nevertheless they are pleased to give direction, and on their
behalf, I do require you, That You make a positive Answer unto this Charge
that is against you, in plain Terms (for Justice knows no respect of
Persons) you are to give your positive and final Answer in plain English,
whether you be guilty or not guilty of these Treasons laid to your charge.


King. When I was here Yesterday, I did desire to speak for the Liberties of
the People of England, I was interrupted, I desire to know yet, whether I may
speak freely, or not?


Brad. Sir, You have had the resolution of the Court, upon the like Question
the last day, and you were told, that having such a Charge of so high a nature
against you, Your work was, that you ought to acknowledge the Jurisdiction of
the Court, and to answer to your Charge, when you have once Answered, you shall
be heard at large, make the best defense You can: But Sir, I must let You know
from the Court, (as their Commands) That You are not to be permitted to Issue
out into any other discourses till such time as You have given a positive
Answer concerning the matter charged upon you.


King. For the Charge I value it not a Rush, it is the Liberty of the People of
England that I stand for; for Me to acknowledge a new Court that I never heard
of before, I that am your KING, that should be an example to all the People of
England, to uphold Justice, to maintain the old Laws, Indeed, I do not know
how to do it: you spoke well the first day that I came here, (on Saturday) of
the Obligations that I had laid upon Me by God, to the maintenance of the
Liberties of My People, the same Obligation you spoke of, I do acknowledge to
God, that I owe to him, and to My People, to defend as much as in Me lies, the
ancient Laws of the Kingdom; therefore until that I may know, that this is
not against the fundamental Laws of the Kingdom, I can put in no particular
Answer, if you will give Me time I will show you My Reasons, and this -- here
being interrupted, the King said again, By your favor, you ought not to
interrupt Me, How I came here I know not; Whether these breaches and
interruptions where made by Brad-shavv, or vvehether they are omissions and
expunctions of some material parts of the King's Speech which this licenced
Penman durst not set down; I know not: I hear much of the King's Argument
is omitted, and much depraved, none but Licenced-men being suffered to take
Notes.
there is no Law for it to make your King your Prisoner; I was in a Treaty upon
the public Faith of the Kingdom, that was the known -- two Houses of
Parliament, that was the Representative of the Kingdom, and when I had almost
made an end of the Treaty, then I was hurried away and brought hither, and
therefore --


Bradsh. Sir, You must know the pleasure of the Court.


King. By your favor Sir --


Bradsh. Nay Sir, By your favor, You may not be permitted to fall into those
Discourses; You appear as a Delinquent, You have not acknowledged the Authority
of the Court, the Court craves it not of You, but once more they command You to
give your positive Answer. Clercke do your Duty.


King. Duty Sir!


The Clercke reads.

Charles Stuart, King of England, You are accused in behalf of the Commons of
England of diverse High Crimes and Treasons; which Charge has been Read unto
You, The Court now requires You to give Your positive and final Answer, by way
of Confession, or denial of the Charge. King. Sir, I say again to you, so
that I may give satisfaction to the People of England, of the clearness of My
proceedings, not by way of Answer, not in this way, but to satisfy them that I
have done nothing against that Trust that has been committed to Me, I would
do it; but to acknowledge a New Court against their Privileges, to alter the
Fundamental Laws of the Kingdom, Sir, you must excuse Me.


Brad. Sir, This is the third time that You have publicly disavowed this
Court, and put an Affront upon it: how far You have preserved the Privileges
of the People, Your Actions have spoken; but truly Sir, men's intentions ought
to be known by their Actions, you have written Your meaning in bloody
Characters throughout the whole Kingdom, but Sir, you understand the pleasure
of the Court; Clarke Record the default; and Gentlemen, you that took Charge
of the Prisoner take Him back again. So the King went forth with His Guardes,
and the Court Adjourned to the Painted Chamber; the Crier (as at other times)
crying, God bless the Kingdom of England.

Saturday, 27 Ian. 1648. The Court sat again in Westminster Hall, the
President was in his Scarlet Robes, 83. The fourth and last days Tri^ll of His
Majesty.
after him 67 Commisioners answered to their Names; The King came in, in His
wonted posture with his Hat on, a Company of Soldiers and Schismatics placed
about the Court to cry for Justice, Judgment, and Execution, The People not
daring to cry God bless Him, for fear of being again beaten by the Soldiers.


Bradsh. Gentlemen, it is well known to all, or most of you here present, that
the Prisoner at the Bar has been several times convented, and brought
before this Court, to make Answer to a Charge of High Treason, and other High
Crimes exhibited against Him, in the Name of the People of England; to which
Charge being required to Answer, He has been so far from obeying the
Commands of the Court, by submitting to their Justice, as He began to take upon
Him Reasoning and Debate unto the Authority of the Court, And to the Highest
Court that appointed them to Try and to Judge Him; but being overruled in
that, and required to make His Answer, He still continued Contumacious, and
refused to submit to Answer. Hereupon the Court (that they may not be wanting
to themselves, nor the Trust reposed in them, nor that any man's wilfulness
prevent Justice) they have considered of the Charge, of the contumacy, and of
that Confession which in Law does arise on that Contumacy; they have likewise
considered the notiority of the Fact Charged upon this Prisoner; and upon the
whole matter, they are resolved, and have agreed upon a Sentence to be
pronounced against this Prisoner, but in respect He does desire to be heard
before the Sentence be Read, and Pronounced, the Court has resolved to hear
Him; yet Sir, thus much I must tell You beforehand, (which you have been
minded of at other Courts) that if that which You have to say, be to offer any
debate concerning the Jurisdiction, You are not to be heard in it: You have
offered it formerly, and you have struck at the root, that is, the Power and
supreme Authority of the Commons of England, which this Court will not admit a
Debate of: and which indeed is an irrational thing in them to do, being a
Court that act upon Authority derived from them. But Sir, if you have any thing
to say in defense of Your self concerning the matter charged, the Court has
given me in Commands to hear You.


King. Since I see that You will not hear any thing of debate concerning that
which I confess I thought most material, for the peace of the Kingdom, and
for the liberty of the Subject, I shall wave it; but only I must tell you, that
this many a day all things have been taken away from Me, but that, that I call
dearer to Me than My life, which is My Conscientie and Mine honor; and if I
had a respect of my life, more than the peace of the Kingdom, and the liberty
of the Subject, certainly I should have made a particular, defense for My life,
for by that at leastwise, I might have delayed an ugly Sentence, which I
believe will pass upon Me, therefore certainly Sir, as a man that has some
understanding, some knowledge of the world (if that my true zeal to My Country
had not overborne the care that I have for My own preservation) I should have
gone another way to work than that I have done: Now Sir, I conceive that a
hasty Sentence once passed may sooner be repented of than recalled; and truly,
the self-same desire that I have for the peace of the Kingdom and the liberty
of the Subject, more than My own particular ends, makes Me now at last desire,
that I having something to say that concerns both, I desire, before Sentence be
given, that I may be heard in the Painted Chamber before the Lords and Commons,
this delay cannot be prejudicial to you, whatsoever I say, if that I say no
reason those that hear Me must be Judges, I cannot be Judge of that that I
have: if it be reason, and really for the welfare of the Kingdom, and the
liberty of the Subject, I am sure its very well worth the hearing, therefore I
do conjure you, as you love that which you pretend. (I hope its real) the
Liberty of the Subject, and peace of the Kingdom, that you will grant Me this
hearing before any Sentence passed; but if I cannot get this liberty, I do
protest that your fair shows of Liberty and Peace are pure shows, and that
you will not hear your King.

The President said, This was a declining the Jurisdiction of the Court, and a
delay: Yet the Court vvithdrevv for half an hour, advised upon it, and sat
again.

Bradshaw said to the King, That the Court had considered what He had moved,
and of their own Authority; the return from the Court is this, That they have
been too much delayed by You already, and they are Judges appointed by the
highest Authority, and Judges are no more to delay, than they are to deny
justice; and notvvithstanding what You have offered, they are resolved to
proceed to Sentence, and to Judgment, that is their unanimous resolution.

The King pressed again and again, that He might be heard by the Lords and
Commons in the Painted Chamber, with great earnestness, and was as often
denied by Bradshaw: at last, the King desired that this Motion of His might be
entered.

Bradshaw began in a long Speech to declare the Grounds of the Sentence, much
aggravating the Kings offenses, and misapplying both Law and History to his
present purpose: When Bradshaw had done speaking, the Clerk read the Sentence
drawn up in Parchment to this effect:

84. The Sentence against His Majesty.
THat whereas the Commons of England in Parliament had appointed them an high
Court of Justice for the Trial of Charles Stuart King of England, before whom He
had been three times Convented; and at the first time a Charge of High Treason
and other high crimes and misdemeanors was read in behalf of the Kingdom of
England, etc. Here the Clerk read the aforesaid Charge.
Which Charge being read unto Him as aforesaid, He the said Charles Stuart was
required to give His Answer; but He refused so to do: and so expressed the
several passages at His Trial in refusing to Answer. For all which Treasons
and crimes this Court does adjudge, That He the said Charles Stuart as a
Tyrant, Traitor, Murderer, and a public Enemy shall be put to Death by
severing of His Head from His Body.

After the Sentence read, the President said, This Sentence now read and
published, it is the Act, Sentence, Judgment, and resolution of the whole
Court; Here the whole Court stood up, as assenting to what the President said.


King. Will you hear Me a word Sir?


Bradshaw. Sir, You are not to be heard after the Sentence.


King. No Sir!


Bradshaw. No. Sir, by your favor Sir! Guard, withdraw your Prisoner.


King. I am not suffered to speak: expect what Justice other people will have.


These are the Names of such Persons as did actually sit as Judges upon the
Trial of His Majesty, with the Council and Attendants of the Court.
Oliver Cromwell, Lieu. General. Com. Genesis Ireton. Major Genesis Skippon. Sir
Hardresse Waller. Colonel Thomas Harrison. Col. Edward Whalley. Col. Thomas
Pride. Col. Isaac Ewer. Col. Rich: Ingolsby. Sir Henry Mildmay. Thomas Lord
Gray. Philip Lord Lisle. Will: Lord Munson. Sir John Danvers. Sir Tho:
Maleverer. Sir John Bowcher. Sir. James Harringto^ Sir. William Brereton Will:
Hennigham Es. Isaac Pennington Ald: Thomas Atkins, Ald: Col. Rowland Wilson.
Sir Peter Wentworth. Col. Henry Martyn Col. William Purefoy Col. Godfrey
Bosvill. Colonel John Berkstead. Sir Will: Cunstable. Col. Edward Ludlow. Col.
Jo: Hutchingson. Col. Rob: Titchburne. Col. Owen Roe. Col. Adriaen Scroop Col.
John Oky. Col. John Harrison. Col. John Desborough. Cornelius Holland, Es.
Miles Corbet, Esquire. Francis Allen, Esquire. Peregrin Pelham, Esquire. John Gourdon, Esquire.
Serj. Francis Thorp. Tho: Challoner, Esquire. Col. John Moore. John Aldred, Esquire.
Col. Francis Lassels. Henry Smith, Esquire. James Chaloner, Esquire. Dens Bond, Esquire.
Humph: Edwards Esquire. Gregory Clement, Esquire. John Fray, Esquire. Tho: Wogan, Esquire. Sir
Greg: Norton. Serj. John Bradshaw. Col. Edm: Harvey. John Dove Esquire. Col. John
Venn. John Foulks, Alder: Thomas Scot. Tho: Andrews, Ald: William Cauwley,
Esquire. Col. Anthony Stapley. John List, Esquire. John Corbet, Esquire. Thomas Elunt,
Esquire. Thomas Boon, Esquire. Col. George Fleetwood Col. James Temple, Sir Peter
Temple. Col. Thomas Wait. John Brown, Esquire. Mr. Bradshaw, nominated President.
Counselors assistant to this Court, and to dravv up the Charge against the
KING, are. Doctor Dorislaus. Master Ask. Master Cook. Sergeant Dandy,
Sergeant at Arms. Mr. Phileps, Clerk to the Court.
Messengers, and Dore-keepers, are, Master VValford. M. Radley M. (...) M.
P^vvell. Mr. Hull. and M. King Crier.

85. Observations upon the Trial of His Majesty.
This is a Relation of his Majesty's Trial by a mixed Court of Justice erected
by 50. or 60. Confederate Members of the House of Commons, sitting under the
power of the Army, after all the rest of the Members above 250. had been
violently secured, secluded, and frighted away: And in order to this design
against the King, the House of Peers voted down, and yet the House of Commons
(when entire) is no Court of Judicature, nor can give an Oath. Had indifferent
men been permitted to take Notes, you had had a more perfect narrative; yet as
it is, truth shines forth to the confusion of this bloody, cheating,
tyrannical faction: could they have wrought the King to have submitted to the
Jurisdiction of this Arbitrary Court, His example should have been urged as an
irrefragable Precedent against the lives and liberties of the whole Kingdom,
and urged to be of as great Authority, as if He had established that Court by
Act of Parliament: So that the King is to be looked on as a Civil Martyr dying
for the Liberty of the People. And although they have failed of this device,
yet they will have some other Arbitrary bloody Inquisition to cut off the lives
(without Law) of such as they desire to remove, without which this Tyrannous
Kingdom of the Saints, or Brambles, cannot subsist; And therefore on Thursday,
2. Februarij, Cromwell and Ireton, and their Canniball Counsel of Officers
projected to get an Act passed by their House of Commons (where all their
Requests, are Commands) to enable the said Council to hang all such as they
shall adjudge Disturbers of the Army, 1. Part of Englands lyberty in Chains,
sub fine: And the Hunting of the Foxes, etc,
although no Members of the Army: they must have public Slaughter-houses in
terrorem, as well as private ad poenam, the nature of their Cause, and their
natural conditions requiring it. Oliver is a Bird of prey, you may know by his
Bloody Beak; so was his Prodromus that Type and figure of him, John of Leyden;
than whom, this Fellow will shortly prove far more bloody: you see this
schismatic remnant of one House, have the impudence to usurp the Supreme
Authority to themselves: And then to tell you, that the Votes of this petty
Conventicle (calling themselves the Commons) are the Law, nay the Reason of the
Land, thereby devesting us of those Laws which shall distinguish us from
Slaves, and denying us the use of our reason, whereby we are differenced from
Beasts, and expecting an implicit faith and blind obedience from us, to all
the Votes of this half quarter of a House of Commons, so far that they Vote
obedience to the known Laws (in many cases) to be Treason; and what all our
Laws call Treason, they Vote no Treason: nay, should they vote a Turd to be a
Rose, or Oliver's Nose a Ruby, they would expect we should swear it, and
fight for it. This legislative Den of Thieves erect new Courts of Justice,
neither founded upon Law nor prescription, Theaters of illegal tyranny and
oppression, to take away men's lives Arbitrarily, for actions which no Law
makes criminous, nay, for such acts as the Laws command, where their
proceedings are contrary to Magna Charta, and all our known Laws and
usages, not per probos and legales homines, no Juries, no sworn Judges,
authentically chosen, no Witnesses face to face, no formal Indictment in
which a man may find error and plead to the jurisdiction of the Court, or
where the Court ought to be of Council with the Prisoner: but the same
engaged and vowed Enemies are both Parties, Prosecutors, Witnesses, Judges (or
Authorizers and Nominators of the Judges) Actors of all parts upon that stage
of Blood.

The King pressed earnestly (especially upon Monday, 22. Ian.) to have His
Reasons against the Jurisdiction of the Court heard, but was as often denied,
He intended then to give them in vvriting, which was likewise rejected: so
they were sent to the press. A true Copy whereof follows: His Majesty's
Reasons against the pretended Jurisdiction of the High Court of Justice, which
He intended to deliver in Writing on Monday, Jan. 22. 1648. 86. His Majesty's
Reasons against the Jurisdiction of the high Court of Justice; published after
His condemnation.

Faithfully transcribed out of the Original Copy under the Kings own Hand.

HAving already made my Protestations not only against the illegality of this
pretended Court, but also that no earthly power can justly call Me (who am your
King) in question as a Delinquent, I would not any more open My mouth upon this
occasion, more then to refer My self to what I have spoken, were I alone in
this case concerned. But the duty I owe to God in the preservation of the true
Liberty of My People, will not suffer Me at this time to be silent: For, how
can any freeborn Subject of England call life or any thing he possesses his
own, if power without right daily make new, and abrogate the old fundamental
Law of the Land, which I now take to be the present case. Wherefore when I
came hither, I expected that you would have indevoured to have satisfied Me
concerning these grounds, which hinder Me to Answer to your pretended
Impeachment; but since I see that nothing I can say will move you to it (though
Negatives are not so naturally proved as Affirmatives) yet I will show you the
Reason why I am confident you cannot judge Me, nor indeed the meanest man in
England; for I will not (like you) without showing a reason, seek to impose a
belief upon My Subjects.

Hereabout I was stopped, and not suffered to speak any more concerning Reasons.
There is no proceeding just against any man, but what is warranted either by
Gods Laws, or the municipall Laws of the Country where he lives. Now I am
most confident, that this days proceeding cannot be warranted by Gods Law, for
on the contrary the authority of obedience unto Kings is clearly warranted and
strictly commanded both in the Old and New Testament; which if denied, I am
ready instantly to prove: and for the question now in hand, there it is said,
That where the word of a King is, there is Power; and who may say unto him,
what do thou? Eccles. 8.4. Then for the Laws of the Land, I am no less
confident, that no learned Lawyer will affirm that an Impeachment can lie
against the KING, they all going in His name; and one of their Maxims is, That
the King can do no wrong. Besides, the Law upon which you ground your
proceedings, must either be old or new; if old, show it; if new, tell what
authority warranted by the fundamental Laws of the Land has made it, and
when. But how the House of Commons can erect a Court of Judicature, which was
never one it self (as is well known to all Lawyers) I leave to God and the
World to judge; And it were full as strange that they should pretend to make
Laws without King or Lords House, to any that have heard speak of the Laws of
England.

And admitting, but not granting, that the People of Englands Commission could
grant your pretended power, I see nothing you can show for that; for certainly
you never asked the question of the tenth man of the Kingdom, and in this way
you manifestly wrong even the poorest Plough-man, if you demand not his free
consent; nor can you pretend any color for this your pretended Commission
without the consent at least of the major part of every man in England, of
whatsoever quality or condition, which I am sure, you never went about to seek,
so far are you from having it. Thus you see that I speak not for My own
right alone, as I am your King, but also for the true Liberty of all My
Subjects, which consists not in sharing the power of Government, but in living
under such Laws, such a Government as may give themselves the best assurance
of their lives and propriety of their goods. Nor in this must or do I forget
the Privileges of both Houses of Parliament, which this days proceedings does
not only violate, but likewise occasion the greatest breach of their Public
Faith (I believe) ever was heard of, with which I am far from charging the
two Houses: for all the pretended Crimes laid against Me, bear date long
before this late Treaty at Newport, in which I having concluded as much as in
Me lay, and hopefully expecting the two Houses agreement thereunto, I was
suddenly surprised, and hurried from thence as a Prisoner, upon which account I
am against My will brought hither, where since I am come, I cannot but to My
power defend the ancient Laws and Liberties of this Kingdom, together with My
own just Right, then for any thing I can see the higher House is totally
excluded.

And for the House of Commons, it is too well known that the major part of
them are detained or deterred from sitting, so as if I had no other, this were
sufficient for Me to protest against the lawfulness of your pretended Court.

Besides all this, the peace of the Kingdom is not the least in My thoughts,
and what hopes of setlement is there so long as power reigns without rule of
Law, changing the whole frame of that Government under which this Kingdom has
flourished for many hundred years, (nor will I say what will fall out in case
this lawless unjust proceeding against Me do go on) and believe it the
Commons of England will not thank you for this change, for they will remember
how happy they have bin of late years under the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, the
King my Father, and My self, until the beginning of these unhappy troubles,
and will have cause to doubt that they shall never be so happy under any new.
And by this time it will be too sensibly evident, that the Arms I took up were
only to defend the fundamental Laws of this Kingdom, against those who have
supposed My power has totally changed the ancient Government.

Thus having showed you briefly the Reasons, why I cannot submit to your
pretended Authority without violating the trust which I have from God, for the
welfare and liberty of My People; I expect from you either clear Reasons to
convince My Judgment, showing Me that I am in an error (and then truly I
will readily answer) or that you will withdraw your proceedings.




This I intended to speak in Westminster Hall on Monday, 22. January, but
against reason was hindered to show My Reasons.

87. Alteration of the forms and styles of Writs and Legal proceedings.
The 27. Ian. The Commons read the Act for Altering the forms of Writs, and
other procedings in Courts of Justice, which (according to all our known
Laws, the custom of all Ages, and the fundamental Government of this
Kingdom) ever ran in the King's Name. This Act upon the Question was assented
to, and no concurrence of the Lords desired, of this more hereafter.

88. A Proclam: to be brought in. prohibiting the Pr: of Wales, or any of the
Kings Issue to be proclaimed King of England.
The I unto of 50. or 60. Commons appointed a Committee to pen a Proclamation,
That if any man should go about to Proclaim Prince Charles, or any of that
line King of England (after the removal of King Charles the Father out of this
life) as is usually, and ought to be done by all Mayors, Bailiffs of
Corporations, High Sheriffs, etc. under high penalties of the Law for their
neglect) or shall proclaim any other without the consent of the present
Parliament: the Commons declare it to be High Treason; and that no man under
pain of Imprisonment or such other (arbitrary) punishment, as shall be thought
sit to be inflicted on them, shall speak or preach any thing contrary to the
present proceedings of the Supreme Authority of this Nation, the Commons of
England assembled in Parliament. Your hands and feet, liberties and consciences
were long since tied up, now you are tongue-tied.

Upon motion, the House ordered, 89. The Bishop of London appointed by the Ho:
to administer spiritual comfort to the condemned King; and the Kings usage by
the Army. See Mr. Io: Geree's Book against Good-vvin, called, (Might
over-comming right.) And Mr. Pryn's Epistle to his Speech. 6. Dec. 1648.
That Doctor Iuxon Bishop of London, should be permitted to be private with
the King in His Chamber, to preach and administer the Sacraments, and other
spiritual comforts to Him: But notwithstanding, their Masters of the Council
of War, appointed that vveather-cocke John Goodwin of Coleman-street (the
Balaam of the Army that curses and blesses for Hire) to be Superintendent
both over King and Bishop, so that they could hardly speak a word together
without being overheard by the long-schismaticall-eares of black-mouthed John:
Besides, I hear that for some nights a Guard of Soldiers was kept within His
Chamber, who with talking, clinking of pots, opening and shutting of the door,
and taking Tobacco there (a thing very offensive to the Kings nature) should
keep Him watching, that so by distempering and amazing Him, with want of sleep,
they might the easier bring Him to their bent.

28. January, being the last Sabbath the King kept in this life, 90. A
Paper-booke of Demands tendered to be Subscribed by the King the Sunday before
He died. See sect. 94.
some of the Grandees of the Army and Parliament tendered to the King a
Paper-booke, with promise of Life and some shadow of Regality (as I hear) if
He Subscribed it: It contained many particulars destructive to the fundamental
Government, Religion, Laws, Liberties, and Property of the People: One whereof
was instanced to Me, viz. That the KING should (amongst many other demands)
pass an Act of Parliament for keeping on foot the Militia of this Army during
the pleasure of the Grandees, who should be trusted with that Militia, and with
power from time to time to recruit and continue them to the number of 40000.
Horse and Foot, under the same General and Officers, with power
notwithstanding in the Council of War to choose new Officers and Generals
from time to time as occasion shall happen, and they think fit; and to settle
a very great Tax upon the People by a Land Rate, for an established pay for the
Army; to be collected and leavied by the Army themselves, and a Court Martial
of an exorbitant extent and latitude. His Majesty (as I hear) read some few of
the Propositions, and throwing the^ aside told them, He would rather become a
sacrifice for His People, then betray their Laws and Liberties, Lives and
Estates, together with the Church and Commonwealth, and the Honor of His
Crown, to so intolerable a Bondage of an Armed faction.

Monday, 29. Ianu. 1648. The legislative half-quarter of the House of Commons,
91. The Style and Title of Custodes libertatis Angliae, voted to be used in
legal proceedings. instead of the style of the King. These Goalers of the
Liberties of England are Individuum vagum, not yet named. See a Continuation of
this madness in an Act for better settling proceedings in (...) of Justice,
according to the present Government, Dated 17. Feb. 1648.
voted as follows, (hearken with admiration Gentlemen) be it enacted by this
present Parliament, and by Authority of the same, that in all Courts of Law,
Justice, and equity, and in all Writs, Grants, Patents, Commissions,
Indictments, Informations, Suits, Returns of Writs, and in all Fines,
Recoveries, Exemplifications, Recognizances, Process, and proceedings of Law,
Justice, or Equity within the Kingdoms of England or Ireland, Dominion of
Wales, etc. instead of the Name, Style, Test, or Title of the KING heretofore
used, that from henceforth the Name, Style, Test or Title Custodes libertatis
Angliae, authoritate Parliamenti, shall be used, and no other; and the Date of
the year of the Lord, and none other; and that all Duties, Profits, Penalties,
Fines, Amerciaments, Issues, and Forfeitures whatsoever, which heretofore were
sued for in the name of the KING, shall from henceforth be sued for in the name
of Custodes libertatis Angliae, authoritate Parliamenti: and where the words
were (Iuratores pro Domino Rege) they shall be (Iuratores pro Republica) and
where the words are (contra pacem, dignitatem and coronam nostram) the words
from henceforth shall be (contra pacem Publicam.) All Judges, Justices,
Ministers, and Officers, are to take notice thereof, etc. and whatsoever
henceforth shall be done contrary to this Act, shall be, and is hereby declared
to be null and void; the death of the King, or any Law, usage or custom to the
contrary notwithstanding, etc.

92. Another device to mortify the King.
The King lay in White Hall Saturday (the day of his Sentence) and Sunday night
so near the place appointed for the separation of His Soul and Body, that He
might hear every stroke the Worke-men gave upon the Scaffold (where they
wrought all night) this is a new device to mortify Him, but it would not do.

93.
Tuesday, 30. Ian. 1648. was the day appointed for the Kings Death; He came on
Foot from Saint James's to White Hall that morning: His Majesty coming upon the
Scaffold, made a Speech to the People; which could only be heard by some few
Soldiers and Schismatics of the Faction who were suffered to possess the
Scaffold, and all parts near it; and from their Pens only we have our
informations.

His Majesty's Speech upon the Scaffold, and His Death, or Apotheosis.
The KING told them,

THat all the world knew He never began the War with the two Houses of
Parliament, and He called God to witness (to whom He must shortly give an
account) He never intended to encroach upon their Privileges; They began upon
Me, it was the Militia they began with, they confessed the Militia was Mine,
but they thought fit to have it from Me: and to be short, if any body will look
to the Dates of the Commissions, Theirs, and Mine, and likewise to the
Declarations, will see clearly that They began these unhappy Troubles.

And a little after He said, I pray God they may take the right way to the
peace of the Kingdom; Soldiers Rebelling against their Master or Sovereign,
though they prevail, cannot claim by conquest, because their quarrel was
perfidious, base and sinful from the beginning.
But I must first show you how you are out of the way, and then put you into
the right way: First, you are out of the way, for all the way you ever had yet
(by any thing I could ever find) was the way of Conquest, which is a very ill
way, for Conquest is never just except there be a good just Cause, either for
matter of wrong, or just Title, and then if you go beyond the first Quarrel
that you have, that makes it unjust in the end that was just in the beginning;
but if it be only matter of Conquest, then it is a great Robbery, as the
Pyrate said to Alexander, and so (I think) the way that you are in has much of
that way; Now (Sirs) to put you in the way, believe it you will never do
right, nor God will never prosper you, until you give him his due, the King
(that is My Successor) his due, and the People (for whom I am as much as any of
you) their due.

1. You must give God his due, by regulating rightly his Church, (according to
his Scripture) which is now out of order, to set you in a way particularly now
I cannot, but only a National Synod freely called, freely debating amongst
themselves must settle this; when that every opinion is freely and clearly
heard.

2. For the King, the Laws of the Land will freely instruct you, and because
it concerns My self I will only give you a touch of it.

3. For the people (and truly I desire their Liberty and Freedom as much as
any man whatsoever) I must tell you, their Liberty and Freedom consists in
having such a Government, whereby their Lives and Goods may be most their own,
it lies not in having a share in the Government, that is nothing pertinent to
them; a Subject and a Sovereign are clean different things: and therefore
until you restore the People to such a Liberty, they will never enjoy
themselves; Sirs, it was for this I now come hither, if I would have given way
to an Arbitrary sway, to have all Laws changed according to the power of the
Sword, I needed not to have come here; See sect. 90.
and therefore I tell you (and I pray God it be not laid to your charge) that I
am the Martyr of the People, etc.


The House had the impudence to answer the Dutch Ambassadors, That vvat they
had done to the King was according to the Law of the Land. They meant, that
their Lusts are the Laws of the Land: for other Law they can show none.
This was the effect of His Majesty's Speech, who showed much magnanimity and
Christian Patience during all the time of His Trial and Death, notwithstanding
many barbarous affronts put (by way of tentation) upon Him, He had His. Head
severed from His Body at one stroke, the Soldiers and Schismatics giving a
great shout presently.

Thus this noble Prince (a Gentleman sanctified by many afflictions (after He
had escaped Pistol, Poison, and Pestilent air, could not escape the more
venomous tongues of Lawyers and Petty foggers, Bradshaw, Cook, Steel, Ask
and Dorislaus; thus the Shepherd is smitten, and the Sheep scattered.

THe said High Court of Justice, with the downfall of King CHARLES the I.
thereby and in Him of the Regal Government, Religion, Laws, and Liberties of
this ancient Kingdom is Emblematically presented to the Readers view: See the
Figure, before the Title page.

Presently after this dissolution of the King, the Commons sent abroad
Proclamations into London, and all England over, reciting, 94. Proclamations
published against proclaiming the King.
That whereas several pretenses might be made to this Crown, and Title to the
Kingly Office set on foot, to the apparent hazard of the public peace. Be it
enacted and ordained by this present Parliament, and by the Authority of the
same, that no Person whatsoever do presume to proclaim, declare, publish, or
any ways to promote Charles Stuart ( Son of the said Charles) commonly
called Prince of Wales, or any other Person to be King, or Chief Magistrate of
England or Ireland, or of any Dominions belonging to them; by color of
Inheritance, Succession, Election, or any other claim whatsoever, without the
free consent of the people in Parliament first had and signified by a
particular Act or Ordinance, for that purpose, any Law, Stat: usage or custom
to the contrary notwithstanding: Who shall judge when these Fellows will be
thougt free, and when not?
and whosoever shall contrary to this Act, Proclaim, etc. Shall be deemed and
adjudged a Traitor, and suffer accordingly.

Notwithstanding which inhibition, the 2. February, 1648. 95. A Proclamation
privately printed and scattered, proclaiming CHARLES the second.
was printed and scattered about London-streets this following Proclamation: *
A Proclamation proclaiming CHARLES Prince of Wales, King of Great Britain,
France and Ireland.
WE the Noblemen, Judges, Knights, Lawyers, Gentlemen, Freeholders, Merchants,
Citizens, Yeomen, Seamen, and other freemen of England, do, according to our
Allegiance and Covenant, by these presents heartily, joyfully and unanimously
acknowledge and proclaim the Jllustrious CHARLES Prince of Wales, next heir of
the blood Royal to his Father King CHARLES (whose late wicked and traiterous
murder we do from our souls abominate, and all parties and consenters
thereunto (to be by herditary Birthright, and lawful succession, rightful and
undoubted King of Great Britain, France and Ireland, and the Dominions
thereunto belonging. And that we will faithfully, constantly and sincerely in
our several places and callings defend and maintain his Royal Person,
Crown, and Dignity with our Estates, Lives, and last drop of our Bloods,
against all Opposers thereof; whom we do hereby declare to be Traitors and
Enemies to his Majesty and his Kingdoms. In testimony whereof, we have caused
these to be published and proclaimed throughout all Counties and Corporations
of this Realm, the first day of February, in the first year of His Majesty's
Reign.

God save King CHARLES the Second.



The fag end of the House of Commons, Febr. 1. 1648. 96. A Vote that such
Members as had assented to the Vote, 5. Dec. shall sit no more: others to enter
their disse^t and disapprovall.
passed a thing they call an Act, That such Members as had assented to the
Vote, 5. December. 1648. That the Kings Concessions were a ground for the House
to proceed to a setlement, should not be readmitted to sit as Members; such as
were then in the House and voted in the negative should first enter their
dissent to the said Vote, such as were absent should declare their disabbrovall
before they sit. You see the cheating Godly are resolved to keep all to
themselves.

This day their tame Lordships sent a Message to the House of Commons, but they
were too surly to call the Messengers in: the substance of the Message was,
That their Lordships had appointed 7. 97. The Lords send a Message to the Comm:
but the messenger not called in.
of their House to join with a proportionable number of Commons, to consider
of a way how to settle this Nation.

Monday, 5. Febr. 1648. The Commons debated whether they should continue the
House of Lords as a Court Iudicatory, or Consultory only? And the day
following they put this Question, Whether this House shall take the advice of
the House of Lords, in the exercise of the Legislative power of the Kingdom,
in pursuance of the Votes of this House, 4. Iann: last. This was carried in the
Negative by many Voices: 98. The house of Lords voted down.
in farther pursuance of which Vote, they farther voted, That the House of
Peers in Parliament is useless and dangerous, and ought to be abolished; and
that an Act be brought in for that purpose, and voted down their Privilege of
being exempt from Arrests; yet they graciously condescended they shall be
capable of being elected knights of Shires, and Burgesses, if any will be so
mad as to choose them: yet my Lord of Pembroke is as much overjoyed with gay
Privilege, as if they had bestowed a new Cap with a Bell and a Babble upon him:
who will not now conclude that the Votes of this Legislative, this supreme
piece of the House of Commons, is the only Law and reason of the Land, which
leads all our Laws and reason captive, and is almighty against all but the
Council of the Army.

The 8. Febr. 99. A Protestation of Peers
came forth A Declaration and Protestation of the Peers, Lords and Barons of
this Realm, against the late treasonable proceedings and tyrannical
usurpations of some Members of the Commons House, who endeavor to subvert the
fundamental Laws, and Regal Government of this Kingdom, and enslave the
People to their boundless Tyranny in stead of Freedom. The Protestation
follows.

WE the Peers, Lords and Barons of this Realm of England, for the present
necessary vindication of the undoubted Rights and Privileges of Parliament,
and more particularly of the House of Peers, the just Prerogatives and
Personal safety of our Kings, the known Laws and Liberties of this Kingdom,
the Hereditary Freedom of all the Freemen of this Nation, and our own
affronted and contemned Honors and Authority, against the many late
unparalled dangerous Invasions and treasonable Usurpations of a few insolent
mis-advised Members of the (late) House of Commons, whiles the greatest and
ablest part of that House were forcibly detained or deterred from thence,
wherewith we find our selves and the whole Kingdom unsufferably injured and
deeply afflicted. Do, after a long patient expectation of their own ingenious
Retractations of such unjustifiable Exorbitances, which their own judgments
and consciences cannot but condemn, whereof we now utterly despair; being
thereto engaged in point of Honor, Loyalty, Conscience, Oath, and love to our
Native Country, as also by our Solemn League and Covenant, publicly declare
and protest to all the world, That by the Laws and Customs of this Realm,
and usage of Parliament time out of mind, ever since there were Parliaments in
this Island, the principal Authority and Iudicatory of the Parliaments of
England has always constantly resided, and ought still to continue only in
the King and House of Peers, (wherein He always sits) and not in the Commons
House, who never had, claimed, nor ought to have any right or power to judge
any Person or Cause civilly or criminally (having no authority to examine any
VVitnesses upon Oath, and being no Court of Record) but only to accuse and
impeach Delinquents in and before the House of Peers, where they always have
used to stand bare-headed at their Bar; but never yet to stand covered, much
less to sit, vote, or give Judgment. And that the House of Commons without
the concurrent assent of the House of Peers, and Kings of England, never
heretofore challenged nor enjoyed, nor can of right pretend to any lawful
power or Jurisdiction to make or publish any form or binding Ordinance, Vote,
Act, or Acts of Parliament whatsoever, nor ever once presumed to pass any Act
or Acts to erect a new High Court of Justice, to try, condemn, or execute the
meanest Subject, least of all their own Sovereign Lord and King, or any Peer
of the Kingdom (who by the Common and Statute Laws of this Realm, and Magna
Charta, ought to be tried only by their Peers and not otherwise) or to
Dis-inherit the right Heir to the Crown or to alter the fundamental
Government, Laws, Great Seal, or ancient forms of process and legal
proceedings of this Realm, or to make or declare High Treason to be no
Treason; or any Act to be Treason, which in it self, or by the Law of the Land
is no Treason; or to dispose of any Offices or Places of Judicature, or impose
any penalties, Oaths, or Taxes on the Subjects of this Realm. And therefore we
do here in the presence of Almighty God, Angels, and Men, from our hearts
disclaim, abhor, and protest against all Acts, Votes, Orders or Ordinances
of the said Members of the Commons House lately made and published, for setting
up any new Court of Justice to try, condemn, or execute the King, or any
Peers or Subject of this Realm: (which for any Person or Persons to sit in or
act as a Judge or Commissioner, to the condemning or taking away the lift of
the King, or any Peer or other Subject, We declare to be High Treason and
wilful Murder) to Dis-inherit the Prince of Wales of the Crown of England,
or against proclaiming him King after his Royal Fathers late most impious,
traiterous and barbarous murder, or to alter the Monarchical Government,
Laws, Great, Seal, Iudicatories, and ancient forms of Writs, and Legal
process and proceedings; or to keep up or make good any Commissions, Judges or
Officers, made void by the Kings bloody execution; or to continue any old, or
raise any new forces or Armies; or to impose any new Taxes, Payments, Oaths or
forfeitures on the Subjects, or to take away any of their Lives, Liberties or
Estates against the Fundamental Laws of the Realm, or to make any new
Judges, Justices, or Officers; or set aside the House of Peers (far antienter
than the Commons House) and particularly this insolent and frantique Vote of
theirs, Feb. 6. [That the House of Peers in Parliament is useless and
dangerous, and ought to be abolished, and that an Act be brought in for that
purpose] to be not only void, null, and illegal in themselves by the Laws
and Statutes of this Realm, but likewise treasonable, detestable, tyrannical
and destructive to the Privileges, Rights and being of Parliaments, the just
Prerogatives and Personal safety of the Kings of England: the fundamental
Government and Laws of the Realm, the Lives, Liberties, Properties and
Estates of the People, and the most transcendent tyranny and usurpation over
the King, Kingdom, Parliament, Peers, Commons, and Freemen of England ever
practiced or attempted in any Age, tending only to dishonor, enslave, and
destroy this ancient flourishing Kingdom, and set up Anarchy and confusion in
all places.


All which exorbitant and traiterous Usurpations; We and all freeborn
Englishmen are by all obligations bound to oppose to the uttermost with our
lives and fortunes, lest We should be accessory to our own and our posterities
slavery and ruin, for preventing whereof We have lately spent so much blood
and treasury against the Malignant Party, whose treasons and insolences they
far exceed.

100. The Kingly Office voted down. After almost 1000 years it is now
discovered by these New Lights to be inconvenient to be in one hand; therefore
it must be in the Council of State: forty Tyrants for one King. That is the
Army and their Party.
The 7. Febru: the Commons debated about the Kingly Office, and passed this Vote,

Resolved, etc. By the Commons of England assembled in Parliament, that it has
been found by experience, and this House does declare, that the Office of a
King in this Nation, and to have the power thereof in any single Person is
unnecessary, burdensome and dangerous to the liberty, safety, and public
interest of the People of this Nation, and therefore ought to be abolished,
101. A Committee to bring in a list of Names for a Council of State.
and that an Act be brought in for that purpose.

A Committee was named to bring in a List of Names (not exceeding 40) to be a
Committee of State, by Act of the House of Commons. This is to pull down one
King, to whom we owe Allegiance; and set up forty Tyrants, to whom we owe no
Allegiance.

Instructions were given by the Commons for drawing new Commissions for the
Judges, 102. New commissions for the Judges, whereof six hold, and six quit
their Places.
according to the new Antimonarchicall style and way, the new Great Seal being
now ready, a Committee of the House met the Judges about it; whereof six agreed
to hold (upon a provision to be made by Act of the House of Commons, that the
fundamental Laws be not abolished.) This very provision so made by Act of the
Commons (beside all their former Votes against Monarchy, Peerage, altering the
style of Writs, coynage of Money, etc.) is it self an abolition of the
fundamental Laws: This is but a Fig-leafe to cover their shame. Those that
held were, of the Kings bench. Mr. Justice Rolls and Judge Ierman; of the
Common Pleas, Mr. Justice St. John, and Judge Phesant; of the Exchequer, Chief
Baron VVylde, and Baron Yates: those which quitted their Places and kept their
consciences were, Justice Bacon, Justice Brown, 103. Cyrencester Election: But
the Clerk of the Crown certified, that between the Committee of Elections,
and himself) they could not find the Indentures of return: the House
therefore Ordered, That they should sit, and do de service; so they are
Burgesses not returned: but ordered to sit.
Sir Tho: Beddinfeilde, Justice Cressewell, Baron Treaver, and Baron Atkins.

8. Febr. The Election of the General and Col: Rich at Cyrencester which never
durst see the light before, after about 3 years lying dormant, and no account
made of it; is on a sudden reported to the House, approved of, and the Clerk
of the Crown (for whom they have not invented a new name yet) ordered to mend
the return of the Writ at the Bar.

104. A Declaration, That they will keep the fundamental Laws, (lives) why did
they erect the High Court of Justice, and do still cont nue Martial Law?
(liberties) why do they press Seamen then? (properties) why do they leavie
illegal Taxes by Soldiers, and continue illegal Sequestratio^s.
They likewise passed a Declaration to this purpose, that they are fully
resolved to maintain, and shall and will uphold, preserve and keep the
fundamental Laws of this Nation; for, and concerning the preservation of the
lives, liberties and properties of the People, with all things incident
thereunto, with the Alterations concerning Kings, and House of Lords, already
resolved in this present Parliament.

Monday, February 12. 105. The Judges Circutes appointed, the Benches filled
up, and their Oaths altered.
The Commons appointed the Circuits for those Judges that held, and passed an
Act for Completing the Judges of the several Courts, filling up the rooms of
those that held not, with some alterations in their former Commissions, and a
new Oath to be given them, to swear well and truly to serve the Commonwealth
in the Office of a Justice of the Upper Bench (which all our Laws call the
Kings Bench) or Common Pleas, according to the best of their skill and cunning.

The House passed an Act that the Oath underwritten, 106. A new Oath for the
Freemen of London, and other Corporations.
and no other be administered to every Freeman of the City of London at his
admission, and of all other Cities, Buroughs, and Towns Corporate.

YOu shall swear, that you will be true and faithful to the Commonweath of
England, and in order thereto, you shall be obedient to the just and good
Government of the City of London, etc. 107. An Act to repeal the Oaths of
Allegiance, Obedience, and Supremacy.
They passed an Act also, to repeal the several Clauses in the Statutes, 1.
EliZ. and 3. Jacob. enjoining the Oaths of Allegiance, Obedience and Supremacy,
That the said Oaths, and all other Oaths of the like nature shall be, and are
hereby wholly taken away, the said Clauses in the said Acts be made void and
null, and shall not hereafter be administered to any Person, neither shall any
place or office be void hereafter by reason of the not taking of them, or any
of them, any Law, Custom, or Statute to the contrary notwithstanding.

108. Another Declaration and Protestation of the secured and secluded Members
In opposition to these tyrannous, destructive, illegal and traiterous
proceedings of 40. or 50. cheating Schismatics sitting nuder the force, and
promoting the Jnterests of will and power of the rebellious Council of
Officers in the Army: The secured and secluded Members of the House of Commons
Declared as follows: * A public Declaration and Protestation of the secured
and secluded Members of the House of Commons; Against the treasonable and
illegal late Acts and proceedings of some few Confederate Members of that dead
House, since their forcible Exclusion, 13. Febr. 1648.
WE the secured and secluded Members of the late House of Commons, taking into
our sad and serious Considerations the late dangerous, desperate and
treasonable proceedings of some few Members of that House (not amounting to a
full eighth part of the House if divided into ten) who confederating with the
Officers and General Council of the Army, have forcibly detained and secluded
us (against the Honor, Freedom, and Privileges of Parliament) from sitting
and voting freely with them, for the better settling of the Kingdoms peace; and
contrary to their Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy, their Protestation, the
Solemn League and Covenant, and sundry Declarations and Remonstrances of both
Houses, to His late Murdered MAJESTY, His Heirs and Successors, the whole
Kingdoms of England, Scotland and Ireland, and to all foraigne States and
Nations (since our exclusion and forced absence from their Counsels, by reason
of the Armies force) most presumptuously arrogated and usurped to themselves
the Title of, The Supreme Authority of this Kingdom: and by color and
pretense thereof have wickedly and audaciously presumed, without and against
our privities or consents, and against the unanimous Vote of the House of
Peers, to erect a High Court of Justice (as they term it) though never any
Court themselves, to Arraigne and Condemn His Majesty, against the laws of
God, and the municipall Laws of the Realm: which Court (consisting for the
most part of such partial and engaged Persons who had formerly vowed His
Majesty's destruction, and sought His blood) most illegally and unjustly
refused to admit of His Majesty's just Reasons and exceptions against their
usurped Jurisdiction; and without any lawful Authority or proof against Him,
or legal Trial, presumed most traitorously and impiously to Condemn and
Murder Him: and since that, have likewise presumed to Try and Arraigne some
Peers, and others free Subjects of this Realm for their Lives, contrary to
Magna Charta, the Petition of Right, the Laws of the Land, and the Liberty of
the Subjects, to the great enslaving and endangering of the lives and liberties
of all free People of England.

And whereas the said confederated Commons have likewise tyrannically and
audaciously presumed contrary to their Oaths and Engagements aforesaid, to
take upon them to make Acts of Parliament (as they term them) without our
privity or assents, or the joint consent of the King and House of Lords,
contrary to the Use and Privileges of Parliament and known Laws of the Land,
and by pretext thereof have traitorously and wickedly endeavored to
Dis-inherit the Illustrious CHARLES Prince of Wales, next Heir to the Crown,
and actual KING of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland, immediately after
His said Royal Fathers barbarous Murder, by Right of Descent; and proclaimed
it Treason for any Person to Proclaim Him KING; (whereas it is high Treason in
them thus to prohibit His proclaiming) and have likewise traitorously and
impudently encroached a tyrannical and lawless power to themselves to Vote
down our ancient Kingly and Monarchical Government, and the House of Peers;
and to make a new Great Seal of England without the Kings Portraicture or
Style, and to alter the ancient Regal and Legal style of Writs and
proceedings in the Courts of Justice, and to create new Judges and
Commissioners of the Great Seal, and to dispense with their Oaths of
Supremacy and Allegiance, and to prescribe new Oaths unto them contrary to
Law, (though they have no Authority by any Law, Statute, or Custom to
administer or injoyne an Oath to any man) and thereby have traitorously
attempted to alter the fundamental Laws and Government of this Kingdom, and
to subvert the freedom, privileges, and being of Parliaments; for which
Treasons, Strafford and Canterbury (though lest criminal) lost their Heads
this last Parliament, by some of their own prosecutions, and the judgment of
both Houses.

We in discharge of our respective duties and obligations both to God, the
King, our own Consciences, our bleeding dying Kingdoms, and the several
Counties, Cities and Buroughs for which we serve, do by this present Writing,
in our own Names, and in the Names of all the Counties, Cities, and Buroughs
which We represented in Parliament, publicly declare and solemnly protest
before the all-seeing God, the whole Kingdoms of England, Scotland, and
Ireland, and the world, that We do from the bottom of our hearts abominate,
renounce and disclaim all the said pretended Acts, Votes, and proceedings of
the said confederate Members, (acted under the Armies power against our
Consents) as treasonable, wicked, illegal, unparliamentary, tyrannical, and
pernicious both to the King, Parliamt, Kingdoms, and all the freeborn People
of this Realm; extremely disadvantagious and dishonorable to our Nation,
scandalous to our Religion, and mere forcible Usurpations, and Nullities void
in Law to all intents and purposes; which we, and all the Freemen of this
Kingdom, and all the Kingdoms and Dominions thereto belonging, are bound
openly to disavow, oppugn, and resist as such, with our purses, arms, lives,
to the last drop of our bloods; and to which, neither We, nor any other can,
ought, or dare to submit or assent in the least degree, without incurring the
guilt of High Treason, and the highest perjury, infamy, and disloyalty. And in
case the said Confederates shall not speedily retract, and desist from those
their treasonable practices, and tyrannical usurpations; (which We cordially
desire and entreat them by all obligations of love and respect they have to
God, Religion, their King, Country and Posterity timely to do.) We do hereby
denounce and declare them to be Traitors and public Enemies both to the King
and Kingdom, and shall esteem and prosecute them, with all their wilful
Adherents, and voluntary Assistants as such; and endeavor to bring them to
speedy and condign Punishment, according to the Solemn League and Covenant;
wherein, We trust the whole Kingdom, all those for whom We serve, and the Lord
of Hosts himself to whom We have sworn and lifted up our hands, hearts, and
fervent prayers will be aiding and assisting to us, and all our Brethren of
Scotland and Ireland who are united and conjoined with us in Covenant to our
GOD, and Allegiance to our Sovereign King CHARLES the Second, who (we trust)
will make good all His destroyed Fathers Concessions which really concern our
peace, or safety, and secure Us against all force and tyranny of our
Fellow Subjects; who now, contrary to their Trusts and former Engagements,
endeavor by the mere power of that Sword, (which was purposely raised for the
protection of our Persons, Government, Religion, Laws, Liberties, the KING's
Royal Person and Posterity, and the Privileges of Perliament) to Lord it over
Us at their pleasure, and enthrall and enslave Us to their armed violence, and
lawless martial wills; which we can no longer tolerate nor undergo, after so
long fruitless and abused patience in hope of their repentance. 109. A Paper
entitled, [Foure true Positions, etc.]





About the same time came out another Paper, entitled:

Four true and considerable Positions for the sitting Menbers, the new Course
of Justice, and new Judges, Sheriffs, Officers Lawyers, Justices, and others to
ruminate upon. 1. THat the whole House of Commons in no Age had any Power,
Right or Lawful Authority to make any Valid or binding Act or Ordinance of
Parliament; or to impose any Tax, Oath, Forfeiture, or capital punishment upon
any Person or Freeman of this Realm, without the Lords or Kings concurrent
assents: much less then can a small remnant only of the Members of that House
do it, sitting under an armed force (which nulls and vacates all their Votes
and procedings, as the Ordinance of 20. August. 1647. declares) whilst most of
their Fellow Members are forcibly detained and driven thence, as Mr. St. John
proves in his Speech concerning Ship-mony, p. 33. and in his Argument
concerning the Earl of Strafford's Attainder, p. 70. 71. 76. 77. 78. and Sir
Edw. Coke in his 4. Instit. c. 1.

2. That the few Members now sitting in, and the House of Commons being no
Court of Justice of it self, and having no power to hear and determine any
civil or criminal Causes, nor to give an Oath in any case whatsoever, cannot
by the Laws and Statutes of the Realm, nor by any pretext of authority
whatsoever, erect any new Court of Justice, nor give power or authority to any
new Judges, Justices, or Commissioners to arraigne, try, condemn or execute
any Subject of meanest quality, for any real or pretended crime whatsoever;
much less their own Sovereign Lord the King; or any Peers of this Realm,
who ought to be tried by their Peers, and by the Law of the Land alone, and not
otherwise. And that the condemning and executing the King, or any Peer, or
other Subject by pretext of such an illegal Authority, is no less than High
Treason and wilful Murder, both in the Members, the Commissioners, Judges or
Justices giving and executing Sentence of Death in any such arbitrary and
lawless void Court, or by virtue of any such void and illegal Commissions.

3. That the House of Commons and Members now sitting, have no power nor
authority to make or alter the Great Seal of England, or grant any Commissions
to any Commissioners, Judges, Sheriffs, Justices of the Peace, or any other.
That all the Commissions granted by them, under their New, or any other Seal,
are merely void and illegal; and all the new Writs and proceedings in Law or
Equity before any Judges, Justices, Sheriffs, or other Officers made by them,
merely void in Law to all intents, and coram non judice.

4. That the denial of the KING's Title to the Crown, and plotting the means
to deprive Him of it, or to set it upon another Head, is High Treason, within
the Stature of 25. Ed. 3. chapter 2. And that the endeavoring to subvert the
Fundamental Laws and Government of the Realm of England [by King, Lords, and
Commons] and to introduce a tyrannical or arbitrary Government against Law, is
High Treason at the Common Law (especially in Judges and Lawyers) not taken
away by any Statute. Both which Mr St. John in his Argument at Law, concerning
the Bil of attainder of high Treason of Tho: E. of Strafford, published by
order of the Com: House, An. 1641. p. 8. 14. to 33. and 64. to 78. And in his
Speech at a Conference of both Houses of Parl: concerning Ship money, An. 1640.
has proved very fully by many reasons and presidents; and Coke in his 7.
Report, f. 10, 11, 12. and 3. Instit. c. 1. That the Commons now sitting, in
making a new Great Seal, without the Kings Jmage or Style, in granting new
illegal Commissions to Judges, Justices of Peace, Sheriffs, and other Officers
in the name of Custodes Angliae in the general, in omitting and altering the
Kings Name, Style and Title in Writs, Process, Indictments, and proceedings at
the Common Law, and thereby endeavoring to Dis-inherit the Prince, (now
lawful King by and since his Fathers bloody murder) and to alter and subvert
the Fundamental Laws and Government of the Realm, by such Commissions and
proceedings, and by the power of an Army to enforce them; and the Judges,
Justices, Sheriffs, and other Officers who accept of such Commissions, and all
those (especially Lawyers) who voluntarily assist, consent, and submit to such
Commissions and Alterations by such usurped illegal Authority, and the
Commissioners sitting in the New Courts of Justice are most really guilty of
both these high Whereupon six Judges refused to accept any new Commissions, or
to act as Judges.
Treasons (in which there are no Accessories) and less excusable than
Strafford or Canterbury, whom some of these new Judges and sitting Members
impeached and prosecuted to death for those very Treasons themselves now act in
a more apparent and higher degree than they, and (in respect of their Oaths,
Covenant, Callings and Places) are more obliged to maintain the Kings Title,
the Fundamental Laws and Government, the Rights and Liberties of the Kingdom
and Parliament then they; and therefore (if they persevere therein) may justly
expect the self-same capital punishments they underwent, if not far worse;
especially since they attempt to reduce the antientest Kingdom of all
Christendom, into the puniest and most contemptible State in all the World; and
thereby to render us the most infamous, perfid ous and dishonorable Nation
under Heaven, both to the present and all succeeding Ages: which must needs
make the Contrivers and Abetters thereof the most detestable Traitors and
public Enemies to their King and native Country that ever this Realm brought
forth in any Age. Repent therefore of these your treasons, and amend your
lives, if you expect the least hope of pardon from God or Man; and expiate all
your former high misdemeanors, by engaging all your power and endeavors to
settle all things in Church and State according to your primitive engagements;
instead of accumulating one sin and Treason to another, which will prove your
certain ruin in conclusion, 110. Six propositions of undoubted verity.
Another Paper.
not your safety.

About the same time, and (it is thought) from the same Author came forth a
Paper bearing the Title of,

Six Propositions of undoubted verity, fit to be considered in our present
exigency by all loyal Subjects and conscientious Christians. Every act of
Parliament relates to the first day of the same Parliam: but it cannot be,
that any Act passed in the Reign of King Charles the second should relate to
the first day of this Parliament, which happened in the sixteenth year of
Charles the First, ergo, this Parliament is determined by the death of King
Charles the first.
1. THat this Parliament is ipso facto Dissolved by the King's death; He being
the Head, Beginning and End of the Parliament, called only by his Writ, to
Confer with Him as His Parliament and Council about urgent affairs,
concerning Him and His Kingdom, and so was it resolved in 1. Hen. 4. Rot.
Parl. n. 1. 14 H. 4. Coke 4. Instit. p. 46. and 4 C. 4. f. 44. b.

2. That immediately upon this Parliaments dissolution by the Kings death, all
Commissions granted by the King, or by one or both Houses to the General or
Officers of the Army, the Commissioners of the Great Seal of England, Judges
of the Kings Courts, Justices of Peace, Sheriffs, Excise-men, Customers, and
the like; with all Committees, and Ordinances of one or both Houses made this
Parliament, did actually determine, expire, and become merely void in Law to
all intents and purposes, and cannot be Continued as good and valid by any
Power whatsoever.

3. That instantly after the Kings decease, the Imperial Crown of this Realm
of England, and of the Kingdoms, Dominions, and Rights thereunto belonging, was
by inherent Birthright, and Lawful undoubted succession and descent actually
vested in the most Jllustrious Charles, Prince of Wales, being next lineall
Heir of the blood Royal to his Father King CHARLES: and that He is actual
KING thereof, before any Ceremony of Coronation, as is resolved in full
Parliament, by the Statute of 1. Iacobi, chapter 1. and by all the Judges of
England since. Coke 7. Report. f. 10, 11. in Calvin's Case, Whose Royal Person
and Title to the Crown all loyal Subjects are bound by their Oaths of
Supremacy, Allegiance, and Solemn League and Covenant, with their Estates,
Lives, and last drop of their bloods to maintain against all Opposers.

4. That all Peers of the Realm, Mayors, Sheriffs, chief Officers of Cities
and Corporations in this Kingdom, are obliged by their Places and Allegiance,
without any delays or excuses, to declare and proclaim Prince Charles to be
rightful King of England, and of all Kingdoms and Rights thereunto belonging;
notwithstanding any illegal prohibitions or menaces to the contrary by any
usurped Power whatsoever; under pain of being guilty of High Treason, and
forfeiting their City and Corporation Charters, in case of supine neglect or
refusal thereof; through fair, terror or any sinister respect.

5. That till King Charles be settled in his Throne, or give other Order, the
present Government of the Kingdom is legally vested only in the Lords and
Peers of the Realm, being by Inheritance, Custom and Law in such case, the
Kings and Kingdoms great Council, to whose lawful Commands all other Subjects
ought to yield ready Obedience.

6. That every professed actual endeavor by force or otherwise to alter the
fundamental Monarchical Government, Laws, and legal Style and proceedings of
this Realm; and to introduce any new Government or Arbitrary proceedings
contrary thereunto, is no less than High Treason, and so declared and resolved
by the last Parliamt, in the Cases of Strafford and Canterbury, the loss of
whose Heads (yet fresh in memory) should deter all others from pursuing their
pernicious courses and out-stripping them therein; they being as great, potent,
and as far out of the reach of danger and justice in humane probability as
any of our present Grandees.

111. A New Stamp for Coin
That no Act of Rebellion and Treason might be unattempted by this Conventicle,
no part of the Regalities of the King, or Peoples Liberties unviolated; they
considered of a New Stamp to be given to all Coin (for the future) of this
Nation.

112. Instructions for the Council of State.
13. Febr. They considered of Instructions and Power to be given by way of
Commission to the said Committee, or Council of State. 1. For the Government of
the two Nations of England and Ireland; appointing a Committee to bring in the
Names of these Hogens Mogens; and to perfect their Instructions: for, (1)
Ordering the Militia. (2) Governing the People, (they were wont to be Governed
by known Laws, not by Arbitrary Instructions, and by one King, not by forty
Tyrants, most of them base Mechanics, whose education never taught them to
aspire to more knowledge than the Office of a Constable.) (3) Settling of Trade.
(most of them have driven a rich Trade in the work of Reformation for
themselves.) (4) Execution of Laws, (this was wont to be done by legal sworn
Judges, Iuries, and Officers.)

113. Powers given to the Council of State.
14. Febr. The Committee reported to the House the Names of the Committee of
State, or Lords States General. Also the Power they were to have, viz: 1.
Power to command and settle the Militia of England and Ireland. 2. Power to set
forth Ships, and such a considerable Navy as they should think fit. 3. Power to
appoint Magazines and Stores for the Kingdoms of England and Ireland, and
dispose of them from time to time for the service of both Nations, as they shall
think fit. 4. Power to sit and execute the several powers given for the space
of one whole year; with many other powers not yet revealed, and daily
increased: besides what improvements of Power they are able to make hereafter,
having the Militia of an Army (that formidable Hob-goblin) at their Command.
They have two Seals appointed, a Great Seal, and a Signet Patents for
Sheriffs, and Commissions for Justices, and Oaths for both, were reformed
according to the Godly cut.

When the Committee of State was nominated in the House, 114. An expurgatory
Oath put upon the Council of State, scrupled by some of the Members, and
moderated by Cromwell, in opposition of the Levellers.
diverse Gentlemen of the best quality were named; whom they could not omit,
because they had sat with them, and concurred in all their great debates:
although they had more confidence in those petty Fellows, who had, or would
sell their souls for gain, to make themselves Gentlemen, to debar the said
Gentlemen of quality therefore and make them forbear, they invented an
expurgatory Oath or Shibeleth to be taken by every Member before his
initiation, whereby they should Declare, That they approved of what the House
of Commons and their High Court of Justice had done against the KING, and of
their abolishing of Kingly Government, and of the House of Peers, and that the
Legislative and Supreme power was wholly in the House of Commons. 22. Febr:
Cromwell (Chairman of that Committee of State) reported to the Commons, That
according to the order of that House, 19 of the said Members had subscribed to
that form of the Oath as it was originally penned: but 22. of them scrupled
it, whereof all the Lords were part, not but that they confessed (except one)
The Commons of England to be the Supreme power of the Nation, or that they
would not live and die with them in what they shall do for the future, but
could not confirm what they had done in relation to the King and Lords: so it
was referred to a Committee to consider of an expedient.

Cromwell (having made use of the Levellers (Assertors of public Liberty) to
purge the House of Commons, 115. Cromvvels usurped power. When the House of
Commons opposed Cromvvells and ^ons designs, they cried up the Liberty of the
People, and decried the Authority of Parliament, until they had made use of
the Levellers to purge the House of Commons, and make it subservient to their
ends; and abolish the House of Lords: and then they cried up the Supreme
Authority of their House of Commons, and decried the Liberty of the People, and
the Levellers who upheld it. So Charles the 5. first made use of the Popes
Authority to subdue the Protestants of Germany, and then used an Army of
Protestants to subdue and imprison the Pope.
and abolish the Lords House) does now endeavor to cast down the Levellers
once more, finding himself raised to so great an height, that he cannot endure
to think of a levelling equality; he oversvvaies the Council of War,
over-avves the House of Commons, and is Chairman and Ringleader of the
Council of State: so that he has engrossed all the power of England into his
own hands, and is become the Triple King, or Lord Paramount over all the
Tyrants of England; in opposition therefore to the Levelling party, and for the
upholding his own more Lordly Interest, he procured an expedient to Alter and
Reform the said Oath, which at last passed in this form follovving: February
the 22. 1648.
116. The form of the said reformed Oath.
I A.B. being nominated a Member of the Council of State by this present
Parliament, do testify, that I do adhere to this present Parliament, in the
maintenance and defense, of the public liberty and freedom of this Nation as
it is now Declared by this Parliament, (by whose Authority I am constituted a
Member of the said Council) and in the maintenance and defense of their
resolutions concerning the settling of the Government of this Nation for the
future, in way of a Republique without King or House of Peers, and I do
promise in the sight of God, that (through his Grace) I will be faithful in
performance of the trust committed to me as aforesaid, and therein faithfully
pursue the Instructions given to the said Council by this present Parliament;
Here you see a curtain drawn between the eyes of the people and the clandestine
machinations and actings of this Council.
and not reveal or disclose any thing in whole or in part, directly, or
indirectly, that shall be debated or resolved upon in the Council, without the
command or direction of the Parliament, or without the order or allowance of
the major part of the Council, or of the major part of them that shall be
present at such Debates or Resolutions: In confirmation of the premises, I have
hereto subscribed my Name. 117. The C: of War debate to massacre the Kings
party. See Will: Sedgvvicks [Iustice upon the Armies Remonstrance.]





About this time it was debated at the Council of War to Massacre and put
to the Sword all the KING's Party. The Question put, was carried in the
Negative but by two Voices. You see what Furies pursue these sinful
VVretches, and what dangerous rocks they dash upon, in order to that base and
covvardly principle of Self-preservation.

118. Schismatic Petitions for 2. or 3. principal Gentlemen in each Country
to be brought to justice.
The Army has in every County of England packs of schismatic Beagles, whom
they hollovv on to hunt in full cry (by Petitions to the House) after the
blood of such whom they design for slaughter. Many Petitions have been lately
presented, That two or three principal Gentlemen of the KING's Party (by name)
in each County, might be sacrificed to Justice, whereby the Land might be freed
from bloud-guiltinesse.

Diverse Merchants have contracted to send forth several Ships for the next
Summers Fleet, at their own charge. 119. Merchants arming Ships for this
Summers Fleet.


The prodigious High Court of Justice was revived in order to the Trial of
the Earl of Holland, the Earl of Cambridge, the Earl of Norwich, the Lord
Capel, and Sir John Owens; 120. The High Court of Justice revived.
the Commissioners were changed (that they may engage as many men in
arbitrary, illegal tyranny and bloodshed as they can.)

Hamilton was exceedingly importuned by Cromwell (who took a journey to
Windsor purposely) to name such Members of Parliament and Citizens as had any
hand in calling him in: 121. The History of Hamiltons imprisonment and death.
See digitus Dei upon Duke Hamilton.
this he either could not, or would not do; he had (in order to his own
ambition) first exasperated the Independent party against the KING, and
afterward sought their ruin by engaging for the KING: and he doubted that to
undertake so odious an office as to play the Devils part, and be an Accuser of
his Brethren, would but set a gloss upon the Independents intended severity
against him. Being brought to St. James's in order to his Trial, Cromwell
(hoping to train him to a confession) caused all his Creatures to carry a
favorable countenance to him. Bradshaw smoothed him up with soft language at
the Bar; the Lord Gray of Grooby, Col: Wait, and Hugh Peter's, gave him
hopes that they would not much obstruct his pretended Plea of Quarter from
Lambert upon Articles, Peter's avouched Quarter so given by Lambert;
notvvithstanding Colonel Wait (when he made Report to the House of Commons
how he took him) affirmed He yielded at discretion, and Lambert was not then
near him: after this Peter's gives Hamilton a Visit, who gives Peter's thanks
and money to boot for his late favor done him in Court; Quaere, What an
accusation extorted for fear of death, and hope of life is vvorth? Hamilton
confessed at his death, he had been much pressed; yet had named no man. Argyle.
and knovving him to be an Instrument of Cromwells, employed him as his
Solicitor to the Members of the House and Army. Peter's prays for Hamilton
openly as his Lord and Patron, still feeding him with hopes, If he would
Impeach their Opposites: yet still he vvaved this, offering them 100000 l. for
his life, and often inculcating what services he would do them in Scotland;
for which purpose he offered to join Interests with Argyle, and be a Servant
to their Party. Messengers were posted into Scotland to know Argyles
pleasure: But he had been overreached formerly by Hamilton, and he was
resolved to admit no Competitor, which would have eclipsed his greatness,
and have made him not the sole Patron of Scottish Independency: Besides, the
Kirk so far hated Hamilton that they preached off his Head in Scotland,
before it was cut off in England: the High Court of Justice lingered long in
expectation of an Answer; at last such a one came as decried all reconciliation
with Hamilton; vvhereupon the scene was altered presently, Bradshaw handled
him roughly at the Bar, Mar. 6. Those which smiled on him before, frovvned
now; being asked vvh^^ he could say? he pleaded Quarter, and vouched Peter's
Testimony: who with a brazen face renounced his former Testimony, When
Hamilton was upon the Scaffold, diverse Officers of the Army, and Hugh Peter's
conversed familiarly with him, to the last, and Messengers passed to and fro,
saying, He now remembered no such matter, but that the Army scorned to give
quarter to h m, or any of his Nation: vvhereupon, he was condemned to the
Block; which Sentence was executed upon him, March 9. yet they fed Hamilton
with vain hopes to the last gasp, for fear he should give glory to God, and
throw shame and infamy upon themselves by a Christian confession of his,
Argyles, and their mutual vilanies: besides, such a Discovery would have made
Argyle less serviceable to them in Scotland, whose next design is to cajole
the Kirk by seeming an Enemy to the Sectaries of England, and pretending to
serve the Presbyterian Interest. Thus I conclude the Tragedy of Duke Hamilton.

122 The Death of the Ld Capel.
In opposition to whom, I will briefly relate the Tragedy of the noble Lord
Capel, a Gentleman of great courage and integrity. He had made an adventurous
escape out of the Tower, but was re-taken by the treachery of a limping
VVater-man, (if I knevv his Name I would bestovv a blot of Ink upon him.) He
pleaded for himself Articles of Surrender (which were real in him, though
not in Hamilton) that diverse that were in Colchester, and in his condition,
had been admitted to Compound; and desired to be referred to Martial Law,
which being denied, He moved, he might not be debarred of Additionall defense;
if he must be judged by the Common Law, then he demanded the full benefit of
that Declaration of the Commons, 19 Feb. 1648. which Enacteth and Declares,
That though King and Lords be laid aside, yet all other the fundamental Laws
shall be in force concerning the lives, liberties and properties of the
Subject: and recommended to them Magna Charta, The Petition of Right, 3 Caroli:
and the Act made, H. 7. for indempuity of all such as adhered to the present
King in possessione also the exception in the Act of Attainder of Strafford and
Canterbury, which says, Their Cases shall not be used as a precedent against
any man: He desired to see his jury, and that they might see him, and so might
be Tried by his Peers, saying, He did believe no precedent could be given of
any Subject Tried, but by Bill of Attainder in Parliament, or by a Jury. But
all was but to charm a deaf Adder. He was a gallant Gentleman, and they
durst not let him live.

The KING's Library at St. 123. The Kings Library at Saint James's given to
Hugh Peter's.
James's was given (I hear) to that ignorant Stage player Hugh Peter's.

26. Febr. John Lylborne delivered to the Commons (by the name of the Supreme
Authority of England) A Petition in the name of many thousand well-affected,
with a Book annexed, entitled, 124. L.C. Lylburnes Petition to the House,
with Englands new Chains, annexed. See the Hunting the Foxes, etc. page 8.
Englands new Chains discovered. The most material points thereof are, that
they find fault with The Agreement of the People, presented to the House by
Lieut. Gen: Hammond, from the Officers of the Army: because.

1. They like not there should be any intervalls betvveen the end of this
Representative now sitting, and the beginning of the next, whereby during the
said Intervall the Supreme power will be lest in the new erected Council of
State, a Constitution of a new and unexperienced nature, which may design to
perpetuate their power, and keep off Parliaments and Representatives for ever.

2. They conceive no less danger in that it is provided that Parliaments for
the future, are to continue but 6 months, and the Council of State 18 Months;
in which time having Command of all the Forces by Sea and Land, they will
have great opportunities to make themselves absolute and unaccountable.

3. They are not satisfied with that Clause in the said Agreement, That the
Representative shall extend to the erecting and abolishing Courts of Justice;
since the alteration of the usual way of Trials by 12 sworn Men of the
Neighborhood may be included therein, as has lately been done by erecting a
new High Court of Justice criminal under a President and Commissioners, or
Tryers picked and chosen in an unusual way, all liberty of exceptions against
them being overruled.

4. They are not satisfied with that Clause in the Agreement, That the
Representative have the Highest small Judgment; since their Authority is only
to make General Laws, Rules and Directions for Courts, and Persons assigned
by Law to execute them, unto which the Representatives themselves are to be
subject, it being a great partiality and vexation to the People, that the
Lawmakers should be Law-executors.

5. They find fault with the Excise, calling it, The great obstructor of all
Trade, far surmounting Ship Money, and all Patents, Projects, and Monopolies
before this Parliament.

6. The Act for Pressing of Seamen.

7. The General and Officers obstructing the Press.

8. The Chauncery and Courts of Justice not regulated.

Hunting the Foxes, p. 8. sajes it was Iretons invention.
9. They complain, That a Council of State is hastily chosen as Guardians of
the Peoples liberties, with a vast and exorbitant power: 1. To command, order,
and dispose of all Forces by Sea and Land, and all Magazines of Store in
England and Ireland. 2. To dispose all Public Treasure. 3. To command any
Person whatsoever before them, to give Oath for discovery of Truth. 4. To
Imprison any that shall disobey their Commands, and such as they shall Judge
contumacious: what now is become of Magna Charta, and the Liberties of the
People, That no Man's Person shall be Attached or Imprisoned, or Dissersed of
his Freehold or Free-customes but by Lawful Judgment of his Equals? This
Council of State has got all Power into their hands (a project long
labored) and now their next motion will be (pretending ease to the People)
to Dissolve this Parliament.

10. The Petitioners complain, that in order to settle their Tyranny, the
Council of Officers insisted upon it, That a motion should be made to the
House of Commons, to enable them to put to death by Martial Law all such as
they shall judge by Petitions, or otherwise to disturb the present
proceedings, whether Members of the Army, or not. And when it was urged,
That the Civil Magistrate should do it: it was ansvvered. The saying of Col.
Hevvson the one-eyed Cobbler. See Hunting the Foxes, p. 10.
They could hang twenty ere the Magistrate could hang one. The prayer of their
Petition is:

1. That the Self-denying Ordinance be observed.

2. That they would consider how dangerous it is, to continue the Highest
Military Commands so long in the same Persons, especially acting so long
distinct, and of themselves, as those now in being have done, and in such
extraordinary ways, whereunto they have accustomed themselves, which was
the original of most Tyrannies.

3. That they would appoint a Committee of Parliament Men, to hear, and
determine all controversies between Officers and Officers officers, and
Soldiers: To mitigate the rigor of Martial Law, and to provide it be not
executed upon any, not members of the Army.

4. That they will open the Presses.

5. That they will dissolve this Council of State, threatening so manifest
Tyranny.

6. That they will severely punish all such as acting upon any Order,
Ordinance, or Act of Parliament, shall exceed the power conferred on them.

After this, 125. A second part of Englands New Chains.
came forth a second part of Englands new Chains discovered, setting forth the
hypocrisy and perfidiousnesse of the Council of the Army and the Grandees, in
cheating all Interests, King, Parliament, People, Soldiers, City, Agitators,
Levellers, etc. which tells you, That the Grandees walk by no principles of
honesty or Conscience, but (as mere Politicians) are governed altogether by
occasion as they see a possibility of making progress to their Designs,
which course of theirs, they ever termed. A waiting upon Providence, that
under color of Religion they might deceive the more securely. It tells you,
their intent is to Garrison all great Towns, to break the spirits of the
People with oppression and poverty. It farther Declares, that these Grandees
judge themselves loose, when other men are bound; all Obligations are to them
Transitory and Ceremonial; and that every thing is good and just as it
conduces to their Interests. That the Grandees never intended an Agreement of
the People, but only to amuse that party, whilst they hastily set up a
Council of State to establish their tyranny; that to prepare the way to this,
they broke the House of Commons, took away the House of Lords, removed the
King by an extrajudiciall way of proceedings, and erected such a Court of
Justice as had no place in the English Government. That the remainder of the
House of Commons is become a mere channel through which is conveyed all the
Decrees and Determinations of a private Council of some fevv Officers. All
these, and the Votes, That the Supreme Power is in the People, and the Supreme
Authority in the Commons their Representative, were only in order to their
Interests of will and power. That they place their security in the divisions of
the People. That if the present House of Commons should never so little cross
the ambition of these Grandees, they would show no more modesty to them than
they have done to the excluded Members: See the Hunting of the Foxes, etc. p.
6, 7, 8.
And so it concludes with a Protestation against their breaking the Faith of
the Army with all Parties, their dissolving the Council of Agitators, and
usurping a power of giving forth the sense of the Army against the Parliament
and People, against their shooting to death ^he Soldier at VVare, Return to
sect. 2. and 5.
and their cruelties exercised upon other Persons, to the debasing of their
Spirits, and thereby nevv-moulding the Army to their Designs: against their
playing fast and loose with the King and His Party till they had brought a
new and dangerous War upon this Nation. They also protest against their
dissembled Repentances, against their late extraordinary proceedings in
Bringing the Army upon the City, (to the ruin of Trade) their breaking the
House of Commons in pieces, without Charging the Members particularly, and
then judging and taking away men's lives in an extraordinary way, as done for
no other end but to make way for their own absolute Domination. They also
protest against the Election and establishment of those High Courts of Justice,
as unjust in themselves, and of dangerous precedent in time to come; as
likewise against the Council of State, and putting some of themselves
therein, contrary to their own Agreement. They also protest against all other
the like Meetings of those officers, that on Thursday, 2. Feb. Voted for so
bloody a Law, as to hang whom they should judge disturbed the Army, as having
no power either by such Councels to give the sense of the Army, or to judge
any Person not of the Army, or to do any thing in reference to the
Commonwealth.

126. The Hunting of the Foxes from Tryplo and Nevvmarket by 5 small Beagles,
p. 8.
About this time also became public a pretty Book, entitled [The Hunting of
the Foxes from New Market and Triploe to White Hall by 5 small Beagles,] which
tells you, That the Grandee-Officers of the Army to keep the Soldiers quiet
did formalize about an Agreement of the People whilst they carried on their
platform of absolute tyranny (long since hatched by Ireton) by erecting a
Council of State: no sooner was this monster borne, but it devoured half the
Parliament of England, and now it is adorning it self with Regal magnificence,
and majesty of courtly Attendants, and like the 30 Tyrants of Athens, to head
it self over the People; this is, and yet this is not our new intended King,
there is a King to succeed, this is but his Viceroy. O Cromwell! whither art
thou aspiring? the word is already given out amongst their Officers, That this
Nation must have one prime Magistrate or Ruler over them, and that the General
has power to make a Law to bind all the Commons of England: This was most
daringly and desperately avowed at White Hall, and to this temper these Court
Officers are now a moulding: He that runs may read and foresee a new Regality,
thus by their Machivilian pretenses and wicked practices, they are become
Masters and Usurpers of the name of the Army, and of the name of the
Parliament, under which Visors they have levelled and destroyed all the
Authority of this Nation; for, the Parliament indeed and in truth is no
Parliament, but a Representative Glass of the Counsel of War; and the
Council of War but a Representative of Cromwell, Ireton, and Harrison: and
these are the All in All of the Nation, which under the guises and names of
Parliament, Army, General Council, High Court, and Council of State, play
all the strange pranks that are played. And further, p. 13. The conclave of
Officers have sucked in the venom of all former corrupt Courts and Interests,
the High Commission, Star Chamber, the House of Lords, the King and his privy
Council, are all alive in that Court called, The General Council of the
Army. 1. The King stood upon it, That He was accountable to none but God, The
House by Vote, 5. Dec. 16. 8 voted, the King's Concessions a ground, etc. And
the Army secured and expelled 250. Members for using liberty to vote according
to their consciences, and overruled those fevv they left sitting to unvote in a
thin House, what was voted in a full House; this is more than to usurp a
Negative Voice over them: return to sect. 18. 23. 28.
that He was above the Parliament and People; and to whom will these men be
accountable? to none on earth: and are they not above the Parliament? they have
even a Negative Voice thereover, formerly the Commons could pass nothing
without the House of Lords, and now they dare pass nothing without the
concurrence of the conclave of Officers: we were formerly ruled by King, Lords,
and Commons; now by a General, Court Martial, and House of Commons: what is
the difference? the Lords were not Members both of the House of Peers, and of
the House of Commons, but the Officers, (our martial Lords) are Members both
in the House, or Council of Officers, and in the House of Commons, we have not
the change of a Kingdom to a Commonwealth; we are only under the old cheat,
A transmutation of Names, but with the addition of new Tyrannies, for casting
out one unclean Spirit, they have brought with them in his stead seven other
unclean Spirits more wicked than the former, and they have entered in and
dwell there, and the last state of this Commonwealth is worse than the first.
Lastly, they set down some illegal proceedings and Examinations before the
Council of War, exceeding the High Commission, and Star Chamber.

127. The Authors censure of the Levellers.
These three Books show the late endeavors of the Agitators, and that party
which the Grandees politickly mis-call (to cast an odium upon them) Levellers;
they are the truest Assertors of humane liberty, and the most constant and
faithful to their Principles, and party of any in the Army, and though they
have many redundancies and superfluous Opinions fit to be pruned off by
conversing with discreet honest Men, or rather by a discreet and just public
Authority, (which I am confident is feasible, since their principles concenter
in the public, not in their own private Interest and Opinions, and are no
otherways changable than conduces with the emergent occasions of the
Commo^-wealth) yet they are but like the water-boughs of a healthy fruit Tree,
rather troublesome than dangerous, whereas the designs of their Antagonists
(like rocks under water, or poison in well-cooked meat) destroy before they are
discovered.

128. The Authors censure of His Majesty's Posthumus work, entitled, (The
Pourtraicture of His Sacred Majesty in His Solitudes and Sufferings.)
About this time arose a Phoenix out of His Majesty's Ashes, that most excellent
Issue of His Brain, entitled, [THE POURTRAICTURE OF HIS SACRED MAJESTY IN HIS
SOLITUDES AND SUFFERINGS.] A Book full fraught with wisdom, Divine and Humane,
showing Him to be more than Conqueror of His Enemies in His rare Christian
patience and charity; the very reading of it aggravateth our loss of so
Gracious and excellent a Prince, that had learned the whole method of humane
perfection in the school of adversity. Herod and his Jews never persecuted
Christ in his swadling-clouts with more industrious malice, then the
Antimonarchicall Independent Faction, this Book in the Presses and Shops, that
should bring it forth into the world, knowing that as the remembrance of Heaven
strikes a horror into us of Hell, So the contemplation of his virtues will
teach us to abhor their vices.

March 8. 1648. 129. The form of Writs for Elections changed.
The Commons assented to a new Form of a Writ for election of Knights and
Burgesses for the Parliament.

But three days before it was reported to the House from the Council of
State, what number of Horse and Foot they thought sit to be kept up for the
service of England and Ireland, 103. A new establishment for the Army reported
to the House from our new Masters the Council of State.
and the Monthly charge, which estimated comes to 160000 l. per mensem. You see
we are likely to find these our new Lords such gracious Masters to us, that (
as the second part of Englands new Chains says) We shall have Taxes, though we
have neither Trade nor Bread. In the Earl of Essex time (when the War was at
the highest) the Monthly Tax came but to 54000 l. a Month, yet had we then
seven or eight Brigades besides his Army and Garrisons: but that the Faction of
Saints may carry on the work of a through Reformation in our purses, as well as
they have done in the Church and Commonwealth, they first raised the Tax to
60000 l. a Month for England, besides 20000 l. a Month pretended for Ireland
(but I believe little of it slips through their sanctified fingers to go
thiter.) And now (to show they can use double dealing against the Ungodly) they
would double the sum from 80000 l. to 160000 l. a Month, this is to break our
hearts with popetry, and make them take what impressions of slavery they please
to set upon them; this Conventicle of State will engrosse all the Coin and
Treasure of the Land into their own hands, and then subdue us therewith, and
make us (like slavish Egyptians) sell our Selves and our Lands for Bread, or
money to buy Bread, when (that inseparable companion of a long war) Famine
approaches, which their barbarous and illegal Sequestrations (unstocking men's
Farms and laying them wast) will inevitably bring upon us; they have more hope
to subdue and lessen the number of their Opposites by famine and want, than by
the Sword; in order to which, they have destroyded the Trade of the City, and
undone multitudes of Tradesmen, who being disabled to pay their Taxes, the
Army cause all their Arreares to be leavied upon the City by a new Tax upon the
rest of the Inhabitants and the Ourlandlords; and when Cromwell was told, this
would undo the City, He answered, It was no matter, the more were undone, the
more would clap Swords to their sides and come into the Army: you see Soldiery
is intended to be the chief Trade. 131. An Act for Abolishing the Kingly
Office, etc.


March 17. 1648. The empty House of commons in farther prosecution of their
said Design, and to please their Masters of the Army, passed, printed, and
published in the form and style of a Statute this Paper following: entitled,
An Act for the Abolishing the Kingly Office in England, Ireland, and the
Dominions thereto belonging.
WHereas Charles Stuart late King of England, Ireland, and the Territories and
Dominions thereunto belonging, has by Authority derived from Parliament, Since
by the law, the Crown cures all defects; how can the King's blood be
attainted?
been, and is hereby declared to be justly condemned, adjudged to die and put
to death, for many treasons, murders, and other heinous offenses committed by
him, by which Judgment he stood and is hereby declared to be attainted of High
Treason, whereby his Issue and Posterity, and all others pretending Title under
him, are become incapable of the said Crowns, or of being King or Queen of the
said Kingdom or Dominions, or either or any if them:

Be it therefore Enacted and Ordained, and it is Enacted, We have svvorn
says and Allegiance to K Charles the First, His lavvfull Heirs and Succ ssors,
and our Vovv is recorded in Heaven from which no power on earth can absolve
us. See the Oaths of Allegiance, Obedience, and Supremacy. The Statute of
Recognition, 1. Iac. But the Commons are now so Supreme, as in imitation of
the Pope to bring this Clause in practice, Licet de jure non possumus, tamen
pro plenitudine potestatis nostrae volumus, etc.
Ordained, and Declared, by this present Parliament, and by Authority thereof,
That all the People of England and Ireland, and the Dominions and Territories
thereunto belonging, of what degree or condition soever, are discharged of all
Fealty, Homage and Allegiance which is or shall be pretended to be due unto any
of the Issue and Posterity of the said late King, or any claiming under him;
and that Charles Stuart eldest Son, and James called Duke of York, second
Son, and all other the Issue and Posterity of him the said late King, and all
and every person and persons pretending Title from, by, or under him, All our
Laws cut off by the non obstante of an eight part of the House of Commons
sitting under a force. After almost 1000. years experience it now found to be
dangerous. The English were never one half-quarter so much ens aved since
William the Conqueror subdued them, as they have been since Oliver the
Brevver subjugated them.
are and be disabled to hold or enjoy the said Crown of England and Ireland,
and other the Dominions thereunto belonging, or any of them; or to have the
Name, Title, Style or Dignity of King or Queen of England and Ireland, Prince
of Wales, or any of them; or to have and enjoy the power and Dominion of the
said Kingdoms and Dominions, or any of them, or the Honors, Manors, Lands,
Tenements, Possessions, and Hereditaments belonging or appertaining to the said
Crown of England and Ireland, and other the Dominions aforesaid, or to any of
them; or to the Principality of Wales, Duchy of Lancaster or Cornwall, or any
or either of them, Any Law, Statute, Ordinance, Usage or Custom to the
contrary hereof in any wise notwithstanding: And whereas it is and has been
found by experience, that the Office of a King in this Nation and Ireland, and
to have the power thereof in any single Person, is unnecessary, burdensome and
dangerous to the liberty, safety and public interest of the people, and that
for the most part, use has been made of the Regal power and prerogative, to
oppress, impoverish and enslave the Subject; and that usually and naturally
any one person in such power, makes it his interest to incroach upon the just
freedom and liberty of the People, and to promote the setting up of their own
Will and power above the Laws, that so they might enslave these Kingdoms to
their own Lust: But in a Council of State of forty Tyrants sitting under the
protection and awe of Oliver.
Be it therefore Enacted and Ordained by this present Parliament, and by
Authority of the same, That the Office of a King in this Nation, shall not
henceforth reside in, or be exercised by any one single Person; and that no one
person whatsoever, shall, or may have, or hold the Office, Style, Dignity,
Power or Authority of King of the said Kingdoms and Dominions, or any of them,
or of the Prince of Wales, Any Law, Statute, Usage or Custom to the contrary
thereof in any wise notwithstanding. And it is hereby Enacted, That if any
person or persons shall endeavor to attempt by force of Arms, or otherwise,
or be ayding, assisting, comforting or abbetting, unto any person or persons
that shall by any ways or means whatsoever, endeavor or attempt the reviving
or setting up again of any pretended Right of the said Charles, eldest Son
to the said late King, James called Duke of York, or of any other the Issue
and Posterity of the said late King, or of any person or persons claiming under
him or them, to the said Regal Office, Style, Dignity, or Authority, or to be
Prince of Wales; or the promoting of any one person whatsoever, to the Name,
Style, Dignity, Power, Prerogative or Authority, of King of England and
Ireland, High Treason is what these Legislative Thieves list to make it an
Arbitrary or me, notvvithstanding the St^t 25 Ed 3. for limiting and
ascertaining of Treasons, for security of the People. Tiberius and Ne^o's days
are fallen upon us, of which Tacitus, lugeni crimen debitiae; etc mplementum
omnium accusationem, lasa majestat.
and Dominions aforesaid, or any of them; That then every such offense shall be
deemed and adjudged High Treason, and the Offenders therein, their Counselors,
Procurers, Ayders and Abettors, being convicted of the said Offense, or any of
them, shall be deemed and adjudged Traitors against the Parliament and People
of England, and shall suffer, lose and forfeit, and have such like and the same
pains, forfeitures, judgments and execution, as is used in case of High
Treason: And whereas by the abolition of the Kingly Office provided for in this
Act, a most happy way is made for this Nation (if God see it good) to return
to its just and ancient right of being Governed by its own Representatives or
National meetings in Council When was England governed by their own
Representative? or had any other regliment then Kings? But what the
Legislative Conventicle declares, we must believe though contrary to our
knowledge. They will lead our faith and reason in a string, or have our necks
in a halter. A period to this Parliament, and leave the Supreme power in the
Council of State, a design long since a^tempted. See 1 and 2 part of Englands
New Chains, and the Hunting of the Foxes. No obedience is due by Law to
them, which takes no notice of this form of Government.
, from time to time chosen and entrusted for that purpose by the People; It is
therefore Resolved and Declared by the Commons assembled in Parliament, that
they will put a period to the sitting of this present Parliament, and dissolve
the same so soon as may possibly stand with the safety of the people that has
betrusted them, and with what is absolutely necessary for the preserving and
upholding the Government now settled in the way of a Commonwealth; and that
they will carefully provide for the certain choosing, meeting and sitting of the
next and future Representatives, with such other circumstances of freedom in
choice and equality in distribution of Members to be elected thereunto, as
shall most conduce to the lasting freedom and good of this Commonwealth: And
it is hereby further Enacted and Declared, notwithstanding any thing contained
in this Act, no person or persons of what condition and quality soever, within
the Commonwealth of England and Ireland, Dominion of Wales, the Islands of
Guernsey, and Jersey and Town of Berwick upon Tweed, shall be discharged from
the obedience and subjection which he and they owe to the Government of this
Nation, as it is now Declared, but all and every of them shall in all things
render and perform the same, as of right is due unto the Supreme Authority
hereby declared to reside in this and the successive Representatives of the
People of this Nation, and in them only.

About the same time they passed another Act, for Abolishing the House of
Peers, to this purpose. 112. An Act for Abolishing the House of Peers. More
New lights, new di coveries made by forty or fifty (...) gross fiery
Meteors, remaining in the H: of Commons.


THe Commons of England assembled in Parliament, finding by too long experience
that the House of Lords is useless and dangerous to the People of England to
be continued, have thought sit to Ordain and Enact, and be it Ordained and
Enacted by this present Parliament, and by the Authority of the same, That from
henceforth the House of Lords in Parliament shall be, and is hereby wholly
abolished and taken away, and that the Lords shall not from henceforth meet, or
sit in the said House called the Lords House, or in any other House or place
whatsoever, as a House of Lords; nor shall sit, vote, advise, adjudge, or
determine of any matter or thing whatsoever, as a House of Lords in Parliament.
Nevertheless it his hereby Declared, That neither such Lords as have demeaned
themselves with honor, courage, Fidelity to the Commonwealth, nor their
Posterities who shall so continue, shall be excluded from the public Councels
of the Nation, but shall be admitted thereunto, and have their free Vote in
Parliament if they shall be thereunto Elected, as other Persons of interest
elected and qualified thereunto ought to have: And be it farther Ordained and
Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that no Peer of this Land not being
Elected, qualified, and sitting in parliament, as aforesaid, shall claim,
have, or make use of any Privilege of Parliament, either in relation to his
person, quality or estate, any Laws, Usage or Custom to the contrary
notwithstanding. 133. A Declaration of the Commons, to show the Reasons of
their said proceedings. The State is Free, but the People Slaves; as a Galley
is free, but the Rovvers Slaves. 1 part. 72. 73. See these Books ( A full
Answer to an infamous Pamphlet, entitled. A Decl: of the Commons of England.]
[The Charge against the King dis harged.) (The Royal and Royalists Plea,)
(King Charles vindicated, etc.) And His Maj: last Book, or Pourtraicture. and
His Maj: Gracious Messages for Peace.




And to lessen the amazement of the People, the same day they passed and
Ordered to be printed a Book, called, [ A Declaration of the Parliament of
England, expressing the grounds of their late proceedings, and of settling the
present Government in the way of a Free State:] when they formerly passed the
4. Votes for no more Addresses to our late King, they seconded it with a
Declaration, to show the Reasons of those Votes, wherein they set forth no new
matter but what they had formerly in parcels objected against Him; and yet they
have since that time made Addresses to him, and both taken and caused others to
take the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy, and the Protestation and Covenant
to defend His Person and Authority, etc. And in this Declaration there is no
new objection of moment, but what is contained in the former Declarations
against Him, and as I looked upon the first Declaration as a Prologue, so I
look upon this last as the Epilogue to His Majesty's Tragedy. The whole matter
of charge in both of them has been sufficiently Answered in several Books,
and either confuted or justified, to which I refer the Reader; whom I will only
trouble with some few short Observatio^s of my own upon it: ( p. 5.) The
Parliament (in imitation of their Masters, the Council of Officers) pretend a
necessity to change the fundamental Government into a Free State, to prevent
Tyranny, Injustice, and War, etc. (I doubt rather to promote them.) It
affirms, ( page 15, 16.) That Offices of Inheritance are forfeited by Breach
of Trust, (a condition annexed to every Office) and seems to imply as much of
the Kingly Office: but this Penman had forgot, that by the Law the Crown
takes away all defects, and the King being Supreme Head and Governor over all
Persons, and in all Causes, it were absurd to make Him accountable to any
Authority; for in such case, that Authority would be Supreme to Him, and so
erect two Supremes one jarring and interferring with the other, which in
Law and Policy is as absurd as to suppose two Almighties or Infinities in
Divinity, which cannot be, for that one Infinity would terminate another:
Impossible esse plura Infinite, See Greg: Tholos^nus, l. pol. 1. Keckerin:
Sistema pol. l. 1. Contzenii. l politic. 1. a cap. 17. ad c. 25 and many good
Authors quoted by him. Moecenalis orationem ad Augustum, apud Dionem Cassium.
quoniam alterum esset in altero sinitum, says Cusanus. (page 16.) The
Declarers play the Orators in behalf of the felicity of Government by
Free-States, rather than by Kings and Princes. This is a spacious field to
walk in, I will only cite some learned Authors living in Republiques of a
contrary opinion, and send my Readers to them for their Arguments. It applauds
the prosperity and good Government of the Switz: which (I think was never
commended before) a grosse-vvitted People, living in a confused way of
Government, where virtue and industry find no revvard, the Rich become a daily
pray to the Poor, and their popular Tribunes, who uphold their credits by
calumniating the vvealthy, and confiscating (or sequestring) their Estates, the
best wealth of this Nation is Pensions from Neighbor Princes, to whom they
let their Blood to Hire, and become Mercinaries many times to the extreme
damage and (if their Country were vvorth subduing) danger of the State. For
Venice it is an Aristocracy (if not Olygarchy) of many petty Kings, so
burdensome to all their Subjects upon Terra firma, that they dare not trust
them without Citadals to keep them under; they never conside in any of their
number or Natives to be Comander in Chief of their Land Forces) fearing to be
tyrannized over by a Cromwell or an Ireton, or by some property subordinate to
them in all but Title. The Morlachy, and many Inhabitans of Dalmatia, and
Candia, have lately preferred the Turkish Government before theirs. As for the
Low Countries, (their nearest example) peruse Bernavelt's Apology, and many
good Histories. For Rome, from their Regifugium, they were never free from
Civil VVarres, cecessious Tumults, and changes of Government; first to
Patritian Consvlls, Regia pote, state; then to promiscuous Consuls ( Plebeyans
as well as Patritians) with popular Tribunes to control them (then to
Decemviri legibus Scribendis; then to Tribuni militares consulari potestate,
Dictators upon all special occasions, sometimes an Aristocrary, sometimes a
Democracy, betvveen two Factions Patritian and Plebeyan. And never could that
unhappy Idol of the multitude [Liberty] find any time of settled rest and
Government until their giddy Republique was overthrovvne by Julius Caesar,
and turned into a Monarchy by Augustus, which approved Cratippus saying, See
some Authorities cited verbatim in the first Page.
Vitiosum Reipub: statum exigere Monarchiam; and then (and not till then) Rome
came to his height of Glory and Dominion, and continued so a long time,
sometimes empayred by the vices of some Emperors, and sometimes repaired by the
virtues of others: he that reads Liry and Tully's Orations, with many other
Authors, shall find how infinite corrupt the People were, both in making and
executing Laws, in dispensing Justice both Distributive and Commutative;
what Complaints, that their comitia were venalia; what Bulvvorks they were
feign to erect against the ambition and covetousness of their Great men; Leges
Ambitus, leges Repetundarum peculatus; all to no purpose: the great abuse of
Solicitors and Undertakers in every Trybesto contracte, for suffrages: the
Domestic use of their Nomenclators, their Prehensations, Invitations,
Clientships; their kissings and shaking hands (even from the greatest
Personages) prostituted to every Cobbler and Tinker; their costly public
Shows and spectacles to vvoe the Rabble; he that reads observingly shall find
that ambition and covetousness (nurses of all corruption) were the best part
of the vvisdome and industry of that Republique until it came to be a
Monarchy, and shall farther find, that those corrupt manners and customs
which the People (from the highest to the lowest) had contracted during the
several licentious Alterations of their Commonwealth, from one form of
Republique to another: were (like a second nature) not to be corrected by the
better discipline of a Monarchy, and (at last) occasioned the ruin of that
Monarchy, together with the desolation of that Nation, which shows, that
Monarchy (with which their Nation began) was their natural and genuine
Government, when it could not be taken away sine interitu subjecti, without
the ruin of the whole subject matter. ( p. 11.) It is said, The Kings Revenue
by a medi^m of 7 years was yearly 700000 l.
It has been lately computed, that the Court purveyances (notvvithstanding
many good Laws to the contrary) cost the Country more in one year, than
their Assesments to the Army; what? above 100000 l. a month, when the charge
of the KING's Housekeeping came but to 500000 l. a year: (I speak not of
Wages and Pensions) I know not who should make this computation, unless old
Sr Henry Vane, and his Man Cornelius Holland, (the latter of which was turned
out of his Office in the Green-cloth for abusing his Place) not in whose time
of employment (unless their own) such prodigious abuses should happen. ( p.
19.) It is said, The legal and justifiable Revenue of the Crown fell short of
100000 l. per annum: I perceive this is all the Account the Commonwealth is
likely to have from the Committee of the Kings, Queens, and Princes Revenue,
nor do I know what a pruning hook that phrase (legal Revenue) may prove:
But I conceived all that Q. Elazabeth, the Kings Father and Himself received,
had been His Revenue de jure; I am sure it was de facto, and the Parliament in
their Declarations promised to settle a better Revenue upon Him than any of His
Ancestors enjoyed: neither did this, nor any former Parliament complain, that
His Purse was grown too full, or His Revenue too fulsome: and if the Committee
of the Revenues had enjoyed no more but their own legal and justifiable
Revenue, so many of the KING's Servants and Creditors had not starved forvvant
of their own. ( p. 19.) They very much aggravate Monopolies, Patente, and
Projects: I vvonder they suffer so many Men guilty in that kind to sit in their
House, old Sir Henry Vane, Sir Henry Myldmay, Sir John Hypsley, Cornelius
Holland, Laurence VVhytakers, etc. 2 Part of Englands New Chains discovered,
etc. and the Hunting the Foxes return to s. 12^.
( p. 20.) They speak against the Lords Negative Voice, but not a word
against the Council of VVarres Negative Voice, who march up in hostile manner
against Parliament and City, and secure, seclude, and drive away 250 Members
at one time, if they vote any thing contrary to their Interest. They speak
likewise against the Lords Iuditiall power over Commoners, but have forgot
what unjust and illegal use themselves attempted to make of the Lords
jurisdiction against the 11 impeached Members, the 4 Aldermen, and Citizens. 1
Part. sect. 45, 46, 47, 48, 49, 50, 51, 52, 53, 54.
( p. 21.) They excuse their receding from their Declaration of April, 1646.
(they might have minded you of a Vote of a later Date, had it made for their
turn) for Governing the Kingdom by King, Lords, and Commons. To this it is
said, the King nor Lords could take no advantage thereof being a contract they
never consented unto, indeed it was never presented to them; but I shall ask
whether the people may not take advantage thereof? for whose satisfaction
this was Declared, (a general grudge being then amongst them) that the
Parliament and Army would subvert the ancient Fundamental Government, (p. 22,
23.) They answer an Objection, that these great matters ought to be determined
in a full House, not when many Members are excluded by force, and the
privileges so highly broken, and those who are permitted to sit, do act under
a force. To this is ansvvered (how truly let any man that has read our
Histories tell) That fevv Parliaments have Acted but some force or other has
been upon them, (I vvonder they did not argue thus for the silly Tumult of
Apprentices) for Breach of Privilege of Parliament. They Answer, It will not
be charged upon the remaining party, or to have been within their power to
prevent it, or repair it, (to this I reply, that it is doubted the remaining
party (being the Army party) contrived it in their Iunto at Somerset House: for
( p. 23. it is acknowledged, they called and appointed the Army for their
Guard, which was not openly done by a full House: it must be therefore
secretly done by a party. See many Reasons for this conjecture before. 24.
Farther they say, That the safety of the Kingdom ought to be preferred before
privilege of Parliament; and that if their House had declined their duty (viz:
by not Acting) they had resigned up all to ruin and confusion: from whence
should this ruin and confusion come, but from their own Army, which they
perpetuate to eat up the Kingdom; and continue their own power and profit?
and I vvonder they did not use the same moderation after that childish Tumult
of Apprentices, but Declared all Acts, etc. passed from 26 July (which day the
Tumult began and ended) to the 6. August, null and void. And endeavored to
make the very sitting of the Members and the Citizens obeying to the said
Orders (though no Judges of the force) Treasonable: they deny they sit now
under a force, the Army being their best friends, called by them for their
safety. Indeed it is generally thought the Army and this remnant of the House
of Commons, are as good Friends and Brethren as Simeon and Levi, Pilate and
Herod were; and were called to secure the Members and purge the House: yet if
the remaining party should Vote contrary to the Dictates of the Council of
War, Quaere, 2 Part of Englands New Chains, and the Hunting the Foxes, etc.
Whether they will not be used as uncivilly as the secured Members? nay
worse, by being called to account for cousening the State. ( p. 24.) They say,
There is a clear consistency of our Laws with the present Government of a
Republique. I desire to know who by our Law can call or hold a Parliament
but the KING? who is, Principium, Caput, and Finis Parlamenti? who is the
fountain of Justice, Honor, Peace, when we have no King? who is
Conservator of the Laws, and Protector of the People? where is the Supreme
Authority? to Vote it (in their own case) to be in a Representative of 50 or
60 Commons, without legal proofs or precedents is to lead Men's reason
captive, as well as their Persons and Estates, (to impose an implicit faith
upon Man, not to use discourse and reason against their Votes, is to take Man
out of Man, to deny him his definition, Animal rationale) to whom does the
Subject owe Allegiance? and where is the Majesty of England when there is no
King? for all Treason is, Crimen laesae majestatis, contra debitam ligeanciam.
Therefore where) by the known Laws) no Allegiance is, there is no Treason.
Lastly, if our present Laws be so consistent with the Republique, I desire to
know why they did not Try the 4 Lords legally at the Common Law by their
Peers, and Sir John Owen by a Jury of 12 Men of the Neighborhood, according
to Magna Charta, and other good Laws? but were feign to put a Legislative
Trick upon them, and erect such a Court for the Trial of them as was never
heard of in England before, nor has no place in our Government. They conclude
( p. 26.) That as they have not intermedled with the assaires and Government of
other States, so (they hope) none will intermeddle with them: This assertion is
as true as the rest, it being well known, that for about 3 years last passed
they have boasted, That they have many Agents in France, who under color of
Merchandise, vent Antimonarchicall and Anarchicall Tenants, and sovv seeds of
Popular Liberty amongst the poor Peasants and Hugonots of France, which they
brag prospered well there; their very declared principles and doctrine of there
Pulpilts and Army are, That they must break the Powers of the Earth in pieces.
Monarchy must down all the world over, first in England, then this Army must
put over and manumit the Peasants of France, the Boors of Germany, etc. And
diverse of this Party have reported, that they have supplied the Revolters of
France with money; their Licenced Nevvs-books are full of this Doctrine, and of
many invectives against the Tyranny of the French King.

134. Harry Martin's Judgment of the King and Kingly Government.
Such were their proceedings against the King, or rather against Kingly
Government, which was cut off by the same Axe that murdered the King, and
was (indeed) first in their intention, though last in execution; as appears
by Harry Martin's Speech in the House upon the Debate, Whether a King, or no
King? That if they must have a King, he had rather have had the last than any
Gentleman in England? he found no fault in His Person, but in His Office.

135. The Council of Officers endeavor to join Interests with the Papists in
England and Ireland.
The KING had offended the Papists in the last Treaty, by granting so much to
the Parliament for their suppression: The Independents perceiving it, and
vvilling to join with any Interest to make good their Design. It was
proposed at the Council of Officers, That the Papists should raise and pay
about 10000. Additionall Forces for this Army, in recompense whereof, all
penal Laws concerning them should be repealed, all Taxes and Contributions
taken off, and they to have the protection of this Parliament and Army. Under
the same notion they endeavored to join Interests with Owen Roe Oneale,
Own Roe Oneale.
that commanded the bloody Party of massacring Irish (with which they had
formerly taxed the King) they supplied him with Ammunition, and admitted O
Realy, The Popes Nuntio.
the Popes Irish Nuntio to a Treaty here in England, Sir John VVynter was
taken into employment, and the Arrears of his Rents gathered for him by
Soldiers, to the regret of the Country. Sir Kenelme Digby had a Pass to come
into England, and came; as was foretold by a Letter from an Independent Ag nt
for the Army, from Paris to an Independent Member of the House of Commons, a
Creature of the Army, bearing Date, 28. Nov. 1648. and printed at the latter
end of [ The True and full Relation of the Officers and Armies forcible seizing
of diverse eminent Members, etc. Walter Moungue let forth upon Bail; what
becomes of this Negotiation? and whether those that have played fast and loose
with all Interests in the Kingdom, have not done the like with the Papists?
I cannot yet learn.

This VVinter, 136. Scarcity of Coals how ocasioned, and why.
Coals (as well as other things) had been at excessive rates in the City,
whereby many poor perished with cold and hunger; what the reason thereof
was (besides unreasonable Taxes, Excise, and Soldiers quartering in and near
the City) was diversely disputed: most Men imputed the blame to Sir Arthur
Haslerigge Governor of New Castle, who (without any public Authority)
presumed to lay on a Tax of 4 s. a Chaldron upon the Coals there; which is
estimated to amount to 50000 l. a year; what use that Money was put to was
as variously vvhispered: as likewise what design they had in bringing so
pinching a want upon the City? some said, it was to enforce the poorer sort
into Tumults, and then to charge the vvealthier sort with the crime, and
ensnare them; others said, it was to cast an odium upon the PRINCE, as if His
Ships had kept in the Colliers.

The 23. March, 1648. The Commons Ordered, 137. The Lo: Mayor ordered to
proclaim in person the Act for Abolishing the Kingly Office; and punished for
neglect.
That the Lord Mayor of London in Person be required to publish and proclaim
in the City the aforesaid Act for dissolving Kingly Government: and to give an
account thereof to the House. The Mayor refusing this service, was by the
Commons called to the Bar, fined 2000 l. committed Prisoner to the Tovver,
and outed of his Mayoralty; and Alderman Andrews (a Man after their own
heart) chosen by a fevv Schismatics in his Place.

Ordered by the Commons (upon a report from the Council of State) that
Commissioners be appointed to make Sale of the Kings, 138. The Kings, Queens
and Princes personal Estate ordered to be sold.
Queens, and Princes Personal Estate, upon Inventory and Apprisall, for
satisfaction of all just Debts due to well-affected Persons (viz: Men of their
Faction) in this Nation, before the beginning of these VVarres: But first 30000
l. to be taken out of it for the use of this Summers Fleet, and that it be
reserved back to the 40 Hogen Mogens, or Council of State to consider what
they think sit to be sold, and what they thinko sit to keep and reserve for the
use and furniture of them and their Attendants. Observe, that by that time this
gulf is stopped, the whole remainder to be sold for payment of Debts
aforesaid, may be written with a Cipher. 139. Crown Lands shared amongst the
Godly.


I hear the House has given away the KING's House, Parks and Honor of Eltham
to Sergeant Bradshaw, their quondam President. Greenwich to Bolstrode
VVhitlocke. The Lions Skin is now dividing amongst the Party. Thus have they
killed and taken possion: and the King's Revenue has proved as ominous to Him
as Naboth's Vineyard was to his Master.

140. Another Report for an establishment for the Army. Diurnall, Mar: 30, 31,
1649.
This day another Report was made to the House from the Committee of the Army
of the particular sums to be Monthly leavied in each County, to make up the
whole sum of 90000 l. Monthly fot the Armies of England and Ireland, besides
20000 l. per men's. out of Fee-farme Rents.

28, March, 1649. The Commons in pursuit of the advice given them by Monsieur
Paw, 141. An Order, that no Preacher meddle with State affairs.
and according to the example cited by him of the Low Countrios, Ordered, That
no Minister in his Pulpit should meddle with any State affairs: had this been
observed from the beginning these Pulpit Incendiaries had never kindled a War
betvveen the King and Parliament.

142. The 5. Lights of Walton.
About the beginning of Lent last, Master Faucett Minister of Walton upon the
Thames in Surrey, preached in his Parish Church after dinner, when he came
down out of his Pulpit it was tvvylight; and into the Church came six
Soldiers, one of them with a Lantern in his hand and a Candle burning in
it, in the other hand the had four Candles not lighted: He with the Lantern
called to the Parishoners to stay a little, for he had a Message to them from
God; and offered to go up into the Pulpit, but the Parishioners would not let
him; then he would have delivered his errand in the Church, but there they
would not hear him; so he went forth into the Churchyard, the people
follovving him, where he related to them, That he had a Vision, and received a
command from God to deliver his will unto them: which he was to deliver, and
they to receive upon pain of damnation. It consisted of 5 Lights:

1. That the Sabbath was abolished as unnecessary, Jewish, and merely
ceremonial: And here (quoth he) I should put out my first Light, but the wind
is so high I cannot light it.

2. Tithes are abolished as Jewish and ceremonial, a great burden to the
Saints of God, and a discouragement of industry and tillage: And here I should
put out my second light, etc. as aforesaid, which was the burden of his song.

3. Ministers are abolished as Antichristian, and of no longer use now Christ
himself descends into the hearts of his Saints, and his Spirt enlighteneth
them with Revelations, and Inspirations: And here I should have put out my
third Light, etc.

4. Magistrates are abolished as useless, now that Christ himself is in purity
of Spirit come amongst us, and has erected the Kingdom of the Saints upon
earth; besides, they are Tyrants and Oppressors of the Liberty of the Saints,
and tie them to Laws and Ordinances, mere humane inventions: And here I should
have put, etc.

5. Then putting his hand into his pocket, and pulling out a little Bible, he
showed it open to the People, saying, Here is a Book you have in great
veneration, consisting of two parts, the Old and New Testament; I must tell
you, it is abolished: It contains beggarly rudiments, milk for Babes; But
now Christ is in Glory amongst us, and imparts a fuller measure of his Spirit
to his Saints then this can afford; and therefore I am commanded to burn it
before your faces: so taking the Candle out of his Lantern, he set fire of
the leaves. And then putting out the Candle, cried, And here my fifth Light is
extinguished.

Upon a Report from the Council of State, 143. The Earl of Warwicke's
Commission recalled; and 3 Admirals appointed.
the Commons Voted void the Earl of Warwick's Commission for Admiral, and
appointed three Commissioners to have and execute the Admirals Place, with 3 l.
a day a piece; a Commission for Martial Law, and Land Soldiers aborad to keep
under the Seamen. The three Admirals are, Col. Edw: Popham, Col. Rob: Blake,
and Col. Deane.

Sunday after Easter Day, 144. Cormvvell turned Preacher.
six Preachers militant at White Hall tried the patience of their Hearers; one
calling up another successively: at last the Spirit of the Lord called up
Oliver Cromwell, who standing a good while with lifted up eyes, as it were in a
trance, and his neck a little inclining to one side, as if he had expected
Mahomet's Dove to descend and murmr in his ear; and sending forth abundantly
the groans of the Spirit, spent an hour in prayer, and an hour and an half
in a Sermon. In his prayer he desired God to take off from him the Government
of this mighty People of England, as being too heavy for his shoulders to
bear: An audations, ambitious, and hypocritical imitation of Moses. It is now
reported of him, that he pretends to Inspirations; and that when any great or
weighty matter is propounded, he usually retireth for a quarter or half an
hour, and then returns and delivers out the Oracles of the Spirit: surely
the Spirit of John of Leyden will be doubled upon this Man.

145. The last Retreat of the faction by H. Martius report.
About this time the Palsgrave took his leave of the Parliament, being much
courted and complemented by them, and his 8000 l. per annum, with all Arreares
confirmed to him: since his departure Harry Martyn (in a jolly humor) was
heard to say, If the worst happened, and that they should not be able to stand
their ground in England, yet the Palsgrave would afford them a place of retreat
in the Palatinate; the seeds of these Anarchicall, Anabaptisticall humors
(upon the reducing of Munster) spread themselves in England, and now have a
mind to return into Germany to kindle a fire there.

146. Io. Lilburne's third Book, called, [The Picture of the Council of
State.]
About this time John Lilburne, and his Company, set forth a Book, called, [The
Picture of the Council of State, etc.] wherein they set forth the illegal and
violent proceedings of the said Council against them in seizing upon them with
armed Bands of Soldiers, and interrogating them against themselves, etc.
(where they have these words) The Faction of a traiterous Party of Officers of
the Army has twice rebelled against the Parliament, and broke them in pieces,
and by force of Arms culled out whom they pleased, and imprisoned diverse of
them, and laid nothing to their charge; and have left only in a manner a few
men (besides 11 of themselves, viz: the General, Cromwell, Ireton, Harrison,
Fleetwood, Rich, Ingolsby, Haslerigge, Constable, Fennicke, Walton, and Allen
Treasurer) of their own Faction behind them, that will (like Spaniel-dogs
(serve their lusts and wills; yea, some of the chiefest of them, viz: Ireton,
Harrison, etc. yea, Mr. Holland himself styled them a Mock-Parliament, a Mock
power, at Windsor; yea, it is yet their expressions at London: And if this be
true that they are a Mock-power, and a Mock-Parliament, then. Quaere, Wether in
Law or Justice (especially considering they have fallen from all their many
glorius promises, and have not done any one action that tends to the universal
good of the people) can those Gentlemen sitting at West-minster in the House
(called, the House of Commons) be any other than a factious company of Men,
traitorously combined together with Cromwell, Ireton, and Harrison, to subdue
the Laws, Liberties, and Freedoms of England, (for no one of them protests
against the rest) and to set up an absolute and perfect tyranny of the Sword,
will, and pleasure, and absolutely intend the destroying the Trade of the
Nation, and the absolute impoverishing the people thereof, to fit them to be
their Vassals and Slaves. And again, the three forementioned Men, viz:
Cromwell, Ireton, and Harrison, (the General being but their stalking horse,
and a cipher) and their traiterous faction, having by their wills and Swords
got all the Swords of England under their command, and the disposing of all the
great Places in England by Sea and Land, and also the pretended Law-making
power, and the pretended Law-executing power, by making among themselves
(contrary to the Laws and Liberties of England) all Judges, Justices of Peace,
Sheriffs, Bailiffs, Committee Men, etc. to execute their wills and tyranny,
walking by no limits or bounds, but their own wills and pleasures, and
traitorously assume unto themselves a power to leavy upon the people what money
they please, and dispose of it as they please, yea even to buy knives to cut
the peoples throats that pay the money to them, and to give no account for it
till Doomes-day in the afternoon; they having already in their wills and power
to dispose of the Kings, Queens, Princes, Dukes, and the rest of the Childrens
Revenue; Deanes and Chapters Land, Bishops Lands, Sequestered Delinquents Lands,
Sequestered Papists Lands, Compositions of all sorts, amounting to Millions of
money, besides Excise and Customs; yet this is not enough, although (if
rightly husbanded) it would constantly pay above one hundred thousand men, and
furnish an answerable Navy thereunto: But the people must now after their
Trades are lost, and their Estates spent, to procure their Liberties and
Freedoms, be cessed about 100000 l. a Month, Master Boon a Member of the
House, lately a Tapster, has 6000 l. given him. Sir Arth: Haslerig 3 great
Manours, Bishops-Aukland, Ever-wood, and another. Col. Backster (the pitiful
Thimble and Bodkin Goldsmiths) bought as much Bishops Lands as cost 10000 l. at
two or three years purchase, and has already raised his money.
that so they may be able like so many Cheaters and State-thieves, to give six,
eight, ten, twelve, fourteen, sixten thousand pounds a piece over again to one
another, (as they have done already to diverse of themselves) to buy the
Commonwealths Lands one of another, (contrary to the duty of Trustees, who by
Law nor equity, can neither give nor sell to one another) at two or three
years purchase. (the true and valuable rate considered) as they have already
done, and to give 4 or 5000 l. per annum, over again to King Cromwell, as they
have done already out of the Earl of Worcesters Estate, etc. besides about 4
or 5 l. a day he has by his Places of Lieut. General, and Colonel of Horse in
the Army; although he were at the beginning of this Parliament but a poor Man;
yea, little better than a Beggar (to what he is now) as well as others of his
Neighbors.

147. A Petition in behalf of Io: Lylburne and his company.
2. April, 1649. A Petition subscribed by diverse Persons in behalf of John
Lylburne and his company, was presented to the Commons, wherein (amongst other
things) are contained these three just demands:

1. That no man be censured, condemned, or molested, but for the breach of some
Law first made and published to the People, whereby is avoided that uncertainty
and howerly hazard that otherwise every man is subject to, both in respect of
his Estate, Liberty, and Life.

2. That every crime have not only its penalty annexed, but together therewith
the manner and method of proceedings ascertained.

3. That the execution of Laws be referred to ordinary Magistrates and
Officers by Law deputed thereto, and that the Military power be not used, but
where the Civil is so resisted, as that of its one strength it is deficient to
enforce obedience.

148. Itinerant Ministers, an invention to undermine our Orthodox settled
Ministers, and infect the people with Schisms and Anarchicall principles,
suitable to the many-headed tyranny of the Grandees.
April 12. 1649. It was referred to a Committee to consider of a way how to
raise Pensions and Allowances out of Deanes and Chapter Lands to maintain
supernumerary Itinerant Ministers, who should be Authorized to go up and down
compassing the earth, and adulterate other Men's Pulpits and Congregations, and
put affronts and raise factions and scandals upon such orthodox and
conscientious Ministers (in order to their Sequestration) as cannot frame their
Doctrine to the damnable practices and Anarchicall principles of the times.
These wandering Apostles are to preach Antimonarchicall seditious doctrine to
the people, (suitable to that they call the present Government) to raise the
rascal multitude and schismatic rabble against all men of best quality in
the Kingdom, to draw them into Associations and Combinations with one another
in every County, and with the Army against all Lords, Gentry, Ministers,
Lawyers, rich and peaceable men, and all that are Lovers of the old Laws and
Government, for the better rooting of them out, that themselves alone may
inhabit the earth, and establish their new tyranny or Kingdom of the Saints,
upon the ruins of our ancient Monarchy. These men (like Balaam) shall bless
and curse for hire, and vent State-news, State-doctrine, and poison the people
with such changeable and various principles as from time to time shall be
dictated to them by those Pseudo-polititians as now sit at the Helm: they
shall cosen the people with pretended illuminations, Revelations, and
Inspirations, and power out all the Vials of Gods wrath amongst them.

Cromwell and Ireton, and their Faction, 149. A fraudulent Reconciliation and
uniting of Interests attempted, with a Mock-fast for that purpose.
having formerly deluded all the Interests and Parties of this Kingdom, were
arrived to that highth of impudence as to endeavor to cheat them all over
again, they had by murdering the King, abolishing the House of Lords, putting
an execrable force upon the far major part of the House of Commons, making
themselves and their Party a tyrannical Council of State to usurp the Supreme
power and Government, See a Paper, called, Arguments against all Accommodation
between the City of London, and the engaged Grandees of the Parl: and Army And,
A seasonable Caution to the City of London? printed at the latter end of
Relation and Observations, Hist. and Pol. etc.
endeavoring a toleration of all Religions, attempting to take away Tithes,
mocking and then tyrannizing over that part of the Army they please to miscall
Levellers, distracted and discontented all Parties within the Kingdom, and
stirred up all the Princes of Christendom to defend the common interest of
Kings, now controverted in England. This cloud threatened to pour down a new
War upon them; to provide a remedy therefore for this soar, Cromwell moved
in the House of Commons, That the Presbyterian Government might be settled,
promising his endeavors thereto; but whether he meant a Classical or
Congregationall Presbytery (which differs little or nothing from Independency)
he did not declare: and here lies the fallacy, he likewise moved, that the
secured and secluded Members might again be invited into the House: they sent
their Agents both Laymen and Ministers (amongst whom Mr. Marshall, Nigh,
Carrell, Goodwin and Hugh Peter's were chief) to cajole and decoy the Ministers,
Citizens, and the expulsed Members; with discourses and propositions, they told
them, The Presbyterians had differed from the King in point of civil Interest,
which was more irreconcilable than that interest of Church Government,
whatsoever show was made to the contrary, (They will not endure to hear of the
KING's exemplary patience and Christian charity to all; nor of His precepts and
strict injunctions to His Son of clemency and abstinency from revenge,
contained in His last Book, [The Pourtraicture of His Majesty.] These things
will both apologize for our young King, and condemn our bloody vindicative
Saints.) That the Presbyterians as well as the Independents made War against
the late King, brought Him low, and prepared Him to receive his late deadly
Blow from the Independents, and therefore the King would look upon both
Parties as equally guilty, and was deeply engaged in point of interest to cut
off both Parties: Endeavoring by these discourses to put the Presbyterians into
despair (their own and Iudas's sin) and then to work upon that base and
cowardly principle of self-preservation, and invite them to join with them in
point of civil Interest and common Defense. But their kindness was but like
that of a malicious Man, who having plaguesoars upon him, embraces his Friend
rather to infect than cherish him: they know that by sitting, voting, acting,
and complying with them, (whose actions the Laws of God and the Land have
damned and anathematized with the highest condemnation) they should contract
the guilt of all their forepassed crimes and treasons; in the mean time the
Presbyterians should sit and act but as a suspected Party, and should be
baffled and turned out again when the danger is past; the Independents keeping
in their own hands all the power, profits and preferments of the Land, and
using the Presbyterian party but as Gibeonites, Hewers of wood, and Drawers of
water under them; they invited them therefore to share with them in their
sins, shames, and punishments, but would keep Achans Wedge and the Babylonish
Carment (the profit of their crimes) to themselves: And (as if it were not
sufficient to cosen Man without mocking God) the House of Commons Ordered a
strict Fast to be kept upon Thursday, 19, April, 1649. as a day of Humiliation
to implore Gods forgiveness for the ingratitude of the people, who did not
sufficiently acknowledge with thankfulness Gods great mercies upon this Land
in freeing them from Monarchy, and bestowing liberty upon them, by changing
Kingly Government into a Free State or Republique. The Faction knew that to
partake with them in these prayers, was to partake of their sins. God deliver
us from those deceitful lips, whose prayers are snares, whose kisses prove
curses, and whose devotion leads to damnation: Never was Fast enjoined with
more severity, nor neglected with more contempt and horror; men shunning it
like the sins of Rebellion and Witchcraft. Besides, their consciences told
them, that they never suffered the thousandth part of the oppressions they now
groan under.

About this time it was debated to send Supplies for Ireland; 150. The juggling
design of sending part of the Army for Ireland.
the predominant Grandees were desirous to purge the Army (as they had done the
House) and send the Levellers (Assertors of Liberty) thither: the Levellers
were desirous to keep their ground here, and send the more mercinary enslaving
and enslaved part of the Army: the better to color the design, Cromwell
undertook to be Conductor of this expedition, and light them the way into
Ireland with his illuminated Nose: having taken order before hand that his
precious self should be recalled time enough to keep up his party in England
from sinking by his longer absence, and the better to accommodate the
business, Lots were several times cast what Regiments should go; but the
Lots not falling out to the minds of the General Council of Officers, they
cast Lots again and again, until fortune agreed with their desires: This
being discovered, a printed Paper was scattered about the streets, 26. April,
1649. as follows: ALL worthy Officers and Soldiers who are yet mindful that
you engaged not as a mere mercinary Army, hired to serve the Arbitrary ends of
a Council of State; but took up Arms in Judgment and Conscience in behalf of
your own, and the peoples just Rights and Liberties; you may see plainly by the
proceedings of Col. Hewson with his Regiment that the design of your grand
Officers is, to reduce the Army to a mere mercinary and servile temper, that
shall obey all their commands, without so much as asking a question for
Conscience sake. Intending by this blind obedience in you to make you he
whatsoever they shall find requisite to establish their own absolute power
over the Commonwealth yea though it be to cut off your best friends, or
perpetuate this their own Parliament and Council of State, things so
evidently destructive to your own and the peoples just Rights and Liberties as
nothing can be more.

And for compassing whereof, you know they have long since dissolved the
Agitators, and erected a Council amongst themselves, by which they have
molded the Parliament and a Council of State to their own wills; both which,
are to be as ascreen between the People and your Grandees, to make the world
believe, they do nothing but by order of Parliament, and Council of State,
when they order all things themselves; and indeed are confederated together to
defend and protect each others in their defrauding and enslaving the
Commonwealth.

This they have long aimed at, but cannot possibly effect it, until they
reduce the Army to a servile and base temper, which they have been laboring to
bring to pass a long time; as by picking quarrels with most Officers and
Soldiers, that have manifested any sense of Common Right, and so vexing them
and wearying them out of Troops and Company. And (you know) they have been
more than once disbanding twenty of a Troup, upon pretense of easing the
public charge: all their mischief being ever done, after either fasting, and
prayer, or upon some very specious pretense; but the care and resolution of the
honest Officers and Soldiers ever prevented this.

But now the business for Ireland (it seems) must do the deed; that being a
service that must be preferred before the settling of the Liberties and
Freedoms of this Nation: and all that are not for this service must be
esteemed no better than Enemies and Traitors; and therefore an Ahab-like Fast
goes before the Lots are cast: and Col. Hewson falls to work and disbands all
those Soldiers and Officers that refused to engage for the service of Ireland,
before the Liberties of England (which we never trod under foot) be restored to
the people.

The end of this being to be a leading case to all other Regiments both Horse
and Foot; not that they certainly intend for Ireland, but by such means to be
rid of all such as are apt to desire to be satisfied in their Consciences of
the justice of the Cause before they engage in the killing and slaying of men
any more; or before they see some fruits answerable to the blood that has been
spilt.

And being rid of this kind of Officers and Soldiers, then to fill the
Regiments as this Hewson does, with such ignorant, needy, or servile men as
these miserable times (through loss of Trade) have begotten.

And this being done, then to make more strict enquiry after this sort of
people in the Army, and all other places, suppress Meetings, and if that will
not do, then to disarme all from whom they suspect the least repining or
opposition.

And therefore all those Officers and Soldiers, and all people in all places
are concerned in a very high nature, even as much as the freedom of the Nation
is worth; yea, as they tender the good of their Wives, Children, Families and
Posterity, to venture their lives and all they have, to make opposition against
this the greatest mischief that ever was attempted; the greatest Treason that
ever was committed against the liberties of the people: and not to stand any
longer in a miz-maze between hope and fear; for if this design take place,
your great Officers and their Confederates in Parliament and Council of State,
will be as so many Kings, Princes and Lords, and your selves, and all the
people, their Slaves and Vassals.

Therefore keep every man his place and post, and stir not, but immediately
choose you a Council of Agitators once more to judge of these things; without
which we shall never see a new Parliament, or ever be quit of these intolerable
burdens, oppressions, and cruelties, by which the People are like to be
beggered and destroyed.




About this time Master Robert Lockier and five or six other Troupers of
Captain Savages Troup were condemned for a supposed mutinys in behalf of
whom Lieut. C. John Lilburne writ this Letter follovving to the General,
dated 27. April, 1649. 151. M. Lockier condemned by a Council of War, with
his honorable death and burial: and Lilburnes Letter to the General.


May it please your Excellency;
WE have not yet forgot your Solemn Engagement of June 5. 1647. whereby the
Armies Continuance as an Army was in no wise by the will of the State, but
by their own mutual Agreement: And if their standing were removed from one
Foundation to another, (as is undeniable) then with the same they removed from
one Authority to another; and the Ligaments and Bonds of the First were all
Dissolved, and gave place to the Second; and under, and from the head of their
first Station, viz: By the Will of the State, the Army derived their
Government by Martial Law; which in Judgment and Reason could be no longer
binding then the Authority (which gave being there to) was binding to the
Army: For the denial of the Authority, is an Abrogation and Nulment of all
Acts, Orders, or Ordinances by that Authority as to them: And upon this
account, your Excellency with the Army, long proceeded upon the Constitution
of a new Council and Government, contrary to all Martial Law and
Discipline, by whom only the Army Engaged to be Ordered in their prosecution
of the ends, to wit, Their several Rights, both as Soldiers and Commoners,
for which they associated; Declaring, Agreeing, and Promising each other, not
to Disband, Divide, or suffer themselves to be Disbanded or Divided, without
satisfaction and security in relation to their Grievances and Desires in behalf
of themselves and the Commonwealth as should be agreed unto by their Council
of Agitators: And by virtue, and under Color of this Establishment, all the
Extraordinary Actions by your Excellency, your Officers, and the Army have
past: Your refusal to Disband, disputing the Orders of Parliament; Impeachment
and Ejection of Eleven Members; your First and Second March up to London; your
late violent Exclusion of the Major part of Members out of the House, and their
Imprisonment without Cause, etc. which can no way be justified from the
Guilt of the highest Treason, but in the accomplishment of a righteous end,
viz: The enjoyment of the benefit of our Laws and Liberties which we hoped
long ere this to have enjoyed from your hands; Yet when we consider and
herevvith compare many of your late carriages both toward the Soldiery and
other Free People; and principally your Cruel Exercise of Martial Law, even
to the Sentence and Execution of Death upon such of your Soldiers as stand for
the Rights of that Engagement, etc. And not only so, but against others not of
the Army; we cannot but look upon your defection and Apostasy in such
dealings, as of most dangerous Consequence to all the Laws and Freedoms of the
People.

And therefore, although there had never been any such solemn Engagement by the
Army, as that of June 5. 1647. which with your Excellency in point of duty
ought not to be of the meanest obligation. We do protest against your Exercise
of Martial Law, against any vvhomsoever, in times of Peace: where all Courts
of Justice are open, as the greatest encroachment upon our Laws and Liberties
that can be acted against us; and particularly, against the Trial of the
Soldiers of Captain Savages Troup yesterday, by a Court Martial, upon the
Articles of War, and sentencing of two of them to death; and for no other
end (as we understand) but for some dispute about their Pay: And the reason of
this our Protestation, is from the Petition of Right, made in the third year
of the late King, which declares, That no person ought to be judged by Law
Martial, except in times of War; And that all Commissions given to execute
Martial Law in time of Peace, are contrary to the Laws and Statutes of the
Land. And it was the Parliaments complaint, That Martial Law was then
commanded to be executed upon Soldiers for Robbery, Mutiny, or Murder. Which
Petition of Right this present Parliament in their late Declarations of the 9.
of February and the 17. of March, 1648. commend as the most excellentest Law
in England; and there promise to preserve inviolably, it, and all other the
Fundamental Laws and Liberties, concerning the preservation of the Lives,
Properties, and Liberties of the people, with all things incident thereunto.
And the Exercise of Martial Law in Ireland, in time of Peace, was one of the
chiefest Articles for which the E. of Strafford lost his Head: The same by
this present Parl. being judged High Treason. And the Parliament it self,
neither by Act nor Ordinance, can justly or vvarrantably destroy the
Fundamental Liberties and Principles of the Common Law of England: It being a
Maxim in Law and Reason both, that all such Acts and Ordinances, are ipso
facto, null, and void in Law, and binds not all, but ought to be resisted and
stood against to the death. And if the Supreme Authority may not presume to do
this, much less may You, or Your Officers presume thereupon; For where Remedy
may be had by an ordinary course in Law, the Party grieved shall never have
his recourse to extraordinaries. Whence it is evident, That it is the
undoubted Right of every Englishman (Soldier, or other) that he should be
punishable only in the ordinary Courts of Justice, according to the Laws and
Statutes of the Realm in the times of Peace, as now it is; and the
extraordinary way by Courts Martial, in no wise to be used.

Yea the Parliaments Oracle, Sir Edward Cook, Declares in the third part of
his Institutes, Chap. of Murder, That for a General or other Officers of an
Army, in time of Peace to put any man, although a Soldier, to death, by color
of Martial Law, it is absolute murder in that General, etc. Therefore
erecting of Martial Law now, when all Courts of justice are open and
stopping the free current of Law, which sufficiently provides for the
punishment of Soldiers as well as others, as appears by 18 H. 6. c. 19. 2 and 3
E. 6. c. 2. 4 and 5 P. and M. c. 3. and 5. l. 5. and 5 Iam. 25. is an absolute
destroying of our Fundamental Liberties, and the razing of the Foundation of
the Common Law of England; the which out of Duty and Conscience to the Rights
and Freedoms of this Nation (which we value above our lives) and to leave You
and Your Council without all excuse, we were moved to represent unto Your
Excellency, Earnestly pressing You, well to consider what You do, before you
proceed to the taking away the Lives of those men by Martial Law; least the
blood of the Innocent (and so palpable Subversion of the Laws and Liberties
of England) bring the revvard of just vengeance after it upon You, as it did
upon the Earl of Strafford: For Innocent blood God will not pardon; and what
the people may do (in case of such violent Subversion of their Rights) we
shall leave to Your Excellency to judge, and remain

Sir, Your Excellencies humble Servants, JOHN LILBURNE RICH: OVERTON.
From our Canslesse, and unjust, and Tyrannical Captivity. in the Tovver of
London. April 27. 1649.

Notvvithstanding which Letter, and much other means made, the said Lockier
was Shot to Death in Saint Paul's Churchyard the same day, to strike a terror
and slavish fear into such other Soldiers as shall dare to take notice of
their approaching slavery; but his Christian and gallant deportment at his
death, with the honorable funeral pomp accompanying him to his Grave turned
all the terror of his Tragedy into hatred and contempt of the Authors thereof.
152. Arreares given to Col. A Popham, and H. Martin, and temptations put upon
Lilburne and Joyce.


About this time the House of Commons gave to Col. Alexander Popham all his
Arreares, and to Harry Martyn 3000 l. to put him on upon the holy Sisters, and
take him off from the Levellers: And Cromwell is now playing the Devils part,
shevving the Kingdoms of the earth, and tempting John Lilburne to fall down
and worship him, to forsake his good principles and engagements, and betray
the liberties of the people, but L. Col. Lilburne is higher seated in the good
opinion of the people than to be suspected of so much baseness, who are
confident he will as constantly resist false promises and vain hopes, as he
has vain threats and terrors of Indictments, and not cast away the hold he
has of immortality by hearking to such a Siren whose promises are but baits,
with a hook hidden under them; and his preferments but like Mahomets
paradise: he that has cousened all the Interests of the Kingdom will not
scruple to cheat his Enemy, a free-spirited plain meaning man. This is to
undermine and blovv up his credit with his party, and make him liable to a
revenge hereafter: He that stoops to the lure of a known Enemy is guilty of
inexcusable folly, and a Betrayer of himself, especially having had so fair a
Copy of Cons^^ncy set him by Coronet Joyce who has with much faithfulness
resisted the like allurements, and so foul a Copy of Inconstancy by Reynolds.

The Commons have ordered, 153. The design of making Members of Parliament
liable to Arrests.
That upon Complaint made to any Judge of the three Benches, the Judges shall
send a Letter of Summons to such Member of their House as shall be complained
of, to give an appearance, and submit to legal proceeding^; otherwise his
person to be liable to Arrests. But our present Judges are Creatures to the
House of Commons and know beforehand what Members are Babes of Grace in
favor, and must be privileged; and who are out of favor, and must not be
privileged; they have an Index tells them when to grant and when to deny,
Sinners must not be partakers of the same Laws with Saints: This is a Whip
and a Bell to drive such dogged Members out of the Hall as will not hunt in
pack with the Grandees in pursuit of their design, and are quick-sented
enough to smell out their knavery, if they come too near their door: It is
thought the tyrannical Hocas Pocasses had an aim hereby to lash Harry Martyn
off from the Levellers, and make him come in to them. 154. Women Petition the
House for L Col. Lilburne and his Company.


About this time some thousands of vvelaffected Women of London, Westminster,
Southwarke, and the Hamlets, stormed the House of Commons with two Petitions
in behalf of Io: Lilburne and his Company: They complain of the Council of
States violent and illegal proceedings against them, in seizing them in the
night by Soldiers; of Lockiers being shot to death by Martial Law; of their
Arbitrary Government, Second part of Englands New Chains discovered.
Taxes, Excise, Monopolies, etc. That there was a Design to fetch Lilburne and
his Fellow Prisoners out of the Tower at midnigbt to White Hall and there
murder them; That the House by Declaring the Abettors of the Book laid to
those Prisoners charge Traitors, have laid a snare for people; when as hardly
any discourse can be touching the affairs of the present times but falls
within the compass of that Book; so that all liberty of discourse is there by
utterly taken away, then which there can be no greater slavery.

They received not so good Answers to these Petitions as they were wont to
receive, when they had Money, Plate, Rings, Bodkins, and Thymbles to sacrifice
to these Legislative Idols, they were bid Go home and wash their Dishes; to
which some replied, They had neither Dishes nor Meat left.

Note that the Commons have returned answer to some Petitioners, 155.
Observations upon the Commons Answer to those that petitioned for Lilburne, etc.
that Lilburne shall be Legally Tried by Laws preceding the fact, and yet by
their Order, 11. April, 1649. it is Ordered, That the Attorney General be
required to take speedy course for prosecution of Lieu. Col. Io: Lilburne, etc.
in the Upper Bench this Term, upon the Declaration of this House touching the
Book, entitled, [The second part of Englands new Chains discovered.] if this
Order be not a Law and preceding the fact too, then our supreme Saints have
told a Legislative Lie. In the latter end of the said Answer they are angry
the Petitioners should discover so much of their baseness, That Cromwell and
Ireton rides them, and therefore (contrary to all men's knowledge, and their
own Consciences) they term those Intimations, seditious Suggestions; and
Ordered, that Cromwell and Ireton should dravv up a Declaration to prevent the
people from being misled by Sovvers of sedition; Humiliter servivunt, aut
superbe dominantur.
such are the degenerous Spirits of under-Tyrants, who are Asses to their
Superiors, and Lions to their Inferiors: Cromwell and Ireton, that have
subverted all civil Authority, Murdered the KING, possessed themselves of
what they please, and enslaved the Kingdom with a Military tyranny, must
dravv up a Declaration according to their fancy, for their own vindication,
and the Commons must Father the Bastard and set the stamp of their Authority
and privilege upon it, lest any man should confute it, and beat back the
Authors lies into their throats. But this is no new invention, for formerly
when the Council of Officers set forth their Answer to the House of Commons
Demands concerning their secured Members; Ireton penned this scandalous Answer
of the said Officers.
Cromwell and Ireton caused their Iourney-men of that Conventicle to Vote, That
the House did approve the matter of the said Answer; thereby ovvning all the
gross lies therein contained to deter the imprisoned Members from replying
to it, and so by a tacit confession to acknovvledge themselves guilty.

About this time appeared out of the East a New Light in our Horizon, 156. The
Turkish Alchoran taught to speak English.
the Alchoran of Mahomet (Predecessor to Cromwell) and of Sergius (forerunner
of Hugh Peter's) naturalized and turned English. Now the Jews (Professed
Enemies to Christ (which Mahomet is not) are accepted off) it is believed that
their Thalmude and Caball will shortly be made English too, that this Island
may be rendered a complete Pantheon, a Temple and Oracle for all Gods and all
Religions; our lightheaded innovating People being like Reeds as apt to be
shaken by, and bend unto every vvind, every breath of pretended Inspiration, as
the ancient Arabians were.

May 1. 1649. 157. New-declared Treasons to defend tyranny and usurpation, and
ensnare the People.
The frighted Conventicle of Commons considered of an Act (forsooth) to
fortify themselves and their usurpations with a Scar-crovv of nevv-declared
Treasons, to the purpose follovving:

1: If anyman shall maliciously (this is a word of qualification, a back-dore
to let out such as they shall think fit) Affirm the present Government to be
tyrannical, usurped, or unlawful, or that the Commons in Parliament, are not
the supreme Authority of the Nation, or endeavor to alter the present
Government.

2. If any affirm the Council of State or Parliament to be Tyrannical or
unlawful, or endeavor to subvert them, or stir up sedition against them.

For Soldiers of the Army to contrive the death of the General, or Lieutenant
General, or endeavor to raise mutinies in the Army, Quaere, whether Cromwell
be Lieutenant General, or no?
or to leavy War against the Parliament to join with any to invade England
or Ireland, counterfeit the Great Seal, kill any Member of Parliament, or
Judge, or Minister of Justice in their duty: All these several cases to be
Declared, Treason. You see the terrors of Caine pursue these guilty Covvards.

This Fools Boit is chiefly aimed at the honest Levellers; this Iunto of
Commons have made themselves legal Traitors already, and would now make all
the Kingdom legislative Traitors; but I hope none of those that arrogate the
Reverend Title of Judges of the Law (although against Law) will be so
lavvlesse as to give Sentence of Death upon any such illegal Act of the House
of Commons; nay, this very Act denounces slavery and bondage to the Nation,
and therefore is an Act of the highest tyranny, and a snare.

158. The Levellers Randezvous in Oxfordshire.
May 6. 1649. The honest Levellers of the Army, (for that is the Nickname
which Cromwell falsely and unchristianly has christened them vvithall) Enemies
to Arbitrary Government, tyranny and oppression, whether they find it in the
Government of one or many? whether in a Council of Officers, a Council of
State, or a fag end of a House of Commons? whether it veil it self with the
Title of a Supreme Authority, or a Legislative power?) drevv together to a
Randezvouz about Banbury in Oxfordshire, to the number of 4000 or 5000. others
resorting to them daily from other parts. This gave an Alarm to our Grandees,
fearing the dovvnfall of their domination. Cromwell (not knovving what Party
to dravv out against them, that would be steadfast to him) shunned the danger,
and put his property the General upon it to oppose the Randezvouz, and
(looking as won as the guilles of a sick Turkey-cock) marched forth himself
VVestvvard to intercept such as drevv to the Randezvouz. In the mean time the
said Levellers printed and published this ensuing Paper, entitled,

Englands Standard advanced: or, A Declaration from Mr. Will: Thompson, and
the oppressed People of this Nation, now under his conduct in Oxfordshire:
Dated at their Randezvouz, May 6. 1649.
WHereas it is notorious to the whole world, that neither the Faith of the
Parliament, nor yet the Faith of the Army (formerly made to the People of this
Nation, in behalf of their Common Right, Freedom, and Safety) has been at all
observed, or made good, but both absolutely declined and broken, and the People
only served with bare words and fair promising Papers, and left utterly
destitute of all help or delivery: And that this has principally been by the
prevalency and treachery of some eminent Persons (now domineering over the
People) is most evident. The Solemn Engagement of the Army at New Market, and
Triploe-heaths by them destroyed, the Council of Agitators dissolved, the
blood of War shed in time of Peace, Petitioners for Common Freedom suppressed
by force of Arms, and Petitioners abused and terrified, the lawful Trial by
12 sworn Men of the Neighborhood subverted and denied, bloody and tyrannical
Courts (called an high Court of Justice, and a Council of State) erected, the
power of the Sword advanced and set in the Seat of the Magistrates, the Civil
Laws stopped and subverted, and the Military introduced, even to the hostile
seizure, imprisonment, trial, sentence, and execution of death, upon diverse of
the Free People of this Nation, leaving no visible Authority, devolving all
into a factious Juncto and Council of State, usurping and assuming the name,
stamp, and Authority of Parliament, to oppress, torment and vex the People,
whereby all the lives, liberties, and estates, are all subdued to the Wills of
those Men, no Law, no Justice, no Right or Freedom, no case of Grievances, no
removal of unjust barbarous Taxes, no regard to the cries and groans of the
poor to be had while utter beggary and famine (like a mighty torrent) has
broke in upon us, and already seized upon several parts of the Nation.

Wherefore through an inavoidable necessity, no other means left under Heaven,
we are enforced to betake our selves to the Law of Nature, to defend and
preserve our selves and Native Rights, and therefore are resolved as one Man
(even to the hazard and expense of our lives and fortunes) to endeavor the
redemption of the Magistracy of England, from under the force of the Sword, to
vindicate the Petition of Right, to set the unjustly imprisoned free, to
relieve the poor, and settle this Commonwealth upon the grounds of Common
Right, Freedom, and Safety.

Be it therefore known to all the free People of England, and to the whole
world, that (choosing rather to die for Freedom, than live as Slaves) We are
gathered and associated together upon the bare account of Englishmen, with our
Swords in our hands to redeem our selves and the Land of our Nativity, from
slavery and oppression, to avenge the blood of War shed in the time of Peace,
to have justice for the blood of M. Arnold Schot to death at Ware, and for the
blood of M. Robert Lockyer, and diverse others who of late by Martial Law were
murdered at London.

And upon this our Engagement in behalf of the Commonwealth, We do solemnly
agree and protest, That we will faithfully (laying all self respects aside)
endeavor the actual relief and setlement of this distressed Nation.

And that all the world may know particularly what we intend, and wherein
particularly to center and acquiesce for ever, not to recede or exceed the
least punctilio, We do declare from the integrity of our hearts, that by the
help and might of God we will endeavor the absolute setlement of this
distracted Nation, upon that form and Method by way of an Agreement of the
People, tendered as a Peace Offering by Lieut. Colonel John Lilburne, Mr. Will:
Walwyn, Mr. Thomas Prince, and Mr. Rich: Overton, bearing date May 1. 1649. the
which we have annexed to this our Declaration as the Standard of our
Engagement, thereby owning every part and particular of the Premises of the
Agreement, promising and resolving to the utmost hazard of our Lives and
Abilities, to pursue the speedy and full Accomplishment thereof, and to our
power, to protect and defend all such as shall Assent or Adhere thereunto: And
particularly, for the Preservation and Deliverance of L. Col. John Lilburne, M.
Will: Walwyn, Mr. Thomas Prince, Mr. Richard Overton, Captain Bray, and Mr.
William Sawyer, from their barbarous and illegal Imprisonments: And we
Declare, That if a hair of their heads perish in the hands of those Tyrants
that restrain them, That if God shall enable us, we will avenge it seventy
times seven fold upon the heads of the Tyrants themselves and their Creatures.

And that till such time as by Gods Assistance we have procured to this Nation
the Declared purpose of this our Engagement, we will not Divide nor Disband,
nor suffer our selves to be Divided or Disbanded, resolving with soberness and
civility to behave our selves to the Country, to wrong nor abuse any man, to
protect all to our power from violence and oppression in all places where we
come; resolving to stop the payment of all Taxes or Sessements whatsoever, as
of Excise, Tithes, and the Tax of Ninety thousand pounds per mensem.

And having once obtained a New Representative, according to the said
Agreement, upon such Terms and Limitations therein expressed; We shall then
freely lay down our Arms, and return to our several Habitations and Callings.

And concernings the equity, necessity, and justice of our undertaking, We
appeal to the judgment of the oppressed, betwixt their Destroyers and Us;
Whether by the law of God, of Nature, and Nations, it be not equally
justifiable in us to engage for the Safety and Deliverance of this Nation, as
it was with the Netherlanders, and other People for theirs, and that upon the
same Principles that the Army engaged at New Market and Triploe-heaths; both
Parliament and Army declaring, That it is no resistance of Magistracy to side
with just Principles, and Law of Nature and Nations: And that the Soldiery may
Lawfully hold the hands of that General, who will turn his Cannon against his
Army, on purpose to destroy them: The Seamen the hands of that Pilot, who
wilfully runs his Ship upon a Rock. And therefore, (the condition of this
Commom-wealth considered) we cannot see how it can be otherwise esteemed in us.
And upon that account we Declare, that we do own, and are resolved to own
all such Persons, either of the Army or Countries, that have already, or shall
hereafter, rise up and stand for the Liberties of England, according to the
said Agreement of the People: And in particular, We do own and avow the late
proceedings in Colonel Scroops, Col. Harrisons, and Major General Skippons
Regiments, declared in their Resolutions published in print; As One Man,
Resolving to live and die with them, in their and our just and mutual defense.

And we do implore and invite all such as have any sense of the Bonds and
Miseries upon the People; any Bowels of Compassion in them, any Piety, Justice,
Honor, or Courage in their Breasts, any Affections to the Freedoms of England,
any love to his Neighbor or Native Country, to rise up, and come in to help a
distressed miserable Nation, to break the Bands of Cruelty, Tyranny, and
Oppression, and set the People Free.

In which Servise, Trusting to the undoubted goodness of a just and righteous
Cause, We shall faithfully discharge the utmost of our Endeavors; Not sparing
the venture of all hardships and hazards whatsoever, and leave the Success to
God.

Signed by me WILLIAM THOMPSON,
at our Randezvouz in Oxfordshire near Banbury, in behalf of my Self, and the
Rest Engaged with me, May 6. 1649.

For a New Parliament, By the Agreement of the People.

About this time Doctor Dorislaus a Civil Lawyer, 159. Doct Dorislaus stabbed
to death in Holland.
sometimes Judge Advocate to the Earl of Essex, and Lord Fairfax, and lately
one of the Council in the High Court of Justice against the KING, and the 4.
Lords, was sent from the Parliament, Agent into Holland, where about 18.
Scots-men, repayring to his Lodging, 6. of them went up the stayres to his
Chamber, whilst 12. of them made good the stayre-foot, they stabbed him to
death, and escaped.

About the 14. day of May, 1649. 160. Hasleriggs barbarous motion to murder ix
Royalists of the best quality in revenge of Dorislaus.
Report was made from the Council of State to the House of the examination of
3. Servants of Doctor Dorislaus, concerning the Death of their Master; and what
allowances were fit to be given to his Children out of the Kings Revenue,
thereby to lay an aspertion upon the King (as if He having had an influence
upon that Fact, His Estate must make the recompense, notwithstanding Scottish
men did the deed in revenge of Hamiltons death.) Dorislaus had been a poor
Schoolmaster in the Low Countries formerly, from whence he was translated to
read the Histori Lecture at Oxford, where he decried Monarchy in his first
Lecture; was complained of, and forgiven by the benignity of the King. Then he
became Judge Advocate in the Kings Army in his expedition against the Scots:
afterward he had the like employment, under the Earl of Essex; and lastly,
under Sir Tho: Fairfax, a great Gainer by his employments, but withal, a great
Antimonarchist, and a Saint in Cromwells Rubric, and therefore had a
magnetique virtue both living and dead to draw money to him in abundance. Upon
occasion of this Debate, Haslerigge moved, That 6 Gentlemen of the best quality
[Royalists] might be put to Death as a revenge for Dorislaus, and to deter
men from the like attempts hereafter. (That you may the better see of what
Spirit Haslerigge is known, That some Northern Counties having petitioned the
Commons for relief, against the miserable famine raging there: Haslerigge
opposed their request, saying, That want of food would best defend these
Counties from Scottish Invasions.) What man that had any sense of Christianity,
Courage, Honesty, or Justice, would have been the Author of so barbarous and
unjust a motion, That 6. Gentlemen no way conscious nor privy to the fact
should be offered up a sacrifice to revenge and malice; nay, to guilty fears
and base cowardice, to keep off the like attempts from Haslerigge and his
Party. I wish this Gentleman would read the Alchoran (or new Independent Bible
of the new Translation) and from thence gather precepts of more Humanity,
Justice, Honesty and Courage, since he has Read the Old and New Testament of
Moses and Christ to so little purpose. Yet the House, 18. May, passed a
Declaration, That if more Acts of the like nature happened hereafter, it should
be retaliated upon such Gentlemen of the Kings Party as had not yet Compounded.
But this is but a devise to fright them to Compound, unless it be a forerunner
to a Massacre heretofore taken into consideration at a Council of War: See.

161. An Act declaring more new Treasons.
About this time came forth that prodigious Act, declaring 4. new Treasons with
many co^plicated Treasons in their bellies, the like never heard of before in
our Law, nor in any Kingdom or Republike of Christendo^: Because I have
formerly spoken of it, the Act it self printed, published and dreadfully
notorious throughout the whole Kingdom; I will refer you to the printed Copy;
only one clause formerly debated was omitted in the Act, viz. That to kill the
General, Lieu. Gen: any Members of this present Parl: or Council of State to
be declared, Treason; this would have discovered their guilty cowardice so much
they were ashamed of it: besides it was thought fit to make the People take a
new Oath of Allegiance to the new State. First, I will only give you some few
Observations thereupon. This Act declares to be Treason unto death and
confiscation of Lands all Deeds, Plots, and Words: (1.) Against this present
fagge end of a Parliament, and against their never-before heard-of Supreme
Authority and Government: for, when was this Kingdom ever governed by a
Parliament, or by any power constituted by them? (2.) All endeavors to subvert
the Keepers of the Liberties of England and Council of State constituted, and
to be from time to time constituted by Authority of Parliament, who are to be
under the said Representatives in Parliament, (if they please, and not
otherwise; for the Sword and the Purse is trusted in the power of the Council
of State) yet the Keepers of the Liberties of England, and the Council of
State of England to be hereafter constituted by Parliament, are Individua vaga,
ayrie notions not yet named nor known; and when they are known we owe them no
Allegiance, (without which no Treason) by the known Laws of the Land. which
is only due to the King, His lawful Heirs and Successors, and thereto we
are sworn; nor are the particular Powers and Authorities, granted by this
Parliament to the said Keepers of the Liberties of England, and Council of
State yet any where authentically published and made known to us by any avowed
Act, (unless we shall account their Licenced New books to be such) and
therefore they may usurp what powers they please: So that these men who
involved us in a miserable War against the late Murdered KING, pretending He
would enstave us, and they would set us free; have brought us so far below
the condition of the basest Slaves, that they abuse us, like brute Beasts, and
having deprived us of our Religion, Laws and Liberties; and drawn from us our
money and blood, they now deny us the use of reason and common sense, belonging
to us as Men, and Govern us by arbitrary, irrational Votes, with which they
bait Traps to catch us; woe be to that People whose Rulers set snares to catch
them, and are amari venatores contra dominum, Men-hunters against God; nay, to
move any Person to stir up the People against their Authority is hereby
declared, Treason; mark the ambiguity of these words (like the Devils Oracles)
which he that has Power and the Sword in his hands will interpret as he
please: If the Keepers of the Liberties of England, or Council of State shall
extend too far, or abuse their Authority never so much contrary to the Laws
of the Land, Reason, Justice, or the Laws of God) as has been lately done in
the Case of Lilburne, Walwyn, etc.) no Lawyer, no Friend shall dare to perform
that Christian duty of giving council or help to the oppressed, here Fathers
and Children, Husbands and Wives. Brothers and all relations must forsake, nay
betray one another, lest these Tyrants interpret these duties to be, A moving
of them to stir up the People against their Authority. 3. All endeavors to
withdraw any Soldier or Officer from their obedience to their superior
Officer, or from the present Government, as aforesaid; By which words it is
Treason: First, if any man's Child, or Servant, be enticed into this Army, and
the Father or Master endeavor to withdraw him from so plundering and roguing a
kind of life back to his profession. Secondly, if any Commander or Officer
shall command his Soldiers to violate, wrong, or rob any man for the party so
aimed at, or some wel-meaning Friend to set before the said Soldiers the sin
and shame of such actions, and dissuade them from obeying such unlawful
commands. 4. If any man shall presume to counterfeit their conterfeit Great
Seal, it is declared Treason. I wonder it is not Treason to counterfeit their
counterfeit Coin! Behold here new minted Treasons current in no time nor place
but this afflicted Age and Nation: Edw. 3. anno 25. regni, chapter 2. passed an
excellent Act to secure the People by reducing Treasons to a certainty; as our
new Legislative Tyrants labor to ensnare the People by making Treasons
uncertain and arbitrary; Sic volo, sic jubeo, it shall be Treason, because
they will call and Vote it so.
what they please to call Treason shall be Treason, though our known Laws
call it otherwise: we have long held our Estates and Liberties, and must now
hold our Lives at the will of those Grand Seigniours, one Vote of 40. or 50.
factious Commons, Servants and Members of the Army vacates all our Laws,
Liberties, Properties, and destroies our Lives. Behold here a short view of
that Act which has no Additions by any Act subsequent. See stat. 1. Mariae, c.
10. Whereas diverse opinions have been before this time, in what cases Treason
shall be said, and in what not; The King at the request of the Lords and
Commons, See 1 H. 4. c. 10. ^1 H. 7. c. 1.
Declares:

1. That to compass or imagine the Death of the KING, (how much more to act
it) Queen, or their eldest Son and Heir.

2. To violate the KING'S Companion, eldest Daughter unmarried, or the Wife of
the KING'S eldest Son and Heir.

3. To leavie War against the KING, or adhere to His Enemies in his Realm,
and thereof be proveably attainted of open deed by people of their condition.

4. To counterfeit the KING'S Great or Prive Seal;

5. Or His Money.

6, To stay the KING'S Chancellor, Treasurer, Justices of one Bench or other,
Justices in Oyre, Justices in Assize, and all other Justices assigned to hear
and determine, being in their Places doing their Offices.

If any other case supposed Treason which is not above specified, So the 4
Lords ought to have been Tried, not by a new shambles of justice.
does happen before any Justices, the Justices shall tarry without any going to
Judgment of the Treason, till the Cause be showed and declared before the KING
and His Parliament (not before the House of Commons only, or before both
Houses without the KING) whether it ought to be adjuged Treason.

You see how few in number these Treasons specified are, and that they must be
attainted of open deed by their Peers; our words were free under Monarchy,
though not free under our Free State; so were they under the Romans. Tacitus,
An. 1. sub finem, speaking of Treasons, facta arguebantur, dicta impune erant.
These horrible tyrannies considered, (and being destitute of all other less
desperate relief) I do here solemnly declare and protest before that God that
has made me a Man and not a Beast, a Freeman and not a Slave, that if any man
whatsoever that takes upon him the Reverend name and Title of a Judge or
Justice shall give Sentence of Death upon any Friend of mine upon this or any
other illegal Act of this piece of a House of Commons, I will and lawfully may
(the enslaving scar-crow doctrine of all time serving, State-flattering Priests
and Ministers, notwithstanding) follow the exemples of Sampson, Judith, Iaell,
and Ehud, and by Poniard, Pistol, Poison, or any other means whatsoever,
secret or open, prosecute to the Death the said Judge and Justice, and all
their principal Abettors: and I do hereby invite and exhort all generous
freeborn Englishmen to the like resolutions, and to enter into Leagues
defensive and offensive, and sacramental associations (seven or eight in a
company, or as many as can well confide in one another) to defend and revenge
mutually one another Persons, Lives, Limbs, and Liberties as aforesaid,
against this, and all other illegal and tyrannous Usurpations.

162. A motion to enlarge Sr Will: Waller, etc. And the Generals Answer,
intimating the securing of the Members to be done by confederacy with the
Army-party in the House.
About this time or a little before, the General was moved to enlarge Sir
William Waller, and the other Members illegally kept Prisoners in Windsor: He
answered, they were no longer his, but the Parliaments Prisoners: It should
seem the Brute has made a private deed of gift of them to his Journy-men of
the House. The Generals Warrant seized and Imprisoned them, and
notwithstanding the Council of Officers declared in print, that they were
preparing a Charge against them, yet the Knaves lied like Saints; they were
then so far from having matter to accuse them of, that they have ever since,
hunted after a Charge against them, and endeavored to suborne Witnesses; but
after 24 Weeks restraint (whereas by the Law no Man ought to be committed
without an accusation) they have found nothing against them. This turning over
of these Prisoners to their House of Commons proves what I formerly asserted,.
24. That the violence of the Army in securing and secluding the Members, was by
consent of their Somerset house Iunto now sitting in the House of Commons.

163. The General sends forth Warrants to all Justices of the Peace to attach
those Levellers that he had routed.
The honest Leveliers (most of them Countrymen) endeavoring to draw to a
Randezvouz, about 600. or 700. of them marched from Banbury to Burford in
Oxfordshire, where lying securely (because they were upon Treaty with the
Enemy) their Quarters were beaten up, and about 180 of them taken Prisoners,
which their Enemies (according to their usual custom) to gain reputation by
lying, reported to be so many Hundreds. And the General (as if they had been
all routed) sent forth his Warrants to all Justices of the Peace in the
adjacent Counties, requiring them to apprehend and secure all such of them as
shall be found; I desire to know by what Authority the General takes upon him
to command Justices of the Peace who are not under his Power, and what tame
Animals these Justices are that will submit to his commands? and whether he
thinks the Civil Magistrate to be obnoxious to the Power of the Sword and the
Council of Officers? See the Vote and Act for abolishing the Kingly office.
164.
and his single self the Supreme Magistrate or Tyrant Paramount,
notwithstanding the Vote of his Journeymen Commons, That no single Man should
be trusted with the Supreme Power.

The Levellers having possessed themselves of Northampton: the General (it is
said) thought fit to take hold of the Horns of the Altar, The General sends
to the City for additionall Forces.
and wrote to his Vassals of the City to send their Trained Bands to his
relief that he might the better domineer over them, and continue their slavery
hereafter. But if the Citizens have no more wit, I wish their Horns may be as
visible in their foreheads, as the Nose in Olivers face.

To cozen the honest Levellers, 165. The Commons colourably debate to dissolve
this Parl: and settle a succeeding Representative.
the Commons (in order to the ending this present Parliament) are debating how
to pack a succeeding Representative as wicked as themselves and of the same
leaven; whose Election shall not be free, but bounded with such Orders of
limitation and restriction as shall shut out all men from electing or being
elected, as are not precisely of the same principles and practices, and as deep
engaged in their tyrannical, traiterous, cheating, bloody designs as
themselves, guilty Committee Men, and Accountants to the State shall be the
next Representative; and for the better lengthening of the business (that they
may see what success) in the mean time (the Levellers will have) they
wire-draw it through a Committee, and refer it to be debated by a Committee
of the whole House. And at last (if they must dissolve) having packed
themselves into a Council of State, they will usurp the Supreme Authority
there: to prepare the way to which design, they have passed another Act, May
19. That the People shall be Governed as a Free state by Representatives, and
by such as they shall constitute; and then consider what kind of
Representatives we are likely to have.

Great care is taken that the State (or rather our States-mens private pockets)
might not be prejudiced by Judgments, 166. A Debate how to defeat Judgments,
Extents, etc. upon Delinquents Lands. sect.
Extents, etc. lying upon Delinquents Estates: you see notwithstanding their
declaratory Vote, That in things concerning the Lives, Liberties, and
Properties of the People, they would maintain the known Laws of the Land; yet
this Vote (as well as all others) has a condition implied, that it do no
ways hinder the Gains of our godly Grandees, otherwise they would not
consider how to defeat Creditors of their legal assurances.

John Lilburne being ordered a close Prisoner in the Tower by the Commons
without Pen, Ink, or Paper, 167. John Lilburnes starving imprisonment in the
Tower.
(which was tyranny under King Charles, but not under K. Oliver) a Petition was
presented to the Commons by many well-affected, that John might have the
allowance usually and legally due to Prisoners in the like case for his
support; The allowance is 4 l. a Week as I conceive.
which was rejected, insomuch that John was kept 3 whole days with one half
meals meat: this is to condemn men unheard to be murdered by famine in their
private slaughter-houses, when they cannot, or dare not murder them in their
pretended Courts of Judicature, or public shambles: yet afterward when the
drawing together of the Levellers, and discontents of New Castle affrighted the
Commons, they voted him the short allowance of 20 s. a Week. Thus you see
nothing but fears and dangers can kindle the least spark of goodness and
compassion in their woolvish breasts: wherefore Lord (I beseech thee) heap
fears and terrors upon their guilty pates till with Judas Iscariot they cry
out, We have sinned in that we have betrayed innocent blood.

168. Why Ireton laid down his Commission.
Cromwell being to march against the Levellers, left Ireton behind him (like a
hobby daring of larks) to overawe the Conventicle at Westminster, and see they
chaunt no tune but of their setting, the better to keep himself in a neutrall
reconciling posture: Ireton laid down his Commission, (which he can take up
again at pleasure) whereby he puts off all addresses to him from the levelling
party for the present. This poor Fellow now keeps his golden Coach which
cost 200 l. and 4. gallant Horses. The world is well altered with such petty
Companions; and hereby the Soldiers may see what becomes of their Arreares.
There has been a seeming falling out between Cromwell and Ireton.

169. Hugh Peter's visits I. Lilburne in the Tower, and the sum of their
Conference.
John Lilburne being a close Prisoner in the Tower (as has been said) Hugh
Peter's (Chaplain in Ordinary to two great Potentates, Lucifer and Oliver) came
about dinner time ( May 25. 1649.) to visit him, and though admittance be
denied to other men, yet to him the Gates slew open; as sure as Saint Peter
keeps the keys of Heaven, Hugh Peter's keeps the keys of our Hell and out
Grandees Consciences, and opens and shuts at pleasure; he is Confessor to
Tyburne, and has a great power over damned Spirits, or rather over such
Spirits as not submitting basely to the tyranny of our State-Mountebanks,
Witness his tampering with Hamilton, etc.
incur their condemnation in this world, (by Gods permission) in order to
their salvation in the next world: the tyranny of these Usurpers implying at
once, their cruelties over our bodies, and Gods mercy to our souls. Hughs
first salute was, That he came merely to give John a visit, without any
design, (his guilty Conscience prompting him to a voluntary Apology) John
answered, I know you well enough, you are one of the setting Dogs of the great
Men of the Army, with fair and plausible pretenses to insinuate into Men, when
they have done them wrong, and to work out their designs when they are in a
strait; and cover over the blots that they have made. Then John complained of
the Compare this Act of the Kings, With the violent act of those Traitors and
Tyrants, Fiarfax and his Council of War in imprisoning and secluding above
200. Members at once without cause shown, and leaving only 40. or 50. of their
cheating Faction in the House to carry on their bloody Anarchicall designs;
some of which secured Members with barbarous usage were almost brought to
death, and their murder since attempted by Soldiers.
illegal and violent seizing upon him by Soldiers, and carrying him before
that new erected thing, called, [A Council of State] who committed him without
any Accusor, accusation, Prosecutor, or Witness, or any due process of Law:
and yet when the King impeached the 5 Members and preferred a Charge of High
Treason against them; Recorded 1. part Book of Decl. p. 35. and only failed
in a single punctilio of due process of Law, they cried out, it was an
invasion of the Peoples Liberties; so that four or five Recantations from Him.
(Recorded in their own Declarations) would not serve His turn. Peter's half
out of countenance (if so prostituted a Villain that practices impudence
amongst common Whores, and whose Pulpit is more shameful than another man's
Pillory, can be out of countenance) takes up one of Coke's Institutions, and
professed Lilburne was merely gulled in reading or trusting to those Books, for
there were no Laws in England. John answered, he did believe him, for that bis
great Masters, Cromwell, Fairfax, etc. had destroyed them all. Nay, (quoth
Hugb) there never was any in England: with that John showed him the Petition of
Right, asking him, whether that were a Law? which Peter's had the impudence to
deny, asking what Law was? John replied The Law is now taken away and all
things in confusion by turning our Monarchy (without our consent) into a
Free State of Slaves govened by Tyrants.
out of the Parliaments own Declarations, Tbe Law is that which puts a
difference betwixt good, and evil; just, and unjust: If you take away the Law,
all things will fall into confusion, every man will become a law unto himself;
which in the depraved condition of humane nature must needs produce great
enormities; lust will become a law, envy a law, Covetousness and ambition
will become laws; and what dictates, what decisions such laws will produce
may easily be discerned. Tbis (Master Peter's) is a Definition of Law by the
Parliament in the days of their primitive purity, before they had corrupted
themselves with the Commonwealths money. And elsewhere the Law is called, The
safeguard, the custody of all private Interests, your honors, lives, liberties
and estates, are all in the keeping of the Law, without this every man has a
like Right to any thing; It is the best birthright the Subject has: it is a
miserable servitude or bondage where the Law is uncertain or unknown. To this
the Comic Priest replied, I tell you (for all this) there is no Law in this
Nation but the Sword, and what it gives; This doctrine of Devils, that it is
lawful to submit to any present power that is strongest; is broached in a
Pamphlet by old Rowse the illiterate Jew of Eaton-Colledge. And by John Goodwin
the sophistical Divine: which is fully confuted in A Religious Demurrer
concerning submission to the present power; an excellent piece.
neither was there any Law or Government in the world but what the Sword gave.
To this the honest Lieutenant Colonel answered, Master Peter's, You are one of
the Guides of the Army, used by the chief Leaders to trumpet their Principles
and Tenants; and if your reasoning be good, then if six Thieves meet three or
four honest men and rob them, that act is righteous, because they are the
stronger Party. And if any power he a just power that is uppermost, I wonder
how the Army and Parliament can acquit themselves of being Rebels and Traitors
before God and Man, in resisting and fighting against a just power in the KING,
who was a power up and visible, fenced about with abundance of Laws, so
reputed in the common acceptance of all Men, by the express letter of which
all those that fought against Him are (ipso facto) Traitors; And if it were not
for preservation of our Laws and Liberties, why did the Parliament fight
against Him, a present power in being? and if there be now no Laws in England,
nor never was, then you and your great Masters, Cromwell, Fairfax, and the
Parliament are a pack of Bloody Rogues and Villains, to set the People to
murder one another, in fighting for preservation of their Laws, (in which
their Liberties were included) which was the principal declared Cause of the
War from the beginning to the end. I thought (quoth the Lieutenant Colonel) I
had been safe when I made the known Laws the rules of my Actions, which you
have all sworn and declared to Defend; and make as the standard and Touchstone
between you and the People. The Laws are now no protection to us, nor the rule
of our actions, but the arbitrary wills and lusts of the Grandees.
I but (replied Hugh) I will show that your safety lies not therein, their
minds may change, and then where are you? I but (quoth the Lieutenant Colonel)
I cannot take notice of what is in their minds to obey that: but the constant
D^claration of their minds (never contradicted in any of their Declarations)
as, That they will maintain the Petition of Right, and Laws of the Land, etc.
This was the substance of their discourse, saving that John pinched upon his
great Masters large fingering of the Commonwealths Money, calling it Theft and
State-Robbery, and saying, That Cromwell and Ireton pissed both in one quill,
though they seem sometime to go one against another; yet it is but that they
may the more easily carry on their main design, To enslave the People.

Reader, I was the more willing to present the sum of this Debate to thee,
that by comparing their doctrine and principles, with their daily practices,
thou may perfectly see to what condition of slavery these beggarly upstart
Tyrants and Traitors have reduced us by cheating us into a War against our
lawful Sovereign, under pretense of defending our Laws and Liberties, and
the Privileges of Parliament, which themselves only (with a concurring
faction in the House) have now openly and in the face of the Sun pulled up by
the roots: and now they stop our mouths, and silence our just complaints with
horrid, Sect. 162.
illegal and bloody Acts, Declaring, words and deeds against their usurpations
and tyranny, to be High Treason: nothing is now Treason but what the remaining
faction of the House of Commons please to call so. To murder the King, break
the Parliament by hostile force, put down the House of Lords, erect
extrajudiciall High Courts of Justice to murder Men without Trial by Peers or
Jury, or any legal proceeding; to subvert the fundamental Government by
Monarchy, and dispossess the right Heir of the Crown, and to usurp His
supreme Authority in a factious fagge end of the House of Commons, to put the
Kingly Government into a packed Iunto of forty Tyrants, called, A Council of
State; to exercise Martial Law in times of peace, and upon Persons no Members
of the Army; to raise what unnecessary illegal Taxes they please, and share
them and the Crown Lands and Revenues amongst themselves, leaving the
Soldiers unpaid to live upon Free Quarter, whilst they abuse the People with
pretended Orders against Free quarter; to alter the Styles of Commissions,
Patents, Process, and all Legal proceedings, and introduce a foraigne
Jurisdiction; to Counterfeit the Great Seal and Coin of the Kingdom, and to
keep up Armies of Rebels to make good these and other tyrannies and Treasons,
is High Treason by the known Laws; but now (by the Votes of the Conventicle
of Commons) it is High Treason to speak against these Crimes Good God! how
long will thy patience suffer these Fools to say in their hearts there is no
God? and yet profess thee with their mouths? to break all Oaths, Covenants,
and Protestations made in thy name, to cloak and promote their Designs with
days of impious fasting and thanksgiving? how often have thy Thunderbolts
rived senseless Trees, and torn brute Beasts that serve thee according to
their creation? yet thou passest over these men who contemn thee, contrary to
their knowledge and professions: Scatter the People that delight in war:
Turn the Counsels of the wise into folly, let the crafty be taken in their
own net; and now at last, let the Oppressed taste of thy mercies, and the
Oppressor of thy justice; throw thy rod into the fire, and let it no longer be
a bundle bound together in thy right hand. They appeal to thee as Author of
their prosperous sins, become (Lord) Author of their just punishments; bestow
upon them the reward of Hypocrites, and teach them to know the difference
between the saving strength of Magistrates, and the destroying violence of
Hang-men: But what am I that argue against thy long-suffering (whereof my self
stand in need) and seek to ripen thy vengeance before thy time? shall the Pot
ask the Potter what he does? I beheld the prosperity of the wicked, and my
feet had almost slipped; Lord amend all in thy good time, and teach us heartily
to pray, Thy will be done in Earth as it is in Heaven.

170. The Act for Abolishing Monarchy proclaimed in London.
May. 30. 1649. The aforesaid traiterous Act for abolishing Kingly Government,
and converting England into a Free State. (consisting of forty Tyrants, and
many millions of Slaves) was proclaimed in London by the newly intruded
illegal Lord Major Andrews, accompanied with 14 Aldermen of the same pack;
the People in great abundance crying out. Away with it, away with it; GOD save
King CHARLES the Second: and bitterly reviling and cursing it and them, until
some Troops of Horse (ready prepared in secret) were sent to disperse, beat,
and wound them: and yet the Trial of the King, and the subverting of our
well-formed Monarchy (under which we lived so happily heretofore) with all
other Acts of the like high nature was done in the name of the People of
England, although (I dare say) at least five hundred to one (if they were free
from the terror of an Army) would disavow these horrid Acts; so little are the
People pleased with these doings: notwithstanding the new Title the Conventicle
of Commons have gulled them withal, Voting the People of England to be The
Supreme Power, and the Commons representing them in Parliament the Supreme
Authority of the Nation under them: This was purposely so contrived to engage
the whole City and make them as desperately and impardonably guilty as
themselves: and certainly if this Tumult of the People (amounting to a public
disclaimour of the Act) had not happened, the whole City had been guilty by way
of connivance, as well as these Aldermen, and the illegal Common Council,
newly packed by the remaining Faction of Commons, contrary to the Cities
Charters, to carry on these and such like Designs, and entangle the whole City
in their Crimes and Punishments.

* The Names of the Lord Mayor and Aldermen of the City of London that
personally proclaimed the Act for abolishing Kingly Government.
Alderman Andrews, Lord Mayor. Alderman Pennington. Ald. Wollaston. Ald.
Foulkes. Ald. Kenrick. Ald. Bide. Ald. Edmonds. Ald. Pack. Alderman Bateman.
Ald. Atkins. Ald. Viner. Ald. Avery. Ald. Wilson. Ald. Dethick. Ald. Foot.
The Pharasiticall House of Commons voted an Act, 171. A Thanksgiving Dinner
in the City for the General, etc.
1. June for a day of Thanksgiving to set off K. Olivers Victory over the
Levellers with the more luster; and to sing Hosanna to him for bringing the
grand Delinquent to punishment. The wise Lord Mayor and his Brethren (in
imitation) invited the Parliament, Council of State, the General, and his
Officers, to a Thanksgiving Dinner upon that day. The Commons appointed a
Committee (under pretense of drawing more money from Adventurers for Relief of
Ireland) to engage the City farther to them; Cromwell had the Chair in that
Committee: the device was, that the Common Council should invite the
Parliament, Council of State, and Officers of the Army to Dinner, and feast
them as a Free State, and then move the Supplies for Ireland, But if the
Levellers had prevailed, the thanksgiving whit-broth and custard had been
bestowed upon those free-spirited Blades, whom Oliver raised into a mutiny with
one hand, and (by advantage of his Spies) cast down with another, for the
glory of his own Name, and that he might have an occasion to purge the Army
(as he had done the Parliament) of all freeborn humors.

172. The Council of State sit in pomp at Wihte hall.
White Hall is now become the Palace of a Hydra of Tyrants instead of one King,
where our Hogens Mogens, or Council of State sit in as much state and
splendor with their Rooms as richly hanged (I wish they were so too) and
furnished (if you will believe their licenced News-books) as any Lords States
in Europe; yet many of these Mushromes of Majesty were but Mechanics,
Goldsmiths, Brewers, Weavers, Clothyers, Brewers-Clerks, etc. whom scornful
Fortune in a spiteful merriment brought upon the Stage, and promoted to act
the parts of Kings (to show that Men are but her Tennis-balls) and when she is
weary with laughing at their disguises, will turn them into the Tyring Room
out of their borrowed cases, and show us that our Lions are but her Asses. The
Kings poor Creditors and Servants may gape long enough (like Camelions) to see
the aforesaid Ordinance executed, for sale of the King's Goods to pay their
Debts: they (poor Souls) are left to starve while these Saints Trimphant
revell in their Masters Goods and Houses.

173. A general survey to be taken of the whole Kingdom, that every man's
Estate real and personal may be taxed.
Orders about this time were sent forth into London and the Counties adjacent
for certain Committees to enquire upon Oath and certify the improved value
and revenue of every man's Estate real and personal, wherein good progress
has been made already; the like is to go forth throughout the Kingdom. That
our 40 mechanic Kings now sitting in White Hall, and the self-created supreme
Authority of the Natlon, may take an exact survey (in imitation of William the
Conquerours Book of Survey, called Doomes-day, remaining in the Exchequer) of
their new conquered Kingdom, and know what they are like to get by their
villainies; and how to load us with Taxes and Free Quarter, and what the value
of their Estates are when they have completed their Design of Sequestring the
Presbyterians as they have done the Royalists.

The faction in the House are this beginning of June, 174. An Act enabling
Committees to give Oaths.
1649. sitting abrood upon an Act to enable Committees to give Oaths in some
cases; and yet the House of Commons never had nor pretended to have power to
give Oaths themselves (though every Court of Pypowders has) because the House
of Commons is no Court of Judicature, but only the Grand Inquest of the
Kingdom, to present to the King the grievances and the necessities of the
People by way of humble Petition; as appears by our Law Books and Statutes: and
therefore the Commons can grant no more then they have themselves, But now the
remaining faction of the House have voted themselves to be the supreme
Authority of the Nation, and have a Sword to maintain it, they and we must be
what they please: yet I must affirm, that to take illegal Oaths is neither
justifiable before God nor Man, and no less than damnable. But (it may be)
that by accustoming the People to take these new-imposed, illegal Oaths, they
hope to make them the more easily swallow their intended new Oath of Allegiance
to their new State, and their own Damnation together hereafter.

All the Scrivenors about the Town are commanded by the Supreme thing to
produce their Shop-books; 175. Scrivenors commanded to show Shop-books.
that notice may be taken who are guilty of having money in their purses, that
the fattest and fullest may be culled out and sequestered for Delinquents, now
that their almighty Saints-ships have occasion to use it for defense of their
Free State, if they would but search one another private pockets they would
find money enough. The like attempt (only) in the Kings time was cried out
upon as a high piece of tyranny, but nothing can be tyranny under a Free State:
The Supreme Authority being so full a Representative-glasse of the People, that
it takes our very substance into it self, and leaves us only the shadow,
whilst we wander up and down like our own Ghosts, who having lived under the
Monarchy of Good KING CHARLES, are now dead and descended like shades into the
Kingdom of Pluto.

The 7. June, 1649. the thanksgiving (spoken of. 172.) was solemnized in the
City: the Lord Mayor meeting the Speaker, 176. The aforesaid Tanksgiving
solemnized.
resigned to him (as formerly was used to thc King) the Sword of State (as had
been ordered by the House the day before) and received it again from him: and
then the Mayor conducted them all to Christ-Church, where the Commons, Council
of State, General, and his Officers, together with the Mayor, Aldermen, and
Common Council, etc. mocked God with their Devotions, where Master Tho:
Goodwin, and M. Owen preached out of the Politics to them; from thence they
were conducted to a great Dinner at Grocers hall, and entertained in the
quality of a Free State: no man being admitted without delivering his Ticket.
They were all strongly guarded with Soldiers, and every Cook had an Oath
given to be true to them, which showed they had more of fear and guilt than
confidence and innocence within them. Great Presents of Plate given to his
Excellency Fairfax, and to his Super-excellency Cromwell, and to others, fit to
be chronicled in Stowes, and Hollingsheads Volumes, amongst other solemn
Fooleries; let it not be omitted that Hugh Peter's and many other Saints were
too full of the Creature (anglice) Drunk.

177. A necessary advertisement to all honest Presbyterians. See K. Charles the
First his Book, [The portraicture of His Majesty in His solitudes and
sufferings.] Some over-hastily expect the King should satisfy the
Presbyterians by His Declaration? but the height of the Independents malice and
their guilty fears are such as may endanger the drawing on a Massacre upon them
by such a course.
I am to give a necessary advertisement to all men, that though the young KING
shows much respect and a desire of reconcilement (according to his dead
Fathers never dying preceps) to all moderate men and Presbyterians that make
Addresses to Him, yet it is complained of by some (who look not into the
underminning practices of our new Statists) that some few of His Counselors
and Followers are as violent against the more moderate and honest
Presbyterians, as against the Independents who murdered His Father; but these
zealous Royalists are either some passionate light-brain'd men of little
discretion and less power with Him, or else some false-hearted Pensioners to
our new State, and such as have underhand an Indemnity for their own Estates
in England; who stand like Scar-crowes about His Majesty to fright away such as
return to their Loyalty, and tender their due Allegiance to Him, thereby to
weaken the hands of His Majesty, and cut off the hopes of this Nation from
depending upon Him, who as our undoubted Sovereign (both by the Laws of God
and the Land) and Gods Vicegerent in His three Kingdoms, only can and will
(if we forsake not him and our selves) free and protect us from the many
headed, miserable, arbitrary tyranny we now starve and bleed under; and restore
unto us again our Religion Laws and Liberties, our Wives, Children, and
Estates, Trading, Husbandry, peace and plenty now held in more than Egyptian
bondage, under our cruel, See a Book, entitled, [His Majestices Gracious
Messages for Peace.] and Master Pryn's Speech, 5. Dec. 1648. in the House. And
the secured Members Reply to the Council of War.
bloody and thievish Taskmasters, Remember his deceased Majesty's gracious
Messages frequently fent for peace and reconcilement; Remember His Concessions
to His Parliament upon the last Treaty; (more than ever any King granted to His
People.) Remember His pious, meek and Christian Martyrdom suffered for His
People, which bitter Cup had passed from Him if He would have built up and
established this Babel of Tyranny now insulting over us, and have turned our
wel-mixed Monarchy into an Olygarchicall legal Tyranny, by adding His Royal
Assent to their wicked Demands tendered to Him but two days before His
translation form this valley of tears. Remember His Post humus Book to His
Son, full of precepts, savoring merely of piety, Christian wisdom, charity
and forgiveness, to His very Enemies; and then judge whether our late King, or
our usurping Kinglings (now scratching and tearing us, making one War
beget-another, 1 King. 3.
perpetuating an Army, and domineering over us by the power of the Sword) were
the natural Parent whose bowels yearned upon this (now) Orphan Child, the
English Nation dying and expiring under this new Corporation of Tyrants, Oath
of Allegiance, and Stat. of Recognition, 1 Iacobi,
(the putative Parent) which overlayed it? He that acknowledged Allegiance to
the Father, cannot deny it to his Son, as having sworn to bear faith and
true Allegiance to the King his Father, and to his lawful Heirs and
Successors; which our usurping Hogens Mogens cannot pretend to be: so that as
well for duty and conscience to God and their own Souls, as for a necessary
and just protection of their lives and estates, all honest and wise men ought
to cast themselves into the Arms of his Dread Majesty our present KING, as the
only sanctuary of their salvation, and not suffer themselves to be so far
misled by vain reports, as to be more afraid of their cure than of their
disease.

Stultorum incurata pudor malas ulcera celat. Solomon has showed you out of
the Cabinet of Nature the difference between a Natural-Mother and a
Stepmother; Dictum de Kennelworth
and that you may see the difference between a natural King, correcting his
own people with fatherly compassion for examples sake; and a Usurper,
wounding, killing and robbing (those which are none of his own) his fellow
Servants for his lust and lucre sake, I will set down a short Abridgement of
our own famous Dictum, de Kennelworth, and first the occasion thereof, which
was thus:

Simon de Montford, Earl of Leicester, conspiring with many other great Men,
rebelled against Henry 3. pretending (after the manner of all Rebels)
Reformation of public Grievances. He overthrew the King in battle, took Him
and his Son Prince Edward Prisoners; the Prince after a while escaped out of
Prison, raised an Army, overthrew and slew in the Battle of Evesham Simon
Montford, subdued the whole Party, rescued and re-inthroned his Father.
Commissions were sent forth to prevent future troubles, and settle men's minds
grown desperare with fear what horrid punishments so horrible a Rebellion
would bring upon them: The result of all is contained in the said Dictum de
Kennelworth as I find it in Magna Charta veteri, fol. 60. part. 2. observe the
moderation of it; No man bled to death for it but in the field; the blood of
war was not shed in time of peace: the King did not slay those whom he had
taken with his Sword and with his Bow, but reasonably fined them, See the late
History of the Marquess of Montrosse what gentle use he made of his Victory
after he had subdued the strength of Scotland at the Battle of Kylsythe.
not unto destruction; though the known Laws called them Traitors, and put
them into his power for life, lands and goods; they were but once punished, not
always tormented and kept upon the rack, after the late custom of our fellow
Servants and Subjects; who will never suffer the partition wall between us to
be thrown down, England once more to become one Nation, and one People; and
our broken bones to be again set and knit together.

Dictum de Kennelvvorth.

None to be Dis-inherited, but only fined: As namely, Those

1. That began and continued in War. 2. That held Northampton against the
King. 3. That fought against him at Lewis, Evesham, Chesterfeild. 4. That were
taken at Kenilworth. 5. That sacked Winchster, being yet unpardoned. 6. That
voluntarily sent against him, or the Prince. 7. The Officers of the Earl of
Leicesters who molested their Neighbors with Rapine, Fire, Murder, or
otherwise, to pay in three years five years value, and half their Estates of
Land. If they sell it, such as are by the Kings grant possessed of then to have
them giving as any other, etc. and so if it be to be Let, those who pay the
whole to have all instantly, and that pay half, to have half: If in three
years the whole be unpaid, the Land to be divided between him that owes it,
and him to whom the King has given it. If any have Woods by sale of which he
would pay his Fine, the money to be paid by two, of which either side to choose
one.

2. Knights and Esquires, who during this War have enriched themselves by
Rapine, having no Land, to pay half their goods, and be bound with Sureties to
the peace; if no goods be quitted by Oath, exceptis bannitis quibus solus Rex
potest remittere.

3. Lords of Wards to pay for them, and be answered by their Wards when they
come to age; which if they accept not, the Wardship to accrue to such as the
King has given the Ransom to, and they to be so answered.

4. The Kings Wards to remain where they are placed, and be Ransomed as
others, but without destruction.

5. Such as were with the King before the Battle of Lewis, and since are
Dis-inherited, His Majesty to declare his pleasure touching them.

6. No man now possessed of wood to fell any but only for repair till the last
day of payment be passed and not observed.

7. The King and the Popes Legate to send beyond sea for a time such as are
likely to trouble the peace of the Kingdom, which if it hindered the paying of
their Ransom, not for that to be Dis-inherited.

8. Such as were grieved with this Agreement might appeal to the Kings Court
before S. Hilary, and such as were beyond sea to have inducias transmarinas.

9. Because the King was to reward many and some had too much, the King out of
these Fines to provide for them.

10. The Legate, King, and Henry d'Almain to Elect 12. who should cause these
Articles to be executed, and to see performed what they ordain, according to
the estimates already taken, or if not to have new rates taken reasonable and
true.

11. Tenants tha were against the King to lose their Leases; but at the
expiration of their time the Land to return to the true owner.

12. Forts built by the assent of the King, but without that of the Person
dis-inherited, after the Fine paid in three years, to pay the costs of
building of it in six years, or receive a reasonable exchange in Land.

13. Such of the Lay as apparently drew any to the part of the Earl of
Leicester to pay two years Revenue.

14. The Buyers of other men's goods wittingly, to restore the value of that
they have bought, and be at the Kings mercy, because that they did was against
justice.

15. Those that at the Earls command entered Northampton, yet fought not, but
entered the Church.

16. Such as held not of the Earl, yet at his command entered to the action
with him to pay half one years Revenue.

17. Such as held of the Earl to be only at the Kings mercy.

18. Impotent Persons, and such as did nothing to be restored to their
Possessions, and by justice recover their damages, their Accusers punished by
Law, yet without loss of life or limb.

19. Maliciously accused to have their Estates immediately restored.

20. Women to have their own Lands, and what they had of their first Husbands;
if their late Husbands were against the King to be restored according to Law,
or Fined.

21. None to be fined but such as were against the King.

22. Such as have been Pardoned to remain so.

23. Those that are fined to answer no Loss done to any, but all damages to be
remitted on every side; except those that intermedled not, and of the Church
whose actions are saved.

24. The King by reasonable Exchange to receive the Castles of Erdsley-Bishop,
and Chartley, it seeming dangerous to leave Forts in their hands who have
carried themselves ill toward the King.

25. Those that in the future shall commit any outrages, to be punished by Law.

26. An Oath to be taken where it shall be held convenient, not to pursue each
other with revenge; and if any shall attempt the contrary, to be punished
according to Law.

27. The Church to be satisfied by those that injured it.

28. Such of the Dis-inherited as refuse this Composition to have no Title to
their Estates, and to be esteemed public Enemies to the King and Kingdom.

29. Prisoners to be freed by the advice of the King and Legate.

30. No Person to be Dis-inherited by reason of these Trouble sby any to whom
he ought to Succeed.

You see what great care was here taken to prevent spoil and waste of Woods,
etc. whereas in this latter Age the first thing taken into consideration, is,
how to raise ready Money by destruction of Woods, Housing, and selling of the
Stock to lay the Lands waste, and decay Husbandry, to the endangering of a
Famine for the present, and the Dis-inheriting our innocent Posterity for the
future: so little care is taken to Keep that well which is so ill and illegally
gotten. And how much regard was had to preserve innocent Persons from suffering
wrong in any just claim or Title they could make to any Land possessed by a
guilty Person: whether they claimed by Dower, Jointure, Title or Estate in
Reversion, or Remainder or otherwise? I wish the like justice were now observed.

Monday night, 4. June, 178. The loss of Ships at Kingsale suppressed, and
misreported in the House, and why.
1649. that third part of a Lord Admiral, Col. Edw. Popham came to
Westminster, and presently made his Addresses to the high and mighty Estates in
White Hall, giving them a dismal Relation of his ill success in tampering
with the Governor of Kingsale in Ireland; who (proving honester than the
Saints expected) took a sum of money of him to betray the Town, Forts, and
Ships in the Road: but when Popham, came in to the Haven to take possession of
his new purchase, gave him such a Gunpowder welcome that he lost most of his
Men, landed to take livory and seasin, and diverse Ships: he was commanded to
conceal this Ill news, lest it discouraged the City to engage so far with
them, as to entertain them in the condition of a Free State, and surrender the
Sword to them, and so spoil the Design of their Thanksgiving Devotions and
Dinner to be celebrated together in, and with the City upon Thursday ensuing
the 7. of June: and lest it should dishearten more secluded Members from
coming to sit in the House with them again, knowing, tbat Tyrants are
followed for their fortunes, not for themselves: wherefore upon Tuesday
following (being the 5. June) Popham made another kind of Report to the
Plebeians of the Commons House (who must not be trusted with the truth of
State-mysteries, but (like Wood-cocks) must be led in a mist) Thvt he had left
Kingsale blocked up with ten Ships, and the Seas secured in peace and
quietness: and the better to adorn the fable, and suppress the truth from
approaching the ears of the people. the House that day (5. June) passed an
Order, That for this remarkable additionall mercy bestowed upon them in the
prosperous success given to their Fleet at Sea, upon Thursday next, 7. June
(the day set apart for public Thanksgiving) the Ministers should praise God.
Lord! since these audacious Saints are so thankful to thee for one beating,
bestow many more beatings upon them, for they stand in need of all thy
corrections The like attempt has been upon Scilly with the like success,
since which time forty sail of Ships are pressed in the Thames to recruit
their shattered Navy; Scout, from June the 8. to 15. 1649.
given forth to be a Winter Guard at Midsomer.

179. Gifts given amongst the Faction.
John Blackiston is packed away to the other world; and the House upon 6. June,
voted to his Wife and Children 3000 l. out of the Earl of Newcastle's, and
Lord Wytherington's Estates, in compensation of the loss of his pedlery Ware,
in his Shop at Newcastle; he had formerly given to him 14000 l. you see the
insatiate hunger of Gold and Silver survives in the very Ghost of a Saint after
he is dead. 500 l. more was given to John's Brother; an Estate out of the
Rectory and Demesnes of Burford was settled upon the Speaker. 4000 l. per ann.
Lands are to besetled upon the General out of the Duke of Buckinghams and his
Brother the Lord Francis Villers Estates. 400 l. per ann. out of
Claringdon-Parke upon the Earl of Pembroke. 1000 l. was bestowed upon an
eminent Member of Parliament for his many good Services. 4868 l. to the Lord
Lisle, out of the Monthly Assessment for Ireland, for his pennyworth of good
service done there; you see to what purpose we pay Taxes. 2000 l. Land per an.
and 1000 l. Money given to Bradshaw, the price of Blood. And 400 l. more given
to the Poor of the City (to stop their mouths from cursing upon the
Thanksgiving-day) out of the 2000 l. Fine set upon the Lord Mayor Reynoldson
for not proclaiming the Act for abolishing Kingly Government; this is
(according to the Spanish Proverb) To steal a Sheep and give away the Trotters
for Gods sake. You see the Saints can find Money to give Gifts, though not to
pay Debts; although the Public Faith lie at pawn for them. A Committee is
appointed to consider how to prefer Mr. Tho: Goodwin and Mr. Owen to be Heads
of Colleges in Oxford as a Reward for asserting the late proceedings of
Parliament upon the aforesaid Thanksgiving-day. It is not fit such men should
serve God for nothing: in the times of S. Peter and S. Paul, Godliness was
great Gain; but in the days of our modern Saints, Gain is great Godliness.

The thing that miscalls it self a Parliament, 180. The Excise enlarged upon
Salt.
has set an Excise of Id. the Gallon upon all foreign Salt imported; which
is, in effect upon all the Salt we use, (our home-made Salt being
inconsiderable) you see our Cups, our Spits, our powdring Tubs, our washing
Bowls, our Kettles, our Hats, Dublets, Breeches, Stockings, Shoos; nothing we
use, eat, drink or wear, is free from being devoured by these sanctified
Locusts of the Free State, who complained of the King for that petty
inconsiderable Tax of Ship Money, which His Majesty spent in maintaining Guards
of Ships upon our Seas, so much to the Honor of our Nation, that the King of
Spain trusted all those vast sums of Bullion he sent to the Low Countries,
to be Coined in our Mint, and above a third part yearly to be laid out here in
English Cloth and Commodities, which with the residue of the Spanish Treasure
was afterward wafted over into Flaunders in English Bottomes, for which they
were liberally paid; whereby every man's Estate was increased 10 l. in the
hundred, England, infinitely abounded with Coin and Plate, as appears by
those many vast sums that have been constantly extorted from the People since
the beginning of these Wars; more, I dare say, than all our Kings since the
Conquest, excluding William the Conqueror and Henry the Eighth) ever raised
upon the People) and by those many vast sums our seeming Saints have sent
into Banks beyond Sea, and buried in their private Coffers.

Reader, let me admonish thee, 181. A Vindication of the Levellers in some
things? and a farther design to garble and enslave the Army.
That the Levellers) for so they are mis-called, only for endeavoring to
Level the exorbitant usurpations of the Council of Officers and Council of
State) are much abused by some Books lately printed and published in their
names, much differing from their declared Principles, Tenets, and Practices;
but forged in Cromwells and Iretons shops to cast an odium upon them. These
State-wolves by such forgeries endeavor to make the Sheep forsake and betray
the Dogs that faithfully guard them; that they may with more security fleece
them, slay them, and eat them hereafter. Ireton, Haslerig, and
Postmaster-Attorney Prideaux, by themselves and their Bloud-hounds, (Spies and
Intelligencers) have been very diligent to draw dry-foot aftet M. Lilborne,
Walwine, etc. and suborne witnesses against them, but (not having yet quite
extinguished all sparks of truth and honesty, unless it be in their own
breasts) failed of their purposes. Yet they go on to purge the Army (as they
have done the Parliament and Conventicle of State) of all freeborn humors
(in order to their destruction) that the Army may consist of mere mercenary
brutish spirits, such as will so far neglect the duties of men and Christians,
as to execute all their tyrannous, bloody, illegal Commands, with a blind
obedience and implicit faith, without asking a question for Conscience sake,
the better to enslave both the Kingdom and Common-Souldiers. In farther
prosecution of this Design, they have projected to levy seven new Regiments,
which (by way of Gullery) they call Presbyterian Regiments, and shall be raised
by Presbyterian Commanders, but those Commanders shall only be employed to
countenance the work for a time, and then for pretended offenses be purged out
of the Army, if not out of this world, by the Council of Officers: and more
confiding men put in their rooms: and then shall these new Officers and
Regiments be used as Catch-poles and Hang-men (contrary to the honor of
Soldiers) to persecute and execute such Members of the Army as retain any
sense or memory of their old Engagements and Principles.

182. The pretended Parliaments Council of state and officers confederated
with O-Neale. See An After-game at Irish. etc. 1649. and the Propositions
printed at Cork and reprinted at London. From June 6. 1649. June 8. 1649.
I formerly told you of an underhand combination between the domineering
Independent party here, and Owen Roe Oneale: which is now openly declared and
avowed by their own licenced News-books. Owen Roe and Colonel Monk are joined
(says the Modest Narrative) our Party have permitted 300. of Oneals own
Regiment to Quarter in our parts amongst the Creats within two miles of
Dundalke, (says the Scout) Owen Roe and Berne are come toward Col. Jones,
Moderate Intelligencer, from June 7. to 14. 1649. number. 221.
and Col. Monks Quarters, he is so fair as to pay Contribution: his Quarters
are to the Scots side of Dublyn, to prevent their giving aid to Ormond in his
attempt upon Dublyn: who can blame necessity? nor do our Grandees now deny
this Confederacy with the bloody Popish massacring Rebels, although they had
the impudence to make the only supposition thereof one of the principal
Charges against the late King; and to raise a great out-crie against the
Marquess of Ormond and Lord Inchiquine for their conjunction with Preston: yet
they joined but to prevent the Cromwelists, who offered to associtate with him
upon conditions much more prejuditiall to the Protestant Religion, and English
Interests, han Ormond has given them. They have offered this Oneale all the
Lands in Vlster forfeited by his Grandfather Tyrone, Shane Oneale and others
attainted, thereby destroying the British Planters there; and this is the
reason they employ so few old Irish Commanders into those parts, lest the
Oneals should doubt they came to recover their own Lands again. But our
Atheistical Saints account themselves loose when other men are bound, nothing
but a Halter can hold them; all obligations to men, See the Council of Wars
Answer concerning the secured and secluded Members? from 6. June, to 13. number. 3.
all duties and Vows to God, they break upon pretended necessity and honest
intentions. Their Metropolitan Nuntio, Judas Haclet, tells you, Their Party
will not join with the bloody Irish, until they are brought to such a pinch,
as to say. Flectere si nequeo superos Acheronta movebo. If God will not be
Author and Patron of their Designs, the Devil shall; you see these
Independents hang between God and the Devil, Michael and the Dragon, not
resolved which part to take.

Be it known unto all men by these presencs, 183. Parker the Observator.
that Harry Parker the Observator is returned from Hamborough, and highly
preferred to be Brewers Clerk, ( alias Secretary) to Cromwell; to whose
Designs he has prostituted his pen.

There is lately come forth a Book of John Meltons (a Libertine that thinks
his Wife a Manacle, 184. Meltons Book, The tenure of Kings and Magistrates,
etc.
and his very Garters to be Shackles and Fetters to him: one that (after the
Independent fashion) will be tied by no obligation to God or Man) wherein he
undertaketh to prove, That it is lawful for any that have power to call to
account, Depose, and put to Death wicked Kings and Tyrants (after due
conviction) if the ordinary Magistrate neglect it. I hope then it is lawful to
put to death wicked Cromwells, Councels of State; corrupt Factions in
Parliament: for I know no prerogative that usurpation can bestow upon them. He
likewise asserteth, That those, who of late, so much blame Deposing, are the
men that did it themselves, (meaning the Presbyterians.) I shall invite some
man of more leisure and abilities than my self to Answer these two Paradoxes:
But shall first give him these cautions:

1. That for the Polemick part he turn all his Arguments into Syllogismes, and
then he will find them to be all Fallacies, the froth of wit and fancy, not the
Dictates of true and solid Reason.

2. That for the Historical or narative part he would thoroughly examine them,
and he will find few of them consonant to the plumbline of truth.

3. That he would consider that from the beginning of this Parliament there
were three Parties or Factions in it: 1. The Royalists. 2. The Presbyterians.
3. The Independents.
For though they were not then notorious by that name, yet the Persons
confederated were then extant and active; being a complication of all
Antimonarchicall, Anarchicall heresies and schisms, Anabaptists, Brownists,
Barrowists, Adamites, Familists, Libertines of all sorts; the true Heirs and
Successors of John of Leyden and Knipperdalling in all their principles and
practices united under the general Title of Independent: and these were
originally the men that by their close insinuations, solicitations and actings
began, and carried on the War against the KING, with an intent (from the
beginning) to pull down Monarchy, and set up Anarchy, See the Mystery of the 2.
Iunto's Presbyterian and Independent.
notwithstanding the many Declarations, Remonstrances, abortive Treaties,
Protestations, and Covenants to the contrary; which were Obligations (from time
to time) extorted from them by the Presbyterians, although not strong enough to
hold such subtle Sampsons, whose strengths to break such Wythes lay not in
their Bushes of Hair, but in the Ambushes of their Hearts, wherein there
always lay hid some evasion, equivocation, or mental reservation, which, like
a back-dore, gave them leave to make an escape. In the beginning almost of this
Parl. the Independents (that is, the Schismatics) in the Parliament insisted
openly upon it, to have the Papists in Ireland rooted out, and their Lands sold
to Adventurers, and passing an Act to that purpose, necessitated the Irish
Papists to massacre the English Protestants; which was purposely done by the
Independents, that both Papists and Protestants might destroy one another
there, that they might the better subvert Protestancy in England, which is now
in hand. And though it be true that the first General, the Earl of Essex was
a Presbyterian, yet he was acted by Independents, as the L. Say, and others, of
the like stamp; and had a clause in his Commission, [ to forbear the KING'S
Person:] which clause upon the Independents new Modelling the Army under
Fairfax was omitted at their especial instance.

Monday, 18. June, 185. L. C. Lilburnes Book, [The Legal fundamental
Liberties of the People, etc.]
1649. came forth that most useful Book of John Lilburnes, called, [ The
Legal fundamental Liberties of the People of England Revived, etc.] wherein
he excellently well sets forth the new usurped tyranny of that Hydra of Nimrods
now subverting our Laws, Liberties, and Property, consuming us with illegal
Taxes, Excise, Free quarter, Monopolies; and sharing Land, Money, Goods, and
Offices amongst themselves, perpetuating an Army to enslave us, and overthrow
the fundamental Government of this Nation, in order to which they have
complied with and cheated all Interests, broken all their Obligations to God
and Man; violated all the Laws of this Land, their own Protestations,
Covenants, the Oaths of Allegiance, Supremacy, (which themselves caused the
People to take) and their own Votes, Declarations, etc. The illegality of
their late erected High Court of Justice, and their unjust proceedings therein,
the tyranny and usurpation of the Council of State and Officers of the Army.
And proves, that Col: Prides new purged, new packed House, is neither a House
of Commons, nor Parliament; their usurped Supreme Authority to be a mere
nullity or fiction; and especially, That this Parlioment is clearly dissolved
and ended, which he proves by the Death of the King, and by many other solid
Arguments; and therefore all their Actings to be void and null: with many other
considerable passages, where he ingeniously confesses, that being the Kings
Prisoner at Oxford, with many other of the Parliament Party, the King did
strictly observe the Laws of the Land in His proceedings against them, which
this Parliament does not do in any their most legal proceedings, for all
their pretended Engagements, Declarations, Votes, Protestations and Covenants
to maintain and defend the Laws and Liberties of the People, Ergo, the King
really, the Faction in Parliament but pretendedly fought for our Laws and
Liberties.

The Faction are now contriving to seize all the Tithes of the Kingdom into
their own hands, 186. Tithes to be Sequestered for the State.
(yet they are the Ministers Freehold) and to make all the Ministers their
stipendary Lecturers; that they may preach and teach only such Doctrine to the
people as may bring them under a blind and slavish obedience to our forty
Tyrants of the new Council of State, presuming that all our Ministers carry
their Consciences in their purses, because the Independents do so. Look to
your ways Christian Brethren, you are likely hereafter to have Oracles of
State obtruded upon you instead of the Oracles of God. If the Ministers will
not parret forth the new States Doandtrine to you, they shall be starved out of
their Pulpits.

187. An Adjournment of this pretended Parliament considered of.
The thing called a Parliament is now likely to have so general a purge as will
leave neither life nor soul, dung nor guts, in the belly of it. K. Oliver
(unwilling to go for Ireland, and leave them sitting, who may unvote all he
has compelled them to vote) has commanded his Iourney-men to think of an
Adjournment for some good time, that they may take the air, and grow wholesome
again; and then (without some dire mischance) they never meet more: but this
Supreme thing has learned to use so much modesty to their Superiors, as to
refer it to the Hogens Mogens, or Council of State, to consider what Votes
and Acts they shall pass beforehand for establishing their Highnesses in their
new Dominion; And when (out of their usurped Supreme Authority) they have
conferred as much upon the Council of State as their ambitions aim at, they
(good Boys) shall have leave to break up School and go into the Country to
see their Friends, and visit their Foes: that is, all such as have full purses
to be squeezed. Thus you see the method of Divine vengeance observes a
Degradation: 1. Down went the King, and His Authority lapsed into the two
Houses. 2. Down went the Peers House, and all Authority fell down into the
Commons House. 3. Down goes the House of Commons, and the Supreme Authority
translates it self into a Council of State. And (if my conjecture fail me
not) 4. Down will go the Council of State, and all Authority be grasped into
the iron hands of Campson Gaurus and his Mamaluchy, his Council of War, when
they shall think fit to Act barefaced without using a packt pecce of a
Parliament or Council of State as a screen or vizard to cozen and befoole the
people.

In order to which Government by the Sword, 188. Cromwell voted for Ireland
with full power Civil and Military.
Cromwell is voted to go into Ireland with his own confiding Officers and
Army, with all power Civil and Military for 3 years: what does this import
less than that he is to be K. of Ireland? there to practice the first
rudiments of Kings-craft, and when he has inured those Semibarbarians to a
Military Government, he shall return with his Ianisaries and subdue the
English to the like obedience: In the mean time his proporty Fairfax shall be
under the observation of the Council af State here, and be, beleaguered both
in his own house and Army with Olivers Creatures; and in this dishonorable
fickle condition he shall have the vain honor to keep Olivers Regalia. (the
Crown sitting upon one side like a Fools Cap upon his Head) until he
return, and shall then be called to account for all odious and unfortunate
accidents that shall happen (for it is not for the Majesty of Oliver to bear
the blame, although they fall out by Cromwell's own oversights, or Gods anger
upon him) thus Cromwell's shadow being removed, himself may take substantial
and actual possession of the Throne which he already enjoyes in all things but
the Title. And then let all true Saints and Subjects cry out with me, God save
K. Oliver and his brewing Vessels.

The Iunto of Tituler Supremists at Westminster (especially so many as have not
packt themselves into the Council of State) are very unwilling to quit their
long-held Dominion, 189. 13 Bills enjoined to be passed by the Commons before
Adjournment.
and submit to their own Bastard brood, The Lords States at White Hall; but
there is no remedy, Oliver is resolved to unyoke his Cattle and turn them to
grass; he knows they may unvote all they have voted at his command, if
(during his absence in Ireland, or Scotland rather) a new emergent power should
overawe them; the present fear being always most terrible to Cowards. But the
Council of State has set them their task, which they must speedily perform
before they Adjourne, consisting of 13. Points:

1. That all Acts concerning the Loans of Moneys, Excise, Sequestrations,
Goldsmiths-hall, Haberdashers-hall, Assesments for England and Ireland be
passed. These reprobate Saints will sooner forget their God, then their Mammon,
[money.] You see they mean to perpetuate our burdens, as well as their own
Army; and domineer over us with an arbitrary, military tyranny for ever.

2. That an Act be passed for settling the Militia of the Nation. This amounts
to a new invented Commission of Array (lawful for usurping Saints, though not
for a lawful King) by virtue of which the scum and dregs of the people (base
enough to associate with the Army) shall be Armed, and all men of quality and
fortunes (unless such as owe their fortunes to their crimes) dis-armed.

3. Against exporting Wool and Fullers Earth. Unless it be for the benefit of
the Saints.

4. To prohibit exportation of Gold and Silver. The Saints have exported all
our Gold already, and most of our Silver; and will never give over the Trade
themselves though they prohibit others. But Gold and Silver are drawn out of
Mines Royal, and belong to the Saints by their prerogative.

5. An Act to be passed for punishment of Revolted Sea men and Mariners. None
against traiterous, tyrannous, thievish Saints.

6. An Act for relief of well-affected Tenants against Malignant Landlords; who
having compounded for their Estates, rack their Tenants Rents, or turn them
out of doors. This is a device: First, to make work for such Members as not
being of the Council of State, would become as contemptible as they are
hateful, being divested of all power to play the Tyrants after Adjournment.
And secondly, to stir up all the Tenants of England (especially Schismatics)
to combine with them; against their Landlords; and deprive them of the legal
use of their Estates, and the benefit of their Compositions; for, to what
purpose shall Gentlemen compound for their Estates, when they must let and set
them at the discretion of domineering Committees, or Commissioners, conspiring
with the high Shoos, to oppress, make a prey of, enslave and unspirit all the
Nobility and Gentry of England here aimed at under the general Title of
Malignants? oh persidious Tyrants! keep your money Gentlemen, or turn it into
iron and gunpowder.

7. An Act to suppress Malignant Pamphlets aspersing the present proceedings
of the Parliament, Council of State, and the Army, and prevent Printing as
much as may be. This is to set Truth in the pillory, whilst her counterfsit,
impudent lying and slandering sits in state in Parliament, Council of State,
and Council of Officers, and rides trimphantly Coached into the City to
Thanksgiving Devotions and Dinners.

8. That the Pulpits being as scandalous as the Press against their
proceeding; they enjoyne that a more strict course be taken to stop the mouths
of the Preachers hereafter. 1 King. 18.17.
You see how Ahab-like these Subverters of Church and Commonwealth, accuse our
Prophets for troubling our Israel (being their own sin) and seek occasion to
bring a spiritual as well as a corporal famine upon the Land, cutting off the
staff of bread as well from our souls as bodies, by stopping the mouths of
Gods Messengers. But I hope they will remember the duty they owe to the honor
of him that sent them upon his Embassage to his people, and fearing God more
than Man, every Man cry out to his own soul and conscience with S. Paul, 1
Cor. 9.16. Vae mihi si non praedicavero, Woe be to me if I do not Preach.

9. That an Act be passed that that clause of the Stat. 23 Eliz. 25 Eliz. 1
Iac. against Sectaries sbould be repealed, that none may be questioned thereby
in the vacancy of Parl. What is this but to pray in aid of Turks, Jews,
Anabaptists of Munster, nay the Devil himself to join with them as they have
already joined with Owen Roe Oneale, and his bloody massacring Irish Papists
against the Protestant Religion, which was part of the design of the
schismatical Party in Parliament in waging war against the King from the
beginning. See. 184. the Marginall Notes there. This impious Liberty of
Conscience to destroy the Protestant Religion is all the liberty we are like to
enjoy under the kingdom of these bloody cheating Saints, in all things else we
are mere and absolute Slaves.

10. That an Act for a General Pardon be passed to all Persons except such as
are particularly named therein, and declaring no Pardon to any that shall for
the future raise War in this Nation against the present Authority thereof.
This is a project, 1. To pardon themselves and their Party for their
transcendent villinies, and to stop the mouths of the Country from
complaining of them after their Adjournment, and this shall be effectually
done, 2. To befoole silly weak spirited People with general words of a Pardon
which shall be made ineffectuall by many exceptions and limitations. 3. This is
principally intended to fright men from attempting any thing against the
usurped Supremacy and Tyranny of the Council of State: and therefore all
Pardons to such Attemptors are beforehand declared against. This with them (as
a sin against the Holy Ghost) unpardonable; to deny their Supreme, arbitrary
Authority.

11. That the Act for relief of poor Prisoners for Debt may be passed. Though
I can with as much Charity as any Man wish a relief to them; yet I like not
that Charity should be made a cloak to ambitious Knavery; and all the Creditors
of the Kingdom be made liable to the vexation of a covetous Committee, who
under color of Charity shall raise up all the indebted Men of the Kingdom
against all the monied Men, if they will not sacrifice their purses to the
Ech-Gods of the new State, and be bountiful to the Committee; which is the
full scope of this Proposition.

12. That the Soldiers may be secured their Arreares out of the late Kings
Lands. This is to tie all the Soldiery by the pursestrings (which is Saints
Tenure) to make good that horrid, traiterous Murder.

13. That an Act be passed for Probate of Wills, Granting Administrations, and
Investing of Ministers presented. These lunatique Saints should have thought
upon a new way to be set up before they throw down the old one, and not have
left men in an uncertainty how to dispose of their Estates, and a Iustititum, a
vacancy of Justice upon the Kingdom: you see what Mountebanks our new
State-Iuglers are. The good Boys began to learn these Lessons upon Monday,
25. June.

190. Things undertaken by the Council of State during the Recesse.
The Council of State likewise reported to their said Free-Shoole of Commons
several things which they (in order to their future greatness) would put into
a way during the Recesse: against the Houses next meeting, when two Sundaies
come together.

1. That Commissioners be appointed in every County to make an estimate of all
Tithes, to the end they may be taken away for the future, and some other
provision designed for Ministers. This is a Whip and a Bell to lash Ministers
to Preach State-Divinity.

2. That the Council of State consider of settling future Parliaments, and the
constant time of their calling, sitting, and ending after this Parliament shall
think fit to dissolve themselves. If they are not dissolved already, (which is
the constant opinion of many great learned Lawyers well-affected to the Parl.)
they will never be dissolved without the help of a Hangman. But I would gladly
know by what Authority a Pack of forty Knaves calling themselves a Council of
State, and usurping Regal power shall take upon them to abolish our ancient
form of Parliaments, contrary to the fundamental Laws of the Land, their own
Declarations, Protestations and Covenants, and to pack and shuffle new
Parliaments, to dispose of our Religion, Laws, Liberties, Lives and Estates,
against the consent of the far major part of the people.

3. That they shall consider of an Act for regulating Proceedings in Law, and
prevent tediousness of Suites. There are too many Lawyers in the Council of
State to do any thing effectual that way; but it may be they will consider
how to make the Laws of the Land more suitable to an Olygarchicall tyranny, and
less agreeing with Monarchy.

4. That they will consider what Laws are fit to be repealed. That is, all
Laws enjoining uniformity in Gods Worship, all Monarchical Laws, and all
Laws allowing more civil Liberty and Privileges to the People, and to
several Degrees of men than squares with the Designs of our new upstart State.

So many men have been cheated with Public Faith, 191. Deane and Chapters
Lands purchased by the Godly.
Irish Adventures, and Bishops Lands, that the Market is spoiled for sale of
Deane and Chapters Lands, wherefore the Saints (being the only monied men left
in the Kingdom) have now agreed to buy them themselves, considering, that
since they hold their Heads and all that they have in Capite of their Lords
Paramount, the Council of Officers, they may as well buy dog-cheap, and hold
Bishops Lands by the same Tenure. For which purpose they have their Broakers
abroad to buy in Soldiers and Officers Debentures for Arreares at 5 s. and 6
s. in the pound, though they are allowed the whole sums of the Debentures in
the Purchase. which doubling in ready money they purchase upon such easy
particulars as brings it down from ten years purchase, to two or three years
purchase. They are not seen in the business themselves, but buy them in other
men's names, and to the secret use of their Wives and Children. The Lord Munson,
Humphry Edwards, and Sir Greg: Norton, (who has sold his own Land to purchase
now upon this Title) and many other Saints have lately trod this obscure path.

192. Soldiers insolences remediless.
Great complaints are made by the Country of the Soldiers insolency (amongst
many other things) in putting their Horses into mowing Grass. The General
has ordered the next Officer in chief to cause double damages to be given by
the Soldier; and if the said Officer neglect, he is to answer it at a Council
of War at the Head Quarters. This remedy is worse than the disease, and as
mere a gullery as the Act for taking off Free Quarter. The chief Officer will
laugh at the Complainant, the Head Quarters are far off, and the Council of
War will tire him with delays, and expose him to more injuries of the angry
Soldiers. The Officers will not, nor dare not keep a strict discipline.

193. The Earl of Denbigh and Henry Martin referred to Committees.
The Earl of Denbigh referred to the Committee of the Revenue to consider the
Arreares of his Ambassie in Italy, and of his 1000, Marks per ann. pension
bestowed upon him by the late King. If his deserts had been better, his Reward
had been worse. and worse paid. Also Henry Martius Losses and Arreares referred
to the consideration of a Committee. If the Committee-would know what Harry
has lost, they must examine his Barber-Surgeon. Rowland Wilsons Arreares and
Losses, and the L. Gray's Charges and Arreares to be considered and reported:
you see charity begins at home, and the Members exercise it (for the most part)
in their own House.

194. The Council of State authorized to grant Letters of Marque.
June 25. An Act passed, to enable the Council of State with absolute power to
grant special and particular Letters of Marque or Reprisall in the name of the
Keepers of the Liberties of England by Authority of Parliament: what is this
but to empower the Council of State to make war at Sea with all Princes and
States at their discretion? they have already so far decayed all the Trade of
this Nation, that ere long Traffic will be totally destroyed; whereby our Sea
men with their Ships will be necessitated (for want of employment) to Revolt to
the PRINCE: to prevent which inconvenience they will find work for them by
granting so many particular. Letters of Marque to all such as shall but pretend
themselves wronged by Foraigne Nations as will amount to a General practice
and profession of Pyracy, and turn England into a second Argires, whereby all
Princes and States will be provoked to make a Pyraticall War upon England; as
against a Den of Thieves and Robbers, Common Enemies to Traffic and humane
Society: as the Romans did under the Conduct of Pompey, against the Cilician,
and other Asiatique Pirates.

Captain Young has blown up with Gun powder a Ship of the Princes, called
the Antilope, 195. Capt. Yongeu's blowing up the Antilope in Helversluce; with
a Caution.
lying at Anchor in Helversluce, under protection of the States of Holland,
whereby the Chamber of Holland and the honor of their inland Sea is ravished
from them. By this, and by some former actions of the like insolency (as the
firing upon their Ships, and killing their men for not striking Sail to them)
you may see what good Neighborhood the Dutch are like to have of their younger
brother State, when they are once settled and confirmed in their yet infant
Government: even the very same which the Carthaginians found after the new
erected Commonwealth of Rome grew up to maturity; which proved so dangerous a
Competitor in point of power, profit, and honor, as buried the more ancient
Free State of Carthage in its Ruins. Free-states (especially Aristocracies)
are very quarrelsome with their Neighbors, and never want many of their
Patrician most potent Families ambitious to increase their own power and glory
by Wars: and therefore seek occasions of quarrel with their Neighbors; such
was the whole Family of the Barchines at Carthage; the Scipios, Fabii, Camilli,
Grassi, Pompeii, Caesares, and many more at Rome: Thus was Greece torn in
pieces by its Free-states.

The Commons have bestowed St. Crosses Hospital upon Cook for acting the part
of an Attorney General against the late KING. It is fit every Judas should have
his reward; 196. More Gifts to the Godly.
the New Park in Surry bestowed upon the City in reward of their Thanksgiving
Dinner, that the new-packed Court of Aldermen and Common Council may not want
venyson to fill their Wives Bellies, nor they Browe Antlers to hang their Hatts
on.

197. Order 9. June, 1649. referring all secured and secluded Members to be
examined before a Commitee.
The 9. June the Commons (about 46 in number) had passed an Order concerning
their secured, secluded, and absented Members; and referred all such as had not
already entered their dissent to the Vote, 5. December. 1648. to a Committee to
give such satisfaction to them as the House should approve of before the 30. of
June instant, or else the House would take order for New Elections. This was to
bring the said Members (300 in number at least) to the winnowing, that they
might admit such as were for their turn to recrute their thin House, and
expel the rest: few repaired to them, and of those very few were chosen, the
Speakers Son, Sir John Treavor (who has a Monopoly of 1500 l. per annum, out
of New Castle Coals; for which he was many Months kept out of the House, and at
last admitted (only to comply with the Faction) and his said Monopoly
continued) Sir Henry Haymonde, two Sons of the Earl of Pembroke, were received.
This was thought very unreasonable that so many Gentlemen either kept out or
driven away by force should by a far less number sitting and acting under
the same force, be sent to attend a Committee, to stand with their Hatts off to
Holland, Scott, etc. and be examined and expelled for giving their Votes (Yea,
or No) in the House according to their Consciences. This was to subvert the
Liberty of all Parliaments for the future, and to make this House) which calls
it self a Parliament) a mere packed Iunto to carry on forelaid Designs.
Besides, to expect they should approve all that the sitting Party in the House
had done in the absence of these non-sitting Members, who neither heard the
Debate nor Reasons whereupon they grounded their Votes against the KING, and
House of Peers, nor for the abolishing Monarchy, and turning it into a
Free State, erecting a Council of State for that purpose, voting the Supreme
Authority to be in themselves, and many other matters of the like high nature,
which have no place in the Laws of England; was such an imposition as neither
agreed with the known Parliament Privileges, Liberty of Conscience, (so
loudly professed by these sanctified Members which sit) nor with humane reason
and sense. And at last to sit under those Armed Guards that put a force upon
them (the 6. December.) before; promised as little of safety, unless they would
renounce their own Consciences and Act the wills of their Ianisaries and their
Party; and would render them contemptible to all the world, especially to those
men who put this insolency upon them.

I formerly told you how unwilling the Members were to adjourne and resign
their more than Kingly Power to the Council of State; 198. Articles of
Impeachment against the Speaker,
wherefore Cromwell finding he could not obtain that of them by a Vote,
projected another way to work his Design, not the old way of a violent purge
by securing and secluding the Members with his Myrmidons, Note that Oliver,
before he left the Town, erected a Committee of Officers of the Army to
prosecute and bring to punishment grand Delinquents. This is a new kind of
Stat-Chamber of military Nobles, held like a Rod over the Mock Parliament,
Council of State, and the General, in case they shall oppose Olivers Designs.
that is already infamous, and would savor too grossly of the Power of the
Sword; and would show Oliver to be rather a Quack-salving Doctor of Physic
than a Doctor of the Civil Law. He caused the Council of Officers therefore
to frame certain Articles of Impeachment against Mr. Lenthall their Speaker,
as follows:

1. FOr releasing out of Newgate 3 of the Queens Priests and Jesuits by his
Warrant.

2. For maintaining and protecting several Spies and Agents for the late King
within the Line of Communication during the late War.

3. For conveying diverse remarkable Prisoners of War out of the Line of
Communication unto the late King.

4. For assisting and protecting several Plotters on the behalf of the late
King, to destroy the City of London.

5. For suffering above 30000 l. to be conveyed to the late King out of the
Line of Communication, wittingly and willingly.

6. For sending Horses of War, with Men and Arms to the late King.

7. For holding an intercourse of Letters with the late King.

8. For maintaining and keeping an Agent in the Garrison of Oxford, for
expediting the foregoing Treacheries.

9. For corrupting many Members of the Parliament, some lately excluded, and
some now sitting in the House to conceal and smother the foregoing Treacheries.

10. For endeavoring to take away the Lives of several the Prosecutors and
Witnesses unto the foregoing Treacheries.

You see there is not one word in them of Cousening the Commonwealth, (which
is now become the Private-wealth of every particular Saint) because this would
have broken universally the whole communion of Saints, and would have set them
all together by the ears, to defend themselves by recriminating one another:
The device was, by taking off the Speaker, to Dissolve them; since they cannot
by the Privileges of the House, choose themselves a new Speaker without the
consent of a power higher then their own, (to wit) the KING's. And though they
will be so much Masters of their own Privileges, as to coin new every day
upon emergent occasions, yet those irregularities are always done under the
power and protection of the Sword, which they could not expect against their
own Vizier Basha Oliver. This trick being smelt out, was so highly resented,
that it perished in the birth; only (I hear) the Speaker bled in private
15000 l. toward Olivers expedition.

199. 150000 l. Advance money for Cromwells expedition.
All the sinks of tyranny and oppression about the Town, the Committee of the
Revenue, Goldsmiths hall, Haberdashers hall, the Excise Office, etc. are all
emptied into that Common-Sewer Olivers expedition into Ireland (or rather
Scotland) or engaged as a security to furnish him with 150000 l. part whereof
only he is accountable for; the residue is left to his discretion and
conscience to buy Towns and Victories with, and to be offered upon an Altar to
be erected Deo ignoto.

At Olivers request, the House admitted Sir Edward Ford to compound upon the
Articles of Oxon, notwithstanding his lapse of time; Forde married Ireton's
Sister, and the Lord Culpeper's Son married Forde's Daughter. Observe how the
General is lessened to advance Cromwell. 1. The Command of the Irish Forces
taken from him, and Cromwell sent with a Higher power than ever any went with
into that Nation. 2. All Soldiers that will are enabled to leave their
Regiments and List under Cromwell so that the discontented and Levelling Party
only are left under the Command of Fairfax.

Col. Martin's Accounts brought into the House, 200. More Gifts to the Godly.
3. July. 1649. his Arreares came to 25000 l and 1000 l. per ann. Land ordered
to be settled upon him and his Heirs. The Lord Gray of Grooby's Arrears for the
last Summer only against Duke Hamilton, 1500 l. These things considered, I
cannot wonder at the Petition presented to the General by Captain Iubbs, The
Moderate, from July 3. to July 10. 1649.
in the name of Col. Huson's Regiment about July 6. wherein (amongst other
things) they complain; That the House do Weekly bestow 1000 l. per an. upon
themselves out of the public Treasury of the Nation, when as the Soldiers
wants are great, and all the People are in great necessity,

As if the dividing of the Army, 201. Endeavors to lessen the General.
and putting the most confiding men under Cromwell, the taking the whole
Command of Ireland from the General, and conferrirg it upon Cromwell, the
drawing dry all Treasuries of Money to furnish Cromwell, and leaving no Money
to content the Generals remaining part of the Army, the turning the odium of
seizing and secluding the Members, and Murdering the KING, upon the General,
were not sufficient diminutions of the General, and augmentations of his
Lieutenant General: The Welsh Counties are set on work to desire Harry Martin
for their Commander in Chief; and the Western Garrisons (the most
considerable of England) are to be taken from the General, and put into the
hands of Cromwell and his Party, for his retreat from Ireland; so that if all
this do not enable him to ruin the General, it will (at least) enable him to
divide the Army, and cautonize the Kingdom, and turn the General into the
dangers and troubles of the starving, forlorn, North Counties bordering upon
Scotland And if Cromwell find Ireland too hard a Bone for him (it is thought)
he will endeavor to surprise the Isle of Man, and from thence infest Scotland
and Ireland.

202. An Inquisition for blood, an ingenious piece newly come to light.
About the 18. July, 1649. was presented to the world an ingenious piece,
entitled, [An Inquisition for Bloud] to the Parliament, in statu quo nunc. And
to the Army, Regnante: wherein the Author proves, That the KING dsd not take the
guilt of Blood upon Himself by granting the Preambulatory Proposition in the
late Treaty in the Isle of Wight, in these words, (viz;) That He acknowledged
that the two Houses of Parliament were necessitated to undertake a War in
their own just and lawful Defense, etc. And that therefore all Oaths,
Declarations, or other public Instruments against the 2 Houses of Parliament,
or any for adhering to them, etc. be Declared null, suppressed and forbidden.





sub stricta novacula, when the Razor was (as it were) at His throat: 1. An
Army of 3e000. Horse and Foot effective against Him. 2. When He was endangered
and tired out with a long and close Imprisonment. 3. When many dangerous,
menacing Petitions against His life, had been encouraged and entertained: so
that the King may seem to have been necessitated to yield to this Grant for His
own just and lawful Defense.



the Essence of the Treaty. Philosophers and Schoolmen tell us, Proems to Laws
are condemned by many Lawyers and Politicians. Est nihil frigidius Lege cum
Prologo, jubeat lex, non suadet.
No valid proof can be drawn out of Proems and Introductions, but out of the
Body of the Text. So in the Laws of England, and in all Accusations and
Charges, Prefaces and Preambles are not pleadable. They are the last in penning
of Laws, least in account, nor never had the force of Laws.

There Is not a syllable in this Preface which Repeales any former Law
inflicting a Penalty upon such Subjects as bear or raise Arms against their
KING: nor those Laws which (e contrario)

Whereas the said Preface says, the two Houses were necessitated This may
relate to a necessity a part post, not a part ante, self-defence is the
universal Law of nature, extending to all Creatures; it is, non Scripta sed,
nata Lex. Therefore when the two Houses (or rather a schismatic Party in
them) had brought upon themselves a necessity of Self-defence, By raising
Tumults, etc.
His Majesty was contented to acknowledge that necessity. If one Man assault
anothar upon the Highway, and the Assailed furiously pursue the Assailant,
putting him to the defensive part; the Assailant is now necessitated to fight
in his own defense, although he drew that necessity upon himself, yet is he
now excusable a posteriori, not a priori. And as Civilians say of clandestine
Marriages, Quod fieri non debuit, factum valet; for multa sunt quae non nisi
peracta approbantur.

Lewis the 13. of France, had many Civil Wars with his own Subjects, amongst
other Treaties to compose them, upon the Treaty of Lodun he was enforced to
publish an Edict, approving of all that had been done by his Opposites as done
for his service. The like Extenuations are not unusual at the close of Civil
Wars; and the only use made of them was never other than to make the adverse
Party more capable of pardon, to secure them against the brunt of the Laws, to
salve their credits, and pave the way for an Act of Oblivion, and restore a
settled peace; Peace and War, like Water and Ice, being apt to beget one
another, But never was use made of such Grants to ruin the King that Granted
them, or His Party.

Thus having confuted that misprision, That the King by Granting that
Introductory Proposition, had taken all the Blood upon His score: my Author
having cleared his way to his farther Inquisition after Blood, proceeds, and
tells you, Belw. Cap was the first that opened the Issue of Blood by entering
England, and showing Subjects the way of representing Petitions to the King
upon their Pikes points: That the Irish took their rise from him. And whereas
occasion was taken to calumniate His Majesty for having a foreknowledge thereof
(amongst many other convincing, Arguments to clear him) my Lord Macquire upon
the Ladder, and another upon the Scaffold, did freely and clearly acquit Him.
And (in regard great use was made of the Irish Rebellion to imbitter the People
against the King) the Author winds up the causes there of upon one bottom.
Telling you.

1. They who complied with the Scots in their first and second Insurrection.

2. They who dismissed the Irish Commissioners (sent to present some grievances
to the Parliament) with a short, unpolitique harsh Answer.

3. They who took off Straffords Head (the only Obstructor of that Rebellion)
and afterward retarded the Earl of Leicesters going into Ireland.

4. They who hindered part of the Disbanded Army of 8000. Men, raised by the
Earl of Strafford, being Solders of Fortune, to go serve the Spaniard, as His
Majesty had promised the two Spanish Ambassadors, the Marquesses of Velada and
Maluezzi. which cashiered discontented men first put fire to the Tumult: They
who did all this, are guilty of the Irish Rebellion, and of the Blood of above
10000 Protestants who perished in that War. Add, They who importuned the
King (contrary to His judgment) to make the Irish desperate by passing an Act
to confiscate their Estates, and grant them away to such as should advance
Moneys upon Irish Adventures.

Touching the War kindled in England, the Author confesses it was a fatal
thing there should be a withdrawing of the Kings Person from the Parliament.
But averreth it was a barbarous thing that the King with above four parts in
five of the Lords, and two parts in three of the Commons should be frighted
away by Tumults raised by Ven and Burges, and a Design to seize the Kings
Person: yet its fit it should be remembered.

1. What reiterated Messages His Majesty sent, offering to return, if there
might be a course taken to secure His Person, with those Peers and Commons
rioted away,

2. That there was not the least motion toward War, until Hotham shut the
Gates of Hull against the King, attended only with some few of His household
Servants; which Act of his was approved of afterward by the House of Commons
Vote, as if he had done it by their warrant.

3. That a while after, there was an Army of 16000. men effective enrolled
about London, to fetch Him to His Parliament, and remove ill Counselors,
under the Earl of Essex, long before the King began to set up His Standard.

4. That the same Army so raised, to bring the King to His Parliament, was
continued two years after to keep Him from His Parliament.

5. Who interdicted Trade first, and brought in Foreign Force to help them?
and whose Commissions of War were near upon two years date before the Kings.

6. That in all His Declarations, He always protested, He waged not War
against the Parliament, but against some Seditious Members, against whom He
could not obtain Common Justice.

7. That upon all good Successes, the King still courted the Parliament and
City to an Accommodation.

8. That upon the Treaty of Vxbridge, The King moved, that (to prepare men's
minds to Peace) there might be freedom of Trade from Town to Town: Acessation
of all Acts of Hostility for the time, that the inflammation being allayed, the
wound might be cured the sooner.

9. That this present Army remember how often in their Proposalls, and
Declarations they protested, That their aim was, to restore His Majesty with
Honor, Freedom, and Safety, whereunto they were formerly bound by their
Protestation and Covenant; and that the two Commanders in Cbief pawned their
Souls to Him thereupon.

10. That to settle Peace, the King did in effect, (by His Concessions) part
with His Sword, Scepter, and Crown, and every thing that was personal to Him.

11. With what admired Temper, Prudence, Constancy, He comported Himself in His
Afflictions; and how many of His engaged Enemies became His Converts thereby,
speaking Panegyricks in His praise.

12. That though there be some precedents in our Histories for Deposing Kings
in point of Competition for the Crown; yet it is unexampled, That a King of
England, of an undoubted Title, should be Summoned, Arraigned, Tried,
Condemned, and Executed at His own Door, by His own Subjects; and by the Name
of their King, to whom they had sworn Allegiance: Contrary to the Whole Current
of the Law, which says, The King can do no wrong, The Crown takes away all
defects: Wherefore it was adjudged superfluous to take off Attainders, under
which Hen. 7. and Queen Elizab. lay, because the Crown wyped off all Blots. Rex
non habet Parem in suis Dominiis nec Superiorem, satis habet Rex ad paenam,
quod Deum expectat ultorem. If therefore by the Laws of the Land, all men must
be Tried by their Peers, and the King have no Peer, what power had these Men
to Arraign their King? to be both His engaged Enemies, Accusors, and Judges;
and to Erect an unpresidented Tribunal, without the least Foundation in Law,
with power, and purpose to condemn all that came before it; and that Sentence
of Death should pass without conviction, or Law, against the Head, and
Protector of all our Laws, and Fountain of Iusticc and Mercy.

13. That they who (by their own Confession) represent but the Common People;
should assume power to cut him off, who immediately represented God.

203. M. Pryns excellent Book entitled, [ A legal Vindication of the
Liberties of England] Against illegal Taxes, and pretended Acts of Parliament
abridged in part, but the whole commended to be seriously read by all men.
About the same time Mr. William Pryn Assigned his Reasons, why he could neither
in Conscience, Law, nor Prudence, voluntarily submit to pay the Arbitrary
illegal Tax of 90000 l. a Month imposed upon the People, by a pretended Act
of the Commons, bearing Date of 7 April 1649. toward the maintenance of
Forces to be continued in England and Ireland.

Because by the Fundamental Laws, and known Statutes of this Land, No Tax,
etc. ought to be Imposed, or Leavyed, but by the Will, and common Assent of the
Earls, Barons, Knights, Burgesses, Commons, and whole Realm, in a free, and
full Parliament. See Magna Charta, 29. 30. Stat. 25 Edw. 1. chap. 5, 6. 34 Edw.
1. De Tallagio non concedendo, c. 1. 21. Edw, 3 Rot. Parl. nu. 16. 25 Edw 3. c.
8. 36 Edw. 3. Rot. Parl. nu. 26. 45 Edw. 3. Rot. Parl. nu. 42. 11 Hen. 4. Rot.
Parl. nu. 10. 1 Rich. 3. c. 2. The Petition of Right, and Resolutions of both
Houses against Loanes, 3. Car. The Votes and Acts against Ship Money,
Knighthood, Tonnage, and Poundage, and the Star Chamber this Parliament, 17,
18. Car. agreed to by Mr. William Hackwell in his Argument against Impositions.
Judge Hutton, and Crook, in their Arguments, Mr. Saint John in his Argument and
Speech against Ship Money, with others Arguments and Discourses upon that
subject. Sir. Edw. Cook. in his 2 Instit. page 59 60. 527, 528, 529. 532, 533.
But this Assessement was not so legally imposed, Ergo, I, nor no man else ought
to pay it. 1. This Tax was not imposed by any Parliament; The late Parliament
being actual dissolved above two months before this pretended Act was passed
for imposing it, by the Murder of the King. as is resolved by the Parliament. 1
Hen. 4. Rot. Parl. nu. 1. 4 Hen. 4. and 1 Hen. 5. Rot. Parl. nu. 26. Cooks 4.
Institutes, p. 46. 4. Edw. 4. 44. 6. For the King being both the Beginning,
End, and Foundation of Parliament, (according to Modus tenendi Parliamentum,
and Sir Edw. Cook, 4. Instit. p. 3,) which are Summoned, and Constituted only
by his Writ, the Writ is actually abated by bis Death. 1 Edw 6. c. 7. Cooks 7.
Rep. 30. 31. Dyer 165. 4 Ed. 4. 43. 44. 1 Edw. 5. 1. Brook Commission, 19. 21.

It appears by the writs of Summons to the Lords, Quere, How a Parliament
Summoned by the Writ of K. Charles I. and called Parliamentum nostrum ad
tractandum nobiscum super arduis negotiis regni nostri, can be continued one
and the same Parl. after the Kings death that called it? and the Monarchy
changed into a Common wealth? formally it cannot be the same, the King the Head
thereof being gone. The Lords House and Monarchy being abolished, and the State
not the same? materially it cannot be the same, so many of the ancient Members
being thrown out, and new ones unduly elected brought in. But there are some
pragmaticall Tailors in the House, who can make a garment fit for all states of
the moon, and a Parl. fit for all changes of the State.
( Crompt. Jurisdiction of Courts, fol. 1. Cooks 4. Instit. p. 9. 10.) and of
Elections, and leavying their Wages: That the Parliament was only Parliamentum
nostrum, the Parliament of the Kings that's Dead, not of his Heirs and
Successors, They are all Summoned to come to his Parliament to advise with him
(nobiscum, not with his Heirs and Successors) of great and weighty Affairs
concerning, Nos and Regnum nostrum, Him and his Kingdom, 5 Edw. 3. 6. part 2,
Dors. Claus. Regist. fol. 192. 200. So the King being dead and his Writ, and
Authority by which they were Summoned, and the end for which they were Called:
Ad Tractandum ibidem nobiscum, super arduis negotiis nos and statum Regni
nostri tangentibus; being thereby absolutely determined without any hope of
revivall: The Parliament is determined thereby, especially as to those who have
Dis-inherited his Heirs and Successors, and Voted down Monarchy it self; and
the Remnant now sitting are no longer Members of Parliament, as all Judges,
Justices of the Peace, Sheriffs, made only by the Kings Writ or Commission, and
not by Patent, Cease, and become void by the Kings death, for this very reason,
because they are constituted, Iustitiarios and Vicecomites nostros ad pacem
nostram, etc. custodiendum The King being dead, his Writs, and Commissions
expire with Him. 4 Ed. 4. 43, 44. Brook, Office and Officer 25. Commission, 19.
21. Dyer, 195. Cook 7 Rep. 30, 31. 1. Ed. 6. c. 7. Daltons Justice of Pace,
chap. 3. page 13. Lambert, page 71.

Object.
If any object the Act of continuance of this Parliament, 17. Car. That this
present Parliament shall not be dissolved unless it be by Act of Parliament to
be passed for that purpose.

Answ.
It is Answered, That it is a Maxim in Law, That every Statute ought to be
expounded according to the intent of those that made it, and the mischiefs it
intended only to prevent. 4 Edw. 4. 12. 12 Edw. 4, 18. 1 Hen. 7. 12. 13.
Plowdens Commis, fol. 369. Cooks 4. Institutes page 329. 330. Now the intent
of the Makers of this Act, was not to prevent the Parliaments dissolution by
the Kings Death, (no ways intimated in any Clause thereof, although it be a
clear dissolution of it to all intents, not provided for by this Act) but by
any Writ, or Proclamation of the Kings by his Regal Power, without the consent
of both Houses, which I shall prove by the Arguments following.

1. From the principal occasion of making the said Act. The Commons in their
Remonstrance, 15. December. 1642. complain, That the King had dissolved all
former Parliaments against approbation of both Houses of Parliament: wherefore
to prevent the Dissolution, Prorogation, or Adjournment of this present Parl.
by the Kings Regal Power, after the Scots Army should be disbanded, and before
the things mentioned in the Preamble could be effected, was the ground and
occasion of this Law: and not any fear of Dissolving the Parliament by the
Kings death, Natural, or Violent, which is confessed by the Commons in the
said Remonstrance, Exact Collect. page 5. 6. 14, 17. compared together, where
they Affirm, The abrupt dissolution of this Parliament is prevented by another
Bill, etc. In the Bill for continuance of this Parliament, there seems to be
some restraint of the Royal power in Dissolving of Parliament; not to take it
out of the Crown, but to suspend the execution of it for this time, and
occasion only, which was so necessary for the Kings own Security, and the
Public Peace, that without it we could not have undertaken any of those great
Charges, but must have left both Armies to disorder, and confusion, etc.

2. The very Title of this Act [an Act to prevent inconveniences which may
happen by the untimely Adjourning, Proroguing, or Dissolution of this present
Parliament] intimates as much, compared with the body of it, which provides as
well against the Adjourning, or Proroguing without an Act, as against a
Dissolution. Now the Parliament cannot be said to be Adjourned, or Prorogued
untimely by the Kings Death (which never Adjourned, or Prorogued any
Parliament) but only by his Proclamation, Writ, or Royal Command to the
Houses, or their Speaker executed during his life time. See Parl. Rols, 6. Edw
3. 2. Rot. Parl. 3. 6. 5. Ric. 2. n. 64, 65. 11. Ric. 2 nu. 14, 16, 20. S Hen.
4. nu. 2. 7. 27 Hen. 6. nu. 12. 28 Hen. 6. nu. 8. 9. 11. 29. Hen. 6. nu. 10.
11. 31 Hen. 6. nu. 22, 30, 49. and Cook: 4. Instit. p. 25. Dyer fol. 203.

3. The Prologue of the Act implies as much, whereas great sums of Money must
of necessity be speedily advanced for relief of His Majesty's Army (not his
Heir or Successor) and for supplying other His Majesty's (not his Heirs, nor
Successors) occasions, which cannot be so timely effected, as is requisite,
without credit for raising the said Moneys; which Credit cannot be attained
until such Obstacles be first removed, as are occasioned by Fears and
Jealousies; That this Parliament may be Adjourned, Prorogued, or Dissolved,
before Justice shall be duly executed upon Delinquents (then in being, as
Strafford, Canterbury, not since made) Public Grievances (then complained of,
as Star Chamber, High Commission, Ship Money, Knighthood Money, Tonnage, and
Poundage, etc.) redressed: Peace concluded between the two Nations, sufficient
provisions made for repayment of the said Moneys (not others since) so to be
raised. All which expressions related only to His late Majesty, as to His Acts
of Royal Power, not to His Heirs and Successors, after His Natural (much
less) Violent death, which was not then thought on, but publicly Detested,
and Protested against; no Man being so hardy as to mention it for fear of the
Law, not then subdued by the Sword; And the several Principal Scopes of this
Act are fully satisfied long before the late Kings Death.

4. It is clear by the Body of this Act; And be it declared, etc. That this
present Parliament, etc. Shall not be dissolved, unless it be by Act of
Parliament to be passed for that purpose; nor shall at any time, or times
during this present Parliament, be Adjourned, or Prorogued, unless it be by
Act of Parliament to be passed for that purpose; and that the House of Peers
shall not at any time, or times, during this present Parliament, be Adjourned,
unless it be by themselves, or by their own Order. And in like manner, That
the House of Commons shall not at any time, or times be Adjourned, etc. as
aforesaid. From whence it is undeniable.

1. That this Act was only to prevent untimely Dissolving, Proroguing, and
Adjourning of that present Parliament then Assembled, and no other, by Acts of
Royal Power.

2. That the King was the Principal Estate, and Member, yea, our Sovereign
Lord, the sole Declarer, and Enacter of this Law, by Assent of the Lords and
Commons.

3. That neither this Act, nor any other, for Dissolving, Proroguing, or
Adjourning this Parl. could be made without the Kings Royal Assent, which the
Lords and Commons in their Remonstrance, 26. May, 1642. often acknowledge,
together with His Negative Voice to Bills, exact Collect. p. 69. 70. 736. 709.
722.

4. That it was not the Kings intent in passing this Act to shut Himself out of
Parliament, or create Members of Parliament without a King, as He professes,
(...), c. 5. Nor the Lords and Commons intent to Dis member Him from His
Parliament, and make themselves a Parliament without Him, as their said
Remonstrance testifies; and the words of the Act import, much less was it
their intent to pack a Parliament of 40. or 50. Commons only, selected by
Colonel Pride, to Vote according to the Dictates of a Council of War, after
they had destroyed the King, and House of Peers: Against which transcendent
usurpation this very Act provides, That the House of Peers shall not be so much
as Adjourned, or Prorogued, but by themselves, or their own Order.

5. Neither did the King, Lords, and Commons, in passing this Act intend, That
by Murdering the King, Abolishing the House of Lords, and expelling by power of
the Sword eight parts of ten of the Commons, the remaining Faction should
constitute themselves, their Heirs and Successors, a Perpetual Parliament,
It is against the nature, and essence of a Parl. to be Perpetual, and against
the Liberty of the People.
which would Cross, and Repeal the Act for a Tryenniall Parliament made on the
same day in Law. Brook, Parliament 80. Relation 85. Dyer 85.

6. The last Clause of this Act concludes as much. And that all, and every
thing, or things whatsoever done, or to be done (to wit, by the King; or His
Authority) for the Adjournment, Proroguing, or Dissolving of this Parliament,
contrary to this present Act, shall be utterly void and of none effect. Now
Death of the King, and Dissolution of this Parliament thereby cannot properly
be styled a thing done, or to be done by the King, if by those Words (things
done, or to be done for the dissolving, etc.) they shall say, they related to
the Kings Natural Death; Natural Death is the Act of God, which these Saints
cannot make void, if they related to His violent Death, it could not then be
said a thing done, or to be done for the unlawfulness, and injustice of it.
This Act passed long before any War, or Blood shed; The only pretense they
have since found out for the Kings Murder.

2. If this Parliament were not Dissolved by the Kings Death, Yet the House of
Peers (formerly Voted) down by the Commons, gave no consent the passing this
Act, Entitled, An Act of the House of Commons; who, without the concurring
Assent of the Lords, and the Kings Royal Assent, have no power to pass any
Act, Make, or Declare any Law, or impose any Tax, as appears by the
fore-recited Acts; The Petition of Right, The Act for the Trienniall
Parliament, and this very Act against Dissolving, Proroguing, etc. with all our
Printed Statutes, Parliament Rolls, and Law-Bookes. The Commons being so far
from claiming the sole Legislative Power heretofore, as that they were not
Summoned to our Ancient Parliaments, (which consisted only of King, Lords,
Temporal and Spiritual) until 45 Hen. 3. nor had they so much as a House of
Commons, or Speaker, until the Reign of Edw. 3. nor never tendered any Acts,
or Bills to the King, but Petitions only of Grievances, until long after
Rich. 2. time. See the Printed Prologues to the Stat. 1, 4. 5, 9, 10. 20. 23.
36. 37. 50. Edw. 3. 1 Ric. 2. 1. 2. 4. 5. 7. 9. 11. 13 Hen. 4. 1. 2. 3. 4. 8. 9
Hen. 5. 1, 2, 3, 4, 6, 8, 9, 10, 11, 14, 15. 28, 29, 39 Hen. 6. 1, 4, 7, 8, 12,
17, 22 Edw. 4. 1 Rich. 3.

3. But suppose the Commons alone had power to impose Taxes, yet it must be in
a full, and free House: whereas, when this Act for 90000 l. a Month passed,
the House was neither Full, nor Free, The Major part of the House (who by Law
are the House) to wit, 8. parts of 10. at the least, being Secured, or Secluded
by Col. Pride, and his Soldiers, by Confederacy with those 40. or 50. then
sitting when this Act passed, and acting the Wills of the Council of Officers,
to the subversion of Parliaments, and the great wrong of those Counties and
Buroughs for which they served.

Object.
If it be objected, that by usage of Parliament, 40. Members make a House of
Commons.

Answ.
1. I Answer, not to all intents and purposes; Not to grant Subsidies, nor pass
Laws, or matters of greatest moment, Modus tenendi Parl. Cooks 4. Instit.
page 1. 2. 26. 35. 36. Cromptons Iurisd. of Couts, fol. 1. 39 Edw. 3. 7. Brook,
Parl. 27. 1. Iac. c. 1.

2. 40, Members make not a House, when the rest are Excluded by force without
Doors, and fraud of their Fellow Members within Doors, on purpose, that (being
the Major number) they may not over-vote them. The Commons not having power to
expel any of their Members, without consent of King and Lords, in whom only
the Judicial power. Paribus in Pares non est Potestas, Claus. Dors. 7 Rich. 2.
M. 27, Seldens Title of Honor, page 737. Baron Camoyes case discharged by the
Kings Writ, and Judgment from serving amongst the Commons, because a Peer of
the Realm: The practice for Members to Expel, and Sequester their
Fellow Members, being a late dangerous innovation, to pack a Factious
Conventicle instead of a Parliament.

If the King should send forth no more Writs then would Summon 40. or 50.
Commons, it were no House. Added by the Abridger.


So M. Pryn concludes; That if he should voluntarily submit to pay this Tax, by
virtue of the said pretended Act of Parliament, Dated 7. April, 1649. made by
those now sitting, (some of whose Elections have been Voted void, others of
them Elected by new Illegal Writs, under a new kind of Seal, since the Kings
Beheading; as the Earl of Pembroke, and Lord Edward Howard, incapable of being
Knights, or Burgesses by the Common Law because Peers of the Realm, as was
adjudged in the Lord Camoyes case, Claus. Dors. 7 Rich. 2. M. 32. and asserted
by Mr. Seldens Titles of Honor, Part 2. chap. 5. page 735. Seconded by Cooks
4. Instit. page 1. 4. 5. 46. 47. 49.) As he should admit those to be lawful
Members, so he should assent to ex post facto, some particulars against his
Knowledge, and against the Oaths of Allegiance, Supremacy, Protestation,
Solemn League and Covenant, taken in the presence of God, with a sincere heart,
and real intention to perform the same; and persevere therein all the days
of his life, without suffering himself directly, or indirectly, by whatsoever
Combination, Persuasion or Terror to be withdrawn therefrom. As for example,
he should thereby acknowledge, contrary to his knowledge, and the said Oaths
and Covenant.

1. That there may be, and now is, a lawful Parliament of England, actually in
being, and legally continuing after the Kings Death, consisting only of a few
late Members of the Commons House, without either King, Lords, or most of their
fellow Members.

2. That this Parliament sitting under a force, (and so unduly Constituted, and
packed by power of an Army combining with them) has just, and lawful
Authority.

1. To Violate the Privileges, Rights, Freedoms, Customs, and alter the
Constitution of our Parliaments themselves.

2. To Imprison, Seclude and Expel most of their fellow Members (the far
Major part of the House) for Voting according to their Consciencies, (in favor
of Peace, and settlement of the Commonwealth)

3. To Repeal all Votes, Ordinances, and Acts of Parliament they please.

4. To Erect new Arbitrary Courts of War and Justice.

5. To Arraign, Condemn, and Execute the King himself, with the Peers, and
Commons of this Realm, by a new kind of Martial Law, contrary to Magna Charta,
The Petition of Right, 3. Car. and the known Laws of the Land.

6. To Dis-inherit the Kings Posterity of the Crown.

7. To extirpate Monarchy, and the whole House of Peers.

8. To Change, and Subvert the Ancient Government, Seals, Laws, Writs, Legal
proceedings, Courts, and Coin of the Kingdom.

9. To Sell, and Dispose of all the Lands, Revenues, Jewels, Goods of the
Crown, with the Lands of Deans and Chapters, (for their own advantage, not the
easing of the People from Taxes.)

10. To absolve themselves (by a Papal kind of Power) and all the Subjects of
England and Ireland, from all the Oaths and Engagements they have made to the
Kings Majesty, His Heirs and Successors; yea, from the very Oath of
Allegiance, notwithstanding this express Clause in it (fit to be laid to Heart
by all Conscientious Christians) I do believe, and in Conscience am resolved,
That neither the Pope, nor any Person whatsoever, has power to absolve me of
this Oath, or any part thereof, which I acknowledge by good and full Authority
to be lawfully Minstred to me; and do renounce all Pardons, and Dispensations
to the contrary.

11. To dispense with our Protestation and Covenant so Zealously enjoined by
both Houses on all sorts of People.

12. To dispose of the Forts, Ships, Forces, Offices, and places of Honor,
Power, Trust, or Profit, to whom they please, (to their own Party.)

13. To Displace, and Remove whom they please from their Offices, Trusts,
Pensions, Callings and Franchises at their pleasures, without any Legal cause,
or Trial.

14. To make what New Acts, Laws, and Reverse what Old ones they think meet,
to ensnare, and inthrall our Consciences, Estates, Liberties, and Lives.

15. To create new monstrous Treasons never heard of before; and to declare
Real Treasons against the King, Kingdom and Parliament to be no Treasons; and
Loyalty, Allegiance, due obedience to our known Laws, and a Conscientious
observing our Oaths of Allegance and Supremacy, and the Covenant, to be no
less then High Treason: for which they may take away our Lives, and confiscate
our Estates to their new Exchequer. Thereby at once repealing Magna Charta. c.
29. 5 Edw, 3. c. 6. 25 Edw. 3. c. 4. 28 Edw. 3. c. 3. 37 Edw. 3. c. 18. 42 Edw.
3. c. 3. 25. Edw. 3. c. 2. 11 Rich. 2. c. 4. 1 Hen. 4. c. 10. 2 Hen. 4. Rot.
Parl. 11. n. 60. 1 Edw. 6. c. 12. 1. M. c. 1. The Petition of Right 3 Car. So
much commended this Parliament, and laying all our Laws, Liberties, Estates,
and Lives waste, after they have drawn so much Blood and Treasure from us, in
defense of them.

16. To raise, and keep up what forces by Land and Sea they please, and impose
what Taxes they please, and renew, increase, and perpetuate them to support
their more then Regal or Parliamentary power.

17. To pack, and shuffle themselves into a Council of Lords, This 17. is
added by the Abridger.
States General (without any provincial States) 40. Hogens Mogens, with
Supreme, Regal, and Arbitrary power, in absence of Parliaments which are
Abolished by these Usurpations as well as Monarchy.

4. The principal ends proposed in the pretend Act for imposing this 90000 l.
a months Tax, oblige all men not to pay it, viz. The keeping up this Army
under the Lord Fairfax.

1. Because this Army, by Rebelling against their Masters, the Parliament, and
waging War upon them: and by conspiring with their owe party of the sitting
Commons, have occasioned all the Mischiefs last mentioned, to the ruin of
King, Parliament, and Kingdom, Religion, Laws, Liberty, and Property; and
daily threaten an utter dissolution, both in their Deeds, and Words. Both
Officers and Soldiers Boasting, That the whole Kingdom, and all we have is
theirs by Conquests; Tbat we are but their Conquered Slaves and Vassals, and
they Lords of the Kingdom, That our Lives are at their Mercy and Courtesy;
That when they have gotten all we have from us by Taxes and Free Quarter, they
will seize our Lands, and turn Us, and our Families out of Doors: That there
is no Law in England but the Sword (as Hugh Peter's, the Rebels Apostle says)
The present power must be obeyed, (says parasiticall John Goodwin) that is the
power of the Sword still.

More has been raised by Taxes these last eight years, then in all the Kings
Reigns since the Conquest, and no account given.
2. No Tax ought to be imposed but upon necessity, for good of the People, 25
Edw. 1. chap. 6, Cooks 2. Instit. page 528. But the keeping up this Army is
the Bane of the People.

1. Because they are already exhausted with War Plunder, Taxes, Free Quarter,
etc.

2. Because the Soldiers have decayed Trade, and brought a Dearth upon the
Land.

3. This Tax of 90000 l. a Month destroyed Trade, by Forestalling, and
Engrossing most of the Money now left in the Kingdom.

4. There is no Enemy in the Kingdom visible, nor no fear of any, if we will
believe our Grandees.

5. When the King had two Armies in the Field, and many Garrisons, this whole
Army consisted but of 22000. Men, and had an Established pay but of 45000 l. a
Month. See Ordinances. 15. Feb. 1644. and 6. April 1646. Exact Collect. page
599. 876. But when the Army (by confederacy with their Party in the House) took
the boldness to increase their number without Order, 60000 l. a Month was
thought abundantly sufficient to pay the Army, and take off Free Quarter: and
why this Tax should now be raised to 90000 l. a Month, when sundry Regiments
of it are Assigned for Ireland, and yet Free Quarter continued, is a mystery of
Iniquity which fills the Saints Pockets with Money, and all the World with
Wonder.

6. The Counties Militia (so much contended for with the King) would better
defend the Kingdom from Foreign Invasions then a Mercinary Army. Therefore
there is neither necessity, nor public utility in keeping up this Army, or
raising Taxes to maintain them, or pay their pretended Arreares. The
Free Quarter they have taken in kind, and leavyed in Money, will treble their
Arreeres, and make them much indebted to the Country. Thus far (and much
farther) Master Pryn, whose whole Book at large I commend to all men's serious
perusal.

The Marquess of Ormonds happy achievements in Ireland beginning to look
formidably, 204. Cromwell sets sail for Ireland.
had cooled the hcat of K. Olivers courage) though not of his Liver) insomuch
that he and his intimate Friends began to project how (without loss of
reputation) to take him off from so desperate an Engagement, as (at that time)
that seemed to be: unnecessary delays were used in Shipping his Men.
Hasterigge and his Party reported great terrors from Scotland. Oliver and his
Bloud-hounds of the Faction made a shift to smell out a silly Plot in
Dorset-shire for surprisall of Weymouth and Portland for the KING: now laughed
at, and exploded by their own New-books. And the tender-conscienced Brethren
were prompted to apprehend their own dangers, and put into a Petitioning
posture, That such a Worthy of Israel, such a chosen Instrument of Gods mercy,
might not in a time of danger leave the Land of his Nativity, the Habitation of
the Saints, to seek foraigne adventures in a Heathen Land: Whilst these
preparations were making to withdraw Olivers stake, he appeared not openly in
them, but making more show of the Lions skin than the Foxes, had written to
Col. Jones how heartlesse his Soldiers were, and that unless Jones did by
some successful Sally lessen their terror, he should not be able to get them
on Shipboard. This was (like the Monkey) to rake Chesse-nuts out of the fire
with the Catts foot; to take a presage of his own success at Col. Jones
hazard. Jones makes an attempt with better luck than he expected, though not
with half so good success as was reported. Saturday, 12. August, when the
news first came to Town, (the Lion is not so terrible as he is painted) it is
a peculiar privilege of the Saints to lie (without sin, or at least, without
imputation of sin) for the good Cause, either in Re, or in mode Rei; in the
matter, or manner; in the thing, or the extent thereof: yet this success was
enough to invite Cromwell over to pursue the Victory, and partake of the
spoils, if not to usurp the whole Honor of the Achievement to himself, by
his accustomed special prerogative. So upon the 16, or 17. of August, K. Nol
set sail toward his new Principality, carrying (contrary to the custom of
the Sea) his Lantern in his Proawe, not in his Poope; where we will leave him
for the present to his adventures.

205. The Association between Oneale and C. Monk. See the Paper at large.
I have formerly hinted to you the Agreement made between Colonel, Monk, in
behalf of the Parliament of England; and Owen Roe Oneale, the massacring Irish
Rebel: I have now occasion to speak more at large of it, and examine the
truth of a Paper, called, [ The true state of the Transactions of Col. George
Monk with Owen Roe Oneale, as it was reported to the Parliament by the
Council of State, etc.] Printed by Edward Husbands, 15. August, 1649. The said
Agreement made between the Antimonarchicall Independent Party in Ireland, and
the massacring Antimonarchicall Popish Party under Owen Roe Oneale (being a
mere conspiracy to root out Monarchy and Protestancy: first, in Ireland, and
then in England: and a second crucifying of Christ in his members between two
Thieves, the Schismatique and the Papist) was so generally abhorred by the
English Soldiery, that many there took occasion to forsake the English
Parliament; and many here disbanded rather than they would accompany Cromwell
in so wicked an expedition. Wherefore Cromwell writ Letters to his Creatures of
the Council of State by Monk himself, complainig how much the miscarriage of
that Agreement had retarded his said Voyage; desiring them (for satisfaction of
the Soldiery and People) to Treat with Monk to take the whole business upon
himself, and to clear the Council of State, the Parliament, and Cromwell
himself, from having any hand at all in it, which upon Terms of safety and
advantage (he said) he already found him inclinable to do. The better to carry
on the scene, this Agreement was with much heat of zeal complained of in the
Apocryphal House of Commons by a Brother who had his cue beforehand, and by
the Iuncto was referred to the Council of State as was forelaid, where their
High and Mightinesses (after some private conference with Monk to accommodate
the business) voted their dislike of it: Scot having studied the Politiques in
a Brewers Tally, is become a great Statesman in our new Babel. See the said
Paper, The true state, etc.
Bradshaw reprehending Monk in jest therefore. And at last they Ordered, That
the whole business, with Monks Reasons for his justification should be
reported by Thomas Scot to the House of Commons: which was accordingly done
Upon Friday, 10. August, Monk was called in to the Bar, where (amongst other
things) the Speaker asked him, What Persons he meant in his Letter to the L.
Lieutenant of Ireland; wherein he says, He made the Agreement with Oneale with
the advice of some others? Monk answered, that he did it upon his own score,
without advice of any other Person; only having discourse with Col. Jones:
Jones told him, if he could keep Owen Roe and Ormond from joining, it would be
a good service. This Answer (such as it is) was taken for Satisfactory in so
Comic an Interlude. The next demand was, Whether he had any advice or
Directions from the Parliament, Council of State, Lord Lieutenant of Ireland,
or any other Person here to do the same? which he did expressly deny, saying, he
did it upon his own score. Hereupon the House voted as follows:

Resolved, etc. That this House does utterly disapprove of the proceedings of
Col. Monk in the Treaty and Cessation (as they please to call it) made between
him and Owen Roe Oneale, and that this House does detest the thoughts of any
closing with any Party of Popish Rebels there, who have had their hands in
shedding English blood. Nevertheless the House being satisfied that what the
said Col. Monk did therein, was, in his apprehension necessary for the
preservation of the Parliament of Englands Interest: That the House is content
the further consideration thereof; as to him, be laid aside, and shall not at
any time hereafter be called in question, So exit Monk, and the Play was done;
wherein take notice of these following Observations:

1. The Armies Doctrine, See the Answer of the Council of Officers to the
Parliaments Demand, concerning their secured Members: And their Answer thereto.
and use of apprehended necessity and good intentions to justify evil
actions; approved of by this example of the Parliament (as they will be called.)

2. This Agreement (though it were at least twelve Weeks ago publicly known
in England; and divulged in their own Licenced Newes-bookes) was never
scrupled until now: That 1. the said Agreement was expired. 2. That Oneale was
so beaten by the Lord Inchiquine, that he is (as their own Newes-books say)
inconsiderable, and must suddenly join with the Marquess of Ormond, or be
destroyed.

3. That these Votes call this Let me not seem over-bold in maintaining a
different opinion, since Parliaments are no more infallible than Popes; and all
humane opinions are equal unless Reason make the difference. I hope we have
not lost our Reason with our Laws and Liberties, nor the exercise and use of
it.
Agreement but a Treaty and Cessation of Arms; which (I affirm) to be a
League Defensive and Offensive against Ormond, Inchiquine, and all that do and
shall uphold Monarchy (if not Protestancy too) for these Reasons: 1. Article
second says, Tbat upon all occasions both Parties be ready with their Forces
to assist one another until a more absolute Agreement be made and condiscended
unto by the Parliament of England. This is beyond a Cessation. 2. Article
third, says, That the Creaghts of Ulster residing within the Quarters of Col.
Monk, shall pay Contribution to General Owen Oneale. This is a Concession of
a great latitude far beyond the authority of any subordinate Commander or
General, and against the Laws and Liberties of the Land to grant Taxes. It
should seem by this, that Oneale and his Army, were become Mercenaries, taken
into pay by Monk 3. Article fourth, says. That if General Owen Oneale shall
happen to fight against the Forces under the Command of the Marquess of
Ormond, the Lord Inchiquine, or any other Enemies of the Parliament of England,
and thereby spend his Ammunition, if he be near unto my Quarters, and be
distressed for want of Ammunition, I shall then furnish him. This was actually
performed when my Lord Inchiquine Besieged Dundalke. I make the same
interpretation of this Article that I have made of the third. 4. The fifth
Article allows to Oneale the use of any Harbors within Col. Monks liberty;
which likewise is too much for a bare Cessation or Truce.

4. Who can believe that any subordinate Officer commissionated to prosecute a
War against Owen Roe and the rest in Arms in that Kingdom, should dare to
Treat and conclude an Agreement and conjunction with that very Enemy he had
Commission to fight against without the knowledge and Directions (public or
private) of those from or under whom he has his Authority; and should be so
bold when he had done to come over and justify his said doings,
notwithstanding they proved unprosperous? Col. Monk being so much a Soldier
as to know, That (all the world over) to exceed the bounds of his Commission
(much more to act against his Commission, as in this case) is assured death
without mercy, both by the Law Martial, (without which Military Discipline
will perish) and by the Laws of our Land.

See the said Letter printed at the latter end of a Relation of the securing
and secluding of the Members by the Army.
5. Wherefore was Sir John Winter and Sir Kenelme Digby sent for over? (as was
foretold by an intercepted Letter, where of I have formerly spoken) and O Realy
the Popes Irish Agent, and another Agent from Owen Roe O Neale privately
entertained in England (as I have formerly hinted) but to drive on Treaties and
Associations of this nature? insomuch that long since it was whispered amongst
Cromwels party in England (to uphold their Spirits) That upon his showing
himself in Arms in Ireland, Ormonds Catholic Irish party would all forsake
him and go over to O Neale, who maintained the Popes Interest in that Kingdom.

The aforesaid Paper printed by Authority, and styled, The true State of the
Tronsactions, etc. besides the said Articles of Cessation. Nota.
sets down other Articles, called.

The PROPOSITIONS of General Owen O Noale, the Lords, Gentry, and Commons of
the confederate Catholics of VLSTER: To the most High and most Honorable, The
PARLIAMENT of ENGLAND.
1. INprimis. That such as are already joined, or shall within the space of
three Months join with General Owen O Neale, [within the space of three
Months] is not in the said Copy printed at Cork.
in the service of the Parliament of England, in this Kingdom, as well Clergy
as others, may have all Laws and Penalties against their Religion and its
Professors, taken off by Act of Parliament, and that Act to extend to the said
Parties, their Heirs and Successors for ever, while they Loyally serve the
Parliament of England.

2. The said General O Neale desires an Act of Oblivion to be passed, to
extend to all and every of his Party, for all things done since the beginning
of the Year, 1641.

3. They desire that General Owen O Neale be provided with a Competent Command
in the Army befitting his worth and quality.

4. They desire that they may enjoy all the Lands that were, or ought to be in
their, or their Ancestors possession.

5. That all incapacity, inability, and distrust hitherto by Act of State, or
otherwise, against the said Party, be taken off.

6. That on both sides all jealousies, hate and aversion, be laid aside: Unity,
love and amity, be renewed and practiced between both Parties.

7. That General Owen O Neale may be restored and put in possession of his
Ancestors, not Successors: a fault of the Printers.
Successors Estates, or some Estates equivalent to it in the Counties of
Tyrone, Ardmarch, or Londondery, in regard of his merit, and the good service
that he shall perform in the Parliament of Englands Service, in the
preservation of their interest in this Kingdom.

8. That the Army belonging to General Owen O Neale and his Party be provided
for, in all points as the rest of the Army shall be.

9. That the said Party be provided with, and possessed of a convenient
Seaport in the Province of Ulster.

I do, upon receiving a confirmation of these Propositions, forthwith
undertake and promise in behalf of my self, and the whole Party under my
Command, faithfully and firmly adhere to the Service of the Parliament of
England in this Kingdom, and maintain their Interest hereafter, with the
hazard of our lives and fortunes:

In witness whereof, I have hereunto put my Hand and Seal this 8. day of May,
An. Dom. 1649. Signed Owen O Neale.


Thus far the said Paper, stild, [The true State, etc.] goes on with the
Relation of the said Treaty and Agreement, but conceales what farther
Transactions passed between Monk and O Neale upon the last recited
Propositions; Wherefore I shall be bold to continue the Story out of a Paper,
entitled, [ The Propositions of Owen Roe O Neale sent to Col. Monk, The Story
of the farther Transactions between O Neale and Monk continued and enlarged
out of the Propositions, printed at Cork.
and a Cessation for three Months concluded between them. Together with a
Letter thereupon sent by a Gentleman at Dundalke, to his Friend at Cork.
Printed at Cork 1649.] The last recited Propositions were sent to Monk, 25.
day of April, 1649. who perused them, and made some inconsiderable alterations
in them, as appears by Monks Letter of Answer thereupon to Owen O Neale, dated
from Dundalke, 26. April, 1649. as I find it in the said Paper printed at
Cork, in these words: SIR.
I Have received your of the 25. April, and I have seen your Order given to
Captain Hugh Mac Patricke Mac Mahon to Treat and Conclude a Peace with me in
the behalf of your self and the Forces under your Command. I have perused
your Propositions, and conceiving there are some particulars in them which at
first view the Parliament of England may scruple to grant, I have made a small
alteration in some of them, being well assured, by it, you will not receive the
least disadvantage, but it will rather prove a means to beget an increase of
their good opinion toward you and your Patry: which I believe your reality,
fidelity, and action in their Service will sufficiently merit, and in case you
approve of them, as I have revised and altered them, I desire you to send them
to me Signed and Sealed by you, that I may present them to the Parliament of
England, to obtain their favorable Answer in return of them: And in the
mean time I desire that according to this enclosed Paper, three Months
Cessation between us be condiscended unto, and inviolably kept between our
Forces during the same time.

Dundalke, 26. April, 1649. Gorge Monk.




1. Observations upon Monks Letter.
1. Col. Monk in his said Letter to O Neale, 26. April, answers him: 1. That
he had perused his Proposition, and conceiving there are some Particulars which
at first view the Parliament of England may scruple to grant, etc. A gentle
Phrase to nourish hopes in O Neale even of obtaining all his Demands (if need
be) upon debate and deliberation; though not at first view. That he has made a
small Alteration in some of them (I confess very small) being will assured be
should not receive the least disadvantage by it, etc. From whom had Monk this
Assurance, unless from those Men by whose Authority and Directions (private or
public) he presumed to Treat with that Enemy he was Commissioned to fight
with, and whose Names he does conceal? That it (yiedling to Monks amendments
would rather prove a means to beget an increase of their (the Parliaments)
good opinion of Owen Roe O Neale and his Party, etc. It should seem then the
Parliament had entertained a good opinion of O Neale and his Party before hand;
for every thing must have a being, before it can have an increase of being. In
case you approve of them (the amended Articles) I desire you to send them to me
Signed and Sealed by you, that I may present them to the Parliament of England
to obtain their favorable Answer in return of them, etc. You see all Monk
did was in reference to the Parliaments ratification: and therefore reason
tells us the Parliament was originally privy to the Treaty: It is not likely
Monk should Treat upon his own head, and abruptly send the result of the
Treaty to be confirmed by the Parliament without any warning foregoing to
prepare them.

2. Observations upon the Propositions amended. See the said Paper printed at
Cork, especially Monks Letter.
O Neale sent his Letter and Propositions to Monk, Dated 25. April, 1649.
Monk answered his Letter and corrected O Neales Propositions the day after,
being the 26. April.

And the last mentioned* Propositions of Gen: Owen O Neale, the Lords, Gentry
and Commons of the Confederate Catholics of Vlster, etc. as well as the first
mentioned Articles for 3. Months Cessation, etc. bear Date 8. May. 1649. which
I conceive to be the Date given them when they were ratified by the Parliament,
or Council of State. See the said Paper, [The true state of the Transactions,
etc.] Then follows: A second Copy of Owen Roe Oneales Propositions as they
were Corrected by Col. Monk, Paper printed at Cork.
and sent to Oneale to be subscribed: And then sent by Monk to the PARLIAMENT
to be granted: as follows verbatim.

1. INprimis. That such as shall join with General O Neale in the Service of
the Parliament of England in this Kingdom, may have Liberty of Conscience for
themselves and their Issue.

2. The said General O Neale desires an Act of Oblivion be passed, to extend
to all and every of his Party for all things done since the beginning of the
Year, 1641.

3. They desire that general O Neale be provided for a competent Command in
the Army befitting his worth, place and quality.

4. They desire that they may enjoy all those Lands that were in their
possession at the beginning of this War for themselves and Heirs during
their fidelity to the Interest of England.

5. That all incapacity, inhability and distrust hitherto by Act of State, or
otherwise, against the said Party, be taken off.

6. That on both sides all Iealousies, hate and aversion be laid aside; unity,
love, and amity, renewed and practiced between both Parties.

7. That Genesis O Neale may be restored and put in possession of his Ancestors
Estate, or some other Estate equivalent to it, in regard of his merit, and the
good Service that he shall perform in the Parliament of Englands Service in
the preservation of their Interest in this Kingdom.

8. That the Army belonging to the Genesis O Neale and his Party be provided for
in all points as the rest of the Army shall be.

9. That the said Party be provided with, and possessed of a convenient
Seaport in the Province of Vlster.

See the Date in The true state of Transactions, etc. It seems to be 8. May,
1649.
And I do, upon receiving a Confirmation of those Desires undertake and
promise in the behalf of my self and the Whole Party under my Command,
faithfully and firmly to adhere to the Parliament of Englands Service in this
Kingdom, and to maintain their Interest hereafter with the hazard of our
Lives and Estates against all Opposers whatsoever.

Given under my Hand and Seal.


In the said Paper, printed at Cork, is also contained. [A Letter from a
Gentleman in Dundalke, dated 20. May, 1649.] which take here verbatim; that you
may see what opinion Men there (upon the place) had of that business at Cork
in Munster. To my Worthy Friend, SIR,
YOu may wonder my Obligations being so great toward you, that my returns of
acknowledgment should be so seldom as they have been, but you must know there
is no defect in my desires to be at your ears often; it is only the
preservation of my Liberty and Safety in these parts that makes me forberare
the frequency of such intercourses. I am confident these Letters, this
Messenger and the enclosed Papers, which I here send you, (containing a true
Copy of the Propositions and Letters of Agreement between Owen Roe O Neale,
and Col. George Monk) will be able to give you some account of the passages in
these parts, and will make you assured that I do not forget the respects I owe
unto you.

I must confess to you that (as you ever conceived) I never could imagine that
the Parliament proceedings would have advanced to so high a degree of rage and
wickedness, as I see they are now come to, and are resolved to act by: but
being amazed at the KING'S Murder, and seeing the Gangrene does so cruelly
spread, I will impart to you my resolution, That I am resolved to get into your
parts with the first convenience, and adhere to you there, whose actions are
more conducing to the preservation of our Religion, Law, and Common Interest,
than any where else, that I can find. But that this my so sudden resolution may
not be conceived the fruit of some vain fear, miscarriage in my self, or
light desires to abandon my former principles; I shall give you a right
understanding of all the motions and passages of my soul, since I was
acquainted with this late Treaty between Col. Monk, and Owen Roe O Neale, that
thereby you may judge of the ground of these my Designs and distasts, and my
resolutions taken thereupon.

And before I consider the particulars of the Treaty, the thing it self is so
odious unto me, that if they could have made the best bragaine to be imagined
for the English Safety, the manner of it would have appeared to me very
unsavory.

For although it cannot be denied that almost the whole Irish Party (in regard
of their Confederacies, and Combinations) have not been innocent in all
particulars of that vast Ocean of English Blood that has been shed; yet it is
most clear that the Plotters and Contrivers of this Treason, and the unnatural
and butcherly Executioners thereof, are that Party principally, which are now
Headed by Owen O Neale; for, although many of the pale, with others of
Conaught, Leinster, and Munster entertained the Design, when they saw it was so
far spread, and the English so much weakened in their Persons and Possessions,
yet it cannot be denied but this Kingdom had still many moderate-minded Men,
that loathed their Country-mens barbarity, and could never be drawn to adhere
to their Party in their least consent.

Now for the Parliament Agents, to gather up these Men (and these only) that
have been drunk with the blood of their Brethren, and to fortify them with
Arms, Councels, and conjunction of Forces, that thereby they may preserve to
themselves the Triumphs of their Cruelty and Treachery, and to lap them up in
their affections with promises of reward, if they will persevere to act with
the ruin of the KING and Monarchy, the destruction of the remnant of the
English Protestants, and the ancient Irish who have now declared their Loyalty;
and submitted to, and consociated with them, are things that I much loathe, and
can no way embrace.

Besides, if you consider the passages of the Treaty, you will easily be drawn
(I suppose) to cast away your former entertained scruples, and not condemn me
for being out of love with mine.

1. For first. The Title to Owen Roes Propositions excludes all other of his
Nation but such as will join with him, though they be far more capable of
Peace and Pardon than himself, or his Party.

2. He and his Party who in a late Paper of theirs, styled the Parliament of
England, Monstrosum Parliamentum, (the monstrous Parliament) when (as then) it
had not besmeared it self with Royal, Sacred, and Noble Blood, as since it
has done: yet now where he sees them act like himself, he has taught his
tongue to quaver, and calls them, The most Honorable and potent Parliament;
when all Honor is persecuted by them, and no power exercised by them but
brutish violence, and extreme tyranny.

3. In the second Proposition: That an Act of Oblivion be passed to extend to
all and every of Owen O Neales Party for all things done since the Year, 1641.
You shall find that Monk approves of it totally, without the least reserve of
punishment to any the most bloody Plotters and Murderers whatsoever that are
in that Crew, which makes me more in love with my Lord of Ormonds peace than I
was before.

4. It Is propounded by Owen Roe; and approved by Monk, That he shall have a
Seaport to himself, to make use of, for the perfecting of his designs, when
(as we hear) the least Traffic will not be allowed to you in Munster.

5. Although Col. Munke do a little pare his Propositions concerning the
Repealing of Statutes against Roman Catholics since Hen. 8. lest he should
offend the People: And though he do not absolutely undertake to grant him all
his Ancestors Lands (which when he is once styled O Neale, he will challenge to
be the six escheated Counties) yet by Monks Letter he is assured, that he
shall not receive the least disadvantage thereby. All which directions,
Councels, and assurances (I am confident) Col. Monk would not have used
toward him, if he had not had a Parliament-foundation to warrant it.

Thus you see these Men who lately were utter Enemies, have confederated
together to ruin Monarchy and the Protestant Religion, merely to raise
themselves, and support their own Faction. They will not here allow the KING
to make use of His own Subjects to revenge His Fathers blood, to Re-inthrone
Himself, to re-establish Religion and the Laws, and the just Liberties and
yet they allow themselves a latitude of calling in any Party, though the most
blody and inhumane, to assist them, in the carrying on their wicked Designs.

We have seen Col. Jones his Letters, censuring the Lord of Ormond for joining
the Irish to his Party (though the best and least culpable of them) and yet the
same Jones (whose head and hand is in this Treaty and Conclusion) thinks it
allowable in himself to close with the worst, and that upon his own terms.
And though Col. Monks hypocrisy (in Correcting Owen O Neales 7. Article) will
not allow that unity and amity shall be publicly proclaimed between them; yet
he is willing it shall be practiced, and they shall mutually assist one another
against all Opposers whatsoever, that is, the KING, and all in Authority under
Him.

The consideration of these things has left such an impression upon my soul,
that I am resolved to make speed to you, no way desiring to live under their
Commands, whose actions increase in horror, and beget new afflictions to all
honest English hearts. So praying you to forbear further writting to me,
because I mean speedily to see you, I rest,

Dundalke, May, 20. 1649. Your assured Friend and Servant.




Upon which Propositions so corrected by Monk, and the close carriage of this
business, I shall trouble my Reader with these following Observations.

1. Article. You see the Counterfeit, Alchymy Saints, are content to join
covertly with Massacring, Irish Papists, to carry on their Antimonarchicall
Designs: and to make a false Religion and corrupt worship of God the wages and
hyre of righteousness.

2. Article. You see those Men that are so bloodily zealous to bring Protestant
Delinquents (nay, the KING Himself, under the notion of the Grand Delinquent,
the Man of Blood) to punishment, and pretend themselves engaged by Oath so to
do; can dispense with the Massacre of two hundred thousand English Protestants
barbarously and inhumanely slaughtered in Ireland in time of full peace; and
can grand an Act of Oblivion to whole Armies of their Murderers, thereby at
once making their Antimonarchicall interest the price for which they sell the
innocent blood of their Brethren, and defrauding the Irish Adventuers of that
Money which the Parliament persuaded them to lay forth to purchase Rebels
Lands in Ireland, for which they have an Act of this Sessions of Parliament.

The like may be said of the 4. and 7. Articles, whereby Rebels attainded and
convict are restored to their confiscated Lands, and the English Protestant
Planters that purchased them of the Crown, are expelled out of their
Inheritance: what is this but a design to root out Protestancy as well as
Monarchy?

5. Article. Takes off all Incapacity, Inhability, and distrust from O Neale
and his Party at that very time when with much counterfeit zeal they pretend
great severity against the English Papists: I think because they are not so
very Rebels as the Schismatics.

According to their usual custom, to accuse other with complying with the
bloody Irish Papists; and do themselves actually combine with them to root out
Monarchy and Protestancy, giving them a Toleration of their Religion, and the
possession of the English Protestants Estates for their Hyre.

And it now appears by Letters newly come to London, the 24. August,
(notwithstanding the said Votes of the Commons against all association with the
Irish Murderers) That Sir Charles Coote, See The Perfect Occurrences, nu. 138.
from Aug. 17 to the 24. 1649.
and O Neale, are associated; and that the Siege from Londonderry was raised by
O Neales help which plainly proves, that the Treaty and Conjunction was not
only between Monk and O Neale; but between O Neale and the Parliament, or
Council of State; and that the said Propositions so altered by Monk are
confirmed by the Parliament, or Council of State; and do still serve for a
foundation for O Neale to assist the Parliament upon, who have turned out O
Neale at the Fore-dore (to gull the People) and taken him in again at the
Back-dore.

206. Cromwell's Soldiers desert him ad Milford-haven: and upon his complaint,
his House of Commons vote their Debentures void.
Many of K. Olivers Officers and Soldiers, abhorring the said Association with
O Neale, deserted him at Milford-haven (as I have related) and came to London,
whither they were pursued at the heels by a Letter from his Mushrome Majesty,
directed to his Vice-Royes at Westminster, willing his Parliament (that since
to encourage the Soldiers to undertake the Irish expedition only) their
Accounts had been Audited, and Debentures granted for their Arreares, they
should recall and null their said Debentures: In obedience to which Command, a
thing like an Act of Parliament is drawn up, and order taken that the
Commissioners that attend Cromwell into Ireland should certify the Names of
them all to the Parliament, that they may be punished in purse, for not
prostituting their Consciences, and shedding more innocent blood, with an
implicit faith and blind obedience, to K. Olivers unquestionable commands, in
maintenance of usurpation and lawless tyranny. The rest of the Army may see,
by this precedent, they may as well hope to recover a damned Soul out of Hell,
as their Arreares out of this bottomless Gulf, the New State:
(notwithstanding all their fair promises, Orders, weathercock Acts, and
Debentures; which are all written in wastpaper, and as changeable as Tickets
and Securities for the Public Faith.) It being their constant resolution and
best policy to feed them (from time to time) with vain hopes, and a little
spending-mony (for which they are never the better) now a bit of money, and then
a bob of Martial Law; and always to promise, never to pay their Arreares;
thereby to keep them together from Disbanding, and going to their own homes
and callings; whilst the Council of Officers (who only are accounted the
rational part of the Army) receive duly their full pay, and whatsoever else
they can sharke from the private Soldiers, (who are looked upon but as the
Brutish part of the Army) in whom it is become a capital Crime to question
whether their Superiors deal justly with them or no? as it proved to Lockyer.
The Common Soldiers, as well as the Common People, paying for the Riot of
their Colonels and superior Officiers (who Lord it in their guilt Coaches, rich
Apparel, costly Feastings, (though some of them led Dray-horses, wore
Leatherpelts, and were never able to name their own Fathers or Mothers) I: and
for the Lands they purchase too: yet the Officers have one device more to keep
the Soldiers together, which is, They make them believe they are so generally
hated they cannot with safety Disband and go home; whereas it is the
Superiors only that are looked upon with hatred as the Authors of Tyranny and
Oppression: The Private Soldier being esteemed but their Instruments, and such
as (in their kind and way) are Sufferers under the hand of oppression, as well
as other men; many Soldiers have been purged out of the Army; others have
voluntarily quitted the Army and returned to their callings, without being
endangered or injured after their retirement, which shows this objection is
but a Scarcrow.

207. A League Defensive and Offensive, concluded between O Neale and Sir
Charles Coote Governor of Connaught for the Parliament: See the last Section
save one.
For the clear manifestation of the Association between O Neale and the
Parliament, there are lately come to the Council of State two Letters out of
Connaught from Sir Charles Coote; one Dated the 14. the other the 15. of August,
1649. informing them with how much zeal to the Parliaments interest Own O
Neale had freely raised the Siege of Londonderry. Upon which Letters, and the
Votes and proceedings of Col. Pride's Parliament thereupon, I shall commend to
my Readers observation these following particulars:

1. The 15. August, Letters inform, that O Neale freely offered his assistance
to Coote, professing much affection to the Parliament of England, and an
earnest-desire to maintain their Interest, etc. (which is, his own interest)
you may remember that this bloody Rebel O Neale heretofore (when the
Parliament was not half so corrupt as now) styled it, Monstrosum Parliamentum,
the Parliament of Monsters: but now that he sees them act his way, and concur
with him to destroy Monarchy and Protestancy, he styles them. The Honorable
Parliament; aids, and affects them.

2. The 14. August, Sir Charles Coote informs, that he has found O Neale and
his Army very punctual and faithful in all their Promises and Engagements and
he makes no doubt but they will continue so unto the end, etc. The reason is,
because they aim all at one end and interest: Subversion of Monarchy and
Protestancy, and go one way to effect it, by a Conjunction of Forces and
Councels.

3. The 15. August, that O Neale in his Express to Coote enclosed some Letters
he had received from Monk; and amongst the rest, a Copy of a Letter from
Monk in Answer to a Letter of the Lord Inchiquine charging Monk with joining
with O Neale and his Party; wherein Monk insinuated, as if O Neal's submission
to use the the Parliament Power, were already accepted by them, etc. Monk
needed non insinuate it, but might have spoken it plainly: as he has done to
sundry of his Friends in England, who reprehended him for joining with O Neale,
to whom he Answered, that be had the Authority of his Superiors to warrant his
doings therein: But this was before he went to Milford-haven to Cromwell, who
then taught him the art of Cromwellizing to carry on their design.

4. The 15. August, Why did they cry out opon King Charles I. upon a surmise
that He used the help of the more innocent Irish Papists, being His own
Subjects under his Allegiance and Protection? but we find the Godly are above
all Laws.
Coote's Letter (to justify his doings) delivers a piece of Doctrine to the
Council of State; the Use whereof they were very perfect in before, viZ.
Calling to mind that it is no new thing, for the most wise God, to make use of
wicked Instruments, to bring about a good Design, for the advancement of his
glory, etc. This Casuist in Buffe had forgotten, That we must not do evil
that good may come thereof; and that both the just and the unjust, the
righteous and the unrighteous man being al of Gods Creation and making, he has
the same prerogative over them all jure creations, that a Potter has over his
Pots, he may use them, and do with them what seems best to his most holy
will: and it is therefore good, holy, just, because he wills it. His Divine
pleasure being the rule and standard of goodness, holiness, justice. Mistake
me not; I do not mean his bare providence, or permissive will, which no man
can take notice of, and Traitors, Tyrants, Thieves, and Reprobate Saints
execute, and boast of to their own assured damnation. Therefore Gods employing
wicked Instruments can be no president for our Alchimy Saints to do the like;
unless Cromwells Council of Officiers, of State, and Parliament.
three Iuntoes and faction, will usurp Gods prerogative, as they have done the
Kings.

5. The 15. August, the Letter says, that Coote called a Council of War,
who resolved, It was better to accept of the assistance of those who proclaimed
themselves Friends to us, and the Interest we fight for, etc. Here you see O
Neale's bloody Party and those Parliament Champions united, and friendly
conspiring to uphold one Common Interest, which can be nothing but the downfall
of Monarchy and Protestancy.

6. The 15. August, the Letter further says, that we (Coote and his Council
of War) added to the Articles this wary Proviso, not to use their assistance
longer then the approbation of the State of England should go a long with us
therein, etc. It should seem by this wariness, that for the time they had used
their help, (which was ever since the 22. of May last) the approbation of the
said State (as they call it) has gone along therewith. And for the time they
mean to use their assistance hereafter, it is left indefinite; (no longer then
the approbation of the State shall go along with us therein) which may happily
be until Domes-day: notwithstanding the Order, Dated the 24. August, 1649.
voting, That their Vote of the 10. August, in the Case of Col. Monk, be
communicated to Sir Ch: Coote, as the Resolution of the House, etc. For, who
knows whether the Copies of that Vote may miscarry, or be stayed by the way
either accidentally or purposely.

7. The 14. August, the Letter says, See Monke's Letter of Answer to Oneale,
Dated 26. April, 1649. from Dondalke, contained in the last foregoing Section
but one: See the said Paper, entitled, [The Propositions of Owen Roe O Neale,
sent to C. Monk, etc.] printed at Cork 1649.
O Neale was pleased to communicate to him certain Proposalls, which (he
says) were long since transmitted into England to the Parliament, by C. Monk,
and though for his own part and the prime Officers with him, (these are privy
to the secret carriage of the business, and therefore may well be satisfied
with what is done already) they do not doubt but the Proposalls are already
yielded to by the State; yet in regard their Army and Party in all other parts
of the Kingdom (these are ignorant of the juggle, and causes thereof) cannot
be satisfied therewith, until the Parliament be pleased to declare themselves
more publicly therein (it should seem they have done it privately already for
satisfaction of O Neale and his said prime Officers) he has therefore desired
me humbly to entreat your Lordships to declare your Resolution therein, with as
much speed as may be. Here you see O Neale and his prime Officers (who know the
juggle) satisfied already with a private confirmation of the Articles. But to
satisfy the rest of his Army and Party (to whom this mystery is not yet
revealed a public Declaration thereof is desired, that they may Unanimously
and cheerfully endeavor the preservation of the Parliaments Interest.

The Articles of Agreement between O Neale and Coote conclude clearly a League
or War Offensive and Defensive against the Enemies of both or either, until
a more absolute Agreement be made and condiscended unto by the Parliament of
England. This more absolute Agreement is now in agitation, and private
Directions sent to Coote how to behave himself in the Transaction thereof: See
the 1. Vote, die veneris, 24. August, 1649. See the Relation of the
Transactions between Sir Charles Coote and Own Roe O Neale, printed by Order,
28. Aug. 1649.

The Votes upon these Letters and Articles were two: Upon part, in the first
Vote I have observed something already in the 6. branch of this Section, (viz.)
that their Votes of the 10. Aug. in Case of Col. Monk be communicated to
Coote; and a Direction for him how to behave himself in the Transaction
between him and Own Roe O Neale; this Transaction is called in the Articles (ut
supra) a more absolute Agreement. These Letters, Articles, and Votes being
Apologetically published for satisfaction of the Soldiery and People; it had
been fit to have communicated the said Directions also to their Trustors and
Sovereign Lords the People, that they might have seen fair play above board,
and not to have sent clandestine Directions to Coote (in so suspicious a
business) how to behave himself in the Transaction with O Neale; which implies
the said Transaction shall be continued and may be completed; the rather for
that their second Vote says, The House is well satisfied of the diligence,
faithfulness, and integrity of Sir Charles Coote in preserving the Garrison of
London Derry: now it was preserved by his said Conjunction with O Neale, who
raised the Siege.

About this time came forth a Book, called, 208. The Levellors vindicated: or,
The Case of the twelve Troops, etc.
[ The Levellors vindicated: or, The Case of the 12. Troops which (by Treachery
in a Treaty) were lately surprised at Burford: Subscribed by Six Officers in
the name of many more.] Wherein (p. 2.) they say, That under color of the
Armies solemn Engagement at New Market and Triplo-heath, June 5. 1647. and
many other their Declarations, Promises, and Protestations in pursuance
thereof, (which Engagement they affirm (against their Preaching Coronet Den)
was never retracted by any General Council of the Army, nor upon any Petition
of the Soldiers, nor their Agitators ever by them recalled or dismissed) The
whole fabrik of this Commonwealth is fallen into the grossest and vilest
Tyranny that ever Englishmen groaned under, all their Laws, Rights, Lives,
Liberties and Proporties wholly subdued to the boundless wills of some
deceitful Persons, having devolved the whole Magistracy of England into their
Martial Domination, etc.

Page 7. They say, That the Soldiers Paper-Debentures are good for nothing but
to sell to Parliament Men for 3. or 4. in the pound. (which they are forced to
sell them for to keep them from starving, because they will not pay one penny
Arreares to such as they put out of the Army any other ways) that so they may
rob the Soldiers of their Seven years Service, and make themselves and their
Adherents Purchasers of the Kings Lands, for little or nothing: and (for ought
appears) the Money they buy these Debentures with, is the Money the Nation can
have no Account of. That they have dealt as basely with other Soldiers who
never resisted their Commands. 1. They turned them off with only two months
pay. 2. They have taken away three parts of their Arreares for Free-quater,
without satisfaction to the Country. And at last force them to sell their
Debentures at the aforesaid rates, that those Soldiers that are continued in
Arms shall fare no better, when they have served their turns, with them.

Page 10 they say, Their engagements against the King was not out of any
Personal enmity, but simply against his Oppressions and Tyranny on the People;
but the use and advantage on all the success God has been pleased to give us,
is perverted to that end, That by His removal the Ruling Sword men might
intrude into His Throne, set up a Martial Monarchy, more cruel, arbitrary,
and tyrannical, than England ever tasted of; and that under the notion of a
Free State, when as the People had no share at all in the constitution thereof,
but by the treachery and falsnesse of the Lieutenant General Cromwell, and his
Son-in-Law Ireton, with their Faction, was enforced and obtruded by mere
Conquest on the People. And a little after, now rather then to be thus
vassallized, thus trampled and trod under soot by such as over our backs have
stepped into the Chair of this hateful Kingship over us, in despite of the
consent, choice, and allowance of the Free-People of this Land (the true
fountain and original of all just Power (as their own Votes against Kingly
Government confess) we will choose subjection to the PRINCE, choosing rather ten
thousand times to be His Slaves than theirs, etc.

Page 11. They Vote and Declare, The People the Supreme Power, the Original of
all just Authority, pretend the promotion of the Agreement of the People; style
this, The first year of Englands Freedom; entitle the Government, A Free
State; and yet none more bloody, violent, and perverse Enemies thereto: for,
not under pains of death and confiscation of Lands and Goods, may any man
challenge or promote those Rights of the Nation, so lately pretended by
themselves. Nothing but their boundless, lawless wills, their naked Swords,
Armies, Arms is now Law in England, etc.

16. August, 1649. Col. 209. Col Morris Governor of Pontefract for the King,
Endicted at the Assizes at York, condemned, and executed.
Morrcie (who kept Pontefract-Castle for the KING) was Endicted before Judge
Thorpe and Pulleston at York Assizes upon the Stat. 25. Edw. 3. for leavying
War against the late King and Parliament, The Colonel challenged one Brook
(Foreman of the Jury) for being his professed Enemy; but the Court (knowing
Brook to be the principal Verb, the Key of their work) answered Morris, He
spoke too late, Brook was sworn already. Brook being asked the Question,
Whether he were sworn or no? replied, He had not yet kissed the Book. The
Court answered, It was no matter, that was but a Ceremony: alleging, he was
recorded Sworn, there was no speaking against a Record: Sure they made great
haste to record him sworn before he could kiss the Book: so Brook was kept
in upon this cavil; by whose obstinacy, Morris was condemned. I cannot wonder
that legal Forms and Ceremonies are laid by (although justice cannot subsist
without those Legalities to ascertaine her proceedings, which otherways would
be left at large to the discretion of the Judge) when I see our known Laws,
Magna Charta, the Petition of Right, 3. Carol. and the rest, with the
fundamental Government of this Nation, pulled up by the roots to carry on
their Designs of enslaving the People to their lusts, notwithstanding the
Parliaments Declarations, Remonstrances, Protestations, Covenants, and Oaths
to the contrary: and their late Vote in the Act for Abolishing Kingly
Government. That in all things concerning the Lives, Liberties, Properties and
Estates of the People they would observe the known Laws of the Land. But to
return to our Relation: Then Morris challenged 16. more of the Jury; whereat
Pulleston was so pettish, that he bade Morris keep his compass, or else he
would give him such a blow as should strike off his head. Until Morris cited
the Stat. 14, Hen, 7. fol. 19. whereby he might challenge 35. men without
showing cause: Here you see the Judges (which ought to be of Council with the
Prisoner in matter of Law) endeavoring to outface and blind the Prisoner with
ignorance of the Law, being a Martial Man. Then he desired a Copy of his
Endictment, that he might know what to answer; saying, he might plead Special
as well as General; which the Court denied him. Next, because there was point
of Law in it, he desired to have Council, citing the Stat. 1. Hen, 7. fol. 23.
which was likewise denied him; yet (I am deceived, if Rolfe had not Council
allowed him, being endicted at Winchester for an endeavor to Murder KING
CHARLES the First, and had many other favors denied to Morris.) Then Col.
Morris for his discharge produced the PRINCE'S Commission as Generalissimo to
the KING his Father. The Judges answered, The Prince was but a Subject as
Morris was, and if He were present must be tried as he was; and rejected the
Commission without reading: Morris told them, the Prince had His Authority
from the King, in whose name all Judges and Officers did then Act. The Court
Answered, the power was not in the King, but the Kingdom. Observe, they
endicted him for Leavying War against the King and Parliament. The word
[Parliament] was a surplusage; for which no Indictment could lie: no
Allegiance, no Treason; and we owe Allegiance to the King alone; whosoever
Leavyeth War in England (in the intendment of the Law) is said to Leavy War
against the King only: although he aim not at His Person, but at some other
Person: And if he that Leavyeth War against the King. His Crown, and
Dignity, be a Traitor; how much more must they be Traitors that have actually
Murdered the King, and Dis-inherited and proscribed his lawful and undoubted
Heir; and (as much as in them lies) have subverted the Monarchical Government
of the Land, and consequently, all Monarchical Laws; whereof the Stat. of
Treasons for Leavying War against the Kings Majesty is one; and therefore
Morris under a Free State ought not to be condemned or tried upon any
Monarchical Law. So Morris was found guilty by a Jury for that purpose. And
an illegal president begun to cut off whom the Faction pleases, under a
pretense and form of Law, without help of a Council of War, or a private
Slaughterhouse, or a Midnight-Coach guarded with Soldiers to Tyborne. These
Usurpers have got the old tyrannical trick, To rule the People by the Laws,
but first to overruled the Laws by their Lawyers; and therefore, Vt rei
innocents pereant, fiunt nocentes judices; that true men may go to the
gallows, Thieves must sit on the bench; but, silent Leges inter arma; and now,
silet Iustitia inter Leges, silet Ius inter Iudices: the mungrell,
hypocritical, three-headed conquest we live under has dispoiled justice of
her balance, Three-headed, consisting of, 1. Council of War. 2. Council of
State. 3. Parliament.

and left her in a Military posture, with a Sword to strike; but no scales to
weigh withal: Our licenced News-Books (like Ill-Boading-Birds) foretold and
fore-judged Morrice's death a Month before, He died resolutely. Observe the
thing aimed at in this new form of Endictment of High Treason, for leavying
war against the King and Parliament, is, first that the word [King] may hold
in the Edictment, which otherwise would be found to have error in it; and
though the word [for Leavying War against the Parliament] be a vain
surplusage, signifying nothing; yet at last (by help of their own Judges, and
new-made presidents) to leavy war against the Parliament, shall stand alone,
be the only Significator, and take up the whole room in the Edictment, and
thrust the word [King] out of doors and then Treason shall be as frequent as
Malignancy is now. Morris had moved, he might be Tried like a Soldier by a
Council of War, alleging the inconvenience of such a president if the Kings
Party should retaliate it, which would not be granted; yet Col. Bethel writ to
the General and his Council of War, desiring he might be reprieved: but
Col. Pride opposed it; urging, That it would not stand with the justice of the
Army, (you see now who is the fountain of Justice) nor the safety of the
Commonwealth, to let such Enemies live, the Parliament having adjudged him
worthy of death, (without hearing) and given instructions to the Judges
accordingly. (O serviceable Judges!) so the General was overborne by this
Dray-man. This fellow sits frequently at the Sessions House in the Old
Bailey, where the weight of his Slings turns the scale of Justice which way he
pleases.

Col. Prides's Dray-horses, 210. Capt. Plunkett and the Marquess of Ormonds
Brother voted to be Tried.
the Commons in Parliament assembled, not yet satisfied with Blood, because
they are out of danger of bleeding themselves; have Voted that Capt. Plunkett
and the Marquess of of Ormond's Brother (Prisoners in Ireland) shall be
brought to Trial. If the King's Party (in imitation of their Cruelty) shall
put to death the Prisoners they have taken, the Parliament will save their
Arreares for their own privy purse; These two cases, are examples of the
greatest danger, and the highest contempt of Soldiers that ever were set on
foot in any Age or Nation.

29. August, 1649. came forth, a Book, called, 211. An Our cry of the young
Men and Apprentises London concurring with those fasly called, Levellors.
[ An outcrie of the young Men and Apprentises of London: Or, An Inquisition
after the lost fundamental Laws and Liberties of England.] truly and
Pathetically setting forth the slavery, misery, and danger of the Common
Soldiery and People of this Nation, and the causes thereof: well worth the
reading.

About this time came forth an Act (for sooth) for the speedy raising and
leavying money upon the Excite: 212. Excise.
that is (as the Act tells you) upon all and every Commodities, Merchandises,
Manufactures, as well imported or exported as made or growing, and put to sale
or consumed, etc. That is, to lay impositions upon all we eat, drink, wear
or use, as well in private houses as victualling houses, warehouses, cellars,
shops, etc. as well what the Soldier devoures in Free Quarter upon us, as
otherwise, under unheard of penalties both pecuniary and personal to be paid;
and leavied with rigor. And to make every man's house lie open to be searched by
every prowling Rascal as often as he or they please.

213. Foraigne Plantations.
The Traitors, Tyrants, and Thieves, the Commons in Colonel Prides Parliament
assembled, are now again frighted into a consideration of Foraigne
Plantations: And passing Acts, That they shall all be subject to the new Babel,
or State of England: for which purpose they are very busy to undermine,
devide, and subject the old and first Planters, that (if need be) these
reprobate Saints may come in upon their labors, and the better to accommodate
themselves there. In the Act for sale of the Kings, Queens, and Princes
personal Estate, they have given leave to their Agents the Commissioners to
transport beyond sea (that is to say, to their own Plantations) (under
pretense of sale) the rarest and choicest of the Kings Gods; they heap up
abundance of wealth by Excise, Taxes, Goldsmiths-hall, Haberdashers-hall,
Sequestrations, cousening the Soldiers, etc. That they may transport the whole
wealth of the Land with them, and leave England naked, disarmed and oppressed
with famine, and disabled to pursue them for revenge, or recovery of their
losses.

214. More Gifts to the Faction.
The said Commons are never wearied with exercising their bounty amongst their
own Faction out of the public purse, about 1300 l. to Col. Fielder: to
Scobell their Clerk (heretofore a poor under-Clerke in the Chauncery, who
writ for 2d. a sheet) besides an employment he has already in the sale of
public Lands worth 1000 l. a year) a Pension of 500 l. a year; and a Noble,
Fee for every Copy of an Order taken forth, toties quoties; although most of
their Orders contain not above three or four lines; an extortion far
surmounting the Star Chamber, or Council Table, of which themselves so much
complained: the Diurnall tells you, Numb. 319. from Monday, Sept. 3. to Monday,
Sept. 10.
an Act was read for satisfying the sufferings of two Members, who have been in
the late War damnified many thousands: these (I conceive) to be Sir Tho:
Iervys and Mr. Robert Wallope; this satisfaction must be made out of the
public purse, which must be filled by Taxes again out of their private
purses who have lost as well as they without satisfaction, or hopes of
satisfaction, notwithstanding many Votes that all should be satisfied.

O Cromwell has reduced the Officers in Col. Jones his Regiment, and other
Dublin Regiments, 215. O Cromwell reduces Jones own Regiment and other
Regiments in Dublin. Let Sir C. Coote and his Regiment in Londonderry expect
the like.
notwithstanding their valor and fidelity shown in raising the Siege of
Dublin: you see he will trust none but his own immediate Creatures: this
Faction casts out all other men, as Quicksilver spues out all other metals
(Gold excepted) so that by this, and many other examples, they may see that all
their faithful services and bloodshed are poured into the bottomless tub of
oblivion; as their Arreares are cast into the bottomless bag of the Public
faith.

Sunday 9. Sept. 1649. 216. A violent irruption of the Parl: Ianisaries upon
the Protestants at Church in St. Peter's Pauls-wharfe, Sunday morn, 9. Sept.
1649.
At the Church of Saint Peter's Pauls-wharfe, Master Williams reading Morning
Service out of the Book of Common Prayer, and having, prayed for the KING, as
in that Liturgy (established by Act of Parliament) he is enjoined: Six
Soldiers from Saint Paul's Church (where they quarter) came with Swords and
Pistols cocked into the Church, commanding him to come down out of the Pulpit;
which Williams immediately did, and went quietly with them into the Vestry:
when presently a party of Horse from Saint Paul's rode into the said Church with
Swords drawn and Pistols spanned, crying out, Knock the Rogues on the Head,
shoot them, kill them; and presently shot at random at the crowd of unarmed
Men, Women, and Children, shot an old Woman into the head, wounded grievously
above forty more, whereof many are likely to die, frighted Women with Child,
and rifled and plundered away their cloaks, hats, and other spoils of the
Egyptians, and carried away the Minister to White Hall Prisoner. You see these
Heretics Schismatics, and Atheists that cry so loudly upon Liberty of
Conscience for their own Blasphemies, will allow no Liberty of Conscience to
Protestants, notwithstanding their Doctrine and form of Service is ancient,
allowed, and commanded by known Laws, and approved of by all the Reformed
Churches of Christendom. This strongly argues a Design in the three
Kinghdomes to root out Protestancy, as well as Monarchy, carried on by a
conjunction of Councels and Forces between that triumvirate of Rebels, O
Neale, O Cromwell, and (as many wise men think) Argyle: who would not
otherwise keep the Scots from complying with the KING upon modest and moderate
terms, such as shall leave him in the condition of a Governing King able to
protect His People from injuries at home and abroad, without which, He is but
-- magni nominis umbra, the shadow and May Game of a King. Observe, This Mutiny
was not begun by Levellors.
this provocation was put upon the City when an artificial Mutiny was raised
at Oxford; and against the Great Horse-race appointed to be at Brackley, the
11. September, to draw both City and Country to join with the Mutineers: and
then the Soldiers should have made their peace by themselves, and have left
the rest to the mercy of the State to raise more money upon them for O
Cromwells expedition in Ireland, who has writ for more recruits of Men and
Money.

Those bloody Saints that accompanied O Cromwell into Ireland (to make that
Kingdom as miserable and slavish as they have made this) do now pour forth
the blood of their own bowels in great abundance: 217. O Cromwell's Men sick
in Ireland.
Gods vengeance having visited most of them with the Bloody flux; whereof many
die: But this is a secret that must not be known to the Ungodly, and therefore
O Cromwell and his Council of War at Dublin have made an Order, Declaring,
That if any Person residing within the Garrison of Dublin, whether Inhabitants
or Soldiers, shall (upon pretense of writing to their Friends) signify the
Transactions of the Army (between O Neale, and O Cromwell, it may be) or their
Engagements with the Enemy, so as to setforth their Success, or Loss, until
first the General or Council of War have signified (falsified) the same to
his Parliament of England, they shall incur the breach of the Article against
Spies, and be accordingly punished with Death, etc. Here you see O Cromwell, in
the first Year; nay in the first Month of his reign, sets up a military
tyranny in Ireland, to which all People, as well not Soldiers as Soldiers must
submit their lives and fortunes; and the writing of news to their Friends in
England (whereby their Lies and Forgeries may chance to be co^tradicted) shall
be construed to be a Breach of the Article against Spies: not because Reason
and Truth, or the Customs of War calls it so, but because the Sword puts
this construction upon it. Take notice Ireland that this is the first year of
thy Bondage if they prevail. And take notice England that O Cromwell and his
Council and Party are resolved to Lie without control if they prevail not;
their Letters speak him to be 15000. strong before Tredah, which has Articled
to yield: That the next he will vouchsafe is Dundalke. and that Ormond flies
from the face of this Josua; and Lying Prophets are sent over to gull the
People into a belief. But the truth is, he is not able to draw together above
4000. or 5000. men; unless his Confederate O Neale join with him: And Ormond
has wit enough to know that sickness and famine in that wasted Country, are
sufficient to deal with O Cromwell without his running the hazard of an
engagement with such desperate forlorn Wretches.

218. Unreasonable Fees extorded by Birckhead by Dures of Imprisonment; with
the connivance of the Commons.
Col. Bromfield, Hooker, Cox, and Baynes, Citizens, who the last year were
committed upon suspicion of High Treason (to which every offense against this
new Babel-state is now wrested (notwithstanding the Stat. 25. Edw. 3. for
limitation of Treasons) as in an infectious season all diseases turn to the
plague) and were then discharged for want of matter to make good the charge:
are now again imprisoned (in the first year of Englands Liberty) at the
request of Birkhead (Sergeant at Arms to the Commons) until they pay such
unreasonable Fees as he pleases to exact from them: This had been great
Extortion and Tyranny in the KING's time, when this Nation enjoyed so much
freedom as to call a Spade, a Spade; an Extortioner, an Extortioner; and a
Tyrant, a Tyrant. And reason good: for if such Fees be legally due, Birkhead
has Legal means to recover them: if not Legally due, it is Extortion in him
to demand them in so violent a way; and Tyranny in his Masters the Commons to
maintain him in it.

Sir Henry Mildmay lately coming to the Tower, 219. Sir Har. Mildmay's
Politic Observations: Chaste Conversation: and first initation at Court.
and perceiving the Countess of Carlisles window had some prospect to Col.
Lylbornes grates, (out of his parasitical diligence) told the Lieutenant of the
Tower, That notwithstanding the distance was such as they could not communicate
by speech, yet they might signify their intentions, by signs upon their
fingers, to the prejudice of the tender, infant State: and accompanying this
admonition with some grave and politic Nods, hasted away to the Council of
State, and (being both out of breath and sense) unloaded himself of his
Observations there: and was seconded by Tho: Scot (the Demolisher of old
Palaces, and Deflowrer of young Maydenheads, before they are ripe) who much
aggravated the danger, and applauded the Observator. Sure Sir Henry has not
yet forgot the bawdy Language of the hand and fingers; since he first, in Court
began, to be Ambassador of Love, Procuror, Pimp or Pandor to the Duke of
Buckingham; and labored to betray the honor of a fair Lady (his nearest
Ally) to his Lust, had not she been as Virtuous as he is Vicious, (if it be
possible for any Woman to be so) and did actually betray others to him. I can
tell you that very lately Sir Harry (pretending himself taken with the
Windcollick) got an opportunity to insinuate himself into a Citizens house in
Cheapside, and tempted his Wife; but had a shameful repulse: but more of this
I will not speak, lest his Wife beat him, and give an ill example to other
Women, to the prejudice of our other New Statesmen, and their New erected
Sodomes and Spintries at the Mulbury-garden at Saint James'.

220. Felons fetched out of Newgate to inform against Merchants for not
paying Customs.
Master Gybs (Master of a Ship) having caused three Fellows to be committed to
Newgate upon Felony, for Robbing him: These Fellows sent to Col. Harvey, That
if he would procure their Liberty, they would discover to him several
Merchants who had lately stolen Customs: Whereupon, Harvey sends for those
Rogues out of Newgate, hears their Accusation, approves it, prosecutes the
Merchants upon the Information of those Villains, discharges them of their
Imprisonment by his own power, and recommends them to Col. Deane to be employed
in the Navy. And one Master Lovell, a Silk-man in Saint Lawrence-lane, is
committed to the Gate House Prisoner, because he refuses to Swear how many
Bayles of Silk he has come over: if the First year of our Liberty make such
presidents, what Monsters will the Sixth and Seventh year produce? All Princes
begin with moderation; the Elders gave good Counsel to Rehoboam, Serve the
People one day, and they will serve thee for ever hereafter. Nero had a
commendable Quinquennium; but our Novice Statists are Tyrants ab incunabilis;
Oppressors with shells upon their heads, from the Nest, before they are
fledged; what will they be hereafter?

221. Sommer-hill given to Bradshaw. A sop for Cerberus.
Sommer-hill: a pleasant Seat, worth 1000 l. a year, belonging to the Earl of
Saint Albans, is given by the Iunto to their Bloud-hound Bradshaw, so he has
warned the Countess of Leicester, (who formerly had it in possession to raise
a Debt of 3000 l. pretended due to her from the said Earl; which she has
already raised fower-fold) to quit the possession against our Lady Day next.

THE END.
An Exhortatory Conclusion to the English Nation.
TO conclude the series of Affairs and Action on both Parties (especially of
late) rightly compared, Compare the Date of the K. Commissions with those of
the Parliament, and their Declarations on both sides.
it appears by the sequel, That KING CHARLES the First, from the beginning
took up Defensive Arms to maintain Religion, Laws, Liberties, and the
Ancient fundamental being of Parliaments, and this Kingdom; and that there
always was, and now especially is, a predominant Faction in Parliament
(notwithstanding their frequent Declarations, Remonstrances, Petitions,
Protestations, Covenant, and votes to the contrary) conspiring with a Party
(especially of Commissioned Officers of the Army) without the Houses, to Change
the Fundamental Laws and Government of the Church and Commonwealth, to usurp
into a few hands the Supreme Authority, to enslave the People with an
Oligarchicall, Military, and Arbitrary Government, to raise what illegal Taxes
they please, to establish their tyranny and enrich themselves and their Party,
to oppress, consume and devour all Men, of a judgment contrary to their
Interest; to Murder them by new-declared arbitrary Treasons, contrary to the
Stat. 25. Edw. 3. for ascertaining Treasons; to Disfranchise them of their
Birthrights, and make them Adscriptios Glebae, Villains Regardante to their
own Lands, which the Nobility, Gentry, and Yeomanry plough, sow, and reap,
whilst Brewers, Draymen, and Cobblers, eat, drink, and play upon the sweat of
their labors; and are the Usufructuaries of their Estates. All which they have
lately brought to pass; wherefore let all true Englishmen (as becomes good
Christians, good Patriots, and gallant Men) claim their Birthrights; and with
one voice cry out.

1. We will not Change our Ancient, settled and well approved Laws to which we
are sworn.

2. We will not Change our Ancient and well-tempered Monarchy to which we are
Sworn.

3. We will not Change our old Religion for New Lights and inventions.

4. We will not subject our selves to an eight part of one Estate or House of
Parliament, sitting under a force, and having expelled two hundred and fifty of
their Fellows (more Righteous then themselves) by force, and usurping to
themselves the Supreme Authority.

5. We will not be subjected to a new Supreme Authority usurped by forty
ambitious, covetous Tyrants, arrogating to themselves to be a Council of
State, and designed to supply the room of Parliaments, under what name or
title soever they shall mask themselves.

6. We will not submit our selves to a Military Government, or Council of
Officers.

See the Stat, of Recognition, 1. Iac. and the Oaths of Allegiance, Obedence,
and Supremacy.
7. We must and will have A KING, and The KING whom the Laws of God and this
Land have Designed to us, we being by the Oaths of Allegiance, Obedience, and
Supremacy sworn to bear faith and true Allegiance to KING CHARLES the First
his lawful Heirs and Successors.

Hic telum infigam, moriarque in vulnere -- POSTSCRIPT.
REader, at the latter end of my First part of The History of Independency, I
have presented to thy consideration, some General Conclusions arising out of
the Premises: the same Conclusions do as naturally arise out of the Premises
of this Second part of the History: and do as aptly serve to illustrate this
Second, as that First part; wherefore to that First part I send thee for
opening thy understanding.

When our old Laws run again into their Ancient Channel, and the Sword of
Murder is sheathed, and the Sword of Justice drawn, the Author engages to
publish his Name and Apology, and show what he has done and suffered for the
Parliament and Kingdom.

THE END.

