CHIRURGICALL TREATISES.

TRactatus hi Chirurgici si prelo mandentur, magno id commodo Medicis pariter
ac Chirurgis cessurum judicamus.

Georg. Ent Eques Auratus, Colleg. Regal. Med. Land. Praeses, M.D. Tho. Coxe,
Elector and Censor, M. D. Dan. Whistler, Regestarius ac Censor, M. D. Humphr.
Brook, Censor, M. D. Tho. Franckland, Censor, M. D.


SEVERAL CHIRURGICALL TREATISES.

By RICHARD WISEMAN, Serjeant-Chirurgeon.

LONDON, Printed by E. Flesher and J. Macock, for R. Royston Bookseller to His
Most Sacred Majesty, and B. Took at the Ship in St. Paul's Churchyard, Anno
Dom. 1676.

TO THE MOST SACRED MAJESTY OF CHARLES II. KING OF GREAT BRITAIN, FRANCE and
IRELAND, etc. ARE HUMBLY DEDICATED THESE Chirurgicall Labors OF His MAJESTY'S
most faithful Servant, and loyal Subject,

Ri. Wiseman.

THE EPISTLE TO THE READER.
Reader,
THE nobility and dignity of Surgery are too well known to want the help of
an Orator to set them forth. If a Panegyric were necessary, it were best made
by running through the Particulars of the Art, and the History of the Diseases
cured thereby. He that shall duly consider the deplorable misery of mankind,
and how much it wants relief in such a multitude of Instances, must needs
acknowledge us to be what Antiquity has long since called us, viz. The Hands
of God. Indeed the ancient Grecians in the days of Ignorance and Idolatry did
not stick to testify their reverence of the Eminent men of the Profession, by
referring them into the number of the Gods which they worshipped. Nor have the
latter times, though wiser then to rise to such extravagancy, been backward in
expressing their esteem of us; which notwithstanding they have guided with more
discretion and usefulness. In stead of such Deification and fabulous Stories,
they have rewarded us with Honor, Wealth, and Collegiate Foundations both in
Universities and great Cities. Among which sort our own Society in the City of
London, established by Kings, and frequently encouraged by fresh Grants from
them, ought to have an honorable mention; the Professors of which have
contributed so much to the improvement of the Faculty, and to the honor of the
Nation. The Anatomiall part has been signally promoted in it, so as to render
it famous all over Europe, and every year to invite Forreiners to attend our
Lectures from beyond the seas. It had like to have done as great things in the
Institutionary part of Surgery, had the learned Lectures of that excellent
Surgeon Doctor Read been continued by a succession of such Professors. It
being reasonable to imagine, that the Curiosity and Industry that has been so
eminent in our Nation in the Anatomicall part, would have been the like in that
also. Since it has been our unhappiness to have that neglected, I hope it will
not be ill taken if we that are Members of it do supply this defect by our own
private Labors. This has been already done by Mr. Clowes, Mr. Woodall, and
some others, whose laudable Example I have adventured to follow, and to put my
own Papers in print; that what was at first intended for my private
satisfaction, may be useful to others as well as to my self. In doing this,
Reader, I have made a virtue of necessity, and employed those hours for the
public service, which a frequently-repeated Sickness has for this twenty
years last past denied me the use of in my private occasions. It has pleased
God by casting me into such a condition to give me opportunity of reading and
thinking, as well as practicing. Both which are necessary to the accomplishment
not only of an Author, but indeed of a Surgeon. I cannot be so
uncharitable to my Brethren, as to wish them the like Sickness to oblige them
to the like Retirements for contemplation and study. But I do heartily wish,
that what was necessity in me may be choice in them, viz. that they would set
apart some time for reflection upon their Labors, and for comparing the
Empiricall part of the Prefession with the Rational. They will soon find how
many Gaps do still lie open in this goodly Fabric, and how much is wanting to
make the Building complete. What defects do remain even in the History of
Diseases themselves, and the plain practical things, wherein in every expert
Surgeon can correct the Authors he reads? This well considered cannot but
spur him on to add his Observations to the bulk of what has been heretofore
heaped up for this purpose, and to contribute his endeavors to the finishing
of what has been begun, and thus far carried on, by other hands. As to my own
performance, Reader, I must tell thee, that what I have chiefly aimed at in
this Book has been, perspicuity and conciseness in the Institutionary part of
the same, and aptness in the annexed Observations; that so the whole may be
made easy to the young Surgeon, and as instructive as may be. In all which I
doubt not but the farther he goes on in practice, the more of clearness and
plainness he will find; and the whole so much better performed then a mere
Academick could have done it, without being a Practitioner himself, as a
Traveller can describe a Country to one that is taking a journey into it more
sensibly and usefully, then one that has only read of it and seen it in Maps.

Know, Reader, that as to these Treatises, though in preparation to them I have
read all the eminent Chirurgicall Authors, yet in the writing of them I was
more conformed to my own judgment and experience, then other men's authority.
This will consequently make them liable to the Censure of many sorts of men.
Such ancient Practitioners as are unwilling to be now learning a new Lesson,
will be angry that those Definitions and Descriptions, and sometimes Methods of
Cure, are receded from, which they learned when young; those being the basis on
which they have built the whole superstructure of their Practice. I desire such
men to content themselves with neglecting them; they being not written for
their use, but for younger men, who have their Principles and Maxims of
Surgery yet to choose. Others, wholly taken up with the Novelties wherewith
this Age abounds, will be angry that all the new Notions are not here pursued
to nicety, and many little both Anatomicall and Chymicall Punctilio's inserted
and brought in on all occasions, in stead of the old way of expressing the
Accidents of Diseases, with their Causes and Cure. I would have these men
consider, that I am a Practiser, not an Academick: that I delight in those
things as far as they are useful to life, but thought it too great a
digression from my present purpose to stuff up a practical Book with such
Philosophical Curiosities, which become it just as well, as it would become a
Divine to fill a practical Discourse with School-distinctions.

However, I resolving not to trust my self wholly with a case of this nice
difficulty, did choose a Friend to whose Judgment I did permit the whole, I mean
the Learned Doctor Walter Needham of the Charter House, who, upon perusal of
my Papers, was pleased to approve of my intention, and withal to alter what he
thought fit in them, and always to cut off the Theory, when it adventured upon
Controversiall Discourses; still urging, that this was not intended for a Book
of Controversy, but of plain Institution; not to make men subtle Disputants,
but good Practisers. I do confess he did gratify my humor in it, whose
inclinations lie wholly that way: But withal I made bold sometimes to please
my own fansy, in not always following his advice, or obeying the Corrections he
made. His pardon I easily got for so doing, he not affecting a Tyranny in
Friendship: and I hope I shall thine, (Reader,) if among many things that are
here delivered, thou find some not altogether to thy palate. Let what thou
do find acceptable to thee in this Treatise excuse the impertinence of the
rest.

Thou art farther to be informed, that the writing of so large a Volume as thou
now art presented with is but a late design, to which several of the
particular Tracts, some of which were published four years since, others written
about that time, did encourage me. One attempt drew on another, till at length
it grew to the bulk thou see. Which I do allege in excuse of the Method of
this Book; which, if it had been all written at once, might have been contrived
all into a piece. But the lesser Treatises being written before the greater, I
was not willing to dismember them again, or to write new Discourses on those
Subjects which I had already handled fully. The young Surgeon will reap
benefit by it, finding some of the most troublesome Diseases in Surgery
treated of wholly under one view, which otherwise he must have found piecemeal
delivered in several places. This Apology I chiefly made for the Treatise of
the King's Evil, where many Diseases are discoursed of which other Writers
handle in other places of Surgery. It is sufficient to say, that I think
most instances of those Diseases to partake at least of that Malady, if not
entirely to be that: and therefore when I wrote the particular Treatise, it was
fit to handle them there; and that being done, I saw no reason for taking them
out again, to supply other parts of the Book.

After all things are considered and weighed in this and other Chirurgicall
Discourses that are public, and they compared with our success in Practice, we
shall soon find cause of lamenting our own weakness and inability in the
carrying on of so great a work, as the recovery of Mankind out of those many
Distempers to which various Misfortunes, and many repeated successions of
Intemperance, and other Accidents both without and within, have betrayed us for
so many ages together. When the young Surgeon shall find the Cure easy in
the Theory, and appear so at first in the Practice too, yet suddenly deceive
him with a Relapse, and not only once, but often, delude his best endeavors:
when the Bystanders and persons concerned shall begin to accuse him of Knavery
in his proceeding, and think him to pull back a Cure, whilst he is only
rolling Sisyphus his Stone, which will tumble down whether he will or not: He
will then wish, that all other Practisers had done what I have in this
Treatise, viz. recommended their Observations, both successful and
unsuccessfull, thereby increasing knowledge in our Profession, and leaving
Sea-marks for the discovery of such Rocks as they themselves have split upon
before. For my part, I have done it faithfully, and thought it no disgrace to
let the world see where I failed of success, that those that come after me may
learn what to avoid: there being more of instructiveness often in an
unfortunate case then in a fortunate one; and more ingenuity in confessing such
misfortunes which are incident to mankind, and which have attended all my
Brethren as well as my self, and will attend thee also, Reader, in spite of
all thy care and diligence, if thou undertake the employment. Thou will also
learn one necessary piece of Humility, viz. not to trust too much on thy own
judgment, especially in difficult cases; but to think fit to seek the advice of
other Physicians or Surgeons, whose long experience has enabled them to
assist thee in preventing the Accidents, and encourage thee to go on in the
work, or forewarn thee of the danger. After thou have thus defended thy self
from the censure of Rashness, proceed boldly, and let thy sincerity in thy
acting be thy warrant to hope for God's Bl^ssing on thy endeavors: and if th
se Papers prove any advantage to thee in them, remember with kindness the
Labors of

Thy Friend and Servant, Richard Wiseman.
May 24. 1676.
ERRATA.
Page 41. l. 24. for his, read her. Ibid. l. penult. for cleansed, read dried.
Page 144. l. 20 for betae, read cerae. Page 192. l. 29, 30. read, of Turbith
mineral. the next day, and it gave, etc. Page 257. l. 19. read, bals. Peruvian.
Page 266. l. 42. for modestly, read modishly. l. 45. for Dand, read Dacre. Page
272. l. 7. read, materia polenta. Page 276 l. 6. read, The other Strumae. Page
315. l. 5^. read, beaten to a froth with a piece of Alum. Page 327. l. 8. for
siccat. read excortic.
What other faults the Reader shall meet with, he is desired to amend and
excuse.

A TABLE Of the several TREATISES and CHAPTERS In this BOOK.
TREATISE I. Of TVMOVRS.
CHAP. I. OF Tumors in general. Page 1 CHAP. II. Of Humorall Tumors in
general. Page 3 CHAP. III. Of Inflammation or Phlegmon. Page 14 CHAP. IV. Of
Tumors from Milk. Page 25 CHAP. V. Of Abscesses and corrosive Ulcers arising
from distempers of the Vterus in Childbed. Page 29 CHAP. VI. Of an Erysipelas.
Page 34 CHAP. VII. Of a Furuncle or Boil. Page 42 CHAP. VIII. Of Epinyctis and
Terminthus. Page 44 CHAP. IX. Of Inflammatory Tumors of the Glandules. Phyma.
Page 45 Phygethlon. Page 46 Bubo. Page 47 Parotis. Page 49 CHAP. X. Of a
Carbuncle. Page 52 CHAP. XI. Of Paronychia. Page 55 CHAP. XII. Of Pterygion.
Page 59 CHAP. XIII. Of Pernio. Page 62 CHAP. XIV. Of a Varix. Page 64 CHAP. XV.
Of an Ecchymosis. Page 66 CHAP. XVI. Of an Aneurisma. Page 70 CHAP. XVII. Of an
Herpes. Page 77 CHAP. XVIII. Of an Oedema. Page 81 CHAP. XIX. Of a Scirrhus.
Page 90 CHAP. XX. Of Warts and Corns. Page 95 CHAP. XXI. Of a Cancer. Page 98
CHAP. XXII. Of Noli me tangere. Page 118 CHAP. XXIII. Of Waterish Tumors. Page
119 Hydrocele. Page 124 Hydrocephalus. Page 131 CHAP. XXIV. Of Scabs and Itch.
Page 134 CHAP. XXV. Of Lepra or Elephantiasis. Page 138 CHAP. XXVI. Of Gutta
Rosacea. Page 141 CHAP. XXVII. Of Flatuous Tumors. Page 143 CHAP. XXVIII. Of
Hernia. Page 147
TREATISE II. Of ULCERS.
CHAP. I. OF Ulcers in general. Page 163 CHAP. II. Of a Simple Ulcer. Page 168
CHAP. III. Of Ulcers with Intemperies. Page 171 CHAP. IV. Of Ulcers with Pain.
Page 176 CHAP. V. Of Ulcers with Fluxion. Page 179 CHAP. VI. Of Ulcers with
Hypersarcosis. Page 182 CHAP. VII. Of Ulcers with Caries in the Bones. Page 183
CHAP. VIII. Of Ulcers with Callous Lips, etc. Page 189 CHAP. IX. Of Putrid
Ulcers. Page 190 CHAP. X. Of Phagedaena, Nomae, Dysepulota. Page 193 CHAP. XI.
Of Ulcers with Varices. Page 200 CHAP. XII. Of Sinuous Ulcers. Page 202
TREATISE III. Of the Diseases of the ANVS.
CHAP. I. OF Haemorrhoids. Page 211 CHAP. II. Of Procidentia Any. Page 219
CHAP. III. Of Condyloma, Ficus, Thymi, etc. Page 222 CHAP. IV. Of Phyma. Page
225 CHAP. V. Of Sinuous Ulcers and Fistulae in Ano. Page 226
TREATISE IV. Of the KING'S-EVILL.
CHAP. I. OF the Cure of the Evil by the KING's Touch. Page 245 CHAP. II. Of
the Definition and Causes of the Disease. Page 248 CHAP. III. The History of
the Disease, with the Diagnosticks and Prognostics. Page 250 CHAP. IV. Of the
Method of Cure. Page 254 CHAP. V. Of Ophthalmia. Page 313 Lippitudo. Page 321
CHAP. VI. Of Aegilops, Anchylops, etc. Page 322 CHAP. VII. Of the Tonsills.
Page 329 CHAP. VIII. Of Ranula. Page 334
TREATISE V. Of WOVNDS.
CHAP. I. OF Wounds in general. Page 339 CHAP. II. Of Wounds of the Veins and
Arteries. Page 353 CHAP. III. Of Wounds of the Nerves, Tendons and Ligaments.
Page 357 CHAP. IV. Of Wounds of the Face. Page 361 CHAP. V. Of Wounds
penetrating the Oesophagus and Aspera arteria. Page 363 CHAP. VI. Of Wounds of
the Lims. Page 364 CHAP. VII. Of Wounds of the Breast. Page 366 CHAP. VIII. Of
Wounds of the Belly. Page 371 CHAP. IX. Of Wounds of the Head. Page 374 An
Additionall Discourse of Wounds of the Brain. Page 400
TREATISE VI. Of GVN-SHOT WOVNDS.
CHAP. I. OF Gunshot Wounds in general. Page 407 CHAP. II. Of the Cure of
Gunshot Wounds; and first, of Extraction of Bullets, etc. Page 409 CHAP. III.
Of Dressing Gunshot Wounds after Extraction. Page 412 CHAP. IV. Of Accidents
befalling Gunshot Wounds, and of Sinuous Ulcers. Page 415 CHAP. V. Of Gunshot
Wounds with Fracture. Page 419 CHAP. VI. Of Gunshot Wounds in the Joints. Page
429 CHAP. VII. Of Gunshot Wounds in the Belly. Page 431 CHAP. VIII. Of
Gunshot Wounds in the Thorax. Page 434 CHAP. IX. Of Symptoms of Gunshot. Page
436 An APPENDIX to the Treatise. Page 439 CHAP. I. Of Burns with Gunpowder,
etc. Page 440 CHAP. II. Of Gangrene and Sphacelus. Page 443 CHAP. III. Of
Fistulae. Page 457
TREATISE VII. Of FRACTVRES and LVXATIONS.
CHAP. I. OF Fractures. Page 463 CHAP. II. Of Luxations in general. Page 478
CHAP. III. Of Luxation of the lower Jaws. Page 482 CHAP. IV. Of Luxation of the
Clavicle or Collar-bone. Page 484 CHAP. V. Of Luxation of the Shoulder. Page
486 CHAP. VI. Of Luxation of the Elbow-joynt. Page 491 CHAP. VII. Of Luxation
of the Carpus, Metacarpus, and Fingers. Page 493 CHAP. VIII. Of Luxation of the
Hip. Page 494 CHAP. IX. Of Luxation of the Knee. Page 496 CHAP. X. Of Luxation
of the Ancle-bones. Page 497 CHAP. XI. Of Luxation of the Spine. Page 498
TREATISE VIII. (misprinted VII.) Of LVES VENEREA.
CHAP. I. OF Lues Venerea. Page 3 CHAP. II. Of the Remedies generally used in
the Cure. Page 7 CHAP. III. Of the Specificks in this Disease. Page 15 CHAP.
IV. Of the Cure of the Symptoms. Page 19 CHAP. V. Of Gonorrhoea. Page 57 CHAP.
VI. Of the ill Consequences of a Gonorrhoea. Page 66
A TREATISE OF TUMORS.

OF TUMORS. The First Book.
CHAP. I. Of Tumors in general.
WHat a Tumor is (when we understand a Disease by the word) is so sufficiently
explained by Galen, Definition.
that I shall not trouble my self with any farther disquisition about it. It is
by him defined, A Disease in which the parts of the body recede from their
natural state by an undue increase of their bigness.

Now by what Names the Ancients did express a Tumor in general, many of which
were afterward appropriated to the particular Species of it, as Oedema,
Apostema, Phyma, etc. I shall leave to the Critics and men of leisure to
enquire: it shall suffice me, that my Definition tells you what I mean.

The Causes of Tumors are variously delivered by sundry Authors, Cause of
Tumors.
with a larger repetition of which I shall not here trouble you. What my own
thoughts suggest to me out of them upon this subject is this in short, viz.
that they must be considered either with regard to their Time and Place, or to
the Matter of which they consist.

I. In regard to their Time and Place we call them, 1. Antecedent, 2. Conjunct.

1. By an Antecedent Cause I mean that which yet has not actually produced a
Tumor, but is thoroughly mixed with the Blood, Antecedent.
or otherwise lodged in some convenient place where it is not troublesome to
nature, at least not to this Part; though it have a great inclination to be so,
and, if not prevented, does produce the feared effect. Of this sort I reckon
all Impurities in the Blood which do not yet start out into the solid parts: as
the Matter of an Erysipelas, Phlegmon, Parotis, Bubo, etc. before a Crisis is
made; so also any Tumor in the body, which, lying in any part of it, is apt to
be translated to another. This, though it may be the conjunct cause of the
Tumor of the part where it is now lodged, is the antecedent cause of that
Tumor which it raises in another place, to which it may be after derived, etc.

2. By a Conjunct Cause I mean the very Matter of the Tumor that is already
impacted into the part, by others called the causa continens: Conjunct.
upon the increase of which the Tumor increases; on the diminution of it it
diminishes.

II. In regard of the Matter of which they are made, we do usually attribute
their Original to, 1. Humor, 2. Wind, 3. the Interposition of a solid Body.

First, Humor: by Fluxion;
Humor produces Tumor by, 1. Fluxion, 2. Congestion.

1. Fluxion is the sudden motion of Humors in the body to any part, and
commonly depends upon one or more of these following causes: 1. the part
transmitting; 2. the part recipient; 3. the condition of the Humor.

(1.) The part transmitting does cause sudden Fluxion, when, being it self
strong, it is provoked by the heat, sharpness, quantity, or other fault of a
Humor, and, being so provoked, translates it to some weaker part, whether
external, or internal. This is most evident in the Crisis of Fevers, from
which the Humor is often discharged inwardly by the way of Phlegmon upon the
inward viscera; or outwardly in the form of an Erysipelas, Bubo, Parotis,
Carbunculus, etc.

(2.) The part recipient is the Cause of Tumors either, 1. passively, or, 2.
actively.

1. Passively, when it receives Humors, and cannot expel them: whether it be
through its weakness, laxity of Pores, over-widenesse of Vessels, as in a
Varix; or their too great streightness or obstruction, its position in a
declining part, or its being disabled by external accidents, as Bruise, Fall,
etc.

2. Actively, when it attracts Humors to it self: either, 1. through heat,
whether created by Humors already flowed, or by hot Medicines, blistering
Plasters, the Sun, Fire, Cupping-glasses, etc. or, 2. pain from corroding
Medicines, wounds, bruises. I know this latter Head of Attraction may be
quarreled at by some, who will reduce all Attraction to Pulsion, and so render
other reasons of these accidents: But that troubles not me, who handle the
notion in a practical way, leaving the speculation to curious men.

(3.) The condition of the Humor is the third and, indeed, great Cause from
which Tumors do arise: in the explaining of which we must consider either the
Plenitude of Vessels, or the Impurity of the Humors themselves.

1. The Plenitude of Vessels, otherwise called Plethora, when it happens,
causes an Extravasation of blood, either by Ruption or Apertion of them:
either of which, if they fall inwardly upon the Brain or some noble part, are
of great danger; as in Apoplexia, etc.

2. Impurity or Cacochymia (to which some will also reduce Plethora) is a
Degeneration of the Humors into a preternatural state, from which Degeneration
a multitude of Diseases do arise.

2. by Congestion.
Congestion is then said to be the Cause of a Tumor, when the growth of it is
slow and without pain, it commonly owing its original to a fault of Concoction
in the Part, or at least a weakness in the expulsive faculty; sometimes also to
the want of heat, and the density of the skin, which hinders perspiration.
These Tumors are generally cold, whereas those made by Fluxion are most
frequently hot. The Matter of these is either thin and serous, or thick and
phlegmatic, or apt to coagulate and grow hard, as many scirrhous Tumors and
Exostoses, or made up of nutritious juices, as Sarcoma, Hernia carnosa, etc.

Secondly, Wind.
As Humor, so Wind begets Tumors: which though it seldom appears alone,
but usually mixed with some Humor which is the cause of it; yet getting
predominancy it denominateth Tumors, and is called Emphysema.

Thirdly, Interposition of a solid Body.
The Interposition of a solid Body is frequently the Cause of a Tumor; as in
the Hernia intestinalis, zerbalis, Exomphalos.

Now from the variety of these Causes arises a great variety of Tumors, which
do receive their several denominations from them.

I shall not trouble you with all the several divisions and enumerations,
which, according to Sennertus's Arithmetic, make 226 in all: but I shall
briefly instance in these following Heads, to which the rest may without
difficulty be reduced.

1. The Blood it self is the matter of many Tumors; and that two several ways.

(1.) When the serum is so extravasated as to carry something of the red or
grumous part with it into the Tumor. In which case we find the Inflammation or
Phlegmon, and the consequences of that, viz. Gangraena, or Sphacelus of which
we have treated elsewhere: also Erysipelas, Furunculus, Epinyctis, Tereminthus,
Phyma, Phygethlon, Bubo, Parotis, Carbunculus, Paronychia, Pernio, and
Pterygion.

(2.) When the whole mass of Blood is so driven into a Tumor, as that the
grumus is either principally concerned, or at least equally mixed with the
serum. Examples of this are Varix, Ecchymosis, Aneurisma.

2. From Choler proceeds Herpes.

3. From Phlegm, Oedema.

4. From Melancholy, Scirrhus.

5. From Atra bilis, Cancer, etc.

6. From waterish Humors, Hernia aquosa, Hydrops, Hydrocephalus.

7. From salt Humors, Scabies, Lepra, etc.

8. From Wind, Emphysema.

9. From interposition of a solid body, Hernia.

I have thus cursorily given you a summary view of the chief Heads of Discourse
which are usually handled by our Chirurgical Writers, as a Preparatory to what
I my self have to say. And first we shall treat of Humoral Tumors in general,
descending from thence to as many of the Particulars as will be necessary for
the Instruction of the young Artist.

CHAP. II. Of Humoral Tumors in general.
THe Causes of these Tumors have been sufficiently handled in the First
Chapter, where we have discoursed how Tumors from Humors are produced: I
shall here discourse the Diagnostick, Prognostic, and Cure.

If a Humoral Tumor be made by any external Cause, as by a Wound, Signs.
Bruise, etc. it is easily discerned: but if there were no such preceding
Cause, you may conclude that it arises from within. In this latter case you
may judge whether a Tumor be made by Fluxion or Congestion thus.

That which is made by Congestion rises gradually, Tumors by Congestion.
and is collected into a compact Tumor without any preceding cause or sign of
Fluxion, and is made with little pain, unless it begin in the Joints, or parts
of exquisite Sense. And then also in little Children the Tumor is some times
made before it is discovered, and supposed a luxation of that Joint, the Skin
retaining its natural color: yet as the Tumor increases, the veins are
frequently swelled in the surface of it, and as the Matter makes its way
outward, if some times inflames and becomes painful.

If the Tumor be made by Fluxion, the part is affected with pain, Tumors by
Fluxion.
and swells suddenly, and is accompanied with Tension, Pulsation, and Fever.
Now when the Tumor appears either before or with the Fever, no other Disease
having preceded it, this is to be called Fluxion in the strictest sense of the
word. But there are two other sorts of Tumors reducible to Fluxion, and those
are made by, 1. Translation, 2. Attraction.

First, Tumors by Translation.
The Translation of an Humor, in the sense I here mean it is, is that sort of
Fluzion which happens from within upon the Crisis of some foregoing Disease;
which though it be really Fluxion, yet it differs from that which is strictly
so called by these circumstances. 1. In Translation another Disease preceded;
in this, none at all. 2. In Fluxion, strictly so called, the Skin is first
affected, and by degrees the neighboring parts; in Translation it is affected
last, the Matter working it self from within outward, insomuch that you may
find Matter in the Tumor before the Skin is much changed. 3. In Translation
there is often a real Extravasation of the serum of the blood between the
Interstices of the Muscles, which falls from some higher place; nay, Pus it
self may be bred above in some inward Cavity, and fall down thither actually
formed before the Tumor begins: which is quite otherwise in Fluxion strictly
so called.

Secondly, Tumors by Attraction.
The other sort of Tumors reducible to Fluxion are those that are made by
Attraction: which if they do happen, some of the visible Causes mentioned Chap.
1. did precede.

Tumors made by Fluxion have their several degrees and times, Times of Tumors
made by Fluxion.
as their Beginning, Augment, State, and Declination. Their Beginning is with
the extension of the part affected: the Increase, when it rises into a
conspicuous Tumor, and is then accompanied with Symptoms increasing
accordingly: the State is when the Tumor is made, and the Symptoms at the
highest: the Declination is when the Tumor becomes less, and the Symptoms
abate.

The Prognostics of Tumors in general are taken from the Part affected,
Prognostics.
as it is of more excellence and use; also as it is internal, or external. By
how much the more noble the Part is, by so much the more dangerous. The
internal more dangerous than external. Prognostics are also taken from the
greatness of the Tumor, and Accidents that attend it; and from the quality of
the Humor that raises it, whether hot or cold, thick or him, malign or
benign: for according to these circumstances the Cure is more or less difficult.

The manner of its Termination is to be considered: whether by Discussion, viz.
insensible Transpiration; or Suppuration, i.e. the converting the Humor (which
raised the Tumor) into Matter; or by Corruption, when the part affected is
overcome by the ill quality of the matter, and putrefies; or by Induration,
when the Tumor is hardened, and the Symptoms of pain diminished; or by
Retraction, when the Tumor suddenly disappears, going back into the Body.

All Tumors which own their original to Humors terminate one of these five
ways.

1. Signs of Discussion.
The Signs of Discussion are the Relaxation, Diminution, and ease of the part,
without Suppuration. 2. Of Suppuration.
The Signs of Suppuration are Pain, Pulfation, etc. with Fever, according to
Aphor. Hipp. Dum Pus conficitur, dolores ae febres accidunt. But the Matter
being made, those Accidents cease, and the Tumor rises in a Cone, and appears
whitish: also the Matter fluctuates under your fingers. Yet it frequently
happens in crude Tumors, and those that lie deep amongst the Muscles, that
Matter is not so easily discovered. 3. Of Corruption.
The Signs of Corruption are a livid or blackish color of the part affected,
together with a sinking of the Tumor. 4. Of Induration.
The Signs of Induration are, Diminution of the Tumor and Pain, with increase
of Hardness. 5. Of Retraction.
The Sign of its Retraction is, a sudden disappearing of the Tumor without
Discussion or Suppuration: which, if it be from an inward cause, is always
evil, and there arises Fever, (if there were none before) together with
grievous Symptoms from the return of the Matter.
In the Cure of Tumors two things are chiefly to be considered: Cure.
1. the nature of the Part; 2. the nature of the Tumor.

I. Things to be considered in the Part.
In the Part it self we are to consider, 1. its Temperament, 2. its
Conformation, 3. Situation, 4. Sense, 5. Use. 1. In Temperament, some are hot,
as the Muscles; some cold, as the Tendons, Glandules, and other exanguous
parts. Some are moderately moist in themselves, and require to be treated with
Medicines of the like nature, such as are neither violently drying, nor too
much moistening, as the Fleshy parts: others dry in themselves, yet requires
exiccants; as Bones: others again overwhelmed with perpetual Moisture, by
reason of their situation and spongy substance; as the parts about the Anus,
Vterus, Axillae, Inguina, etc. 2. Conformation of the Part regards either its
outward Figure, or inward Composition: which latter may consist of several
other lesser, whether similar or organicall; as a Thigh, of Bone, Muscles,
Veins, Arteries, Nerves, Membrances, etc. all which are duly to be considered,
that so the nature of the Fluxion, the Vessels that feed it, the disadvantages
or advantages of the Part, the best way of Revulsion, Discussion, etc. may be
the more readily suggested to the fancy. We may also thereby be informed what
Cavities or Interstices may be there for the receipt of Humor; and how great
the degeneration is from the natural state or figure. 3. Situation of the Part
is of great importance: which, if it depend too much, must of necessity be
raised; otherwise the Fluxion will be increased. Therefore if it be a Hand or
Arm, it must be raised to the Breast; if a Leg, it must be laid on a Bed,
Stool, or the like. 4. The Sensibleness of Parts is of much moment in the Cure
of Tumors: which, if they light upon such as are of over-acute sense, produce
exquisite torments, such as require often a more peculiar care of the
Surgeon then the Tumor it self. Also its neighborhood to such a place
obliges us to prevent its reaching to it. 5. The Use of a Part, as it is more
or less noble, is very much to be attended: whether it be of immediate
importance to Life, as the Liver, Brain, Lungs, Heart, etc. or to great and
noble uses; whether of sense, as the Eye, Nose, Ear; or of common excretion, as
the Bladder, Anus; or of generation, as the Testicles, Vterus, etc. Of all
which Circumstances great care is to be had, that they may be treated
accordingly.
II. Things to be considered in the Tumor.
Having thus considered the nature of the Part, you are next to attend to the
Tumor it slf, both as to its Time and other circumstances. As to its Time, if
it be already in the State, you have no more to do but to regard the conjunct
cause, viz. the Matter already lodged there; the due removal of which
sufficiently disposes it to Cure: but if it be only beginning, then the
antecedent causes are to be likewise considered, and to be removed out of hand;
the Fluxion to be checked by evacuation of the Humor, by bleeding and purging,
or by revulsion, derivation, interception, repulsion, discussion, etc.
These several intentions will best be judged of by viewing the quality of the
Tumor. If it be hot, and made by Fluxion, then it is to be treated by the
aforesaid Method. If it be cold, and made by Congestion, then purging only
with resolvents, discutients, and strengtheners of the Part, are to be made use
of. Where the Tumors are mixed, the intentions of Cure ought to be so too.
Where Attraction is the cause of Tumor, the cause of the Attraction ought to
be removed; whether it be too much heat, drawing Medicines, blistering
Plasters, or the like. All which things as they will be sufficiently handled
in the Particulars when we come to them; so it will be much for the advantage
of the young Artist, if we do here say something of them in general.

Now since Tumors caused by Fluxion are like to employ the former part of this
Treatise, I shall begin with those, and consider them in their several
estates, of Beginning, Increase, State, and Declination.

In the Beginning I have already told you of Bleeding, Bleeding.
which potently checketh Fluxion, and ought to be proportioned to the greatness
and violence of the Disease. In tender bodies and small Tumors the evacuation
needs not be much: but if otherwise the Fluxion be great, and the body strong,
we must take away large quantities.

Besides Bleeding, Purging.
evacuation by Stool will be requisite: and, indeed, immediately before or
after bleeding a Clyster or some other Lenitive ought to be exhibited. Nor is
that to be rested in, but further purging, either by milder or stronger
medicines, to be attempted, suitably to the condition of the Patient. It is
true that in hot Tumors there may seem to be only a Plethora, which
notwithstanding will require evacuation by purging as well as bleeding; it
being seldom found that a Tumor is caused by a mere Plethora without
Cacochymia; which Cacochymia, if it does not precede the Tumor, certainly
accompanies it, (as will be made more manifest when we come to treat of
particular Heads) and therefore requires the method now mentioned.

Lenitive Purges are Sena, Rhubarb, Cassia, Tamarinds, Manna, with Cremor
Tartar, Electuar. lenitiv. Diaprun. lenitiv. Diacass. cum manna, sir. rosar.
solut. sir. de Rhabarb. etc. which is as high as we ought to go, if the Humor
be hot. In cold ones stronger Catharticks are advisable: of which more anon.

These two are premised in regard of the antecedent cause: but that is not
enough, unless the conjunct cause be also removed; which, being the very matter
of the Tumor, admits of several intentions. They are reducible to these two
Heads.

1. Translation to some other Part in the body: which is performed by, 1.
Revulsion, 2. Derivation, 3. Repulsion. 2. Evacuation out of it: and that is
obtained by, 1. Discussion, 2. Suppuration, 3. the Discharge of the matter by
Apertion.
Translation, Revulsion.
and, 1. by Revulsion, is chiefly intended for the defense of some noble Part
which is endangered by the Tumor, or else for the lessening of the Matter when
it is excessive. This intention regards as well the antecedent cause as the
conjunct. The antecedent, when by Venaesection, Cupping-glasses, Leeches, etc.
the whole mass of Humors is diminished: of which already. The conjunct, when
the Tumor it self is lessened, or quite taken off, by translating it either
into the mass of Blood, or into some other remote Part.

The former of which is often very innocently done in the beginning of a
Tumor, whilst the serum is yet only extravasated, and not otherwise altered
in its quality; so that being remixed with the mass, it is capable of
Concoction, and consistent with the health of the Patient. The latter is, when
by Cupping, Blistering, Ligatures, Frictions, or the like, we raise a Tumor in
the contrary part, and give Nature occasion of discharging the Matter in a
place far distant, which otherwise she would have lodged here: in doing of
which she often sucketh in the Humor again which she had before separated into
the former place.

2. Derivation.
Derivation differs from Revulsion only in the measure of the distance and the
force of the Medicines used. If we draw it to some very remote, or, it may be,
contrary part, we call that Revulsion: if only to some neighboring place, and
by gentle means, we call it Derivation.

3. Repulsion.
To the making of either of these effectual Repulsion is also necessary. For
Humor that is already impacted will not so easily be drawn out by former
remedies, if something be not applied to the Part to drive it back.

These Medicines are all astringent more or less. The milder sort of them,
which are the most usual in all hot Inflammations, as Lettice, Purslane,
Navel-wort, Plantane, Bramble-tops, red Roses, Knot-grass, Horse-tail,
Houseleek, and, where the pain is more vehement, Poppy, Mandrakes; these may be
applied liquid, or in the forms of Liniments, Cerots, Cataplasms, or
Emplasters: of which this Book will give you examples. The more astringent are
Pomegranate rinds and flowers, Medlars, Quinces, Sloes, Acorns, Cypress-nuts,
Mulberries, Sumach, Bole-armoniack, sanguis draconis, Vinegar, red Wine, etc.
Compounds of both sorts are, Ol. omphacin. ol. rosar. unguent. rosar. popul.
album, unguent. nutrit. cerat. refrigerans Galeni, Empl. e bolo, de minio
camphorat. oxycratum, oxyrrhodinum, oxelaeum. succi solani, plantag.
sempervivi, an. ij. aceti optimi j ss. mucilag. sem. psyllii, cydon. extract.
cum aq. rosar. an. j. Misc. in which you may dip clothes, and apply them to the
Parts affected, renewing them often; or you may add to it pulv. gland. flor.
ros. rub. balaust. an. ij. Bol. armen. iij. olei myrtillor. unguent. rosati,
an.q.s. fiat mixtura. Apply it in the form of an Emplaster over and about the
diseased Part.

Concerning these foregoing Medicaments it is to be cautiously observed,
Cautions.
1. That they are proper only in the beginning of the Tumor, whilst you
intend to prevent it by driving it quite back into the Blood again. For if the
Humor be so impacted as not to be repellible, but that is must have its
evacuation in the place by Suppuraiton, then if by bleeding you hinder
concoction of the Matter, you prolong the Disease; Nature in that case wants
all its heat and all its serum. Much more do you hurt it if you use Repellents,
which, being commonly cold and astringent, do close up the Pores, and keep out
both the natural heat and the serum of the blood, the affluence of which and
its mixing with the Humor is necessary to the dilution and the digestion of
it; so that both being hindered, the Part will grow livid and mortify.

2. Caution is to be used in the application of these Medicines where the
Tumor is malign, or the Crisis of a malignant Fever: for in all such cases the
Retraction into the blood is of very dangerous consequence: wherefore we then
rather use Cupping-glasses and other Attractions to draw it out.

3. It is to be noted that these Repellents are often applied above the Tumor,
as defensatives or intercipients: in which case they have regard to the
antecedent cause, and in a strict discourse should have been handled under that
Head; but I rather accommodate my self to the method of Operation.

Evacuation is necessary for the discharge of that Matter out of the body by
some more immediate way, which either cannot, or ought not, by the former
intentions be driven back. Now that is of three sorts.

1. Discussion.
Insensible, by Discussion or Resolution; which is nothing else but a breathing
out the Humor by insensible transpiration. Therefore the Humor so to be
discharged ought to be thin, and the skin lax and rare: for if it be otherwise,
or lie deep amongst the Muscles, it will not easily yield to Transpiration. The
Medicaments called Discutients ought to be hot and of a subtle quality,
powerfully penetrating: which quality renders them improper to be applied in
the beginning of Inflammations; (for thereby the Part would be too much heated,
and consequently the Tumor made great;) but they are proper being mixed with
Repellents: in the beginning of the Augment, when the Tumor is hard, and not
fit to be treated longer with Repellents alone.

These Medicaments are to be proportioned as the Matter and conformation of the
Part requires. Discutients and Emollients.
The milder are emollient and rarifying, proper in soft bodies where there is
Inflammation with hardness: and they are Radices and folia althaeae, malvae,
violar. sem. lini, foenug. flor. chamaemel. meliloti, sambuci, far hordei,
lentium, orobi, lupinor. wihch may be made up in Cataplasms with some of these
following, which are of the same quality, viz. sallet-oyl, butter, axung.
porcin. anseris, anatis, gallinae, sevum ovinum, vitulinum, vaccinum. The more
recent these Fats are, the more emollient; and the more rancid, the more
discutient. Mel and cera are reckoned amongst the Discutients: also ol. cham.
lumbricorum, sambuci, lini, irinum, etc. Empl. diachyl. simpl. cum gummi,
ireatum, de mucilag. de meliloto, etc. The milder Discutients mixed with
Repellents may be thus made: fol. and rad. althaeae M. j. flor. cham. M ss.
coq. in sero lactis, and fiat cataplasma S. A. addendo in fine coctionis ol.
ros. and cham. an. q. s. Or, fol. malvar. parietariae, plantag. an. M.j. sem.
lini, foenug. an. j. summitat. absinthii, florum sambuci, an. M ss. flor. ros.
rub. M.j. coq. in s. q. vin. tenuis, addendo farinae hordei iiij. andol.
olivar. immatur. q.s. fiat catapl. S. A. As the Humor discusseth, you may
foment it with a Decoction of summitat. absinth. flor. cham. ros. rub. balaust.
bacc. myrtill. or the like, in wine and water, by which you may dry up the
remaining Matter, and strengthen the relaxed Part.

In Tumors where the Matter lies deeper, rad. althaeae, ebuli, irid. recent.
an. ij. rad. bryoniae, cucum. agrest. an. j ss. flor. cham. meliloti, summitat.
anethi, an. M.j. sem. lini, foenug. an. j. fiat catapl. S. A. addendo axung.
anseris, anatis, an. j. mell. com. ij.

These following are yet more attenuating, and proper in crude Tumors:
summitates origani, thymi, calaminth. pulegii, rorismarini, hyperici, centaur.
min. bacc. lauri, juniperi, sem. cymini, rutae, etc. Gumm. galbanum, ammoniac.
bdellium, opopanax; also sulphur viv. alumen, calx lota, sal nitri, cineres
ligni quercini, sarmentor. vitis, brassicae. The compounds are, ol. scorpion.
nardin. euphorbium, petroleum, oleum philosophor. unguent. aregon, martiat.
Empl. de ranis cum and sine Mercurio, Empl. diasulphuris, de baccis lauri,
cicutae cum ammoniaco, etc. The Matter may also be disposed for resolution by
such like Fomentation: rad. enulae campanae, bryoniae, an. ij. summitat.
pulegii, origani, scabiosae, abrotoni, an. M. j. bacc. lauri, juniperi, an. j.
sem. cymini, ss. coq. in aqu. font. and vin. alb. an. lib. ij. colat. add
aceti vin. ij. salis nitri j. Misce. salis, nitri, ciner. sarmentor. an. j. ol.
vet. vj. cerae iij. terebinth. clarae j. fiat Cerat. If the Matter be so gross
and viscid as it yields not to the Remedies above prescribed, it may be
reasonable to attempt it by Suffumigation with vinegar sprinkled upon the lap.
pyritis, which sometime disposes them well to Discussion. Caution.
But in the use of these stronger Discutients you are to be careful, that
whilst you endeavor Resolution, you do not breath out the thin Humor, and fix
the more gross, and so render the Part scirrhous.

2. Suppuration.
If after the use of the milder Discutients proposed in hot Tumors the
Symptoms of pain and inflammation do not lessen, you shall then forbear the
farther use of Discutients, and hasten Concoction or Suppuration; which is
indeed the work of Nature, by the benefit of whose heat the Humors are
digested, and pus generated. If the heat be strong, the Matter is for the most
part well concocted; and being so, it is white and of good consistence, and not
ill sented: but if the heat be weak, the Matter is otherwise. It is therefore
our work to cherish and increase the native heat in the affected Part, to
perfect its Concoction: and that is furthered by hindering Transpiration, and
defending it from outward air; also by proportioning the quality of the
Medicaments to the temper of the Part, and quality of the Tumor. And forasmuch
as our natural heat is temperate and moist, such also ought the Medicaments to
be: they ought also to be emplastick. Yet it is not unfrequent to see a
Suppuration made accidentally by cold Medicaments, which by a light, gentle
astriction of the Pores do perform the office of Emplasticks; as Vnguentum
album, Sorrel roasted in embers. Nay, in cold Tumors I have seen Suppuration
caused by the stronger Discutients.

Tumors do suppurate sooner or later according to the Humor of which, or the
Place in which, they are generated. Those which are of Blood, and in Fleshy
parts, do easiest come to maturity. Those which arise from other Humors, and
are near or in the Joints, or Parts endued with little heat, (especially those
contained in a Cystis) do difficultly suppurate.

The Matter differs according to the variety and mixture of the Humors. Of
Blood always proceeds laudable Matter, especially if the native heat be strong:
but if other Humors be mixed with it, as they get predominancy, so is the
Matter more or less crude. In Furuncles or Boils it is clammy, and not unlike
pith.

In Abscesses made by Translation the Matter is purulent, sometimes white and
well-colored, other times partaking of a yellow or green, sometimes of a brown
color; and is more or less foetid according to the time it has there remained.

Tumors made by Translation have sometimes Matter in them from their first
appearance: but it being commonly lodged deep under the Muscles, the Matter is
not felt till it has raised the Tumor; which is not done without pain,
pulsation, etc. as in a Phlegmon, but deeper, and does not affect the skin with
Inflammation till the Matter reach near it. In these Tumors we do not attend
the Symptoms of Suppuration, but open them as soon as any quantity of Matter
offers it self. Whilst the Matter is making, the native heat of the Part is to
be preserved and increased by Medicaments which may alleviate the pain, and
further concoction.

Suppuratives are of two sorts: Suppurative Medicaments of two sorts.
some are simple, others are compound. The simple are Aqua tepida, with which
if you foment the lesser Phlegmons, it will suppurate, (and sometimes by
continuing its use it will discuss them, where the Matter is not fit for
Suppuration.) Hydrelaeum moderately heats and digest. Oleum maturum cherishes
the native heat, and supples and concocts Matter. Butter is maturative, and is
profitably mixed with Anodynes and Suppuratives, especially in soft delicate
bodies. Oesypum is also maturative; and so are the Fats of all domestic
Creatures. Fol. malvae, viol. parietaeriae, mercurialis, brancae ursinae,
decocted in hydrelaeo cum farina tritici, butyro, and vitellis ovorum, are
Suppuratives. A raw Onion is sharp and biting; but roasted under embers loses
its acrimony, and suppurates Tumors that are difficult to digest. The
Lilly-root is a known Suppurative. Out of these Simples Cataplasms are made:
as, radic. althaeae, lilior. albor. an. ij. fol. tussilag. malvae, bismalvae,
an. M. j. coq. in brodio, terantur, adjectis far. sem. lini j. far. tritici ij.
axung. porcinae, butyri rec. an. i ss. croci pulv. ij. vitello ovi unius; Misc.
fiat Cataplasmae. In cold Tumors, or where the Matter lies deep, radic.
bryoniae, lapathi acuti, an. ij. coq. and cribrentur per setaceum, addendo
cappar. and allior. sub cineribus coctorum an. iij. fermenti acris ij. pulv.
sem. lini and foenug. an. j. tritici ij. axung. porcinae ij. mell. com. axung.
anseris j. croc. pulv. j. Misc. Where the Matter is tough, gum. galban.
ammoniac. bdell. Empl. de mucilaginibus, etc. The Tumor being suppurated, be
the Matter what it will, the evacuation of it is necessary, lest it corrupt
within, and corrode the Veins, Arteries, Nerves, Tendons, or the Bone, if it
lie near one: in which cases it is lawful to open it before the Tumor is all
suppurated. So also in the Joints, and in the Head, if the Abscess lie over the
Sutures: likewise in Abscesses in ano, where, through the weakness of the Part,
a putrefaction is apt to follow; or in the fauces, where the neighboring parts
may suffer by consent, and the Patient be in hazard of strangling. In these
cases we wait not for perfect Suppuration, but by deep Scarification discharge
the serous blood, and prevent an Abscess. There is also care to be taken in
Abscesses of the Breast and Belly, where the Matter is in danger of breaking
inwards. Yet by opening these too soon they sometimes apostemate again, or
become crude, and difficult to digest and cure.

3. Two ways of Opening. Incision.
The way of Opening them is twofold; by Knife, or Caustic. They are of use
according to the place that is affected, and the quantity of Matter which is to
be discharged. In the Face, where the Cicatrix may be unseemly, Incision of
them is best: but in large Abscesses, where the quantity of Matter is great, or
where we would keep the Abscess long open, or in a place where Bandage cannot
be made to retain the Tent in, there a Caustic is most proper. Authors do not
generally approve so well of the Caustic; yet Sennertus proposes it in a
Hernia aquosa, where it is least safe: for in truth those cold Tumors do
especially require to be opened by Incision; yet when the habit of body has
been tolerable, I have in that also used the Caustic with good success, as I
shall show in the Cure thereof, and do commend it in the opening of large
Abscesses as most safe and easy, the Matter being thereby discharged
plentifully. And if the Caustic be applied in the declining part, the Abscess
is sometimes near cured before the Escar separates, (if the Matter be not
contained in some peculiar Cystis) and that without dilatation or Tents.
Caution.
Yet you ought to be wary how you make Fontanells with them in hydropick or
very fat people, by reason of the weakness of their natural heat.

Of Causticks there are various sorts; Causticks.
as of the lixivium saponis, cinerum sarment. vitis siliquarum fabar. etc.
boiled to a solid consistence: or in the boiling you may add to them vitriolum
Roman. pulver. from j. to ij. also opium ij. to vj. of the lixivium: or by a
mixture of calx viva and lixiv. saponis you may make a Caustic. These are the
stronger sorts in use amongst us: not but that there are Causticks made with
Arsenick, etc. but, unless it be in great Sarcomata or such like, I use only a
mild preparation of calx viva with a little common soap, and a third part of
the Caustick-stone. In children and tender soft bodies I often use calx viva
made into paste with a little black soap. In these two latter there is no fear
of their spreading; a Pledgit of dry Lint and an Emplast. diachalciteos, or the
like, is sufficient defense, leaving them on till the next morning. Caution.
But in the application of the stronger Caustic there is more caution
required. Those we endeavor to keep within compass by small snips of Emplast.
hoping thereby to defend the parts about: but, in spite of all our endeavors,
they will spread farther then was designed, if they lie any while on the Part
out of our sight. For though the Part be outwardly defended with Emplasters,
they will find a way under the skin, or at least under the cuticula, to spread,
according to the quantity of the liquid salt in the Caustic. They do your work
in less then an hour.

The Escar being made, you may divide it, and stupe the part affected with wine
or milk, and dress it up with unguent. busilicon dipped in ol. lilior. warm,
applying an Empl. diachalc. simpl. dissolved in some of the same oil to the
consistence of a Cerat: or apply an anodyne Cataplasm, and bind it up.

In the opening an Apostem by Incision, you ought to take care that the
Apertion be made in that place where the Matter is most contained, the skin
being for the most part thinnest there: and if it be not the most declining
part, yet you may draw your knife toward it, for the more easy discharge of
the Matter, then that the Incision be made according to the rectitude of the
Fibers. If it be in the Groin or Arm-pit, it ought to be oblique: in other
parts make it according to the length of the member.

In making the Incision you are to avoid wounding the Vein, Artery, or Nerve:
nor must you discharge the Matter at once, especially in great Abscesses, lest
you over-weaken the heat of the Part, or cause fainting.

The Instruments proper in opening Apostemations are made choice of according
to the Part that is affected, and the greatness of the Abscess. Ambr. Parey
proposes some whereby you may more covertly open them: but we make use of
Lancet or Knife, of which our Instrument-makers furnish us with choice. If the
Fauces be affected, the Handle of your Knife ought to be long, and the Blade
short; some thereof crooked, and cutting on one or both sides. Your Instruments
ought to be kept clean, for your credit; and sharp, that you may perform the
work with less pain.

The Incision being made, the Accidents or Symptoms that attend it are to be
removed. In the first place the Bleeding is to be restrained, if any such
happen, (which is very rare) with pulv. Galeni ex thure and aloe mixed cum
albumine ovi. How you shall dress it if opened by Caustic, I have already
showed you.

Fainting, Fainting.
which sometimes happens through weakness or timorousness in the Patient, may
be relieved by laying the Patient upon his back, and sprinkling a little cold
water on his face. But if the Fainting proceeded from some preceding sickness,
and is continued by the greatness of the evacuation and noisome corrupt Matter,
you shall in such cases provide some cordial Juleps or Electuaries, of which
he may take at pleasure. As, spec. diamarg. frig. ss. confect. alcherm. j. sir.
e succo citr. Rhaead. an. iij. aq. melissae, buglossae, cinnam. hordeat. an. i
ss. Misc. Or, confect. de hyacintho ss. sir. garyophyll. rubi Idaei, an. iij.
aq. dracontii, card. benefict. Stephani, an. i ss. Or, cons. borrag. melissae,
cort. citr. condit. ros. rub. an. j. rad. eryng. conditae, nucis mosoat.
conditae, an. i ss. spec. aromat. rosat. ij. confect. alcherm. iij. ol. cinnam.
gut. iv. cum syrupo de cort. citr. q.s. fiat Electuarium. Of which the Patient
may take a morsel any hour in the day. Mithridate and theriaca Veneta are
proper in such cases alone, or mixed with cons. lujulae, or any of the
forementioned Syrups or Conserves.

The spirits may also be refreshed with Epithemata made up of some of the
aforesaid distilled Waters and cordial Species with acet. ros. etc. which for
want of a Physician you may prescribe.

You are in the next place to consider the Abscess, whether after the
evacuation of Matter there remain nay considerable hardness, either by reason
that the Tumor was not enough suppurated, as in large Abscesses it frequently
happens; Fomentation.
or that it be affected with pain and inflammation. Therefore at your next
dressing it may be reasonable that you have a Fomentation ready of summitat.
malvae, bismalvae, flor. cham. summitat. absinth. out of which a Stupe may be
wrung, and applied over the Abscess, to give a breathing to it, and you leisure
to consider how to dress it.

If it was opened by Incision, Digestion.
it requires Digestion; to which purpose this may be proper: terebinth. j. far.
tritici ij. croci pulv.j. vitell. ovi q. s. Misce. But if the lips of the Ulcer
be painful, a little of the Yolk of laid Egg with ol. ros. upon a
proportionable Tent may be sufficient, and an Empl. of diachyl. simpl. with a
mixture of unguent. dialthaeae applied in the form of a Cerat: or, in case of
pain and hardness, this; mucil. sem. lini, foenug. althaeae extract. in decoct.
hordei ij. olei lilior. oesyp. amygd. dulc. an. j ss. terebinth. j. cerae vj.
aut q. s. fiat Ceratum. Then with compresse and Bandage roll it moderately, and
after it is digested you may deterge, as shall be prosently showed.

In Tumors by Congestion foment with decoct. Fomentation.
absinth. flor. sambuci, ros. rub. baccar. myrtill. sem. foenug. in wine and
water, adding afterward some sp. vini. These Abscesses requiring to have their
heat kept up, and the relaxed parts strengthened. If the Opening was made by
Caustic, dress it with a Pledgit dipped in a mixture of unguent. basil. with ol.
lilior. hot: or, to rouse up the heat in the Part, and hasten separation of the
Escar, add a few drops of ol. terebinth. and apply Empl. diachyl. ireat. or
Empl. de minio cum sapone, malaxed with ol. lini. After separation of the
Escar, you may deterge with Mundif. Mundif. Paracels.
Paracelsi thus made: terebinth. clarae, mellis despumati, an. ^ ss. vitell.
ovor. number. iij. coq. ad consist. unguenti. If there be required stronger
Detersion, you may add Merc. praecip. j. to an ounce; you may also add alumen
ust. but that will make the ulcer painful: Mundif* Apii.
however some crude Ulcers may admit of it. Mundif. ex apio is also proper, as
it is in the Pharmacopoeia Land. or this: succ. absinth. ij. succ. brassicae,
chelidon. an. j. mellis rosati colati ij. terebinth. iij. coq. ad succorum
consumptionem, addendo pulv. myrrhae, sarcocollae, an. i ss. pulv. rad. ireos
j. rad. aristoloch. rot. pulv. ij. far. tritici iij. far. orobi, lupin. an. j.
Misce. If the Matter do not well discharge, you must help it by compression and
Bandage: or if the Tumor was large, and the Opening but small or not enough in
the declining part, lay it more open; for without a convenient Orifice, whereby
the Matter may plentifully discharge between Dressings, you cannot hope for a
speedy Cure. That way of dilating by Piths or Sponges is mere trifling, unless
it be to thin the skin for the more easy Incision.

If you deterge not with too sharp Medicaments, they may also serve to incarn:
Urguentum incarnativum. Vnguentum Nicetianae.
or you may use this, or such like; terebinth. Venet. iiij. pulv. aristoloch.
rot. ireos, thuris, an. iij. mastich. myrrhae, aloes, an ss. cadmiae vj. mell.
ros. q. s. fiat Vnguentum. Or, succ. Nicotianae lbj. picis, resinae, ol.
olivar. immatur, an iij. terebinth. Venet. vj. cerae q. s. fiat Vnguentum. If
the flesh grow loose or spongy, touch it with a Vitriol or Alume-stone
moderately, and it will daily waste it, with little or no pain, and dispose the
Ulcer to cicatrize: of which Stones you may have some fitted in Quills for your
use.

The Ulcer being incarned, you may cicatrize with unguent. lithargyri:
lithargyr. Vnguentum lithargyri.
aur. and argent. an. iij ss. calcis decies lotae subtiliss. pulverzatae ij.
cerussae ij. tutiae vj. olei myrtillor. vj. ol. rosati lbj ss. sevi vitulini
viij. succor. plantag. laciucae, solani, an. iv. coq. sevum lento igne cum
oleis and succis usque ad consumptionem succor. deinde colentur; colaturae
addantur unguenti rosati ij. cerae albae q. s. iterum coq. uniea ebullitione;
postea auferatur ab igne, baculo agitando, cum mineralibus praedictis prius
optime pulverizatis, and fiat Vnguentum. Or with unguent. desiccat. rub. aq.
calcis. Or else you may cicatrize with this Water; Aqua cicatrizans.
myrobalan. citr. balaust. an. ij. alum. rup. ss. aq. germin. quere. equiseti,
an. ij. vini albi j. bulliant parum, and colentur pro usu: in which Pledgits
may be dipped and pressed out. You must take care that the Ulcer be cicatrized
seemly, neither too high nor too low.

Having thus treated of Tumors by Fluxion, we shall now say something of those
made by Congestion; which, though capable of most of the former intentions more
or less, yet differ in the manner of governing them, viz.

Bleeding ought in this case to be less frequent; but Purging more strong, with
agarick, hermodactyles, scammony, jalap, aloes, colocynth, pil. rudii, cochiae,
Cornachini, benedict. laxat. confect. hamech, elect. e succo rosarum, purging
Diet-drinks, etc. as in the Chapter of Oedema, to which I refer you. The
Revulsion has little or no place here.

Derivation by Issues and Setons are usual. Repulsion is proper in many of
them, especially that of Bandage in oedematous Swellings of the Legs, Arms and
Hands.

But Discussion is the principal intention of the Surgeon in this place,
and ought to be done with hot Medicines: of which sort I have set you down some
already, and more you will meet with in our particular Discourse of those
Tumors.

Suppuration seldom happens in these Tumors, unless there be an admixture of
blood with it: in which case treat them with Suppuratives, as has been said,
and open them.

After Apertion, the method of healing differs little from that of Abscesses
made by Fluxion: but of their Cure you shall be more informed in the Chapter of
Oedema.

The next thing that offers it self to our consideration is Diet: Diet.
and that is of two sorts; the one regarding Tumors made by Fluxion, the other
those by Congestion.

In hot Tumors made by Fluxion we are to propose such moderation as may take
off from the great ferment in the Blood, whereby it may be rendered less apt to
flow into the weak Part. To which purpose the Ancients prescribed such a
slender Diet as might only support their Strength: yet with a regard to
Custom, the Age and Constitution of the Patient, and greatness of the
Inflammation. If the body be strong and abound with Humors, and the
Inflammation great, their Diet may be the more sparing and cooling; as
Water-grewell, Panado, and such like. Where the Inflammation is less, or the
Patient weak, Chicken-broath, with Wood-sorrell, Lettice, Purselane, or a
boiled Chichen, a potched Egg, etc. and such like meats of easy digestion. To
others, Mutton, Veal, Pullet, Rabbit, and some sorts of the firmest Fish. In
great Inflammations there is commonly Fever attending, in which case they have
little inclination to eat. Their Drink should be Ptisans, or small well-boil'd
Ale. If Wine be allowed, it ought to be small, or allayed with water. Falopius,
in his Discourse of hot Tumors, says, he was wont where there was Plethora,
to prescribe panem lotum in aqua, asperso succo aurantiorum cum modico zuccari,
a little Bread dipped in water, and sprinkled with juice of an Orange and Sugar,
and that but twice the day; and their Drink no better then water. Galen forbids
Wine; yet permits it to them qui habent ventriculum debilem, for their
Stomack'd sake: which is necessary to be observed; for unless that be kept up,
in vain are all our endeavors.

The Air ought to be temperate by art or nature.

All Exercise is to be forborne: for the Blood is thereby heated, and the
Humors made more fluid. Sleeping in the day is also forbidden, out of hopes
they may rest better in the night.

In Tumors by Congestion we allow such a Diet as is heating and attenuating;
their Meat rather roasted then boiled, and of good nourishment; as Mutton,
Veal, Kid, Pullet, Rabbit, Chicken, Pheasant, Partridge, Cock, Snipe, etc. All
White-meats, Fish, Fruits, Sallets, are forbidden. Their Drink may be Ale or
Beer: Wine is also allowed in these cases: and their Drink may be medicated
with Sarsaparilla, China, lign. guaiaci, lentiscinum; as you may see more
particularly hereafter.

The Air ought to be warm and attenuating. Sleep in the day is absolutely
forbidden, and ought to be moderated in the night. Passions of the mind are to
be avoided both in this and all other Diseases.

CHAP. III. Of Inflammation, or Phlegmon.
HItherto I have discoursed of Tumors in general. I shall now descend to
particulars, and begin with Phlegmon, or Inflammation: both because it is the
first degeneration from good blood, and in its own nature nearest of kin to it;
and also because it is the most frequent of Tumors happening in Diseases,
Wounds, Contusions, Fractures, Luxations, etc. It being also the usual
forerunner of many mischiefs that happen in many of those cases, and
consequently the most obvious occasion of exercising the Chirurgeon's Skill.

I define it, Definition.
a large Tumor, hot, of a red color, with pain, pulsation, tension, and a
circumscribed hardness.

The Differences of it are either from the Situation; Differences.
inward, or outward. Or from the Part affected, whence it takes a name. As
inwardly in the Lungs it is called Peripneumonia; in the Pleura, Pleuritis; on
the Diaphragma, Paraphrenitis, in the Brain, Phrenitis; in the Throat, Angina:
outwardly, on the Throat, Angina notha; in the Eyes, Ophthalmia, etc. Or,
lastly, from the Matter: which if simple, it is a simple Phlegmon; if compound,
it has its denomination from the Humor with which it is compounded, and so is
called Erysipelatodes, Phlegmatodes, Oedematodes, Scirrhodes.

The Cause of Phlegmon is generally a Plethora, Causes.
having some acrimonious mixture in the serum of the Blood; which latter is the
usual matter of a Phlegmon, being cast out of the vessels, and lodged in the
pores of the Skin, or other Part affected with it. This serum being accompanied
by the thinner parts of the Blood grows red and angry, and, wanting its due
regress into the Mass, first gathers into a hard Swelling, and in few days (if
it be not discussed) ripens into Matter, and so discharges.

The Signs of Phlegmon are, Signs.
great pain, heat, inflamed red color, and swelling, with hardness, pulsation,
and tension. The Tumor growing big and more collected, a Suppuration succeeds,
and then the Symptoms abate. As the Tumor rises into a Cone, so the Matter
may be felt to fluctuate, and the Skin becomes thin and pale, viz. of the
color of the subjacent Matter.

The Prognostic is good, Prognostics.
when the Tumor insensibly exhales and resolves: in which case the ebullition
abates, and the Blood, being less violent in its motion, passes gently by, and
by degrees swalloweth up that Humor into its chanells again which it had in
the time of its ebullition cast out; or at least, having suffered the thinner
parts to transpire, it receives the rest.

Next to this way of terminating a Phlegmon, Suppuration is best, when the
Matter of the Tumor ripens into a kindly pus.

But it is of ill consequence if the Tumor disappear without abatement of
Accidents, and the Fever still continue. In this case either a Gangrene or some
other grievous Symptom succeeds: or, if it were the Crisis of a Fever, that
increases, and the Life of the Patient is in great danger.

It is also ill when the Matter, in stead of resolving, hardens, and the pain
cease. It foresheweth a scirrhous Tumor approaching.

Fat people are not so easily cured as lean. Nervous and tendinous Parts have
worse Symptoms, and are harder of Cure, then fleshy ones.

If after great Abscesses the Body be not purged and regulated, they are apt to
fall into some other Disease: otherwise they occasion much Health.

The modern Authors have reduced the Cure of these Tumors to four heads: Cure.
1. to the manner of Living; 2. to the preventing the Influx of Humors; 3. to
the evacuating the Humors already inflowed; 4. the correcting of the Accidents
to which they are subject.

1. The manner of Living consists in the moderation of the six non naturales.
As, that the Diet be slender, cooling, and moistening, whereby the increase of
blood may be moderated, and rendered less apt to flow into the weak Part: from
which consideration the Ancients, as I told you, allowed only enough to
preserve their Strength, with regard to their Habit of Body and Custom of
living. They generally prescribed Panadoes, Barley-grewell, and such like
Spoon-meat. Chicken-broth is the highest whilst the Humor is fermenting; but
after Suppuration and discharge of Matter, greater liberty is permitted. Air,
Exercise, Watching, Passions of the mind, etc. are to be regulated; as has
been said in the preceding Chapter of Tumors in general. 2. The second
intention is performed by removing the Cause of the Tumor, which is the
Plenitude and Cacochymia: the former whereof requires Bleeding, the latter
Purging. Bleeding is here proposed as the speedy remedy, both for lessening the
Tumor, and appeasing the Pain; and is made by opening a vein near to the Part
affected. According to Galen, debemus venam secare ad deliquium animi, we ought
to draw blood to very fainting. Yet we are therein to consider the Constitution
and habit of body, and greatness of the Inflammation. Cupping, Friction and
Deligation of the opposite Parts may be hereto necessary before the Tumor is
made.
To take off the Cacochymia Purging with Lenients is proper; as elect.
lenitivum, diaprun. lenitivum, diacatholicon, cassia, tamarindi, manna; cremor
tartari, Infusions of Senna, Rhubarb, and opening Apozems; as has been said in
the former Chapter. In the next place it will be proper to prescribe such
Draughts as may quiet the motion of the Humors, and temper the heat of them,
viz. Emulsions of the greater and lesser cold Seeds made with decoct. hordei;
also Juleps, with sir. de papavere, Rhoead. paralyseos, violar. e succo citri,
etc. in proper Vehicles.

3. The third intention regards the Part affected more immediately, and is the
removing of the conjunct Matter. How that is done by Revulsion, Derivation,
etc. I have showed you in the former Chapter; as also how you are by Repellents
to withstand the influx of Humor in the very beginning; and of what quality
the Medicaments proper thereto are, and in what cases they are not to be
applied; as in malign Tumors, or those in the Emunctories, etc. I shall here
only insert some few Prescriptions that are most peculiar in the several
cases, and begin with Repellents in the first place: of which sort is cerat.
Galeni. cerae alb. iv. ol. rosati omphac. lbj. novies laventur aq. font. deinde
aceto subigantur. Or this: Empl. diachalc. iij. boli armen. iij. baoc. myrtill.
ij. aceti vini cochl. iv. ol. myrtill. q. s. fiat Ceratum. Or this: far. hordei
vj. cort. granat. pulv. ij. balaust. pulv. ss. succ. sedi maj. iij. vini rub.
q. s. coq. ad consist. catapl. and in fine cociionis add ol. myrtill. ij.
Either of the two latter, if timely applied, will not only resist the Influx,
but dry up the inflowed Humor. They must be renewed daily, lest they dry too
much, and thereby increase the heat in the Part.

In the increase of Inflammation and Tumor, when it begins to be hard, you are
to apply Resolvents with Repellents. fol. malv. parietariae, plantag. an. M. j.
far. hord. and fabar. an. j ss. flor. ros. rub. pulv. ss. coq. in aq. font.
fiat Catapl. S. A. addendo in fine ova integra number. ij. ol. cham. ros. q. s.

When the Tumor is more formed and harder, forbear Repellents, and apply
Discutients and Emollients. rad. and fol. althaeae an. M. j. sem. lini and
foenug. an. vj. flor. cham. meliloti pulv. an. ij. far. hord. and tritici an.
vj. fiat Catapl. addendo mell. com. ij. ol. sambucini and axungiae anseris an.
j. If the Tumor decline, fol. parietariae M.ij. sem. lini, foenug. an. ss.
summitat. absinthii, anethi, flor. cham. sambuci pulv. an. iij. flor. ros. rub.
ss. far. lentium and fabar. iv. coq. in vino, and fiat Catapl. addendo ol.
lumbricorum, anethi, an. ij. mellis comm. j ss. Empl. de mucilag. Empl.
oxycrocei, an. ij. diachyl. ireat. j. ol. anethi q. s. fiat Ceratum.

4. The fourth intention is, to remove the Accidents that frequently accompany
these Inflammations; amongst which Pain is the chief: for that not only tireth
and exhausteth the Spirits of the Patient, but also increases Fluxion, and
destroys the Temperament of the Part. Therefore you ought to have especial
regard thereto, and by Anodynes appease the Pain. To which purpose I shall
offer you this following Cataplasim. fol. visci pomorum cum fructibus an. M.j.
fol. hyoscyami M.ij. fol. paepaver. M.j. sub cineribus coquantur; addendo
tandem mic. pranis albi in lacte tepido macerati lb ss. vitell. ovi number. ij.
pulv. croci j. ol. chamaemeli and rosarum an. q. s. fiat Cataplasma S. A.

The Fever which attends Pain is removed by Venaesection, or by the resolution
or suppuration of the Tumor. If it shall unhappily indurate or gangrene, I
refer you to those Chapters of Scirrhus and Gangraena: yet I think, if the
method be rightly observed which has been proposed, there will need no such
reference.

The most safe and speedy way of curing Phlegmons is by Resolvents. In Wounds,
Contusions and Ulcers, Inflammations for the most part go off so: and so would
the greatest Phlegmons, if the foresaid method were truly observed. But the
neglect of timely Bleeding, and the too hasty application of Pultices of
White-bread and Milk, render them incapable of Repellents; and for the most
part of Discussion: whence follows a necessity of Suppurating.

The Medicaments that further Suppuration are suitable in their temper to the
heat of the Part, so as to cherish it, and of an emplastick quality, hindering
Transpiration. So Oils and Grease, which are scarce permitted in Discutients,
(farther then to give good consistence to the Medicine) are here proper. These
following are Suppuratives. radic. althaeae, lilior. albor. an. iv. branc.
ursinae M. j. coq. in brodio aut lacte ad mollitiem; deinde add medullae panis
albi lb ss. sem. lini pulv. ij. axung. porcinae and gallinaceae an. ij. vitell.
ovor. number. ij. croci j. Misc. fiat Cataplasma. Or this: rad. lilior. iij.
cepar. coct. sub cineribus ij. summitat. althaeae M. ij. caricas pingues tossed.
number. 6. coq. and contusis add far. tritic. ij. pulv. sem. lini j. axung.
porcinae ij. unguent. basilici simpl. j. ol. lilior. q.s. cum vitell. ovor. and
croco: fiat Cataplasma. Whilst you endeavor Suppuration, you must expose the
Tumor as little to the air as may be.

The going off of the Accidents of pain, heat, pulsation, etc. are good signs
of Suppuration: but if the Matter lie deep, the Symptoms do not cease till it
be discharged; nor is the Suppuration discerned in some of them otherwise then
by the fluctuation between your hands. In such cases, if you doubt Suppuration,
continue the latter Cataplasm: for if the Tumor be opened before the Matter be
well concocted, it will be the slower in healing.

If the Tumor become more compact, and thrust out in a Cone, and look pale,
defer not the opening of it. For as the opening of Apostems before the
Suppuration be perfected weakens the heat, and renders them crude: so the
letting the Matter lie long after it is made gives way to its putrefaction,
whereby the Parts underneath corrupt, and the Abscess becomes sinuous.

The manner of opening by Incision or Caustic, together with all directions
necessary thereunto, have been sufficiently treated of in the former Chapter.
The Cure of it, by digesting, deterging, incarning and cicatrizing, you will
see in the Treatise of Ulcers, and in the following observations.

I shall begin them with some instances of Phlegmons in their very first
appearance: though I may doubt whether you will allow them for such, they being
then so inconsiderably small, that the Patient himself thinks it not worth
while to send for a Surgeon. Nay, when the pain has increased the
Inflammation, and raised the Swelling big and hard, they for the most part
permit them to be dressed by the next pretender to Surgery with Pultices, as
I have said, of White-bread and Milk, and do not consult us till the Tumor be
in its state; and then it is too late to repel them. Sometimes we may discuss
them, but more frequently they suppurate, and are of longer Cure. Upon the
considerations forementioned, it seems not easy for me to give you such
instances of the beginning of a Phlegmon as may be suitable to the design of
this Discourse: therefore I have set down the fewer of them, and taken them
from such accidental causes as do generally make great Tumors, (if ill
handled,) that you may thereby learn how to prevent their growth by the timely
applications proposed in the method of Cure.

A Man of about thirty six years old, 1. Observation, of the beginning of a
Phlegmon in the right Hip.
after a hard Journey on horseback, sitting upon a cold bench, was seix'd with
a pain in his right Hip, insomuch that he was scarce able to get up to his
chamber. The next morning he complained to me of his ill night's rest by reason
of that pain, he not being able to move that Joint. I embrocated the Part with
ol. ros. cum aceto, and applied an Empl. diachalcit. cum bolo, and let him
blood in the Arm about x. ordered him a Clyster that afternoon, and an Anodyne
draught the night following of vj. sir. de meconio in aq. papaver. cum aqua
cinnamomi hordeat. whereby he rested better. I continued the Embrocation and
Emplaster, by which after a day or two the Fluxion was seemingly wasted; yet he
complained of a pain deeper in the Joint. I then caused a Bryony-root to be
dug fresh out of the earth, and being washed, cut and beaten to a pulp in a
Stone-mortar, I chafed the pained Hip with it, and applied it in the form of a
Cataplasm. It did not lie well on, but by the use of it two or three days it
discussed his pain, and he was cured. This began like a Phlegmon, and afterward
threatened a Sciatica: whither it would have tended I leave others to judge; but
from such little beginnings the greatest Phlegmons have taken their rise.

A Woman aged thirty four years walking in the street one evening, 2. Observat
of a Phlegmon.
and passing near a Coach and horses, was bit in the right Breast by one of
them. The next day she came to me, complaining of the pain, and showed me her
Breast. It was swelled to the bigness of a Hen's egg, with Inflammation and
hardness, the print of the horse's teeth remaining in the skin near two inches
distant from each side. I dressed it with unguentum basilic. and embrocated the
Tumor with ol. ros. cum aceto, and applied an Empl. e bolo over all; then let
her blood, and sent her that night an Anodyne draught of aq. papaver. rhoead.
cinnam. hordeat. cum syrupi de meconio vj. She was purged the next day with an
Infus. senae, etc. By this method the pain and inflammation were remitted, and
a great part of the hardness: the remainder was totally resolved by the
application of unguent. basilic. spread thick in the form of an Emplaster, and
by repeating Purgations twice or thrice.

A Man of about forty years of age, 3. Observat. of a Phlegmon.
of a full body, having (as he thought) heated himself in walking, took cold,
and was seized with a stiffness and pain in his left Thigh, about four fingers
breadth above his Knee. The morning after I saw it swelled and somewhat
inflamed. I embrocated it cum ol. ros. and aceto, and applied an Empl. oxal.
then let him blood about ten or twelve ounces, and advised a Clyster that
afternoon, and desired him to forbear full meals and strong drink. The day
after he was purged with pulvis Cornachin. and by repeating of the Embrocations
and Emplaster was cured of his Distemper.

A Maidservant about twenty six years of age, 4. Observat. of a Phlegmon with
an Herpes.
by reason of a suppression of the Menstrua, was seized with a pain in her
right Thigh on the outside. It growing more painful by the application of
gummy Emplasters, I was sent for, and saw an hard collected Tumor of an ovall
figure lying under the musculus membranosus with Inflammation; also an Herpes
over-spreading the Tumor and that side of the Thigh. It was certainly raised
by their improper Applications. I let her blood at least twelve ounces, and
purged her the next day with pil. cochiae. By repeating the same Purgative
three or four times, intermitting a day or two between, and afterward by the
application of unguent. nutritum alone, the Inflammation was cooled, the herpes
extinguished, and the Tumor wasted.

A Woman of about forty years of age, 5. Observat. of a Phlegmon discussed.
scorbuticall, and of a full body, was pained in her right Thigh on the inside.
Somewhat she applied her self, but it growing more painful, I was permitted to
see it. There was a hard Swelling with Inflammation, Pulsation, etc. as in a
Phlegmon in its increase. I let her blood about ten ounces, and embrocated it
with ol. ros. and chamaemeli, and applied cerat. Galeni on it; and some hours
after I sent her that Cataplasm ex fol. malv. pariet. plantag. cum sem. Cydon.
etc. which she applied. A Clyster was that afternoon adminished, and an Anodyne
prescribed. The next day she was purged with this following Apozeme. fol. senae
ss. rhabarb. ij. flor. sambuci, macis, ij. fiat infus. in aq. matricariae viij.
succ. aurantior. iv. colat. add mannae j ss. sir. de spina cervina vj.
dividatur pro duabus dosibus. By the continued application of the Cataplasm the
Tumor diminished with the hardness. In the declining of it I left out the
Repellents, and added pulver. balaust. and baccar. myrtillor. and boiled them
in Wine, and added only Mel in the place of the Oil: by which I dried up the
remaining Humor, and restored the Part to its former health. Yet she would not
be satisfied without the application of an Emplaster, which was Empl. e bolo.

One of about fifty five years of age, 6. Observat. of a Phlegmon discussed.
of a full body, subject to Gout and Scurvy, was taken with a Fever, which
after a few days terminated in a pain of his right Arm about the Biceps, with
Swelling and Inflammation. Cataplasms were applied of White-bread and Milk: but
the parts were thereby relaxed and rendered more subject to Fluxion, which
swelled the Arm round and deep amongst the Muscles. A Surgeon was fetched,
who, finding the Patient weak and treated by unhappy hands, declined the
meddling with it, as not having been consulted more timely; or, indeed,
doubting how the Cure would succeed. I was then fetched, and observing the
Tumor great, and threatening the destruction of the Member, I stuped it with
Wine, to give a breathing to it, till I could make a Fomentation more for my
purpose; which I hastened by putting a shovell-full of Wood-ashes into a
quantity of water with a few herbs; as summitat. absinthii, centaur. cardui
bened. flor. sambuci, chamaemeli, sem. foenugraeci, etc. Which being boiled and
strained, I added Brandy-wine to it, and fomented the swelled Arm, and the
while made a Cataplasm ex far. hordei and fabar. with some of the
aforementioned Ingredients boiled in some of the same Fomentation, with the
addition of mel com. and applied it. Being thus left alone to act without a
Physician, I let him blood in the other Arm, and prescribed a Clyster and a
Cordial Julep of aq. dracont. cardui bened. and citr. spec. de hyacintho, cum
sir. de succo citr. and caryophillor. with aq. epidemica, also an Anodyne
draught to dispose him to rest that night; which he did better then he had done
many nights before. By the use of the Fomentation and Cataplasm the Swelling
discussed, and our work went hopefully on: the Fever appearing then but
symptomaticall lessened also, as the heat and pain mitigated. My next work was
by Emollients to resolve the hardness which possessed the Muscles and Tendons of
the Arm and Elbow-joynt. To which purpose I fomented them with a Decoction of
fol. and radic. althaeae, malvae, tapsi barbati, rad. lilior. flor. chamaemeli,
meliloti, sem. lini, foenugraeci, etc. made in Flesh-broath, and embrocated
them with a mixture of unguent. dialthaeae cum ol. lumbric. ex pedibus bovinis,
and applied ceratum Agrippinae, with moderate Bandage over all. Thus I resolved
the hardness, and somewhat restored the Joint: but the Arm continues weak to
this day.

A young man aged about twenty years, 7. Observat. of a Phlegmon suppurated in
the Arm.
riding a long journey in the heat of Summer, put his blood into a ferment,
which affected his Bridle-hand with great pain, and produced an Inflammation
with Tumor in that Wrist. To remedy which, he was let blood in the other Arm,
and the Part diseased was embrocated with ol. ros. cum aceto, and an Empl. e
bolo was applied; and the second day after he was purged with an Infus. senae,
etc. The Swelling increasing, with Inflammation and hardness, the moderate
repelling and discutient Cataplasm ex malv. pariet. plantag. etc. was applied.
But this Patient being of a very ill habit of body, the Tumor increased, and,
collecting more round, showed its inclination to suppurate: wherefore I left
our the Repellents, and added rad. lilior. albor. etc. by the application
whereof it suppurated in few days after. I opened it by Caustic, and
discharged a proportionable quantity of Matter well concocted, and hastened the
fall of the Escar by Lenients. During the Fluxion (which was in the Wrist
amongst the Tendons) he complained of a foreness in that Axilla, but took
little notice of it, till, after the opening this, (the pain diminishing there)
he felt that in his Arm-pit more sore. I also felt a small Gland there, and
applied an Empl. de mucilaginibus, supposing that would resolve it. After the
separation of the Escar, whilst I was digesting that Abscess, he was again
purged: but the Swelling increased in the Axilla, and suppurated, and was
likewise opened by Caustic, and endeavors used to digest that. But whilst the
former Abscess cured, this latter became more crude and sinuous, and the
Patient was seized with a Rigor, and a Fever followed; for the Cure of which
he was let blood again and purged, by Doctor Walter Needham his prescription,
with an Infusion of sena in a decoct. tamarindor. with the addition of manna,
sir. de pomis purg. and sir. de spina cervina. By the repeating of this he was
freed of his Fever, but the Abscess would not digest three days together by any
application: upon which consideration we prescribed him decoct. sarsae, lign.
Guaiaci. etc. By the drinking thereof a few days the Abscess digested, and
healed soon after to a wonder.

A Maid of about twenty eight years old, 8. Observat. of a Phlegmon suppurated
in the Breast.
of a gross body, receiving by accident a blow on her right Breast, it swelled,
and grew hard and painful. After several applications, the hardness and pain
rather increasing, she, suspecting a Cancer, came to me. I viewed it, but saw
no Symptoms of it. I embrocated it cum oleo and aceto rosac. and applied an
Empl. de minio cum sapone, and the day after let her blood, and then purged her
with Whey, Manna and Cremor Tartar; by which the hardness was seemingly
resolved for some time: but she being irregular in her appetite, it swelled
again as when I first saw it. Upon which consideration I applied Emollients;
and seeing the Tumor increase, and she impatient at the sight of it, I applied
a Suppurative Cataplasm ex rad. and fol. althaeae, rad. lilior. alb. etc. By
the continued use of it in a few days it suppurated well, and I opened it by
Caustic in the declining part, and discharged a large quantity of Matter. I
dressed the Abscess with lenients, and continued the use of the Cataplasm till
the Escar separated: then I deterg'd with mundif. Paracelsi, and applied Empl.
de mucilag. and shortened the Tent. The Orifice growing less, and somewhat of
the hardness yet remaining, I put in a short Cannicula of Lead, and kept the
Orifice open, till the hardness was totally resolved, and that it mattered very
little, or not at all; then threw out the Tent, and applied a Pledgit of
unguent. diapompholig. and permitted it to heal: which it did in few days. This
was a pure Phlegmon, and lay deep in the Breast, and owed its speedy Cure to
the perfect Suppuration was made in it before the Opening. For otherwise such
Abscesses in large Breasts do frequently terminate in sinuous Ulcers, and grow
callous, by reason of their laxity and want of natural heat.

A Gentleman of about fifty six years of age, 9. Observat. of a Phlegmon.
standing long in the cold to see some extraordinary Show, was taken with a
pain above his left Hip, and the second day after sent to me for an Emplaster.
The messenger not telling me the name of the Patient, nor where he lodged, I
sent him an Emplast. e bolo, proper to resist, and defend a Part from, Fluxion.
The fourth day after he sent to me for another Emplaster, signifying to me that
his pain was much increased; and two days after sent for me. I went, and saw a
large Tumor lying upon the Ilion backwards, with great Inflammation and
hardness, with all the Symptoms of a Phlegmon near its state. I directed a
Cataplasm to be made ex summitat. malvae, bismalvae, absinthii, flor. sambuci,
meliloti, sem. lini, foenugraeci, far. hordei, with an addition of mel commun.
ol. cham. vitell. ovor and croc. and in the interim let him blood, and advised
a Clyster to be administered that afternoon. If this person had been of a
temperate life, and been let blood when he sent for the first Emplaster, this
Tumor might have been happily repelled; but it was now too late to discuss it:
yet I repeated the application of that Cataplasm till I saw it more collected,
and then I hastened Suppuration, by one of the milder Suppuratives set down in
the method of Cure; by the use of which the Tumor was more collected and
raised into a Cone, and by its pale color and thinness of the skin gave an
assurance of a perfect Suppuration. Then I applied some of the milder Caustic,
with an Empl. diachyl. simpl. over it, and the Cataplasm over all. The next day
I took off the Dressings, with design to divide the Escar: but it was done to
my hands, and a large quantity of a well-digested Matter was discharged. I
fomented the Abscess with a Stupe wrung out of Milk, and dressed the Escar with
a Pledgit of unguent. basilic. dipped in ol. ros. and continued the application
of the Cataplasm. Thus in few days the Swelling assuaged, and the Escar
separated. I then endeavored Detersion with mundif. Paracelsi: but the Abscess
being large, and the Suppuration in the middle, and the Part not very capable
of Bandage, there remained a large hollowness, which put me upon a necessity of
laying it more open, for the speedy effecting the Cure; which I did with a pair
of Probe-scissors. This work is necessary in such large Phlegmons; and
therefore it is, I suppose, that Sennertus places his Chapter de Sinubus next
to that of a Phlegmon. After I had made this Incision, I dressed it with that
Digestive ex terebinth. cum vitello ovi, etc. and having digested it, I
incarned, by adding pulv. rad. iridis, aristoloch. rot. sarcocoll. etc. to the
Digestive: and by the help of the Vitriol and Alume-stones, unguent. tutiae and
Emplast. diachalciteos, I cicatrized it.

In the time of the Civil Wars a Gentleman in the West-countrey was sorely
pained with an Inflammation and Swelling upon the os Ilion on the left side.
10. Observat. of a Phlegmon gangrened by improper applications.
Some one applied to Cataplasm to it of White-bread and Milk with Hogs-lard; a
Medicament proper to assuage pain, but being applied in the augment in a full
body, it relaxed the parts, and made way for the influx and increase of the
Tumor. Upon farther complaint, some other of his acquaintance advised the
application of Houseleek, etc. by which the native heat suffocated, and the
Part gangrened. Sir Alexander Frasier, chief Physician to his Majesty, and my
self were fetched, and saw the Tumor black and sunk the compass of the palm of
an hand. We made deep Scarifications, and washed it with a Solution of
Aegyptiac. in spir. vini, and filled the incised parts, especially in the
circumference between the sound and gangrened parts, with Merc. praecipitat.
and applied over all a Cataplasm, such as you will find set down in the Chap.
of Gangraenae. Where we had applied our Precipitate, we found a perfect white
Matter: it was but little in quantity, but by the use of the same Powder we saw
the Mortification stopped, and the Escar in few days after separated with good
digestion. The Ulcer was afterward deterged with mundif. Paracelsi, and cured
by Epuloticks, as in the Cure of Ulcers.

As Phlegmons are subject to mortification through unseasonable application of
Medicaments in time of their state; 11. Observat. of a Phlegmon gangrened after
Opening.
so also in fat bodies they are apt to gangrene after Opening, if that Fat be
not speedily digested out. Thus it happened to a person laboring of a Phlegmon
on the Os sacrum. After the discharge of Matter the Ulcer became crude and
gangrened. Another Surgeon was consulted, who scarified the Abscess, and by
his warm applications supposed he had extinguished the Mortification: but it
appearing otherwise, I was fetched, and saw the lips and parts within gangrened
and gleeting. We scarified the lips: but finding them to be gangrened more
within then without, we pared them off round, then scarified the Abscess
within, and cut out the putrefied Fat, and with an armed Probe dipped in oleo
garyophyllor. hot cleansed the Abscess, and filled the Scarifications with
Merc. praecipitat. We then dressed up the Abscess with a mixture of unguent.
basilicon and ol. terebinth. and applied Cataplasms and Fomentations, as is
usual in such cases. The next day we came provided with actual Cauteries, but
found the Abscess warm, and disposing to digestion in the lips and fleshy
parts: and from that time it digested well. But in the basis of the Ulcer,
where the Mortification had reached to the Periosteum, the slough separated
more slowly: but by the warm application of Lenients it came off, and the Ulcer
happily incarned.

Over-strict Bandage is a frequent cause of Phlegmon, of which I do make
observation for the cautioning of the young Surgeons in the case of
Fontanells.

A person of a plethorick body, aged about thirty years, being subject to hot
Defluxions of sharp Rheum, 12. Observat. of strict Bandage.
was advised to make a Fontanell in her Arm by Caustic. I applied the milder,
with an Emplaster and moderate Bandage to retain it on, with advice to slacken
it, if there appeared cause. The next morning she told me the bandage had been
easy all the day, upon which account she had not slackened it; but it pained
her in the night, and swelled her Arm. It did not seem too straight; nay, I
think if it had been slacker, it would have slipped down her Arm, being
taper-grown: but the Tumor showed the Bandage to be too hard. I loosened it,
and took off the Caustic; where finding a small Escar, I divided it, and
dressed it with unguent. basilic. with an Emplaster to retain it on, leaving
the Arm at liberty. She was easy that day; but about twelve of the clock at
night she was wakened with the pain, and sent to me. The Fontanell not being in
fault, I returned her a glass with ol. cum aceto to embrocate her Arm. The next
morning I visited her: there appeared less fullness and no heat, but she
complained of a numbness in her Hand. I left her to the use of the Oil: it wore
off in a day or two. After the separation of the Escar, I put in a Pea, and
fitted it with Bandage: from which time it continued easy. I foresaw this
disturbance, and advised her to bleed and purge first, but could not prevail.

In fat fleshy Arms you may produce the like by a moderate strict Bandage, when
the Humors are in a fermenting disposition. The way to avoid such
inconvenience is, first to make evacuation by bleeding or purging: for from
such little beginnings greater evils do follow. And if this Fontanell had been
made by the lapis causticus, it had penetrated deep, and might by such a flux
of Humors have been shrewdly disturbed: or if it had beem made by Incision, it
would have been inflamed; and then the conclusion would have been, that it was
made upon a Nerve or Tendon; though possibly in such fat Arms there is none
within half an inch under it.

I shall give you another instance in a Gentleman who came out of the Country,
13. Observat. of over-strict Bandage.
and put himself into the hands of a Surgeon, in which case I was consulted.
The Tumor was in his left Arm upon the Biceps, and was caused by over-strict
binding of his Issue. It was raised below the Bandage; and as it abounded with
Matter, it discharged it self into the Fontanell. The Cure was performed by the
application of a Caustic upon the lower part of the Tumor, and the Matter was
let out by cutting deep into the Escar; after which it was digested and
incarned by the said Surgeon, as in other Abscesses is usual.

Many instances we have of this kind in Infants, who cannot express their
grievances, especially where Issues are cut in their Arms. The Nurses sometimes
binding them too slack, whereby the Pea slides out, and the Issue being almost
closed before the next dressing, they, to recover their error, force in
another, and by too hard Bandage raise a Tumor with Inflammation, to the great
disturbance of the Child.

Thus somewhile since a Child in my neighborhood was seized with an
Inflammation from the Shoulder down to the Elbow, 14. Observat. of Gangrene
from over-strict Bandage.
and from thence an oedematous Tumor reached to the Fingers ends, the
Fontanell it self gangrened. I threw out the Pea, and scarified the lips of the
Ulcer, and dapt it with ol. terebinth. hot with an armed Probe, and applied
Pledgits dipped in a mixture of the said Oil and unguent. basilicon; and having
fomented it well with a decoct. absinthii, etc. I applied a Cataplasm ex far.
hordei and fabar. decocted in Oxymel oever that part of the Arm, and upon the
remote parts I applied cerat. Galeni with good Bandage from the Hand upward. By
this means the Humor was modrately repressed, and breathed forth, the Escar
also separated in the Fontanell; after which the Ulcer incarned with common
Sarcoticks, and the Ulcerations about it were cured by unguent. tutiae and such
like Epuloticks.

A persOn of about forty five years of age, 15. Observat. of Phlegmon
erysipelutodes.
subject to various Diseases from plenitude and cacochymia, as Lethargy, etc.
was lately in danger of sinking under an Apoplecticall Fit, but was freed of it
by a translation of those Humors into his right Leg, with great pain, and an
Inflammation of a deep red color possessing only the skin; but the Swelling
was great, reaching from the gartering to the very Toes. It was Phlegmon
erysipelatodes, and in his case required to be breathed forth by Medicaments of
a temperate quality, yet somewhat cooling. To which purpose I presently
fomented it with Claret Wine, and applied ceratum Galeni over all the Leg, with
a moderate Bandage; then let him blood, and directed him a Clyster. The next
morning I took off the Dressings, and found his Leg in a better condition. I
bathed it with Claret Wine wherein I had boiled summitat. absinthii, salviae,
flor. sambuci, ros. rub. and applied the cerat. Galeni as before, and continued
that method some days; he purging himself the while with Whey, Manna, and
cremor Tartar. Thus the heat remitted, and the Swelling relaxed: yet the
Cuticula was fretted off in several parts, and I felt a small collection of
Matter under the skin on the inside of the Anckle, which I gave vent to by an
Apertion with a Lancet, and discharged about a spoonful of a thin white
Matter. I applied a Pledgit of basilicon upon it, and dressed the Vesiacations
with unguent. tutiae; by which in three or four days they were cured: after
which I put him a laced Stocking on that Leg, whereby it was reduced to its
right tone. I had made him Fontanells inter scapulas heretofore, which he
continues to good purpose.

A Maid aged twenty four years was seized with a pain in her Head and Rigor of
a Fever; 16. Observat. of Phlegmon erysipelatodes.
the second or third day she had an Inflammation in her right Leg a little
above her Knee and so downward. After several applications of Persley, Butter,
etc. I saw it. The Inflammation was in the Skin, and reached down from the Knee
in a red streak about four fingers breadth to the Instep: that inflamed Skin
was tense, but seemed to have Matter lying under it. I made Apertion with a
Lancet on the Knee, and discharged a well-concocted white Matter. I then made
another Apertion lower, and another in the lowest part, with like success: the
blood also trickled down in good quantity from the little wounds in the skin. I
permitted them to bleed, she having need of such an Evacuation; then dressed
them up with unguent. basilici cum vitello ovi upon Pledgits of Lint, and
applied cerat. Galeni over them with convenient Bandage. The next day she was
purged with Elect. lenitiv. and her Leg was stuped with decoct. salviae,
betonicae, flor. ros. rub. We dressed the Apertions as before. This Maid was
lately come out of the Country, and, by reason of the change of Air and course
of life, abounded with Humors which required Evacuation: therefore during her
Cure I let her blood, and purged her twice or thrice, by which she was restored
to health; and the Matter having been so opportunely let out, the Inflammation
went off, and the Apertures cured by a few dressings of unguent. tutiae.

A Man aged about forty years, 17. Observat. of Phlegmon by Translation.
of a healthful complexion, hastening from London (in the time of the last
great Sickness) to his house in the Country by great journeys on horseback, to
avoid Infection, which the Inns on the Road were subject to, chose to rest
himself on his way by lying down in the fields, whilst his horse baited on the
grass near him. But having heated his body by journeying, he took cold by lying
upon the ground, and in rising felt a great pain in the region of his right
Kidney, and returned to his house very ill. He consulted the Physicians in his
Neighborhood. They at first suspected some Disease in that Kidney: but there
being no Symptoms of it in his Urine, they imputed it to other causes, and
prescribed Remedies accordingly. But the Cure not succeeding, they advised him
to Buckstone Waters in the County of Derby: whither he went, and returned more
pained. I, being at that time in a neighboring County, was sent for, and found
him in his bed much emaciated. From the region of that Kidney down to his Hip
and Thigh there appeared a more then ordinary fullness, and in that Groin there
was a painful Swelling, in which there seemed to be Matter, but it lay deep: I
applied to it a suppurative Cataplasm ex foliis and rad. althaeae, rad. lilior.
albor. etc. to suppurate it. To the other pained parts I applied Empl. e bolo.
By the use of the Cataplasm the Tumor in Inguine appeared daily more full of
Matter, and seemed to me to be made by Translation; therefore I did not attend
a perfect Suppuration, but applied a Caustic, and, cutting into the Escar
deep, discharged a much greater quantity of Matter then that Cavity was capable
of; besides, by its foetid smell it seemed to have been long made. I dressed it
up with Lenients. From this Dressing his pain lessened; but the Matter which
discharged daily from it was very much. I made a search with a Probe, and felt
it pass under the Pubes into the Muscle Psoas, (as I conjectured:) upon sight
of which I contented my self in keeping the Orifice open for the discharge of
the Matter, and prescribed him Vulneraries. The fullness from the region of that
Kidney to the Hip continuing exceeding painful, I made a Seton upon the
latter, hoping thereby to give a vent to that Humor. The first three or four
days it mattered little; but afterward, in drawing the Seton, the Matter burst
forth in great quantity: upon sight whereof I cut the two Orifices into one,
and took out the Seton, and dressed it up with Lenients. This was a foetid
purulent Matter, and seemed to be of the same kind with the other which
discharged from his Groin. His next great complaint was of pain in the region
of that Kidney. I supposing that the original Matter might arise from thence,
and pass inwardly to the Groin, and outwardly to the Hip, thought, if I could
give a vent there, it might possibly intercept the Matter in its course to the
other Abscesses. I therefore applied a Caustic upon the most likely part. The
first four or five days after the division of the Escar there appeared no
Matter; but before it was quite separated it made its way plentifully out, and
the other Abscesses were more governable, and the Patient was certainly much
relieved. But one afternoon, while he was lying in bed, and telling us a Story
of some pleasant passages in his Profession, he suddenly died, we supposed from
an eruption of the great Artery; for we found much blood poured forth from all
the Abscesses, but especially that on the region of that Kidney. During the
time of his sickness his Urine was without Blood or Matter, and passed freely
without the least disturbance. I would gladly have opened his body, but was not
permitted.

Observatio casus non vulgaris de Sarcomate in arteria axillari reperto,
communicata a Cl. viro Ed. Duke, M. D.

Die quinto Aprilis Puella quaedam 16 annorum, Filia Nobilis viri,
febricitavit, and capite dolebat. 18. Observat.
Die sequente de cervice rigida and dolente conquesta fuit. Tertio Tumor
occupavit humerum. Quarto vocatus adfui, Febre laborautem inveni, and Tumore
circa humerum gravatam. Huic menses paulo antea substiterunt, and fallaci
impetu in massam sanguinis traducii ejus molem adauxerunt, collisisique ad
invicem particulis putridis Febrem excitaverunt, cujus open natura partem
sanguinis concitati ductilis que in humerum (sui levandi causa) transtulit.
Apparatus sane pro Phlegmone notha struenda idoneus. Hisce perpensis, Revulsio
instituitur per phlebotomiam in latere opposito, praemisso Clystere, nec non
discutientia Tumori adhibentur, Febrisque pro more suo tractatur. Septimo die
Chirurgum vocavi Artis peritissimum, Dominum R. Wiseman. Ad trutinam res denuo
revocatur; and ex indicatis ducimur Revulsionem repetere, placideque per media
conferentia humorem ducere, sine taedio and incommodo Suppurationis. Elapso
autem biduo adsunt Abscessus maturescentis indicia, and commodum satis Materia
in musculo Deltoide circa ejus initium praesentiam sui testabatur, cui per
Causticum datur exitus. Aperto Apostemate effluxit illico pus laudabile, quod
per intervalla debita and partitim fuit eliminatum. Tertio post apertionem die
consistentia Materiae tenuior and male olens: quinto autem in saniem degener,
cum foetore insigni and cadaveroso. Chirurgus ad mundificantia progreditur: sed
sub examine cavitatis occurrit nescio quid grumosum, seu potius densa and
thrombo magis cohaerens substantia cruenta. Stylo igitur exploratorio
undiquaque per Abscessus cavernam circumacto, ductus versus interiora
detegitur: caute interim tractatur ulcus, ne sanies effusior vires attereret:
ultro tamen per noctis intervalla effunditur, and certitudinem erosi vasis
confirmavit. Jam tandem Catarrho perpetim in fauces depluente, aphthis os and
gulam obsdientibus, Febreque scintillante in Materia maligna, quae sparsa and
indomabilis sub uniformi naturae concoquentis opificio subigi recusavit, virtus
vitalis fatiscit, and morbus insolens vigesimo primo ab invasione die de natura
triumphavit. Aperto cadavere, ecce, cruentum illud coagulum seu figmentum
sanguinis ad latera claviculae conspicitur, perqu^e semitam arteriae axillaris
frequenti hujus substantiae conspectu ducimur recta ad cordis ventriculum
sinistrum; quo loci ad ovi columbini magnitudinem congestum invenimus Sarcoma
pellicula densa circumvestitum. Mirum sane, hospitem tam male moratum palatio
illo augusto toto frui, sine ullo viventis de dolor cordis sensu, vel
symptomate laesarum ejus exinde actionum eminenti. Imo per totum morbi decursum
interrogata quomodo se haberet, quam optime se cord valere respondit; and
sponte etiam non long ante obitum in eadem verba prorupit.

CHAP. IV. Of Tumors from Milk.
MIlk (though I cannot say that it is often the matter) is certainly the
occasion of many Tumors of diverse kinds. I know Authors make it the material
Cause of many of the Diseases of the Breasts: but such men must be understood
warily. For if by Milk in this assertion they mean Milk actually generated, and
separated from the Blood, then I know but few cases in which that can be
supposed to be the matter of a Distemper: for when it is in that condition, it
is laid up in certain tubuli lactei, which, being spread all over the Breast, do
unite their branches after the manner of Veins, still growing into bigger
trunks, till they do end at last in the Nipple. Now the motion of this Milk
being de vasis minoribus in majora, what is once separated from the Blood in
the Glands of it into those Vessels has nothing to stop its progress till it
comes to the very place of its Exit from the Nipple. If any stop
preternatural;y happen, as the compression of the Vessel by some Tumor of a
Glandule, or the like, then indeed a varicosity of the lacteous Vessels may
arise: of which case you may see an Observation in the Chap. of Varix.

This case is rare; but there be others very frequent: viz. That the Glandules
through which Milk is separated may either through fault of the Ferment by
which they make that separation produce diverse variety of Distempers, or
through an indisposition of their Pores not permit a due percolation of it from
the Blood. When any of these things happen, there is a disturbance in the
Circulation, and Fluxion does arise, which soon produces a Tumor suitable to
the Humor so stirred up; viz. Phlegmon, Oedema, Scirrhus, Scrophula, yea
sometime Cancer.

This Discourse may serve for a general account of the Causes of the milky
Tumors of the Breasts, and may easily be enlarged to such particular cases as
may emerge.

The Differences may thus be enumerated. Differences.
If the Ferment of the Breast be over-active and vigorous, it separates Milk
with too great violence, causing thereby an over-fermentation in the Part,
which usually produces a Phlegmon, if the serum be hot, or partake much of
Blood: othewise it raises an Oedema; or, if Matter dispose to coagulation, a
Scrophula: which are the most frequent species of Tumors generally reputed to
arise from Milk. Any of these three may degenerate into a Scirrhus, and that
Scirrhus into a Cancer.

The Signs are visible. Signs.
If the first happen, there are all the Symptoms of a Phlegmon, heat, redness,
tension, pulsation, etc. if the second, large distension, with pain, but no
heat: if a Scrophula, then hard kernells are easily felt and distinguished, etc.

Tumors made by the over-eagerness of the lacteous Ferment go easily off,
Prognostic.
if no other Symptom attend them: sucking and drawing the Breast for the most
part discharges the Milk as fast as it can be generated, and then all the
evil is over. But if the Fermentation produce any disorder in the Blood, the
Patient finds more or less of danger according to the quality of the Tumor
produced: viz. a Phlegmon endangereth them of a Fever; oedematous Tumors are
apt to grow ulcerous, and sometimes scrophulous and scirrhous, and become long
of Cure, etc.

Forasmuch as it frequently happens to women in Childbed, that their Breasts
do extraordinarily swell by reason of the abundance of Milk which flows into
them, and that it stirs up Inflammations, Apostemations, etc. therefore
their Diet ought to be slender, and of such quality as may less dispose the
Humors to ferment: to which purpose I shall refer you to the regulation
prescribed in a Phlegmon.

The Medicaments proper to diminish the Milk are, Cure of a Phlegmon in the
Breast.
Lettice, Purselane, Endive, Succory, Smallage, etc. The seeds of wild Rue,
Cummin, Basil, powdered and given to the quantity of j. daily in Broth, will
dry up the Milk, as Authors write.

The Milk is usually drawn out of the Breasts by the infant's sucking them: but
in case the Child be so weak it cannot suck, or does not enough empty them,
some others are to be admitted to help them; or they may put young Whelps to
suck them, or some neighboring woman. But the Mother may draw her own Breasts
her self by an Instrument sold for that purpose.

The Tumor made by the Milk is restrained by the application of Nightshade,
Lettice, Plantane, Vine-tops, Bramble-buds, Horse-tail, etc. or ol. ros.
myrtill. cum aceto, etc. as we usually treat Phlegmons in the beginning.

It may be discussed by the application of Mints, Catmints, Rue, sem.
foenugraec. cumini, foeniculi, etc. or dried up by the applying clothes dipped in
aqua calcis, or a Solution of sacchar. Saturni in aqua sermat. ranar. during
which time fine Towe may be sprinkled with Ceruse, and applied to the Armpits.
But in the beginning of Fluxion we are rarely consulted.

Where I have by chance come in to women that have been much pained with
swelling in their Breasts from Milk, I have applied Emplast. e b^lo, or a
Cataplasm of far. hordei, fabar. lentium, decocted in oxymel, or cerat.
oxelaeum, or santalinum, and at the same time Towe dipped in oxycrate under their
Arms.

If the Inflammation be gone too far toward a Suppuration, (which usually is
before we are called) then it must be promoted with Suppuratives, and opened by
Incision or Caustic, and treated as a Phlegmon has been.

Where the Swelling has been hard, and not inflamed, summitat. absinth. Cure
of oedematous Tumors of the Breast.
pulv. ij. sem. lentium, foenugraeci, foeniculi, an. j. suc. hyoscyami, cicut.
an. iij. unguent. dialthaeae ij. axung. anatis, anseris, an. j. sevi cervini
ij. styracis liquidae ss. cerae q. s. fiat Ceratum.

Cicuta boiled in Wine and beaten up with axung. porcin. Caution.
resolves the hardness in the Breasts; but applied alone stirs up heat, and
ulcerates the Skin. Green Mints or Chickweed are common applications, and of
good use, either alone, or mixed with other Medicaments, in all the hard
Swellings of the Breast occasioned by Milk. All Emplasters applied to the
Breasts ought to have a hole snipt in them for the Nipples, lest they be
fretted by them; especially that the Milk may be drawn forth while the
Medicaments lie on.

A Young Gentlewoman, 1. Observat.
endeavoring to dry up her Milk when it was too late, put her Breast upon
Apostemation. I prescribed her an anodyne Cataplasm, and a day or two after
applied a Caustic, and gave vent to the Matter; then dressed the Escar with
unguent. basilic. and applied cerat. dialthaeae over the whole Breast, and left
her of the same Medicaments to dress her self with, and once in two or three
days visited her. After the Escar separated, and the Matter was well
discharged, I dressed her with unguent. diapompholyg. and left her of the same to
finish the Cure. Many of these, where the Matter has lain superficial, I have
cured as easily.

A young Women after Childbed was vexed with a Swelling in her Breast. 2.
Observat,
One was fetched who possessed her Relations that it was a Cancer, and treated her
accordingly. But her Breast growing more painfully, her Father, much
apprehending the danger of such a Disease, came to Sir Fran. Pr. and acquainted
him with his Daughter's Distemper, and the Judgment that had been given of it;
desiring that he would instantly go with him to see his Daughter. The
Physician, wary in giving his Judgment in Surgery where there might happen
any dispute, advised the Father to take me along with them. We went together,
expecting to see a Cancer in the Breast: we found her in bed bemoaning her
condition. I viewed her Breast, and saw it very big and inflamed, and felt it
all apostemated, and the Matter perfectly well suppurated, the Skin thin and
ready to break. I could scarce believe what I felt and saw. I declared the
swelled Breast to be a Phlegmon well suppurated, and fit to open. The Physician
looked and felt it; but, being prepossessed with the contrary, did not readily
give credit to what he felt. I then proposed the applying a Cataplasm of
White-bread and Milk, assuring them before morning they should find a
Porrenger-full of Matter discharged. They consented unto it. We took our
leaves, and left them to apply it; they did so: and the next morning the old
Gentleman made the Physician a visit, and confirmed the truth of what I had
foretold, and by the use of unguent, basilicon cured it without farther trouble.

The Matter being well suppurated, and a convenient Opening made for discharge,
they generally heal of themselves, if the Habit of body be good: but where it
is otherwise, or irregularly treated, there it is vexatious in the Cure.

While I was dressing a Patient in a Citizen's house, 3. Observat,
I was desired to look upon the Breast of the Gentlewoman of the house. She had
lately layn in, and from abundance of Milk and ill handling her right Breast
had been apostemated, and was broken out in many holes. A woman famous in the
City for dressing sore Breasts was her Surgeon. I observed that the Breast
had at first broke in the upper part in a small pin-hole; and the Matter, not
having had sufficient discharge, had subsided, and so made the other Openings,
and afterward passed an inch lower then any of the Openings, and could not be
discharged otherwise then as it filled up the Sinus, and ran over, or was pressed
from below upward with her hand. By this means the Breast continued inflamed
and apostemated; insomuch as it was impossible to cure it by that method till
it had apostemated the whole Breast. I pitied the Patient, and wondered that a
woman so famed for such Cures could be so ignorant, and yet preserve her credit
with that Sex.

I showed the Patient the cause of her pain, and the unlikelihood of being
suddenly cured by such a Surgeon, and prevailed with her to permit me to lay
on a Caustic upon the depending Part; and having made an Escar the compass of
threepence, opened it, and gave vent to the Matter, and left her a little
unguent. basilic. to apply daily upon that Orifice, and some unguent. tutiae to
dress the rest. By the use of which she was cured in few days without more
directions from me. Yet the good Gentlewoman, I dare say, is of so kind a
nature, as she would quarrel in defense of her Sho-Chirurgeon.

A young Gentlewoman after Childbed being indisposed in her health, Observat.
her left Breast became diseased, and swelled. They contented themselves with
such help as those about them could afford. But after some days it growing more
painful and swelled, the Apothecary brought in his Brother, who endeavored
Suppuration, and after some while gave vent to the Matter, and proceeded in the
Cure. But while he was dressing that Opening, the Fluxion increased, and other
Abscesses were raised, and from the several Apostemations sinuous Ulcers were
afterward made. Thus the work became difficult. I was consulted. In the
pulling out one of the Tents, a thin white Matter issued out in great quantity:
my Brother Surgeon called it Milk; but I thought it Matter, and observed the
Abscess to have begun deep in the body of the Glands, which, through length of
time corrupting them, rendered the Swelling hard, and the Tent stopping in the
Matter between Dressings had occasioned that large discharge we then met with.
The method of Cure consisted in the enlarging of that Orifice where the Matter
seemed to be detained, and then to proceed with Detersives, etc. They
entertained me in the Cure, and I continued my Brother Surgeon. We began
with the application of a Caustic to the Part round about the Orifice,
stopping the hole with Lint; by which means in a short time we made an easy
way for the Matter, and saw no reason afterward to think it Milk.

As the Escar separated, a Fungus thrust forth, which we sprinkled with pulv.
praecipit. rub. dressing up the Escar with unguent. basilic. and the other
Openings with unguent. diapomphol. and cerat. dialthaeae over all. After a more
full separation of that Escar, we, observing the Fungus to rise more large,
applied a Stupe wrung out of a decoct. summitat. absinth. rutae, menth. flor.
ros. rub. balaust. made in wine and water; and the while sent for some
chalcanthum, which we applied upon the Fungus, and Pledgits of unguent. tutiae
over the ulcerated parts. The second day after we took off Dressings, and found
an Escar made by the Cathaeretick, which we thrust off, and dressed it again
with the same, and continued the use of Escaroticks. During those applications
we applied over the Breast the Empl. e bolo to restrain the Influx: but yet the
Fungus increased upon us, and raised a Swelling between that and the other
Orifices. Upon which consideration we applied a large Caustic upon that
Swelling, which laid some of the other Orifices into this; then divided the
Escar, and dressed it up with Lenients, and covered the Fungus with
Escaroticks, wherever it began to thrust out, by which it was kept down. But
after the separation of this later Escar, we seeing the Fungus great, and the
way of extirpating it by Escaroticks slow, and fearing the ill consequences of
it, I pressed with my finger under it, and at once broke into it, and pulled it
but in pieces; then filled up the place with Merc. praecip. and mundif.
Paracels. upon Pledgits, with the foresaid Emplast. over the whole Breast, and
bound it up. The second day after that we opened it again. And by this same
method often repeated we subdued the remainder of the Fungus, and raised a firm
basis on which we incarned, with an addition of pulv. rad. ireos, myrrhae,
sarcocollae, to the forementioned Mundificative; and then applied cerat.
agrippae over the Breast, and in few days cicatrized it with a smooth Cicatrix,
the lips falling in by the benefit of nature, which was assisted the while by
Traumatick Decoctions, etc. as in such cases is usual.

It happens very often, when we have cured one Breast, the other swells,
from the abundance of Milk, and grows hard and apostemates. Sometimes we have
both Breasts thus diseased at one time. 5. Observat.
Such was the case of a Gentlewoman in Clerkenwell: both her Breasts had been
long swelled, and after apostemated, by reason of the pain; several Abscesses
were, made, and their Matter discharged by such Openings. In progress of time
the Ulcers became sinuous and callous, with induration of the Glands. I was
entertained her Surgeon, and began my work with Fomentations and Cataplasms
discutient and resolving, as rad. and fol. althaeae, hyoscyami, summit.
cicutae, menthae, rutae, flor. sambuci, sem. foenug. lini, etc. with far.
lentium, hordei, axung. porc. anatis, anseris, etc. and in dilating the
Orifices, and deterging with mundif. Paracelsi, with Merc. praecip. and alumen,
as I saw cause. While I was thus trying my endeavors by the method abovesaid,
new disturbances arose within, which put me upon the necessity of laying such
places open by Caustic as might best serve for the discharge of Matter. After
separation of the Escar, I again deterg'd and healed them, as has been showed
in such like Ulcers.

How they are to be treated when they are strumous, scirrhous, or cancerous,
you may see in their proper places.

CHAP. V. Of Abscesses and corrosive Ulcers arising from Distempers of the
Uterus in Childbed.
BUT it is not the Breasts only that are troublesome to Women by the frequent
production of such painful Diseases. The Vterus is (though not altogether so
frequently, yet) much more terribly affected in Childbed, producing Fevers of
very malignant and venomous natures, and soon making Phlegmons or worse
Tumors, sometimes in the Vterus it self, and sometimes in other parts of the
body, there being none of them on which the Uterine ferment has not an
influence. The exorbitancies or degenerations of that, whether from a hurt in
Labor, from part of the Afterbirth left behind, from cold taken, or the
Lochia stopped, do soon produce such virulent Distempers in the blood as make
it cast out a Tumor, either upon the Part it self, or else outwardly upon the
Muscles of the body, where when they light they prove corrosive, sometimes
eating out the flesh in which they lodged, which falls off in whole pieces,
without that change of color in the Skin which is in Gangrenes; insomuch that
sometimes the Bone it self is laid bare by them.

The Causes are, Causes.
(as I have said) hard Labor, the Vterus hurt, or part of the Secundine left
behind, cold taken in Childbed, and a predisposition in the Humors by reason
of their peccancy in quantity or quality.

The Signs may be taken from their Causes, Signs.
and the manner of the Abscesse may demonstrate its malign nature and evil
quality.

The Prognostic may be taken from the largeness or other qualifications of the
Abscesse, Prognostic.
and the Symptoms that happen to the body thereupon. If the Tumor happen only
from some little disturbance done to the Womb of a person otherwise of a good
Habit of body, the Cure is hopeful: if part of the Afterbirth be retained,
there is no hopes of Cure till that be removed; nay, if it stay so long as to
induce a putrefaction of the Part, it will be too late then to remove it.

If the body be cacochymicall, the Tumors are apt to degenerate into very
venomous and malignant Abscesses; which if they do not suddenly kill, do at
least produce ill-conditioned Ulcers hard of Cure, and for the most part
mortal in the long run of the Disease.

In the Cure of these Abscesses you are to inform your self how the Womb is
disturbed, Cure.
and appease that: and if any part of the Afterbirth be left behind, to
endeavor the bringing that away, and by good Sudorificks, Cordialls, etc. to
expel the venom, and fortify the spirits against the malignity that is
thereby contracted, and to contemperate the heat and acrimony by Juleps and
Emulsions.

The Swellings arising from these require to be treated in their beginning with
moderate Repellents and Discutients. Afterward, accordingly as the Matter
predominates, make way for its discharge; and cure them as in the Treatise of
Ulcers is showed.

A Young woman after Childbed was seized with a great pain and Swelling in her
left Groin and Thigh with Fever. 1. Observat.
Sir Charles Scarburgh and Doctor Weatherly were consulted. They prescribed
Bleeding and lenient Purgatives, to evacuate the Humors; also cordial Juleps,
etc. to contemperate the heat, and fortify her spirits against malignity. I
was also called in, and by moderate Repellents mixed with Discutients in
Fomentations and Emplasters with Bandage dispersed the Humor in the Thigh, and
restored that Part to its former temper: but in the mean time the Tumor
increased in that Groin. I suppurated it after the manner of a Bubo, opened it,
and endeavored Detersion: but the Sinus reaching down the Twist, the Matter
could not be discharged without laying it more open, as in sinuous Ulcers; by
which method I cured it.

A Gentlewoman in Childbed was seized with a Fever, 2. Observat.
and the ninth day complained of a pain in her right Foot. Sir John Hinton was
the Physician, who treated her in the Fever, and had prescribed Discutients, to
breath out the impacted Matter in her Foot: but the pain increasing, I
assisted, and saw the upper part of the Foot from the Instep to the Toes
oedematous, but from the inside of the Ancle to the middle of the Sole of her
foot inflamed, and seeming to apostemate. We, doubting the ill consequences of
an Apostemation in that Part amongst the Tendons and Bones, and where the Skin
is usually so hard and tough as our strongest Causticks will difficultly
penetrate, resolved to endeavor a restraint of the Influx, and so dry up the
Humor affecting the Part: to which purpose we applied this; far. hordei vj.
sem. lini pulv. vj. flor. cham. sambuci pulv. an. iij. flor. ros. rub. balaust.
an. j. These were boiled in red Wine, with the additon mell. ros. and ol.
myrtill. to the consistence of an Emplaster. It being night, she was laid to
rest with an Anodyne draught.

The next morning I found the Patient somewhat relieved, and taking off the
Dressings saw the Tumor and Inflammation less. I continued the way of
dressing, and applied Empl. e bolo, as an Intercipient, about the Ancle and
upper part of the Foot, and by Compress and Bandage dressed it up. By the
application of these Medicaments we dried up the Humor in few days, and the
Foot was seemingly well; but (whether it was for want of purging, there being
some reason against it, or that the Humor was only restrained by virtue of
the Dressings) there appeared again a Swelling on the Foot, and it apostemated
in the Sole of the foot in three several places; which I opened by Caustic,
to prevent the increase of Matter, and, dividing the Escars, gave vent to it,
dressing them up with Lenients, Pledgits of unguent. basilicon, and the
Emplast. as before. I endeavored daily by Compress and Bandage to hinder the
flowing down of the Matter: but the position of the Foot gave way, and it sunk
lower, and put me upon the necessity of intercepting its farther descent to the
Heel by applying another Caustic, which proved effectual to the discharge, so
that the upper Orifices healed. But this last Escar separated slowly, and left
the great Tendon bare. I furthered its separation by the use of ol. terebinth.
with unguent. basilic. applied warm, and incarned the Tendon with a Sarcotick
composed of a mixture of pulv. ireos, myrrh. sarcocollae, and Merc.
praecipitat. with mel rosar. and terebinth. and cicatrized the Ulcer with
Epuloticks. After it was cicatrized, the Sole of her foot was so relaxed and
tender, that upon the setting it on the ground it became very much subject to
pituitous Swelling: upon which account I caused such a Fomentation to be made
as is proposed in the Cure of Oedema, and put on a laced Sock, by which the
weak parts were strengthened, and she cured.

A Lady in the Country of about twenty eight years of age, 3. Observat.
having gotten some hurt in Childbed, was taken with a Fever, and about four
days after was disturbed with a pain in her right Groin near the Os ilion,
which in a few days after swelled with Inflammation, and became a large Tumor,
reaching from thence over the Belly to the Os pubis like a roll of White-bread.
They sent for Mr. Robert Morrey, an expert Surgeon of Chester, who met
Doctor Smith, an eminent Physician of Shrewsbury. The Lady did not permit them
to see the Tumor, whereupon they could give no certain Judgment of it, but
prescribed an anodyne Cataplasm, which her women applied. Some few days after
the Abscess brake, and then Mr. Morrey was fetched again, and admitted to dress
it. The Abscess was large, and discharged a great quantity of crude Matter
making its way through the Skin by many eruptions. He purposed the laying them
into one: but the Patient not admitting of it, the Matter insinuated it self
deep amongst the Muscles of that part of the Belly. She was then advised to
take a Journey to London, but would not yield to it. In progress of time the
discharge of Matter rendered her lean and hectic: and at last, when she was
almost wasted with her Disease, she was brought to London in a Litter. Sir Fr.
Pr. and my self, being sent for, consulted with Mr. Morrey. We viewed the
Ulcer, and found it seated above the Os pubis, stretching toward the Os ilion,
discharging a purulent Matter. We dressed it with a proportionable Tent armed
with unguent. basilicon, Merc. praecipitat. and Empl. diachalcit. It was upon
consultation resolved that the Sinus should be laid open in order to the Cure;
which accordingly was snipt up about two inches with a pair of Probe-scissors,
and the incised Lips dressed with the common Digestive ex terebinth. cum
vitell. ovi. We afterward proceeded with Detergents, mundif. Paracelsi, etc.
After which Mr. Morrey took his leave of the Lady, and returned to Chester.
Whilst I treated this sinuous Ulcer, she took her Vulnerary drinks and
Balsamicks, also cordial Juleps made out of distilled Milk wherein had been
infused proper ingredients to dispose her blood to a better temper. But she
continued weak notwithstanding all our endeavors, and the Ulcer would not cure
farther then it was laid open. Therefore with one snip more I laid it open to
the very end, and dressed it with Digestives, with good hopes of Cure. But
after some days, finding the Matter not lessen, I made a search, and felt a
Sinus penetrate into the cavity of the Belly under the Os ilion. Considering
the original of the Distemper, I judged it to penetrate into the Vterus or
neighboring Glands, which I presumed were much swelled and ulcerated, and
would be a work of time; therefore proposed to her the removing to some
neighboring Village, to take the benefit of the air. She did so, and while she
was there I cured the Sinus to the very penetration, and did hope that it might
have been kept as a Fontanel. But it continued to matter very much. Upon which
a Consultation was called, wherein the deceased Mr. Ed. Molins advised a
Salivation by Merc. dulcis. She assented unto it, and to that purpose she was
brought again to her Lodging in Town; and by a few Doses of Merc. dulcis a
Salivation was raised, by which the Matter lessened, and the Ulcer dried. But a
Soreness affecting her Mouth, as is usual in Salivation, gave occasion to a
Surgeon, since dead, to insinuate himself into the Lady's Family, where he
inveighed so much against the proceeding by Mercury, as lessened my credit with
them; so that I was not capable afterward to serve the Lady. Yet I prevailed
so far, as that Sir Alex. Frasier was consulted; to whom (in their presence) I
represented the condition of the Patient, and the method of our proceedings. He
approved of what had been given, and assured the Lady it was the only way to
cure her; and that if she would drink a good Decoction of Sarsa, with the
Specificks usually prescribed in such cases, and afterward put her self into a
diet of Asses milk, she might enjoy a good health, and be obliged to
acknowledge the good service I had done her. But she was prepossessed with the
scandal of Salivating, and went out of Town a few days after, and, I suppose
not following the method prescribed, proper after Mercury, languished under a
Consumption, as such people generally do. No Mercury doing well, where the
prescribed method is not observed.

An Apothecary's wife living in my neighborhood in the Old Bailey, 4. Observat.
after a hard Childbed Labor, was seized with a Fever, and great pain in her
right Thigh, from the Groin and Hip downward to the Knee, swelling the Member
round, without Inflammation or discoloring the Skin. Sir Fr. Pr. was the
Physician, and I think Sir. C. Scarb. The Surgeons were Mr. Bing and my
self; and in the time of my Sickness Mr. Meredith a Surgeon dressed her. We
fomented the Parts diseased with decoct. summitat. absinth. majoranae, beton.
flor. ros. rub. cham. meliloti, summit. anethi, sem. lini, foenug. in wine and
water, and made a Cataplasm of the same Faeces with the addition of far. fabar.
orobi and lentium, with oxymel, ol. cham. etc. But the whole Member being
oppressed and weakened by the Influx, it apostemated, and Matter was felt to
fluctuate in several parts. We opened the most likely places by Causticks, and
gave vent to a large quantity of purulent Matter. Then dressing the Escar with
Lenients, we applied the Cataplasm and rolled it up. She was somewhat relieved,
but rested ill that night. At the next dressing we enlarged the Opening with a
pair of Scissors, and gave more way to the discharge of the Matter. Afterward
we continued our care in dressing her, and made other Apertions in parts more
declining, and endeavored Detersion by mundif. ex apio, etc. and by Injections
made of rad. aristoloch. rad. consolid. ireos, sarcocollae, thuris, myrrhae,
decocted in aq. hordei with mel ros. Many endeavors were used to cure these
Ulces; but the Matter grew more corrosive, and the flesh within dissolved, and
we felt the Thigh Bone bare. The Humors all emptied themselves upon this weak
Part; and, notwithstanding all our endeavors, the Patient languished, and died
in the space of eight weeks.

I was also called to another, 5. Observat.
who in Childbed labored of an Ulcer in her left Hip; the Flesh was corroded
round the breadth of the palm of a hand, the whole piece separated and fell off
from the Bone, leaving it bare, and the lips of the Ulcer sordid without
Inflammation or Tumor. I dressed the Bone with extract. scordii dissolved in
spir. vini, and the Ulcer with mundif. Paracels. cum Merc. praecipitat.
Traumatick Decoctions, Balsamicks, Cordials, Opiats, Juleps, were prescribed,
and our work went on successfully a while, the Bone exfoliating from the edges;
and the lips of the Ulcer digested and incarned with Sarcoticks myrrhae, aloes,
sarcocollae, cum sir. de ros. siccis. But in the while a vehement pain seized
the other Thigh, and it apostemated. We opened it on the outside, and felt the
Bone carious: we gave vent to a foetid Matter. I treated it as has been said
in the former Observation: the Matter daily poured out, and the Abscess grew
more hollow. To add to her affliction, she was tormented with a pain in her
right Shoulder and in her left Knee, so that she was necessitated to lie upon
her Hips, which exasperated them. At length the great discharge of Matter and
extremity of pain wasted her, Oedematous Swellings arose in her Legs and Feet,
and she languished and died.

A young Gentlewoman was brought to bed in the Country, and, 6. Observat.
being ill delivered, became indisposed with a Fever, and was pained in several
parts of her body. I found her grievously afflicted with corrosive Ulcers lying
deep in the flesh to the Bone: whole pieces of flesh separated from the Os
coccygis, and came off, leaving the Bones bare as that of a Skeleton. The flesh
also fell off in round pieces from some other parts of her body. Upon the left
Side, a little below her Breast, whilst I was with her, I saw it begin with a
round crack in the Skin, the compass of a Five-shilling-piece in Silver,
without Inflammation or Swelling, or other Matter then a little Sanies. It
penetrated deeper every day, and in three or four days fell off from the
Periosteum that covered the Ribs. I was much at a loss what to dress these
Ulcers with while they were cracking, for they were dry and without tumefaction
of the lips. What the actual Cautery might here have done, I do not know. I
sprinkled Merc. praecipitat. in some places, and in others alumen ustum mixed
with Praecipitate. I fomented some of them with lenient Decoctions, as rad.
althaeae, consolid. fol. malvae. sem. cydon. psyllii, and the like. Others I
treated with decoct. absinth. rutae, scordii, centaurii, cardui benedict. made
in a Lixivie, and Cataplasms were accordingly applied; but nothing checked
them. After the Skin and Flesh were separated, the remaining lips looked as
flesh parboiled; yet they afterward digested, and became better-conditioned;
but this creature had so many places of her Body diseased, as she had not one
free part to lie on. Our whole endeavors (after she was dressed) were, how to
contrive Pillows to give her ease. The women's work was, to quilt them several
ways, and make this and that part hollow suitably to the case: some parts of
the Pillows had to that purpose holes cut in them. Many ways were proposed, but
all to little purpose. She was always restless, frequently removing, and
roaring for ease. I being quite tired, Mr. Newman a Surgeon was sent for,
and relieved me. I soon returned again, and stayed till I grew diseased my
self, and with much difficulty returned home; then another Surgeon was sent
thither: and before I recovered of my own Sickness, I heard that she died most
painfully.

CHAP. VI. Of an Erysipelas.
AN Erysipelas is generated of a hot Serum in the Blood, Description.
and affects the superficies of the Skin with a shining, pale, red or citron
color, without Pulsation or circumscribed Tumor, spreading from one place to
antoher. It begins for the most part with some little Rigor, and is continued
with a Fever.

This Serum, Differences.
according to its several degrees of recess from its natural state toward
that of Choler, does produce several Diseases. When the Recess is less, and
the sharpness of it but little, then it does only cause a reddish Blush upon
the Skin: from which the name of Erysipelas is, or at least may be, derived;
which is therefore by some great Authors reckoned amongst the sanguineous
Tumors, because its color represents Blood. But what will they then say of an
Erysipelas that appears yellow, as most of them do? why should not this color
give it a new name from Choler? But I shall in this submit to the minds of
others. However I dare adventure to add, that a farther progress toward
acrimony makes an Herpes; and if the access of acrimony be very great, it
makes an Herpes exedens.

These Tumors are not always simple, but do usually mix themselves with other
Humors, and from thence get additionall Epithets; as Erysipelas oedematodes,
phlegmonoides, scirrhodes, etc. But that which I propose to treat of is the
Erysipelas a Sanguine bilioso, from choleric Blood, which affects only the
outward Parts, none of which escape its tenuity and subtilness, the Face, Head,
Breast, Back, Emunctories, Thighs, Legs and Arms* nay, when Bones lie bare,
(and so become as it were external Parts exposed to Air) they are also subject
to the same Malady; as we too frequently find in Wounds of the Scull and other
Fractures.

The Humor it self simply considered is very thin and sharp, much affecting
the Pores of the Skin, in which it usually lodges; and in a great measure
owes its confinement thither to an occlusion of them, they being covered with
a Cuticula, whose density hinders transpiration, from whence vered with a
Cuticula, whose density hinders transpiration, from whence pain and redness
arise: and oftentimes other Humors are invited thither, so that the Tumor
enlarges, and becomes compound. Whilst it is simple, the Skin only is the
seat of it, or the Periosteum, or a Bone that lies bare: when it is compound,
it will affect the Flesh also, and other neighboring Parts.

The Matter of this Erysipelas is already described to be a thin choleric
Humor. Causes.
The Fountain of it is the Blood, which by its capillary Arteries discharges
it upon that Part, as often as in bilious or malignant and pestilentiall Fevers
it is provoked thereunto. And this, if the discharge be sufficient, is called
Critical: if it be not sufficient, but that Nature, having discharged part of
the Matter, lies down under the rest, we call it Symptomaticall. So also when
it appears in the beginning of a Fever, it is then reckoned as a Symptom
thereof. Sometimes the Fever is vulgarly esteemed a Symptom of it, viz. when
the Erysipelas is first taken notice of, as if it had preceded the Fever:
whereas indeed there is no Erysipelas that has not a Fever, either visible or
latent, going before it.

External Causes do also concur to the production of an Erysipelas; as
Contusions, External Causes.
Fractures, and such like; also the heat of the Sun, Fire, sharp Medicaments,
etc. All which have this effect in choleric Bodies, where the Blood, being
turgid with that Humor, meets with any occasion of separation of Parts.

The Signs of an Erysipelas are, Signs.
a shining yellowish color mixed with red here and there vehement, heat, with a
pricking pain blistering the Skin, and creeping from one place to another. How
it differs from a Phlegmon may easily be discerned by comparing them: This
lies scattering in the Skin, scarce raising a Tumor; whereas the Phlegmon
lies deep amongst the Muscles, with elevation and circumscription, and is of a
deep red color.

A simple Erysipelas is not accompanied with cruel Symptoms: Prognostic.
there is a Fever, but that diminishes as the Erysipelas increases, according
to an Aphorism of Hippocr. When the Matter is sent from within outward, the
viscera are relieved, and the Patient recovers. This we see frequently in great
Diseases. But ab exteriori introredire malum, the sudden return of the Humor
inward is a bad sign, ill Symptoms frequently following, yea Death, especially
if the Emunctories were affected. Suppuration in an Erysipelas is not good,
according to Galen in his Commentaries on the same Aphorism, speaking of malign
Erysipelas, which in suppurating do for the most part corrupt; as we see by the
discolored Pustulae which arise about them. Also an Erysipelas upon a bare
Bone is ill; and if a Delirium happen, the hopes is less. That Erysipelas which
goes off by Transpiration is best.

In the Cure of an Erysipelas you are to consider the Habit of body: Cure.
for whilst it abounds with bilious Humors, there is no admitting of
Repellents; and by Discutients you will increase the heat, and consequently the
Disease. Therefore we proceed in the Cure of this, as has been said in a
Phlegmon, by Diet, Pharmacy, and Surgery.

Their Diet ought to be, as in hot Tumors, very sparing, Grewells, Panadoes,
and Chicken-broth, with cooling Herbs: their Drinks, Ptisans, Barley-cream,
Emulsions, and Juleps made of distilled Waters, as aqu. borrag. endiviae,
acetosae, lactucae, portulacae, etc. cum sir. e succo citr. limon. granat. rub.
idaei. violar. and the like; avoiding Wine in these Diseases. The Ancients
allowed only Water, and to weaker stomachs Beverage. Rest and Quiet of mind is
here to be desired, and the Belly to be kept soluble.

Concerning Phlebotomy there has been much dispute amongst Writers; but they
all agree that the Patient be let blood, in case the Erysipelas flow upon
Wounds and such like accidents, or where it affects the Head or Throat. In
the former of them it is allowed to prevent a Phrenitis, which otherwise might
ensue; and in the latter a Squinancy, in which there is danger of suffocation.
But if the Erysipelas be simple, and but in the Skin; we are then by Purgations
only to evacuate the redundancy of Humors, and prevent the ebullition of
Choler. The Purgatives ought to be lenient, such as have been prescribed in a
Phlegmon: as cassia, tamarinds, manna, cremor tartar. rhabarb. etc. in Whey, or
in Decoctions of Barley and opening Roots, with Syrups e cichor. cum rhabarb.
and de rhabarb. de ros. solutiv. also the Elect. lenitivum, diacathol. diaprun.
e succo ros. Clysters are also most proper in these Diseases. Having thus
emptied the bowels, you may make Revulsion by Friction, Cupping, etc. and by
Vomit, if the Erysipelas be in the nether Parts.

In your applications to the Part affected you are to consider whether the
Erysipelas was from an internal Cause, or external; also whether it be great,
or little. If it arise from an external Cause, you may safely apply
Refrigerants without any preceding Evacuation, because the Disease took its
original merely from the disaffection of the Part, whether it was from the
scorching heat of the Sun, sharp Medicines, Contusion, or Fracture, etc. and
not from the peccancy of the Humors. Therefore in such cases you are obliged
to appease the pain in the first place by lenient and cooling Medicaments.

If from an internal Cause, then evacuation by Purgatives is always to
precede, unless the Erysipelas be remote from the principal Parts, or that the
heat affecting the Member be vehement; in which case you shall not insist upon
Evacuation, but apply the milder Refrigerants to contemperate the heat, and
afterward proceed in evacuation of the bilious Humors.

But if it be in the Head or Face, Caution.
you are then to be cautious in your Applications, (Abstinence or a very
slender Diet being the best remedy to begin with) and to forbear to treat the
Parts affected till the Erysipelas have a while made its progress, and in some
degree spent its heat. But if something must be done to satisfy the Relations
and Bystanders, let the Topic rather be of an exsiccant quality then
repellent, lest some ill accident ensue.

We shall begin with an Erysipelas proceeding from external Causes. The
Medicaments generally prescribed in such cases are of a cooling humecting
quality, not too much astringent, lest you dry the Skin, and prohibit
Transpiration, and the Humor included become sharp, corroding the Parts, or
stir up Apostemation. The Simples are, umbilicus Veneris, polygonum, plantag.
trifolium palustre, portulac. psyllium, sempervivum, solanum. The Compounds are
of various sorts. cerussae viij. lithargyr. auri iv. mucilag. sem. psyllii,
cydon. extract. in aq. solani, succi solani, umbilici Vener. an. iij. aceti
cochl. iv. ol. ros. and myritill. an. lbss. sevi vitulini iv. coq. ad succor.
consumpt. deinde add thuris pulv. x. cerae q. s. fiat Ceratum. Ceratum Galeni
is also proper in these, so is unguent. nutritum, with a third part of
populeon. Linen dipped in any of the aforesaid Juices may be applied: but then
they must be renewed as often as they dry; otherwise they may increase the
heat, and excoriate the Part.

They who do use stronger Repellents ought to be careful lest, Caution.
in repressing the Inflammation, they do extinguish the natural heat of the
Part, or strike the Humor inward upon the Viscera.

In the Erysipelas proceeding from internal Causes decoctum salviae with a
Solution of Castle-soap is a good Fomentation; and ceratum Galeni applied after
it is sufficient. In those which are critical, a Cerote of ol. olivar. cum cera
alba has hitherto served my purpose. If the heat be vehement, I renew the
application daily; otherwise every other day suffices: and as the Blisters
arise, I cut them, to prevent Erosion. If afterward they do excoriate, I dress
them with unguent. tutiae, or the following Unguent upon Pledgits of Lint, by
which the serous Humor may be imbibed, and the Ulceration healed. If a
Fomentation be necessary, that of obibanum and Myrrh decocted in Wine may be
used. troch. alb. Rhas. and tutiae pulver. an. iss. plumbi usti j. camphorae
ss. cerussae iss. ol. ros. vj. sevi agnini iij. cerae alb. q. s. fiat Vnguentum
in mortario plumbeo per duas horas agitatum. This will cicatrize them. In those
of the Head Aetius proposes nidum birundinis pulver. and cum melle mixtum. He
anointed the Erysipelas with a feather, and delivers it to us as a Medicament
drying without any repelling quality. The Decoction of Coleworts is also
commended to bath them. But, unless there be great Excoriation, it will be
safer to leave the Cure of such Erysipelas to Nature, and evacuate and
contemperate the heat by internal Medicaments. Nor ought we to be over-forward
in our applications to the Face or parts about it: yet in my Practice I have
commonly used aq. calcis with ol. lini well shaken together with good success;
as also these following, where I thought more Exsiccation necessary. Take
distilled Vinegar in which has been boiled a piece of Lithargyr. or minium:
after it is settled, pour off the clearest of it, and filter it: put some of
this into a glass, and add ol. ros. to it, and shake them together. Or, in
case of present use, take saccharum Saturni, and beat it up with the said oil.
Either of these applied with a feather twice or thrice a day will serve your
purpose.

The Accidents which attend Erysipelas are the same as in a Phlegmon,
Correction of Accidents.
and do happen through the unseasonable use of Repellents: therefore when you
see the heat go off, and the Skin relax, or when the Patient feels himself
eased of that burning and pricking pain, forbear the use of your Repellents,
and apply Resolvents and Discutients, to corroborate the Part, and restore it
to its natural tone. For though the Erysipelas do not arise with any
circumscribed Tumor, yet in its progress the Member is swelled, and remains so
after the Erysipelas is breathed forth, and for want of Discussion does
frequently become oedematous. Therefore to prevent that, it may be reasonable
to foment the relaxed Parts with decoct. summitat. absinth. flor. cham.
sambuci, ros. rubr. etc. in Wine, with an addition of Brandy. If an Emplaster
be necessary, farinae fabar. orobi, an iv. sem. foenug. j. flor. sambuci, ros.
rub. an. iss. pulverizentur, coq. in hydromelite ad consumptionem humiditatis;
deinde add ol. anethi and cham. q. s. fiat Emplastrum. But if the Erysipelas
terminate in a hard Tumor, rad. althaeae, lilior. an. lbss. sem. lini and
foenug. an. ij. coq. in brodio capitis vervecini, and extrahatur mucilag. cui
add ol. ex pedibus bovinis, pingued. gallinae, ol. amygd. dulc. an. ij. adip.
agnin. and vitulia. an. iss. medullae ij. lithargyri aur. iv. cerae q. s. fiat
Ceratum.

A Person of quality, 1. Observat.
laboring under some indisposition of body and apprehension of a Fever, was by
her Physicians advice let blood about viij. in the left Arm. The second day
after she felt that Arm pained, but most about the Bend of it near where the
Vein was opened. I looked upon her Arm, and saw it was spread with a burning
heat of a palish yellow color, mixed with red here and there: the Skin was
tense and shining, also rimpled and blistered down from the Bend of the Arm to
the Hand: from the Elbow to the Shoulder it was of an inflamed red color. The
whole Arm was swelled by the influx of the Humor. This Erysipelas was thrust
forth by the strength of nature, and possibly it might be invited thither by
the Bandage. However it were, the Patient was relieved thereby; she
acknowledging her self more affected with the pricking and burning heat in her
Arm then any Sickness: yet she was not without some Fever. I thought it not
safe to be too busy with Repellents in this case: for though I might thereby
have prevented the increase, and cured it sooner; yet her Fever might have been
by that means augmented, and her Recovery hazarded, she being then with Child.
Therefore I resolved to give way for the Humor to spend it self by
Transpiration: to which purpose I fomented with a decoct. salviae with
Castle-soap dissolved in it, and the while made a Cerote of ol. olivar. and
Wax, and applied it in several pieces upon the Arm, with Bandage to retain it
on; during which her body was kept soluble Lenients, and a Pearl-Julep
prescribed to refresh her Spirits. Her Diet was Chicken-broth, Grewells, and
the like. As the Blisters arose, we snipt them, and to some of the biggest of
them applied unguent. tutiae upon Pledgits. During these Applications the heat
went off from the Parts it had first affected, and spread up higher to the
Breast and Scapula; it also affected the Hand and Fingers with Blisters: but
the tops of them being cut off, they healed, the Inflammation breathed forth in
four or five days after, and she recovered; but by reason of the Fluxion her
Arm was swelled. For the removal of which I directed them to foment it with
the Decoction prescribed in the Method of Cure, by which, with the help of
Bandage, it discussed. The roughness of the Skin was afterward cleared with
Pomatum.

A Youth about seven or eight years old, 2. Observat.
laboring under a complication of Diseases from his Mesentery and Kidneys, was
ordered by his Physician to have a Fontanell made in his left Arm: I made it,
and left it well digested. About ten days after that Arm was overspred with an
Erysipelas from the Shoulder to the Wrist, here and there blistered. I threw
out the Pea, and dressed the Ulcer with unguent. basilicon and Praecipitate, then
fomented the Arm with Milk, applying over it ceratum Galeni with Bandage. By
this I designed to give transpiration to the Part whilst the Physician did
treat the Fever. The next day I renewed the Dressings in his presence, and the
Ulcer being somewhat digested, I put in a Pea by his advice, and dressed the
Arm as before, thereby curing the Erysipelas in few days: but the Child
remaining indisposed, the Erysipelas burst forth againg, and was also cured by
the same method. Then the Patient was purged, and sent into the Air near
Barnet, where he drank those Waters, and being thereby relieved, was brought
back to his Parents. But within sew days after he relapsed, and an Erysipelas
discharged it self again on the same Arm, with a small Phlegmon below the Elbow
on the outside. It suppurated, and was opened by a Caustic, and cured
according to that Method. The Erysipelas was also cured by the Cerote as
before. After this the Child brake out of the Smallpox, and by the great
endeavors of the Physicians was freed of that Disease; but languished and died
soon after. Upon the opening of his body, as Stone of the bigness and shape of
an Almond was found in his left Ureter. We remembered the constant pain he had
in his Back long before the first Erysipelas, and thought that might be the
occasional cause of all these Maladies; viz. the continuation of pain caused
many reiterated Fevers and Fermentations in the blood, of which these
forementioned Diseases were the effects. A thing not rare in Surgery, to
find the Smallpox produced by the pain of an Ulcer, as also to break out after
the curing of them.

A Gentleman of about sixty years of age, 3. Observat.
having labored many years under an Asthma, was seized with a pain in his left
Side, and a Pleurisy followed, with great oppression in his Lungs, his former
accustomed way of discharge by expectoration being suppressed. Doctor Jasper
Nedham was sent for. By his prescription the Patient was let blood ten ounces:
Lohochs and Pectoralls, also opening Apozems, were prescribed, and Venaesection
repeated; by which the Patient was relieved. Then a Fontanell was cut in his
left Arm, which being digested, the Physician and Surgeon were dismissed. A
few days after the Patient relapsed, and an Erysipelas thrust out the whole
length of his Arm. I was fetched, and saw it swelled, the Cuticula vesicated,
and shining with a burning heat of a citron color from the Fontanell downward,
but upward to the Shoulder it was more red. His Friends and himself thought the
Inflammation to proceed through default of the Fontanell, as not made in the
right place. But that was an error in them: for it was a translation of part
of that Humor which affected his Lungs, and was by the strength of nature
discharged upon this Part, to which the too strict Bandage might possibly
contribute; there being nothing more ordinary then such discharges upon
Fontanells: and it was well for him that it there disburthen'd it self. The
Physician and my self concluded it a pure Erysipelas, and that it required to
be breathed forth: to which purpose I applied a Cerote of Wax and Oil over all
the Arm, and put a lesser Pea into the Fontanell, with a Pledgit of unguent.
diapompholyg. and Emplast. diachalcit. rolling up the Arm from the Hand to the
Shoulder. The next day in dressing him I snipt the Blisters, to let out the
serous Humor, which might otherwise have ulcerated the Skin. The day after,
observing the heat to go off, I put in a larger Pea, and dressed his Arm as I
did the day before. In two or three days after, the Arm being as it were freed
of the Erysipelas, I fixed the Fontanell, (which he keeps to this day:) but the
Erysipelas spread to that Scapula and Clavicle, and so down to his Breast and
Back. I dressed it with the same Cerote, and left him enough of it for his
Servants to dress him with: during which Purgatives were repeated, and he was
cured by the application of the said Cerote.

A person of about sixty four years of age, of a melancholic dry Constitution,
4. Observat.
was in the Winter-season taken with a Quartan-ague, and after the second Fit
was seized with a pain in his left Leg, which increasing, he sent for me. The
Leg was inflamed from the Knee to the Foot: the Inflammation of the Skin was of
a more deep red color then is usually seen in a true Erysipelas, it indeed
partaking somewhat of a Phlegmon; but the Swelling was without circumscription;
it was tense and shining, made by a Translation of his Ague: so that by this,
if well managed, he was in a possibility of being freed of that. Therefore I
proposed by Lenients to moderate the heat, and breath out the Humor. Having
satisfied him, that it was necessary to proceed deliberately with it, I treated
it as in the former Observation has been said, and dressed it twice or thrice
with the said Cerote; and, having assuaged the heat and pain in it, I showed
his Servants how to dress it, and gave directions to the Patient in the
regulation of his Diet, etc. and took my leave; advising them not to dress it
too often, lest upon so doing the Inflammation should go off before the
morbifick Matter were spent. From the time the Inflammation was made in his Leg
he had no more Fits of his Ague, and his Leg became well without the
application of other Medicaments. Upon the going off of the Inflammation I made
him a Fontanell in that Leg, which he continues still.

A Gentleman of about sixty years of age, of a full Body, 5. Observat.
with a short Neck, and of a sanguine Complexion, having long labored under
the apprehension of an Apoplexy, his Mouth having some while been a little
distorted by a Paralysis of his Cheek and Tongue, was let blound in the Neck
about ten ounces. The night after he was seized with a pain in his right Leg
from his Knee to his Toes, with great Inflammation. For the appeasing of which
a Fomentation was brought him by some Pretender in Surgery, and applied with
course woollen Stupes; one of which was bound upon his Leg. This Leg growing
from that time more painful, I was fetched to him; when, taking off the
Stupes, I found the Leg exceedingly inflamed and blistered, so that the Stupe
sticking in the Sores had excoriated the Part with great pain and Fluxion,
which drew after it a small Phlegmon. There was in this Patient great need of
making a Revulsion from his Head; but this was by woollen Stupes was of too
much danger to be continued. I wanted a Fomentation to cleanse and refresh the
Part, and, being in haste, caused some water to be heated, with a handful of
Wheat-bran: which being strained, I bathed the Member with a Sponge; then
applied unguent. tutiae upon Pledgits of Lint on the Excoriations, and a Cerote
of Wax and Oil over the Leg, and an anodyne Cataplasm on the Tubercle. These
Dressings were renewed daily, till the Accidents were diminished, and the
Tumor suppurated. Then I gave a vent to the Matter, and proceeding by
Digestion, made no haste in the Cure, but expected rather that the Plethora
should be carried off the while by Purgatives, and the Patient relieved in his
Head. The Physicians were of another mind, affirming that it would be time
enough when his Leg should be cured. I was therefore obliged to hasten: however
I made him a couple of Issues inter Scapulas; and having well-near cured that
Tubercle in his Ham, I left a Pea in it to keep it open as a Fontanel. Though
that Leg was not so fit for it, by reason of the great Inflammation it had
labored under; yet I thought all little enough for Derivation, and would
gladly have continued the Leg more sore: but I obeyed my order, and left him
cured of his Leg.

A Gentlewoman of about forty years of age, 6. Observat.
of a full Body, was taken with Rigor and Fever. After some days she
complained of a pain in her left Shoulder, and a pricking heat in that Arm. I
was sent for, and perceived it to be an Erysipelas thrusting out: wherefore
thinking she might be much relieved thereby, I dissuaded her from applying any
thing to it. But the heat and pain increasing, she was advised to apply some
cooling Ointment to it, which was thought excellent for Inflammations. She
permitted it; and it did indeed check the Inflammation, but her Fever
increased, with a Delirium. She was let blood, cupp'd and blistered, and all
things were done to draw back the Matter; but she died.

A Man of about 27 or 28 years old, 7. Observat.
riding abroad wit some Friends in hot weather, his body being heated by
Good-fellowship, was seized with an Erysipelas in his Face. I presently let him
blood, and bathed it with a decoct. salviae cum sapone Veneto, and left
directions to wet his Face often with it. I also directed a Clyster to be given
him that night, and a Cordial Julep upon occasin. In the morning he was hot,
and had rested ill, and the Erysipelas was spread to his Neck, and affected his
left Ear with great pain, and reached up to his Forehead amongst the Hair. I
let him blood again, and advised him to keep his bed, and put himself into a
Sweat with a draught of Possetdrink wherein had been boiled a little
Hartshorn, a few opening Roots and Marigold-flowers. I also sent him a glass
of aqua calcis with ol. lini beat in it, with direction to anoint his Face with
a feather, it being very much heated and swelled: he was also purged with
Lenients, some of those which have been set down in the method of Cure. By this
method the Erysipelas went quite off in 10 or 12 days. Then I bathed it with
decoct. malvae, viol. etc. to bring off the Scurf, and afterward with
Butter-milk, to supple it, and anointed his face with Pomatum.

A Gentleman some years since, 8. Observat.
very curious and neat in wearing his Hair, was persuaded to permit it to be
boiled as it grew on his Head: by which doing an Erysipelas was raised in the
hairy Scalp. I let him blood in the Arm, and purged him with Lenients; all
things else were done for Revulsion: but, by reason of his Hair, there were no
applications made to relieve the Part affected; whereupon a Suppuration
followed; which put me upon a necessity of cutting it off, and applying
Fomentations discutient and drying. I met with much difficulty in curing the
Ulcer; but at last it was cured as a corrosive Ulcer, to which I refer you.

An Erysipelas arising from an internal Cause affecting the Head requires the
timely advice of a Physician, it frequently causing grievous Accidents, as
Fever, Delirium, etc. and, being subject to great Ulcerations with
putrefaction, does frequently corrupt the Flesh to the Bone. Sad instances may
be given of these; (they ending for the most part in Death:) therefore it were
to be wished in such cases, that the Hair be timely cut off, for it contributes
much to the Erosion that happens.

An Erysipelas affecting the Face of a Person of Honor, 9. Observat.
he consulted Sir Chapter Scarburgh and other Physicians: they prescribed Bleeding
to the quantity of eight ounces, also Clysters and lenient Purgatives to keep
his body soluble. During the time of Inflammation he was feverish and
indisposed, also subject to Fainting and the like. In consideration whereof he
was advised to keep his bed, and sometimes to dispose himself to breathing
Sweats with the Countess of Kent's Powder: cordial Juleps were also prescribed
him. The Erysipelas shifted from one part to another in and about his Face.
They applied no Medicaments to the Parts diseased. In the declination of it I
saw it arise again fresh in his Forehead with a Swelling very high, only from
the streightness of his Cap: which I taking notice of, and advising it to be
slackned, the Swelling sunk again few hours. I instance this only to show how
small a thing will raise this disturbance where the bilious Humors are in
ferment. As his Erysipelas spent it self, they purged him, and he recovered. An
Erysipelas sometime affecting one particular part of the Head or Face, as the
Eye, Nose or Ear, has given mech trouble to the Physician and Surgeon in
removing it.

It is not many days since I was called to one laboring of an Erysipelas on
his right Ear. It had been diseased four or five days before I came: 10.
Observat.
it was prodigiously swelled and inflamed; and, by reason of the acrimony of
the Humor which was included between the Folds of the Ear and the Ear and
Scalp, there was great Excoriation. I fomented it with decoct. salviae cum
sapone, dressed it with that Preparation of acet. litharg. cum ol. ros. above
proposed in the method of Cure, and left her some of it to dress her self as
occasion should offer; then let her blood, and directed a Clyster to be given
her. The next day I purged her with Whey and Manna, and repeated it again and
again. She lived a few miles out of Town, which put me upon the necessity of
committing the Cure of it to themselves, with Directions, and Medicaments such
as I have above proposed. It dried up the external heat; but the Fluxion, which
lay more internally, after all apostemated, and was cured accordingly.

I was called in by my kind neighbor Doctor Denton to a young Woman who had
been afflicted with an Erysipelas, which had spread over all her Face: 11.
Observat.
it had shifted often: at length she was cured thereof by the said Physician;
yet was the right Eye closed with the Inflammation and Swelling from the
relics of that Erysipelas, and the lower Lid apostemated, and the Matter was
ready to make its way inwardly into the hollow of the Eye. We opened it by
Incision, discharging a proportionable quantity of Matter; the remainder of
which we digested and cleansed to a perfect Cicatrice by unguent.
diapompholygos, discussing the Tumor in the mean while by Fomentations.

CHAP. VII. Of a Furuncle or Boil.
FVrunculus is a painful Tubercle of the bigness of a Pigeon's Egg,
Description.
with a broad basis, arising in a Cone. It is generally called a Boil, and in
its state is accompanied with Inflammatio, Pulsation, and Tension.

It proceeds from a gross vicious blood separated from the rest a
unprofitable, Cause.
and is cast forth by the strength of nature into the external parts of the
body.

It differs as it is greater or less, Differences.
and as it affects the Skin or lies deeper in the Flesh: it is also accounted
malign, or benign. Those that are more deep partake of the nature of a
Carbuncle, and are mistaken for such, but are not of so adust or corrupt an
Humor. Furunculus differs also from a Carbuncle, in that this comes to
Suppuration, which the other never does.

A Furuncle is in its beginning round, Signs.
hard, and inflamed; and as it increases it rises up with an acute head, and
sometimes a Pustule: and then it is more inflamed and painful, (whence arises
that expression, As sore as a Boil,) especially when it arrives at its state,
which is about the eighth or ninth day. If the Boil be malign, it is of a black
dusky color: there is also a Fever and other untoward Symptoms, and a thin
Sanies issues from it; and if it does digest, it is with much difficulty.

Boils are for the most part without danger. Prognostic
The common sort do predict Health, and frequently cure though nothing be
applied to them; for they come to maturity and break of their own accord. But
when they arise in nervous parts of the Arms or Legs, they affect the
neighboring Emunctory. In the Nose or Ears they are very painful, and
vexatious to cure.

The Cure consists in the regulation of Diet and in Evacuation, Cure.
like as in a Phlegmon; only the Applications in these ought to be maturative,
they always terminating in Matter, and being, as you may perceive by the
toughness of the Matter, not capable of Resolution.

The Maturatives are, rad. and fol. althaeae, malvae, rad. lilior. uvae passae,
ficus, and all the emollient Gums, galbanum. ammoniac. etc. The Compounds are,
Empl. diachyl. cum gummi, de meliloto, tripharmacon, de mucilaginibus. In the
extremity of pain you may assuage the heat with this or such like: mucilag.
sem. psyllii, altaeae, lini, an. jss. far. hordei ij. ol. llior. axung.
gallinae, an. j. butyri recent. ss. croci j. cum vitell. ovi fiat Cataplasma.
When the Tumor is broken, deterge that tough Matter with mundif. ex apio, and
apply this or such like Cerote over the Tumor; sevi cervini and vitulini an.
iij. axung. anseris j. terebinth. jss. cerae q. s. fiat Ceratum.

IN a Man of about fifty years of age, 1. Observat.
of a healthy strong Body, journeying to London, a Boil rose upon his Wrist. He
applied to it an Emplaster of Shoemakers-wax. When he came to me it was hard
and inflamed. I dressed it with the abovesaid Cataplasm, by which it
suppurated. As the Pustule fretted off, a hot Sanies issued forth in a small
quantity. I dressed the Pustule with unguent. basilic. cum vitell. ovi upon a
Pledgit, and continued the application of the Cataplasm over all. The next day
I took off the Dressings, and found the Cuticula cast off, and the acute end of
the Boil red, and a thick white Matter sticking in it. I dressed it as before,
and the second day after again, and saw the Cone or head of the Boil broken
off, and that thick tough Matter lying in it; which Matter likewise appeared
round about through the several Eruptions it had made. I dressed it with
mundif. ex apio, and applied the Cerote Sevi cervini over it. The second day
after I found the Openings broke one into another, and the tough Matter
sticking in them as in a Honeycomb. At that time the Ulcer was near as broad
as a Half-crown. I continued the Mundificative and Cerote, and dressed it every
other day. As this tough Matter digested out, it incarned underneath, and
contracted, and healed as fast, and cicatrized by the application of unguent.
tutiae, leaving little Scar, and no hardness, behind it.

Some years since I was sent for early one morning to a Gentleman about forty
years of age, 2. Observat.
who was extremely pained with a Boil on th outside of his left Thigh. I
pulled off the Emplaster, which was of galbanum, and saw the Boil was in its
state, and ready to break. It was much inflamed, and the Pustule was of a livid
color. I dressed the Pustule with ol. ros. cum vitell. ovi, and applied over
the inflamed Boil an Emplaster of bailicon. I returned that night, and dressed
it with the Cataplasm above prescribed, by which it suppurated, the Cuticula
brake off, and a thin Sanies with some little Matter discharged. As the Boil
came more to maturity, the Pustule or head brake off, and made way for the
Matter to digest out: and accordingly the Ulcer cured. An Empirick, angry that
his Medicaments were thrown off, and mine applied, complained to a Person of
Honor, whose Family I then attended, that this Gentleman labored under a
Carbuncle or Plaguefore: but I cleared my self to that Person, and shall show
you in its proper place, that a Carbuncle is another kind of Boil.

A Gentleman near seventy years old was sorely afflicted with a Furuncle within
his Nostrills, and about his Nose with great Inflammation and hardness. 3.
Observat.
I fomented the diseased Parts with decoct. summitat. althaeae, malvae, viol.
flor. chamaem. meliloti, sem. lini and psyllii, and with a Syringe injected
some of the same liquour into his Nostrills, and applied the forementioned
Cataplasm over his Nose. I purpose the letting him blood in the Arm, but it
would not be admitted by reason of his age: but by setting on Leeches behind
his Ears I took away some blood; also by blistering the Neck and Shoulders I
endeavored Revulsion, by Clysters kept his body soluble, and continued the
Applications, by which his pain was somewhat mitigated. After five or six days
the Skin became thin, and a white Matter showed it self in several places
within and about his Nose, and gradually made its way through many small
Openings. I made it more way here and there with the point of a Lancet, and
dressed them cum vitell. ovi and ol. lilior. and continued the use of the
Fomentation, and applied the Cerote. I was much troubled to think what would
become of his Nose, the exterior and interior parts being all stuffed with that
clammy Matter, so that it would not issue out; and, when it should, I doubted
it would leave little coverture for the Cartilagues. To hasten it out, I daily
dropped in a mixture of mel ros. cum succo apii decocted; and by conveying a big
Tent dipped in the same into each Nostrill, I pressed the Matter outward, and
sometimes pulled it away with my Forceps. It came out as if it had been broken
pieces of the Spinalis medulla, and burst some of the Openings into one
another; which I was sorry to see. But the Matter not being accompanied with
acrimony, the hollowness filled up, and the distended Lips, falling near one
another, agglutinated as the Matter digested out: and by the Compression I made
with my Tents within the Nostrills I enlarged them, and furthered the well
cicatrizing of the Ulcer; which was effected in few days after with Cicatrices
not unseemly.

CHAP. VIII. Of Epinyctis and Terminthus.
THere are yet two sorts of painful Tubercles which I have met with in my
Practice: they are taken notice of by the Ancients under the names of Epinyctis
and Terminthus; a couple of angry Pustules, affecting the Skin in the Arms,
Hands and Thighs. They do not differ much one from another, so may well be
entered together.

The Epinyctis is of the bigness of a Lupin, Description.
of a dusky red, and sometimes of a livid and pale color, with great
Inflammation and pain. It discharges first a Sanies, then a bloody Matter.
Terminthus is somewhat less, of a blackish color: it breaks and gleets, and
within a day or two the Pustule separates, and comes away in a Slough, and from
that time it digests and heals.

They both proceed from an excessive heat in the Blood, Cause.
but are without malignity or danger, and cure with little difficulty, if there
be no error committed in Surgery.

The Cure consists in Evacuation by Bleeding, Cure.
Purging, and regulation in Diet, etc. as in a Phlegmon.

The external Applications commended to us by the Ancients are, fol. cientae,
solan. plantag. cum polenta; or, uvas passas mundatas, and contusas superpone:
and to wash them with aqua salita, to dry up the Matter, and prevent Erosion;
afterward to dress them with a mixture of equal parts of sulphur viv. and
spum. argenti cum vino. I never was consulted in these till they were arrived
at their height, and then found Anodynes of most use, and applied such as have
been prescribed in the former Chapter, and afterward healed them with unguent.
tutiae.

A Maid came recommended to me with the former of these Tubercles on the inside
of her Arm of the bigness of the greater sort of Lupins, 1. Observat. of an
Epinyctis.
of a livid color, with a small acute Pustule rising up in the middle of it.
It was accompanied with great Inflammation, affecting the Tendons with hardness
in the Joint. I prescribed her that Cataplasm ex mucilag. sem. psyllii,
althaeae, lini, etc. as in the Chapter of Furuncle, and embrocated the Tendons
affected with ol. ros. and cham. By this the Tubercle was brought near
Suppuration, the Pustule first brake, and discharged a thin Sanies. I dressed
it cum vitello ovi, and about two days after the Tubercle it self thrust out a
bloody Matter. I dressed it with unguent. basilic. added to the vitell. ovi,
and applied cerat. dialthaeae, and continued the Embrocation. The Matter from
that time was daily better digested, and the pain diminished: it was healed
with unguent. diapompholyg. and Empl. e bolo.

A young Gentleman having such another on the outside of his Wrist was
recommended to some body who opened it by Incision: 2. Observat. of an
Epinyctis.
but from that time it became more exceeding painful. He came to me with it
hard and dry, and it had communicated its Anguish all along by the Tendons and
Nerves to that Axilla with several Glands. I embrocated the Arm from the Axilla
to the Knuckles of that Hand with ol. ros. cum aceto, and applied Empl. e bolo
upon those Glands. To the Tubercle I applied unguent. basilic. cum ol. ros.
spread indifferent thick in the form of an Emplaster, and dressed it so twice a
day. I purposed the next morning to have let him blood; but he was easier: and
the same night I felt the Tubercle softer, and saw a bloody Matter thrust out.
From that time it digested better, and the Accidents diminished: in four or
five days after the Glands resolved, and the Ulcer cured by the application of
unguent. tutiae, etc.

Of the latter sort there arose one in the Knuckle leading to the Forefinger
of a Gentlewoman of about forty years of age. 3. Observat. of a Terminthus.
An old acquaintance of mine called me to the sight of it. It was a small
Tubercle inflamed round its basis, having a black head, and a long inflamed
Streak passing from it to a Fontanel which she had on that Arm. Whether it did
run upward from the Pustule to the Fontanel, and affect it, or descend from it
to the Pustule, I know not: however it was, there were marks of communication
from one to the other, and both were painful, and the Patient was indisposed
with a Fever. In the Fontanel there was a small Orenge-pea, which I cast out,
and put in a common one, and dressed it with Lenients, and an Emplaster to
retain them on. I dressed the Pustule with unguent. basilic. cum vitell. ovi,
and applied the forementioned Cerote prescribed in Furuncle. It suppurated the
next day, and the head of it cast off in a Slough. I clipped off the loose skin
from it, and dressed it with unguent. tutiae, and in five or six days
cicatrized it. During the Cure the Patient was afflicted with a Diarrhaea,
which was purged off. After which she was hot and feverish, and troubled with a
Rheumatismus; for which she was let blood, and cured.

CHAP. IX. Of Inflammatory Tumors of the Glandules.
UNder this Head I comprehend all those Tumors of the Glandules which have
Blood for their essential ingredient. They are usually reckoned Phyma,
Phygethlon, Bubo, Parotis. It is true that Strumae and Scrofulae do sometimes
partake of Blood and become Phlegmonoide, etc. but that is not essential to
them: witness the great numbers that never come to inflame or suppurate.

OF those that are essentially bloody Tumors, Phyma.
though few of them pure Phlegmons, PHYMA is the first; Description.
which is an Inflammation affecting the Glandules under the Jaws. I mean the
conglobate Glands: viz. neither the internal salivary, which is Ranula; nor the
external, which is Parotis. The name of Phyma is also given to the Phlegmonoide
Tumors in and about the Anus, because of their near resemblance to glandulous
Tumors, if they be not really such.

They are caused by a mixture of impure Blood with Pituita. Cause.
Children are most subject to them; and in them they are hastened by their
wearing of Stays, a way to keep their Head-cloaths on.

The Tumor is round and hard; Signs.
in time of Suppuration it inflames, and is accompanied with Pulsation,
Tension, etc. as in a Phlegmon, but does sooner suppurate.

They have been taken by some for Strumae: Difference.
but they differ from a Struma, which, being contained in a Cystis, does
require to be eradicated by Escaroticks after Suppuration and discharge of its
Matter; but these after discharge of Matter are cured either of themselves, or
by the ordinary intensions of Digestion, etc. They are without danger, and
easy of Cure.

The method of Cure is the same with that of the little Phlegmon: Cure.
only these do not admit of Repellents; but from their very beginning must
either be discussed, or brought to suppurate. And indeed all that I have ever
seen did terminate by Suppuration. In the beginning we treat them with Empl.
diachyl. cum gummi, de meliloto, and the like: or, in case of pain, with
maturative Cataplasms, as has been set down in Phlegmon and Furunculus; as
rad. althaeae, lilior. sem. lini, psyllii, etc.

A Gentleman fetched me one night from my house to see his only Child, 1.
Observat.
about a year old, laboring of one of those Tumors under the right Jaw: it
was round and hard, of a pale color, and was supposed the King's Evil. I
applied Empl. diachyl. cum gummi, and, in stead of the Stay, put on a folded
linen cloth about it, to retain the Dressing. After three or four days I
visited the Child again, and saw the Tumor red, tending to Suppuration. I then
dressed with unguent. basilic. and a Plaster; and the third day after, feeling
the Tumor well suppurated, opened it by the milder Caustic, and discharged a
Matter of good color and consistence. I dressed it with Lenients, and after
separation of the Escar disposed it to incarn by the common Sarcoticks, and by
the use of the Vitriol-stone; and afterward with unguent. de lithargyro cured
it in few days.

Such another, 2. Observat.
but bigger, was that in a Girl of about nine years old, where Doctor Rugely
was the Physician. She had been diseased with a Fever, and some Relics of
that Matter discharged themselves in a Swelling under the right Jaw as big as a
Pullet's egg. It was suppurated, and required vent, which I gave it by
Incision; but could not cure it till I had applied a Caustic upon the
depending part. The place not being very capable of Bandage, it could not be
treated so advantageously when opened by Incision, and dressed with Tents: but
after the laying it more open by Caustic, the Matter plentifully discharged,
and the Abscess cured as the former. Many of these have been brought to me upon
suspicion of the King's Evil: some of which my Servants have cured by my
directions after the abovesaid manner. You will meet with more of this Tumor
in the Treatise of the Diseases of the Podex.

PHYGETHLON is a Tumor affecting the glandulous parts under the Jaws,
Phygethlon. Difference.
and is called Panus. It differs from Phyma, in that it has a mixture with
Bilis, as the other had with Pituita, and lies round and flat as a Cake under
the Jaws.

It is cured after the same manner as the other; Cure.
so will not be worth the troubling the Reader with many Instances of it. I
shall give you one, whereby you may distinguish it from Phyma and other Tumors.

A little Girl was brought to me upon a supposition of having the Evil.
Observation.
She had a flat, hard, round Tumor lying under her Chin and part of the right
Jaw down toward her Throat: it was of a yellowish red color, not unlike that
in an Erysipelas, but without Vesication. I directed one of my Servants to make
a Cataplasm ex rad. lilior. alb. etc. by the application of which it suppurated
in three or four days, and discharged a well-digested Matter; during which the
hardness resolved, and it cured in seven days by the only use of that
Cataplasm.

THE Tumor called BVBO is an Inflammation of the Glandules in the Emunctories
of the Groin or Arm-pit. Bubo.


It takes its Differences from the quality of the Humor: Differences.
and so they are either benign, or malign. The latter sort are either venereal,
or pestilential.

The Causes of Bubo are internal, or external. Causes.
The former are vicious Humors abounding in the Blood or in the Nerves
excreted sometimes critically, sometimes symptomatically. The external Causes
may be pain affecting the exterior Parts: so a Wound in the Hand or Arm, nay
the Finger, will affect the Arm-pit with a Tumor. You have an Instance of it
in Phlegmon. A Cancer in the Breast does the same. So an Ulcer in the Foot
affects the Groin. In the Treatise of Struma you may see some Instances of it.

A Fontanel in the Leg distempered with pain caused a swelling of the Glands in
Inguine. I was consulted about the Swelling, and, Observat.
enquiring of the reason of the sudden Tumor, found the Fontanel disturbed by
walking much that day. I dressed the Fontanel with Lenients; and the Tumors of
the Glands in Inguine, which were risen like so many Scrofulae, relaxed, and
were scarce to be felt the next day.

A Bubo arises in the Emunctories with pain, Inflammation, hardness, Signs.
etc. as in a Phlegmon. If it was made by Crisis, then a Fever preceded: if
there were none, then other Causes must be enquired after: as, whether pain
preceded in some remote Part; also, whether it be pestilential, or venereal.

Buboes that are neither malign nor contagious are not dangerous, Prognostic.
if they suppurate kindly, and are timely opened: but if the contrary happen,
they may degenerate into Fistulae, and then are not without danger. If they
proceed from a Translation of Matter, (as sometimes from the Parts near the
head of the Vena cava and top of the Breast or bottom of the Neck into the
Armpits, or from the lower parts of the Belly in the Glands and other Parts
near the Rami iliaci into the Inguina) the Cure is difficult: and if the Lungs
above, or the Vterus, Bladder, or Rectum below, partake in the Tumor, it is
more desperate.

A Bubo, according to the usual method of Practice, Cure.
ought not to be repelled: therefore in order to the Cure you are to consider
the Cause; and if it were by Crisis, you are either to breath it forth by
Discutients, or hasten Maturation. If the Crisis be imperfect by reason of the
weakness of the expulsive faculty, you ought by Attraction to help it forward,
either by Cupping-glasses, or by the application of sour Leaven, black Soap,
sterc. columbin. sem. sinapis, urticae, Figs, roasted Onions, etc. Or, cepam
magnam, excavetur, and impleatur cavitas theriaca; deinde papyro involuta coq.
sub cineribus calid. and cum ol. scorpion. fiat Cataplasma, addendo fermenti
acer. ss. Misc. Or, Empl. diachyl. cum gummi ij. picis Burgund. ammoniac.
solut. an. ss. pulv. aristoloch. rot. rad. gentianae, an. j. cum ol. scorpion.
fiat Ceratum. All the hot Gums are hereto proper. But if it be symptomatical,
it betokens Plethora, which ought to be removed by Bleeding. Purging is also
necessary, both to carry off the quantity, and also to amend the evil quality
of the Humor, Plethora in this case being usually cacochymical: yet must not
our purging be too violent, but only such as may assist nature in making a due
separation of the peccant Humors from the mass of Blood. And if it was caused
by pain from some other Part, you ought by Lenients to assuage that pain, and
by moderate Discutients mixed with Repellents scatter that Humor in the
Emunctories. But if it will come to Suppuration, you shall hasten the Opening
of it, and digest, incarn and cicatrize it, as is said in the general Chapter
of Abscesses, and will be showed in the following Observations.

A Man of about fifty years old, 1. Observat.
of a full Body and strong Constitution, was taken with a pain under his right
Arm with hardness and Inflammation. I was sent for, and, concluding it a Bubo;
thrust forth by the strength of nature, applied Empl. diachyl. cum gummi,
designing not to dress it again till it was near suppurated: but the Tumor
increasing with great pain and inflamed redness, I was put upon a necessity of
applying anodyne Cataplasms. Within few days after, it being suppurated, I
opened it by Incision, and discharged a well-concocted Matter: then dressed it
with unguent. basilicon cum vitell. ovi upon a Tent, and applied an Empl.
diachyl. simpl. malaxed with unguent. dialthaeae, and afterward dressed it
with mundif. Paracels. Having so disposed it to heal, I left Dressings, and
after three or four days visited the Patient again: when, observing the
hardness digested off, and the Abscess fit to cicatrize, I left off the use of
the Tent, and dressed it with a Pledgit of unguent. diapomphol. and the Cerote
over it, and left them wherewithal to finish the Cure. But a few days after
they sent for me again. I found it swelled, and the Matter issuing from it thin
and foetid, much more in quantity then I could expect. I enlarged the Opening
by Incision, and there came forth a Tent which in his Servants Dressing had
slipped into the Abscess. From that time the Matter lessened, and the Abscess
cured without relapse by the method aforesaid.

A married Wife, 2. Observat.
of about thirty four years of age, having been long diseased with Hystericall
Fits, with a complication of other Maladies, after many unsuccessfull attempts,
was put into the hands of Sir Fra. Pr. who prescribed Merc. dulc. j. in cons.
cichorii. The second Dose salivated her sixteen or seventeen days, whereby she
was relieved for some months: but then she complained of a pain in her left
Groin, which growing bigger, and raising the Parts about it into a Tumor, she
embrocated it by my advice with ol. lumbric. After a few days, the Tumor more
increasing with Inflammation and hardness, I applied Emplast. mucilag. with a
third part of Emplast. diachyl. cum gummi. The fourth day after, feeling the
Tumor suppurated, I opened it by a Caustic, and discharged a proportionable
quantity of Matter well digested; then dressed it with Lenients, to hasten the
separation of the Escar. While the Escar was separating, a long Streak of red
appeared stretching down from the Inguen along the middle of the Thigh toward
the Ham. I embrocated it with ol. ros. and applied cerat. Galeni. The next day
I felt Matter in it, and saw the inflamed Streak stretch lower down. I applied
a little of my milder Caustic upon the upper part of it, which was about three
fingers breadth from the Tumor in Inguine, and gave vent to a little digested
Matter, dressing it with Lenients. This while the Abscess in the Groin was in
good temper, and disposed to heal: but the aforesaid inflamed Streak passed
down to the Ham, and so along the Musculus gastrocnemius to the great Tendon of
it which leads to the Heel, and had Matter in it the whole length. In less
space then four days I made Apertions in it in five several places, all by
Causticks; the lowermost in the lower part of the Calf of the leg. These
discharged the Matter, and were cured in few days (after the Escars were
separated) by the use of unguent. tutiae and the like.

After some months she was seized with Convulsive twitches, which she observed
to arise from the lower part of the Calf of the leg that had been affected with
the Apostemations, and in the same place where the Matter before terminated.
Upon which consideration the Physician prescribed a Fontanell to be made in the
very Part; which accordingly I made, and kept open by a Pea, with an Emplaster
and laced Stocking: by which means she was freed of her Fits, and enjoyed a
tolerable measure of health a long time after.

So a Lady laboring under such like Fits, which began on the outside of the
Os tibiae near the Shin, was cured by making a Fontanell in that place, when
other Remedies failed. She continues it to this day, I suppose.

In another we made a Fontanell between the Thumb and Forefinger; and in
another in the Breast; and in a Child behind the Ear: those Fits beginning
there.

PAROTIS is a Tumor in the Glandules behind and about the Ears, Parotis.
Description.
generally called the Emunctories of the Brain; though indeed they are the
external Fountains of the Saliva of the Mouth, as modern Authors do agree.

The immediate Cause is the Blood offending in quantity or quality, Cause.
as it has admixture with the Ferment of the Part, or with other Humors. It
also happens by an external Cause, as Bruise or Wound, whereby blood is
extravasated, and cast out into these Glands behind the Ear on one side or
other, making a Parotid Tumor.

They differ according to the Humor, and manner of generation. Difference.
To the Humor; as whether the Blood be mixed with Choler, Phlegm, or
Melancholy. To the manner of generation; and so a Parotis is a Symptom of a
Fever, or a Crisis of it. Those Fevers be usually malignant that cast out such
Tumors: but sometimes a Parotis rises simply.

The Parotis is known by the Part it affects with Tumor, Signs.
Pain and Inflammation, as having generally a great proportion of blood mixed
with other Humors, according as they are predominant. If it be malign or
pestilentiall, there is Fever joined with it. Whether it proceeded
symptomatically or critically, the time of the Disease and Signs may
demonstrate.

A Parotis without a Fever is less malign or dangerous then that which arises
with one. They are also less dangerous which attend long Fevers, Prognostic.
then those which follow acute ones. Those which are thrust forth by a Crisis
are salutary and easily cured: but those which happen after great Evacuations,
or Fever, without remission of it, are pernicious and dangerous. Those which
break forth symptomatically, and arise from vicious ill-disposed Humors, are
of difficult Cure, and dangerous.

In the Cure of this Tumor, Cure.
you are to consider whether it be symptomaticall, or critical, or of what
kind of Matter generated.

If it be critical, and come out kindly, the business is then by Lenients to
mitigate the pain, and further Suppuration; as has been said before in Bubo.
But whether it be symptomaticall or critical, with little or much Tumor,
malign or benign, you ought not to use Repellents, lest thereby you return the
Matter from without inward. If the Inflammation be great, and the Accidents
high, and Blood abound, let it out, evacuating the Humor by lenient
Purgatives, regulating the Patient's Diet, contemperating the Humors as in
Phlegmon, and embrocating with ol. lumbric. chamaem. etc. But if through any
defect nature do not thrust the Tumor out as you would, you may further it by
Cupping-glasses and Attractives, as in Bubo has been said. Or if the Matter be
crude and viscid, you may apply powerful Discutients, and with Emollients if
you fear induration. But if after all it tend to Suppuration, then further it
with Suppuratives; as, rad, lilior. cepar. sub cineribus coctar. an. iv.
mucilag. sem. lini, jss far. tritic. iij. axung. procinae, unguent. basilic.
an. jss. vitell. ovor. ij croci ij. fiat Cataplasma. The Matter concocted, you
are to give it vent, and proceed in the Cure, as has been said in the former
Chapter of Bubo.

A Child aged about three years, 1. Observat.
by accident of a Fall, was seized with a Dizziness and some twitches of a
Convulsion. A Fontanell was made in the Neck, and a Vesicatory applied inter
Scapulas: but the Child was not thereby much relieved. A Tumor afterward
thrust out behind that Ear. I made a Fontanell under it, and derived the Matter
thither, and thereby the Child recovered.

In Concussions and Fractures of the Cranium these Tumors are frequent, and
are discussed by. ol. cham. etc. or the Matter may, as has been said, by a
Fontanell there-under be happily spent.

The perspiration in these Parts is to be regarded; for the checking of it has
caused Convulsions, yea Death, in little Infants.

A Gentlewoman aged about thirty years, 2. Observat.
of a strong healthful Constitution, was taken one night with a pain behind
her right Ear; it increased, and became very troublesome. After three of four
days she sent for me. The pain affected the Temporal Muscle with heat and
Tumor, and her Head with Twitchings and frequent Startings. She kept her bed,
and was faint and weak; she had neither purged nor bled. I felt her Pulse
small, which I judged to be rather from oppression then weakness, there being
no confiderable cause for the latter. I persuaded her to be let blood, which
with some unwillingness she yielded to. I opened a Vein in her right Arm: the
blood flowing out in a full stream, and being serous, I took away ten ounces;
then embrocated the Tumor with ol. cham. warm, and dipped Wool in it, and
applied it upon the Part affected. A Clystes was given her some hours after,
and an Emulsion prescribed her, of which she drank a good draught that night,
and repeated it at pleasure. The pain continuing, a Cataplasm was applied ex
rad. lilior. fol. malvae, violar. flor. cham. sem. foenug. made up with a few
crumbs of White-bread, Saffron, Yolk of an egg, and ol. sambuci; the Parts being
first fomented with some of the Decoction, and part of the Liquour cast in with
a Syringe; Wool also was dipped in the same, and put into the Ear. By these
Applications an Apostemation discharged it self thereout; yet the Tumor did
not much slacken. Therefore I purged her with an Infusion of sena, rhabarb.
etc. in which was diffolved Manna, and sir. ros. pallid. whereby she was
somewhat relieved. A day or two after I purged her with Whey, Manna, and Crem.
tartar. and afterward repeated it: the Tumor the while discussed, her Menses
came down, and she recovered.

I was sent for to a Child of about two years of age diseased with a large
Tumor of an ovall figure, 3. Observat.
hard and inflamed, under the right Ear. I embrocated the Tumor with ol.
lilior. and cham. and directed a Cataplasm to be applied of a few malvae and
viol. with the Crumbs of a White loaf boiled in Milk. and made up with axung.
porcin. Yolk of an egg, and a little Saffron. And the day after, calling there
again, and seeing the Tumor hard, I advised a Lilly-root to be roasted under
embers, and beat up with the remaining Cataplasm: by which in two or three days
it suppurated. I opened it by Caustic, and discharged a well-concocted Matter,
and in few days after cured it by Digestion, etc.

Amongst the many diseased people that came to me at the public Healing in
November 1673. 4. Observat.
there was a Child of about two years of age diseased with a hard inflamed
Tumor lying round behind the left Ear. I directed one of my Servants to apply
an Emplast. diachyl. cum gummi malaxed with unguent. dialthaeae: and the fourth
day after, feeling it suppurated, we opened it by a Caustic about half an inch
long in the declining Part, and gave vent to a well-concocted Matter. From that
time it was dressed with unguent. basilic. in the form of a Cerote. Thus the
hardness was resolved, and, as the Matter discharged, the Abscess healed within
in few days with little or no pain or trouble: whereas if it had been opened by
Incision, it must have been kept open by a Tent, and been rendered more painful
and slow of Cure. After the Escar separated, a Pledgit of unguent.
diapompholygos and a touch sometimes of the Vitriol-stone deterged, incarned,
and cicatrized it.

An old Gentleman, a Servant to the King below stairs, brought his Son to me,
5. Observat.
an infirm Youth of about thirteen years of age, having a large Tumor behind
his right Ear arising from a crude Matter. It had been of some years growth. I
applied Emplastr. ad strumas cum stercore columbino, to discuss it, but it
heated: whereupon I applied a Cataplasm, one of the Suppuratives above
mentioned, and concocted it; then opened it by Caustic, and discharged a mixed
crude Matter. The Ulcer being sordid, I laid it more open, and dressed it with
mundif. Paracelsi, with alum. ust. and Merc. praecipitat. and dressed the Escar
and incised Lips with Digestives. After the separation of the Escar, I deterged
the Abscess more powerfully by the use of the Vitriolstone and Praecipitate,
and afterward incarned by the common Incarnative used in such cases, and
cicatrized it smooth without any remaining hardness: and the Youth enjoys his
health well since.

A person of about fifty years of age, 6. Observat.
having long labored under Scorbuticall affections, was seized with a slow
Fever; his Head was affected with Vapors, and his Spirits oppressed: during
which a Tumor arose behind his left Ear, and reached down under that Jaw,
growing big and hard, of a dark red color. We endeavored by discutient and
emollient Cataplasms and Embrocations of various sorts; but it would not yield
to any of them. We repeated Venaesection, and made him Fontanells inter
Scapulas; Purgations were also repeated: but without successs. I then applied
an Emplast. ad strumas, and continued it without removal the space of fix or
seven days, supposing thereby the Tumor would suppurate or resolve: yet it
continued hard amongst the Muscles. I repeated the use of the Emplaster; and
the third or fourth day after, feeling the Matter fluctuate under it, I took
off the Emplaster, applied a Caustic on the depending Part about an inch in
length, divided that Escar, and gave a discharge to a crude serous Matter, then
dressed it with Lenients, and applied Emplast. de mucilag. with a third part of
diachly. cum gummi. After separation of the Escar, I deterged with the
Vitriol-stone and basilicon and Merc. praecipitat. and at other Dressings dipped
them in pulv. praecipitati. Having thus deterg'd, I incarned, and by Epuloticks
cicatrized it firm. During the while he was often purged, and Traumaticks and
Antiscorbuticks were prescribed: but a hardenss remained notwithstanding.
Whereupon, doubting a Recidivation, I applied another Caustic the length of
that Induration; and, having thereby penetrated deep into it, divided that
Escar to the quick: and by separation of the Escar, and Digestion of the lips
of the Ulcer, that hardness was breathed forth, and the Patient cured, and
enjoys a good health to this day.

CHAP. X. Of a Carbuncle.
A Carbuncle is a round hard Tumor arising somewhat like an angry Boil,
Description.
of a dark red color, accompanied with the highest circumstances of pain and
Inflammation, with many Vlcuscula round about it, never coming to digestion
till it has corrupted the Part which it seizes, so that the whole piece
comes away, if the Patient recover.

It owes its Original to a very high Degeneration of the Blood into a Humor
that is of a caustic quality, Original.
which suddenly arising seizes the Part and corrupts it, burning it as it
were to a coal, from whence it has its Name.

The Causes of these Degenerations of the Blood are diverse. Causes.
The most usual is a pestilentiall Infection. But it is not seldom found that
the Humors of some bodies do corrupt into so great a degree of virulency, as
to cause such a Tumor when there is no appearance of a Plague. Hence it is
that they are divided into pestilentiall, and not pestilentiall: which
distinction has reference more to the antecedent Cause then to the Tumor it
self.

Therefore it is that, Signs.
let the Carbuncle be of which sort it will, the Symptoms attending it are much
alike; viz. nausea, vomiting, dejection of appetite, tremor, palpitation of the
heart, frequent swouning, delirium, etc.

The pestilent is distinguished from the non-pestilent by the greatness of the
Symptoms, and the Infection that is in the air.

A great Carbuncle is more dangerous then a small one, Prognostic.
and the black is more pernicious then the inflamed red one. Those that are in
the Emunctories, Throat, or near any principal Part, have more of danger then
those that are seated remote in the Lims, especially in the musculous Flesh.
The most dangerous Symptom of all is the return of the Matter of the Carbuncle
into the Blood again.

In the Cure of a Carbuncle two things offer themselves to our consideration:
Cure.
1. the antecedent Cause, the overheated corrupt Blood abounding in the Body;
2. the conjunct, or the Humor affecting the Part, and making the Carbuncle.

In order to the first, a regulation in Diet ought to be observed, and the hot
Blood fermenting in the body to be evacuated by Venaesection, especially in
those that are not pestilentiall, and that to fainting: but in the
pestilentiall it is judged not so safe, lest thereby the malignity be drawn
inward; but if you do let blood, it must be in the beginning, whilst the body
is strong to bear it. And forasmuch as Bleeding scarce evacuates all the
depraved Humors, therefore Purging is prescribed, lest by the abounding of
corrupt Humors the native heat should be extinguished. But in pestilentiall
Carbuncles there is also a Caution required upon the same consideration as in
Bleeding: therefore we content our selves with Clysters and lenient Purgatives,
as manna, cassia, electuar. lenitiv. diaprun. and the like; and proceed in
resisting the malignity by alexipharmaca, viz. theriaca, Mithridat. elect. de
ovo, confect. alkerm. de hyacintho, etc. The heat of the blood may be
contemperated by syrup. e succo citr. limon. acetos. borrag. bugloss. etc. Or,
cons. borrag. bugloss. lujulae, an. j. spec. de hyacintho j. cort. citr.
conditi, nucis moschat. an. iij. cum sir. e succo citr. fiat Electuarium. After
a morsel of which, a draught of such like Julep may be drank and repeated once
in four hours: aquar. scordii, dracont. citr. an. iij. spec. de hyacintho j.
aq. theriacalis iij. sir. e succo citr. q. s. Misce. Also Epiphemata may be
made ex aquis melissae, ros. damase. borrag. nymphaeae, cum aceto sambucin.
rosac. etc.

In treating the Carbuncle as it relates to the conjunct Cause, you ought to
consider the strength of the Patient; and if it be not likely to thrust forth
kindly, you are to endeavor by Attraction to assist nature in the bringing it
outward, by the application of a such like Cataplasm: summitat. rutae M.ij.
fermenti acris ij. ficus vet. number. viij. piperis albi ij. salis com. iij.
Misce. Or that Cataplasm proposed in the Discourse of Bubo ex theriaca coct. in
cepa excavata. And, if there be occasion, Cupping-glasses may be applied to
help it forward. But if the Body be strong and plethorick, and the Carbuncle
thrust forth with raging heat and pain, then that Cataplasm prescribed by
Galen, ex foliis plantag. pan. tritic. decocted in Wine, may be of good use, it
being by him commended to have the virtue moderately to repress the heat, and
to digest. Others have proposed an Emplaster of Plantane-leaves, Galls,
Lentills, and Wheat-bran, beaten up with Vinegar, and having thus mitigated its
heat, they endeavor Suppuration.

But I never saw a true Carbuncle suppurate: therefore if the aforesaid
Medicaments avail not, I advise the scarifying or cutting deep into it, to give
a breathing to the Humor; then dress it with some Escarotick that may resist
its malignity, as troch. Andronis, polyidae. Some Authors have proposed the
Caustic. Without doubt the actual Cautery timely applied on some of them
would save the Patient much pain, and shorten the Cure: for the malignity being
thereby consumed, the Escar might without much difficulty be digested, the heat
about the Carbuncles alleviated the while by one of the abovementioned
Cataplasms, and the Ulcer cured by the common method. But I refer this to the
consideration of the Surgeon; and shall give you an Instance of a Carbuncle
to confirm what I have delivered.

IN the time of the last great Plague a Person of Honor, 1. Observat.
about sixty years of age, of a gross Body and highly scorbuticall, was after
dinner seized with a Rigor and Vomiting. His Physcian Sir Francis Prujean
being out of Town, he sent for me. I suspecting it to be the beginning of some
malign Fever, desired to be excused, his condition requiring rather a knowing
Physician then a Surgeon: but I was afterward fetched by a more powerful
messenger, and found the Patient in his bed, vomiting, and in a burning Fever.
I advised the giving hm Carduus Posset to further his Vomiting; during which I
sent for a mixture of theriaca Veneta and cons. lujulae, and cordial Julep of
aq. dracont. etc. as it is above set down in the method of Cure; of the former
I gave him a morsel, and some of the Julep after it, and advised his Servants
to repeat the use of them once in four hours. He rested very disquietly that
night, but in the morning I found him more calm. I let him blood, and directed
a Clyster to be given that afternoon. As I was taking my leave of him, he
disired me to look upon his Back, it being very sore. I supposed his Fontanells
(which he had long continued inter Scapulas) were uneasy; and, making way to
look upon them, I found his Malady four fingers breadth beneath the right
Fontanell. It was a dark red Swelling, about the bigness of a small Chestnut,
lying very hard between the musculous Flesh and Skin, with many small white
Wheals about it of the simple Herpes. I was somewhat surprised at the sight,
and dressed it hastily up with unguent. basilic. and retired to my house to
make ready that Cataplasm of Galen's, which I soon after applied, and continued
the use of it some days: during which the Carbuncle increased in breadth and
hardness, the Vlcuscula also spread round it. Upon which consideration I applied
the suppurative Cataplasm above mentioned, to endeavor Maturation; and on the
Vlcuscula and Parts about unguent. nutritum, to calm the burning heat. The
Patient's Body was kept soluble by Clysters and lenient Purgatives; the
cordial Electuary and Julep were also frequently repeated, and his Diet was
Broths with Wood-sorrell and such like Contemperatives boiled in them.
Nevertheless the Fever continued, and the Patient lay dozed and somewhat
delirous, as also troubled with a Singultus and Aphthae. Observing him daily
more indisposed, and the Carbuncle increasing in bulk, and not likely to
suppurate, I scarified deep into it, washed it with a Solution of theriaca
Veneta and mel Aegyptiac. in aceto vini, then filled the Incisions with pulver.
troch. polyidae, and applied a Cataplasm over all ex farina orobi decocted in
Oxymel. By the use of these Applications the Vlcuscula dried, and the Carbuncle
gleeted, but by the use of Lenients it digested after a few days; and as the
Escar separated, a well-concocted Matter discharged in great quantity daily
more and more: yet the separation of the mortified Carbuncle had left a very
large Opening, and there appeared no considerable Swelling whereby one might
judge the Cavity large. But feeling the Parts about, and pressing my hand upon
the right Clavicle and under that Axilla, the Matter poured out abundantly: yet
these Parts were not inflamed during the growth of the Carbuncle. This put me
upon a necessity of making an Incision proportionably, and, cutting off the
flapping Lips to prevent the retention of Matter, I then dressed the Abscess
with mundificat. ex apio, and the tender Lips with the common Digestive ex
terebinth. cum vitello ovi; and applied a Cataplasm ex farina hordei, fabar.
flor. ros. rub. etc. decocted in Oxymel, with Compress and Bandage. We had
often proposed the consulting a Physician, but those of his acquaintance were
out of Town. Accidentally I met with Doctor Tho. Cox about the twentieth day
near the Patient's house, and prevailed with him to visit this Person. He saw
the Abscess dressed, and the Patient laboring under the Singultus and Aphthae,
also so dozed as he scarce spoke to the Physician. He prescribed the Patient
Cordialls, and what else he thought necessary, and left several Prescriptions
for the Family. Until then they suspected not the Disease; though the Servants
that washed his Linen brake out in Blanes on their Hands and Arms as far as
they were in the Soap-suds. From the time I made that large Opening the Matter
lessened, and the Cavities healed up by agglutination, the Ulcer incarned, and
was cicatrized by the common Epuloticks.

The same year I was fetched to a Child at nurse in Westminster, 2. Observat.
that had been some days sick of a pestilential Fever, during which a Carbuncle
thrust forth in the right Breast a little below the Clavicle, of the compass of
a broad Shilling; but it was then sunk, and of a black color. I divided it,
and gave vent to a bloody serum, and saw the Flesh underneath it sound: it was
without Inflammation. I dressed it up with warm Digestives, and applied an
Emplaster of Mithridate on it; then gave it some Elect. de ovo dissolved in a
spoonful of aq. theriacalis. I came too late, for the Child died a few hours
after.

CHAP. XI. Of a Paronychia.
PAronychia, so called by the Greeks, Description.
is a small Swelling about the Nails and ends of the Fingers, known amongst the
Latins by the name of Panaritium: Names.
by the vulgar people amongst us it is generally called a Whitflaw.

There are two sorts of Paronychiae: Differences.
they both affect one and the same Part, and are frequently taken one for the
other, but are very different in their Symptoms. We shall distinguish them by
the names of benign, and malign. The former rise superficially under the
Cuticula, and come suddenly to Suppuration: whereas the malign Paronychia lies
deep amongst the Ligaments and Tendons, and is slow in coming to maturity. I
suppose it is that which is commonly called a Felon.

The benign or milder Species takes its Original from a bilious hot serum:
Causes.
the other is commonly said to proceed from Adustion in the Blood, with a
mixture of Choler or salt Phlegm.

Paronychiae may truly be reckoned amongst the Inflammations, Signs.
they arising with great pain and burning heat, with Pulsation and Tension. The
benign comes soon to maturation, and may be discerned by change of color in
the Cuticula, the Matter appearing under it as in a Blister.

The Signs of a malign Paronychia are an intense vehement pain deep amongst the
Ligaments and Tendons, with Fever, Fainting, and a slow Suppuration.

The Prognostic may be made by what has been delivered of them, Prognostic.
viz. that the benign comes soon to Suppuration, and is as easily cured: the
worst danger that can behappen it is but a loss of the Nail.

The other, which lies deep, is of a malign quality; and, if it be not
speedily removed, will corrupt the Periosteum, rot the Bone, and soon extend
its putrefaction to the next Joint, and threaten the welfare of the Hand.

In the Cure of Paronychiae Authors generally make no distinction. Cure The
method of the Ancients.
They propose evacuation by Bleeding, and the observance of a slender Diet, as
in a Phlegmon. Concerning Topics, they commend Repellents in the beginning of
the Fluxion, but not with much astringency, (unless as Intercipients upon the
Parts above) lest the Matter should thereby be impacted in the Part, and
corrupt the Bone: yet the Medicaments they then prescribe do all partake of
that quality; as, ol. ros. and myrtill. cum succo solani and bol. Armen. and,
gallas virides cum aceto mixed. Others mix Lenients with them, as that of succ.
solani, plantag. portulac. umbilic. Vener. mucilag. sem. psyllii, cum dictis
succis vel aceto extract. to which they add bol. Armen. gallas and camphor.
cum ol. ros. and myrtill. and unguent. alb. popul. etc. Others mix Discutients
with Repellents: as that of Paracels. galla cum melle mixta; or, ol. mastich.
ol. olivar. matur. an. j. antimonii crud. ss. thuris iij. resin. pini and
cerae, an. q. s. Misce; or that sulphuris vivi, fuliginis, allii, sal. com.
sem. carui, an. p. aeq. Misce. In case of pain, fol. malvae, byoscyami, rad.
althaeae, sem. psyllii, lini, foenugraeci: and these are Suppuratives, of which
diverse others are prescribed by them. All which are proper in the benign
Paronychia, as they are set down, and some of them may be applied to the malign
one in its very beginning; but while you endeavor Suppuration in it, the Bone
will certainly corrupt. Therefore if the pain go not off by the first
Applications, give a breathing to the Humor by cutting deep into the Part most
affected, and then dress it up by such like Lenients as follow: sem. lini,
foenug. pulv. an. ss. mucilag. sem. psyllii j. vitell. unius ovi, croci, an. j.
pingued. gallinae aut butyri recent. q. s. fiat Cataplasma. Or, dress it with
unguent. basilic. by which the Wound will cure, if the Humor has not altered
the Part: if it has, proceed as shall be showed in the following Observations.

I shall begin with the benign or milder Species, commonly called a Whitflaw.
It is a Disease so common, that I think there is none but knows what it is, and
how to cure it. Yet I shall give you two or three Instances, the better to
distinguish it from the other.

A Child of about four years of age was brought to me while I was dressing a
Patient in a Noble Family. Paronychia benigna. 1. Observat.
The Child was pained with a small red Swelling about the inside and root of
the Nail of one of the Fingers. I applied a little cerat. Galeni upon it. The
second day after I found the Matter shine under the Skin, and the Swelling lie
like a Blister about part of the Nail. I opened it, as I had often seen the
common people, by passing a Needle through the Skin: it discharged a thin
yellow Matter, and by two Dressings with unguent. basilic. it cured.

Such another I met with in the Finger of a Friend lying upon one side of the
Nail. 2. Observat.
I opened it with a Lancet, and after the discharge of the Matter pared away
that side of the Nail, and dressed the Blister with a Pledgit of unguent.
tutiae. Himself cured it with some of the same in two or three days.

A Gentleman came to me not long since with one of these very large upon the
pulp of one of his Thumbs; 3. Observat.
it lay like a great Blister. I let it out with my Lancet, and dressed it up
with unguent. basilic. and gave him some of the same to cure it.

Another I saw lie under the forepart of the Nail and Finger, 4. Observat.
very painful for the while, but it quickly suppurated by Lenients. The Matter
being let out, and part of the Nail cut away, it cured in a few days. But when
this happens in scrophulous Children, or where acrimony abounds, the Cure is
vexatious enough: but it does seldom corrupt the Bone, nor is the pain
considerable compared with that which passes under the name of a Felon or
malign Paronychia; of which I shall now give you some Instances.

A Gentlewoman came to my house one night late, Paronychia maligna. 1. Observat.
complaining exceedingly of a pain in the pulp of one of her Fore-fingers. I
looked upon it, and felt it hot, but saw nothing of Swelling whereby I could
judge it so ill. She seemed ready to swound with the pain. I proposed the
making Incision into it to the Bone, not imagining so fearful a creature would
have permitted it; but she readily assented: whereupon I presently made a
Puncture deep in the most pained part to the Bone, and suffered it to bleed
while I made a Dressing of unguent. basilicon to apply upon it with an Emplast.
e bolo; which being applied, she complained of the smarting of the Wound, but
said it was nothing to the pain she felt before. The next day I waited upon her
at her Lodging: she had slept well that night and in perfect ease. I took off
the Dressing, and saw the Wound agglutinated, then dressed it as the night
before, and from that time dressed it no more. After the same manner I have
freed many in the beginning of the Disease.

A young Fellow attending in a Nobleman's house was seized with a grievous pain
in the pulp of one of his Fore-fingers, 2. Observat.
and came to me bemoaning his condition. The Part affected felt hot, but seemed
neither inflamed nor much swelled. I pressed in the point of my Incision-knife
into the place where he was most pained, and in the drawing out the Knife
enlarged the Wound a little. There seemed to issue out only a little Blood,
which I permitted a while to flow, then dressed it up with a Pledgit of
unguent. basilicon and an Emplastr. e bolo. The second day after I met him,
took off the Dressings, and saw the Wound cured: and he said the pain went off
that night he went from me.

Another Young man serving in a Noble Family was afflicted with a pain in the
pulp of one of his Thumbs, 3. Observat.
and after three or four days trial of several Applications he was commended
to me. His Thumb being inflamed and swelled, I made Incision into it to the
Bone: this not only bled, but gleeted a few drops. I dressed it with Lenients,
and rolled it moderately, hoping thereby to agglutinate it. The second day
after I took off the Dressings, and, finding the Wound open and undigested,
dressed it up with a Dossill dipped in Merc. praecipitat. with Emplaster and
Bandage. The third day after I dressed it again. The Dossill came off with a
Slough, and left the Ulcer disposed to Digestion. I dressed it with a less
Dossill spread with basilicon and Praecipitate, with a Pledgit of unguent.
diapompholygos, and an Emplaster over it. From that day it digested, and cured
in six or seven. The occasion of its not healing by Agglutination, as the
others did, was from the alteration (I suppose) the Ichor had began to make in
the bottom of the Wound: which may, I think, enough show the necessity of
laying these Tumors open more timely, unless they have discovered some other
way of discussing the Humor; which I confess I have not been able to make out,
though I have tried many Medicaments commended in such cases. Forestus, in his
fifth Book and sixteenth Observation, sets down some arcana in the Cure of it:
but after the trial of them, we find him foiled in the Cure of his Patient,
and the same Patient cured by another Surgeon, by the laying it open, and
taking the rotten Bone out.

I shall now show you what they are when they have been longer treated by
Suppuratives, and the like.

A Servant to an Officer of the Court was brought to me sorely afflicted with
one of these Paronychiae in his Forefinger by the side of the Nail. 4.
Observat.
He had been under hands that had treated it with Medicaments till the
putrefaction within had rotted the Ligaments and Periosteum, and bared the Bone
of the first Joint, and apostemated it to the third Joint. I laid it open by
Incision from the very end of the Finger downwards the length of the Abscess,
and dressed it with Merc. praecipitat. applying Dossills over it spread with a
Digestive to keep the Lips of the Wound distended, and with long snips of Empl.
diachalcit. rolled it up, leaving way between for the Matter to discharge, over
which I repeated a moderate Bandage to press out the Matter in the Part, and
restrain the Influx, and reduce the Finger to its former shape. The third day I
dressed it again, and, finding the Ulcer sordid and overgrown with loose
flesh, rubbed it with the Vitriol-stone, filling the Ulcer again with Merc.
praecipitat. and dressed it up as before. By this method I deterged the Ulcer,
and with Sarcoticks incarned it, and by the application of Epuloticks with
Bandage cicatrized it, and reduced the Finger to its natural shape, so that he
recovered the use of it.

A Lady commended a Poor woman to me, who brought her Child, 5. Observat.
a little Boy of about five years of age, grievously diseased of a Paronychia
on the very end of the Forefinger and under the Nail. The end of the Finger
was rotted away, and the Bone sticking out bare: the Nail was also rotten, and
heaved up by the putrefaction underneath it. I took hold of the Nail with my
Forceps, designing to cut it off, (it lying in my way;) but it separated off
from the root more easily. I also pinched off as much of the end of the Bone as
was naked, rubbed the loose Flesh and the remaining Bone with my Vitriol-stone,
and applied a Pledgit of Lint dipped in a Solution of tinctur. vitrioli next the
Bone, then filled the Ulcer with Praecipitate, laying over it an Emplastr.
unguent. e lithargyro with a moderate Bandage. The third day I dressed it
again, and found a separation of the corrupt flesh: but the Matter was more
then I could reasonably expect from such an Ulcer. Whereupon I made a farther
search, and found a Sinus running the length of the second Joint. I presently
made an Incision that length, and filled up the Opening with Dossills dipped in
Lenients, then dressed the more corrupt parts with the same Medicaments as
before, and rolled it up. The third day after I took off the Dressings, and
found the Bone covered with its Periosteum in the Sinus I had last opened: but
it was full of a loose Flesh the whole length. I dressed it as I had done the
former; the Vitriol-stone being of great use in these Ulcers which so abound
with luxurious Flesh amongst the Tendons: for by it the corrupt Flesh is dried
up without offending the Nerves, Tendons, or other sound Parts; and the Ulcer
may be deterged, according as it is touched, more or less; and the Bone it
self, where it is bare or carious, may be dried by it, and disposed to moulder
off. Where the Hypersarcosis was great, there I also sprinkled it with
Praecipitate, whereby I more speedily freed the Ulcer of its putrefaction; and
by the application of long snips of Emplaster rolled about the Finger I
restrained the influx of Humor. By moderate Compression I restored the Finger
to its true shape, and by the common Epuloticks cicatrized it, without more
loss of the Bone then what I cut off at the first Dressing, the Stump
exfoliating insensibly.

Whilst I had the honor to attend the King at the Hague, 6. Observat.
a Woman related to one of the Princess Royall's Servants had been lamentably
afflicted with one of these malign Ulcers in the Forefinger of her right Hand:
by reason of the long application of Supputatives the Bones of the first and
second Joint were rotted, and the putrefaction had spread round, and corrupted
their Ligaments. I made Incision the length of the Abscess, and upon farther
search feeling the Bones not only rotten, but loofe, I took them both out, and
separated the Nail from some part of the Ligament to which it adhered; then
deterg'd the Ulcer by filling it with Praecipitate, dressed the Lips with
Digestives, and rolled it up. After I had thus deterged it, and by Compresses
and Bandage reduced the Finger to a better figure, I left off the use of
Dossills, and by long pieces of Emplaster brought the Lips together, and left
the Finger well shaped, and a Nail thrust out again: but it, having lost its
Supporters, was of little use. Whether afterward any Callus thrust out to
supply the place of the Bones, I doubt: but in strumous and some other Ulcers
you may see how such defect has been recompensed.

Some years since I was fetched into the City to a Gentlewoman who was much
afflicted with one of these malign Ulcers in the very first Joint of one of her
Fingers. 7. Observat.
The Surgeon that attended it had been suppurating it, but the while the
Bone corrupted. I proposed the laying it open by Incision, and to have
proceeded by Detersion. She assented to it, and accordingly it was laid open.
After a Dressing or two I left it to the Surgeon. But about ten days after
she sent for me again, and was much unsatisfied in the proceedings. I looked
upon it, and, seeing it was like to be a tedious and an unsuccessfull work,
advised the cutting off of her Finger: which, after some deliberation, she
submitted unto.

The Wise of a Bitmaker attending the Court, 8. Observat.
whilst we were at S. Johnston's in Scotland, was seized with a pain in the end
of her Forefinger, and desired my advice. I told her the nature of the
Disease, and showed her the necessity of making a Puncture with an
Incision-knife into the pained Part: but she went murmuring away from me, and
made use of some other, who endeavored to suppurate it. In the while I made
her a visit or two to persuade her from that methold; but she would not permit
me to open it. Some while after, the putrefaction being increased, it made its
way out, and discharged some of its Sordes. This they called Suppuration, and
promised themselves a speedy Cure, censuring me for advising her to open it
before Maturation. But in these Abscesses the Suppuration is false, and rarely
happens till the Bone and Ligaments are corrupted: which after a while she
finding too true, made friends to me; at whose desire I visited her, and found
the Finger miserably swelled, and the Ulcer sordid, the Bone lying rotten in
it. I dressed it with Detersives, and offered to her consideration, whether she
would permit the Ulcer to be cut open, (for Causticks are of ill use in Ulcers
with Caries in these Parts,) and dressed with such Medicaments as might cleanse
it, and dispose the Bone to exfoliate, which would be a long work, and
uncertain; or that she would without more delay permit it to be cut off, and
thereby have it speedily cured. After some demurre, she submitted to the
latter; and I cut it off with a Chisell, dressed up the Stump with pulv. Galeni
cum albumine ovi* and rolled it on. The second day after I dressed it cum
terebinth. and vitell. ovi, etc. and digested it; and afterward I incarned it
with the common Sarcoticks, and cicatrized it in few days with unguent.
desiccat. rubr. and Pledgits dipped in aqua calcis. She gave me a great many good
words for the ridding her of such a painful Finger, but never forgave me the
neglect (as she called it) of dressing it with Suppuratives; she supposing that
I could so have cured it, and would not. It was a crime which might be the
easilier forgiven her, since we meet with it so often in some of our own
Profession.

CHAP. XII. Of Pterygion.
PTerygion is an Excrescence of flesh about the Nails of the Fingers or Toes.
Cause.
A Whitflaw arising about the Nails is often the Cause of this Disease in the
Fingers: it is also caused by some Bruise of the flesh under or about the
Nails. Sometime an Excrescence arises from the root of the Nails by reason of
some Pustule that preceded; in which case the Membrane underneath is often
concerned.

It happens also in the Toes through some Bruise or pressure of the Nail,
especially where the Nail is thick and hard, as some overgrown Nails are,
whence pain and Inflammation is stirred up, and an eruption of Matter
follows, which being exasperated by a continual pricking or pressure of the
Nail, the Ulceration spreads and corrupts it, and thrusts out Excrescences and
loose flesh round about. When this happens in poor people, who travel much in
the wet and dirt, and want that accommodation which is necessary to keep their
feet dry and clean, the Matter corrupts the Tendons and Bones; as I have
frequently seen amongst our common Soldiers in the time of the Civil Wars, and
amongst some of the poor people that come out of the Country in the time of
public Healing, to be touched for the King's Evil.

They take their Difference from the Cause, Difference.
and Part which they affect: some rising superficially in the sides of the Nail
with erosion; whereas others, arising from the Tendons, corrupt the Bones.

The Signs are evident, Signs.
viz. the Ulceration and Excrescences appearing about the root or sides of or
under the Nails with pain. If it affect the Tendons or Membrane under the Nail,
the pain is more vehement: if the Bone be corrupted, the putrefactive Smell
will discover it.

In the Pterygion affecting the Skin there is no great difficulty of Cure:
Prognostic.
if the Nail be pared away, the Ulceration will soon heal. But if it arise from
the Tendons or Membrane at the root of the Nail, the work is more hard, and in
old people, or Bodies ill habited, it is apt to gangrene.

In the Cure of the superficial Ulcerations with loose flesh arising about the
Nail, Cure.
you are in the first place to cut away the Nail, that you may apply your
Medicaments to the Ulceration, which may consume or dry the loose flesh and
cicatrize it: in which case you may use a little dry Lint, or Lint dipped in aq.
calcis and dried, or pulv. cort. granat. balaust. terr. sigillat. lap. tutiae;
in stronger habits, Merc. praecipitat. You are to avoid the application of
moist or greasy Medicaments, for they rot the Nails, and increase the
Ulceration. The Excrescences arising from the Tendons or Membrane to the roots
of the Nails require Medicaments more powerfully dying; such as are aes ustum,
squamae aeris, calx viva, troch. polyidae, Andronis, Musae: yea the
Caustick-stone warily used, Merc. praecipit. and the Vitriol or Alume-stone,
may serve to cicatrize the Ulcer.

A Young Lady having bruised her Forefinger accidentally, and neglected the
Cure, 1. Observat. of Excrescences about the Nail of the Forefinger.
it corrupted under the Nail, and became very sore. I was sent for, and found
the inside of the Nail loose, the skin at the root of the Nail raised up, and
full of spongy flesh. I presently cut away the side of the Nail, to give
discharge to the Matter, then dressed it with dry Lint, and applied a Pledgit
of unguent. tutiae over it. The Excrescence rising from the root of the Nail I
dressed with Merc. praecipitat. and laid a Pledgit of unguent. tutiae over that
Swelling, with a snip of Emplastr. diachalcit. as an intercipient, and rolled
it up. The Ulceration on the side where I cut the Nail away cicatrized by the
foresaid Dressings; but that at the root of the Nail I found swelled; the
Praecipitate had crusted the loose flesh and stopped the Matter in. I scraped
it away, and filled the Ulcer again with the same Praecipitate, and applied a
Pledgit and Emplaster over it, as before. The second day after I dressed it
again, and found it more hollow, the loose flesh coming away in a Slough. I
then left off the use of the Praecipitate, and applied a Pledgit of unguent.
tutiae with an Emplaster, and made a moderate Compression over the Ulcer to
unite the Cavity, and thereby agglutinated it in three or four Dressings, and
cicatrized the lax edges with the Alume-stone and dry Lint. This Nail being
cast off, a new one thrusting forth restored the Part to its natural figure.
From such Ulcerations at the roots of the Nails there often arise great
Excrescences, especially from the Thumbs, and are extremely painful and
difficult to cure.

I was sent for to one who was grievously afflicted with such an Excrescence:
it was as big as a Cherry-stone; 2. Observat. of an Excrescence on the
Thumbnail.
it was hard and gleeted, and the parts about it much inflamed. I applied a
snip of Emplaster between the Excrescence and the Nail: then I rubbed the
Excrescence with a Caustick-stone, and with an armed Probe dried up the Salt as
it dissolved in the working. After I had consumed the Excrescence, I washed out
the Salts in the Escar with a little Wine warm, pulled away the snip of the
Emplaster which I had laid to defend the Nail form the Caustic, and covered
the Escar with Praecipitate, applying a Pledgit of basilicon, and an Empl. e
bolo over it. I dressed it the next day lest the gleet should offend the Nail;
but I found it dry, and Patient easy from an hour after I had last dressed it
up. I continued the use of Lenients, and, after the Slough separated, rubbed
the remaining root with Vitriol-stone, covering it with Praecipitate again; and
afterward by dressing it twice or thrice with Praecipitate dried it up.

A Gentleman, 3. Observat. of the Nail of the great Toe.
having layn some while under Physic and Surgery for an Ulceration about
the Nail of his great Toe, consulted me. I saw the Matter flow round the Nail,
yet the Nail was not loose, nor did it seem to press into the flesh; for there
had been a Corn-cutter who had cleared it: and in truth I supposed the Matter
to arise from behind the root of the Nail, it being there hollow and inflamed.
To make a farther discovery, I filled all the chinks with Merc. praecipitat.
and with a dry Pledgit of Lint and Emplastr. de minio dressed it up. A day or
two after when we dressed it, we found the Nail overflowed with Matter, and
could make no certain judgment of its original: whereupon we dressed one side
with Praecipitate, the other with dry Lint, and that behind the Nail with
unguent. diapompholyg. and thereby it appeared that the Matter arose from
behind the Nail. For by this way of dressing the sides dried, but after we
filled that Cavity over and behind the root of the Nail, the Matter burst out
under the Nail, and was seen to lie in the sides. Upon which Physic was again
proposed, to purge off the naughty Humors: but indeed the Cure consisted in
the cutting off that callous Skin behind the root of the Nail. But my Brother
Surgeon dissenting, the Patient complied with him to avoid the pain. Yet
after a farther experiment by dressing two or three days, I prevailed, and with
an Incision-knife cut off that callous Skin, then digested it with unguent.
basilicon, and in as few days cicatrized it: and from that time there appeared
no more Matter or Sore.

A Gentleman of about 70 years of age, 4. Observat.
having Nails on his great Toes very big, hard and crooked, the one of them
pressed so straight upon the Membrane underneath it as to make an Ulceration,
which increasing with putrefaction, he came to Town. It seemed to me to be
gangrened underneath the Nail; wherefore I presently passed my Knife under the
Nail; and made a separation of it. The sides of the Nail lay very deep, and in
some parts tied fast by its Ligament. It being removed, I washed the Ulcer with
Wine; but it bleeding too fast to make any farther judgment of it at that time,
I covered it with Praecipitate, and retained it on by Pledgits of Lint and
Emplaster. The second day after I found it crusted with the Praecipitate, but a
corrupt Matter bursting through it in several parts, and the Ulcer appearing
deep, I took off that Crust, and dressed it with unguent. basilicon mixed with
Praecipitate and alum. ust. and by Detergents and Epuloticks, as has been
showed in the preceding Observations, I deterged and cicatrized it: then
causing the Nail of the other great Toe to be rasped and cut round, to prevent
the like accident, I dismissed him.

Sometime in elderly people a crude Humor diseases the Tendons and Membranes
at the root of the Nail, and through defect of the natural heat corrupts it,
and if it be not timely succored a Mortification follows.

A Gentleman of above 70 years of age, 5. Observat.
complaining of a Sore at the root of the Nail of one of his great Toes, was
commended to my care. The Ulcer was crude, and had corrupted the Flesh and part
of the Ligament. I dressed it up with Merc. praecipitat. with a Pledgit of dry
Lint upon the Nail; and over the Part affected applied unguent. basilic. with
Emplastr. diachalcit. The second day after, opening it again, but finding no
digestion, I dressed it as before, and the next day fomented it with a Lixivium
wherein was decocted absinth. etc. I cleansed the Ulcer of the Praecipitate,
and dressed it with a Dossil dipped in oleo terebinth. hot and unguent. basilic.
with an Emplaster over it. The next day I dabbled it hot with ol. terebinth.
upon an armed Probe, filled it with Praecipitate, dressed it up as the day
before, and desired that a Physician might be called to see the evil quality of
the Ulcer, I suspecting it would not digest. The second day after Doctor
Jasper Nedham met me, and saw the Ulcer dressed. There then lay a hard dry
Escar without either Matter or Gleet, which I took for a good Sign, and with my
Knife made a little Separation of the Escar, to give vent to it, and dressed it
up with Lenients, to hasten the fall of the Escar. It was seven or eight days
in separating, and then it came off with a well-digested Matter, incarned, and
in few days cicatrized.

When these Ulcers corrupt the Bone, the best way is to cur off that rotten
Joint, to preserve the rest.

Thus one being affected with a putrefactive Ulcer to the Bone, 6. Observat.
part whereof lay bare under the Nail of one of her great Toes, I advised the
cutting off that Joint: which she consenting to* (as being the most easy and
speedy way to prevent farther mischief) I sent for a Mallet and Chisell, and
cut if off. Then having permitted it to bleed some ounces, I dressed it up with
pulv. Galeni cum albumine ovi, with some snips of an Emplaster cross over the
Stump, and a piece of a Sheep's bladder with Bandage to retain the Dressings
close. The second day after I dressed it cum terebinthina and vitello ovi, and
thereby digested it, then incarned it with unguent. diapomphol. and with the
help of the Vitriolstone and Pledgits dipped in a Solution of sacch. Saturni in
sp. vini cicatrized it in few days.

CHAP. XIII. Of Pernio.
PErnio is a peculiar Inflammation, Description.
and belongs to Blood* it raises a thick red Swelling with itching pain in
the Hands and Feet.

Those affecting the Hands are generally called Chilblanes, Differences.
and under that notion I have seen them in the Faces of some tender persons,
who do not often expose them to the air without a mask. When they affect the
Feet they are called Kibes.

This Disease happens sometimes in people of age, but more often in Children.

The outward Cause is the nipping cold air in the Winter season, Causes.
which pierces the Skin, makes painful Swellings, and at the same time
shuts up the Pores so as the Humor cannot transpire, whereupon it corrupts,
and raises little Wheals or Blisters, which ulcerate the Cuticula, and corrode
into the Skin, and sometimes deeper, as in Kibes is frequently seen.

The internal Cause may be taken from some indisposition of the Blood.

The Signs are manifest in the back of the Hands and Fingers, Signs.
they appearing, as we generally express them, swelled with cold. They are of a
thick red color, and thrust out many small Wheals which itch very much, and
being rubbed do ulcerate and chop the Skin, and discharge a thin Humor. Kibes
appear after the same manner in the Heels.

Chilblanes are exempt from danger, Prognostic.
but are vexatious, and not easy to cure whilst the cold weather lasts, and
being cured are apt to return yearly. The Kibes may prove dangerous, and
difficult to cure, if they be any whit neglected, the Matter being apt to
ulcerate the Flesh to the Bone, and sometimes gangrene.

In the Cure the manner of living is to be considered, Cure.
especially that they defend themselves from cold, and keep their Feet dry and
warm. Of the Medicaments proper in this Disease some are preservative, while
the Skin is whole; and others are curative, and necessary when they are whealed
and ulcerated.

The Preservatives are, as I have said, to cloth the Parts warm, that the
Pores may be open to give a breathing to the Humor: to which purpose furred
Gloves and woollen Mittens and Socks are to be commended, also Dog-skin Gloves
for the poorer sort; the richer may have oiled Gloves. Socks dipped in
Brandy-wine and worn are preventive. The Mariners to prevent this Disease in
their Hands dip their Mittens in Seawater, and having wrung out the water,
draw them on. All Fomentations, whether it be fresh water, or Beef or
Fish-broth, are proper to further Transpiration. In the Cure we commend the
Decoction of warm Plants, as Wormwood, Southernwood, Mugwort, Marjoram, Thyme,
Hyssop, Rue, Rosemary, Bays and Juniper, with their Berries. Turnips are the
specific, and if they be frozen they are more efficacious. Unguent. rosat. cum
oleo terebinth. in a roasted Turnep is an approved remedy in the Cure of them:
also this, mannae, thuris, an. j. cort. pini ij. axung. porcinae and anserin.
an. iij. cerae q. s. fiat Ceratum. If the Ulceration be large, it requires to
be cured as in an Ulcer with Fluxion.

In the Cure of Chilblanes we are never consulted unless they be complicated
with some other Disease, or are past the Cure of common Applications.

A Girl of about nine years of age, of a very ill Habit of body, 1 Observat. of
Chilblanes and Kibes.
was the last hard Winter very much troubled with Chilblanes upon her Hands and
Fingers. She had also Kibes on her Heels, and about one of her Ancles, and on
the small of the other Leg. I directed a Fomentation of a Decoction of some of
the aforesaid Plants, with an addition of Brandy-wine, with which they were all
bathed. The excoriated Chilblanes I dressed with unguent. de lithargyr. upon
Pledgits of Lint lying at such distance as the Matter might get out between.
The clusters of Wheals were dapt with a Solution of sacchar. Saturni in spir.
vini, and the forementioned Cerote applied over all. From the Kibes, which were
ulcerated and sordid, I clipped the loose Cuticula, and dressed them with
unguent. basilic. cum Merc. praecipitat. and sprinkled some of them first with
Merc. praecipitat. The Excoriations about them were dressed with unguent.
tutiae, etc. according as they required, during which she was purged, and
happily cured.

A Gentlewoman of about forty years of age, 2. Observat. of Chilblanes in Face*
Ears and Hands.
abounding with sharp Humors, was some Winters past grievously afflicted with
Chilblanes on her Hands and Fingers, which terminated in great Excoriations:
they also affected her Face and Ears. I let her blood about viij. and dressed
the Ulcerations with unguent. tutiae, and washed the Parts whealed and swelled
with spir. vini wherein was dissolved sacchar. Saturni. The next day she was
purged with an Infusion of sena, rhabarb. cum sir. ex infus. ros. cum agarico.
I bathed her Face and Hands with Barnet-posset, and dressed the Ulcerations with
unguent. de lithargyr. She was prescribed a medicated Ale with sarsaparilla,
China, etc. with the antiscorbuticall Plants and was sometimes purged with
calomel. and resina Jalapii: by which method she was cured, but has been since
subject to Chilblanes, and I believe will be so every Winter as long as she
lives.

I was fetched to a Youth about ten years of age who had Kibes on both his
Heels. 3. Observat. of kibed Heels.
I bathed them at that time with Beef-broth out of the pot, and clipped away the
Cuticula which hung over them and shut in the Matter. That being removed, I
dressed the Ulcers which were sordid with Detergents, unguent. basilic.
Praecipitate, and alum. ustum, etc. as abovesaid, and the Excoriations with
Epuloticks: but the long continuance of the Ulcers had produced a Fluxion,
which swelled the Parts about. They not being so capable of Bandage, I caused
laced Socks to be made and put on, by which having restrained the descent of
the Humors, I fomented the diseased Parts with a Decoct. salviae, beton. flor.
ros. rub. balaust. nuc. cupress. in Wine, then applied Compresses dipped in the
same, and by good equal Compression disposed the Ulcers to incarn and
cicatrize, and cured them as Ulcers abounding with humidity.

CHAP. XIV. Of a Varix.
HItherto I have treated of Tumors arising from the serous part of the Blood:
I shall now deliver somewhat of those which take their original from pure
Blood; and they are of three sorts, Varix, Ecchymosis, and Aneurisma.

Varix is the dilatation of a Vein: it happens in diverse parts of the Body;
but for the most part the Thighs and Legs, the Testicles and haemorrhoidall
Veins, and in Women the Belly, are frequently affected.

It proceeds from the restagnation of gross Blood, Cause.
which being transmitted into the Veins, either by reason of the depending of
the Part, or from some other pressure upon the Vessel, or else by its own
grossness, proves unapt for Circulation. Then, in stead of continuing its
current proportionably to the other Parts, it stops in the place and
coagulates, and by degrees increases it self by the accession of the like
particles out of the succeeding Blood; and, enlarging its bulk, dilateth its
Vessels into a capacity big enough to receive it. This coagulation of Blood in
a Varix is not so entire as to stop the passage wholly up. For the succeeding
current always forces at least its thinner parts by the sides of the Coagulum,
and consequently helps the dilatation. But it lies lazily there, and suffers
the rest of the stream to pass by it. This most commonly happens in cutaneous
Vessels, where the Veins have no assistence from muscular Flesh, which by
frequent pressure would otherwise be apt to squeeze it forwards. To which it
may be added, that the Valves of the Vein so swelled, whether naturally or
accidentally, are weakened, and do not sufficiently support the Blood in its
ascent; so that, falling down upon the sides of the Vessel, the weight of it is
too great to be driven forward by the venall motion of the Blood.

All parts of the Body are capable of Varices, though they are most commonly in
the depending ones, as the Thighs, Belly, haemorrhoidall Veins, the Testicles,
etc. for the reason aforesaid. But in other places, where depending cannot be
the cause of the Check of Circulation, we do see Varices to grow.

In some places it owes its original to natural Causes; as to the generation
of Milk in the Breasts, and of the Foetus in the Womb: in both which cases,
Nature being obliged to spend the nutritious Serum upon the uses there
intended, the Blood returns thick, and is apt to restagnate, and usually
increases the Veins at those times to six or seven, it may be ten, times their
natural bigness: which very accident is by Doctor Walter Needham (in his Book
De formatu foetus) made use of as an argument to prove, that the nutritious
juices are carried to those places by the Arteries, and not by any peculiar
Vessels. But it also preternaturally falls out so in Tumors of the Breasts
and other Parts: in all which (but most visibly in Cancers) the Vessels
enlarge, and the Veins become varicous. The cause of which may be referred
either to the coagulation of the Serum, or grumousness of the Blood, or to the
obstruction of the Vein somewhere in its passage by some angustation upon it by
part of the Tumor; from whence it will often happen that the Vein beyond it
has its current stopped, and is forced to swell. Nay, not only the
contraction of the Vessels by preternatural Tumors does this, but also any
other Pressure. As in a Woman with Child, the burden lying upon the Ramus
iliacus on either side of the body, makes the Thigh and Leg on all that side
varicous. Straight gartering does the like in the Leg. So the weight of the
Testicles, or the pressure of a Bolster-Truss, in case of Rupture, renders them
varicous. Riding much on horseback does the like, by reason of the pressure
that is made upon the inside of the Thigh by the Saddle, to which it usually
clings; especially if you ride with long Stirrups. So also by much walking and
in Labouring-people Varices usually happen, being occasioned, as I suppose, by
the perpetual contraction the Muscles are put upon in standing, which being so
contracted do press upon the upper branches of the Veins in the Thigh, and
streighten them, thereby hindering the free ascent of the Blood.

They are easily known, in what external Parts soever they are, Signs.
by the turgency, the crooked figure of the Veins, and azure color, which is
more or less apparent as the Veins lie superficial or deep.

The Sign of a Hernia varicosa is, the unequal knotted Tumor in the Vein
leading to the Testicle, with a relaxation of the same Testicle: and when the
Testicles are inflated with Wind, the Vein in also distended and painful. What
the Signs are of the Haemorrhoidal Varices, and how they are to be treated, you
may see in their peculiar Treatise.

Varices are not dangerous in themselves, Prognostic.
they rather free the Patient from imminent Diseases, especially those of
Melancholy; according to that Aphorism of Hippocrates, Insanis si varices vel
haemorrhoides superveniunt, fit insaniae solutio. Which words are to be
understood of Veins if they grow very large, or if they break and run: but if
they flow intemperately, Cachexia, Dropsy, Consumption, and such like
Diseases, follow. So, on the contrary, if they be unseasonably suppressed,
Madness, Pleurisy, Coughing of blood, pain in the Kidney, Apoplexies, etc. do
follow. The Hernia varicosa or Cirsocele is difficult to cure, as the rest are.

The Varices ought not to be cured, unless they be painful, Cure.
or that they be extended into a large Tumor, or ulcerate and bleed much: for,
as I have said, they preserve health. But if there be a necessity of curing
them, it ought to begin with Purging and Bleeding, not once or twice, but often
repeated; and if the Viscera be in fault, they ought to be strengthened and
amended; after which the Cure may be endeavored by astringent and exsiccant
Medicaments, and those to be applied with convenient Bandage, to press back the
blood coagulating in the Vessel, and moderately resist the Current. If these
suffice not, then, according to the ancient practice, you are to proceed by
Section, dividing the Skin and separating the Teguments; and having raised the
varicous Vein, you are to pass a Ligature above and another beneath it, making
a deligation of them; then slit the Vein, cast out the gross Blood, and
afterward digest and heal it, as is after said in an Aneurisma. With what
success this has been done, you may read in the Works of Fabricius Hildanus:
and whether the pain be little or much worth the while, you may see Marius his
Argument thereof in his Life set down by Plutarch. In my Practice I have met
many diseased with varicous Swellings in the Thighs, Legs, Belly, etc. some of
them very large, and as unsightly as troublesome: but I never met with one
Patient that cared to hear of the Cure by Ligature, nor indeed have I seen any
great reason for it. For if the unsightliness and pain be in the Legs, it may
be helped by the wearing a laced Stocking, placing a Card, piece of Vellum or
beaten Lead between them. A laced Trowze will do as much for the Thigh. When
they affect the Belly, they may be restrained by a Bracer, without much trouble
to the Patient, or inconvenience to his health. But if you suspect it, you may
in great Varices both purge and bleed them. The Medicaments externally applied
are balaust. cortices granat. ros. rubr. nuc. cupress. Empl. Caesaris, unguent.
sumach. etc.

The Cure of the Hernia varicosa is by good Bandage, viz. a Bag-Truss, and the
same Medicaments above mentioned: but if they be distended with Wind, treat
them as flatulent Tumors. How the Varices when ulcerated ought to be dressed
and cured, you may see in the Treatise of Ulcers.

CHAP. XV. Of an Ecchymosis.
ANother sort of Tumor arising from mere Blood is the Ecchymosis, called by
the Latins Suffusio or Sugillatio: which two latter are more proper to the Eye
then other Parts.

Ecchymosis may be defined, Definition.
an Extravasation of the Blood in or under the Skin or any other Part, the Skin
remaining whole.

It is an eruption of Blood from the lesser Vessels in the Skin or near it,
Cause.
whether from Blow, Bruise, Fall, or Prick of a Lancet in Surgery, when the
Orifice of the Vein lies not directly under the Orifice made in the Skin, so
as that the whole stream may discharge there, and after bleeding both be closed
together. For if when you close the outermost the inner lies open, it will
make a Sugillation.

These external Effusions are the Subject of this Chapter.

To the better understanding of the nature of these, it will be necessary to
divide the Blood into two parts, Serum and Grumus.

The Serum is that fluid substance which flows about the Coagulum or Grumus
in the Chirurgeon's Porrenger. It is not only the nutritious juice that
nourishes all the parts of the Body, but also the Balsam that heal it; and is
that thing that is capable of digestion, discussion, and many other
alterations. This is the Vehiculum of the Grumus, and whilst it circulates does
keep it fluid, and causes its perpetual motion through all the Vessels and
Pores, as long as they continue incorporate together. And in Extravasation, if
the effusion be not great, it will by degrees swallow up the Grumus, dissolving
it and returning it into the Veins again: but if the effusion be great, so that
the Grumus separates from the Serum in the Contusion, there it difficultly
re-uniteth with the Serum again, much less digests, but either putrefieth in
the Part, making Inflammation, and sometimes Gangrenes; or else, which is more
seldom, hardens there and dries, making only a morbus in numeris partium. Such
a one Doctor Walter Needham and my self saw in the Foot of a young
Gentlewoman, who was our Patient upon another account.

Signs of a Contusion are the black and blew color with or without Tumor.
Signs.
The Causes, Causes.
as Blow, Fall, etc. are learned from the Bystanders.

The danger is small, if the Contusion be such: Prognostic.
also whilst the Humors are thin and fluid, there is hopes of returning them
back, or they may be afterward discussed.

But when any great Contusion happens, there the case alters, and danger is
often great: of which, to omit many others, that of Ingrassius is a remarkable
instance; where a Nobleman's Leg being bruised by the armed Knee of one that
encountered him on horseback, it killed him in three days.

When the Part, in stead of being black, blew or green, grows red, hard and
painful, the danger is eminent. Such was the case of a fat Gentleman, who, by
a Fall upon his Buttocks going down stairs, bruised those Parts, and neglecting
the Cure, it tended toward a Gangrene, but was got off by Scarification and
Discutients.

Since the discovery of the Circulation of the Blood, Cure.
some people have proposed to themselves the Cure of this Disease by returning
the Blood back into its Vessels by warm Applications, as spir. vini, etc. Which
possibly may have seemed to effect it where the Ecchymosis has been small: but
in great effusions of blood, accompanied with much pain, it is not reasonable
to hope a return of the Blood by such Applications; for thereby the Tumor
would be made bigger, and the least that can be expected therefrom is a
Suppuration; whereas those which shall be treated according to the method of
the Ancients, by Repellents, and afterward by Discutients, shall be secured
from Apostemations, and soon recovered, if the Habit of the body be any whit
good.

If the Effusion of great, we begin the Cure by opening a Vein, and drawing
blood proportionably. If it be small, the common Remedy of brown Paper soaked
in cold water or Oxycrate may serve for the first Applications; and afterward
the Sugillation may be breathed forth by fomenting it with Discutients, or warm
water, or with spir. vini, ol. anisi, etc. But if we suspect great
Extravasation, we then embrocate with ol. ros. myrtill. cum aceto and album.
ovor. and renew the Applications often: or if more astringent be required,
there may be added of the pulv. bol. Armen. sang. dracon. flor. ros. rub.
balaust. myrtill. gallar. nuc. cupress. And after the Fluxion is restrained, we
apply Discutients with Repellents. ung. aregon iij. ol. lumbric. cham. rutae,
an. j. terebinth. ij. pulv. sem. foenug. vj. flor. ros. rubr. balaust. an. ij.
croci ij. cerae q. s. fiat Ceratum. If the skin be whole, a mixture of the tops
of green Wormwood, Bay Salt and Vinegar may be applied. In great effusions of
blood this Discutient may be applied after the Fluxion is checked: rad.
bryoniae, sigill. Solomonis, an. iij. flor. cham. sambuci, an. P. j. far.
hordei, fabar. sem. foenug. an. j. summit. absinthii M.j. sem. cumini iij. coq.
in vino, and fiat Cataplasma S. A. addendo in fine Oxymel. scillit. q. s. and
foment the Part with a decoct, absinth. in lixivio com. If after such
Applications the Blood remain extravasated, you shall then open the Tumor,
lest it corrupt the Bone or Parts underneath: but if it inflame, and turn to
Suppuration, hasten it by Suppuratives, and give vent to the Matter, and
deterge with mundif. ex apio, etc. as the putrefaction requires. If it tend to
Mortification, treat it as such; but with Caution to leave off these
Applications when you have restored the native heat to the Part, lest thereby
you make new Fluxion, and the Part gangrene indeed.

In case the body be bruised by a Fall from on high, or any other way, the
Patient is to be immediately let blood, and the bruised Parts to be embrocated
with some of the abovesaid Repellents; or, if it may be had, lap him in a
Sheep-skin flayed quick off: and then you may prescribe the common Remedies, as
a draught of Spruce Beer, or j. sperm. ceti, Irish Slate, or such like Powders;
rhabarbari tosti, terrae sigill. mumiae, an. p. aeq. The Dose may be a dram in
some proper Vehicle: and afterward you may by Discutients in the form of
Unguents or Cerots breath forth the remaining bruised Blood.

I shall now give you some Observations of an Ecchymosis, and should begin with
the lesser, as those in the Face, which are so commonly known by the black and
blew marks which they leave behind: but the Cure being as common, makes it not
worth my labor. Something of them you may meet with in the Treatise of Wounds.
Of the Cure of the greater Contusions I shall give you some Instances.

A Person of about thirty years old, 1. Observat.
of a full Body, stepping into his Coach, his foot slipped, and he bruised his
Shin upon the Foot-board. He returned to his Lodging, and purposed to send for
a Surgeon: but in the while looking upon it, and seeing no skin broken, he
was advised to bath it with spir. vini, to rarefie the blood and keep it
circulating; a new way to make work for a Surgeon. He did so, and lapp'd it
about with a cloth dipped in the same, continuing this way of Dressing some
days. It growing daily less painful, but the Swelling not going away, I was
sent for, and perceived indeed the black and blew colors to be in a great
measure gone, but by their relation the Tumor was bigger: by which it was
easy to judge of the great virtue of spir. vini so used. Whereas by Repellents
at first with the expulsive Bandage the Blood might have been restrained, and
afterward what was extravasated might have been easily discussed. We see it
daily in our Practice, and censure those of our Profession who suffer such
Extravasation in every little Tumor to corrupt.

In this Patient there was a Tumor of about a week's continuance: the question
was, whether what was contained in the Tumor was Blood or Matter. If Matter,
then a painful Fluxion should have preceded with Inflammation and hardness,
and have terminated by Discussion or by Suppuration: whereas this swelled and
was painful upon the blow, but was never hard nor inflamed, or much painful,
after the sense of the stroke was over, but soft from the first night; and must
consequently be Blood. But whether it were Blood putrefied, or concocted
Matter, there remained no hopes of discussing it; nor was it safe permitting it
to lodge so near the Bone in expectation thereof. Therefore, without farther
dispute, I laid it open by Incision, and discharged about two spoonfulls of a
corrupt black blood and Serum; then dressed it up with a Digestive ex
terebinth. and embrocated the Tumor with ol. chamaem. and applying an Emplast.
stict. Paracels. with Compress and Bandage rolled it up. The third day after I
dressed it again, fomenting it with the Decoction set down in the method of
Cure, and deterged with mundif. Paracelsi; and by the help of the Vitriol-stone
and the common Sarcotick, unguent. diapompholyg. etc. incarned and cicatrized
it, but continued the Bandage a few days after, to strengthen the Part.

A decayed old Gentleman walking in the streets one evening was crushed up to a
wall by a Cart: 2. Observat.
the Wheel passing too near him bruised the outside of his left Leg, but did
not break the skin: it was suddenly swelled, and very painful. His Friends
chafed it with Brandy-wine, and, dipping a cloth in the same, bound it about
the Part. By this way of dressing that side of his Leg swelled and inflamed
very much. Others advised him L^^^^^^'s Balsam: by which improper Application
the Fluxion was increased, and the Patient confined to his bed. Here was an
object of Charity, upon which account I was sent to him. I found the outside
of his Leg swelled and apostemated from the Gartering to the Small. I laid it
open by Caustic an inch or two, according to the length of the Member. In
dividing the Escar, there was discharged a large quantity of Matter with
clotted blood in it. I dressed the Escar with Lenients, and embrocated the
Parts affected cum. ol. ros. and vino austero, and applied Empl. e bolo over
the Tumor with Compress and Bandage. The next day I brought a Decoction of
absinth. flor. cham. ros. rubr. bacc. myrtill. fomented the Leg, and dressed
the Escar with Lenients to hasten Suppuration; then by good Bandage thrust out
the Matter, and endeavored to agglutinate the hollow Parts; but could not do
it without laying it more open by a snip made with a Probe-scissors. After
which I deterged the Ulcer with the Vitriol-stone and with unguent. basilic.
cum Merc. praecipitat. Then I incarned and cicatrized it, as has been said in
the former Observation. If in stead of spir. vin. etc. they had dressed this
man's Leg cum bol. Armen. aceto, album. ovor. and ol. ros. they might have
happily prevented the pain and trouble that followed.

And old Gentleman was sorely bruised by a Fall in several parts, 3. Observat.
but especially on the inside of his left Arm. After the space of two months I
was consulted, and saw an Ecchymosis very hard and big lying along the Vessels
that reach on the inside of the Arm to the Elbow-joynt. I embrocated cum oleo
lumbricor. vulpin. and guttis aliquot olei origani and lavendulae, and applied
cerat. agripp. over all. The next day I fomented with Discutients to which was
added spir. vini. Then, having embrocated it as abovesaid, I applied a
Cataplasm ex farinis hordei, orobi, lentium, sem. foenugraeci, cum flor.
chamaemeli, sambuci, etc. decocted in some of the former Fotus, with an
addition of some of the abovesaid Oils and Oxymel scillitic. By which method
the Swelling and Ecchymosis were scattered.

A Man of about sixty years of age scorbutically affected, 4. Observat.
by a Fall upon a paved Floor, bruised his left Thigh. It was embrocated cum
oleo ros. and aceto, and an Empl. e bolo applied over the grieved Part.
Venaesection was proposed, but not permitted, by reason of his age, not would
he purge. The third day he complained of extremity of pain, and suspected his
Hip luxated. I took off the Dressings, and felt the Joint well, but all that
side of the Thigh over-spred with an Ecchymosis. I embrocated with ol.
chamaemel. and lumbricor. with an addition of ol. terebinth. and applied Empl.
stict. Paracels. with a third part of Empl. diachalciteos; and the next day
fomented the diseased Thigh with decoct. absinth. etc. in vino and aqua, to
which was added spir. vini. Thus the extravasated Serum was resolved: but the
Emplaster was continued by reason of his pain which remained notwithstanding.
Some weeks after he complained of a nummedness of the whole Leg: upon which
account Embrocations were repeated, also Purging and decoct. sarsae, etc. with
Antiscorbuticks: but he took little of them. During this the Leg began to
emaciate, and a Species of a Paralysis increased. Vesicatories were applied,
and afterward a Caustic below the Gartering. The next day I divided the
Escar, and dressed it with Lenients, but left the attending of it to my
Servant. Some days after, being informed that the Escar did not separate, but
grew painful, I visited him, and saw it dry, not likely to separate: the Leg
was also swelled with pituitous Humors. Since his Fall he had been below
stairs walking with Crutches, but of late did sit up most part of the night, by
reason of his pain. This and the weakness of the Member had occasioned the
Swelling, and infeebled the native heat in the designed Fontanell. I cut into
the Escar, dapt it cum oleo terebinth. hot, and filled it with Merc.
praecipitat. then dressed it with Pledgits applied warm out of a mixture of
unguent. basilic. with some of the said Oil; after fomented the Leg with a
Lixivium wherein had been decocted some of the warm Plants, and applied a
Cataplasm over the Ulcer. Thus the Escar was digested, and fitted with a Pea,
and the Swelling restrained: but some months after he sunk under a Diarrhoea.

A Man of about thirty six years of age, 5. Observat.
of a lean Constitution, by accident of a Fall near two stories high into the
Street was sorely bruised, especially on his left Side, Hip and Arm. I
immediately let him blood largely, and embrocated the Parts bruised cum ol.
ros. myrt. and aceto, and applied astringent Emplasters as above mentioned. A
Clyster was also prescribed, and Irish Slate, etc. was given him, whereby he
was disposed to a breathing Sweat: and at the hour of Sleep an Anodyne draught
was prescribed, to incline him to rest. By this method the Fluxion was checked,
during which the Parts diseased were fomented with a decoct. summitat. absinth.
anethi, majoranae, flor. cham. sambuci, sem. anisi and cumini; to which was
added spir. vini. Embrocations were also made ex oleis aneth. rutae, and
terebinth. and the Cerote above proposed was applied over them: and in progress
of time he was cured.

CHAP. XVI. Of an Aneurisma.
AN Aneurisma, according to my Description, is an Ecchymosis, and indeed the
highest Species of it. But since Authors have given another account of that
Tumor, and have allowed it a peculiar Chapter, I have done so too; the rather,
because the nature of the Vessel through which the Effusion is made does
require a different method of Cure.

It is a Tumor soft, Description.
white, and yielding to the touch, but rises again upon the removal of your
finger; and is for the most part accompanied with pulsation of the Artery.

It is raised, Opinion of the Ancients.
according to the Opinion of Authors, by dilatation or relaxation of the
Artery; they supposing the Blood to have burst its passage through the first
Coat, and dilated the second, thereby raising the Tumor. And this some of them
have delivered to us so positively, as if they had in opening them found the
exterior Coat so dilated. This I my self was taught, and some while believed:
but not having been able by my Practice to discover one Aneurisma made by
dilatation or relaxation of the outward Coat, I am apt to believe that there is
no such thing, but that it takes its rise from Blood bursting quite through the
Artery into the interstices of the Muscles, where it raises a Tumor suitable
to the Cavity it finds, growing bigger or less, of this or that shape, as the
Muscles give way. But this Tumor consists of Blood extravasated, the Artery
lying undilated the while. I do therefore suspect the possibility of an
Aneurisma by the dilatation of the outward or softer Coat of the Artery,
because it seems improbable that a force big enough to burst the inward Coat,
which is so tough and firm, should leave the exterior, being softer and
weaker, whole, and go out so leisurely into it as to give it time for
dilatation. Those which I have met with did all come from downright eruption
through both the Coats; and those that come from external Punctures must of
necessity begin with a breach of the external Coat first, it being next the
Lancet, or other Weapon that made the division. Sennertus would have it to heal
again, though contrary to my experience, who have always found it open as well
as the internal: and indeed reason must tell us, that the constant eruptions of
blood out of the Artery in every Pulse must needs keep it open; nay, the Blood
keeps not within the bounds of any one Membrane, but I have seen it
extravasated through all the interstices of the Muscles of the whole Arm.

The Causes of Aneurisma's are diverse, internal, or external. Causes.
1. The internal Cause is, the impetuosity of the Blood, which moving with
greater violence in its Channels then the Artery can sustain, does force its
way through the side of the Vessel, and, bursting a hole in it, does issue into
the space that lies between it and the neighboring Muscles, there
incrassating the Membranes of the Muscles, and framing it self a nest.

This Impetus may rise first from the quantity of the Blood. Either when it is
more then the Vessel can contain, a case that seldom happens to produce an
Aneurisma in any conspicuous Vessel; but if any such thing be, it opens at the
Nose, or Lungs, or in the Brain, (there causing an Apoplexy;) or in the
Stomach, Guts, Anus, etc. Or else when this Blood is not really more then the
whole Body naturally should contain, but by violent Passion, or motion in
stirring, is too forcibly driven forwards from the Heart toward some peculiar
Artery; when the farther progress being (it may be) intercepted by some violent
contraction of the Muscles through which it must pass, it of necessity breaks
the Vessel: and thus in violent Vomiting and other Straining Aneurisma's are
often made in the Neck, Arms, Legs, etc.

Secondly, from the quality of the Blood, which, being too sharp or thin,
crodes the Vessel; or, being highly fermented by other causes, bursts through
all.

This Blood, though extravasated, does usually pulse: partly, because the body
of the Artery from which it breaks does pass through it, and by its Pulse does
agitate that; and partly, because in every such Pulse some addition of Blood is
made to the Tumor. Yet this Pulse is chiefly in small Aneurisma's or
superficial ones; for in the greater the motion of the Artery is not always
felt.

2. The external Causes are puncture by Lancet or Weapon, cutting, bruising,
erosion, or whatever else may divide the Coats of the Arteries.

The Differences of an Aneurisma are either from its magnitude, situation,
Differences.
or shape. From the Magnitude it is denominated great or little, possessing the
whole member or a part. From its Situation, it is superficial near the Skin, or
deep in the Muscles. From its Shape: either it keeps the shape of the Part;
which usually happens when the Orifice in the Artery is small, so that the
Blood comes out leisurely, and finds the neighbour-Membranes so well united as
to keep it within a certain channel, which Membranes are also fortified by an
addition of a Serum coagulated from the extravasated Blood: or else it alters
its form, when it grows suddenly and irregularly, the Eruption being so great
that it cannot be kept within bounds; or when it is by an ignorant Surgeon
treated with Lenients and Discutients, being mistaken for some other Disease;
for in this case the Membrances are relaxed, and give way to the Tumor.

From these Differences the Signs of an Aneurisma may be taken. Signs.
If the Tumor be small and superficial, a Pulsation may easily be felt in
every part of it. If it be great and rise suddenly, and was white and soft from
its first appearance, though there be no Pulsation to be felt, yet you may
conclude it an Aneurisma, there being not any Humor save that of Blood which
can so suddenly raise such a Tumor. The often increase and diminution of the
Tumor is also a Sign of an Aneurisma; the diminution of it being the return of
the Blood into the Artery, whence it as often comes out again.

If it happened from a Puncture of a Lancet, the manner of the spurting out of
the Blood will show it: and if it do not bleed, yet a sudden Tumor thrusts up
under your Finger, with Pulsation, the blood breaking out into the interstices
of the Muscles, though not quite into the Skin.

The Tumor is more compact or scattered according as there was care taken at
first to restrain it within compass. In some of these there is redness and
Inflammation, by reason of the expansion of the Parts beyond their capacity, or
from the putrefaction of the Blood: in which latter case Fever and Fainting for
the most part accompany it.

All Aneurisma's are difficult of Cure. Prognostic.
Those which are large, and arise from Arteries deep in the Muscles, to which
you cannot make your Applications, are incurable: and if they be unadvisedly
opened, the Patient is in great danger of his life. But if the Aneurisma be in
such a Part as is capable of Bandage and application of Medicaments, the Cure
is feasible; or the Disease may be palliated to the ease of the Patient.

The Cure of an Aneurisma consists in the timely application of proper
Medicaments, Cure.
and Bandage to restrain the Blood and keep it within its Channel: or by
Escaroticks or the actual Cautery you may destroy it. But if it lie where you
may take it up, the Cure is then best performed by dividing it. The Medicaments
proper to restrain it in its motion, and agglutinate the Vessel, are, bol.
Armen. sang. dracon. thus, aloe, far. volat. gypsum; also the juices of
plantag. burs. pastoris, millefol. vincae pervincae, pilosellae, lamii, and
such like. The Compounds may be made of some of the foregoing Powders with some
of the aforesaid Juices, or mixed cum aceto and albumin. ovorum.

In the first appearance of the Tumor, if it arose from an internal Cause, you
shall endeavor by the application of some of the aforesaid Astringents and
Bandage to restrain the growth of it: but if it be in a place incapable of
Bandage, you must content your self with the application of Empl. Caesaris, or
such like. If it be near the trachea Arteria, the Patient may wear beaten Lead
or Gold upon it covered with Sarsenet or the like. You are to be well advised
before you attempt the Cure by opening it. If by putrefaction the Blood burst
forth suddenly upon you, the life of your Patient is then in danger, and it
will become you to be quick in the application of good Restrictives and
Bandage, till you have time to consider what to do: and be sure to provide
against the next Eruption; for till it break of it self you are not to open it;
and then you may attempt the stopping of the Flux by such means as have been or
hereafter shall be proposed.

If the Aneurisma happen by Puncture in letting blood, the Surgeon ought to
permit the Vessel opened to bleed freely: but if it does not bleed well, let
him immediately loosen the Bandage, and apply a Compress dipped in his MAJESTY's
Stiptick, or, for want of it, in Oxyerate. Let it be held firmly upon the
Apertion by a Servant, whilst the Surgeon opens a Vein in the other Arm,
and makes Revulsion by a large evacuation to fainting, if it may be permitted.
The while let your astringent Powders be applied to the Wound, with good
restrictive Emplasters over them. The upper part of the Arm to the Axilla is to
be defended by clothes wrung out of Oxycrate. Then with a Rowler with two heads
take two or three turns upon the diseased Part, and roll upward, (his Arm being
bowed the while:) and, for more security, take a turn about the Neck, and
return back with your Bandage gradually to the Part affected, fastening it on
the outside; then make the expulsive Bandage from the Hand upward. These ought
to be made to the ease of the Patient, who, being thus dressed, must be put into
his bed, and his Hand placed upon his Breast. Contemperating Juleps, Emulsions,
Opiats, etc. ought to be prescribed him, and his Diet, etc. to be regulated as
is proposed in the Chapt. of the Wounds of the Veins and Arteries. Having made
this Bandage well, you are not to be overhasty in opening it again; for this
first Dressing happily secures your Patient. For the great mischief happening in
these Aneurisma's proceeds from the ignorance of the Bloud-letter, who, not
considering the error by him committed in letting blood, binds up the Arm
carelessly, and the next day, upon the Patient's complaint, not discovering the
cause of the Tumor, foments and embrocates it, thereby making way for the
Blood to empty it self into the interstices of the Muscles; whereupon the whole
Arm swells. In which case a laced Sleeve and Glove may be of great use. When
this method fails, it may be necessary that you prepare for Deligation of the
Artery. The manner of doing it you may see in the Chapter of the Wounds of the
Veins and Arteries. I shall also show it in one of the following Observations.

I Have had many brought to me with swelled Necks, 1. Observat. of Aneurisma's
lying near the trachea Arteria.
upon suspicion that they were troubled with a species of King's Evil, called
Bronchocele: but the Pulsation of those Tumors showed them to be Aneurisma's,
and the most difficult to treat, they, by reason of their situation, not being
capable of Bandage. In which cases I commonly proposed the wearing of a Cap of
beaten Lead made of many sheets laid upon one another, and covered with Silk or
Sarsenet, which with Ribbons were made to fasten about the Neck with much ease:
or, if they would have Emplasters, I applied some of a mixture of unguent.
sumach with Empl. Caesaris, or such like.

Where Aneurisma's have affected Parts capable of Bandage, I have sometime
palliated them: but when they would not be so quieted, I prosecuted the Cure as
follows.

A Man of about 40 years of age, 2. Observat. of an Aneurisma.
having some time been troubled with a large soft Tumor on the inside of his
right Leg about his Gartering, desired my advice. It was without Pain,
Inflammation or Pulsation, but soft from its first appearance, and was bigger
or lesser according as he walked much or little; which gave me suspicion it
might be an Aneurisma. I applied Empl. Caesaris over it, caused a laced
Stocking to be put on, let him blood, and advised to Purging, regulation of
Diet and Exercise, etc. by which it was kept quiet some time. But he, growing
more secure, neglected the Rules prescribed him; whereupon the Tumor
increased, and burst forth one night in a flux of Blood. I was sent for, and
found much extravasated; but the Opening it self was stopped with a clot of
grumous blood. I dressed it up with Restrictives and Compress wrung out of
Oxycrate. Then I made Revulsion by Venaesection and Deligation of other Parts.
I also prescribed Opiats, etc. to calm the ferment in the Blood. By this and my
way of dressing the Blood was for some days tolerably restrained: but as the
Opening grew bigger, the effusion was greater. Upon which consideration I had
provided some trochisci de minio of several sizes, also some pulv. sine pari
Jo. Arden. I put in some of the former, and applied my Restrictives and Bandage
over the Tumor; and, as often as the Blood burst forth, I continued that way
of dressing, hoping by those Escaroticks to destroy the Artery. Afterward the
Orifice growing larger, I filled up the Abscess with the pulv. sine pari upon
Dossills, and applied Restrictives and Bandage as before. The Patient grew
daily weaker; but from this latter Dressing the Bleeding was restrained till
the fifth day, when I was necessitated to open it, by reason of the
Excoriations made in many places about it by the Escaroticks: nor was it then
much. The Opening being large, I applied the Escaroticks to more advantage, and
dressed the Excoriations with unguent. album camphorat. continuing my Empl. e
bolo and Bandage. From that time the Bleeding was stopped, I suppose by
consuming the Artery; yet for some while there came away much stinking clotted
Blood. While I endeavored to keep the Blood within the Abscess, it insinuated
between the Muscles, making the Calf of the leg hollow to the very Tendon:
therefore, after I was secured of the Bleeding, I made way for the easy
discharge of Matter, and deterged the Abscess with mundif. Paracels. To the
Excoriations I continued the use of Epuloticks, and nourished my Patient with
good Broths, Caudles, etc. by which he recovered strength apace. The sharp
Humors being evacuated with his Blood, the Abscess incarned by the application
of the common Sarcoticks, and he was cured in less then a month, recovering
also the perfect use of his Leg.

Some years since I was desired to give a visit to a man lying in my way to
White Hall. 3. Observat.
He had a large white Tumor possessing the forepart of his right Thigh of few
months growth: it was soft from the first appearance, and observed by the
Patient to be bigger and lesser one time then another. I considered the
Swelling, and concluded it an Aneurisma. That there was no Pulsation to be felt
in it, was because it lay deep amongst the Muscles, in which case the Pulse is
frequently intercepted. There lay a gummy Emplaster upon it, and an attempt had
been made to open it by Caustic; but it not penetrating deep enough, the Escar
separated without reaching near the Cavity. I declared to the Patient my
thoughts, viz. that the Swelling proceeded from Blood poured forth of its
Vessels, either by Erosion from within, or by some outward cause, as by Riding,
etc. and advised him not to permit the Tumor to be opened, desiring that, if
his Surgeon should persist in the suppurating or opening of it, he would
send to me to meet him. Some few days after the Patient sent me notice that his
Surgeon had been with him, and resolved to open it: whereupon I took the
next opportunity to speak with the Surgeon, and went along with him to his
Patient; where I endeavored to persuade him that the Swelling arose from
Blood, and withal proposed a palliative Cure by a laced Trowze and some good
Restrictive. But the Surgeon declared himself positively for the opening of
it. I, seeing his resolution, replied, Since you are so opinionated, you may
(if you think good) make a trial of the Tumor by thrusting a small Lancet
directly into the middle of it; and if upon pulling out of the Lancet it appear
mattery, you may lay it more open; if it appear bloody, you may more easily
cure it then one made by a Caustic. He readily assented to the trial, and the
Patient rejoicing in the proposal, he attempted it with a Lancet: but not
thrusting it deep enough to reach the Cavity, I took the Lancet, and, passing
it into the same Opening he had made, thrust it directly down into the Cavity,
and pulled it out bloody, but not one drop followed it. The Surgeon not
being therewith satisfied, I wished him to pass a small Probe down into the
Opening. He did so: and I also made a search with the same Probe, and felt the
Cavity large and full of Liquids, which was certainly Blood, the Probe coming
out bloody. I persuaded the Patient to keep his bed till that Puncture should
be agglutinated, and advised the Surgeon to be careful in the Cure of it.
We dressed it with a Pledgit of liniment. Arcaei, with Emplaster and Bandage:
to the use of which Medicine I left them, not doubting of their care in healing
up so small a Puncture. About ten days after, walking near the door in a dark
evening weary, and desirous to rest my self, the thoughts of this poor man
inclined me to go into the house. I enquired of the Land-lady if he was within.
She replied, He is dying: That upon his rising out of his bed the Blood had
burst forth excessively: That the Surgeon had for some days endeavored to
stop it, but had since left the Patient, and a Neighbour-woman had applied a
Pultice to it; and that the Chamber stunk so extremely as it would poison me to
go into it. I went up, and found the room scattered with stinking bloody
Clothes, and the poor man languishing in his bed, which was not cleanlier. I
sent presently away for the Surgeon, and in the while made Rowlers and
Compresses, and sent for some Yeast and Wheat Flour. The Surgeon being
come, we spread a mixture of them upon clothes, and armed several Tents with the
same. Having thus prepared our Dressings as the time would permit, we took off
the bloody ones, and held the Orifice close while we cleansed the Thigh from
the Pultice and Blood, then stopped the Orifice with a Tent proportionably, and
applied our Agglutinatives over, with Compress and Bandage wrung out of
Oxycrate. We rolled the Member moderately straight, then laid him clean, and
caused a mess of Caudle to be given him, and encouraged him with hopes of
recovery. The Surgeon pleaded for himself, that he thought the Patient had
been dead.

Three or four days after we dressed him again, and found him much recruited in
his Spirits, he not having bled one drop: and indeed the Emplasters adhered as
close to the Skin as we could desire. After we had taken out the Tent,
abundance of grumous Blood issued forth: we cleansed it away, and shaked into
the Abscess about a dram of Merc. praecipitat. and though we had then choice of
Medicaments, yet we applied the same as before, and continued that method of
Dressings, till the Blood was converted to Matter. Then we slit open the
Orifice, and dressed it as a sinuous Ulcer. After some days, observing that the
Matter could not discharge while he kept his bed till the Abscess was full to
run over, we caused him to rise out of it: but that little while he was up he
swouned; wherefore we put him to bed again, and allowed him stronger
nourishment, and by a Seton-needle made way for the discharge of Matter to more
advantage. The Abscess being well disposed to cure, I left him again to his
Surgeon, who cured him.

This Experiment of opening Aneurisma's by Puncture is not to be imitated,
unless it be in such cases as this, where both Patient and Surgeon are so
incredulous.

Some years since, while I dwelt in the Old Bailey, 4. Observat.
I was consulted in the case of a man who in his letting blood was pricked in
the Artery. The Artery did not bleed outwardly, but discharged it self between
the Muscles. The Tumor, being mistaken for a puncture of a Nerve or Tendon,
was fomented with Discutients, whereby I found it much enlarged, and not only
the inside but the outside of the Arm swelled above and beneath the Elbow, with
a Pulsation in those remote Parts. I caused an Emplaster to be made of some of
the Restrictives set down in the method of Cure, cum ol. ros. myrtill. and
aceto, and applied it over the Arm to the Axilla with Compress and Bandage. I
then let him blood, and disposed him to rest with an Anodyne draught, and
prescribed him Emulsions and cooling Juleps, with such a Diet as might
incrassate his Blood. A day or two after I strengthened the former Bandage by a
laced Sleeve and Glove, by which for some time much of the Blood was returned
back into the Artery, and the Arm seemed in a hopeful way of recovery: but
through irregularity the Arm swelled again, and the Patient grew weary of us,
and gave ear to every prattle; and so it happened that an Empirick was
commended to them, as having an excellent Medicament to stop Bleeding. He was
fetched, and undertook the Cure, and removed the Patient nearer his Lodging,
where he treated him: but he being ignorant in making the Bandage, or possibly
not thinking it so necessary, the Arm swelled; and the Tumor on the inside of
the Arm being soft and prominent, he concluded it a bag of Matter, (as he
called it) and applied a few bruised Herbs to it, which eat into the Skin, and
made way for the Blood to burst forth abundantly; insomuch as a neighboring
Surgeon was sent for, and he called others, who together made a shift to
stop it at that time. But his Arm gangrened, so that within few days after they
prepared for the cutting it off. The Patient's Relations, being acquainted with
the accident, sent me to them. I saw it amputated, and the Patient put into his
bed. We slit up the Arm, and laid the Artery bare. It retained its natural
shape and smalness, not one jot dilated; nor was the Apertion considerable
which had been made by that accident, but by reason of its constitution
continued open, as I have seen a hole punched in Leather, whereby it was
capable of receiving the Blood, if it had been timely returned: but that being
omitted, the extravasated Blood forced amongst the interstices of the Muscles
up to the Axilla, and on the outside of the Arm down beneath the Elbow, in
which places we found a quantity of stinking grumous Blood.

A Man being much afflicted with a Tumor in his right Arm, 5. Observat.
occasioned by the pricking of an Artery in letting blood, having tried the
endeavors of several of our Profession unsuccessfully, some whereof had
purposed the taking off this Arm, at the last I was sent for, and met Mr. Arris
and Mr. Hollier there. Mr. Gardner was his Surgeon. The Tumor was large,
much inflamed, and painful, with little or no Pulsation: but the Accident
which gave rise to the Tumor enough confirmed it an Aneurisma. My opinion was,
that a Tumor so inflamed was not capable of such Bandage whereby they might
hope to return the Blood back into the Artery. Nor indeed was it reasonable to
suppose that such a putrefactive heat as seemed to be enclosed in that Swelling
was capable of being thrust back or retained long there, without making its own
way by a Gangrene: and of what danger such an Eruption might be to the Patient,
if a Surgeon were not at hand, I left to their consideration. Then in order
to the removal of the Tumor there were but two ways, viz. Amputation of the
Arm, or cutting into the Tumor, and making Deligation of the Artery; which
latter I commended to them. They assented to the Deligation: only the Patient
desired a day or two to prepare himself. We applied Empl. e bolo, with a
moderate Bandage to restrain the increase of the Tumor the while. The fourth
day after we met again, and, having all things ready, the Patient was placed in
a Chair toward the light. I took off the Dressings, and made a Ligature four
fingers breadth above the Tumor, on which Mr. Hollier made a gripe. Some other
held the Hand and lower part of the Arm, whilst I made Incision down the length
of the Tumor. That done, I threw out the grumous Blood with my fingers, and
cleansed the Wound with a Sponge. Then desiring Mr. Hollier to slacken his
hand, upon which the Artery discovered it self by the blood spurting out, I
passed my Needle under the upper part of the Artery, and tied that, and cut off
the end of the Ligature. Near the Wound made in the Artery by letting blood
there was a cartilaginous body formed, which hindered my coming to the Artery; I
cut it away, then passed my Needle, and made a second Ligature. We dressed it
up with Pledgits spread with the common Digestive ex terebinth. dipped in pulv.
Galeni, and applied Empl. diachalcit. malaxed with ol. ros. and rolled it up to
the ease of the Patient; then put him into his bed, and prescribed him an
Anodyne draught to take that night. The next day I visited him, and found him
in much ease: he had slept well with half the draught was designed him, and was
not troubled with those fainting fits which he had been subject to before the
Operation. The third day we took him out of his bed to dress his Arm. In taking
off the Dressing we found all safe, and the Lips of the wound tending to
digestion. Mr. Hollier, who held the Arm above, seeing no Blood flow from the
Wound, for experience sake griped it harder: upon which the Blood of a sudden
dropped from the fleshy parts and Capillaries in great drops, as if it had been
pressed out of a Sponge. I wondered at the manner of its bleeding, not minding
what he had done: but he slackning his hand, it ceased as soon. Caution.
Which may show the ill consequence of over-hard binding in the dressing of
Wounds, Ulcers, etc. We dressed the Wound with the Digestive as before, and so
continued it till the Wound was well digested. From that time we dressed it
with Sarcoticks, rubbed the loose flesh with the Vitriol-stone, and hastened
the cicatrizing of it with aq. medicamentos. etc. I saw the Ligatures fall off,
and the Wound cicatrizing, then left it to his Surgeon, it being at that
time indeed almost cicatrized. The Patient made me a visit a while after, and
showed me that he could use that Arm as well as the other.

What more concerns an Aneurisma you may see in the Chapter of the Wounds of
the Veins and Arteries.

CHAP. XVII. Of an Herpes.
HErpes has its name a serpendo, from its creeping quality: Names.
it is also called Formica ambulativa and corrosiva; and, by Celsus, Ignis
sacer. It proceeds from pure Choler (as it is yet thought) separated from the
other Humors, and cast out into the Superficies of the Skin.

There are three Species of them, 3. Species.
differing from each other according to the Humor of which they are generated.
The first is the Simple Herpes, proceeding from pure Choler. The second is the
Herpes miliaris, wherein there is an admixture of a salt waterish Humor. The
third Species is Herpes exedens, where the Humor added to the Bilis partaketh
of much acrimony, and proves exceeding corrosive.

The Simple Herpes is a Pustule of a yellowish inflamed color with a sharp
head: it comes soon to maturity, Simple Herpes.
and the Matter is visible in the upper part of it whilst its basis is
inflamed; but in the eruption of the Matter the Inflammation goes off, and it
heals. In the Face they frequently appear single, and so they will in other
parts of the body, and are generally taken notice of as choleric Pustules: but
they do often appear over-spreading the Back, Sides, or Breast, and are
accompanied with an Erysipelas, and have a Fever joined with them; being in
this case known by the name of Shingles.

The Herpes miliaris rises in a cluster of small Wheals little differing from
the color of the Skin. Herpes miliaris.
They are first discovered by their itching, and being rubbed or scratched they
weep a thin waterish Humor: from that time a Scab appears in the head of
each of them of the form of a Millet-seed, from whence the Tumor has its
name. As the Pustules heal in one place, they usually break out in another.

Herpes exedens is said to be rather an Ulcer then a Tumor, Herpes exedens.
but is indeed an Ulcer with Tumor, it rising in the Skin in a small Tubercle,
on the top whereof there appears an Ulcer like a pin-hole. It is for the most
part without Inflammation or pain. When it arises alone it is scarce taken
notice of, it mattering but little unless it be picked, and then it scabs soon
after with a thin Scurf. But in progress of time it shows its ill condition,
by eating away the Skin, and indurates the Flesh underneath and Parts about.
Sometime I have seen these Ulcers arise in the Skin somewhat distant one from
another, making an unequal furrow; as from the upper Lip by the Nostril
creeping to that side of the Nose, so to the ridge of it, and down again to
that corner of the Eye; healing in some places while it eat deep into the flesh
in others.

This Herpes in Lues venerea frequently arises from a Simple Herpes, while the
Matter is shut in by the Scab, it corroding underneath, and making an Ulcer;
when it breaks out, appearing like a Honeycomb, bigger or less, and of a
round or long figure, accordingly as the Disease has more or less malignity.

The Simple Herpes is neither dangerous, Prognostic.
nor difficult of cure; but in the Face it may be exasperated by picking or
scratching, and grow corrosive; otherwise it will heal of it self. When it
first overspreads a Part, the Patient is indisposed with Fever; but as it
comes to Matter, that indisposition goes off.

As an Erysipelas does sometime terminate in a Herpes, so an Herpes is
frequently accompanied by an Erysipelas.

The Herpes miliaris is without Fever, but is difficult of Cure, especially if
it affect the Face, Nose or Ears. If the Cure be neglected, it eats deep into
the Flesh; and then, in what Part so ever it is, the Cure is hard to accomplish.

The Herpes exedens is most difficult of cure, and if it be not timely treated,
it certainly terminates in a Phagedaena of Cancer: but when it arises from
Lues venerea, the very worst is curable.

As to Internal Remedies; Cure internal.
a Simple Herpes is cured much like an Erysipelas, by evacuation and
contemperation of choler. Herpes miliaris comes near to the nature of an Itch,
and is to be treated with Purgatives and Alteratives much of the same kind
with what is proposed for that. For the Cure of the exedens I refer you to the
Treatise of Ulcers.

External Applications also in the Simple Herpes do imitate those of
Erysipelas, Cure external.
but ought to be more drying; as polygonum, equisetum, millefolium, plantag.
solanum, etc. whose Juices may either be applied upon clothes wet therein, or
else be mixed with lithargyrum auri and argenti, cerussa, tutia, bolus armen.
so as by addition of ol. ros. myrtill. and Wax to make Cerots or Ointments: as,
succ. plantag. summit. vitis, polygoni, an. iij. tutiae praep. cerussae, an.
ss. litharg. auri j. antimonii iij. cerae q. s. ol. ros. and myrtill. fiat
Cerat. Our Dispensatories abound with Compositions fit for your purpose, as
unguent. album camphor. diapompholyg. tutiae, desiccativ. rubr. nutrit. mixed
with populeon.

Herpes miliaris requires a more powerful exsiccation: viz. pingued. porcin.
vitulin. vaccin. an. lbss. fol. alleluiae, chelidonii, sedi minoris, plantag.
ling. canis, an. M.j. calcis ter extinctae lbss. chalcanthi pulver. j. flor,
aeris iv. omnia ad invicem conquassentur, and simul dimittantur marcescere per
hebdomadam; postmodum addantur aq. plantag. and succ. granator, an. iv. deinde
bulliant lento igne usque ad consumptionem aquae and succi, and colentur;
colaturae add lithargyri aur. and argent. an. iv. boli armen. minii, an. j.
pulv. cort. granat. ss. terebinth. clarissimae iij. iterum bulliant, and cum
cera alb. fiat Vnguentum. Or, axung. porcin. ol. laurin. an. ss. unguent.
rosat. iij. auripigment. ij. Merc. sublimat. ss. argenti vivi saliva jejuni
extincti ss. lithargyr. auri, argenti, and cerussae, an. iij. Misce in mortario
marmoreo pro usu. Merc. dulcis, Merc. praecipitat. arcanum corallinum mixed
with unguent. rosatum, have sometime served me to good purpose in the curing of
this Disease in Children and tender Bodies; but in the more rebellious sort we
foment them with good Lixivium or an Ablution of Turbith. Spirit of Vitriol and
the Caustick-stone it self may be also necessary. And this is it which makes an
Herpes in the Face so hard of cure, we not daring to apply such Corrosives
there, especially not on the Nose, where the Cartilages and Bones lie so near
the Skin.

A Girl of about six years of age was brought to me with many small angry
Wheals rising behind her left Ear and down that side of her Neck toward that
Clavicle, with an Inflammation about them. 1. Observat. of an Herpes behind the
Ear.
I applied an Empl. de cerat. ad herpetem, to assuage the heat, and defend her
clothes from sticking to them, and advised her Mother to keep her warm. A few
days after they brought her to me again. The Inflammation was then going off,
and the Pustulae on the lower parts burst; but those behind her Ear were white
and full of Matter. I opened them all, and discharged the Matter, then dressed
them with unguent. tutiae upon Pledgits of Lint; by which in three or four days
after they were dried up and cured.

A Gentleman of about fifty years old, through some disorder in Diet, 2.
Observat. of an Herpes.
heated his Blood, and was indisposed with a Cough and Shortness of breath: he
had also many Pustules risen upon his Breast, Back, and Sides, with an
Inflammation partaking of an Erysipelas. I let him blood about ten ounces, and
prescribed him a Clyster, also a pectoral Ptisan, and advised him to forbear
strong drinks, and to make his diet of Water-grewell, Panado, and the like. I
sent him some of my lenient Cerote to apply, in case any of the Pustules should
matter and stick to his linen. Three or four days after they came to maturity,
and brake, and dried as the former: while they dried he was purged with Whey
and Manna, and a few days after was well and abroad.

A young Gentlewoman of about eighteen years of age, 3. Observat. of an Herpes.
upon a suppression of the Menstrua, wa afflicted with many angry Pustulae on
her right Hand from her Wrist to her Fingers ends, which by ill treating
ulcerated into one another, and excoriated all over. I dressed them with
unguent. album camphorat. beaten up with album. ovi, then let her blood in the
Arm, and advised her a Clyster of Milk and Sugar. The next day I purged her
with an opening Apozeme, such as is proposed in the Chapter of the Itch; which
she repeated often. The day after her first Purge I looked upon her Hand, and,
finding it all mattery, bathed it with a Decoction of polygonum, summitat.
equiseti, rubi, etc. then dipped clothes in some of the same, and rolled up each
Finger by it self, leaving a space here and there between, on which I applied
Pledgits spread with unguent. de lithargyro. I dressed up the Hand after the
same method, and advised her to renew the Dressings thrice aday. By this and
other drying waters it cicatrized here and there; but then an Inflammation
arose above the Wrist with many Wheals. Upon the sight of which I gave her j.
calomel. over night, and a draught of her purging Apozeme in the morning. By
the repeating it three or four times, with intermission of some days, I took
off the Fermentation in her blood; and by the bathing that Hand and Arm with
lac butyriatum, and dressing it with unguent. de lithargyro and such like, I
cured her. It being then the season to drink the Waters, I recommended her to
Epsom, and from thence to Tunbridge: they passed well, and she recovered her
perfect health.

A Person of Honor, 4. Observat. of an Herpes.
of a full Body abounding with sharp Humors, was seized with an Herpes on his
right Leg. I dressed it with a mixture of unguent. nutritum and populeon, and
proposed Bleeding and Purging: but we being upon a march, our lying in the
fields the nights and marching all day was inconsistent with such Rules;
whereupon it inflamed and swelled very much, many Wheals arose, and fretted one
into another, with great Excoriation. I fomented the Leg in the mornings, and
sometime in the evening, (as we had time) with a Decoction of polygonum,
plantag. equiset. flor, ros. rubr. and dressed it with unguent. album
camphorat. cum albumine ovi, with an addition of unguent. tutiae spread upon
little pieces of Linen, and laid on at such distance as the Matter might get
out between, then rolled on a Compress pressed out of the Fomentation. But the
Fluxion was so great, and the Matter so very sharp, that for a while it would
yield to no Applications. But after he had the convenience of a Coach to rest
his Leg, I made a shift to cicatrize the Ulcerations by applying bits of Linen
dipped in the aforesaid Decoction, and laying Pledgits spread with unguent.
tutiae, etc. upon the edges of the Ulcerations over the Linen, with Compresses
and Bandage. The Matter was well discharged between Dressings, by which means
the Ulcer was digested and healed.

Of the Cure of these Ulcerations with Intemperies humida you may read more
particularly in their proper Chapter in the Treatise of Ulcers.

One came to me having an extreme itching in the Palm of one of his hands. 5.
Observat. of Herpes miliaris.
I looked upon it, and saw many small white Wheals scarce discernable: those
which he had scratched had small Scabs on the heads of each one of them like
Millet-seed: they seemed dry, but were encompassed also with Wheals, and did
all itch very much. He had also somewhat of the same Herpes on his Thumb and
Forefinger of the other hand. I purged him with pulv. cornach. and sent him a
pot of the unguent. calcis prescribed in the method of Cure to dress them with.
I afterward purged him with pulv. cornach. and Merc. dulcis: by which, and the
addition of a few grains of Merc. sublimat. to the aforesaid Unguent, the
Herpes was dried up in the several Parts.

A Woman came to me with an Ulcer in the Sole of one of her feet. 6. Observat.
of Herpes miliaris.
It was an unequal dry Ulcer, eating into the Skin to the Flesh of the compass
of Half a crown: it was not much painful or inflamed, otherwise then as she
heat it by walking on it. I caused it to be washed with an Ablution of Turbith,
and applied unguent. calcis upon it, and afterward purged her with Catharticks
and Calomel. Thus the Ulcers dried, but afterward rose again in the ragged
Lips. Upon sight whereof I rubbed those Lips all off with the Caustick-stone so
far as I could judge any of that Humor lurked; then applied unguent. basilicon
hot upon Pledgits, with some of the abovesaid Cerote over all. The third day
after, when I thought to have seen a deep Ulcer, I found it flat and dry, and,
scraping off the Ointment, I also brought off the Slough, and saw the Skin
smooth and even perfectly well: by which it was evident that the Disease was
only in the Skin.

A Gentlewoman about fifty years of age, 7. Observat. of Herpes miliaris and a
simple Herpes.
upon the ceasing of the Menstrua, was afflicted with an itching on the right
side of her Head above her Ear. It growing vexatious, and not yielding to
common Remedies, she came to me. It was an Herpes miliaris about the breadth of
an Half-crown-piece amongst her Hair. Her often scratching it had exasperated
it, and the sharp Humor which issued from it had fretted the Skin behind her
Ear downward, and in progress of time that became serpiginous, and was, when I
saw it, covered with white branny Scales. The Humor dropping down from these
had then inflamed the Parts beneath, and many fiery Pustulae were there risen,
which spread down to that Clavicle. I dressed these latter with cerat. Galeni,
let her blood that evening, and the next morning purged her with Whey, Manna
and crem. tartar. and that afternoon, when her Physic had done working, I
dressed the simple Herpes with the Cerote as before; then clipped off the Hair
from the Herpes miliaris and parts about, and with a strong lixivium bathed
that Herpes, and washed off the branny Scales; then applied that Unguent with
the auripigmentum mentioned in the method of Cure. It was very painful, but by
twice applying the malice of the Disease was extinguished; and afterward by
anointing it with unguent. rosatum the pain was removed, and the Herpes
miliaris and Serpigo appeared well cured. The Herpes beneath mattered, and were
dried up with the common Epuloticks. I then made her Fontanells in her Legs;
since which time she enjoys good health.

A Man long vexed with an Herpes miliaris on the inside of his Thigh was cured
by the same method.

CHAP. XVIII. Of an Oedema.
HAving showed you how Blood and Choler become offensive when disturbed and
thrown out of their proper Sphere, I shall now proceed to speak of that Tumor
which has its rise from the Pituita or Phlegm, and is known by the name of
Oedema.

It is a soft cold Tumor without change of color, pulsation, heat or pain,
Definition.
unless it be from the distension of the Part it affects.

The Cause of Oedema is, as in other preternatural Tumors, Antecedent, Causes.
and Conjunct.

The Antecedent Cause are either remote, as default in Diet, Air, Exercise,
etc. also old Contusions, Luxations, Fractures, etc. or more immediate, as the
pituitous Humor abounding in the Body.

The Conjunct Cause is the same Humor collected into a Tumor, which is done
for the most part by Congestion, these cold Tumors being rarely made by
Fluxion.

Oedema in it self is not dangerous; Prognostic.
people of gross bodies and good fellows are frequently subject to them, yet
live to old age. But in Consumptive and Hydropical bodies it is of ill
consequence, not as it is a Disease, but as it foreshews a decay of native
heat. Those Oedemata that attend accidents of Wounds, Fracture, etc. are not
dangerous, nor difficult to cure: but if an Oedema grow hard and painful,
there is fear of a Scirrhus; or if it suppurate, of a long and tedious Cure.

In the Cure of an Oedema three things are required: first, Cure.
preventing the generation of the pituitous Matter; secondly, evacuating the
gross Humors that abound in the body, which is the immediate Cause of the
Disease; thirdly, the Cure of the Tumor it self, which is effected by external
Remedies.

The first of these is performed by regulating the Patient in his manner of
living; as in Diet, Air, Exercise, Sleeping, Watching, Passions of the mind,
etc. As, that his Bread be of pure Wheat, well baked with Correctives, as
Carraway, Fenell, or Anise-seeds: that his Meat be Flesh of good nourishment
and easy digestion, Mutton, Veal, Pullet, Rabbit, Chicken, etc. that his Drink
be Ale well boiled and medicated. Wine is also commended; but moderation in
drinking is desired. The Air ought to be dry and heating, the very removal into
hotter Countries being often the Cure of this Disease. Exercise is required, to
stir up the native heat, and to wast the Crudities. Sleep in the daytime is
forbidden, and ought to be moderated in the night. Melancholy is to be avoided,
and Venery if the Body be weak.

The second consists in prescribing such Remedies as may attenuate, open
Obstructions, and evacuate the pituitous Humor. Bleeding is not always proper,
yet may be admitted if there be Plethora. Purging is necessary, and in order
thereto you may begin thus; rad. apii, petroselini, an. ss. flor. persic.
genistae, an. P. j. senae ij. salis tartari ij. agarici inclusi in nodulo jss.
zinzib. j. coquantur in aqua font. ad viij. colat. add sir. de spina cervina
x. pro dnabus vicibus. Or, sem. carthami contusi iij. senae ij. flor. sambuci,
persic. an. P.j. fiat Decoct. in aq. font. and vin. alb. ad iiij. colaturae
add aq. cinnamomi hordeat. cochl. iij. sir. ros. cum agarico j. Misce. Or you
may purge him with this following Apozeme; rad. ireos j. cort. inter. sambuci,
ebuli, an. ss. rad. faeniculi, petroselini, an. vj. summitat. centaur. min.
agrimoniae, marrubii alb. an M. j. flor. genistae, sambuci, an. Mss. sem.
foenic. carui, an. jss. fol. senae x. turbith, sem. carthami, an. iij. fiat
Decoctio s. q. vini and aquae ad 3. part. stent in infusione per noctem, mane
colentur xij. colaturae iv. sir. de spina cervina j. Misce; fiat haustus;
reiteretur per aliquot dies. The stronger Catharticks are, pil. e duobus,
extract. rudii, pil. cochiae minor. pulv. diaturbith cum rhabarbaro, diasen.
cornachin. etc. Six drams of Electuar. caryocostin. is a good Purge for the
poorer sort. Vomiting is of great use: and, if the Tumor be in the inferlour
or remote Parts, it may be as useful for making of Revulsion, if the Patient
labor not under a Phthisis. Your Vomit may be oxymel scillit. or the emetick
Wine, sal vitrioli, etc.

You are also to have regard to the weakness of the Stomach, and endeavor the
strengthening it, not only by outward Applications, as Fomentations of absinth.
card. benedict. scord. cassiae lign. calam. aromat. etc. but also with
stomachical Unguents and Emplasters, of which you may find sufficient set down
in the London Dispensatory. Cordial Electuaries and digestive Powders are also
useful, whereof I shall give you some. cons. anth. ij. cort. citri condit. ss.
nuc. moscat. condit. vj. spec. diarrhod. ij. cum sir. de cort. citri and sir.
garyophyll. fiat Electuarium: of which the Patient may take the quantity of a
Nutmeg often in a day. Or this; sem. anisi and foenic. cond. an. j. coriand.
and carui condit. an. jss. cinnam. pulv. iiij. spec. aromat. rosat. ij. fiat
pulivis. A spoonful of this may be taken after Dinner, or at any other time.
Also Decoctions of sarsaparilla, lign. guaiaci, sassafras, with
Antiscorbuticks, etc. adding Wine, aq. mirabilis, or the like cordial water to
it, to make it more grateful and hearty in the Stomach.

The third concerns the handling of the Tumor it self: and that varies,
according as it is in its beginning, state, or declination.

In the beginning, the Medicaments may be such as do moderately repel, not
violently, lest the Humor of which the Tumor proceeds, being for the most
part gross, be thereby made more tough: besides, Repellents are not so proper
in congested Tumors. When we use them, it is rather to strengthen the Part,
then to repel; therefore we mix with them such as have an attenuating and
discutient faculty. One of the milder is Bay Salt with Oil of Olives. In small
Swellings proceeding from the weakness of the Part Brandy-wine, or a Solution
of Bay Salt in Spanish Wine, or the Partie's own Urine, may serve sufficiently
to attenuate and dry up the humidity, and strengthen the Part.

In the state, when the Tumors are large, they require Medicaments more
resolvent and discutient: and the better to dispose them to rarefaction, you
may begin with such a Fomentation as this: summitat. absinthii, abrotoni,
origani, calaminthae, pulegii, sambuci, chamaemeli, rutae, salviae, an. M. j.
bacc. lauri, juniperi, an. j. sem foeniculi, dauci, carui, cymini, an. ss.
contundantur crasso medo, and in aq. q. s. bulliant ad dimid. partis
consumptionem; colaturae add spir. vini q. s. fiat Fotus. After which you may
embrocate with this; ol. laurini, rutacei, de castoreo, an. ij. salis marini,
ij. Misce: and apply this Cataplasm; farinae fabar. hordei, an. vj. summitat.
absinth. rutae, origani, abrotoni pulv. an. ss. flor. sambuci, chamaemeli, ros.
rub. pulver. an. iij. coquantur in praedict. fotu ad cataplasmatis
consistentiam, addendo in fine aluminis and sulphuris vivi an. j. olei rutacei
and mellis com. q. s. If these be not enough discutient, you may make the
former Decoction in a Lixivium, and the Cataplasm in the same, and embrocate
with such like: ciner. brassicae ij. unguent. dialthaeae iij. ol. cham. chymic.
j. Misce. Emplast. de minio cum sapone, Emplast. diasulphur. are also proper to
discuss these Tumors.

In the declining of the Tumor foment with such things as may be discutient,
and corroborative to strengthen the Part: summit. origani, majoranae, flor.
anethi, cham. ros. rubr. an. M.j. balanst. nuc. cupress. calic. gland. an. jss.
calam. aromat. ligni aloes, an. ij. coquantur in vino rubro, and fiat Fomentum.

Bandage is of great help in the Cure of these pituitous Swellings: indeed we
can do nothing considerable without them. Those I especially recommend to you
are the laced Stocking, Trowze, Sleeve and Glove. They, as sitting most firmly,
may be worn with the greatest advantage, and with the least trouble or
prejudice to the health of the Patient; yet do they require your consideration
and care how they be laced: for by the unequal hard lacing of them you may
raise a Tumor, and by an equal over-streight lacing you may emaciate the most
fleshy Leg. Many instances may be given of the former, and I shall give you one
of the latter.

A person of a sedentary life, who had been vexed with an Ulcer in one of his
Legs, was advised by his Surgeon to wear a laced Stocking; and having
thereby cured the Ulcer, he thought fit to continue the use of the Stocking
some while, which he did: but, minding more his Study then his Leg, he laced
the Stocking every morning streighter, till his Leg became so weak that it
could scarce support his body. I was fetched, and surprised to see his Leg so
dwindled away, wondering how he could lace it so small without causing
Inflammation, or indeed suffer it to be so extenuated without taking more
timely notice of it. I presently caused the Stocking to be unlaced, and his Leg
to be bathed with warm water, and embrocated with ol. lumbricor. by which it
plumped again in few days, and recovered its former strength.

A Gentleman of about thirty years of age, 1. Observat. of a swelled Hand.
having labored long of a Quartan Ague, was afflicted with a phlegmatic
Swelling in his right Hand from the Fingers ends to the Arm, as full as the
Skin could hold, both back and palm, the Joints stiff and useless. The Tumor
was painful by reason of the great distension of Parts, and was thereby
rendered hard, yet yielded to the impression of my Fingers. Doctor Lenthall had
purged him frequently; but the Tumor not yielding thereto, he put him into my
hands. I began my work with the milder Fomentation prescribed in the method of
Cure, and embrocated it with ol. cham. and rutac. cum sale comm. applied over
the whole Swelling Emplastr. diasulphuris, rolled it up, and placed it high up
to his Breast. I continued this method some days without much advantage, then
left off the use of the Emplaster, and applied a Cataplasm ex faer. hordei,
etc. as it is set down in the method of Cure, and continued the Fomentation and
Embrocation; by the use of which the Tumor did somewhat discuss. But,
according to my long Observance, these crude Tumors cannot thoroughly discuss
without the help of a more strict Bandage; therefore, having thus disposed them
for Bandage, I caused a Glove to be made of strong Leather, slitting the back
and fingers, and making Eylet-holes to draw it close. Then having applied the
Cerote above prescribed, with a Compress of cloth over it, and a piece of
Vellum to defend the Hand from the Lace, I laced the Glove on moderately
straight to the ease of the Patient, and straightened it still daily. But from
that time I did not dress the Hand more then once in four or five days, and
then I fomented and dressed it as I had done before, laying Compresses upon the
Palm of the hand and elsewhere as I saw occasion. As the Swelling diminished
the Glove became too big; we therefore put on another less, and began again to
purge him, and prescribed him decoct. sarsae, lign. guaiaci, etc. and from that
time we purged him once a week with extract. rudii and calomel. By this method
I discussed this Tumor in the midst of Winter, he not keeping his Chamber but
when he took Physic: yet there remained a stifness in the Joints of the Wrist
and Fingers, and the Arm was extremely emaciated. For the nourishing of it I
made a Fontanel in that Arm; and in order to the relaxation of the stifness of
the Joints of his Hand, I fomented them with emollient Herbs boiled in
Flesh-broth, and embrocated them daily with ol. lumbricor. applying a Cerote of
unguent. dialthaeae and Wax over all. His Hand was also sometimes put into
Grains or a Beast's Belly. After which we dressed his Hand, and laced on the
Glove, as before we were accustomed to do, and directed him to wear a furred
Glove to keep it warm. By this method his Arm grew fat, and his Hand flexible
and strong before March.

A Widow-woman aged fifty six years, 2. Observat. of swelled Legs.
of a gross Body, having been long subject to Swellings in her Legs and Feet,
was at last thereby confined to her Bed. They were pituitous, and yielded to
the impression of my fingers; yet were hard, and somewhat inflamed, and
painful: which latter was occasioned, I suppose, from the extraordinary influx
of Humor. I purposed to have begun my Cure with Purgatives: but she, having no
use of her Legs, would not be persuaded to Physic. I fomented her Legs and
Feet one after another with the milder Fotus prescribed in the method of Cure,
embrocated them with ol. cham. lilior. cum aceto, and applied a Cerote of
unguent. dialth. with an addition of Wax, and j. of ol. cham. chymic. with good
Bandage from the Toes to the Knee. I repeated this way of Dressing twice aday,
till I had mollified and resolved somewhat of the Tumor and hardness; then
made the Fomentation more discutient by the addition of Salt and Sulphur viv.
and some days after caused a pair of laced Stockings to be put on, and laced
them daily streighter. But from that time I dressed her Legs but once in three
or four days, unless it were that the Skin were fretted by the Salts or her
scratching them. In which case I took them off, and bathed her Legs with warm
water, and applied cerat. Galeni on them. Thus her Feet and Legs were made
less, and her Stockings taken in accordingly, till the Swellings were quite
discust, and her Legs and Feet restored to their true shape, which was in less
then eight weeks; during which I purged her with that Apozeme prescribed in the
method of Cure, and made her Fontanels in her Legs, and continued the use of
the laced Stockings. I thought this Widow had been dead, till the last Summer
she sent to me for an Emplaster for a pain in her Shoulder; it being the year
59. in which I cured her.

A Person of Honor about fifty years of age, of a corpulent full Body, 3.
Observat. of swelled Legs. etc.
whom I had seen many years before in France afflicted with pituitous Swellings
in his Legs and Feet, came over into England, and put himself into the hands of
Sir Fr. Prujean, he then laboring under a complication of Diseases, of which
those Swellings in his Legs and Feet were only a Symptom. By Chalybiats and
Antiscorbuticks he was relieved, and restored to a tolerable good health; but
those Swellings in his Legs did not lessen. Upon which consideration I was sent
for, and proposed the laced Stockings as the only remedy. It being allowed of
by the Physician, I fomented his Legs with the milder Fomentation above
prescribed, embrocated them as above faid in the preceding Observation, and
rolled them up from the Feet above the Knees. After three or four days I put
him on laced Stockings with Knee-pieces, and by a moderate lacing of them
restored the Legs and Feet to a better shape then they had been in many years
before, and he enjoyed a better health. After the wearing them some months
longer, his Legs grew so well, that he frequently discontinued the use of them
many months: yet when he perceived any fullness in them, he did put them on
again, without advising us about it. Nine years after this Person was diseased
with a Carbuncle: after the Curing whereof his Legs, Thighs and Belly swelled
extraordinarily. By Purging and Antiscorbuticks his Belly sunk; and by laced
Stockings and Trowzers the Swellings in his Legs and Thighs went off, and they
continued well without farther use of the laced Stockings, he enjoying a good
health some years afterward.

In the time of the last great Plague, while I was in the Country, 4. Observat.
of a swelled Thigh.
I was fetched to a Person of worth, of about seventy years of age, lying in
bed diseased with a cold phlegmatic Tumor in his right Thigh, soft and
yielding to the impression of my fingers. Doctor Bowls had been with him, and
prescribed a Fomentation with Embrocations to be daily applied. I approved of
what had been done: but the weather being then extreme cold, the ground covered
with Frost and Snow, I thought he might get cold in the time of Dressing; and
besides, without a strict Bandage it was not likely to remove that Tumor.
Therefore I offered to their consideration, whether a Flannell Trowze might not
be made to lace straight upon that Thigh, to cherish the native heat of the
Part, and defer the Cure of the Tumor till the Spring. The Patient approved of
it, and declared that he would return to London about that time, and consult us
there in order to his Cure. This being his resolution, I directed his Servants
to make a Trowze of a fine Dimity, lined with a soft Flannel, with Eylet-holes,
to lace on the outside, with a Wast-band fitted to the upper part of it. The
Trowze being made, I saw it laced on, a piece of Spanish Leather being placed
under the Lacing, to defend his Thigh from being hurt by it. The lower part of
the Trowze was tacked to a Cotton Stocking he put on that Leg. I desired (in
case that Leg should swell) they would put on a laced Stocking with a
Knee-piece. After I was gone, there were some Objections made against this
Bandage: but the Patient, finding ease by it, continued the use of it, and came
to London in the Spring of the year, and sent for Sir Fr. Prujean, Doctor
Bowls, and my self, to meet Sir Ed. Alston and Mr. L. a Surgeon at his
house, to consult his health. We met, and found the Patient walking in a large
Dining Room. He gave us an account of the Swelling in his Thigh, and how it was
cured by the Bandage I had directed in the Country. He also related to us how
he had been over-perswaded to have the Calf of that Leg blistered, and of the
pain it gave him, and that a Fontanel had been made in the same Leg; which he
was also forced to heal up by reason of the pain. (These were made after I had
been with him.) He farther declared the Objections had been made against the
Bandage, and said, he had therefore sent for us together, to have our Opinions
how to regulate himself for the future. The Physicians did all approve of the
Bandage, and allowed his wearing laced Stockings on his Legs in case they
should swell, and prescribed him a stomachical Pill and some pectoral Syrups to
take for a Cough he was subject to. Some while after the Patient's Legs
swelling again, I put him on laced Stockings, which he did wear till they
recovered their tone. Afterward, as occasion offered, he wore them, or left
them off. During the time he wore them, he commonly bathed his Legs with warm
water at night (by my direction) once a week to refresh them, and put fresh
Stockings on the next morning. Thus he lived happily some years, and died of
Old age.

A Youth aged about 15 years was diseased with the Smallpox, 5. Observat. of
an oedematous Swelling with Apostemation, etc.
and soon afterward with a Rheumatismus, which especially afflicted the
Scapulae and right Ischion. During these Distempers the Physicians endeavored
by frequent Bleeding, Sudorificks, etc. to take off the Ferment in the blood:
but the pain increased, and that Leg swelled from the Hip to the very Toes
exceedingly, and seemed oedematous. On each of the Scapulae there also appeared
a large Tumor without Inflammation. These latter we judged to be full of
Matter, and accordingly I opened them by Incision, and discharged a great
quantity of purulent Matter. We dressed them with unguent. basilicon upon
Pledgits. The Swelling in the Leg we stuped with a Decoction of warm Plants in
a common Lixivie, adding to it some Brandy-wine. After we had well fomented it,
we embrocated the whole Member with ol. olivae and a Solution of common Salt;
then rolled it from the Toes up to the Hip, and placed the Foot and lower part
of the Leg so high upon Pillows as might hinder the descent of the Humors. We
also laid him upon his left Side, to give ease to a large Ulceration upon the
Os coxendicis, which was occasioned by his long lying upon that Part. After we
had thus dressed him, my Kinsman Jaques Wiseman took the care of him, and in
four or five days removed the Swelling out of the Foot, Leg, Knee, and lower
part of the Thigh, to the great ease of the Patient: but the while the upper
part of the Thigh and Hip swelled the more; also an Anasarcous Tumor stretched
the Scrotum to such a bulk as hindered his lying longer upon his Side. At the
fight of which I scarified it with a Lancet, gave vent to that serous Humor,
applied a warm Stupe on it wrung out of the forementioned Decoction, and
thereby freed the Scrotum so perfectly well as it became no more difeased. The
Abscess in Scapulis continued to matter much, and the Bones were felt bare in
both of them: but upon making new Apertions in the Parts more declining, the
Matter discharged easily, and they cured within three weeks after. But in the
mean time the Tumor in the upper part of the Thigh became painful daily more
and more. Feeling Matter fluctuate in it, we opened it by Incision, and
discharged a large quantity of Matter indifferently concocted: yet we could not
by search of Probe discover any Sinus considerable; but, by pressure with our
hands upon the Os sacrum and backside of the Ilion, we saw the Matter flow
fresh out of the Abscess: upon which account care was taken to make Compressure
by Bandage upon that Part. Whilst this Abscess became the care of the
Surgeons, there was consideration had of Internals, to dispose the Humors
to a healing condition. But, alas! he was so emaciated, weak and restless by
reason of new Ulcerations which were risen upon the Os coccygis and both Hips,
that we only prescribed him good Broths and such Meat as might nourish him;
and at last, for his more ease, we placed him directly upon his Belly; and
thereby the Ulcers which had been made by lying on the places aforesaid were
disposed to cure, and the Matter which lodged deep in the upper part of the
Thigh and Ischion, etc. by this pofition made its way down by the Os ilion, and
flowed more plentifully. Upon fight whereof that Opening was enlarged about two
or three inches, for the more free discharge. From that time the Matter daily
lessened, and accordingly the Tumor diminished, the Abscess and external
Ulcerations healed, and the Patient visibly recovered his strength, insomuch
that we hoped our work had been well-nigh at an end. But he not being able to
lie so long upon his Belly, the Ulcerations on his Back and Hips increased, and
proved exceedingly vexatious, also the Swelling upon the Ischion grew big, and
so painful, that it contracted that Leg. Fomentations and Cataplasms
powerfully discutient and resolvent were for some time applied: they proving
ineffectual, we applied a strong Caustic on the middle of that Tumor, and cut
into it: but it appearing dry and callous, we filled up the Apertion with
Praecipitate. While we were digesting out that Callus, Embrocations were used
to the contracted Tendons, and the Ulcerations, etc. were daily dressed,
whereby in the space of six weeks they were all cured, and the Patient restored
to the use of that Leg, but as yet he makes use of Crutches to support his weak
body.

I was sent for to an Infant of about a year old, 6. Observat. of an Oedema in
the Thigh.
diseased with a soft white Tumor in the midst of her right Thigh yielding to
the impression of my fingers: it was of a very large size, without much
complaint of pain. I embrocated the Swelling with ol. ros. and Bay Salt, and
applied an Emplaster of diachyl. ireat. cum aceto, with Bandage over it. After
a few days continuance of these Dressings, finding the Tumor not to lessen, I
fomented it with the milder Discutients set down in the method of Cure, and
applied Emplast. diasulph. by the use of which it seemed to dissolve; but
afterward it increased again, and became hard, of a dusky color, and as it
were fixed to the Bone. Then I applied a Cataplasm ex mucilag. rad. althaeae,
lilior. sem lini and foenugraeci, etc. endeavoring Resolution: but it
inflamed, and suppurated deep amongst the Muscles. I continued Suppuratives,
and after a few days, the Matter being more concocted, opened it, and gave vent
to a foetid Matter; then dressing up the Abscess with unguent. basilicon upon a
Tent, I embrocated it with ol. ros. applied the same Cataplasm, and afterward
deterged it with mundif. Paracels. and incarned and cicatrized it as has been
said in large Phlegmons.

A poor Woman brought a Child to me diseased, as she was told, 7. Observat. of
the Thigh.
of the King's Evil; as indeed now-adays every Disease that appears dangerous
or difficult of cure is sent to us as the Evil. He was about six years of age,
and had a large Tumor on the inside of his righ Thigh. It was not the Evil,
but, the Child seeming an object of Charity, I offered her the Cure of it; and
at the same time, while the Child lay upon the Table, I made Incision into it
without asking leave, and discharged, I believe, near a Chamber Pot full of a
crude Matter; then dressed it up with Pledgits of unguent. basilicon and
Emplastr. diachalcit. with Compress and Bandage. The second day she brought him
again to me, and then the Skin seemed much contracted; yet it bagg'd, and had
near a Porrenger-full of Matter in it. I laid it open that way with a pair of
Probe-scissors, and dressed it afterward once more. My Servants from that time
continued to do it, till she thought she could cure it her self.

A Child of about four years of age, 8. Observat. of phlegmatic Tumors in the
Thigh and Ischion.
having been seized with a Fever in the Autumn, languished the Winter following
under various Diseases, and was lame by reason of some Swellings about the
right Hip and Thigh. Dr. Denton was his Physician, who, having recovered the
Child to a tolerable measure of health, took me along with him to consider
those Swellings. There was one round Tumor near the Hip, the other was on the
forepart of the Thigh, very large: they had all the signs of flatulent Tumors
(except the Sound.) We applied Emplastr. diasulph. and put on a laced Trowze
with a Compress upon the Tumors, and deferred the farther prosecution of the
Cure till the weather grew warmer; and then, finding the Tumors unresolved, we
fomented them with Discutients boiled in a common Lixivium, and repeated the
use of the former Emplaster, by which the Tumor on the outside discussed, (if
it did not pass its Matter into the other:) which soon after I opened in the
most declining part four fingers breadth above the Knee, and, instead of Wind,
discharged a large Porrenger-full of a clay-coloured foetid Matter. The Opening
was made by Caustic: it served for the easy discharge of the Matter, which
after a few days lessened, and by Compression the Part agglutinated above, and
cured without farther enlarging or putting in a Tent.

A Gentleman of about thirty years of age having from his youth been vexed with
a fistulous Ulcer in his right Testicle, 9. Observat. of an Oedema in the Belly.
in progress of time a Tumor arose in the lower Belly over the Pubes,
stretching to the right Groin. He consulted Mr. Jenman and my self. The
Swelling was hard and painful, but without Inflammation. We supposed it to
arise from an effusion of Serum through all the hypogastrick Arteries. That of
the Testicle we believed to come from Juices cast in by the spermatick Vessels,
which, meeting with a check in their progress, made the whole Testicle
scirrhous, and the Ulcer, as I said, fistulous. We begun our Applications to
the Tumor with a discutient Cataplasm ex far. fabar. hordei, sem. lini,
foenugraeci, flor. sambuci, cham. pulver. in oxymel. hoping to scatter the
Humor: we also endeavored Revulsion by Venaesection, Clysters, and lenient
Purgatives. Doctor Short was consulted, and assisted all along in the Cure.
While we were endeavoring to discuss the Tumor, it began to inflame and tend
to Suppuration. Upon sight whereof we suppurated it, and opened it by Caustic
about two inches long near the Os ilion, and discharged a large quantity of
Matter. As the Escar separated, we endeavored Digestion, and cherished the
Parts by good Fomentations, adding Compress and Bandage to press out the
Matter; the Physician having the while prescribed a decoct. sarsae, chinae,
etc. with proper vulnerary Plants and Balsamicks, purging by intervals. Yet
notwithstanding these endeavors, the Abscess became more sinuous, and put us
upon a necessity of laying it open the whole length as it lay transverse the
Belly. The Matter was thereby more easily discharged; but, by reason of its
virulencie, it corroded under the Lips of the Ulcer, rendering them sinuous and
jagged, and the Peritonaeum bare in some places. The least application of a
Cathaeretick exasperated it, etc. The rubbing of a callous Lip with the
Caustick-stone gave him a fit of the Colic. Upon which considerations we
exhibited a few grains of Turbith mineral, which gave him three or four Vomits.
By the repeating of that some times he salivated, and the Ulcer afterward
became well disposed and cured. The Testicle was grown to the Scrotum, and
passed its Matter through it in two several places: there was also another
Sinus which passed through the body of the Testicle downwards. We had been some
while endeavoring to consume the Callosities of these by Emollients outwardly
applied, as also by Cathaereticks inwardly upon Tents into the Ulcer: but
failing in the latter, we laid open the Sinus on the side of the Testicle from
one Orifice to the other, and digested and healed it; then passed a
Seton-needle through the other Sinus, and made way beneath for discharge of the
Matter. When that lower Orifice was digested, 10. Observat. of a Tumor in the
Belly.
we pulled out the Ligature, and kept it open with a Tent, and thereby drained
the Matter from the uppermost parts, and cured the Testicle.

A Man came out of Ireland diseased with a large Tumor in the lower Belly deep
under the Muscles, without Inflammation, hardness or Pulsation: it was most
prominent toward the left Inguen, and somewhat heated. The Tumor had been
long growing, and of late very painful. I applied an Empl. Caesaris over the
whole Tumor, and fitted him with a Bracer to bear part of the weight of it,
designing that way to palliate it. By these he was somewhat relieved, and made
a Journey with some of his Friends into the North, purposing to drink the
Waters at Knaresbrook: but by reason of his pain he stopped at York; and,
meeting wlth no hopes of Cure there, he returned hither, and sent for me. I
went, and found him in his bed full of pain, and that part of the Tumor in the
Groin swelled and inflamed, and full of Matter, as I thought: but, doubting the
success, I desired he would consult some eminent men of my Profession. He made
choice of Mr. Tho. Hollier. We considered the situation of the Tumor, the time
and manner of its growth, with the Symptoms all along attending it, and
concluded it originally a Tumor by Congestion; supposing the pain to proceed
from some acrimony in the Serum, which falling into this declining Part
putrefied. Upon this supposition we complied with the Patient and his Friends
desires, opened the Tumor in that Groin by Incision, and discharged about half
a large Porrenger of a bloody Serum. We then laid it more open, and, observing
nothing more to come forth, made a search with our fingers, and, feeling
nothing but Fat, dressed it up with Digestives ex terebinth. etc. with
Emplaster and Bandage. The Patient was eased of his pain, and rested well that
night, The third day we met again, and found him as well as might reasonably be
expected: but from the time we opened the Tumor he had not been out of his
Bed. Taking off the Dressings, we found the Tumor sunk, and a little Matter
from the Lips of the Wound; but from the Abscess there was only a Gleet
discharged. We fomented the whole Belly with decoct. absinth. flor. cham.
sambuci, etc. made in Wine, and dressed up the Abscess with Digestives as
before. We were not satisfied with our work, yet had no Symptoms of its
penetration: he breathed well, and his Urine and stools were good. At our next
Dressing we saw the Ulcer had gleeted much, and the Opening appeared full of a
greasy Fat soiled, as the Omentum will be after it has been some time
corrupted by the air. We pulled some of it out, and, having made a Ligature
under it, cut it off, and dressed up the Patient as before. We were inclinable
to think that what we had cut off was part of the Omentum: but then why should
not the Intestines thrust out? To clear this Doubt, I brought the next day an
Injection made of a Decoction of some Vulneraries, ex rad, ireos, aristoloch.
rot. myrrh. aloe, sarcocoll. mell. ros. and a little spir. vini, and cast some
of it up with a Syringe. It came out again. We repeated the Experiment, till we
had well satisfied our selves that it came all out again: which confirmed to us
that the Abscess was not within the cavity of the Belly amongst the Bowels.
But the casting up of this Injection gave the Patient a Colic, upon which we
used it no more. The Lips of the Abscess digested well, but from within it
only gleeted, and thrust out Fat, which we daily cut off without the loss of a
drop of blood, and dressed up the Abscess with mundif. ex apio, continuing the
use of discutient Fomentations and Cataplasms. We very much desired to see our
Patient up out of his Bed: but he apprehended that his Guts would tumble out;
and the more Fat we pulled away, the more he desponded, and in the space of two
months languished and died. I resolved to open his Body, and to that purpose
made my Incision down from the Cartilag. ensiformis to the Pubes, and from the
Navel cross over. Then it appeared plainly that the Tumor was made by
abundance of a soft white greasy Fat lying between the Peritonaeum and Muscles
of the lower Belly. The Peritonaeum was sound, not the least tainted, yet lay
so bare, that the most curious Anatomist could not by Dissection more expose it.

If this person had but rose out of his Bed to the Close-stool, nay, if he had
but rose upon his Knees to urine, the Fat had slipped out at the same time; for
it lay loose floating upon the Peritonaeum. After I had removed the Fat, I
divided the Peritonaeum, and there I saw all the Viscera sound and sweet as
ever I beheld in any dead body in my life.

CHAP. XIX. Of a Scirrhus.
SCirrhus has hitherto amongst Authors been reputed to have its Original from
Melancholy and tough Phlegm: What among the Ancients.
the truth of which I dare not deny before I know what is meant by those words.
For in progress of discourse the Writers upon this Subject do divide Melancholy
into natural, and preternatural: a Distinction by whom begun I do not at
present remember, but continued and used by all Writers of the latter Ages. Men
that make this Distinction do suppose the natural Melancholy to be the
terrestrious part of the Blood, but not yet to have exceeded the bounds of a
sanguineous element: preternatural to be such as has contracted a more then
ordinarily fixed or terrestrious quality by a fault in Concoction, which if it
be only a Humor so fixed, may be called preternatural Melancholy. If the
Blood was very hot and acrimonious, it has been presumed to be burnt, and has
gone by the name of Choler adust: but then it is not of the same kind or
family. Of these more in the Treatise of Cancers.

I desire not to wade into Controversies of this nature, fitter for the Schools
then a practical Discourse: it may suffice to give such a notion of Melancholy
as may be agreeable to the common conceptions of men versed in the Faculty.

If we so derive our Notion, we may consider the Blood to be bred out of Chyle,
What truly it is, with its Causes.
which in the lacteous Vessels is white, but when it enters the Veins it by
degrees grows to be pellucid, and then is called Serum, and in some cases
Pituita; and at last, when it is red, we call it Blood. Which Blood consists of
much Salt and Sulphur, without which neither the animal Spirits nor the solid
Parts themselves could be made. According to the degrees of fixedness and
volatility that these Salts and Sulphurs do acquire, the Blood is more or less
florid, and the whole Habit of body of a better or worse Constitution. If these
Parts arrive to their due volatility, the whole Habit is Sanguine: if they be
too fixed, it is Melancholic, according to the old phrase; which is indeed so
far from being Adustion, that it is rather a Crudity, and the body in this case
differs from a Sanguine condition as a green Apple does from a ripe one. It
being the fault of the Blood that the Chyle, having met with too great acidity
in the first Concoction, does not ever acquire a genuine ripeness, but is apt
upon occasion to concrete it self upon the Fibers of the Tendons or Muscles
outwardly, and upon the Viscera inwardly: which Concretion, where it happens,
is that Tumor which we call Scirrhus.

The Differences of Scirrhus must be taken from the various mixture that
happens in the Juices of the Blood. Differences.
For Blood, being made at several times, may partake of many several qualities;
some of which may be produced in the Mass of Blood, and some in the Part it
self, either by the peculiar Ferment thereof, or else by the alteration it may
receive from applications of Medicaments. If a false Ferment in the Ventricle
vitiate the Digestion, instead of good and laudable Chyle, we often find the
product to be peccant, either in acidity, or acrimony, or some other quality.
If it be Acrimony, when it comes into the Blood it produces many hot Diseases,
and often Cancers: of which more hereafter. If a mere crude Acidity, then the
body is liable to a Scirrhus: but that Scirrhus, according to the various
mixtures it may meet with of Blood that went before, may be so compounded as to
make those several Species which we call Scirrhus phlegmonoides,
erysipelatodes, aedematodes, etc. Nay, though the whole Blood may be troubled
with one uniform Distemper, which may dispose it to the raising of a Phlegmon,
Erysipelas, Oedema, etc. yet the applications of Medicines to a Part so
affected may be such as, exhaling too suddenly the thinner Juices, may make the
cruder portion that remains, instead of ripening into a due Digestion, harden
into a Scirrhus: or else by Medicines that cool too much the whole Mass may be
kept in its crudity, and so fixed in the Part as to become hard.

The exquisite or true Scirrhus has no sense; Signs.
the imperfect Scirrhus has some sense, if it be pressed upon. The Tumor is
hard, immovable, and of a dark red color; if Pituita be mixed with it, then it
is of a livid color. If a Scirrhus be the original Disease of the Part, and
not the effect of some other that has been ill handled, it begins usually
small like a Vetch or Pea, and by degrees increases, without shifting or
changing of place. If it be the effect of some other Tumor that terminated in
it, as a Phlegmon, etc. then the Accidents proper to that Tumor did suddenly
change into those of a Scirrhus: of which you may see more in their proper
place.

The true or exquisite Scirrhus, being altogether without sense, Prognostic.
admits of no Cure. The reason is, because the induration of the Part is so
great, that it will not open to receive the free afflux of Blood into it, but
keeps its own hardness in despite of all Applications, and thereby the use of
Medicaments is rendered ineffectual.

The imperfect Scirrhus, which has some sense, is not incurable, but yields by
Resolution; though very often it terminates in a Cancer.

The Scirrhus which arises from Pituita, without change of color in the Skin,
if it be very big and hard, and have hair grown upon it, is neither curable,
nor yet does terminate in a Cancer.

In the Cure of the Scirrhus three Intentions are required. Cure.
The first is, in the regulation of Diet and manner of living: the second is,
in the preparing and evacuating of the antecedent or peccant Humor: and the
third is, in the application of external Medicaments.

In order to the first, the Air ought to be clear, and temperately hot and
moist. Their Aliment such as may breed good Blood; as new-laid Eggs, Chickens,
Pullets, Mutton, Veal, Lamb, Kid: and these boiled with Spinach, Borrage,
Endive, Succory, Lettice, Sorrel, etc. are better then roasted. Their Bread
ought to be of good Wheat and well baked; their Drink a well-boiled small Ale,
or small White Wind, Rhenish, etc. Their Exercise moderate, and also their
Sleep: their Mind cheerful, free from care: and the Body soluble, by Clysters
or otherwise.

The second Intention is, the evacuation of the Humor which abounds in the
Body: whether, to use the vulgar phrase, it be Pituita or Melancholy that
caused the Scirrhus; or that it proceeded from Obstructions of the Menstrua, or
Suppression of the Haemorrhoids. If from any of these Causes Blood abounds and
be feculent, Phlebotomy is allowed, a Clyster preceding: but if Blood do not
abound, forbear Bleeding, and proceed in preparing and evacuating the Humors.

The Preparatives thereto, according to the Ancients, were with sir. de succo
borrag. bugloss. fumariae, lupul. de duabus radicibus, de pomis, Byzantinus,
etc. in the distilled water of the same Plants, or in Whey. But our Patients
would think that time lost: therefore, instead of those Digestives, we purge
with Minoratives; viz. decoct. senae Gereonis, decoct. epithymi, also
Decoctions of cassia, tamarind. etc. cum syrupis de pomis purg. etc. elect.
diacathol. diaprun. solut. diacassiae; and also pil. de lapide lazuli, de
agarico, aggregativ. etc. These tough Humors require frequent Purging, but not
by strong Catharticks: confect. hamech and elect. diaphoenic. are of the
strongest sort. If Phlegm abound, proceed as has been proposed in Oedema, and
forbear Bleeding.

The Plethora evacuated, you may endeavor Revulsion to the contrary Parts by
Friction, Cupping, Fontanels, etc. In Obstructions of the Haemorrhoids Leeches
may be applied; and in Suppression of the Menstrua a Vein may be opened in the
Arm or Leg.

The third Intension is performed in treating the Tumor it self: in which
these Directions are to be followed. First, that you do not use Repellents; for
cold and tough Humors, of which these Swellings are created, are not capable
of returning back as hot Humors, but do increase the more thereby. In the next
place, you ought to be cautious in the use of Emollients alone; for thereby
they are frequently exasperated, and terminate in Cancers. You ought also to
avoid the use of the stronger Discutients, lest thereby you resolve the serous
thin Humors, and convert the grosser part into a more solid substance.
Therefore you are to consider well the Habit of the Body, and whether the
Scirrhus be recent or old, and what the Parts are that be affected, and
proportion your Medicaments accordingly.

As to the Habit of the Body: young people, and such as live effeminately,
require to be treated with milder Resolvents then those who live a laboring
life. So also a Scirrhus in its recency, whilst it is in its augment, requires
milder Applications then the confirmed or inveterate one. And those Scirrhi
arising in the Fleshy parts will more easily resolve then those on the
Ligaments and Tendons.

The milder Resolvents are butyrum rec. adeps gallinac. ol. amygdal. dulc.
lilior. adeps anser. anatis, sevum vitulin. hircinum, vaccinum, axung. porcin.
vet. rad. althaeae, lilior. etc. The stronger are radices cucumeris agrest.
bryoniae, sigill. Solomonis, ireos, pix navalis, liquida, terebinth. gum.
galban. ammoniac. bdellium, opopanax, etc. Acetum by virtue of its penetrative
quality is properly mixed with other Medicaments in the resolving gross Humors.

Some Writers do not approve of Fomentations: but I have always found them
necessary to dispose the Tumor to Resolution, and have ever begun my
Applications with them, and do propose them to you. rad. althaeae, lilior. an.
iiij. rad. cucumeris agrest. ij. summitat. cicutae, M. ij. summitat. majoran.
M. j. flor. meliloti, sambuci, an. P.j. sem. lini, foenugraeci, althaeae, an.
j. coquantur in s. q. aq. font. colaturae add aceti modicum.

In soft Bodies, where the Scirrhus is recent, rad. althaeae lbss. rad. lilior.
iij. sem. lini and foenug. an. j. coquantur in brod. ex capite and pedibus
vervecinis, deinde pistentur, and trajiciantur per setaceum, addendo olei
chamaemel. lilior. an. ij. oesypi jss. Empl. diachyl. simpl. cum oleo lilior.
solut. iij. cerae alb. q. s. fiat Ceratum. Ceratum hyssopi is also proper to
resolve these Tumors.

In dry Bodies, where the Scirrhus is more confirmed and fixed amongst the
Ligaments and Tendons, the Fume of acetum, yea sp. vini sprinkled upon a hot
Stone, are of special virtue in resolving those Tumors: afterward you must
chafe the Part, and apply this or such like. gum. galban. ammoniac. bdellii in
aceto dissolut. styraecis liquidae, an. j. diachyl. magn. ij. ol. lilior.
axungiae anseris, an. j. cerat. aesypat. ij. liquescant omnia simul, and cum
cera alba fiat Ceratum molle. If by the use of these Medicaments it tend to
Suppuration, treat it accordingly: but beware that you be not deceived, and the
Suppuration prove false, and terminate in a Cancer.

A Person of Honor near 40 years of age, of a full Body, 1. Observat.
had been long subject to oedematous Swellings in both her Legs from the Knees
downwards: for the remedying of which many Applications had been made abroad
during the time she was in France; but, by reason of her constant attendance
there, they continued swelling, and in progress of time the Matter indurated
and became Scirrhous, not only along her Shins, but the musculous Flesh on the
Calves of her Legs and Ancles. The Cure was difficult; but she promising to
keep her Chamber, I undertook it. She consulted Sir Alex. Fras. who prepared
her body by Purging, etc. after which I began my work with the Fomentation set
down in the method of Cure, her Servants bathing her Legs with a Sponge morning
and evening; after which they were embrocated cum oleo ex ped. bovinis and ol.
lumbric. Then I applied a Cerote on them of unguent. dialthaeae and Wax, and
rolled them moderately on to retain the Dressings: after which she rested her
self upon a Bed or Pallet daily. Whilst this Person was under Cure, there
happened a private Dissection of a sound Body at our Hall, whence I collected a
good quantity of Fat, which I clarified, and, after the fomenting of her Legs,
I embrocated them with it twice aday; to which I imputed very much the
Recovery; for from that time the hardness visibly resolved, and in a month's
space they were restored. During this method of Dressing she was frequently
purged, and a Fontanel made in each Leg. Suspecting her Legs might swell upon
her first going abroad, I caused a pair of laced Stockings to be put on, which
she did wear some few days: but observing they did not swell, she not only
left them off, but healed up the Fontanels.

A Gentleman of about fifty years of age by a Fall brake his lower Jaw, 2.
Observat.
the Cure whereof you may see in the Treatise of Fractures. About half a year
after the same Patient complained of a hard Tumor fixed under that Ear and
Maxilla, of a dark red color, not so much painful, as uneasy from the hard
binding of the Parts together. It was an imperfect Scirrhus, and not unlike to
end in a Cancer. Sir Charles Scarburgh, Physician to his Royal Highness the
Duke of York, and one of His Majesty's Physicians, was consulted, and by his
prescription the Patient was let blood, and several times purged. I fomented
the Tumor with the Fotus above mentioned, and embrocated it with ol. lilior.
sambuci, and unguent. dialthaeae, applying Empl. diachyl. cum gummi, and
afterward a Cataplasm ex fol. cicutae, rad. lilior. sem. lini, foenugraeci,
etc. During these Applications little hard Tubercles rose in the body of the
Tumor, (as I have sometime seen rise about the Lips of inveterate cancerated
Ulcers,) and after some days brake and gleeted, but would not digest. In the
presence of the Physician I cut into them, filled them with Praecipitate,
applied unguentum basilicon on them, and continued the use of Fomentations,
etc. The Praecipitate not digesting them, I rubbed into them with a
Caustick-stone, divided the Escars, and filled them with Praecipitate, from
that time hastening separation of the Sloughs. Then by the Vitriol-stone and
Praecipitate I deterged them. As these digested, the hardness resolved, and I
cured them with unguent. tutiae. The Patient being cured, we sent for Mr.
Gosling, to inform himself whether any carious Tooth or Stump affected that
Jaw. He pulled out one; but whether that was the cause I much doubt.

One of about fifty years of age, 3. Observat.
of a full Body, came to me with a hard Tumor of about four inches in length
lying on the outside of his right Thigh, close to the Musculus vastus externus,
of a livid color mixed with a dark red. It was occasioned by a Fall upon a
Threshold of a door, which bruised the Part, and I suppose made a large
extravasation, which, for want of timely discussing, dried and hardened. The
Tumor was sensible, but not otherwise painful then as it numm'd that side of
the Leg, and so caused a Lameness. I began with Venaesection, and purged him
frequently with decoct. epithymi, etc. during which I fomented the Tumor with
the Fotus proposed in the method of Cure, and beat and pulped the faeces of it,
and with farin. lentium and hordei cum axung anseris and ol. lilior. made up a
Cataplasm and applied it. I embrocated the benumbed Parts with ol. lumbricor.
and made him a Fontanel on that side of the Leg. After I had continued these
Applications some days, I added more Cicuta to the Cataplasm, and boiled it in
Wine and Water. By the frequent application of the Cicuta the Skin was fretted;
in which case I omitted the use of it, and applied the milder resolvent
Emplaster set down in the method of Cure, and embrocated the Tumor with axung.
humana. By this method I resolved the Tumor, and dismissed him cured.

I could give you some other Instances of these imperfect Scirrhi; but they not
differing in their Cure, I shall forbear, and conclude this Chapter with one
Instance of a Scirrhus which may serve to show what the Disease is when
heightened by acrimony or evil quality.

A Gentle woman aged forty eight years, 4. Observat.
of a full Body, having been long diseased by immoderate fluxes of the
Menstrua, and subject to Cough with Shortness of breath, etc. at length
recovered her health by the prescriptions of Doctor Denton, and enjoyed it the
space of a year; but was then seized with a streightness and pain in her right
Breast, which increasing much with Inflammation, she came again to her
Physician, who sent for me. At the first sight it seemed to me a confirmed
Cancer fixed to the Ribs: but upon more mature deliberation and handling of it,
I found the Disease was in the Skin, and that the Glands and musculous flesh
underneath it were not hard, or otherwise affected then as they were bound in
by the intense hardness of the Skin, which kept them immovable. From that
uneasiness an Erysipelas was raised, which overspred the Skin of the Breast and
Parts about with great heat. We supposed the hardness proceeded from a
concretion of the nutritious Juices: but how to relieve her was the
difficulty. We applied over the Parts affected cerat. Galeni to repress the
heat, and supplied her with Medicaments to dress her self, that she might,
according to her desire, retire to her house in the Country, where she was let
blood, and purged with manna and cremor tartar. dissolved in Whey; and her
house being near Epsom, she was afterward purged with those Waters. But, after
all, growing more indisposed, she returned to London: at which time I saw her
Breast inflamed and excoriated, also several hard Tubercles risen in the Skin
which gleeted much. The Scirrhus was also spread up that side of the Neck by the
Muscul. mastoides to the Os bumeri and Scapula, and so under that Axilla, and
down that side. We dressed some of the Excoriations with unguent. tutiae
Vigonis, and others with Pledgits dipped in this following Lotion; aq. spermat.
ranar. lbj. sem. cydon. ij. sem. plantag. j. infund. calide per quatuor horas:
colaturae add troch. alb. Rhas. pulv. j. sacchar. Saturni ss. And over all we
applied some of this following Cerote: mucilag. sem. cydon. psyllii extract.
cum aqua solani, an. iv. unguenti nutriti iij. unguent. popul. vj. cerae albae
q. s. siat Ceratum. Thus the Inflammation was remitted, and the Excoriations
healed in some places, and checked in others. Many internal Remedies were also
prescribed, Emulsions, Cordials, etc. according to the Accidents which
happened. During the while I was in the Country other Surgeons were
consulted, but without success; the Scirrhus, still spreading, overran the
other Breast and side of the Neck, and in few weeks rendered her Neck stiff and
immovable: and, by reason of the Compression which was made in the Axilla and
about the Shoulder, there was a restagnation of the Humors, and the Arm
swelled to the Fingers ends. We fomented the Arm with a decoct. fol. and rad.
althaeae, fol. violar. plantag. solani, salicis, lenticulae palustris, flor.
cham. meliloti, sem. lini, foenug. and endeavored by Embrocations and Cerots,
Emollients and Resolvents, to succor these Parts: but all this while she was
either afflicted with Colicks, or Diarrhoea, or Vomiting. We endeavored to
carry off the Matter by Calomel, inwardly, and by Mercurial Unguents outwardly,
and would have salivated her, if she would have permitted. The weather growing
hot, and her Lodgings being too straight, she removed again to her house in the
Country, where she was visited by us. I saw the Scirrhus affecting both sides
of her Neck, her Shoulders, Arms, Breasts and Sides, and beginning to invade
the Skin of her Loins and Hips; yet she was not at that time sick or pained,
but eat her Dinner well. She at length grew weary of Medicine, and with
patience endured the remaining Accidents of her Disease till it killed her. She
was seized with this Scirrhus in May, and died in August following.

CHAP. XX. Of Warts and Corns.
HAving run through the Discourse of Scirrhus, I shall make bold to add to it
something concerning Warts and Corns, as being more reducible to that Head then
to any other that I know: they being for the most part indurated Tumors; and
though sometimes we find them soft, yet that is upon some admixture of an
extraneous Humor that makes the Tumor compound.

Warts and Corns are both of them cutaneous Tumors, but do differ from each
other by this most essential Difference: A Wart begins in the Cutis, Cause
of Warts.
and seems to be either an efflorescence of the Serum of the Blood, which,
hardening in the surface of the Skin, makes a dry Tumor; or else some small
luxuriancy of the little Arteries of the Cutis, which do thrust out themselves,
making a petty Sarcoma which we call a soft Wart. Differences.
According to the variety of the Tumor, it is sometimes whole with a smooth
surface, sometimes chapp'd and uneven. According to the manner of their
production, sometimes they arise by a general exsudation out of the Cutis, with
a broad basis, and are called Verrucae sessiles; sometimes a few Capillaries
putting out together do, after they have grown to a small length, enlarge
themselves into a greater compass, and make the pensile Tumor we call
Acrochordon.

The Corn, on the other side, begins in the Cuticula with its basis outward,
Cause of Corns.
owing its origin to an outward Compression, and thence derives it self inward
into the Skin, nay, often through it to the Membranes, Tendons, and Cartilages,
to which it frequently unites it self, to the no small disturbance of the
Patient. It grows in any part that is liable to great Pressure; the Toes and
Feet, the Lips of Trumpetters, the Ears of Ladies, etc. The hardest part of the
Corn is usually in the middle, thrusting it self in like a Nail; whence it has
its Latin appellation of Clavus. That hard part does often turn black, making
a speck in the middle, which in some Countries gives it the name of a Bird's
eye. The outsides are softer, not so horny as the former, but still scirrhous,
and do either prohibit access into the hole whence the Corn grew, if it have
been cut out; or else suffer themselves to be crowded into the place that was
voided by excision, there hardening into a new Corn of the like solidity with
the former.

But it is not always that Corns are hard, Differences.
they often are soft between the Toes, where the Compression is not great, and
sometimes have Inflammation joined with them: which variety is ordinarily
observed, and easily reduced to the common heads.

There need no Signs be given of Warts, Signs of both.
they being so apparent. And for Corns, whether they be hard or soft, the pain
will discover them: yet in the soft Corns the Skin is for the most part whiter
then the rest.

Warts do often fall away of themselves; Prognostic.
whereas Corns are scarce ever so cured that they return not again.

The Medicaments commended in the Cure of Warts are many. Cure of Warts.
Those which are most easy to be had in the Country are, the green Rinds of
Willows beaten, the juice of Marigolds, Celandine, all the Spurges, a
Garden-snail sprinkled with Salt. If you rub them with any of these, they will
fall off. Ol. vitrioli or ol. sulphuris will certainly destroy them. I have
seen some burn them out by running a hot Needle into the roots of them. There
are other ways, as by rubbing them with raw Beef, and burying it. But when any
great one falls into my hands, I make a speedier riddance of it by Ligature or
Caustic. Where it is capable of being tied, I make a Ligature: in others,
where it is not, the Caustick-stone alone will do it.

The Cure of Corns is in paring them off, Cure of Corns.
and applying red soft Wax: or, picis navalis j. Empl. diachyl. magn. iij. gum.
galban, dissolut, in aceto ss. salis ammoniaci j. Misce; or, aluminis, vitrioli
Vngarici, auripigment. ana part. aequal. pulveriz. and misceantur cum aceto.
All which are proper as well in the soft as in the hard Corns.

A Young Lady, 1. Observat. of Warts.
having been long vexed with an unseemly overgrown Wart upon one of her
Fore-fingers, desired my help. I rubbed the chapp'd head of it with a
Caustick-stone till it was soft and black, then scraped it off, and rubbed the
remaining root with some of the same till I judged it was eradicated, then
washed out the Salts, and dressed it cum unguent. basilic. with a few drops of
ol. terebinth. which made separation of the Escar, and cured it.

In another young person, 2. Observat.
where they were small in the basis, I tied some of them close by the roots
with a Silk, others I snipt off with a pair of Scissors, not regarding the
dropping of the blood upon the neighboring Parts, which is thought to infect
them, and beget others. Then I rubbed the roots of them all with a
Caustick-stone, and digested the Sloughs out as above said, and they cicatrized
of themselves the while.

Yet you ought to be cautious how you meddle with those growing upon the
Knuckles: Caution.
for Warts there, being for the most part near the Tendons, cannot well be
extirpated without offending them, and so are consequently subject to Fluxion,
and corrupt the Cartilages or Bone.

This was the case of a Person of quality aged about fifty years, 3. Observat.
of a plethorick Body, who had a Wart upon the first Joint of one of her
Fore-fingers. It was imprudently undertaken by some pretender to Surgery,
and treated as ill; so that after many months endeavors he was dismissed, and
a more knowing Surgeon entertained, who found much difficulty in the Cure,
yet made a shift to cicatrize it: but it swelled again, and discharged part of
its Matter by the side of that Nail. Upon sight whereof I was consulted, and
saw a thin Ichor weeping through the old Cicatrix at an Opening not bigger then
a small Pin-hole. The Lady importuning me to undertake the Cure, I sprinkled
the Orifice with Praecipitate, whereby I crusted in the Matter to thin the
Skin, which the next day I opened, and by search of a Probe felt the Cartilages
rotted. I informed the Patient of the necessity of making an Incision
proportionably large in order to the Exfoliation, and withal represented the
difficulty; and offered to her consideration the more certain and speedy way by
cutting off that Joint. She with little demurre consented to it. All things
being immediately prepared, I chopped off that Joint, dressed it up with pulver.
Galeni, and afterward digested it, and cured it, as has been showed in such
like Extirpations.

A Citizen came to me complaining of a pain between the two little Toes of one
of his Feet, 1. Observat. of a soft Corn.
which he had of a long time supposed to arise from a Corn on the outside of
his little Toe, and pared that often, causing his Shoes to be made wider, yet
without any manner of ease: but of late he had discovered the pain to be on the
inside of the little Toe. I looked on it, and, seeing the Skin whiter there
then on the other parts, concluded it a soft Corn, and sent for one to cut it
out. He pared out that white Skin, and filled up the Fovea with soft red Wax.
From that instant he wore the streightest Shoes with much ease.

Many such like Corns I have been consulted in making the discovery, and by my
advice they have after the aforesaid manner relieved themselves.

A Person of quality complained to me of a pain in the Joint of her great Toe
and Sole of the Foot: 2. Observat.
underneath the Toes she said her pain was so much, that she could neither go
in the day upon it, nor sleep in the night. I looked upon them, and, supposing
they might be soft Corns, sent for a Corncutter. He cut away the thick Skin to
the quick, as we thought; but she continued in much pain, and, sending for me
the next morning, told me she had not been in bed that night by reason of her
exceeding pain. I suspected they had been cut too close, and were festering;
but in looking upon them I saw no heat or disturbance; yet upon pressing my
fingers on them she complained much. I, concluding there was some fault under
the Skin, resolved to find it out: to which purpose I rubbed one of these
places with a Caustick-stone, and scraped away the Skin as it softened, and,
penetrating more deep, gave vent to an extravasated Blood. I served the rest
so, and found the like Blood in every one of them: the quantity did not exceed
the kernel of a Cherrystone. I dressed them all with unguent. basilicon and an
Empl. diapalm. over them, and thereby they cicatrized in twice or thrice
dressing; but from the first dressing her pain ceased, and she continues since
without complaint.

In the Cure of the hard Corns of the Feet or Toes I do not busy my self, if
such Emplasters as have been proposed fail, they may send for the Corn-cutter.
But if through pain a Fluxion be occasioned, and the Part apostemate, it may
then be worth the consulting a Surgeon; for generally they penetrate to the
Periosteum: and if the Apostemation does not foul the Bone immediately, yet the
Lips of the Ulcer grow callous, and do not easily unite.

An clderly Gentlewoman was much afflicted with Corns, 1. Observat. of
Apostemations from a Corn.
especially one on one of her little Toes, which apostemated, and discharged
its Matter forth at a small Pin-hole. The speedy Cure was, by eating that Skin
off with a Caustic, or cutting it away, that the Matter being at once let out
it might heal. But she not admitting of either, I was put upon the necessity of
paring away the Callosity, and dressing it with Lenients. Thus the Skin was
kept supple, and the Matter discharging freely the while, it healed underneath,
and the Callosity pilled off: and from that time the Toe has continued free
from Corns.

A young Lady about fifteen years of age had an Apostemation on the outside of
one of her Toes. 2. Observat.
It was occasioned by the hard pressure of a Corn upon the Joint of it, and had
continued some months discharging its Matter through the middle of the Corn, in
spite of the endeavors that had been tried by Corn-cutters and others. Upon
sight of it, the Skin which covered the Ulcer appeared (to my judgment) callous
within, and not capable of uniting with the parts underneath. Upon which
consideration I stopped the Orifice with Lint, and, rubbing the Skin with a
Caustick-stone, removed that false cover; then dressed it with unguent.
basilicon warm; by which it was digested, and afterward cicatrized.

Another having an Apostemation on the outside of her little Toe by reason of
its hard Pressure, 3. Observat.
I opened it by Incision, and discharged the Matter; and afterward perceiving
the Matter retained under the callous loose Skin, I snipt it off with my
Scissors, whereby she was freed of her Corn, and the Ulcer was soon cured by
the abovesaid Unguent.

A young Gentlewoman came to London with an Ulcer in one of her Toes, 4.
Observat.
that next to the little one. It was on the middle Joint, occasioned by the
pressure of a Corn. Doctor Walter Needham commended her to my hands. We
dilated the Ulcer, and discovered the Bone carious. We advised her to keep her
Chamber in order to the Exfoliation of it, and withal put her in mind that it
was the work of nature, and required time for the perfecting of it. Upon which
she demanded how long the Wound might be curing if the Toe were cut off: and
being told fourteen days; she replied, Cut it off. We did so, and cured it
accordingly by the method usual in such Extirpations.

CHAP. XXI. Of a Cancer.
CAncer is the name of a Tumor arising (as it is thought) from an adust or
atrabilious Humor. Description.
It is round, unequally hard, and (if not inflamed) of a livid or brown color,
with exquisite pricking pain: the Veins appear turgid in the Skin upon the
surface of the Tumor.

The Cause of a Cancer is usually said to be adustion of Humors, Cause.
which upon an over-concoction or rather broiling grow retorrid and sharp.

I cannot imagine what heat these Authors suppose to be in the Body which is
capable of making such an Adustion as is here spoken of. I rather impute the
corrosive venom that attends this Tumor to the materials of which it is made,
then to any extraordinary heat; and that because we see the highest Fever not
attended with a Cancer, and on the contrary a Cancer not often attended with
any extremity of heat: so that it cannot be Adustion that is the cause of the
Malady. But I rather think the matter of the Humor to be in fault, which by
some error in Concoction became sharp and corrosive, (it may be arsenical, as
appears by the Sloughs we sometimes find made in a night.) This Humor, being
of it self sharp and corrosive, is apt to convert whatever comes to it of Blood
into the same acrimony with it self: which is easy to be done by mixing such
an acrimonious Ferment with a Liquour that abounds with acid Salts, as the
Blood of such men usually does. Being such, it does increase apace while the
Skin is yet whole; but much more when, upon breach of Skin, the accession of
air adds to the vigor of the Ferment, upon which it grows fierce, and thrusts
it self out into Fungus and Tubercles, etc.

The remote Cause of this Tumor is, either a fault in the original
Constitution of the Body; or an acquired one, as by Bruise, Tumors, ill
handling, etc. Or it may be an error in Diet, viz. a great acrimony in the
meats and drinks meeting with a fault in the first Concoction, which, not being
afterward corrected in the Guts, suffers this acrimonious matter to ascend
into the Blood; where if it find vent in the Menstrua in Women, or by the
Haemorrhoids, or by Haemorrhagia, or Urine, or the like, the mischief may be
prevented: but if upon any defect in those the Humors divert to some other
peculiar Part, then the foundation of this Disease is laid, whether it be in
the Breasts, or other glandulous and spongy Parts, or indeed any other Part of
the Body.

The Differences of Cancers are many; some whereof are with Ulceration,
Difference.
others not. The Cancer not ulcerated is of two sorts. The one is visible and
evident to the sight in the exterior Parts of the Body, and bears the name
of a Cancerous Tumor: the other is within the Body, and is called a Latent or
Occult Cancer, and possesses the Vterus, Anus, Palate, etc. Others call all
those Cancers occult which are not ulcerated, amongst which may be reckoned
those which are felt in the Glands of the Breasts, etc. Of these some are loose
and movable, and sometimes so hard that they have knocked against one another
like Pebbles; if it be not more fit to call them Scirrhi: others again are hard
and fixed to the Bones. Some lie superficially under the Skin; whereas others
are deeper in the Flesh. Other Differences may be taken from the Humor to
which they owe their Original. If the Matter be not very corrosive, their
growth is slow, and they are not very painful. These are called the milder
sort, of which I have had many under my care; and some of those affecting the
Breast I have palliated a long time with easy Remedies. If any man will,
instead of mild or occult Cancers, call them scirrhous Cancers, I shall not
gainsay him.

Such was the case of a Lady that labored many years of an ulcerated Cancer.
It had eat deep into her left Breast, and was fixed to the Ribs, 1. Observat.
of Varieties Cancers.
but not with much pain. In progress of time the Lips inverted, and united as
it were, and lay covered with a crusty Scab: the Humor in the mean while spent
it self upon the Nerves, and caused a Species of a Paralysis in some parts of
her Body, and the Gout in others. She lived long, and in her latter age
tolerably healthful.

Another person of great age has labored long of such another Cancer in her
right Breast. It lies large and deep about the middle of it: 2. Observat.
the whole Breast is hard and immovable. She enjoys a good health, and is like
to live long for any thing of disturbance she at present suffers by it.

It is not long since that Doctor Walter Needham and my self were desired to
look upon a Gentlewoman's Breast in the City. 3. Observat.
We found a Tumor hard and fixed, which had been some years ulcerated, and was
judged a Cancer by those who had before seen it; but it was not painful. We
judged it a scirrhous Cancer, as indeed all the forementioned are, or at least
seem to partake much of a Scirrhus: yet by ill handling or increase of Acrimony
they frequently terminate in raging Cancers, and torment the Patient with
exquisite darting pains. Some Instances whereof I shall set down, to make the
young Surgeon more cautious in undertaking the Cure of them.

An old Gentlewoman came to me with a Swelling behind the right Ear, 4.
Observat.
supposing it the King's Evil. The Tumor was of the bigness of a Pigeon's egg,
but lay more flat: it was hard and fixed, of a dark red color, with a pricking
pain. I assured her Friends that the Swelling was cancerous, and gave them
caution in applying Suppuratives. But there wanted not one who undertook the
Cure by breaking of it; upon which it became more painful. I was sent for, and
saw it ulcerated deep, with stinking Sloughs, and thick Lips standing up. It
was spread under her Ear, and so horribly painful that she seemed distracted
therewith.

So a Girl of ten years old had a hard round Tumor in her left Cheek; 5.
Observat.
by the use of Discutients it heated and became painful, that Eye inflamed,
and the Temporal Muscle swelled: it reached downward, and afflicted that Jaw
and Tonsil, rotting the Bones underneath, without breaking the Skin. She lost
her Eye, and died soon after Lethargick.

A Lady coming to Town with a Swelling in her left Breast consulted some of our
Profession, 6. Observat.
and at last me. She said she had some years since Kernels in her Breast, which
were judged the King's Evil; upon consideration of which she was presented to
His MAJESTY, and touched. In progress of time they swelled, and, her Breast
being extremely painful, she desired my Judgment of it. The Swelling was large
and round, and greatly inflamed, under which it was soft, and seemed to have
Matter in it. The Parts more distant were hard, and several Tubercles lying
under the Skin made it unequal: yet the Breast was not fixed. She urged me
instantly to deliver my thoughts of it: which to decline, I turned from her,
and told her Friend it was a Cancer, and that I saw no hopes to save her life
but by cutting it off. He wished me to consider how I delivered such Judgment
of it, two Surgeons having lately assured her the contrary, they taking it
for a Phlegmon. But I, not being used to guide my Judgment by what others
delivered, confirmed to him what I had before said by a sad prediction, which
befell her within few weeks after. And indeed there was no way then to deal
with it but by cutting off her Breast.

In another, 7. Observat.
who consulted me about a pain in her Breast, I felt one of the Glands swelled.
I advised her to refrain the handling it, and to avoid the lacing her self too
straight. It lay some years quiet; but then the death of her Husband happening,
and one affliction following another, and the Menstrua stopping, the Humors
fermented in this Gland, and afterward the Breast swelled, and seemed to
apostemate. Some were so wise as to assure her it was a simple Apostemation,
and required Digestives: whose advice she was persuaded to follow, till she
became extremely pained, and then she sent for me. It was without Inflammation,
but swelled very big, and seemed to be full of Matter; yet was not without hard
Tubercles and other Symptoms to show it would terminate in a Cancer whenever
it should break. Therefore I refused to open it, but advised the best I could
to give her ease, and promised to come to her, if after it brake she would send
to me. Some months after she sent for me, and showed me a great quantity of
curdled Matter newly burst forth. The Breast was lank, but very hard Glands lay
within, and in the circumference of the Tumor there were some Tubercles that
required to be eradicated. To which purpose I designed to have slit open the
Abscess, and to have pulled away the cancerated Glands: but she would not
permit me so much as to enlarge the Orifice: upon which consideration I left
her. She sent for another, who chose rather to treat her the way she desired,
then to leave her to other hands. She died within half a year after.

Some years since a Clergyman dwelling in the City brought his Wife to me with
a painful hard Swelling in one of the Glands of her left Breast. 8. Observat.
I advised them to forbear the use of all Cataplasms or Emplasters that might
heat her Breast, and to dress it with valentia strammonii: but she was
otherwise persuaded, and thereby increased her misery. About half a year after
she came to me again with a stinking sordid Ulcer, with Lips turned out, and
the Breast fixed to the Ribs, with a hard unequal Swelling reaching to that
Clavicle and side of the Neck, apostemated in some parts, and ulcerated in
others. From the Pectoral Muscle it crept up to the Shoulder, and affected the
Axilla underneath; and by the Compression of the Vessels the upper part of the
Arm swelled, and became scirrhous. From the Elbow downwards it was oedematous
to the Fingers ends. She passed under the endeavors of many eminent Physicians
and Surgeons of the City, but died miserably.

There is also a sort of bleeding Cancers, which become such either from an
eruption of some Vessel, which makes a vent often at the Nipple or some other
Pin-hole, the Breast remaining whole; or else from the spreading of infinite
capillary Vessels in a Fungus, which in ulcerated Cancers is not unfrequent.
These do very much spend the strength of the Patient, so that they soon die
exhausted and tabid.

Cancers may also be said to differ as they affect several Parts of the Body,
as the Head, Face, Eyes, Nose, the Palate, Tonsils, Throat, Tongue, Jaws, or
Lips: in some of which they take their Original from small hard Tubercles, or
little Excrescences, and in progress of time penetrate deep into them, or
spread and invade the neighboring Parts with a Fungus or loose Flesh, rotting
the Bones under them.

Cancers affecting the Vterus and Podex may also be distinguished as they are
in the interior or exterior parts; or as they take their beginning from a
Swelling, or Excrescence: in both which cases and places they are extremely
painful, and communicate their malignity both from within outward, and also
from the external to the internal parts. Those that possess the body of the
Vterus, or the upper part of the Rectum intestinum, are not discovered till
they have made some progress; in which cases there is a bearing down, with
suppression of Urine.

And this was the case of a Country-Gentlewoman who came to London last Summer
with great suppression and difficulty of Urine, 9. Observat.
(she supposed from the Stone.) Upon search I felt two hard Glands in Vagina
uteri: these pressed upon the neck of the Bladder, and suppressed the Urine.
The pains from hence were so like those of the Stone in the Bladder, that Mr.
Hollier at first would not be dissuaded from that opinion; but upon search he
found it cancerous. She, poor woman, rejoiced that it was not the Stone, and
soon after returned homewards, but died by the way.

If they be ulcerated, a filthy Sanies will discover it. If it be in the
Intestinum rectum, the difficulty and pain in going to Stool will be exceeding
great. If the Vterus be cancerated, there will be Fever; nauseousness, anxiety
of mind. In some of those who died so diseased I have opened the Body, and
found the Vterus preternaturally big and hard: in cutting into it, I have seen
it all rotten. Those in the more exterior parts, whether it be of the Womb or
Podex, are sooner discovered, and the Patients are in a greater possibility of
being eased of their pains.

The Signs of a Cancer may be taken from what I have already delivered of them.
Whether they begin in a Tumor or Excrescence, Signs.
their first appearance is very small: and according as the Humor is of which
they are generated, so is their increase quick or slow, from the smalness of a
Vetch to the bigness of a Pompion. If the Matter be very corrosive, the pain is
sharp, (to use their own expressions) as if they were struck with a dart. And
these painful Tumors have frequently a Phlegmon joined with them, or are
overspred with an Erysipelas. And while they are thus inflamed, they will be
soft underneath the Inflammation, so may be thought full of Matter; but if you
then open them, they will only gleet. If you assuage that heat, the same place
indurates again. Yet I have frequently seen a Phlegmon suppurate in some part
of the Cancer: and after the cutting off a Cancer I have found an Apostemation
of well-concocted Matter in the body of it. And so it was in that Cancer my
Friend Mr. Nurse cut off in the presence of Doctor Walter Needham and several
of us. If pituitous Humors abound in the Body, an oedematous Tumor many be
found affecting some exterior part of the cancerous Tumor: in which case the
Swelling somewhat resembles a Tumor made by Congestion. These are they that
grow to such a great bulk, and are pale or livid, with a mixture of a brown
color, and have those turgid Veins stretching over the Skin: whence Authors
have likened them to Crabs, and these Veins to their Claws, and from thence
imposed upon them the name of Cancer. The many Tubercles lying under the Skin
make the Tumor round and unequal: at last they break; and from that time, be
the Matter much or little, they ulcerate, thrust out hard painful Lips,
discharge a stinking Gleet, and fix to the Ribs, as if they were nailed to
them, and in progress are of a horrible aspect.

Of all the Diseases which afflict mankind the Cancer is the most grievous and
rebellious, Prognostic.
and is generally incurable, by reason of its corrosive and malign venom
fermenting in the Humors, which, so far as we can yet find, yields neither to
Purging, Bleeding, Repellents, Discutients, Suppuratives, nor any other
Medicine inward or outward.

Those which lie superficially under the Skin may be attempted by the
Chirurgeon's hand: or if they rise from an external cause, as Bruise, etc.
though they lie deeper, they may be cut off, or otherwise extirpated. But those
that arise from a corrosive quality in the Humors, though they may be cut off
or otherwise extirpated, yet the success is most doubtful. Nor do Cancers in
the Mouth or other internal Parts cicatrize well, though they be extirpated by
Knife or Fire.

The Cure of a Cancer in general consists in these three Intentions: Cure.
first, in the generation of good Blood; secondly, in correcting and evacuating
of the atrabilious Humors in the Body; thirdly, in preventing the growth of
the Tumor, and disposing it to Discussion.

We endeavor to perform the first Intention by an exact regulation in Diet and
way of living, advising to abstain from such salt, sharp and gross Meats as may
dispose the Blood to acrimony, and make choice of the contrary, such as are
cooling and moistning, of easy digestion and good nourishment, as has been
proposed in the Chapter of a Scirrhus.

The second Intention is, in preparing and purging off the acrimonious Humors.
If there be Plethora, or a suppression of the Haemorrhoids or Menses, a Vein
may be opened, and a Clyster given. The Humors may also be evacuated by
lenient Purgatives, as decoct. epithymi, sennae Gereonis: or this; flor. trium
cordialium M. j. senae iij. epithymi ij. infund. in sero lactis; colaturae add
sir. de pomis purg. j. mannae vj. Misce. Clarified Whey and what else has been
prescribed in the Chapter of Scirrhus are here proper. Traumatick Decoctions of
this sort are also usually prescribed. rad. and fol. caryophyll. chelidon. maj.
pimpinellae, senecionis, gentianae, plantag. an. M. j. These are to be boiled
in two parts Water and one of Wine to the quantity of three pints, and sweetened
with Sugar, to drink thrice aday. Or, rad. scrofular, maj. tapsi barb. an. ij.
filipend. ceterach, herb. Roberti, agrimon. tormentillae, scabiosae, linariae,
an. M. j. flor. sambuci, anthos, an. P. j. sem. urticar. ij. fiat Decoct.
colaturae add sir. de pomis alterant. and de succo citr. an. q. s. This
following Electuary is also reckoned among the Specificks: pulver. ranarum,
limac. praeparat. an. ss. pulv. cancror. fluviatil. j. ossis de cord cervi j.
cort. citr. condit. j. cons. borrag. lujulae, an. ij. sir. de succ. citr.
garyophyll. q. s. fiat Electuar. sumatur q. nuc. castaneae mane and vesperi,
superbibend. hanst. Decoct. superscript. Emulsions, distilled Milks and Opiats
are of great use to contemperate the acrimony, and alleviate the pains.

The third Intention is, to restrain the growth of the Tumor, and moderately
discuss it. Whilst the Humors are evacuating, we apply Repellents, and
afterward we add Discutients. The Repellents ought to be of the milder sort,
lest they render the Humors too gross and unfit for Resolution; as, Lactuc.
portulac. plantag. umbilic. Ven. solanum, sempervivum, Lentils boiled in
Vinegar, also Clay tempered with Vinegar.

The Medicaments ready compounded are, unguent. album, nutritum, populeon,
tutiae, de plumb. usto, Lead it self. And all the Unguents prescribed ought to
be wrought in a leaden Mortar. Lead beaten into thin laminae is usually worn in
these cases; so is Gold after the same manner.

The Oil of Frogs is commended in this case, and is made by baking them with
butter in their mouths. Frog-spawn-water is of good use in the Summer, if
clothes be dipped in it and applied: but they ought to be shifted as they dry,
and fresh ones applied. The often changing them in the Winter may cause the
Patient to take cold, therefore you may apply then this or such like Cerote:
ranar. virid. iij. pulv. cancror. fluviatil. combust. ss. lithargyri aur. ij.
plumbi usti, tutiae praeparat. an. ij. cerussae vj. succor. solan. plantag. an.
vj. aceti ij. olei ranar. and unguent. popul. an. iij. sevi vitul. iiij. cerae
q. s. fiat Ceratum. Or, sem. papaveris albi j. sem. hyoscyami ss. opii j. gum.
Arabic. ss. pulverizentur, and cum ol. ros. and myrtill. an. iij. cerae q. s.
fiat Ceratum. This is proper in case of pain, in the extremity whereof you may
double the quantity of Opium; or in such cases you may foment the Tumor with a
Decoction of Poppy-heads, flowers of Roses, and tops of Melilot, and apply the
following Unguent: theriacae vet. j. succ. cancr. fluviatil. ss. succ. lactucae
and ol. ros. an. jss;s. vitell. ovor. sub cinerib. coct. number. ij. camphorae ss.
agitentur in mortario plumbeo.

The Discutients are Ceterach, Agrimony, lens palustris, scabios. stramonium,
succ. coriandri, ranar. limac. cancror. fluviat. Raisins of the Sun stoned and
beaten with Rue and Garden-Nightshade into a Pultice are proper to resolve
them. Many such like Medicaments are designed to this purpose; Cancers
requiring variety of Applications.

If notwithstanding all your endeavors the Tumor increase, and be like to
ulcerate, you may do well to forewarn the Patient of the danger: and if it be
loose, and in a place where it may be safely extirpated, propose it to them,
lest afterward they desire it when it is too late.

That you may be the more successful in the Operation, I shall offer to your
consideration these few Oualifications. First, that the Patient be of a strong
Constitution, and of a tolerable good Habit of body, and not in a declining
age, when the Menstrua are ceased. Secondly, that the Cancer be loose, and the
Axilla free from painful Glands. It were also to be wished that the Cancer
took its Original from some Accident, as a Bruise, etc. Thirdly, that the
Operation be performed in the Spring or Autumn of the year: lest through the
great heat of the Summer the Spirits be resolved; or by reason of the extreme
cold in the Winter the native Heat should be choked.

In order to the Operation you ought to have good Rowlers, Compresses,
restrictive Powders and Defensatives, as in other Amputations. The use of
Chalcanthum or other Escaroticks I do not approve: for you cannot apply them so
to the mouths of the Arteries but they will corrode the adjacent Parts, and
cause pain, which ought not to be, especially in a Cancer. Besides, they
require a strict Bandage, which is very troublesome on the Breasts. To avoid
which inconveniences, I propose the stopping of the Blood by a small
Buttoncauterie; which I acknowledge is not done without some pain, but that is
momentary, and serves to correct the indisposition of the Part: whereas the
other lies gnawing so long as it is upon the Part, and rendereth it crude and
ill-disposed. There ought to be actual Cauteries of different sorts ready
heated in some corner of the Chamber, lest in the Extirpation there happen to
be left some relics of a cancerous Gland behind. All things being ready, the
Patient must be placed in a Chair to the light, and held steady. It is then at
the Operatour's choice, whether he will make a Ligature about the basis of the
cancerous Tumor, or pull it to him with one hand while he cuts it off with the
other. For the cutting into the Breast, and pulling out the cancerated Knot,
rarely succeeds well: nor indeed is every Breast so capable of being freed of
the Cancer when it is cut off by making a Ligature. If the Cancer be cut off
clear, your business is then to stop the blood as you please: but if any
Scirrhosity remain, you shall do well to consume it by actual Cauterie. The
Ancients used in these Operations to permit them to bleed freely, nay provoked
them to it by crushing the blood out; after which the actual Cautery was
applied all over, then they dressed the Wound as a Burn: but according to my
method pulv. Galeni is most proper. Then place the Patient in bed, and give her
an Anodyne draught that night, to quiet the Ferment. The second or third day
after you may dress her with some Digestive, as that ex terebinth. cum vitello
ovi; or, terebinth. lotae iij. sir. de ros. siccis jss. succ. plantag. solani,
an. ij. succ. apii j. coquantur ad dimid. succor. consumptionem; dein add far.
hord. and ciceris an. ss. croci ij. vitell. unius ovi: Misc. If there be pain,
you may apply this Anodyne over it; mucilag. rad. and fol. althaeae, malvae,
violar. lb. j. far. tritic. ij. ol. ros. iij. coq. ad consistentiam Catapl.
addendo in fine coctionis vitell. ovor. number. ij. croci j. Misc. But if there be
no pain, dress it with Empl. e bolo. After Digestion proceed with Detergents,
and incarn and cicatrize as in Wounds is showed; remembering to keep the Body
soluble the while by Clysters, and purge or bleed as you see occasion. And if
they had no Fontanels before, make them some now: for though the Cure may seem
successful, yet if there be any evil quality in the Humors remaining the
Ulcer will scarce cicatrize.

If in cicatrizing it the Lips do grow callous, attempt the eradicating it
timely by actual Cautery, whilst it is within a narrow compass, and lies in
the superficies: for if you defer it till it has seized the musculous Flesh,
it will be too late, it being then scarce capable of Palliation. Yet some
Authors have left us Prescriptions whereby they give us hopes to cure them, or
extirpate them. Those they have offered to us for the Cure are much the same
with what I have already set down: viz. ol. ros. cerae alb. an. ijss. succ.
granat. and solani an. ij. cerussae lotae ij. plumbi usti loti and tutiae
praep. an. ss. thuris, mastich. an. ij. fiat Vnguentum S.A. Or, unguentum
tutiae Vigonis iiij. theriacae Venetae j. sacchar. Saturni j. succ. geranii q.
s. ducantur in mortario plumbeo, etc. Others commend the Juice of Mullen boiled
with Honey. Riverius tells you in one of his Observations, that he cured one by
the often dressing it with aq. ros. plantag. and rhoead. with a mixture of mel
rosat. Aetius proposes extract. sumach: but that is more proper in Cancers of
the Vterus.

Empiricks amongst us brag much of their skill in curing of them; and, by the
giving of Matthews's Pill, or Opium mixed with some Purgative, they do now and
then alleviate the pain, and thereby encourage diseased people to commit
themselves into their hands, whom if they can persuade to an Amputation, they
get some money in hand: but their frequent miscarriages in that work have
taught the more prudent people to avoid them.

Some eminent Surgeons, I suppose, after a fruitless endeavor to cure them,
have attempted the extirpating of them by Escaroticks. Guido has commended to
us Arsenick poudered and sprinkled daily upon them, the Escar being first
pulled off. Riverius in his Observations tells of a Cancer that was extirpated
by this Application: aq. fortis j. sublimati crudi viij. salis Armeniaci ij.
arsenici j. These are to be distilled ad siccitatem, then the eaput mortuum
poudered, and the like weight of Vinegar to be put thereto, and distilled again
to the consistence of a soft Paste for use. Ol. arsenici, aq. regia, ol.
vitrioli, lap. caustic. etc. have been proposed. When such are applied, there
will be need of good Defensatives. By the authority of some of these Authors
young Surgeons have been sometimes engaged to their prejudice: and some
years since an eminent Surgeon, since deceased, undertook the eradicating of
an ulcerated Cancer in the Breast of a Woman that had strength and courage to
endure it. He applied the strongest of the forementioned Escaroticks: they
penetrated deep, and made great Sloughs, which he pulled off, and by repeating
the Escaroticks raised new; but the use of them was not long continued: for the
Gleet partaking of the Corrosives ulcerated the adjacent Parts; and the Cancer
was so enraged by the Escaroticks, as showed there was no good to be done by
them. Indeed if they had contrived Medicaments that could have penetrated deep
with little pain, there might have been some hopes of success. So cancerous
Excrescences and Ulcers in the Mouth are increased by the touching them with
ol. vitriol. sulphur. etc. Upon which consideration there remain but two ways,
either the actual Cautery, or palliative Medicines. If the Cancer be in such a
place as you may hope to eradicate it, the actual Cautery is then a sure help:
but not by applying it lightly upon the upper parts; but by thrusting at the
root with a Scoop or Chisel-like Cautery, carrying it away before you. If there
remain any rags of it, with a proportionable Button-cautery burn it down to a
crust: but if this cannot be effected, then endeavor Palliation by such
Medicaments as above have been proposed; and in case the Menstrua or
Haemorrhoids be stopped, bleed by Venaesection or by Leeches, and make Fontanels:
for by such means many people live tolerably well who have Cancers ulcerated;
when others, who ailed less, by their impatience are dead. As you may see
amongst the following Observations.

A Maid of about twenty years of age, of a healthful Complexion, 1. Observat.
of a cancerous Gland in the Breast.
came to me complaining of a pain in her Breast. I looked upon it, and felt a
hard Gland of an oval figure movable. I advised her to keep her hands off of
it, and to give her Breast what liberty she could by cutting the Stiffning out
of her Bodies, there being little more to be done in such Tumors. I prescribed
her a Solution of sacchar. Saturni in aq. spermat. ranar. to dip clothes in,
and apply to her Breast, in case of pain; advised her to bleed Spring and
Autumn, to purge with Whey, Manna, cremor tartar. and to contemperate the
Humors with clarified Whey, wherein Borrage, Bugloss, Cichorie, Fumitorie,
etc. had been boiled. Some time after, upon a new complaint, I added troch.
alb. Rhas. cum opio to the former Water. By such like Remedies she lived with
more quiet of mind many years, and with much ease, and has lately recommended
others to me upon the same account.

To another, 2. Observat. of a cancerous Gland in the left Breast.
very much pained with a Gland in her left Breast of the bigness of a Chestnut,
I prescribed the dressing of her Breast with clothes dipped in the forementioned
Solution, and some days after let her blood, and prescribed an Electuary of
cassia, manna, pulp. tamarind. cum resina jalapii and sal. tartari, to take the
quantity of a Nutmeg at any time to keep her Body soluble. Her pain continuing,
I prescribed an Infusion to be made of sem. cydon. psyllii, papaver. alb.
hyoscyam. in aq. solani and plantag. She was purged with decoct. epithymi cum
sir. de pomis purg. Barly-creams, Emulsions, with Cra-fish, etc. were
prescribed. After all she removed into the fresh air, and drank the Waters of
Barnes and Tunbridge; by which she was somewhat relieved: and by the repetition
of the abovesaid Prescriptions the Gland continues quiet, and may to her death.

A Gentlewoman came out of the Country with a cancerous Gland in her right
Breast, 3. Observat. of a cancerous Gland in the right Breast.
she supposing it was the Evil: but being informed what it was, she desired my
advice. I prescribed her such like Medicaments to palliate it. She was after
some while advised to consult others. Some of them applied an Emplastr. galbani
to it: from which time the pain increased, and the Breast swelled. She then
returned to me. I anointed it with valentia stramonii, let her blood, and
purged her with Whey, Manna, etc. by which I calmed the Ferment, and she
returned into the Country well contented to palliate it, and by that Unguent it
is quieted.

A Gentlewoman, 4. Observat. of a cancerous Gland behind the Ear. 5. Observat.
of a cancerous Gland in the left Breast.
pained with a cancerous Tumor behind her left Ear, was by the said Ointment
palliated many years; and, for ought I know, is yet alive.

A Gentlewoman aged about fifty years, of a Scorbutical and very ill Habit of
body, had also a painful Gland in her left Breast. Sir Fra. Pr. was her
Physician, and commended the Cure of that swelled Gland to me. She was in a
Scorbutical course of Physic, and had been let blood by Leeches, Fontanels
were made, and several Medicaments had been applied unsuccessfully to her
Breast. I applied this: sevi vitulini vj. unguent. rosati, popul. an. ij. ol.
myrtillor. iij. succ. plantag. solani, geranii, an. ij. succ. rutae murariae,
summit. rubi, an. j. lithargyr. aur. iij. tutiae praeparatae, cancror.
fluviatil. an. vj. plumbi usti and cerussae an. j. mucilag. sem. psyllii,
papaver. alb. hyoscyami extract. in aq. spermat. ranar. iij. cerae q.s. fiat
Unguent. in mortario plumb. S. A. By the use of this her pain was eased; yet,
being a melancholic person, she was not without suspicion of ill from it, and
in the Country sometimes consulted me in it. But of late years the Gland
lessened and resolved. Some while after she complained of a pain in her Back,
and made bloody water, which growing more foul, she came to London. Her
Physician being dead, she consulted others. They all suspected an Ulcer in her
Kidneys, treated her accordingly, and sent her to Tunbridge; from whence she
returned little the better. She retired into the Country, and enjoys there a
tolerable Health. I suppose this of her Kidneys is a Translation of some of
those sharp Humors which affected her Breast.

A Gentlewoman of about forty years of age, 6. Observat. of a cancerous Gland
in the Breast, the extirpation attempted by Caustic.
subject to the Gout and Scorbute, consulted me about a small painful Gland
lying superficially under the Skin of her right Breast two fingers breadth
above the Nipple, not bigger then a small Hazel-nut. It was a Cancer incipiens,
and like to be of ill quality, beginning with so much pain. I proposed the
palliating of it, or the taking of it out by Incision. To the former I rather
inclined: she replied, she would have it broke, and cured by digestion. Some
days after she met with one that applied a Caustic upon it, and treated it
that way; and, being confident of the success, she sent to me to see her
dressed. I went, and saw the Ulcer in a seeming good condition; but, in
handling of it, I perceived part of the Gland remaining hard, which confirmed
to me the unsuccessfulness of the undertaking. He dressed the Ulcer with
Praecipitat, alb. upon Lint, and applied over it a piece of a boiled Tripe
scraped thin, (as I was afterward informed.) About ten weeks after the patient
sent for me. She was much emaciated, and her Breast ulcerated, and fixed to the
Ribs, with inverted Lips, and a foetid Gleet issuing from it. I dressed her
Breast with unguent. diapompholyg. and applied on the Parts about it unguent.
nutritum, prescribing a Pearl-Julep to refresh her fainting spirits, and an
Anodyne draught that night to dispose her to rest. The next day Sir Fr. Pr.
appointed her this distilled Milk: rad. garyophyll. chelidon. symphyt.
tormentill. gentianae, an lbss. fol. plantag. sedi vulg. hederae terrest. vinc.
pervinc. agrimoniae, an. M. vj. fol. veronicae utriusque an. M. iv. glycyrrhiz:
Anglic. sang. porcin. an. lbij. lactis vaccini cong. ij. distillentur in
organis rosaceis; sumat. ad q. iv. tribus horis medicinalibus, addendo singulis
vicibus aq. cinnamomi hordeat. cochlear. ij. vel iij. and tabell. magist.
Perlar. ex duplic. vel triplic. caudar. cancror. q. s. in saporis gratiam. And
in extremity of pain, sir. e cort. citric. and de pomis alterant. an. iij.
theriac. solani gr. iij. sumat. hora somni.

I fomented her Breast with a Decoction of some of the abovesaid Plants, and
with some of the Unguents prescribed in the method of Cure of Cancers ulcerated
dressed her up, by which she was restored to such a condition as to return to
her house in the Country. About half a year after her Physician writ to me, and
by her order offered me a sufficient Reward with convenience answerable to come
to her. To which I returned for answer, That if he could propose how I might
extirpate the Cancer or palliate it otherwise then I had directed her from
hence, I would gladly make a Journey to her; otherwise I desired to be excused.
How long she lived afterward, I have not heard.

A Person of Honor aged about thirty eight years was taken with a pain in her
right Breast, she thought from some Bruise. 7. Observat.
A while after she felt a hardness two fingers breadth above the Nipple, which
growing more painful, she put her self into the hands of some who pretended to
cure it: but the blood burst out at the Nipple the while, which eased her of
the pain. During this the Nipple contracted inward, and by the large and
frequent bleeding the Humors became sharp, affecting her Kidneys, and at other
times her Hands and Arms, with a Rheumatismus: meanwhile her Breast was easier.
Thus she suffered some years under the Fermentation of sharp Humors in one
part or other, but for the most part in her Breast, which in progress of time
raised it into a great unequal Tumor of a brown and livid color, with turgid
Veins overspreading it. Doctor Whistler had been often consulted by her, and
relieved her as often by Purging, Venaesection, Leeches, Traumatick Decoctions,
etc.

The Cancer growing great, and the Tubercles ready to disburthen themselves of
the corrupt Serum which distended them, I was consulted, and, observing the
danger the Patient was in, desired a Consultation, and that Dr. Whistler, who
had discontinued his Visits, might be present, with Sir Al. Fras. Dr. Walter
Needham, and Mr. Hollier Surgeon, to join in the Consultation. Accordingly
we met, and considered the Cancer. It was of a very ill aspect, ready to burst,
and not fixed. But I, apprehending that after its eruption it would fix, and
rage, as is usual at such times, offered to their consideration the taking off
the Breast while it was capable of it, lest afterward it should be objected as
a fault. It arising from an outward cause, gave me the more encouragement: but
the Patient not admitting of it, we consulted how to treat it. Cordials,
Emulsions and Anodyne draughts were prescribed; external Medicaments were also
considered to calm the heat of the Cancer. Some few days after a stinking Gleet
burst its way out in great quantity by a small Opening, to the great ease of
the Patient; upon which the Tubercles and Breast sunk, and, after the casting
forth of some corrupt Sloughs, the Matter became well sented, the Breast also
contracting into an uniform shape, grew less then the other, and the Patient
recovered strength to rise out of her Bed. Doctor Whistler attended the Cure,
and by good Balsamicks, Traumatick Decoctions, etc. disposed the Humors to
better temper, insomuch as the Lady appeared abroad, to the wonder of those
that had seen her some weeks before. She being so recovered, it became a
question whether it had ever been cancerated. But since that there have
happened new Eruptions, and there yet remains such hardness and inequality in
it as will demonstrate what it was.

The year before the Sickness a young Woman came to me complaining of a
grievous pain in her right Breast. 8. Observat.
She was of a healthy Complexion, and her Breast seemed to look as well: but in
handling of it I did feel a couple of hard Glands. She had consulted others,
and came to me to cut them out. I dissuaded her at that time from such
thoughts, by telling her the inward Cause was first to be removed, and the
Humors better disposed. To which purpose she was let blood, purged with
Infusions of Sena, etc. and advised to drink the Waters of Epsom and Tunbridge.
I also directed her some of the Medicaments set down in the method of Cure, to
alleviate her pain. Some weeks after she came again, and told me she was
informed that she should not be eased of her pain till those Knots were taken
out. I told her those Glands lay deep, and the musculous Flesh and Parts about
were infected with the same Juices, and consequently the Operation could not be
successful unless the Breast were cut off. Upon which she departed from me
unsatisfied, and some days after put her self into the hands of another, who
cut out those Glands, and endeavored to cure. But it grew cancerous; and then
he cut off the whole Breast. Some months after, when it was near cured, she
came and showed it me with much joy. I felt it hard round about, and suspected
it would not cure; as indeed it did not: for some months after she came again
to me with it ulcerated deep and wide into the pectoral Muscle and Parts about,
and fixed to the Ribs. She grievously bemoaned her misfortune, in permitting it
to be cut off. By this and such like work I have been taught not to cut off
Breasts that cancerate from an internal Cause. I did what I could to ease her
pain by palliating the Ulcer, but it was too late.

In the time of my waiting at the public Healings there came to me a
Country-maid, 9. Observat. of a Cancerous Breast cut off.
aged about twenty six years, of a sickly Complexion, diseased with a Cancer in
her right Breast arising from some accidental Bruise. It first swelled, then
grew hard, and in progress of time ulcerated, and had frequently bled to the
quantity of a quart at a time, and sometime to two quarts, as her Friends told
me. I considered the Breast as incurable, and judged the bleeding to arise from
a Fungus which lay too deep to be reached by any Medicament: therefore thought
it reasonable to propose to them the extirpation of the Breast before it should
be fixed to the Ribs. They had tried many things unsuccesfully in the Country:
and, being now informed that it was not the King's Evil, they were not
unwilling that it should be cut off, but took time to consider of it; and about
a month after came to me again resolved for the work.

The taking off of this Breast happened to be seasonable for the experimenting
of the Royal Stiptick liquour which was given me the morning before by His
MAJESTY's command: upon which consideration I provided no other Astringent then
a couple of Buttons made of Lint which lay wet in a spoonful of that Water.
But, in order to the bringing the Lips of the Wound together, I had prepared a
couple of Needles with a strong twisted Thread cered, also a Digestive ex
terebinth. cum vitello ovi, etc. spread upon Pledgits, with Compress and
Bandage. Being thus provided, I attended some Friends who desired to see the
efficacy of the Water. But Doctor Walter Needham being come, and it growing
late in the evening, we proceeded in the work. He pulled up the Breast while I
made a Ligature upon the basis of it, and cut it off. The two Arteries bled
forcibly out, till Doctor Needham applied a wet Button on the one, and my
Kinsman Jaques Wiseman applied the other. That of the Doctour's stopped the
Bleeding at that very instant, and the Compress adhered to it; but the blood
dribbled from under the other: which we supposed happened by reason of the
blood streaming upon it in the putting it on. But by the application of a fresh
Button the Bleeding there also stopped. During this the Lips of the wound were
brought nearer to each other by a cross stitch. We then applied our Digestive
with convenient Bandage over it, and laid the Patient in her Bed. In our
absence she fainted, and upon the drinking a draught of cold water vomited, and
her Breast bled through the Dressings. Upon sight thereof I took off the
Dressings, and seeing one of the Arteries seepe, I applied a fresh Dossil, and
stopped it: but it being night, and dreading mischief might happen if it should
bleed again, I sent for a small Button-cautery, and that way secured it. The
third day we took off Dressings, and found it well digested; and from that time
it cured daily. But she complained of a soarness of that side of her Throat,
which she had done ever since her Breast was cut off, and within a week after
of a shortness of breath; upon which she was let blood; and by my Friend's
prescriptions she was also purged with infus. sennae, rhabarb. etc. and
afterward with pil. foetidae, etc. Her Breast being near cicatrized, she was
supplied with Dressings, and returned to the Country the sixth week after the
cutting it off. But she continued there indisposed, and the Cicatrix, by reason
of the sharpness of Humors, fretted off, and enlarged the Ulcer very much:
whereupon she returned to me again. I dressed the Ulcer with unguent. tutiae,
etc. and let her blood; then purged her as abovesaid, made her a Fontanel in
her left Arm, and in few weeks cicatrized her Breast. Since which time I have
seen her often in Town in very good health, and her Breast firmly cicatrized,
without pain or hardness.

A person of about fifty years of age, 10. Observat.
having some scirrhous Glands in her left Breast, was impatient to have them
discussed or suppurated: to which purposed she consulted several of our
Profession, and afterward my self. She was under the hands of some Empiricks,
that were endeavoring by Pultices to break it: there was also a Fontanel made
in the lower part of the Breast under the Tumor, she hoping that way to spend
it. I advised her to forbear the use of such applications as might heat her
Breast, telling her the ill consequence in breaking those Swellings. She did
not approve of what I said, but pursued her design. Some time after a false
Suppuration was made in her Breast, and an effusion of blood followed; and by
the continued use of Pultices the Ulcer enlarged, and by frequent Bleeding her
Body emaciated. She being very near wasted by a new Eruption sent for me. I
stopped the Bleeding by the application of pulv. sang. dracon. with Pledgits of
unguent. desiccativum rubrum, with a soft cap of Tow pressed out of Oxycrate.
The next day I took off the Dressing, and found it had not bled. I also
observed the Tumor to be a mere Fungus, and the Ulcer an Excoriation of the
Skin which encompassed it round, and the frequent Bleeding occasioned by
Escaroticks and hot Cataplasms. I dressed the Breast with Epuloticks, as
unguent. tutiae Vigonis, and such like, and with clothes dipped in aq. spermat.
ranar. with sacchar. Saturni; and in some parts I applied Pledgits dipped in the
same, with a Solution of troch. alb. Rhas. cum opio, by which the heat was
contemperated, and the Excoriation cicatrized. Sir Fra. Pruj. was in the while
consulted, and prescribed her this; antimonii diaphoretici gr. 15. magist.
perlar. gr. 6. fol. auri number. j. Misc. pro una dosi, and sic pro aliis; detur
horis matutin. and quartis pomeridianis, superbibendo sequent. Julep. iv.
singulis vicibus: aq. stillat. borraginis, buglossi, cardui benedict. scordii,
dracont. an. lbss. sir. e succ. citr. and de pom. alterant. an. iv. ocul.
cancror. ss. aq. cardiacae iv. Misc. in usum praescript. And to dispose her to
rest, sir. e succo citr. garyophyll. an. iij. theriac. solani gr. iij. sumat.
hora somni. Distilled Milk, Emulsions, etc. were prescribed; her Body was kept
open by Clysters; and, after she recovered her strength, she was purged with
Whey, Manna, etc. Thus in a few weeks she was cured: but the Tumor remained,
and retained the color of the Blood lying underneath it. In the time of the
Bleeding, by the application of Escaroticks and hard Bandage a Gland was raised
under the right Axilla: but by forbearing the use of Bandage, and my dressing
her Breast with Lenients, the pain therein ceased, and she enjoyed a good
measure of health, and was my good Friend, till about a year after it was told
her that one Mrs. R. who labored of a Cancer in her Breast, had caused a
Mountebank to cut it off, and that she was thereby cured. Upon this she sent
for me, and would have her Breast cut off. I declined it, and showed her, as I
thought, such reasons as might have dissuaded her from such an Enterprise: but
she was resolved, and, after I was gone, sent for the Empirick, who undertook
to extirpate it by Escaroticks: and she bled to death in few days. I was sent
for; but, being out of Town, she was dead before I came to her. If she had not
been in such have, she might have outlived that Gentlewoman: for her Breast
cancerated, and she died within a few months after.

A person of about forty years of age, 11. Observat.
of a very ill Habit of body, from her very youth had a hard Gland on her right
Side near her Breast: it had some pricking pain in it, but was movable: it
seemed to me a Cancer incipiens. I was willing to apply somewhat to it, but,
suspecting that the increase of the Gland might be imputed to it, advised her
to keep her hands off it, and to lace her Bodies more slack; telling her, that
upon her return to London the Autumn following, if she were not better, she
might consult those of our Profession. She did so, and accordingly as she had
proposed came to Town again, and sent for me. The Gland was then grown bigger
and more painful, but was movable: there was also a small painful Gland under
that Axilla, which much discouraged my undertaking. I acquainted her Physician
of the danger she was in, and wished him to propose to her the consulting some
others. The next day Doctor Wharton met the Lady's Physician, Doctor
Windebanck, and my self. At the Consultation I declared my thoughts of that
Gland, viz. that it was a Cancer, and by the progress it had made in three
months it was like to be a difficult work, and wished the Patient might be
acquainted with the danger; for by her discourse to me she expected I should
speedily cure her, and that by suppurating the Gland: which way was
destructive. For, according to Galen, and our daily experience, ab
emollientibus exasperantur: and to proceed by Repellents and Discutients were
only to palliate; which I doubted we should not be long able to do. The only
hope then remaining was, cutting into the Skin, and taking the Gland out while
it was movable. This was not approved of. We then considered what to dress it
with. Doctor Wharton would needs leave that to my care: but I, having no
inclination to be engaged in it, desired it might be prescribed by us, and made
by the Apothecary; which was as follows. aq. spermatis ranar. lbj. sem.
psyllii, papaver. albi, cydon. an. ij. extrahatur mucilag. cui add. troch. alb.
Rhas. cum opio j. sacchar. Saturni j Misc. fiat mixtura parti affectae tepide
linteis in illa madefactis applicanda: then a distilled Milk; fol. agrimoniae,
veronicae utriusque, garyophyll. plantag. borrag. fumariae, heder. terrest. an.
M. iij. limac. cum testis lbij. passul. maj. lbj. astacor. fluviat. number. 24.
glycyrrhiz. rec. lbss. sem. foenic. dulc. coriand. an. iv. fiat omnium
distillatio in congiis ij. lactis vaccini recentis; dulcoretur cum sacchar.
perlar. q. s. capiat lbss. 3 horis medicinalibus; in haustu ultimo, hora somni,
capiat alternis nociibus j. syrup. de papaver. erratic. asellor. recent. number.
xx. pistentur and macerentur in haustu aq. lactis praescript. capiat horis
matutinis tres dies continuos. Many things were prescribed, both internal and
external: but she was no way relieved. When the Glands were not painful, she
was sick of some Diarrhoea, Catarrh, etc. and if she was well in health, then
the Glands were painful: and while this bigger was treated, it would feel soft
in some part, and be protuberant, and after a while harden again. Thus every
new Fluxion increased this Gland, and gradually made it unequal; yet it
continued movable: which gave me one time an occasion to tell her, that the
cutting the Skin, and taking that Gland out whole, was the best way to free her
of it. She, perceiving that I had no inclination to suppurate it, as she hoped
I would, was contented that I should draw off, to make way for some other.
About two months after I met with one that attended the Cure; who told me they
had suppurated it, and were in hopes to cure. I replied, You will only have a
Gleet; as indeed it proved: and afterward it thrust out a large Fungus. She
was then desirous to have it cut off, but it was too late.

A Woman of about thirty six years of age was supposed to have a Cancer in her
left Breast, and had been palliated many years by Sir Fra. Pr. One day, 12.
Observat. of a cancerous Wen gangrened and cured.
she being at her house in the Country, it did break, with very exceeding pain.
She writ to her Physician, who sent me to take off the Breast. When I came, I
saw it gangrened, and was somewhat surprised at the novelty. The Tumor was
round, of a very great bulk, and movable; it was gangrened by reason of the
overstretching of the Skin. The Mortification had eaten through the Skin the
compass of the palm of a hand. I cut into the body of the Tumor, and found it
a cancerous Flesh, and lying within a Cystis. I, supposing it a cancerous Wen,
(how properly I know not, it being the only one I ever saw,) fomented it with
Wine, dressed it up hot with unguent. basilicon, and gave her an ounce of sir.
de meconio in a draught of Mace-ale, to quiet her pain. The next morning I
found her much afflicted, and saw many clothes wet with the Gleet, the
Mortification was much spread in the Skin, and the cancerous body cracked as a
Pomegranat over-ripe. I considered the Gangrene, and supposed it would save me
the labor of cutting off the Breast, and that it would cease upon the pulling
away of the cancerous body. Upon which consideration I pulled out that part
which was outermost, I believe the fourth part of it; and would then have
pulled it all out by dividing the Skin; but she would not permit it. I
continued my way of dressing as before, stayed at the house with her three
days, and dressed it twice a day, pulling out some part of the Wen each time.
The Gangrene in the Skin stopped, and she became very easy. But perceiving she
would not permit me to thrust out the remaining Wen, I desired a neighboring
Surgeon might be sent for: who being come, we dressed the Patient. I showed
him that by Digestion the remaining fleshy body with the Cystis would come
away, and by that time the Lips with the Skin would be ready to unite with the
whole: which accordingly came to pass, and she was perfectly cured in less then
six weeks, and is yet well.

A Man of about fifty years of age came to me out of the Country with a hard
unequal Tumor, of the bigness of a large Wall-nut, 13. Observat. of a
cancerous Tumor on the Head.
between the Coronal and Sagittal Suture: it had been ulcerated, but was at
that time crusted over with a Scab, and seemed to be a milder sort of Cancer.
He supposed it the King's Evil; but being assured by me otherwise, he desired
my help. I, considering its basis resting upon the Cranium, made no difficulty
in the undertaking it. Therefore providing Dressings ready, I made an Incision
round it to the Scull; then raised it off with a Spatula, and permitting the
blood to flow a while, dressed it up with Astringents. The third day after I
took off Dressings, and saw the Lips of the Wound well disposed, and the
Cranium uncorrupted. I rasped it till the blood appeared under it, then dressed
up the Wound with Digestives ex terebinthina, etc. and after Digestion incarned
and cicatrized it with as little difficulty, and dismissed him cured.

A Man about twenty eight years of age came out of the Country recommended to
me with a Cancer on his left Cheek, 14. Observat. of a Cancer on the left Cheek.
stretching it self from that side of his Nose close under the lower Ey-lid to
the external Canthus, so making a compass downwards. It was broad in its basis,
and rose copped like a Sugarloaf. It gleeted, and was accompanied with
Inflammation and much pain. He had also some scirrhous Glands under that Jaw.
The extirpation of this Cancer had been attempted in the Country; but it
growing afterward bigger, and threatening his Eye lately with Inflammation, he
hastened up, and importuned me to undertake it. I complied with his desire, and
four or five days after, having prepared all things ready, viz. actual
Cauteries, Digestives, Defensatives, Bandage, etc. Doctor Walter Needham and
my Kinsman Jaques Wiseman being assisting, I pulled the Tumor toward me with
the one hand, during which I made my Incision close by the Eyelid, and cut it
smooth off, as close to the Os jugale as I could do it, avoiding the
Periosteum. The blood at first spurt out forcibly from many Capillaries besides
two considerable Arteries: we permitted them to bleed a while. The lesser
Vessels stopped of themselves, and we cauterized the greater afterward. Then
viewing our work, and observing some relic of the Cancer remaining above the
external Canthus, we consumed it by actual Cautery, and dressed up the Wound
with our Digestive, with Embrocations, Defensatives, and moderate Bandage to
retain them. The third day we took off Dressings, saw it well disposed to
digest, and dressed it as before. The second day after, dressing it again, the
Cancer appeared rising from the side of the Nose and Eyelid; it also
over-spred the Cheek-bone. I dressed it as I had done the time before; and the
next time came prepared with actual Cauteries, and consumed it all, then
dressed it up with Lenients. From that time the Ulcer healed daily, and
contracted in ten days space to the half: yet since that it begins to bud again
here and there, which will put me upon a necessity of using the actual Cautery:
and what account to give of it I yet know not.

A Gentlewoman aged about forty years, 15. Observat. of a cancerous
Excrescence of the lower right Jaw.
of a strong healthy Constitution, came out of the Country diseased with a
large fleshy Excrescence, painful, and of a livid color, thrusting out from
the Gums of the lower right Jaw. It had rotted the Teeth nearest to it, and
weakened the rest, by the Ulceration and Relaxation it had made in the Gums. It
had been viewed by some of our Profession, who declined the meddling with it as
cancerous; for which reason I undertook it: for, supposing it a Cancer, it
ought the rather to be extirpated whilst it affected some particular Part that
was capable of it. The ill consequence of such omissions may be judged by the
following Observations. I readily undertook the freeing her of the Excrescence
by actual Cautery: which she consenting to, I caused a Scoop-like Cautery to be
made proportionably big, to thrust off the Excrescence at once with its root:
then sent for La Roche, who punched out the stumps of the Teeth that were in my
way. Then, one of my Servants holding her Head steady whilst another held her
lower Lip down and her Tongue on one side, I pressed with the Cautery well
heated into the lower part of the Gum, and extirpated it quite; then with a
Bolt-cautery consumed and dried the lax and rotten basis: which being done, she
held in her mouth a decoct. hordei cum sem. cydonior. and used it daily till
the Escar separated. I then made her a decoct. plantag. equiset. summitat.
rubi, flor. ros. rub. balaust. cum sir. de ros. siccis, with which and the
Vitriol-stone I cicatrized the Ulcer firmly. I neither purged her, nor let her
blood; supposing the latter would be more seasonable after in case of
Inflammation: but there happening none, that was omitted. And so was the
Purging, I supposing it might put the Humors rather upon a Ferment. She was
cured in less then three weeks, and continues well.

A person of about fifty years of age, of a strong Constitution, 16. Observat.
by cracking of an Apricock-stone caused a pain amongst the great Teeth of his
upper Jaw on the left side. From that time that part of the Gum swelled, and
one Tooth grew loose, and after some time a Fungus thrust the Tooth out. A
Frenchman, Surgeon to his Regiment, endeavored to consume the Fungus with
oleum vitrioli and such like: but it increasing spread farther, and affected the
whole Jaw, insomuch as all his Teeth dropped out to the Septum. The Fungus
greatly increasing thrust out two distinct Lips, the one whereof stretched out
the Cheek, and the other overspred that side of the Roof of his mouth. The
Patient being in this condition came up to London, and called to a Consultation
Sir Fra. Pr. and Doctor Bate Physicians: of Surgeons there were Mr. Arris,
Mr. Edward Molin (deceased,) Mr. Shunbub, a German, Surgeon to his Grace the
Duke of Albemarl, Mr. Troutbeck, and my self. We, being met, saw the Patient
dressed; his Surgeon pulling out a Tent very big and long from between the
two Fungi in that place where the Disease began. After we had severally
considered the Malady, we withdrew to consult, and, unanimously concluding it
an ulcerated Cancer, proposed various Remedies in order to Palliation; as
shaving the Hair of his head, applying Cephalicks, a Seton in the Neck,
Fontanels, Blistering, Bleeding, Purging, etc. Coming to the Patient with the
Prescriptions, he asked what way we had designed to cure him. After some pause,
(for we, having no hopes of curing him, had not discoursed of that,) Sir Fra.
Pr. answered, the attempt of Cure in such Ulcers had been always unsuccessfull
and extreme painful, viz. by Burning, and thereby the Disease has been for
the most part exasperated, and the Life of the Patient shortened. The same was
affirmed by us all. The Patient replied, God's will be done. I pray go and
consider of the way: for I had rather die then live thus. We withdrew, and
resolved to comply with his desire, returning suddenly again to him with that
Answer, and commended to him Mr. Edward Molin, that excellent Operatour. But he
refused it, as being preingaged to go out of Town. It was then put upon me:
and at their desire I undertook it, and gave directions for the making actual
Cauteries of various sorts, some Bolt-like, others like Chisels, others of
other fashions. There were Instruments also made to defend his Tongue and Lips.
While these were making, the Patient was let blood, purged, and prepared for
the work. That done, we met again, and had the Instrument-maker attending to
heat the Cauteries, and mend or alter them as occasion should offer. One of the
Assistents held his Head and upper Lip, whilst I with a Speculum oris held down
the Tongue with the one hand, and with the other passed a plain Chisel-cautery
just under the upper Lip into the body of that part of the Cancer which
stretched it self along the Roof of the mouth to the Palate, and repeated the
use of that-fashioned Cautery till I had made a separation of so much. The
carrying the Cautery thus in the middle of that cancerous Lip was the way to
preserve the sound parts from being scorched with the reflection of the glowing
Iron. It was also a great encouragement to the Patient to see such gobbets
burnt off with so little pain. After I had scooped off what I could of that
Lip, then with Olive and Boltlike Cauteries by burning I dried up the remainder
to a crust. That done, I went to work with the other cancerous Lip which lay
stretched along that part of the Jaw to the Cheek, and raised it up as a
Trumpeter's in the time of sounding. I passed a Chisel-cautery into the body of
that, and made a riddance of a great part of it, cutting and burning through
the Alveoli, which were as rotten as dirt, till the Patient grew weary, and the
Physicians thought it was enough for that time. We then gave him of this Lotion
to hold in his Mouth to cool it: sem. cydonior. j. sem. psyllii and papaver.
albi an. ij. extrahantur mucores in aq. plantag. solan. and ranar. an. part.
aeq. That night he was laid to rest with this; aq. paralyseos ij. aq.
theriaoalis iij. sir. de meconio vj. Misc.

The next day in the afternoon the two Physicians and some of the Surgeons
met me at tha Patient's Chamber. He had slept well, and was for the work, he
said, placing himself very cheerfully in the Light. Renewing my work, and
feeling with my Finger the length of that Lip stretching by the Roof of the
mouth, I felt a moisture in a chink, which I searched with a Probe, and found a
hollowness over the Roof, from whence there issued Matter. On the other side,
which I burnt last, the Flesh was high. I began with that over the Roof, and
burnt all that part dry, and left it lying hollow like an Arch: then burnt the
other side with Olive and Bolt-cauteries down toward the basis of the Alveoli,
and found the remaining Sockets full of the same loose Flesh. I burnt into each
of them, and at the same time dried them what I could; and wherever I saw any
Excrescence, I consumed it, and thereby smoothed my work. It was not easy to
distinguish the sound from the unsound by reason of the swelling in the
neighboring Parts. It was also much more painful to the Patient, as the sense
of the Nerves and Membranes were more exquisite then that of the hard Lips
which I consumed the day before. Yet he sat cheerfully, till I declared that I
had not left a cranny uncauterized: them he rose, and washed his Mouth with
some of the forementioned Mucilage, to which there were some beaten whites of
new-laid Eggs added. His constant Drink was this: rad. sarsaparillae vj.
infund. in aq. font. lbix. per horas xij. tum add. rad. scorzonerae iij.
summitat. majoranae, melissae, an. M. j. flor. cordial. an. Mss. pom. redolent.
number. vj. coq. ad tertiae partis consumption. decocti praescript. lbjss. cancr.
fluviat. coct. number. xvj. amygdal. dulc. number. vj. nuc. pin. iij. manus Christi
perlatae j. fiat Emulsio. Of which latter he took thrice a day. About 12 of the
clock that night he sent for me, and told me I had changed his pain: It was
before, said he, a gnawing pricking pain, but now it is burning hot; yet, said
he, I did not send for you so much to ease my pain, as to rejoice with me in my
recovery. I embrocated the Cheek cum oleo and aceto rosac. and afterward
applied soft clothes dipped in the same, advising him to hold some of his
formerly-prescribed Lotion in his Mouth, and gave him a draught of his Anodyne,
which laid him to sleep. In the morning, when he wakened, he called his pain a
comfortable heat. His Physicians prescribed him a Clyster, and this cordial
Electuary and Julep: pulpae cons. lujulae, garyophyll. an. jss. confect. de
hyacintho jss. marg. praeparat. j. magist. e coralliis ij. sir. garyohyll. q.
s. fiat Opiatum; capiat q. nuc. moschat. 3 horis medicinalibus, superbibend.
Julep. sequens; aqu. cerasor. nigror. flor. tiliae, an. vj. aq. theriacalis ij.
sir. garyophyll. jss. Misc. I visited him daily, and where I saw loose flesh
arise, I burnt it down with one Cauterie or other moderately heated. A learned
person visiting him often, and for the most part finding me there drying and
smoothing my work with the actual Cautery, suspected the event, and went out
from us mumbling that Aphorism of Hippocrates, Quibus sunt Cancri in Palato,
Sede, Vtero, etc. si urantur ulcera, cicatrice induci non possunt. It much
disturbed me, but I prosecuted my Cure more industriously; and by drying the
loose Flesh wheresoever it appeared, as also the Bones, I disposed them to cast
off, and the Flesh to a hard Callus, which cicatrized with the adjacent Parts.
In the time of the cicatrizing I prescribed him this Water to wash his Mouth
before and after meat: aq. plantag. equiseti, fragor. an. lbj. flor. ros. rub.
balaust. an. M. jss. coq. ad 3. partis consumptionem; colaturae add. sir.
diamoron, de ros. siccis, an. jss. acet. rosac. vj. Misc. By this method he was
cured in the space of six weeks with a firm and smooth Cicatrix. Doctor Bate
whispered Sir Fra. Pr. that it would not hold a month: but it held seven years,
or thereabouts. Others of our Profession, who at our first Consultation had
declared it an incurable Cancer, did afterward, when they saw it cured,
declare amongst their Companions that it was no Cancer. Such an irresistible
Disease is a Cancer.

In the year sixty eight the same person, being at his house in the Country,
was taken with a Fever, which after some days terminated by a Crisis in the
outside of the same Cheek from which the cancerated Jaw had been extirpated.
They dressed it with Pultices of Chick weed and the like, by which it
suppurated, and discharged its thin Matter by small Eruptions; the grosser
remaining rendered the Ulcer sordid and callous. Upon which they sent for a
Surgeon, and afterward for a Physician of that Country. They dressed it
about half a year. It not yielding to their Applications, they consulted me by
a Letter: to which I returned Answer, that I suspected it cancerous. Upon the
receipt of it, he came to London, believing at the worst I could burn it out.
He here consulted diverse eminent Physicians and Surgeons. It was now a
Cancer, and indeed not capable of extirpation, having seized that side of his
Throat. I attempted some part of it within by the actual Cautery: but it not
succeeding, and I being soon after fetched into the Country, others were
employed: but after all he languished and died.

A Captain of a Company in one of His MAJESTY's Regiments of Foot quartering in
the North of England was troubled with a small Excrescence under his Tongue.
17. Observat. of a Cancer under the Tongue.
He consulted the Physicians and Surgeons in his neighborhood: but it
increasing with pain, he was persuaded by his Friends to come to London to me.
But after he came to Town, he met with some who told him that such a small
thing was not worth the troubling me. Upon which he went to some other, and,
having got somewhat to dress it, he returned to his Command in some of the
neighboring Counties, and there fell into the Surgeons hands, where it
increasing and spreading much infected the internal salivary Glandules on both
sides the Tongue, all the lower left Maxilla, and part of the right. 'Twas
fixing upon the lower Lip, the Teeth all loose, and some of them fallen out:
there were also some Glands without under the Jaws. In this condition he came
to me. I acquainted his Friends that it was a Cancer, and incurable. If an
attempt was to be made in hopes of Cure, it was to be by burning it out. They
consulted their Friends: and afwards Doctor Tho. Cox, Doctor Walter-Needham
and my self met. It was concluded by them, that there was no other way or hopes
to cure him: how that might succeed we doubted. If he would have it attempted,
it should be at his desire, and not upon any assurance from us to cure him
thereby: for indeed it was doubtful. The next day he sent for us to meet at
his Chamber in order to the extirpation. Accordingly we met, and, having Mr.
Gosling with us, and our actual Cauteries and all things ready, we placed the
Patient in a clear light, then pulled out the Teeth that lay loose, and as it
were buried in the Fungus. Then having his Head held firm, and his lower Lip
defended, I passed in a plain Chisel-cautery under the Fungus, as low as I
could, to avoid scorching of the Lip, and thrust it forward toward the Tongue,
by which I brought off that Fungus and the rotten Alveoli at twice or thrice
repeating the Cautery; then with Bolt-cauteries dried the basis to a crust.
After with a Scoop-cautery I made a thrust at the Fungus over-spreading the
left Jaw, and made separation of that, and what was rotten of the Alveoli: then
with Olive and Bolt-cauteries I dried that as well as he would permit, and left
the rest for the next day's work, giving him some decoct. hordei cum sem.
cydon. psyllii, and alb. ovor. beaten in it, to cool the heat in his Mouth, and
applied on the outside under his Chaps this Defensative: boli armen. pulv. j.
pulv. flor. rosar. rubr. balaust. sumach, an. ss. gallar. pulv. iij. coq. in
acet. acer. lbss. ol. ros. and myrtill. an. ij. empl. de minio q. s. The
Physicians prescribed this: laudani gr. iij. solv. in aqu. epidemic. cinnamon.
hordeat. an. jss. sir. kermes iij. capiat tertiam partem statim, repetatque
altern. horis donec placide dormierit. This following Cordial was also
prepared: aq. epidemic. viij. sir. caryophyll. e succo citr. cardiac. an. ss.
sumat cochlear. iv. ad libitum in languoribus.

The next day we met again, and found our Patient much relieved with the good
night's rest he had got: he was cheerful, and resolved for the work. I began
with Bolt and Olive-cauteries to make an end of drying that Fungus on the left
Jaw; which having done, I burnt the salivary Glands on both sides of the
Tongue: then I placed a Tin-instrument between the Tongue and the Excrescence
which was rooted on the Ranula, of the shape of a Crista, thick and hard,
bearing the Tip of the Tongue backward. The Tongue thus defended, I thrust at
the root of it with a Bolt-cautery, by which I eradicated and burnt it off.
Having thus cleared the Mouth of the Fungi, I desired the Physicians Judgment
of it: they looked, and liked what was done: the Patient washed and cooled his
Mouth with the same Lotion as before, and had liberty to repeat the use of the
Opiate and Cordial.

The next day we met again, and found our Patient well satisfied with what had
been done, it being only stiff and hot, otherwise not painful, and he could
take his sustenance with more ease and Gusto. The Physicians prescribed him
this Clyster to make his Body soluble: decoct. com. x. elect. lenitiv. vj.
mell. violac. and sacchar. rub. an. jss. ol. amygdal. dulc. j. Misc. fiat
Clyster. The second day they purged with the following Apozeme: fol. senae j.
turbith and hermodact. an. ij. ligni sassafras, sem. coriand. an. j. nuc.
moschat. ss. salis tartari ij. infund. and bull. in aq. beton. s. q. fiat
colatura ad xij. cui add sir. de pom. magist. jss. sir. ros. solut. mannae,
an. j. clarificentur ovi albumine, and fiat Apozema pro tribus dosibus
matutinis, sumend. horis duabus ante jusculum cum custodia. There was also
prescribed this following Traumatick Decoction: sarsaparill. ij. chinae j. ras.
eboris, corn. cerv. an. j. infund. and bulliant in aq. font. lbvj. addendo
debito tempore summitat. elatin. hyperici, millefolii, herb. Robert. an. M. j.
sem. coriandri ij. cinnamomi jss. passul. enucleat. ij. colat. ad lbiv. bibat
lbjss. in die quotidie. By the extirpation of the Fungus within, the hard
Glands under the Chaps wihtout dissolved: but the Patient not permitting me to
keep down the Fungus afterward as it arose, it quickly overran all his Mouth,
and those Glands swelled again and apostemated, and afterward indurated
amongst the internal Muscles of the Larynx, and hastened his death. Yet long
before that he admitted me to use the actual Cautery, but so sparingly as it
signified nothing. Indeed some Empiricks promised him great hopes of Cure by
their Specificks: but he languished and died notwithstanding all our endeavors.

Thus another person of about sixty years of age, 18. Observat. of a Cancer on
the Tongue.
having been long diseased with a Cancer on the left side of his Tongue, staid
in the Country till it had corrupted one half from the Root to the Tip of it,
as also the Ranula and Salivals of that side, as well the external as internal
parts. Then being at a loss what to do, he came up to London recommended to
Doctor Walter Needham for Cure; who, seeing his case so deplorable, advised
him to consult others. He assenting to it, Doctor Micklethwait, Mr. Arris, Mr.
Hollier and my self met Doctor Needham. At a Consultation we proposed to
palliate the Disease. But he declared to us that he came to Town with
resolution to have the Cure attempted, though he died under it. We endeavored
to dissuade him from it; but he persisted earnestly in the having it attempted:
to which we at last complied, and agreed to cut off that part of his Tongue,
and to cauterize the sordid Ulcer that lay on that side of his Mouth between
that Jaw and his Tongue. To which purpose we presently sent for some actual
Cauterie, and in the presence of that Company I put into his Mouth a Raspatory,
and, fixing it between the Root of his Tongue and edge of that Tonsil, pulled
away the corrupt Flesh; and then with Olive-cauteries burnt that to a crust.
Having, as we supposed, consumed the Cancer there, I passed a Probe with a
Ligature into the Ulcer under the Tongue, and brought it out above through a
Tubercle; then, pulling his Tongue forward, I cut off the cancerated part as it
lay, according to its length, from the Tip to the Root of the Tongue: and after
I had permitted it a while to bleed, I cauterized it. We then gave him of a
decoct. hordei, cydon. etc. to cool his Mouth, and treated him as has been
said in the preceding Observation. In this Patient the Escars separated, and
the Ulcers digested, and that part of the Tongue near the Tonsil cicatrized;
but the while a hard Swelling arose in his right Thigh, and became so painful,
that he was forced to keep his Bed: the Matter fermented also in the salival
Glands, and made Apostemations on the outside under the Jaws: of which together
he languished and died.

These unsuccessfull attempts may render us extreme cruel to those who feel not
the misery those poor creatures suffer with Cancers in their Mouths.

If the Cancer be but in some particular part, as the Tongue, Gum, etc. though
the Patients have no certain hopes of being cured by knife or Fire, yet they
generally put it to trial sooner or later. How much more then shall these poor
creatures, who have Cancers overspreading their Mouth, eating and gnawing the
Flesh, Nerves and Bones? who, besides the danger they are in every minute of
being choked with a fierce Catarrh, do suffer hunger and thirst; and if they
can swallow Broth, Caudle or Drink, yet is it with an unsavory taste, by reason
of its passing through such sore corrupt Parts, form which putrefaction their
stomach nauseates its sustenance, and their Spirits are infected with the
stink, whence Fainting frequently happens; Sleep is a stranger to their eyes,
their Slumber very troublesome, and Death is only their desire. At such a time
as this it is not to be wondered if they try a doubtful Remedy, though
painful. What I have attempted of this kind has been at the earnest request
of the Patients and their Friends, and by the authority of a Consultation of
eminent Physicians and Surgeons. That the Cure succeeded not, must be
imputed to the greatness of the Disease, and may teach others how dangerous it
is to neglect the consulting the experienced Surgeon while the Disease is
recent, and easy to be eradicated.

CHAP. XXII. Of Noli me tangere.
Authors in their Chapter of Cancer do usually mention Noli me tangere and
Lupus. These two most men esteem to be but particular names of a Cancer when it
is fixed in some peculiar place: as in the Face, Nose or Lip it is called Noli
me tangere; in the Legs and Shins, Lupus. Whence it is plain that our vulgar
language uses the name of Wolf in a large sense, applying it very often to the
Breasts, and indeed any other place, where the Cancer grows highly corrosive.
I shall think it more instructive to the young Surgeon, if I appropriate
this word Noli me gangere to a small round acuminated Tubercle, Description.
which has not much pain, unless it be touched or rubbed, or otherwise
exasperated by Topics. Concerning which Rogerus says, that Cancer plus
corrodit uno die quam Noli me tangere in uno mense. But if so exasperated, it
is immediately enraged, and becomes a true Cancer. Such as these are sometimes
found in the Face and Lips; but do likewise happen in all other parts of the
Body. I have seen them in the Arm. Particularly a person of about sixty years
of age, of a healthy Constitution, has one in the outside of his right Arm, a
little above the Elbow. He wears a Cup upon it of a light wood, with Straps
fastened to it, which brace it on, and defend the Part from the pressure of his
Sleeve. He sent for me one morning to see it when he was in bed, his Arm lying
out covered with a light mantle. He turned up his Sleeve, took off the Cup, and
showed it me. The Tubercle was small, of a bluish color, and looked as if it
had been a Varix: it was without Inflammation, hardness, or change of color in
the Parts about it. He did not permit me to look long upon it: the while I did,
I saw it rise into a Tumor as big as a Kernel of a Hazel-nut. Such another I
saw in the Arm of a Woman of about forty years of age, of a blew color, on
the outside of her Arm: but it was not defended from the pressure of her
Sleeve. I offered to undertake the Cure of them both; but they had been
dissuaded by most of those that had seen them. I should not have doubted of
good Success, having before seen a person so diseased and cured by an Eminent
Surgeon in his time, who by the application of an actual Cauterie burned it
to the Flesh, supposing it had lain no deeper; but after the separation of the
Escar it rising again, he burned it deeper, and from that time it returned no
more.

WHile I was attending a Noble Family in the Country, Observat.
a Person of quality in the neighborhood sent his only Daughter of about
eleven years of age to me. She was diseased with an unequal Tubercle upon her
left Cheek, of the compass of a half Guinny when undisturbed; but if any thing
were applied to it, it heated the whole Cheek. It was a great blemish to her
Beauty, upon which very account her Parents had much endeavored to have it
cured, or at least to be disposed to such a calm temper, as it might bear a
black Patch. Some weeks after the Lady her Mother brought her to London, and
put her into the care of the late deceased Doctor Stanly and my self. He
purged her with this: fol. senae ijss. rhabarb. j. sem. foenic. dulc. ss. salis
tartari j. infund. in aq. cichorei cum succo aurantior. colat. ij. add sir. de
pomis purg. j. Misc. This was repeated often. Merc. dulc. and ceruss. antimonii
were also given her at distinct times, and distilled Milks, such as have been
set down in the Cure of Cancers. I begun my Application with this; litharg.
uuri ij. sem. cucurbit. excorticat. ss. aceti vini q. s. nutriatur in mortario
in formam unguenti, addendo camph. dissolut. in aq. ros. gr. vj. This was
applied spread thin upon Sarsenet: but it immediately swelled and heated all the
Cheek. I then took it off, and anointed the inflamed parts about the Tubercle:
but it did not agree with it. We wiped it off again, and by exposing it to the
air it cooled, and returned in a day or two to its former temper. After I had
tried several Medicaments unsuccessfully, a Friend gave me a black concreted
Juice to work into a Paste to cover the Disease, it being all the Mother then
desired from me: and this being laid upon it, adhered to it as if it had been
Pitch, and seemed to agree well with it. But after four or five days it heated
her Cheek, and was taken off. Upon which the Mother grew impatient, and had
some thoughts of going with her Daughter into Gloucester-shire to a man there
who pretends to the Cure of Cancers. Which coming to my knowledge, I made an
offer to Doctor Stanly to undertake the Cure by extirpating that Tubercle by
the actual Cautery. But he replying, that the very mention of it would fright
them out of Town; I then proposed it by Caustic to the Lady-mother: which she
accepted, upon a promise not to do it whilst she was in Town, nor then till I
heard from her in the Country. Some while after she went into the Country, and
wrote to some of her Friends to see the work done. Upon the receipt of which I
met Doctor Stanly and them; and, having placed the Patient in a clear light, I
drew a Line with ink how far I intended to burn, and they took the compass
exactly in a piece of paper, which they kept. I began with a Caustick-stone
pointed, and pressed upon the middle of the Tubercle, burning deep into it;
and, to quicken the work, I touched it with ol. vitrioli upon a Stick, and then
with the Caustick-stone interchangeably, till I had consumed the Tubercle and
the parts within the marked Line. The while I was thus working, I dried up the
Salts which mixed with the Ichor with armed Probes. Having thus finished the
work as I designed, to the satisfaction of the Physician and Relations, I
washed out the Salts of the Caustic with Wine warmed, then divided the Escar,
and washed it again with Milk, till I had freed the Escar and the Part from
pain: then I dressed it with unguent. basilic. cum oleo ros. on a Pledgit, and
applied an Empl. e bolo overall. By these Lenients the Escar separated, and
left a deep round Ulcer: which in few days I digested with unguent. basilic.
mag. and Merc. praecip. and incarned and cicatrized with unguent. tutiae, etc.
but within ten days after it broke out again. We repeated Purging with calomel.
Bezoard. miner. etc. and healed it up with a firm Cicatrix by the aforesaid
method, adding a few drops of tinct. vitrioli dulc. in aqua rubi. From which
time it has continued well, she not having worn any Mouch upon it of late
years. I have now under cure one of this kind; but, it not being perfected, I
shall insert it in the Treatise of Strumae.

CHAP. XXIII. Of Waterish Tumors.
WAterish or Hydropical Tumors are the effects of an extravasated Serum, which
according to the place on which it lights does denominate the Disease.

If it fall inwardly into the Cavities of the Belly, it is Hydrops ascites; of
the Thorax, Hydrops pecioris; of the Scull, Hydrocephalus: which name it also
retains if it affect the outward parts of the Head. When it is lodged between
the Skin and the Flesh, or in the Interstices of the Muscles, it is Anasarca;
in the Scrotum, Hydrocele, or Hernia aquosa, etc.

Waterish Tumors that are external differ from the phlegmatic by their
shining and the manner of their pitting. Differences.
Hydropical Swellings, if they be pure, do glister and are pellucid, they take
impression easily, and do as soon lose it. Oedemata receive the impression
easily also, but they keep it longer. The transparency in the surface or change
from the natural color in the Skin is less then in the other. But these
Humors are very apt to mix both in the Anasarca and other Swellings; which
where they do, the Symptoms are confounded.

Ascites differs from Tympanites by its weight, and the swagging of the water
in the Belly; whereas the Tumor in a Tympanites is more light, equal, hard,
and, say Authors, sounds like a Drum.

Causes of Waterish Tumors are whatever may either increase the Serum of the
Blood beyond its proportion, Causes.
or restrain it in any part of the Body preternaturally, so that, wanting its
natural course, it stagnates in some one or more places. Of the former sort are
ill Digestion in the Stomach; defect of Sanguification, which is frequent in
intemperate persons; also great Haemorrhagies, where the Blood, being weakened
by much diminution of its quantity, is not able to digest the Aliments assumed,
but lets them run into Serum, from which Cause alone several waterish Tumors
arise; so also any defect in the Ferments of the Viscera, as when the Kidneys
do not separate the Serum from the Blood, or the conglobate Glands do not
their office; likewise too great acrimony in the Blood, which, though hot in it
self, yet melts down the Blood into a thin Serum, as in hot Catarrhs. Of the
latter sort are, 1. a check of transpiration through the Pores of the Skin,
which keeps in a greater part of the thinner Serum, and forces it to stop in
the body: 2. retention of Urine: 3. the forming of some Cystis in which it is
contained: 4. its extravasation in any part of the body, external or internal.

Waterish Tumors are, as we have reckoned, internal, or external.

The internal ones are described in Physik-books; Signs.
and their Signs shall be given particularly by me as I have occasion.

The external, if they be pure indeed and very much external, do by a visible
resplendency betray themselves to the eye; those especially that lie near the
Cuticula and Cutis making a very thin pellucid Tumor. Those that lie deeper
under the Skin do shine less: yet in some of them, if in a dark room you shade
them, as women do an Egg with their hands, and hold a Candle to the other
side, you will find at least a faint transparency. Those that lie yet deeper,
or are contained in a Cystis, do not discolor the Skin at all, nor cause any
considerable pain: but if the Swelling be large, you may by shaking it perceive
an undulation.

Waterie Tumors as such portend no danger to the life of the Patient,
Prognostic.
unless the Viscera be obstructed or otherwise tainted. If such Obstructions or
Corruptions happen, the measure of the danger is to be taken from the degree of
the Corruption. Those inward Tumors are more dangerous then the outward; and
the more noble the Part affected, the more important the danger.

In the Cure of these Tumors there are four Intentions required. Cure.


The first consists in a requlation of Diet and manner of living: the second,
in evacuation of those serous Humors by Stool, Urine, or Transpiration: the
third, in rectifying the Concoction, and restoring the Viscera to their natural
state: the fourth, concerning the Tumor it self, is performed by Discutients
and Exsiccants, or by Apertion.

1. The Diet ought to be with great moderation, excess in eating or drinking
being prejudicial to their Cure. As to the quality of it, Physicians generally
prescribe it drying and attenuating, such as has been proposed in the Chapter
of Oedema; and after that manner they ought to regulate their way of living:
yet it is not unfrequent to see these Tumors arise from a hot Cause, in which
case cooling Diets are requisite.

2. The second Intention is usually performed by Purging with such things as
are prescribed in Oedematous cases. Only here there ought to be a more
particular regard had to the Hydragoga, as elaterium, camboya, sambucus,
ebulus, rad. bryoniae, sir. de spina cervina, etc. If the Cause be hot,
Bleeding and Barnet Waters may be necessary, of which you may find some
Instances.

3. The third Intention of restoring or rectifying the Viscera, ought to be the
work of the Physician.

4. The fourth Intention is, of removing the conjunct matter by drying and
discutient Medicaments; for which all those set down in Oedematous and
Flatulent Tumors are suitable. summitat. abrotoni, absinth. origani,
calaminth. majoranae, an. M. ij. flor. sambuci, chamaem. anthos, ros. rub. an.
M. j. baccar. lauri, juniperi, an. ij. coquantur in s. q. aquaefont. to which
may be added Wine, Vinegar, Salt, Sulphur, or Alume. Or you may make the
Decoction in the common Lixivie, if the Tumor require it. You may also
embrocate with such like; salis nitri x. piperis albi vj. euphorb. ij. ol.
laurin. vj. Misc. and apply this over the Part affected; sem. anisi, cumini,
bacc. myrtil. lauri, an. ss. succi ebuli iiij. ol. rutac. and cerae q. s. fiat
Ceratum. If by application of these or the like Medicaments the Cure succeed
not, it may be reasonable to make Apertion, and give vent to the Water, and
proceed in the Cure as shall be showed in the following Observations. Where the
Hydrops has affected the Breast, I have not seen any operation attempted by
letting out the Water, the Disease it self being rarely discovered till after
the death of the Patient. In some such I have taken out about a gallon. Nor is
there often found better success where the Water affects the Belly, as in the
Ascites: it being for the most part the product of long chronick Diseases,
which either took their original from or ended in Obstructions of the Viscera;
in which cases the Cure usually depends upon the Physician; the best assistence
of the Surgeon being that of Bandage, which, if applied even to the whole
Belly by a strong Dimitee or Holland Bracer, made to encompass the Abdomen, and
tied or laced behind, may conduce much to the prevention of a sudden increase
of the Swelling.

The like or greater success we may hope for in Anasarcous Swellings, where the
Legs, Arms, Hands, etc. are affected, to which a straight Stocking, Sleeve,
etc. being accommodated does usually repress the Humor, and dispose it to be
carried off another way by Medicine.

Where the Ascites follows Haemorrhagiae, Fever, or any acute Disease, it
admits more often of Cure: but those of our Profession are rarely consulted
while there is any hopes thereof by internal Remedies, which is so long as the
Patient has strength to bear them. At last, when the Viscera are tainted, the
evacuation of the Water hastens their deaths, and the Operation is scandalized:
whereas if the Paracentesis were made in time, better success might be expected.

The way of making a Paracentesis or Tapping has been variously set down,
according to the several fancies of Surgeons. Some have made the Apertion in
the Navel by Bodkin, Needle, etc. others three fingers below it on either Side,
choosing that on which the Patient did least lie; for the Orifice ought to lie
uppermost, to prevent too great an effusion. Those that open below the Navel
have likewise devised several ways. Some take up the Skin, and perforate that
first; then make a Perforation in the Peritonaeum. A method not practicable
where the Belly is very hard and stiff with much Fat between the Skin and
Muscles. Therefore it is that we generally strike through all at once. The
worst way is by Caustic, and Incision after that.

But the downright Puncture, being the best of Cures, is to be so managed as
that the Serum may not fly out all at once, but be retained according to the
desire of the Surgeon; nothing being so pernicious to the Patient as great
Evacuations, though of an excrementitious Humor. Hence it is that much Art
has been used in this affair as to designation of quantity and contrivance of
Instrument. Barbett has lately published the use of an hollow Needle, which,
being thrust in, will let out what quantity you please, but being pulled out
leaves little or no passage in the Skin. The repeated intrusion of this into
the same or into fresh holes (say he and Sylvius) will evacuate Water at your
pleasure. Truly, the whilst the Belly is distended with abundance of Water, it
may succeed well: but they themselves dare not pretend farther then the
Evacuation of half the Liquour, for by that time you will be in danger of
wounding the Intestines. Several Experiments I have made of that Instrument,
and one lately, rather to satisfy the Patient and his Relations that the
Swelling was an Ascites, then that we could propose any Cure by it. I made the
Apertion in the presence of Mr. Hollier: we discharged about a pint of Water,
and part of that by a Catheter; for, feeling some opposition in the cavity
within the Abdomen which obstructed the flowing of the Water, I pulled the
pointed Cannula out: and it was well I did, for afterward in opening the dead
body I found the Intestines floating above the Water, though there were above
two gallons in the Belly. Upon which Observations I do conclude it a very unfit
Instrument to discharge a Dropsy: besides, our people will not admit of so
many Openings as would be necessary to empty an Hydropicall Belly. This very
person, as earnest as he was at first for the Operation, chose rather to die
with the Water in his Belly then suffer a second Apertion.

I therefore do conclude the good old way of a Cannula made taper-wise with
holes in the side, whose description you may find in Pareus, to be the best;
which being conveyed through a hole made by puncture may be kept in by Bandage
till the Water be evacuated, the hole of it being stopped by a Screw or
otherwise, as you will find in the aforesaid Author. I shall now give you some
Observations of this Work, though it be for the most part unsuccessfull: as
indeed what can be expected from rotten Viscera?

A Woman near fifty years of age, of a gross body and strong Constitution, 1.
Observat. of Ascites.
labored of an Ascites a long time: after much Physic ineffectually taken,
the Water burst its way through the Skin by a small Opening on her right Side,
near the place where we usually make the Paracentesis; and after some days, the
Aperture wearing larger, the Water flowed more abundantly. I was fetched, and
stopped up the Orifice with a Tent of Lint, applying a Pitch-plaister, and over
that another of Yeast and Wheat Flour, with Compress and Bandage. Then I
advised her to lie on the contrary Side, by which that part was kept dry. The
fourth day I opened it, and gave vent by a Cannula to three pints of Water;
then bound it up again. As the Belly emptied, the Opening contracted: Therefore
I put in a Cannula, retaining it in with Compress and Bracer, and thereby
discharged the Water at pleasure, and afterward left it to her own and her
Servants ordering. I visited her some while after; and, finding most part of
the Water discharged, I took out the Cannula, and permitted it to cure. The
Water seeped out sometime upon rising or lying on that Side; but she was a
strong Woman, and recovered.

A young Man of about eighteen years of age fell from a Fever into a Quartane
Ague, 2. Observat. of Ascites.
which held him long, and ended in an Ascites: his Belly swelled exceedingly,
and he became extenuated. While he languished in this deplorable condition, one
undertook the Cure of him, by letting out the Water with a Thorn thrust into
his Navel, (though it were not at all swelled up.) The Water was let out
gradually, and a sticking Plaster only applied over it. Thus in a month's
space it was evacuated, and the Belly contracted proportionably. During this
Evacuation he took opening Broths and Apozemes. After the Water was discharged,
and the Puncture cured, he continued extremely emaciated, and the Skin of his
body and lims was withered; yet he was ordered to be let blood about six
ounces: at which time he was so very a Skeleton, and his Skin hung so loose,
that I doubted how I could hold it over the Vein to open it. Yet after this I
saw him fat, and perfectly cured.

A Gentlewoman of about thirty eight years old labored of an Ascites with
Anasarcous Swellings on her Belly, 3. Observat. of Ascites.
Thighs and Legs; and, having taken much Physic unsuccessfully in the Town,
was removed to her house in the Country to die: but after some while being
tired with the weight and stretching pain of her Belly, she sent for me to give
vent to the Water. I went provided for the work, and found the Patient resolved
to undergo the Opening. Other Symptoms to encourage me I had none. The next
morning, she having prepared her self, and being placed on that side she could
best lie upon during the Evacuation, her Bracer being well fitted, I made the
Perforation according to custom three fingers below the Navell on the upper
side. The Water spurted out forcibly whilst I passed in my taper-pointed
Cannula, which fitting exactly, I let out about three pints of Water, then
applied an Emplastr. ad herniam over it, with a Stupe wrung out of a
carminative Decoction and Bandage. She seemed somewhat relieved at the present,
but rested ill that night, and was much indisposed in the morning, yet would
have more Water let out. I discharged two quarts of Water, and dressed it as
before.

After I had continued there three or four days, and showed the Servants the
manner of letting out the Water and dressing, I returned to London. After a few
days, going back, and finding her Belly very much sunk, and the Water not
over-ready to flow, I took out the Cannula, applied a Pledgit of unguent.
basilicon, and an Emplastr. ad herniam over it, with a warm Stupe and Bracer as
before. I left her weak and not like to recover; and indeed she died a few days
after.

A Gentlewoman of about thirty years of age, big with Child, 4. Observat. of
Anasarca in the Legs, etc.
was much diseased with Anasarcous Swellings in her Legs and Feet. Sr. Fr. Pr.
was sent for; who, seeing her in such a condition, and unfit to take Physic,
desired my Opinion concerning them. I saw the Swellings pale and shining,
yielding to the impression of my fingers, and returning slowly. She was very
uneasy in her bed, and not in a condition to sit up. I proposed Fomenting with
good discutient and exsiccant Medicaments, to dispose them for Bandage, and
then to put on laced Stockings and Trouzes. After he had a while considered of
it, he wished me to write a form of the Fomentation; which I did thus:
summitat. absinthii, majoranae, origani, rorismarin. an. M. iiij. flor.
chamaemeli, sambuci, ros. rub. an. M. ij. baccar. lauri, juniperi, an. iiij.
sulph. vivi, aluminis rup. an. lbss. salis com. M. iij. coq. in s. q. aquae pro
usu. He gave way to the use of it and the Bandage. I began the next morning
with the Fomentation, causing her Legs to be bathed, then rolled them up from
the Feet above the Knees equally straight. After I had repeated this method
three or four days, and disposed her Legs by Bandage for the laced Stockings, I
saw them laced on with Knee-pieces and Trouzes: these were daily straightened to
such proportion as the Patient could easily bear. By the wearing of these she
recovered the use of her Legs, to the great advantage of her health. She went
her full time, and was delivered of a healthful Child, which is yet alive.

A Gentleman having long labored under a complication of Diseases,
particularly a Dropsy, 5. Observat. of Anasarca of the Legs.
sent for me. I found his Body much extenuated, his Legs Anasarcous, and his
Back and Hips excoriated with lying in bed. I proposed to him to use of a
Fomentation and equal Bandage, viz. a pair of laced Stockings. After some
reasoning with me about the use of them, he complied, and I caused a pair to be
made, and laced them on. They were easy, and did all I designed by them. He was
able to walk to his Closet, and take the air in his Coach, and was well pleased
with them. But afterward, being informed by some body of great inconveniences
that might happen to him from the wearing of them, he caused them to be pulled
off; upon which his Legs swelled again, and he was confined to his bed, whereby
his Hips and Back galled: also by reason of the great increase of those
waterish Swellings the native heat was overcome, and a preternatural one
arising inflamed and blistered them. I was fetched, and by Fomentations, etc.
got off the Mortification, and in six weeks healed the Ulcer and Ulcerations. I
made him a Fontanell by Incision in his right Leg, and put him on the laced
Stockings again, by the use of which he recovered.

A young Woman of about twenty five years of age, 6. Observat. of a watery
Tumor in the Back.
of a healthful Constitution, came to me out of the Country, supposed to have
the King's Evil. Upon enquiry I found none of that Evil, but a large Tumor
lying upon the Muscles of the Back: the Skin of the Tumor was thick, without
inflammation or discoloring.

I was then in quest of windy Tumors, and thought this might be one, having
Symptoms not unlike it, the Sound excepted. I had a great desire to see what it
was which made that bulk, and offered her the Cure of it gratis; which she
gladly accepting, I ordered my Servants to make ready Astringents and Bandage.
Then I made an Apertion into it with a Knife, upon which a Water forced out: we
received it in a Chamber Pot. Whilst it was discharging, I slit up the Tumor,
and gave way to the Dregs, which were like Honey, but not contained in a
Cystis. I cut off as much of the Skin as was superfluent, and brought the rest
together, dressing it up with the common Digestive ex Terebinth. etc. with a
restrictive Emplaster, Compresse and Bandage. Being thus dressed she walked
with her She-friend, more briskly then she came, to her lodging in Shoe-lane;
from whence she came to my house the third day after, to be dressed, and so
daily till the Wound was cured; which healed by Agglutination in less then
three weeks.

OF Waterish Tumors Hydrocele is one very remarkable Species, Hydrocele.
which subdivides it self into many others.

It may be generally defined, Definition. Differences.
a waterish Swelling of the Scrotum.

This may be either part of another more general Tumor, or else an original
Disease of that place. When it is part of another Tumor, the Body is
Hydropicall, viz. either Anasarcous or Asciticall: in both which cases it is
frequent to see the Cod swelled up after the manner of an Anasarca. And indeed,
when in Asciticall cases we find a Swelling of the Testicle, there is for the
most part an Anasarca of the lower parts of the Belly joined with it. When it
is an original Tumor of the Part, it either lies without the Tunica
vaginalis, affecting the whole Scrotum; or else is contained within the said
Tunicle, or at least in a Cystis of its own: in which case you will find one
side swelled whilst the other remains in its natural state; or if both
Testicles are concerned, the Tumors are distinct.

The Causes of Hydrocele are the same with those of a Dropsy, Causes.
at least when it is part of a Dropsy. But when it comes alone, it is
generated as all other waterish Tumors are, viz. by a separation of Serum out
of the Arteries, which never returns into the Veins, but lodges in the Skin
or other parts of the Body. This Extravasation may be caused from some Bruise
by Blow, Fall, etc.

Signs of an Hydrocele may be taken from the distemper of them. Viz. Signs.


1. The Anasarcous Hydrocele may be known by the splendor, softness and
thickness of the Scrotum. It takes impression from the fingers easily, and may
be wrought like soft Wax. The Prepuce is usually swelled, if it attend the
Dropsy of that name.

2. The simple Hernia aquosa, as it affects the whole Scrotum, fills it like a
Bladder, and discovers it self by its shining.

3. When the Hydrocele lies within the Tunica vaginalis, between it and the
Testicles, or in a peculiar Cystis, the Scrotum is proportionably stretched,
and somewhat wrinkled; and indeed at first sight it is not unlike an Hernia
intestinalis or zirbalis: but you may distinguish them by pressing with your
fingers upon the Production, which when you do, bid the Patient cough; if
nothing press upon your hand like wind, it is an Hydrocele. If the Water be
lodged in the Tunica vaginalis of both Testicles, the Swelling appears double.

This Disease is more or less dangerous according as it is complicated
Prognostic.
That which is joined with Dropsy cannot be cured, unless that be first cured:
yet it sometimes serves to discharge anasarcous Swellings in the Parts lying
above it. Those which arise from an external Cause are more easily cured. If
the Habit of body be tolerably good, the Hydrocele may be cured; and if it be
bad, the Water may be let out as often as it fills, without danger. Cure.


In the Cure of these Tumors there is required a regulation in Diet and manner
of living, as has been set down in the preceding Discourse of Waterish Tumors
in general: only here they are to be proportioned according to the greatness
of the Malady and the Accidents that attend them. They also require to be
treated with such Discutients and Exsiccants as have been there proposed, and
you must retain your Applications close to the Part to which they are applied.
A Bag-truss is necessary, it serving also to sustain the Part, lest by the
weight of the Humor the Tumor be increased: also after the discharge of the
Water it furthers the corrugation of the Scrotum.

While the Swellings are small, they may happily yield to Discutients. An
accidental Bruise, by stirring up an Inflammation, has sometime disposed them
to Discussion. If they tend to Suppuration, further it by Suppuratives, as in a
Phlegmon has been showed, and treat them as such. But if the Tumor have any
quantity of Water in it, your speediest way of Cure is by giving vent. if it be
an Anasarca that possesses the whole Scrotum, the way to discharge it is
either by Scarification, or by a Seton.

Scarification is proper when only the Scrotum is Anasarcous. If it be made by
puncture with a Lancet, the Water will discharge in few hours, and the Wounds
agglutinate soon after without other Application then a warm Stupe. An Instance
whereof you may see in the Observations of Oedema.

If there be an Anarsaca of the Belly, the Seton is most proper, in
consideration of the time which is required for such an Evacuation. It ought to
be made transverse the Scrotum in the depending part. It is to be kept open
till the Serosity be discharged; and the while you are to preserve the native
heat of the Part by the application of warm Stupes wrung out of Wine wherein
have been boiled summitat. absinthii, majoranae, flor. chamaem. ros. rub.
balaust. bacc. myrtill. nuc. cupress. etc. And take care lest the Scrotum
excoriate from the sharpness of the Humor and inflame: for in Hydropical
bodies it is apt to gangrene. If you apprehend such mischief, pull out the
Seton.

In the Opening the other Species of Hydrocele, you are to consider the
quantity of Water, and the place it is lodged in. If it have not a pint of
Water in it, forbear opening it till it be bigger, lest you hurt the Testicle:
besides, it is not worth the while. But if it be a Child that labors of it,
you may open it though there be scarce half a pint of Water. In order to the
Opening them, you are to place the Patient in a clear light: then with the one
hand to press upon the Production, that the Tumor may be more tense: and if
the Hydrocele be in a Man, your Servant ought to press with his hand upon the
other side, that the Scrotum may be the more steady. You are to make the
Puncture in the depending Part, and avoid the cutting of the greater Veins
lying upon the Scrotum, lest thereby the Water be made bloody, and you be
thought to have hurt some Part within. You are to make the Apertion big enough
to receive a small Cannula, which you are immediately to put in, and keep it
there till you have drawn out all the Water. That done, apply a Pledgit of
unguent. basilicon, and an Emplaster to retain it on, with a Flanell Stupe
wrung out of an astringent Decoction, and put such a Bag-truss on as may keep
your Dressings close. By this method you will in two or three days find the
Puncture cured, and the Scrotum contracted. Yet it may be reasonable to apply
an Emplastr. Caesaris, or some other astringent Emplaster, over the Scrotum,
and to put on a less Truss, which the Patient may wear for more security. For
they are apt to fill again with Water once in a year or two, if the Habit of
body abound with serous Humors.

If the Water be lodged in a Cystis, or within the proper Coats of the Testicle
or Testicles, they require accordingly to be opened distinctly. And in these
Hydrocele's you are to be careful to pass in your Cannula, and keep it in till
the last drop of Water be discharged: for if by any accident it slip out, you
will scarce get it in again; the inner Tunicle hanging loose, the holes may not
answer each other; nor is the Tumor capable of being opened so well again as
at first: and if you leave any Water behind, the Operation will be thought ill
done. The Water discharged, you are to proceed in the Cure as above said. What
has been hitherto delivered of these Hydrocele's does only concern the
palliative Cure.

If you purpose the perfect Cure, you ought then to make the Apertion large on
one side of the Scrotum reaching toward the Production, in such manner as it
may lie according to the length of the Testicle, that you may open it after the
Water is discharged, and thereby the better apply your Medicaments to it in
case it be affected. In these Operations the Patient should be of a tolerable
good Habit of body, and not in his declining age: for whether they be made by
Incision or Caustic, they are generally subject to Inflammation, Colic and
Fever, till Suppuration be made. In which case Bleeding and Clysters are
necessary, and outwardly Lenients and Anodynes are to be applied, also good
Fomentations to keep up the natural heat: of which you will find some
Instances amongst the following Observations.

A Boy of about six or seven years old was brought to me laboring of an
Ascites, 1. Observat. of Hernia aquosa with an Anasarca and Ascites.
with an Hernia aquosa in Scroto, and Anasarcous Swellings possessing the
outside of the Scrotum and Prepuce. I made an Apertion on the left side of the
Scrotum in a depending Part, and, passing in a Cannula, discharged near a pint
of Water; then fomented it with warm Stupes wrung out of red Wine. While I was
fomenting it, suspecting the Anasarcous Humor would soon fill up the Scrotum
again, if the Apertion were not kept open, I therefore without delay thrust a
Seton-needle with a small twist of Silk through the Aperture before made, and
passed it out transverse the Scrotum, about an inch distant from the first
opening; then cut off the Seton from the Needle, and tied the ends together,
fastening them with an Emplaster above upon the Scrotum, and trussed it close
with a warm Flanell Stupe, covering also the Penis, and dismissed them with
directions to stupe it at least thrice a day with a Decoct. absinth. flor. ros.
rub. etc. as it is proposed in the method of Cure. If in this case the Stupes
be not often shifted, the serous Humor, which so continually drops into it,
will excoriate the Scrotum, and stir up a painful Inflammation. Some few days
after I visited the Patient, and saw the Swelling in the Prepuce and Scrotum
discussed, the Seton having well discharged its part. I cut out the Seton, and
dressed the Ulcers with unguent. tutiae, by which they healed; and by the
continued use of the Fomentation in a few days the Scrotum contracted.

A Gentleman of about sixty years old came to London diseased with a Hernia
aquosa. 2. Observat. of Hernia aquosa with Anasarca.
The lower parts of his Belly and upper parts of his Thighs were Anasarcous:
the Prepuce and Scrotum were not free of it. Sr. Fr. Pr. being his Physician
advised the opening of the Tumor, and was present the next day: where, having
all things ready, I placed the Patient in a Chair to the light, the Physician
laying his hand upon one side of the Scrotum, while mine was on the other side.
I made a Puncture in a declining Part, then passed in a Cannula, and let out
about three pints of Water in a Basin. I was much of the color of Urine in
healthful people. The Water discharged, I pulled out the Cannula, and applied
a warm Stupe, and trussed it up close. In the space of two or three days the
Anasarca discussed, and the Scrotum contracted and cured. I applied an
Emplastr. Caesaris over the Scrotum, and fitted him with a Truss accordingly.
Two years after I opened this Tumor again.

A Man of about forty years of age, 3. Observat. of an Ascites with Anasarcous
Swellings in Scroto, etc.
of a strong Constitution and sanguine Complexion, being of late years
Asthmatick, was about two months since swelled with an Ascites and an Anasarca
of his Belly, Scrotum, Thighs and Legs. Dr. Denton and Dr. Brook were his
Physicians, and consulted me in the Surgery, especially in that of the
Scrotum, which was very much distended (as we supposed) with Water, the
external parts being (as I have said) Anasarcous.

I proposed Scarification in order to the present discharge of the Anasarca:
but, in consideration of the necessity that appeared of continuing a vent to
the serous Humors, which would most certainly affect the Scrotum whilst any
thing of the Hydrops remained in the parts above, we resolved upon the use of a
Seton. To which purpose the Patient was seated upon the side of his Bed, and a
Basin placed under the Scrotum. I raised up the Anasarcous Skin, and, whilst
Dr. Brook held part of it, passed through the Needle with a twisted Silk.
Immediately upon the Apertion there discharged a bloody Serum, (as it seemed to
us by the candlelight,) which we permitted to flow to the quantity of at least
a pint and a half: during which the color not changing, we stepped to the window
with the Basin, and saw it a pure florid blood; so also was that which flowed
the while into a Porrenger. Upon sight whereof I pulled out the Seton, and
placed a Servant's fingers upon the two Apertions, till I hastily made
Dressings ready of farin. tritic. cum albumine ovor. spread upon a couple of
Pledgits and upon linen cloth in the form of a Plaster, which I applied upon
that part of the Scrotum with Compresse and Bandage, whereby the bleeding was
stopped. We did not perceive that he was the least discomposed by the Evacuation.
The second day after we met again, and saw the Patient walking in his Chamber
marvellously relieved both in his breath and strength. He formerly took his
rest by leaning upon his Knees and Elbows; but that night he slept lying down
in his Bed, and had discharged in our absence above a gallon of Urine well
colored, and made more then a quart during our being in the house. In the
taking off Dressings the Apertions were seemingly healed, and had not bled one
drop after the application of those Emplasters. We fomented the Scrotum, and
trussed it up. His Physicians prescribed antiscorbutical Juices, cordial
Juleps, etc. The second day after we met again, and, seeing the Scrotum big,
made Scarification by puncture of a Lancet. The blood trickled down apace; but
after a while it stopped, and a Serum flowed forth. A warm Stupe was applied, and
renewed often, and continued the most part of that night; during which the
Serum was plentifully discharged, and he urined well. At our next meeting,
which was within two or three days, we found our Cure succeed well; but the
Scrotum was big, and likely to be so whilst there remained any Water in the
Abdomen or Parts about. Upon which consideration we were inclined to make a
Seton again: but, suspecting a new effusion of blood, we contented our selves
at that time in making an Apertion with that Spear-pointed Cannula described by
Barbett. It bled at first opening about two ounces, then gleeted a serous
Humor. We dressed it as before, and thereby the Serum was discharged for the
space of three or four days; during which the Patient removed from his Lodging
at Lime-house into the Town, nearer his Physicians. Then we again pierced the
Scrotum with a round Needle and twisted Silk, whereby the bleeding was
restrained and the Serosity discharged: but the Scrotum from that time began to
indurate, and thereby straightened the Seton, and stopped the Water in its
passage. Upon sight whereof we fomented the Scrotum with Emollients and
Discutients, viz. ex foliis and radic. althaeae, bryoniae, cucumeris sylvest.
summitat. ebuli, flor. sambuci, sem. foenugraeci, etc. and of the Faeces made a
Cataplasm, with an addition of farin. hord, lentium, axung. porcin. etc. During
these Applications the Patient was purged with Hydragoga once in two days,
whereby great quantities of waterish Humors were each time evacuated. The
Juices were also repeated those days he intermitted Purging. Thus the Patient
was daily relieved, the heardness in Scroto resolving as the Seton digested,
and indeed the Scrotum was well-nigh restored to its natural bigness. We then
designed Scarification of his Legs, to evacuate that Serum: but he not
permitting it, we fomented them with Discutients, and embrocating afterward
cum oleo olivar. aceto and sale, we rolled them from the Toes upwards; and
having that way disposed the Parts for straight Stockings, we laced them on,
and fitted laced Trouzes to the Thighs. During which the Patient was frequently
purged to much advantage; yet the swelled Thighs and Legs did not yield to our
Bandage, but continued hard and painful. He was also straightened in breathing,
and often delirous, and too much debilitated to bear so frequent Purging as was
requisite to evacuate the daily increase of Water. Upon which consideration we
scarified his Legs and Feet, and by the application of Cupping-glasses
discharged a quantity of bloody Serum: from which time the evacuation of Serum
was continued by the application of warm Stupes and Emplasters. About ten days
after, having notice that his Legs and Feet were exceeding painful, I made him
a visit, and found him upon his Feet: his Stockings being pulled off, I saw his
Legs inflamed, and in one place livid, and the very Toes inflamed, also
blistered, and in some parts livid. I scarified them, and fomented them with
decoct. summit. absinth. flor. ros. balaust. in vino rubro; then dressed the
Scarification with unguent. basilic. hot, and applied cerat. Galeni with
moderate expulsive Bandage from the Feet to the Knees; then put him into Bed,
placing his Legs upon Pillows, to prevent the descent of Humors. The next day
the Patient was let blood about ten ounces; from which time he began again to
urine plentifully, and thereby was freed of the Delirium and difficulty of
breathing, the Inflammations of his Legs and Feet went off, and those
Ulcerations healed: yet there afterward appeared a small collection of Matter
upon one of his Legs; which being discharged, and disposed to cure, the Patient
was again purged, and is at this present in a hopeful way of Recovery, his
Belly, Thighs and Legs being soft, and in a manner restored to their natural
state, and his Physicians are sending him into the fresh Air to perfect his
health.

A Gentleman of about twenty seven years of age came to London diseased with a
Swelling in Scroto. Dr. Walter Needham was his Physician. 4. Observat. of
Hydrocele.
It was soft, and possessed the Tunicles of the right Testicle, making a Swelling
only in that Testicle. It did not shine, as the simple Hernia aquosa is wont
to do. We made Compression upon the Production of that Testicle, and concluded
the Tumor water, and lodged within the proper Coats of that Testicle, the
other lying unconcerned. We made an Apertion in the declining Part, and,
passing in a Cannula, discharged about a quart of Water, all that was in the
Scrotum: then pulled out the Cannula, and applied a Pledgit of unguent.
basilicon, and an Emplaster to retain it on, with a hot Stupe wrung out of
Wine, and trussed it up close. By which method of dressing the Puncture cured,
the Scrotum contracted, and he returned cured.

A person aged fifty eight years, 5. Observat. of Hydrocele.
having been long troubled with a large Tumor in Scroto, desired my advice.
The Production of the Peritonaeum on the right side was much dilated. I pressed
upon it with my hand, and upon his Coughing felt nothing of Wind. That Testicle
was lodged within the Tumor, so as I could not feel it. The Tumor was soft
and without pain. I concluded the Disease to be Water lodged within the Tunica
vaginalis, or some particular Cystis encompassing the Testicle; the other
Testicle and Production being unconcerned, and the Scrotum thick, as is usually
in such cases.

I proposed the letting out of the Water; but he desired time to consider of
it. After two or three days I was sent for again, where I met Sir Charles
Scarburgh, Physician to his Royal Highness the Duke of York, and one of his
Majesty's Physicians, and Doctor Denton. We together considered the Tumor;
and they, being satisfied that it was Water, encouraged the Patient to admit of
the Opening of it. I, having all things ready, made a Puncture in a declining
Part, and, passing in a Cannula, discharged near two quarts of Water, dressing
it up as above said. I opened this Tumor afterward twice in the space of four
years.

A Gentleman of about sixty years of age, laboring of an Hydrocele, was
commended to me by Doctor Morison, his Majesty's Botanick. 6. Observat. of
Hydrocele.
The Swelling was within the Tunicles of the right Testicle, the Scrotum thick.
I let out the Water by Puncture and Cannula; it was about a quart; then dressed
it as above said, and the third day applied a restrictive Emplaster over it,
with Compress and Bag-truss, and within a few days after dismissed him cured of
his Disease.

A year after or thereabouts the aforesaid person came to me again, the Scrotum
being replete with Water. I opened it, discharged the Water, and dressed it as
above said, and thought him well, and gone out of Town. But after some days,
accidentally hearing he was sick and kept his bed, I hastened to him, and found
him afflicted with a Colic and Fever: the Scrotum was also swelled and
inflamed. I ordered him a Clyster, let him bold, and applied an anodyne
Cataplasm. By these means the pain was mitigated, and the accidents of Fever,
etc. ceased: but the Scrotum remained relaxed and big. In consideration of
which I applied Cataplasms powerfully discutient, ex rad. bryoniae, fol.
cicutae, flor. cham. sambuci, sem. foenugraec. etc. by which the Swelling
lessened. He being in have to go out of Town, I supplied him with Medicaments
to dress himself, by which the Tumor was discussed. He has not been troubled
with that watery Swelling since.

A person having a Swelling in the left Testicle desired my Opinion of it. The
Tumor was soft, 7. Observat. of Hydrocele.
and of the bigness of a Goose-egge, without Inflammation or pain, the Scrotum
it self not much concerned. I, supposing it an Hydrocele, and within some of
the proper Coats of that Testicle, advised him to truss it up close, and in
case it grew bigger, I would open it; for at that time there was not half a
pint of Water in it. After a year or more, this person in riding bruised the
same Part against the Pummel of his Saddle; it immediately became painful and
hard. He came to London, and sent for me. It seemed to me then to be in a
capacity of discussion by reason of the access of heat: to which purpose I
prescribed this Fomentation: fol. hyoscyami, cicutae, an. M. ij. fol. malv.
bismalv. an. M. j. flor. cham. sambuci, an. M. ss. rad. bryon. and lilior. an.
iiij. sem. lini and foenugraeci an. ij. these to be decocted in brodio ex
capite and pedibus ovinis, and the Faeces made into a Cataplasm, with the
addition of medulla panis tritic. mel comm. and axung. porcin. By the
application of these emollient and resolvent Medicaments the hardness and
Swelling were removed, and the Testicle reduced to its natural state.

One between forty and fifty years of age, 8. Observat. of an Hydrocele
returned.
of a full Body, came with his Surgeon to consult me concerning some kind of
Hernia which of late began in Scroto, and was since by accident of Bruise much
increased. At sight of the Tumor it appeared to be overspred with an
Ecchymosis, and I supposed the Humor within it to be an extravasated Serum. I
advised a discutient and exsiccant Fomentation and Emplaster, also a Bag-truss.
Some little while after, seeing the Extravasation discussed, and the Tumor
inconsiderable, I advised the continuance of the Trusse. About a month after we
visited the Patient, and saw the Tumor very large and tense, and by holding a
lighted Candle on one side it appeared splendent. We concluded it an Hydrocele,
and proposed the Opening of it: but the Patient at that time declined it; and
some while after his Surgeon assured me that it went off of it self, without
any manner of Application.

Whilst I attended the KING at St. Johnstone in Scotland, 9. Observat. of an
Hydrocele with Sarcomata of both Testicles.
a Man of about forty years of age desired my advice, he having been some years
troubled with a Swelling in Scroto, which through length of time was grown so
big, that he was not capable of following his affairs without much pain. It was
soft, and seemed to make a double Tumor. I concluded it an Hydrocele
distinctly lodged within some Cystis, or the proper Tunicles of the Testicles,
for I could feel neither of them. The Scrotum it self was not concerned,
otherwise then by its giving way to the Humors within. The Patient desired to
be cured: to which purpose I began my work on the right Testicle, it being the
most swelled. I applied a Caustic according to the length of the Part on the
outside, so as after the discharge of the Water the Opening might fall upon the
side of the Testicle, that, in case it should be corrupted by the long lying of
the Humor, I might the better apply Medicaments to it. The next day I divided
the Escar, and gave vent to a quantity of Water, then to a rotten Matter, with
some rags of corrupt Flesh; and at last a bloody Serum discharged; upon which
this side sunk, but the other remained full as before. I dressed it up with
unguent. basilicon hot, and applied over all Empl. e bolo with Compress and
Bag-truss. The Patient was that night seized with a Colic, and rested ill; and
in the morning, finding him distempered with a Fever, I prescribed him a
carminative Clyster, and some hours after let him blood. That evening, taking
off the Dressings, I found the Escar dry, and the Parts about it swelled, and
beginning to inflame. I fomented it with decoct. absinth. flor. cham. sambuci,
ros. rub. etc. in vino rubro, and applied unguent. basilicon as before, and a
Cataplasm ex far. hord. fabar. etc. decocted in Oxymel over the diseased Part.
In the next Dressings I added ol. terebinth. to the aforesaid Unguent, and
continued the use of the Fomentation and Cataplasm. By these Applications the
Ulcer tended to digestion, and the Escar separated; but the Swelling continued
big. I then applied the Cataplasm mentioned in the former Observation, doubling
the quantity of cicuta, and dressed the Ulcer with mundif. Paeracels. cum
praecipitat. After a few days I observed in dressing of the Ulcer a rotten
Slough to lie within, which I took hold of with my Forceps, and feeling it
loose pulled it out. It was the corrupt Cystis. Upon the coming away of which
the Tumor sunk. I dressed it up with Dossills spread with the Mundificative,
and upon the Ulcer without applied unguent. diapompholygos, as also where the
cicuta had blistered the Scrotum. From this dressing the Ulcer digested well.
My endeavor was then to dry up the humidity, and contract that part of the
Scrotum: which I did by adding flor. balaust. nuc. cupress. sumach, etc. to the
former Fomentation of red Wine, and by a Cataplasm of far. hordei and fabar.
boiled up in some of the said Fomentation. Whilst I was healing the Ulcer
within, a hard Swelling arose near the Production, and a Fungus thrust out from
that Part of the Testicle. Upon search I found that occasioned the hard
Swelling; whereupon I laid that part open by a Snip with a pair of Scissors,
and covered the Fungus with Praecipitate and Dossills of Lint; and by the use
of that and the Vitriol-stone I consumed it, and cured the Ulcer.

After the Patient had a little recovered his strength, I began with the other
by Incision, making it about an inch in length, supposing it would sooner
digest, and thereby escape those accidents. It discharged the like Matter as
the other did. He suffered also Colic and Fever, till the corrupt Cystis
digested out, which was the space of ten or twelve days. After which the Ulcer
digested, and by the same method it healed, and the Scrotum contracted, so as
it was not easy to judge that it had ever been diseased. The Patient is yet
alive, and has never been disturbed in those Parts since.

A Citizen aged about forty six years labored of such an Hydrocele in both
Testicles. 10. Observat. of the same.
I opened and treated them after the same method as in the former Observation
has been said. He was subject to the same Accidents of Colic, Fever, etc.
After Digestion the Cystis cast forth, as in such like cases is usual, and by
the blessing of God I cured him. Doctor du Molin saw him dressed once or twice,
and prescribed him some cordial Julep, etc. as he thought fit.

These Hydrocele's do not differ in the way of Cure, therefore I forbear a more
particular discourse or giving you more Instances of them; but wish you to
consider the Age and Habit of body before you begin this way of Cure; for they
are generally subject to Colicks, Fevers, Singultus, etc. and, if the native
heat be weak, they are apt to gangrene.

HYdrocephalus is a watery Swelling of the Head, Hydrocephalus.
having the same Original with other Hydropical Tumors. It is most usually the
Disease of Children. The Part affected is (as I said) the Head, either within
or without the Cranium.

The Causes of it are an effusion of the Serum, Causes.
either outwardly between the Cranium and the Scalp, or inwardly between it and
the Membranes.

Those that happen on the outside are too often the effect of ill handling by
Midwifes and Nurses, whereby the capillary Vessels are bruised, and the serous
part of the Blood extravasated. From this Bruising it is that Corruption often
follows, and the Humor is apt to stink.

The other more internal Hydrocephalus, affecting the Parts within, is an
effusion of Serum within the Scull, either between it and the Dura matter, or
between that and the Pia matter. It is not less frequent to find this Serum so
extravasated to coagulate into a stiff gelatinous substance all about the
Vessels under the basis of the Brain, and thence to involve all the Roots and
the Caudex of the Spinall marrow, quite over the Nates and Testes and Glandula
pinealis, reaching into the Ventricles of the Brain. Many instances of this
kind I could give you in Ricket children: but these things are not to be
discovered till the Patient be dead.

The Signs are suitable to the Part affected, Signs.
and the quality of the Humor. If it lie immediately under the hairie Scalp,
and possess it, all the whole Head must be swelled. If the Matter within be
oedematous, it will pit under your finger: if it be a pure Serum, it will
return to its seat when your finger is taken off. The Face is pale and swelled,
so also are the Eyelids, sometimes bloody and shining. In the increase of it,
it sometimes thrusts out a Tumor like a Wen, but the Fluctuation of it shows
it to be Water. If it be between the Cranium and Pericranium, you may feel the
Cranium bare, and a Fluctuation between it and the Pericranium. If it lie
between the Cranium and Dura matter, the Sutures are loose, so that you may
often bury your finger between them. When it lies under the Dura matter, it
makes that swell, and frequently thrusts it self through between some of the
Sutures of the Scull; as particularly it did in a young Child, of which anon.
What is within the Ventricles of the Brain is not easily discovered whilst the
Patient is alive; only it may be guessed at by great Stupidity and
Insensibility, if any such thing be.

Doctor Walter Needham did tell me of one that in Bedlam was observed to sit
upright with his back to a wall without speaking or opening his Eyes for many
months, only some odd mimicall gestures he used. Upon his death he was opened
by order of Doctor Thomas Allen, Physician of the place. An oedematous Tumor
was found to occupy all the upper part of the Cerebrum between it and the Pia
matter, which descending by the posteriour parts of it did possess the entrance
into the two Ventricles, the Glandula pinealis it self being turned into a
Bladder of water.

But the Story cited out of Vesalius by Sennertus is yet more wonderful, of a
young Girl, that kept her Senses well enough, yet her Head swelled so great as
to hold nine pints of Water. The like Observations we find in Hildanus,
Kerkringius, and others, where the Brain has been so little, and so oddly
placed, that the whole has been judged to be Water. By which we may judge that
Stupidity, though, when we find it, it may give us cause of suspicion that such
a Tumor is there lodged, yet it is not the necessary concomitant of the
Disease.

Children laboring of this Disease are for the most part very unhealthfull,
Prognostic.
and in their infancy subject to Convulsions. If they escape that, they fall
into Rachitis, which for the most part terminateth in the King's Evil.

Those that thrust out from within the Scull are deadly. Those next the Cranium
are not without great danger. If the Tumor be large, and possess all the Head,
the Cure is not without difficulty: but if it possesss only some particular
external Part, it is more easy.

The Cure of this Disease is much the same with that which has been delivered
in the general Discourse of Watery Tumors, Cure.
viz. by powerful discutient and drying Medicaments; as summitat. thymi,
absinth. majoranae, fol. beton. salviae, flor. sambuci, chamaem. ros. rub.
balaust. sumach, bacc. myrtill. nuc. cupress. gland. querc. gallae. These may
be boiled in Wine, or in a Lixivium. And if stronger Medicaments be required,
you may add to them sulph. vivum, alum. and the various Salts, with which you
may foment the Parts. You may also embrocate with such like; ol. laurin.
anethi, an. ij. ol. de spica, de lateribus, an. j. sulph. vivi, salis com.
aluminis usti, an. ss. ciner. siliquar. fabar. ij. terebinth. styracis
calamitae, an. j. Or with the addition of Wax make it into a Cerote. Or,
pulver. summitat. absinth. origani, flor. ros. rub. balaust. an. j. salis com.
vj. mellis com. q. s. fiat Cataplasma. Empl. de baccis lauri, cephalicum, empl.
diasulphuris, de sinapi, are proper. In order to the applying of these the Hair
ought to be shaved. Fontanells are also of use in the Neck and behind the Ears,
etc.

If the Humor does not discuss by the aforementioned Remedies, you may let the
Water out by small Apertions, that it may as it were insensibly discharge; and
the while continue the use of the milder Discutients and Exsiccants, to restore
the Scalp to its natural tone. But if, through length of time, the Humor has
united it self into a Tumor of some particular Part, if you be satisfied that
it does not arise from within the Scull, you may cut into it, and let out the
Water; or, if it has a small basis, make a Ligature on it, and cut it off. But
if you suppose it arises from within the Scull, forbear the extirpating it.

A Child of about four years of age was brought to me, 1. Observat. of
Hydrocephalus.
supposed to have the King's Evil. The Head was extraordinary big, the Face
full and pale, the Eyebrows and Eyelids swelled. I laid my hand upon the
Head, and, feeling it soft, I advised them to purge the Child with resina
jalapii or diagridium and Calomel. in the form of a bolus, cum sir. de spina
cervina, and to make Fontanells in the Neck and behind the Ears, and afterward,
if there were occasion, to shave the Head, applying such Medicaments as have
been set down in the method of Cure. Sometime after the Parents told me the
Child was cured only by the Fontanells behind the Ears.

In a Child of half a year old, 2. Observat. of Hydrocephalus.
laboring under a watery Swelling of the upper part of the Head between the
hairy Scalp and Pericranium, I made Issues behind the Ears and in the Neck, and
fomented the Head with a Decoction of the milder Discutients and Exsiccants
boiled in red Wine. But, it being cold weather, they rather desired an
Emplaster. In compliance with their desires a cephalic Emplaster was applied.
After some time it made such an itching and soarness, as put us upon the
necessity of taking it off; which was not done without difficulty, the Scalp
being much excoriated underneath. We fomented it again as abovesaid, and
applied Colewort-leaves on the Parts affected. It healed up in few days, and
the Disease was not much lessened: the Issues behind the Ears also healed as
the Escars cast off. Having applied several Medicaments unsuccessfully, I made
two or three Punctures into the Scalp, and let the Water out; then applied a
Cataplasm ex far. fabar. flor. ros. rub. balaust. nuc. cupress. bacc. myrtill.
and summit. hyssop. pulver. decocted in red Wine. By the use of this and the
foresaid Fomentation the Child was cured.

A Gentleman of about forty years of age, 3. Observat. of Hydrocephalus.
having a large Tumor on the Os lambdoides bigger then a Goose-egge, was
commended to me by Sir Fra. Pr. I shaved the Hair from about it, brought the
basis in by a Ligature, and cut it off; then made a cross Stitch, taking up the
Artery with the same Stitch, and brought the Lips as close as conveniently I
could; then dressed up the Wound with pulv. Galeni cum albumine ovi, and
applied an Emplastr. e bolo over all, with Compress and Bandage. The Humor was
a crude Serum, as in Hydrocele; only in the bottom of it there were dregs that
seemed to be a melicereous Matter. The third day after, finding the Wound
tending to digestion, I dressed it with the common Digestive ex terebinthina:
after Digestion I cut the Stitches, and incarned and cicatrized it in few days
by the usual Medicaments set down in Wounds of the Head. Many as big I have
taken off the same way, and cured accordingly.

Some years since I was fetched to a little Infant not ten days old that was
born with two of the abovementioned Tumors. 4. Observat. of Hydrocephalus.
They were of the shape of Cupping-glasses of the middle size, seated upon the
Suturae lambdoides and sagittalis: they had their Original within the Scull. I
felt the Holes they thrust out at; each Hole was round, I suppose of the
compass of an Half-crown, and, as I afterward found, had their Cystis from the
Dura matter. The Infant seemed to be dying when I came; it died that night. The
next day I opened it, and found it as I have said. There was also great
quantity of Water floating within the Meninges, and in the Ventricles of the
Brain, and a gelatinous substance all about the Vessels on the upper part, as
also under the basis of the Brain, etc. as I have before related.

CHAP. XXIV. Of Scabs and Itch.
AFter Waterish Tumors I find Authors frequently treating of the Scab or
Itch; Causes.
a Disease which seems to have its Original either from abundance of vicious
Salt in the Blood, or possibly from a local Ferment in the Skin.

A Scab catched by Infection seems pretty manifestly to own its Origin to a
local Ferment, there being no other fault in the Body then what lies in the
Skin it self, and converteth the nutritious Juices thither conveyed into the
Disease here mentioned. And its probable that most other Itches do begin in the
same place, there being in the Skin a vicious Ferment which makes a Concoction
accordingly, and consequently causes all the other Degenerations that happen.
These Degenerations do increase to a farther infection, if the Blood abound
with a salt Serum; in which case the Fermentation becomes exorbitant, the
Disease grows more vigorous, spreads farther inward, and infects the whole
mass.

This way, I say, the Itch is very often generated, pressing from without
inward: nay, I believe that most commonly it so happens. But I do not deny that
it may likewise rise from within, as some of the greater sorts of Scabs
certainly do.

The Differences may be taken from the Cause, Differences.
and accordingly as it affects the whole Body, or some particular Part, as the
Hands, etc.

The Disease needs not much description; it is known by its nastiness and
trouble, and upon that account is more important then it would otherwise be
thought.

The Scab or Itch is not esteemed dangerous to Life when it proceeds from an
outward Infection. Prognostic.
But if it owe its Original to an inward indisposition of the Blood, it may
prove dangerous; either when it is accidentally stopped by external
Applications and causes, upon which occasion Fevers, Epilepsies, Consumptions,
and many other like Accidents, have arisen: nay, when the Scab has not been
hindered in its untoward progress, the Blood has nowithstanding been wholly
corrupted, and the Patient brought to the grave. Another mischief it has, viz.
Infection, especially if the Scab be moist and full of subtle Humors. Upon all
these accounts, both of the Turpitude, Danger, and Infection, it is convenient
to propound a Cure.

Whether this Disease arise from an outward Infection, Cure.
or inward indisposition of the Blood, the Cure is much one; only this latter
requires more your consideration, to take the indication from the Cause, and
to make Evacuation accordingly before you apply your external Remedies.

In the first place, a good Diet ought to be prescribed, of Mutton, Veal,
Pullet, Chicken, etc. and those rather boiled then roasted. All sharp, salt and
spiced Meats are forbidden: so are all Fish, Milk, and Herbage, as being
corrupters of the Blood. Their Drink may be a small Wine diluted with Water, or
a well-boiled small Ale, which may also be medicated with Dockroots, Succory,
and Grass-roots, the tops of Agrimony, Pimpernell, Hart's-tongue, Fumitory,
Hop-buds, etc. Or, fol. agrimoniae, origani, veronicae utriusque, an. M. ss.
rad. enulae camp. scorzonerae, hirundinariae, an. iij. macis, cinnamomi, an. j.
coq. in cervisiae tenuis lbvj. ad dimid.

The Evacuation ought to begin by Bleeding; and if Blood abound, the
Venaesection may be repeated, after the Body has been somewhat emptied by
Purging.

The Purgatives may be Whey and Manna, with crem. tartar. or a Decoction of
some of the opening Roots, with sena, rhabarb. etc. summit. fumariae, M. j.
rad. cichorii, polypod. lapathi acut. an. j. flor. trium cordial. M. ss.
epithymi ij. senae iij. rhabarb. incisi and in nodulo inclus. j. liquiritiae
ij. sem. foenic. dulc. iij. coq. in aq. font. ad lbj. colatur. add sir. ros.
cum agarico j. ss. mannae ij. vel q. s. dividatur pro tribus dosibus. Decoct.
senae Gereonis, Decoct. epithymi, in the Pharmacopoeia Londinensis, are proper
in this Disease.

If the Body be strong, and the Humors contumacious, you may purge with pulv.
diaturbith, pulv. cornachin. pil. cochiae, de agarico; or with this: tartari
vitriolati, diagridii, an. ss. turbith albi gummosi, hermodact. an. ij.
pulverizentur, and cum oleis caryophyll. and cinnam. an. ss. Misc. Dosis a ij.
ad j. Merc. dulc. aethiops mineralis, Bezoard. mineral. ceruss. antimonii, are
also of use in the Cure of this Disease. If the season of the year be proper,
Barnet or Epsom Waters may be also good. Amongst the common people Brimstone
and Milk is a usual Remedy.

The outward Applications prescribed in the Cure of this Disease are numerous,
and may be proportioned to the quality of the person, viz. as he is poor or
rich, and the greatness of the Disease.

If it affect but some one part, as the Hands, the Cure may be performed by
Fomentations, Unguents, or Cerots: but where the whole Body is infected, there
I propose Bathing as most necessary. A Fomentation may be made of such like;
rad. enulae camp. lapath. an. ij. rad. bryoniae j. summit. fumariae, abrotoni,
an. M. ij. flor. ros. rub. M. j. cort. granat. sumach, an. ss. vitrioli albi
iij. salis petrae ij. aluminis, sulph. vivi, an. ss. coq. in aq. font. lbiiij.
colatur pro usu. After which the diseased Parts may be anointed with some of
these following: unguent. rosat. iij. balsam. Peruvian. ss. arcan. corallin.
ij. Misc. Or, sevi agnini iiij. ol. amygd. dulc. papaveris, an. j. ol.
hyoscyami per express. ij. unguent. tutiae Vigonis jss. aluminis usti,
zinziberis pulv. an. ij. olibani j. croci ij. cerae alb. q. s. Or, unguent.
nutrit. ij. unguent. populn. j. styracis liquidae j. cinnabaris iij. Misc. Or,
unguent. popul. j. unguent. rosati ij. opii ss. Misc. In Chops of the Hands or
Fingers, unguent. rosati in succo aurantior. lot. iij. cerae alb. vj.
misceantur super ignem; addatur piperis albi, zinziberis pulv. an. q. s. fiat
Ceratum.

Where the Disease has overspred the whole Body, there (as I have said)
Bathing is necessary; and if the season of the year be proper, the River of
Thames or other Rivers may serve: but in the colder seasons Bathing in warm
water is effectual, the party sitting the while on a Bag of Wheat-bran.
Persons of quality may have sweet Powders, as those of lign. cassia, Rhodium,
calamus aromaticus, etc. If the Disease require it, they may have such
Ingredients boiled in the Bath as have been prescribed in the Fomentation
above: they may also have a mixture cinerum sarment. fraxini, alum. rup.
sulphur. viv. etc. cap. pulverizatorum an. p. aeq. It may be quilted in bags,
or made into balls with Wheat-bran and Soap, with which they may rub their
diseased Bodies.

In the time of the late Civil Wars our Soldiers in the Western parts of the
Kingdom were much annoied with this Disease, which being gotten amongst them,
they infected one another. I commonly let them blood which fell under my care,
and advised them to drink for their Mornings draughts Brimstone and Milk, and
to anoint themselves with Brimstone and Butter. But in warm weather frequent
bathing in the Rivers was their Cure.

CHange of Diet and manner of living is frequently the cause of the Itch. 1.
Observat.
So a Youth of about seventeen years of age, newly entertained into a
Gentleman's service, raised from a slender mean Diet to a more plentiful fare,
brake out with Itch and Scabs all over his Body. Several Ointments were
applied, and after all a Quick-silver-Girdle was put on him: but the Disease
enraged, and under the Girdle the Skin was heated and excoriated much. I caused
the Girdle to be thrown off, and advised the raw Parts to be dressed with a
mixture of unguent. nutrit. and populeon; then caused him to be let blood, and
purged with a Decoction of radic. lapath. sena, sem. carthami, etc. and
directed him to bath in warm water for some few days: by which he was cured.
Such like Youths so diseased, in the hotter seasons, after Purging and
Bleeding, I have commended to bathing in the River of Thames, and thereby cured
them.

A Girl of about twelve years of age was infected by her Play-fellows at School
in the Country, 2. Observat.
and brake out in mattery Scabs and Itch all over her Body, insomuch as her
Shift was frequently bloody with scratching her self. I let her blood also,
purged her often with Infusions of Sena, Rhubarb, etc. I endeavored to
contemperate the Humors by calomel. and aethiops mineralis, but without
success, it itching so intolerably, that, do what we could, she would rub and
scratch, so as it no sooner healed in one place, but it brake out in the same
or in another. So difficult a work it is to extinguish this Disease where it
has been of any long continuance. The weather growing warmer, she bathed in
warm water, rubbed her Body with some of the abovementioned Bags the first
three or four Bathings, and in about three weeks space was freed of her Itch,
and perfectly cured thereby. The Scars and discoloring of her Skin on her
Hands and Arms were removed by anointing them with a mixture of sacch. Saturni
with unguent. rosac.

A Gentleman of about thirty six years of age was infected with the Itch all
over his Body. 3. Observat.
I let him blood and purged him, as has been set down in the method of Cure;
and, having so evacuated the Plethora, I prescribed him the taking of aethiops
mineralis, and sent him some unguent. popul. etc. and cured him. By the same
means I have cured some others since.

A Gentlewoman of about fifty years of age was very much disturbed by an Itch.
4. Observat.
After the taking diverse Medicaments unsuccessfully she sent to me. I made her
some Pills of aethiops mineralis, which she took morning and evening, without
any observance of keeping her house; by which she was cured in eight or ten
days, and has not been troubled with it since, as she her self told me three
years after, which was last Summer.

A person of about forty years old, 5. Observat.
of a melancholic and scorbutical Habit of body, was sorely afflicted with the
Itch all over her Body. Her Physician at the same time being indisposed could
not visit her, but, according to the relation her Servants gave him of her
Disease, prescribed her Clysters, and purged her with such opening Apozemes as
were proper in her case, advising blood to be drawn from the Haemorrhoidall
Veins by Leeches, and afterward prescribed her a Bath, in which she bathed
often, but without success. Upon which consideration I was desired by the
Physician to give her a visit, to inform him of her condition. I did so, and
saw her Hands, Arms and Breast overspred with brawny Scales, under which were
mattery Wheals. She was very hot, and her Tongue parched; her Pulse seemed to
be oppressed. I told her she had a Fever. She replied, it was for want of sleep
occasioned by the intolerable Itch and soarness. I gave an account of her
condition to the Physician, who thereupon prescribed her to be let blood about
eight or nine ounces, and that night after a Clyster and a cordial Julep; by
which she was relieved. About three or four days after she complained of a pain
on her left Side, and had a Fever, with great heat and thirst. The Physician
prescribed more blood to be taken away; which was done to the quantity of nine
ounces or thereabouts, by which she was relieved of her pain and Fever, and
daily recovered strength. And upon farther information of her Recovery, her
Physician advised her to remove to Epsom, and there to drink the Waters. She
did so, and by his Prescriptions was also cured there of her Itch.

A Girl of about four years of age was brought to me in a poor woman's arms in
the very midst of Winter, the ground being covered with snow. 6. Observat.
She was broken out all over the Body with an Itch and mattery Scabs. The woman
desired my Opinion of it, whether I could cure it. I told her the Cure was
difficult; but when the weather should be more seasonable I would readily
undertake it. The following Spring I was fetched to this Child, saw the Body so
diseased as I before represented it, and was persuaded to undertake the Cure.
I, considering that they were but few things I could give such a Child, and
those required to be well tasted, therefore began with a small Ale medicated
with sarsaparilla, lign. lentisc. China, and some of the Herbs and Roots
proposed in the method of Cure for such Drinks. In some of this Ale I mixed a
purging Syrup, by which the Child was frequently purged: then I gave her Merc.
dulc. in cons. ros. damasc. once in three days, and continued medicated Ale for
her ordinary drink, with which they also sometimes made a Possetdrink. By this
method the Itch lessened, and the Scabs dried: but by the prosecution of it the
Child's Chaps became somewhat soar. I cured the Child and finished my course by
bathing it in Milk and Water, and some few Diaphoretcks. The Parents were well
pleased with the Cure: but afterward consulting a Physician (since deceased)
in some case concerning their own healths, and discoursing of the Child's Cure,
he persuaded them I had effected it with Mercury, and put them upon such a
prejudice to the Medicament, as they from that declined the advising with me,
suspecting I might again repeat the use of it.

CHAP. XXV. Of Lepra, or Elephantiasis.
LEpra and Elephantiasis have so many acceptions in Writers, Description, and
Differences.
that it is fit to distinguish them in the first place. I shall therefore
understand by Lepra the highest degree of the Itch, where the Scabs grow dry,
and break out in the form of white Scales, sticking hard to one another, not
easily to be pulled off; but if they are, they leave the place red, and soon
return again. The Leprosy of the Arabians was a quite other Disease, which by
the Greeks is called Elephantiasis, and is nothing else but an universal
Cancer of the whole Body, black, and indeed a most miserable Disease, but I
think scarce known in England. The Arabians also have an Elephantiasis
differing from that of the Greeks, which is a kind of Varix, of which Authors
may be consulted.

The Disease I purpose to give you an Instance of is the Lepra Graecorum,
supposed to be Celsus his Impetigo, and by others Psora, the white Scurf,
proceeding from a vicious Salt in the Blood, that does diminish the Serum of
it, which when the Skin should separate by a just Transpiration, in stead
thereof it converts it into a dry, salt, itching, white Scab, very troublesome
to the Patient, and difficult of Cure.

The immediate Cause of this Disease is, Cause.
as I have said, a vicious Salt in the Serum. Authors will have it to be
generated of a mixture of Atra bilis, to be of a more gross matter, and to
arise from evil Diet, a dry Intemperies of the Skin, a Suppression of the
Haemorrhoids or Menses, also from a Quartan Fever; and to proceed by the way of
Infection, as Scabs do, it being an excess thereof.

It is known by the Description I have given of it, Prognostic.
and from thence a Judgment may be given of the difficulty and
contumaciousness of Cure. If salt Humors abound very much in the body, it
proves often incurable.

The Cure of this Disease consists in the prosecution of the same method with
that of the Scab; Cure.
only this, as it exceeds that, requires to be treated more strictly, and with
Medicaments more powerful. I shall not trouble you with the particularizing
them, but refer you to the Observation following.

A Young Woman about 20 years of age had been long afflicted with a Species of
an Elephantiasis upon her left Brow. 1. Observat. of Elephantiasis.
Many endeavors had been used by Prescriptions internal and external, viz.
frequent Venaesections, application of Leeches, etc. The Disease increasing, I
was consulted, and advised her to purge once in four days with Merc. dulc. and
diagrid. and the intermitting days to take Bezoard. mineral. and to drink for
her ordinary drink decoct. sarsae, lign. lentiscin. with some of the alterative
Plants prescribed in the method of Cure. The Part affected we fomented daily
with the Fotus proposed in the method of Cure: and after the Scabs and Scurf
were removed, it was anointed with some of that Unguent of Vigo's prescribed in
the Cure of Herpes miliaris. I began this Cure in Winter, presently after
Christmasse, and cured her before the Spring; yet advised the continuance of
the internalls, purging her weekly, and when the weather should grow
seasonable, bathing in fresh water temperately warm. I saw her half a year
after perfectly well.

A Maid of about thirty years of age, 2. Observat. of Elephantiasis.
having been a long time diseased with an Impetigo, or Species of Elephantiasis
Graecorum, in her Arms, Thighs and Legs, came commended to my care. It began
with a Serpigo, making many round spots, such as are generally called
Ring-worms, with extreme itching, which by frequent scratching heated and
mattered, and afterward scabb'd, and in progress overspred her Lims with a dry
white Scurf, under which the serpiginous circles lay covered. She had passed
through the milder Remedies frequently without success: upon which account I
designed Mercurialls; and beginning with Venaesection, afterward purged her
with decoct. epithymi, as it is prescribed in the method of Cure. After the
second Dose I gave her twenty grains of Calomel. over night, and purged it off
in the morning with the said Apozeme: during which I caused her Lims to be
bathed and rubbed often with the Decoction to that purpose prescribed in the
method of Cure, by which the Scurf was moistened and brought off; then it was
anointed with one of the foresaid Unguents. After I had thus evacuated the
Plethora, and disposed her body for Mercurialls more operative, I gave her each
morning and evening a few grains of Mercur. diaphoret. in a bolus with cons.
lujulae and Mithridate, disposing her thereby to a breathing sweat, and caused
her Lims to be daily anointed with unguent. enulat. cum Mercurio. These
Medicaments proving unsuccessfull, and her Chaps not growing soar, I caused her
Lims to be anointed with Sir Alex. Fras. his Unction prescribed in Lues
venerea, and vomited her once in four or five days with Turbith mineral. By
this course she emaciated, and her Skin became clean of the Impetigo, etc. but
she did not salivate, nor indeed were her Chaps very soar. I concluded her
course of Physic with Bathing, and Sweating with Diaphoreticks, purging her
between whiles, for the space of a fortnight, and dismissed her, with advice to
drink a Decoction of rad. lapath. summit. fumariae dulc. amarae, etc. About two
months after she showed her self to me cured and well complexioned, and is well
at the Printing of this.

A Maid of about fourteen years of age, 3. Observat.
of a sallow Complexion and lean dry Body, having been diseased from her
infancy with a white dry Scab from the crown of her Head to her Feet, her Skin
of a Moorish tanned color, after taking diverse Remedies without success, was
at last put into my hands for Cure. I purged her with a draught of the Decoctum
epithymi, and the day after let her blood about eight ounces or more. She bare
it well, and the blood was of good color and consistence. The day after I
purged her with some of the same Decoction, with the addition of sir. de pomis
purg. and in the while caused a medicated Ale to be made according to the
prescription has been set down in the preceding Chapter of the method of Cure,
which was her ordinary Drink, and served to make Possets those days she purged.
Then I prepared a Bath wherein had been boiled fol. and radic. althaeae,
lapath. enulae camp. bryoniae, fol. scabiosae, majoranae, fumariae, saponariae,
bacc. laur. juniper. sem. staphisagriae, sem. sinapis, alumen, sulph. vitriol.
Hungaric. and a Bag of Wheat-bran to sit upon. I prescribed her likewise the
Mixture before mentioned made into a Ball, with common Soap, for her to rub her
self with while she sat in the Bath. She had also a Pearl-Julep ready to take
upon occasion. After she had thus bathed according to her strength half or
three quarters of an hour, she was lapt in a warm Sheet, put into bed, and took
a morsel of a cordial bolus ex theriaca, cons. borrag. lujulae, Bezoard.
occident. ocul. caner. troch. de viper. made up cum sir. e cort. citr. and pom.
alterant. Upon which she swet an hour or more, then dried, and anointed with
one of the forementioned Unguents. A wast-coat, etc. was put on, and she arose
and was dressed. Her Diet was of good nourishment and easy digestion, such as
has been already proposed. I continued this method of Bathing some while, and
purged her every third day with calomel. j. at night, and a draught of decoct.
epithymi next morning. Her Head was full of white dry Scabs; for which reason
her Hair was clipped close off, and her Head bathed with a Lixivium wherein had
been boiled some of the same materials which were prescribed for the Bath, and
then anointed with burnt Butter cum fuligine and sale, an. p. aequ. In the time
of Bathing I caused her Head to be rubbed with common Soap, and bathed, to
loosen the Scurf and dry Scales. Sometime during her Bathing I rubbed some of
the largest Scales and such as stuck firmest with a Caustick-stone, which did
not only hasten their fall off, but scoured the Skin notably well. Where the
bigger Scabs separated, there remained for the most part an ugly discoloring
of the place, and little Excrescences of flesh, by which those Scabs had been
held on so close as if they had been thereby nailed fast. These Excrescences I
rubbed off with the Caustick-stone, and where there was occasion I dressed the
Parts with unguent. tutiae or lithargyr. yet notwithstanding the Disease rose
in one part as it dried in others. Upon which consideration I vomited her with
a few grains of turbith mineral. and repeating it twice or thrice, intermitting
a day or two between, her Chaps swelled. Upon which I forbore the use of the
Bath, and kept her warm, then salivated her seventeen or eighteen days: in
which time the Scurf fell off quite, and her Skin became clean. I then purged
her with Sr. Alex. Fras. his Potus amarus, and put her into a decoct, sarsae,
Chinae, etc. with some of the hepatick Plants; I swet her for some days with
Diaphoreticks, purging her once in three or four days; then bathed her in warm
water, washing her Body with Balls of Wheat-bran and Soap for some few days.
Thus we concluded the course, she being to all appearance perfectly well, and
her Complexion fresh. She should then have returned into the Country, but that
I desired she might stay the Spring of the year for a farther trial of her
Cure, it being then February. She did stay, and in April the Disease began to
appear in her right Arm, and rise scattering about her Body; which increasing,
I let her blood again, purged her with Whey and Manna, and bathed her in warm
water, wherein I put a Solution of Sublimate, designing that way to flux her.
But it not rising to my mind, I anointed her Legs and Arms with Sir Alex. Fras.
his unguent. Neapolit. by which I salivated her near thirty days; in which time
the Scabs fell off again. As the Salivation declined, I put her into a decoct.
sarsae as formerly, swet her and purged her, and, having finished the course
with Bathing as I had done before, delivered her once more cured. Her Friends,
seeing her thus recovered, put her to School, to give her that Breeding which
her diseased Body had hindered her so long from. Since that she is married,
and, as I have been lately informed, continues well: yet is not so freed of
that Disease, but that she has sometimes little Remarques of it.

CHAP. XXVI. Of Gutta Rosacea.
THe Face is also subject to these irksome Diseases, which have been anciently
distinguished by the names of Impetigo or Lichen, Mentagra, and Gutta Rosacea.
The former of which raged in Italy, and was taken notice of by Pliny in his
days as a malign Disease; but it is not known in our times, unless it be in the
Lues venerea, where are sometimes found all the Species of Impetigo and
Pustulae that ever were mentioned by any of the Ancients. But in this place I
shall only take notice of the Gutta Rosacea, a Disease which, when heightened
by acrimony, is not inferior to the most malicious of other Diseases, and as
difficult of Cure.

Gutta Rosacea arises in little hard Tubercles like so many Hordeola,
Description.
affecting the Brows and Face all over with great itching, which being scratcht
look red, and rise in great Welks, rendering the Visage fiery, and in progress
of time make those toting Copper-noses, as we generally express them.

The immediate Cause is gross hot Blood affecting the Face with such a flushing
heat as is commonly seen in Blushing, Cause.
and by reason of its gross consistence can neither return back, nor suddenly
discuss, but remains in the Part, and after some time rises in red Pimples,
which so vitiate the tone of the Fibers, that though the Patient do get
afterward a better Habit of body, yet does he for the most part suffer under
the Disease. Ill Diet is a Cause, hot Spices, Onions, Garlic, and the like; so
are strong Wines: yet it is thought more commonly to befall those that drink
strong Beer. A suppression of the Menses or Haemorrhoids is often a Cause of
this Disease.

The Signs of the Disease are, a flushing heat, with red Pimples and Tubercles,
Signs.
which in progress of time become bluish, and of a more dark red color.

The Gutta Rosacea is difficult of Cure in its recency: and if it be of long
continuance, Prognostic.
the Tubercles grow big, and Excrescences arise out of them, and they accompany
the Patients to their graves.

The Cure is begun with regulation of Diet, Cure.
removing of the Obstructions in the Viscera, and contemperating of the evil
quality of the Blood. The Diet ought to be of good nourishment and of easy
digestion, as has been above said. The Evacuation consists in Bleeding, and
Purging with opening Apozemes: as, fol. cichor, acetosae, an. M.j. senae iij.
tamarind. ss. flor. trium cordial. an. P.j. liquiritiae ij. sem. foenic. dulc.
j. coq. ad iiij. in colat. dissolv. Rhei in aq. cich. infus. j. sir. ros.
solut. jss. aq. cinnam. cochl. j. Misc. Or, rad. oxylapath. acetosae, cichor.
gramin. an. j. fol. endiviae, fumariae, dent. leon. capill. Ven. an. M.j. sem.
quat. frig. maj. an. iij. liquiritiae ss. senae ij. tamarind. j. galang. ij.
santal. citr. j. coq. ad lbj. colat. add expressionem ss. rhab. in praedict.
decoct. sir. de pomis purg. and diasereos an. q. s. fiat Apozem. With which you
may purge your Patient. After which Chalybeats may be of use, etc.

In the use of externalls, if the Disease be recent, only with a flushing heat
in the Skin with some small Pimples, a decoct. malvae, bismalvae, viol. sem.
verbasci, psyllii, or the like, may give a breathing to the Humor; and a
Posset made with juice of Limons or the like may restore the Face to its former
good Complexion. But if the Disease be of longer standing, and the Tubercles
many and hard, you must then bath them with more powerful Emollients: as, rad.
sigil. Solomon. cucumer. agrest. rad. lilior. sem. lini, foenug. etc. and
cerat. dialthaeae may be afterward applied on them, and such Medicaments as
may dispose them to Suppuration: then they may be opened with a Lancet, and the
Matter discharged. You shall afterward deterge and cicatrize them with as small
a Scar as may be, and smooth the Skin with such like; camphorae j. ol. amygd.
dulc. iij. mix them in a mortar, then add ol. Tartari per deliquium ij. vitell.
ovor. number. ij. sacch. Saturni ss. aq. flor. fabar. sigill. Solomon. and aq.
ros. an. iij. Or a lac virginis thus made; lithargyr. aur. iij. aceti optimi
lbj. coq. ad dimidium, and colatur. add salis com. in aq. font. soluti iiij.
aq. ros. vj. sal. ammoniac. j. Misceantur omnia simul pro usu.

A Gentleman of about forty years old was very much vexed with a flushing heat
all over his Face, Observat.
with some red Pimples not considerable. Many Medicaments he applied, but in
progress of time they terminated in Tubercles, some whereof were round, others
of an ovall figure; some were hard, others soft. They all itcht extremely, and
put him upon a pinching of them, upon which they grew the bigger. One of them
he opened with a Penknife, and gave vent to a viscous white Matter, but the
Tubercle filled again. Upon which consideration he advised with me, and desired
my help. I caused a Fomentation to be made of some of the Emollients above
mentioned, and to the Faeces beaten and pulped I added axung. gallin. anatis,
ol. ex ped. bovinis, and with a little terebinthina and Wax made a Cerote,
which after the use of the Fomentation was daily applied. In the while he was
purged, as has been above proposed, and let blood, and after wards drunk Epsom
Waters. By this method much of the Matter was evacuated, the heat
contemperated, and the Tubercles in part breathed forth. Those that suppurated
I opened, and discharged the Matter: and those that would neither suppurate nor
discuss, I cut into, and permitted them to bleed. By the continuance of
Emollients they resolved, and in the space of six weeks he was in a manner
freed of these Hillocks, and his Countenance became smooth and clear.

Some others I have cured by the same method, and of the female Sex, where it
was more discernable. I shall forbear the instancing them, because it was a
work of time, and performed after the same method.

CHAP. XXVII. Of Flatuous Tumors.
WE have already treated of Tumors coming from Humors, which was our first
general Head: we shall now say somewhat of those that owe their Origin to
Wind, called by the Latins Inflationes, by the Greeks Emphysemata.

They are by Authors usually ranked next to Oedema, as partaking much of the
nature of those Tumors, having generally a watery Phlegm joined with them.

Emphysema is a light puffy Tumor easily yielding to the pressure of your
fingers, and arises again in the instant you take them off. Description.
It is of an uncertain bigness, some times very large, other times small,
without any weight to the Part that contains it.

As to the Differences, they are either pure, or mixed. Differences.
A pure Emphysema is found rarely, unless it be in cases of Wounds in the
Breast, where the air getting in between the Muscles and Membranes does puff
them up like to the inside of a Shoulder of veal. Most usually they are mixed
with Humor, which is always Phlegmatic. They differ also as to their place,
some being inward, others outward. The inward belong to the Physicians.
Outwardly we find them upon the Ey-lids, on the great Joints, and in other
membranaceous Parts. The Belly is very subject to them, both in the Scrotum and
Navell, which are the usual seats of the Hernia ventosa; and indeed in other
parts of it wheresoever of the Guts, etc. the Peritonaeum is relaxed. In which
places we do first find a soft windy Tumor, and at length, if it be not
prevented, an Extuberance of the Gut it self.

The Cause of the pure Emphysema is evident, viz. the ingress of air. Cause.
But that of the mixed ones is not so be assigned. And possibly he that reads
what the learnedest Authors have said on this Subject will depart unsatisfied.

In the inward Parts, as in the Ventricle and Guts, we find manifest acidities,
which meeting some fermentaceous Matter do huff and puff, and, being contained
within the bounds of these Cavities do blow them up into a Tumor, which is
usually dissolved by Evacuation upward and downward; which notwithstanding does
not prevent the successions of new Inflations, unless the fermenting principle
be destroyed.

In the outward Parts, as the Knees, etc. we do imagine some proportionable
degeneration of the local Ferment, which does make the like Ebullition with the
extravasated Humor. The Vapor so generated being confined within the Skin, so
as not to be suffered to pass out, remains there in a windy or flatuous
Swelling.

Those Tumors are without alteration of color in the Skin, or pain, Signs.
unless they ly deep amongst the sensible Parts near the Periosteum. One Sign
is given us of them, viz. the sudden increase and diminution. The Ancients
distinguish an Emphysema from other Tumors by the Sound it gives when struck
upon. But that Sign I have not met with, no not in the Tympanites. Indeed a
crackling is often felt, if the Tumor be in the Knee or other outward Part;
and in the Belly Wind is heard to rumble: but what concerns inward Diseases
is not within compass of my discourse.

Flatuous Tumors affecting the great Joints are of most difficult Cure,
Prognostic.
and not to be opened without mature consideration. All Tumors of this nature
are more easily cured in Summer then Winter. But those off from the Joints may
be opened at any time, and are of easy Cure.

In the Cure of those Tumors you may proceed by internalls, as has been
showed in Oedema, Cure.
the Causes differing but little, both being from a Phlegmatic constitution of
the Blood. Phlebotomy may be admitted, if Blood; but generally the Pituitous
Humors are here in fault, and they are to be prepared and purged as aforesaid.

The external Applications ought to be such as may by their heating and
attenuating quality discuss the Flatulencies. Such are summitates majoranae,
abrotoni, hyssopi, origani, rutae, rorismarin. bacc. lauri, juniperi, sem.
anisi. foeniculi, carui, cymini, etc. Of which Fomentations may be made in
Lixivies or Wine. Sacculi likewise may be made ex sem. milii, cymin. and sale.
Embrocations may also be as follows. ol. rutacei, sambucini, chamaemeli,
anethi, an. j. majoranae, carui, an. j. Misc. ol. sulphuris, terebinth. bals.
sulphuris Rulandii, Empl. de baccis lauri, e cymino. Or, faecis betae novae
lbjss. micae panis furfuracei lbss. flor. ros. rub. j. coquantur in vino albo;
deinde contunde, and add piperis, caryophyl. nucis myristicae, zinziberis, an.
ijss. sem. cymini, anis. foenic. ammeos, an. ss. ol. chamaemeli, anethi, rutae,
an. ij. Misc. S. A. and fiat Cataplasma. Searification, Blistering and Cupping
are also commended. If by none of these it yield to Discussion, but inflame and
grow painful, treat it with Anodynes; of which cerat. oesypi and lana succida
has the preeminence. But if the Tumor be in such place where it may be safely
opened, the speediest way of Cure is by cutting into it. Some Writers have
advised the binding of the Part above and below, and opening the Tumor
between. If you think there be reason for it, do so; but there is no fear of
its flying away from the vent you shall give it. The Cure of the Abscesse is
afterward effected as in other crude Abscesses has been showed.

In penetrating Wounds of the Thorax, and where the external Orifice is small,
there flatulent Tumors may be frequently seen greatly blowing up that and the
adjacent Parts. The Cure is performed by enlarging the external Orifice in the
Skin. You may see an Observation of it amongst those of the Breast in the
Treatise of Wounds.

Of the many that have come to me supposed to have the King's Evil, there were
not a few diseased with crude Tumors of other kinds. Some of those which
seemed most like Flatulent Tumors I opened, but they proved all to be
phlegmatic and waterish Tumors. Those in the very Knees which are so
generally esteemed flatulent, I opened by puncture with a Lancet, some to the
very Bone: in the most prominent parts there issued forth only a few drops of
serous blood, and that without any diminution of the Swelling. In some of those
in which I made the Puncture less deep I passed in a Probe, where feeling a
Tumor under the Periosteum, I penetrated it with my Lancet, and discharged an
Ichor in small quantity: the Bone was there carious. Upon which consideration I
am apt to think that all these painful Swellings in the Knees (which are not
strumous) do arise from an over-moisture of the Membranes and Ligaments, which
in progress of time does corrupt the Bone underneath, so that they apostemate
and terminate in carious Ulcers. Those which are less painful are generally
superficial, proceeding, as I suppose, from an over-moisture of the Membrana
carnosa and Parts above it. It being so, our best endeavors ought to be in the
applying moderate attenuating and exsiccant Remedies with good Bandage.

A Young Gentleman of about eighteen years of age was commended to my care by
Doctor Denton. 1. Observat.
He had a round soft Tumor upon the forepart of his right Thigh, without
Inflammation or Pulsation. I applied a Caustic upon it, and the next day
divided the Escar: there came nothing of Matter forth. I thrust my Knife deeper
into it: there followed only a few drops of blood, but the Tumor sunk. I
dressed up the Escar with unguent. basilicon to digest off the Slough. During the
separation of it there appeared no more Matter then might reasonably be
expected from such an Escar. After separation thereof the Ulcer incarned and
cicatrized in few days. This we judged a flatulent Tumor, yet it was not
discovered by its Noise or Sound.

A Citizen's wife aged about thirty six years, of an ill Habit of body, had, 2.
Observat. of a flatulent Tumor on the outside of the Thigh near the Knee.
amongst other Diseases, a soft white Swelling a little above her Knee on the
outside of her right Thigh. Many Applications having been ineffectually
applied, Doctor Walter Needham and my self were consulted. We concluded it a
Flatulent Tumor, and proposed the opening of it; to which purpose she was
purged. Her Body being so prepared, I applied a Caustic on the most prominent
part, and the next day divided the Escar, and passed my Knife deep into it:
there came out nothing of Matter or Blood. I made a search with a Probe, and
passed it almost to the Bone, meeting no other opposition by the way then a
soft puffy membranous Flesh, such as is usually seen in a Shoulder of Veal. I
dressed it with Lenients, Emplasters and Bandage.

The fourth day, the Physician being present, I took off the Dressings; on
which there appeared little more Matter then what is usual from such Escars.
The Tumor continued, and was somewhat inflamed: it required Digestion. To
which purpose I sprinkled in about j. of Merc. praecipitat. and dressed it up
with Lenients as before. The third day after I dressed it again, and saw the
Escar separating, and the Abscesse digested. I dressed the Abscesse again with
Praecipitate, and the external parts with unguent. tutiae. By this method the
Abscesse digested, and the Tumor sunk, and was cured as has been above
showed. Many of these Tumors we meet with which are certainly raised by a
Flatus, yet give no Sound, nor yet does there appear any Wind to puff out upon
opening.

In the time of the Wars a Soldier was brought to me much wounded. 3. Observat.
During his Cure we took notice of a large white Swelling on the outside of one
of his Thighs, which we supposed Matter: and after the Digestion of his Wounds
I opened that Tumor. There issued out only a little waterish Humor, part
whereof was tinctured with the blood dropping from the incised Lips. There was
neither crackling of Wind nor hollow Sound, yet the Tumor sunk from that
Dressing; and by Discutients and Exsiccants with good Bandage it was soon
cured. Some other such like Tumors I have met with, and cured accordingly.

A Gentlewoman of about thirty years of age had a Swelling on her right Knee
encompassing the Rotula: it had been growing about a year or two. 4. Observat.
I supposed it flatulent, and treated it as has been set down in the method of
Cure, by Fomentations, Embrocations and Emplasters: but it heating thereby and
increasing, I applied an Empl. e bolo, and caused a Knee-piece to be laced on:
by the continued use of which the Swelling was restrained, and the Knee
recovered its former strength.

Another about forty years of age, of a full Body, had a round soft Swelling
lying on each side of the Rotula without alteration of color in the Skin. 5.
Observat.
It had some time disabled her from going up or down a pair of stairs, and
often hazarded her falling in other motions. In this case I applied an
Emplaster ad herniam, with an addition of cerat. hyssopi over each Tumor, and
a Compress of brown Paper soaked in aqua fabrorum, over which a laced Kneepiece
was put on, and straightened proportionably. By the renewing these Dressings
once in a week or ten days the Swelling discussed, and her Knee recovered its
former strength: yet she continued the wearing of the Bandage some years.

A young person having been some years afflicted with a Swelling in one of her
Knees, 6. Observat.
after various Applications it increasing, I was sent for, and saw it
overspreading the Joint and Parts about, retaining the natural color of the
Skin. It yielded to the impression of my fingers as a Bladder half blown up; by
which I judged it flatulent. The Bone on the inside of the Knee was also
protuberant, which at their first discovery of the Tumor gave the Parents a
suspicion it was luxated. I began with a Fomentation made of a Decoction of
some of those Plants proposed in the method of Cure, and embrocated it with
unguent. nervinum, and with Wax made up a Cerote of the same, which I applied
with good Bandage till I got a Knee-piece made. Being made I laced it on, and
from that time repeated the Dressings once in a week or ten days. By this
method the pain and Swelling diminished, and she walked on it with more
strength. Indeed the Cure of these chiefly depends on the well-lacing of them;
for accordingly as it was straightened, so the Swelling lessened. The weather
growing seasonable, she went to the Spa, and afterward to the Bath: from
whence returning no better, she was again recommended to my care. I then
attempted the discussing it by Medicaments more powerful: they heated the
Tumor, and blistered it here and there, but did not lessen it. After I had
assuaged the heat by Lenients, and healed the Excoriations, I applied over the
Tumor Empl. diasulphuris Rulandii, laced on the Knee-piece again, and renewed
the Application once in ten days. In their over-hard lacing of this Bandage the
Leg swelled: to prevent which, I caused a laced Stocking to be put on it. By
the wearing thereof the Knee-piece was laced with more advantage, and she
recovered strength of it daily, to walk, dance, and visit her Friends abroad.
During this, Doctor Micklethwait being in the house visited my Patient,
prescribed such Internalls as were proper for her, and proposed the embrocating
of the Tumor cum oleo sulph. terebinth. which was used daily for some time.
Afterward a Pultice was advised of the tops of green Wormwood, Rue, Sage and
Feverfew, with Hogs grease: this was applied till it became offensive to her.
After these several Applications, it appearing to them more visibly that her
Cure consisted in the well lacing of her Knee-piece, there was taken more care
therein by her Servants, and a warm Cerote applied under it. The Tumor
lessened, and is since very much diminished. I have lately taken off the
Plaster and laced Stocking, and hope in few weeks she may leave off the
Knee-piece, the Swelling being now inconsiderable.

A young Gentlewoman came to London with a puffy Swelling on her left Foot near
her Toes; 7. Observat.
part of the Swelling stretched over the Toe next the little one, on which the
Tumor was near two fingers breadth. It was without Inflammation or
considerable pain. I supposed it to be Wind, and would have given vent to it;
but, not being permitted, I endeavored then by Discutients to scatter it: it
inflamed, and would not yield thereto. I then applied Emplastr. e bolo, and put
on a laced Sock with a Bracer tacked to it for that Toe, and by Compresse and
careful Lacing suppressed the Swelling, and gave her so much ease, that after
some time it hindered her not form taking those Divertisements others her
School-fellows did. After she had worn this Sock some months, she left off the
use of Emplasters, but continued the Bandage some years. The Swelling on her
Foot is since discussed, but the Toe continues still big, yet inconsiderably to
what it was.

CHAP. XXVIII. Of Hernia.
HAving thus far treated of Tumors by Humor and Wind; it remains now that I
say somewhat of a Tumor made by the interposition of a solid Body. Examples of
this nature are frequently to be found in some sorts of Hernia, viz. the
zirbalis and intestinalis, the falling out of the Kell or Guts, which, being
both of them solid Bodies, are often interposed preternaturally between
several Coats of the Peritonaeum, Scrotum, or other adjacent places, and do
denominate the Tumor an Hernia of that Part where it is raised.

If is burst out at or near the Navell, extending there the Peritonaeum,
together with the several Tendons of the oblique and transverse Muscles of the
Abdomen, The Kinds. Exomphalos.
it is called Exomphalos. If either of these break down into the Cod, that
Tumor is most strictly called a Hernia. Hernia.
And though only these which I have here mentioned be strictly that Disease,
yet other Tumors of those Parts, for their likeness to these, obtain the same
name: viz. the Hernia aquosa, which is an Hydropicall Tumor; the Hernia
carnosa, which is a Sarcoma, or sometimes Scirrhus, of that Part; the Hernia
ventosa, which also belongs to another Head, as also does varicosa: of the
former notwithstanding of these two I do add something in this place, by
reason of the affinity of the Cure.

I shall first begin with the Hernia Scroti, intestinalis and zirbalis: Hernia
Scroti.
both which are manifestly the falling down of the Gut or Kell, either quite
into the Scrotum, which is a perfect Rupture; or else part of the way only,
which is usually termed a Relaxation.

That this Disease may be thoroughly understood, it will be necessary to give
you an exact account of the Parts concerned. The principal is the Peritonaeum,
or strong Membrane that lines all the insdie of the Abdominall Muscles, and
then passing to the Back, does there some way or other involve and give Coats
to all the Viscera. It is a strong Membrane, everywhere double; in the
duplications of which all the Viscera of the Abdomen are hid, and through which
all the Vessels do pass. Its thickness and thinness is very different in
several Parts, according to the several necessities of Nature. The lower part
of it is strongest, to enable the Belly the better to bear the weight of the
Intestines; and is usually presumed by inadvertent men to be perforated in the
Navell, for passing of the Umbilicall Vessels, and in the Groin, for the
transmission of the Seminalls. But he that will consider the case will find it
otherwise. For the Membrane, being everywhere double, does so receive these
Vessels between its Coats, as that they passing behind the first Coat leave it
everywhere entire, both at the Navell and Inguen. But in the latter place, the
Seminalls do take the outward Lamina, of the Peritonaeum along with them,
which, containing them in it self, does at length make that Tunicle which
involveth the Testicle, by the name of Tunica vaginalis or Elytroides.

This, I say, is the most natural structure of the Peritonaeum, in which if
the inward Lamina be strong, it keeps within the hollow of the Belly the Guts
and Humors, if there, so that though the Cavity be full of water, yet it
transmits nothing into the Scrotum; and the Tumors that happen to the Scrotum
of Hydropicall persons are usually anasarcous, coming outwardly into the
Membranes of the Scrotum, not passing from one Cavity to the other.

But if this inward Lamina, either through its own weakness, or the force put
upon it in straining, etc. do relax, the Entrals thrust forwards to the
Scrotum, and in the top of the Process (usually so called) suffer an Angle to
be excavated wherein part of the Guts is contained, and the Membrane extended,
but not broken. In which case the membranous partition that intercedes between
the Guts and the Scrotum is visible. But if the Membrane break, then the
Entrals rush down without control into the Scrotum.

In Women also Ruptures are apt to happen in the Groin in the same place by
reason of the transition of the Ligamenta uteri teretia, which pass between the
Laminae of the Peritonaeum after the same manner as the Seminall Vessels do in
men. These Tumors usually end in the Groin, and are known by the name of
Bubonocele, which is a common name to all the Herniae in that place, whether
they be in men or women.

The Causes of Hernia intestinalis and zirbalis are diverse. Causes.
In Children it proceeds from abundance of crudity or moisture, vehement
crying, and holding their breath too forcibly. In those of more age, from
violent Exercise, hard riding, jumping, vaulting, hallowing, carrying great
burdens, a Blow or Fall, or any thing that many over-stretch the Peritonaeum.
The very weight of the Bowels and Kell in fat people is often the occasion of
a Rupture. In such bodies Vomiting may be a cause; yea the very straining upon
the Close-stool (if they be costive) is enough to make a Relaxation in some
part, and a Rupture frequently follows.

In Women hard labor in Childbed has often been the Cause of a Rupture in the
Groin, as also in the Navell.

The Sign of a Hernia by Relaxation is, a certain Eminence or soft Tumor
appearing under the Skin in either of the Groins, or other part of the Belly,
without Inflammation or pain, Signs.
which disappeareth after the Patient has layn some time on his back in bed,
and appears again when he is up: and by laying your hand then upon it, if he
cough or sneeze, you will feel the impulse of the Bowels, which is not to be
felt on the sound part. According as this Swelling is greater or less, so it is
more or less accompained with an uneasiness or Colic. In Infants this Disease
is scarce taken notice of by their Nurses, till it has made its way into or
near the Scrotum, to which place these through neglect do fall.

The Sign of a Hernia intestinalis made by Eruption is, the sudden rise of the
Tumor, whether it be made by Blow, Fall, or the like; in which case the
Intestines or Omentum, or both, slide down into the Scrotum, or lie in a great
Tumor in Inguine. If it were caused by a Blow or Fall, there is sometimes
blood extravasated, and the Swelling is painful, whether it be in Inguine or
Scroto; and it soon descends from the Inguen to the Scrotum, where you may
distinguish it from a Sarcoma by laying your hand upon the Production of the
Peritonaeum just at its Exit from the Abdomen, then putting the Patient upon
coughing or sneezing: upon either of these you will perceive the motion of the
Gut, if it be there. If this Hernia be neglected in the Female sex, it will
make a round Tumor near the Pudenda.

The Hernia omentalis is an unequal soft slippery Tumor, of a continued
bigness, whether the Patient be full or empty: whereas that of the Intestine is
round, and has a certain murmuring, if it be empty; and if it be full of
Excrements, they may be felt in it. The Tumor is also greater or less
according as the Patient is full or empty: a painful Colic attends it; and,
if it be not timely reduced, a Fever and Vomiting follows.

The Hernia umbilicalis is discerned by the Prominence in the Navell. Whether
it be of the Omentum or Intestines, may be judged by what I have already said
of the other.

The Pneumatocele or Hernia ventosa, affecting the Belly in diverse parts, is
distinguished by its quick growth and roundness. Infants are frequently subject
to it, sometimes in one Groin and Testicle, and other times in both. It lodges
between the Testicle and Tunica vaginalis, making a Tumor like the Bladders
which are found in some Fish: it is long or round, according as it possesses
only the cavity of the Testicle, or that and the whole Production.

No Hernia intestinalis is without danger: Prognostic
those made by Relaxation are least dangerous. Those by Ruption in Children and
Youth under twenty years of age, or while they are growing, are curable if they
be timely reduced, though the Intestine be fallen down into the Scrotum: but in
people of full growth they are for the most part capable only of being kept up
by good Bandage. If the Intestine be not speedily reduced, there follows
grievous pain, with Colic and Fever, because the excretion of Excrements is
prohibited; from whence Inflammation, vomiting of Excrements, yea sometimes
Gangrene and Death, ensue. But if the Rupture in the Peritonaeum be very large,
the Intestines frequently perform their office as safely in the Scrotum as if
they were in their natural place within the Abdomen.

The Hernia umbilicalis is subject to the like Accidents as that of the
Scrotum, if not timely reduced.

In other cases the Skin is sometimes worn so thin that it breaks, and the Cure
is most difficult, by reason of continual pressure of the Bowels.

The Hernia omentalis is not dangerous, yet by reason of its softness and
slipperiness it is difficultly reduced, and retained within after it is
reduced, but in Children it is of easy Cure: and those people who are of a
sanguine and humid Temper are of more hopes of Cure then those of a dry Habit.
Yet if the Tumor be small and recent, and only in Inguine, the Cure is
feasible, be the Habit of body what it will.

Hernia arising from Wind is of more easy Cure, especially in Children, whom it
generally afflicts.

In order to the Cure, you are to consider the Hernia, Cure
whether it be intestinalis or omentalis, recent or of long continuance, made
by Relaxation or Ruption. You are in the first place to endeavor the reduction
of it; to which purpose, you ought to advise the Patient to lie upon his Back,
with his Head declining, and his Hips raised high, with his Heels retracted
toward his Hips. Then with warm clothes you are to try how you can reduce it,
pressing moderately and gradually, taking care that you do not bruise it or the
Testicle. If it yields not to such endeavors, you are then to consider whether
the repletion of Excrements or Crudity were the Cause; in which cases you may
prescribe a Clyster: rad. and fol. althaeae, fol. malvae, viol. betae,
parietariae, an. M.j. flor. cham. melilot. sambuci, an. Mss. sem. lini,
foenugraec. an. vj. sem. anisi, foenicul. an. j. coq. ad tertias; colat. sum
viij. in quibus dissolv. sacchar. rubr. ij. mellis rosat. colati, diacathol.
an. j. hierae picrae vj. ol. cham. lilior. an. ij. salis com. ij. fiat Enema.
Or else Clysters of fat Broth with a little Salt. These may be repeated till
you have emptied the Bowels, and the while the remaining Decoction may be
applied hot with Stupes: and if the Excrements by hardened in the prolapsed
Intestines, you may make a Cataplasm of the Faeces, by beating them up with
axung. porcin. unguent. dialthaeae, ol. lilior. etc. and apply it hot to the
Scrotum. Thus the Excrements may be softened and evacuated. If Flatulency be the
cause of its not reducing, foment and embrocate with such Discutients as have
been proposed in Flatulent Tumors, (if what is prescribed be not sufficient;)
then reduce the Hernia: which being done, your next work will be to shut up the
Foramen by which the Omentum and Intestines passed forth; and that we shall
propose with Medicaments that have a binding and agglutinative quality. Such is
Emplastr. contra rupturam in the London Pharmacopoeia, and Emplastr. de pelle
arietin. Or, mastich. thuris, aloes, sang. dracon. sarcocollae, bol. Armen.
gypsi, gallar. an. ij. ichthyocollae and taurocollae in aceto dissolut. an ij.
malaxentur, and fiat Emplastr. Spread some one of these upon Leather, and apply
it with some convenient Truss; of which some are made of Dimity or course
Holland, others of Whale-bone, Steel, etc. Those made of Dimity have Boulsters
stuffed with Cotton for one or both Groins, with two Straps to come betwixt the
Legs, and fastened behind or to the Boulsters by Clasps or Points. Those that
are designed for the Bubonocele have a couple of Straps tacked to the end of
the Boulster, and, passing betwixt, are fastened with Points behind. These
Trusses are proper for Infants and tender bodies, where the Rupture is recent,
and for the most part made by Relaxation. They are necessary in the Cure of
Ruptures in people of years, and have always served my prupose in the Cure of
Children. There is great care required in the putting them on and wearing them.
In Children it is the work of Nurses or Maidservants, who frequently tie them
too slack about the Loins, and too straight betwixt the Legs; by which
negligence they bring the Truss over the Buttock, or else permit the Rupture to
slide down under the Boulster into the Scrotum: all which Errors, though they
be forewarned, yet they do often commit, and thereby the Cure is delayed, and
imputed to the Ignorance or Neglect of the Surgeon. To avoid which, we are
sometimes necessitated to put them on Straps over the Shoulders, such as
Laborers commonly wear to keep up their Breeches. Nor indeed are Children
only sufferers in this case, for people of full age, by reason of carelessness
in putting on and wearing their Trusses, permit small Herniae by Relaxation in
Bubonocele to increase and slide down in Scrotum. To prevent which in Men, I
commonly order a Bag-truss to be fastened near the Boulster, by which the
Scrotum is tucked up, and rendered the less capable of receiving the prolapsed
Omentum or Intestine. In Women, through ignorance and shyness in consulting,
small Herniae in Inguine do also increase to a great bulk: in which case a
hollow Boulster-truss may be fitted proportionably to the Rupture, or a
Bagtruss, to retain it up. In Men, through the often descent of the Bowels,
the Eruption is made some times so large, that the Intestines do their office
in the Scrotum with as little disturbance as if they were in the Belly: in
which case a Bag-truss is to be proportioned, with a hole for the Penis to pass
through; which being put on whilst the Patient is in bed, and in a declining
posture, will much hinder the prolapse of the Bowels, and ease the Patient
much in his going abroad about his affairs; and by the continuance of the
Surgeon and his endeavors the Rupture may be restored to good condition.
These sorts of Trusses are well made by Mr. Syms in Bell-alley near Temple Bar.

There are other sorts of Trusses made of Whale-bone. The stuffing of the
Boulster is placed upon Cork, which will sit firm upon Children and Youth.
There are others made of thin Laminae of Tin and Steel, with and without
Joints, which do sit easily about the Loins: they have also Boulsters, that, by
virtue of Worms and Screws fixed in them, do sit closer or more distant, and
retain the Rupture up without pressing upon the Spermatick Vessels or Os
pubis. They are useful in old Herniae. These are made by Mr. Smith, a
Scotchman, who lives near Fleet-bridge. He is the most ingenious man in that
work, and makes the best Trusses for the retaining the Hernia umbilicalis
within its bounds. But in great fat Bellies we find it often necessary to put
them on a Bracer to encompass the Belly, which may be laced behind or on one
side, to bear part of its weight.

Having thus far provided for the retaining the Hernia within its bounds, you
ought to have the Hair shaved, if there be any, and apply Agglutinatives with
good Bandage. If the Boulster sit uneasy, a Quilt may be made to lie under it,
or a Compress of brown Paper soaked in aqua fabrorum wherein some Astringents
have been boiled; by which your Truss will sit the easier, and retain the
relaxed or torn Parts, and thereby they may be the sooner agglutinated.

Our next consideration will be matter of Diet and manner of living. Their Diet
ought to be sparing, but of good nourishment. as Mutton, Veal, Lamb, Pullet,
Chicken and the like; avoiding all Herbage, Fruit, Fish, and Whitemeats, such
as may engender Crudities. Their Bread ought to be of Wheat, with carminative
Seeds in it. The confected semina carui, coriandri, foeniculi, and the like,
are commended after Dinner and at other times to further Digestion. Their Drink
a red Wine with a little Water wherein gads of Steel have been quenched; or Ale
wherein some of the specific Plants have been infused.

Rest is of great advantage in the Cure of these Herniae. Fabritius Hildanus
and others who have writ of this Disease will tell you, that some have been
cured of great Ruptures by keeping their bed upon some accident of a Fracture,
or fit of the Gout, when before their best endeavors in the Cure signified
nothing. In consideration of which they forbid all manner of Exercise; and
advise them that, whilst they keep their beds, they should often feel with
their hands about the Part affected, principally in case of any sudden Sneezing
or violent Coughing, and especially in easing nature by Stool, that, if any
Relapse happen, it may be helped. But that you may the better avoid such
Accidents, you ought to keep their Bodies soluble by Clysters, Suppositories,
or lenient Electuaries. Where the pituitous Humors abound, they require
sometime also to be purged; for which I refer you to the Chapter of Oedema.
After it may be proper to prescribe some Agglutinatives; and they are either
simple, or compound.

The simple are reckoned among the Vulnerary Plants; not all of them, but such
as have a moderate Astringency, and are without remarkable heat or acrimony,
and have specificall virtue. Such are consolid. maj. and minor, quinquefolium,
equisetum, sanicula, auricula ursi, pilosella, jacea utraque, sigill.
Solomonis, tormentilla, osmunda regalis, hippoglossum, lunaria min. perfoliata,
herniaria, herba trinitatis, cort. cypress. granat. etc. The distilled water of
osmunda regalis is commended in the Cure, so are also pilosella, hippoglossum,
lunaria, and severally given in a Powder in a Decoction of Comfry-roots.
Perfoliata and herniaria are delivered to us to be of so great virtue as to
cure this Disease in few days, conditionally the Rupture be kept in by a good
Bandage. They may be given as Tea; or they may be juiced or powdered, and mixed
with red Wine.

The more compounded are these: cons. ros. rub. vet. symphyti, an. j. florum
salviae, acori, an. ss trochisc. de carab. vel de spodio, vel e bolo, iij. cum
sir. cotoneorum, fiat Electuarium: of which the Patient may take twice or
thrice a day, drinking thereupon six ounces of this medicated Wine, herba
alchimillae, ophioglossi, nummular. fragar. auricul. muris, veronic.
artemisiae, scolopendr. perfoliat. an. M.j. virgae aur. M.ij. rad. cichor.
tormentill. bistort. vincetoxici, id est, hirundinariae, an. j. perfoliat. ss.
cort. citr. jss. sem. anisi. foeniculi, an. iij. coriandri praeparat. cinnamom.
an. j. flor. borraginis, buglossi, an. ij. prunell. sylvestr. jss. galang. ij.
passul. enucleat. jss. Misc. infund. in s. q. vini optimi; colatura reservetur
pro usu.

If after the forementioned endeavors to reduce the Hernia, (whether it were
by reason it had been too long relapsed, and the Excrements grown hard and
dried in the Intestine, or that they were stuffed with Crudities, or inflamed
by the constriction in the Production, etc.) you do not succeed, you ought to
consider what the impediment is, and proceed accordingly to let blood, purge or
vomit, or put him into a Semicupium, keeping on his Bag-truss the while: after
which he may if occasion require, be carried to and so fro upon the back of a
strong man with his Head downward, by which the prolapsed Bowels are often
reduced. Mr. Smith the Truss-maker told me he had made such an Engine by which
he set them on their Heads, and thereby had reduced many, which could not
otherwise be relieved.

But the aforesaid ways, I bless God, have served the most deplorable Patient
laboring of these Diseases under my hands. Yet if it should so happen, that
all endeavors of this kind prove ineffectuall, and the Patient's life be
threatened by frequent vomiting and inflation of the Abdomen, and nothing pass
through him by Stool, I would ask whether in such a case it be not more
reasonable to offer in Consultation the laying open the Production while there
is strength, then to suffer the Patient miserably to perish under the Disease.
I refer it to the judicious Artist, there seeming nothing of difficulty or
danger in the work; yet would not have it attempted whilst there is hope of
otherwise reducing it.

To perform this Operation, the Patient ought to be laid flat on his Back upon
a Table or Form, and bound thereon; then an Incision must be made upon the
upper part of the Scrotum to the Production, which requires also to be
divided, without touching the Intestines or Omentum: then you are to pass in a
Cannula (like our common Directour, but as big as a large Goose-quill) into the
Cavity under the Process of the Peritonaeum upwards, avoiding the Intestines;
then make your Incision of such a length as may serve to put your fingers into
the Scrotum, and raise the Intestines and Omentum, which you are to reduce into
their natural place within the Belly. They being thus reduced, you must stitch
up the Wound, as is said in the Wounds of the Abdomen, taking up with your
Needle so much of the Production as may shut up the Cavity, and prohibit the
relapse of the Intestines. That done, cure the Wound, as is showed in the
Treatise of those Wounds; it not being so large or dangerous as many of those
we have cured in the Wars.

In the farther Cure of these, various ways have been proposed by Surgeons;
viz. the actual and potentiall Cautery, also Puncture and Deligation of the
Process of the Peritonaeum, also Incision, with or without extraction of the
Testicle. These ways are not practiced amongst our people, they esteeming such
Operations full of hazard and cruelty: yet they having been delivered to us by
good Authority, I shall show you how they are performed, and begin with that of
the actual Cautery. In the effecting of which work there are required various
sorts of Buttons, some bigger and less then other. Whilst these are in the
fire, the Patient must stand, and hold in his breath, by which doing the Tumor
in Inguine will be more apparent. Then it is to be circumscribed within a
triangular figure: after which the Patient being placed on his Back, press with
your hot Cautery on the middle of that Triangle, and repeat it often, making
the form of the Greek Letter G so deep till you reach to the Membrana adiposa,
taking care you do not scorch the Peritonaeum: then dress the burned parts with
a little Salt and an Onion beat together, and afterward digest and heal the
Ulcer as you find proposed in the Chapter of Burns, he keeping his bed till he
be cured. By this method the Author proposes a contraction of the Skin by
reason of the Cicatrix. How this will do without the wearing of a Truss, I
much suspect.

Another proposes the reducing of the Hernia, and the thrusting up of the
Testicle to the Os pubis; then marketh the Compress of the Prominence made by
the Testicle, and, shoving it and its Vessels out of the Scrotum, he burns
in the middle of that Mark (with a pointed Cautery a little curved) to the very
Bone, then dresseth it cum albumine ovor. and cures it as a burn: by which if
he burns the Bone, it must necessarily exsoliate, and unite with the Skin and
fleshy Parts over it, and hinder the prolapse in Scrotum. But yet there must
remain a Bubonocele, which will require a Boulster-Truss to prevent its
swagging down, as is frequently incident to Women.

The way by Caustic is propounded by others as more easy. The mildest of them
is Soap-lees boiled to a stone, with the addition of sevum vitulin. and a
fourth part of opium added to it at the last. The other are as follows.
vitrioli usti iij. salis ammoniaci j. calcis vivae, ciner. e vini faece, an.
iij. these must be bruised and mixed with a lixivium e cineribus sicuum and
tithymall. then strained out and boiled to a stone. Or, salis nitri,
chalcitidis, an. x. distill them, and cast away the first water, it being black
and unfit for use. The second Distillation is clear, and must be put into a
Glass bottle, in which dissolve arsenici albi ij. tartari albi usti, merc.
sublimati, an. j. then put it into a copper Vessel, and by a moderate heat
consume the humidity; the remaining faeces is the Caustic.

In order to the applying of any of these Causticks, the Part must be marked,
and the Patient afterward laid upon a Table, as has been said in the
preceding Operations; then the Caustic is to be applied cross-wise, an inch
long and as much transverse, near the Os pubis; which having operated to the
Bone, it is supposed that Bone shall exfoliate, and the Callus arising from it
will unite with the Ulcer in the fleshy Pannicles and Skin, and stop the
descent of the Viscera: which notwithstanding cannot prevent a Bubonocele.
Another way is by the application of a Caustic in Inguine, then to raise off
the Escar, and, taking up the Membrana adiposa with a Hook, to divide it, and
free the Seminall Vessels from the Process of the Peritonaeum. Then pass a
Needle with crude Silk under it, tie it close, and leaving it hanging out
digest the Ulcer, incarn and cicatrize it; during which the Silk will have cut
through, and fall off: and the Production uniting with the Wound absolutely
confirms the Cure. The Cure by Puncture is the invention of some of the
Moderns, and is set down by Ambrose Pareus.

There yet remain two ways of Cure by Incision: in order to which the Patient
must stand upright, as has already been said, that the Rupture by falling down
may plainly discover its bigness, and that the Part so swelled may be
encompassed with a circle: after which the Patient must be laid flat on a
Table, with his Heels raised up, as in the forementioned cases: then one of the
Assistents shall press with his hand upon the bottom of his Belly, whilst the
Surgeon with his left hand raises up the marked Skin as much as he can,
then divides it with his Knife long-ways down the length of the Process or
Tunica vaginalis, so as to open that Coat, and lay the Seminall Vessels bare;
which he is to avoid the hurting whilst he takes up the divided Tunicle, and
stitcheth it with the Skin so close that the Hernia may be retained within the
Belly from starting out. Then by Agglutinatives, as bol. Armen. sang. dracon.
thus, aloe, cum albumine ovi, dress it up, and place him in his bed. If
afterward there be occasion to apply Digestives, vitell. ovor. number. ij. far.
tritic. thuris pulv. q. s. After which you may deterge with mundif. apii, and
incarn with some such like Sarcotick: terebinth. siccat. iij. thuris, mastich.
sem. foenugraec. an. ss. cerae j. ol. hyperici x. Misc. S. A. Then cicatrize it
as in other like Wounds.

The Empiricall way is by extraction of the Testicle: in the doing of which the
Patient must be laid on his Back, as before mentioned, and bound fast upon the
place: then the Intestines being reduced, the Assistent shall retain them up
with his hands, whilst the Operator makes an oblique Mark in the Groin, to
which place he thrusts up the Testicle; then makes an Incision so deep and
large upon it, as to take it out with the spermatick Vessels, which he holds
with the one hand, while with the other he separates it from the Membranes. (In
all which cases he must be careful not to lacerate them, for thereby he shall
cause Convulsions, and hasten the death of the Patient.) That done, he makes a
Ligature above the Testicle upon the Vessels, and cuts it off. If there be
fear of a flux of blood, he cauterizeth the ends so tied: then, re-placing them
within the Belly, leaving the ends of the Ligature hanging out, he stitcheth up
the Wound, dressing as above said: and during the time of Cicatrizing the
Ligature falls off.

In order to these Operations the Patient ought to be of a strong Constitution
and well habited, his Bowels emptied by Purging and Clysters, and to be very
sparing in his Diet, at least three or four days preceding the Work. But I
never yet met one that would submit to any of these ways.

The Cure of the Bubonocele in Women requires its being reduced and cured as
those in Men, by Emplasters and good Bandage, etc. as has been already showed
in those.

In the Hernia umbilicalis the Cure also consists in the well reducing of it,
and in the retaining it so by Agglutinatives and good Bandage. If through
neglect of treating it timely, as aforesaid, the Skin do wear thin and
mortify, you must dress it as such: and after the separation of the Escars,
you must then endeavor to take up the Peritonaeum, stitch it close together,
and incarn it with the rest of the Ulcer, as has been showed: and after it is
cicatrized, endeavor by good Bandage to retain it more easily within its
bounds.

There is scarce any Disease little Infants are more subject unto then
Ruptures. They are not difficult of Cure, if their Nurses would be careful to
keep their Trusses well on: but, through their negligence therein, the Cure is
frequently rendered vexatious. Therefore I shall begin my Observations with them.

AN Infant of about four months old was discovered to have a Swelling in the
left Inguen, 1. Observat.
another in the Navell, and another three fingers breadth higher. That in the
Groin, which we generally call Bubonocele, was made by Relaxation of the
Intestine, as appeared by the noise it made in the time of Reduction. The other
two proceeded from Wind. I took the compass of his Hips with a Ribbon, and the
next day brought a soft Boulster-Truss of Holland linen, with two Straps
fastened to the Boulster: and, having applied an Empl. ad berniam spread upon
Lambskin on the Tumor in the Groin, I fitted the Boulster to it, and reduced
it, then tied it on; then passing the Straps between his Legs, I fastened them
with Points on each side behind; by which the Rupture was retained within the
Boulster, not pressing upon the Thigh or God. On the Rupture of the Navell, or
Hernia umbilicalis, I applied a mixture pulver. thuris, mastich. aloes, etc.
sang. draconis, cum albumine ovi, and made a Compression with an Emplastr. e
bolo by a small Button sticking in the middle thereof, made of some snips of
the same Emplaster, by which the Emplaster under it was retained the closer. On
the other above the Navell I applied a Compress made by some pieces of
Emplastr. ad herniam, and retained them close by applying over them Emplastr. e
bolo. By this method these Herniae were cured in few weeks. For that in the
Groin they had half a dozen Trusses sent them, for shift as occasion offered;
and it was cured thereby in few months.

A Child about two months old labored of some Indisposition of body, 2.
Observat. of Hernia intestinalis.
and was observed to have a Swelling in the right God. In pressing upon it with
my fingers, it seemed to me not to lie loose in the Scrotum: it yielded to a
moderate pressure; and being somewhat reduced, the residue of it jerked
suddenly up with a noise, which confirmed it a Hernia intestinalis by
Relaxation. I took the compass of his Loins to the Groin, and the next day
brought him an Emplastr. ad herniam with some Boulster-Trusses. I reduced the
Rupture as easily as I had done the day before, then applied the Emplaster,
fitted the Boulster over it, and tied it moderately straight. These Trusses had
the Straps stitched on behind; they were brought between his Thighs, and
fastened to the upper part of the Boulster cross each other by Points. I showed
the Nurse how they were to be put, and gave her caution lest the Boulster
should at any time gall the Thigh or Scrotum, or that by too strict a Bandage
the Hip should be hurt, or by too slack a Bandage the Hernia should slide down
under the Boulster, or whilst it was loose tied those Straps between the Legs
should be tied so straight as to bring the Bandage over his Hanches and slip
down. Having thus forewarned her, I made my visits the seldomer, as not
desiring to appear too officious; and indeed was fetched the next day to a
Patient some miles off, where I staid three weeks. At my return I made a visit
to this little one, and felt the Rupture slipped down into the Scrotum by reason
of the slackness of the Bracer; and the Nurse had pulled the Straps between the
Thighs so over-streight as to bring the Bracer down, and would not believe it
could be kept up without a Bandage from the Shoulders. But I reduced the
Rupture, tied it streighter, slackened the Straps between the Thighs, and
showed her it could not fall over the Buttocks whilst it was so tied. The next
Error she committed was in bracing it too straight about the Hips, whereby she
had gauled it on the right Hip; and then she complained to her Lady, that it
was not possible to cure the Child without giving it some healing Drinks: such
and such had been cured so in few days. To this I replied, That the Cure
consisted in the keeping up the Rupture; that done, it would cure without
Drinks: That there was but little to be given to such an Infant. Yet I wished
them to consult their Physician therein. I applied an Emplastr. diachalciteos
upon the Excoriation, with two or three folds of soft linen over it, and braced
the Bandage slacker: by which Dressings the Excoriation cured, the Nurse became
more experienced, and the Child was happily recovered in few weeks; but left
not off the wearing the Truss till the Summer following.

I was fetched to a Child half a year old having a Swelling in Scroto on the
left side. It was a Hernia intestinalis by Relaxation. I reduced it easily, 3.
Observat. of Hernia intestinalis.
and the next day fitted it with a soft Boulster-Truss; and, having reduced it,
applied Emplastr. ad herniam, put on the Bandage, and supplied them with more
Trusses for change, (they being apt to bepiss them daily, so that, if they be
not carefully attended, they are subject to Excoriation.) Once in four or five
days I called in to see how the Nurse ordered her affair; and by her diligence
the Child was cured in few weeks, but continued the use of the Truss till it
was grown stronger, and had bred his Teeth.

A Youth aged eleven years had been some months diseased with a Rupture before
his Friends discovered it: 4. Observat. of Hernia intestinalis.
through which neglect it fell into the Scrotum, and indisposed him with
Colicks. I was sent for, and saw it an Hernia intestinalis on the left side. I
endeavored to reduce it, but could not. I then took measure of his Loins, and
the next morning found him in bed, and placed him on his Back, with his Hips
high, etc. and with warm clothes reduced the Rupture: then put him on a
Boulster-Truss made of strong Holland, with a couple of Straps fastened to the
lower part of the Boulster; and having fastened the Truss about his Loins with
Points, I brought the Straps between his Legs, and tied them behind. Thus I
retained the Rupture. The next day I made him a visit, and seeing the Rupture
well retained, I loosened the Bandage, applied an Emplastr. ad herniam, and
braced it on again, leaving Directions with his Servant to take care in the
bracing the Truss close every morning. This Patient was very active in running
and playing daily; yet by the use of these Emplasters and careful Bandage, he
was cured in few months, I scarce making him six visits the while.

A Child of about six years of age was brought out of the Country, 5. Observat.
of Hernia intestinalis.
having somewhile suffered under a Hernia in Scroto. He had a Truss, but it was
not well made. I laid him upon his Back, with his Heels retracted to his Hips.
It did not presently yield to a Reduction; whereupon I caused some warm clothes
to be applied, and then pressed it moderately upward: it returned up with a
murmuring noise. I then applied my Emplaster and Bandage, and, having advised
them concerning the use of the Truss, I left them to prosecute the Cure,
supplying them with Emplasters and Bandage. About half a year after I saw hm
cured.

A Youth of about nine years of age was brought to me out of the Country with a
Swelling in his right Groin: 6. Observat.
it was supposed to be a Bubonocele, and to that purpose Emplasters and Trusses
had been put on, and the Part thereby inflamed. I felt the Swelling, and, as I
thought, the Testicle which was wanting in the Scrotum. Upon which
consideration I forbad the use of the Truss, and applied an Emplastr. oxelaei:
by which the heat was removed, the Child freed of his Bandage, and the Testicle
left to fall down by degrees; which accordingly it did, and his Parents were
well pleased.

The Pneumatocele, 7. Observat. of Hernia ventosa.
or Hernia ventosa, appears often in Inguine in the Tunica vaginalis, and
makes a Tumor not unlike that of the Testicle. Such a one was brought to me
in the Groin of a Child of about seven years of age. It was as big as a
Pullet's egg, soft, but withal so tense that it yielded little to pressure.
It had been treated by Bandage, but yielded not thereto, but became more
painful. I prescribed a Fomentation and Emplasters, as has been set down in
Flatulent Tumors, and caused a soft Boulster-Truss to be put on, rather to
keep it warm and retain the Dressings on, then to make any straight
Compression. I treated him by internalls proper in such Tumors, by which he
was some time after cured.

A Gentlewoman brought a Son to London with a Swelling in his left Testicle. 8.
Observat. of Hernia ventosa.
Several of our Profession had seen it, but delivered no certain Judgment of
it, nor prescribed ought in order to the Cure. The Swelling was Wind gotten
into the Tunica vaginalis, which encompassed the Testicle round, so as I could
not feel it. By reason of the Tumor, which was so tense that it would not
yield to the pressure of my fingers, I proposed Discutients and a Bag-Truss.
They were dissuaded from my Opinion by some who had rather their Friend should
fail of his Cure then receive it from me. Which has somewhat appeared in this
case: for two years after the Father of this Child told me he continued as I
had formerly seen him.

A Child about two years old had one of these Tumors lying the whole length of
the Production the Testicle, 9. Observat. of Hernia ventosa.
like unto the uppermost of those Bladders which we find in Carps: and the same
Wind, having raised up the Tunica vaginalis, made the Testicle not unlike to
the lower round Bladders that are united with the forementioned upper Bladders
in the same Fish. The Cure was performed by Discutients and a Bag-Truss.

I was fetched to see a Child who was (as I suppose) not two months old: 10.
Observat. of Hernia ventosa.
it was a very small Infant, much emaciated. A Swelling had been newly
discovered in Scroto, and supposed a Rupture: it affected the right Inguen down
into the Tunica vaginalis. The Tunicle of the other Testicle was likewise
distended. And the next day, when I brought a Bag-Truss, I found that Inguen
also affected with the same Disease. Whilst the Infant cried, the Tumor was
much; but by an easy pressure with warm clothes it lessened. I designed a
Fomentation: but the weakness of the Child, together with its frowardness,
deterred me. Whereupon I applied Emplastr. e cymino over the Scrotum and
Inguina, and put on the Bag-Truss. The next day I met the Physicians, took off
the Truss and Emplasters, and showed them that it was a Hernia ventosa, not
capable of Reduction nor of other Bandage. There was also a Hernia umbilicalis,
which was likewise from Wind, which I treated as has been showed in the first
Observation. The Physicians resolved the Milk should be changed: upon doing of
which the Child began to thrive. But this Nurse not keeping the Child very dry,
the Piss fretted the Thighs and Cod: upon which account I put on a
Diachalciteos Emplaster, and renewed it daily. It not only cured the
Excoriations, but also supplied the place of the other Plaster. During the
Cure, I observed that upon good Bandage the Tumor appeared very
inconsiderable, and some times would be quite discussed: but then through
neglect in bracing the Truss close, it would appear very big. The last time I
saw the Child it was grown fat, and the Flatulency seemingly discussed: but a
Rupture appeared in both Groins. Upon which account a double Boulster-Truss was
put on, whereby it is kept up, and in a hopeful way of Cure.

A Man of about thirty years of age, of a full Body, 11. Observat. of
Bubonocele.
having some time a Swelling in his left Groin, consulted me. I declared it a
Hernia inguinalis, and advised the use of a Boulster-Truss, which accordingly I
brought the next day, with an Emplastr. ad herniam; which, after I had shaved
the Hair, I put on, and left him Directions how to wear it. He carefully
observing the Direction, it was in some months happily cured.

A Man of a full Body, by a Fall in riding, 12. Observat. of Bubonocele.
bruised his left Inguen and that side of the Scrotum against the Pummell of
his Saddle, by reason whereof a Rupture was made in his Groin, and much blood
was extravasated in the Inguen and Scrotum to the very Praepuce. It was too
late to apply Repellents, therefore I prescribed this following Fomentation:
summit. majoranae, absinth. flor. cham. sambuci, an. vj. flor. ros. rub.
balaust. an Mss. nuc. cupress. bacc. myrtill. sumach, an. jss. coq. in vino
austero, addendo in fine sp. vini iiij. fiat Fotus. A Cataplasm was also made
thus: farinae fabar. lbss. furfuris tritici M.j. flor. cham. sambuci pulv. an
j. sem. anis. foenic. pulv. an ij. These were boiled with some of the
Fomentation, and toward the latter end some Spirit of Wine, mel commun. ol.
rutac. which was applied upon the diseased Parts with a Bag-Truss. We let the
Patient blood, prescribed him Clysters, and keeping of his bed during the Cure.
This method of Dressing continued till the Swellings were discussed: then I
shaved the Hair, and applied to the Groin a mixture of Emplastr. Paracels. and
diachalciteos, with a soft Boulster-Truss, to which a Bag was fitted for the
Scrotum, to retain the Dressings on. Some few days after, observing that the
Scrotum was over-moistned as in an Anasarca, which hindered the corrugation of
it, I applied Emplastr. diasulphur. by which the Humor was dried up. After the
tenderness of the Groin was removed, I applied Emplastr. ad herniam, with a
Quilt under the Boulster, and braced it streighter; then, having caused a less
Bag to be stitched on to retain the Scrotum, I gave him leave to sit up. His
Rupture having been reduced from the first night I saw it, there was little
doubt but his lying in bed had disposed it to Cure. Indeed from that time I
heard no more of it; but he continued the wearing his Truss longer.

I was sent for to one of about thirty six years old, 13. Observat. of
Bubonocele.
of a full Body: he complained of a Swelling in his left Groin. It was a
Bubonocele, and, by the manner of reducing it, seemed to be of the Omentum. I
applied an Emplastr. ad herniam with a Boulster-Truss, and advised him how to
govern it. I heard not from him again in five or six years; about which time
being sent for I found him in bed, bemoaning himself that his Rupture was
fallen into the Scrotum, and he could not reduce it. I felt it lie unequally in
the Scrotum. He had, it seemed, neglected the bracing of the Truss while it lay
in Inguine, and so it happened that in progress of time it slipped down under
the Truss; upon which he consulted some, who put him on a Steel-Truss: but that
pinching and gauling, he caused others to be made, of which he showed me at
least half a dozen; but they all hurt him, and did not keep his Rupture from
falling down. But now it was so great, that he could not reduce it but with
warm clothes: which being done, I fitted to it a Boulster-Truss with a Quilt
and Bag. To those Excoriations occasioned by his Steel-Truss I applied
Emplastr. oxelaei spread upon course linen, which soon cured them; and if his
occasions would have permitted him to have kept his bed, he might have been
restored to a better condition: but this served his turn as a palliative Cure.

A Man of about 30 years of age, 14. Observat. of Bubonocele.
of a healthy Constitution, came to me with a Bubonocele. I advised him the
wearing a Boulster-Truss with an Emplaster under it: which for some time he did
with much ease; but afterward became more secure and careless in the bracing
it, upon which the Omentum slid down half way into the Scrotum. It being yet
within the Process, I easily reduced it, and applied a fresh Emplaster, and
supplied him with more and new Trusses. His affairs would not permit him to
stay within doors, yet by his well ordering it he was cured in a few months,
and for a trial he left off wearing the Truss three or four days: but, having
been used to it, he could not be without it; so that he continued the use of
it, but without the Bag or Quilt.

Another of that age, 15. Observat. of Bubonocele.
but not of so good a Habit of body, being diseased with a Bubonocele, had for
some time worn a Steel-Truss: but the Hernia slid down in Scrotum
notwithstanding, though often reduced, and the Truss braced more close. Upon an
extraordinary relapse, when endeavors of his own failed, I was sent for, and
upon examination found the Intestine and Omentum both in Scroto. I could not
reduce them by warm clothes, therefore prescribed him a Clyster, and after it a
Fomentation, Cataplasm, and Bag-Truss. The next morning I fomented the Part
again, and, placing him in a convenient posture, reduced the Rupture; then
shaved the Hair, and applied an Emplastr. ad herniam, with a Compress made of
brown Paper which had been all night soaked in an astringent Decoction, and
fastened thereon a Boulster-Truss, with a Bag fitted to it, for to bear up the
Scrotum, that, in case the Rupture should slip downwards, yet it should meet
with a check. Having thus by Bandage trussed it up, I advised him to keep his
bed some days, at least till the Excoriations which the Steel-Truss had made in
his Hips were cured. During which his Diet was slender, and his body kept
soluble by lenient Bolus's, and consolidating Drinks were prescribed him. He
was one that had no great employment abroad, so was persuaded to keep his bed
the longer; during which the lacerated Parts did unite, and he was cured.

One Summer, whilst I attended the King at Hampton Court, 16. Observat. of
Hernia intestinalis.
an Officer belonging to the Larder, a man of above sixty years of age, having
been long afflicted with a Hernia intestinalis, which frequently slipped into the
Scrotum, had it then fallen down past his skill of Reduction. I, finding him
vomiting and in a Fever, endeavored by warm clothes to reduce it, but could
not. I therefore presently caused a Clyster to be given him of fat Broth with a
little Salt in it, and applied a Fomentation made of the same Broth, and at
length, putting him in a declining posture, I reduced the Rupture, and put on
his Truss with a Compress under the Boulster; by which I retained the Rupture
up. I would have prescribed him other helps, but he was satisfied that it was
reduced. After two or three days he went abroad again, and, for ought I know,
is yet alive.

A person having been long afflicted with a Hernia in France, 17. Observat. of
Hernia.
through ill fitting of Trusses had it much increased, till at length he threw
them off, as not only useless, but painful to him. The Rupture was so large,
that the Intestines did their office in the Scrotum without Reduction. But the
weight of them was uneasy, and often accompanied with Colicks, and would by
degrees have proceeded to worse inconvenience. I helped it by the palliative
way of a Bag-Truss, with a perforation for his Penis. This sustained the
weight, and enabled him to follow his occasions without farther trouble.

In some people I have seen the Ruptures so great that they have not been able
to go; yet not any of them would admit of the most probable of the
forementioned Operations, but contented themselves with such accommodation as a
Bag-Truss would afford them.

A young Woman, after hard Labor, had a Rupture in her left Groin. 18.
Observat.
I supplied her with a Boulster-Truss with one Strap and Emplaster, by which
she was cured, or at least palliated. In others, where they have not timely
consulted, whether through ignorance or shame, they have increased to a greater
bigness, and have made in progress of time such a swagging Tumor as became
extremely troublesome to truss up.

One of about thirty years of age, of a gross fat Body, 19. Observat. of Hernia
umbilicalis.
labored of a Hernia umbilicalis about the breadth of the palm of a hand. He
had worn the common Navell-Trusses; but they, not sitting steady upon the
diseased Part, pinched him sometimes in one place, sometimes in another, and
did not retain the Rupture. I being advised with, and considering his Belly
very great, and likely to suffer greater Ruptions, if the weight of it were not
timely born up, persuaded him to permit a Bracer to be made to lace in his
whole Belly, under which a Boulster might be placed on the Navell. I took
measure of it, and fitted him with such a one as reached from the Pubes to the
Cartilago ensiformis, and laced behind. Under this I applied an Emplastr. ad
herniam with a quilted Boulster, which was worked upon Sole-leather: this was
tacked to the Bracer. In some others I have made a Bandage over that Bracer;
but here it was needless.

One had three Herniae besides that of the Navell, viz. one in each Groin, 20.
Observat. of Hernia.
whereof the one descended in Scrotum, and the other not; the third lay on the
left side of his Belly, raising up a Tumor under the Skin like half an Apple.
The Herniae in Inguinibus were kept up by a Steel-Truss with a double Boulster;
to which a Bag was tucked to retain the Scrotum. To that on the side of the
Belly was applied an Emplastr. ad herniam, with a Compress in the middle of it,
made of some folds of the same Emplaster, and a quilted Boulster over it. To
the Navell there was an Emplastr. ad herniam applied, and such a like Boulster
as was used in the like case in the former Observation of a Hernia umbilicalis:
and, to retain these close, a Bracer was fitted to the Belly with Straps, which
went from the lower part of it between the Legs, and fastened behind, where the
Bracer was laced. This person being fat was also gauled between the wrinkles of
his Belly, which was for some time dressed daily with Epuloticks.

A Person of quality, 21. Observat. of Hernia umbilicalis.
of a full Body, having been sometime subject to a Hernia umbilicalis, which
through defect in Bandage increased much, so that the Skin was excoriated by
the unequal sitting of the quilted Boulster, I was consulted. The Rupture in
the Peritonaeum was great, and the Omentum and Intestines had made their way
out to the external Skin of the Abdomen, so that between them and the Boulster
it was worn very thin. The Excoriation was dressed with Epuloticks, as
unguent.tutiae, etc. and a soft Compress applied between the Quilt and
Emplaster. A Belly-piece was made to bear the weight, and retain the
Compression. After this was cured, Mr. Smith was advised with. He made a
Boulster with a Bracer to sit under the Belly-piece, which retained the
Rupture, and the Patient went abroad daily. But one day, whilst he was about
his affairs, the Boulster slipped off, and the Intestines started out between the
Muscle and external Skin, so that he was brought to his Lodgings very ill.
Physicians were consulted, and I was sent for, and reduced it with a warm
cloth in their presence, and an Emplaster and Bracer were put on. From which
time he has not been so subject to a Relapse.

A TREATISE OF ULCERS.

OF ULCERS. The Second Book.
CHAP. I. Of Ulcers in general.
AN ULCER is a Solution of continuity in a soft Part made by Erosion with loss
of substance, Definition.
which loss is in this Description presumed to be the effect of the Erosion:
for if it be the effect of the Wound, as a piece of flesh being cut out, etc.
it is not immediately an Ulcer, nor does it deserve that name properly, till by
ill handling there do fall upon it corrosive Humors, which cause a farther
diminution of the substance: for till then the Digestion and Matter there
produced do not alter the name, but continue the appellation of a Wound; but
having once lost part of its natural flesh by such Erosion, though
preternaturall do arise in the room of it much more in quantity then what was
lost, as Fungus, etc. yet the name of Ulcer remains.

To this Ulcer many Accidents may happen, and especially Tumors of all sorts:
but these are not parts of the Ulcer, being separable from it; for they may be
taken away, and the Ulcer remain. The subject of an Ulcer is chiefly Flesh,
especially in the larger sense of the word, as it signifies Membranes, Tendons,
Guts, Bladder, etc. When an Erosion happens in a Bone, it is commonly called
Caries.

For the Differences of Ulcers, some are more proper, Differences.
by some Writers called essential; others accidental. The more proper, or, as
some call them, essential, are taken from the form of the Ulcer and efficient
Cause; as from the figure, magnitude, equality and inequality, and Part
affected. From the Figure; they are straight, oblique, round, or crooked. From
the Magnitude; some are great, others small, superficial, deep, long, short,
broad, and narrow. From the Equality and inequality: those are equal in which
the Flesh is alike plain; unequal, when it is corroded more in one place then
another. From the Part affected; some Ulcers are in the Flesh, others in the
Membranes; or in this or that Part, internal, or external. Differences from
the Causes will be best understood by viewing the Causes themselves.

The accidental Differences are taken from those things which are not
intrinsecall to the nature or constitution of an Ulcer; as, to have
Inflammation, Tumor or Putrefaction joined with them, as Phlegmon, Erysipelas,
Cancer, Gangraena, Callus, Varix, or Caries: Also from the Symptoms; some
Ulcers are painful with Pulsation, and pricking burning heat, others with
itching and Excoriation: From the quality; Ulcers are malign, benign,
contagious, or not; rebellious, or easy of Cure: Also from the age of the
Ulcer; some are recent, others annual; also some in their state, others in
their declination, only requiring Desiccation.

From these fountains the Differences and Distinctions of Ulcers do arise; the
methodizing of which has already pozed able Writers: we shall endeavor to put
them into such order as shall be most plain to the young Surgeon.

Therefore first we shall speak of Ulcers in general: 2. of a Simple Ulcer: 3.
of Ulcers with Intemperies: 4. of Ulcers with Pain: 5. of Fluxion: 6. of Ulcers
with Hypersarcosis or superfluous Flesh: 7. of Ulcers with Caries: 8. of Sordid
Ulcers: 9. of Callous Ulcers: 10. of Ulcers called Phagedaena and Dysepulota:
11. of Ulcers with Varix: and, lastly, of Sinuous Ulcers. I should also treat
of Fistulous Ulcers from Gangraena and Sphacelus; but they have been heretofore
occasionally put into the Treatise of Wounds, to which I refer you.

We shall begin with Ulcers in general, Causes of Ulcers in general.
and treat first of their Causes; of which some are internal, others
external: both are (if we speak of immediate Causes) corroding Humors, which
eat away the Flesh, Membrane, etc.

If this corrosive quality arrive from Internal Causes, it owes its Original
to the excess of an acrid Serum: which Serum if it mixeth with any other
Humor, whether Choler, Phegm, Blood, Melancholy, etc. gets a denomination from
that.

These Humors, when they abound so far in the Body as to exceed that
Temperament ad justitiam which is always necessary to health, (to which
Temperament a latitude must be allowed,) are apt to separate from the whole
Mass, and flow either quite out of the Body by natural Excretions, or else upon
some Members of it; whether they be carried thither by their own source, or
drawn by some attractive cause.

Being so cast out from the Mass of blood, they are no longer subject to the
Balsam of that, but become acrimonious and corrosive: and by how much the
longer the Humor has been extravasated, by so much the more acrid it becomes,
and is the more corroding; acquiring in its degeneration a quality suitable to
the Humor out of which it is engendered.

The External Causes are Poisons, corrosive and causticall Medicaments. Nor do
we exclude actual Fire, Hot water, scalding Oil: to which may be referred the
Contagions of Scabby, Leprous and Pocky persons, which are communicated to the
Skin, and exulcerate it, and beget the like Disease.

From these diversities of Causes different sorts of Excrements flow: three
forts whereof give name to Ulcers.

1. The one is a thin serous Humor, called Sanies, by the Greeks Ichor; by
others Virus, from whence they are called virulent. Celsus reckons two sorts
of Sanies; the one he calls Ichor, and the other Meliceria. They are taken
notice of by Fabricius Hildanus. The Ichor is a thin whitish Gleet incident to
ill-disposed Ulcers, especially amongst the Nerves and Tendons. The Meliceria
is a thick glutinous Humor of a pale color, and it may be yellowish, not
unlike Honey, from whence it takes its name. This also affects Ulcers of ill
condition near and in the Joints, where the Membranes and Tendons are eroded.
But that which we generally in our common Surgery call Sanies is, a thin
excrementitious Humor begotten from abundance of serosity in Ulcers, and
rendering them humid. Of which Humors some are hot and reddish-coloured,
others cold and pale-coloured. These are called Sanious Ulcers.

2. There is a second sort of Matter affecting Ulcers that is thick, generated
of abundance of gross tough Humors, and rendering the Ulcer foul; whence it is
called a Sordid Ulcer. This kind of Sordes differs as it is white or grayish,
though unequally coagulated, or else as it is blackish and foetid.

3. The third sort of Matter is of a middle consistence between thick and thin;
sometimes of a greenish or yellowish color, and then it has a rank smell; but
for the most part it is of a white color, and is called Pus or Matter. And
this is supposed to proceed from a benign Serum flowing to the Part affected
for its nutriment; which, by reason of the weakness of the Part, is not
assimilated, but converted into a whitish substance, and gives the name of a
Purulent Ulcer.

These Differences of Excrement in a Sore are best understood by considering
the Causes of their generation. For if the nutritious Serum be well
conditioned, and the Part not affected with Wound, Tumor, or other
preternaturall weakness, it is by Nature converted into nourishment: but if
there be a Solution of continuity, then she, failing of her first intention,
acts according to her ability, and according to the quality of the Serum. If
the Constitution be good, and the Serum well-conditioned, then we find a
laudable Pus to arise, which is white, smooth, and easy to the Part, and every
day approaches nearer and nearer to the true nutritious Juice, till by degrees
the Ulcer fills up with Flesh and heals. But if it degenerate toward a sharp
virulent Serum, then the Ulcer appears full of a thin Ichor or Sanies,
Nature's Balsam being weak, and her heat insufficient for a due concoction of
the Matter. If the Blood grow phlegmatic, its Serum is so too, and grows
gross and slimy, and wanting heat, does corrupt into a thick glutinous Matter,
which we call Sordes; and sometimes a stinking Matter, which makes a Putrid
Ulcer.

An Ulcer, if it be in the outward Parts, is discoverable by the sight. Signs.
If it be inward, viz. in the Ventricle, Guts, Vterus, Kidneyes, etc. it must
be guessed at by the Excrements that come from it, and other Symptoms. The
greatness and littleness is likewise distinguishable by the eye, if it be in
the Superficies. But Ulcers that are deep require farther search of Probes,
etc. and, if inward, must be presumed proportionable to the quantity of the
Matter that flows from them. Equality and Inequality are also judged by the
view; so Sinuosity and Caries by Probing.

Sanious Ulcers are known by the undigested Serum that gleets from them: and if
the Gleet be corrosive, we find the flesh waste apace. If that Erosion be with
jagged and callous Lips, it is Phagedaena, or at least virulent. If the Matter
issuing out be slimy and gross, it is a sordid; if foetid and corrupt, it is a
putrid Ulcer. If it be only superficially corrosive and spreading, it is a
Herpes exedens.

The nearness of a Nerve, Tendon or Ligament, is best understood by the pain,
which is commonly acute. If a Nerve ly near, and cause pain, it is apt to
contract the Lim, or cause Convulsion. An Artery if near, is discovered by
Pulsation.

To make a right Prognostic in the Cure of Ulcers, Prognostic.
we ought first to observe well the greatness of the Disease, and what strength
the Patient has to overcome it: for if that be deficient, our endeavors to
cure them will prove vain.

The greatness of the Disease is known, either by the quality of the Part
affected, or by the depth or other conditions of the Ulcer.

As to the quality of the Part: Those in the Skin are not dangerous, nor
difficult of Cure, but as they are accompanied with Intemperies. Ulcers in the
Emunctories, by reason of the great Vessels, may be dangerous, and through
moisture of the place are difficult of Cure. Those near any principal Part are
not without danger, for that by their penetration the neighboring Viscera may
suffer. Ulcers in the Muscles of the Spine of the back and in great Joints are
of great danger and hard Cure: amongst the Tendons and Bones of the Hands and
Feet they are painful, by reason of their exquisite sense, and of difficult
Cure.

The depth and largeness of the Ulcer makes the Cure hazardous: for in great
and wide Ulcers the native heat is much weakened; and if they penetrate under
any great Artery, Nerve or Tendon, that you cannot safely lay them open, the
Cure must needs be slow, and the great discharge of Matter may exhaust the
Spirits of the Patient.

The Condition of the Ulcer is of great moment in Prognostic: where we are to
consider both the quantity and the quality of the Humor flowing to it. If it
be in a depending Part, and the Body plethorick, the very multitude of Humors
(though otherwise not bad) is a sufficient impediment of a Cure: so also if the
quality be amiss, though the quantity be not great. For when the Ulcer is
accompanied with a dry Intemperies, it frequently eludes your Medicines. The
case is as bad when Ulcers have continued so long as to bring an habitual
Dyscrasy upon the Part: as we see in the Nomae and annual Ulcers, which are
either not cured at all, or with danger to the life of the Patient. A degree
beyond these are the Phagedaenicall Ulcers, and worst of all the Cancerous and
Sphacelous: of all which in their due places.

In the Cure of Ulcers in general, Cure.
we shall consider the Ulcer first as it is simple, with Solution of continuity
and Erosion; then as it is compounded, and has other Symptoms or Indisposition
joined with it.

The Simple Ulcer, as it consists in a Solution of continuity, requires
Union; and as it has lost of substance, Restoration: and this is effected by
Exsiccation; for so long as the Ulcer continues sanious or sordid, it cannot
heal: therefore in such cases Digestion or Detersion are required.

The loss of substance is either of Skin or Flesh. If only the Skin be
wanting, the Flesh is so to be dried with Medicaments, as the Juices coming
thither may be hardened into a callous substance resembling Skin; for that it
is a spermatick Part, and cannot be regenerated. If the Flesh be wanting, it
must be renewed: which work is performed by the benefit of Nature out of a part
of that blood which was designed for the nourishment of that Member. But
forasmuch as in the generation of Flesh in an Ulcer there is a twofold
Excrement separated, the one thin, the other thick; the thin, as I said,
requires to be dried up, and the thick to be deterged.

But in the Cure of Compound Ulcers many Indications are requisite, according
to the variety of Causes and Symptoms which attend them. In the application of
Medicaments to those Ulcers you ought to consider their beginning, augment,
state, and declination. In the beginning the Sanies is crude and waterish, and
requires the benefit of Concoction, whereby it may be made thicker, and turned
into good Matter; in which case Suppuratives are of use: which is not allowable
in putrid Ulcers, for in that case they increase Putrefaction; and in purulent
ones also they render the Ulcer more lax, and at length sordid. If the
indisposition of the Ulcer be caused merely by the pain, Suppuratives are
convenient; for by their digestive and lenient quality they mitigate the pain,
and thereby remove the Cause: which Suppuratives are to be continued till the
Matter be well concocted. And for this reason it is we use them in the
beginning, lest the extravasated Humors should corrupt, and stir up pain and
Inflammation. In the Augment, when the Matter is less in quantity and thicker,
we use Detergents to cleanse it. In the State, when the Ulcer is well cleansed,
it may be reasonble to use Sarcoticks: and in the Declination, as the Ulcer
fills with Flesh, we do our endeavors by Epuloticks to cicatrize it.

But if the Ulcer labor under any Distemper of Symptom, whether it be
internal or external, as Influx of sharp corrosive Humors, whether they
abound in the whole Habit of body, or affect only the Part it self; they are
all to be removed before you can hope for Cure. The consideration of which
indicateth many Intentions: we shall reduce them to four heads. The first shall
be of a regulation in Diet and the other Non-naturalls: the second of
Evacuation, Revulsion, and Derivation of the antecedent Matter: the third shall
have a regard to the Part in which the Ulcer is seated, to strengthen it
against the Influx: and the fourth and last treats of a due application of
Medicines to the Ulcer it self.

1. To satisfy the First Intention, their Diet shall be proportioned to the
strength of the Patient, according as the Humors are peccant in quantity or
quality, and abound in the whole Body, or in some particular Part; that their
heat and acrimony may be contemperated. To which purpose there is regard to be
had that the Air be good, and their Exercise, Passions of the mind, etc. be
moderated, according as has been said, in the former Treatise, of Tumors in
general.

2. The Second Intention consists of Evacuation, Revulsion, and Derivation of
the Humors. If they abound in quantity, or offend through their evil quality,
it may be made either by Bleeding, if their strength permit, and other things
be consentaneous, which also makes Revulsion; or by Purging or Vomiting.

Derivation is always made in the remote Parts, and according to the rectitude
of the Vessels, either by opening a Vein by Lancet, or by the application of
Leeches, Cupping-glasses, Blistering-plaisters, Friction, Binding etc. for
which I refer you to the Treatise of Tumors.

3. The Third Intention has regard to the weakness and Intemperies of the Part
affected: to which purpose the Humors may be intercepted in their course by
the application of astringent and repellent Medicaments on the sound Parts
above the Ulcer, in the nature of Defensatives. If the Member be dependent, the
raising of it up, and placing it equal with or higher then the rest of the
Body, may be of great advantage: the Influx may also be restrained, and the
Part strengthened by expulsive Bandage. We may also by Alteratives correct
their acrimony, and, if the Humors be too serous, incrassate them, or, if
otherwise they offend, rectify them by their contraries. How farther to resist
the various Symptoms attending Ulcers shall be set down in the particular Cure
of each several Species.

4. The Fourth Intention is in curing the Ulcer it self; which is, as I have
already said, by drying up the excrementitious serous Humor, and deterging the
more gross. The Medicaments proper thereto, with the method in applying them,
shall be treated of in the particular Cure of each Ulcer, to which I hasten.

CHAP. II. Of a Simple Ulcer.
A Simple Ulcer is a Solution of Continuity with Erosion, Description.
having no other Symptom or remarkable Affection joined with it. Of these
Authors make two kinds; Kinds.
the one only with Skin off, and the other with the loss of Skin and some part
of the Flesh. As they call the first planum or equal, so they call this latter
cavum. The former is inconsiderable: the Cure of the latter I shall here
deliver.

In the doing of which two things offer themselves: Cure.
the one is the generation of Flesh, to fill up that Cavity; and the other is
the making a Cicatrix, to unite the separated Lips of the Ulcer.

To the prosecution of the first Intention, in restoring the lost Flesh, it is
necessary that the Part affected be free from distemper: for the generation of
Flesh is the work of Nature, and her strength consists in the just temperament
of the Part; which being so, our endeavor ought to be, that the Succus
nutritious, whereof the Flesh is generated, be good, and that it flow moderately
into the Part affected. To which purpose a good Diet must here also be
observed, with a regulation of the Non-naturalls; that the Air be temperate,
Exercise moderate, and in some cases none at all. In Sleeping and watching a
mediocrity ought to be observed; natural Evacuations are to be continued, and
the Quiet of the mind to be preserved. If these things be duly observed, and
the tone of the ulcerated Part preserved by the moderate inflowing of good
Juices, and the Matter in the Ulcer well digested, it is then capable of being
healed: but if the Ulcer be too dry, moist, or crude and undigested, it cannot
incarn. Therefore it behooves that we consider the temper of the Part ulcerated,
and the Excrements flowing thereout, and thence take indication whether to use
Suppuratives or Detergents, and when Sarcoticks are convenient, or one more
then another. Suppuratives ought to be of a lenient quality, temperately hot
and moist, proportioned to the Habit of body, as it is weak or strong, and to
the temper of the Part they are to be applied unto. The common Digestive is
terebinthina in tender bodies, with far. tritici, a little crocus pulv. cum
vitell. ovi. In drier bodies we add far. hordei, fabar. colophon. thus, pulv.
sem. foenugraeci: to which we sometimes add mel rosat. and sir. de ros. sicc.
Unguent. basilicon is not inferior to any. These Medicaments ought to be of a
moderate consistence: not too liquid, lest they make the Flesh too lax, or run
off the Pledgits, and leave them uneasy to the Soar. For the same reason your
Medicaments are not to be of too hard a consistence. The deeper Ulcers may
admit of the more liquid, that they may reach to the bottom. They are to be
used upon Lint in the form of Pledgits, Dossills, or Tents; and over them may
be applied Refrigerants, to contemperate the heat of the Part, and resist the
Fluxion.

Suppuratives are of no longer use then till the Matter be well digested; for
through the too long use of them the Ulcer may be made sordid: therefore when
the Matter appears well digested, we mix Detergents with them, to cleanse the
Ulcer. Of the milder sort is this: terebinth. lot. in aq. acetos. iiij. succ.
apii vj. coq. ad consumpt. succi, deinde add vitell. unius ovi. Such is
mundif. Paracelsi. In these kind of Ulcers I have frequently digested, deterged
and incarned by the use of Merc. praecipit. mixed with unguent. basilicon more
or less. The Ulcer deterged, (which you may know by the good condition of the
Matter, together with the ruddy color and firmness of Flesh,) you may then
proceed by Sarcoticks. In the use of which you are to remember, that in the
generating of Flesh two sorts of Excrements arise, the one thin, called Sanies,
the other thick, distinguished by the name of Sordes. How they disturb the
Ulcer in its healing, I have elsewhere told you, and now advise you that you
consider the temper of the Part, and what Sense it has, and fit Sarcoticks
accordingly, moderately to dry and cleanse; lest through error therein by
over-drying you consume the Flesh you designed to raise, or by too moist
Applications render it corrupt. The season of the year is herein to be
observed: for in the hotter season Medicaments more cooling are required, and
in cold weather more heating. Therefore at such times we put thicker Compress,
and take more turns with our Rowls, then in hot weather. The Habit of body is
also to be regarded. For in lax and tender Bodies Sarcoticks require to be
moderately drying, such as are olibanum, thus, aloe, cort. thuris, far.
foenugraeci, orobi, etc. The Compounds are, unguent. matrisylv. or basilicon
magn. diapompholyg. unguent. tutiae, calaminaris: or this, myrrhae, aloes, an.
ss. thuris j. mastich. ss. gum. elemi iij. terebinth. Venet. iiij. ol. hyperici
q. s. fiat Vnguentum. The more drying are, rad. ireos, aristoloch. rot. far.
lupinor. sarcocoll. asa foetida made up with mel despumat.

If these Medicaments be well proportioned to the nature of the Ulcer, the
Matter will appear of good color and consistence, and in less quantity, and
the Flesh of a natural color, firm, and drawing into a healing condition. But
if the Medicaments were too drying, the Flesh in the Ulcer will be pale, the
Matter thin, and the Parts about heated with the disturbance.

The Ulcer incarned, you are to endeavor to cicatrize it by drying the Flesh
into Callus: and forasmuch as Callus is drier and harder then Flesh, therefore
your Medicaments ought to be more drying then those you incarned with, and to
be endued with an astringent Quality.

The making of this Callus is the work of Nature, yet is furthered by the
application of Medicaments, (as I have said.) If the temperament of the Part be
well disposed, you may observe the Ulcer to skin from the edges while it is
filling with Flesh within, and without the help of Epuloticks: but where the
Part has been long affected with Ulceration, it is usually weak and out of
temper, and is very difficult to cicatrize; therefore it requires Epuloticks
accordingly more drying and astringent.

The milder cicatrizing Simples are, bolus Armen. sang. dracon. creta, pulv.
ostreorum combust. ros. rub. balaust. sumach, calx lota, cerussa, plumb. ustum,
tutia. A mixture of some of these may be sprinkled upon the Ulcer, or a
Decoction of them applied upon Lint. The stronger are, sacchar. Saturni,
vitriol. Romans aes ust. squamae aeris, ferri, croc. Martis astringens. These
Powders may be mixed with Unguents. Or, unguent. calaminaris, Emplastr. grisei,
an. j. liniment. Arcaei ss. sacchar. Saturn. j. cerae q. s. fiat Emplastrum. Or
some of the abovesaid Powders may be decocted or dissolved in proper Waters,
and applied upon Lint, taking care that you do not by the use of them consume
the Flesh, in stead of condensing it into Skin.

The time of applying Epuloticks is, when the Flesh is rising up near the Lips
of the Ulcer, (before it grow too high) that it may be dried to cicatrize even
with it; for Nature is not wanting the while to incarn. Therefore if you defer
the use of Epuloticks till the Flesh be grown equal with the Skin, you will be
forced to use Escaroticks, or make an unseemly Cicatrix: to avoid which we
generally apply Epuloticks to the edges while we are incarning the middle. For
by the way you must take notice, that none but ill-conditioned Ulcers begin to
cicatrize from the middle. If the Lips of the Ulcer lie not level with the
Ulcer, it will not easily cicatrize: therefore in such case you must make a
more strict Compression by Bandage.

AMongst the various and sundry sorts of Ulcers that happen daily under my
Cure, I find it difficult to make out one Simple Ulcer, as Authors have
described it to us, without other Symptom or Affects joined to it; every Ulcer
having somewhat of distemper till it be digested and brought into a healing
condition. In which regard we shall call that a Simple Ulcer which has fewest
Accidents attending it, and shall give you an Instance of one in a Gentleman,
1. Observat. of a Simple Ulcer.
who having a small incomsiderable Push risen upon one of his Legs on the
outside, he not taking notice of its mattering, it adhered to his Stocking, and
became ulcerated in the Skin, with a small Inflammation and Swelling. I dressed
the Ulcer with unguent. basilicon upon a Pledgit of Lint, applying Emplastr.
oxelaei with a soft Compress lf linen over it, and rolled it up from the Small
of the leg to the Gartering, advising him to favor his Leg what he could, by
laying it sometimes upon a Stool. Thus in two or three days it was digested,
and freed of the Inflammation and Swelling. From that time I dressed it with
unguent. tutiae Vigon. by which I cicatrized the Ulcer to the compass of a
silver Halfpenny. The Patient supposing himself cured left off the use of the
Bandage, and gave himself the liberty to walk abroad: upon which the Lips of
the Ulcer grew high, and became incapable of cicatrizing that way. I therefore
made a Paste of Ceruse with unguent. rosat. which with Compress and Bandage
pressed the Lips even with the Ulcer, and cicatrized it in three or four days,
whilst he was attending his affairs at home.

Such another was commended to my hands by Doctor Weatherly. 2. Observat. of a
Simple Ulcer.
The Ulcer was in the Leg, and had been very vexatious to the Patient: it was
accompanied with some little Fluxion, enough to relax the Parts, and keep the
Ulcer from digesting, and consequently from healing. I dressed it as in the
former Observation has been said; only in stead of a Rowler I put on a laced
Stocking: by the wearing of which the Humors were restrained, and the Patient
cured himself in few days by the Unguents forememtioned.

CHAP. III. Of Ulcers with Intemperies.
IT frequently happens that Ulcers are subject to various complicated Affects:
Therefore the Cure must necessarily vary accordingly. For which cause we shall
now treat of Ulcers as they have Symptoms or Diseases joined with them; and
begin with those that labor under Intemperies, whether from corrupt Juices in
the whole Body, or Imbecility in some particular Part. Whatever it is, that
Cause must be first removed, before you can hope to make good Digestion in
order to the incarning or cicatrizing of the Ulcer.

Intemperies is simple, or compound. The Simple are four, hot, cold, moist,
Kinds.
and dry: the Compound are, hot and moist, hot and dry, cold and moist, cold
and dry. We shall begin our Discourse with the Hot Intemperies.

A hot Intemperies may arise from a Fermentation of the Serum in the blood, Hot
Intemperies.
and that from ill Habit of body, ill Diet, or the like; also from heat of the
Air, or keeping the Part affected too hot, by lapping too many Clothes or
Rowlers upon it, or by reason of too strict Bandage, or by the application of
too sharp Medicaments.

A cold Intemperies is caused by abundance of pituitous Humors, Cold
Intemperies.
or by exposing the Ulcer too much to the air in the time of dressing, or by
the not enough defending it in cold weather by good Compresses and Bandage, or
through the application of Medicaments too cooling.

A dry Intemperies may be occasioned by the exhausting of the natural heat,
Dry Intemperies.
as in long chronick Diseases, Hecticall indispositions, or by too slender
Diet, or the like; also through defect of Aliment in the Part it self for want
of use, as it frequently happens where Ulcers have long affected the Member.

A moist Intemperies may proceed from abundance of Humors in the body, Moist
Intemperies.
and Imbecility of the Part affected from hard Bandage or too slabby
Applications, or possibly want of Bandage. Wet and foggy weather is frequently
a cause of it.

If the Intemperies be hot, the Ulcer and Parts about it are red, Signs of hot.
and the Patient complains of heat in the Ulcer. Also the Matter is sharp,
whence a pricking and burning is frequently felt, and sometimes an itching in
the Part. The Cause preceding will show the nature of the Intemperies.

These sorts of Ulcers are relieved with cooling Medicaments, and exasperated
by those that heat.

The cold Intemperies may be distinguished by the livid or pale color of the
Ulcer and Parts about it; the Flesh in the Ulcer is whitish and loose; Signs of
cold
the Patient also complains of cold. It finds relief by Medicaments that are
heating.

A moist Intemperies may be judged by the too much humidity in the Ulcer: Signs
of moist.
and if that Humor be not acrimonious, the Flesh will be luxurious and
flaccid. The great discharge of excrementitious Humors and the Habit of body
will evidently discover the Cause.

A dry Intemperies is for the most part judged by the Habit of the body, Signs
of dry.
it being lean and dry; the Member or Part diseased is also dry and squalid,
the Lips thin and lank, and with little moisture.

By the Signs of these Simple Intemperies the Compound may be judged of.

As all Ulcers complicated with great Diseases are of difficult Cure,
Prognostic.
and therefore called Cacoethe: so these Ulcers laboring under Intemperies,
though they be well handled, are hard of Cure, and may be truly reckoned among
the Cacoethe, malign and rebellious Ulcers. But those accompanied with Siccity
are the worst; for that we are necessitated to neglect the Cure of the Ulcer,
to succor the Part affected. The Cure is also long in effecting, by reason
that the whole Habit of body requires by Humectation to be altered, which is a
work of time: whereas the Ulcer distempered with heat, cold, or moisture, may
be cured while you are removing the Intemperies.

THE Cure of these Ulcers consists in the removing of the Intemperies. Cure of
a hot Intemperies.
Therefore in the first place you are to consider whether it be hot, cold,
moist, or dry, and endeavor to restore the diseased Part to its natural
temper by its contraries; as if it be hot, treat it with Refrigerants, to the
moist apply Desiccants, and so the rest: having care the while that you do not
neglect the Cure of the Ulcer. But if it be so that both may not be relieved at
one and the same time, then you are to regard that which most requires your
help. If the Ulcer be accompanied with a hot Intemperies, that must be first
removed by Refrigerants of an astringent and repellent quality, milder or
stronger according to the greatness or smalness of the Distemper. Also a
cooling and moistening Diet is to be observed, with regulation of the
Non-naturalls. If there be Plethora, Purging and Bleeding are necessary, as
well for Evacuation as Revulsion. The Ulcer it self requires detergent and
exsiccant Remedies: But in consideration that the hot Intemperies consumes the
humidity in the Ulcer, and renders it less moist, therefore these Ulcers are to
be treated with the milder Driers, yet with regard to the greatness of the
Intemperies, and the quantity of Matter the Ulcer discharges. The Topics are
unguent. diapomphol. tutiae, album, unguent. e plumbo, e calce, basilicon, with
Praecipitate.

The external Remedies to be applied over the Part affected, to abate the heat
of the Intemperies, may be unguent. album camphorat. Emplastr. diapalm. cum
succis, Emplastr. oxelaeum, etc. unguent. refrig. Galeni, nutritum, and
populeon. The Unguents may be applied simply, or made into a Cerote with white
Wax. Over them may be applied clothes dipped in Oxycrate, or red Wine, or Juices
of fol. plantag. polygon. lactuo. burs^^pastoris, with acetum, or red Wine,
wherein have been infused flor. ros. rub. bacc. myrtill. balaust. sumach, etc.

A Reverend Divine of a good age, Observat. of an Ulcer with hot Intemperies.
having labored some months under an Ulcer on the inside of his right Leg
along the Shin-bone with much pain, sent for me. The Part affected was
distempered with great heat, and the Ulcer discharging a Sanies, endeavors had
been used to digest it cum terebinth. and vitell. ovi, and such like,
unsuccessfully. I fomented the Ulcer and Parts about with Claret Wine, and
dressed it with two parts of unguent. diapompholyg. and one part of unguent.
basilicon maj. with Praecipitate. Upon the Lips of it I applied Pledgits spread
with unguent. diapomphol. and an Emplaster of some of the same diapomphol. over
all, with Compress wrung out of the Wine, and rolled it up lightly, placing his
Leg in bed as before. The next day I brought a Decoction of fol. plantag.
summitat. rubi, equiseti, flor. ros. rubr. balaust. to which I added some Wine;
and while it was heating I took off the Dressings, and found the heat somewhat
allayed, and the Ulcer well disposed to Digestion. I stuped the Ulcer, dressing
the Parts about with unguent. tutiae. mag. Vig. and rolled it up as before. By
this method the hot Intemperies removed, and the Ulcer digested: after which by
the help of unguent. desiccativum and the Alume-stone I cicatrized it firm, to
the satisfaction of the Patient and his Relations, leaving him again to the
care of his Physicians Sir. Alex. F. and Sir Fr. P. by whose order I made him a
Fontanell, and some while after put him on a laced Stocking.

IN the Cure of an Ulcer with a cold Intemperies there is required an
observance in Diet and other Non-naturalls, Cure of a cold Intemperies.
as has been prescribed in cold Tumors, with Purgations to evacuate the
Cacochymia, and alterative Decoctions to attenuate and dry the Humors.
Outwardly are required Medicaments heating; and, forasmuch as it is the nature
of cold to streighten the Pores and harden the flesh in Ulcers, they ought also
to be attenuating and rarefying. The Medicaments proper to dress the Ulcer
ought to be drying and detergent. The degrees of these qualities must be taken
from the distemper of the Ulcer and Part affected, as it is much or little;
also from the Age of the Patient, and Season of the year; and from the
greatness or smalness of the Ulcer.

The Intemperies of the Part we correct by Decoctions of absinth. scabios.
agrimon. salv. betonic. flor. cham. bacc. lauri, juniperi, with the addition of
Wine or spirit. vini, and all those Medicaments proposed in the Cure of
Oedematous Tumors, applied hot with Stupes. Those proper to deterge the Ulcer
are, mundif. ex apio, mundif. Paracels. unguent. apostolor. The Emplasters are,
diachyl. ireat. de betonica, barbarum magn. diasulphuris, flos unguentorum.
After which you may proceed with Sarcoticks and Epuloticks, as shall be said.

A person of about twenty five years of age, of a gross fat Body, Observat. of
an Ulcer with cold Intemperies.
was vexed with an Ulcer in his right Leg. The Ulcer was large, crude and
undigested, and the Lips thick, the Parts about the Ulcer pale, and yielding to
impression. I fomented the Ulcer and Parts about with Wine, filled up the Ulcer
with Praecipitate, and applied unguent. Nicotianae over it, with Emplastr. de
sandyce, Compress and Bandage, and dressed it not again till the third day. In
the while I purged him with an Apozeme made with a Decoct. polypodii, sennae,
rhabarb. agaric. sem. carthami, to which was added sir. de spin. cerv. and put
him into a Decoction of sarsa, lign. guaiaci, sassafras, etc. then provided a
laced Stocking, and a Fomentation made of absinth. hyperic. centaur. flor.
cham. bacc. myrtill. ros. rubr. and balaust. boiled in Wine and Water, with an
addition of spirit. vini: after that I took off Dressings, fomented the Part
affected, and dressed the Ulcer cum unguent. Nicotianae, with a mixture of
pulv. praecipitat. and Emplastr. didehyl. ireat. and laced on the Stocking with
a good Compress under it. By which I brought the Ulcer to Digestion, flatted
the Lips even, disposed it to incarn, and afterward cicatrized the Ulcer with
Pledgits pressed out of a spir. vini wherein was dissolved a few grains of
sacchar. Saturni.

IN the Cure of an Ulcer with a moist Intemperies slabby and greasy Medicaments
are to be forborne, and drying to be used: and, Cure of a moist Intemperies.
in consideration that the Part is weakened by the too much humidity, you are to
mix Corroboratives of an astringent faculty; the Ulcer also requires to be
dried. The Medicaments ought to be proportioned according as the Intemperies
affects the whole Body, or some particular Part, and as the Ulcer is great or
small. Diet, Air, Contemperatives are also here to be considered. The simple
drying Medicaments in these Ulcers are, Litharg. auri and argenti, minium,
cerussa, plumb. ust. and the like, of which Medicaments may be made up. Or you
may make choice of some of these Compounds. plumbi usti, pompholyg. lot. an. j.
ol. myrtill. and cerae q. s. or, unguent. diapompholyg. tutiae mag. unguent. e
calce lot. unguent. nutritum, album camphorat. desiccativum rubr. or, cadmiae
jss. aernginis, aeris combusti, an. ij. alum. scissilis ss. cerae novae v. sevi
arietin. q. s. Misc. fiat Vnguentum.

If the Ulcer requires to be fomented, a Fomentation may be made of summitat.
absinth. fol. beton. flor. ros. rubr. summitat. rubi, bacc. myrtill. nuc.
cupress. balaust. sumach, etc. boiled in Wine or Oxycrate. Also aq. calcis and
aluminosa are useful in the drying up of the humidity in the Ulcer and Parts
about it.

A Gentleman of a full Body, Observat. of an Ulcer with moist Intemperies.
between fifty and fixty years of age, abounding with Cacochymia, and subject
to Swellings in his Legs by reason of the Gout, which he was frequently
afflicted with, by some accident rubbed the skin off his left Leg. He
endeavored the curing it by healing Medicaments, but it was thereby the more
exasperated, and spread larger. I, observing the too moist Intemperies of the
Part, and the Matter crusted about upon the sound edges, bathed it with aq.
calcis, dressed the Ulcerations with unguent. de lithargyr. and applied a
Compress wrung out of the said aq. calcis over that with good Bandage. After I
had thus dressed him, I let him blood in the Arm about ten ounces, and the next
day purged him with half an ounce of Elect. caryocostin. But notwithstanding
these endeavors, I found in the taking off Dressings a great discharge of a
hot serous Humor, which increased the Ulcerations much. I therefore caused a
Fomentation to be made of some of the forementioned Ingredients, to fortify the
weak Part against the Influx, and to dry up the Ulcer, and applied my Pledgits,
spread with Epuloticks, somewhat more distant one from another, that the thin
Humor might get out between them; then applied a Compress spread with unguent.
nutritum over all, rolled it up equally, repeated the Purgation, and ordered
him each other night vj. sir. de meconio in aq. papaveris rhoead. with a little
aq. cinnamom. hordeat. Observing in taking off my Dressings, that the Matter
would in spite of my endeavors be here and there shut in by the Pledgits which
lay upon the edges of the Ulcerations, I sprinkled them with pulv. lap. tutiae
praeparat. and forbore the use of Pledgits there, supposing that way to give
vent to the Matter, and at the same time to cicatrize them, and the while
dressed the Ulcer with Pledgits pressed out of a stiptick Decoction in some
places, and in other with unguent. e plumbo. But I found on the next Dressings
that the Powder crusted upon the edges, and by retention of the Humor caused
Erosion underneath. I then made a Solution of pulv. lap. tutiae corn. cerv. ust
calx lot. etc. in a Decoction of fol plantag. salicis, summitat. rubi and
equiseti, dipping little bits of fine Lawn in it, and appled Desiccatives upon
that; on the edges, unguent. desiccativum rubr. mixed with unguent. e calce lot.
in the middle I sprinkled some Powders, as boli Armen. corn. cerv. ust. Various
endeavors were used; but by this last way the Ulceration was cured. Then a
laced Stocking was put on, which restored the Part to its natural tone. Of
this Intemperies you will find an Observation in Herpes, and another in the
Treatise of Wounds, particularly that in the outside of a young Nobleman's Leg,
which puzzled two eminent Surgeons as well as my self. And wherever you
meet it, you shall find difficulty.

IN the Cure of an Ulcer with dry Intemperies, Cure of a dry Intemperies.
you are to apply your endeavors more immediately to the removing the
Intemperies, and content your self the while in digesting the Ulcer, and
keeping it clean. You are here to consider the Cause of the Drought; whether it
were from defect of Nourishment in the whole Body, or in some particular Part,
or in both. If the first, then a good Diet must be directed of such meats as
are of easy and good nutriment. In this case Wine is allowed to be moderately
drank. In the second and third cases, you are to endeavor that the aliment be
attracted into the affected Part by putting it upon action, if it may consist
with the Cure of the Ulcer. Otherwise Friction, Pitch Emplasters, Fomentations,
Embrocations, Fontanells, and the like, are to be used, to stir up heat in the
Part affected. The Fomentations are to be applied moderately warm, and the
Member to be bathed till it looks red and begins to swell: then you are to
desist; for if the Member be longer fomented or chafed, you may dissipate what
you attracted. The Medicaments afterward to be applied ought to be humecting,
as a mixture of Water and Oil; also such like Cerote may be applied: succ.
bismalvae and parietariae an. ij. ol. amygdal. dulc. vj. cerae albae q. s. fiat
Ceratum.

The while the Intemperies is removing, the Ulcer may be dressed with the
milder Digestives, or with unguent. basilicon and Praecipitate; which is also a
good Detergent and Sarcotick: or this; thuris, mastich. sarcocollae, an. j. ol.
hyperici ij. terebinth. Ven. iss. cerae albae q. s. fiat Vnguentum. In the
treating of these Ulcers, you are to be careful that your Applications to the
Ulcer be not too drying, lest you thereby bring the Intemperies again upon the
Part. The Ulcer incarned, you may proceed with Epuloticks, as has been all
along delivered.

A Youth of about thirteen years of age was brought out of the Country,
Observat. of an Ulcer with dry Intemperies.
and lodged near me. He labored under several Ulcers in his right Leg, one
especially upon an Exostosis on the Os tibiae on the inside near the Ancle. The
Ulcer was large, and of an ovall figure, the Lips pale, dry and thin, the
Matter little and sanious, the Leg it self emaciated and squalid; which I
supposed was by the weakness of the native heat from not using of the Lim. I
caused his Leg to be bathed with warm water, and dressed the Ulcers with
unguent. basilicon and Praecipitate, applying a Cerote over all of a mixture of
unguent. dialthaeae, ol. expedibus bovinis, and Wax; then rolled a soft
Compress on it, to retain the Dressings on and keep it warm, and ordered his
Diet as above said. The lesser Ulcers digested and cured by the ordinary
Epuloticks; but the larger upon the Exostosis would not digest for three days
together with any Medicaments: which gave me cause to suspect the Bone under it
to be carious, and that I should be necessitated to lay it bare: but I could
not by search of my Probe feel it. I continued to nourish the Part by bathing
it with emollient Decoctions and Embrocations, with ol. ex ped. bovinis, and
gave the Patient liberty to use his Leg by setting his Foot on the ground; by
which it swelled, and became more humid. After some while, when I saw the
temper of the Member alter, I ordered a laced Stocking to be put on, for that I
could not with a Rowler make such a Compression so near the Ancle as I would,
without causing a swelling in his Foot. I dressed it with Pledgits of Lint dipped
in a Solution of Tincture of Vitriol in aq. rubi, and made the Compression over
it; by which method the Ulcer cured with a firm Cicatrix upon that Exostosis.
He went well cured out of my hands, and I suppose is well to this day. These
kind of Ulcers are frequently seen in Hecticall and emaciated Bodies and
withered Lims.

CHAP. IV. Of Ulcers with Pain.
PAin is also one of the Symptoms which interrupts the Cure of Ulcers, and
affects the Part sometime after the Ulcer is cured, whence various Accidents
are stirred up, as Fever, Watching, and a Prosternation of spirits. Therefore
it requires our utmost endeavors speedily to remove or mitigate it.

The Causes of Pain are acrid sharp Humors corroding the Ulcer, Causes.
and heating the Parts about; proceeding either from a repletion of evil
Juices abounding in the Body, or through misapplication of Medicaments in
Surgery, as not timely digesting the Ulcer, or from too long use of
Abstersives.

The Complaint of the Patient will demonstrate the Pain, and the Symptoms will
show the Cause; Signs.
whether it arise from want of Digestion or Detersion, the Matter will testify.

The removing of the Pain requires a right distinguishing of its original
Cause. Cure.
The Habit of body is also to be considered, how it is fault: and accordingly
as there is Plethora or Cacochymia, you ought to make Evacuation by Purging, or
Bleeding, or both, and use contemperating Juleps, Opiats, and the like. Also
the Patient's eating and drinking ought to be regulated proportionately.

These things premised, you are to apply your speedy endeavors to remove the
Pain by proper Anodynes. If the Ulcer be sanious, it wants Digestion; and that
is furthered by such Medicaments as have a temperate heat, as we have already
showed. The heat in the Parts about may be mitigated by Lenients, as is before
said in Tumors, and after in Wounds, or by such like; as the Mucilages of sem.
cydon. psyllii, althaea, extracted in decoct. malvar. and far. hordei, croc.
and vitell. ovi, axung. gallin. porcin. made into the form of a Cataplasm, or
with Wax into a Cerote, or ceratum Galeni, or that with populeon: if more
cooling be required, unguent. nutritum, alb. camphorat. Emplastr. e bolo, etc.

If the Pain arise from hot acrid Humors fretting the Ulcer, it may be dressed
with unguent. diapompholygos, or unguent. e plumbo, unguent. tutiae simply, or
mixed with basilicon, with a little Praecipitate, with Compress wrung out of
Oxycrate, or red Wine, whereby the heat may be contemperated, and the Part
strengthened to resist the Influx, by which the Cure of the Ulcer may happily
be effected.

If the Pain be caused by a sordid Matter sticking to the bottom of the Ulcer,
and hindering transpiration, you cannot remove the Pain without Detersives; of
which Merc. praecipitat. is the best and mildest.

Pain is so familiar an attendant of Ulcers, as it is not easy to represent you
any one without it: but in complicated Ulcers it may not possibly be so easy to
distinguish its Cause, nor yet so directly to demonstrate the way of relieving
it, as in a Simple Ulcer, where there is no other Symptom joined with it.
Amongst which I suppose it may appear most conspicuous in Fontanells, I
therefore have chose to give you a few Instances of such, but shall begin with
one arising from an Accident.

A Person of about forty years of age, of a full and scorbuticall Body, 1.
Observat.
by some accident broke her Shin, and endeavored the curing of it: but it
daily growing more painful, and not to be endured, I was sent for, and,
observing the Ulcer sanious, proposed Digestion as the only way to remove the
Pain. I dressed the Ulcer with two parts of the common Digestive ex terebinth.
and one part of unguent. tutiae mag. spread upon a Pledgit. The Ulcer was of so
exquisite sense, that it would scarce bear the Pledgit. I applied unguent. alb.
camphorat. spread Emplaster-wise, with a Compress of soft Linen over it, and
rolled it up from the Foot to the Gartering lightly, a little to restrain the
Influx. This method I continued three days, by which the Ulcer was pretty well
digested, and less painful; but the Leg was subject to Fluxion: and I doubted
how it would cure so suddenly as was expected without the help of a more steady
Bandage, meaning a laced Stocking. But she replied, they had always made her
sick. I then proposed Purging. To which she objected the want of convenience. I
continued the dressing of the Ulcer as before, till it was digested well; then
I dressed it with Pledgits dipped in aq. calcis overthwart the ends of the Ulcer,
with a Pledgit of unguent tutiae in the middle, to cicatrize if from the end,
and applied unguent desiceativ. rub. over them as an Emplaster, then rolled it
up; by which it cicatrized in a few days. After the Patient saw her self so
suddenly cured, she became well inclined to have a laced Stocking put upon that
Leg, and, finding no inconvenience by it, bespake another for the other, and
returned well satisfied to her house in the Country.

Some months after this person being again in the Town was grievously pained
with a Fontanell in her left Arm, 2. Observat. of Pain from Sordes.
which she had kept for the space of eight years; but now, not being able to
ease her self by the usual method, she threw out the two Pease, and
endeavored to cure it: but it became more painful, and would not heal. I,
being sent for, observed the Ulcer to retain the form the Pease had given it,
by reason of a grayish viscid sordid Matter that covered the bottom and sides
thereof. This hindered the Transpiration, and stirred up a great heat about and
in the Ulcer: the Lips grew turgid with the anguish, and so painful that she
could not endure the wiping the thin Ichor from it with a soft Rugin with her
own hands.

This Ulcer required Detersion, and the best Anodyne had been to have filled it
with Praecipitate, and to have applied Lenients over it. But her complaints put
me upon the dressing it with such Medicaments as she had least apprehension of,
which were unguent. basilicon with Praecipitate upon a Dossill, which I laid in
the Ulcer lightly with Pledgits of unguent. diapomphol. over the Lips, and
unguent. album over all; she fastening a Cloth over it, according as it would
bear. She then complained grievously of the pain she felt by the Dossill in the
Ulcer, and was, as she told me next morning, in a Fever all that night. I
continued the same Dressings, only applied Emplastr. e bolo over all that Part
near the Ulcer, which remitted the heat and pain thereabout; but the Ulcer was
excessive painful for the space of two hours after dressing: yet the Lips of
the Ulcer had cast off part of the Sordes, and the Ulcer it self looked better
after three or four days Dressings. The Parts without were so well tempered,
that she could bear a Compress and Bandage: but the Pain in the Ulcer continued
for some hours after dressing, and returning again in the evening, lasted a
great part of the night. Upon which consideration I desired her to give me
leave to dress it with Praecipitate, assuring her ease from it. She permitting
me, I dipped my Dossill in the Praecipitate, and sprinkled some of it where the
Sordes was thickest. I then applied my Dossill over it, and a Pledgit with
unguent. diapomphol. over that, with Emplaster and Bandage, as before, and
resolved not to open it again till the third day after; but was called the next
morning and informed by her self, that she had been much easier since the
dressing: and indeed at the next dressing I found a Slough come away with the
Dressings, which was the Sordes. I dressed it with unguent. basilicon and
Praecipitate mixed as at first, with the other Applications and Bandage; and
the second day after dressing it again, and finding it well digested, and free
from Pain, I put an Orange-Pea in the Ulcer, and continued it as a Fontanell
with much ease.

Thus in scorbutically-habited ill Bodies, abounding with Cacochymia, we
frequently see these simple Ulcers afflicted with sharp Humors, which corrode
them, and render them painful fordid Ulcers; which, if not timely relieved by
Detersives and Lenients, do terminate in putrefactive Ulcers.

A Person of Honor of about thirty six years of age, 3. Observat. of Pain from
Putrefaction.
laboring under sharp Humors, was ordered a Fontanell in her Thigh, which a
Surgeon made, and fitted with an Orange-Pea. It grew very painful; but the
Patient, supposing it should be so, endured it so long till she could not stand
with it. I was sent for, and saw the Thigh much swelled and heated with the
excessive Pain, and the Ulcer covered with a brown Sordes, and a quantity of a
thin Gleet issuing from it. I threw out the Pea, fomented the affected Part and
Ulcer with Wine, filled the Ulcer with Merc. praecipitat. and applied unguent.
tutiae with Pledgits over it, with Emplastr. e bolo over all, rolling it up,
and advising her to keep her Chamber and Pallet. The third day after I dressed
her again: the Slough came in part away. I dressed it up again as before; and
the third day after found the Ulcer digested. The Pain mitigated the first
night, and the heat went off the next dressing. I healed this Fontanell in few
days, and made her one in her Arm.

But in such indisposed Bodies Pain does not affect the Ulcers only, but the
Parts also where they have been, after they are cured.

A Maid of about thirty five years of age, 4. Observat.
of a scorbutic Habit of body, had an Issue made in her left Arm, which was
continued running many years; but at length, whether through negligence, or
from some other reason, she suffered it to dry up. The Winter following she
grew very much out of order by reason of a great complication of ill Symptoms,
of which the most important was an intolerable pain in that Arm and place where
her Issue had formerly been. After various courses of Physic and external
applications, she was in some measure relieved, and was pretty free all the
following Summer: but in the Winter, viz. 1672. her pain returned with such
violence, as to afflict not only the place of the Issue with such pains, that
she likened it to the cutting off of the Arm, but it stretched it self in a
while after to the whole Arm, Shoulder, yea the very Side it self; so that many
Attempts being made, the Surgeons in the Country opened two Issues on each
side of the seat of the old one. Many other things were done, till at last she
came into my hands. Doctor Walter Needham was her Physician, and upon
examination found her afflicted with a Rheumatismus, for which he instituted a
convenient course, and judged withal that the Pain of the Part was from the
usual way Nature had taken to the old Issue, whither the sharp Humors making
their passage, and finding no vent, did disperse themselves through all the
branches of the Axillary Artery on that side, viz. to the Scapulary and
Thoracick branches, etc. the Pain being everywhere found according to the
places of their distribution.

To the Cure of this, besides what was inwardly administered, it was thought
requisite to eat down deep by a Caustic into the place where the old Issue had
been, and thereby to divide the Fibers of the Membrane of the Biceps, which lay
just under it, and seemed to be the place of the principal Pain. When this was
done, we divided the Esoar, and cut it out, then filled the Opening with
Praecipitate, and applied a Pledgit of unguent. basilicon. with ol. liliorum
upon it, and dressed it up. We dressed it every other day, till the remaining
Escar and Slough separated; then we incarned and cicatrized the Ulcer even.
From the time of the Opening this her Pain ceased, and she was well of that,
but labored under a Rheumatismus in great measure, it swelling her Thighs,
Legs, Hips, and lower Belly: but by frequent Phlebotomy, Purging, and other
Prescriptions, she was by my said Friend happily cured.

CHAP. V. Of Ulcers with Fluxion.
BUT it rarely happens that Pain afflicts an Ulcer without Afflux of Humors:
we shall therefore say somewhat of that, it being a great cause of the
difficulty we meet with in the Cure of Ulcers.

What the Causes of Fluxion are, Cause.
has been delivered when I treated of Tumors in general, viz. the Part
mittent, and Part recipient: That vicious Humors peccant in quantity or
quality are either thrust forth by the Part mittent, through the strength of
nature; or attracted by the Part recipient, by reason of heat or pain; or are
moved to it by reason of its weakness, or low situation, which renders the
descent of the Humors more easy.

An Ulcer with Afflux of Humors is discerned by the tumefaction of the Lips
and Parts about it; Signs.
and from the abundance of excrementitious Humors flowing from the Ulcer. It
is also accompanied with Inflammation proportionably to the quality of the
Humors.

All Ulcers with Fluxion are of difficult Cure, Prognostics.
the Ulcers being thereby rendered lax and indisposed with Pain, Tumor, etc.
and by how much the greater the Influx of Humor is, so much the more difficult
is the Cure.

In the Cure of this Ulcer, the Cause of the Fluxion is to be enquired into;
Cure.
whether it proceeds from Humors peccant in quantity or quality, thrust
forth by the Part mittent upon the inferior weak Parts, or that it was
attracted to it by reason of heat or pain. If Heat was the Cause, that must be
removed as has been said in the Chapter of a Hot Intemperies. If Pain was the
Cause, you must endeavor to mitigate that by Lenients, as has been showed in
the preceding Chapter. If Plenitude be the Cause, a slender Diet ought to be
prescribed, and Venaesection if nothing hinders, and the Body kept soluble by
Clysters and the like.

If the Humors offend by reason of their evil quality, Purgatives are proper,
according to the quality of the Humor: and if they be too fluid, they must be
incrassated and contemperated by Alteratives, as Endive, Succory, Sorrel,
Purslane, Lettice, in Broths; also Barly-cream, Emulsions, Violets, Citron,
Rasburies, and the like: and the Humor flowing to the weak Part may be averted
by Revulsion, Interception, and Repulsion. What they are, and where they ought
to be applied, you may see more particularly in the Treatise of Tumors in
general.

The Medicaments proper to strengthen the weak Part, and resist the Influx,
ought to be of a cold and astringent quality; as fol. plantag. polygon. summit.
rubi, equiseti, cort. ulmi, flor. ros. rub. bacc. myrtill, balaust. nuc. gland.
querc. cypress. gallor. Some of these may be juiced, others powdered and mixed
with Unguents, or boiled in Oxycrate, or red Wine, and applied with Stupes to
the Part. In great Fluxion and in strong Bodies aq. aluminis and aq. calcis may
be of use; to the latter of which may be added a few grains of Sublimate.

The Unguents may be unguent. nutritum, alb. camphorat. unguent. desiccativ.
rub. cerat. Galeni, Emplastr. de minio, e bolo, etc. But forasmuch as these
Ulcers are frequently disturbed by sharp Humors impacted in the Pores, which
cannot be repelled, and by their acrimony may stir up pain and Inflammation;
you shall therefore have regard to the Ulcer, to digest and deterge it, while
you outwardly resist the Influx upon the Parts about it: and let your
Detergents be such as are more drying then in simple Ulcers, but with little
acrimony: of which sort you may find choice set down in the Chapter of the
Moist Intemperies, to which I refer you. The Ulcer deterged, you may incarn
with such like: terebinth. Venet. ij. sevi vaccini j. plumb. usti vj. tutiae
praepar. corn. cerv. usti, an. ij. Misc. To which may be added thus,
sarcocolla, resina pin. etc. For in the dressing of Ulcers the proportioning of
Medicaments ought to be left to the discretion of the Surgeon, avoiding
greasy Applications in these Ulcers as much as may be. The Ulcer incarned, you
may proceed by Epuloticks, as has been all along showed.

A Maidservant living in a Noble Family had cut the inside of her right Leg by
a Fall upon a hot Grate-iron, 1. Observat. of an Ulcer with Fluxion
and, having suffered about eight weeks under ill Surgery, was commended to
my care. The Ulcer was with loss of substance and sanious, with some pituitous
Swelling in the Lips and Parts about. I dressed it with unguent. basilicon
mixed with Praecipitate, as it is usually in my Salvatory, j. of it to one
ounce of the Unguent. I applied over it an Emplastr. diachalcit. sprinkled with
a little acetum, and a Compress wrung out of Oxycrate, then rolled it up with
the expulsive Bandage; the Cure indeed consisting mainly in the well rolling,
the want of that causing frequently Crudity in the Ulcer. By the use of it both
the Influx was restrained, and the Member strengthened, and with the help of
the Unguent aforesaid it was digested: as the Lips flatted by virtue of
Compression it, incarned, and by unguent. tutiae and Pledgits dipped in aq.
calcis cicatrized in few days, without Purging or Bleeding.

A Man about fifty years old, 2 Observat.
of a gross Body, frequently afflicted with the Gout, and laboring then under
it in his left Leg, (as I remember) was commended to an Empirick, who pretended
extraordinary skill in the Cure of that Disease, but understood no more then
what he had learned by Books. The Patient's Leg was much swelled with pituitous
Humors, as most fat Bodies are that have long labored under the Gout, and no
Medicaments or Bandage were used to fortify the weak Member. He began the Cure
by Purging, and then proceeded by bathing his Leg in a Tub with some Decoction
of Herbs, etc. The Bath might possibly be good; but the putting his Leg into
it, as it seemed, served but to lead the Humors more powerfully down to it,
and increased the Swelling. Whereupon he was again purged by strong
Catharticks, it was supposed Lockyer's Pills: he was also frequently vomited as
roughly; but without success, the Gout continuing, and the Leg growing more
weak and swelled. Endeavors were used by Emplasters of various sorts, and
Purgatives repeated, till the Patient's spirits and strength were near
exhausted, the Empirick confidently promising a Cure thereby. But the Patient
not able longer to endure his Applications, I was sent for, and found him
extremely weak, and complaining much of Pain. I took an Emplaster off his Leg,
I suppose Emplastr. de ranis cum Mercurio, or some Solution of Mercury with
Gums; it was spread thick upon Leather, and lay in great wrinkles about the
whole Leg: under it was great Excoriation, with Tumor and Inflammation. I
caused some water to be warmed, and while it was held over a Vessel my Servant
bathed it with a Sponge, to cleanse it, and give a breathing to the Humor. I
then dressed the Ulceration with unguent. tutiae, and applied ceratum
refrigerans Galeni, cut into pieces, to give way for the discharge of the
Humor, and rolled the Leg from the Foot to the Knee. After I had continued
this method of dressing a few days, mitigated the pain, and digested the
Ulceration, I left off the use of the Cerote, dressed the Ulcer with unguent.
desiccativ. rubr. applied unguent. nutritum over all, then rolled the Member
more strictly, and thereby cicatrized the Ulceration, and he was free from the
Gout. I ordered him a laced Stocking, and by moderate and equal lacing it
restored the Leg to a better shape then it had been in many years before, and
left him well recruited in his strength; forewarning him again to trust such
Braggers.

A Servant to a Nobleman in the Country, by a Fall upon a sharp piece of
Timber, 3. Observat.
bruised and cut his left Leg from the Shin-bone transverse the outside of the
Calf of his leg. Through neglect in the Country it inflamed and swelled very
much, and the Ulcer became undigested. He was sent up to Town, and lodged near
me. I fomented the Part affected with Wine, dressed the Ulcer cum terebinth.
vitell. ovi and far. hordei, applied Emplastr. e bolo, with a Compress wrung
out of the said Fomentation, and rolled it up; then let him blood. The next day
I fomented his Leg with a Decoction of some of the Simples above mentioned,
dressed his Ulcer as before, and applied an Emplaster of farina fabarum, pulv.
ros. rubr. balaust. bacc. myrtill. sumacb, decocted in Wine, adding some mel
commune to it. Thus in few days the Ulcer digested, and the Tumor wasted. Then
I deterged with the same Digestive, adding pulv. rad. aristoloch. ireos,
sarcocoll. and mel ros. touching the Ulcer with the Vitriol-stone daily more or
less, and applied Emplastr. e bolo as at first; then by a more strict Bandage
disposed the Lips of the Ulcer to incarn; and by unguent, e plumbo and
desiccativ. rubr. I cicatrized it, and directed him a laced Stocking to be put
on, and returned him to his Lord.

CHAP. VI. Of Ulcers with Hypersarcosis.
THE arising of luxurious Flesh in Ulcers sometimes creates a difficulty in
their Cure.

The Cause is either from abundance of serous Humors flowing into them; Cause.
or the ignorance of the Surgeon, in not distinguishing the superfluous
Flesh from the good, who thereupon continues the use of mild Detergents or
drying Medicaments.

The Signs are so evident that they need no Remarks.

The Indication of Cure is taken from the Cause. Cure.
If Fluxion were the Cause, Purging and Bleeding may do good, and a regulation
of Diet, with the use of such Remedies as may resist the Fluxion; as you may
see in the preceding Chapter. But if too mild Detergents or Sarcoticks caused
the Flesh to grow lax and spongie, then more powerful Driers are required, yea
cathaeretick or caustic Medicaments, as you see cause.

The milder are spong. ust. cort. granat. nuc. gallar. lapis tutiae, alumen
ustum; and amongst them Merc. praecipitat. may well be reckoned, if used alone.
Compounds are these: nuc. gallar. cort. granat. an. ij. balaust. j. aluminis
ust. j. pulver. subtle. Misc. It may be sprinkled on the Ulcer thick, and dry
Pledgits with Compress bound over it; or it may be boiled in red Wine, and
Pledgits dipped in it and applied. Aq. calcis is also moderately drying without
pain: if you add a few grains of Sublimate, it is more powerful. Aq. lapidis
medicamentos. aq. viridis, and Fallopii, are more strong; but by the addition
of aq. plantag. or the like they may be made milder. The Vitriol and Alumestone
serve well to this purpose, to keep down loose Flesh, and to cicatrize those
Ulcers which are most luxurious; and if they be discreetly used, will perform
the work with little pain, and cicatrize these kind of Ulcers most firmly.

A Gentleman of about twenty years old, Observat. of an Ulcer with loose Flesh.
of a good Habit of body, put himself into my hands for the Cure of an Ulcer on
his right Side the breadth of the Palm of a hand. It was occasioned by a Burn,
and had been bigger. The cause why this remaining part of the Ulcer did not
cicatrize was most evident, it being overgrown with loose Flesh. I applied
Pledgits of a mixture of unguent. basilicon with two parts Aegyptiac. upon it,
with Bandage: but observing it not to yield to that so soon as I designed, I
levelled it with the Caustick-stone, and after separation of the Escar digested
the Ulcer with unguent. basilicon and Merc. praecipitat. and afterward
cicatrized it with some of the Waters above mentioned.

CHAP. VII. Of Ulcers with Caries in the Bones.
A Caries or Rottenness in the Bone is frequently found in Ulcers, and
sometimes gives rise to them: but however it is, it always prolongeth and
renders the Cure of them difficult.

The Causes of Caries in the Bones are either internal, Causes.
as through retention or acrimony of the Matter, or some occult quality, as in
Lues Venerea, where the Bone is carious, and the Skin is whole; or in strumous
Ulcers near the Bones, where the Erosion begins in the Bone it self; or they
are corrupted externally by the Air. Bruises, Wounds in the Head, through ill
Surgery, may corrupt both Tables, etc. But this I never met with in any
Patient of my own, or where I had power to govern. The Bone may also be fouled
by over-sharp Medicaments.

If the Bone be bare, its Corruption is easily discerned, Sign.
though sometimes it be covered with a grumous or viscous Matter, which rubbed
off, the Bone appears white, brown, or black. If the white be pory, the
Caries may be deeper and more dangerous then if it were black and hard. If the
Bone lie so hid as that you cannot feel it with your Probe, yet you may judge
it carious from the quantity or quality of the Matter. If the Bone lie near,
and the Flesh lax and white, it is shrewdly suspicious that the Bone is
carious: but if the Matter stink or be oily, it is a more certain sign of a
Rottenness. Ulcers of long continuance near a Bone do also foreshew a Caries,
according to Hippocrates, Si Vlcera annua aut etiam diuturniora fiant, ossa
corrumpi necesse est. Also the difficulty in cicatrizing them, and the frequent
and sudden Eruption of them after they are cured, gives a suspicion of a foul
Bone. But if the Bone be much corrupted, the Matter is foetid, and the Probe
will penetrate into it.

Ulcers with Caries or Rottenness in the Bones are of difficult Cure,
Prognostic.
and reckoned amongst the Cacoethe and malign Ulcers; but are more or less
dangerous where the great Joints or heads of the Bones are affected, where the
Surgeon cannot safely apply such Remedies as are proper for Exfoliation.

In the Cure of Ulcers with Caries a good Diet is to be observed, Cure.
and the peccant Humors to be evacuated and averted by Bleeding, Purging, etc.
left they cause Fluxion. And forasmuch as in the Cure of these Ulcers the
corrupt Bones must be first removed, and a Callus generated, before you can
hope for Sanation; therefore you must in the first place make way to the Bone,
that, if it be possible, you may have it in your sight. To which purpose, if
the outward Orifice be small, you must enlarge it proportionably according as
the Caries is greater or lesser, and scrape the rotten Flesh away, or consume
it by Escaroticks. But if by reason of the nervous and great Vessels, as in
the Hands, Feet, and in the great Joints or Spine, you cannot safely do it;
you shall then by prepared Sponge, Gentian roots, or the like, dilate the Ulcer
till the Caries be bared. But if the Caries lie just under some comsiderable
Nerve, Tendon or Artery, so that you cannot well come to apply your Medicaments
to the Bone; you are then to consider whether the Caries can be removed without
laying the Bone more bare: and if that be not fecible, you are then to consider
the prejudice may happen to the Patient in the cutting off those Vessels, and,
comparing the Worthiness of them with the Inconveniences which may behappen the
Patient from the Caries, proceed accordingly.

The Bone laid bare, you are then to consider the Caries, whether great or
small, deep or superficial, hard or soft; and proceed by Medicaments or
manual Operation accordingly. The Bones of the Head do not admit of the hot
Iron, nor need it. The Vertebrae of the Back will neither admit of Cauteries,
Rugin, or sharp Medicaments, the Spine of them excepted: nor will the Sternon
or Rib admit of the Cautery. The Heel-bone requires also great caution, for
that it is soft, and rarely exfoliates by rough handling. In the rest you may
proceed by Cautery, actual or potentiall, Rugin, or otherwise.

If the Caries be superficial, and the Bone firm, you may by Medicaments of a
moderate drying quality consume the moisture in the Caries, and thereby dry the
Bone, and dispose it by virtue of its ossifick faculty to thrust out a Callus,
and make separation of its Caries.

The milder sort are, rad. ireos, peucedanum, rad. aristoloch. myrrha, aloe,
cort. pin. and spir. vini.

The stronger are, euphorbium, unguent. Aegyptiac. ol. garyophyll. spir.
vitriol. sulphur, pastill. Andronis, Musae, polyid. But these require to be
used with caution, and the sound Parts to be well defended from their acrimony.

The Powders above mentioned may be applied upon the Bone with Dossills of Lint
over them, to keep the Lips of the Ulcer distended; or may be mixed with sir.
de ros. sicc. aut mel rosat. vel commun. or used in a spirit of Wine, or with
unguent. Aegyptiac. or thus in the form of Injections: symphyt. maj. gentian.
aristoloch. rot. and long. rad. ireos, an. j. flor. ros. rub. sumach, balaust.
an. ss. coq. in vin. alb. ad lbij. colaturae add spir. vini ij. mell. ros. aut
Aegyptiac. q. s. Where you can safely dilate the Ulcer, you ought to do it,
and keep the Bone bare and dry, by filling it up with Dossills, that the Lips
of the Ulcer encroach not upon your work, lest the Matter dropping from thence
corrupt the sound Bone under them: for to exfoliate well, it should begin to
rise from the sound edges.

The spongie Bones in the Hands or Feet are to be kept bare by Dossills,
according to the length of the Caries: and if the whole Bone be corrupt, it
will dry and separate from the Joints in time, and the Ulcer happily cure; yet,
to hasten it, you may dry it with an actual Cautery. But if the Bone be only
carious in one part, as in the middle or at the end, to hasten the Cure you may
nip it there in pieces with a pair of Pincers, pull away the broken bits, and
dress it lightly with some of the above milder Driers; whereby in few days the
Caries will cast forth, a Callus thrust out, and unite the two ends, as in
fractured Bones, if the native heat of the Part be preserved the while.

But if the Caries be in the great Bones, and lie deep, and be subject to the
inflowing of Matter; your speediest way will be by manual Operation, viz.
either by Rugines or actual Cautery. If you can come easily to the Bone to
scrape it, as in the Cranium, that way will be most proper. You are to scrape
till you find it firm, or that you discern a ruddiness in the Bone; and not
only till it look white, for that is the natural color of the outer Shell of
the Bone: yet in some it is frequently found pory and carious while it retains
that color; and if you do not rugine that away, the Callus will be slow in
thrusting out; and if you do rugine it, the deeper you enter into it, the
browner and softer the Bone will be. Therefore you must be cautious in this
Work, lest you penetrate to the Marrow of the Bone, when possibly you needed
not have taken away more then the external Shell of it.

The Bone rugined, dress it up with the milder Sarcoticks: or, if you had
rather use an Unguent, terebinth. clarae iiij. gum. elemi ij. resin. pineae,
mastich. an. vj. thuris, sarcocolae, an. iij. Misc. super ignem. Apply this
warm upon Lint, and in few days you may see the Flesh thrust forth in small
grains, which is Callus, and in a few days more thrust off small Speels from
the Bone you scraped.

But if the Caries be so deep that you cannot rugine it, then with a Terebellum
make penetration into it to the found part, or by an actual Cautery consume the
Rottenness. In order to this work, if the Ulcer be narrow, you are to pass it
through a Cannula fitted to go down through the Ulcer to the Bone: which
Cannula or Pipe ought to be covered with an Emplaster or Linen starched on, and
oiled, to pass in more easily. Then having a Basin of Water ready to cool the
Pipe, you shall place the Cannula upon the carious Bone, having first cleansed
the Matter from it with armed Probes: then pass the actual Cautery down
through the Cannula to the Bone so often till you have dried it, pulling out
the Cannula after each heat. So you may perform the work without scorching the
Lips of the Ulcer.

According as the Bone is rotten, so the Humor will spurt out from it upon the
first application of the Cautery: but upon repeating it, that Bone will be so
dry that you shall not hear it hiss; besides, you may feel the Bone firm. Then
dress it with the white of Eggs beaten with the Mucilage of Quince-seeds
extracted in aq. germ. querc. or the like, and dress the scorched Ulcer and
Lips with unguent. refriger. Galeni, and a Cerote of the same over that and the
neighboring Parts. Continue this way of dressing till the heat of the Ulcer be
mitigated: then, if the Lips be vesicated, dress them with unguent. album,
tutiae, or the like, and the Bone with the milder Exfoliatives, and keep the
Ulcer open till the burnt Bone cast off; then throw out the Dossills, and you
shall see the Ulcer incarn and cicatrize by the most familiar Epuloticks.

IN the year 1652. passing from Cheshire into the County of Rutland, 1.
Observat.
taking North-Luffenham in my way to London, I was desired there to visit a
Freeholder, who had labored under a Fever, and had been long Bedridden by reason
of a grievous pain in his right Thigh, which was supposed the Crisis of that
Fever. I saw him much emaciated, and his pained Thigh was somewhat the bigger
of the two, but it retained its shape without any visible Tumor, Inflammation
or hardness; nor was the Fluctuation so distinguishable as that I could
positively say there was Matter, it lying so deep and equally in the outside of
it: but, suspecting Matter, I opened it on the outside according to the length
of the Member, and feeling my Knife in the Cavity, I made the Apertion large,
and discharged a putrid Matter like the Lees of Beer. After I had discharged a
Porringer-full, I dressed the Opening cum unguent. basilic. upon a Tent, with
an Emplaster de minio over it, and with Compress and Bandage rolled it up. The
next day, finding the Patient relieved, and the Matter plentifully discharged,
I fomented the Tumor with a Decoction of absinth. flor. cham. ros. rubr. and
such like, and making a search with my Probe, found the Bone bare a great
length. I enlarged the Opening, to make more way for the Matter, and the better
to apply my Medicines to the Bone; then dressed it up as before, and against
the next day made an Injection summitat. hyperici, centaurii, rad. consolid.
maj. bistort. tormentill. gentian. ireos: to which strained liquour I added
sir. de ros. siccis, and cast some of it daily in warm to deterge the Ulcer.
His body was kept soluble by Clysters of Milk and Sugar, and his Spirits
relieved by a morsel of theriac. Land. with cous. lujulae. I also ordered him
a Julep made with a few Strawberry-leaves and roots, a little Ivory, and a
crust of Bread, infused a stick of Cinnamon in the strained Decoction, put in a
few drops of spir. sulphur. and sweetened it with Sugar. His Diet was
Oatmeal-Caudle, Broth, Grewells, and Eggs; and as his Appetite increased, we
allowed him a more liberal Diet. Although the Opening was large, and the Thigh
very bare of Flesh; yet, by reason of the distance the Bone lay from the
Opening, and the hollowness of the Ulcer, it was not possible to make any
Applications to the Bone by Medicaments to exfoliate it, that should not be
offensive to the Ulcer, if they were so powerfully drying as the Bone required.
Therefore I caused an actual Cautery to be made at the next Smith's, and dried
the Bone that way, and the while continued the abovesaid method of dressing,
keeping the Orifice moderately dilated with Dossills pressed out of the
Injection; then by good Compress and Bandage squeezed out the Matter, insomuch
as it lessened daily, the more remote Cavities agglutinated, and the Ulcer was
like to cure, if the Caries in the Bone did not obstruct it. That it might not,
I got the Cautery made in the form of a Wedge, but thicker, to retain heat; and
having fitted it with a Cannula, I placed it upon the Bone according to the
length of the Caries, passed the Cautery through it to the Bone, and repeated
it again and again, cooling the Cannula each time in a dish of water near me:
then I covered the Bone, and dressed the Opening with Dossills dipped in a
Mucilage of Barley and Comfrey-roots, fastening a Thread to those Dossills which
I conveyed first in toward the Bone, the better to bring them out again, and
applied unguent. refrigerans Galeni outward upon the Ulcer, with an Emplaster
of cerat. Galeni over all. This way of dressing I continued daily till the
Excoriation was healed without: then I repeated the use of the former
Injection, adding flor. ros. rubr. balaust. sumach, with a little alumen, and
by Compress and Bandage hastened the unition of it within, leaving the
Exfoliation of the Bone to nature. While I stayed in that Country, the Cavity
filled up, and by the well-digested and little Matter the Ulcer seemed near
cured; and I was afterward informed that the Patient followed his Husbandry
some one or two months after. The Exfoliation was here insensible, as it most
frequently happens, the Scales mouldering away, and discharging with the Matter.

A Gentleman of about forty years of age, 2. Observat. of an Ulcer with Caries
in the Tibia and Fibula of the right Leg.
having been long afflicted in the Country with Ulcers on his right Leg and
Foot, came to London, and put himself into my hands. There wa^ one large Ulcer
upon the Fibula near the Ancle here and there superficially cicatrized. Upon
search with a Probe I found the Bone carious in several places, but covered
with the Tendons of the Peroneis. On the inside of the Leg upon the Tibia near
the Ancle there were also Ulcers with Caries: the Foot was also ulcerated, and
the Leg and Foot swelled. I began with the laying open of that Ulcer on the
outside upon the Fibula by the application of a Caustic, and dividing the
Escar took out some small pieces of Bones which lay loose in the Ulcer. The
Fibula it self was covered with the Tendons of the Muscle Peroneis, so as there
was no possibility of applying Medicaments to exfoliate the Bone, nor indeed of
curing the Ulcer, whilst those Tendons lay in the way. Wherefore I cut them
transversly; upon which division the upper part of them contracted, and then
the Fibula appeared bare and black. I applied dry Lint upon the Bone, and
dressed the Ulcer with unguent. basilicon hot, to hasten Digestion and
separation of the Sloughs. The other Ulcers and Excoriations I dressed, some
with Detersives, and others with Epuloticks, according as they required; and
with Compress and Bandage endeavored to press out the pituitous Humors
affecting those Parts. As the Escars began to separate, I deterged by the use
of the Vitriol-stone and Praecipitate, and dressed the Bone with Dossills
pressed out of tinctura vitrioli dulc. of Felix Wurtz. The upper ends of the
Tendons suffered Convulsion with great tremor upon the application or taking
off Dressings; but it was without pain: yet, suspecting the worst, I cut as
much off of the Tendons (with a pair of Scissors) as lay bare, then dipped them
cum oleo terebinth. hot, and dressed them with Praecipitate. By this way of
dressing the remaining ends of the Tendons digested and incarned with the
fleshy Parts, and by the application of Epuloticks cicatrized: so also the main
Ulcer cicatrized round from the edges to the carious Bone, thrusting off the
rotten edges of them before it. During this I healed the Ulcers and
Excoriations on his Foot, and by the help of a laced Stocking pressed back the
pituitous Humors, and reduced the Member to its true shape. Having thus
happily succeeded, I began with the laying open the Ulcer upon the Os tibiae by
Caustic, and in dividing the Sloughs took out several fragments of Bones
which lay entangled in the Flesh. After separation of the Escar, i deterged
that Ulcer after the same manner as the former; and indeed by rubbing the
carious Bones with the Vitriol-stone I hastened the Exfoliation of them. They
came away in bits at several times, but that of the Fibula was thrust off by
the Callus underneath in one piece. After the Exfoliation of the Bones I purged
the Patient with a cathartick Apozeme, and prescribed him a Decoction of Sarsa,
etc. and soon after cicatrized the Ulcers; but advised him to continue the
wearing of the laced Stocking.

A Young man by some accident bruised the Back of his hand: 3. Observat. of an
Ulcer with rotten Bones in the Hand.
it inflamed and apostemated, and after some while terminating in a sinuous
Ulcer, and underneath corrupting the Bone, I was consulted, and advised the way
of dressing it: but that method not being observed, other Bones of the Hand
became carious, and the Hand in great hazard of being lost. Upon which he was
commended to my care. Sir Alex. Fras. being present, I took off the Dressings,
made a search with a Probe, and felt the Bones leading to the two middle
fingers bare, rough, and, as I suspected, rotten. The Orifice being small, I
applied a Caustic large enough to make way for the taking out those Bones;
then divided the Escar, and dressed up his Hand with Digestives, Emplaster and
Bandage. Sir Alex. Fras. prescribed him a vulnerary Decoction, and left the
prosecution of the Cure to me. As the Escar separated, I saw the Bones leading
to the two middle fingers black, and softened with Putrefaction. I laid hold on
the one with my Forceps, and pinched it into pieces with much ease, bringing
part of it away. I fomented the Hand with decoct. absinth. etc. in Wine,
dissolved a little Aegyptiac. in some of it, washed the Ulcer, and applied a
Dossill dipped hot in it upon the Bone, and unguent. basilicon over the Escar. I
then pinched out what was most rotten, dressed the remaining ends of them with
a mixture of unguent. Aegyptiac. spirit. vini and extract. scordii actually hot
with an armed Probe, applied Pledgits of the same upon the Bones, rubbed the
loose Flesh in the Ulcer with a Vitriol-stone, and laid unguent. diapomphol.
upon Pledgits over the tender edges of the Ulcer. By this way of dressing I
deterg'd the Ulcer, and at several times pinching out those rotten Bones that
led to the two middle Fingers, disposed the rest to cast off. During which I
laid the Ulcer higher open to the Joint of the middle Finger: which Knuckle I
also found rotted to pieces, and took out what would come easily away; then
dressed the remaining Caries as the other in the Hand, and after some time made
a separation of the Caries there. Having the while digested and healed the
Ulcer I first laid open, I also cicatrized this Part, and dismissed the Patient
well cured, as I thought. But some while after he came to me again with a
Tumor upon that Knuckle of the middle Finger, from some remaining Splinter of
a Bone. I laid it open, and took that out. While I was curing this, I observed
a small Opening, with a Tumor near it as big as a small Hazell-nut, upon that
part of the Bone which led to the Forefinger. I opened this by Caustic, and,
discovering part of the Bone black, pinched it off, and dressed the remaining
end with Aegyptiac. scalding hot upon an armed Probe. I kept the Ulcer open
with Dossills pressed out with spirit. vini till I made separation of it, then
cured this Ucler also. And from that time, which is more then five years, he
has continued well, and his Hand is firm and strong; Nature having supplied
that loss of Bones with Callus. But he bears the Marks of the Disease, which
will assert the truth of what is here delivered. You may see more of this work
in the Treatise of Struma.

An Officer of the King's Regiment of Foot, 4. Observat.
of a Sanguine and healthful Constitution, marching at the head of his Company
in a hot Summer's day, heated his Blood, and was seized with a pain in one of
his Teeth of the lower right Jaw. He sent for a Tooth-drawer, who pulling out
the Tooth brake the Alveoli off from the Jaw according to the length of it. The
pain made great Fluxion, and required Evacuation and Revulsion by Bleeding and
the like. But this being omitted, and the Part affected not treated as it
ought, the pain increased, the neighboring Parts swelled and apostemated, and
all his Teeth and part of the Alveoli cast off. After some weeks continuance in
the Country, finding his Disease increase upon him, he came to Town, and sent
for me. That side of his Head, Face and Neck were extremely swelled outwardly,
so was the Cheek and Tonsill within, and the fractured Bones hidden within the
Tumor. Upon a pressure with my hand on the outside of his Cheek, seeing the
Matter flow into his Mouth out of a small Opening near the farther part of that
Jaw, I made a search with a Probe, and felt the Jaw bare. There was a necessity
of laying that Orifice open, for the more easy discharging of the Matter: which
being done, I employed my endeavors to take off the Fluxion and Fever he
labored under, let him blood from that Arm ten ounces, prescribed Fomentations
and Cataplasms to be applied outwardly to discuss the Tumor, and inwardly an
Injection to deterge the Ulcer of rad. ireos, tormentill. bistort. aristoloch.
with sir. e rosis siccis, and a little spirit. vini; also a Gargle to wash his
mouth of flor. ros. rubr. plantag. summitat. rubi, etc. with diamoron and
spirit. vitrioli dulcificat. Doctor Warner being consulted, he directed
Anodyne draughts, Cordialls, Juleps, Emulsions, and purging Apozems. The
Cacochymia thus evacuated, and the Humors contemperated, we hoped the outward
and inward Swellings and discharge of Matter would have lessened: but they not
yielding one jot to our endeavors, I laid open the Cheek from the Orifice I
had enlarged forward along the Bone, with intention to take it out; but it
was so shut in that I could by no means get it out, till with Watch-makers
Files I cut through that Bone; then the ends thrust out into his mouth. These I
pulled out: they proved to be pieces of the Alveoli. Then I felt the Jaw it
self arise; and, considering that if it were loose it must out, I passed the
end of my Probe under it, whereupon it rose up, having been some while loose,
and was only held down by the foresaid Alveoli; which being removed, the Jaw
came away without the least pain or one drop of blood, he only crying out of
his Ear, as if it had made a hole through there.

The Jaw being extracted, the side was ready to fall in: to prevent which I
caused the Patient to hold it stretched out with his fingers in his mouth, and
a Looking-glass held before him, that he might the better see to keep it more
exactly even, whilst I by agglutinative Powders cum albumine ovi made a Crust
upon the outside; which with Pastboard wet in aceto applied over it sat close
to it, and after it was dried kept that side of the Cheek firm, and by Bandage
it continued so, he helping it as has been above said. It also was somewhat
stiffned by the hard Swelling which was in the Cheek.

To hasten the Callus, I gave him daily osteocoll. as I had read in Fabr.
Hildanus his Works. Whilst his Chaps were thus bound up, I continued to wash
his Mouth with the Decoction abovesaid injected often in a day with a Syringe;
by which means the Ulcer was cleansed and cured, and disposed to a Callus,
which grew and hardened in less then twenty days so equal with the other, as
without looking in his Mouth it could not be discerned.

CHAP. VIII. Of Ulcers with Callous Lips, etc.
IT also frequently happens that Ulcers become callous, hard and livid, and are
thereby rendered difficult of Cure.

These Ulcers are generally annual, Cause.
and through length of time contract this Callosity and hardness with a livid
color. The Causes of these are the frequent defluxion of a hot Serum, which
has been condensed by the Air, or by over-cooling or drying Medicaments.

The Signs are evident from what has been said of them.

The Prognostic of them is, Prognostic.
that the Ulcer cannot cure till the Callosity be removed: and if the Ulcer be
of a round figure, that ought also to be changed.

In the Cure of this Ulcer you are to consider the hardness of the Lips; Cure.
for from what cause soever it arises, that must be removed, or deprest to
cicatrize with the Ulcer; for no Ulcer skinneth well but from the edges.
Therefore if the Lips be hard and callous in the Superficies, you shall
endeavor by emollient and discutient Medicaments to soften them, and by good
Compress and Bandage dispose them to cure first, by a Fomentation of rad. and
fol. althaeae, lilior. malvae, sem. lini and foenugraeci, flor. cham. melilot.
sambuci. By this you may also rarefy the condensed blood, which makes the
lividity in the Parts about the Ulcer, and preventeth the generation of good
Flesh. Then you may embrocate the indurated Lips with unguent. dialthaeae, ol.
amygdal. dulc. ol. lilior. lumbricor. and apply cerat. oesypi, cerat. Galeni,
Emplastr. e mucilag. diachyl. ireat. or, if stronger be required, Empl. de
ranis cum Mercurio, or a plate of Lead rubbed with Mercury, or a Past of Ceruse
or calx lot. made up with axung. porcin. and over this a good Compress and
Bandage; of which sort the laced Stocking is best for the Leg, which being well
made preserves the other Parts from Fluxion better then a Rowler does. But if
the edges of the Lips be inverted and callous, or the Ulcer be in such a place
where you cannot make good Bandage, your best way then will be by Caustic or
Knife to remove it, and then digest and heal the Lips even with the Ulcer.

A Young man of about eighteen years old, of an ill Habit of body, 1. Observat.
having labored long under an Ulcer on the inside of the Ancle of a round
figure, with the Lips thick and callous, and the Parts about livid, put himself
into my hands for Cure. There was in this case no hopes by Emollients or
Bandage to flat the Lips so as to dispose them to cicatrize; therefore I rubbed
them with a Caustick-stone round, dressed the Ulcer with unguent. basilicon and
Praecipitate, and applied Emplastr. diachyl. ireat. over all, with Compress and
Bandage, designing to dispose the Lips to unite with the Ulcer. But the Escar
separating slowly, the Lips skinned underneath, and disappointed me.
Notwithstanding, the inverted parts being removed with the Callus underneath, I
made a Paste with calx lota and axung. porcin. and with good Compress forced
the Lips even wih the Ulcer, then united it with a smooth and firm Cicatrix.

A Maid in Fanchurch-street laboring under such an Ulcer with livid callous
Lips, 2. Observat. of Callous Lips.
but not inverted, I digested with unguent. basilicon and Praecipitate, and
fomented with a Decoction as above mentioned, then applied Emplastr. diachyl.
ireat. over the Parts about, and put on a laced Stocking with a Compress under
it, thereby digesting the Ulcer, and flatting the Lips; incarning and
cicatrizing it with unguent. diapompholyg. in less then three weeks, which had
been more then three years the work of some Barber-chirurgeon. The speedy Cure
of this I imputed to the laced Stocking, it performing all the Intentions
necessary to the curing of many such like Ulcers.

CHAP. IX. Of Putrid Ulcers.
ULcers laboring under Fluxion of sharp acrid Humors are (as I have elsewhere
said) for the most part sordid. The Sordes as it increases in the Ulcer rots
the Flesh, renders the Ulcer putrid, and the Matter foetid.

The immediate Cause of these Ulcers are gross viscid Humors heated in them by
the Intemperies of the Part, Causes.
whence they contract a malign quality, and corrupt. They also happen through
the unseasonable application of lenient or greasy Medicaments, or by
too-powerfull Detergents, which resolve the sound Flesh, and stir up a
putrefactive heat in the Ulcer, whereby the Humors become so sharp that they
corrode the Parts about: whence they are sometime deservedly called Vlcera
serpentia and depascentia.

The preceding Causes are excrementitious gross Juices abounding in the body
from ill Diet, Causes preceding.
Air, etc. Malign Fevers are also the Cause, by transmitting their malignity
outward.

The Sign of a sordid Ulcer is a viscous tough Excrement sticking in it with
great heat and pain. Sign.
As the Sordes increases, it changes its color, by reason of the suffocation
of the natural heat, and the Ulcer corrupts, and the Matter stinks.

If from abundance of Sordes Transpiration be hindered, Prognostic.
a corruption of the Part follows, and it terminates in a corrosive or putrid
Ulcer: and if that Putrefaction be not checked, a Gangrene and Sphacelus
follows.

In the Cure of these Ulcers a good Diet is to be observed, Cure.
with a regulation of the Non-naturalls: the viscous Humors require to be
purged, and Revulsion is to be made by Bleeding and otherways. Vulnerary
Decoctions are also to be prescribed, to waste the excrementitious Humors. The
Topics or outward Medicaments are to be proportioned according to the quality
of the Ulcer. In sordid Ulcers made by too strong Detergents unguent. basilicon
cum Merc. praecipitat. unguent. diapompholyg. mag. be proper to dress the Ulcer
with; and some cooling Unguent or Cerote, as refrigerans Galeni, may be applied
over it, with a Compress wrung out of Oxycrate.

If the Ulcer became sordid by the use of Lenients, and be lined thick with the
Sordes, doubt not to fill the Ulcer with Praecipitate, and apply some mild
Detergent on Pledgits of Lint over it, with a Compress wrung out as is
prescribed in humid Ulcers, and dress it not till the third day after: thereby
the pain will lessen, and the Sordes come away in a Slough. After which digest
the Ulcer till it look more fleshy and natural; then proceed with milder
Medicaments, and incarn.

In the common sordid Ulcers unguent. basilicon and Praecipitate, iij. to an
ounce, mundif. Paracels. with alumen ust. and unguent. apostolor. are proper
Detergents.

If the Ulcer be putrid, wash it with a good Lixivium wherein absinth.
scordium, etc. have been boiled, or with spirit. vini and unguent. Aegyptiac.
or sprinkle the Ulcer with pulv. sine pari Joan. Ard. or pulv. troch. Andronis,
etc. and outwardly defend the Parts from Fluxion.

If the Ulcer be corrosive, and undermine the Lips, and render the Flesh soft
and unfit for healing, dress it as shall be showed in a Phagedaena.

But if the putrefaction increase, and the Ulcer tend to Mortification, treat
it as is said in Gangraena and Sphacelus.

A Woman of about forty years of age, scorbutically and hydropically affected,
1. Observat. of Putrid Ulcers.
having long labored under a sordid Ulcer in the Country on the inside of her
Leg, with great pain, came at last to Town, and put her self into my hands. The
Ulcer was large and deep, with great putrefaction; the Leg was much swelled,
inflamed, and had been excoriated in the Parts about by the acrimony of the
Matter; and by the application of Nutritum or such like the Matter was crusted
in, and also a Hypersarcosis was risen underneath very large. I fomented the
Parts affected with wine, and washed the Ulcer with spirit. vini and unguent.
Aegyptiac. then with a Spatula thrust out the putrid Flesh, and strewed the
Ulcer with Praecipitate, dressing it with Pledgits pressed out of the same
Solution, and applying an Emplastr. diachalcit. over it with Compress and
Bandage. The next morning I took off the Bandage and Emplaster, fomented the
Ulcer with a Luxivium as above mentioned, applied mundif. Paracels. cum oleo
terebinth. on the Ulcer, and a Cataplasm ex far. fabar. with oxymel, and rolled
it up as before, causing her to keep her bed. The day after I purged her with
an Infusion of Sena, etc. cum sir. de spina cervin. and de ros. sol. and
prescribed her a Decoct. sarsae, lign. guaiaci, with Antiscorbuticks. Having by
the Dressings abovesaid removed the Putrefaction, I endeavored to incarn with
the sarcotick Unguent, and applied cerat. oxelaei over it with good Bandage:
but it would neither deterge nor incarn nor yet digest for two days, till I put
on a laced Stocking; by the use whereof the Influx was restrained, and the Lips
pressed down. Having disposed the Ulcer to a healing condition, I incarned it
with the foresaid Unguent of mel despumat. mixed with sarcotick Powders. While
I was doing that, I rubbed part of the Lips which were callous with a
Caustick-stone, and also rubbed the Hypersarcosis off by some of the same
Caustic. After separation of the Escars I cicatrized the Ulcer and
neighboring Ulcerations with Epuloticks, then made her a Fontanell in the
other Leg, and returned her into the Country cured.

A Maid of a gross full Body, aged about twenty three years, 2. Observat.
wanting her natural Evacuations, an Abscesse thrust out on the inside of the
Calf of her left leg, and terminated in a callous sordid Ulcer. After some
endeavors ineffectuall in the Country, she was sent up to London, and
commended into my hands by Sir Fr. Prujean. The Ulcer was large and deep. I
dressed it with unguent. Aegyptiacum, basilicon, and Emplastr. diachalcit. with
a Compress dipped in red Wine, rolling it up from the Foot to the Knee. The
Physician began with the direction of a Purging draught, and the second day
after I let her blood. She was also prescribed the Decoct. traumat. Londinens.
and once a week purged with pulv. cornachin. I furthered the Detersion of the
Ulcer by rubbing it with the Vitriol-stone, and afterward digested it, and
endeavored to incarn with Sarcoticks, as in the former Observation: but on a
sudden, without any cause, the Matter became sanious and flowed in great
quantity. I then dressed the Ulcer with pulv. Andronis mixed with unguent.
basilicon, fomented the Part with summitat. absinth. centaurii, hyperici, flor.
ros. rubr. bacc. myrtillor. balaust. decocted in Wine, and by Intercipients
upon the Knee and good Bandage endeavored to resist the Influx. Upon my
complaint to the Patient and her Relations of the difficulty I met with in the
Cure, I perceived by them that the Ulcer had been frequently subject to such
discharge. The Physician was again consulted, who concluded they were the
Menstrua that thus periodically affected the Ulcer. She was again let blood and
purged, and put into a chalybeate course, a Fontanell was also made in her
other Leg: during which I proceeded again by Detersives, viz. the
Vitriol-stone, Merc. praecipitat. alone, and with mundificat. Paracelsi, etc.
and applied Defensatives, with Compress and a laced Stocking. By which method
the Ulcer seemed a while well disposed to incarn: but the Menstrua being still
obstructed, the Ulcer became again distempered, and rendered all my endeavors
fruitless.

I having spent some months in this work to little purpose, they grew weary of
me, and were desirous to make use of an Empirick, who had been it in my
absence, and promised a speedier Cure. I gave way to the entertaining him; he
also dressed the Ulcer after his way: but his endeavors proving also
unsuccessfull, they came to me again. I, finding the Leg much inflamed and
swelled, and more sordid, dressed the Ulcer with Detergents as above said,
applying ceratum Galeni over the diseased Parts with Compress and Bandage as
heretofore, and by Sir Fran. Prujean's leave gave her a few grains of Turbith
mineral. The next day it gave her four or five Vomits and a Stool or two. The
next day after I fomented the Ulcer as at first, continued the use of the
former Dressings, put her on a laced Stocking, and repeated the use of the
Turbith three or four times, avoiding Salivation. We also put her into a
Decoct. sarsae, lign. guaiaci, etc. and by this method incarned the Ulcer, and
by a malagma of calx lot. beaten up with axungia cicatrized it. By the
continuing of the laced Stocking she remained well, and after some months those
Evacuations came naturally down of themselves, which by no Art would be
persuaded, and she remained well.

CHAP. X. Of Phagedaena, Nomae, Dysepulota.
BEsides all the difficulties we find in curing of Ulcers upon the
forementioned Accidents, there yet remain diverse others which are not easily
described, nor easily reconciled to the ancient Nomenclature of Ulcers: I mean
those called Annua, Phagedaenica, Depascentia, Nomae. Out of which words that I
may pick some sense, I shall refer them to two Heads.

One, of the corrosive Ulcers, which from their corroding the neighboring
Parts have obtained several names in the Greek and Latin; as Phagedaenica,
Depascentia, and Nomae: all which depend upon an acrimony of the Humor.

The other are rather the effect of some continuance of an Ulcer, which after
long Intemperies does by degrees so weaken the tone of the Fibers, destroy the
natural Balsame of the Part, and by frequent Fluxion induce Callosity, that
the Disease grows very hard of Cure, and when cured is apt to break out
again. These, from their continuance, are called Annua; from the evil
disposition of the Part, Cacoethe; from the hardness of cicatrizing,
Dysepulota; from the reputation Chiron the Centaur had in Surgery, Chironia;
and Telephia, from the hard fate of Telephus, whose Wound could not be cured
but by the Spear that wounded him. These latter being insignificant names, not
describing the nature of any Ulcer, I shall content my self only to have
explained them in few words: but the former, namely Phagedaena, or Vlcus
depascens, Nomae and Dysepulota, deserve farther consideration, and are our
present task.

Phagedaena strictly so called is an Ulcer with swelled Lips, Description.
that eats the Flesh and neighboring Parts in the bottom and edges of the
Ulcer. It differs from Herpes, because that always begins in the Skin, with
little moisture, this always affects the Flesh, and abounds with Matter.

Noma is a deep Ulcer that eats and spreads without Tumor, but has a
Rottenness and Putrefaction joined with it.

Both these are venomous malignant Ulcers, and both spread: Difference.
but they differ, in that one has Tumor, and no Putrefaction; and the other
Putrefaction, and no Tumor.

These Ulcers do all take their Original from vicious Humors abounding in the
Body. Whether they be simple Choler, or a salt Phlegm mixed with it, Cause.
or that the Humors are made sharp and corrosive from a hot and dry
Intemperies of the Part affected, I leave others to judge: but in Bodies
abounding with Cacochymia it is frequently seen, that an Herpes exedens arises
in the Nose and Face from a small Wart or fiery Pustule, which being heated by
scratching or picking with their Nails will terminate corrosive, and from an
Herpes exedens become Phagedaenicall, and by a farther exasperating cancerate;
they differing but as the Humor becomes more or less fierce.

The Signs are evident from what has been delivered of them. Signs.
Some take their Original from Abscesses deep in the Flesh, others begin more
shallow, and in time spread and eat, not only the Skin to the Flesh, but the
Parts about, and dissolve the Flesh in the bottom of the Ulcer very sensibly.

All these kinds of corrosive eating Ulcers are accounted malign: Prognostic.
but some are less malign then other. Those which arise in venerall Diseases
are in themselves difficult of Cure; but by reason of the Specificks that
Disease has for its help, they become easy. The other are extreme difficult,
and do frequently terminate cancerous. Cure.


In the Cure of these Ulcers a good Diet ought to be preseribed, to prohibit
the increase of sharp Humors. The Body is also to be purged, the Humors
contemperated, and the Matter to be diverted by Revulsion, Dervication and
Interception, if it be possible. The virulent Humor affecting the Ulcer
requires to be dried up, and the Intemperies to be corrected. But forasmuch as
these Ulcers differ one from another in their corrosive quality, the
Medicaments must accordingly vary. If the Intemperies be hot, and the Ulcer
corrosive, your Applications are to be cold and dry, with some little
astringency; as unguent. tutiae, e plumbo, de calce, and de lithargyro. If
these answer not expectation, you must proceed with more strong Medicaments.
But by the authority of the Ancients you must scarify these Ulcers, or some way
provoke them to bleed, that the sharp Humors may thereby be discharged. Then
wash them with some drying Medicaments, which may also restrain the Influx of
the Humors; as aq. calcis, aeruginosa, or aluminosa, or a Decoct. plantag.
equiseti, rubi, flor. ros. rubr. balaust. nuc. cupress. gallar. in a Chalybeate
water. After which the Ulcer may be sprinkled with any of these, pulv. tutiae
praeparatae, corn. cervi usti, pulv. ostreor. combust. cort. granat. Or they
may be made into Unguents, as thus; unguent. diapomphol. ij. bol. Armen. sang.
dracon. balaust. an. ss. ol. ros. q. s. Misc. a Compress being applied wet over
all, wrung out of some astringent Decoction. The Ulcer thus dressed is not to
be opened again in three or four days: for in these Ulcers the temperament of
the Part is weak, and the frequent exposing it to the Air renders it more
weak, and the Medicaments less effectual.

But if this Ulcer be with Rottenness and Putrefaction, you are to proceed with
Detergents, as unguent. Aegyptiac. Merc. praecipitat. pulv. Andronis, Musae,
also Caustic and actual Cautery. To these Applications Objections have been
made; and, but a little above, Medicaments are by my self proposed drying
without Erosion: but when those take no place, we proceed to stronger; and
where there is Putrefaction, you will find use for the strongest sort of
Medicaments, as the actual Cautery, it not only serving to remove the
corrosive Flesh, but to check the malignity, and strengthen the weak Part. But
in case that will not be admitted of, you must proceed with the other, and the
while defend the parts about with refrigerants, and after separation of the
corrupt Flesh, treat it by Sarcoticks and Epuloticks, as has been elsewhere
said.

A Man aged sixty odd years, of a lean dry Habit of body, 1. Observat. of an
Ulcer hard of Cure.
had a long time been troubled with an Ulcer on the inside of the Ancle on his
right Leg: it had been often cured, but it broke out again soon after. I found
the Ulcer sanious, the Parts about it swelled and livid, and endeavored to
cure it by the common method set down in the general Cure of Ulcers; but it
would not digest two days together. I then proposed a laced Stocking: but he
replied there was no need, his Rowler kept off the Swelling. Observing him to
be so very wise, I omitted my accustomed attendance, upon which he employed
another, who found much difficulty in it. Whether he cured it or no, I do not
know; but about half a year to more after, the Patient sent for me again. The
Ulcer was undigested, and the Flesh in it soft and rotten, of a florid color,
and the Parts about it as it were bruised; which proceeded from the frequent
Fluxion and unequal strict Bandage. I proposed a laced Stocking which he
willingly permitted. Mean time I deterged the Ulcer with Merc. praecipitat.
applied Pledgits of unguent. basilicon mag. over it, with an Emplaster of
cerat. Galeni, Compress and Bandage. The second day after I fomented the Ulcer
and Parts affected with a discutient and astringent Decoction, and digested it
with unguent. basilicon and Merc. praecipitat. After I had thus digested and
deterged the Ulcer, and rarefied the impacted Humors in the adjacent Parts, I
fomented it with aq. calcis, applied Pledgits dipped in the same over the ends of
the Ulcer, and dressed the middle with Compress, and laced on a straight
Stocking; by which the Fluxion was moderately restrained, and the Ulcer
disposed to cicatrize: yet through the acrimony of the Humor, and the
indisposition of the Lips and adjacent Parts, the work was not without some
difficulty, the Matter being apt to shut in and bring part of the Cicatrix with
it. But it was cured in less then two months space; whereas without that
Stocking it would scarce have cured in six months. It was usually painful
after it had been cured by former methods, but was now free.

A person of about fifty years of age, much subject to the Gout, 2. Observat.
of an Ulcer of hard cure.
having long labored of a soar Leg, sent for me. There was one large Ulcer
with callous Lips on the inside of the Small of his leg, with an Ulceration
down below the Ancle. This Leg had been formerly subject to pituitous
Swellings, wherein the endeavoring to resist the Influx had impacted the
Matter, and made the Tumor scirrhous. The Ancle-joynt was stiff, and the Knee
as bad, by reason of a contraction in the Ham. Upon these considerations the
Soars were of difficult Cure. I dressed the larger Ulcer, which was sordid,
with Praecipitate and unguent. basilicon, the lesser with unguent, e plumbo,
with Compress and Bandage, and against the next Dressing provided a Fomentation
of red Wine with Stipticks, hoping that way to cicatrize the lesser Ulcers at
least: but they would not cure so, for the indurated Parts required to be made
soft, and the Matter to be discussed first: but this was a hard task, while the
Patient labored under the Gout, or pain from the weakness and indisposition of
the Parts. Therefore, having designed a Fomentation ex rad. and fol. althaeae,
malvae, parietariae, sem. lini, etc. I bathed the Leg as it was held over the
Liquour, continued my Applications to the Ulcers, and applied cerat. dialthaeae
over the scirrhous Parts; continuing this method till I had relaxed the
hardness. Then I put on a laced Stocking, by which I strengthened the Part
against the Influx, and used all my endeavors to cicatrize the Ulcers, by
Pledgits pressed out of astringent Liquours applied upon Lawns, also by epulotick
Unguents, Powders, and Malagma: but as fast as I healed them in one place, they
brake out in another, so that with much difficulty I cicatrized them at last by
the help of a laced Stocking.

A Maid of about seventeen or eighteen years of age, 3. Observat. of an Ulcer
difficult of cure.
with an Ulcer in her right Leg about a hand's breadth on the inside near the
Ancle, despairing of Cure, sent for a Woman who had some credit in the curing
such Ulcers. She came, and seeing a foul Ulcer with thick hard Lips, applied a
Caustic to it, I suppose Merc. sublimat. It put the Patient to grievous pain
for the space of a day and night, causing great Inflammation and Tumor. Upon
which consideration the Woman was sent for again. She saw the effects of her
Medicine, and would have applied somewhat to ease the pain: but the Patient's
Friends seeing the disturbance in the Ulcer, and doubting whither it might
tend, resolved now to put her into the hands of a Surgeon, and sent for me.
I came, and found the Leg swelled, and the Escar large covering the Ulcer, and
taking in the callous Lips round. It was so thick and deep, that I much feared
it would leave the Bone bare under it. My work was to hasten the separation of
the Escar, and mitigate the Accidents of pain, etc. To which purpose I fomented
the Part affected with Milk, dressed the Escar with unguent. basilicon cum ol.
liliorum, and applied cerat. Galeni, with Compress and Bandage to retain it.
Thus in few days the pain ceased, and the Escar separated, leaving a Flesh of a
color as it were bruised. I dressed the Ulcer with a Digestive ex terebinth.
far. hord. etc. and fomented the Tumor and Ulcer with Decoci. absinth. flor.
ros. rubr. balaust. etc. then applied unguent. tutiae as an Emplaster with
Bandage. After Digestion, I incarned with mel despumat. etc. and continued the
use of the Fomentation, hoping thereby to give a breathing, and dry up the
bruised Parts with made that lividity about the Ulcer, and were the cause of
its difficult curing. As the Ulcer incarned, I endeavored by Bandage to keep
the Lips flat to cicatrize with the Ulcer, and to that purpose dressed them and
the Ulcer with unguent. e calce, touching the lax Flesh with the Vitriol-stone,
to dry it, and fit it to cicatrize, and with much pleasure cicatrized it to the
compass of a Silver penny, and thought the work very easy. But, when I least
suspected it, the Skin cracked in the sound edges, and the Flesh in the Ulcer
looked of a dark red color. I dressed it with Epuloticks, hoping it would yet
cicatrize: but the Cuticula afterward cracked in three places more, and the
Patient suspected the cause to be from a fault in the Bone; as in truth I
should my self have doubted it, if I had not seen the separation of that Escar;
for the Flesh appeared rotten under the broken Cuticula, and as the Ulcer
healed in one corner, it broke out again there, or in another place. But this
was from the Intemperies of the Part, and required again to be digested before
I could hope to cicatrize it. To which purpose I dressed it with unguent.
basilicon and Praecipitate, let her blood, purged and vomited her, prescribed
her a decoct. sarsae, put on a laced Stocking, and used my utmost endeavors to
cicatrize it, as in such Ulcers I was accustomed to do; but all to no purpose,
the Cicatrix would not hold two days. I then left off the use of the laced
Stocking, and desired the Patient once more to give me leave to try whether it
would cure without it; and to that purpose persuaded her to keep her Leg upon a
Stool level with her Body a few days, I hoping thereby to keep off Fluxion,
and supposing, if I could once more breath out that gross Blood impacted in the
Part, I should be able to cicatrize the Ulcer; and if the Ulcer were cicatrized
without Bandage, it would be the more lasting. I repeated the Fomentation,
digested the Ulcer, and with a Solution of the Tincture of Vitriol in a Decoct.
equiseti, etc. applied Pledgits over bits of fine Lawn, and smeared the edges
of the Ulcer with unguent. tutiae, that it might not adhere to them. With such
like endeavors I cicatrized it firm, then put on a laced Stocking again, with
a Compress under it spread with unguent. tutiae, moderately to dry the Cicatrix,
and dressed it once it two or three days for fear of the worst. A dry Scale
arose upon it do what I could. I anointed it with Pomatum to supple it; then
raised it lightly up, and took it off: and so I did two or three times, and at
last left it firm and natural as the rest, and so it continues to this day.

This Ulcer from its continuation might be Annuum; from its difficulty of cure,
Chironium, or Telephium; from its rottenness of the Flesh, Noma; from its
callous Lips, Callosum; from its frequent cracking of the Skin after
cicatrizing, Dysepulotum.

As I was passing one day through Brainford to London, 4. Observat. of a
Phagedaenous corrosive Ulcer.
I was desired to see a poor Servant lying under an Abscess in his left Leg,
the Crisis of a malign Fever. The Abscess possessed the outside of his Leg,
from the head of the Fibula to the Ancle, the Orifice being three fingers
breadth below the said Fibula. The Matter could not discharge it self till it
overflowed; therefore I applied a Caustic upon the lower part of the Tumor to
give vent to it, and left him Dressings till he should be able to follow me.
Some days after he came to Town: I visited him, and found the lower Opening
discharged the Matter well, as I had designed; but it was sanious, and abounded
in quantity more then was reasonably to be expected from the Abscess. I
endeavored to deterge it with mundif. Paracelsi mixed with Praecipitate, and
fomented the Part affected with a Decoct. absinth, salviae, betonicae, flor.
ros. rubr. bacc. myrtill. balaust. in red Wine; then applied Emplastr. e bolo,
with a Compress wrung out of the Fomentation, rolled it up, and applied a
Defensative over the Knee to restrain the Fluxion: I also let him blood, and
purged him with an infus. senae, rhabarb. etc. cum sir. de spin. cervina. But
finding the Ulcer would not deterge, I laid it open the whole length, and
seeing it sordid, filled it with pulv. Andronis, applying the Mundificative
upon Dossills between the Lips, with an Emplastr. e bolo over all, and rolled
it up. The third day after I dressed it again with the Mundificative as before,
only adding some Merc. praecipitat. to it. This method I continued some days,
rubbing the loose Flesh with a Vitriol-stone, dipping some of the Pledgits in
Praecripitate, and applying it under some of the Lips of the Ulcer which was
undigested; then cut off some part of the Lips where they were very hollow and
troublesome, and put on a laced Stocking. Thus I deterged and disposed the
Ulcer to incarn under the Lips and elsewhere; and that it might do so, I put
the Patient into a Traumatick Decoction, and vomited and purged him as occasion
offered. But after some days, observing the Lips of the Ulcer did not unite
with the neighboring Flesh, nor the Ulcer contract as I expected, I made a
search with my Probe, and found the Flesh, which was seemingly good, to be
soft, and the Lips hollow and thin, and in some part callous. I dressed them with
that unguent. aeruginis, Cadmiae, etc. as it is set down in Ulcers with moist
Intemperies, rubbed the callous Lips with the Caustick-stone, and applied
unguent. basilicon to hasten the separation of the Escar; supposing by these
drying Medicaments to dispose the Ulcer to Incarnation. But as they incarned
and cicatrized in one end or part, the Flesh became soft and rotten in another,
and here and there the Lips were hollow, which I cut off, and thereby freed the
Ulcer of them; and by the help of the former Sarcoticks I incarned it again:
but frequently in the cicatrizing some part of the Ulcer would be corroded from
the acrimony of the Humor, insomuch that I was necessitated to dress this
Ulcer with various Medicaments. In some parts of it I applied Pledgits in
drying Waters, as aq. calcis, lapidis medicamentosi, and Epulotick Unguents, to
cicatrize it; while in some others I applied Detergents, yea and Digestives in
others; and was not wanting the while by Mercuriall Remedies and good Diet to
contemperate the acrimony in the blood: yet was it a most hard and difficult
work. My Kinsman Jaques Wiseman was my Assistent in the dressing of him, and
saw this Ulcer with much ado cured: but he continued the use of a laced
Stocking for some while after.

Such an ill-conditioned Ulcer affected the Thigh of a Gentleman of about fifty
years of age, of a full Body: 5. Observat.
it was the Crisis of a malign Fever. Doctor Wederbourn was the Physician. The
Ulcer was of the compass of a Five-shillingpiece, but lay only in the Skin,
extremely corrosive, with Lips standing stiff up round the Ulcer: and although
I took them down with Caustic, yet they arose again in the same form; and,
being in a place difficultly managed by Bandage, would not cicatrize, but
thrust out in the middle little hard Excrescences of red Flesh like pins heads,
which increasing grew bigger, first one, then another. While I was endeavoring
to deterge these Excrescences, they became callous, united with one another,
and made an unequal Cicatrix, notwithstanding my endeavors by the
Caustick-stone to rub down those that rose higher then their fellows. At last
it joined it self to the Lips round, making a firm and hard Cicatrix, which
after some while cast off a dry Scurf, and became soft as the natural Skin.

In the year after the great Plague I was sent by Sir Fran. Prujean to a
Gentleman of about fifty years of age, 6. Observat.
of a lean dry Habit of body, laboring under a corrosive Ulcer, running from
the left side of the upper Lip near that Nostrill, close along by the Nose, to
the great Canthus or Corner of the Eye, penetrating the Skin here and there
deeper then elsewhere: it spread also without the edges of the Ulcer, making as
it were a double furrow along the ridge and side of the Nose superficially in
the Skin. These latter did not matter much, nor were they very painful. His
Physician had purged him with an infussenae, rhabarb. and the like, in which
were dissolved Manna and sir. de pomis purg. and put him into a Decoct. sarsae,
Chinae, corn. cervi, eboris, santal. with vulnerary Herbs, also purged him once
in four or five days with calomel. and resina jalap. cum Elect. lenitiv. And
those days he did not purge, he took ceruss. antimonii in confect. Alkermes,
with pulv. corallii and perlar. etc. I began my Dressings cum unguent. tutiae
Vig. with Merc. praecipitat. upon Pledgits in some parts where there wanted
Digestion, and in others with unguent. tutiae simple, and applied unguent.
Comitiss. over all. The next day I took off the Dressings, somented the
affected Parts with a Decoct. fol. plantag. ros. rubr. balaust. sumach and
aluminis in Wine, and continued to dress the deeper Ulcers with the unguent.
tutiae and Merc. praecipitat. The other, which were more superficial, I
sprinkled cum pulv. e corn. cerv. ust. balaust. and croc. Martis astring. and
applied unguent. Comitissae over all. By this method I dried up the upper Ulcer
on the side of the Nose, but the Cicatrices were unseemly, as in most such
rebellious Ulcers they are, we being glad to dry them on any fashion as we may.
The other Ulcers also filled up with Flesh, and afterward cicatrized in some
parts. The deepest Ulcers were also well disposed to it. The season of the year
being hot, the Patient retired into the Country, taking the foresaid
Medicaments with him, they agreeing well with the Ulcer. His Wife, having often
dressed him in Town, knew how to apply them, and dressed him in the Country,
where he continued all the Summer. He not giving us the least account of his
Ailment, I concluded him cured: but in the Fall of the leaf he returned, and
then I found the Ulcer much exasperated, and discharging a virulent Matter, it
having corroded deep the whole length from his upper Lip along the Cheek into
the great Canthus dividing the lower Lid of the Eye, and was passing between
the Glandula lacrymalis and the Eye: it had also spread beneath into that
Nostrill, and had passed its Matter through; and in truth the case was most
deplorable; for whatever these Ulcers may bear of sharp Medicaments in another
Part, here they would not: and possibly this was exasperated by such in the
Country amongst those busy-bodies. I endeavored to recover it by Lenients
powerfully drying without acrimony, such as I had formerly used in the like
case, and washed the Ulcer with a Solution of a Salt drawn off from the flowers
of Antimony in aq. veronicae. Doctor Prujean was again consulted, and Doctor
Bate, also Mr. Hollier and other Surgeons. The Physicians repeated the
former course, with some additions, and sweat him, and after that prescribed
him a Diet of Milk, which he lived strictly upon a long time. Many Topics were
proposed by us, but they were only drying Medicaments without acrimony, which
agreed well with the Ulcer, and those served only to palliate it. Whilst I
attended it, the Ucler spread it self under that Eye, fretting off the Muscles
so that the Eye was drawn by the contrary Muscles to the external Canthus, and
distorted so as it was easy to see the Optic Nerve. I was not able to serve
him. He lived under Palliation till within this twelvemonth. The Humor
afterward affected the other side: what progress it made there I cannot tell.

A Gentleman of about forty years of age, 7. Observat. of an Herpes exedens.
of a sanguine Complexion and Plethorick, came to me with an Herpes exedens
affecting the Eyelids. It had been of some years growth: it began on the
middle of the upper Eyelid near the Cilia or edge in a small Pustule, (as it
is described in the Chapter of those Tumors,) and in continuance spread along
the edge to the external Canthus, where it eat deeper into the Skin, and by
erosion caused an Ulcer of a round figure the breadth of a Silver-peny, eating
into the corner of the Membrana conjunctiva, and thence the length of the lower
Eyelid, consuming it downwards, leaving the neighboring Parts scirrhous. Its
Erosion in these Parts was increased by the continual Fluxion from the inflamed
Eye: for the upper Lid where the Herpes first arose was not so much concerned,
the original Herpes lying there not unlike a hordeolum. Upon view of this Ulcer
I desired a Consultation, and to that purpose Doctor Tho. Cox and Mr. Hollier
met me. Collyria of a refrigerant and exsiccant quality were prescribed,
Venaesection in the Arm, Purging with decoct. epithymi, etc. and the second day
after the external Jugular was opened, and about ten ounces of blood was taken:
Fontanells were also made inter Scapulas, etc. a Seton was also advised. The
Patient thus fitted took a Journey upon extraordinary occasions into the
Country. About a month after he returned, and put himself again into my hands.
I treated the Ulcer with Epuloticks of various sorts and forms, applied
Frontalls to intercept the descent of Humors, purged him with Calomel. cum
rhabarbaro, prescribed Vulneraries in a decoct. sarsae, lign. lentiscin. etc.
with Balsamicks to contemperate the acrimony of the Humors. This method not
succeeding, we consulted a Physician, who prescribed cooling Juleps of
distilled Milks, etc. But he growing hereby indisposed in his Stomach, and the
Ulcer raging, he returned to his former Prescriptions; and by the taking
Bezoard. mineral. those days he intermitted Purging, and by the application of
unguent. calaminar. he was restored to better health, and the Ulcer more
sedate: upon which he supplied himself with some of the same internal and
external Remedies, and retired into the neighboring Country. About six weeks
after he showed himself to me. The Ulcer in and near the external Canthus was
almost cicatrized, and the other Parts well disposed. He then recruited himself
with more of the same Medicaments, since when I have not seen him; but hear it
increased in the Country, and he has almost lost the fight of that Eye.

CHAP. XI. Of Ulcers with Varices.
WE have already treated of Varix as it affects the Thigh, Leg, etc. and have
there showed you that it is a Dilatation of the Veins with gross Blood: we also
have there delivered the Cause and Signs, and how it differs, as dilating some
one Vein, or all the branches of that Vein to the very Capillaries; and so the
Varix may lie deep between the Muscles and Skin, or more superficially. I have
also there showed the advantage and disadvantage that may happen in repressing
them. It remains now that I say somewhat of them as they are ulcerated by the
acrimony of the Humor, or by some accident of Bruise, Wound, etc. whereby they
become painful, inflame, and swell the Member.

The Cure of these Ulcers with Varix are real, or palliative. Cure.
The Real or perfect Cure proposed by the Ancients I have delivered to you in
the Chapter of a Simple Varix: it is by making an Incision in the Skin, and
taking up the Vein and tying it, etc. But this way has not been admitted (to
my knowledge) amongst us; nor have I often seen that a Varicous Ulcer could be
cured by cutting off the branch leading to the Ulcer, there being commonly more
Veins concerned in it.

The Palliative Cure consists in dressing the Ulcer with Digestives and
Detersives, according as the Ulcer is sanious or sordid, and the while by good
Bandage or a laced Stocking to repress the Humors impacted in the Part; by
which Bandage the Lips of the Ulcer are disposed to cicatrize with the Ulcer. I
call this method Palliative, for that it commonly lasts no longer then the
laced Stocking is worn. In the Cure of these Ulcers, if there be Plethora, it
may be necessary that the Body be purged, and a Vein opened.

A Woman of a full Body, aged 54 years, was grievously pained with an
Ulceration on her right Leg. 1. Observat.
Several Medicaments had been ineffectually applied. I being consulted saw the
Ulceration large, and the Capillary Veins lie dilated superficially in the
Skin; from whence I judged the Ulceration to arise. The Leg was much swelled,
and somewhat inflamed. I dressed the Ulceration with unguent. tutiae Vigon.
applied over it a mixture of unguent. nutritum and populeon, rolled it up with
Compress and Bandage, and bespake a laced Stocking against the next day; which
being then laced on, and the former method of Dressing repeated, the pain
ceased from that day, and, the Humors being repressed by virtue of the
Bandage, the Ulceration cicatrized in ten or twelve days.

In the year 1654. 2. Observat.
I was sent for to an Inhabitant of this City, who complained of his soar Legs,
and that his Surgeon who used daily to dress them was lately dead: he
desired me I would supply his place, and accordingly he would allow me the same
Salary. I unrowled his Legs, and saw the Ulcers lying in the Skin in several
places amongst the Varices without Inflammation or SWelling: but toward night
they swelled, and were painful. I acquainted him with the nature of his
Disease, and proposed the Cure by laced Stockings. I dressed the Ulcers with
unguent. diapomphol. and rolled them up. Within a day or two his Stockings were
brought him, and after I had dressed his Legs they were put on, with Compress
under them upon the Ulcers. There were also pieces of Vellum laid between to
defend them from the wrinkles of the Stockings. By the wearing of these the
Humors were restrained, and the Ulcers disposed well to cure. I made him a
Fontanell in each Leg, and left him some Epuloticks to finish it, which they
effected in few days. The Issues he continued to good purpose, for he is alive
to this day.

A Nobleman of Scotland, of more then seventy years of age, 3. Observat. of a
varicous Ulcer.
being diseased here in Town with a large varicous Ulcer in the inside of his
left Leg, was commended to my hands by Sir. Fr. Prujean. The Ulcer reached from
the Gartering to the Small of the leg deep amongst the Fleshy parts; it was
crude and undigested. I dressed it with unguent. basilicon and Praecipitate,
applied unguent. tutiae spread as an Emplaster with a Compress wrung out of
Oxycrate, and with good Bandage rolled it up from the Foot to the Knee. The
next day I fomented it with a Decoction of flor. ros. rubr. baec. myrtill.
balaust. nuc. cupress. in Wine and Water; then dipped the Pledgits spread with
basilicon in Praecipitate, and applied unguent. tutiae as before, with Compress
and Bandage. The third day I opened it again, and dressed it as before. The
fourth day after, finding the Ulcer well deterged, I dressed it with unguent.
basilicon mixed with Praecipitate; and after I had digested it, put on a laced
Stocking; then incarned with this, aloes and thuris an. j. assae foetid. jss.
mellis despumati vj. Misc. and fiat Vnguentum. I afterward added a third part
of unguent, e plumbo to one part of this Sarcotick, and by the help of the
Vitriol-stone, and Pledgits dipped in a stiptick Wine, cicatrized the Ulcer. Mr.
Pearce was his Lordship's Apothecary.

One having been troubled with a soar Breast about a year after Childbed, 4.
Observat. of a Varix in the right Breast.
it growing more swelled and ulcerated, she sent for me. It was hard, without
Inflammation or discoloring in the Skin, and discharged a well-concocted
Matter out of the Nipple and some small Openings near it. I wondered what should
be the reason it did not cure. At last, in handling the Breast, I felt a Varix
lying under the Skin: it felt like Network. I dressed the Ulcer sometimes with
unguent. basilicon, and others with unguent. tutiae, applied Emplastr. e bolo
over the Breast, with Bandage to support it, and advised the wearing of fine
Tow sprinkled with Ceruse under that Axilla: by which method it was afterward
cured in a month's space or thereabouts.

The last year, while I was putting these Observations of Ulcers with Varices
together, 5. Observat. of a varicous Ulcer with great tumefaction.
a poor Woman was brought to me out of the Country, suspected to have the
King's Evil in one of her Legs. The Swelling was great, and the Ulcer large
and sordid. In handling of it, I felt the Veins dilated under the Skin in the
Fleshy parts of the Leg from the Gartering to the Ancle, by which it was
evident that the Ulcer was varicous; upon which account I undertook it gratis,
and commended her to own of my Servants to cure, with directions to keep her
Chamber, and that he should the while foment and dress her Leg after the same
method set down in the former Observations, and by Bandage dispose it for a
laced Stocking. Accordingly he fomented the Leg, dressed the Ulcers with
Detersives, and with Compress and Bandage rolled it moderately straight from
the Foot to the Gartering. After he had thus rarefied the pituitous Humors
which were impacted in the Part, and deterg'd the Ulcer, he laced on a straight
Stocking with a Compress upon the Ulcer, by which the blood was straightened in
its passage, and the Humors represt, also the Lips of the Ulcer were brought
even and cicatrized in few weeks without Purging or Bleeding, and this
prodigious swelled Leg was reduced to its natural state. Thus may the greatest
Swelling accompanying varicous Ulcers be removed, and the Ulcers palliated, if
not cured: for it is confessed that they return again for the most part upon
the discontinuing the laced Stocking.

CHAP. XII. Of Sinuous Ulcers.
HItherto I have treated of Ulcers which take their names from the Humors
which affect them: I shall now discourse of that Ulcer which derives its name
from its hollowness, and is called a Sinuous Ulcer.

Sennertus places the Chapter of Sinus next to that of a Phlegmon: Causes.
and indeed they frequently arise from such, especially where the Orifice has
not been sufficiently large to discharge the Matter: nay, in some great
Abscesses, where the Cavity has been very large, there, though the Aperture be
great, yet for want of good Compression, and disposition in the Humors, the
Skin unites so unequally with the Flesh underneath, that it makes several
Sinus's, and does as it were cuniculos agere, make Coney-burrows. Sometimes
Abscesses do arise from within, viz. from the Lungs, etc. and pass their Matter
externally under the Armpits, or through the Back, Breast, or Sides; or from
other Viscera in the lower Venture, and raise Abscesses amongst the external
Muscles of the Abomen, etc. Of which I shall give you some Instances, having
already occasionally treated of the other sort in a Treatise of Gunshot.

The Antecedent Cause may be ill Diet, etc. whereby the Humors exceed in
quantity, or evil quality, and being too long retained in the Abscesse, get a
corrosive disposition, and render the Ulcer sinuous.

These Ulcers differ from one another, as they are either straight, or crooked;
deep, Difference.
or lying only under the Skin; or have one or more Sinus's. They may be
distinguished from a Fistula, in that the latter is callous, which these are
not, unless it be in the very Orifice.

The Signs of Sinuous Ulcers may be taken from the preceding Causes, Signs.
whether it be a translation of Matter from within outward, or from Phlegmon,
or other Abscess, Wound, etc. The Sinus may also be judged by the search of a
Probe or Wax-candle. The quantity of Matter will also show the largeness of it.

Sinuous Ulcers of long continuance are of difficult Cure, Prognostic.
by reason of the weakness of the native Heart in the Part, which renders it
incapable of assimilating its proper aliment, and subject to the receiving
superfluous Humors. Also if the Sinus run under the Joint, Nerves or Tendons,
where it may not be safely laid open, the Cure is more hard to obtain.

If the Sinus proceed from a translation of Matter from within the body, you
cannot hope to cure it till the diseased Viscera be healed, during which the
Patient is in great danger of a Marasmus; but if the sinuous Ulcer discharge
little Matter, and that well digested, and be in a place where it may safely be
kept open, the Cure is hopeful.

In the Cure of these Ulcers Authors have proposed four Intentions. Cure.
The first consists in a regulation of Diet and the other Non-naturalls,
accordingly as it has been set down in the general Discourse in this Treatise.

Secondly, that the Humors be evacuated and contemperated. If there be
Plethora, the Evacuation will be necessary by Purging and Venaesection. The
contemperating of the Humors may be by Traumatick decoctions and other
Balsamicks, as all along has been proposed.

The third is effected in prohibiting the Humors to flow into the Ulcer, and
that by Revulsion, Interception and Repulsion: which has been sufficiently
spoken of in the Discourse of Tumors in general.

The fourth Intention concerns more immediately the Cure of the Ulcers, viz. by
the removing of those accidents of pain, inflammation, tumor, etc. without
which there is no hope of Cure. In order to this work, you must consider the
Sinus, how the Matter may be best discharged. If the Orifice be in the
declining part, enlarge that: but if the Sinus run beneath downward, your best
way will be to open that in the declining and lowest part by Knife or Caustic;
so shall the Sinuous Ulcer above be disposed to cure. But if the Sinus do run
under considerable Vessels, or be in such a place where you cannot safely lay
it open, you ought then to enlarge the Orifice, and put the Member in such a
position as may dispose the Matter to flow forth, and by Compress and Bandage
contribute your endeavors thereto. Having thus made way for the discharge of
Matter, you are then to deterge the Ulcer with Medicaments proportioned to the
impurity of it. The most usual are, unguent. Apostolor. mund. Paracels. and ex
apio: to which may be added Merc. praecipitat. etc. If there be a necessity of
Injections, you may with a Syringe cast in some of these following Liquours;
but do not stop the Orifice the while, for thereby you will dilate the Sinus.
The milder may be, a decoct. bordei, cum sir. de ros. sice. mell. magist. nost.
Or, summitat. centaur. min. agrimon. equiseti, pimpinellae, an. Mj. rad.
aristoloch. rot. rad. iridis, an. ij. myrrhae, sarcocollae, an. iij. coq. in
aq. font. lbij. colat. add spir. vini iiij. mell. rosar. q. s. Other of this
sort you may see in the Chapter of Sinuous Ulcers in Gunshot Wounds. If the
Ulcer arise from some Abscess within the body, it will not be safe to use
Injections, till you can satisfy your self how they will come out again.
Therefore in such cases you must consider, as above said, how you may give a
vent to the Matter: for while that is retained, there is no hope of detersion.
But that being conveniently made, you may keep it open by Cannula, or with a
Pea threaded, as a Fontanell, till Nature shall be disposed by the Physician's
help to heal the internal Viscera, and then the external Ulcer will heal of it
self under the Pea, if you leave it not timely out.

During the Cure of all these Ulcers, you ought to use Fomentations discutient
and drying proportionably as the case requires; viz. of summitat. absinth.
majoranae, hyperici, betonicae, flor. cham. ros. rubr. balaust. bacc. myrtill.
nuc. cupress. etc. in Wine and Water, with the addition of Brandie.

A Married Woman aged thirty four years, 1. Observat. of a Sinuous Ulcer in the
Leg.
having layn a great while lame with a pain in her right Leg, supposed a
Rheumatismus, after frequent bleeding, purging, etc. it swelled on the outside
from the Gartering to the Heel, and discharged its Matter near the Ancle. Some
neigbouring Surgeon and Apothecary were employed, who dressed it and
prescribed her Physic accordingly, and after some time permitted the Ulcer to
close, endeavoring to persuade her she was cured. But it swelling soon after
with Inflammation, I was sent for, and saw the Ulcer near closed: but the
quantity and ill quality of the Matter showed it sinuous; and upon search I
discovered it so to the very Gartering, also a Sinus running down toward the
Heel. I dilated the Orifice with Gentian roots, applied a Caustic about an
inch and a half in length upon the Sinus above, and gave vent to the Matter,
dressing it up with Lenients, as unguent. basilicon cum. ol. ros. and after the
fomenting it, applied cerat. Galeni with Compress and Bandage, supposing the
Matter would be intercepted, and the Sinus's beneath thereby disposed to cure.
But after separation of this Escar, the Ulcer appeared hollow under the lips;
and the Matter flowing from the remaining Sinus above, put me upon a necessity
of laying that open by a Snip with a pair of Scissors: and after all my
endeavors, I was glad to lay open the lowermost Sinus, from the Ancle
downwards, before I could dispose it to cure. The several Cavities being laid
open, I dressed them with Digestives, Detersives and Epuloticks, accordingly as
they required, then cherished the native Heat in the Member by good
Fomentations, as above in the method of Cure is set down; and by Intercipients
and Bandage restrained the influx of Humors.

To add to this poor Woman's misery, Caution in making Fontanells.
she had a Fontanell formerly made upon the Tendon of the Biceps, which had
caused a contraction of her Arm, and a hard Tumor on the inside of the Radius,
with great pain and convulsion in her Hand and Fingers. This very pain kept her
watching day and night, exceedingly exhausted her spirits, and put such a
Ferment in her blood, as it seemed to me difficult to cure her Leg whilst this
disturbance continued on her. Wherefore I began with the Embrocation of the
Arm, and so downwards, with this; unguent. nervin. iij. ol. lumbric. ij. ol.
vulpin. j. ol. origani, lavend. ana q. s. Misc. and applied over the Tumor on
her Wrist a mixture of Emplast. diachyl. cum gummi and de mucilag. I also
prescribed her an Infusion of Sena, etc. with Manna and sir. de pomis purgant.
and that night one grain of laud. in cons. anthos, and sir. de garyophyll. and
a cordial Julep of aq. cerasor. nigror. tiliae, lil. convall. cinnamomi,
confect. Alkerm. and sir. e suce. citr. of which she drank frequently. She was
also purged once a week with Calomel. and at other times took Antimon.
diaphoret. etc. Thus I resolved the Tumor in her Wrist, and the contraction of
her Arm, and restored the use of her Hand: during which the Ulcers in her Leg
digested, incarned and cicatrized, according to the method prescribed in the
general Chapter of Ulcers. Her Leg being extremely emaciated and weak, I
advised the bathing it with Flesh-broth wherein had been decocted emollient
Herbs; by which it afterward grew so full, that I was necessitated to put her
on a laced Stocking; and thereby the swelling was restrained, and she recovered
strength to walk on it very well.

A Maidservant, 2. Observat. of a Sinuous Ulcer penetrating the right Breast.
aged twenty six years, had a small Phlegmon on a part of her right Breast
tending to Suppuration. I, supposing it simply such, confidently undertook the
Cure; and having suppurated it by the application of unguent. basilicon, opened
it by Caustic, and discharged a purulent Matter; which increasing daily with
diminution of the Inflammation and Tumor, I made a search with a Probe, and
penetrated into the cavity of the Thorax. I then discoursing with her, informed
my self that she had been long diseased with a Cough and frequent Shortness of
breath. I was much ashamed of my confident undertaking it. The rarity of the
case deceived me, and as many as afterward saw it, every one judging the Ulcer
simple. But its penetrating (as I said) showed the Cure difficult, and the work
of time. Therefore I fitted it with a Cannula, which I retained with a snip of
Plaster, and applied a thin piece of Sponge pressed out of Wine upon it, with
Compress and Bandage over it, directing the dressing it twice aday. After I had
thus healed up the rest of the Ulcer, I left out the Cannula, put in a Pea, and
kept it as a Fontanell, till Nature should dispose the Viscera within to a
better condition. But she, growing hecticall, removed into the Country with
internal Prescriptions and directions to dress her self; where I suppose she is
since recovered of her Fever.

Some while since I was accidentally consulted in the Country by a Surgeon
there about an apostemated Breast, 3. Observat. of an Ulcer penetrating the
Breast.
the biggest I ever saw. The Patient was a Woman of about forty years old: she
had a Cough, and was oppressed with Difficulty of breathing. The Surgeon
opened her Breast in the declining part, and discharged a proportionable
quantity of foetid Matter. She was somewhat relieved by it; but it penetrated
into the Thorax, and the large discharge of Matter soon wasted her.

A Child of about four years of age was brought to London, 4. Observat. of
Sinuous Ulcers on the left Sid penetrating.
supposed to have the Kings-Evill. It had three Ulcers lying near one another
on his left Side, between the two lowermost of the true Ribs: they were
accompanied with Inflammation and Excoriation. He was much emaciated, and
afflicted with a Cough and Shortness of breath. Upon search with a small
Wax-candle into the upper Orifice, I penetrated between the Ribs, and felt the
edge of the uppermost foul. The other Ulcers were made by the insinuation of
the Matter for want of timely enlarging the first Orifice. I dressed the
Excoriation with unguent. album camph. and cerat. Galeni, and applied some of
the mild Caustic, by which I enlarged those Orifices. After the separation of
the Escars, I dressed the lowermost with unguent. tutiae, and cured them. The
uppermost I kept open as a Fontanel with a Pea, for discharge of the Matter
from within, not concerning my self in the exfoliation of the Bone, but leaving
that to Nature, which seldom fails where the Ulcer is kept well digested.
During my proceeding thus with the Ulcers, the Child was prescribed a Decoction
of Sarsa with Pectoralls, and his body kept open with sir. de rhab. in aq.
germ. querc. somewhat of Calomel. was also prescribed, cerussa Antimonii, etc.
and the Child recovered. But while the Attendants grew secure and careless in
dressing the Ulcer, the Pea slipped out, and the Orifice closing in the Matter,
he was seized with a Cough, Difficulty of breath, and Fever. Upon which account
I opened that Ulcer again, and relieved him. He went soon after into the
Country, and by the foresaid method recovered.

A Man of about forty years of age laboring under a Fever in the Country, 5.
Observat. of a Sinuous Ulcer in the Breast.
it terminated in some Abscess within the Breast, and passed its Matter at last
into the right Axilla, raising a large Abscess there, which, being left to
Nature, made its way through the Skin; but not having Opening sufficient nor
timely, the Matter invaded the interstitia of the Muscles, and spread it self
over all the Breast and Side, and did not discharge it self outwardly otherwise
then as it overflowed: by which means the Abscess became very large, and the
quantity of Matter had wel-nigh exhausted the Patient. It was my chance to come
into that Country, and being desired to give him a visit, and seeing the cause
of it, I presently made a long Incision in the lower part of his Breast, and
gave vent to the Matter; and afterward made another Opening from the Ulcer in
the Axilla downwards, where the Matter was straightened by a hard Callus. In
other parts, where the Matter was also contained, and could not be discharged
by the former Openings, I applied Causticks, and the next day divided the
Escars, thereby giving way to the remaining Cavities to empty themseves. This
being done, I left Medicaments and directions for the dressing them: viz.
unguent. basilicon for Digestion; mundificat. Paracelsi, Merc. praecipitat. and
Vitriol-stone for Detersion; unguent. sarcotic. to incarn; and unguent. tutiae
and desiccativum rubr. for the cicatrizing the Ulcer. For whatever people
pretend of Cure by Injections, the way is slow and hazardous, they often
rendering these Ulcers more sinuous, and being of use only where the Ulcer may
not be opened by reason of the considerableness of the place. Here in this
case, after the Matter had free vent, the Ulcer cured most easily.

A Daughter of a substantial Citizen labored under an Abscess in the Region of
her left Kidney, and was long treated by a bold Empirick, 6. Observat. of a
Sinuous Ulcer penenetrating the left Kidney.
who promised Cure: but after all his endeavors, the Child languishing under
the Ulcer, sometimes by reason of the great discharge of Matter by Urine, and
othertimes through the suppression of it, great pains were stirred up within
the Body, and outwardly in the Abscess. I being consulted, observed that the
external Abscess took its original from the Ulcer within the Kidney, and
required other manner of dressing, its Cure being the work of time. I proposed
the laying it open to the very Part where the Matter passed forth from the
Kidney. To which purpose I applied a Caustic upon the Sinus below, divided the
Escar, and dressed it up with Lenients. Then after separation and digestion of
the Ulcer, searching the same with my Probe, I found the Sinus run up above the
Orifice; which being also laid open, I discovered the passage into the Kidney,
and felt the side of the last short Rib bared by the Matter in its passing out.
I dressed the Ulcer with mundif. ex apio, and healed up the remaining Sinus's
above and below to the very Aperture. While I was doing this work, Dr. Barwick
was consulted to help us in the Cure by Internalls, who prescribed a Traumatick
decoction of Sarsa, etc. with the more temperate Plants, and Balfamick pills to
contemperate the Humors. During my disposing of this Ulcer to retain a
Cannula, the Matter discharged by Urine in great quantity, and the Patient was
as soarly afflicted, and had the same Symptom that others have who are
diseased with Ulcers or Stones in the Kidney; but after vent was given by a
short Cannula of Lead, she recovered. Having continued the use of the Cannula
some months, I removed it, and kept a Pea just in the Opening, and by red
Sparadrope and Compress retained it on; then left her to her Mother to dress,
and only called some times when they gave me notice of their wants. After a
year or thereabout that she had kept this Fontanell open, the internal pains
and discharge of Impurities ceased, and she grew more fleshy and strong. She
went also daily to a neighboring School, where she was exercised in Dancing,
etc. After the space of two years or thereabout, the Ulcer seeming not to
matter more then might be expected from a small Fontanell, the Mother cast out
the Pea, and permitted it to heal up. But being soon alarmed by the old
Accidents which returned upon the Child, she sent for me. I opened it again,
and left them to keep it so. Dr. Barwick was also again consulted, who repeated
the former method with some little alteration. The Ulcer was afterward kept
open near three years, during which she repeated her course of Physic Spring
and Fall, and was frequently brought to me. At length I seeing her well grown
and of a fleshy and healthy Complexion, and the Fontanell in a manner dried up,
I advised them to throw out the Pea, it being of no use. They did so: from
which time the Patient has continued strong and well, and is since married.

A young Gentleman of about ten or eleven years of age was afflicted with a
Sinuous Ulcer on his right side of the Spine. 7. Observat. of a Sinuous Ulcer
penetrating the right Side.
It had taken its original from a translation of Matter arising from within
his body whilst he lay sick of a Fever in the Country. It came at length to
maturation, and was let out by a neighboring Surgeon: but it proving
difficult of Cure, he was brought to Town. He was hectic, and diseased with a
Cough and Shortness of breath, the Abscess mattering much, but especially when
he bowed his body downward, or lay in his bed upon the contrary Side; also in
lying upon his Belly the Matter ran forth some spoonfulls, and upon holding his
breath it blubbered forth, which showed it came from within. Yet, for that
sometimes upon pressing with our hands upon the Muscles of that side the Spine,
there discharged Matter, we were apt to think it lay originally between the
Muscles of that place. Doctor Micklethwait was consulted, and entertained
their Physician, and was often present at the dressing the Patient. The
Apertion was small, and obstructed by a Callus and luxurious flesh within the
Ulcer, whereby neither the Probe nor Wax-candle could make any considerable
way. We were satisfied that there were more Sinus's then that transverse the
Back, yet by the search of a Probe we could make no discovery: but about three
days after a redness in the Skin showed us a Sinus lying near the Os ilion of
about two inches long, the Skin seeming thin. I opened it with a mild Caustic,
and having divided the Escar, I passed in a Probe from thence toward the
Spine: but that not satisfying me, I applied a Caustic upon the old Orifice,
and another lower, whence I had pressed out Matter. Then dividing them, I
filled them with Praecipitate; and by rubbing into those Escars afterward with
the Caustick-stone I penetrated into the Sinus's. One of these discharged the
Matter which flowed that way; and the other served our purpose to discover the
Sinus penetrating under the uppermost false Rib toward the Breast; which I
dilated, and by detersion enlarged the passage, then fitted the Ulcer with a
Cannula of Lead, with an Emplaster, Compress and Bandage over it, by which the
Matter discharged very well, and the Patient was relieved in his Cough, and
recovered his appetite. The other Apertures, having emptied the external
Sinus's, were deterged and cured. After the use of the Cannula some days,
perceiving loose Flesh to arise in the Ulcer, which hindered the discharge of
Matter, and that the activeness of our Patient caused the Cannula frequently to
start out of the Sinus, and sometimes fit uneasy, I left it out altogether, and
put in a large Pea, with a Thread in it to pull it out at pleasure. By this,
with application of the common Sparadrope for Issues, this Ulcer was as a
Fontanell kept open, and the Matter plentifully discharged thereby; his Habit
of body was also by the Physician's prescriptions of Vulnerary decoctions and
Balsamicks, with lenient Purgatives, so well restored, that he returned into
the Country with his Parents. Some while after coming again to London with
them, I gave him a visit, and found him fat and well recovered. I did not see
the Ulcer, but was assured from himself and his Servants, that it was kept open
with much ease, and that it mattered but little. I advised then the keeping it
so while any Matter flowed to the Part: which they did, and thereby cured him.

A TREATISE OF THE DISEASES OF THE ANUS.

OF THE DISEASES OF THE ANUS. The Third Book.
CHAP. I. Of Haemorrhoids.
VARIX in general has been handled in one of the foregoing Treatises. But
because there is one sort of Varices more important then the rest, I mean the
varicous Swellings of the venae haemorrhoidales, I thought it convenient to
discourse of them particularly by themselves. These happen very often both in
men and women, so as sometimes to break and void blood; other times only to
swell and distend. But the consequences of these are very great, both as to the
duration and intenseness of the pain, and also as to the Tumors and Ulcers
that arise from them. These Tumors are sometimes phlegmonous, sometimes
scirrhous, sometimes cancerous; many times they are ulcerous and fistulous.

I shall therefore take occasion from that Chapter of Varix, to add in this
place an entire Discourse of the Haemorrhoids, together with all the Diseases
that are of the same kindred and family with them: in which if I swarve from
that accuracy of method which Learned men may expect in the disposition of the
Parts of this Book, I hope the young Surgeon will at least think that fault
sufficiently recompensed by having all the troublesome Diseases of that Part
brought at once into one view.

The perspicuity of this Discourse will depend much upon a true notion of the
constitution of the Anus, or uttermost Exit of the Intestinum rectum. In which
place it is bound about with a Sphincter-Muscle, the contraction of which shuts
it so, as to detain within the Guts whatever Excrements fall down thither, till
such time as Nature, being stimulated either by the fullness or provocation of
matter, does voluntarily relax it, and by the help of several pairs of Muscles
dilate it, to make way for the discharge. All these things put together make up
that organicall Part which we call the Anus in a compound sense; though in a
strict signification it denote only the extremity of the Intestinum rectum, to
which all these things belong, and for the motion of which they are all
designed. These Muscles, and especially the Intestinum rectum it self, are fed
by several Arteries. As, first, the Arteria mesenterica inferior, which, being
almost wholly designed for the Intestinum rectum, does spread branches all over
it copiously, and very particularly to that end which we call the Anus: and,
secondly, the Arteria hypogastrica does send branches to the Anus, but chiefly
to the Muscles belonging to it. These Arteries bringing Blood hither, have
proportionable Veins destined for its return; one of which is the
haemorrhoidalis externa, usually so called, which is a branch of the
Hypogastrick vein, and corresponds with its cognominall Artery. The other
indeed most important Vessel is the haemorrhoidalis interna, which receiving
the Blood from all the parts of the rectum, and especially about the Anus,
unites into a slender Trunk, which passing along the Gut by degrees creeps into
the Mesentery, and usually inserts it self up between the Mesentericall
branches of the Porta, sometimes into the right, sometimes into the left, and
sometimes into the Trunk of the Porta. More rarely it forsakes this course, and
is inserted into the Splenick branch, sometimes without, and sometimes within
the Spleen. This last case happens but seldom: yet surely it happened to those
that first conjectured this Vein to be the Evacuatour of the melancholic
Humors of the Spleen. How else should they guess that a Vessel so visibly
inserted either into the Trunk of Porta, or at least into the Mesenterick
branches, should derive Humors rather from the Spleen then the Liver?

But since the doctrine of the Circulation has quite taken away the
foundations of this Hypothesis, we are of late taught clear a new Lesson, viz.
That the Blood descends hither only by the Arteries, chiefly by the
mesenterica inferior, by which being cast into the middle and inward Coats of
the Gut, it is carried back by the Vein aforesaid. Now if any man ask me the
reason of the frequent Tumors and Apertions of this Vein, I shall give him
this account. First, that it is set in a depending Part; which reason is common
to it and the Legs, both of which are more subject to Varices then other parts
of the Body. Secondly, that the Legs and all musculous parts of the Body, when
they receive Blood into them, do contract themselves more vigorously for the
expulsion thereof, and promoting of its ascent, then the Gut, which is a more
lax part, and contracts with less force at all times, save when Nature aims at
an expulsion; in which case the tendency of Nature is downwards, quite contrary
to that of the motion of the Blood, and rather hinders the return then furthers
it, binding up the Blood in its own Vessels. Thirdly, the Veins hereabout are
in themselves so very small that they have no Valves, so that Blood being
detained in them, is not so easily carried up or hindered from restagnation, as
where Valves are frequent. Fourthly, the place is so often moistened by the
frequent afflux of Humors, that it is very forward to increase the natural
Laxity of the Part, to dilate the Vessels, and to provoke an afflux of
Humors; by virtue of which sometimes spongie Flesh is thrust out, and
sometimes Tumors of other natures generated. Fifthly, that these Vessels being
here not only depending, but also cutaneous, scattered in a very thin tender
Skin, are apter upon the impulse of Blood to fly open, then where they are
bound in by a thick strong cover: and for this reason the Nose also (if it be
seasonable to speak of it in this place) is apter to bleed then other parts.

The natural construction of the Anus being such as I have described, the
preternaturall may easily be inquired into. For if by any Fermentation or
Ebullition of the Blood any sharpness so affect it as to cause a stagnation in
this place, presently the Veins, being not sufficient for the discharge, grow
varicous: and if the Humor by its sharpness or thinness, or both, stimulates
Nature, by this means the rectum is always offering to squeeze and contract it
self, and binds up the Vein so that the Blood cannot ascend, but is by the
violence of the motion thrust back again, to the bursting open of the mouths of
the Vessel. If the Coats be thick or apt to sponginess, then the Parts swell,
and either the Vessels themselves appear blew and in clusters like Grapes, or
else Flesh grows about them, and makes Ficus, Condylomata, and Crista's. If
the Humor be of a saline nature, it dries and parches the Skin, and chaps it;
from whence comes Rhagades and Fissurae, things frequent in the Nose and Lips
as well as here.

This Humor is most frequently lodged within the verge of the Anus, and so
appears to the eye: but it likewise very often is lodged on the Muscles near
it, where the Varices are hidden, and seldom discover themselves, but only an
outward Tumor appears which in progress often times apostemates, and at last
ends in a fistulous Ulcer; which Ulcer, according to the duct of the Vessels
that feed it, sometimes penetrates the Gut, and sometimes not.

I shall first treat of the Varices themselves, and the Tumors that are
consequent to them; and then shall beg leave of my Reader to translate hither a
Discourse concerning the Ulcers of these Parts: which I should have placed
elsewhere.

The Varices haemorrhoidales themselves will admit of these following
Differences; which are either essential, or accidental.

I. Essential are those that are taken from the Parts themselves that are
tumefied: viz. either the Vein only swells, or some adjacent Bodies swell with
it, Differences.
or some new Body is generated that adheres to it.

1. When the Vein only swells, then either it swells without bleeding, which
we call Haemorrhoides caecas or blind Haemorrhoids; or, 2. upon swelling it
opens and bleeds, which we call Haemorrhoides apertas.

2. When other Parts swell with the Vein, other Tumors arise, as Phlegmons,
Scirrhi, Cancers, etc. all which are seated in the Muscles of the Anus, or of
the adjacent Parts.

3. When new Bodies are generated, they, according to their figure and
substance, are called by several names, as Ficus, Condylamata, Warts, etc.
which are all of them Excretions upon the Veins so swelled.

II. Accidental Differences are many: viz. 1. From the place; so they are
internal, or external. 2. From the bigness; great, or small. 3. Number; one,
or more. 4. Figure; round, as the Haemorrhoides caecae, or long, as the Ficus,
and Warts, or triangular, as the Crista. 5. Superficies; equal, or unequal.
6. The basis; broad, or narrow, etc. 7. The Times; periodicall, or uncertain.
Many other may be reckoned, as men's fancy leads them.

The Internal Causes of Haemorrhoids must be either a mere Plethora, Causes.
or a Cacochymia. A mere Plethora is a rare case, and if ever it happens,
sooner affects other Parts then this. But a Cacochymia does produce them
sometimes when it is plethorick, and then is commonly periodicall and breaks:
or else when it is without a Plethora, the sharpness of the Humor, or weakness
of the Part, or both, do concur to the production. So according to the variety
of the degeneration of the Humor variety of Tumors do arise: concerning which
we have severally treated already in their particular Chapters.

But they are not Internal Causes only to which these Tumors owe their
Original, they have often External Causes; as biting of Leeches, pain any way
caused by Blow, Bruise, Friction, or Puncture. So a man living near Piccadilly
in eating of Plaice swallowed a Bone, which in passing stuck in the Intestinum
rectum, and stirred up pain. He advised with some, who applied Leeches, whereby
the Fluxion was increased, and made an Abscess, which terminated in a sinuous
Ulcer. The Patient pulled out the Bone, and I was called in to the sight of the
Ulcer by the Surgeon, who was of my name and relation. So likewise there are
many instances that demonstrate the Piles to arise from Chirurgicall Operations
and Applications. Likewise sharp Humors passing near that place from the Guts
do by their acrimony provoke the Piles. This Humor may be from internal
Causes in the Blood, and yet effects externally, viz. whilst passing out at the
Anus, it makes the same affections there that a sharp Clyster would: or it may
be excited by Aloeticall, Scammoniate, or other acrimonious Medicines.

After all this Discourse it will be needless to say much of the Signs. Signs.
Your eye will tell you whether it be a Vein or some other Tumor that you see;
also whether the Part bleed or not. In other Tumors the Figure will tell you
which is the Ficus, Morus, Crista, Condyloma: the last of which is like a round
pensile Wart with a narrow neck; if it be flat, it is Ficus; if it have a broad
basis, it is Crista; and so forward; their names being given from their
resemblances. Cancer, Phlegmon, Scirrhus, have their Signs taught in their
proper Chapters.

If the Haemorrhoids flow seasonably and moderately, Prognostic.
they purge the Body of feculent gross Blood, and thereby free it of many
dangerous Diseases, as Pleurisy, Inflammation of the Lungs and Kidneys,
Quartane Fevers, etc. and restore health.

If they flow immoderately, the Patient grows weak and faint, is subject to
Cachexia, Dropsies, etc. So also by the inordinate suppression of them the
Patient is rendered subject to all the forementioned Diseases.

From all which it may be concluded, that there is not less danger in
unseasonable suppression of the Haemorrhoids, then there is from their too
great Evacuation; and that they are not unadvisedly to be provoked, nor yet too
suddenly to be checked.

If the Haemorrhoids called caecae, or blind Piles, be extreme painful, and
not timely succored, there is danger lest, through the great concourse of
Humors, Inflammation, Apostemation, etc. do follow.

Those Haemorrhoids which affect that part next the Neck of the bladder are
more vexatious, by reason of the consent they have with it; whence Inflammation
and Strangury may happen.

Those Haemorrhoids called verrucales are the worst sort; the uvales are the
milder, and the morales have a mediocrity between both.

In the Cure of the Haemorrhoids we shall begin with the caecae, Cure of the
Haemorrhoids; and first of the caecae, or blind Piles.
as well the external as internal: in both which the Patient's Diet ought to
be such as has virtue to keep the Body soluble; because in these Diseases they
are generally costive, and by straining to ease nature do only excrete a
Mucus; and if by such excretions they do avoid Excrements, it is with much
pain. Therefore Pannado's, Barly-grewells, Oat-meal-caudle's and Broths of
Veal, Chicken, etc. with Beets, Spinach, Borage, Bugloss, Endive, Succory, etc.
are proper. Their Drink may be a small Ale, Beer, or Wine diluted with Water,
or Ptisans. Strong Drinks and Salt or sharp Meats are hurtful. The Body may
also be kept soluble by Clysters of fat Broths, emollient Decoctions, or of new
Milk. They may be cast up with Syringes which have a short thick Pipe
Tapershion. Lenient Purgatives are also of use, viz. Elect. diacathol. lenitiv.
diaprun. etc.

If there be Plethora, or the Haemorrhoids be inflamed, Bleeding in the Arm is
necessary, and in the Leg is you repeat it. If the Patient has been accustomed
to a Flux of the Haemorrhoids, and they are suppressed, then Leeches may be
applied, that the Blood may have its discharge that way: but unless in the
cases aforesaid Leeches ought not to be used, and then also cautiously, Caution.
they rather drawing the Humors to the Part, then carrying them off, and so
are frequently the cause of Piles and all the mischief that attends them.
Therefore we take off the Plethora, and make revulsion by Bleeding in the Arm,
before we apply them.

The external Medicaments proper in the Cure of this Disease are of diverse
kinds, and ought to be proportioned according as they are internal or
external, recent or of long continuance, or according to the pain and cause
whereof they arise.

We shall begin with the external ones, which, whether they be one or more, do
always thrust forth with great pain, and are subject to Inflammation. In which
case, if you propose to restrain the Flux, and dry them up, fol. plantag.
polygon. summit. rubi, equiseti, an. M. ss. flor. verbasci, M. ij. sem. lini,
ij. flor. ros. rub. cort. granat. balaust. baccar. myrtill. an. vj. coq. in
sufficienti quantitate aquae font. and vini rubri, fiat Fotus. After you have
fomented them, apply a mixture of unguent. popul. cum subere ust. Upon a
Pledgit of soft Tow morning and evening.

If the Disease be in its state, and the pain exceeding great, fol. malv.
verbasci, an. M.j. flor. hyperic. M. ss. rad. cynoglos. ij. sem. lini, foenug.
an. vj. sem. althaeae, ss. coquantur in brodio pro fotu. Or this; farinae hord.
ij. succi intybi, lactucae, an. iij. sem. psyllii, ss. ol. nymph. ij. vitell.
ovor. number. ij. croci ij. In extremity of pain, olei vitellor. j. opii gr. vij.
Misce.

In the Cure of the internal Piles the same emollient Decoctions and Anodynes
which have been proposed in the external ones may be injected with a Syringe
to good purpose.

If the pain proceed from a gross viscid Matter distending them, such
Medicaments ought to be applied as are moderately heating, and resolving: viz.
radic. chelidonima, rad. gladioli, caepae, allium, squillae, etc. Also Balsam.
sulph. Rulandii.

In the Declination of this Disease you may treat them with Medicaments that
are powerfully drying: for the Parts distempered are lax, and, having been much
distended with that Humor, cannot easily recover their former tone. Therefore
we use bolus Armen. calx lota, crocus Martis astring. squam. ferri, aerugo,
etc. alone, or mixed with mel commune, axung. porciin. etc. aqua calcis,
aluminosa, sulphurat. lap. medicamentos. etc. When they do not yield to such
applications but are pendent as uvae, etc. they will be apt to swell upon every
little disturbance, therefore in such cases I frequently cut them off.

The Apertae or bleeding Haemorrhoids ought not to be stopped while they
discharge a gross vicious Blood, Cure of the Haemorrhoides apertae, or bleeding
Piles.
or while the Patient bears the evacuation well, and labors of some
Disease, whereof he may hope to be freed by the bleeding of them. In these
cases the Haemorrhoids ought to be permitted to flow freely forth. If they do
not, you are to endeavor to make them bleed with such Medicaments as have a
quality thereto. The internalls are all those which have Aloes, Scammony,
Colocynthis, etc. Doctor Read in his Chirurgicall Lectures commends pil. Ruffi;
and a Physician in the Country once told me, he had experimented them with good
success, and freed himself of a Haemoptoe and Phthisis he was falling into.

The Ancients have offered unto us diverse Medicaments to the same purpose: viz.
the rubbing of the Podex with Fig Leaves; also the Roots of wild Cucumber,
Sow-bread, etc. made in the form of a Suppository, and put up. Or, fellis
bovini j. aloes ij. aceti acer. ij. Misce, and injiciatur. Or, pulv. colocynth.
iij. amygd. amar. j. mellis despumati ij. Misce, fiat Suppositorium. Or, Take
two small Onions, Garlic four heads, flower of Lupins two ounces, Wine-vinegar
as much as will make them into a Paste in the form of Suppositories. It would
be of great use in the preventing as well as curing of many Diseases, if such
evacuations could be made when we would: but so far as I could yet ever see,
outward Medicaments have rather disturbed the Parts, then moved them to bleed
to any purpose: yet I suppose they may provoke them in such Bodies as have been
heretofore subject to them, and so may be of good use.

In others who are extraordinarily subject to the bleeding of the Haemorrhoids,
your care will be required in the moderating of them by regulation of Diet and
manner of living: in which cases I refer you to the Chapter of the Wounds of
Veins and Arteries. If the Flux of blood be great, you may make Revulsion by
Venaesection, Cupping, and binding the remote Parts, also by the application of
astringent Medicaments; or by such internalls as may incrassate and
contemperate the Ferment in the Blood. Such are syrup. cydonior. portulac. de
succo citr. acetos. plantag. de rosis siccis, de rib. myrtillor. etc. mixed
with some of the distilled Waters or Decoctions, ex radic. consolidae: So also
pulv. bistortae, tormentillae, fruct. mespilor. malicor. acatiae, cornu cerv.
usti, bol. Armen. lap. haematit. sang. dracon. Troch. de terra Lemnia, de
spodio, de carab. etc. may be mixed with Syrups: viz. boli very j. lap.
haematit. ss. poscae iij. sir. myrtillor. j. Misc. Or, croc. Martis astringent.
j. cons. ros. rub. j. Misc. Opiats are also useful in great Fluxes of Blood,
viz. theriaca Veneta, diascord. laudanum, etc.

The external Applications are cort. granat. balaust. thus, mastich. nuc.
cupress. gallae, hyporistis, etc. made into Suppositories with gum. tragacanth.
Ising-glass, or cum album. ovor. Hares-furre with which Pledgits of Tow may be
spread and applied externally. The Royal Stiptick cast with a Syringe is also
proper in these cases.

A Man of about forty years of age, 1. Observat. of the caecae-or blind
Haemorrhoids.
of a lean and dry Habit of body, was subject to the Haemorrhoids called caecae
affecting the verge of the Anus. I let him blood about seven ounces in the Arm,
and, in consideration of his costiveness, advised a Clyster of Milk and Sugar.
The same night I fomented the Piles with the Decoction of plantag. polygon.
etc. and applied a Pledgit of Tow spread with unguent. populeon, as is
prescribed in the method of Cure: by the application whereof he was eased, and
in few days cured.

Another aged fifty years of a full Body, 2. Observat.
diseased with the same kind of Piles, with great pain. They lay varicous in a
great cluster, so as it was not easy to find the way into the Anus: but in
pressing some of them on one side, I saw a loose red Flesh thrusting from
within outward. It was the inner Spongie Coat of the Recium intestinum relaxed
by the Fluxion, and hence a serous Humor discharged with some Mucus. I let him
blood in the Arm about twelve ounces at that instant, and stuped the inflamed
Piles with clothes wrung out of Claret Wine. An hour or two after a Clyster was
exhibited of Milk with the Yolk of an Egg, some Sugar, and two ounces of ol.
hyperic. which brought away hard Excrements, and mitigated the bearing down
which he had complained so much of. The same night I visited him again, and
fomented with a Decoction of malv. verbas. sem. lini, etc. as it is described,
and applied a Cataplasm of the faeces beaten and pulped. I advised him to a
slender Diet, and prescribed him a Barley-cream cum sem. melon. papaver. alb. a
few Almonds, a little juice of Lemons, aq. ros. and cinnam. hordeat. He rested
tollerably well that night, and was easier in the morning. I continued the same
method of dressing till the pain was assuaged, repeating Clysters as occasion
offered; and afterward fomented them with a Decoction of summit. anethi,
hyperici, salviae, ros. rub. nuc. cupress. in Wine, by which I discussed and
dried up the humidity, and thereby cured him.

A Man of about forty six years of age, abounding with sharp Humors, 3.
Observat. of external Haemorrhoids.
frequently diseased with the Haemorrhoids, being one time sorely afflicted
with them, consulted me. I saw them lying in a great Cluster round the verge of
the Anus, which was also relaxed and turned out. The Varices were of different
sizes and colors: some were inflamed red, others pale, others livid, and some
black. At first sight I supposed them Gangrened: but after a farther search I
observed the different color of them proceeded from the great Influx of
Humors which dilated them, and caused the Compression they made upon one
another. We commonly see the same in making a Ligature on any of the Varices;
in which case generally they inflame, or if tied very straight, grow pale and
become livid; then, as the heat extinguisheth they grow black: Yet sometime,
upon tying, the Blood bursts forth, and they recover their native heat. Thus in
our case, through want of timely relief, they inflamed and swelled, and
straightned themselves; till by corrupting they withered, and made room for
their fellows. Whether these would have gangrened if not then succored, I
shall not conclude; but in bodies ill-habited they do so sometimes. These were
exceeding painful, and, by reason of the Relaxation of the Anus, caused a
vexatious Tenesmus, and discharged much Gleet and Mucus. I fomented them at the
instant with red Wine, and injected up a spoonful or more of ol. hyperici, to
abate the acrimony causing the Tenesmus; then let the Patient blood. The next
morning I fomented the diseased Parts with the foresaid discutient and drying
Decoction, and applied that old Remedy of fried Leeks with Butter, beaten to a
Cataplasm: by which the pain was mitigated and the varicous Swellings relaxed.
The Ulcerations were afterward dried up by the sprinkling them with pulv. nuc.
cupress. and balaust. and the continued use of the foresaid discutient
Fomentation; in which, toward the declination of the Disease, was dissolved
extract. sumach, whereby the humidity was dried up, and the Anus reduced;
during which his Body was kept soluble by Clysters, and Lenient Bolus's of
cassiae extract. etc.

A Woman of about forty years of age came to London upon some affairs, 4.
Observat. of external Haemorrhoids.
and, having been formerly subject to the Haemorrhoids, was here again
afflicted with them. She being a stranger, and shy in discovering her Malady,
it increased with much pain, which afterward put her upon a necessity of
complaining. I was consulted, and saw them thrust out in a great cluster with
Inflammation to putrefaction, the Anus turned out with great Tumor. She was
also diseased with a Tenesmus,, which put her bowels upon a continual
excretion of much Gleet and Mucus. I fomented them with Wine, cut off some of
the varices, scarified others, and permitted them to bleed; then washed them
with a Solution of unguent. Aegyptiac. in some of the Wine, and injected some
ol. lini. Afterward I applied a Cataplasm of fried Leeks over all. Cordialls
were prescribed her, and an Anodyne draught that night, to dispose her to rest.
A discutient and resolvent Fomentation and Cataplasm were also applied by her
Nurse-keeper, as occasion offered. By these Applications the pain mitigated,
and the Tumor relaxed. The Ulceration being great required Medicaments drying
and detersive; to which purpose I left off those slabby ones, and fomented with
aqua lapidis Medicamentos. applying bals. sulphuris Rulandii upon Pledgits of
Tow, with warm Stupes over it. By the use of these the Ulcerations were healed,
and the over-moistned Parts dried, also the Anus contracted. During her Cure
Lenients were injected, to mitigate the heat and disturbance in the Intestinum
rectum, and her body was kept soluble by Clysters. Also to prevent future
Costiveness, I prescribed her a Lenitive Electuary of extract. cassiae, pulp.
tamarind. maciae, pulv. jalap. salis tartari, to take the quantity of a dram
more or less at night going to bed. I purposed the making her a Fontanell, but
she being well went out of Town.

A Gentleman aged about forty years, 5. Observat. of external Piles.
of a healthful Constitution, was often vexed with Haemorrh. uval. on one side
of the Podex, one whereof, being over-stretched, was incapable of being so
discussed, but that it swelled and inflamed upon every little disorder or
Costiveness. He at last, wearied with the disturbance, consulted me: it was
then swelled, and somewhat inflamed. I, observing its basis capable of tying,
made a Ligature upon it, and cut it off; then permitting it to bleed some
while, I dressed it cum pulv. Galeni, with a Pledgit of unguent. basilicon, and
a Plaster of unguentum nutritum over it, and cured it by the touch of a
Vitriol-stone and unguent. desicat. rub. Since when he has enjoyed good
health, and been less troubled with the Piles.

What more concerns the Cure of these kind of Haemorrhoids, we shall be
obliged to take notice of in the following Observations of the Haemorrhoides
apertae, they being for the most part accompanied with them, and are also
attended with Tenesmus and Procidentia Any.

A man aged about fifty years, 1. Observat. of the apertae, or bleeding
Haemorrhoids.
of a gross Body, subject to a bleeding of the Haemorrhoids, presuming upon
that benefit of nature, heated his Blood by disorder so, that it flowed
violently forth by Stool, and in few days it brought him to be very faint and
weak. I injected two or three spoonful of succ. urticar. and applied a Pledgit
of Tow on the Podex dipped in a Solution of extract. sumach in red Wine; then
prescribed him an Emulsion, ex sem. hyoscyam. and papaver. alb. By this method
the Bleeding was stopped, but thereupon he grew feverish, and the Haemorrhoids
swelled externally. To them I applied unguent. populeon cum subere ust. and
took away a few ounces of Blood from his Arm: by which and contemperating
Julips, etc. his heat remitted, and he recovered.

A Woman of about forty years of age, 2. Observat.
having been long afflicted with the Haemorrhoids of both kinds, whereby she
was much emaciated and grown cachectick, in extremity of a Fit of both kinds
joined together sent for me. I caused this Leniment to be injected, and applied
upon a Pledgit of Tow: mucilag. sem. psyllii extract. in decoct. malvar. iiij.
myrrhae, thuris, croci pulveriz. an. ss. vitell. unius ovi, ol. ros. ss. opii
gr. viij. This gave the Patient present ease; but the next day she was seized
with a pain in her Head, and her Uvula and right Tonsill grew inflamed. I
supposed it was a translation of that Matter which had been checked by the
Anodyne; yet could scarce believe that a Body so emaciated, and so lately
emptied by the bleeding of them, could be subject to such an Accident. I let
her blood in the Arm four ounces, and by the application of Discutients
externally to the Fauces, and a Gargarism of a few distilled Waters with sal
prunellae and sir. diamoron, the Inflammation remitted, and she recovered.

A man aged about forty years, 3. Observat.
extremely subject to the Haemorrhoids many years, came to Town, and being
sorely diseased with them, he consulted me. I saw him newly come off the
Close-stool, sitting upon the corner of a Trunk, with a Pillow and Napkin under
him, his breeches hanging about his Legs: his Visage was pale and dejected, a
cold sweat dropping from his Brows. He had been twice upon the Close-stool
straining with great uneasiness, avoiding only a Mucus with a bloody serum. He
then went again to it, and after some while straining returned discontented to
his bed, where (he said) he was wont after an hour or two to be easier. I
viewed the diseased Part, and saw the Podex relaxed so much as I believe I
might have put up my four fingers. It was varicous round the verge, and had
bled some two or three ounces. From the internal Piles he frequently bled very
much, yet was not the less pained. I called for soft Napkins well warmed, and
applied one after another hot, whereby I soon quieted and reduced the relaxed
Anus. I commended to his use an Infusion of Astringents in red Wine, to be
applied hot with Scarlet-cloaths immediately upon his coming from the
Close-stool, and to wear a Pledgit of Tow sprinkled with pulv. nuc. cupress.
balaust. etc. by the use of which he was frequently much eased. Some years
after he dyed suddenly of an Apoplexy, as was supposed.

CHAP. II. Of Procidentia Any.
HAving in the preceding Discourse made often mention of a Relaxation of the
Anus, we shall now treat more particularly of it. N^mes.
It is called by the Latins Procidentia Any, also Prolapsus and Exitus Any. By
those names it is also known amongst us. It is a Relaxation of the Sphincter to
such a degree, Description.
that the internal rugous Coat of the Intestine turns out, and bearet down,
making a Swelling proportionably.

The Causes of this Disease are Costiveness, at which time, Causes.
straining to ease nature it frequently falls down; also Fluxes of the Bowels
in Diarrhaea, Dysenteria, and especially Tenesmus. The Piles are for the most
part a Cause, so is hard Labor in Childbed, and the Stone in the Bladder. In
Infants it commonly falls down through Crudity or over-moisture of the
Levatores Any. In those of Age the Cause will be more certainly discovered by
the complaint of the Patient.

The Signs are evident to the sight: the inside is turned outward, Signs.
and the Tumor is of a fleshy color and rugous, by reason of the folds and
wrinkles of the Coat; and it is accompanied with an uneasiness, and desire to
go to Stool.

The Cure of this Disease is difficult, Prognostic.
but much worse in old people then young; and if it succeeded a Dysenterie or
Haemorrhoids, it is the most difficult. In the latter case it is scarce ever
curable. If it happened through Costiveness, the Cure is hopeful; so it is if
it was caused from the Stone in the Bladder, or Childbed Labor, if in that
work the Muscles or Membranes were not torn.

In order to the Cure, Cure.
the prolapsed Intestine ought to be put up with an easy hand. The usual
method is, to apply a Stupe of Flannell or Scarlet-cloath, wrung out of some
Decoction of red Wine hot; and after the Part has been a while fomented, you
are to thrust up the relaxed Anus with your fingers till you have reduced it.
If the Tumor be great and hard, you ought then to foment it with Emollients
and Discutients, viz. fol. mal. viol. taps. barbat. flor. sambuci, cham.
meliloti, sem. lini, foenugraeci, etc. The Tumefaction removed, reduce it as
abovesaid, binding on a Button of soft Tow pressed out of an Astringent Decoction
made thus; baccar. myrtillor. flor. ros. rubr. balaust. an. ss. nuc. cupress.
gland. querc. an. j. sumach, acatiae, hyporist. an. ijss. corn. cervi usti,
thuris, an. ij. infundantur in vin. rubr. lbij. and coquantur ad tertiae partis
consumptionem. Your next endeavors should be how to prevent the descent of it
in the time of easing nature; for upon the least straining it for the most part
thrusts down again. Therefore it is that we desire the Patient should be so
well disposed in his Bowels, that, if it be possible, he may go seldom to
Stool, and when he does, that it may be with the least straining. He should
also have a couple of Sticks whittled and fitted for him to place close on each
side the Podex, so as in straining the Excrements may pass out, yet the
Prolapse of the Intestine be hindered. For the like purpose I have frequently
commended a small Tin-hoop to be fastened in a quilted Boulster, which being
fitted with Bandage may be retained at that time to pass the Excrements
through, and prevent the Relapse. What you can invent to this purpose will much
facilitate the Cure.

An Infant about a month old was diseased with a Procidentia Any, 1. Observat.
of Procidentia Any.
which being not reduceable by the Women, I fomented it with red Wine three or
four times, then with my fingers upon the Stupe pressed equally upon it, and
reduced it. I continued the fomenting it a while longer, then applied a Pledgit
of dry Tow upon the Anus, directing them how to relieve it in case of its
Relapse. I afterward sent them papers of Astringents to infuse in red Wine, to
apply as above said. By which method it was strengthened and cured in few days
by the care of the Nurse.

A sickly Child about four years old had been some months diseased with a
Procidentia Any, 2. Observat. of Procidentia Any.
by reason of a preceding Flux of the Bowels with Tenesmus. It had been
neglected by the Servant that attended it, and was too much swelled to yield to
a Reduction. I fomented it with the discutient and emollient Decoction
prescribed in the method of Cure, then bound on warm Stupes wrung out of the
same, and kept him in bed. The Swelling being thereby somewhat relaxed, I
endeavored again Reduction; but it not yielding thereto, I fomented it with
Discutients with somewhat of Astringency, and sprinkled the inner Tunicle with
pulv. nuc. cupress. corn. cervi usti, an. part. aequal. then applied warm
Stupes thereon. After I had thus dried up the superfluous Humidity, I attempted
it again: but as I pressed upon it on one side, it rose on the other. I
repeated the warm Stupes, and with my fingers upon the Stupe I pressed close
upon it, and twiddled it in first one side, then the other. It being reduced, a
Compress of Tow made in the form of a great Button, dipped in an astringent
Decoction, was placed thereon, and retained by good Bandage. His Diet was
boiled Rice and suchlike, which might prevent a Looseness. At his next going
to Stool I was fetched. After he had eased nature, I fomented the relaxed Anus,
and having cleansed and dried it, reduced it easily, then dressed it as before,
and continued my attendance at such times; whereby I facilitated the work and
cured the Child, by the assistance of the Servant that attended it. Many
suchlike in Children to twelve years of age I have happily recovered by the
like method.

A Man of about twenty eight years of age, 3. Observat. of Procidentia Any.
afflicted with a Procidentia Any, consulted me. It was neither inflamed nor
hard; but, having been long out, was not easy to reduce. I returned that
evening with a Decoction of summitat. anethi, hyperici, flor. cham. ros. rub.
balaust. sumach, nuc. cupress. made in Wine; and after I had fomented the
relaxed Parts, I endeavored again to reduce it: but it not yielding, I
sprinkled the inner Coat of the relaxed Anus with pulv. nuc. cupress. and
applied a warm Stupe over it with retentive Bandage. The next morning I
returned thither, and repeated the Fomentation, and having thereby reduced it,
I dressed it up with a Compress of Tow made in the form of a Button dipped in a
Solution of extract. sumach in red Wine, with Bandage to retain it close. I
afterward made him several visits, and assisted him in the reducing it,
directing him according to the way proposed in the method of Cure for
preventing the Relapse: by which method the Relapse was lessened, and the
easier reduced when it slipped out.

I was fetched to a Woman of about forty years of age, 4. Observat. of
Procidentia Any.
who had been long afflicted with the Haemorhoids both internal and external,
through the continuance of which the Sphincter relaxed, and, for want of timely
reduction, in process of time swelled big, and was accompanied with great
Fluxion, Ulceration, and various sorts of Excrescences, which rendered it
incapable of being reduced. I advised a discutient and astringent Fotus, as
has been proposed in the method of Cure; and the next day cut off the
Excrescences with a pair of Scissors, and applied warm Stupes, to continue the
bleeding till I thought I had sufficiently given a breathing to the Part. Then
sprinkling them with a mixture of pulv. cort. granat. nuc. cupress. with a
third part of Merc. praecipitat. I applied a warm Stupe over all, with
retentive Bandage. The next day I repeated the same Applications, with this
Emplaster under the Stupe: pulv. summitat. millefolii, flor. chamaem^l. an. vj.
cortic. granat. ij. ciner. ligni fraxini ij. aluminis usti ij. rad. squill.
coct. sub cineribus iiij. pistentur in mortario cum axung. porcin. and mel.
communis an. q. s. fiat Emplastrum. By the continued application of these
Medicaments, I discussed part of the Swelling, and dried up the Ulcerations,
and by rubbing of many roots of the Excrescences with the Vitrioll-stone
consumed them. But the circumference of the Podex after all being too turgid to
turn inward, I fomented it with Emollients, and applied Cataplasms of the same;
by which it was after a while rendered reduceable, and by Compression retained:
but by reason of the laxity and over-moisture of the Part, she was subject to
the Haemorrhoids afterward, and the Anus frequently relapsed. She languished
long under that Disease, and died hydropicall.

A person aged about sixty years, 5. Observat. of Procidentia Any.
having labored a long time under various Chronick Diseases, and of late years
a supposed Fistula in Ano, which grew daily more vexatious; I was consulted.
Upon view of the Part, I judged it a Procidentia Any. It being questioned, I
called for warm Napkins, and applying them hot one after another, I reduced it
whilst I pressed one of the warm Clothes close to it, and thereby eased the
Patient, and confirmed the Judgment I had delivered of it. This Procidentia
Any, by reason of its long continuance, and the continual discharge of serous
Humors by it, rendered the Part so lax, that it relapsed upon the least
walking. Wherefore I provided accordingly a Compress dipped in astringent
Liquours, with Bandage to retain it close, and some days attended him in
reducing it, and in showing his Servants how to reduce and dress it. The work
of Reduction being grown more easy to his Servants, the Patient contented
himself with having it reduced so often as occasion offered, and declined the
trouble (as he called it) of Bandage. During the time of my attendance on this
Patient, I observed the folded Sheet which lay all night under him to be wet
through, as if so much water had sieped into it. Upon enquiry whence it
proceeded, and feeling his Belly, I concluded the Patient hydropicall, and that
the discharge per Anum was from thence. I was not much credited; but it
appeared so about three quarters of a year after, when he dying of an Apoplexy,
his Servants taking him out of Bed, the Sheet under him was found wet as
aforesaid. In order to the Embalming of him, I pierced his Belly, and
discharged twenty two pints and a half of Water. Toward the latter part of his
life he was subject to Vomiting, with dejection of Appetite: the Procidentia
Any was also continually attended with a Tenesmus, which was no small
disturbance to his Bowels. In the opening of the lower Venture, I found the
Viscera much obstructed; and in the left Kidney there was one stone filled up
the same.

CHAP. III. Of Condyloma, Ficus, Thymi, etc.
THe Anus is also subject to various sorts of Excrescences besides those
arising from the Haemorrhoids, and have names from the things they most
resemble, being called Condylomata, Ficus, Cristae, Thymi, etc. Authors do not
agree about the Names of the three former: some making Crista and Ficus all
one, only differing as they are greater or lesser; and take no notice of
Condyloma at all. Others also have given very different Descriptions of them,
such as seem to me insufficient to distinguish them. I shall therefore take the
liberty to represent them to you as I have seen them grow.

The Condyloma and Ficus I suppose to be both one, Description of Condyloma.
differing only in their manner of growth, they both arising from a peculiar
kind of soft round Tubercle distending the internal rugous Tunicle of the
Anus, without pain or alteration of color in the Skin; and as that increases,
it grows fleshy. If it continues that figure, it is Condyloma: but if it
shoot out with a long neck, Ficus.
as frequently it happens, resembling a Fig, it may deservedly be called Ficus.

Cristae are a sort of hard Excrescences arising somewhat distant from the
verge of the Anus, Cristae.
in the form of a Cock's Comb, and are usually a symptom of the Pox.

Thymi are hard Excrescences not unlike the tops of the Herb they borrow their
name from. Thymi.
They partake of the nature of Warts, and differ only in their manner of
growth. There are other sort of Excrescences of a softer substance, called
Papulae, etc. Of the former some are benign, others are malign and of a
Cancerous quality.

Rhagades are Chaps or Fissures about the verge of the Anus proceeding from the
acrimony of the Humor fretting and cracking those Parts. Rhagades.
This happens in those who have been infected with any of the abovementioned
Excrescences: it may also proceed from a Diarrhaea, etc. They are deep or
shallow, dry or moist, malign or benign, according to the quality of the Humor
to which they owe their original.

The abovementioned Excrescences are enough distinguished by the sight from one
another. Difference.
They differ from the Piles, as affecting only the Skin, and that without
Tumefaction of the Podex: nor have they any likeness to a Varix.

The material Cause of all these sorts of Excrescences is pituitous or gross
viscous Blood thrust forth by the strength of the Expulsive faculty out of the
Pores of the Skin, and dried up into these forms in which we see them. Causes.
The Condyloma and Ficus arise from a viscous Humor flowing preternaturally
into some part of the rugous Coat of the Anus, raising it into a small Tumor,
as I have already said. The Cristae and other Species of Excrescences are
reputed to arise from the Lues Venerea, and from that filthy sin of Sodomy, and
have the Rhagades for their companions: which I believe is frequently so seen
in the hot Countries; but amongst us is a Symptom of the Pox. Yet I have met
with it in a little Infant; and all the other Species in people whom I suppose
never had the Lues Venerea.

The Thymi are the worst sort of Excrescences, they being more often malign,
Prognostic.
and are then painful; also if their extirpation be unsuccessfully attempted,
they grow cancerous. The Condyloma, Ficus, Cristae, etc. are not difficult to
extirpate or cure, if the Disease be rightly considered from which they arise.

The Cure of these Excrescences at their first budding forth may be attempted
by Medicaments that are astringent and drying; as summit. rubi, equiseti, Cure.
fol. and baccar. myrtillor. sumach, cort. granat. balaust. squamae aeris,
ferrugo, calx lota, ^^umen, etc. made into Fomentations, or poudered and mixed
with Ointments, and applied upon Tow. If these do not check their growth, you
may cut them off with a Knife or Scissors, and consume the remaining roots by
escarotick or actual Cautery, and then proceed in the Cure by Digestion and
Epuloticks accordingly. To prevent their growing again, Authors commend the
Ashes of Vine and Bean-stalks mixed with Vinegar, to apply upon the Part.

The Cure of Rhagades consists in removing the Callosity, and cicatrizing them
smooth, as abovesaid. If Humidity abound, it requires Exsiccants: to which
purpose, flor. ros. rub. bacc. myrtill. summit. rub. an. M.j. rad. tormentill.
bistortae, an. j. aluminis j. coquantur in aq. chalybeat. ad. lbjss. in fine
decoctionis add vini rub. iiij. with which foment the part. Then apply
suchlike: lithargyri, cerussae, an. iij. sarcocollae, mastich. thuris, an. j.
terrae sigillatae, ij. ol. ros. iiij. cerae q.s. Misce super ignem, deinde
pistentur in mortario. plumbeo pro usu. If siccity be the fault, you must dress
them with Medicaments that are humecting; as, pingued. vitulin. anatis,
gallinae, an. ij. lithargyr. aur. j. Misce in mortario plumbeo S. A.

ALL these Species of Excrescences are for the most part symptoms, 1. Observat.
of Rhagades, Ficus, Thymi.
as I have said, of the Lues Venerea, to which Treatise I shall refer you for a
more particular information, and shall here, for brevity sake, give you only
one Observation of a person who suffered under various Species of them the most
I ever saw, yet was not venereal. He was a man of about fifty six years of age
of a healthy Constitution; he complained that he had been long obstructed in
easing of nature by reason (as he thought) of the Piles, which of late was much
more grievous to him, they in a manner stopping up the Anus. I viewed the Part,
and saw a numerous company of Excrescences, great and small, overspreading the
Anus, insomuch that it was very difficult to find their insertion. There were
five very large, of the form of green Figs, the least of them about an inch and
a half long, inserted within the Anus. There were other lesser growing more
externally, upon the verge of them some hung like so many Leeches. There were
also about the Anus many Thymi growing right up of different size; under which
were Rhagades, Chaps and Fissures, with small Excrescences or Papulae thrusting
here and there out of them. These being all washed and cleansed from the
Excrements, retained the natural color of the Skin, and were not painful. He
had concealed his Disease so long as he could, and was encouraged to send for
me, upon a report he had heard from a Neighbor of his, whom I had freed from
an Excrescence in the same Part. I readily undertook the Extirpation of them,
but desired to have some witness of the work: to which purpose one was
consulted; but he, discouraging us with a prediction of their malign quality,
left us. Yet the Patient urging me to proceed in the operation, and I
considering the necessity of it: I came the next day with my Servant, furnished
with Knife, Scissors, Needles and strong Thread, actual and potentiall
Cauteries, astringent Powders, etc. Then having placed the Patient in a clear
light, with his Knees drawn up toward his Body, he with my Servant assisting
with their hands, I again considered the Part affected; and finding it
difficult to get to the roots of those inserted within the Anus, thought to
begin with those more remote. But suspecting how his courage might hold out, I
began with those nearest the verge of the Anus, clipping them off close from
their roots one after another, as fast as I could, not minding their bleeding,
till I had freed my way to those within the Anus. Then with a Sponge dipped in
Oxycrate I washed off the Blood, and with small actual Cauteries dried the
roots of them. That done I oyled my Finger, and passed it into the Anus, to
make way to the next: and whilst I held my Finger beyond it close to the root,
my Servant the mean time pulling the Ficus to him, I passed the Scissors under
it toward the end of my Finger; then tied them, and passing on cut them off,
my Finger within directing me in the work. I tried the Speculum Any: and by the
help of my Finger within, and a Speculum at the entrance upon the verge, I
cleared the Anus of them, cauterized their roots, and put up a bit of a Rag
dipped in unguent. refrig. Galeni. Then I fell to work with the rest, snipping
and cutting them off, and consumed their roots with actual Cauteries. Some of
those that had very small roots I burnt with the Button-end of my Probe, others
with the point of my Forceps. The Lips of some of the Rhagades which were
callous I burnt with the Spatula, some others I rubbed off with the
Caustick-stone. Thus in less then an hour and a half I consumed them all, and
left the Anus free, and the Parts about smooth. I dressed them up with a
Pledgit of Two spread with unguent. refrig. Galeni, and in the space of fourteen
days or thereabouts cured him: for indeed most of them cicatrized as the Escars
cast off. This Patient lived many years after, and publicly acknowledged the
Cure to persons of great Quality. If these had risen from the Pox, they would
have soon returned, and rendered my operation unsuccessfull; which they did not.

A young married Wife having been long diseased with an Excrescence growing out
from the Os coccyx between three and four inches in length, 2. Observat. A
preternaturall Body growing from the Os coccyx extirpated.
not unlike the tail of a Turkish Sheep, retaining the natural color of the
Skin, without pain, except in time of Childbed. She being again with Child,
and dreading the pain thereof, consulted me. I undertook the extirpating of it,
and in the presence of some eminent Physicians made a Ligature upon the basis
of it, and cut it off. It scarce bled; yet having astringent Dressings ready
prepared, I applied them. We slit the preternaturall Body open, and judged it
to be a soft white Fat, like that of a Rump of Mutton. At the next Dressing I
perceived the remaining part was Fat, and had for its root long slips of the
same kind of Fat, running up from the Coccyx on each side to the back of the Os
sacrum about two inches in length. I laid it open, and digested it out with
Merc. praecipitat. then cured it according to the usual method in such cases,
since which time she has been delivered of two Children without any
disturbance from that Part.

CHAP. IV. of Phyma.
IN the lower part of the Intestinum rectum, where the Musculi Any are
inserted, there frequently arises a hot Tumor called Phyma. You may find it
described amongst the Tumors arising from Blood; therefore I shall not trouble
you here with a farther Description of it; but give you three instances of it
as it affected the Anus, the better to show you the original of Fistulae in
Ano: they for the most part proceeding from these Abscesses, whether they break
within and ulcerate there, or the matter descend lower, and raise a Tumor
without the verge of the Anus.

Those within the Anus produce the most dangerous Fistulae. The matter of which
penetrating through the coats into the neighboring Muscles, Prognostic.
is rarely discovered till it has made its way more outward amongst the
Muscles of the buttock; but if it chance to be discovered sooner, yet the cure
is most difficult: nay those Phymata which appear outwardly upon the verge of
the Anus, though they are of easier cure; yet if they be ill handled, the
defluxion is continued, and the Sinus within grows callous, and requires the
same method that Fistulae in Ano do, it being directly such as you may see in
the following Chapter.

The way to prevent these mischiefs, is by timely laying open the external
Phyma by Caustic, that the Matter may have free discharge; Cure.
for if you open that by incision it must be kept so with a Tent, which cannot
be easily retained in: and whether the Matter be choked in by that, or it slide
out and the Orifice close up, is alike inconvenient and prolongs the cure. The
internal Phymata are easily cured if they be timely discovered and opened by
incision.

I Shall begin with an instance of an external Phyma, in a Child of about four
years of age, the only Son of his Parents; 1. Observat. of an external Phyma.
he had been grievously pained in Ano four or five days, they not discovering
his malady: but the Tumor appearing externally, I was fetched; it lay juxta.
Anum, of the bigness of a Phesants egg, perfectly suppurated. I applied the
milder Caustic upon the declining part, with Plaster and Bandage. The next
morning I heard the Patient had rested tollerably well. I took off the
Dressings, and found the Matter discharged through the Escar, which was, as I
had designed it, the breadth of a twopence. I dressed it with a Pledgit of Tow
spread with unguent. basilicon cum ol. ros. by this method the Matter
discharged freely without disturbance in going to Stool, and it cured by the
Maids dressing, I not visiting it thrice. Many such I could give you of these
so easily cured.

A Countryman aged about thirty years, of a Sanguine full body, 2. Observat.
of external Phyma.
coming to London, was taken with a pain in Ano, and desired my advice. I
viewed the Part and made a search with my finger dipped in a little oil, but
discovered nothing whereby I might suspect Ulcer or Piles. I injected a
spoonful or two of ol. liliorum warm, and directed him the use of it; but
after three or four days the Pain increasing, I made a search, and felt a
Swelling on that Part which lies next to the neck of the Bladder; I took a
crooked incision-Knife, and defending the edge of it almost to the point, with
a bit of Plaster conveyed it in by my Finger to the Swelling, and made
incision into the Tumor; he presently discharged a spoonful or two of Matter.
From that time he complained no more of pain. I cast up a little ol. Hyperici
warm as before, and henceforward dressed him no more, he being perfectly cured.

A Planter which came from Virginia, 3. Observat. of a Phyma.
lodging in the Old Bailey, being extremely pained in Ano, consulted his
overthwart Neighbor Physician, who prescribed Fomentations, Embrocations, etc.
but his Pain increasing, and the Physician not coming to him so often as he
desired, the Patient went to the Physician, where renewing his complaint, I was
sent for and viewed the Podex; but seeing no outward disturbance, I anointed my
Finger with a little Butter, and in passing it up in Ano felt a Tumor, which
with their leave I opened as in the former Observation has been said. The
Patient cried out he must ease himself; I finding nothing for him to do it in,
and seeing by my Finger and Knife it was Matter, I bid him ease himself there;
he did so, and discharged only a quantity of Matter well concocted. From that
time he complained no more of Pain, and was cured within a day or two by the
benefit of Nature; I declining to cast in any injections lest they should get
into the Abscess and make it sinuous.

CHAP. V. Sinuous Ulcers and Fistulae in Ano.
FROM the afore-recited Haemorrhoides and Phymata Sinuous Ulcers are made.

Those proceeding from the internal Piles are made gradually, and pass their
Matter (which is generally a thing gleet) between the Tunicles of the
Intestinum rectum, making their way out near the verge of the Anus through a
small pinhole. They are rather discovered by the discharge of a thin Humor
stai^ing the Shirt, then by any pain they have; which discharge is often
thought to be rather a Sweating of the Part then otherwise: but in progress it
is accompanied with itching, and is subject to excoriation; from whence it is
that various sorts of Papulae, etc. do arise, and sometimes Rhagades. At last
these sorts of Sinuous Ulcers spread outward or grow callous, and the Orifice
grows hard and so contracted that you cannot pass in the smallest Probe.

Those Ulcers which proceed from Phyma, do pass their Matter deep amongst the
Interstitia of the Muscles, as other Abscesses in fleshy parts do according as
they can make their way. These sometime penetrate through the Intestinum
rectum, to the very neck of the Bladder; yea into the Pelvis, or at best do
insinuate their Matter in amongst the Musculi Glutei, etc. This happens
according as the Apostemation at first lay deep or shallow, or was great or
small, or in a body Plethorique or ill-habited. They are very painful, and
discharge a purulent Matter proportionably as they are hollow, and are they
which do cuniculos agere; yet they do grow callous, and are reckoned amongst
the worst sorts of Fistulae Any.

The Causes I have already declared with the manner of their growth, by which I
suppose they may be sufficiently discovered. If you make a search with a Probe
into the sinuous Ulcer arising from the Piles, and the while pass your Finger
into the Anus, you shall feel the Probe run all along between the Tunicles of
the Intestine, and it may be pass out through the Pile which gave it its
original: whereas, the other sinuous Ulcers have in their beginning no
external Orifice, but discharge their Matter by Stool; but at length possibly
they pass their Matter externally through one or more Orifices, more or less
distant from the Podex, or according as the Abscess lay in the Intestine.

Sinuous Ulcers arising from the Piles are heathfull, Prognostic.
and ought not to be cured while they may be continued without pain or
disturbance to the Patient.

Sinuous Ulcers arising from Phymata are dangerous and difficult of cure, if
they have been of long continuance. The Ulcer in Ano is also of difficult cure,
if it discharge great quantity of Matter by an opening so remote that you
cannot lay it open with safety; but if the Sinus lie near the Anus, the cure
will be more easy.

Sinuous Ulcers in progress of time grow callous, and are then deservedly
called Fistulae. What a Fistula is I have declared in its proper Chapter: How
these Sinuous Ulcers become fistulous, I have showed you in this foregoing
Discourse with the Causes, etc. You may also make a Prognostic of them from
what has been said of sinuous Ulcers, they differing only from them as they
are callous; for if Fistulae do run superficially upwards by the Rectum
intestinum, whether it penetrate the Anus or not, the cure is without dnager or
difficulty performed. Those Fistulae which run higher up then you can reach
with your Finger are difficult to cure, because you cannot lay them open the
whole length, for the Humor will flow from the remaining Sinus upon the part
opened, and hinders its cicatrizing.

Those Fistulae which penetrate deep beyond the Musculi Any, if they be cured
by laying open, the Patient will afterward retain his Excrements with much
difficulty; and if they reach quite beyond the Sphincter, the retention is
impossible.

If the Fistula be the effect of a Cacochymical Habit of body, especially if
the Lungs be weak, or any other of the Viscera, it will be reasonable to keep
it open as a Fontanell for discharge of that peccant Matter; but if it cannot
be kept open with ease to the Patient, it will be requisite that a good Diet be
prescribed, and the Humors carried off some other way before you cure the
Fistula, and Issues elsewhere opened.

Fistulae therefore in Ano are not always curable, nor safe to be cured; they
frequently serving nature for the discharge of superfluous Humors, Cure.
palliative.
brought down by the Haemorrhodiall vessels: so that unless they be painful
and vexatious in keeping open, you ought not to cure them, especially if they
be small and terminate in the circumference of the Anus.

In which case if you apprehend that the Orifices of them will swell and not
keep open, or that by reason of the contraction of the Callus the Matter may be
straightened, and insinuate itself lower or deeper, and render the evacuation
troublesome; you may then apply a small Caustic upon the Orifice to remove the
Callus, after which separation of the Slough, the Orifice may be kept open with
more ease as a fontanell; and for the receiving the Matter, and preventing of
excoriation, the Patient may wear a Pledgit of fine Tow which will sit close
without Bandage; or it may be spread thin with any lenient Unguent, as the
exigency requires, and be kept clean without pain or considerable trouble, till
time shall cure it, or indicate what to do more in it.

But if you design the Cure, and the Sinus lie more distant from the Anus,
Curative.
you shall begin with laying it open first to the Anus, and curing that
Apertion before you divide that in Ano. Which being done you shall then
consider the Habit of body, and according as the Humors are peccant in
quantity or quality, so you may let Blood or purge: but if there be no
necessity of either, you shall prescribe your Patient a good Diet to prevent
Fluxion, and especially a Diarrhaea, for a looseness much disturbes the Cure;
therefore in such cases you are to forbear the dividing the Sinus till that be
stopped.

The way of laying open the Fistula in Ano is either by Incision or Ligature;
the latter was the way of the Ancients, and ought to be proportioned so as it
may divide the Sinus with the least pain: it is made of twisted brown Thread,
or stitching Silk, some put a Horse-hair to them, whereby they are made to do
their work the quicker; a twist of three Threads or of stitching Silk may be
sufficient, for if you make the Ligature big, it will too much bruise the Flesh
in cutting it. In the next place you are to consider the Needle you pass the
Ligature with. If the Fistula has penetrated the Intestine, then a Leaden
Probe with an Eye, or of any thing else that is pliant, will serve to carry the
Ligature through; it ought to be pliant, that it may perform its work with more
ease: a piece of a searching-Candle may serve in some, in others a Probe of
small Wire of Silver or Gold; for a present supply I have made use of a small
Probe out of my Plaister-box, cutting off part of it, and smoothing the end.
Where the Fistula has not penetrated, I have for need made use of the like
Probe making the point sharp to pass through the Intestine; but you ought to
have Needles more pliant, fit for that work. In some cases where the Fistula
lies high, and the Sinus crooked, I make use of a fit Cannula for the conveying
of the Needle up, and to strengthen it in its work, that it do not bend in the
perforating the Intestine.

The way by Incision is with a pair of Scissors to divide the Sinus, a way
approved by some who have observed the speedy division it makes; and in truth,
if the Sinus be short it is the best. In doing thereof they ought to be
careful the while, lest the folds of the rugous Coat fall between, for so you
make two Wounds for one. But if the Fistula penetrate the Intestine deep, the
work will be more hazardous, not only in the cutting as I said before, but in
progress of the Cure; for the recent divided Lips will be apt to fall upon one
another again, and then what can hinder their uniting? which if they do the
Fistula is renewed, a Doffill or Tent put up the Sinus will not continue in it,
but lie as a Suppository stimulating the Intestine to excrete it: whereas the
Ligature contuses the Lips in cutting them, so that they require to be digested
before they can unite, in which time the Sinus fills up and heals within;
insomuch as the Fistula may be judged to cure above, as the Ligature divides it
below. I shall anon give you some instances of both ways, and leave it to your
own Judgments to proceed as you like best. The manner of operation by Ligature
is this.

You shall make a search with a Probe into the Fistula, running up by the
Intestinum rectum, and the while anoint your Finger with a little Oil or Butter
and pass it up; and according as you feel the Probe more or less distant, or
penetrating, proceed in the Cure. If the Fistula be straight and much callous,
dilate it first with a Gentian-root or the like, and remove the Callus by such
cathareticks as have been proposed in the Chapter of Fistula in general. But
if that side be only callous which is next the Intestine, you may divide that
in laying open the Fistula; therefore pass your Ligature with a Needle blunt or
sharp, according as the Fistula penetrated or not; and as you pass the Needle
up with one hand, turn the point with your Finger which is in Ano, and bring
it out under that Finger as you thrust it up with the other: and if you pass
the Needle through a Cannula, you must first pass up the Cannula, and place the
end of it against your Finger, which is in the Intestinum rectum, then another
holding the Cannula, pass your Needle through it into the Gut; and as it is
brought out by your Finger there slip off the Cannula, and hasten the Needle
forward on its way, till you have brought it out with the Ligature: then cut
off the Needle, and make a knot upon a fold of Linen or bit of Plaster, to
prevent, the Ligatures cutting the outside, tie it as straight as the Patient
can bear, and let the second knot be with a bow: then place the ends of the
Ligature on one side, lest it be fouled in going to Stool, and apply a Stupe of
Tow dipped in vino austero, and ol. ros. to calm the heat of the part. Some make
the knot upon a bit of Stick and twist it daily; but that is more painful, and
cuts from without inward, which is to be avoided. I use to drss them daily
after easement of Nature, and if there be cause, inject Decoct. hordei cum sem.
cydon. and apply some Lenient as abovesaid, or unguent. rosat. popul. etc. and
the fourth day loosen the Ligature by drawing the bow-knot, and tie it
streighter: so in twice or thrice tying the Ligature will cut its way out, or
when it is almost through with a pair of Probe-scissors you may free the
residue; or if the Sinus run deep under the verge of the Anus, that the Lips be
like to lie high, so as to make a guttur, it will be better to take them down
by the application of a Caustic, for it will much hasten the Cure, and make
the Cicatrix smooth.

If there be any shriveld Piles, Condylomata, etc. about the verge of the Anus,
cut them off at the same time or before you make the Ligature, to prevent the
inflation they would be subject to from the pain caused by the Ligature or
Incision. The Sinus laid open, whether it were by Incision or Ligature, the
Ulcer requires to be digested, incarned and cicatrized, as has been showed in
other Ulcers, and shall be more particularly demonstrated in the following
Observations.

A Young married Wife being diseased in Ano, 1. Observat. of a Sinuous Ulcer.
with great Pain and discharge of Matter, advised Midwives and others, who
though they could not discover the cause of her Pain, yet prescribed
Medicaments and kept her long in their hands, to the great increase of her
Malady. At length I was consulted, and discovering nothing outward about the
Anus, I passed my Finger up into the Rectum intestinum; about an inch within on
the left side I felt a Perforation, I pulled back my Finger and saw it Mattery;
I concluded that was the Orifice of the Ulcer, and supposed its Sinus lay
amongst the Muscles, and that it took its Original from a Phyma, which she
concealing, as in that modest Sex it frequently happens, the Matter had
corroded and penetrated the Intestinum rectum, and the adjacent fleshy parts: I
pressed with my Fingers on the outside where I conjected the Abscess to ly, and
thought I felt the Sinus; I marked the place, and purposed the opening it when
it should be desired. At that time my business was to satisfy the Relations
concerning her Disease, which I declared to be an Ulcer in Ano, and for further
proof offered to open it in that place I had marked; which they consenting to,
I came about ten days after, and applied a Caustic upon that very place in the
presence of some of her Kniswomen, and the next day divided the Escar, and
passing the Knife down into it I met with the Sinus, and drawing my Incision
toward the Anus, under the coccix gave vent to the Matter; then passed a
Ligature with a blunt-pointed Needle, through the Sinus into the Gut, and with
my Finger in Ano bowed the end of the Probe, and as I thrust it in with one
hand, brought it out with my Finger of the other; then cut off the Needle, and
tied the Ligature on a fast knot, and dressed the Ulcer with unguent. basilicon
dipped in a little ol. ros. warm to hasten the separation of the Escar. They
continued this way of dressing it daily, till the Escar separated, then I tied
the Ligature streighter, and in few days cut it through, and digested the Ulcer
with the common digestive; and deterged, incarned with mundif. Paracels. with
the addition of Merc. praecipitat. and afterward cicatrized it by the help of
the Vitriol and Allum-stone firm: since that she enjoys her health well.

A Gentleman of a full Body, 2. Observat. of a Sinuous Ulcer.
aged about thirty six years, came to London laboring under various Diseases,
as the Gout, Colic and Stone in the Kidney, and a sinuous Ulcer in Ano. Sir
Fra. Prujean was his Physician and sent for me. The Sinus did stretch it self
down from the verge of the Anus near the coccix, toward the perineum, about
two inches, discharging much Matter. I laid open the Sinus with a pair of
Probe-scissors to the Anus, and dressed it up with the Digestive ex terebinth.
spread upon Dossills dipped in pulv. Galeni, with Emplastr. e bolo over it, and
Compress and Bandage to retain it on. I afterward deterged cum mundif.
Parcels. and Merc. praecipitat. with the help of the Vitriol-stone, and with
Epuloticks, Unguents, aq. calcis, etc. cicatrized that Sinus to the verge of
the Anus: then consulting the Physician in the prosecuting of the Cure, we
considered the Patients ill Habit of Body, and the advantage he might receive
in keeping the Ulcer open as a Fontanell for the discharge of peccant Humors.
This being resolved upon, I advised the Patient to apply upon it a Pledgit of
fine soft Tow morning and evening, or so often as occasion required; it kept on
without Bandage, and received the Matter which discharged, and served as a
Fontanell without any disturbance to him in riding or sitting. Thus it was
continued some years with great ease and advantage to his health; but since
that Physicians death, the Patient was persuaded by others to have it cured. I
was sent for and made a search, and found it had perforated the Anus about half
an inch within the Rectum: I passed a Ligature with a piece of a Wax
searching-Candle, and tied the Ligature straight upon a fold of Plaster to
prevent the cutting outwardly; then cut off the overplus of the Ligature,
applied a Pledgit spread with unguent. alb. camph. over all. The Servants
renewed the dressings so often as he went to Stool, and the fourth day I
loosened the Bow-knot; and finding the Ligature near passed through, divided it
with a pair of Probe-scissors, and dressed it up with the common Digestive:
after it was digested I dressed it with unguent. diapomp. upon a Pledgit of
Tow, and cleansed the Ulcer daily with aq. lap. med. Crollii, and in a few days
cicatrized it; he returned to his house into the Country, but being a diseased
person he lived not a year after.

A Person aged about thirty years, 3. Observat. of a Sinuous Ulcer.
of a sickly Constitution, subject to Cough and Rheums, being one day costive,
and straining to ease nature, felt somewhat slip down as it were between the
Tunicles of the Intestinum rectum, to the verge of the Anus, which lay uneasy;
he put up his Finger and felt a small Tubercle of the bigness of a large Pea,
which increasing settled somewhat lower, and made a hard Swelling without the
verge of the Anus on the right side, and in few days raised itself into a
Tumor as big as a Pidgeons-Egg, and inflamed and suppurated. I was then
consulted, and opened it by Caustic, and discharged about two or three
spoonfulls of a digested white Matter: after separation of the Escar, I finding
much Matter discharged out of it, I made a search, and found it run up close
along the Rectum; I laid it open to the Anus by a snip with a pair of
Probe-scissors, and dressed it with a Dossill spread with unguent. basilicon, and
a Pledgit of soft fine Tow spread with unguent. album over it, and in few days
cured it to the verge of the Anus. Then considering the Patient laboring under
a Cough with other obstructions, I proposed to him the continuing this Ulcer
open as a Fontanell, till he should reover his health better, and that if he
found any inconveniency by it, I would readily cure it. I advised only a
Pledgit of Tow to be applied to it, with directions to renew it as he should
see cause. I took leave of him, he followed my directions, and finding no
inconveniency in riding, walking, or the like, continued it as a Fontanell to
his much advantage; he recovering his health very well afterward, and is yet
alive.

A Gentleman of about forty years old came out of the Country, 4. Observat. of
a Fistula in Ano.
laboring of a Fistula in Ano, breaking out on the left side: it arose from a
Phyma, (I suppose;) the Sinus was large and painful, the Matter having spread
under it. If I had laid this open by incision, the Lips would have lien hollow,
and have rendered the Ulcer slow in curing; therefore I removed them by
Caustic, laying the Ulcer open to the Anus, and after separation of the Escar,
digested, incarned and cicatrized it: then made a search with a Probe, putting
my Finger in Ano the while, and feeling the Probe pass into the Gut about an
inch high, I prepared a Ligature, and with a Probe-needle passed it up into the
Gut; then turned the end of the Needle downward under my Finger, and made a
deligation, as in the like case has been showed, and applied a Stupe spread
with unguent. nutritum over all. The next day dressing it again I found the
part a-little heated, and a Pile that was before the making of the Ligature
(lank and withered) swelled and beginning to inflame; wherefore doubting it
might be troublesome, I cut it off close by the root, and rubbed it with a
Caustick-stone to stop the bleeding, and consume the remainder of it. Then I
dress up the Escars with a Pledgit spread with unguent. basilicon and the
nutritum over all. The fifth day I straightened the Ligature again, and dressed
it up with a Stupe spread with unguent. nutritum as before; and as occasion
offered I syringed the part affected with a Decoct. hordei, with a little Syrup
de ros. siccis. About the tenth day of the Ligature, I observed it cut so near
through as it was easy for me to divide the rest by a snip of a pair of
Scissors; yet in consideration that the Ulcer was deep, and consequently the
Lips so cut, would lie high and be apt to receive Excrements, which might make
it painful and very troublesome, I chose rather to free my self of them by
rubbing through them with a Caustick-stone: which having done and flatted them
as I designed, I pulled the Ligature to me, and the while passed my
Probe-scissors under, and divided the Sinus; and pulling away the Ligature
uncut, dressed up the Ulcer with a Pledgit dipped in basilicon warm, and applied
a Stupe wrung out of red Wine over it. After separation of the Escar, I
incarned and cicatrized with unguent. tutiae, etc. as aforesaid.

A Gentleman of about forty years of age, 5. Observat. of an Ulcer in Ano.
having labored long under Chronick Diseases, with great irregularity in Diet,
etc. during which, Nature to ease her self, discharged some part of the Disease
in an Abscess in his left Inguen, and another in Ano. This latter discharged a
great quantity of Matter daily, and was exasperated by a Diarrhaea. The former
in Inguine, (he not permitting it to be opened by his Surgeon) had made its
way through the Skin in many little openings, and lay ulcerated under it about
three inches in length, and in no condition to cure. Doctor Tern was his
Physician, and by his prescriptions had opposed the various Symptoms that
threatened the life of the Patient; but the Patient being ungovernable, I was
called in, and seeing him much emaciated and cachectick, not likely to be cured
till he should attain a better Habit of body, purposed to palliate these Ulcers
awhile: that in Inguine by dressing it with Pledgits of unguent. diapomp. and
cerat. dialtheae over it, whereby the Matter might be moderately discharged,
and the Tumor mollefied, and rendered less subject to Fluxion. The Sinuous
Ulcer in Ano was not capable of healing, while he labored under such a
Diarrhaea; but that it might be the better disposed thereto, I laid the Sinus
open by Ligature, and thereby freed the tender Lips from the Excoriations they
were before subject to; it was dressed with Lenients, and thereby the Matter
was discharged with more ease, and the Ulcer disposed to cure, when Nature
should be that way inclined: which, that it might the sooner be so, his
Physician prescribed this Traumatick decoction, fol. millefolii M.ij. veronic.
bugul. sanic. alchimil. flor. hyper. an. P.j. glycyrrhiz. ij. coq. in aq. font.
ad lbij. in colat. dissolv. sir. e symphyt. Fernel. ij. bibat iiij. ter in die
horis Medicinalibus. Also these Balsamic Pills, terebinth. chiae ij. bezoard.
mineral. j. balsam. solut. iiij. glicirrhiz. pulv. j. fiant pilul. sumat ss.
quotidie mane and vesperi. In the time of his Diarrhaea his Physician
prescribed this, rhei elect. parum torrefact. and aq. cinam. irrorat. ss. salis
tartari gr. iij. cons. ros. rub. gr. xxv. M. fiat bolus quem sumat mane per
triduum. This Julep was also prescribed him, aq. cinamomi hordeat. menthae
crisp. an. iiij. spir. menth. ij. sir. e corallis camp. x. M. de quo bibat
coch. iij. pro re nata. Also this Antiscorbutick, aq. cinam. tenuior. succ.
cochlear. hortens. an. vj. sacchar. christ. viij. digeratur in balneo, sumat
cochlear in sing. haust. potus ordinarii. At other times he took calomel. gr.
xx. in cons. ros. rub. ss. The Patient thus supplied with different
prescriptions, according to the exigency; the Spring coming on he retired to
Chelsey, where following the method prescribed he recovered strength, and the
discharge of Matter lessened; and consequently his Ulcers became so
well-conditioned, as his Friends and Servants about him were capable of
dressing him, and in few months he grew more healthful and fat. That Abscess
in his Groin healed up by the Medicaments aforementioned, but that Fistula in
Ano we thought fit to continue as a Fontanell for his health-sake; which he
kept easy by wearing a Pledgit of fine Tow on it, till at length it healed up
of it self: he is no grown fat.

A Woman aged about thirty four years, 6. Observat. of a Fistula in Ano.
diseased with a Fistula in Ano, having tried unsuccessfully the endeavors of
such Medicaments as those of her own Sex could advise her; at the last sent for
me, it took its original from a Phyma in Ano, which had passed its Matter in a
Sinus down to the Perineum. I laid open the Ulcer to the verge of the Anus, and
cut off a withered Pile that was swelled (from the anguish of the Ulcer) to
prevent its further inflaming; then applied a Pledgit dipped in album. ovi, and
cum pulv. Galeni, and a Stupe of Tow spread with an Astringent over it with
Bandage. The next day I dressed her with a Digestive of basilicon, and a
Pledgit of unguent. nutritum over it; and left her Dressings, and visited here
my self once in three or four days. That Ulcer being cured, to the Fistula I
made a search with a Probe, and passed my Finger up in Ano, and felt the Probe
about three quarters of an inch within, but not penetrating: The Sinus was
small, wherefore I put up a Gentian-tent, with a string fastened to it, and left
them some of the same sort to put up daily to dilate it. The third day after
they sent for me again, they had thrust the tent too far, so that in pulling it
out the string came away, leaving the tent betestine higher then the Sinus,
then drawing my Finger back over the Sinus, I thrust the tent out; then laid
open this Fistula by Incision with a pair of Probe-scissors, passing one shaft
into the Sinus and the other with my Finger in Anum, guiding it up the hight,
and with one snip laid the Fistula open, then applied a Dossill spread with
a-mixture of pulv. Galeni cum albumine ovi, and bound it up with a Stupe spread
with unguent. nutritum, and left her Dressings with directions how to apply
them. I presumed by this way of Incision the Cure would be the sooner effected,
and with fewer visits from me; but the Sinus filled up with loose Flesh, and
the Dossills I left them to cicatrize it with commonly slipped out of the Sinus,
and lay uneasy not unlike a Suppository, putting her upon a Tenesinus, and if
the Injections were any thing abstersive they did the same; so that to hasten
the Cure I was obliged to dress it my self, and dry the loose Flesh by rubbing
the Sinus with the Vitrioll-stone; by which, and the Alum-stone, I at last
cicatrized it.

A Gentleman aged about forty four years, 7. Observat. of a Fistula in Ano.
having long labored with a Fistula in Ano, and a Tumor in Perineo, growing
at last extremely diseased with it, was brought up to London, and sent for me.
The Tumor was in Perineo bigg, and seemed to me callous, it reached from the
Anus to the Scrotum; and by the Matter I saw discharged from the Anus, I
concluded the Tumor was made by its insinuating itself downward, and that
through length of time it was grown callous. The compression it made upon the
Ductus urinarius, caused a difficulty in Urine, upon which account my speedy
help was required. I began the Cure by laying this Sinus open by Incision, from
the Scrotum toward the Anus: in cutting it I found the Sinus small, and the
Matter in it little and thin, rather an Ichor; but the Lips were hard and
thick, and did not much separate one from another: wherefore having applied to
a Dossill spread with unguent. basilicon in the bottom of the Sinus to defend
it, I applied a Caustick-stone on each Lip, from the Scrotum upwards, and some
hours after took it off; and finding it had penetrated the Callus, as I
designed, I bathed it with Decoct. malvae, etc. and dressed it up with
Lenients, after the separation of the Escars I found that part freed of the
Callus. I digested it with basilicon and praecipitat. and with unguent.
diapompholig. healed that Part. Then applied a Caustic upon the remainder
reaching to the verge of the Anus, and freed that also of its Callus, and
disposed it to cicatrize; which while I was I doing, made a search with a
Probe, passing it into the Anus, where I quickly discovered that about half an
inch high the Sinus opened into the Intestine. It had run deep all the way, and
here it lay deeper and more callous. Upon which consideration I passed up a
Speculum any, and during the dilatation, laid it open with a Caustick-stone in
my hand by rubbing it, then washed out the Salts, and cut through the upper part
of the Fistula with a pair of Probe-scissors; that done, I injected some ol.
lini to hasten the fall of the Escars: which being separated, I digested it
with unguent. basilicon and praecipitat. and dried the Ulcer with the
Vitrioll-stone and Pledgits dipped in aq. aluminis, and cicatrized at firm, and
returned him cured in few weeks.

I was fetched to a Gentleman aged about fifty years, 8. Observat. of a Fistula
in Ano.
who had been long diseased with the Haemorrohoides, and several Apostemations
the space of twenty two years; the Matter had passed through the Intestinum
rectum into the Musculi glutei making various fistulous Ulcers, but one in
Perineo, which through length of time was increased to a great bigness, and
reached to the Scrotum. I began with that, by the application of a Caustic
from the Scrotum upward, and divided the Escar; there issued out only a little
foul Gleet, which had flowed into it from within the Intestinum rectum. I
dressed this Escar with Lenients, as in the former Observation has been
showed: and as it separated with the Callus, the Sinus appeared dry and hardened
with thick Lips, lying not unlike a trough: therein appeared many Excrescences,
which put me upon the use of Escaroticks, viz. the Caustick-stone,
Praecipitate, Alum, etc. Also by the use of the Vitrioll-stone I rubbed them
off, and disposed the Ulcer to cicatrize: then I applied a Caustic to the
remaining Callus, which run up from thence to the Anus, the pain whereof
stirred up a Swelling in some withered Piles. To prevent their inflaming, and
to put them out of my way, I snipt them off close by the roots, and after they
had bled awhile, I rubbed them with a Caustick-stone, and dressed them up with
a Stupe of fine Tow, spread with unguent. basilicon: having digested these, and
disposed this part of the Sinus to Cure, and the lower part (which I first
began with) being cured, I made a search into the remaining Sinus's, which lay
on each side the Anus; those I opened by Incision and Caustic, digested and
cured them. Then I made a search into the great Fistula, which had penetrated
the Rectum about three quarters of an inch within, and passed a Ligature
through it, and tied it straight. The while it was dividing, I fomented the
Anus with red Wine daily, and cast up Lenient injections, to ease the pain and
cleanse it: and after I found the Ligature had made its way near out I loosened
it, and with a Caustick-stone rubbed the remaining Callus off, for that by
Incision it would have been long digesting, and the Sinus would have lain deep,
and the Lips troublesome after the Cure. The Callus divided and the Ligature
come away, the Escar separated by Lenients and the Ulcer cicatrized: in very
few days the bottom of the Sinus having been hardened by the Callus, remained as
a small guttur in spite of my endeavors to the contrary; but it proved no
great inconvenience to the Patient, he being perfectly well. And from that time
following his Employment daily abroad.

A Gentleman of about forty years of age, 9. Observat. of a Fistula in Ano.
a strong healthful Person, of a Plethorique body, after a hard riding in
hunting, was seized with a pain in the Intestinum rectum; and a few days after
with a Swelling and Inflammation about the Anus, which terminated in an
Abscess, and was opened on the left side near the Perineum. After two years the
Abscess remaining uncured, the Patient came to London, and put himself into the
hands of Sir Fr. Prujean, who recommended him to me: Sir Charles Scarborough,
since Physician to his Majesty, and to his Royal Highness the Duke of York, as
also Doctor Warner were some time consulted. There were two Sinuous Ulcers, one
on the left, and the other on the right side of the Perineum; they had both
communication with one another near the Anus, and passed up between the Anus
and Bladder as we supposed, for we could not make a search far up, till these
were laid open: to which purpose I hastened the dilatation of them by
Gentian-roots, etc. and afterward with Caustic and Scissors laid them both
open; then by Digestion disposed them to cure. That effected we met again, and
I made a search with a Probe up the main Sinus, and discovered it running
between the neck of the Bladder and Intestinum rectum above an inch high, but
could not feel the Probe with my Finger in Ano: it was hoped the Sinus reached
no further, but pulling out the Probe and bending it, I passed it up again by
the rub I met with before, and discovered the Fistula at least half an inch
higher; and by pressing the end of the Probe toward the side of the Intestine,
I did with my Finger there feel as I thought the end of the Probe, but at a
great distance off, by which I well perceived it would be a difficult work to
penetrate it, and bring the Needle out with my Finger, the Sinus being so high
as I could scarce reach the end of the Probe with my Fingers end. It lay off
such a distance from the Intestine, as I could not pass a small Needle without
a Cannula, and a bigger which was proper for the penetration of the Gut, would
not ply enough to be returned out with my Finger by the Anus; and to lay a
Sinus open of that length and thickness by a pair of Probe-scissors, was very
improbable; wherefore I resolved to dilate it, and try how I could digest off
the Callus. To which purpose I dressed it daily with a Tent made of a
Gentian-root, and afterward endeavored to consume the Callus by Tents made
with Lint, and the white of an Egg crusted with a mixture of Merc. praecipitat.
and alumen ust. over which I applied a Pledgit of unguent. basilicon, and a
Stupe of fine Tow spread with a mixture of unguent. nutritum and popul. over
that: from that time I fomented the pained part daily with an Emollient
Decoction, and repeated the Lenient applications, but removed not the Tent till
it separated with its sloughs. Having thus wasted the Callus, I left off the
use of those Tents and dressed it with others armed with Digestives, and
shortened these daily: during this work the Patient drank a vulnerary Decoction,
and took such Balsamicks as the Physicians judged necessary. After I saw the
Sinus well digested and but little Matter, I left off the use of the Tent (lest
by keeping it longer open it should skin again within) and in few days
cicatrized it, but some while after it brake out again; and upon search I found
the Sinus open as at first. I attempted the wasting the Callus again; but
seeing no good come of it, I tried by an Injection of aq. lap. Medicament. but
that only shrivelled up the Sinus and might have been of good use to palliate:
but my work being to cure, I dilated the Fistula with rad. gentianae in order
to the laying it open; and then calling in a Surgeon well experienced in
this Art, who met the Physicians and my self, he made a search and concluded
the way by Ligature proper. The Patient being prepared for the work, laid
himself over a Chair: but when I came to pass up the Cannula, the Patient grew
so unquiet as my brother Surgeon desired me to forbear, he supposing by the
Patients complaint that it was cancerous; and advised me to proceed in the cure
by Injections, which I having no faith in, desired the Patient that my brother
Surgeon might bring his Injection, and dress the Fistula for some time:
which accordingly he did some days; but seeing it unsuccessfull, he then
advised the Patient to retire into the Country, and content himself with a
palliative Cure. But the Patient being sensible enough that the Cure was
feasible, if he could once resolve upon it; wherefore he dismissed the
Surgeon, and sometime after took new resolutions and sent for another, who
was no less eminent in this Cure then the other; he came and made a search, and
approved of the dividing the Fistula by Ligature, and commended the way as both
safe and easy: a day was prefixed, and the while I dilated again the Sinus with
Gentian-roots. The day the operation was to be performed, the Patient dined
abroad, and when we met and placed him in the light to proceed in our work, the
Gentian-tent was fallen out, and the Sinus was closing; but we being resolved
not to lose that opportunity, I dipped the Cannula in Oil, and passed it up about
an inch, but then meeting with the old rub, the Patient began to be
troublesome, and would have persuaded us to desist. The Surgeon supposing I
was at the height, advised me to pass the Needle; but I knowing the Sinus
reached further, and the inconvenience which might happen in the Cure by doing
so, minded him not, but pushing the Cannula upward as I had designed, till I
felt the end of it with my Finger, which was the while in Ano: that done I put
the Cannula into my brother Surgeons hand to hold there, while I passed the
Needle into it, and through the Intestine to my Finger within, with which I
bended the point of the Needle, and drew it out of the Anus with the Ligature
hanging at it. I then cut off the Needle with part of the Ligature, and having
applied a fold of Plaster on the place, I tied the Ligature straight, and
fastened it with a bow-knot, and applied a Stupe of fine Tow, spread with a
mixture of unguent. popul. and nutritum over it. The Patient being dressed threw
himself upon his Bed, my brother Surgeon told him the work was well done,
and that he ought to account that day, as the day of his Birth, there being no
hopes of Cure any other way; so took his leave. The Patient rested very ill
that night, and was the next day feverish, and continued restless by reason of
the pain, notwithstanding all my endeavors by Lenients. The third day after I
was sent for in great haste, he being dying as they said; I found him shrewdly
alarmed, he had newly voided three or four spoonfuls of Matter (as they called
it) in his Urin; upon which it was concluded by them that I had wounded his
Bladder in passing the Needle, and that I had passed it farther then my brother
Surgeon advised. I was somewhat surprised at their Language, and replied,
there was a necessity of laying open the Fistula the whole length: looking in
the Urinal I saw such a quantity of thick Mattery substance, but could not
imagine how I should hurt the Bladder in passing the Needle; but there was no
answering them. I carried the Urinall to Sir Fr. Pruj. he caused some of it to
be heated in a spoon over a Candle, where it hardened, by which we were assured
it was not Matter; he concluded it made in the Bladder, by the heat and
disturbance it had received from the Neighboring parts. I returned to my
Patient with the Physicians answer, which somewhat quieted them; but that
expression of my brother Surgeon had done me some prejudice, if the Patient
had not recovered. Thus it usually happens amongst us in Operations, where they
prove unsuccessfull. From that time the Ligature made its way more easily, I
taking more time in the cutting through the Callus, by which compliance it was
above sixteen days cutting its way out; all which time Injections were cast up
after his going to Stooll, and the Part affected was treated with Fomentations
and Lenients, and at length the Ligature made its own way out: during which the
Sinus above cured, so as I had nothing to do but to cicatrize the outmost part,
which I did with Lotions and Pledgits dipped in aq. calcis, etc. in a few days
after; and the Patient returned joyfully to his sports in the Country, and
relapsed no more.

I was sent for to a Gentleman of about thirty six years old, 10. Observat. of
a putrid and fistulous Ulcer in Ano.
much emaciated and of a very ill Habit of Body; he was diseased with a
painful Tumor on the left side of the Anus, reaching from the Os coccix to
the Perineum, of a dark red color hard in the circumference, but along the
verge of the Anus, it felt soft; it seemed to arise from under the Anus, and to
be an ill-conditioned Tumor: I applied a Caustic upon the soft part according
to the length of it near the Anus, and some hours after divided the Escar, and
gave vent to a a faetid brown Matter. I dressed the Escar with unguent.
basilicon cum oleo terebinth. and applied a Cataplasm over it of far. fabar.
pulv. sem. faenug. lini, flor. chamomel. sambuci, ros. rub. decocted in oxymel;
as the Escar separated the Ulcer showed it self putrid. I fomented it with a
lixivium wherein good store of wormwood had been boiled, and dressed the Ulcer
with mundif. Paracels. cum praecipitat. and alum. and the Escar with Lenients,
etc. as before.

This Patient had labored some weeks of a Diarrhaea, which after the Escar was
separated flowed into the Ulcer, and much disturbed our Cure; therefore I
caused an Injection to be made of a Decoct. absinth. hyperici, scord. centaur,
etc. to which I added spir. vini, mell. ros. and unguent. Aegyptiaci; and that
the Excrements or sordes might not be retained, and render the Ulcer more
sinuous, I cut it open the whole length above and below, and filled it up with
Merc. praecipitat. with the mundificative upon Dossills, and with Plaster and
Bandage retained them on. Then prescribed him a Decoct. sarsap. etc. also an
Electuary of cons. ros. rub. diascord. and rheitorrefact. etc. which he took
once in four hours, and thereby stopped his looseness. The Ulcer not deterging
with the former applications, I dressed it with pulv. Jo. Arden. and defended
the Lips with unguent. basilicon, and an Emplastr. e bolo over all. Thus in two
or three dressings I consumed the sordes, then dressed it with mundif.
Paracels. and praecipitate; and applied Stupes of Tow over it pressed out of red
Wine, wherein had been infused flor. ros. rub. balaust. etc. and afterward
prescribed him the taking of calomel. j. every other night. Thus the Ulcer
deterged, I incarned it with pulv. aloes haepat. myrrhae, sarcocol. rad.
aristoloch. rot. ireos florent. lap. calamin. made up into the form of an
Unguent with mel ros. While this was incarning, and in some parts cicatrized, a
Sinus appeared running under the verge of the Anus about half an inch; I
applied a Tent armed with the mundif. Paracels. and after it was deterged, left
out the Tent and it cured. But then a small Sinus discovered it self on the
otherside of the Anus; upon sight thereof, lest more mischief should fall upon
those weak parts, (whilst I attended the cure of that Sinuous Ulcer under the
Anus) I dilated it, and snipt it open with a pair of Probe-scissors into that
great Sinus, and from that time the Ulcer cured, and I thought my work had been
done: but within a few days after another Sinus appeared near the verge of the
Anus, on that side where the former was; it much discouraged the Patient, but
it lying so convenient for discharge of the peccant Matter, I continued it to
further consideration, it proceeding from the mere weakness of the part. I
advised the keeping it clean, and to wear a dry Pledgit of Tow over it: It was
kept with much ease, and the Patient enjoyed his health very well many years,
and at length it cured of it self.

A Person of Honor having some months labored (as was supposed) under the
Piles, being extremely wasted with the pain and accidents which attended it,
11. Observat. of an Ulcer in intestino recto with stricture of the Anus.
sent for me to consult with his Surgeon; I went, and there I also met Dr.
Tho. Cox his Physician. The Patient discharged a purulent Matter per Anum as he
lay in his bed, and in each Stooll a great quantity came away with his
Excrements; on the left side of the Anus lay an Abscess perfectly suppurated,
to which we presently applied a Caustic, and gave vent to a digested Matter. I
then made a search with a Probe, and the while passing my Finger in Ano, felt
the Probe in the Intestinum rectum about an inch deep; I pulled it out and
endeavored by my Finger in Ano to find what Sinus or cavities there were, and
felt one above the Sphincter in that part of the Gut lying next the Bladder: I
supposed the Abscess was there, and that the Matter from thence had insinuated
it self amongst the Muscles, and made that Tumor outwardly, which we had
opened by Caustic. What it was that gave original to that Ulcer, was not easy
for me to determine, whether it was a Phyma, or a translation of Matter from
some other part: However it was, the Cure was difficult and depended upon a
rectifying the Habit of body, it being by what I then felt out of our reach to
lay more open; nor did I think it safe to be overhasty in injecting Liquors
there, I always suspecting the seminall Vessels concerned in those Abscesses,
in which cases Injections may dilate the Ulcer, and hasten its penetration into
the Pelvis; therefore we dressed it up with Lenients to hasten separation of
the Escar: after the Escar separated, we made a search with a bended Probe, and
turning it upward, found a cavity amongst the Muscles on that side; by which it
seemed to us, that the laying that Sinus open into the former would be of no
great advantage, we thereby could only divide the upper part of the Abscess,
and so make the first Orifice wider: yet it seeming somewhat advantageous to
the discharge of Matter, we passed a Ligature through, and in few days divided
that Sinus, and soon after cured it again; for the discharge of Matter
continued very great per Anum. The Patient continuing weak and more indisposed,
Sir Alex. Fraser was consulted, who seeing such a discharge of Matter per Anum,
concluded that an opening ought there to be made in some external part; we had
several times endeavored to find some place amongst the external Muscles of
the Anus and Glutei: and now again we raised the Patient upon his Knees in Bed
to search, but we could not by Fluctuation or otherwise discover ought, whereby
we might be encouraged to apply a Caustic; whilst he was in this posture, the
Matter poured forth, as also when he lay down in his Bed it came involuntarily
out. We having in a former search with a bended Probe, discovered a cavity
amongst these Muscles beneath the former Abscess, it was resolved that an
opening should be made there; but that cavity lay at such a distance within,
that it was not easy to reach it by Caustic: wherefore I having at my house an
Instrument proper to open Sinuous Ulcers so lodged, I sent for an
Instrument-maker, who upon sight of that and the cavity we designed to pierce,
fitted us with one somewhat like a crooked Forceps; one leg thereof we passed
into the Anus, which being crooked turned up into the cavity, and being there,
the other shaft having a sharp blade in the form of a great Lancet fixed in it,
would at our pleasure cut in upon the other, which was the Director: thus we
cut into the Buttock from without inward, and that we might not lose the
opening we had made, we presently passed a Fistula-needle through it with a
Ligature which we brought out per Anum; and having tied the ends together, we
fastened it on one side with a snip of Plaster, and dressed up the wound with a
proportionable Tent armed with a Digestive. From that time we dilated it daily
toward the Buttock, to try whether the Matter would that way discharge. The
Physicians prescribed vulnerary Drinks, Balsamicks; Cordial Bolus's and Juleps
were also prescribed, Lenients to appease the Tenesmus, and somewhat of
Injections we considered of to cast up in some little quantity to heal the
Abscess which lay above the Sphincter. After we had some-while continued that
opening last made, and observed it painful, and not to empty the Matter, nor
divert it from flowing its wonted way, we cut it down to the Anus and cured it.
From that time we applied our endeavors to cure the Ulcer within, whence (it
was most certain) all the abundance of Matter issued. The method used was by
detergent Injections, such as have been proposed in the Chapter of Sinuous
Ulcers; but without acrimony to avoid a Tenesmus, and in small quantity at a
time lest it should be retained and render the Ulcer more Sinuous. After we had
thus spent some time successfully, and by the Physicians help removed the
severer accidents; it was resolved (the weather growing being warmer) that the
Patient should remove to Kensington, and take the benefit of the fresh air, and
observe a Milk-Diet, and prosecute his Cure there. Whilst the Patient was weak
and kept his Bed, and was vexed with Diarrhaea's, etc. we could not observe any
want he had of the retentive faculty; but being in the Country somewhat
recovered, and walking daily abroad, he complained that he could not retain his
Excrements, they pressing almost continually forth. We went on our method in
curing the Ulcer, and accordingly it contracted daily narrower, and the
discharge of Matter grew less; but as the Ulcer cicatrized, he found his
Excrements did not come away, but with great straining, and those that came
away, were small like Earthworms: he also complaining of frequent pain in his
Hips and Os sacrum, sent for his Surgeon and my self; we went and prevailed
with him, to let us put up our Fingers dipped in a little Oil, upon search we
found a stop about an inch or more within the Rectum, the Gut pursed up so
close, that I could not get in my Forefinger to the first joint. This was by
reason of the cicatrix; we caused presently a Decoction to be made of rad.
lilior. albor. altheae, sem. lini and hordei, to which was added some ol. ex
ped. bovinis, and injected some of it: we directed the repeating of it often in
a day, and to permit a Syringe full to be cast in at his going to sleep at
night; we afterward dilated it with Tents of Gentian-roots, and between while
others of Deer-suet, some whereof were fitted with strings. A consultation was
also resolved on for the Physicians to meet us at, which time we came provided
with a spec. Any, etc. in order to the dilating of the stricture: but the
Patient would not admit it, he being eased by the use of the Emollient
Decoction; but replied, if it again contracted, he would come to Town and be
governed by us. Some months after the Winter approaching, he returned to Town;
his Excrements were suppressed, and his Belly swelling, his Urin also
high-colored and near suppressed: his Physicians prescribed him a Clyster that
Evening, and a Purging-draught of Decoct. cassiae, tamarind. etc. he omitted
the taking of the Clyster, but took the Purge the next morning, which bearing
down the Excrements, so over-distended the Colon, that the way between that and
the Strictura being choked up by them, the Patient fell into a cold Sweat, and
frequent fainting; but by laying him in his Bed, and Cordialls, he was somewhat
relieved, and at last the Physic worked through him, and he grew better; and
from that time he was more governable, and admitted of Clisters before Purging,
both which he often repeated. We together prosecuted the Cure by internal
Medicaments, such as by their virtue restored the Patient to a better Habit of
body: our work was the dividing the contracted Callus, which made the
Strictura, which we did by an Instrument made for that purpose, with which
without hurting the Intestine we cut through in several places, making the
opening so large that the Excrements came away big; and by the injecting of ol.
lumbricorum, cured the wounds in few days after, and left him at liberty, he
not only expelling them well, but also retaining them: Yet within this
twelvemonth twice, we have enlarged it, and by the Instrument we designed, it
may at any time be helped without hazard of wounding the sound parts near it;
but since the last Incision of it, February 1673. it has continued open, and
upon a late search with my Finger I could feel nothing of it.

A young Fellow of about thirty six years old, 12. Observat. of a Sinuous Ulcer
near the Anus.
a Servant to a Person of Honor in the Country, was sent to Town; he had been
long diseased with a supposed Fistula in Ano, it was on the right side near the
Podex, the Ulcer was sordid and with round callous Lips. I made a search and
found it run under the verge of the Anus, but not penetrating it. He had been
long diseased of the Kings-Evill, there being many Scrophulae on both sides of
his Neck. I rubbed the sordes and putrid flesh with the Vitriol-stone, and then
filled it with Merc. praecipitat. with Pledgits of Lint close over it. Then
applied some of my caustic Unguent upon a Pledgit round over the callous Lips,
and with an Emplastr. e bolo, and Bandage bound it up. The next day I took off
the Caustic and found it had worked as I designed: I dressed it with Lenients
to hasten separation of the Escar. This poor man had heretofore been subject to
the Haemorrhoids; from which disease some withered Piles remained hanging upon
the verge of the Anus, which upon the application of the forementioned
Escaroticks and Causticks, began to heat and swell: I presently cut them off
with a pair of Scissors, and after they had bled awhile, dressed them with
pulv. Galeni, and afterward cicatrized them by the use of the Vitriol-stone
and common Epuloticks. During which I cleansed the Ulcer of its sordes, and
endeavored to lay a basis with mundif. Paracels. etc. for incarnating the
Ulcer; but while I was so doing, I observed a great quantity of corrupt Matter
flowing again down upon the Ulcer: upon search I found a Sinus run toward the
Os sacrum a great length, and so deep as gave me small hopes of laying it open.
The next Dressing I was provided with vulnerary Injections, such as have been
set down in Sinuous Ulcers, and dressed him up with Detersives, and prescribed
him such Physic as might have regard to his Scrophulous Habit of body. While I
was thus treating him, he began to be troubled with a cough, which he had been
frequently subject to in the Country, upon which account Pectoralls were
prescribed, and he was thereby relieved. The cure of the Ulcer not succeeding,
I applied a Caustic upon the upper part of the Sinus between the Os sacrum and
the coccix, and passed in my Director at the same time, and cut through the
Escar into it, designing by this opening to intercept the Humor flowing
downward to the Ulcer, but the while he was taken again with a shortness of
breath: I let him Blood, and repeated the use of Lohocks and Cordialls, with
Spirit of Saffron, etc. but he took his Bed and died the third day after. I
having leave to open him, desired Doctor Walter Needham his assistance in
finding out the Cause of his death; we found all the Glandules within very
Scrophulous, those that lay upon the Iliack-Vessells ulcerated, from whence
flowed a great quantity of Matter down into the Pelvis, thence insinuating it
self amongst the Muscles, and so to the place where I had applied my Caustic,
and from thence to the Ulcer near the Anus: his Lungs were also stuffed with
Strumae, and the Viscera all very bad.

This Observation being indeed strumous, should have been placed in that
Treatise; yet notwithstanding I thought it fit to insert it here, that the
young Surgeons, when they meet with such sordid Ulcers, with extraordinary
discharge of Matter, may learn to suspect some extraordinary cause within.

A Lady of about sixty eight years of age, a lean withered Body subject many
years to the Haemorrhoids, 13. Observat. of an ill-conditioned Ulcer in Ano.
which in her declining years grew more painful, and at last afflicted her
night and day, and being without hopes of relief from the several applications
prescribed her, was persuaded to admit of a Surgeon: She sent for me, I
heard her roaring before I came into her Chamber. On the lower part of the
verge of the Anus, next the Perineum, was a Swelling as big as a Phesants egg,
it seemed to be the inflation of the rugous coat, but was hard and of a livid
color; but that which she most complained of was within, which I could not
come to see nor yet feel: by pressing this downward, I saw a foul Matter, and
as I thought a large Ulcer; I caused a Syringe to be fetched, and some mel ros.
which I mixed with some Chicken-broth and cast it up, and brought away some
Excrements, and foul mucus: I caused a Fomentation to be made of fol. verbasci,
solani, plantag. an. M. j. sem. lini j. sem. cydon. ss. sem. psillii ij. flor.
nymph. and ros. rub. an. P. j. boiled in Wine and Water, by which it was often
stuped in a day; also a mucilage with some of the cold Seeds, with sem.
papaver. alb. hyosciam. psillii, were thrown up to quiet the pain within.
Emollient Clysters were also sometimes injected with a Syringe, having a short
thick taper-Pipe; lenient Cerots were outwardly applied, made of some of those
abovesaid mucilages cum sevo cervin. vitulin. vitell. ovor. croco and opio, cum
ol. lumbric. and cera alb. By these Medicaments I somewhat relieved the
Patient, and got so much credit with her, as I hoped to have liberty to take
off this Tumor by one way or other. Some while after I did apply a Caustic,
and removed the upper part of it, as I designed: there came nothing out of it,
but it was so levelled, that I could with the help of a Spatula look into the
Anus, where at some distance I saw little hard Excrescences like Thymi standing
stiff up; these were they which gave her so continual pain, especially in the
easing of nature. There was also a fordid Ulcer between them and the external
Tubercle, (to which I had applied the Caustic:) it was not easy for to me
extirpate the Thymi till I had quite removed this Tumor without; whereupon I
presently rubbed it with a Caustick-stone, and laid it flat, and washed it with
the Emollient Decoction; then scarified the Escar, and filled it with Merc.
praecipitat. and dressed it up with Lenients; afterward I worked it down, and
smoothed it with the Vitrioll-stone, and cicatrized it with Epuloticks, the
Alum-stone, etc. This removed I began with those Thymi, which if I might have
had my own way, should have been treated by the actual Cautery; but I did not
mention it, nor did I acquaint them with what I intended to do, but placed her
toward the light, and passed a Scoup-like Instrument up into the Anus, then
having a Caustick-stone fixed in a convenient Instrument, I pressed upon the
head of thencerest Thymus, and as the Salts melted, dried them up with an
Armed-Probe, and continued the work till I had quite extirpated it; then cast
up some of an Emollient Decoction with a little ol. Hyperic. by which the pain
was assuaged; after the Escars cast off, I touched them with sp. vitriol. and
afterward with the Vitrioll-stone and cicatrized it, then dressed the sordid
Ulcer with Detergents stronger or weaker as it would bear; by which I cleansed
it well, and disposed it to Cure by injecting aq. calcis, etc. During which I
attempted the extirpation of the other Thymi with Caustick-stones, and thought
I had eradicated them; but some time after they rose again, and in truth did so
often, and proved vexatious to the Patient, and troublesome to me: Yet at last
after a years attendance they wore off, and the pain ceased. She lived many
years afterward as happily as any person of her age.

A Freeholder about fifty four years old, much emaciated, 9. Observat. of a
Cancer in Ano.
having labored many years under the Haemorrhoids, and Apostemations within
the Anus; at last being tormented excessively with pain, and not able to ease
nature, he came to London in a Litter. He sent for me supposing that he had a
Fistula in Ano; I looked and saw the verge of the Anus callous, then searching
with my Finger I felt a large cancerate Ulcer within the Rectum, lying under
the Os coccix, and possessing the parts round with hard Lips; also a large
Excrescence, growing upon the lower part of the said Intestine about an inch
and a half within, so that there was but a small passage for discharge of
Excrements.

This was an inveterate Cancer, and not likely to yield any thing to
Palliatives: I would gladly have been rid of him, but he would be my Patient,
protesting that he could not live unless way were made for the more easy
disburthening of nature; to which purpose he implored my speedy help. I
perceiving his lamentable condition, and his resolution to have somewhat
attempted, desired him to consult some eminent Physicians and Surgeons; he
assented to it, and made choice of Doctor Tho. Cox, and Mr. Hollyer
Surgeon. We met at his Chamber the next day and made a search, and concluded
it an inveterate Cancer incapable of Cure: but the Patient declared, he came to
Town with resolution to be cured or dye, and would have it attempted. We at his
importunity complied, and resolved upon the use of the actual Cautery, as
being the only way whereby we could hope to extirpate these Excrescences and
callous Lips, he was well pleased with our proposalls, and desired we would
meet again with what expedition might be. The second day after we met, and came
provided with an actual Cautery of the fashion of a bolt, with a Cannula
having a hole cut in it to receive that great Excrescence near the Sphincter: a
mucilaginous Decoction was also prepared ex summitat. malvae, viol. sem. cydon.
psillii, etc. in aq. hordei. The Cautery being ready, and a basin of Water with
Sponges to cooll it; the Patient rose out of his Bed, and placed himself
toward the light, leaning upon the side of his Bed without any body to hold
him. I anointed the Cannula with unguent. refrigerans Galeni, and passed it up,
placing the opening in the Cannula upon the Excrescence; then passed in an
actual Cautery glowing hot, and repeated the use of it so often, till the
Physician and Mr. Hollyer judged the Excrescence and callous Lips consumed; Mr.
Hollyer putting his Finger in after the passing each Cautery, the Cannula being
the while taken out often and cooled in Water. The work done, Injections were
cast in, and the burnt parts dressed with Lenients; the Patient returned
briskly to his Bed, and from that time discharged his Excrements freely, but
made little Urine, and that high-colored: by the use of Emulsions, and the
frequent casting in Emollient Clysters and Injections, his Urin voided more
easily, and in more quantity. After the separation of the Escars, we dressed
the Ulceration with unguent, tutiae, and injected troch. alb. rhaz. dissolved
with a Mucilage of the greater Cold Seeds, sem. plantag. papaver. albi,
psillii, in aq. spermat. ranar. and germ. querci. These parts disposing to
cicatrize, the Patient was seized with a Pleurisy, and not submitting to be
let Blood as was prescribed, his pain increased so very much that he could
scarce breath; being afterward let Blood about eight ounces, he was relieved:
but then a Diarrhaea followed, and it being Mid-winter, and the Patient not
allowing himself Fire, nor observing good Diet, it terminated in a Dysenterie,
and he languished and dyed.

A TREATISE OF THE KING's-EVILL.

OF THE KINGS-EVILL.
The Fourth Book.
CHAP. I. Of the Cure of the EVIL by the KING's Touch.
WHAT great difficulty we meet with in the Cure of the KING's-Evill, the daily
experience both of Physicians and Surgeons does show. I thought it therefore
worth my while to spend a whole Treatise upon the Subject, and very
particularly to go through the description of it, informing thereby the young
Surgeon whatever is requisite to the Cure, at least as far as it comes
within the compass of our Art. But when upon trial he shall find the
contumaciousness of the Disease, which frequently deludeth his best care and
industry, he will find reason of acknowledging the goodness of God; who has
dealt so bountifully with this Nation, in giving the Kings of it, at least from
Edward the Confessor downwards, (if not for a longer time) an extraordinary
power in the miraculous Cure thereof. This our Chronicles have all along
testified, and the personal experience of many thousands now living can
witness for his Majesty that now reigns, and his Royal Father and
Grandfather. His Majesty that now is having exercised that faculty with
wonderful success, not only here, but beyond the Seas in Flanders, Holland
and France itself. The King of this last pretends to a Gift of the same king,
and has often the good hap to be alone mentioned in Chirurgicall Books, as the
sole possessor of it, when the French themselves are the Authors: yet even they
when they are a little free, will not stick to own the Kings of England as
partakers with him in that faculty; witness the Learned Tagaultius, who in his
Institutions takes notice of King Edward's faculty of doing the same Cure, and
the continuance of it in his Successors. Italy as well as France has made the
like acknowledgments in the Book of Polydore Virgill, who reciting the Gift
given to Saint Edward the Confessor, does subjoyn these words: Quod quidem
Immortale munus quasi haereditario jure ad posteriores Reges manavit: nam Reges
Angliae etiam nunc tactu, ac quibusdam hymnis, non sine ceremoniis, prius
recitatis, strumosos sanant. Which Immortal gift has been derived as it were
by an hereditary right to the latter Kings; for the Kings of England even now
also do Cure the Struma by Touch, etc.

Indeed if Historians of our Nation be diligently compared with the French, we
shall find that the French Kings had this Gift later then ours. Dupleix a most
diligent Writer of that History, deriving it no further then Phillip the first,
and Lewis the gross; saying, that before their times no man had that power:
whereas we on the contrary meet with the general acknowledgments of all our
Writers of the same miraculous Power in Saint Edward's time, which were enough
for this Controversy: and not only so, but with strong surmises, that this
Miracle was ancienter; it being notorious in the days of Malmsburiensis, who
lived not long after his Reign, that it was then disputed, whether the Cure of
the Evil were a peculiar reward of the Kings Holiness, or rather a Hereditary
faculty attending the English Crown. Which Gift, that it was not taken away
upon our departure from the Church of Rome, we have not only our daily
experience to testify, but also the confession of Doctor Harpsfield, a great
Divine of the Romish persuasion; who, after he has in the Ecclesiastical
History of England described at large the Miracle wrought by the Confessor,
does add, Quam strumosos sanandi admirabilem dotem in posteros suos Anglorum
Reges, ad nostra usque tempora tranfudisse and perpetuasse, merito creditur.
Which admirable faculty of Curing the Struma, he is justly believed to have
transmitted to his Posterity, the Kings of England, and to have continued it
amongst them to those times in which he wrote. And when Bishop Tooker would
make use of this Argument to prove the Truth of our Church, Smitheus does not
thereupon go about to deny the Matter of fact; (nay indeed both he and Cope
acknowledge it) but he rather chooses first to retort upon him the Protestant
argument against Miracles which they will not allow to be the necessary mark of
a true Church, because they may also be performed by Infidels. But withal he
himself, who is not willing to let go so specious an Argument from his own
Church, finds another Solution of the difficulty, attributing it to the great
Goodness of God, and the great Grace of Saint Edward, Quod nec in indigna
haerede defecerit, that the Gift did not fail in an unworthy Successor: Such
as he calls Queen Elizabeth, and adds, that She did perform that Cure, non
virtute propria, sed virtute signi crucis; not by her own virtue, but by virtue
of the Sign of the Cross, which she made at the time of Healing; as if the Sign
of the Cross, by whomsoever made, were sufficient to work a Miracle. What would
he now say were he living, and had seen it done by three Generations of Kings
without the Sign of the Cross? But it is not my business to enter into
Divinity-controversies: all that I pretend to, is first, the attestation of the
Miracles; and secondly, a direction for such as have not opportunity of
receiving the benefit of that stupendous Power. The former of these, one would
think, should need no other proof then the great concourse of Strumous persons
to White Hall, and the success that they find in it. I my self have been a
frequent Eyewitness of many hundreds of Cures performed by his Majesty's Touch
alone, without any assistance of Surgery; and those, many of them, such as
had tired out the endeavors of able Surgeons before they came thither. It
were endless to recite what I my self have seen, and what I have received
acknowledgments of by Letter, not only from the several parts of this Nation,
but also from Ireland, Scotland, Jersey and Garnsey. It is needless also to
remember what Miracles of this nature were performed by the very Blood of his
late Majesty of Blessed memory, after whose decollation by the inhumane
Barbarity of the Regicides, the relics of that were gathered on Chips, and in
Hankerchieffs, by the pious Devotes, who could not but think so great a
suffering in so honorable and pious a Cause, would be attended by an
extraordinary assistance of God, and some more then ordinary Miracle: nor did
their Faith deceive them in this point, there being so many hundred that found
the benefit of it. If his dead Blood were accompanied with so much of virtue,
what shall we say of his living Image, the Inheritour of his Cause and Kingdom?
whom though it has pleased God to deliver out of those dangers that
overwhelmed his Royal father; yet it was with so long an exercise of
afflictions, that though (God be thanked) he be not now like to increase the
catalogue of Martyrs, yet he may well be added to the number of Confessors.
This we are sure, the Miracle is not ceased.

But since matter of Fact itself is, in such difficult cases as these, liable
to exception; I shall take notice of the Evasions, that obstinate and
incredulous Men have used to avoid so great a notoriety of Experience. For
since it cannot be denied that many go away cured, some will impute it only to
the Journey they take, and the change of Air; others to the effects of
Imagination; and others to the wearing of Gold.

The first of these is easily confuted by the hundreds of instances that are to
be given of Inhabitants of this City, who certainly could meet with little
change of Air, or indeed of exercise, in a Journey to White Hall. The second is
as readily taken off by the Examples of Infants, who have been frequently
healed, though they have not been old enough to imagine any thing of the
Majesty, or other secret rays of Divinity, that do attend Kings, or do any
other act that way to contribute to the Cure. The third has more of color in
it, because many that have been touched, have upon loss of their God felt
returns of their Malady, which upon recovery of that have vanished. But in this
case also we have many Evidences of the contrary.

For his Majesty's Royal father in his great extremity of Poverty had not Gold
to bestow, but instead of it gave Silver, and sometimes nothing, yet in all
those cases did cure; and those that were cured by his Blood wore no Gold.

Now whereas upon the loss of the Gold some have found damage; I would know,
whether any of them were relieved by the wearing any other Gold then what the
King gave them. This is certain, that many that lost their Gold continued
sound; and whereas others did not, it may rather be imputed to secret
Providence, which would give the Persons concerned that obligation of being
mindful of their Benefactor.

But since the infidelity of many in this fantastical Age, and the want of
opportunity of others, does deprive them of this easy and short remedy; and,
since it is not necessary that a Disease, which is cured by Miracle, should be
remediable by no rules of Art; I think it will not be amiss, if I do here give
an account of what Nature and Art have supplied toward the relief of Mankind,
in one of the most obstinate Diseases that I know: in the doing of which,
though I think I shall say as much as those have said that have preceded me in
this Employment, (it may be something more;) yet I must needs profess that what
I write, will do little more then show the weakness of our ability, when
compared with his Majesty's, who cures more in any one year, then all the
Surgeons of London have done in an age. However that this Attempt may not
seem to want precedent, give me leave to tell you, that it is no more then the
French Kings Surgeons have done before me, or then old Mr. Clow's did in
Queen Elizabeth's days, and all other general Writers in Surgery have done
more or less. Withal, as feeble as our Art is, this Treatise willshew you that
it is not altogether ineffectuall; and though the difficulty of Cure will
sufficiently appear, yet the possibility will also be made out in many
remarkable instances.

CHAP. II. Of the Definition of the Disease, and it is Causes.
THE Latins call this Disease Struma and Scrophula, we the Kings-Evill. Galen
defines it thus, Struma caro estsicca quae aegre solvitur: Paulus thus, Strumae
sunt Glandulae induratae: Aetius, Strumae sunt carnes subcandidae facile
augescentes, in membrana contentae, and in summa glandula induratae, quae in
collo and sub inguinibus oriuntur. Strumae are a hard Glandulous flesh,
somewhat white, contained in cystis, etc. But none of these Definitions do seem
to me sufficiently to express the Disease which we in England call the
Kings-Evill. For I appeal to the practitioners of this Nation, Physicians and
Surgeons, desiring them to say, whether there be not many Tumors and Ulcers
commonly judged to be the Evil, which are contained in no cystis at all;
neither do they concrete into a Glandule. I instance in the thick upper Lips
chopped, diverse Tumors by congestion in the musculous parts of the Body, other
in the Bones, etc. so that either we must exclude all these from the King's
Touch, or alter our Definition: yet I do confess withal that the specific
Difference, whereby this Tumor is distinguished from diverse others, is so hard
to find out, that it will be difficult to put a new Definition in the room of
those which I now reject. I shall endeavor to fix upon a peculiar Acidity in
the serum sanguinis for my specific Difference; and shall describe the
Kings-Evill to be, The Author's Description.
a Tumor arising from a peculiar Acidity of the serum of the Blood, which
whenever it lights upon Glandule, Muscle or Membrane, it coagulates and
hardens; when it mixeth with Marrow always dissolves it, and rotteth the Bone.

If this acid Humor be simple, the Disease is a simple Struma; if joined with
a malignity, or any other Humor, it makes a mixed Tumor, as Struma maligna,
Phlegmonodes, Schirrhodes, Oedematodes, etc.

Now by a Coagulation I mean something distinct from Concretion, which is
incident to all other Humors and Tumors, and to the serum itself upon many
other causes. The whole Blood being fibrous may admit of many concretions and
thicknings; but they differ from this Coagulation as much as the boiling of
Milk up to a thickness, or their thickning it with Flower, etc. differs from
making a curd with Rennet. I shall the rather assume this instance of Milk
because of the near kindred between it and Blood, and also for the near
resemblance that many Strumous Tumors have with the curd of that. It is very
common to see the lesser Glandules of the neck, which of late have obtained the
name of Conglobate, to grow large, and fill with a white curd so exactly like
that of Milk that it is hard to distinguish them. When they differ from this,
it is from some other mixture in the Blood which makes some other alteration;
which may be very various, whether in the nature of the coagulating Ferment, or
of the matter coagulated: the former may be an Acidity of this or that sort,
and sometimes so sharp as to approach near to the acrimony of aqua fortis; in
which cases the Patient feels violent corrosions and hideous pains, the Tumor
it self being apt to degenerate into a Cancer, or may have other mixture with
it to make it of a Vitriolique or Aluminous nature: all which Acidities though
they agree in the common notion of Coagulating, yet they make Coagulations very
unlike each other. The difference also may be in the Matter coagulated, the
varieties of which being infinite are hard to be recited: only I must take
notice, that from this latter Cause it is that I was forced to put as well the
property of Dissolution as of Coagulation into the description of the Disease;
for though the Acidity be the same which comes into a Bone with that which
goes into the Flesh-glandule, etc. yet the Matter it works upon being
different, viz. Marrow, (whole peculiar nature we do not understand, only find
it much different from other Juices of the body) it does there dissolve and rot
it, and with it the fibers of the Bone itself. Let no man wonder at the
contrary effects of the same Cause, who observes the different operations of
Fire itself upon wax and clay; where it is visible that the contrariety of
Accidents happens from the Matter, and not the Efficient. The like instance may
be made in Vinegar, which when it is mixed with Milk, etc. it coagulates it
into a curd; if put upon an Egg, it not only dissolves the Shell, but also
attenuates the White contained in it into a limpid water; which White we
notwithstanding observe to be a body much apter to concrete and grow thick then
Milk itself. The similitude will hold good of our Strumous Acidity, which when
it lights upon the Serum of the Blood coagulates it, and when it enters into
Marrow, though that be in a nearer disposition to Hardness then the Serum, yet
the mixture of this Acidity is so far from promoting that Hardness that it
rather dissolves the consistency it already has.

The immediate Cause of the Kings-Evill is delivered already, Causes.
viz. the Acidity of the Serum: but the remote Causes, viz. the causes of this
Acidity (to which the Strumae owe their original) are somewhat hard to be
enumerated. The heads to which they be referred are these, Air, Diet, Exercise,
natural Complexion, hereditary Affections, etc.

Those who are born of Strumous Parents are usually subject to these Diseases,
and derive it from them; so they will from a Nurse so diseased whose Milk they
sucked.

Those whose temper of Blood is acid and the Serum apt to coagulate, are very
obnoxious: so are Rickety children, and indeed in all children the heat being
little for concoction, the Serum is apt to coagulate.

Those that live in an Air excessively thin and sharp, or very thick and foggy,
are both liable to the same Disease. Diet of salt, sour and slimy meats are
causes of this Disease, of which more elsewhere.

Want of Exercise is a great cause of the Bloud's growing acid and slimy:
external Accidents are often the occasional cause of the Kings-Evill, but they
always suppose a predisposition of the Body to it; in which case we often see a
blow, compression, bruise, etc. to produce it. So also by a wrench of the hip,
knee, anckle, or other joint, we find crude Tumors to arise which are soon
followed by visible Symptoms of the Kings-Evill, viz. either glandulous
Tumors in the Neck, etc. or Tumors of the Bones themselves, which arising in
the body of them make the Spina ventosa; of which elsewhere. I shall give you
one remarkable instance of a Cook's servant in the Old Bailey, who sleeping one
Summers night upon a fourm, his head slipping off the one side of his Neck
pressed upon the end of it: when he wakened his Neck was full of Strumae on
both sides, some as big as Walnuts, others less; they were of different
figures, and distinct from one another. He was presently let blood and purged,
all else was done that expert Physicians and Surgeons thought fit to relieve
him; but the Strumae continued and after a few days apostemated and mattered,
and became virulent Ulcers: he died tabid within half a year. A straight stay,
as some Women and Children wear them, has too often the same effect: pain in
the Breast makes them under the Arms, and in ill Habits of body; a sore Leg
has often caused as much in the Groines.

CHAP. III. The History of the Disease with the Diagnosticks and Prognostics.
THE Kings-Evill is already described in short; but that will not serve the
uses of a young Practitioner unless he may have the History of it more fully
delivered, which cannot be well done unless we give an account of the Parts
themselves which are concerned in it. Parts affected. Nerves and Brain.
Now the Parts usually affected are either Glandules, Muscles, Viscera,
Membranes, Tendons or Bones. I do not remember ever to have seen the Nerves or
Brain affected immediately with any Humor of this kind: or if they have, the
Juices of those Parts are rather dissolved, and the Fibers corroded by this
Acidity after the likeness of Marrow and Bones, then coagulated into a Tumor;
which Corrosion when it happens, the Disease gets another name, and being
indeed mortal needs not be insisted upon in this Treatise, it admitting of no
other doctrine but that of a Prognostic.

So a young Lady having overgrown Tonsills, Observat.
which were judged Strumous, was cured by me by Extirpation, as you may see in
the chap. of Tonsills: but she some years after laboring under great pains of
her Head, and being upon the way coming up to London for Cure, dyed suddenly;
her Head being opened, her Brain was found corroded, and much wasted with great
putrefaction, the inner Table of the Skull carious.

The Veins and Arteries do indeed dilate themselves in all congestions of
Matter, Veins and Arteries.
whether natural or preternatural; but have not any particular Affection in the
Strumae distinct from what they have in other cases.

Glandules are a very notorious seat of this Distemper, insomuch that Authors
generally have confined it to them as its subject. Glandules.
Here we have a great deal to say, viz. that this Part is the most commonly
affected whenever the Patient is Strumous; and if the outward and more visible
Glands remain whole, Mesentery.
yet generally speaking the inward ones, those especially of the Mesentery, are
obstructed and swelled. Of these I have seen diverse examples, especially in
Children, and have passed my Judgment that they have been Strumous, when the
outer Signs could not so far justify my conjecture as to make others of my
mind: yet when the Patient has been dead, the truth has appeared upon
dissection. In one of this sort Dr. Walter Needham has lately been my witness.
Nay whenever the outward Glands do appear swelled, you may safely conclude the
Mesentericks to be so too, they being usually the first Part that is attacqued
by this Malady. Nor is the Mesentery alone, but all the conglobated Glandules
partake with it; which word Sylvius has appropriated to the reductive Glands
that serve the Lymphaeducts. Conglobate.
These are frequently liable to this Distemper, their offices being a
percolation of the Serum; therefore whenever that is amiss, these must needs
suffer. This is outwardly visible in the Neck, on the sides of the musculus
mastoideus quite down to the Clavicle, Neck.
whence they pass into the Thorax down a-long the Spine, and about the Lungs;
which themselves also do frequently abound with Strumous coagulations.
Laurentius adds the Bronchocele as a species of this Disease.

It is as easy to be seen in the Groine, Axillae, Groines. Axillae Conglomerate
more seldom.
etc. in both which places they do often appear; but nowhere more commonly and
frequently then in the Neck, of which every day shows examples. Nor are the
conglomerate Glandules free of the like malady, under which name Sylvius
contains all the excretory ones, which I do reckon to be the Salivalls bigger
and less, the Tonsills, the Glandulae Lachrymales, the Thymus, the Pancreas,
the Mammae, the Testicles, Prostates, etc.

These are sometimes affected together with the Conglobates, sometimes
separably. Many instances may be given thereof, in some we have found all the
conglobate Glandules of the Neck swelled, and many of them to press hard upon
and between the parts of the Salivalls; Salivalls.
yet they remained sound.

The like has been seen concerning the Pancreas and Thymus, which have been
both surrounded with Strumae, yet themselves remained untouched; but very often
the Conglomerates are affected by themselves, of which we have a great example
in the Ranula, it being but the Tumor of the Glandula salivalis inferior,
Ranula.
which in a man lies immediately under the sides of the Tongue. The Parotis
also, which is the external Salivall, is very often preternaturally affected;
and in the Pancreas the learned Dr. Walter Needham says, he has, seen a
Strumous Tumor suppurated, which held a pint of matter when the other Glands
of the Mesentery remained sound.

The Breasts are evidently obnoxious to it, as common practice testifies.
Breasts.


In a late private Healing I presented a young Woman with one in the right
Breast, and 3 near that lying between the 2 Breasts, as large as Pheasants eggs.

The Testicles and Prostates may be liable, but I cannot instance in them;
Testicles and Prostates.
and it may be that we do the less acknowledge their being affected with this
Disease, because we are apt in all these cases to suspect another distemper.

The overgrown Tonfills are so frequently Strumous, Tonsills.
that they need not be insisted on.

The Glandulae Lachrymales are often infected, and do according to the variety
of their disorders produce several sorts of Tumors about the eye; the most
usual of which is a Lippitudo, an affection of the ends of the Lachrymall
Vessels, which being derived from them do terminate near the cilia: so also
the Hordeoli, etc. nay it is not rare to see the whole ball of the Eye thrust
out by the Tumor of these Glandules.

Ophthalmia itself is often a consequent of the Disease; Ophthalmia, Fistula
Lachrymalis, Adventitious Glands, Face, Legs, Arms, Skin Muscles, Membranes.
so is also the Fistula Lachrymalis which often owes its original to this
cause.

Besides all these Glandules which are naturally born with us, there are many
more which do arise upon the occasion of this Disease in the several
interstices of the Muscles, as I have seen in both the arms of one person now
under my Cure near the musculus biceps. The like happens to others in the Legs
and Feet, also the very Fingers and Toes.

In a Child of six years of age I saw them scattering all over the Body, as in
the balls of the Cheeks, and upon that part of the Os zygoma nearest the
external canthus of the Eye, higher then the parotis reaches: but whether
that were part of the parotis or not, the others were certainly adventitious
which appeared upon the sides, back, breast, belly, shoulders, arms, and
things, scattering up and down, some superficial in the skin, other deep.

The Viscera are often found with great Strumae growing in them, Viscera.
or from them. Nor are we to wonder at it if Malpighius's doctrine be true, who
supposes poseth most of the Viscera to be made up of Glandules. In them we
frequently find Strumous Swellings as in the Liver, Lungs, Spleen, and
sometimes appendants to them. Dr. Walter Needham declared in one of his late
Lectures of Anatomy at our Hall, that he saw a Strumous Swelling hang at the
cone of the Heart that weighed 2 ounces.

The Tendons are sometimes involved with a great gumminesse and collection of
Strumous matter, especially the fingers, hands, feet and toes; yea upon the
musculus mastoideus itself we find them very distinguishable from glandulous
Tumors, and hard to be managed. Elbows, knees, anckles are very remarkable
Seats of this species of the Disease.

Bones are as frequently affected as any part of the Body, Glandules only
excepted: Bones carious from within.
but there the manner of the Tumor differs; for though the Bone swell, and the
outward shell thereof appear hard, yet the inward Juices are all putrid and
rotten. This sort of Tumor is sometimes called Spina ventosa, how properly let
others judge; but it is certain that not only the Bones of the fingers, carpus,
metacarpus, tarsus, metatarsus, and Toes, are liable to this Evil, but also
the Skull itself and the Jaw-bones, and all the other Bones of the body; the
venomous nature of which will be seen by those who upon opening some of these
Tumors have found the Bone when laid bare at the first appearance sound, but
when pierced into to be in the heart wholly rotten.

Bones are likewise affected on the outside by any Strumous Tumor that
touches them; Bones outwardly catious.
whether Membrane or Tendon, etc. which we often experience in opening of them
when they lie near such parts; for when we do, we most commonly find the Bone
itself bare, if not carious. There is a mixed case of Membranes and Bones which
frequently is found Strumous, I mean the Ozaena, which requires your utmost
diligence; the Bones and Cartilages there soon rotting, leave a blemish to the
scandal of the Patient.

As to the Differences of the Strumae, Differences.
they are sometimes more mild without Inflammation or pain, and moderately
hard, but by access of heat inflame and suppurate; as well those of a round
figure, which is esteemed the best and mildest sort, as those of any other.
Some of the mildest and biggest Strumae I have seen perfectly suppurated
without change of color in the skin, but after some days they again became
hard as before. When they suppurate with Inflammation then there is a mixture
of Blood with them, and then are called Phlegmonoides; others are indurated and
after a while Schirrous, yet sometime by a putrid heat do ferment, and grow
painful and soft in the upper part; which softness has by some been mistaken
for a Suppuration, but at their Opening they only gleet, and at length too
frequently show their malign quality by terminating in one of the species of a
Cancer, as I have showed you in the Chapter of Cancers.

Other Differences may be taken notice of, viz. that some are primigenial as
when the Disease is original, Other Differences.
and secundary when they succeed some other Disease, as particularly a Fever,
which often terminates in a congestion of matter. It also sometimes happens
after Catarrhs and other Distempers. There are likewise some by sudden Fluxion,
others by long Congestion. From the place of their situation Differences may
be taken which every man's eye can show him.

The Steatoma, Atheroma and Meliceris, as they are the frequent companions of
so they are often not easily distinguishable from, Steatoma, etc.
these Tumors. This makes Barbett, a late Author, to say, that Materia melli,
sebo, aut pulti similis, circa articulos, Ganglion, circa colli glandulas,
Scrophulam sive Strumam, in brachiis, pedibus, aut capite Tubercula, and si ex
Lue venerea Tophum constituit. By which it appears that he makes them not to be
distinct Species of themselves, but the accidents of other Tumors.

Signs of these Tumors will be more difficultly given, by reason of the
various shapes in which they do appear.

When it affects a conglobate Glandule the Tumor is usually round, Diagnostic^,
moderately hard, and moveable without pain. Those of an ovall figure which are
hard, and accompanied with pain without Inflammation, are of an ill quality;
and if they grow unequal they threaten a Cancer. When a Conglomerate is the
seat of it, it usually observes the shape of that Glandule, especially if the
whole Gland be diseased: but it is not unfrequent to see those Glandules (which
are indeed but compositions of lesser Glandules clustered up together like a
bunch of grapes) particularly affected; so that some of those lesser Glandulae,
or Kernells, shall swell into ovall, round, or flat, or other figures, leaving
the remainder sound enough; as indeed having no other communication with them,
but only by that small pedunculus which tieth them to, and discharges them by,
the common great duct of the Glandule.

In a Muscle the shape is uncertain, and always distinct from the Muscle; the
Tumor harder or softer as it happens: but those of a round figure are the
best-conditioned ones.

The lip when infected is commonly thick and chopped.

Bones when Strumous do swell, grow hard and big, but if you open them, they
are found inwardly rotten, as has already been hinted.

These which we present to his Majesty are chiefly such as have this sort of
Tumor about the musculus mastoideus, or Neck, with whatever other
circumstances they are accompanied; nor are we difficult in admitting the
thick-chapped upper Lips and Eyes affected with a Lippitudo: in other cases we
give our Judgment more warily.

In the Prognostic you are to consider, whether the Tumors be many or few,
grown together in clusters or more distinct, great or small, Prognostic.
deep or shallow, moveable or immovable, benign or malign, soft or hard: the
place of them, whether near great Vessels, Joints, Nerves, Tendons or Bones,
and the Habit of body, is to be considered; also the Age of the Patient.

If the Habit of body be tolerable, the Patient young, the Strumae recent and
but moderately hard, the Resolution or Suppuration of them is feizable: but if
they have been of long continuance, are hard and lie deep amongst the Vessels,
the work is difficult; yet the Cure of both is very often furthered by
accidental Ferments, which will resolve them to a wonder, and as often
suppurate them. In case of the King's Touch the Resolution does often happen
where our endeavors have signified nothing; yea the very Gumata, insomuch that
I am cautious of predicting concerning them (though they appear never so bad)
till 14 days be over. If the Struma be moveable, and free from remarkable
Vessels, the extirpation is not difficult; but if the Habit of body be bad,
the Strumae immovable, they are not to be meddled with; if that they be
moveable, yet lie deep amongst the great Vessels, the extirpation is dangerous:
besides, in the best Habits of body new Strumae are apt to arise while you are
extirpating the old ones.

If the Strumae have been long ulcerated, and are become sinuous and virulent,
Strumae ulcerated.
and if they lie near one another, they do often find a communication to one
another, though to your Eye they may seem distinct: in which case the Lips grow
callous and the Ulcers corrosive, yea frequently sordid, and the Cure not to be
hoped as long as any one cystis remains, or indeed the Vessels that feed them;
and if they run under the great Vessels what will you do? but if the
Ulcerations be simple the Cure is accordingly easy.

Those that are seized of Strumae in the Neck after 40 years of age seldom
recovery, those generally laboring under great obstructions, whence spring
Scorbutical affections, Jaundice, fainting, vomiting, loss of appetite,
sometimes Dropsy; otherwhile a Cough, in which case they die tabid.

If Strumous Tumors or Gumata arise from caries inthe Bones of the fingers or
hands, Caries within the Bone.
it will require your care; if in the foot or toes, it will be more difficult;
if in the Os calcis, Joint of the ancle, or Astragalus, or in the Kneebones, or
Ischia, etc. where you cannot lay open, or indeed where you cannot judge of the
rottenness, the case is deplorable, the work is long; and the very discharge
of matter exhausts the spirits of the Patients, so that they generally die of a
Marasmus: but if by strength of Body and help of Medicines the Ulcers do
digest, sometimes the rotten Bones do moulder and cast forth, and by virtue of
a callus within, the member is supplied; as in some cases you may see, but the
case always portendeth danger.

If Strumous Tumors or Gumata do outwardly foul the Bones, Caries from
without.
if the Habit of body be tolerably good and the Ulcers well-handled, they may
recover; but if the Habit of body be bad, new Ulcers arise so that the work is
long and difficult.

CHAP. IV. Of the Method of Cure.
IN the Cure of the Kings-Evill you must consider the Habit of body, strength
and age of the Patient, the affection of the Viscera, and particularly whether
the Struma be simple or complicated.

If all things appear benign according to the Diagnostick or Prognostic
before delivered, you may hope well; if otherwise, then you are to defend your
self with a prediction, and work warily.

In order to the Cure three Intentions are required. The first consists in the
regiment of Diet and the other non-naturalls; the second, in Pharmacy or
internal Prescriptions; the third, in the application of Externalls either to
discuss, suppurate or extirpate the Glands.

In the firt concerning a general regiment of Diet, amp;c. there ought to be
special regard had of the Constitution of the Patient whether he be hot or
cold, dry or moist, old or young, tough or tender and washy. If the Body be
cold and moist, we generally suppose a crapula preceded, and crudity to abound;
in which case the ready road is by Fasting from meat and drink, which was the
method of the Ancients, or at least great moderation: their Diet ought to be
moderately heating and drying, Mutton, Kid, Rabbet, Pullet, Chicken, Partridge,
Pheasant, Cock, etc. and these roasted; avoiding all meats which yield a gross
nourishment, as water-foule, fish and herbage: their Bread ought to be of wheat
well baked, and their Drink medicated ale or beer; wine is also allowed and
water utterly forbidden.

In hot and dry Bodies which are tending to a Hectic, we allow a more
humecting Diet, their meat boiled with Lettuce, Spinach, Purslane, Woodforrel,
etc. To some of these we dare scarce permit the eating of any Flesh, but rather
a Milk-diet or Asses milk; but where Milk does not agree we prescribe them
medicated Broths.

Air is a great help in our Cure: in the cold ones it ought to be moderately
heating and attenuating, in the hot ones cooling; in neither overmuch
piercing, as that of Hampsted is, in which sort of Air there is always
something esurine and acid; but rather mild and gentle, as that of Kingsington,
upon which supposition of gentleness, the farther removed from the smoke of the
City the better. I shall mention one Observation which I leave to your
Judgment, whether it ought to be attributed to the smoke or Northern blasts
from High-Gate. It was in a Patient of Dr. Tho. Cox and mine, diseased and
wasted even to skin and bone: we removed him to Knights-bridge, where after in
some weeks he had a little recruited his strength, and was eased of his Cough,
which had been very grievous to him; we removed him (for more convenience of
curing an Ulcer with caries of the cranium which he had some time labored
under) to a Lodging near Kings-Gate in Holborn, which stood backwards and Airy
enough, the windows opening to the Fields. Upon lying there but two nights he
relapsed to such a degree, that if I had not removed him the third day I verily
believe he could not have survived the fourth; but at Knights-bridge he again
recovered, and some weeks after went well away to his Parents in the Country,
and has continued healthful since.

Exercise of body ought to be enjoined, it being necessary to waste
superfluities; Sleeping in the day is forbidden, unless it be in case of pain
to which it is an Anodyne; Passions of the mind ought also to be moderated.

The second Intention consisting in Pharmacy, must be qualified according to
the Habit of body. If it be cold and phlegmatic, abounding with gross viscous
Humors, your Prescriptions ought to be heating and attenuating: in Plethorique
bodies you must purge with the stronger Catharticks, or repeat the milder
often, otherwise the Disease will be apt to increase under your hand. The
Purgatives are, species hierae cum agaric. diaturb. pull. cornachini, pil.
cochiae, e duobus, rudii, hermodact. aloephang. imperial, e succino, trochis,
albandal, diagrid. resinae jalapii, and merc. dulcis, and all those Medicaments
prescribed in Lues venerea. pil. rudii j. calomel. gr. 15. ol. sassafras gut.
iij. Misce and fiant pilulae 5. auratae; sumat summo mane. Or, senae ss.
agarici trochiscati j. hermodact. iiij. sem. carthami iij. salis tartari ss.
ligni sassafras ij. fiat infus. in aq. flor. genistae, scrophular. an. vj.
colaturae add sir. de spina cervina x. vel q.s. Or, turbith gummos.
hermodactil. an. ij. rad. scrophulariae ultriusque, an. j. rad. angelicae iij.
fol. senae ss. diagrid. ij. fiat pulv. and cum sir. ex infus. ros. pallidar.
fiat Electuar. dos. j. ad ij. addendo calomel. gr. x. now and then. Or,
sarsaparill. elect. ij. rad. chinae, cort. lig. vitae, an. ss. sassafras,
santali, citri, an. iij. rad. jalapii, senae, an. iiss. hermodact. turpeti, an.
iss. pulveriz. omnia, and fiat Electuar. cum s. q. mellis despumati. Or, rad.
aristoloch. rot. raphani, spatulae foetidae, an. j. pimpinellae, rutae,
pilosellae, an. ij. rad. scrophular. filipend. an. ss. sem. anisi ij.
zinziberis j. turbith gummosi, fol. senae, an. iij. sacchar. alb. iiij. fiat
pulv. of which the Patient may take daily a spoonful in White Wind. Or he may
purge with this Wine, summitat. marjoranae, origani, calaminthae, tamarisci,
an. Mj. flor. ros. damas. salviae, betonic. anthos. staechad. centau. min.
veronic. utriusque, an. Mss. sem. papaver. alb. iij. sem. fenic. dull. nigellae,
Romi, cardomomi, cubebar. an. j. rad. ireos florent. calam. aromat. pyrethri.
an. ss. cortic. aurantii siccat. iij. cort. lig. sassafras, cort. Winteran. an.
ij. hermodactill. turbith gummosi, an. ij. hellebori nigri iij. macerentur in
vino Hispan. lbiiij. per quatriduum; dos. cochl. iij. mane and hora somni.
spec. hierae picrae simpl. iss. cort. Winteran. contus. ss. maneat spatio trium
dierum in frigido in aq. lumbric. lbss. aq mirabilis and bryoniae composit. an.
lbj. saepius agitentur, extrahatur Tinctura clara.

pull. sancti ij. sacchar. opt. in aq. mirabilidissoluti j. spir. cinamomi, gut.
ij. fiat tabella ad pondus j. capiat iij. pro dos.

Alteratives are also usefully taken those days they do not purge, of which
sort this is very much commended. ciner. spongiae, pilae, or paleae, marinae,
ossis saepiae, piperis longi nigri, cardomomi, zinziberis, salis gemmae,
pyretbri, nuc. cupressi, gallar. an. ij. fiat pulvis: he is to chew some of it
daily, and swallow it down as it were insensibly. Or, rad. gladioli condit. j.
ciner. viperar. vj. ciner. spong. ss. spec. de gemmis j. diarrhod. abbatis ij.
cum sir. de betonica fiat Elect. de quo capiat ad q. castaneae tribus horis
medicin. any hour in ^^e day fasting. Or, rad. helen. gladioli, ircos, an. j.
cons. flor. anthos. betonic. an. vj. theriac. Venetae iij. spec. aromat.
rosati, diagalangae, an. j. cum sir. de cort. citri, fiat opiata; sumat q. iij.
hora somni. After any of these may be drank a draught of the following
Decoction; sarsaparillae iij. ligni guajaci iss. sassafras vj. rad.
filipendulae, scrophulariae maj. an. j. fol. agrimoniae, herb. Roberti,
veronicae utriusque, an. Mss. flor. betonic. anthos. an. P. j. liquiritiae ij.
sem. coriand. vj. coq. in s. q. aq. font. ad lbvj. colaturae add vini rhen.
lbij. sumat vj. horis trib. medicinal. Or, rad. chinae ij. sarsaparillae vj.
santal. omnium, an. iij. sassafras x. infund. in aq. font. lbviij, per horas
12. deinde, adjectis fol. agrimon. Mij. fol. veronic. Miij. seabiosae Mj. sem.
fenic. dull. carvi, an. iij. uvar. passular. enucleat. vj. coq ad consumpt.
tertiae partis; fiat colat. pro potu ordinario. rad. sarsaparillae ss. rad.
chinae j. ligni sassafras j. rad. scrophular. filipend. an. j. ophyoglos.
alchimillae, fol. agrimon. veronicae utriusque, an. Mj. milleped. no. 200.
liquirit. ijss. coq. in aq. font. lbx. ad lbvj. sumat ad iiij. tribus horis
medicin. The Decoction of lig. vitae in phlegmatic Bodies alone frequently
cures the simple Strumae. sarsaparillae incis. and contus. iij. rad. chinae j.
lig. lentis. ij. ras. ebor. j. millep. recent. no. 1000. uvar. passular.
enucleat. viij. rad. rusci iiij. M. fiat sacculus pro congiis tribus cerevisiae
non lupulat. pro potu ordinario. In some cases aq. calcis has been of good
use, thus: aq. calcis lbvj. sarsaparillae incis. and contus. ij. chinae j.
sassafras vj. uvar. passul. enulceat. iiij. glycyrrhizae j. fiat infus. and
coletur pro usu; bibat iiij. tribus horis medic. in delicate Bodies you may
leave out the Sassafras and make Emulsions of it with some of the 4 cold Seeds,
Almonds, etc. sweeten it with fine Sugar. Chalybeats are frequently of use in
these Diseases, and may be thus prescribed. margaritae pull. vj. ocul. cancror.
j. cerus. antimon. ss. salis martis iij. sacch. cand. alb. iiij. fol. Auri no.
vj. M. fiat pull. Or, chalibis cum sulphur. praeparat. rhab. opt. an. vj. cort.
Winteran. ij. sal. absinth. j. sacchar. opt. iiij. fiat pull. the Dose of either
may be a Dram. If the Patient be of a hot and dry Constitution the case is more
difficult, because the Medicaments eminent in the Cure of this Disease are
generally such as are like to injure the Body in one of those qualities, being
most of them such as either heat, or at least dry it; many of them do both,
viz. Sarsa and the Woods as also the cineres Spongiae, sal Gemmae, and all the
Species. In this case the Waters will have their place (though I cannot so
particularly approve them as others do.) Asses milk is of great efficacy in the
most of these, of which I shall give you one instance in a case where thy
worthy friend Sr. F. P. was concerned.

A young Gentlewoman about 11 years of age, shrewdly diseased with Strumae in
her Neck, with obstructions in the Mesentery, she being thereby exceedingly
emaciated: Sir F. Pr. being sent for, and seeing her so diseased with loss of
Appetite, advised her to be removed to the fresh Air at Kingsington; she was
so, and there by Asses milk recovered her strength, and returned to her
friends, well recovered. Where Asses milk does not agree we prescribe Distilled
milk, of which sort this may serve for an example. sarsaparillae elect. incis.
and contus. lbj. ras. corn. cervi vj. fol. agrimon. veronicae utriusque, an.
Miij. santal. alb. rubri, an. ij. liquiritiae Anglic. lbj. limac. horten. no.
100. vermium terrest. lbj. lactis vaccini recent. cong. ii. distillentur in
organo commun. S. A. Liquoris distillat. sing. lbiij. add tabellas oculor.
cancror. ij. sumat ad quantitatem iiij. singulis dosibus addend. aq. cinam.
hordeat. Cij. To these diseased Patients we also generally prescribe Decoctions
of sarsa, china, ligni lentiscini, santal. albi, ras. C. C. and eboris, with
the more temperate Pectoralls and opening Roots; so also the testareous powders
of oculor. cancror. coralli, margaritae, etc. of which this my serve for an
instance. ohelar. cancror. cerus. antimonii, ccul. cancror. an. iij.
margaritae, coral. rub. an. ii. sacchar. purissimi iiij. fiat pull. de quo
capiat ad j. ter in die superbibendo haustum aq. lactis superscriptae. Or the
foresaid powders may be made into Pills with bals peruvianam, etc. Mer.
diaphoret. bezoard. miner. antimon. diaphoret. are also great Specificks in
these Diseases; Emulsions, Pearl, Juleps, and Opiats are also of use. Purging
in this case, if the Body require it, ought to be with Lenitives, viz. Elect.
diacassiae cum manna, diacatholic. diaprun. sir. de pomis, purgantis diasereos,
sir. de rhab. and de cichoreo cum rhabarbaro: and to Children the infusion of
Rhubarb is sufficient. Our most experienced Physicians have generally purged
these with pull. rhab. with an addition of the Elect. diascord. or, succ.
chermes, with Mer. dulcis where they have been subject to Diarrhaea, and in
other cases alone, or mixed with the milder Purgatives: for in truth whatsoever
Disease it is complicated with, without some preparation of Mercury our hopes
are vain; nay in some of the most deplorable cases where the Patient has been
extremely emaciated by reason of the Acidity in the serum, I have proceeded
higher to salivate them, and thereby recovered them, as you may see in some of
the Observations of Ulcers with caries in the Bones.

The third Intention is performed by the application of Externalls, 1. to the
Tumors which we endeavor to resolve or suppurate or to extirpate, which
latter may be performed either by manual Operation or by Escarotick or
Causticall medicaments; 2. to the Ulcers, which are the effect either of
Suppuration or Extirpation. In Tumors we shall begin with Emollients and
Discutients, though I must confess it is no easy work to resolve these Glands,
if we consider two things: first, the stubbornness of the Matter, secondly,
it is being contained within a cystis; yet in soft delicate Bodies the milder
sort of Glands, which are not too much indurated, do frequently resolve. We
shall therefore offer to you such as I have sometimes applied with tolerable
good success: as empl. diachyl. ireat. ij. gum. galbanum, ammoniac. dissolut.
in aceto, an. ss. pull. sem. nasturtii j. sal. gemmae ij. sem. sinapis and
urticae pull. an. iij. axung. anseris, ol. irini, an. vj. cerae ij. M. S. A.
fiat cerat. Or, rad. bryoniae, cyclam. raphani, an. ij. cucumeris silvest.
spatulae foetidae, an. j. coquantur in lixivio communi ad mollitiem:
cribraturae add sterc. columbini, caprini, an. j. gum. ammoniaci dissol. in
sp. vini ij. labdani, styrac. calamitae, an. ss. picis naval. q. s. fiat cerat.
Or, gum. galban. sulph. vivi, an. j. salis armoniaci ij. terebinth. q. s. fiat
ceratum. The softer Strumae may by these or some of Celsus's Malagma be
resolved, or disposed to Maturation by the access of Heat and subtle quality
of the Medicaments.

Those which partake of a Phlegmon do frequently suppurate: the way to further
Suppuration is by suchlike; cepar. capita allior. in furno coctor. no. ij.
mucilag. radic. althaeae, lilior. an. j. pull. sem. foenugraeci, lini, an. ss.
fermenti veteris ij. cari tosti no. iiij. limac. no. vj. axungiae anseris and
porcinae, an. iss. croci j. M. fiat cataplasma. tussilag. cum toto Mij. sem.
lini pulver. vj. axung. porcinae q. s. fiat cataplas. S. A. Or, folior. and
rad. altheae, rad. lilior. an. Mj. sem. lini, foenugraeci, an. j. far.
triticeae. iss. axung. porcinae and gallinae, an. iss. vitel. ovor. no. ij.
croci j. fiat cataplasma. In order to the suppurating of them it is common to
pinch them hard: I have seen some people in the Country thrust a Thorn into
them, and thereby stir up Inflammation which soon disposes them to suppurate.
You must endeavor a perfect Concoction; for if you open them while any part of
the Gland is hard, it will increase and put you upon a necessity of eradicating
it, or of leaving your Cure imperfect. I could give you many instances of
Patients that have come to me for Cure after such Treatment. As to the way of
opening them when suppurated that by Incision makes the least Scar; but if the
Struma be large, the way by Caustic may give you more Opening, and with less
pain assure the Cure: the Matter being discharged you may deterge with mundif.
Paracels. praecipitat. and the Vitrioll-stone, and afterward incarne and
cicatrize as in crude Abscesses has been showed.

But in the old and hard Strumae we do seldom obtain a complete Suppuration;
sometimes during the application of the most subtle Discutients we raise a
heat in the Skin, which affecting the cystis and part of the Gland next under
it does cause an imperfect Suppuration: by the continued use of the Discutients
it at length frets its way through in small Apertures, in which case if you
continue the Applications, they grow bigger and become so many painful Ulcers
spreading one into another, the body of the Gland remaining hard without hopes
of Suppuration. But if you dress them a day 2 or 3 with a Pledgit of unguent.
basilic. you may qualify the Heat and moderate the Ulceration; and so by
interchangeably applying the Discutient or Lenient, you may happily waste the
whole Gland, if the Patient be treated the while by proper Internalls. In some
of these who have come to me out of the Country with Strumae ulcerated about
the Chops, I have seen the Strumae thrust forth in a fungus; so that with my
Spatula passing under them I have thrust them quite out, and healed the Ulcer
in few days: in others where they are incapable of being so soon thrown out, I
cut off the protuberant part, and consumed the remaining basis with Escaroticks.

If the Struma be moveable, and free from remarkable Vessels, the speediest
way of Cure is by cutting the Skin, and taking them out whole with their
cystis: those which have stalks and are pendent, or grow small near the basis,
may be tied and cut off; of this sort we see many. The last I was consulted in
was as big as the largest Catharine Pear and of that shape, growing on the
outside of the thigh of a Woman: I made a Ligature about the basis of it, and
and in compliance with the Patient left it on, and deferred the cutting it off
till the next day; but when I came I found it rotted off by force of the
Ligature and required no Dressing, I cut it in pieces and found it a white
Glandulous body. In an Infant newly born there appeared one upon the outside of
her little Finger, of the perfect shape and color of an unripe Cherry, partly
red and partly pale, with a stalk proportionably long; I cut it off with a
Knife, it bled with a full stream, I stopped it by the application of pull. Galeni
cum alhumine ovi; the third day after I took off Dressings and saw it healed.
About ten days after coming thither to make a Fontanell, I saw that Cherry
lying in a Box in the window: I cut into the soft part and discharged a bloody
serum: the other side which gave the pale color to it was a Glandulous flesh.

In those which are so thick in the basis that you cannot make Deligation on
them, you may pass a proportionable big Needle under the roots of them, and cut
them off under the Needle.

The common way of taking out all the species of Strumae, Atheromata, The way
by Incision.
and Meliceris, by Incision, is in cutting the Skin the length of the Tumor:
in these latter you must make the Incision more warily, lest you divide the
cystis and the Matter flow forth. After you have separated them round to the
basis, it may be sometimes necessary to make a Ligature upon the Vessels
before you cut them off. Those which are of great bulk and have their basis
proportionably big, as Steatoma, generally called Wenns, are sometimes taken
out by making a cross Incision, other-while by an ovall, one taking off so much
of the Skin as may be judged superfluous; then separate it, proceed calmly in
the Work, for in these the Skin commonly adheres so close to the cystis, that
it will not part from it without the help of your Knife: having separated it
turn it out, and make a Ligature underneath upon the Vessels, and cut it off;
then bring the Lips of the Wound together with 2 or 3 stitches, and dress it up
as you see cause. Some Empiricks cut them off without more ado, scarce making
a Ligature on them; but this way being always attended with a flux of Blood,
others choose rather to pass a Seton-needle with a strong Ligature close under
the basis, or as near it as may be, and that way make a Ligature strictly about
it. Sometimes we make the like Ligature without Incision, and are content to
eat off the Tumor by streightening it. Thus it falls off without effusion of
Blood; but hereby there is hazard in mortifying the sound parts underneath, or
of causing such disturbance as prolongeth the Cure: upon which consideration I
do propose in great Steatoma's and complicated Tumors, which are enclosed in
cystis's, rather to cut into the cystis, and with your hands to pull out that
preternaturall Body, and leave the cystis behind. So shall you be secured from
a flux of Blood, and for the cystis, you need not doubt but by Digestion it
will separate and cast off; the Wound will also heal smooth by Agglutination
afterward, if you cut off the superfluous Skin, and bring the remaining Lips
together, as in such Operations is usual. An Instance of this I shall give you
amongst the following Observations.

After the same manner I usually treat all those Tubercles in the Eyebrows and
Face, where the cystis separates difficultly from the circumjacent parts, or
where a great Scar may be unsightly.

Where the Strumae are large or lie deep near considerable Vessels, there,
Extirpation by Escaroticks.
if Extirpation be safe, the best way will be by causticall Medicines and
Escaroticks. It is a Work requiring more time, yet it is sure; and indeed is
the only way our Patients generally admit of. The very mention of a Knife
frighting them from us.

In preparation to this Work, the Body ought to be frequently purged, and if
there be Plethora Venae-section may be necessary: also during the Extirpation
they ought to be in an Antistrumaticall course of Physic with Alteratives,
etc. as has been already prescribed; otherwise new Glands will arise whilst
you are eradicating the old ones. Upon which consideration you are to furnish
your self with such Escaroticks as may penetrate deep into the Gland, and do
their work with least pain: for these Glands have small sprigs of a Nerve
branching through them, which makes them sensible of Pain and subject to
Fluxion; therefore it is that we endeavor to eradicate them with Corrosives
least painful. But such is our misfortune that all Medicaments fit for this
Work are extremely painful, the stronger Causticks are most proper to begin
with upon condition that they be kept within their bounds: of these some are
made up of Sope-lees boiled to a Stone, but this Medicine will spread in spite
of all our Defensives; so will all those made with Arsenick, Sublimate,
Vitrioll, etc. that of calx viva boiled up with lixivium saponis spreads the
least. The Medicaments proper afterward to eradicate them are either
Escarotick, as the Caustick-stone Mer. sublimate, Arsenick, ol. vitrioli.
Auripigment, unslacked Lime, etc. or Catheretick, viz. all the sorts of
Vitrioll, viridis aeris, squamae aeris, chalcitis misii soris Cinnabar. Alumen,
Mer. praecipitat. and so forth. The compositions of the Escaroticks are pull.
sine pari ex aequal. part. Merc. sublimat. Auripigmenti, Calcis vivae. A milder
then this is that of Johan. Arden, Trochis de minio vigon. is a powerful
Escarotick; it is compounded of Mer. sublimat. Minium, and Leven. In his Book
you may find Prescriptions more escarotick, of which this is one. merc.
sublimat. ss. arsenici pull. iss. cerus. succi amyli an. iiiss. succi asphodeli
x. aceti opt. v. bulliant omnia ad consumptionem succi and aceti, deinde
pulverizentur and incorporent. cum ij. panis crudii addend. auripigment.
calcinati iiiiss. and cum modica aqua ros. fiant Trochisci. You may make this
stronger by leaving out the Ceruss and Starch, and adding a few drops of ol.
Arsenici; but you will find the mildest of these preparations with Sublimate
too painful to be applied in tender Bodies. The Cathereticks commonly used are
Turbith minerale, merc. praecipitat. alone or mixed with Alum. ust. or applied
with the use of the Vitrioll-stone; the mildest is the Precipitate, it is of a
slow operation, but may serve in tender Bodies.

In the eradicating of Strumae, we are sometimes necessitated upon an
accidental erosion of an Artery to apply the strongest Escaroticks; but
generally we qualify them according to the Habit of Body, Age and Strength of
the Patient, and condition of the Glands, as they are hard or soft, have more
or less sense, or are seated in or near an Emunctory. In my long Practice in
eradicating these Glands, I have experimented all the several Escaroticks and
Cathereticks aforementioned, and know that those Compositions which have
Sublimate in them are exceeding painful, scarce to be endured in the strongest
Bodies, although you do take them off in 5 or 6 hours after; yet the Salts
having once penetrated the Glands, the Pain will continue vehement many hours
after, and affect the neighboring Parts with great Inflammation and Tumor,
and so frequently raises new Glands: but when you apply these to the softer
Sex, or tender Bodies, it affects their Head with grievous pain benumbing that
side and parts about, depriving their very senses. Fainting, and palpitation of
the Heart, are frequent effects of such Escaroticks, and not seldom a Fever; by
which may be judged the ill consequence of applying strong Escaroticks of
Sublimate indistinctly to all Complexions and Ages.

The Method I usually begin this Work with is by the application of such a
Caustic as will least spread, making it proportionably long, reaching from the
lowest part of the Gland upward; for in the consuming it, the Strumae will sink
downwards: you must defend the sides with Plasters that it do not spread; for
the Lips being once divided they will give way, and accordingly as your
Escaroticks penetrate into the body of the Gland, the sides of it will fall in
and be eradicated out of the narrowest Opening you can make; and the narrower
it is the less Blemish will arise from the cicatrix, and the sooner it will be
cured. The Escar being made you may divide it the whole length, and with a
Caustick-stone rub into it till it has penetrated into the body of the Gland,
which it will the sooner do if interchangeably you press into the same place
with a stick dipped in ol. vitrioli. Having thus done, dress it up with unguent.
basilic. cum oleo lini hot, embrocating the parts about cum ol. ros. and aceto,
and apply an Emplaster e bolo over all. This way of Dressing is not without
pain, but it seldom lasts above half an hour. The third day after you may dress
it again, and if you find the Escar in the middle dried hard, I dress it with
Lenients: but if it feel soft rub it again interchangeably with the
Caustick-stone and ol. vitrioli, thrusting them every was into the body of the
Glands, taking care that the Lips of the Ulcer be not enlarged thereby: by this
way of proceeding a great part of the Struma will be eradicated before the
first Escar in the Circumference cast off from the Skin. Having thus near
eradicated the Struma, you may consume the Remainder with Merc praecipitat. and
keep it open by Dossills of Lint; permitting the Lips of the Ulcer to contract
narrower the while, that it may heal with a cicatrix like an incised Wound.
This I conclude the easiest and speediest way to eradicate the largest Struma:
but in these complicated Strumae, and others which will not admit of such
proceeding I apply an Escarotick or the strongest Catheretick powders as I see
cause; of which proceeding you may see more particularly in the following
Observations. The Steatoma being suet yields not to Escaroticks.

All this while I have treated only of the Kings-Evill as it is contained in a
cystis, being the Struma of the Ancients: but in my History of the Disease I
have enlarged the bounds of it further, so as to take in several Tumors and
Ulcers upon Muscles, Tendons, Ligaments and Bones; also Ophthalmia, Aegylops,
Fistula Lachrymalis, Tonsillae, etc. which cannot be reduced to this Method
here proposed: yet that concerning Muscles, Tendons and Bones being more
universal, and happening in several parts of the Body, especially the Joints,
I shall say somewhat of in this place; the other I shall be forced to handle in
distinct Chapters, and place them in the latter end of the Treatise.

As to the Strumae, and other preternaturall Tumors included in a cystis,
affecting the Muscles, Tendons, Ligaments and other parts of the Body, they
differ not in the way of Cure from what has been already delivered, save that
they require more caution in the Extirpation of them as they affect the Joints
or sensible Parts.

The Ulcers arising from these are cured after the same manner that has been
showed in that Treatise; for whatever some Authors may have pretended of this
or that peculiar Remedy, the Cure depends upon the general Method there
proposed, to which if your fancy so lead you may add Specificks.

The gumminess upon the Muscles and Tendons require emollient and discutient
Dressings, as in the Chapter of Sehirrus has been demonstrated.

The Swellings affecting the Joints in this Disease are of 2 sorts: Swellings
of the Joints are of 2 sorts, External and Internal.
both of them are made by Congestion, and increase gradually; yet differ in
that the one arises externally upon the Tendons, and between them and the
Skin, or between them and the Bone; the other internally within the Bone itself.

That which arises externally affects the Ligaments and Tendons first, and
sometimes relaxeth them to such a degree that the heads of the Joints
frequently separate from one another, and the Member emaciates and grows
useless. But for the most part the Humor over-moistning the Ligaments and
Tendons produces a weakness and uneasiness in the Joint, raising a Tumor
externally, and in progress the Membranes and Bones are corroded by reason of
the acidity of the Humor; yet it is much hastened, if upon a Supposition of a
dislocation they consult the Bone setters.

In order to the Cure you ought in the beginning of the Fluxion to apply
Emplasters of an astringent and drying faculty, empl. de minio, e bolo
caesaris, etc. with moderate Bandage, and place the Member in such a position
as may prevent the descent of Humors. If Blood abound Venaesection may be
admitted, but this Humor requires Purging with calomel. etc. and Alteration
by specific Decoctions, antimon. diaphoret. bez. minerale, etc. In the
declining of the Fluxion you must strengthen the Joints by Fomentations and
Emplasters of a discutient and astringent quality, summitat. hyperici, centaur.
absinth. majoranae, betonic. flor. salviae, anthos. ros. rub. balaust. nuc.
cupressi, bacc. myrtill. juniperi, etc. in Wine with the addition of Brandy and
Emplaster de sandicis, etc. But if through want of such a Treatment they grow
excessively swelled, and the Humor incapable of being pressed back or
discussed, you may shrewdly suspect the Bones corroded: for that Swelling is
for the most part raised by an Hypersarcosis within, and ought not to be opened
without a prediction of a caries; for however it may by a seeming Fluctuation
be thought to have Matter, yet upon Opening it will only discharge a Gleet, and
the Hypersarcosis will thrust out in a fungus. If in some particular part there
do visibly appear Suppuration, and upon Aperture there do discharge an
albugineous Matter, you may conclude the Bone under it is rotten, especially if
it be hand or foot: and the longer you delay the Opening the more rotten the
Bones will be.

Therefore in such cases make your prediction of the danger, and give vent to
the Matter proportionably large (according to the rectitude of the Vessels) to
the Bone, and proceed in the Cure as in Ulcers with caries, being careful to
keep the Member in a right position that the Joint above it do not contract, as
it frequently happens in the Elbow, Knees and Hip. It sometimes happens that
those diseased creatures fall into the hands of pretenders to Surgery, who
by improper Applications raise great Tumors, and unadvisedly open them; and
not knowing how to dress them suffer the Aperture to be filled up, and
overgrown with luxurious Flesh till the Bone rot underneath. It is also as
usual in some others of our Profession, when consulted in such cases,
(although they know the Bones to lie carious underneath that Hypersarcosis) to
advise the leaving them to nature, persuading their Patients that it is the
work of Time, and that the assistance by Surgery will but increase the
Malady. But be assured one rotten Bone cannot cast off another, they may well
rot in pieces; but until the Hypersarcosis be removed, and the Bones laid
bare, you can expect nothing but Apostemations one after another, and your
Patients at length will die Hectic. Therefore when you shall be called to such
deplorable cases consume that Hypersarcosis by such Applications as their
strength can bear, and make way to the Bone or Bones, and pull out such as are
loose, and dispose the other to exfoliate; then by Compress and Bandage press
out the Matter, and endeavor to restore the part to its natural smallness;
which that you may do, the Ulcer must be well deterged, and the native Heat
cherished by discutient and drying Fomentations as abovesaid. The Compresses
under the Bandage ought also to be pressed out of a Solution of sal nitri, etc.
in aceto. But this Method you may happily cure them, if Internalls be the while
prescribed with regulation of Diet, etc.

The other sort of Abscesses which take their beginning from an Ulcer in the
Bone, I have already mentioned in the general Description of the Disease under
the name of Spina ventosa: Spina vento. sa.
it has been taken notice of by very few Authors, and I my self succeeded
happily in the curing those in the lesser Bones, many years before I knew what
to call the Disease. And in truth I do not now greatly approve of the Name, but
shall acquiesce in it, and represent it to you as I have frequently seen it in
my Practice in the Kings-Evill, it being a certain species of that Disease, and
of no other that I ever saw.

It takes it is beginning from a thin acid serum in the medullary Juice, It Is
Original.
which corroding the Fibers makes a solution of continuity there, and at
length corrupts the interior part of the Bone, and at last (if not prevented)
corrodes the Shell, and passes it is subtle Humor through some porosity it
had made.

This Disease of the interior part by degrees usually so affects the
external Shell of the Bone, as to raise it to a preternaturall Tumor, which
at the same time overstretching the Periosteum causes an uneasiness; and this
Pain if it grow so acute as to produce Inflammation, an Abscess consequently
follows.

If the Bone be spungy and soft, it is wonderful to see how quickly the Fibers
of it will be mollified by the influence of the serum of the Blood, and made
apt for a sudden Distension, as if the part were rather musculare then Bone. So
in childrens Fingers I have seen a Bone swelled in a night, and the like Tumor
raised in the spongy Bones of elder persons in few days, and without much
difficulty to yield again to exsiccant Remedies.

Yet it sometimes happens that the interior part of the Bone is totally
corrupted without any external Tumefaction or Pains, till the acid Humor
makes its way through the cortex, and eroding the Periosteum, causes a
Solution of continuity there; which by access of pain swells and inflameth
the external Parts, and produces Maturation in few days. Those in the
protubeberant Bones do also frequently raise Abscesses after the same manner,
and sometimes whilst the exterior Parts suffer under another Ulcer different
from this: But of that hereafter.

Somewhat of their Differences I have showed you in the preceding lines,
Differences.
others may be taken from the Quality of the serum. In some there is a sudden
Tumor raised in a night, in others it swells gradually and never corrupts
externally. In others the Humor pierces through the cortex, and raises
suddenly an Abscess. And these Differences may be said to arise somewhat from
the Place or Bone they affect; for accordingly as the interior part of it is
softer or harder, or the external cortex is solid or porous, so it suffers
Solution sooner or later. Those of the cranium for the most part pass their way
through the interior lamina, and affect the dura matter, etc. producing great
Pains, Convulsions, Spasmus, Epilepsies, and they die before the Disease is
discovered. In the great Bones of the Knees, Ancles, Elbows, etc. they pass
their Matter slowly, and are more generally diseased with Apostemations,
externally arising from the protuberance of them. In the Os tali or Heel-bone
which is spungy within and full of external pores, they make their way through
more suddenly, and so accordingly they do in the Jaws, Fingers and Toes.

The cause of the Spina ventosa I have already delivered you in short to be the
Acid quality of the serum sanguinis in the Bone. Signs.
The most visible Signs of it are a protuberance of the Bones without
discoloring of the Skin, and often without Tumor or Pain.

The Apostemations proceeding from the Spina ventosa do most certainly show
them, they rising always between the Membranes and Tendons; and somewhat of
Fluctuation may be felt there before the external Skin be considerably
inflamed: also if upon Opening it you make search with a Probe, you will find
it penetrate deep into the Bone, yet is the cortex of it white; whereas the
other Abscesses do always begin externally, and if the Bone be bare, yet is it
only superficially carious or stained by the Matter.

The Cure of the Spina ventosa in the lesser Bones, as the Cranium, Jaws,
Prognostic.
Fingers and Toes is feasible; but those in the bigger Bones are for the most
part deplorable. Infants and Children are generally the subject of this Disease.

In the Cure of these the same Method is required which has been above
proposed Cure.
in those Abscesses and Ulcers with caries; as also the same regulation in Diet
and other non-naturalls.

The Topics ought in the beginning to be such as are astringent and drying, as
has been set down in Abscesses, viz. empl. e bolo caesaris, comitissae,
deminio simp. etc. cum sapone, de sandicis, and de ranis duplicat. mercurio,
with good Bandage.

If afterward they pass their Matter externally they must be laid open by
Incision according to the length of the protuberance. Those of the Cranium are
not much protuberant for the reasons aforesaid, yet you ought to make
inspection, and proceed accordingly by Rugine or Trepan as the Symptoms
indicate. Those of the Jaws are visible, and require vent by extraction of the
Teeth, after which the caries must be consumed by Medicaments of a drying
quality, of which the actual Cautery is the most speedy and effectual. Those
of the Fingers and Toes are to be laid open by Incision in case of Apostemation
the length of the protuberance, and the Bone cut into, and the caries dried up.
The Ulcers in the greater Bones ought also to be opened, that the Matter may be
discharged, and the Bone laid bare in order to Exfoliation, (if it be
possible;) but if the interior part be much corrupted, your best way will be
to keep that part of the Ulcer dilated which lies over the Aperture in the
Bone by some Dossill dipped in sp. vini or the like, and heal the rest of the
Ulcer, and prescribe such Internalls as may dispose the Body to a better Habit.
For these only are the carious Bones which we may leave to time, it being in
vain to attempt the Exfoliation of great Bones where the rottenness, as in a
Pear, beginning at the core has consumed the substance of them. How all these
are particularly treated by me, you may see in the following Observations of
Ulcers with caries.

We shall begin our Observations with the resolving of Strumae, which
generally is a work of Time, and in those which suffer under internal
Obstructions of the Viscera it is not so advantageous to their healths: upon
which consideration I for the most part endeavor to waste them by Maturation,
and the while prescribe Internalls suitable to the Habit of body and
complication of the Disease; for if in resolving them the Viscera grow more
diseased, it will be imputed to that, and if new Strumae arise the Patient will
grow weary and be easily persuaded to consult others, who sometime get the
credit of the Cure when the foundation was laid to their hands; wherefore I do
not readily engage in this Work till they have tried others, and can willingly
submit to my endeavors.

AN Infant about a month old, 1. Observat. of Discussion.
the only surviving child of its Parents, being subject to Fermentations of
sharp Humors breaking out in the head, face and body, and frequently affecting
the internal Viscera, being recommended to my care, I made a Fontanell in its
Neck, and purged it with sir. de rhab. once in 4 or 5 days, and on the
intermitting days gave him a few grains of bez. minerale in a spoonful of
white Bread and Milk: his spoonmeat was made in a Decoction of sarsa, ras.
eboris, etc. In case of Catarrh or Cough I prescribed him my anodyne Syrup;
sometime the acid Humors affected his bowels with a Diarrhaea, (especially in
breeding his Teeth:) to remedy which we prescribed diascord. cum pull. rhab.
etc. Thus each disturbance was leviated, and the Child thrived. In his 2d. year
he fell into the small Pox, and was helped through it by Dr. Tho. Cox; after
that the Kings-Evill appeared in large Glands on the left side of his Neck: I
embrocated them cum ol. ex ped. bovinis, and removed his Fontanell into his
Arm, also purged him with Rhubarb infused in his Drink, and prescribed merc.
diaphoret. his breaking out in his Head was anointed with Bacon-lard, and
covered with a Cap made of a Bladder. It was easy for me to have cured all the
Eruptions in the Skin with Externalls, but I thought it safer to cure them by
sweetning his Blood. The last Symptom which appeared was a swelled upper Lip,
at sight whereof I purged him again as aforesaid, and discussed the Swelling.
This method of purging with infus. rhab. etc. he continues to this day, and
has thereby recovered a strong healthy Habit of body.

A Youth aged about 13 years, of a strong Habit of body, 2. Observat. of
Discussion.
was commended to me, having a Struma of an ovall figure on the right side of
his Neck; under his Ear he had also an Ozaena, with a thick chopped upper Lip. I
purged him with the Infusion of Sena, etc. prescribed in the method of Cure;
and afterward with one of the specific purging Powders, to which I added
Calomel, and enjoined him the drinking decoct. sarsae, lign. guaiaci, etc. with
a strict drying Diet, and made him a Fontanell in his Arm. I embrocated the
Gland cum ol. ex ped. bovinis and aceto, and applied emplastr. diachyl. ireatum
malaxed with cerat. oesypi. By this method the Struma relaxed, and seemed to be
divided into 3 small Glands, which also resolved soon after. The thick chopped
Lip was cured by the anointing it with Merc. praecipitat. mixed with unguent.
rosat. after it was cured, I perceived his Nose swelled and hard; I looked upon
his Nostrills, and saw them contracted very small, and stuffed with a crusty
Matter. I directed some ol. lilior. to be snuft up into his Nostrills, and the
next day caused them to be syringed with decoct. hordei, sem. lini and
althaeae, and purged him the day following with extract. rudii and Calomel.
repeating it every other day, and continued the drying Decoction, antimon.
diaphoret. etc. His Nose being cleansed of its Mucus, I syringed it with one of
the Errhina prescribed in the Cure of Ozaena in Lues Venerea, and thereby
healed the Ulcers.

A Child of about 4 years of age was diseased with a Vitiligo, thick upper Lip,
3. Observat. of Discussion.
and a couple of Strumae on the left side of his Neck somewhat large. I purged
him with an Infusion of Rhubarb once in 3 or 4 days, and prescribed him 6
grains of Merc. diaphoret. sometimes, and othertimes Bez. mineral. then removed
his Fontanell out of his Neck into his Arm. Thus at length the Vitiligo was
dried up, and the Strumae totally resolved. His Lip was frequently relaxed upon
his purging, but at length it ceased swelling.

A Maid aged about 12 years, 4. Observat. of Discussion.
who had formerly been extremely diseased with internal Obstructions of her
Mesentery, etc. supposed the Kings-Evill, was cured by Sr. Fra. Pruj. but after
4 years relapsed, and came to me with several Strumae on both sides of her
Neck. I directed the embrocating them with valentia digitalis morning and
evening, purging her sometimes with a cathartick Apozeme of sena, rhabarb.
agaric. hermodact. turbith, polypod. etc. cum syrup. de spina cervi; and in the
intermitting days kept her to the drinking of a decoct. sarsae, lign. lentisc.
with some of the antistrumatick Plants prescribed in the method of Cure; with
which she took some of the Specificks. There was also prescribed cerussa
antimonii, etc. The Glands sensibly resolved, and she recovered her health.

A Maid aged about 24 years, of a strong Constitution, 5. Observat. of
Discussion.
came out of the Country to me with many Strumae on both sides of her Neck. I
purged her cum pulv. diaturbith magist. with the addition of Calomel. and
prescribed her a decoct. sarsae, Chinae, lign. vitae, etc. which being
clarified was afterward decocted with mel commune, of which she drank thrice a
day with antimon. diaphoret. etc. During her taking these Internalls, her Neck
was for some time embrocated daily with valentia digitalis, and a Cerot was
applied ex rad. bryoniae, cyclamin. etc. After she had some weeks experimented
the foresaid method, and found relief thereby, she returned into the Country.
About a year after she came up to London in a very good condition, and by my
advice was again purged, and a Solution of crude Mercury dissolved in aq. regis
was added to the said Emplastr. ad strumas: by which, as I have been since
informed, those Strumae are near resolved.

A Maidservant of about 24 years of age, 6. Observat. of Discussion.
of a Phlegmatic Constitution, came to me with pituitous Swellings in her Legs
and Thighs. She had been frequently purged and treated rationally by others:
but the Swellings continuing, she came to me. I advised her to proceed on in
the foresaid Course of Physic, and directed her to wear laced Stockings and
Trowzes: the former whereof she did make use of with much advantage. But some
weeks after she returned to me with many Strumae thrust out on both sides of
her Neck, very big, and of different figure. I purged her with pil. cochiae
min. calomel. etc. and prescribed her opening Decoctions, with Chalybeats and
Antistrumaticks, according to the method of Cure, also directed the embrocating
her Neck with valentia digitalis, etc. but had no great hopes to resolve those
Glands whilst pituitous Humors so abounded. The Cure being slow, she grew
weary, put her self into other hands, and at length died, I suppose Hydropicall.

A Child aged about 7 years, 7. Observat. of Discussion and Suppuration mixed.
having been some time diseased with Obstructions in her Mesentery, etc. and a
hard Struma of an ovall figure movable under her Chin, Dr. Dacre and my self
were consulted. We made her a Fontanell in her left Arm, and prescribed one of
Celsus Malagma's, which we applied on the Gland, and set her down this
following Course of Physic: resinae jalapii gr. 5. calomel. gr. 10. cons. ros.
damasc. ij. cum syrup. violar. q. s. fiat Bolus sumend. mane crastin. cum
regimine. lign. sancti, sarsae, an. ij. sassafras j. fol. scrophul. filipend.
cum toto, an. Miij. betonic. salviae, urticae, malvae, an. Mij. rorismarin.
majoran. an. Mj. rad. lapathi acuti, rusci, polypod. an ij. rad. galangae j.
nuc. moschat. ss. uvar. passular. lbss. milliped. 500. contund. aliquant. and
praeparentur pro sacculo suspendendo in cerevisiae mediocr. cong. 3. and post
debitam infusionem utatur pro potu ordinario. antimon. diaphoret. ss. sumat in
cochl. 1. potus praescript. mane and vesperi. By the application of the
Emplaster part of the Gland resolved, and part discharged it self in a thin
Humor, fretting through small Pin-holes in the Skin. After it was thus totally
wasted, I cicatrized the Frets with unguent. tutiae; during which she recovered
her health. Mr. Barnard was her Apothecary.

A young Gentlewoman about 13 years of age, 8. Observat. of the effects of Merc
dulc. in Children.
Sister to her in the preceding Observation, of a Plethorick body and strong
Constitution, was diseased with an Ophthalmia, etc. I prescribed an Infusion of
Rhubarb in small Ale to take 3 days, then to take Merc. dulc. gr. 10. sacchar.
alb. gr. 6. in a spoonful of White-bread and Milk, and gave her half a dozen
papers of the Powder, designing she should repeat the taking them once in 4 or
5 days. She went into the Country, and observed the Directions. She took
Calomel. upon a Saturday in Christmass-week: it purged her 3 or 4 times. She
slept well that night, and went to Church the next day modestly dressed. The
night following she complained of some indisposition, and was griped, she also
vomited and purged often. She continued ill 3 days before I had notice of it.
Then Dr. Dand and my self went to her, and found her in bed, subject to a
Vomiting and a Tenesmus, with frequent excretion of a Mucus. We directed
Clysters of Milk cum vitellis ovor. we also gave her a morsel of an Electuary
of diascord. cerussa antimon. cons. ros. rub. confect. alchermes, as it is
prescribed in the Treatise of Lues Vener. in such cases. We likewise prescribed
her decoct. rad. scorzonerae, corn. cerv. ust. with aq. cinnam. hordeat. She
did not complain of any soarness in her Chaps, nor was there any smell of the
Mercury in her breath. She rested well that night, and was well in the morning.
We returned to London, concluding that her Distemper was the effect of Cold she
had taken at Church. Two or three days after I received a Letter, that she was
seized again with a Vomiting and Griping in her Bowels. I carried the Letter
to the Physician; who concluded her Distemper to arise from the corrosive
quality of the Mercury. I replied, it would not then have ceased upon our
Prescriptions: besides, her Chaps must then have been soar, which they were
not. I concluded, that the Humors drawn inward by her Purging, being checked
as aforesaid, still affected her Bowels, and required to be purged off. To
which purpose I resolved to carry with me 2 quarts of Barnet-water to purge
her. I accordingly went early the next morning, boiled it with Milk, and
dissolved some Manna in the first draught. She vomited that presently. I gave
her more of the same Water, and plied her with it till she had drank it all.
She vomited much green Choler with viscous Phlegm, and her Stools were frequent
and bilious. A Clyster was given her of Milk and Yolks of eggs; and that night
I laid her to rest with an Anodyne draught. She slept well, had a good Stool in
the night, and slept again. She eat a boiled Chicken in the morning, and from
that time was no more griped. I stayed 2 days, and, seeing no Relapse, came
away. This was all the ill I ever met with in the giving Merc. dulc. and upon
such ill regulation every Cathartick would have done as much.

A Woman of about 36 years of age, 1. Observat. of Suppuration.
who had formerly been afflicted with a Strumous Ulcer, came to me, with
another of an ovall figure, very hard, near the Muscle mastoides. I applied a
Malagma of Celsus, with directions to continue it so long as it would stick. In
the space of 3 weeks it suppurated it, and fretted a hole, by which the Matter
burst forth. I dressed it with unguent. basilic. and empl. diachyl. ireat. as
it is prescribed in the method of Cure. There remaining some hardness after the
discharge of Matter, I applied again the Malagma, which caused a Suppuration of
the remainder: which being permitted to flow forth, I dressed it with Lenients
as aforesaid, and thereby cured the Abscesse, without enlarging it by Knife or
Caustic.

A Child of about 4 years of age, being internally diseased with a Cough, etc.
2. Observat. of Struma suppurated.
was put into my hands for Cure of a Struma on the right side of his Neck, near
the bigness of a small Pullet's egg. I purged him with sir. diasereos dissolved
in a pectorall Decoction, and prescribed Lohochs, also medicated Ale, Bezoard.
mineral. etc. Externally I embrocated with unguent. magist. ad strumas, and
applied cerat. Agrippin. by which method the Struma resolved, and the Child
recovered that Summer in the Country, by repeating the Internalls above
mentioned. But about a year after he returned to Town diseased with a large
Struma on the same side of his Neck, and internally obstructed with the said
Disease. Antistrumaticks were prescribed as formerly in order to the removing
those Obstructions; the Struma was suppurated, the Matter let out, and the
remaining body eradicated, the Ulcer also disposed to cicatrize. During which
the Child not taking those Internalls designed, the Obstructions increased, and
he died before the Ulcer cicatrized.

A Man of about 25 years of age, much emaciated with the Kings-Evill, 3.
Observat. of Struma suppurated.
being internally obstructed, was commended into my hands. He had externally on
the right side of his Neck a great Cluster of Strumae: some of them were
inflamed, and inclinable to suppurate; others lying amongst them, and
scattering about, were pale and hard. I applied over the whole Tumor some of
the Suppuratives set down in the method of Cure; and having concocted the
Matter, where I found it at first inflamed, I applied a Caustic the whole
length of the Bunch, taking in such a breadth as might serve for the
eradicating of the rest. Then dividing the Escar, I gave vent to the Matter,
and dressed it up with Lenients. During the digesting of it, I purged him with
an Infusion of Sena, Rhubarb, etc. and put him into a decoct. sarsae, lign.
lentisc. santal. etc. with milleped. and some of the antistrumatick Plants, and
prescribed him Calomel. with some of the milder Purgatives to be taken once in
4 or 5 days. After separation of the Escar, I saw the Ulcer lying unequal, and
by search of my Probe found Sinus's running under one another, some of them
deep under the Muscles. They seemed to be made by the unequal Suppuration of
the Glands. Some of the deepest Sinus's I dressed with Dossills spread with
unguent. basilic. and Praecipitate, others I dipped in Praecipitate; some I
rubbed with the Caustick-stone, others with the Vitriol-stone; then covered all
the Ulcer with Praecipitate, and applied empl. e bolo over all. After I had
thus eradicated those Strumae most conspicuous, I divided some of the uppermost
Sinus's with a pair of Probe-scissors, and kept the Lips dilated with Dossills
dipped in Praecipitate, till I had wasted those Lips: then I made way to the
Sinus's, and laid them all open, with Escaroticks smoothing the Ulcer; and
raising a basis of good Flesh, I cicatrized the Ulcer even. After I had cured
him, I continued the prosecuting of the foresaid Course of Physic with some of
the milder Specificks, and directed him to drink Asses milk; which he did, and
thereby recovered his strength, and appetite to stronger nourishment. About 2
months after, this person came to me, complaining of that side of his Neck. Dr.
Walter Needham being present, we both looked upon the place where the Strumae
had been lodged, and saw that Part and the Clavicle down to the head of the Os
humeri much leaner then the other side. I made him a Fontanell in that lame
Arm, and advised the embrocating the extenuated Parts with axung. humana cum
guttis aliquot ol. lavendulae: by the use whereof it plumpt, and he enjoys a
good health to this day.

A Man of about 45 years of age came to me with a round Tubercle (without
inflammation) between the Sagittal and Coronal Suture. 1. Observat. of Incision
of a Meliceris.
I opened it by Incision, and discharged first a yellow Serum, then a gritty
Matter like Honey. I wiped away the blood, and pressed out the Matter; then
dressed it with Dossills spread with unguent. basilic. dipped in Praecipitate, and
thereby digested out the Cystis; and cured it soon after by the common method.

A Man of about 30 years of age came to me with an Atheroma on one side the
left Temporal Muscle. 2. Observat. of Incision.
I opened it by Incision, and digested it with mundif. Paracelsi. He had also
one near the Coronal Suture, which had been formerly opened by Puncture, and
remained sinuous and full of loose Flesh. I laid it open by a snip of a pair of
Scissors, and deterged, incarned and cicatrized them both according to the
usual method of curing such Ulcers.

A Gentleman came to me one evening with a Steatoma a little above the Coronal
Suture. 3. Observat. of Incision.
I slit the Skin with a Lancet, and thrust it out with its Cystis, then applied
a Pledgit of unguent. basilic. over which he put his Peruke on without farther
concern, and cured it himself in few days.

A Woman of about 40 years of age had 5 of these scattering about her Head, 4.
Observat. of Incision.
all which I cut out: some of them were small, others large. They digested with
unguent. basilic. and were soon cured. Sometimes they lie so superficially,
that the scratch of a Comb has made way for their discharge.

A Child of about 3 years of age was brought out of the Country to me with a
Struma on the left Eye-brow, 5. Observat. of Incision.
of an ovall figure. I made Incision upon it according to its length, and,
separating it from its Ligaments, thrust it out, then put a small Dossill in
its place dipped in a Digestive, with a Pledgit of the same, cum emplastr. e
bolo, and Bandage over it. The fourth day after I dressed it again, deterged it
with unguent. basilic. and Praecipitate upon a less Dossill, and dressed it up
as aforesaid. The second day after I left off the use of Dossills, and,
bringing the Lips together, dressed them up with the common Sarcotick, thereby
uniting them in a few days, and returned the Patient cured with a seemly
Cicatrix.

A Maid aged 18 years had a Struma on the left Brow of the bigness of a
Pearplum. I made Incision into the Skin according to the length of the Brow, 6.
Observat. of Incision.
and separating it, took it out. I dressed it with a Dossill dipped in albumine
ovi and pulv. Galeni, and with empl. e bolo and Bandage bound it up. The next
day the Eyelid being very much swelled, I embrocated the Parts about cum ol.
ros. and aceto, then let her blood, prescribed a Clyster at night, and an
Anodyne draught. The day after, finding the Inflammation and Swelling great,
and the Wound sanious, I fomented them with decoct. flor. melilot. cham. ros.
rub. balaust. etc. in vino rubr. and dressed the Wound with a Digestive ex
terebinth. cum vitell. ovi: by which method the Wound digested, and was
afterward deterged with mundif. Paracelsi, and incarned. I afterward
cicatrized it with aq. calcis, etc.

A Youth of about 12 years of age had a Struma lying under his right Jaw, 7.
Observat. of Incision.
of an ovall figure. I made Incision into the Skin according to its length,
then separating it, fastened a Ligature under it, and cut it out, leaving the
Ligature to digest off. I dressed it with a Digestive ex terebinth. cum empl. e
bolo. After Digestion I deterged, incarned and healed it as has been showed in
the former Observations.

A Young man aged 24 years was brought to me, 8. Observat. of Incision.
who had a large Struma on the Os frontis, of an oval figure, between his
Eyebrows. I divided the Skin, made separation of the Gland, and thrust it out;
then cut it off, and dressed the Wound with Pledgits and Dossills spread with
unguent. basilic. dipped in pulv. Galeni, and with Compress and Bandage bound it
up. The third day I dressed it again with warm Digestives, and afterward
deterged with the addition of Praecipitate. By lessening the Dossills it
contracted, and I incarned and cicatrized the Lips close, according as is
usual in such Wounds.

A Child of about six years of age had a long white Swelling reaching down from
the Os frontis between his Eyebrows to the Ridge of his Nose, 9. Observat. of
Incision.
swelling both sides of his Nose to both the Angles of his Eyes. After various
endeavors by internal and external Remedies, he was commended into my hands
by Sr. Fra. Prujean and Dr. Wolf. I designed the opening it by Incision
according to the length of the Tumor: to which purpose I marked it with ink,
and cut into the Tumor as low as might serve to discharge the Matter, with
regard to the beauty of the Nose, where the least Scar is a blemish. There
discharged a Matter not unlike the White of an egg, upon which the Tumor sunk.
I dressed the Wound with a Digestive ex terebinth. cum vitello ovi upon a
Dossill with a Pledgit and an Emplaster over it; applying upon the sides and
lower parts of the Nose Compresses of Lint dipped in Oxycrate, to press out the
Matter, and retain them close, that they might unite the sooner. By this method
the Abscesse was digested, and afterward cured in 10 or 12 days by the common
method.

A Woman of about 28 years of age had a large Struma on the left side of her
Neck, of an ovall figure and movable, under the Skin. 10. Observat. of Incision.
I made an Incision the full length of it, and, separating it from the Skin on
the sides, pulled it out, tied a Ligature on the Vessels under it, and cut it
off, then dressed it up with a Dossill spread with a Digestive ex terebinth.
dipped in pulv. Galeni, with Pledgits of the same Digestive over it, and a
restrictive Plaster over all, with a retentive Bandage. After Digestion I
incarned, and cicatrized the Lips together, according to the foresaid method.
11. Observat. of Sarcoma cured by Excision.


A Gentleman aged about 63 years, having been some years diseased with a
Sarcoma on his lower Lip, consulted me with Dr. Fielding, an eminent Physician
of the City of Gloucester. It had been formerly attempted by Escaroticks and by
Exsiccants; but it returned, and thrust forth Excrescences, one whereof was not
unlike a Strawberry. They were accompanied with Tumor and hardness, and would
not cicatrize by any Application, but grew up, and spread under a crusty Scab,
which frequently fell off of it self. We resolved upon the extirpation of it.
To which purpose the Dr. prepared his body by Purging, etc. Then in order to
the work, the Patient being placed in a Chair to the light, I marked out so
much as I designed to cut off; then took hold of the Lip between my Thumb and
Forefinger, and pressing the Sarcoma outward, I cut it off with a pair of
Scissors: upon which I saw the remaining roots start up in a ridge of loose
Flesh. I pressed them upward, and snipt them off. Then, after I had permitted
the Arteries to empty themselves awhile, I stopped them by the application of
Dossills pressed out of tinctura vitriol. dulc. and with pulv. Galeni cum
album. ovi dressed the Wound up. From that time it bled no more. The third day
I took off Dressings, and saw the Wound well disposed to digest. I dressed it
with Digestives ex terebinth. etc. and from that time deterged it with Merc.
praecipitat. and the Vitriol-stone, cicatrizing it with unguent. tutiae and the
Alume-stone, 12. Observat. of Noli me tangere cured by Excision.
and so it continues to this day.

A Woman about 30 years of age had a small Gland of the bigness of a Lupine
upon her left Cheek a little above the lower Jaw. It had been a long time
growing, and of late years was exceedingly painful, periodically pricking and
shooting with Inflammation in that Cheek, and would endure no Application. Upon
which account she came to London, where she consulted several of our
Profession together. They all thought it necessary to be eradicated, but
differed in the manner, most of them concluding the actual Cautery properest.
I was afterward consulted with Dr. Tho. Cox, and proposed the extirpating it
by Incision, and a week after visited her again; when, in the presence of Dr.
Cox, I passed a Needle under the Gland, and cut it off. I dressed it with a
Digestive ex terebinth. etc. deterged with unguent. basilic. and Merc.
praecipitat. and afterward cicatrized it with unguent. tutiae, and dismissed
her cured.

A Youth about 12 years of age had a Struma of an ovall figure on his right
Cheek, 13. Observat. of Incision.
lying movable between his Jaws, and most capable of being taken out on the
inside within his Mouth. I made Incision upon it there, and with my fingers
pulled it out, then washed his Mouth with Oxycrate: but it continuing to bleed,
I filled the Wound with Dossills of Lint, and placed a round Boulster dipped in
the foresaid Oxycrate between his Teeth and Cheek: I also applied externally a
Compress spread with a Defensative with Bandage; by which the bleeding was
restrained. I took out the Boulster in the morning from between his Cheek and
Teeth, and permitted him to wash his Mouth with a tincture of Roses with syrup.
diamoron, and the second day after took the Dossills out of the Wound: but
suspecting that the way of dressing it with them might prolong the Cure, I
clipped off the lower Lip with a pair of Scissors, and prescribed him a sanative
Lotion of fol. plantag. virg. aur. alchimillae, pilosellae, rad. consolid. and
liquiritiae, cum sir. de ros. siccis: by the use of which it cured in few days.

A Man of about 30 years of age had an Atheroma on his left Cheek, 14.
Observat. of Incision.
which at length made its way externally through a small Orifice, and healed up
again. It growing vexatious to him by its frequent eruptions, he put himself
into my hands at a time when it was full of Matter. I, feeling the Tumor big
within between his Jaws, made a large Incision into it, and discharged a foul
Matter with dregs, which showed it a Meliceris. I put my finger into it, and
with a Knife in my other hand cut off the nearest Lip as far as it was hollow,
and prescribed him a decoct. summitat. equiseti, veronicae, bistortae, rad.
iridis, consolidae, etc. to wash his Mouth: by which he was cured, and from
that time relapsed not.

A poor fellow of about 40 years of age came to me with a large white Tumor
upon the right Cheek reaching close to the tip of his Ear, 15 Observat. of
Incision.
supposing it was the Kings-Evill. I put my finger into his Mouth, and feeling
it big within, and the Matter fluctuating, I thought it Atheromatous; yet for
more security opened it by Puncture. It discharged a bloody Serum. I permitted
it to empty it self, (it being toward evening) and contented my self in
stopping it up with a Tent of Lint dipped in albumine ovi, applying a restrictive
Emplaster and Bandage on the external parts. The next morning, finding the
external Tumor sunk, I took out the Tent from within, enlarged the Opening,
and thrust out a foul Matter like dregs of Beer. I cured it in few days, after
the same method that has been showed in the former Observation.

A Tradesman aged about 30 years came to Dr. Walter Needham and my self (while
we were dressing a Patient in the City) with a large soft Tumor within his
right Cheek near his Mouth, much distorting it, 16. Observat. of Incision.
so that it hindered him in eating his Victuals: it was overspred with a Varix;
which ill aspect, I suppose, had deterred the Surgeons whom he had consulted
from meddling with it. But we concluding it a Species of an Atheroma, I opened
it by Incision by the side of that Varix, and discharged a proportionable
quantity of Serum, and crushed out a Cheesie substance. Then considering that
the over-stretched Lips of the Abscesse would by falling between his Teeth be
very troublesome, I cut them away, laying the Abscesse open: after which I gave
him Water and Vinegar mingled together, to wash his Mouth, and prescribed him
decoct. veronicae utriusque, salviae, betonicae, flor. ros. rub. with a
Solution of mel ros. to gargle it: and by the touching it sometimes with a
Vitriol and Alume-stone, it was deterged and cicatrized in few days; his Cheek
also contracted, and became natural as the other.

A Man of about 24 years of age came to me with a very large soft Tumor under
his upper Lip near his Nose, with very great deformity. 17. Observat. of
Incision.
He had tried the endeavors of the Physicians and Surgeons in the Country
by internal and external Remedies, and earnestly desired my help. I,
concluding it Atheromatous, proposed the opening it: which he submitting unto,
I passed a Knife deep into it, and gave vent to at least a Bloud-porrenger full
of serous Humor. Upon consideration of the quantity, I made a search with a
Probe, and felt a large Opening into the Cavity of the Maxilla superior; but
supposed nature would dispose it to heal, if the Orifice were a while kept
open. To which purpose I immediately enlarged the Orifice by Incision the whole
length of the Abscesse, and gave him of the Decoction prescribed in the former
Observation to wash his Mouth. He stayed 3 or 4 days in Town, and showed
himself to me. The Abscesse being well disposed to cure, I permitted him to
retire to his house in the Country, and prosecute that method. Whilst he was
there, the Orifice closed, and the Part grew painful and swelled again; upon
which he returned to me. I opened it, and discharged a well-concocted Matter,
keeping it dilated with a Tent dipped in sir. de ros. siccis. By this way of
dressing the agglutination of the Ulcer was prohibited, and the Abscesse was
drained. He returned back into the Country, and I suppose was thereby cured;
for I heard no more of him. 18. Observat. of a complicated Tumor taken out by
Incision.


In the time of the last great Sickness, whilst I was in the Country, a young
Woman was brought to me who had a large unequal Tumor near her Neck, movable,
and without Inflammation. I, designing to take it out by Incision, prepared
Dressings ready, and had 2 Women, and a Boy that I had taken to attend me that
Journey, present to assist me. During the separation of the Skin from the
Wound, it bleeding, my two Women left me, and the Boy dropped down in a Swoon:
the Patient also growing froward, and the work of Separation being not very
easy, I was put upon a necessity of cutting into the Cystis the whole length:
in the doing of which there discharged about half a large Porrenger-full of
materia purulenta: after which, putting in my hand, I pulled out a hard body of
Suet. It was a Steatoma, and weighed 9 ounces and a half. Then I filled the
Cystis with Stupes of Tow dipped in a mixture of unguent. basilicon and ol.
terebinth. hot; and bringing the Lips of the Wound over it, applied an
emplastr. e bolo, with convenient Bandage, to retain the Dressings, there being
no appearance of its bleeding. The fifth day after I returned thither again,
and dressed it as before, the Wound digesting well. The fourth day after,
dressing it again, and seeing the Cystis lie loose, I pulled it away with the
Dressings; and perceiving the Wound within fresh, I brought the Lips flat over
it, and healed it in few days by Agglutination. I did not design the leaving
this Cystis behind when I began the Operation; but am satisfied that it is the
easiest and most safe way in great complicated Tumors, where there is danger
of a flux of Blood, and much to be preferred before that Mountebank-way of
Abscision with Ligature in every respect.

A person of above 60 years of age, 19. Observat. of a preternaturall Tumor
taken out of the left Breast by Incision.
of a corpulent full Body, had a round movable Tumor on his left Breast of the
bigness of a Chestnut. I divided the Skin by Incision, and, finding that
Tubercle lying in its Cystis, I easily thrust it out by passing a Spatula under
it; then dressed up the Wound with a round Dossill spread with the common
Digestive ex terebinth. cum vitell. ovi, with empl. e bolo over it. The third
day I dressed it again, lessening the Dossill. Thus the Wound digested, the
Lips contracted and incarned, and healed in few days. In this Cystis was
contained a Trash not unlike Hair or Wool. This person was subject to these
preternaturall Tumors. He had one caused by the Wast-band of his Breeches,
which I afterward cut out: it contained the same kind of Trash.

Whilst I was attending a Person of Honor in the Country, 20. Observat. of a
complicated Tumor in Inguine taken out by Incision.
I was desired by an Apothecary in the neighborhood to look upon an elderly
Woman, who had a very large unequal soft Tumor in her right Groin. I
concluded it complicated, and at their desire opened it, and discharged about
the quantity of a Pint of a brown trashy Humor: whereupon the greatest part of
the Tumor was voided; but what remained of it lay as it had been a coverture
to a cluster of Damascens. I enlarged the Orifice, and found these so many
Bladders containing several sorts of Trash in them, some whereof was
melicerous. I pulled them out, and tare a thick Membrane which had divided the
Abscesse into several partitions; then dressed it with Stupes of fine Tow
spread with mundif. Paracelsi, which I dipped in Praecipitate, and bound it up.
The fourth day I dressed it again; and, seeing it digested, I dressed it with
some of the same Mundificative dipped in mel rosar. and embrocated the Parts
about cum ol. ros. By this method the Abscesse deterged, and the Tumor
lessened: by which time having done my business in that Noble Family, I left
the Cure of the Woman to the Apothecary, who finished it.

A Maid aged 24 years came to London diseased with a large Struma, 1. Observat.
of Struma eradicated by Caustic.
of an ovall figure, lying on the left side of her Neck deep amongst the
Muscles and Tendons. After evacuation by Purging, designing the eradicating it
by Caustic, I marked out the place with ink, drawing 2 lines down the length
of it, about a finger's breadth from one another: then defending the outsides
with Snips of Plasters, I applied Pledgits spread with my caustic Unguent in
the void space, with emplastr. diachalciteos, Compress and Bandage. The next
day I divided the Escar, and rubbed into it with a Caustick-stone and Stick
dipped in ol. vitrioli interchangeably, till I had penetrated deep into the body
of the Struma. Then I cut through that Escar, and dressed it up with unguent.
basilic. malaxed cum ol. terebinth. embrocating the Parts about cum oleo ros.
and aceto. I then dressed it up with empl. e bolo. The third day I took off
Dressings, and fomented it with decoct. fol. althaeae, malvae, summitat.
abrotoni, flor. sambuci, sem. lini, etc. and dressed it with Lenients as
before, to hasten the separation of the Escar. After I saw the Escar digest,
and somewhat separated in the bottom, I rubbed into the Struma again with the
Causticks, penetrating deeper into each part of it, and dressed it up with
Lenients, and so dismissed her. About an hour after, the Escaroticks
penetrating some Artery in the Gland, it bled through the Dressings very much,
and continuing so to do, she was brought back to my house in a Coach: at which
time I was in the next Street with Dr. Walter Needham, experimenting the Royal
Stiptick-Water. We hastened to this Patient, and seeing her bleed, we took off
the Dressings, and applying Dossills dipped in the Stiptick, immediately stopped
it. I dressed the Escar with Lenients, and a Restrictive over it. The fourth
day after I took off Dressings, and applied Lenients again. After the
separation of the Escar, seeing the body of the Struma consumed, the sides
only remaining, I filled with Praecipitate, and kept the Orifice dilated till
they were totally wasted; then permitted the Ulcer to incarn, and afterward
brought the Lips of the Ulcer close together, and cicatrized them with unguent.
desiccativ. rub. etc.

A Gentleman aged 30 years, of a tolerable good Habit of body, 2. Observat. of
the like.
had been long diseased with a hard Struma, of an ovall figure, seated under
the lower Jaw on the right side. After he had vainly endeavored by various
Applications to resolve it, he put himself into the hands of Sr. Alex. Fras.
and my self. We proposed to eradicate it by Escaroticks: to which purpose his
Body being prepared by Purging, we began our Surgery with the application of
a Caustic the length of the Struma, and the next day divided the Escar,
fomenting the Tumor with a Decoction of absinth. flor. cham. ros. rub.
balaust. etc. then filled up the divided Escar with pulv. sine pari of Sr.
Alex. Fraser's prescription, applying Pledgits of unguent. basilic. cum ol.
ros. over it. The second day after I fomented and dressed it up again with
Lenients and continued that method till the Escar made by the Escarotick began
to separate: then I thrust it off, and filled it again with pulv. sine pari. By
this way of dressing, sometimes with Escaroticks, and othertimes with
Digestives, we consumed the main body of the Struma, and afterward digested
out the Cystis with Merc. praecipitat. then permitted it to incarn by lessening
the number of the Dossills, and at last cicatrized it with a small Seam by the
help of the Vitriol-stone and common Epuloticks.

A Man aged 20 years, of a Phlegmatic Constitution, 3. Observat. of the like.
came to me with a large Struma, of an ovall figure, lying under the lower
right Jaw. There were also some little ones lying higher up nearer that Ear.
The bigger of these had not appeared worth taking notice of till within six
weeks of the time that he came to me. I began with the application of valentia
digitalis, and purged him frequently with pulv. diaturbith, pil. cochiae min.
calomel. etc. The Tumor increasing, I applied more powerful Resolvents, as
emplastr. diachyl. ireatum cum gummi, etc. by which, after some time, it tended
to maturation; and then I proceeded that way, purposing not to open it till the
whole Struma should be suppurated. But he, impatient of the delay, showed it to
some other, who opened it whilst the Suppuration was superficial; so that
presently after the discharge of the Matter it hardened again, and grew
difficult of Cure. The Patient returning to my hands, I took off the Dressings,
and seeing the Tumor large and hard, the Orifice small, and a Tent in it, I
pulled it out, and filling the Orifice with Lint, applied a large Caustic
according to the length of the Gland. The next day I divided the Escar, and
filled the incised part with turbith mineral. and applying Pledgits of
basilicon over the Escar, dressed it up with empl. e bolo. After the separation
of the Sloughs, I dressed it every other day with Merc. praecipitat. Vigon.
repeated Purgatives, and prescribed him decoct. sarsae and lign. guaiaci, with
Antistrumatick Plants, for to drink thrice a day, also cerussa antimonii, and
some of the testaceous Powders, to be taken as often. During the application of
Praecipitate and the milder Escaroticks, I made but small progress: wherefore
to hasten the extirpation of it, I applied a troch. de minio the whole length,
with Dossills spread with Lenients over it. At the next day's dressing I found
the troch. de minio had made a great penetration into the Gland, but with
excessive pain, inflammation and tumefaction of the Parts. I fomented it with
Milk, dressed the Escar with Lenients, and applied an anodyne Cataplasm ex fol.
malvae, bismalvae, panis triticei, etc. by which the Tumor relaxed, but those
Strumae near the Ear appeared bigger; which foreshewed the danger of proceeding
farther with Escaroticks of Sublimate. I embrocated them with valentia
scrophulariae, and hastened the discussing and drying up of the inflowed Humor
by a Fomentation of summitat. absinth. majoran. flor. ros. rub. balaust. etc.
During the separation of the Escar there appeared daily an increase of a
well-digested Matter, and after the Escar cast off, the Matter issued out above
and below under the Gland. The way to remove these Sinus's was to extirpate the
Struma; which I presently did, by rubbing it with the Caustick-stone and Oil of
Vitriol interchangeably. After I had removed it, and wiped off the loose
Sloughs, I dressed the Escar with a mixture of unguent. basilic. and ol.
lilior. hot, and kept the Lips of the Ulcer dilated with Dossills, then
embrocated the Parts about, applying over all empl. e bolo. After the
separation of this last Escar, there appeared part of the Struma lying on one
side, which I afterward wasted by the application of Praecipitate and the
Vitriol-stone, then lessened the number of my Dossills, and permitted the Ulcer
to heal up; during which I repeated Purging, and advised Embrocation of the
lesser Glands. He was hastened into the Country: but of late years I have seen
him very well, and those lesser Strumae wasted.

A young Gentlewoman, 4. Observat. of the like.
Scrophulous and full of fancy, came out of the Country with a large Struma on
the right side of her Neck, lying under that Maxilla, not unlike that in the
former Observation. It had been attempted in the Country superficially, and
healed up again, with the Skin adhering to it. She had consulted several of my
Profession in the City, and was curious in the informing her self how I would
proceed in the taking it out. I offered to her the several ways proposed in
the method of Cure, but more particularly the way by Incision. She objected
against that way, having (it seems) been told that it might prejudice that Eye.
I, supposing she urged it out of fear of having it cut, did not farther insist
upon it: for indeed the very proposal of cutting generally frights people from
us. Some time after she took a Lodging near me. I began the work by the
application of a Caustic the full length of the Struma, divided the Escar, and
filled it up with Merc. praecipitat. Vigon. then embrocating the Parts about
cum ol. ros. and aceto, I dressed the Escar with unguent. basilic. and applied
empl. e bolo over all, repeating this way of dressing every third day, and
fomenting it with decoct. absinth. flor. ros. rub. balaust. baccar. myrtill.
nuc. cupress. After the Escar separated in the middle, I thrust in a troch. de
minio, and dressed it up as aforesaid. The next day she complained of her ill
night's rest, and showed me the Tumor and Parts about inflamed and swelled. I
fomented them with Milk, dressed them up with Lenients, and let her blood in
the Arm. The next day I purged her with an infus. senae, rhab. etc. and
afterward with a cathartick Apozeme. Which method ought to have preceded, if
she would have admitted it. As the Sloughs cast off, I strewed in Praecipitate,
and touched it sometimes with a Vitriol-stone. Having thus penetrated under
part of the Struma, I raised that part up, and thrust it out in pieces with a
round-pointed Knife fitted to that purpose, then dressed up the remaining
Struma with the milder Escaroticks. From the time I applied that troch. de
minio, she complained that her right Eye was less then the other, and was so
possessed with the thoughts of it, that I was glad to refer it to the judgment
of what Physicians she pleased. Whereupon Dr. Glisson, Dr. Tho. Cox, Dr.
Staynes and Dr. Walter Needham were consulted. By this her Surmise I had the
honor to have my work approved by so many knowing persons, and she was the
more encouraged to admit of my proceeding. The Cure was effected afterward in
the space of 3 weeks to her satisfaction: yet she would not be dissuaded but
that Eye was less then the other. About a year after I saw her again in the
Town, and felt a small Gland of the bigness of a Lupin lying lower on that side
of her Neck. I would have persuaded her to admit of a resolvent Emplaster, and
to be touched: but she did not (as she said) believe it to be the Kings-Evill.

A person of about 19 years of age had many Strumae on both sides of her Neck,
one especially very large on the left side, 5. Observat. of Strumae extirpated
by Caustic.
reaching from her Ear downwards, of an ovall figure. The extirpation whereof
having been attempted in the Country by Knife and Escarotick unsuccessfully,
she was brought to London, and put into the hands of Dr. Walter Needham and my
self. The Physician began with the purging her by this: tamarind. ss. fol.
senae iij. rhab. i. sem. coriand. ss. infund. in aq. font. q. s. ad iiiss. add.
mannae opt. vj. sir. de spin. cervin. ss. aq. menthae ss. Misc. and fiat potio
mane sumend. cum regimine. She was afterward frequently purged with this:
rhab. senae, an. iij. hermodact. ss. zinziber. iij. passular. exacinat. lbj.
Misc. S.A. and fiat sacculus pro 3 congiis Alae recentis. There was also
prescribed her as follows: lign. guaiaci ij. cort. ejusdem j. sarsae,
sassafr. an. ij. Chinae iij. infund. and coquant. in aq. font. q. s. ad lbix.
deinde rad. scrophular. maj. filipend. an. iij. passul. maj. ij. glycyrrhizae
j. coletur pro potu ordinario. olibani, matricariae pulv. subt. an. j. sacchari
alb. crystallin. ij. Misc. and fiat dosis una mane, and altera hora quarta
pomerid. in cochlear. decoct. superscript. and superbibat haustum, quarta
quoque nocte capiat pil. stomach. e gum. ij. in 4 pilulis, pergat ad 20 dies.
After her Body was thus prepared, we designed to have taken out the Struma by
Incision: but it lying deep, and the upper part of it being grown to the Skin
by reason of the former attempts, we applied a Caustic according to the length
of it, defending it from spreading. The Escar being made as we designed, I
divided it, and began to raise it off, with intention to take out the Struma:
but she growing impatient of the smart, I rubbed deep into the body of it with
a Caustick-stone, and filled that Escar with Merc. praecipitat. applying
Pledgits of unguent. basilic. over it; then embrocating the Parts about cum ol.
ros. and aceto, dressed it up with empl. e bolo, Compress and Bandage. The 4. day
we opened it again, and repeated the use of the Caustick-stone and ol. vitrioli
interchangeably, penetrating thereby deep every way into the Strumae; then
dressed it up with Lenients as before. By this way of dressing we eradicated
the Struma; and afterward, by rubbing it with the Vitriol-stone here or there
where any little relic of it appeared, and dressing it with Dossills dipped in
Merc. praecipitat. we digested it. I being then obliged to a journey into the
Country, left the finishing the Cure to my Kinsman Jaques Wiseman, who, by
lessening the Dossills gradually, permitted the Ulcer to heal within, and by
Epuloticks and Bandage brought the Lips to unit; so that at my return I saw it
cicatrized smooth and narrow, and the Struma totally eradicated. The other
Struma, which had been big, seemed also wel-nigh resolved: yet upon the
cicatrizing that Ulcer she was seized with an Erysipelas on her Head and Face,
which swelled them extraordinarily; but by purging the Physician removed that.

A young Gentlewoman about 18 years of age, 6. Observat. of a Struma extirpated
by Caustic.
having been long diseased with a Struma on the left side of her Neck, reaching
from her Ear down under her Jaw, and frequently subject to Catarrhs, and
sometime Coughing of blood; I began the extirpation of it by the application of
a Caustic the whole length of the Gland. In dividing the Escar there
discharged a small quantity of an albuginous Matter. After the separation of
the Escar, a Cheesie substance came away, and the Gland lay hard underneath. I
filled the Abscess with Praecipitate, and kept the Lips dilated with Dossills,
repeating this method of dressing her every third day: during which Dr.
Micklethwait was consulted, and prescribed Internalls accordingly as he saw her
obstructed. He met with many difficulties in the removing those various
Distempers arising from the acid quality in her Blood, it dissolving her Flesh,
and threatening a Marasmus. By the continued use of the Praecipitate the
strumous Flesh seemed to me consumed, and the Ulcer well disposed for
incarning: when one day in dressing her I beheld a small white Bleb of flesh in
the middle of the Ulcer, and pressing upon it with my Probe, penetrated deep
into it. I pulled out the Probe again, and bending it passed it into the said
Sinus, and thereby discovered it hollow both above and below: by which it
appeared I had incarned upon a false foundation. I passed a Director into the
said Sinus, and laid it large open the whole length. The work was neither
painful nor bloody. I filled up the Sinus with Dossills, rubbed the spongy
Lips with the Vitriol-stone, and covered the Ulcer with Praecipitate, keeping
the external Lips dilated as at first I had done. By the repeating this method
the strumous Flesh was consumed, and the Ulcer smoothly cicatrized. But about a
month after there appeared a Swelling in the same Part, to the great
disturbance of my Patient: but it was only a Flatulency, which I soon
discussed by the application of Discutients. From that time she has been free
of that Malady. She continued longer under the Physician's care, and at length,
by his endeavors and the fresh Air, she recovered her health and strength, and
is since a happy Mother.

A Man of about 30 years of age, 7. Observat. of a strumous Tumor above the
right Scapula.
of a tolerable good Habit of body, came to me with a strumous Tumor a little
above the right Scapula. It had been of a long continuance, and some years
before it had suppurated, and was opened by some neighboring Surgeon: but
he not thoroughly eradicating it, it grew again, and was very large, the Skin
adhering to the upper part of it. I applied a strong Caustic on it; which
having penetrated deep into it, I divided the Escar, and applied troch. de
minio to it, then dressed it up with Lenients. After the separation of this
latter Escar, I rubbed it with a Caustick-stone under the edges of the first
Escar, and into the basis of it, and interchangeably pressed into the body of the
Gland with ol. vitrioli; then wiping away the loose Sloughs and blood, I filled
it up with Merc. praecipitat. Vigonis, and dressed it with Lenients. After the
separation of these Sloughs, I thrust out pieces of the strumous Flesh with the
end of a Spatula somewhat bended and sharpened to that purpose. Thus I
extirpated this great body of the Gland, and by the use of the Vitriol-stone
and Praecipitate I deterged and cicatrized it smooth; and so it remains to
this day.

A Maid aged about 18 years came recommended to me out of the Country with a
cluster of Strumae lying behind her left Ear, 8. Observat. of Strumae. and
Sarcoma extirpated by Caustic.
along the Musculus mastoides, down to the Clavicle. She had also a Sarcoma on
the inside of her left Ancle. Sr. Fra. Pruj. prescribed her a Course of
Physic, by which her Body being prepared, I began with the extirpation of the
Strumae by the application of a Caustic from the uppermost part near the Ear
downward, making the Escar about half an inch broad, then dividing it filled
the Ulcer with pulv. sine pari of Sr. Alex. Fras. and applied Lenients over the
Escar with empl. e bolo. The next day I stuped the Tumor with decoct. malvae,
violar. etc. and dressed it up with Lenients, continuing that way of dressing
till the Slough which was made by the pulv. sine pari separated: then drawing
the Lips wider open, and finding that I had penetrated into the body of the
Strumae, and that some of them lay loose, I passed in my bended Spatula, and
thrust part of the Cluster out, some in pieces, others whole in their Cystis.
That done, I wiped away the blood, and filled the Cavity with Merc.
praecipitat. applying Dossills of Lint and Lenients over all. By this method of
dressing I extirpated the Strumae, and disposed the Ulcer to cure. During this
I began with the Tumor on the Ancle, and having applied a large Caustic upon
it, I made an Incision into it, and discharged a bloody Serum in some quantity:
yet the Tumor did not sink. I filled up the Incision with troch. de minio, and
dressed the Escar with Lenients, empl. e bolo, and Bandage. The fourth day
after I took off Dressings, and, finding all well, repeated the application of
Lenients, to hasten separation of the Escar; which in few days cast off, and
the fleshy body within appeared to be a Sarcoma. I filled it with Sr. Alex.
Fras. his pulv. sine pari, and dressed it again as before with Lenients,
Compresse, and good Bandage. These fleshy Tumors were not of so acute sense as
the most sorts of Strumae are, but more difficult to extirpate, by reason of
the many Veins and Arteries which brancht through the body thereof, and
rendered it apt to bleed, and increase faster then I could take it down by
Escarotick powders. Upon which consideration I proposed the actual Cautery:
but that not being admitted, I made up some Trochisks de minio with a double
quantity of Merc. sublimat. in the form of Tents; and as the Escars separated
in any part thereof, I thrust in a Trochisk, which always caused the blood to
burst forth: but by the application of the pulv. sine pari with Dossills dipped
in albumine ovi, with good Compresse and Bandage, I stopped it. By this method
I made way deep into the body of it: yet between the Trochisks and in the
circumference it did rise upon me; which put me upon a necessity of using the
Caustick-stone and ol. vitriol. The use of these several Escaroticks caused
excoriation in the neighboring Parts, which obliged me to dress them the
oftener with Refrigerants, unguent. alb. camphorat. etc. Having thus extirpated
the Sarcoma near its basis, I left off the use of the Trochisks, and for some
days applied pulv. sine pari Jo. Ardern. it being more powerfully drying, and
less corrosive; then applied a Malagma of Celsus in the form of a Cake round
over it, with Compresse, and laced on a straight Sock, to keep all fast. After
I had thus wasted the Sarcoma, I dressed it with Merc. praecipitat. unguent.
tutiae Vigonis, etc. and by the help of the Vitriol-stone, aq. calcis, and the
like, I smoothed and cicatrized the Ulcer. That of her Neck curing some weeks
sooner.

One about 11 years of age, of a sickly Constitution, 9. Observat. of Struma
with a fungus of an Artery.
was brought by her Friends to Sr. Fra. Pruj. He consulted me in the
extirpating a Strumous Tumor upon the Aspera arteria. It was composed of many
several Glands, in the middle whereof one lay much more protuberant, of the
bigness of a Handball. It was to my judgment Atheromatous, but somewhat more
tense; and I thought I felt Pulsation in it, but so small, that I doubted
whether it were not rather in my fingers: however, I desired a Surgeon might
be consulted; who accordingly was fetched, and concluded it an Atheroma. We
agreed in the opening it by Caustic, and by eradicating that to make way for
the remainder. After the application of the Caustic we met again, and seeing
the Escar almost large enough to take out the Tumor whole in its Cystis, we
divided it, and began with our Knives to separate it: but the Child feeling it
smart, and the blood trickle down, it hindered our farther proceeding that way,
so that we only cut off the loose Escars, and dressed it up with Lenients. The
third day Sr. Fra. Pruj. met us there as we were taking off Dressings. The
Cystis appeared to me the thickest and strongest I had ever seen. I could not
think it was made to contain an Atheromatous Matter. I felt it again, and was
contented to believe the Pulsation I there felt might be in my fingers ends;
however I resolved to proceed warily; and to that purpose made a Puncture into
it with a French Lancet, upon which a florid blood trickled forth. The Apertion
being small, it stopped by the application of pulv. Galeni cum album. ovi, and we
left her. The next day the Surgeon and my self met, and, considering the
Cystis being disroabed of her natural Tegument, the Skin was not like to be
re-invested with it again, we proposed to proceed timely in the preventing an
effusion of blood. The way we designed was by Escaroticks, viz. pulv. sine
pari. The next day we took off Dressings, and covered the Cystis with the
foresaid Powder, applying Restrictives over all the Part, it being incapable of
strict Bandage. Against the next eruption we provided all things ready, both
actual and potentiall Cauteries; yet with consideration not to dress her till
we were necessitated. The second morning after we were both called early out of
our beds by a messenger, telling us she had bled the most part of the night. We
dispatched our Servants away to prepare Dressings, and hastened after, and
taking her out of her Bed placed her in a Chair. I stood behind her to hold her
steady, and had one Servant near me with a Dish wherein were several
Escaroticks, some stronger then other, also of different sizes and shapes. My
brother Surgeon had his Servant near him attending the actual Cauteries in
the fire. In taking off the Dressings, the blood burst forth with such a gush
as gave no leisure to call for an actual Cautery, nor was there possibility of
using it with any advantage. I presently thrust in a piece of Merc. sublimat.
and pressed a Pastillus of Celsus close upon it, and held it so with my hands;
which stopped the bleeding in a moment. I held my hands on it till we judged the
Escarotick had secured the bleeding: then they cleansed the Parts about with a
Sponge, and refresht the Patient with a draught of a cordial Julep: after
which the Restrictives were applied one over another over her Throat, up both
sides of her Neck. I kept my hands upon them till they were dried fast on. Then
we put her on a Crevat, and laid her again in bed. It did not bleed; but she
complaining daily of pain more and more, we agreed to dress her the fourth day.
I attended then with our Servants, preparing our Dressings, to stop the blood
and heal the Excoriations. My Copartner not coming, I took off Dressings, with
design only to dress the Excoriations: but they came all off together,
bringing with them a very thick Escar. While I was looking upon the Fungus, I
saw the blood rise out of it in many places, as if it had been pricked with a
Lancet. Those drops immediately enlarged their way, and bled forcibly in so
many Streams. At first sight of it I applied a piece of Merc. sublimat. The
blood burst forth between my fingers a while; but upon the applying a
proportionable Pastill over the Sublimate the bleeding stopped. Whilst I
continued my hands upon it, my Servant wiped away the blood, and dressed the
Excoriations with unguent. alb. camph. etc. and applied the Restrictives over
all as before: which being dried on, a Crevat was put on, and she placed again
in her Bed. From this Dressing I grew confident of success, the former Escar
appearing extraordinarily thick and large, as well it might, considering the
Caustic, (which was such as I would not advise to use in any case where there
may be the least hopes to save their lives without it.) Where the Opening is
small, a Finger may stop the bleeding of an Artery: but in a Fungus so
branched, in a place so incapable of Bandage, what could have resisted such a
gushing forth of blood but Merc. sublimat. whose force is far more penetrating
in such Fungi then a hot Iron? especially considering how the blood would have
dulled it by the way. The use of the Sublimate this second time caused a
Fainting and Palpitation of her heart: in which case Sr. Fra. Pruj. came again,
and assisted us by his Prescriptions; yet it terminated in a Ptyelismus. The
fourth day after this we met all together, and took off her Dressings,
whereupon was separated a thick white Escar; the remaining body appearing like
a glandulous Flesh, somewhat hard, and of the bigness of a small Chestnut. It
bleeding no more, we dressed it with some of the milder Escaroticks, and the
Excoriations with refrigerant Epuloticks, with Emplasters of diachalcit. etc.
we wasted that Fungus, and also healed the Excoriations in the space of 3
weeks. There was a fair opportunity of extirpating the remaining Glands: but
the Relations suspecting perhaps that new mischiefs might happen from some
branches of the same Artery, we cured this Ulcer, and left the extirpation of
the other to farther consideration.

A Maid aged about 30 years, of a tolerable strong Constitution, 10. Observat.
of Bronchocele.
came to me with a complicated Tumor lying on the left side of her Neck, from
her Ear to the Aspera arteria, and so stretching over it upward to the other
side of the Neck. It was soft, and seemed to be full of Matter, but without
Inflammation. I made a Puncture into the body of it, and discharged a stinking
Serum not unlike Horse-piss. That being let out, the Tumor sunk, and felt
unequally hard. I dressed it up with a Pledgit of unguent. basilicon and empl.
diachalcit. The next day, taking off Dressings, and seeing the Swelling lank, I
applied a Caustic the length of two inches, about 3 fingers breadth distant
from the Ear: the Escar I divided, and discharged a foul Matter, and afterward
dressed it up with Dossills dipped in Merc. praecip. with Lenients over the
Escar; and from that time hastened the falling off of the Slough. After the
separation of it, I thrust out a different sort of Matter, not unlike that of
an Atheroma and Meliceris mixed together. I passed in my Probe-scissors, and
laid it open downward to the Aspera arteria, and pulled out with my fingers
several Vesiculae, some containing a foul Serum, others a gritty substance.
There also came away gobbets of Flesh, with which the basis of the Abscesse
seemed to be covered. Having thus cleansed it, I filled it up with Dossills
dipped in Praecipitate, and kept the Lips dilated; repeating this method of
dressing every other day, and rubbing the strumous Excrescences with the
Vitriol-stone. The Sinus contracted narrower within; but the original of this
Tumor being Strumous, it would not heal whilst there remained any hollowness,
but filled with that sort of Flesh, and raised a Tumor. Upon sight whereof I
applied a Caustic upon the upper part toward the Ear, and divided it with a
pair of Scissors, then filled the Sinus with Merc. praecipitat. dressing the
Lips of the Ulcer with Digestives. After the Escar separated, I applied my
endeavors to eradicate the strumous Flesh with the Vitriol-stone and
Praecipitate, and cicatrized it from the Ear downwards; yet not without some
difficulty, the basis proving false more then once in one part or other. Some
of this strumous Flesh rising amongst the Vessels, and uniting over them, made
Sinus's so deep, that I much doubted how to divide those without danger of
these Vessels: but there being no Cure to be expected whilst this remained, I
passed a Ligature with a small Probe under the Fungus, and by Deligation of it,
and application of Praecipitate, I consumed the Fungus, and laid the deepest of
them open; and afterward by the application of Epuloticks brought a Cicatrix
upon them. Having thus well-near healed the Abscesse to the Aspera arteria, I
laid the other side open, and eradicated that part by the same method as the
former, and cicatrized it smooth.

One of about 14 years of age came out of the Country recommended to Sr. Alex.
Fras. with a complicated Tumor of a great bulk on the left side of her Neck
and Cheek, 11. Observat. of Bronchocele.
arising under her Ear. It had been growing many years, and was without
Inflammation. Her Body being prepared by a purging Apozeme, and Antistrumaticks
prescribed by her Physician, he commended the extirpation of it to my care.
Accordingly I met him at her Chamber. We designed the taking it out by
Incision; and to that purpose, having all things ready, I made Incision into
it. But the blood trickling fast down, we forbear the Operation that time, and
dressed it up with Astringents. The second day after we met again, and in
taking off the Dressings saw it had not bled, nor was there any Pulsation to be
felt in it whereby we might suspect any considerable flux of blood. What did
flow proceeded, as we supposed, from some small Fungus. Upon which
consideration we resolved to eradicate this preternaturall Tumor by
Escaroticks; and began with the application of a strong Caustic on the middle
of it, according to the length of the Tumor. The next day we divided the
Escar, and filling it full of his pulv. sine pari, I embrocated the Parts
about, and dressed the Escar with unguent. basilic. etc. By the application of
this Powder we penetrated into the body of the Tumor: and after separation of
the Sloughs, seeing no danger of its bleeding, we repeated the use of the pulv.
sine pari: and having thereby discovered the Tumor to consist of many several
Species, viz. Strumae, Atheroma, Meliceris, and Steatoma, we laid it more open
by Incision, and with a crooked Spatula and our fingers pulled out some of them
in pieces, others whole in a Cluster, then filled it again with the said
Powder, and dressed the divided Lips with Dossills spread with Digestives. By
this method we eradicated this great body: but in our approaching near that
part of her Cheek which had bagg'd so long time between her Jaws, we found it
penetrated, and the Liquour she took in her mouth diffusing it self into the
Abscesse, also the Matter made in the Abscesse discharging it self into the
Mouth. Whether this Opening was made by the Teeth, or fretted by the acrimony
of the Humor within, I shall not dispute; but it contributed much to the
forwarding of the Cure there: for by Injections detersive and drying we cleared
that part of the Ulcer, and cicatrized it with the external part of the Cheek
so close, that her Jaws were at liberty to chew her meat, which they had not
been in a long time before. The last difficulty was, in eradicating that part
which lay in a manner round under the root of the Ear, threatening the very
Organ. We laid it open, and by the milder Escaroticks at length eradicated the
Strumae there without offense to the Organ, cicatrizing it smooth the whole
length of the Ulcer, by bringing the Lips together within a narrow Cicatrix, to
the satisfaction of her Relations. During the application of some of these
Escaroticks, she was subject to a Palpitatio cordis, and did somewhat salivate;
but was therein relieved by Sr. Alex. Fraser's Prescriptions, and restored to
perfect health, which I have lately heard she yet enjoys.

A Youth of about 10 years of age was brought out of the Country to me with a
strumous Ulcer on one side of the Sagittall Suture. 1. Observat. of an Ulcer on
the Head.
It was hollow the compass of a Half-crown; and had discharged its Matter, and
filled up again with strumous Flesh. I applied a Caustic on it, and after
separation of the Escar consumed the Strumae with merc. praecipitat. then
cicatrized it with unguent. e calce and the Vitriol-stone.

A Lady brought her only Son to Town, who was about 7 years of age, 2.
Observat. of Ulcers about the Chaps.
of a sickly weak Constitution, obstructed internally with the Kings-Evill in
his Mesentery and Lungs. He had externally many Strumae under his Jaws, from
his left Ear down to his right Jaw. Some of them were bigger then others, and
ulcerated: one whereof had made its own way out, was grown callous, and lay
protuberant in the form of an overgrown Excrescence. I desired the assistence
of a Physician: but the Mother would not, yet promised, if there were a
necessity, she would at any time consult one. I began his Course of Physic
with a Solution of sir. de rhab. in a Tincture of Sena, and prescribed him a
medicated Ale of sarsa, lign. lentisc. Chinae, ras. eboris, rad. rusci,
scrophul. etc. with millepedes. I dressed the ulcerated Glands with unguent.
basilic. and Praecipitate: and after Detersion with unguent. diapomphol. to the
other Glands, which were hard and entire, I applied empl. diachyl. ireat. as it
is set down in the method of Cure. During which application, I purged him
again, and with a few grains of diagrid. and Merc. dulc. vomited him once: it
worked churlishly with him. That night I sent him some of the anodyne Syrup to
take in a draught of Mace-ale; which quieted the Ferment raised by the Physic.
From that time I purged him with Infusion of Rhubarb in his medicated Ale once
a week, giving him 7 or 8 grains of Calomel. the night before he drank his
Rhubarb: the intermitting days he took one of the testaceous Powders prescribed
in the method of Cure. The callous Struma I rubbed down with the
Caustick-stone, and after separation of the Escar I deterged with the
Vitriol-stone, and sometime Merc. praecipitat. rubr. The ulcerated Strumae
digested well, and as the Glands wasted, the Ulcers cured. To the other Glands
not ulcerated I applied a Malagma of Corn. Celsus, by which they visibly
resolved. Whilst I proceeded in this method, Dr. Micklethwait was consulted by
the Mother, he being her Physician. He saw the Patient in this thriving
condition, and, I think, prescribed him only a cordial Julep. The Winter
approaching, I supplied the Patient with Dressings and internal Remedies,
showing his Maid how to apply them, and directed her how to regulate the
Patient. The Cure of these Diseases is the work of time: for till the internal
Viscera be freed of the Strumae which generally they are stuffed with, the
external Cure of them signifies little. They returned into the Country, and
the Child enjoyed a good measure of health till about Christmas, and then the
Matter fermented again internally and externally, that Air disagreeing with
him: upon which account they returned back to London early in the Spring, and
sent for me again, and, I think, for Dr. Micklethwait. The Child was put into
much the same Course of Physic as before. I also digested the Ulcers, and
proceeded as I had done the last year: the Child accordingly recovered, and
enjoyed a good health. His Maid being grown skillful in dressing him, I visited
him the seldomer, yet sent my Servant oftener: for, as I have said, his Cure did
not consist in the healing these Strumae; yet they were in a good condition,
and not at all painful, unless it were sometime when I used the Vitriol-stone
and Praecipitate together, which was seldom. He being well recovered, returned
into the Country toward Autumn, and came up the Spring following indisposed
with a Catarrh and other Diseases in his Bowels; but soon recovered here,
whereas the Northern Air was too sharp for his tender Body. During the time I
attended him, he was as much grown and improved in his health as ever I saw
any, and the Strumae that were remaining were few, and much diminished: the
Malagma of Celsus put them upon a Suppuration whenever it was applied; and I
always permitted the Matter to make its own way out by small Eruptions: during
which I ordered them to be dressed with Lenients, viz. unguent. diapompholyg.
tutiae, or such like, till the Matter was discharged; after which I applied the
Malagma again, to put the remainder upon Suppuration. This way I showed his
Maid, and by these interchangeable Applications they did resolve. The Mother
did not this last time consult Dr. Micklethwait nor my self in Physic, but
employed some other secretly. Upon notice thereof I visited them less, and told
the Mother, that where I did not prescribe the Physic, or was consulted with
the Physician, I did not desire to be the Surgeon, the Cure depending most
upon the internal Prescriptions. Some weeks after, visiting the Patient, I saw
one of the Strumae thrusting out of the Skin in a Fungus. I would have thrust
it more out, tied a Thread under it, and have snipt it off with a pair of
Scissors: but he crying, I dressed it up with Praecipitate. At my next visit I
met a Surgeon there, and presented the case of the Patient to him, with my
way of proceeding. He saw me dress the Ulcers: they were but few and small. He
declared the way had been rational, and that such Diseases did require time to
perfect them.

A young Gentleman, 3. Observat. of Ulcers in the Neck, and an Atheroma in the
Arm.
aged about ten years, was diseased with many Strumae: some whereof lay under
his Jaws and the side of his Neck, stretching down from the one Ear to the
other; some of them lay entire in their Cystis; others were ulcerated, and
passed their Matter into one another: they were sordid in some parts, and
overgrown with loose Flesh in others. He had also an Atheroma on the outside of
one of his Arms about three inches in length, reaching to the Elbow-joint. Sir
Alex. Fraser was his Physician, and put him into my hands. He purged him with
an Infusion of Sena, Rhubarb, etc. and prescribed him a decoct. sarsae, etc.
with Antistrumaticks. I began with the application of a Caustic on the
Atheroma, laying it open the whole length, and gave vent to an albuginous and
cheesy Matter; then dressed it with Lenients, to hasten separation of the
Escar. I also laid open the Sinuous Ulcers in his Neck, some by Caustic,
others by Probe-scissors. Those Ulcers which were sordid I dressed with Mercur.
praecipitat. rubbed the luxurious Flesh with the Vitriol-stone, and kept the
incised Lips dilated with Dossills spread with Digestives. Whilst I deterged
those several Ulcers, I endeavored resolution of the lesser Strumae by the
application of some of the Discutients proposed in the method of Cure. During
these proceedings in Surgery, Purgations were repeated, with the addition of
Calomel. and on the intermitting days cerussa antimonii, etc. were prescribed;
and thereby the Ulcers were disposed to a healing condition. The Atheroma on
his Arm I endeavored to digest with various Medicaments: but whilst any part
of it lay hollow, it would neither digest nor deterge: but after I removed its
Coverture, it digested and incarned with mundif. Paracelsi, and cicatrized as
the other did by the common Epuloticks.

A person about 28 years old, 4. Observat. of Ulcers on the Neck.
having been long diseased with the Kings-Evill in many Glands on both sides of
her Neck, frequently apostemating with great tumefaction and pain, came to
London, and consulted me. Those on the left side were then swelled from the
Nuke down that side of the Neck and Cheek to the other side of the Trachea
arteria. Whilst she was in the Country, that Gland near the Nuke apostemated,
and was opened by a Surgeon there: but from that time it grew corrosive, and
passed its Matter downward into the body of the Tumor amongst the rest of the
Glands, and could not empty it self but as it overflowed. Upon which account I
proposed the making an Opening in the declining part of the Tumor: but she,
having been extremely over-watched and tired with pain, took deliberation, and
after a day or two sent to me to meet at a Consultation with one who pretends
great matters in Surgery. I accordingly went: but he had been there before
me, and, according to his custom, boldly undertook the Cure, promising to
resolve it in ten days by the application of an incombustible Sulphur. I did
not believe it possible to cure her without giving vent to the Matter below,
but left the Patient at liberty to proceed with him, or any other. He began the
next day with the anointing it with bals. sulphur. Rulandii, and every day
daubed more of his said Balsam upon the Swelling, till the ten days were
passed. During which applications, the Matter being thereby choked in, her
pain increasing more and more, and she being no longer able to endure those
applications, she sent for Sr. Alex. Fraser, Sr. George Wakeman, and my self.
We saw the Tumor exceedingly increased, and crusted hard over with the Balsam.
I fomented it with Milk, and embrocated it with fresh Butter: but it not
yielding thereby, I applied a Cataplasm ex fol. malvar. violar. sem. lini, pane
tritic. axung. porcina, etc. The next morning we met again, took off the
Cataplasm, freed the Tumor of its crusted Coverture, and saw the same hard,
dry, and much inflamed. We added to the former Cataplasm mucilag. rad. althaeae
and lilior. and applied it, thereby suppurating it; then opened it by Caustic
in the declining part near the Trachea arteria, discharged a large quantity of
digested Matter, and dressed it with Lenients. Whilst the Matter plentifully
emptied it self there, the Inflammation and Tumor daily diminished, and the
Ulcer above, which had been daubed close up with the bals. sulphuris, appeared
well inclined to heal, and cicatrized soon after by the applying of unguent.
tutiae. The accidents of Pain, etc. thus removed, the Physicians were again
consulted; and hearing her still complain of a Vertigo and great pain in her
Head, as likewise of an Inflammation of her Eyes, they prescribed her a purging
Apozeme of sena, polypod. hermodact. turbith decocted with sarsa, lign.
guaiaci, santal. etc. She was also purged with Cephalic Pills. Calomel. was
also prescribed, and a decoct. sarsae with the specific Plants was her
ordinary Drink. By these and such like Prescriptions she was freed of those
various Distempers, and restored to a better Habit of body. The Tumor the
while emptied it self by the depending Orifice, and several of the Strumae
which had been encompassed with in that Tumor appeared again movable, and were
afterward totally resolved by the application of Celsus's Malagma, and by the
Apertion made by the Caustic cured perfectly. The Strumae on the other side of
her Neck, which seemed suppurated when I first came to her, did all save one
harden again, (during her Course of Physic.) That one lay upon her Cheek near
her Ear. I opened it, and thrust out a Cheesy Matter; then dressed it as
abovesaid with Detersives, and cured it. The Patient being thus happily
recovered, I supplied her with a Roll of Celsus's Malagma, by which the
remaining Strumae were resolved or suppurated: and since that I have seen both
sides of her Neck freed of that Disease. Yet she is still subject to some
little Indisposition of body, enough to show that there yet remain some seeds
of that Disease in her Viscera.

A Gentlewoman aged 34 years, of a sickly weak Constitution, 5. Observat. of
Strumous Ulcers on both sides of the Neck.
subject to the King's-Evill many years on both sides of her Neck, ulcerating,
and the Ulcers passing their Matter one into another down to the Clavicles, had
gone through long Courses of Physic, and had permitted diverse Applications to
be made: but they proving unsuccessfull, she put her self into the care of Sr.
Fra. Pruj. and my self. The Ulcers seemed to have risen from so many distinct
Glands, and that after Suppuration, the Matter, growing virulent, corroded
under the Lips, and both rendered them Sinuous, and at length Callous, and
consequently not capable of Cure but by laying open. Yet I began with
Digestives, and discutient and drying Fomentations. The Physician prescribed
lenient Purgatives, with the addition of Calomel. once in 4 or 5 days, and on
the intermitting days decoct. sarsae with antimon. diaphoret. These not
answering our expectations, I proceeded in the laying open the Ulcers, and
removing the callous Lips, there being not one that would cure till that was
done. Afterward they digested, incarned, and cicatrized from the edges firm
and smooth, by the common method of dressing Ulcers.

A Citizen's Daughter, 6. Observat. of Strumous Ulcers in the Axilla and Arm.
aged about 12 years, of a weak Constitution, had been long diseased with the
Kings-Evill. She had one Strumous Swelling on the right side of her Neck close
above the Clavicle, from whence to the Os humeri there seemed to be a more then
usual fullness. Under that Axilla lay an Ulcer, and another on the outside of
the same Shoulder, and others down all along to the Elbow, some of them sordid.
By search of a Probe these Ulcers appeared to be so many Eruptions from the
Sinuous Ulcer in the Axilla. I dressed them with Detersives, etc. and
prescribed a decoct. sarsae, Chinae, lign. lentisc. with some of the
antistrumatick Plants, milleped. etc. with which she took antimon. diaphoret.
and once in 4 days a few grains of Calomel. cum pulv. rhab. in the form of a
Bolus. I embrocated the Gland near the Clavicle and the Swelling of the
Shoulder daily with valentia digitalis, and endeavored the Detersion of the
Ulcers with mundif. Paracelsi, Praecipitate, and the Vitriol-stone: but the
Ulcer being Sinuous, (as I said) it would not digest in any one part. The
Fluxion increasing greatly, and seeming to flow from that Ulcer in the Axilla,
I laid it open: but that not serving my purpose, I cut open the upper part of
the Sinus on the outside of the Arm near the Shoulder, hoping that way to
intercept the flux of Humor: but the Fluxion continuing, I began to suspect
the Matter flowed from the Strumous Tumor near the Clavicle; wherefore I
opened it, and upon search found the Matter did pass from thence into the
Axilla, and to the outside of the Arm. I discharged the Matter, and eradicated
that Struma: after which the Fluxion diminished in the other Ulcers. That of
the Axilla dried up soon after: the other also cured more easily, accoridng to
the method set down in Sinuous Ulcers, and she recovered her perfect health.

A Woman came out of the Country with a diseased Child of 2 years old. She had
brought many into the world, 7. Observat. of Ulcers in the Head, Neck, Lips,
etc.
but they had been all lamentably diseased, and died one after another. This
was broken out all over the Head, and ulcerated in many places to the
Pericranium. It had also a large white Tumor lying deep under the left Jaw to
the Trachea arteria. I fomented the Head with a Decoction of Cephalic Herbs,
cum flor. ros. rub. bacc. myrtill. balaust. in Wine and Water, and dressed the
Ulcers accordingly as they required, some with Digestives, others with
Detersives, and others with Epuloticks; and to the Tumor I applied
Discutients. During these Applications I purged the Child once in 4 or 5 days,
giving it 4 or 5 grains of Calomel. over night, and in the morning sir. de
rhab. in medicated Ale of sarsa, lign. lentisc. etc. and the intermitting days
Bezoard. mineral. Before I put her into this Course, the Humors were so
acrimonious, that the least scratch with a pin terminated in a corrosive Ulcer:
but after she had proceeded in this method a while, they all healed. So that
there remained only the Tumor under the Jaw, which seeming full of Matter, I
thought reasonable to open: but she having privately consulted some person,
who, in consideration of its situation, thinking it dangerous, dissuaded her
from it, upon notice thereof I left them. But some weeks after, having tried
other Endeavors unsuccessfully, she came to me again; the Child being broken
out for want of prosecuting the former method of Calomel. etc. and also
diseased with a Cough. I began with the opening of the Tumor, designing to do
it by Caustic: but in consideration of the Prognostic which had been
delivered of it, I made an Apertion with a Lancet, and passing in a Cannula,
discharged a spoonful or two of a purulent Matter: which confirming my
Judgment of the Tumor, I stopped it up with a Tent, applied a Caustic the whole
length of it, and the next day divided the Escar, and gave vent first to a
purulent Matter, then to an albuginous Humor. I dressed the Ulcer with
Dossills spread with mundif. Paracelsi, and the external Escar with unguent.
basilic. cum ol. lumbricor. After Detersion the Ulcer filled up with an
Hypersarcosis, as all Strumous Ulcers are apt, and so render our labor vain.
Therefore timely to prevent it, I dressed it with Merc. praecipitat. and kept
the Orifice dilated with Dossills. While I was thus eradicating the Struma, I
repeated the former method of Physic, and healed the several Ulcerations
about the Head, Face and Lips. All things thus succeeding well, the Mother
returned into the Country with her Child, unknown to me, (supposing it cured:)
but she not taking Specificks with her to prosecute that method there, it
languished and died, as I was afterward informed.

A Child of about 3 years old had an Ulcer with Caries upon the right side of
the Os frontis, close by the Temporal Muscle. 8. Observat. of an Ulcer with
Caries in Cranio.
It took its original from an Atheroma, as I suppose, (the Child having some
Strumae on his Neck.) The Bone lay carious the compass of half a Guinny. I took
off the Lips of the Ulcer by Caustic, and dressed the Bone with Dossills pressed
out of spir. vini, to keep it dry till Nature should be disposed to make
Exfoliation of its rottenness. For in this tender Child there was no talk of
rasping, nor was there always liberty to put in my Dossills so close as I ought
to have done. During this work the Child was afflicted with the Measils, and in
the declination of them with a Cough, and such a discharge of Matter from his
Lungs, that he grew thereby Hectic, and emaciated to skin and bone. The Lips
of the Ulcer on his Head lay lank and dry, and the Bone as it were dead without
moisture. He being thus weak, Dr. Bates was consulted, and declined the
attending it, as coming too late to him. Dr. Tho. Cox was persuaded to take
care of him, who prescribed Pectoralls of various sorts, and advised the
removal of him to Knights-bridge, where he drank Asses milk. Having there
somewhat recovered, he was removed to a house near Kings-Gate, into back
Lodgings looking into the Fields, for benefit of the Air, and more convenience
of Dressing the Ulcer on his Head. But upon the change of the Air he so
relapsed in 2 days, that it was believed, if he had lain one night more there,
he had died there. Upon which consideration he was again removed back to
Knights-bridge, and there he daily recruited his spirits. As his strength
recovered, the Lips of the Ulcer recovered their heat, and digested, the Caries
of the Bone cast off, and the Ulcer contracted narrower. He afterward removed
farther off into the Country to his Parents: my Kinsman Jaques Wiseman attended
him, and finished the Cure there.

A Child about 3 years old was brought by its Mother out of St. Martin's Lane
to me with a large soft Swelling upon the left side of the Head without
inflammation. I, suspecting the Bone carious, 9. Observat. of Atheroma with
Caries on the Cranium.
applied a proportionable Caustic on it, and gave vent to a Matter not unlike
Batter, and by search of a Probe felt the Cranium bare, I dressed it with
Lenients, and after separation of the Escar saw the Cranium bare the compass of
a broad Shilling. I dressed it up with liniment. Arcei hot, and the Lips of the
Ulcer with unguent. basilic. magist. The second day I fomented it with a
Decoction of summitat. hyperici, origani, betonicae, flor. ros. rub. balaust.
in Wine and Water, and dressed the Bone with Dossills of Lint pressed out of
spir. vini: the Lips I dressed with unguent. diapomph. touching them sometimes
with a Vitriol or Alume-stone. By these Applications the Bone incarned, united
with the Lips of the Ulcer, and cicatrized from the edges round. During which
some small Speels of Bones cast off, and the Ulcer cicatrized without much
difficulty.

A sickly Child of about 7 years of age was brought to me by its Mother out of
Drury Lane, 10. Observat. of an Atheroma with Caries in Cranio.
having a large Atheroma between the Sagittal and Coronal Sutures. I, supposing
the Bone carious, applied a large Caustic on it, and dividing the Escar
discharged a crude Serum, and afterward a curdled Matter. I felt the Bone
carious round under the Escar, and dressed it up with Lenients: after the
Sloughs cast off, I dressed the Cranium with Dossills pressed out of spir.
vini, applying them close to the sound Edges; the Exfoliation beginning always
from the circumference. By which may be judged the ignorance of that man, who
applied Lint dipped in Red wine over the middle of the Bone, leaving the Lips
hollow. By this way of dressing a Callus rose from the sound Edges, the
thrusting off the Caries, united with the digested Lips of the Ulcer, and at
length cast off all the rotten Shell, and incarned and cicatrized firm by the
method observed in the former Observation. I have since seen this Girl diseased
with many Strumae in her Neck, and purpose to undertake her Cure when the
season shall be more proper.

A Woman of about 40 years of age, 11. Observat. of Spina ventosa in Cranio.
of a Plethorick Body, having been long diseased with a pain in her Head on the
right side, between the Sagittal and Coronal Sutures, it at length apostemated,
and she was put into my hands. I made a search with a Probe, and feeling the
Bone carious, opened it by a circular Incision, taking away so much of the
Hairy-scalp as I judged necessary; then filled it with Dossills of Lint, and
applied over them Pledgits cum albumine ovi and pulv. Galeni, empl. e bolo,
etc. The third day, taking off the Dressings, I saw the upper Lamina very
white, dry and thin: it was corroded, and seemed chambered like unto that
Fracture the Greeks call Camarosis, or like some piece of old worm-eaten
Timber. I dressed it with Dossills pressed out of spir. vini, and the Lips of the
Wound with a Digestive ex terebinthina cum vitell. ovi, etc. embrocating the
Parts about cum oleo ros. After Digestion of the Wound I designed the rasping
away that thin Shell: but her pain ceasing, it was deferred. About the tenth
day she was taken with a Fever. The Physician visiting her, I dressed her Head,
and offered to his consideration the setting on a Trepan. But he concluded the
Fever scorbuticall, and no way related to the Ulcer in Cranio. But the Fever
increased, and she died. The Physician being indisposed with the Gout, another
was fetched, who saw her opened. At the taking off the Cranium, the interior
Lamina appeared sound, and the Dura matter unconcerned; nor was there any Blood
or Matter extravasated between the Membranes or Ventricles of the Brain; but in
the Lungs a great Stagnation. When this Matter affects only the interior
Lamina, the Patient generally dies before the Malady is discovered.

A little Girl was brought by her Mother to me with a soft Tumor, 12.
Observat. of a Struma with Caries in the Os Zygoma.
of the bigness of a Nutmeg, upon her left Cheek, on the Os Zygoma. She desired
me to undertake the Cure. But I, being at that time much indisposed in my
health, declined the meddling with it, concluding the Bone carious, and that it
was not so slight a work as she thought. The Mother went from me to a
Surgeon then in my Neighborhood, who opened it, and took much pains in the
exfoliating the Bone: but it growing more carious, he at length left the
Parents at liberty to make choice of some other. They came to me again. I made
search with a Probe, and felt the Sinus's running under the Bone toward the
Eye. I dilated the Ulcer, and, seeing the Bone black, applied a Dossill pressed
out of spir. vini on it, kept the Orifice open with a Dossill spread with a
Digestive, and embrocating the Parts about cum ol. ros. and aceto, dressed it
up with empl. e bolo. By his way of dressing the pain was mitigated, and the
Ulcer digested. I continued the use of the Dossill with spir. vini to the Bone
daily, and dressed the Ulcer with a Pledgit of diapomphol. By this very method
the rottenness of the Bone soon shell'd off: after which, by lessening of the
Dossills, I permitted the Ulcer to incarn, and by gradually leaving off the use
of the Dossills, and dressing it with Pledgits of diapompholyg. it cicatrized
firm in the space of three weeks, and continues so to this day.

A person of about 26 years of age came to Town with an Ulcer in her Cheek
penetrating high under the Os Zygoma: 13. Observat. of strumous Ulcers with
Caries in the Os Zygoma.
there was also an Ulcer near the external Canthus of that Eye. I supposed
them to have coherence with one another, and by search of a Probe felt the
Bones carious. Her Cheek had been much apostemated and blemished by their
Surgery in the Country, and like to be made worse, if the Bones were that
way to be exfoliated. Wherefore I considered to do it otherwise. The Teeth in
that Maxilla were all sound and fast; yet I persuaded her to the pulling out of
one under these Ulcers. She seemed to receive some advantage by it, the Ulcer
mattering less for the space of 4 or 5 days: but both the Ulcers growing
afterward worse, and our hopes of Cure that way failing, I enlarged the lower
Orifice, and rubbed off the overgrown callous Lips with a Caustick-stone, and
proceeded in the deterging and digesting the Ulcers. During which Dr. Willis
was consulted: but upon supposition she might be with Child, she took little
Physic. By dilating the inferior Ulcer the uppermost closed up, that Matter
discharging it self by the Ulcer beneath, but not without much disturbance, it
threatening a Sinus down her Cheek. To avoid which, I caused an Instrument to be
made whereby I cut between her Cheek and Jaw into the Ulcer to the carious
Bone, and gave vent to the Matter. After I had thus laid open the Sinus, and
wiped away the blood, I dressed it with a Tent dipped in sir. de ros. siccis, and
the external Ulcer on the Cheek with a Pledgit of unguent. tutiae, and by
Compression cicatrized that smooth and firm. The Ulcer within her Mouth growing
offensive to her by reason of the foetid smell of the Bone, put me upon the use
of an Injection of aq. ros. damasc. sir. de ros. siccis, and a few drops of
tinctur. vitrioli Felix wortz: by which the Ulcer deterged, and grew daily less
offensive. I continued the dressing it with a Tent whilst any thing of Matter
discharged. That ceasing, I omitted the use of Tents, and healed up the Ulcer,
and so it is like to continue.

A Child between 3 and 4 years of age, 14 Observat. of an Ulcer with Caries
behind the Ear.
having been subject to soar Eyes and an Abscesse in one of its Ears, was
brought to London, and commended to my care. The Matter at length made its way
forth behind that Ear, and flowed in great quantity. Upon search I found the
Bone carious. I began my work with Dilatation of the Ulcer by Gentian-roots;
and after I had made way to it, I dressed it with Dossills pressed out of spir.
vini and unguent. tutiae upon Pledgits, or such like, accordingly as I saw
occasion. Having thus disposed the Bone to Exfoliation, I purged the Child with
infus. rhab. and afterward with Calomel. once in 4 or 5 days, and prescribed
Bezoard. mineral. also a medicated Ale, to take the intermitting days.

After some time, seeing the Bone continue firm, I dressed it with a mixture of
mel Aegyptiac. pulv. myrrh. etc. and thereby hastened the Exfoliation of the
Bone. That being cast off, I designed to cicatrize the Ulcer: but perceiving
the Eyes grow soar, I put a Pea into that Ulcer, and continued it a Fontanell;
not thinking it safe to dry up the Ulcer behind the Ear, though the Child had
before one proper for Derivation. The dressing this Ulcer was never very
painful: but the Servant that attended the Child having accustomed her self to
put it beside its Frowardness by threatening to send for me, it so terrified the
Child, that it always cried at the very sight of me; upon which account I left
her in the condition I have represented. She was long after diseased with soar
Eyes from the acidity in her Blood, but has since outworn it.

From a Caries in the Alveoli Apostemations are frequently made externally
under the Jaws; which being not unlike strumous Tumors, are by unexperienced
people supposed to be such, and sent to us to be presented to his Majesty. Many
Instances may be given you of this kind, if it were necessary: but they not
being Strumous, I shall forbear, and present to you what is, viz. the
protuberant Jaws. They are made hollow by an acid Humor, which fretteth and
corrodeth the Alveoli and inner substance to the very external Shell; in which
cases they thrust out with great deformity. I have made mention of this Disease
under the name of Spina ventosa, and distinguished it from the Caries arising
from an external Erosion by that name. When this affects the Jaws, the Teeth
grow loose, and Excrescences do arise, which in progress of time thrust out the
Teeth. They sometimes discharge their Matter externally. But by pulling out
those Teeth these Apostemations cure, and the Jaw having thereby vent for its
Matter, the Caries will cast off insensibly by the force of Nature, and at
length, if the Habit of body grow better disposed a Callus fills up the void
space in the Bone. But where Nature is deficient, we consume the Caries in them
by detersive and drying Medicaments, or by actual Cautery: after which, if the
Patient be young, he grows out the Deformity.

A Child aged 9 years, 15. Observat. of external Ulcers from a Spina ventosa.
having been formerly diseased with the Rachitis, and afterward with the
Kings'-Evill, the left Jaw grew preternaturally big, and her Teeth in it rotten
and loose: an Apostemation also had discharged it self externally under that
Jaw in 3 several places. I caused some of those Teeth to be pulled out, and
dressed the Ulcer with a Tincture of Vitriol. I prescribed Internalls,
according to the method of Cure; then rubbing off the callous Lips externally
with a Caustick-stone, and digesting them, they cicatrized without laying open
or trouble in dressing, the Matter spending it self within, where it was not
taken notice so much of.

A Gentlewoman about 40 years of age, 16. Observat. of Spina ventosa in the
left Jaw.
having been many years diseased with the King's-Evill and a Spina ventosa in
her left Jaw, put her self into my hands. She had formerly Apostemations under
that Jaw externally; but the Matter having made its way out by loosening some
of her Teeth, (which afterward dropped out,) those Ulcers were in a manner
healed up. The place where her Teeth had fallen out was filled with a putrid
Flesh, which was very offensive to her by reason of the rottenness of the
Alveoli. In this case there remained nothing to do, but to consume and dry up
the corrupt Flesh and Bones; which I did by actual Cautery to the very end of
the Mandible, laying it hollow like a Trough. I was troubled in my thoughts to
see it so, suspecting it would prove an unthankful work, to leave such a
uselses Cavity: but it was done to save that Jaw. I dressed it up with Dossills
dipped in a mucilaginous Decoction, and after Digestion with Dossills dipped in
spir. vini, the sides of the Mandible were dried by the actual Cautery, and
being thin, they cast off, and the Gum lay flat, and served her afterward to
chew softer food.

A Youth about 15 years of age came to Town with a Spina ventosa in the
inferior left Jaw, 17. Observat. of Spina ventosa in the inferior Maxilla.
the two farthest Teeth being thrust out with a Fungus rising in and about the
Alveolus. It had passed its Matter externally on that side of his Neck and
under that Jaw; also an Apostemation had been raised on the upper part of that
Jaw externally near the insertion of it, between the Ear and the Cheek, in
which place the Bone was carious round. It had been laid open by a Surgeon
in the Country, who designed the cutting it off. I rubbed that Bone with ol.
myrrhae distillat. and kept the Ulcer dilated with Dossills pressed out of spir.
vini. The Fungus in the Jaw I consumed with the actual Cautery, pulled out
pieces of the corrupt Alveolus, and disposed the rest to cast off soon after;
then dried up the remaining Caries in the Jaw, and afterward dressed it with
Dossills pressed out of tinctura vitrioli. Whilst this was doing, I rubbed off
the callous Lips of the external Ulcers by Caustic, opened their Sinus's, and
disposed them to speedy cure. After the cicatrizing of the Ulcer in the Jaw, it
lying hollow and subject to Excrements, I filled it with soft Wax. Having thus
cured those Ulcers, and exfoliated the greatest part of the Caries on the
external part of the Jaw near the Ear, I lessened the Dossills, permitted that
Ulcer to contract proportionably, and supplied his Sister with Medicaments and
Directions to finish the Cure, and dismissed him. It being the work of time,
required a longer keeping open then consisted with their convenience to attend
it here.

In the year 1672. I was consulted by Letter out of the Country concerning a
young Gentleman, 18. Observat. of a Spina ventosa in the right inferior
Maxilla.
whose Case I have here inserted as it was sent me.

Adolescens nobilis, 19 circiter annos natus, duobus abhinc annis correptus est
gravi Dentium molarium dolor in Maxilla dextra, unde unius caries subsecuta
est. Remittentibus doloribus, suborta est Glandula exigua (jam fere evanida) in
cuspide externa Maxillae ex adverso denti primo vel secundo molari; exinde
tumor Maxillae indies auctus, qui videtur in ipsa substantia ossea radicatus,
nulla exsistente vel Cutis ipsius vel Glandularum circumquaque prominentia
manifestaa, cum dolor exiguo vel nullo Maxillae, nisi cum asperius digitis
tractata vel fricata fuerit. Ex adverso latere circa eandem partem Glandula est
exigua and mobilis. Tractatus est ab aliis Medicis cum Pilulis purgant.
Mercurialibus, Diaetis Scrophulus respicientibus, Antiscorbuticis, and externis
etiam Emplastris de ranis and ex ammoniaco, Fomentationibus, etc. sine fructu.
Veremur ne ex illo tumore pereat aliquid de venustate faciei Adolescentis.

Quaerimus quibus modis vel curetur, vel saltem incrementum praecaveatur.

In answer to this, I advised the extracting of the carious Teeth, to make way
for the discharge of Matter, and proposed Remedies to consume the rottenness in
the Maxilla.

About half a year after the Patient was brought to me by his Uncle Mr. Tho.
Chol. He had then a Spina ventosa or Exostosis very large upon the outside of
the said Jaw, which threatened a total corruption of it. They demanded my
judgment in the taking it off. I replied, If the Bone be thin, it may be cut
off by passing an Incision-knife within his Mouth between the Cheek and his
Jaw. If upon trial the Bone prove too hard or difficult to extirpate, the
Wound will soon cure without Deformity. This was delivered by me with such
hesitation as might have well showed the little inclination I had to operate in
it. Three or four months after the Patient came to me with his Uncle Captain
Middleton, and earnestly desired me to proceed in the cutting out that
Exostosis the way I had discoursed of formerly to him. I advised them to
consult Physicians and Surgeons in the undertaking. They consented to it,
and sent to Dr. Charleton, (who had been one of his Physicians in the Country,)
Dr. Water Needham, and Mr. Hollyer. We accordingly met, and together informed
our selves of the nature of the Tumor and its situation, then retired to
consult. The first question proposed was, whether the Exostosis might be cut
safely off: which was unanimously granted. The next consideration was, of the
way to take it out. But we differing therein, concluded to defer the Operation
till the Caries in the Jaw should by its eruption make its own way through.
Somewhat to this purpose we all subscribed, and delivered to the Patient; which
he threw into the fire, and departed much unsatisfied with such a dilatory
Answer.

The third day after we were consulted again, and concluded that Incision
should be made between the Cheek and Jaw to the Exostosis, and that accordingly
as the Bone should be discovered by the Knife to be hard or soft, so we should
proceed in the sawing it off, or permitting the Wound to heal again. This we
subscribed, and sent to the Patient; and I afterward discoursed with him and
his Uncle, and prevailed with them, that those who had been consulted might be
present at the Operation. Accordingly they sent to them. In the mean time his
Body was prepared by a purging Apozeme 4 or 5 days. Venaesection was deferred,
in consideration that blood would be evacuated in the Operation.

In order to the Operation, the Patient having seated himself in a clear light,
I passed my Knife between the outside of his Jaw and his Cheek close to the
basis of the Exostosis the length of it, and at that instant attempted the
cutting of it: but it was too hard. I declared so, and asked them whether I
should pull out the Knife. They all unanimously, with the Patient and his
Uncle, declared that I should proceed with the Saw; of which there were two
provided of equal size with the Knife. I pulled out the Knife, and passing in
the Saw to the very basis, made a track: then put the Handle of the Saw into
one of the Physician's hands, desiring them they would severally help in the
sawing off the Bone; so should they be more satisfied in the work, and ease me,
who was too much indisposed in my health for such a business. They did
severally take their turns, and had at that time sawed off the Bone, if we had
not been interrupted by the weariness of the Patient, and the bleeding of a
small capillary Artery in the Cheek. I dressed up the Wound with Dossills of
Lint, to keep it dilated, and thereby stopped the bleeding. We embrocated the
external parts with ol. ros. cum aceto, and applied empl. e bolo over it. The
third night the Wound bled afresh, whether it was caused by eating, or what
other accident; but my Kinsman Jaques Wiseman stopped it with a Compresse dipped in
the Royal Stiptick held close with his fingers, and was relieved by others.
But the Patient not permitting them to hold the Compresse so close on as Mr.
Hollyer and myself advised, the Vessel was the longer in agglutinating, and
raised an Aneurisma of the bigness of a Lupin, which lying in our way, we burnt
it down by a small Button-cautery. This difficulty over, we all met again, and
proceeded in the sawing off the Bone, and did all of us suppose we had finished
that work, (which Opinion was occasioned by the Caries within it, which
admitted of our Probes, and made the whole Bone seem loose,) and purposed then
to extract it. But he pleading his weariness, we complied with him, dressed up
the Wound with a Tent dipped in vitello ovi, and somenting the external Parts,
dressed them with Lenients; by which the parts were eased, and the Wound
discharged a well-digested white Matter. In this condition I left the Patient
(with their leaves,) to make a Journey into the Country 4 or 5 days; during
which I grew more indisposed, and returned home grievously diseased, yet made a
shift to visit the Patient, and urged the extraction of the Bone. Whether it
was that he heard the Wound was to be enlarged, and that he feared a Flux of
blood, but he put them off from day to day, and during my confinement to my
Chamber I had news of an approach of Convulsions; upon which I was carried to
him, where we all met at a Consultatioon, and Dr. Lowre with us. It being
suspected that this Accident was occasioned by some Shivers of the Bones
pricking the Membranes, we resolved to hasten the extraction of them: but his
Teeth being set, there remained no possibility of doing it that way. Therefore
we resolved to apply a Caustic on the lower part of the Jaw externally, and by
cutting through it to draw out the Bone. My hands being weak, Dr. Lowre marked
it, and together they applied the Caustic, resolving to meet again that
afternoon to divide the Escar, and take out the Bone. But within few hours
after the Patient sent for us to take off the Caustic. I went, and found an
Escar made as was designed, but I had not strength enough in my hands to make
use of a Knife. Dr. Charleton and Mr. Hollyer were at a public Dissection in
our Theater, where Dr. Walter Needham was Reader: only Dr. Lowre and Jaques
Wiseman were to be found. They being come, my Kinsman divided the Escar, made
separation of the Bone, and drew it out. I afterward put in my finger, and
feeling no Shiver, advised the dressing it up with unguent. basilic. hot. That
evening they all met, and approved of what had been done, and hoped the cause
being taken away, the effects would have ceased. Dr. Goddard's Drops were
prescribed, and Venaesection had been proposed; but being disputable, it was
deferred. The next morning Dr. Tho. Cox met us at a Consultation, and advised
the Patient to be let blood, the Hair of his head to be shaved, blistering
Plasters to be applied, and variety of internal Medicaments were prescribed;
the Wound was opened and dressed: it was not without good hopes of Digestion,
but the Patient died convulsive the third day after.

The Patient's Cheek was laid open in the presence of all the Physicians and
Surgeons. The Bone was found sawed off without the least impairing of the
Jaw; but it was very much eaten into by the Caries, and was spongie. The cause
of the Convulsions seemed to be referrable to the Constitution of his body, and
the Acrimony of the blood, which upon fluxion fermented, and produced that sad
effect. We see frequently the same in little Maladies. The only drying up of a
light Excoriation behind the Ears in Infants has caused Convulsions. In the
King's- Evil you may see many Instances of the fermenting of this kind of
Matter most grievously upon the healing some one Ulcer.

The Monument at Westminster of the young Lady holding up her Finger pricked
with a Needle, of which she died, may serve to show you that in ill Habits of
body small Wounds are mortal. As to this Operation, it was not dangerous, if
you consider the great Fractures in the Jaws which we frequently cure; and that
of late years I cut into the inside of a man's Cheek, sawed in pieces the
Alveolus, and took out the whole Jaw, and cured him. That the Operation was
necessary, appeared by the rottenness in the Jaw upon dissection, and may be
determined by all those who know what a Spina ventosa is, and consider the
progress this had made in so short a time.

Having thus given you some Instances of the several Strumae with complicated
Tumors and Ulcers arising from them, I shall now show you how the Tendons and
Joints are diseased with various sorts of Tumors, some whereof are without
Caries, others with it, and others take their original from Caries in the
Bone, commonly called by the name of Spina ventosa.

A Child aged 7 years was brought to me, 1. Observat. of Gummi upon the Tendons.
which had a Gummy Swelling encompassing the Muscle mastoides on the right side
of her Neck: the Tendons also of the Fingers of her right Hand were affected
with the like Swellings. She had also a frequent discharged of purulent Matter
from her right Ear; also an Ozaena, and thick upper Lip chapt. I caused the
crusted Matter in her Nostrills to be suppled by the frequent injecting of
decoct. hordei. sem. althaeae, etc. and afterward deterged the Ulcers with a
Solution of mel magistral. in a Decoction rad. bistortae, tormentillae, ireos,
etc. The Lip was dressed daily with a Pomatum of unguent. rosat. and Merc.
praecipitat. Vigon. and the Gummi upon the Neck and Fingers were embrocated
with unguent. magist. ad strumas, and an empl. ad tophos applied over all.
During which Applications the Child was frequently purged with Calomel. and
diagrid. and drank a decoct. sarsae. radic. bardanae, scrophul. maj. flor.
salviae, beton. anthos, etc. But the Cure not succeeding with these, I gave her
a few grains of theriac. metal. by which she salivated: during which the Gummy
Tumors resolved, and the several Ulcerations dried up: yet to confirm her
Cure, she took Sudorificks, and purged frequently.

A Child of about eight years of age was brought to me with a pituitous
Swelling in his right Ancle and Foot. 2. Obervat. of a strumous Swelling on the
Ancle.
His Parents supposed it caused by some distension of that Joint, and had
applied anodyne relaxing Medicaments. But upon observing the Bones of the Ancle
to be preternaturally big, I concluded the original of the Disease in them,
and that the Swelling in the Parts about proceeded from the dilatation of the
Membranes and Ligaments of that Joint. I declared the Cure to be a work of
time: we not having yet discovered any Medicaments of force to dry up that
Humor in the Bone, and restore it to its former smalness. That which was
offered by me was, to discuss and dry up the serous Humors affecting the
softer Parts, by Bandage to compresse them, and resist the Influx, and the
while to evacuate and contemperate the serous Humors. This being accepted of,
I began with the fomenting it with decoct. summitat. absinth. majoranae.
Jacobeae, flor. hyperici, salviae, ros. rub. balaust. bacc. myrtill. etc. in
Wine and Water, with the addition of spir. vini. I then applied an empl. e bolo
with a laced Sock over it, advising that Leg to be laid level with the Body
till the Fluxion should be remitted, and the Joint strengthened. During which
the Patient was purged weekly with Calomel. in cons. ros. damasc. adding
sometimes a few grains resinae jalapii, or diagrid. and the intermitting days
he drank decoct. sarsae, etc. and took those mornings Bezoard. mineral. cum
sir. e cort. citri. Thus at length the Humors were contemperated, and the
Joint strengthened; and as the patient grew more in years, the other Ancle
increased proportionably to it, and lessened the deformity.

I could give you many Instances of these Tumors; but the Cure not differing
from what has been said of this, I though it unnecessary. What the
consequences of these Tumors are when such method is neglected, you may see in
some of the latter Observations.

An Infant scarce a year old, 3. Observat. of astrumous Tumor by Congestion.
in the undressing of it, was discovered to have a round soft white Swelling on
the head of the Shoulder. It was thought overstrained by the Nurse. A Physician
was consulted, then a Bone-setter, who declared it luxated, and pretended he
had set it: but his frequent coming to dress it, and the remaining Tumor,
showed that he understood not what he did. I was fetched, and opened it by
Incision, giving vent first to an albuginous, then to a white concocted Matter;
upon which the Tumor sunk. I fomented it with Red wine, and dressed it with a
Digestive ex terebinth. cum vitell. ovi, with empl. diachalcit. Compresse and
Bandage, and afterward deterged it with an addition of mel ros. then left off
the use of Tents, and in few days cured it with unguentum diapompholyg. This
Infant was afterward diseased 5 or 6 years with the Kings's- Evil affecting
other Parts.

Such another like Tumor did rise in the top of the Shoulder of a little
Infant, 4. Observat. of the like; and of a strumous Tumor in the Thigh.
the only Daughter of its Parents. At the Nurse's first discovery of it, she
ran with it to the Bone-setters. They all concluded it out of Joint, and every
one pretended he had set it. But the Swelling continuing, I was fetched; and,
opening it by Incision, discharged such a like Matter as in the former
Observation, and cured it as soon, after the same manner as abovesaid. This
Child was afterward afflicted with a very large Tumor lying deep under the
Muscles on the inside of one of its Thighs. After diverse Applications to
resolve it, it at last came to Suppuration, and discharged an impure Matter;
but was deterged and cured by the ordinary method set down in Putrid Ulcers,
without any seeming defect in the Member. But some months after, the Infant
using its Legs, this appeared much shorter then the other, yet without any
manner of contraction or stiffness of the Member. I designed an Instrument for
distending of it; but the Child being extremely froward, I declined it. After
she was grown of more years, I was consulted again: but it was then too late.

One about 19 years of age, of a seeming healthful Constitution, 5. Observat.
of an Abscesse on the Elbow.
was suddenly seized with a white Swelling in his right Elbow, rendering the
Joint immovable. Though he could not remember any particular action of his that
should dislocate it, yet he was persuaded to consult the Bone-setters. They all
concluded it out, and endeavored to reduce it; thereby hastening an
Apostemation amongst the Ligaments and Tendons, which discharged its Matter
through many Orifices on the inner and outer side of the Joint, making part of
the Bone carious. Some of the declining Orifices I laid open, and deterged
them; during which he was purged, and prescribed Antistrumaticks. Injections
were cast in of that sort proposed in Sinuous Ulcers with Caries, also
discutient and corroborative Fomentations were applied. By all which at length
the Tumor resolved, the Ulcers cured, and by frequent Embrocations he
recovered a tolerable use of that Joint.

A Child of about 3 years old, healthful from its Cradle, 6. Observat. of an
Abscesse on the Hip.
was on a sudden taken lame in its right Hip. The Lameness increasing, he was
brought to me. I compared the Hips, and found that swelled, and the Leg
beginning to emaciate. I embrocated the Tumor cum ol. ros. and aceto, applying
emplast. e bolo, and his Leg cum ol. lumbricor. I prescribed him a medicated
small Ale with Sarsa, etc. and purged him once aweek with Rhubarb infused in
some of the said Drink, giving him the night before a few grains of Merc.
dulcis, and the intermitting days Bezoard. mineral. By this method he was
relieved; yet afterward upon the omitting it he relapsed, but at length
recovered. Others of this kind I have had under my care: but partly by reason
of the progress the Disease had made before, and partly through the Impatiency
of the Parents, the Cure has failed.

A Youth of about 12 years of age was seized with a pain in his right Hip. 7.
Observat. of the like.
It increasing with Tumefaction and great Lameness, the Parents, suspecting it
might be out of joint, sent for Thurland the Bone-setter. He declared it
luxated, and pretended to set it, and dressed it up his way. The Child
continuing lame, they sent for him again. He assured them he had set it, and
that in time the Child would recover strength in it, and be well. But the Child
growing daily more pained, Surgeons were consulted, and at last my self. I
saw the head of the Os femoris shot upward, and a large Tumor possessing the
Hip and Parts about, under which there seemed to be lodged Matter. There was
also a long white Swelling stretching down the forepart of the Thigh, from the
Groin toward the Knee, within 4 fingers breadth of it. The Tumor seemed to be
full of Matter, and to derive it self from the Hip, and that the Luxation had
been made by Fluxion, and increased by the Extension. But however it was, the
Bone was not capable of Reduction, nor could I promise my self any credit from
my Endeavors there; yet I complied with his Parents, resolving to serve them
as well as I could; but desired that the Bone-setter might be first fetched to
see his work: I not thinking it safe to meddle in the Cure, whilst he insisted
that the Bone was reduced. They sent often for him, but he did not come, till I
accidentally met him at a Person of Honor's Lodging, and by threatening brought
him with me to the Child; where he acknowledged his fault, and declared the
Bone incapable of reduction. Yet this Fellow went directly back to that Person
of Honor, and upon demand where he had been, declared that he had been with
me, to set my Patient's Hip, and that he had reduced it.

This Fellow's scurvy using me almost discouraged me in the undertaking: but
after making a presentation of it, I attempted the Cure, and began with
discutient Fomentations, Embrocations, and Emplasters, according to the method
of Cure, till I had discussed part of the external Tumor, and satisfied my
self that there was Matter lying deep under the Muscles of that Joint. Then, to
prevent farther corruption of those Parts, I applied three several Causticks
on them at one time: after which I divided the Escars, and penetrated deeper
into them with a Caustick-stone, and by Incision gave vent to the Matter (which
was partly albuginous) in the several Parts; then fomented them, and dressed
them up with Lenients, to hasten separation of the Escars. The next day I
applied a Caustic upon the declining part of the Abscesse on the forepart of
the Thigh, and discharged much purulent Matter. By the opening this at first, I
might have discharged the Matter above: but that being the Part immediately
affected, it was not probable to cure it thereby, and afterward the Opening
would have been more difficult. And indeed, though by one single Apertion on
the Hip the Matter might have been let out; yet such a large Abscesse would not
have cured so: and afterward to have cut through so many Muscles, must needs
have been hazardous. But their lying thus triangular served to good purpose not
only in discharging the Matter, but for convenience of deterging; which after
separation of the Escars I did with mundif. Paracelsi and Merc. praecipitat.
and kept those Orifices so open, that I could pass my Probe out of one into the
other till they were deterged, and the Matter little in quantity and good.
During which, the Matter in the other Abscesse discharging daily in great
quantity, and being of so virulent a quality as to retain its Cavities, and
render the Lips phagedaenous, I snipt the Abscesse more open according to its
length, and deterged it as the former, then purged him with resina jalapii,
Calomel. etc. and gave him the intermitting days Bezoard. miner. His constant
Drink was a medicated Ale with sarsa, lign. lentisc. etc. with millepedes. By
this method the Humors were digested, and the several Ulcers incarned and
cicatrized by the common method of Cure. During which his Leg was kept
straight; and time has since made the place callous which received the head of
the Bone, so that he walks tolerably well on that Leg.

A Youth of about 9 years of age was taken lame with a pain in his left Hip. 8.
Observat. of an Abscesse on the Hip.
Bone-setters were advised with, also Physicians and Surgeons were
confulted, and many Applications made; he was likewise carried to the Bath: yet
notwithstanding all their Endeavors, the pain increased with great
Tumefaction. I was at last consulted, and felt the head of the Os femoris
luxated and raised upward, with a great Tumor about it, which I judged by its
fluctuation to be full of Matter. It was expected I should open it, and give
vent to the same: but this Child being emaciated and Hectic, and the Matter
lying deep, as in all these Strumous Abscesses it does, the Solution beginning
in or near the Joint, I declined the present Opening of it, and proposed the
drying up of that Matter by powerful Exsiccants and Discutients, viz. aq.
calcis, and empl. diasulph. with convenient Bandage. During which the Physician
prescribed lenient Purgatives, with Calomel. decoct. sarsae, Bezoard. min. etc.
by which method the Patient was more easy, and seemed relieved for a while. But
the Tumor increasing upon the least neglect in rolling, and appearing by its
fluctuation to be full of Matter, I complied with their desire, and opened it
by a large Caustic, giving vent to an albuginous Matter. I made search, and
felt the Bone bare. I hastened separation of the Escar; and afterward feeling
the Skin thinner in the declining part of the Tumor, and judging that
convenienter for discharge of the Matter, I opened that part by Caustic.
Having now made way for the Matter, I cast in an Injection of Decoct. rad.
irid. aristoloch. etc. with a Solution of unguent. fuscum. After separation of
the Escar, I enlarged the Orifice toward the old one, and saw the Epiphysis of
the Os femoris lying out of its Acetabulum, and black with its Rottenness. I
dressed it with Dossills dipped in spir. vini, and kept the Ulcer dilated,
expecting what Nature would do: but in the while the Child languished, and
died tabid.

A Girl of about 9 years of age, born of a diseased Mother, 9. Observat. of an
Abscesse on the Hip.
having been some months lame of a Swelling on the Hip, was brought to me. It
seemed to me that the head of the Os femoris was luxated by a defluxion of
sharp Matter, and that there was small hope of Cure. I applied empl. diasulph.
with a laced Trowze, and prescribed Antistrumaticks. In progress of time the
Tumor increasing, they brought her again to me. When I had considered the
original of it, and that if there were Matter in it, it lay too deep to be
reached with a Caustic, I proposed the application of a pointed actual Cautery
about the head of the Joint, hoping I might that way at least give timely vent
to the Humor, and prevent the corruption of the Ligaments and Bones. To which
purpose I applied three small Causticks triangular about the most tumefied part
of the Joint, and the next day passed in an actual Cautery through each Escar,
dressed them up with Lenients, and fomented the diseased Part daily with an
Infusion of Discutients in aq. calcis and empl. opodel F. W. over all. As the
Escars cast off, a thin Sanies discharged, and the Tumor seemingly discussed:
but then on a sudden it swelled; which put me upon the use of a maturative
Cataplasm, by which it suppurated, and discharged its Matter through the former
Apertions. But afterward observing these Openings would grow too little, I
passed in a small Probe with a Ligature into one of these, brought it out at
one of the other, and kept them open by that Seton, then proceeded again with
Discutients and Internalls. Some months afterward these two Openings were laid
into one, and the Orifice kept dilated with Dossills spread with Detersives, and
the Abscesse was again restored to a healing condition. But after all my
Endeavors, new Apostemations arose, and the Child died tabid.

A Young man of about 18 years of age, being lame of his left Knee, 10.
Observat. of a Protuberance in the Bone of the Knee.
sent for a Bone-setter, who declared the Bone luxated, and would have extended
it. The next day I was sent for, and saw a Protuberance on the inside of the
Bone, a pituitous Swelling on each side of the Rotula, and a painful Swelling
on the other Parts about the Knee. These, with the Protuberance of the Bone,
made the Joint seem somewhat luxated at first sight: but upon farther, search,
that Prominence was in the Bone it self, and is usual in strumous Tumors of
the Knees, Ancles, etc. and has been taken notice of by Aquapend. under the
name of Spina ventosa. I have taken notice of it in several places of this
Treatise, and shall have occasion to speak of it again in some of the following
Observations.

I concluded this Disease to have been originally in the Bone; and, upon
farther enquiry, did discover that the Patient had been diseased of the Knee
from his Childhood more or less. I directed an empl. e bolo to be applied on
the Knee, to calm the heat in the Part, then let him blood, and afterward
purged him. The next day after I caused his Knee to be fomented with
Discutients and Exsiccants infused in aq. calcis some days, and afterward
applied empl. diasulph. with a Knee-piece, and disposed him to walk with more
ease. About a year after he came to me again complaining of it, and will be
subject to pain in it at times whilst he lives. This was the case of a person
Dr. Walter Needham and my self were lately consulted about: and such are
frequently seen at our public Healings, they being generally accompanied with
other marks of the Kings-Evill.

A person of about 9 years of age, 11. Observat. of a Tumor on the inside of
the Knee.
of a tender Constitution, subject to a Cough and other effects from an acidity
in her Blood, was afterward discovered to be lame of her right Knee, supposed
to happen by some accident of a Fall. I being sent for saw the Bone on the
inside protuberant, and covered with a white Swelling. It was possible that
such an accident of a Fall might contribute to the hastening of that Swelling:
but it was certain that the Protuberance of the Bone was of a longer growth.
She had a Species of an Ozaena, as also a Struma ulcerated in her left Arm. I
did suspect this Tumor would prove difficult of Cure, and therefore desired
they would consult their Physician. In the mean time I applied an empl. e bolo.
The third day after I met Dr. Micklethwait. The Tumor was then spreading over
all that side of the Knee. It was resolved by us to endeavor Discussion, by
the application of empl. diasulphuris: which was accordingly done. The
Physician prescribed as follows. sarsaparillae incis. ij. Chinae nodosae i.
sassafras iij. rad. scorzoner. Hispan. ss. ras. eboris, corn. cervi, an. iij.
cretae purissimae, bol. armen. an. ij. coq. in aq. font. ad lbiij. sub finem
add sem. anisi iij. glycyrrhizae ss. uvar. passul. iij. fiat Colatura; bibat
quantum poterit. Merc. dulc. gr. x. cons. ros. damasc. ij. Misc. fiat Bolus
hora somni sumend. 5. quaque nocte milleped. praep. gr. x. antimon. diaphoret.
gr. vj. Misc. This latter she took twice aday, with a draught of her Diet-drink
after it: those days she intermitted, the Purgative. 4 or 5 days after we met
again; and seeing the Tumor increased, and feeling the Matter fluctuate in it,
we concluded it necessary to open it; and to that purpose applied a Caustic on
the declining part. We divided the Escar, and discharged about 3 sponfulls of a
thin white Matter; then dressed it up with Lenients, and empl. diachyl. The
Matter discharged between Dressings very well, yet the Tumor did not lessen:
but upon pressure with my hand above near the Thigh, the Matter gushed out.
Upon which consideration we applied a Caustic there. It did not reach it: but
upon keeping that part open as a Fontanell with a Pea, the Matter made its way
out there, but in the mean while it insinuated it self below the first
Apertion; which put me upon the laying that Orifice open lower. Having thus
made convenient discharge of the Matter, I applied Intercipients above about
the Thigh, and endeavored by Digestives and Detersives with Compress and
Bandage to dispose the Ulcers to cure. But the Matter, originally rising
amongst the Membranes and Tendons, lay deep, and affected the Joint with great
virulency, corroding the very Lips of the Ulcer. Upon which consideration I
would gladly have laid it open from one Orifice to the other: but the weak
condition of the Patient obliged me to cherish the native heat of the Part by
Fomentations ex summitat. absinth. hyperici, flor. rorismarin. beton. salviae,
ros. rub. balaust. bacc. myrt. juniper. etc. in vino rub. and to alleviate the
pain in the Ulcers, till the Habit of body should be better disposed by those
internal Prescriptions, to which were added Emulsions, with aq. calcis,
medicated Broths, Asses milk, Jellies; what not? The Summer coming on, she was
bathed in Milk and Water lukewarm, and by cordial Juleps her spirits were kept
up. By these various Prescriptions the Fermentation in the Humors was calmed,
and her Hecticall heat remitted, also the Defluxion upon the Ulcer diminished,
and the Sinus was in a condition to be laid open. I designed to have done it by
one snip of a Probescissors: but it being suspected she might thereupon faint
or fall into Convulsions, I laid it open by Caustic; and from that time
digested, incarned and cicatrized. I met with many rubs in the work, it
frequently fretting out in one part as it healed in another: and after a year
and a half's attendance, I left a small Ulceration on the upper part of the
Knee, of the breadth of a silver Halfpenny, and a sinuous Ulcer in the hollow
of the Thigh near the Knee, which was not capable of being laid open. In that I
ordered a hollow short Tent of Lead, whereby it was kept open, and the Matter
was seemingly discharged, it scarce at all mattering. Her Leg was all this
while kept outstretched, whereby she was able to stand or walk. In this
condition she removed to drink the Waters at Scarborough, and returned
afterward so well, that they were thought to have cured her: yet she has been
since frequently subject to Eruptions, but her Attendant is her Surgeon.

A Child of about eight years of age was brought to me in the year of the great
Plague during my being in the Country. 12. Observat. of a Tumor on the Knee.
He had one white Swelling on the right side of the Rotula, another beneath it.
There had been one on the left side, but it had been formerly opened at London,
and left sinuous. I began with the laying it more open by Incision; and having
deterged and disposed it to cicatrize by the common ethod of curing Ulcers, I
opened the other beneath the Rotula, and gave vent to an albuginous Matter,
then laid it open the whole length, and dressed it with Dossills spread with
mundif. Paracelsi. This being deterged, and disposed to incarn, I then opened
the third, and discharged the same kind of Matter. I deterged it as the former,
and by the addition of pulv. myrrhae, sarcocoll. etc. incarned it. I cicatrized
the second with unguent. e calce, and having disposed this to do so, I left
him to his Surgeon, who cicatrized it. During the cure of the Ulcers, the
Ham was daily embrocated with unguent. dialthaeae, ol. lumbricor. etc. and was
brought out straight, and left flexible by me. Soon after he recovered strength
of it, and walks now well on that Leg.

Another about 7 years of age was brought out of the Country on me, 13.
Observat. of the like.
and lodged near me in Convent-Garden. He had been 2 years exceedingly lame of
his left Knee by reason of the like Swellings about the Rotula; his Ham was
also retracted, and his Leg emaciated. I began with the stuping them with aq.
calcis wherein had been infused summitat. hyperici, hyssopi, majoranae, flor.
sambuci, chamaem. ros. rub. bacc. myrt. juniper. etc. and applied empl.
diasulphuris, etc. But the Swellings not diminishing thereby, I opened that
beneath the Rotula first, and the rest afterwrds. That on the outside of the
Rotula was an Atheroma, and grew sinuous; and upon search I selt the Cartilage
bare. I laid it open the whole length, kept it so with Dossills dipped in spir.
vini and sir. de ros. siccis, and attended the Exfoliation. During which the
Patient was purged with Calomel. and diagrid. once aweek, and on the
intermitting days drank a decoct. sarsae, etc. Bezoard. mineral. etc. were also
prescribed. Emollient Embrocations were made to the Ham, and a laced Knee-piece
put on to make Compression, and dispose the Lips of the Ulcers to cicatrize: by
which two of the Ulcers soon cured, and some while after the other incarned and
healed to the very Cartilage. I kept it dilated with a Dossill, and thereby the
Matter lessened daily, and that Ulcer cured (by leaving out the Dossill)
without any visible Exfoliation. The Ham was much relaxed: but there being some
contraction remaining, I fitted him with an Instrument which by virtue of its
Screws gradually extended the Joint, and dismissed him with satisfaction to his
Parents.

A Child of about six years of age was brought to me with soar Eyes, 14.
Observat. of a Tumor on the right Knee.
and a white ovall Swelling on the inside of her right Knee. I applied a
Caustic on it, and the next day opened it. It lay deeper then the Caustic had
reached; and the Incision appearing too small for the emptying of it, I laid it
more open with a snip of my Probe-scissors, and discharged a Cheesie Matter. I
then dress it up with Digestives, and the fourth day took off Dressings, and
saw part of the Cystis come away with my Dossills. I dressed it with mundif.
Paracelsi, and having thereby deterged it, I added Sarcoticks to the
Mundificative, and commended the prosecution of the Cure to their neighboring
Surgeon, with direction to proceed with Internalls to evacuate and
contemperate the acid Humors. Many Instances of this kind I could present you:
but they not differing in the manner of Cure, I shall forbear, and give you one
Instance of the sad consequences of these Tumors.

A Young man, 15. Observat. of Tumors on the right Knee.
19 years of age, had been lame from his Childhood with several of the
aforesaid Swellings about the Rotula of his left Knee, with a retraction of the
Ham: he had also Glands swelled in Inguine, etc. At length a Defluxion seized
upon the uppermost Tumor of the Knee, and increased it and the rest with great
pain. A frequent Vomiting and Diarrhoea accompanied it, and sometimes a Cough.
I being consulted endeavored to resist the several Acidents by Pectoralls,
Opiats, Cordialls, etc. and began the Surgery by the application of a
Caustic on the Tumor above the Knee, by which I gave a great discharge to a
purulent Matter; then dressed it up with Lenients, hoping to intercept the
Matter in its descent downwards: but before that Escar separated, the Matter
made its way down to the external parts of the Knee; which put me upon the
necessity of opening it there, and afterward on the inside of the Knee, and in
two several places of the Joint it self. In some of which I felt the
Cartilages and Bones corrupted; to which I applied an actual Cautery, and
afterward kept them open by a Paste made of pulv. rad. aristoloch. rot.
panacis, etc. Having thus given evacuation to the Matter by the several
Apertions, I fomented the Parts with Stupes wrung out of a discutient and
corroborative Decoction, and applied Cataplasms ex far. fabar. hordei, lentium,
flor. ros. rub. balaust. etc. decocted in some of the forementioned Fotus, with
the addition of oxymel scillitic. etc. then by the application of mundif.
Paracelsi, Praecipitate and the Vitriol-stone, I deterged and disposed the
Ulcers to a better condition, that on the upper part of the Knee healing up.
But the while I attended the Exfoliation of the Bones, the Caries increased,
and the Patient languishing died at last tabid.

A Child of about 6 years of age was brought to me extremely emaciated. 16.
Observat. of a strumous Ulcer on the Ancle.
He had a strumous Ulcer on the outside of his Ancle, with a Caries on the end
of the Fibula: he had also three of the Spondylls of his Back distorted. I laid
the Ulcer open by Caustic, and afterward deterged it, and dressed the Bone
with Dossills of Lint dipped in spir. vini; over which I applied Epuloticks, with
Compresse and Bandage. His distorted Spine, being somewhat inflamed, I
embrocated cum oleo myrtill. and aceto, and applied an empl. e bolo, with a
soft Compresse and Bracer. During which Dr. Bate and the deceased Dr. Stanley
were consulted, and prescribed him as follows: Merc. dulc. gr. xv. resinae
jalapii gr. vij. bezoard. min. gr. iiij. cum succo gran. chermes fiat Bolus,
capiat hora somni, and maene iij. syrup. de cichoreo cum rhab. in iij. aq.
germ. querc. iteretur quarto quoque die. sarsaparillae incis. and contus. iiij.
ligni lentisc. ij. rad. Chinae iss. ras. eboris j. milleped. contus. number. 1000.
uvar. passular. enucleat. x. radic. rusci iiij. Misc. pro sacculo pro tribus
cong. Alae tenuis non lupulat. bibat pro potu ordinario. aq. calcis lbj.
sarsaparill. j. rad. Chinae ss. uvar. passular. enucleat. iiij. glycyrrhizae
vj. fiat Infusio. hujus infusionis iiij. rad. eryngii conditi vj. sem. melon.
ij. fiat Emulsio S. A. dulcoranda sacchar. tabellat. perlati, sumat ij. mane
and vesperi. After the removal of the Defluxion upon the Spine, I applied an
empl. ad herniam with Bandage as before. Whilst I attended the Exfoliation of
the Bone by the application of Lint pressed out of spir. vini, I healed the
Ulcer in the Parts about to the very Bone, and as that moulder'd off, the Ulcer
incarned and cicatrized, and the Child perfectly recovered within the space of
two months, continuing straight and well to this day.

One about 13 years of age, grievously diseased with the King's-Evill, 7.
Observat. of several strumous Ulcers with Caries.
was commended to my care. He had a Struma on the right side of his Neck
movable, and of a round figure: he had also a Struma ulcerated in each Arm; the
one on the inside near the Elbow-joint, and the other on the outside of the
Biceps. His right Hand was ulcerated near the Bone leading to the first Joint
of the Thumb, and passed its Matter close by the Bone to the inside, corrupting
the Bone. One of his Ancles was much swelled and ulcerated on the inside in
several places, which Ulcers upon search with a Probe appeared to have
communication with one another, and served for the discharge of an abscesse
lying in the Joint, with corruption of the Bone. He had also in the Groin of
the same side a Cluster of Strumae; which I suppose were occasioned by the
anguish in the Ancle. Sr. Alex. Fraser and Sr. Fra. Prujean were his
Physicians, and prescribed him medicated Broths, traumatick Decoctions, with
other Specificks proper in his weak condition. I began my work with the laying
open those Ulers in his Hand and Ancle by Caustic, and proceeded by Detersives
to consume the Hypersarcosis, and make way to the Bones, accordingly as has
been showed in the Treatise of Ulcers. After I had made way to them, I dressed
them with Dossills pressed out of spir. vini, keeping those Ulcers dilated.
During which I endeavored to digest the ulcerated Parts about, and cicatrize
them to the carious Bones, likewise to cherish the native Heat in the Members,
and defend them from Fluxion by good discutient and corroborative Fomentations
and Bandage. By this means the Matter daily lessened, and the Patient recruited
his strength. I attempted the Exfoliation of these Bones some days, by dressing
them with a Solution of unguent. Aegyptiac. spir. vini, pulv. myrrhae, euphorb.
etc. upon Dossills hot; and it succeeded well to that Caries on the Hand. But
the Corruption was too great in the Ancle-joint to yield to that Medicament;
wherefore having healed that Ulcer to the Caries, I applied an actual Cautery
through a Cannula. At the first application, pressing upon the Caries, the
Matter spurted out upon us. I pulled out the Cautery and Cannula, and dried the
Ulcer with armed Probes, repeating the use of the Cautery till I had consumed
the Caries; then dressed it up with Lenients, to appease the heat. After two or
three days I dressed the Bone with Dossills pressed out of spir. vini, and the
Lips of the Ulcer with unguent. alb. camph. and attended the Exfoliation.
During which I laid open those Ulcers in his Arms by Caustic, eradicated the
Strumae with Merc. praecipitat. and cicatrized them. I also cut the Struma out
under his Jaw, and soon cicatrized it. The Ulcer on the Bone leading to the
Thumb was a painful work, the Tendon lying over the Caries; which put me at
last upon the laying open the Ulcer on the inside, and applying my Medicaments
that way, by which I exfoliated the Bone more easily, and cured the former
Opening the while, and this soon after. The Caries in the Ancle was slower in
Exfoliation, and did not cast off its Shell till I touched it with ol.
vitrioli: after which it soon exfoliated, and the Ulcer cured. The Tumor in
Inguine was embrocated with valentia digitalis during the Cure, but did not
resolve till afterward. The Cure of this person was the work of a year, and
was so doubtful for some time, that it was difficult to determine which should
be dismembered first, Hand or Foot. But he happily enjoys the use of both, with
a perfect good health, to this day.

A weak sickly Child, 18. Observat. of a Struma on the right Foot.
about 10 years of age, was commended to my care by Dr. Mapletoft. She had a
Struma suppurated on the right Foot amongst the Tendons and Bones leading to
the two lesser Toes: I suspected them corrupted. But there being a necessity of
opening it, I applied a Caustic proportionably, and gave vent to an albuginous
Matter, and felt those Bones bare from the Tarsus to the first Joint of the
Toes. I fomented the Part affected with a discutient Decoction, and dressed the
Escar with Lenients, to hasten separation of the Slough: and as it began to
separate, I deterged with Merc. praecipitat. and the Vitriol-stone, making way
through the luxurious Flesh to the Caries. Then with Dossills dipped in mel ros.
and spir. vini, and pressed out, I dressed the Bones, and kept the Ulcer so
dilated, as to see the Bones so far as they were carious. But in the applying
my Dossills, they pressing upon the Tendons, rendered the Ulcer painful, and
subject to great Defluxion of a thin serous Matter, and threatened worse
mischief. To remedy which, I cut off those Tendons, dressed up the Ulcer with
Digestives, and applied Refrigerants externally to restrain the Fluxion. At the
next dressing, finding the Tendons contracted, and the Bones more easy to come
at, and seeing the Exfoliation of them by Medicaments like to be a tedious
work, the Matter having made its way under them, threatening Apostemations in
the Sole of the Foot, I resolved to attempt them by actual Cautery. To which
purpose I dressed them with Dossills of Lint, to dilate them more for my view;
and the next day I burnt them the whole length; then with my Forceps pinched
them to pieces, and pulled those broken bits out: after which I cleansed the
Ulcer, and applied my Dossills pressed out of a mucilaginous Decoction between
and over the ends of the remaining Bones, dressing up the Ulcer with
Digestives, and applying externally Compressed dipped in aceto wherein had been
infused sal nitri, myrrh. etc. over which a laced Sock was put on. Thus I
restrained the Influx, and pressed forth the Matter from its several Cavities.
Yet I was necessitated to make afterward an Apertion through the Sole of the
Foot, and to lay open the Ulcer beneath the Ancle, for the readier discharge of
Matter. I continued the application of Dossills pressed out of spir. vini to
the ends of the Bones, till a Callus thrust forth, filled up the void space,
and supplied the want of the Bones During this work, the Patient was afflicted
either with a Cough, Diarrhoea, or Vomiting: in all which cases Dr. Mapletoft
assisted with various Prescriptions, and contemperated the acid quality of her
Blood: after which by good Nourishment the Child recovered her strength. She
being thus at length disposed to a fair way of Recovery, the Ulcer near
cicatrized to the Bones, and there being nothing more to do but to keep it
open with dry Dossills and a Pledgit of diapompholyg. with the usual Bandage,
I by degrees left it to her Mother to dress, and saw the Child afterward upon
her Feet; and at length she recovered. And thus Time may be said to contribute
much to the Cure of this Disease: but without the Chirurgeon's careful
attendance, they miserably languish and die. For Amputation in this Disease
signifies little, the Ulcers rising with Caries in one Part while you are
extinguishing them in another.

A Gentleman sent two of his Sons out of Ireland to Westminster-School: 19.
Observat. of a Struma on the Thigh, and several other Tumors.
they seemed both healthful Youths, but soon after the elder of them grew
indisposed with a Cough, and died tabid. His Body being opened by his
Physician, his Lungs were discovered full of Strumae. The other, a Youth about
12 years of age, had the while a Soar burst forth of his Thigh, and had been
dressed by a neighboring Apothecary. His Brother being dead of the King's-Evill,
the Relations enquired into the cause of this Youth's Lameness, and discovering
several white Swellings about him, brought him to me. That Ulcer which the
Apothecary dressed was strumous. He had one Struma in Perinaeo, another large
one upon his right Thigh, and two upon that Leg. On his left Leg there was one
upon the head of the Fibula near his Knee, another upon the Calf of that Leg, a
very large one lying on the outside of that Ancle, one lying upon the middle
Toe of the same Foot, and two upon his right Arm. These were all suppurated,
and there was great suspicion that the Bone was carious in those of his Ancle
and Toe. In order to the Cure, they required all to be laid open. But how the
Patient could bear so great an evacuation at once, I much doubted: and to open
them one after another, would be a slow way of proceeding, and subject to many
inconveniences. I concluded it best to lay them all open at one time, while he
was in heart, and had strength to bear it. To which purpose I caused a quantity
of soft Caustic to be made, and the next day applied it proportionably large
upon every one, so as to take off all their Covertures, and dispose them to a
healing condition. For a simple Opening in these Tumors signifies nothing, but
to render them so many sinuous Ulcers. The Escars being made, I divided them,
and gave vent to the Matter in the several Tumors, then dressed them with
Lenients to hasten Digestion. During which Dr. Tho. Cox was consulted, who
directed this following Course of Physic. tamarind. cassiae recent. extract.
an. j. fol. senae vj. Rhei ij. sem. coriand. praeparati j. macis ss. infund.
and ebulliant in s. q. aq. pomor. addendo vini albi and succi pomor. an. ij.
Colaturae lbj. add sir. violar. and mannae an. iss. clarificetur ovi albumine,
and fiat Apozema pro tribus dosibus alternis auroris sumendis. sarsaparillae
vj. Chinae iiij. ligni lentisc. iij. sassafras ij. ligni guaiaci, eboris, corn.
cervi, an. iss. passul. enucleat. lbj. cort. Winteranae, flaved. aurantiorum,
eitr. nuc. moschat. an. ij. incident. incidantur and contund. contundantur, and
add fol. cochlear. marin. ad biduum siccat. Mvj. salviae Mij. anthos Mj.
milleped. lbss. furfuris frumentac. Mj. frust. chalybis recent. number. iiij. fiat
Sacculus suspend. in cong. vj. cerevisiae dimid. part. lupulat. and sit pro
potu ordinario. ligni sassafras lbss. infund. in aquae font. lbxvj. dein add
eboris and corn. cervi an. vj. fol. agrimon. cochlear. marin. becabung.
nasturtii aquatici, an. Mvj. cochlear. hortens. berber. an. Miiij. passular.
enucleat. lbij. cort. Winteran. cinnamomi, an. ij. vini albi lbiiij. lactis
recentis lbvj. distillentur organis commun. capiat. aq. distillatae vj. extra
pastum ter in die, dulcoretur syrupo nostro balsamic. After the separation of
the Escars I rubbed the Hypersarcoses with the Vitriol-stone, and dressed them
with unguent. basilic. and Merc. praecipitat. I cut of the thin Skin which
covered the old Ulcer, dressing it after the same manner, and afterward
cicatrized them all, except those upon the Ancle and Toe, with the common
Epuloticks, in less then two months. But those being carious were a longer
work, the Matter there rising from within the Bones: they were also full of
loose Flesh, and that of the Ancle sinuous and accompanied with Fluxion. The
end of the Fibula being likewise corrupted by the same Matter, I deterged it
with the Vitriol-stone and Praecipitate, dilated it to the Bone with
Gentian-roots, and fomented the diseased Part with a Decoction of absinth.
centaur. hyperici, flor. ros. rub. balaust. bacc. myrtill. etc. in Wine and
Water; then dressed the Ulcer with Digestives, and hastened the cicatrizing of
it to the Sinus penetrating to the Bone. While that was cicatrizing, I kept the
Bone bare with Dossills pressed out of spir. vini, and dressed the Bone of the
Toe after the same manner, till the Ulcer about it was digested and ready to
cicatrize to it. Then I consumed and dried the Caries in the Bones of the Ancle
and Toe with actual Cauteries, penetrating very deep into that of the Ancle;
and repeated this way again and again, till I had wasted the humidity in each
Part of it: then dressed them with Dossills of Lint pressed out of Red wine,
and the Parts about with Refrigerants. After I had thus calmed the heat in the
Ulcers, I kept the Bones dry and bare by the application of Dossills in spir.
vini, and attended their Exfoliation. But in the mean while a Spina ventosa
arose in one of his Hands, and the next Toe to the diseased one began to swell.
Upon sight whereof Dr. Cox was consulted, and prescribed Calomel. and other
Specificks. The Swelling increasing in the Toe, I proposed the cutting off the
other, supposing that to be the cause of it. The Patient appearing unwilling, I
brought in Mr. Hollyer, who encouraged him; and about a fortnight after I
prevailed, and cut it off, and some while after that cut off the other Toe, to
save that Foot. I digested and cicatrized these Ulcers to the Bones, but could
not make them exfoliate, till I had burnt the ends of them with an actual
Cautery; and then they cast off but slowly. The Ulcer in the Ancle I cicatrized
down to the Bone, that it lay dry; yet did that Bone make no have away. During
my attendance on these, a Swelling arose on the outside of one of his Arms near
the Elbow. He concealed that from me till it was grown very large, and ready to
burst. There also arose in one night a Spina ventosa on the Forefinger of the
same Hand where the other arose: upon which I applied an empl. de ranis cum
Mercurio dupl. I laid open the Struma upon his Arm with a Caustic, and
endeavored Digestion in it by the method used in the Cure of the other
Strumae: but it grew corrosive, and resisted my Endeavors. I consulted Dr. Cox
again; and considering the acidity in his Blood and the approach of Winter, we
thought I necessary to attempt somewhat extraordinary, to prevent farther
mischief; and together concluded that he should be put into a light Salivation.
Accordingly I attempted it with Merc. dulcis. But he having taken of that all
along, it worked downwards; and he being weak, I durst not move it by Vomit.
But by Suffumigation I raised it, and salivated him about 17 days: during which
the Ulcer in his Arm cured, and the Spina ventosa on his Hand resolved. But
that other in the Bone of his Forefinger increased, with great Inflammation and
Tumor. In the declination of his spitting we purged him, and sweat him with a
Decoction of sarsa, etc. Afterward he drank his former prescribed medicated
Ale, etc. recovered daily his strength, and grew fleshy; his Ulcers healed up,
and the Bones cast off in the Ancle: so as there remained only a piece of the
compass of a silver Twopence, and that loosened and thrust off by virtue of a
Callus, which, cicatrizing with the Lips of the Ulcer, made a firm Cicatrix.
Yet the Spina ventosa remained, and raised a small Apostemation on the inside
of the Finger. I laid it open by Incision to the Bone, and saw it smooth and
white. I penetrated into it with an actual Cautery, and dried it, then dressed
it with Dossills pressed out of spir. vini, and digested, incarned and
cicatrized it to the Bone. Having thereby disposed it to Exfoliation, and
concluding him as it were cured, I left him Directions to dress it, and others
to judge of my work, I taking the while a Journey into the Country. At my
return I received a Letter from his Mother, dated at Bristoll, that the Bone
was cast off, and his Finger cured. Since which time he has enjoyed good
health, and is grown a man.

A Man aged 23 years, 20. Observat. of a Tumor on the Foot.
of a tolerable good Habit of body, was diseased with a white Swelling on the
inside of his Foot beneath his Ancle down to the Heel. There seeming to be
Matter in the upper part of the Tumor. I laid it open by Caustic, and
discharged an Atheromatous Matter in great quantity, then dressed it up with
Lenients. At the next dressing, finding an increase of Matter, I made a search
with my Probe, and felt a Sinus running to the Heel. I laid it open thither,
and dressed up the wounded Lips with a Digestive ex terebinthina cum vitell. ovi.
After digestion of the Ulcer, I felt the lower part of the Heel-bone bare. I
proceeded in the healing of the upper part of the Abscesse, by laying the
nether part open to the Bone, and dressing the Bone with Dossills of Lint to
keep it dry and dilated to my view. I afterward saw it bare the compass of a
Groat: it appeared white and pory. I continued the method of dressing; and
after I had disposed the rest of the Ulcer to a healing condition, I consulted
Dr. Denton, who had a kindness for the Patient. He met me at the poor man's
Lodging, and saw the Ulcer dressed, and those Inequalities with a Caries in the
Bone. We applied an actual Cautery to it, and kept it dry with Dossills,
according to custom, attending its Exfoliation; the Physician prescribing
Internalls, and taking care of his health. Thus all things succeeded well, as
we thought: but some while after he was seized with a Phrenitis. He had no
Fever, yet died some days after, notwithstanding all our Endeavors by
Bleeding, Cupping, Blistering, etc.

A Child of about seven years of age having been diseased with a Swelling on
the outside of her Heel the space of two months, it apostemated, 21. Observat.
of a strumous Tumor on the Heel.
and discharged its Matter, terminating in a painful Ulcer. Her Friends being
informed it was the King's-Evill, recommended her to me. I saw her Hectic, and
upon a search into the Ulcer felt the Bone carious, but had no order to dress
her till about two months after; and then I began with the laying open the
Ulcer, and bringing the Bone into view. Which after I had done by Dilatation, I
perceived it so loose that I could easily have taken it out whole: but it
looking white, and seemingly sound, I perforated it with a Terebra, and felt
the external part of it hard: though after I had pierced that, I felt the
interior parts soft and rotten. I applied a Bolt-cautery into that
Perforation, to dry up that humidity: but the Matter spurted out of it. When I
saw it irrecoverably lost, I resolved to take it out: to which purpose I
invited Sr. Charles Scarburgh, who upon sight of it agreed to the pulling it
out. I laid hold of it with my Forceps, and easily drew it forth, not a drop of
blood following it: then dressed up the Ulcer with Sarcoticks, and put on a
laced Sock, to bring the Parts close and shape the Heel. Sr. Charles prescribed
Internalls, and visited her often. I proceeded hopefully for a month or two:
but there had been formerly a cluster of Strumae in that Groin, which had been
raised by the anguish of the Ulcer in the Heel, that apostemated, and
discharging its Matter down the Thigh, terminated in a sinuous Ulcer, which
exhausted her strength so that she died tabid.

A Child about 7 years of age was commended to me by Dr. Tho. Cox. 22.
Observat. of Strumae on the Arms, Leg, and Heel.
She had some Strumae in both her Arms, and one large one lying on the outside
of the Calf of her Leg, stretching downwards toward the Ancle. She had another
possessing the outside of that Heel. That on her Leg was suppurated: this of
the Heel burst some weeks before she came out of the Country, and discharged
its Matter by a small Opening. I began with the laying open these two by
Caustic. Out of the uppermost I discharged a serous and curdled Matter. After
separation of the Escars, I deterged them with Merc. praecipitat. and the
Vitriol-stone, must suspecting a Caries in the Heel. During which her Physician
purged her with this: julep. cathartici iij. sir. de pomis magist. ss. aquae
cinnam. hord. j. sir. e flor. persic. ss. Misc. fiat. Potio. This following
Decoction she drank those days she did not purge: rad. Chinae x. sarsaparillae,
ras. corn. cervi, eboris, an. ss. infund. and ebull. in aq. font. lbiiij.
debito tempore, add. rad. tormentillae, bistortae, an. j. millefol. summitatum
caryophyll. mont. flor. hyperici, an. Mj. cons. ros. rub. ij. dactyl. exossat.
number. vj. cinnam. confracti ij. sem. coriand. praeparati jss. colaturae lbiiij.
add sir. de symphyto Fernelii iij. To the Strumae in her Arms I applied
Celsus's Malagma, and disposed them to Resolution. The Ulcers in the Leg and
Heel being deterged as aforesaid, they healed in few weeks: but the latter
brake out again the third day, and confirmed me that it was carious. I went one
morning whilst she was asleep, and applied my mildest Caustic on it; and after
digestion of the Escar I made a search, and penetrated at least half an inch
deep into the Bone. I had before given suspicion to the Parents of the Caries,
and it now appearing to have risen originally out of the middle of the Bone, I
thought it necessary that they should consult some Surgeon in order to the
Cure of it. Mr. Hollyer met the Physician and my self, and after search
declared the Caries as I had represented it. He approved of the dilating the
Ulcer, and dressing the Bone dry. Calomel. Bezoard. min. etc. were then
resolved on and prescribed by the Physician. The next day I began with the
dilating the Sinus with prepared Sponge, and having brought it to view, I
dressed it daily with Dossills pressed out of spir. vini, and the while healed
the Ulcer down to the Bone; by which the great discharge of Matter which so
frequently threatens a Hectic in others was prevented, and our work succeeded
well. But this Child had a Grandmother in the Country, that out of abundance of
kindness to the Child did much frustrate her Cure, not only by her frequent
Letters, but also by a Woman she sent up, who pretended to Surgery, and
seeing the Ulcer without inflammation, swelling, or considerable discharge of
Matter, reported to her that it was an inconsiderable Soar, and would soon
cure, if the Surgeon did not keep it open by thrusting Lint into it. Others
both in the City and Country informed the Grandmother, that the casting off of
the Rottenness in the Bone was the work of Time, and that the Ulcer needed no
such Dressings as I applied. Upon which she persisted in soliciting the Parents
to bring the Child back to her in the Country. These things coming to my
knowledge put me upon as great a desire to be freed of the Patient, and made me
cautious in the dressing the Bone: for it did certainly require the actual
Cautery; but I dressed it only some days with an armed Probe dipped in a
Solution of unguent. Aegyptiac. and extract. scordii scalding hot, and
afterward with Dossills dipped in a Composition of ol. myrrhae distillat. etc.
by which at length the Rottenness seemed to be cast off. I likewise complied
with all their inclinations, leaving out the Dossills, and permitting the Ulcer
to Time. At the first leaving out the Dosslls the Ulcer contracted, and being
callous, and dressed with a Pledgit of unguent. tutiae, retained an Opening
large enough to discharge its small quantity of Matter: which gave hopes of its
being as it were cured. The laced Stocking with Compresses under it restrained
the influx of Humor, and strengthened her Foot so that she walked tolerably
well on it. But not long after he Blood fermented, and the Smallpox burst
forth abundantly, threatening her life. But she happily recovered out of them:
yet from that time her Eyes began to be afflicted with sharp Defluxions, and
the Humors fermented in one of the Glands in her Arm, which was seemingly
before dissolved. This put me upon the opening it by Caustic, and proceeding
in the Cure: which I did, and accordingly soon cured it. In order to the Cure
of her Eyes, Fontanells were made, Leeches applied behind her Ears, blistering
Plasters to her Neck, Intercipients to her Temples, and Applications were made
to her Eyes; lenient Purgatives and Alteratives were also repeated: by which
she was relieved. But they being weakened by the Defluxion, were frequently
subject to it. Thus she returned with her Parents into the Country, supplied
with Directions from hence. After her being there some time, her Heel
apostemated, and I was consulted by Letter. But her Grandmother, listening to
every Prattler, governed the Child accordingly, and I suppose it continues
still diseased.

A Gentlewoman aged 16 years, of a seeming healthy Constitution, 23. Observat.
of an Abscesse in the Foot, with rotten Bones.
was seized with a pain in her right Foot. Various Remedies were applied; a
Bone-setter was also employed, But the pain increasing with Tumor, a
Surgeon was entertained; who, after several Applications, seeing somewhat
like a Suppuration, opened it: but from that time it growing more sinuous, and
the Swelling greatly increasing, he consulted others of his Profession, and
afterward left her to be dressed by one and another. After she had languished
near the space of a year and half, I was consulted, and found her Foot lapt up
in a Cataplasm. Upon the taking which off, I saw it extreme big, and all
apostemated, discharging its Matter round, at the outside, inside, Sole of the
Foot, and Heel, so that it was easy to pass a Probe through any way. The
external Ulcer on the Foot was large, and overgrown with an Hypersarcosis: the
Bones within the said Foot were most of them carious in one part or other; some
of them were rotted to pieces. If this Patient had been tolerably strong of
Body, Amputation had been of use: but she was emaciated, and frequently
afflicted with a Diarrhoea, Cough, and a great weakness and dejection of
Appetite. Upon which considerations the Ulcers were superficially dressed with
Pledgits of unguent. Apostolor. and the Patient persuaded that the Exfoliation
of the Bones was the work of Time. But it being visible, that Nature could do
nothing in her case without the help of Surgery in drying up the luxurious
Flesh, and making way to pull out the rotten Bones, and dressing of the others
which were less carious with Medicaments accordingly drying; I declined the
meddling with it, unless I were permitted so to dress it. Not that I had any
great hopes that way: but if that were not attempted, she would certainly die.
At that instant we dressed up the Ulcer on the upper part of the Foot, which
was overspred with luxurious Flesh, with Merc. praecipitat. the other with
unguent. diapomphol. etc. and with Compresses and Bandage endeavored the
pressing out of the Matter, and restoring the Foot to some shape. This method
was repeated every other day, with Compresses of Tow pressed out of acetum
wherein had been dissolved sal. nitri, myrrha, camphora, etc. But finding the
Fungus still increasing, we applied the actual Cautery; and thereby at once
consumed it down to the Bone, and dressed it up with Lenients. From that day's
dressing the Matter lessened daily, and grew well digested. After the
separation of these Sloughs, we attempted the remaining Hypersarcosis in some
parts with the Caustick-stone, and in others with ol. vitrioli. We applied
Dossills of Lint dipped in spir. vini on the Bones, and sprinkled the luxurious
Flesh in the circumference with Merc. praecipitate. as we saw cause. If this
Patient had been any whit stronger, I should have used the actual Cautery
oftener, and thereby laid all the rotten Bones bare, and dried them with it: but
by reason of her weakness and great indisposition of Body, I proceeded for the
most part with Praecipitate, as aforesaid, and dressed her twice aweek, or
every third day; during which the Foot recovered a better shape, the Ulcers
also discharged less Matter, and she was more at ease. Her Physician prescribed
Internalls, to resist the several Accidents, and corrected the acidity in her
Blood; so that she seemed to recover: but of late, the weather being very cold,
24. Observat. of strumous Ulcers on the right Foot, Aems, etc.
she is subject to a Diarrhoea, and I fear will die of it.

A sickly weak Child, scarce 7 years of age, having long labored under a pain
and discharge of Matter from many strumous Ulcers, was at last recommended to
me. He had one large strumous Ulcer possessing the inside of his right Foot, of
the compass of a Five-shilling piece in silver, and another on the outside of
the same Foot, passing its Matter between the Bones leading to the third and
fourth Toes into the Sole of the Foot. He had also Ulcers in both his Arms near
the Elbow-joints: likewise a Struma suppurated upon the second Joint of his
right Thumb. The middle Finger of his left Hand had a Spina ventosa; also the
fourth Finger of the same Hand was ulcerated, and the Bones rotten from the
second Joint to the Knuckle. In order to the Cure of this Child there was
required a necessity of nourishing it, and of correcting the Habit of body: for
he was extremely emaciated, and the Ulcers were all corrosive and exceeding
painful. Upon which consideration I declined the meddling with him till they
should consult some eminent person of our Profession, who might see his
deplorable condition, and assist in the Cure. They sent for Sr. Fra. Prujean,
who prescribed medicated Broths, cordial Juleps, Decoctions of Sarsa, and
other Specificks proper in his weak condition. Mr. Battersby was his Apothecary.

I began with the opening that Abscesse on his Thumb by Incision, whence I
discharged a curdled Matter; and feeling that Bone carious, I dressed it up
with a Dossill spread with unguent. basilie. and a Plaster of the same over it:
the other Fingers I dressed with some of the same Unguent, mixed with Merc.
praecipitat. and with unguent. tutiae over all, endeavoring Digestion there.
My main business being, to dispose those Ulcers to a healing condition which
were in the Foot, which discharged so large a quantity of Matter, and threatened
the corruption of the Bones. I made a search into that Ulcer on the inside of
the Foot, and finding it hollow round, I stopped up the Orifice with a Dossill,
and applied a Caustic the whole compass of it. To the Ulcer on the other part
of the Foot I also applied a Caustic. The next day I divided these, and after
the stuping them with Red wine, I dressed them up with Lenients and good
Bandage. In the dressing of the Ulcer on the outside of the Foot, perceiving
the Matter likely to raise an Abscesse in the Sole of the Foot, I passed a
Seton-needle between the Bones through that Abscesse, and prevented its farther
insinuation by keeping that Apertion open. As these Escars cast off, I deterged
with Merc. praecipitat. or the Vitriol-stone, and by Epuloticks lessened the
Matter, and cicatrized that Ulcer on the inside of the Foot in three months.
The other Ulcer I cicatrized also to the very Sinus passing to the Sole of the
Foot: but one of the Bones being there carious gave me a longer trouble. I
dressed it dry with a small Dossill; and by keeping the Apertion open under it
in planta pedis, I drained the Matter, secured the Exfoliation of it, and cured
it some time after. While these Ulcers were digesting and cicatrizing, I
proceeded in digesting and deterging the other Ulcers in the Thumb and Fingers.
That in the Thumb I dilated with Gentian-roots, and afterward dressed the Bone
with a mixture of unguent. Aegyptiac. spir. vini, myrrh. and euphorbium hot
upon an armed Probe, and kept it dilated with Dossils and Refrigerants over it.
But finding the Sinus to abound with Matter, and the Bone rendered incapable of
Exfoliating, I passed a small flat-pointed Fistula-needle through the Sinus,
and made way for the Matter to discharge into the inside; then enlarging that
Aperture, I dressed the Bone through it, and permitted the Ulcer above to
cicatrize the while. Having thus disposed this Bone to exfoliate, I laid open
the Spina ventosa by Incision to the Bone; and after dilatation of the Lips,
seeing the Bone white, I cut into the thin Shell, and made way for the
application of unguent. Aegyptiac. etc. by which I dried it within, and
disposed it to Exfoliation: and at length a Callus filled up that Trough,
hardened into Bone, united with the Flesh, and cicatrized firmly. The fourth
Finger I would gladly have cut off: but not being permitted, I laid it open by
Incision, pinched out a piece of that Bone next the Knuckle, and exfoliated the
rest. But the Knuckle it self, being rotten, was so long in exfoliating, that
the Joint contracted, and the Finger remains so weak, that it may well be asked
why I took so much pains to keep it on. But I have told you, they would not
permit it to be cut off. Those Ulcers in his Arms were cured as generally all
such are, viz. by removing their Coverture, by the application of Causticks,
and eradicating the strumous Flesh; of which I have said sufficient. Thus this
young Gentleman was at length cured. He bears the marks of his Sufferings, but
yet without Lameness or Deformity, save in that little Finger.

A little Boy diseased with the King's Evil was brought to me with an Ulcer
between the Joints of one of his Thumbs, and the Bone carious. 25. Observat. of
a strumous Ulcer on the Thumb.
I laid open the Ulcer on the inside according to the length of the Bone, and
dilated it with Gentian-roots. After Dilatation I dressed the Bone with
Dossills dipped in spir. vini, rubbed the loose Flesh with the Vitriol-stone, and
applied Epuloticks over it with convenient Bandage. After a few days dressing,
observing the Bone rotten, I took hold of it in the middle with a pair of
Nippers, pinched it in pieces, and pulled the bitts out; then cleansed the
Ulcer, and dressed the remaining ends with Dossils of Lint as before. By this
method of dressing the Caries separated, and the Callus united the ends of the
Bone. Upon sight whereof I left out my Dossills, brought the Lips together, and
with Epuloticks and Bandage cicatrized it firmly. A day or two after the Child
came to me with his Thumb bent inward. I reduced it, and sent for a Tin-man,
who made me an Instrument, which being put on and fastened about the Wrist,
retained it straight. So I dismissed him into the Country: but by their neglect
it is somewhat bent.

A young Gentleman about 14 years of age, 26. Observat. of strumous Ulcers on
the Back of the right hand.
of a weak sickly Constitution from his Infancy, was brought to me soarly
afflicted with strumous Ulcers on the Back of his right hand. They had been of
many years continuance, and had rotted the Bones. I stopped the Ulcers with Lint,
and applied a proportionable Caustic over all. The next day I divided the
Escar, and as it separated, I rubbed the Hypersarcosis with a Vitriol-stone,
and sprinkled it with Merc. praecipitat. Thus I made way to the Bones, and
pulled out what was loose and lay entangled in the spongie Flesh: the others I
kept bare with Dossills dipped in spir. vini, applying Pledgits spread with
Epuloticks, and Bandage over them. After I had dressed them some days, and had
a full sight of them, I pinched the most rotten of them in pieces, dried the
others with actual Cautery, and continued the dressing the Bones dry as
aforesaid. Mr. Hinton was the Apothecary, and supplied him with cordial Juleps
and somewhat Antistrumaticall, he not being capable of much Purging; nor did he
need it, for by the method aforesaid the Bones exfoliated, and the Ulcers cured
in the space of eight weeks with a smooth and firm Cicatrix. He since enjoys
his health, and strength in his Hand.

Whilst the aforesaid Patient was under Cure, 27. Observat. of an Ulcer on the
left Hand.
a poor Woman brought her Child to me with a strumous Ulcer on the left Hand
swelled and inflamed. I made a search, and felt the Bone leading to the middle
Finger bare. It not being the time of public Healing, I made Incision upon it,
filled the Ulcer with Dossills of Lint dipped in Merc. praecipitat. and dressed
it up with Digestives and empl. e bolo. After Dilatation, finding the Bone
loose, and started up at that end next the Knuckle, I raised it, and separated
it from the Metacarpium: then dressed the Ulcer with Dossills dipped in pulv.
Galeni, and from that time deterg'd and incarned; during which it contracted
narrow, and cicatrized by the application of the common Epuloticks.

A young Woman came out of the Country with strumous Ulcers in the Bones of one
of her Thumbs and one of her great Toes, 28. Observat. of Ulcers on the Thumb
and great Toe.
near the last Joint of them. I laid them open by Caustic, and dilated them
with Gentian-roots and Dossills of Lint: afterward I dried them with actual
Cauteries, and kept them dilated with Dossills of Lint pressed out spir. vini
some weeks. During which time I let her blood, purged her, and prescribed
Antistrumaticks, accordingly as has been proposed in the method of Cure. One
day in pulling the Dossills out of the Ulcer in the Toe, a big piece of the
Bone came away with them. Finding no more upon search, I permitted that Ulcer
to heal up by lessening the Dossills. But growing afterward weary with the
expectation of the Bone's exfoliating in the Thumb, I pinched off the rotten
part of it, dressed the Bone with Dossills as before, and soon after saw a
Callus rise out of that broken Bone, which uniting with the rest of the Ulcer
incarned it, and it cicatrized in few days after under the Dossils.

A Child about 4 years of age, 29. Oservat. of strumous Ulcers on the Wrist and
great Toe.
of a sickly and indisposed Habit of body, being diseased with strumous
Tumors, was commended to me by Sr. Alex. Fras. and Sr. Fra. Pruj. who were his
Physicians. One of the Tumors lay transverse the inside of the Wrist, and
seemed to have Matter in it: the other lay upon the Joint of the great Toe
under the Nail. I concluded the Bones foul in both places, and began with that
on the Wrist by the application of a mild Caustic. That night the Child was
seized with a pain in its Side and a Fever. This was thought by the tender
Mother to proceed from the application of the Caustic: but the Child soon
recovering out of it, she was satisfied by her Physicians otherwise, and I was
permitted to prosecute the Cure as I judged necessary. Whereupon I went on in
dividing the Escar, and gave vent to a curdled Matter, dressing it up with
Lenients, and provided against the next dressing a Fotus discutient and drying.
At the next opening I fomented the Tumor, sprinkled Praecipitate into the
divided Escar, and dressed it up. After separation of the Escar, the Ulcer
appeared full of a luxurious Flesh, and the Matter abounded much. I made a
search with a Probe, and found a Sinus between the Radius and Vlna, and the
Bones carious. I laid open that Sinus by Caustic, and after separation of the
Escar deterged with Merc. praecipitat. etc. and kept that part dressed with
Dossills pressed out of spir. vini. There was in the Child such an acrimony in
his Blood, that I could not keep the Ulcer digested 2 days, nor check the
influx of Matter, it insinuating it self into the Wrist in spite of all my
endeavors. The very transpiration behind his right Ear ulcerated, and grew
difficult of cure. Upon sight whereof the Physicians prescribed as follows;
antimonii diaphoret. in crucibulo per duas horas ignit. q. s. sumat ad quantit.
gr. vij. tribus horis medicin. in cons. anthos ss. superbibendo aquae infra
praescript. cochl. vij. pro singulis vicibus, quarto quoque die sumat Calomel.
gr. xij. resinae jalapii gr. iij. cons. flor. cichorei q. s. and fiat Bolus:
abstineat illis diebus ab usu antimonii diaphoretici. sarsaparillae lbj. ras.
corn. cervi, eboris, an. iij. fol. agrimon. veronicae utriusque, an. Miij.
santali albi, rubi, an. ij. liquiritiae Anglicae lbj. lactis vaccini cong. ij.
in organ. commun. distill. liquoris distillati singul. lbiij. add tabell.
ocul. cancror. ij. sumat ad quant. vj. singulis dosibus, addendo aq. cinnam.
hordeat. cochl. ij. During the Patient's taking these Prescriptions, the Matter
relaxed the Ligaments and Tendons; insomuch as, coming one day to dress his
Hand, I found it crooked, as if it had been falling off from the Joint. I
raised it up, and causing it so to be held, I took off the Dressings, and saw
the Joint far separated in the upper part. I presently sent to Mr. Stockdale,
and directed him in the making an Instrument to retain the lower side of that
Hand and Arm, and hold it even, and in the mean time I boulster'd it up. The
Instrument being made, I placed the Hand in it, and by Screws fixed to it I
kept the Joint close and firm, and did not take it off till that Ulcer was
cured, but proceeded in the way of dressing as above said, laying open some
Sinus's on the Back of the hand, and making Compression upon others. The
carious Bones were dressed with a mixture of unguent. Aegyptiac. extract.
scordii, pulv. euphorbii, and spir. vini, applied hot with armed Probes and
Dossills: the luxurious Flesh was dried and consumed by Escaroticks, and the
Ulcer cicatrized from the circumference with unguent. tutiae, etc. Having thus
in some measure checked the Fluxion, and disposed the Hand to cure, I began
with that Tumor upon the Toe by the application of a Caustic, and gave vent
to a curdled Matter. Upon search, finding the Bone carious, and part of it
lying under the Nail, I was necessitated to apply a small Caustic thereon;
which having softened the Nail, I cut it off, made way to the Bone, and dressed
it with Dossills of Lint pressed out of spir. vini: afterward I dressed it
with a mixture of unguent. Aegyptiac. etc. upon an armed Probe hot, and
disposed it to exfoliate. This Child had an extreme ill Habit of body, the
Ulcers frequently corroding one part as it healed in others, or fermenting in
his Blood, and affecting his Lungs or his Bowels with bilious Colicks, etc. so
that the Physicians met also with much difficulty. But at length an Exfoliation
of the Cartilage of the Joint of the Toe cast off, so also the Caries in the
Bone, and that Ulcer cured: 2 slips of the Nail also thrust out from the
remaining Ligament along the sides, but there grew none on the middle. The
Ulcers on his Hand and Wrist also cicatrized firm: but the Ulcer between the
Radius and Vlna did not cast off its Bones; but being well digested, and the
Bone disposed to Exfoliation, it was thought fit to supply them with
Medicaments and Directions, and remove him into his own Country, to take the
benefit of the Air. He did so, and Dr. Barker of Newb. took care of him there.
During his being there he recovered a better measure of health, and was
afterward removed into Northamptonshire; where I attended him, dressed that
Ulcer between the Rad. and Vln. and left my Servant Mr. Yo. who perfected the
Cure. Since which time the Patient has enjoyed his health very well, and the
use of that Joint. And indeed, if the Member be kept in its true position, and
the Joint above it, whether, Elbow, Knee, etc. be some time stretched out, such
young people fail not of the use of their Lims: but where the position of the
Member is neglected, the Cure succeeds ill, and a Lameness remains ever after.

A young Gentleman aged 12 years, 30. Observat. of strumous Ulcers on the Foot
with rotten Bones.
being much emaciated and diseased with the King's-Evill, was brought to Dr.
Bate's house, where Dr. Willis and my self met at the Consultation. He had an
Ulcer on the outside of his left Foot. Upon search with a Probe the Bone
leading toward the little Toe felt carious the whole length; the Foot was much
swelled, and seemed to have several Abscesses lying amongst the Bones of the
Tarsus and Metatarsus. The way I proposed to Cure was, by the laying open the
Ulcer, and exfoliating of that Bone, and so to proceed in the rest of the work
as I saw cause. This being approved of by Dr. Bate, he prescribed a lenitive
Bolus with a few grains of Calomel. to be taken once in 4 days, and Bezoard.
mineral. witha Decoction of sarsaparill. and lign. lentisc. etc. to be drank
the intermitting days. The next day I began my work with the application of a
Caustic, and enlarged that Ulcer; then laying the Bone bare, I found it rotten
the whole length, and a Sinus stretching transverse over the Foot, from whence
a quantity of Matter flowed, which being retained by the foresaid Bone,
threatened a corruption of the rest, as also a passing of its Matter down to
the Sole of his Foot. Upon which consideration I thought it necessary to remove
the lower rotten Bone by pinching it in pieces: but it not yielding thereto, I
sawed it, and took it out. By the removal of this rotten Bone the Matter had a
free discharge, and I had the convenience of applying my Medicaments to
exfoliate them, and to cleanse the Ulcer; which I did by mundif. Paracels.
unguent. fusc. tinctura myrrhae, etc. and digested the Lips of the Ulcer with
unguent. basilicon, and cicatrized them with unguent. tutiae and the
Vitriol-stone. During which I applied Stupes of Two pressed out of a Solution of
Nitre and Myrrh in Wine-vinegar, and by Compression with a laced Sock thrust
the Matter out of its several Cavities. Yet in declining part of the inside of
the Foot I afterward feeling a small collection of Matter which could not be
discharged that way, I gave vent to it by Caustic, and digested it. After I
had thus made way for discharge of the Matter, I restrained the Humor from
flowing into the Foot, and restored it to its natural figure, having no more
left to do, but attend the Exfoliation of the several Bones. Dr. Willis began
to purge the Patient with the above-prescribed Bolus: but there happening
thereupon a Superpurgation, he declined the repeating of that Purge, and
omitted the prosecuting of the aforesaid Course prescribed by Dr. B. upon which
the Matter fermented, and caused a pain in the Knee of his other Leg. Dr. Bate
being deceased, Dr. Tho. Cox was consulted, and advised the repeating of
Calomel. etc. But it not being prosecuted, other pains arose. During which it
happened that an old. Gentleman came in, who had formerly lived in the
Barbados, and practiced Surgery amongst his Slaves. He desired to see our
Patient dressed, and seeing the Foot without Tumor, and the Matter little and
well digested, confidently undertook the Cure, by the giving him a Wound-drink,
and applying an Ointment to the Ulcers. The Parents rejoicing to hear their Son
might be so easily cured, desired me to give way to it, and permit my Kinsman
Jaques Wiseman to dress him with that Unguent, (which was no other then the
Juice of Clowns All-heal made up with Butter or Hogs-lard.) I complied with
their desires, but withal advised them to leave off the use of the Bandage,
knowing well that it would swell, and discourage the Undertaker. But they
continued it; and after some of their Servants had learned how to dress him,
they dismissed my Kinsman. I would gladly have finished the Cure, but I took my
leave by the way of a Letter, wherein I predicted what followed: for what could
be expected from greazy Ointments, but corruption of the Bones? This young
Gentleman being thus taken out of my hands, gave occasion to some envious men
of my Profession to report it otherwise to my prejudice; wherefore I have here
inserted the Letter I received from his Father in answer to mine.

Sir, I do not doubt but you used your best Endeavors, and observed those
Rules and that method which your judgment thought best for the Cure of my Son;
and consequently you may well have those Apprehensions which you yesterday
signified to me both by discourse and Letter, that the way he is now in may be
prejudicial, if not ruinous to him. Upon which intimation you will easily
believe I am in a straight, and cannot regulate my actions with that clearness
and satisfaction as I desire. But having heard of diverse instances of undoubted
truth, and from Persons of Honor and Quality, of Cures that to their knowledge
had been wrought by plain and empiricall Medicines in short time, and with much
ease, after the means more potent and noble, and managed by expert Artists, had
been long tried, and proved successeless; I resolved, though with some
reluctance, to run the like adventure, and make an essay of Col. Midd.'s
Receipt, and see whether my Son may have the like good fortune. And being entered
into that Course, without any discouragement hitherto discernible, and being to
leave the Town to morrow, I cannot now of a sudden recede, and take up a new
resolution. I shall leave my Wife here with the Child for some weeks: in which
time if any Alteration appear to make it evident that we are in an Error, I
shall thankfully accept your offer to rectify us, and set us in a more
rational way. In fine, if the issue be unfortunate, I must confess that you
have discharged your duty in giving us the advertisement; and that nothing of
blame can reflect upon you; the fault as well as the loss will be our own.

Sir, I am your very affectionate Friend and Servant, W. Y.


A Child of about 5 years of age came out of the Country the Summer after the
Burning of the City of London, 31. Observat. of strumous Ulcers with rotten
Bones.
with an Ulcer in his Heel and another in his Arm, with carious Bones. His
Friends consulted a Surgeon of their acquaintance, who persuaded them to
return with the Child into the Country, telling them Time would cure it. But
that proving an ill Surgeon, and not performing it, they brought the Child
again about a year after to London, and came to me with him. He was then
languishing under a hectic Fever, the Ulcer in the Heel was very large, and
the Bone totally rotten. There was also another upon the Os astragali as bad,
and others upon those Bones which lead to the second and third Toes. On the
outside of the other Leg there was a sinuous Ulcer, and the lower part of the
Fibula was carious, as likewise was the inside of that Ancle. The right Hand
was ulcerated from the Wrist up the Arm between the Radius and Vlna, making
Ulcers on both sides of the Bones: they were also carious the length of between
two and three inches: his Neck was also full of Strumae: and to these he had an
Ozaena, and a thick chapt Lip. I would gladly have declined the meddling with
him, as being my self then much indisposed, and the more at the sight of this
miserable creature, whose condition I knew not how to help. For to propose
Amputation of a Leg or Arm in this Patient, might have savoured of much
cruelty, but availed nothing, while the other Parts were so diseased. But his
Friends would have no nay: they brought him to my house, and obliged me to
dress him. I began my work with that Ulcer beneath the Ancle on the inside of
the Foot. The Opening being small, and the Ulcer and Caries large underneath
it, there was a necessity of laying it open to come to the Bone; Injections
signifying nothing there but to make the Ulcer more sinuous: yet the laying it
open was hazardous, by reason of the Artery which passed over the carious Bone:
but there was no avoiding it. Therefore placing the Child upon a Table near me,
I applied a Caustic, upon the Abscesse. Then, while it was working, I dressed
the other Ulcers, which was at least an hour's work. That done, I caused an
actual Cautery to be put into the fire, ready for my use in case need, then
took off the Dressings from the Foot; and finding the Caustic had worked as I
defigned, I made Incision overthwart the Escar to the Bone, by which I divided
the Artery. The blood bursting our with great force, I filled up the Incision
with Dossills dipped in pulv. sine pari Jo. Ardern. with Emplaster over it:
Whilst I was binding it up, I bethought my self, if by any accident it should
chance to burst out again, the Child might bleed to death before I could have
notice; or they might alarm me in the night upon a suspicion of his bleeding,
when I should not be so provided to resist the Accident as now I was: and
withal considering, I might at the same time secure the bleeding, and dry the
Caries in the Bone, I unbound it, threw out the Dossills, and applying the
actual Cautery in the place, stopped the bleeding, and dried the Caries. That
done, I dressed the Bone with Dossills dipped in a new-laid Egg, and applied on
the Escars unguent. refrigerans Galeni cum empl. e bolo, with Compresse and
Bandage dipped in Oxycrate. After which they carried him home. Dr. Quarterman was
their Physician, and prescribed him Antistrumaticks, etc. The Ulcer in the
Ancle bled no more, nor was that Bone much troublesome after. We laid open the
inside of the Arm by Caustic; and feeling the Bones carious, and the great
Artery lying in our way, we cut off that, and by the actual Cautery dried it;
then made way to the other carious Bones, and laid them open. Then cutting open
the outside of the Heel, and seeing that extremely rotten, in some parts quite
through, we opened the other side, took part of the Heel-bone out, and dried
the remainder with the actual Cautery, then dressed the Ulcers with mundif.
Paracelsi with and without Merc. praecipitat. Some of the Bones less carious we
dressed with extract. scordii, and others with unguent. Aegyptiac. and pulv.
myrrhae, etc. applying unguent. tutiae over the tender Lips. To the Ozaena we
used Injections of decoct. hordei cum sem, cydon. etc. and ol. amygd. dule. to
bring off the Crusts: then with Decoctions of rad. bistort. tormentill. rad.
ireos, flor. ros. rub. and bacc. myrtill. decocted in a Chalybeat-water, we
dried the Ulceration. To his Lip we used a Fotus of an emollient Decoction,
also a Pomatum with arcan. corallinum. Thus we proceeded with great industry:
but as some Parts cured, others brake out, and the Patient died in a Marasmus
after all our Endeavors. Yet that you may not be discouraged in giving your
assistance toward the curing these sort of Ulcers with Caries, I have here
inserted one Observation as it was communicated to me by Mr. Clarke, a
Surgeon dwelling at Bridgenorth in Shropshire, who was sometime my Servant.

Honored Master,
You may please to remember that about 2 years and a half since I writ to you
concerning a Scrophulous person, who was extremely diseased, and had passed
under several hands unsuccessfully. To which you returned me a long Letter of
advice. He had a large hard Tumor in the right Inguen, which reached down in
scirrhous Knots all that Thigh and Leg. He had many Ulcers on that Foot, one
whereof passed through the Ancle, and rotted part of the Os naviculare. There
was an Ulcer on his Heel, and another upon the Tarsus; in both which the Bones
were foul. He had also many Ulcers upon the Metatarsus. You were pleased to
prescribe him a purgative Pill, with Merc. dulcis to take twice aweek, also a
decoct. sarsae, etc. for his usual drink, with antimon. diaphoret. to sweat
thrice aweek. All which we observed. The Ulcers were laid open as you advised,
and those Bones I could lay bare were dressed with pulv. rad. aristoloch. rot.
euphorb. etc. by which they were exfoliated. I kept the Ulcer in the Ancle open
with a Skain of filk the space of ten weeks, and syringed in daily with a
Tincture of Myrrh in aq. Mercurial. and aq. calcis, till the Bones cast off,
then healed it. The aforesaid Water served me to deterge and cure the other
Ulcers. The scirrhous Tumor and Knots were embrocated with unguent. ad
strumas, and at length resolved thereby. He walks abroad with an underhand
Staff and laced Boot with a high heel, and is ever bound to thank you for it,
and so is

Your most obliged Servant, William Clarke.
Bridgenorth, November. 26. 1675.

CHAP. V. Of Ophthalmia.
SOar Eyes are frequently a Species (as I have said) of the King's-Evill, and
take their beginning from vicious Humors inflaming the Tunica adnata, which
increasing does also sometimes affect the other Tunicles, as the cornea, etc.
with great pain, tension, pulsation, etc. whence Pustulae arise and suppurate,
terminating for the most part in Ulcers, which leave hard Cicatrices, and by
reason of the sharp Defluxion falling upon the edges of the Eyelids, do make a
Blearedness: upon which account these Inflammations are generally called
Lippitudo by the Latins.

This differs from the common Ophthalmia, in that it is periodicall,
Difference.
and is accompanied either with strumous Swellings in the Neck, a thick chapt
upper Lip, Ozaena, or some other Accident.

The Causes are the same with those of the King's-Evill; Causes.
yet may it be more particularly imputed to abundance of humidity repleting the
Head, and descending to the weak Eyes.

The Signs of Ophthalmia are apparent by what I have already delivered of the
Disease. Those of the Causes are as follows. Signs.
If the Ophthalmia be from Plenitude, the Face is high-colored, the Eyelids
somewhat swelled and inflamed, the capillary Veins large and full; yet the
Humors are not so apt to fret as in other cases, nor is the pain extremely
vehement. If the Disease be from Choler, the Visage is not red, but the pain is
sharper, and with Excoriation of the Eyelids. If the Ophthalmia proceed from
Pituitous Humors, all the forementioned Symptoms of Inflammation, pain, etc.
are more remiss, and the lacrymal Humors are not corroding, unless there be a
mixture of saline Humor joined with it. Whether an Ophthalmia may arise from
Melancholy, I doubt; but if it do, there is small fluxion or pain. That
proceeding from the King's-Evill is of an acid quality, with sharp fluxion and
pain; the Eyelids are also more apt to be gummed together with a viscous
Humor then they are in those from the other aforesaid Causes. Whether the
Humors affecting the Eyes flow from the external or internal Vessels, may be
discerned by their complaint. For if they flow from the Pericranium, etc. the
pain, pulsation, with heat in their Forehead and Temples, will demonstrate it:
but if the contrary, the pain will be more intense, and deeper within amongst
the Membranes; there will be also an itching in the Palate and Nostrills, with
frequent Sneezing.

The Time of the Inflammation ought also to be considered in order to the Cure,
and is thus discerned: in the beginning the Eyes look red, and the Humors
distilling upon them are thin; in the augment, heat and pain increase; in the
state the accidents of inflammation and pain are great, and the Humors
thicken, and do gum the Lids together, especially in the night; in the
declination, the fluxion, pain, etc. do visibly diminish.

Ophthalmia strumosa is of most difficult Cure, and in Children very vexatious,
Prognostic.
by reason of the humidity they abound with; also because of their frowardness,
and incapacity of taking proper Remedies, or admitting external Applications:
and in consideration of the laxity of their Eyes, they are subject to relapse
upon every little disorder. Those arising by consent from the internal Parts,
the Dura matter, etc. are incident to more grievous Symptoms then those which
proceed from the Pericranium and other external Parts.

If in an Ophthalmia the pain, etc. persevere any long time, there is danger
that the Tunicles of the Eye may be corroded: and if the cornea happen to have
been long ulcerated, a Blindness follows, or at least a Dimness of sight, by
reason of the condensation of a gross Matter about the Pupil.

In order to the Cure, Cure.
their Diet ought to be of Meat of easy digestion, as has been showed in the
method of Cure of the Evil, with great moderation avoiding all sharp, salt,
hot or spicy meats, and such as may beget Crudities. In the beginning of the
Disease Wine is forbidden. Hydromel is allowed: but in hot bilious Defluxions
decoct. hordei cum tantillo aq. cinnam. is only permitted. The Air ought to be
pure and temperate; that which is windy, dusty or smoaky, being offensive to
the Eyes; so is Sunshine: therefore we advise them to wear somewhat of Silk or
Linen before their Eyes, commonly a piece of green Sarsenet. Exercise of all
kind is forbidden, and Quiet enjoined. Sleep is in these Diseases necessary,
when they can get it, the Eyes enjoying Quiet the while, which mightily
conduces to their Recovery. Their Bodies ought to be kept soluble by Clysters
and lenient Purges; strong Catharticks being not approved of in Diseases of the
Eyes. Yet according to Hippocrates, Ophthalmia laboranti alvi profluvium bonum
est: and we sometimes see after a Superpurgation the Fluxion much diminished:
but that may rather be imputed to Nature, which so disburtheneth her self. In
prescribing to these Diseases the Constitution must be considered, and after
Purging Anodynes are necessary, to quiet the Fermentations raised thereby; to
which purpose conduce syrup. paralyseos, de papavere erratico, de papavere
composit. Mesuae, of which this is the Prescription. capitum papaver. albi and
nigri cum suis seminibus an. vj. and ij. capill. Veneris xv. glycyrrhiz. v.
jujubar. number. xxx. sem. lactucae v. malvae, cydon. an. vj. coq. in lbviij. aq.
font. ad medietatis consumpetionem; post modicum colaturae lbiij. penidiorum,
sacchar. alb. an. lbj. fiat Syrupus. All the testaceous Powders prescribed in
the general Cure of Strumae are here of use, also Calomel, Merc. praecipitat.
alb. Merc. diaphoret. bezoard. mineral. antimon. and ceruss. diaphoret.
avoiding Salivation, by purging the Mercury off sometimes with infus. rhab.
sir. rbab. and de ciehoreo cum rheo, diasereos, etc. In the declining of the
Ophthalmia, and indeed after general evacuation and diversion of the Humors,
you will find bathing the Body in Water lukewarm of great advantage to
contemperate hot and sharp Humors, if the Season of the year and their Age be
capable of it.

Derivation is necessary in this Disease; and if there be Inflammation, or that
Blood abound, they may bleed by Lancet in the Arm, Neck, etc. otherwise by
Leeches behind the Ears. Shaving the Head, Blistering, Cupping, Fontanells and
Setons are of frequent use: but Fontanells made in the Neck do often cause
Strumae to arise thereabouts; therefore Sir Fra, Prujean, some years before his
death, prescribed them behind the Ears.

In the application of external Remedies to the Eyes, we ought not to be
over-forward; for the mildest Medicaments dropped into them prove generally
offensive in the beginning of Inflammation: besides, we see in our daily
practice, that the less disturbances of them go off by general Evacuation and
Derivation; and that those Eyes have fared worst which have been most treated
by Topics, We may apply Intercipients upon the Temples, of Mastick,
Takamahaca, empl. ad herniam, etc. Frontalls may also be applied of bol. Armen.
sangu. dracon. balaust. cum aceto and albumine ovi. If you judge the Humor to
flow from the Pericranium and external Parts, you may apply Astringents to the
Jugulars and round about the Neck. But if the Inflammation be sudden, and the
pain vehement, after Evacuation by lenient Purgatives, or a Clyster and
Venaesection, you may have recourse to Anodynes; amongst which Breast-milk and
the White of a new-laid egg have precedence, applied externally, or dropped into
the Eye. There are Objections made against the use of them both, viz. that by
the dropping of Milk into the Eye it may curdle, and by its acrimony offend the
Eye: so also the White of an egg may be its incrassating quality increase the
heat in them. To prevent these inconveniences, you may mix them with
Rose Water, or use them with more caution. In the preparing Medicaments to drop
into the Eyes, the Ingredients mixed with the Collyria ought to be well washed,
that they may be without acrimony, and so subtly powdered, as that they be
not in the least gritty. The Decoctions ought also to be cleanly made: and in
the dressing of the Eyes there ought to be especial care in cleansing them and
their Lids of viscous Matter; to which purpose an Eye-cup is most necessary.
This being observed, you may apply mucilaginous Liquours, or Cataplasms; for
they are good Anodynes. mucilag. sem. psyllii, cydonior. cum aq. ros. and
papaver. extract. extract. an. j. camph. croci, an. gr. vj. album. ovi, Misc.
Or, medullae panis alb. in lacte and aq. ros. maceratae, pulpae pomorum dulc.
an. j. mucilag. sem. psyllii and foenugraec. aq. papaver. extract. an. ss.
vitell. ovi, camph. gr. vj. croci j. Misc. If pain be vehement, you may add to
either of them two grains of Opium, or a mucilag. sem. papaver. albi extracted
cum aq. plantag. ros. etc. applied in the form of a Cataplasm.

But if the Ophthalmia be not accompanied with grievous pain, you shall then
consider whether the Disease be in its beginning, state, or declination, and
proportion your Medicaments accordingly. For let the Empiricks boast of this or
that universal Collyrium, they cannot cure these Ophthalmiae with any one
particular Medicament: for in the Beginning of Inflammation they require
Repellents, and in the increase somewhat of Resolvents ought to be mixed with
them; in the State they ought to be treated with Resolvents of a digestive
quality, and in the Declination with Resolvents and Detersives of an exsiccant
quality. Authors do not all agree of the set time when we should begin our
Applications to the Eyes; but all of them concur in the proceeding first with
general Evacuation and Diversion of the Humor, and afterward, suppose about
the third day, to use Collyria. They ought to be moderately repelling; not too
stiptick, lest the Tunicles of the Eyes be thereby dried, and prohibit
transpiration, and so increase the pain.

We begin with Repellents: of which sort the strongest are the Whites of
new-laid eggs beaten to a froth. You ought to apply it to the Eyelids, the
Patient lying upon his Back the while. This is only proper in the beginning of
hot Defluxions. troch. alb. Rhas. ss. bol. Armen. j. aq. ros. rub. lact.
muliebris, an. jss. mix them in a Stone-mortar, and strain it out for use.
pulpae pomor. acidor. vel cydonior. coct. in aq. ros. and plantag. ij. sumach,
balaust. flor. ros. rubr. pulver. ss. far. hordei j. succ. sedi maj. plantag.
an. q. s. Misc. and fiat Cataplasma. After the taking off the Cataplasm, foment
with this: fol. plantag. Mj. flor. ros. rub. Pj. balaust. ij. coq. in aq.
equiseti and ros. an. q. s. fiat Fotus. The third day, or accordingly as the
Disease indicates, we add Discutients to the Repellents. flor. stoechados,
sambuci, an. Mss. flor. ros. rub. Pj. coquant. in aq. plantag. pro Fotu.
colaturae superscript. iij. sarcocollae j. lap. tutiae praeparat. ss. nutriatur
in mortario marmoreo, and coletur pro usu.

In the State of the Disease Authors generally apply Resolvents, viz. sem.
lini, foenugraec, althaeae, flor. melilot. chamaem. etc. decocted in Water, and
applied warm with Stupes. It assuaged the pain by breathing out the gross
Matter. The Collyria may be a Solution of thus, sarcocoll. sacchar. albi, lap.
tutiae, etc. in the preceding Decoction: or, decoct. sem. foenugraec. iij.
thuris, sarcocollae, an. ss. croci ss. Misce probe, and oculo instilletur. To
prevent the gumming of the Eyelids, cut a piece of Sponge fit to cover the
Eye, and at night, when the Patient is in bed, dip it in aq. verbenae,
enphrasiae, rosar. any one of them, and lay it wet upon the Eye, the warmer the
better, so it do not scald. This will keep the Eye cool, and suck up the
moisture.

In the Declination, tutiae praeparatae j. aloes lotae ss. sacchar. alb. ij.
infund. in aq. foeniculi, verbenae, euphrasiae, rutae, an. j. postea colentur,
and ad usum serventur: or, vitrioli albi, tutiae praeparat. an. j. camphorae j.
infund. in aq. ros. pro Collyrio. In case the Tunicles of the Eye grow too dry,
folior. endiviae, nymphaeae, lactucae, solani, flor. violar. ros. rub. an. Mj.
radic. althaeae, jss. sem. foenugraeci ij. coq. pro Fotu. After the use whereof
you may apply unguent. tutiae mag. ad oculos; or this, butyri Maialis sine
sale, unguent. rosat. lot. in aq. ros. an. jss. lithargyr. aur. and argent. an.
j. aloes ij. camphorae ss. Mise. S. A. in mortario plumbeo pro usu. These are
to be put into the Corners of the Eyes at night going to bed; and in the
morning cleanse them with this or such like: aq. agrimon. rosar. lactis
muliebris, an. part. aequal. Misc. In other cases greazy Unguents ought not to
be applied to the Eyes.

A Child about six years of age, 1. Observat. of Ophthalmia.
heretofore subject to the King's-Evill, was the last Summer distempered with a
heat scattering over her Head, Face, Neck and Shoulders, which meeting with
some check returned inward, and affected her Eyes with Inflammation and great
Fluxion. Upon notice thereof, I directed a Clyster of Milk, Sugar, and a little
Salt, applied empl. ad herniam upon her Temples, and prescribed the dressing
her Eyes with Breast-milk cum albumine ovi conquassat. and Cloths to be dipped in
the same, to lie on all night. The next morning Leeches were applied behind the
Ears, and 4 or 5 ounces of blood was taken away; that day also a Clyster was
again repeated, and the Applications to the Eyes continued. The next morning
were given her 7 gr. of Calomel. with 15 gr. sacchar. alb. which purged her 4
times. That night she took of the anodyne Syrup cochl. 1. in aq. papaver. iij.
aq. cinnam. hordeat. cochl. ij. also a Cataplasm ex pomis acid. etc. was
applied. She rested well that night, and in the morning her Eyes were
marvellously recovered.

A Child of about ten years of age, 2. Observat. of Ophthalmia.
having been long diseased with soar Eyes, and passed through most of the
Empiricks hands in the Town and Country, came to me, with great Fluxion,
Pustulae and Cicatrices from former Eruptions. She had also some small Glands
on both sides of her Neck. I applied Plasters upon her Temples to resist the
Influx, and made Fontanells behind both her Ears by Causticks. I likewise
fomented her Eyes with a Decoction ex flor. Sambuci, chamaem. stoechad. ros.
rub. and furfuris, and brought her an Eye-cup, and a Collyrium of sarcocoll.
lap. tutiae and sacchar. in aqua pomor. dulc. to wash her Eyes. I purged her
the next morning with infus. senae, rhab. etc. cum syrupo ros. and agarico, and
laid her to rest at night with an Anodyne draught. The day after I drew some
blood by Leeches behind her Ears; and the next day prescribed her a medicated
Ale of sarsa, lign. lentisc. with milleped. etc. for her constant Drink; with
which she took antimon. diaphoret. Once in 4 or 5 days I purged her with Merc.
dulc. cum faccharo; and those days she did not purge, I bathed her in Milk and
Water temperately warm. I did not use many Collyria. A Solution of lap. tutiae
cum sacchar. in aq. plantag. and ros. finished the Cure; which indeed was done
by contemperating the acid Humors. There remained some Cicatrices, which I
left to wear off, it being the work of Time; which accordingly effected it. The
Glands did resolve during her Course of Physic, and she continues very well
to this day.

A Child aged about 10 years was diseased with a sharp Defluxion on both her
Eyes, with an Ozaena, and thick chapt upper Lip. 3. Observat. of Ophthalmia.
She had also a Fontanell in her Neck, which was much inflamed, and many
Wax-kernells about it: which I supposing to arise from the anguish of it, threw
out the Pea, and dressed it with Lenients, at the same time applying Causticks
behind her Ears. I also applied empl. ad herniam to her Temples, and prescribed
a Fomentation and Collyrium, as it is set down in the method of Cure in the
State of the Fluxion. I advised the snuffing up of ol. amygd. dulc. to free her
Nostrills of the crusty Matter which hindered her breathing, and afterward
prescribed her a decoct. hordei cum radicibus althaeae, which was cast up her
Nostrills with a Syringe, desiring her to forbear picking of her Nose. Her Lip
was fomented with some of the said Decoction, and anointed with this following
Unguent: sevi vitulini and agnini an. jss. unguent. refrig. Galeni j. succ.
plantag. solani, an. x. coquantur ad succor. consumptionem: Colaturae add
cerussae ij. plumbi usti vj. litharg. aur. and argent. an. ss. antimonii,
tutiae, an. iij. olei vitell. ovor. x. cerae alb. q. s. fiat Vnguentum S. A.
During these Applications a Clyster was prescribed, and she was purged with
infus. senae, rhab. etc. and afterward Calomel. was appointed her once in 3 or
4 days, also a medicated Ale of sarsa, lign. lentisc. milleped. etc. for her
constant Drink. Bezoard. mineral. was likewise prescribed those days that
Purging was intermitted. By this method the Fluxion was removed from the
several Parts, and the Ulcerations dried up: those in her Eyes by Collyria of
lap. tutiae, calamin. etc. and the Ozaena by decoct. rad. tormentill. bistort.
sumach, balaust. etc. in aq. chalybeata. Toward the end of her Course of
Physic, observing her Skin rough and dry, I caused her to be bathed in Water
temperately warm, with a bag of Bran to sit upon. A Cicatrix remained upon one
of her Eyes, but it afterward wore off.

A Child of about 5 years of age was brought out of the Country to me with
great Defluxions in both his Eyes, 4. Observat. of Ophthalmia.
and his upper Lip swelled from the same Humor. He had passed through various
hands unsuccessfully in the Country. I purged him with infus. rhab. in small
Beer, cum sir. diaser. and once in 2 or 3 days gave him a few grains of Merc.
diaphoret. and some nights an anodyne Syrup in aq. papaver. I also prescribed a
Fotus and Collyrium, as is set down in the method of Cure in the State of the
Fluxion. By which method the Fluxion ceased, and he recovered in 10 or 12 days.
A few days after he fell sick of the Smallpox, of which he likewise recovered.
I then designed the Purging him: but his Friends not thinking it necessary, I
desisted from visiting him, till his Eyes inflamed again; and then they sent
for me. I purged him with Whey, Manna, and sal prunell. applied Repellents to
his Forehead and Temples, and drew blood by Leeches behind his Ears; also
repeated lenient Purgatives with Calomel. once in 3 or 4 days, and made
Fontanells behind his Ears; his Hair was shaved off his Head, and a quilted Cap
was put on. Anodynes were dropped into his Eyes, according to the method proposed
in painful Defluxions; by which they were eased. But soon after he fell into a
Diarrhoea, by which he was perfectly freed of the Defluxion on his Eyes and
Lip. But the Diarrhoea terminated in a Dysenteria, and weakened him much. I
prescribed him decoct. corn. cervi usti, with a few rad. scorzonerae,
cinnamomi, which he drank with Milk. Clysters of Milk cum vitell. ovi were
frequently administered, and a few drops of a liquid Ladanum at night in the
foresaid Decoction. Afterward I strengthened his Bowels with elect. diascord.
cons. ros. rub. pulv. Rhei, etc. by which he was also moderately purged. He
afterward recovered strength by continuing his Milk-drink. During his
Diarrhoea I healed up the Fontanells behind his Ears, and after his Recovery
made him a Fontanell in one of his Arms, and dismissed him. He was afterward in
the Country subject to some little weakness in his Eyes at times, upon some
accident of cold; upon which account his Friends consulted me: but of late
years he has been very well.

A Child aged 3 years was brought to London to me with sharp Defluxions upon
both his Eyes, 5. Observat. of Ophthalmia.
and Strumae on both sides of his Neck. I applied empl. ad herniam to his
Temples, fomented his Eyes with Repellents and Discutients, and made Fontanells
behind both his Ears. The second night after I gave him viij. gr. Merc.
diaphoret. and in the morning purged him with Rhubarb-drink, repeating this
method once in 5 days: and on the intermitting days I gave him a scruple of Dr.
Walter Needham's pulv. antistrumat. By this course the Child recovered, and was
returned into the Country. Since that he has frequently relapsed, and new
Strumae have arose: but by prosecuting the former method he has recovered as
often, and the Strumae afterward resolved, we scarce applying any thing to
them.

A young Gentleman of about 16 years of age was, 6. Observat. of Ophthalmia.
after the Smallpox, afflicted with soar Eyes, with a Pustula in one of them;
which not yielding to the common method of Purging, etc. I was consulted, and
prescribed a Fotus and Collyrium, as in the state of the Fluxion; and by giving
him 3 Doses of Merc. dulcis of 15 grains per dosin, in 10 days I cured him of
his Distemper so perfectly, that it returned no more.

A Child of about 8 years of age had been diseased two months with sharp
Defluxions upon both her Eyes, 7. Observat. of Ophthalmia.
with Pustulae and Excoriation of the Lids; she had also an Ozaena and thick
upper Lip chapt. I purged her with sir. diasereos in a draught of Whey in the
morning, and some hours after sent her some astringent Emplasters to apply to
her Temples and Forehead, prescribing the bathing her Eyes with Breast-milk
mixed with aqua plantag. That night she took an anodyne Syrup in a draught of
Mace-ale, and slept with Sponges upon her eyes dipped in the foresaid Liquour.
The next morning I let her blood in the Arm 6 ounces, and syring'd her
Nostrills with decoct. hordei and radic. althaeae, advising her to forbear
picking her Nose. Her Lip was anointed with unguent. tutiae ad oculos, with an
addition of Merc. praecipitat. finely poundered. The next morning I gave her 12
gr. of Merc. diaphoret. and from that time purged her once in 5 days with
Calomel. in cons. rosar. damasc. and caused her to be bathed the intermitting
days. After I had cleansed her Nose of its crusty filth, I syringed it with
this following Decoction: fol. plantag. summitat. rubi, equiseti, an. Mss.
myrobalan. citr. ij. flor. ros. rub. Pj. pom. granat. number. j. contund. and coq.
in aq. plantag. and ros. rub. an. lb j. Colaturae add sir. diamoron, de ros.
sicc. an. jss. mellis Aegyptiaci j. Misc. pro usu. Her Eyes recovered after the
first bathing so well, that she was able to look upon the light, and in less
then 14 days was perfectly recovered. But about a year and a half after she
grew indisposed, and was seized with Convulsions. I purged her with infus.
senae, rhab. etc. and afterward prescribed her three or four Doses of Merc.
dulcis, and thereby freed her of those Convulsions.

A Child aged about 6 years, 8. Observat. of Ophthalmia.
of a weak tender Constitution, having been long subject to Defluxions upon his
Eyes, Catarrhs, etc. was after several unsuccessfull Attempts recommended to
my care. I began with the making him a Fontanell in his Neck by Caustic. (It
had been made sixteen days before he knew of it, and then it was descried by
the clinging of his Hair to the Plaster. From that time he grew froward with
it, and in compliance with him it was healed up again 2 or 3 months after.)
Having fixed the Fontanell, I began to purge him with an Infusion of Rhubarb in
a small Ale, and gave him 6 grains of Merc. diaphoret. in a spoonful of
White-bread and Milk, repeating this Powder and the Infusion of Rhubard once in
4 or 5 days. So often as I designed larger Evacuation, I mixed a purging Syrup
with the Rhubarb-drink: and the following night prescribed him a spoonful of
the anodyne Syrup in Mace-ale, or what else he best relisht. A Pearl-julep was
made him of a distilled Milk, cum aq. cinnam. hordeat. and sacchar. alb. also a
medicated Ale was prescribed him of sarsaparill. lign. lentisc. santal. alb.
passul. maj. enucleat. flor. salviae, beton. euphrasiae, milleped. cort. citr.
and nuc. moschat. He was extreme nice in taking any thing of Physic, so was
for the most part cheated into it. He was also more shy in admitting of
Topics. Sometimes in extremity of pain in his Eyes Stupes were applied to them
wrung out of a decoct. flor. sambuci, cham. ros. rub. etc. Collyria were more
rarely applied: those that were used were aq. pomor. dulc. and sometimes other
distilled Waters wherein had been infused troch. alb. Rhas. or sarcocoll. lap.
tutiae, saccharum. The Water was filtered clear. The Medicaments we laid the
stresse mainly on were, infus. rhab. and pulv. Merc. diaphoret. By which and
the anodyne Syrup he was certainly relieved in his greatest extremity. He was
frequently well three or four months together, and at length has in a great
measure worn off the many Disturbances; yet, being of a tender Constitution,
may be incident to Defluxion upon his Eyes: but he has been hitherto certainly
relieved, as I said, by the foresaid Prescriptions.

A young Woman about 23 years of age had many Strumae on both sides of her
Neck, down the length of the Musculi mastoides, some large, 9. Observat. of
Ophthalmia.
flat and round, others ovall, of a different size: she had much pain in her
Head, and was subject to a Catarrh. I purged her with infus. senae, rhab. cum
sir. ros. cum agarico, etc. and prescribed her a decoct. sarsae with
Antistrumaticks, also Bezoard, mineral. and purged her afterward once in 5
days with Calomel. and diagrid. cum sir. de pomis magistral. I fomented the
Glands with decoct. rad. gladioli, cucumeris agrest. bryoniae, etc. and
embrocated them with ol. ex ped. bovin. some time, and afterward applied a
Malagma of Corn. Cells. by which they dissolved very much, and she recovered
good health. But about 6 months after she came to me afflicted with a severe
Defluxion in both her Eyes. I let her blood in the Arm 10 ounces, and repeated
the former Course of Physic; then prescribed a lenient Fotus, and a Collyrium
ex mucilag. sem. psyllii, etc. and let her blood in the other Arm 7 or 8
ounces; applying empl. e pice Burgund. to her Neck, and Intercipients to her
Temples: by which she recovered of the Defluxion in her Eyes, and by the use of
a Collyrium ex infus. croc. metal. her Sight grew strong.

A young Gentlewoman came to London laboring under great Inflammation with a
Pustula in her left Eye. 10. Observat. of Ophthalmia.
She had also a Struma in her left Foot about the Instep, lying very hard and
big amongst the Tendons. Dr. Pruj. and Dr. Bate. were her Physicians. She began
her Course of Physic with this Prescription: fol. senae vj. rhabarb. turbeth,
an. jss. hermodact. j. salis tartari j. flor. sambuci Pij. fiat Iufus. in aq.
scrophul. q. s. ad vj. colat. add sir. e pom. purg. mannae Calabr. an. jss.
sumat ad quantit. cochl. vij. sing. matutin. cum debito regimine, augendo vel
minuendo dosin pro ratione operationis. aq. scrophul. ij sir. de meconio ss.
sumat hora somni singul. noct. post purgationes. This following Decoction was
also prescribed: infund. in aq. font. lb vj. deinde add rad. rusci iij. fol.
millefol. agrimon. ling. cervinae, an. Miij. ciner. spong. combust. vj. uvar.
passul. enucleat. vj. liquiritiae jss. aq. recent. lb iij. coq. ad consumption.
tertiae partis, and fiat Colatura; add mellis q. s. and clarificetur; bibat
bis in die ad iiij. and etiam pro potu ordinario cum cerevis. ten. 2 part. in
pastu. pulv. milleped. jss. ceruss. antimonii vj. Merc. dulc. ij. Merc. vitae
gr. ij. pulv. cort. citr. condit. jss. cons. euphrasiae, beton. an. ij. sir. e
cort. citr. q. s. fiat Electuar. resinae jalapii ss. amygd. j. Merc. dulc. ij.
Merc. vitae gr. ij. sir. e cort. citr. q. s. fiant Pilulae number. xij. deaurat.
sumat number. iij. summo mane superdormiendo. This was repeated every sixth day.
While she passed through this Course of Physic, Fontanells were made under her
Ears, and Collyria were applied ex mucilag. sem. foenugraeci, etc. in aq. and
lacte; also the Fomentation prescribed in the method of Cure, and empl. ad
herniam upon the Temples and Forehead. The Struma upon the Foot I designed to
have taken out by Incision: but I complied with their desires, and applied a
Caustic the whole length of it, and divided the Escar; then, with a
Caustick-stone rubbed into the body of the Struma, and dressed it up with
Lenients and emplastrum e bolo, with Bandage over it. After the Escar
separated, I rubbed deeper into the Struma, till I came near the basis of it:
then, in consideration that it lay upon the Periosteum, I dressed it with Merc.
praecipitat. upon Dossils of Lint, till I had digested it all out: after which
I left off the use of the Dossils, and suffered the Ulcer to incarn. By the
application of a Pledgit spread with unguent. basilic. mag. it contracted close
in few days, and cicatrized well. During the time I was curing her Foot, the
Defluxions on her Eye remitted, and the Ulcer cured by aq. lap. calam. and she
returned to her Friends. But I have of late heard that both her Eyes have been
since frequently soar.

A Child of about 4 years of age, 11. Observat. of Ophthalmia.
having been long diseased with the King's-Evill from the one Ear to the other,
with soar Eyes and a swelled upper Lip, was commended into my hands. The
Strumae were many of them ulcerated, and the Parts about them fretted and
inflamed by the Matter which was pent in by gummy hot Plasters which had been
applied to them. His Head was also ulcerated under an Emplaster that had lain
long upon it, and his Eyes almost blinded by the defluxion of a hot Rheum. By
means of all which the Child was much emaciated. I dressed the ulcerated
Strumae with Pledgits spread with unguent. diapompholyg. applying cerat. Galeni
over them, and clipped the Plaster off his head; and after I had cleansed it of
the crusted Mucus with which it was covered, I bathed it with Wine wherein were
boiled flor. ros. rub. summitat. absinth. balaust. nuc. cupress. and bacc.
myrtill. then bound a Compresse dipped in the same upon it: by which in a day or
two it dried up. To his Eyes I applied a Fomentation, and an anodyne Collyrium
ex lacte mulier. and aq. ros. was dropped into them. Emplasters ad herniam were
applied to his Temples: I embrocated his Lip with unguent. refriger. Galeni. I
also prescribed him a distilled Milk, with Antistrumaticks, and purged him with
Rhubarb-drink, also a few grains of Merc. dulcis once in three days. At other
times he drank a distilled Milk, Water with new Milk, and some nights an
Emulsion ex sem. 4 frig. By this method his Eyes recovered, the Ulcerations
healed, and at length the Glands resolved, by the use of the Malagma ad
strumas, or suppurated, and wasted themselves that way, and he recovered flesh.
But this Child was of an ill Habit of body, and frequently relapsed or fell
into other Diseases: the Cure of some of these indisposed Bodies being the work
of Time.

A Child of about 11 years of age had been long diseased with Inflammations of
her Eyes, 12. Observat. of Ophthalmia.
with other disturbances from acid Humors. After various endeavors to cure
her, she was at last with much despondency recommended into my hands. I applied
Emplasters ad herniam to her Temples, and prescribed her a Fomentation to
breath forth the impacted Humors, and a Solution of lap. calaminaris in aq.
foeniculi to wash her Eyes. The next day I purged her with infus. senae. rhab.
etc. and sent her half a dozen papers of a few grains of Calomel. cum saccharo,
with directions to take one every 3. 4. or 5. day. From her very first Dose the
Fluxion ceased, she recovered, and continued so some months, and is relieved
thereby constantly. But lately she was seized with a pain in her right Ear, and
many small Strumae arose on both sides of her Neck, which I removed by Purging,
and by embrocating it with unguent. ad strumas.

THese Inflammations of the Eyes are generally attended with Lippitudo,
LIPPITUDO,
and are called so by the Latins: but that which I here mean by it is, a
Blearedness of the edges of the Eyelids; of which there are two sorts,
Lippitudo humida, and sicca. They are both the effects of great Defluxions
excoriating the Lids, and relaxing the tone of them. Humida,
The Humida is more remarkable upon Accidents of burning by Fire, Gunpowder, or
the like: but that which I shall here speak of is, a Lippitudo with an
Hypersarcosis which arises upon the excoriated Lid, and turns it outward,
being always accompanied with Fluxion upon the Eye. The Lippitudo Sicca is an
Excoriation of the Lid, Sicca.
but arises from a salt Phlegm mixed with a bilious Humor, and lies upon the
Cilia amongst the Hair with a branny white Scale, not much unlike an
Elephantiasis, and is attended with an itching. I shall give you an Instance of
each.

A Man of about 56 years of age, of a full Body, 1. Observat. of Lippitudo
humida.
had been subject to a Lippitudo of both Eyes some months. I fomented them with
decoct. euphrasiae, salviae, beton. flor. ros. rub. etc. and after I had
cleansed them of the mucus, I touched them daily with tinctur. vitrioli
dulcificati lightly, and prescribed him some of the aq. viridis set down in the
Chapter of Aegilops to drop into his Eyes at other times: by which method he
was cured.

A Man aged 28 years, of a tolerable good Habit of body, 2. Observat. of
Lippitudo humida. with Hypersarcosis.
came to London with a Lippitudo on the lower Lid of his left Eye, overgrown
with an Hypersarcosis arising from within, overspreading the Tunicle, and
heaving it outward. Dr. Walter Needham was his Physician, and prepared his
body by Purging, etc. In order to my work, I placed him in a Chair in a clear
light, and turned the diseased Lid more outward, the while bringing the upper
Lid close over the Eye, and holding it so whilst I rubbed the Hypersarcosis
with a Caustick-stone, wiping the Salts away as they dissolved with armed
Probes. After I had thus extirpated the overgrown Flesh, I clipped off the loose
Sloughs, and with a Sponge in a Basin of water I washed the lixiviall Salts out
of the Escar, dropping into his Eye mucilag. ex sem. althaeae, psyllii and
cydonior. extracted in aq. plantag. then laying him upon his Back, I covered
over the external parts with Whites of eggs beaten with a piece of Alume to a
Froth, and thereby restrained the Fluxion. After the Escar separated, I rubbed
the remaining Superexcrescence with a Vitriol-stone, washing the Salts out
afterward with fair Water. During this work he was let blood, and frequently
washed his Eye with a Solution of troch. alb. Rhasis and aq. plantag. and
solani. Thus in the space of 3 months it was extirpated and cured, the Eyelid
returning naturally as the other.

A Man of about 26 years of age, 3. Observat. of Lippitudo sicca.
having been afflicted from his infancy with soar Eyes, consulted Sr. Fra.
Prujean, who sent for me. The Patient had a certain Blearedness of both the
left Eyelids from the external Canthus downwards, but more especially on the
lower Lid; which Blearedness was covered with small white branny Scales
investing the Hair. His Physician purged him with an infus. senae, rhab. etc.
and prescribed a Fontanell behind that Ear, also Venaesection in that Arm,
which was accordingly done. I fomented the diseased Parts with a Decoction of
summit. malvar. violar. flor. sambuci, meliloti, sem. lini and foenugraeci, and
anointed them cum ol. vitell. ovor. at least twice aday. By this the dry Scales
were suppled, and after picked off from the Hair and edges of the Eyelids. Then
I touched the bleared edges with aq. viridis, and anointed them with unguent.
tutiae, as it is described in the Pharmacopoeia Londinensis; by which and
internal Prescriptions he was cured.

CHAP. VI. Of Aegilops.
AEGilops is a Tubercle in the inner Canthus of the Eye, either Scrophulous,
Atheromatous, or of the nature of a Meliceris, or sometime with Inflammation.
It has obtained two names amongst the Grecians: Names.
viz. Anchylops, when it is not ulcerated; Aegilops, when it is. In which
latter case it is very apt to grow sinuous; and being so, whether it prove
callous or not, is however called Fistula lacrymalis, sometimes passing through
the Bone of the Nose it self.

The Causes of Aegilops are the same that produce the like Tumors in other
places. Causes.
But in some cases it is made by Fluxion, and appears first as a small
Phlegmon. This Disease frequently occurreth in Lues Venerea: but these I here
treat of are Strumous.

If it be Struma Atheroma, Signs.
etc. it is then made by Congestion, and the Tubercle is round, without
discoloring the Skin. If it be made by Fluxion, pain and redness do appear,
with Inflammation over all that Eye. Sometimes it begins only with a
weeping of that corner, and is not discovered till it affects the Eye with
redness; and then, by pressure with your finger upon that Canthus, a mixed
Matter may be discharged, part whereof is not unlike the White of an egg.
Sometimes this Matter eats quite through the Bone, and discharges it self
downwards through the Nose with a foetid smell.

Fistulae lacrymales are difficult of Cure from what Cause soever they arise.
Prognostic.
The Part being loose and spongy, the Eye very sensible, and the laxity of the
Part, makes Humors apt to soak into it, and to penetrate even to the Bone it
self. The sensibleness of the Eye renders it subject to pain and fluxion, as
also unfit to be dressed with sharp Medicaments, such as these Diseases require.

That Fistula which is recent, with sufficient opening is the easiest of Cure.
Those of a long continuance are for the most part accompanied with Ulcerations
of the Gland, and Caries in the Bone, which makes them subject to a weeping
after they are cured. If the Ulcer be accompanied with Erosion, it will be apt
to terminate cancerous; in which case the Cure is deplorable.

The indication of Cure is taken from the condition of the Aegilops, Cure.
whether it be in its beginning with Inflammation, or by Congestion, passing
its Matter forth under the Cilium into the Eye: in which case it is fistulated.
Anchylops has also its peculiar way of treating, as other Tumors of the
Glands.

In the beginning of Aegilops Bleeding by Lancet is necessary, and so is
Purging, also such Alteratives as have been prescribed in the general Cure of
Strumae, with regulation of Diet accordingly.

Externally we apply Repellents to the diseased Part, to prevent Fluxion, of
aqua portulac. lactucae, plantag. equiseti, solani, sperm. ranar. etc. cum
albumin. ovor. bolo Armen. etc. To intercept the Matter we apply gum. mastich.
takamahaca, emplast. ad herniam, to the Temples and Parts about. If the Tumor
increase with tension and pain, it will then be reasonable to endeavor
Discussion by Medicaments already described in Ophthalmia, of summitat.
absinth. flor. sambuci, rutae, far. lentium, orobi, etc. decocted in Wine or
common Lixive. In the Anchylops rancid Nuts beaten and applied are much
commended: so likewise is calx viva cum melle contrita. If the Tumor tend to
Suppuration, then hasten Concoction cum radic. lilior. mucilag. sem. althaeae,
foenugraeci, lini, far. tritic. axung. porcin. etc. The Matter being well
concocted, lay it open large, that you may have way to apply your Medicaments.
Authors have proposed various Escaroticks to open these; but I use the opening
them by Knife or Caustic. The only Caution is, that you open it such a
distance off from the edge of the Eyelid, that you divide not that: for in so
doing you will leave a remediless Blemish, and the Eye will be apt to water
ever after, and be subject to Fluxion. Therefore if you open it by Caustic, it
will require your greater care. I for the most part open them by Incision. Then
digest them with a Dossill dipped in oleo ros. and vitell. ovi; over which apply
cerat. Galeni, or such like Anodynes, with a Compresse dipped in some of the
abovesaid distilled Waters, to contemperate the heat in the Part; and
afterward deterge with mel ros. sir de ros. siccis; or, mell. comm. ij.
viridis aeris j. spir. vini iiij. coquantur ad tertiae partis consumptionem:
and then dispose them to cicatrize with this; myrobalan. citr. j. thuris,
myrrhae, an. ij. floris aeris j. camphorae gr. ij. infund. in aq. ros. and vini
albi an. iiij. and coquantur ad tertiae partis consumptionem, filtrando pro
usu. And afterward by unguent. tutiae, aq. calcis, etc. with good Compression
incarn and cicatrize them.

If it be Fistulous, and the Orifice small, dilate it with Gentian-roots, or
such like, and proceed with Detersives, as has been said. If thereby the
Callus do not waste, you may inject this following Decoction; fol. rutae,
chelidon. min. agrimon. an. Mss. infund. per noctem spir. vini lb ss. coletur
pro usu: and apply this following upon Dossills; zinziberis ij. viridis aeris
ij. mell. ros. iij. aceti opt. iiij. coq. ad crassitiem. If there be Caries,
apply this: vitrioli usti, cantharid. absciss. alis and capitibus, calcis
vivae, salis ammoniac. alumin. roch. an. p. aeq. cum urina pueri inspissat.
These are the Medicaments proposed by Authors of good authority.

In the applying them the Parts about must be well defended, and the Fluxion
restrained by the application of Refrigerants; and after all it is a most
painful tedious way. Therefore I propose the use of the actual Cautery; which
being applied through a Cannula will with one touch waste the Callosity and
Caries: after which dress it up with a Dossill dipped in a mixture of ol. ros.
cum albumine ovi, and a Compresse in the same over all: then digest and deterge
with the milder Prescriptions, keeping the Orifice dilated with a Dossill dipped
in tinctura myrrhae, etc. till the Bone exfoliate: then with unguent. tutiae,
etc. with Compression cicatrize.

The Anchylops requires Extirpation, and is to be cured accordingly to what is
proposed in this Treatise.

A Young Gentlewoman, abounding with acid Serum, 1. Observat. of Aegilops with
Inflammation.
was seized with an Inflammation and Tumor in the great Canthus or Angle of
her Eye. She had been dressed by some neighboring Friend till the Inflammation
closed up her Eyelid, and alarmed her by the great discharge of a mixed ferous
Matter I, observing the Tumor perfectly suppurated, and the Matter shining
under the Cuticula ready to burst through, opened it by the point of a Lancet,
without drawing one drop of blood. The Matter discharged, I dressed it with a
Dossill dipped in vitello ovi, with a Plaster of cerat. Galeni, and Clothes dipped
in Red wine over all, with convenient Bandage to retain them on. The next day I
took off Dressings, and fomented it with decoct. fol. malv. viol. betonic.
salviae, and flor. ros. rub. in Wine and Water, repeating the Dressings as
before, and let her blood in the Arm. At the next day's dressing I found the
Swelling of her Eyelid relaxed, and the external Inflammation mitigated, but
the Eye it self inflamed. I fomented and dressed the Abscesse with a Dossill
dipped in sir. de ros. siccis, applying a Pledgit of unguent. tutiae over it,
with a soft Compresse thereupon; leaving the Eye at liberty to be refreshed by
the Air, and to be dressed with Breast-milk, etc. as they pleased. To the
Forehead Frontlets were applied to restrain and intercept the Influx. Sr. Fra.
Pruj. was her Physician, and prescribed her lenient Purgatives, traumatick
Decoctions, etc. I also kept the Orifice open sufficiently for discharge of the
Matter and convenience of dressing, applying externally refrigerant and
exsiccant Medicaments, and adding a few drops of tinctura viridis to the Syrup
in which I dipped my Dossills. Yet notwithstanding our endeavors, the Matter
having made its passage into the Eye during the time of Suppuration, it
continued its course, and flowed both ways in too great a quantity for some
time. Upon which consideration I dressed the Ulcer with a Dossill dipped in
Praecipitate, and applied over it a Pledgit cum unguent. tutiae Vigonis, with
Compresse and Bandage. After I had thus digested it, I dressed it with a
Dossill dipped in aq. viridis, (as it is prescribed in the method of Cure,)
lessening the said Dossill daily, and at last cicatrized it firm.

A scrophulous Child of about 4 years of age having an inflamed Tubercle in the
great Angle of her left Eye, 2. Observat. of Aegilops with Inflammation.
the Matter being suppurated, I opened it by Incision, and discharged a
well-concocted Matter; then fomented the Tumor with Wine, and filled the
Abscesse with Dossils dipped in sir. de ros. sicc. with a Pledgit of unguent.
basilic. over it, also a Plaster of cerat. Galeni over that, and bound it up,
proceeding daily in the fomenting and dressing it, till the Inflammation and
Swelling remitted. After which I added a few drops of tinctura viridis to the
Syrup, and kept the Ulcer dilated with a Dossill dipped and pressed out of that
Mixture, applying a Pledgit of unguent. ex lap. calamin. with Compresse and
Bandage over it. And the better to dispose the Ulcer to cure, I purged her once
in 4 or 5 days with an Infusion of Rhubarb in Small beer, and once aweek with a
few grains of Merc. dulc. cum saccharo. The Matter diminishing, I lessened the
Dossill, and cicatrized it with the aforesaid Tincture, making good Bandage
upon the Sinus till it was close united, and ceased weeping.

A Gentlewoman of about 25 years of age having been between 3 and 4 years
subject to the King's-Evill and a Fistula weeping into the Eye from the great
Canthus, 3. Observat. of Fistula lacrymalis.
I prescribed her aq. lap. medicament. Crollii to drop into that corner of her
Eye, and directed her the making a constant Compression upon the external
Parts by an Instrument made to that purpose: by which she was in few months
cured. And by the same way, with the help of Internalls, I have cured many of
those, where the Bone has not been carious, or the Habit of body extremely
indisposed.

A Boy about 7 or 8 years of age, 4 Observat. of Fistula lacrymalis.
of a very ill Habit of body, had also been two years diseased with a Fistula
lacrymalis, and consulted some of our Profession. But they deterred him and his
Parents with the mention of the actual Cautery: whereupon he was put into my
hands to cure. I made Incision into the Cavity, and put into it a
proportionable piece of Gentian-root, with a Pledgit of Basilicon over it, and
a Compresse pressed out of some of the aforementioned distilled Waters. The
second day after I repeated the same manner of dressing, and continued to keep
it dilated with some of the same Roots. During which I endeavored to restrain
the influx of Humors, and dry up those affecting the Part, according as has
been set down in the method of Cure, and by Antistrumaticks disposed the
Humors to a healing condition. The Fluxion being thus removed, and the Matter
little, I left off the use of the Gentian-root, and dressed the Ulcer with
Dossils dipped and pressed out of aq. med. Crollii, and after some days lessened
them daily. Afterward I left off the Dossills, and cicatrized the Ulcer with
Pledgits of unguent. tutiae, etc. Many such I have so cured: but some years
after I have seen diverse of them thus cured weeping again.

A Girl of about 12 years of age having a Fistula lacrymalis of some years
continuance, discharging a mixed crude Matter daily into the Eye, 5. Observat.
of Fistula lacrymalis.
I laid it open by Incision, dilated and digested it, and endeavored by
Internalls to dispose the Body to a better habit, and prosecuted the Cure by
Exsiccants. But it not yielding thereto, I separated the Periosteum from the
Bone, made Exfoliation of it, and incarned upon that, supposing I had by
Compression cicatrized the Ulcer. But it brake out again upon the leaving off
the Bandage; upon which I dilated it again, and by actual Cautery consumed the
Callus and Bone: after which it cured more easily.

A Gentlewoman aged about 38 years had a Fistula lacrymalis discharging its
Matter into the Eye in great quantity. 6. Observat. of Fistula lacrymalis.
I applied a small Caustic upon that part of it where I felt the Cavity; and
having eaten into it, I passed an actual Cautery through it to the Bone,
whereby I cauterized it, then dressed the burnt Escar with Lenients to hasten
its Separation, and afterward deterged and cicatrized the Ulcer as has been
before showed.

A Young fellow, aged 28 years, was commended to me out of the City, 7.
Observat. of Fistula lacrymalis.
having a Fistula lacrymalis discharging a great quantity of purulent Matter
into the Eye. He had suffered many years by it, and passed through many hands
unsuccessfully. I laid it open by Incision, and dilated it, endeavoring some
while to digest it, and to that purpose prescribed various Internalls: but the
Matter rather increasing, I passed a Cannula into the Cavity, and with an
actual Cautery pierced through that side of the Bone of the Nose, thereby
diverting the Matter, and afterward cured the Ulcer with more ease; the Bone
also exfoliated, and filled up with Callus.

I could give you more Instances of the Cures of Fistulae lacrymales: but the
manner thereof differs not from what has before been said; and by the
actual Cautery I never failed in the Cure of the worst of them.

A Woman aged about 30 years having a Tubercle in the great Canthus of the
right Eye of the bigness of a Pistol-bullet, I made Incision of the Skin, 8.
Observat. of Anchylops.
and separating it from the preternaturall body, I raised it up. In taking it
out, the Cystis broke, and showed it self by its Matter to be a Meliceris. I
cleansed the Wound, and cut it out, bringing away the Cystis; then closed up
the Lips of the Wound, and applied a Pledgit of unguent. basilic. with Bandage
over it, and cured it by Agglutination. These Tubercles do frequently yield to
Discutients: and some times, after they have resisted all our Endeavors, they
have of themselves resolved. Particularly I saw it in an Ensign in the
Low Countries, who was troubled with a Tubercle of the bigness of a Pigeon's
egg, which had been of many years continuance. He intended to have been my
Patient there, and some years after designed to have put himself into my hands
here: but a while after it dissipated so as there remained no mark of it.

A young Gentlewoman came to London recommended to me having a Tubercle in the
great Angle of her right Eye, 9. Observat. of Anchylops.
of the bigness of a Lupin. Many endeavors had been used in the Country to
resolve it. I began with Discutients, Bleeding, Purging, etc. and thought I had
thereby dissipated the Matter: but after a few days discontinuance of Topics
and Bandage, it appeared again: upon sight whereof I opened it by Incision, and
discharged a Matter like the White of an egg. I could not perceive any Cystis,
yet judged it an Atheroma. Having dressed it with a Dossill dipped in
Praecipitate, I applied another over it spread with basilicon, with a Compresse
over that dipped in aq. ros. rub. and solani. The third day I repeated the same
kind of Dressings, and continued them till I had well deterged and digested the
Ulcer; then dressed it with a Dossill dipped in a Sarcotick tincture of Myrrh,
Aloes, etc. and afterward proceeded with Epuloticks, and thought it had been
cicatrized. But pressing with my finger one day upon the upper part of it, and
a disproportionate quantity of Matter flowing forth, I passed in my Probe, and
feeling the Bone carious, I dilated it with Gentian-roots, passed in a Cannula
to the Caries, and with an actual Cautery dried the Bone. I applied to it ol.
ros. cum albumine ovi; and afterward dressed the Ulcer daily for the first 4
or 5 days with Dossils dipped in decoct. hordei, rad. consolid. maj. and when the
anguish was mitigated, with tinctura myrrhae, keeping the Orifice open till the
Exfoliation was perfected; then cicatrized it, as has been showed in the
former Observations.

A poor Woman came to me out of the Country with a large Tubercle on the right
Canthus: 10. Observat. of Anchylops with a Polypus.
she had also a Polypus in that Nostrill. I began with the Tubercle by the
application of a Caustic. After the separation of which a Fungus thrust forth,
and grew very vexatious in the eradicating. After I had spent some time
unsuccessfully in the work, I began with the Polypus, attempting to thrust it
out with my finger: but it not yielding that way, I took hold of it with a
Forceps Ducks bills, and having pulled it outward, I passed a Needle with a
twisted brown Thread through it, according to Fab. ab Aquapend. and pulling by
that and my Forceps together, it came away about the length of two inches, but
was attended with a flux of blood from the Nose, Mouth and Eye; which was stopped
by the syringing up of Oxycrate. At the next dressing of the Ulcer in the
Canthus I missed the Fungus,, and found a great hole in the Bone of the Nose.
Upon sight of which I concluded the Fungus which had been there was the root of
that Polypus. The Bone was much corrupted: but I hastened the external Cure of
the Ulcer, and returned her into the Country, leaving the Exfoliation of the
Bone to Nature.

Having treated accidentally of a Polypus, I thought my self obliged to give
you one Observation of an Ozaena, it being an Ulcer within the Nose; and though
it be not the King's-Evill, yet it too frequently accompanies it, and is
occasioned by those sharp Humors passing that way, and yields not otherwise
to Cure then by the general method prescribed in this Treatise.

A young Gentlewoman aged about 15 years, 11. Observat. of Ozaena.
of a lean dry Constitution, was diseased with an Ozaena in both her Nostrills,
a thick upper Lip, and some Glands on both sides of her Neck. She was put into
the hands of Dr. Barwick and my self. He prescribed her as follows. sen.
oriental. ij. Rhei opt. ineis. ss. pulp. tamar. ss. sir. e pom. purg. and mann.
opt. an. v. infund. S. A. in vini alb. iiij. Colatura clarisicetur cum ovi
album. and propinetur mane ad iiij. cum regimine. Singulis noviluniis and
pleniluniis sumat Calomel. gr. xij. diacryd. sulphurat. gr. vj. in formam Boli
redactor. cum conserv. viol. ss. sir. sir. viol. tantillo. ocul. cancror.
Mercur. diaphoret. coral. rub. praeparat. an. gr. iij. Misc. Capiat bis vel
ter quotidie in cochl. j. lact. vacc. cum asellis distillati, and superbibat
cochl. v. vel vj. cum sacchar. opt. dulcorat.

I began my work with the moistning of the crusted Matter sticking in her
Nostrills, by frequent injecting of this: hord. mundati j. sem. althaeae iij.
sem. cucurbit. melon. siccat. an. ss. infund. and coquantur in aq. font. ad
lbjss. cobetur pro usu. After her Nostrills were herewith syringed, she snuft
up a little ol. amygd. dulc. Her upper Lip and Neck were embrocated with
unguent. ad strumas morning and evening. After her Nostrills were freed of that
crusty stuff, this following Errhinum was snuft up into her Nostrills twice
aday at least: fol. plantag. summitat. equiseti, an. Mj. rad. bistortae,
tormentillae, an. j. flor. ros. rubr. Mss. Balaust. iij. coquantur in aq.
chalybeat. ad lbij. Colaturae add syrup. nostrimag. as it is prescribed in the
Cure of Ozaena in the Treatise of Lues Venerea. The edges of her Nostrills were
anointed with unguent. refriger. Galeni cum ceruss. antimonii. By the frequent
repeating of the aforementioned internal Prescriptions and external
Applications, she was happily cured in the space of a month, and so continues
to this day. And by this method all these kind of Ozaenae may be cured.

The Eyelids are frequently diseased with glandulous Tubercles; which, how
different Matter soever they contain, are generally called Hordeoli, and do
take their original from the same Marter that those Tumors do which are
described in this Treatise of Strumae, and are cured after the same manner.
Sometimes they resolve or suppurate: but for the most part they are taken out
by Knife or Caustic. These only that lie between the inner Tunicle and
Cartilage are capable of being extirpated by Incision: the other may be
eradicated by Caustic; the manner I shall show you in a few Instances.

A Gentleman of about 26 years of age had an Hordeolum on his right Eyelid,
lying between the external Tunicle and Cartilage. 12. Observat. of Hordeolum.
I applied emplastrum ad strumas on it, with hopes of resolving it: but after
some time it suppurated. I thereupon opened it with a Lancet, and let out the
Matter; then digested it with unguent. basilic. But feeling afterward some part
of the Gland in it, I sprinkled into it some Merc. praecipit. and applied a
Pledgit of basilicon over it, with emplastr. diachyl. simpl. whereby I
eradicated it, and soon after healed it smooth with unguent. tutiae. Where the
Suppuration has been more perfect, they are easier cured. In others, where
they were hard and movable, I have opened them by Incision transverse, or
according to the length of the Eyelid, and thrust them out whole, then healed
them by Agglutination. Yet in some of these the Cystis has burst in taking
out, and a thick curdled matter has thrust forth: in which cases I digested
them out with Praecipitate, and healed them as aforesaid. But the opening these
with a Caustick-stone pointed is most grateful, to Women at least: upon which
consideration I generally open them that way, and upon separation of the Escar
thrust them out, and cure them by Digestion with little trouble or pain.

A young Woman came out of the North-country to me with an Hordeolum on the
inside of the Cartilage pressing upon the Eye with great weight, 13. Observat.
of Hordeolum.
and inflaming it. I turned the Lid inside outward, made an Incision into it,
and thrust it out: then cleansing the Wound, I returned the Lid down. It cured
of it self in three or four days, without any manner of dressing. Yet sometimes
Excrescences thrust out there, and inflame the Eye. Sometimes I have seen
Excrescences of soft Flesh grow upon the Tunica conjunctiva, and cause an
Inflammation of the Eye. Several such like have come to me out of the Country:
some I have cut away with Scissors; others I have worn off with the Alume and
Vitriol-stone.

A Person of Honor, 14. Observat. of Sarcoma upon the Supercilia.
aged 29 years, was commended into my hands by Sr. Edward Alston Physician. She
was diseased with a Tumor of a dark red color possessing the upper Lid of her
left Eye between the external Tunicle and the Cartilage, spreading to the very
edge of the Cilium. It took its original from some Hordeolum ill handled, and
seemed to be a Sarcoma. I proposed the eradicating it by Escarotick: which
being allowed of, I encompassed the Tumor with Ink, then began with a
Caustick-stone in the upper part of it, wiping up the dissolved Salt with armed
Probes, proceeding gradually in the work to the very edge of the Lid, with
great care to preserve the Hair growing on it. It was a very nice work. After I
had sufficiently penetrated into this Fleshy body, I washed the Salts out of
the Escar, and scarifying it, dressed it with unguent. basilic. cum oleo
lilior. and bound it up. The next day we met again; when I took off Dressings,
and found the Tumor flat, the Escar lying proportionably as was designed, and
the Eye undisturbed. I fomented cum decoct. malvae, viol. etc. and dressed it
up as before, continuing my attendance daily with her Physician: and as the
Escar separated between the Scarifications, I either rubbed the
Superexcrescence of Flesh with the Vitriol-stone, or sprinkled it with
Praecipitate, or used both. And after the Escar cast off, I deterged and wasted
the remaining basis, and cicatrized it smooth, leaving the very Edge naturally
shaped, without loss of one Hair: and so it continues to this day.

An Italian Gentleman was brought to me by Sr. Theod. de Vo. who had a large
Excrescence in the great Angle of his right Eye. 15. Observat. of an
Excrescence upon the lacrymal Gland.
The Extirpation had been attempted both in Italy, and at Paris, as they told
me. I passed a Ligature upon the basis of it, and clipped it off close: then
drying up the blood with a Sponge dipped in aq. sperm. ranar. I rubbed its
remaining basis with the Vitriol-stone, then washed his Eye again with the
foresaid aq. sp. ranar. The next morning I visited him, and met his Physician
there; but we saw nothing of the Excrescence remaining, neither did it appear
any more.

A Gentlewoman near 40 years of age had a very large Thymus growing upon the
side of her Nose, 16 Observat. of Thymus.
over the great Canthus. It was of many years growth; and she had been advised
not to permit the Extirpation of it. But she at length desiring me to take it
off, I passed a Needle under its basis, and cut it out, cicatrizing it
afterward with Epuloticks; and it grew no more.

CHAP. VII. Of the Tonsills.
THE Tonsills, or Almonds of the Ears, are also frequently swelled in the
King's-Evill: which Tumor may be very well reckoned a Species of it.

These Swellings are raised by Congestion gradually without pain, and therefore
are seldom taken notice of till by their growth they bring inconveniences with
them, as Catarrh, Cough, or Difficulty of swallowing: in which latter case
their Drink often runs out at their Nose.

These differ from the common Swellings of the Amygdalae, as Tumors by
Congestion do from those made by Fluxion: which latter are of sudden growth,
Difference.
and terminate as soon; whereas the other may have been many years growing, and
do increase and decrease with the Moon, as generally all Tumors by Congestion
in the Glands do.

The Causes of the Tumefaction of these Glands are the same with those of
Strumae. Causes.


They are soft fleshy Tumors, of a round or ovall figure, retaining the
natural color of the Skin; and are of an obtuse sense, Signs.
so that you may pierce the body of them with a Knife or Probe without causing
pain or drawing blood: yet are they subject to Inflammation, and the like
Accidents that other Swellings of the Glands are.

If the Tumefaction be small, the disturbance is little; many people having had
them from their Infancy without great inconvenience. Prognostic.
If the Swellings be big, there may be danger of Suffocation: but in that case
they may be extirpated without running any great hazard.

In order to the Cure, Physicians do generally prescribe Venaesection, and by
Clysters and lenient Purgatives make Evacuation; also by Blistering, Cupping,
Cure.
Fontanells, etc. they endeavor Derivation: which is necessary in case of
Inflammation; in which astringent Lotions may be also proper. But in those made
by Congestion the speediest way of Cure is by Extirpation: and that either by
Abscission, at once cutting them off; or by actual or potentiall Cautery.
Modern Writers have said little of these Extirpations. Fabritius ab Aquapend.
in his Book De operat. Chirurg. renders the Abscission of them difficult
enough, and not without danger; as you may see, where delivering Celsus and
Paulus's way of cutting them out, he determins at last thus, Ex quibus licet
colligere, neque facilem neque omnino tutam hanc Chirurgiam esse, etc. The
first Surgeon in my memory that attempted the Extirpating them was the late
deceased Mr. Ed. Mol. an excellent Operator. He attempted it upon a Person of
Honor by actual Cautery through a Cannula well contrived for that purpose. I
afterward saw him burn several. He passed the Cautery through the body of
them, and by repeating of it twice or thrice he burnt a hole through them, and
accordingly crimpled them up; as may be yet seen in that Noble Person, somewhat
of the Excrescence still remaining, and not without some uneasinesse at certain
times: upon which account I had the honor to see it some years since. The way
by potentiall Cautery is, by working with a Caustick-stone and other
Escaroticks fixed in such an Instrument as may serve to eat into them, without
offending the neighboring sound Parts. To which purpose I make my way into the
body of the Gland, consuming it within; and at last the Shell (or exterior
parts) falls in pieces, and is so eradicated. The way by Excision is, by making
a Ligature about the basis of them, and snipping them close off with a pair of
crooked Probe-scissors. In this work you ought to consider well how they are
radicated. For sometimes they are rooted like a Crista deeper in the Throat: in
which, if in cutting them out you only cut that part you tied, and cut the
Ligature at the same time, it will slip down into the Throat, and hazard their
choking. Therefore whilst you hold the Ligature with one hand, you must pass
the Scissors down as close by the basis of it as you can, so as by one snip you
may cut it clear off. But lest you should fail, it will be necessary to have
another Ligature fitted in an Instrument for your purpose, and the Patient's
Head to be held steady, that in case you fail in the first attempt, and it fall
into the Throat, you may readily return it, and tie it at the same time; which
is no difficult thing to do. The Excision made, the bleeding will be soon
stopped by Gargling with Oxycrate; and you may cicatrize it in a few days by
touching it with the Vitriol and Alume-stones. I shall give you some Instances
of my practice therein, and show you my first attempt in the Extirpation of
them by Escarotick and Excision in this following Observation.

A Person of Honor, 1. Observat. of the extirpation of both the Tonsills.
aged 10 years, having been some years diseased with preternaturall Swellings
in her Tonsills, with great Defluxion upon her Lungs, also Difficulty of
breathing, and at last of swallowing, her Drink frequently running out at her
Nose, was brought to London, and put into the hands of Sr. Fra. Prujean and Dr.
Luke Rugely. Mr. Arris was Surgeon to the Family. Various Remedies had been
prescribed: but they proving ineffectuall to remove them, I was consulted, and
proposed the Extirpation of them by actual Cautery. But that not being
admitted, I undertook it by Escaroticks, and came the next day prepared, and
placed her in a clear light, her Head leaning to a Bed-post, Mr. Arris sitting
behind, holding it steady. I began with the left Tonsill, holding her Tongue
down with a Speculum linguae, while I pressed into the body of the Tumor with
a long-pointed Caustick-stone fixed to a Stick. After I had held it a while, I
pulled it out, and with a Firre-stick dipped in oleo vitrioli pressed into the
same place, then pulled out that too, and gave her a Glass of water to wash her
Mouth. I repeated the use of the several Causticks; she washing her Mouth
always after the use of them. By this method I penetrated into both the
Tonsills, and divided the left into two. In the time of working with the
Caustic, I dried up the Salts of them with armed Probes so well, that her
Mouth was not fretted in any part by them: and after I had finished the work, I
washed the Tonsills with decoct. hordei, and she afterward gargled with a
pleasant Julep made of distilled Water, acet. ros. and sir. diamoron. Having
divided the one Tonsill, and diminished the other, I caused an Instrument to be
made to convey a Ligature about the basis of them, with design to tie and cut
them off one after another. I began with the left Tonsill, passing a Ligature
upon the one half, and cut it off close. There happening no disturbance by
bleeding, I tied the other, and cut it off: then with a Vitrioll-stone I rubbed
the remaining basis, and thereby smoothed and cicatrized it in 4 or 5 days. I
then began with the right Tonsill. Mr. Arris holding her Head as formerly, I
made a Ligature upon the basis of it, and holding the end of it with my right
hand, I passed a pair of Probe-scissors with my other hand close by the said
basis, and supposing I had encompassed the root, I clipped; but it not coming
away, I thrust my Scissors downwards, and cut again, being confident I had
clipped through the fleshy body. I pulled the Ligature, but it not coming, I was
somewhat surprised what should be the cause: therefore pulling my Scissors a
little back, and turning them more off from the basis, I clipped again, cut off
the bigger part of it, and brought it out with my Ligature: at which instant
she choked. The Ladies seeing it shrieked, and became troublesome. I desired
Mr. Arris to sit still while the Patient choked: she gaping, I passed into her
Throat the Instrument I had made the Ligature by, and raising up the remaining
Excrescence, she recovered, and cried, Shall I live? I replied, Yes, if you sit
still. I passed another Instrument fitted with a Ligature. In changing the
Instruments the Excrescence slipped down, and she choked again; but I raised it
up, and relieved her: then tied the Ligature upon it, and looked into her
Throat; where I saw it rooted like a Cock's Comb, and that in endeavoring to
cut the Tonsill close by the root, I had cut below the part I had tied. Which
if I could have foreseen, and have passed my Scissors close a little lower, one
Snip had brought it clear away: but not supposing it rooted so low, and working
blindfold, I was at a loss. But being now better informed, I passed my
crooked Probe-scissors down lower, cut it clean off by the roots; and brought
it away with my Ligature. I cicatrized it with the Vitriol and Alume-stones in
few days. Yet some while after she was cured, a part of her Drink came out at
her Nose: which happened by reason of the Tonsils drawing that part of her
Palate down lower then naturally it should: and I suppose that was the cause of
her speaking so. But some while after she was freed of those Inconveniences.

A Gentleman aged 25 years, who had been long subject to Defluxions, 2.
Observat. of the right Tonsill extirpated.
etc. from overgrown Tonsills, and taken much Physic unsuccessfully, was
recommended to me. The right Tonsill being very large, I proposed the cutting
it off. The Patient's Friends consulted their Physician and Surgeon: they
did not readily assent to it. But notwithstanding, the Patient and his Friends
perceiving there was no other way of Cure, they recommended him again to my
care. I made a Ligature upon it, with design to have cut it off at that
instant: but observing their great apprehensions of a Flux of blood, etc. I
deferred it till the next morning, and then I saw it shrunk and much lessened.
I took hold of the Ligature with one hand, and passing my Probe-scissors close
by the root of it, at one Snip cut it off, and brought it away with the
Ligature, it scarce bleeding one jot. I rubbed the remaining basis with a
Vitriol-stone, and caused him afterward to gargle with decoct. hordet cum sir.
de rosis siccis, and in 4 or 5 days cicatrized it. The other being small, I
deferred the meddling with it till there should appear more cause. But from
that time he recovered a better health.

A Gentleman's Daughter of about twelve years of age, 3. Observat. of the right
Tonsill extirpated.
frequently diseased with Catarrhs, and after some time with great Difficulty
in swallowing, consulted me. Looking in her Throat, and seeing her Tonsills,
especially the right, very big, I advised the cutting off the bigger. To which
they assenting, I made a Ligature upon it, and at the same instant cut it off;
and afterward, by rubbing it with the Vitriol-stone, cicatrized it in few
days. She being relieved hereby, has hitherto deferred the outting off the
other.

A Gentlewoman of about 26 years of age, subject to Catarrhs, 4. Observat. of
both the Tonsills extirpated.
by reason of the preternaturall growth of the Amygdalae came to London, and
consulted her Physician. He advised her to have them cut off, and brought me to
her. I made a Ligature upon the one, and cut it off, washing her Mouth after
with Oxycrate: then passed a Ligature upon the other, and cut it also off; she
gargled and washed her Mouth. I afterward rubbed the basis of them with a
Vitriol-stone, and took my leave for that time. The next day I came again, with
intention to dress the remaining Wounds: but she was removed from her
Lodgings, or her Physician had undertaken the cicatrizing them; for from that
time I neither saw nor heard from her.

A Gentlewoman aged 56 years had been a long while subject to Defluxions upon
her Throat and Breast. 5. Observat. of the left Tonsill. extirpated.
After various Endeavors to divert this Humor I was consulted. Looking into
her Mouth, I saw the left Tonsill very large, and supposed that the cause of
her Catarrh. I proposed the Excision of it: which being approved of, I came the
next day, and made a Ligature about its root, and with my Probe-scissors cut
through it, as was accustomed. But it not coming away as it should, and the
blood flowing down her Throat whilst she leaned her Head backwards, feeling her
self choking, she flung backwards, thrust away the man behind her, and in
struggling slipped off the Chair. At which instant I lost my hold of the
Ligature, and she lay choking. I saw the cause, and getting hold again of the
Ligature, relieved her, then raised her up, and, having a little refreshed her
with Drink, placed her again in a clear light, and passing my Scissors down
lower, with one Snip cut it off, and brought it away with the Ligature. She
gargled with Oxycrate, and was in few days cured by touching it with the
Vitriol and Alume-stones. Since that time she has not been troubled with
Defluxions, but enjoys a good health to this day.

A young Gentlewoman of about 15 years of age was brought to me out of a
neighboring Village with both her Tonsills preternaturally swelled. 6.
Observat. of both Tonsills extirpated.
She had been long subject to a Catarrh, and had been frequently in danger of
strangling in the night with the Fluxion. I proposed the Excision of them, as
the speediest way and least painful: but she not permitting it, I went about
the Extirpation of them with Caustick-stones and ol. vitrioli interchangeably
used. I began with the right side, which was the lesser Tonsill, and pressed my
Caustic to the middle of it: then pulling it out, I pressed upon the same place
with a Stick dipped in oleo vitrioli: and so applied them interchangeably, (as I
said.) Between while she gargled with Water, and took a breathing-time. Then I
proceeded again in the work with Causticks. But it is not imaginable what a
disturbance I met with from a frothy Saliva filling her Mouth the while to the
very choking of her. I wondered at it, but was told by her Mother then standing
by her, that it was her Disease; and upon that account they had been directed
to me as their last Refuge. At that sitting I penetrated into the body of the
Gland, and eat it hollow, not unlike a worm-eaten Nut. Having wearied her and
my self, I washed out the Salts, and dismissed her. The next day she came again
with it much diminished; the middle of it had been consumed, and the Shell was
contracted. I fell to work on the forepart near its basis, and easily
penetrating through the external part, worked down the edges before me, and in
three or four sittings wasted the Gland so, that there remained only a
Prominency in the basis; which being raw, I consumed it by touching it with the
Vitriol-stone daily: to which purpose I have them also fitted in Shafts, so as
they cannot slip out, though they should break in the use. Whilst this latter
was cicatrizing, I began with the bigger on the left side, after the same
manner as has been said of the former. But the work growing tedious by reason
of the continual flowing of that spumous Humor, I concluded the Extirpation
of that by Ligature and Scissors, and cicatrizing it with the Vitriol and
Alume-stones, dismissed her cured. Since which I have seen her often, and am
satisfied that she is freed of the former Disturbances by the extirpation of
those preternaturall bodies.

A young Gentlewoman of about sixteen years of age, 7. Observat. of both
Tonsills.
nearly related to a neighboring Physician, came out of the Country diseased
as in the former Observation, with much the like Accidents of Catarrh, etc.
attending. In viewing these Tonsills, observing some little Porosity in them, I
made search, and did easily pass in a small Probe, without drawing any blood or
causing pain. They were perfect Fungi, and required to be eradicated. I would
have done it by Ligature and Scissors: but it not being admitted, I proceeded
by Caustic, as abovesaid; and not meeting with that disturbance from the
Saliva as in the former work, I went on more easily, and the sooner extirpated
them. Since when she has been freed of the foresaid Disturbances, and enjoys a
good health.

There also happens an Elongation of the Uvula through the abundance of
salivous Humor flowing upon it: in which case, if it touch upon the root of
the Tongue or upon the Epiglottis, it causes a frequent hauking, and in
progress makes a vexatious Catarrh.

Such was the case of a Servant-maid to a Noble Lady in the Country. 8.
Observat.
Various Medicaments had been prescribed ineffectually: I being in that Family
was desired to see her. Looking into her Mouth, I saw the Uvula hang dangling
upon the root of the Tongue. It was not swelled nor inflamed. I supposing it
the cause of her Distemper, took hold of the lower part of it with my Forceps,
and at the same time cut it shorter with a pair of Scissors. It did not bleed a
Spoonful: and afterward it cicatrized of it self without application of any
kind of Medicament, and she was thereby freed of the Defluxion. Such another I
cut off in a Servant of his Majesty belonging to Hampton Court, and some others
who were so afflicted, and thereby freed them of their Catarrh, when all other
Remedies failed.

CHAP. VIII. Of Ranula.
RAnula is a soft Swelling possessing those Salivalls under the Tongue.
Description.
It is made by Congestion, and in its progress fills up the space between
the Jaws, and makes a Tumor externally under the Chin.

It is caused by a pituitous Matter (say Authors) e Cerebro in Linguam
prolapsa. Cause.
But late discovery has made it manifest to arise from a congestion of Humor
in the inferior salival Gland, which is seated there, as I have already
intimated.

It is a soft Tumor without pain or alteration of color in the Skin. Signs.
It yields to the impression of your fingers, but rises upon the taking them
off; and contained a Matter not unlike the White of an egg, or such as we meet
with in an Atheroma. It is also discovered by a Croaking in their Speech.

They are not dangerous as to life, Prognostic.
but are difficult of Cure.

The Cure consists in the prosecuting the same method which has been
proposed in the Cure of Strumae. Cure.
The Topics ought to be discutient; amongst which all the sorts of Salts and
Aromaticks dissolved in convenient Liquours are proper to hold in their Mouths:
viz. piperis, zinziberis, an. j. sal. commun. and gemmae an. ij. origani,
calaminth. rad. ireos, hermodact. an. ss. mastich. j. Misc. and fiat Pulvis.
These may be boiled in Wine, or mixed with Oxymel; or the Tumor may be rubbed
with the Powder. To the external Tumor you may apply such Discutients as have
been prescribed for Strumae. If by these Applications the Ranula do not
discuss, you must open it by actual Cautery, and dress it as shall be showed
in the following Observations.

A Gentlewoman aged 35 years came to me recommended by Sr. Fr. Pruj. 1.
Observat. of Ranula.
She had a large Tumor lying between her Jaws under the Tongue, and reaching
to her Fore-teeth, making a great Swelling externally under the Chin. It caused
a Croaking in her Speech, and seemed troublesome to her. She had passed through
a Course of Physic, and used various Medicaments to it unsuccessfully. I
proposed the letting out the Matter by actual Cautery: but she not permitting
it, I opened it by making an Incision on each side near the Togue, and
discharged about two Bloud-porringers full of an albuginous Matter: upon which
the Tumor sunk. I then made a search with a Probe, and perceived the Matter
had not only made a deep Cavity downward, but also rendered all the inner part
of the Tongue hollow. I dressed the Abscesse with syrup. de rosis siccis, and
applied empl. ad herniam with a third part of empl. Caesaris externally under
the Chin; deterging it afterward with a Solution of mel Aegyptiac. in decoct.
salviae, beton. apii, etc. then incarned and cicatrized it. But some while
after it rose again in a Tumor as formerly. Upon sight whereof I opened it by
actual Cautery on both sides of the Ranula, by which the Matter was again
discharged, and the Tumor wasted. During the time I was endeavoring the Cure,
she was purged, and put into an Antistrumaticall course of Physic, and was at
last cured as abovesaid. Whether she relapsed afterward I know not, having
neither seen nor heard of her from that time to this.

An old Gentlewoman came out of the country to me with a long Swelling on each
side under her Tongue, of a fleshy color, 2. Observat. of Ranula.
which felt under my fingers like the Gills of a Fish. They were not painful,
but very uneasy to her. I supposed them to have Matter in them, and attempted
to shrink and dry it up, as has been proposed in the method of Cure; but
without success. I then slit the one open the whole length; but there flowed
out only a florid blood, which I stopped by washing her Mouth cum aceto: then
laid open the Tumor on the other side. They cut like cartilaginous bodies. I
stopped the bleeding of this like as I had done the other, and dressed them both
with an armed Probe dipped in tinctura vitrioli dulcificati, designing to dry
them up that way. From the time I opened them, she complained of Hairs in her
Mouth, and frequently endeavored with her fingers to pull them out, and
persuaded me to do the like: but I could feel no such thing. She came to me
daily to be dressed. The Abscesses digested, but the Tumors would not sink:
wherefore I cut off their Lips; yet they did not lie so smooth as I designed.
Upon which consideration I would have burnt them by actual Cautery: but the
mention of that so terrified her, that she came no more to me. I have inserted
this Case for the rarity of it, and am confident the actual Cautery was the
proper and certain way of Cure.

A Young fellow was commended to my hands who had a painful Tubercle in his
tongue. I made Incision into it according to its length, 3. Observat. of Ranula.
and thrust out a Stone bigger then a small Olive. I dressed the Abscesse with
sir. de ros. siccis, and thereby cured it in few days.

A TREATISE OF WOUNDS.

OF WOUNDS.
The Fifth Book.
CHAP. I. Of WOVNDS in general.
A WOVND is a Solution of continuity in any Part of the body suddenly made, by
any thing that cuts or tears, A Wound defined.
with a division of the Skin.

This Definition differs much from what is usually delivered by Authors; and
it is fit it should. For they generally defining a Wound by a Solution in part
molli, do thereby exclude a Cut made into a Bone, as that into the Cranium by a
Pole-axe, etc. which why it should not be called a Wound I know not. I say, It
is made by any thing that cuts or tears. Other Authors define it to be made by
an external Instrument, etc. How then do they call that fracturam cum vulnere,
a Fracture with a Wound, where the Bone from within makes the Wound, and
thrusts it self quite through the Flesh? Sennertus adds to his Definition, that
it be done a re secante and acuta: yet he reckons those for Wounds that are
made by Bullets, although it be Cannon-shot. I do therefore think it fit to
make my Definition more comprehensive, and to take in whatsoever makes a sudden
Solution of continuity, at least immediately and by it self, on what Part
soever it lights. So a Cut into a Bone is a Wound: Tearing the Flesh, Nerve,
Sinew, Tendon or Cartilage, by Bullet, Stone, Splinter, etc. is a Wound. Only
I add this restriction, that the Skin must be likewise divided: by which last
words I exclude Fractures that come not through the Skin, and Contusions if the
exterior Parts be continuous. But by the word Skin I understand not only the
external Cutis, but also the inward Membranes of the Gullet, Ventricle, Guts,
Bladder, Vrethra, and Womb; all which are capable of Wounds from sharp
Instruments, either swallowed, or thrust into them.

A Wound thus defined admits of many Differences, Difference of Wounds.
of which I know none that can be properly called essential. Great or small,
deep or shallow, wide or narrow, straight or crooked, round or angular, are but
accidental Differences. Distinctions taken from the Weapons, whether sharp or
blunt, Sword Rapier, or Bullet, Cut, Prick, or Tearing, are likewise but
accidental. Those that look most like essential Differences are they which
are taken from the Subject in which the Wound (which is it self but an
Accident) inhereth, viz. from the Flesh, Skin, Brain, Nerve, Tendon, Artery,
Vein, Gristle, Bone, etc. All which, being the several Subjects of Wounds, may
well be allowed to specify them; and so much the rather, because from the
nature of them we raise our greatest Indications of altering the method of
Cure. To this Head may likewise be referred the division of them into Simple,
or Compound.

Wounds are in themselves so visible, Signs.
that they need no general Marks to be known by. But the peculiar affections
of the particular Parts hurt, and the methods of discovering what inward Part
is wounded, by observation made of the Symptoms that happen, are fully handled
in those Chapters which treat of the Wounds of the several Parts.

The Prognostics are there also delivered, Prognostics.
that the young Surgeon may be informed how to make judgment of them, and
avoid the engaging himself in promising a Cure of such Wounds as are mortal.
The greater Symptoms of Gangraena, Paralysis, and Spasmus, I have translated to
Gunshot-wounds, they being there more frequent and usual. Haemorrhagiae are
spoken of in this present Treatise.

The Wound being a Solution of continuity, Intentions of Cure.
does require to be made one again, Unity being the perfection of whatsoever
has a being. To effect this is the work of Nature and Art; both must mutually
join their helping hands: and unless both the vital Faculties and nourishment
of the Part do assist the Art of the Surgeon, it will be lost labor: here
must be a joint meeting and agreement of all in one.

In Simple Wounds the Surgeon is to afford his assistence five manner of
ways; the omitting of any of which will render him negligent or ignorant in his
Trade.

The first is, in careful and diligent taking away all such extraneous bodies
as by their interposition may hinder the true Agglutination of the disjoined
Parts, whether they be concrete Blood, Hair, Sand, Dust, pieces of Bones,
Cartilages, or pieces of the Weapons, Rags, etc.

The second is, in bringing the Lips of the Wound even together, which were
separated.

The third is, in retaining the Lips so brought together, that they may by
Consolidation be restored to their former figure.

The fourth is, in conserving the Temperament and natural Heat of the Part, in
order to Unition.

The fifth is, in preventing ill Accidents, and correcting such as have already
seized on the Part.

Thus much is required if the Wound be only Simple: What is required in
compound and contused Wounds.
but if it be a Compound Wound, with loss of Substance, or Contusion, then he
has somewhat more to do. As where there is loss of Substance, there he must
assist Nature with his Sarcoticks, for regaining what is lost: and where there
is Contusion, there he must endeavor the turning what is contused into Pus or
Matter, which must be performed before there can possibly be any Reunion.

As long as there is any strange body or different substance to keep off the
Unition, The first Intention, in taking out extraneous bodies.
you must not hope to make any Cure of a Wound. Therefore if any such be to be
drawn forth, before you attempt it, consider seriously, first, whether it can
be done or no; secondly, whether safely.

For, first, sometimes the Weapon sticks so fast, that by no art it can be
extracted. Then it is of necessity to be left to Nature, who in this case
sometimes works Miracles. For I have known pieces of Splinters, etc.
sometimes stick so fast in the inward Parts, or to have been so enclosed, that
we could by no means get them out: yet at length, upon Apostemation of the
Part, they have thrust forth.

Secondly, you are to consider whether you may with safety pluck out the Weapon
or no. Some will live a day with the Weapon in their Body, who would expire
upon the moment of Extraction. But if your judgment suggest to you that the
Patient is recoverable, make have, out with it before the Part be inflamed.

If the Weapon have pierced deep, Which way the Weapon is to be drawn out.
and through great Vessels and Nervous places; or if the Part opposite to it
be full of Veins, Arteries and Nerves, or have a Bone lying in the way, or over
against the Wound; if there be no great fear of Laceration, pull it out the
same way it went in. For the effecting of which, our Masters have left us
variety of Instruments, the Figure and Use whereof you may see in Scultetus.
But if the Point of the Weapon have pierced above half way through the Member,
and there be no Bones nor notable Vessels to hinder you, (here is use of your
Anatomy and exact knowledge of the Parts,) either thrust the Weapon through, or
make way for it by Incision on the contrary side: but beware the Weapon be not
too big, lest you do make two large Wounds for one.

If the Weapon stick in the Bone, move it up and down to loosen its Point,
Weapon stuck in a Bone.
and then pluck it out: but in case it will not move, cut away the Bone before
you extract it.

If a Weapon be fastened betwixt two Joints, Weapon stuck between the Joints.
make an Extension of the Parts both ways, as it is the manner in Fractures and
Dislocations, that so the Tendons and Ligaments being stretched, the Weapon may
with more ease come out. But do this with moderation, lest you break some
notable Vessels, and a Flux of blood or some ill Accident befall you in your
extracting it. It will be necessary in this work, that you consider the
position the Part was in when the Wound was inflicted. Gesner has a Story, in
his Observat. de Chirurgiae dignitate and praestantia, of a Surgeon, who
when he could by no means get forth an Arrow, asked the wounded Patient in what
posture of his body he received the Wound. Understanding it was done an
Horseback, he placed him in a riding posture, and immediately drew out the
Weapon.

The Weapon thus drawn out, cleanse it from Rags or ought else, and permit the
Wound to bleed, accordingly as you in your judgment shall think fit, still
having respect to the Constitution and Habit of body, that what is in the small
Veins cut asunder may flow out, as well to hinder Inflammation, as the
generation of much Matter. The Bleeding staid, if there be Hair growing about
the Wound, shave it off: then wipe away the clotted Blood with a Sponge dipped in
Red wine, Oxycrate, or Water. But if it stick deep in the Wound, be not too
busy with your armed Probe, for thereby you may stir up a new Bleeding;
whereas this concreted Blood keeps the Wound warm, and defends it from the
outward Air; and by digestion Nature will thrust it forth.

The second Intention is performed by bringing the Lips of the Wound exactly
together. The second Intention, in making Unition.


This Intention is delivered in a few words, but they are to be observed as a
Law; for without that Reduction of the Lips, a slow and deformed Healing
follows. Nature has nothing to do here in bringing the Lips together, that is
the sole work of the Surgeon; who must not lay a Pledgit, or crowd a Dossill
of Lint or Tent into a little Wound: no, that is the way to keep the Wound
open, and make it painful, whereby Defluxions are stirred up, the Temperament
of the Part weakened, and the Cure prolonged; contrary to the intention of all
who have writ of Wounds, and to the practice of our knowing Surgeons here.
Yet amongst the Pretenders to that Art we often meet with such work. As for
instance:

A Young man was wounded near High-gate in the Back, Observation concerning
Dossills in simple Wounds.
slanting under the right Scapula; he had another Wound also on the Back, and
another through the upper part of the left Shoulder, with a long Gash over the
Forehead, and others besides, some whereof were not considerable. The next day
being carried thither to dress these Wounds, I found them all distended with
Tents and Dossills of Lint, disposed to inflame and swell, and the Patient
exceeding full of pain. After I had taken out these extraneous bodies, my
endeavor was to dress them so, as I might incline their upheaved Lips to
return to their natural site. To which purpose I fomented them with Milk, and
applied Pledgits spread with a Digestive ex terebinth. cum vitell. ovi,
embrocating them with ol. ros. them by empl. e bolo, and Bandage with gentle
Compression, I dressed him up; and afterward here in Town cured him by
Sarcoticks and Epuloticks, as in Compound Wounds; a longer work, which at first
ought to have been done by Agglutination. Parts separated and disjoined are to
be brought together gently and equally, that they may touch one another, and so
be prepared for Unition.

This must be done (I say) first gently; Unition to be effected, first, gently:
sensim and sensim, as Fallopius has it, by little and little; not hastily at
one pluck. If the Parts be equally soft, bring them equally together: if the
one soft, the other hard, and not to be moved but with difficulty, bring the
soft part to the stubborn. If the Parts be grown stiff with cold, as when the
party has been left in the field all night, which after a Battle has often
happened, (and particularly to a merry fellow, a common Soldier, that used to
wear an iron Scull under a Cap, and from thence was called by a Nickname; his
Wounds were large, and the Lips hardened with the cold, and it was well for
him, his Bleeding being thereby stayed;) in this case you are to supple them by
fomenting them with Milk or warm Water, or else embrocate them with Oil, till
you perceive the Lips made soft enough for your purpose, before you endeavor
Reunion.

Secondly, secondly, equally.
equally, that the Parts cut asunder may answer one another, as well in the top
as the bottom, brim to brim, and, if possible, underneath Vessel to Vessel;
that Nature may be in a capacity of doing its own work, and by virtue of its
Balsam reunite, agglutinate, consolidate, and heal the Wounds: in all which
Intentions she is the Agent, and the Surgeon only the Assistent. Which
Assistence that it may be the more effectually given, we must go on to the
Third.

The Third Intention is, The third Intention, in retaining the parts united.
Deligation, or retaining the Parts so joined together.

For the effecting of this, our famous Masters have left us two principal
means, Fasciae and Suturae, Rolling and Stitching: to which some, nay most of
them, added Fibulas, or Clasps. But I will not put you upon that. If the Wound
be small, and in a Fleshy part, and according to the length of the Fibers or
Member, you may perform the Cure by Bandage; for here Nature will truly act her
part, by application of blood and nourishment to both sides indifferently, and
finish the Coalitus without your farther assistence. And this is that which
gives such credit to the Sympathetick Powder. In the application of this, it
becomes every Surgeon to be much experienced, in respect of the unspeakable
commodities which the whole Art receives thereby.

By Bandage not only are Parts dexterously accommodated for Union; Their use.
but such also as would unnaturally grow together are kept asunder. In
Burnings, Scaldings, etc. the Fingers would many times grow together, the Chin
would grow to the Breast, the Arms to the Sides, were they not this way
hindered. By them are Fluxes averted, and the delapse of Humors into the
inferior Parts forbidden; and, being already lodged, they are pressed out. By
these are good Juices advantageously forced into Parts emaciated. As, if the
right Arm pine away, roll up the left from the Hand to the Arm-pit, that the
Blood being pressed out into the Vena cava, or rather hindered to flow in so fast
by the Artery, may with more eagerness flow into the other side, where it was
wanting. By these we see great Fluxes of blood, large Haemorrhagiae every day
stayed. By them are ill-shaped Wounds brought into better figures, and made
more apt to be cured. By them is the force of your Applications helped and
furthered, they keeping them close to their proper places, where your care has
bestowed them. By them is the true natural form and beauty of the Part
commonly preserved.

Three especial sorts of Fasciation or Rolling, Three sorts of especial use.
pertaining to our present work, have the Worthies of our Profession commended
to posterity. The first they term Incarnatrix or Agglutinatrix, the Incarnative
or Agglutinative: the second, Retentrix, or Retentive: the third, Expultrix, or
Expulsive.

The Incarnative is that which brings the Lips of the Wound together, 1.
Incarnative.
and conserveth them in their right figure. It must be more strict then the
Retentive, and more loose then the Expulsive; and is the most useful in
simple, fresh, and yet bleeding Wounds. The manner of performing it is thus.

Have in readiness a Rowler of such matter, length and breadth as I shall anon
show you; roll it up at both ends firmly to the middle; then lay the middle
part of the Rowler on that part which is opposite to the Wound, to prevent pain
and inflammation. You are then, after you have made a turn upon the Wound with
both ends of the Rowler, to go up with the one, and down with the other, and
take so many turns about the Part as may be requisite for the restraining the
Flux of blood, or, according to the Season of the year, to defend it from cold,
and yet not keep the Wound too hot, for that may weaken the Part. You must also
be careful that your Bandage be not too hard, so as to intercept the Spirits.
Your Rowler running downwards will press out the Matter from the affected
Part, and by passing upward hinder the influx of Humors.

The Fascia Retentrix is used to keep your Dressings on close about the Wound.
They for the most part are only of use in Wounds of the Head. 2. Retentive.
There must be a moderation in binding with this Bandage.

Fascia Expulsiva is performed by a Rowler of one head: 3. Expulsive.
the special use of it is, to expel Matter out of Fistula's or Sinuous
Ulcers; as also to prevent the descent of Humors, and to expel such as have
already seated themselves upon the Part wounded or otherwise. Do it in the
manner following.

Begin in the sound part, beneath the seat of the Humors, How hard to bind.
and roll upward pretty straight at first, and by degrees; as you come nearer
the Mouth of the Wound, gentlier and gentlier. If you will press out the Matter
contained in the Cavity of the Wound, you must roll loosely there a turn or
two, then harder, and yet a little streighter, the higher you go, to hinder
the descent of Humors; but not too hard, for fear of harm. Terminus sit bona
laborantis tolerantia; Celsus: Let it be made with such moderation, as the
Patient may well endure it. Hippocrates de Offic. Medic. Vinculorum alind per
se (says he) remedio est, aliud iis quae remedio sunt subservit: Amongst
Ligatures, some of themselves are Remedies, others are servants to Remedies.
And true it is in these: for the Incarnative and Expulsive are in themselves,
as you may perceive, Remedies; and the Retentive the common servant to them all.

To these Fallopius, Four other Bandages added by Fallopius.
in Tract. de Vulneribus in genere, adds four more; viz. 1. Fasciam
disjunctionis, 2. Fasciam directionis, 3. Fasciam facientem Apostema, 4.
Fasciam prohibentem Apostema.

1. Fascia disjunctionis. By this Rolling Parts are kept from joining together,
as the Fingers when they are bared of the Cutis.

2. Fascia directionis is that which assisteth in making a crooked Part
straight, or bends a Part unnaturally straight to his proper figure.

3. Fascia faciens Apostema is that which will procure an Aposteme, by
summoning the Matter up into one part, which might perhaps dangerously flow
into others, and those more principal.

4. Fascia prohibens Apostema is that which forbids the collection of
Matter, and consequently hinders the generation of an Aposteme.

For the matter of your Rowlers, Of what Rowlers are to be made.
they must be made of good strong even Cloth, white, clean, and gentle,
without Hem, Seam, or Thread hanging by.

Let the Length be such as the Member affected and the multiude of
circumvolutions require; Their length.
longer in Winter then in Summer. Hyeme (says Celsus) saepius fascia circumire
debet; Aestate, quoties necesse est: Roll on, on, and again, in the Winter; in
the Summer no oftener then needs must. His ground, I suppose, he had from our
great Master, Sect. 5. Aphor. 20. Frigidum ulceribus mordax, cutem obdurat,
dolorem insuppurabilem facit: Cold nippeth a Wound, makes the Skin hard, and
causes pain which cannot be digested. For the Breadth of the Rowler, Their
breadth.
Petr. Pigraeus, Lib. de Vulneribus, is most punctual. Let them be for the
Shoulders, says he, of six inches broad; for the Thighs, of 5 inches; for the
Legs; of 4 inches; for the Arms, of 3 inches; for the Fingers and Toes, of one
inch broad. But this your judgment will teach you to alter, according to the
conformation, shape and positure of Parts.

Fasten not your Rowler by tying a knot; nor yet sow it upon the Wound, or
where you cannot easily come at it again; lest you hurt your Patient. Quickness
and neatness distinguishes the Workman from the ignorant and unskilful. As
the Subject is more noble you work on, so strive to perform your office more
excellently; intending not only your profit, but decency in the dispatch; that
you may please the Eye, both in the time of, and when you have done your work:
thus shall you gain credit to your self, and endear your Patient to submit the
more readily to your Rules, which is not the least part of the Cure.

The next thing that offers it self for keeping the Lips of the Wound together
are Sutures, Sutures. Three sorts.
and they are of three sorts; first, the Incarnative, secondly, the
Restringent, and thirdly, the Conserver.

The first is that which is in most use amongst us, 1. Incarnative.
and is by making so many Stitches at a distance.

The second is the Glover's Stitch, 2. Restringent, or Glovers Stitch.
and much in use among the Spaniards, who stitch almost all Wounds by it. In
the Forehead and Face I have seen them bring the Wounds very close: the third
day they commonly cut the Knots off, and draw the Thread out; then with dry
Stitches keep them so brought together; and in two or three days more they cure
them.

The third Stitch is of use in great Wounds, and those of the Oesophagus,
Conserver.
etc. to hold them forcibly together. It is performed with Pins or Needles, as
in Hair-lips.

There are four sorts of Stitches, mentioned by the Ancients, for the Wounds of
the Belly, whereof I shall take notice only of one, which I have made use of
my self in the stitching of those Wounds; the manner whereof is thus: You are
to take up the Peritonaeum on one side, and leave it on the other; and then
take it up on the other side, and leave it on this. It is so made, that the
Peritonaeum, which is a dry body, may be united with the Musculous flesh:
otherwise only the Fleshy parts would unite, and the Peritonaeum lie open,
upon which a Hernia would certainly succeed, and the Patient be put to the
trouble of wearing a Trusse the rest of his life. The Thread you are to use for
this purpose ought to be a strong round white Thread proportionable to the
Needle, and both accordingly as the Wound requires. You must remember to
cleanse the Wound of its clotted Blood, if you can: but however go on with your
work, that Blood will find its passage out.

In great Fluxes of blood the Glover's Stitch is best. Endeavor in your
Stitching to bring the Artery and Vein to its wounded fellow; so shall you the
likelier secure your self, and make the work more seemly.

In the Incarnative, you are to consider the Wound. If you find it but the
length of a finger's breadth or a little more, it is not worth the stitching:
your Medicaments and Bandage will keep the Lips together, and quickly heal it.

If the Wound be of two Fingers breadth, make one Stitch in the middle; The
distances of Stitches.
if three fingers breadth, make two Stitches; if four fingers breadth, three
Stitches; and so go on, making a Stitch less then the Wound is in number of
fingers. Sometimes in declining Parts we make our Stitches at a little more
distance.

The time of taking out the Stitches is, when the Parts are agglutinated; Time
of taking out the Stitches.
which is sooner or later according to the Habit of body, or Season of the
year. Commonly in great transverse Wounds eight days are required; in less
Wounds not so deep, three or four days: in the Face, do it the next Dressing,
lest the Stitches make so many Scars. But in this work you must use your
judgment: Caution.
for sometimes the Wound may seem to be agglutinated, while the Lips are held
together by Suture, which, after the Stitches are cut out, is not so exactly
cicatrized, but that you might have done better to have left the Stitches a day
longer. But in this case the dry Stitch may help you; Dry Stitches.
and that is another way of keeping these Wounds together. They are made with
little bits of strong linen Cloth, triangular or quadrangular, or of such
figure as may serve your purpose. These are most proper in the Face, to avoid
the other way of Stitching: yet they are of use in other Parts, to preserve the
Lips close. They are commonly spread with a Mixture of sang. dracon. thuris,
aloes, farin. tritic. gumm. tragacanth. an. part. aequal. cum albumin. ovi.
They ought to be of such a consistence, that they may adhere firmly to the
Skin. They must be applied at such distance as they may best perform their
work. After they are dried on, you must bring the Lips of the Wound close
together, and retain them so, taking care they be not wet by the Matter.

The Fourth Intention is, the preserving the natural Temperament of the Part,
that thereby Agglutination may be obtained. The fourth Intention, in preserving
the natural temperament.
Which Agglutination indeed, as I have already hinted, is the work of nature
alone, by whose only power all Parts wounded, disjoined and broken, are knit
and made one again. But in regard there is a certain Medium, which answers in
proportion to a Glue, required in this work, Nature takes what is next hand,
even the Nourishment of the Part which is hurt, to make it of. Vbi morbus, ibi
remedium, Nature agglutinative of Wounds, healing,
is here as an Oracle; Where the Disease is, there is the Remedy. No sooner is
the Wound made, but the Balsam is discovered. Blood (at least the serous part
of it) is the Glue which she uses, both in curing by the first and second
Intention. 1. per Symphysin;
The first being performed per Symphysin, i. e. a Reunion of the Parts without
any Medium; by which word I here mean any Callus or Flesh, or other body
interposed; for in another sense the Balsam of Nature is the Medium, the
instrument of Unity, and knits the Parts together: the second per Syssarcosin,
2. per Syssarcosin.
i. e. with a Medium, or interposition of some Flesh or Callous substance, that
fills up the space between the Lips of the Wound. Great care must therefore be
taken, that the Blood offend neither in quantity nor quality. Too much brings
on proud and loose Flesh; as too little does defraud the Part, and affords
not a competency of Matter for the work. If the quality of the Blood be ill, it
cannot produce good Flesh: as the Blood is, such is the Flesh.

The means whereby this Intention is performed is a Regiment of the Patient:
Regiment, 1. Universal.
and that is either Universal, as to his Diet; or Particular, as to the
peculiar management of the Part it self. As to the Universal, we are to
consider, first, whether a full or slender Diet be to be used. This has been a
Dispute in former Ages: but I think, no man of common sense but knows, that as
a full Diet is hurtful for those of a Plethorick Body, in Wounds where there
is great Inflammation and like Symptoms; so when a Body has been exhausted
through loss of blood or the like, it is reason that a greater liberty should be
allowed, as to take Broths, Jellies, new-laid Eggs, etc. Withal I conceive
there should be Consideration had of the Patient's manner of living.
Consideration from the Patient's manner of living.
Some people have so accustomed themselves to drinking of Strong drinks, that
without such a proportion they cannot live. I could instance it by many
Stories, if it were necessary; but I shall give you one for all, and that from
abroad.

Ed. Br. an old Servant to a Person of Honor, Ed. Br. cured by allowing him
Wine.
was bit by a Monky in the Back of his hand. To prevent Inflammation, I forbad
him Wine. The next morning he complained he had not slept that night, that he
was faint and sick, and that his Wound was the least of his ailment. That day
he continued faint and ill, and the next morning complained again of his want
of Rest; and that afternoon he swouned, and complained he could not live
without Wine. He had good Broths, Caudles, and such like; and I believe he did
drink some Wine. (But he was allowed by his Master a Bottle of a Quart every
morning for his Draught, and was seldom sober.) His Wound was indigested and
inflamed. I complied with his desire; he drank again as he pleased; his
Sickness went off, his Wound digested, and he was soon after cured.

This I have seen often in some of the Dunkerkers at Sea, who drank
extraordinarily, and were full of drink at the time of their Sea Fights. I
could scarce ever cure any of them without allowing them Wine; and thereby
their Spirits were kept up, and I had the liberty to bleed them as I thought
fit. When these kind of people eat as plentifully as they drink, they then upon
a sudden change of Diet labor under a Crapula, and are subject to Fainting, or
have Colic, Dysuria, etc. and if the Wound happen in the Abdomen, it gives a
suspicion (to those that are not well skilled in the Symptoms of Wounds) to
think that it arises from the penetration of the Wound, when there is no such
thing; and so by the perseverance in those Rules the Patient suffers.

It has been a common Saying, A Hair of the same Dog, and thought that
Brandy-wine is a common relief to such. What then must become of such a one,
after a hard drinking for many months together, if he chance in heat of drink
to be wounded, and from that time his Surgeon condemn him to Ptisan for a
week together, nay two days? will he not faint and languish, and his Wounds
become indigested and inflamed? You may laugh at my pleading for them: but I
hope you will consider I am a Water-drinker the while.

As for other things, such Diet is to be observed as their Strength will
permit. We do not use to purge with Catharticks in Wounds, lest by stirring
Matter it flow to the weak Part: but we allow Lenitives, as Cassia, Tamarinds,
Manna, Senna, Rhubarb, with Sal prunellae; also Electuaries, as elect. lenitiv.
diaprun. sir. ros. solut. de cichor. cum rhabarb. also Broths wherein have been
boiled Lettice, Succory, Endive, Sorrel, Purslane, Borrage, Buglosse, etc. And
we let them blood according to the Strength of their body, and as Symptoms
indicate.

Another part of the Regiment of wounded persons will consist in giving of
Vulnerary drinks: of which we find many mentioned by Authors, Vulnerary
Drinks, Powders, and Electuaries.
and the materia medica very large; witness that great tribe of Vulneraries in
Parkinson's Herball.

The most common Simples with us in England are Comfry, Bugle, Ladies-mantle,
Agrimony, Sanicle, Pauls-betony, Fluellen, Perwinkle, Mugwort, Plantane,
Horse-tail, Adders-tongue, Avens, Cinquefoil, Wild-tansie, Vervine, Ground Ivy,
Golden-rod, Herb-trinity, Centory, St. John's Wort, Snake-weed, Knot-grass,
Mouse-ear, Yarrow, Scordium, Strawberrie-leaves and roots, Tormentill Bistort,
Valerian, Red roses, etc. Some of these are made choice of to be boiled in
Water, or White wine, with an addition of Honey: of which sort you have
sufficient examples in the Decoctum traumaticum of the Pharmacop. Land. Their
principal use is in Wounds of the Thorax and Abdomen: yet they are frequently
prescribed in all great Wounds. Sometimes also, if the Disease run out to a
length, we add Guaiacum, Sarsa, and Scorbuticall Medicines. There are likewise
Powders made of Crab's-eyes, Coral, Nutmeg, etc. and Electuaries of some of
the foresaid Roots and Herbs beaten up with these Powders.

The Particular Regiment is, 2. Particular.
in preserving the natural Heat and Tone of the Parts, without which we can
hope for no Union. For the better understanding hereof, I must put you in mind,
that there is not any Part of our body admits of a Solution of continuity
without Pain. Every Scratch in the Skin, and little Cut in the Finger, is
painful: much more are the deeper Wounds in the Flesh. This Pain stirs up a
Heat fermenting in the serous part of the Blood, which readily makes way to the
Wound, and, if not timely prevented, distendeth and raises the Part into a
Tumor with Inflammation. If this happens in a full Body, or one of an ill
Habit, where the Blood is serous, and more apt to ferment, the mischief is the
greater. And if the Wound be in a declining Part, as the Legs, the influx of
Humors is more abundant; and the Member through its weakness not being able to
assimilate, nor yet expel them, is the cause that Crudities do heap upon the
lower Parts, and make an Oedematous Tumor.

To make this more plain, I shall give you one Instance of the many that happen
daily. A young Gentleman about 18 years of age, A person pricked with a Thorn in
his Leg.
of a good Habit of body, one day sporting in the Country with his Gun and
Dogs, was pricked with a Thorn on the outside of the Calf of his Leg. He took
little notice of it till the Evening, and then dressed it with a little Balsam.
The next Morning it was more painful and inflamed, and at length terminated in
a Phlegmon. I was then sent for, and found the Tumor large and full of Matter,
and in the lower part about the Foot an oedematous Tumor. I opened the
Swelling above, and, discharging a quantity of Matter, cured the Patient as is
usual in Phlegmons.

If this person had been treated according to the universal Regiment, by
Bleeding and lenient Purgatives, etc. nay, if only after this particular
Regiment, in preserving the Temperament of the Part, he had been dressed, as in
this case he ought to have been, Medicaments proper in the beginning of a
Phlegmon.
by Refrigerants and Astringents, to have prevented the influx of Humors, and
with a Pledgit of basilicon, to cause Maturation in the festred Scratch, with
convenient Bandage over all; it had preserved the Tone of the Part, and cured
the Soar without farther trouble.

To proceed rationally by this Intention in Wounds, your first Application
ought to be of such Medicaments as have an agglutinative faculty, as bolus
Armois. sang. dracon. thus, aloes, gum. elemi, colophon. terebinth. and apply
over them such as are cooling, and of an astringent quality, to resist the
influx of Humors, as Clothes dipped in the Juices of the following Plants, fol.
plantag. equiseti, millefol. vineae pervinoae, ulmi, or Red wine, or Oxycrate.
To which you may add some of these Powders, flor. ros. rub. balaust. nuc.
cupress. gallar. far. board. and fabar. and oleum olivar. matur. These simple
Medicaments may be proportionably mixed according to the Habit of body and
condition of the Wound. In small and superficial Wounds, Nature of her own
accord is wont to effect the Cure; she seldom requiring more from us, them
that the Lips of the Wound be brought close together, and defended from the
Fluxion, etc. as aforesaid, and with Bandage so retained. A Pledgit of
liniment. Arcei with empl. diapalmae frequently serves the turn. But in greater
Wounds that will not so easily be cured, we stitch the Lips together, and
sprinkle them with such like Powder: bol. armen. thuris, sang. dracon. an.
part. aequal. and apply a Mixture of some of the same Powder with the White of
an egg over them, with a Compresse pressed out of Oxycrate, and a suitable Bandage
over all. This is generally the way: but lest by the adhesion of this
emplastick Medicament the Lips of the Wound should be torn or disturbed in
taking the Dressing off, I choose rather to apply overe the sprinkled Powders a
Pledgit with some of these following sarcotick Unguents: terebinth. Venet. iij.
gum. elemi ij. sang. dracon. thuris, mastich. an. j. Misc. and fiat Unguent. S.
A. or this; terebinth. ij. resin. pin. oliban. colophon. an. jss. mostich. j.
croci j. cerae ij. olei hyperic. q. s. fiat Vnguentum. Over which may be
applied any of these following Emplasters, viz. empl. diapalmae, diachaleit. de
lithargyr. de bolo, etc. In all Wounds where I design to cure by Agglutination,
and would preserve my Stitches, I forbear the use of Fomentations and slabby
Medicaments: nor will you have occasion for such Applications, if you proceed
rationally, as has been above said; for Nature will do her part toward the
Agglutination of the Wound, if you defend it from the influx of Humors. I
always accounting these Wounds near cured, when the Lips are retained close
together, and dressed as abovesaid.

Thus far I have proceeded in the Agglutination of Simple Wounds: Of compound
Wounds.
I shall now consider of Wounds with loss of Substance made by Bill, Pole-axe,
Sword, etc. some cutting twice or thrice in one or near one place, whereby the
Wound is large, transverse, yea and oblique, at the same time, and the Lips
contracted various ways, and so the Cure is rendered much more difficult. These
kind of Wounds are not so often seen in times of Peace, but in the Wars they
are frequent, especially when the Horsemen fall in amongst the Infantry, and
cruelly hack them; the poor Soldiers the while sheltring their Heads with
their Arms, sometime with the one, then the other, until they be both most
cruelly mangled: and yet the Head fares little the better the while for their
Defense, many of them not escaping with less then two or three Wounds through
the Scull to the Membranes, and often into the Brain. And if the man fly, and
the Enemy pursue, his Hinder parts meet with great Wounds, as over the Thighs,
Back, Shoulders, and Neck, Mr. Sanderson, now one of the Surgeons of St.
Bartholomew's Hospital, was once with me assisting in the dressing such. At
Sterling in Scotland Mr. John Chase, Apothecary to his Majesty, helped me in
the like work. One of the Soldiers had such a gash thwart the Nape of his
Neck, that it was a wonder to us he lived. His Wound was full of Maggots; and
so were those of all the rest that were inflicted on the Hinder parts, they
having been some days undrest.

In order to the Cure of these Wounds, you are in the first place to cleanse
them, and then to endeavor the bringing of the Lips together by the
Incarnative Suture, making so many Stitches as may retain them together. And if
you doubt this way not sufficient, you may then, as in a Hair-lip, pass
Needles or Pins through the Lips of the Wound, with little Plates of Lead to
secure them from tearing. But if the Wound be so deep as you suspect its
incarning in the bottom, you must leave a declining Orifice for the discharge
of Matter. If the Wound has lain long undressed, or were not stitched at the
first dressing, and be now so contracted and stubborn that the Lips of it will
not be brought near one another; you must then foment them warm with some
lenient Decoction ex fol. and rad. althaeae, malvae, viol. sem. hini, etc. or
with new Milk; then join them together, as has been said, and dress them as
Wounds so stitcht. But if you left a declining Orifice, keep it open by a small
Tent dipped in some such Medicament as shall be by and by prescribed, and after
Digestion withdraw the Tent, and heal it as such like Wounds. The greater
Wounds, which cannot be brought together by Suture, must be digested, and so
disposed as that new Flesh may be generated to fill up the Cavity: to which
purpose terebinth. iij. far. hord. vj. thuris j. Misc. cum vitell. avi. To this
after a day or two may be added mel ros. During which the Humors ought to be
diverted from the Wound by the universal Regiment set down of Bleeding,
Purging, etc. and by the external application of Refrigerants with good
Compresse and Bandage, to press the Lips of the Wound together, that it may be
the sooner cured. After the Wound is digested, you may deterge with mundif.
Paracelsi, or with this of Quercetan's, which is also a good Sarcotick: fol.
plantag. apii, an. Mj. ros. rub. Pij. vini rub. viij. coq. ad medietat. in
colat. dissolve sacchar. rub. ij. terebinth. j. far. juniper. and orobi, an.
vj. aloes, myrrhae, an. j. decoq. rurfus, and addendo cerae q. s. reduc. ad
formam Unguent. or with this Balsam of the Spanish Priest, commonly called ol.
Aparici; ol. olivar. iij. terebinth. Venet. viij. frument. integr. j. sem.
hyperici ij. rad. eard. benedict. rad. valerian. an. j. pull. thuris, vernieis,
an. ij. The Seeds and Roots are to be cut and beaten, and infused two days in
White Wind: then the Oil and bruised Wheat must be put to it, and so boiled
together to the consumption of the Wine; then strain the Liquour hard out, and
add the terebinth. thus, etc. giving it two or three walms more, and reserve
it for your use. In these larger Wounds, it will be necessary to apply warm
Stupes wrung out of Red wine wherein have been infused flor. ros. rubr.
balaust. nue. eupress. etc. But those Wounds that are full of Maggots or Worms
ought to be washed with a Decoction absinth. card. benedict. rad. gentian.
myrrh. aloes, etc. and deterged as abovesaid with Mundificatives: after which
you may proceed in the same method of Cure as is before mentioned. As to the
time of dressing Wounds, the second dressing ought not to be till the third
day, by which time we suppose them somewhat digested: from that time every
other day may be sufficient. Galen, speaking of the dressing Ulcers, says, he
dressed them but every third day, though the Matter flowed very much; and but
every fourth day in Winter. Indeed the too frequent dressing is hurtful: yet
there may be occasion of opening them sooner then by him proposed, for the
strengthening of Bandage, or for the preserving of the Stitches by putting on
dry Stitches. Also the retention of Matter causes the Suture to relax, and the
Lips of the Wound to open again: therefore that ought to be left to the
discretion of the Surgeon.

After the Cavity in the Wound is incarned, you may cicatrize with unguent.
desiccat. rubr. aq. calcis, etc. or with the Vitriol or Alume-stone, and dry
Lint.

If the Wound be made by a Fall or Blow with great Contusion, Of contused
Wounds.
you must endeavor that the bruised Flesh be digested and turned into Matter;
to which purpose unguent. basilic. is proper, applied warm upon Lint, or
dissolved in ol. lumbric. lini, or such like, anointing the Parts about with
ol. ros. and myrtill. cum album. ovor. with which you may also make up a
Restrictive, with an addition of bol. Armen, sang. dracon. balanst. flor. ros.
rub. and apply it over all. But if the Wound were of some days continuance
before you were consulted, you must then foment it with Discutients, and
embrocate the contused Parts with ol. cham. sambuc. rutac. etc. and continue
the application of Maturatives, proceeding as is set down in the Chapter of
Ecchymosis. After separation of the contused Flesh, the loss of Substance must
be restored by Sarcoticks, and the Wound cured as abovesaid; remembering that in
these Contusions Venaesection is most necessary. If the Wound be deep, and the
Orifice narrow, yet capable of enlarging; it must be laid open proportionably,
that the Matter may not be retained, and render the Wound more hollow. But if
the Sinus be of any great length, and so depending that the Matter cannot
discharge by the Wound; you may then make a Perforation in the lower part for
discharge of it, by Knife or Caustic, or both, first Caustic, then Knife; or
by a Seton-needle with a twisted Silk or Thread, as has been showed in Sinuous
Ulcers; and proceed accordingly.

What I have said of Wounds cut and hackt in heat of Fight by a broad Sword,
happens sometimes in fighting or foyning with a Rapier. For if the Thrust be
redoubled, an Attrition may be made in the lower part of the Wound: and if
there be such an Attrition there, or if some tendonous body be there wounded,
it will be too painful to heal by the first Intention; and if it run far, and
deep amongst the Muscles, it may be a maiming of the person, or an indangering
of his life, to cut such a Wound open from top to bottom. Wherefore you ought
to consider well the manner of the Wound; and if it penetrate so deep, and be
not capable of being laid open by reason of the thickness of it, make a search
with a Probe to the bottom, and feel how far distant it is there from the
Skin: and if it do not lie far off, nor under any considerable Vessel, the
speediest way of curing the Wound will be by passing in a Director, and cutting
it open. Which done, keep it open, and permit the upper part to agglutinate.
But if you think it not fit to open, yet mark the place, that in case there be
a necessity of doing it afterward, you may make the Apertion more certainly.
That done, dress the Wound with a proportionable short Tent armed with a
Digestive ex terebinth. cum vitell. ovi; and embrocate the Parts about with ol.
ros. myrtill. and aceto; over which apply empl. e bolo, or such like and
afterward proceed as aforesaid. For your farther information and more caution,
I shall give you one Instance of the ill effects of cutting open such Wounds
the whole length.

Some years since a young Gentleman was wounded in a Duel; Of a double wound
by Puncture.
the Rapier entered into his right Side slanting by his short Ribs under the
Muscles, reaching within a finger's breadth of the Spine, with a redoubled
Thrust. He was carried to a French Chirurgeon's house, and dressed by him. The
third day after I was fetched, and saw the Wound inflamed and undigested,
likewise the Orifice over-stretcht by the extraordinary bulk of the Tent. I
advised the dressing it with one lesser, and armed with a Digestive, also
Embrocations, etc. as abovesaid. But it was in vain. This Pretender dressed the
Wound with a Tent proportionable to the former, anointed with some Unguent
wherein was sang. dracon. binding a Stupe over it. By this way of dressing the
pain and inflammation increasing, I was fetched again two days after, and then
made a search; and feeling my Probe penetrating obliquely down deep amongst the
Muscles, within a finger's breadth of the Spine, (as abovesaid,) I concluded it
best to make an Opening there. Accordingly I used a mild Caustic, then dressed
up the Wound with a less Tent, spreading it with a Digestive ex terebinth. etc.
embrocating it cum ol. ros. etc. and soon after applied an anodyne Cataplasm,
and so left the Patient to rest. But in the night, he turning in his bed, the
Cataplasm slid off, and our Monsieur discovered a discoloring in the Part, and
supposing it an approach of a Gangrene, I was fetched out of my bed. Upon sight
of it, I found it only stained with the Saffron and Lupins which were in the
Cataplasm, and applied it again, leaving the Patient better satisfied. But the
next morning I met another Surgeon of the forementioned Monsieur's
acquaintance. We took off Dressings, and saw the Wound digesting. I proposed
the dividing the Escar below, to give vent that way to the Matter; but they
were positive for the cutting open the Wound thwart all the Muscles, the length
of between 5 or 6 inches. To which purpose Sponges were pressed out of Melilot
Emplaster, and the Wound filled with them. The next day this latter Operator
laid the Wound open with a pair of Scissors so far as his Sponges had dilated
it, and dressed it up his way. The morning following the Wound appeared dry,
and the Parts about inflamed and swelled very much, and continued exceeding
painful to the third day. Then they, being at a loss, were contented to divide
the Escar; upon which there discharged a quantity of Matter made by
Apostemation in that part: yet notwithstanding they would not enlarge that
Opening, but began where they ended, and cut open the Wound to the Aperture
made by the Caustic, and dressed it up as formerly. Thus they having increased
the pain, the Fluxion also increased, and a great quantity of Matter discharged
from the lower part, also a large Sinus discovered it self stretching over the
Spine to the other Side. In order to the curing of this, they designed
Injections; which I endeavored to dissuade them from: but they persisting in
the use of them, I protested against their proceeding, and left them. They
laughed at me: but about the ninth day after the Patient died, and made good my
prediction. For, alas! what else could be expected from such a Division of
parts, and casting in Injections, but to render it more sinuous from Side to
Side? whereas possibly by Digestion and good Compression it might happily have
healed.

The Fifth Intention is, in preventing of evil Accidents, The fifth Intention,
inpreventing ill Accidents. Of Haemorrhagia, or Bleeding.
and correcting such as are already fallen upon the Part. And these are
Haemorrhagia, Pain, Fever, Intemperies, Convulsions, Syncope, Delirium, and
Palsy.

We shall begin with Haemorrhagia, as being incident to all Wounds more or
less, and sometimes the cause of all other Accidents; wherefore I have treated
purposely of the Wounds of Veins and Arteries in a Chapter by it self; so
intend here only to speak of it as it is made by some Authors the second
Intention. The way to stop the Bleeding as it is common in all Wounds, is, by
bringing the Lips of the Wound close together by Suture, and by applying such
Medicaments to them as have a drying and agglutinative faculty; as Galen's
Powder of Aloes Pj. thuris Pij. and Hares-furre mixed with the White of an egg,
applied upon a Pledgit, also a Plaster of the same Restrictives, with Compress
and Bandage. But if the Wound be such that you cannot bring the Lips of it
together, apply the aforesaid Powder upon Dossills on the bleeding Vessels,
and your Astringents next, with Compresse and Bandage over all: then place the
Member in such a position as may be for the ease of the Patient.

You ought to be speedy in the mitigating Pain, Of Pain.
for that nothing disspiriteth your Patient more, nor makes more disturbance
in Wounds, the Humors flowing abundantly to the pained Part, whence insueth
great Inflammation and Tumor. Wherefore you must hasten to succor it by
Anodynes; amongst which Phlebotomy is proposed by Authors in the first place,
for that it makes evacuation and derivation of the serous Humor which causes
the grievance. The external Applications proper to ease Pain are, fol. and rad.
althaeae, malvae, viol. hyoscyami, thaps. barbat. flor. ros. cham. melilot.
sem. lini, foenugraec. cydonior. psyllii, papaver. alb. etc. which may serve
for Fomentations and Cataplasms, being boiled in the Broth of a Sheep's head
and feet, or new Milk. In the beginning of the Pain a Cataplasm may be applied
of far. hord. fabar. flor. ros. rubr. sambuci, decocted in Red wine or
Oxycrate, with an addition of ol. ros. etc. If the Parts be already inflamed,
take fol. hyoscyami boiled in Milk, with White-bread crumbs, a new-laid Egg, a
little Saffron and ol. ros. and make them into a Cataplasm. For more variety, I
refer you to the Chapter of a Phlegmon, in Tumors. If after this it tend to
Suppuration, you may proceed as in a Phlegmon. If it yield to none of these,
you may truly conjecture some Nerve is offended: then proceed as is said in the
Wounds of the Nerves. But if Pain be caused by Matter that wants a passage out,
give it one by Knife or Caustic.

If some hot Distemper from Choler offends the Part, Of distemper by Choler.
which may be perceived by what has been said of an Erysipelas, then these
Unguents, nutritum, alb. camph. refrigerans Galeni, populeon, are proper; or
this following: succi plantag. solani, semperviv. an. j. bol. Armen. ss.
lithargyr. loti, aq. plantag. and tutiae praeparatae, an. j. ol. ros. omphac.
and nymph. an. ij. aceti rosacei and cerae tantillum; fiat Vnguentum. If the
Distemper be oedematous, then Fomentations wherein flor. cham. aneth. meliloti,
sem. foenug. and such like have been boiled, may, with good Bandage, serve your
purpose.

Fever accompanies great Wounds; Of Fever.
especially where there is Inflammation, it is almost inseparable; therefore
you are the less to trouble your self thereat. But if it continues after the
Pain and Inflammation is removed, and has Delirium or Syncope with it, there
is great cause to doubt the welfare of your Patient: therefore hasten Revulsion
by Venaesection or Vesicatories, also use Clysters and lenient Purgatives, to
loosen the body; and prescribe Juleps, Emulsions, Epithems, which, by
refrigerating and contemperating the heat, may relieve the Patient. The other
Symptoms of Gangrene, Convulsions and Palsies, are translated to the Discourse
of Gunshot Wounds.

CHAP. II. Of Wounds of the Veins and Arteries.
THE next thing that offers it self to our consideration is, the Wounds of
particular Parts; and first of the Veins and Arteries, which are subject to
great effusion of blood, therefore require your speedy help. You may
distinguish whether the blood be from an Artery or a Vein, by the flowing of
it, and by its color.

From the Artery the blood rushes impertuously and per saltum, Signs of the
Artery wounded. Of the Vein wounded.
by reason of the dilatation and constriction of the Heart, and is of a florid
color. The Venall blood flows with a more smooth and even stream; it is of a
grosser consistence, and of a darkish color.

Of these latter Wounds there is no great danger; Prognostic of Vein, and
Cure. Prognostic of Artery,
Galen's Powder with the White of an egg, and the formerly proposed way of
dressing, will stay their bleeding, and cure the Wound in few days. But those
of the Arteries are most difficultly stopped, for that the blood is in a most
vigorous and strong motion.

If these Wounds be not with loss of Substance or bruised Lips, and Cure.
Suture.
you may bring the Lips and Mouths of the Arteries both together, and retain
them by Suture, passing your Needle with a strong waxed Thread through both of
them, making the Glovers stitch, which Guido calls Suppressio. Then apply such
like Emplastick as this; bol. Armen. iij. sang. dracon. thuris, aloes, glutin.
sicc. an. j. gypsi, farin. volatilis, an. ss. hypocistid. acatiae, sumach, an.
iij. Misc. cum album. ov. to the consistence of Honey, and apply over it a
Compresse squeezed out of Oxycrate or Red wine; Rowler.
then roll up the Member with the agglutinative Rowler, beginning on the
opposite part, bringing both the heads over the Wound: and having taken a turn
or two there, roll upwards and downwards, so as to press the blood upward, and
restrain the Influx from above. Your Bandage must be so made, that it be to the
ease of the Patient: the Position ought also to be such as may prevent Pain.
Ordering the Part, and Diet.
He must keep cool and quiet, and observe a slender Diet. His Drink ought also
to be cooling and astringent; as Fountain Water with sal prunell. or acetum, or
with gads of Steel quenched in it, and sweetened with Syrup of Coral,
Pomegranates, Limons, etc. or this following Draught of Quercetan's, croci
Martis, essentiae corallor. an. j. sir. de ros. sicc. and myrtill. an. j. aq.
papaver. rhoead. iiij. Misc. so also a decoct. hord. cum sem. papav. alb. and
hyoscyam. with an addition of Rose Water, and Sugar of Roses, to sweeten it;
also a grain or two of ladanum in case of extremity, if the Patient bears it
well. You may also let the Patient blood, Bleeding where.
by opening a Vein on the contrary part, if his strength will permit it, taking
a little at a time only for Revulsion. You may use also Cupping, Friction, and
Binding the remote Parts, for Derivation.

In Wound of the Artery, dress not oftener then you needs must; once in five
or six days may be sufficient, whilst there is danger of Bleeding. But if you
find the blood has made its way through all the Dressings, and the Bleeding
continues, take them off: and if you discover the Stitches broken, and the Lips
of the Wound incapable of being stitched again; consider whether the bleeding
Artery may not be taken up and tied: if it may, do so. The way of doing it you
may see in the Chapter of Aneurisma, and in one of the following Observations.
Then proceed in the Cure by Sarcoticks, etc. But if the Artery lies so deep
that you cannot possibly come to make Deligation on it, proceed by application
of Escaroticks to the Vessel, or by an actual Cautery.

If by Escaroticks, then you ought to cleanse the Wound of the clotted blood,
Escaroticks.
and dip your Dossills in some such like Powder; thur. pulv. ij. aloes,
glutinis sicc. an. j. chalcanth. ust. ij. arsenici vj. gypsi iij. Apply these
with Lint on the bleeding Artery, and over it Dossills of Lint dipped in album.
ovi cum pulv. Galeni, and dress up the Wound as aforesaid. At your next
dressing, leave the Escarotick sticking on the Artery, and incarn as fast as
you can. For want of the abovesaid Powders, take Vitriol powdered and tied in a
fine Rag, and apply it to the Artery with convenient Dressings over it, as
before-said.

But if after these your Endeavors the Artery yet continue to bleed, Cautery.
you must use the actual Cautery; by which the Vessel will shrink up at both
ends. You may convey the Cautery down to the Artery through a Cannula: and that
the Cautery may not burn through it, you may cover the outside with a Plaster
or Rag wet with the White of an egg, etc. That done, dress the cauterized part
with Dossills dipped in Mucilage of Quince-seeds, or with the White of an egg,
and embrocate the Parts about cum ol. ros. applying emplastr. diachalcit. cum
succis plantag. etc. over all. After you have allayed the heat of the Part,
digest, incarn, and cicatrize the Wound as follows.

A Gentleman of about 35 years of age was wounded with a Rapier on the right
side of the Aspera arteria into the internal Jugular, 1. Observat. of a wound
of the internal Jugular.
through his Neck, it passing out below the last Vertebra. The Wound was small,
yet bled with a full stream. A Servant stopped it with his fingers, whilst I made
Dressings ready of our common astringent Powders, with the White of an egg and
a little acetum, spread upon a Pledgit of Lint, and an Emplaster of the same,
with Compress and such Bandage as it would bear. The Wound behind bled when
that before was dressed. I applied the said Medicaments to that, and caused them
to be held close till they were dried on. Then we put him to bed, and kept him
cool and quiet. I used all my endeavors for the contemperating his blood, as
is usual in such cases, and dressed him but once in four or five days, unless I
were necessitated by the bursting forth of the blood: yet he bled at times
about 16 or 17 days. His Wound by the Vertebra of the Neck healed in few days;
and the other near the Aspera arteria was cured by this way of Agglutination
the 19. or 20. day.

A Man wounded in the Artery under the right Eye was immediately dressed by Mr.
Fawcet Surgeon; 2. Observat. of an Artery wounded.
but the next day in the afternoon the blood burst out impetuously. The Wound
had been made by the corner of a Trencher, and was not so big as a Silver-peny.
I dressed it with pulv. Galeni, and applied a Plaster over it made up with my
common restrictive Powders cum album. ovi, with good Compresse and Bandage. The
next day his Wound bled again, and upon stopping thereof with my finger, the
blood was observed to beat all along the Artery, from the Aperture to the
Temporal Muscle, with a greater force then is commonly seen in an Aneurisma. I
pierced through both the Lips and Artery with a curved Needle, and by
Deligation restrained the bleeding, then dressed it up with Emplasticks as
before, concluding I should have very little more trouble from that Wound. But
2 or 3 days after it burst out again, and in my absence some other Surgeon
was called in and dressed it. Afterward, at another bleeding, Mr. Fawcet dressed
him, and at another time Mr. Arris. The Wound being thus enlarged with the
crowding in of Dossills, and lying in a very inconvenient place for Bandage, it
bled often, and was dressed by such Surgeons as they could meet with in
their necessity. By the frequent application of Escaroticks to stop the
bleeding, his Eye was so much inflamed and corroded, that it was verily
believed by us, that if he did recover of his Wound, yet that Eye would be
lost. But his continual bleeding thus many days had so exhausted his Spirits,
that there was small hopes of his surviving it. At the last bursting out of
this Vessel, Mr. Ed. Molins deceased, Mr. Fawcet and my self met together at
his Chamber. We found him lying as dead with his Hand out of the Bed upon his
Breast. We endeavored to feel his Pulse, but it not beating, we concluded him
dead, and took the Dressings hastily off the Wound. It did not bleed, though it
was open. We supposed the blood exhausted. The Artery lay in the Wound torn by
the Escaroticks. We took up the ends of it, and tied them, dressing the Wound
with liniment. Arcei and a Plaster over it, not believing that the man would
ever recover. But from that time the Bleeding of the Wound ceased, and it daily
incarned by very common Remedies and was soon healed, to my admiration. He was
in less then a month perfectly cured both of his Wound and Eye. This Patient
had been subject to the like Bleeding formerly upon very small Wounds.

A Butcher living at Westminster was wounded in the Artery between the Thumb
and Forefinger. 3. Observat. of an Artery wounded.
After he had been dressed 3 or 4 days by some of his neighboring Surgeons,
the Wound continuing to bleed, he came to me late one night with Dossills
crowded in it. I threw them out, and with a Needle and Thread stitcht up the
Artery, and the Wound with it; then sprinkling some of my agglutinative Powders
upon the Suture, I dressed it up with a restrictive Plaster and Bandage, as in
the former Wounds is said: and in three or four times dressing he was cured.
But afterward there appearing some Pulsation extraordinary under the Cicatrix,
which proceeded from the too lax Incarnation of the Wound, I dressed him with a
Pledgit dipped in a dulcified Tincture of Vitriol, with good Compresse and
Bandage. At the next dressing it was dried and shrivelled, so that there was no
more Pulsation to be observed.

One in the New Exchange had an Aneurisma in the Palm of his hand reaching to
the third and fourth Fingers, which at last broke out, 4. Observat. of an
Aneurisma broken open.
and bled at times the space of 8 or 10 days. I dressed him with the Tincture
of Vitriol abovesaid once in 4 or 5 days, stopped the Bleeding, and cicatrized
it firmly, so that there appeared not the least Pulsation under it.

A sedentary young Gentleman, of an ill Habit of body, 5. Observat. of a wound
of the Sural Artery.
was wounded by a Penknife in the inside of the Calf of his leg into the Surall
Artery. A Surgeon dressed up the Wound with Dossills dipped in escaroticall
Powders, chalcanthum ustum, etc. with Plaster and Bandage, by which he stopped
the Bleeding. The next day I was consulted, and being informed of the Wound,
and the manner of dressing, I deferred the Opening it, and advised him to keep
his Bed. He did so, but complained then of a throbbing pain in his Wound, and
was very apprehensive of its bleeding, looking himself often upon the Bandage,
and alarmed me by frequent messages. The third morning I met his Surgeon
there, and looking upon his Leg, found the Bandage all bloody. We took off the
Dressings, and saw the blood fresh in the Rowlers; but in taking off the
Plaster, the Dossills came out only foul'd with a bloody Sanies, as is usual
in like Wounds after the filling them with such Powders. The Wound and Parts
about were inflamed and swelled; yet I had much ado to dissuade the young
Surgeon from dressing it again with Escaroticks, though he saw the Accidents
arising thereby. But at last I prevailed, and dressed the Wound with a Dossill
spread with the common Digestive ex terebinth. cum vitell. ovi sprinkled with
pulv. Galeni, embrocating the Parts about with ol. ros. cum aceto, and applying
emplast. e bolo over all with good Bandage. By this way of dressing he was
eased, and the Wound at liberty to discharge the Sloughs and Sanies which were
made, and choked in by the former dressing. If it did not thus digest, yet I
concluded that at the next dressing it would be in our power to lay open the
Wound, and divide the Artery, without hurting the Nervous or Tendonous bodies
near it. But the next day I found the Patient unsatisfied how his Wound could
cure so dressed, without a Tent, and often murmuring that it would rankle; yet he
continued pretty easy, and did not bleed during those three days. The fourth
day at the opening we found no Blood but what was mixed with Matter, the Wound
also looked well; yet I complied with the Patient, and put in a short Tent spread
with the Digestive as before. The third day after we opened it, and saw upon
the Dressing some fresh Blood followed by a thick white Matter, as from a
Phlegmon. It proceeded from an Apostemation made by the Escaroticks. The Wound
thus digesting, I left off the use of the Tent, and dressed it with a Dossill,
and by good Embrocations, Compresse and Bandage endeavored the pressing out of
the Matter: which accordingly lessened each dressing, but was not well
digested, nor free from some small tincture of Blood. But this proceeded from
his ill Habit of body, he being highly Scorbuticall, and subject to Fainting,
loss of Appetite, and pituitous Swellings on his Feet. Upon which account
Doctor W. was confulted, and somewhat relieved him. After his Wound was cured,
I caused a straight pair of Stockings to be laced on both Legs, to restrain the
Swelling, and prevailed with him to rise daily: and after he was able to walk,
he retired into the Country, but has not yet got off the Disease he heightened
by keeping within doors with this little Wound. Doubtless this Cure had been
speedier, if immediately at the first dressing his Leg had been bound up with
Agglutinatives, and the whole committed to Nature.

A poor fellow living in the Country was accidentally in letting blood pricked
in an Artery. 6. Observat. of an Artery pricked in letting blood.
The Arm swelling and growing painful, he put himself into another
Barber-Chirurgeon's hands, who by unfit Applications rarefied the Tumor, and
made way to the Extravasation of the blood; which increasing the Tumor, and
rendering it soft, was supposed by the Barber to be a Suppuration of Matter. He
accordingly opened it by Knife or Lancet: at which an impetuous Flux of blood
burst forth, to the quantity of 4 flaggons, (as they told me.) They made a
shift to stop it: but the Bandage being made too hard and unequal, the Arm
swelled, and inclined to gangrene. While this poor man lay thus afflicted, we
his Majesty's and Royal Highnesse's Surgeons, attending the Court, visited
him, and prepared for the taking up this Artery, or, in case of failing, to cut
off his Arm. The Patient being taken our of his Bed, and placed in a Chair
toward the light, we took off the Dressings, and I viewed the Arm: where
finding no Gangrene, according to the report of the Surgeon, but rather an
Ecchymosis, we made a Bandage above the Wound, to prohibit the Influx of blood.
One of the Surgeons making a gripe thereon, we made an Incision into the
Tumor on the inside of his Arm, according to the length of it, over the
Artery; and after we had pulled out the coagulated blood, and laid the Vessel
bare, we passed a Needle with a Ligature under the Artery, and tied it, then
cut off the ends of it, and loosened the Bandage above: and seeing it bleed no
more, we dressed it up with Pledgits dipped in the common Digestive ex terebinth.
cum vitell. ovi, applying them with pulv. Galeni next the Artery, and lightly
filled up the Wound with Pledgits of the Digestive dipped in ol. ros. warm; then
embrocated the Arm with some of the same Oil, and laid a diachalcit. Plaster
over the Wound and Parts about, also applied empl. Paracelsi and diachalcit.
over the Hand and Arm, which were oedematous. Then with Bandage we began at the
Hand, and rolled up to the Wound, taking a turn or two over it, and so rolled
up to the Axilla. He being returned again to his Bed, we placed his Hand upon
his Breast, and felt his Pulse beat strongly in that Wrist. At the next
dressing we found the Tumor dispersed, the Wound fresh, and tolerably
digested. We then passed another Ligature upon the Artery above the first, and
in pulling the first to divide the Artery between the Ligatures, the Artery
broke; which was as well. We dressed it up as before we had done, only leaving
out the Powders. At the next Opening, finding the Wound in a very good
condition, the Lips of it being digested and contracted, we dressed it up with
mundif. Paracelsi, etc. Then seeing it in a hopeful way of Cure, I returned to
London, leaving the Patient to my Fellows, who dressed it successfully the space
of 10 days without any appearance of blood. In some of their absence the
Barber-Chirurgeon dressed the Patient. Whether it was in wiping off the Knot,
or crowding in Dossills, but it burst out again: yet the Artery being divided,
it soon stopped by the application of Colcothar, and from that time it bled no
more. The ancient way of Deligation is, as I have already said, by tying it in
two distinct places, and cutting the Artery off between: but the Patient's
often fainting interrupted us in that work. And truly in this case, where a
Barber was to be entrusted with the Cure, it had been better that the Artery
had not been divided; for then it would not have been in his power to have
rubbed off the Ligature, and before the Wound could have been ready to
cicatrize, the Ligature would have fallen off of it self, without danger of
bleeding.

CHAP. III. Of Wounds of the Nerves, Tendons and Ligaments.
NErves may be many ways wounded, viz. by Scission, or Puncture. Wounds of the
Nerves and Tendons.
The former way they are usually cut through, and then occasion no new
consideration in Surgery, because they wholly cease from action, and are
irrecoverable: but when pricked by a sharp-pointed Weapon, which kind of Wound
is called a Puncture, they are much to be regarded. So also Tendons: not the
small Fibers of them, (which are in every Wound of the Fleshy parts,) but the
main body of them, which usually make up either the tail or head of a Muscle.
If you would know whether these are wounded or not, confider the place wounded,
viz. whether near the Joint in the inside of the Arm or Leg, or the end of the
Muscle, or in the Tendonous parts of the Hand and Foot.

The Symptoms are, Signs.
great Pain and Inflammation, also a contraction and hardness in the Nerve or
Tendon. But if the Nerve be quite divided, the pain is little, only a kind of
Stupor or Nummednesse. According as the Nerve is more or less considerable, so
also the particular Part is lame more or less.

The most frequent Wounds of Nerves, Ill consequences of bleeding not always
from a prick of a Nerve or Tendon.
and most to be taken care of in Surgery, being Punctures, I shall instance
in them, and choose the most common, viz. those which are made accidentally by
letting blood. And here by the way you must take notice, that, in letting
blood, sometimes the Apertion happens to be made, when the Skin, by reason of
the Bandage, or Position of the Arm, lies equal with the Vein, yet afterward
is not so; or the Apertion is made too small in the Skin, so that part of the
blood is choakt in, and lies there extravasated, whence a small Phlegmon
arises: or it may happen in some that are well let blood, that yet through the
indisposition or ill Habit of body, the Part pricked festers, (as they usually
say,) and grows soar a day or two after, and, if neglected, may raise a
Tumor, which lying upon the Nerve or Tendon, may at that time contract the
Arm. If a Boil in a Fleshy part be painful, then much more these in the Joints
amongst the Nerves and Tendons. Such Accidents have and will happen to all that
let blood, whether Physicians or Surgeons: which is the reason that some of
our old experienced Surgeons did, after letting blood, always apply a
Pledgit of basilicon upon the Aperture, with emplastr. diachalcith. over it,
which by its digestive quality secured it from corrupting. But we by a contrary
way, as by a little Compresse dipped in Water, endeavor to restrain the flowing
of the hot Serum to the Aperture; and we should be laughed at if we continued
that old method of Dressing. At the time we let people blood, they are commonly
laboring under some great Fermentation, or apprehend it so: no wonder then if
it sometimes fall upon the Part, where it was invited by Bandage. I have been
sent for into the Country to a person, that, after a letting blood, was seized
with an Erysipelas or bilious Inflammation the whole length of the Arm. The
Aperture in the Vein might possibly be the cause; but that place was not
afflicted at all. Dr. Ringall complained once of a Surgeon, who was so
unconscionable, as he said, to ask five pounds for curing an Arm he had made
soar by his letting blood. But I hope no person is so ignorant or malicious, to
impute such Accidents to a Puncture of the Nerve or Tendon.

For when they are really pricked, their Symptoms (as you may read in all those
that have writ of them) are sudden, with vehement Pain, Faintings, Convulsions,
and attended with great Defluxions. They do not terminate presently in
Suppuration, but gleet, and will not yield to a simple anodyne Cataplasm of
White-bread and Milk.

All Wounds of the Nerves and Tendons are dangerous, Prognostic.
but more or less according as they are of use. Those of the Nerves are
attended with the severest Symptoms, and seize the Patient more suddenly. But
whether it be Nerve or Tendon, the transverse Wound is most dangerous, and
difficult of Cure.

In order to their Cure, Cure.
there are other considerations required; and in the first place, whether the
Nerve or Tendon lie open in view, or under coverture of the Skin. If they lie
covered under the Skin or Membrana adiposa, then you ought to open the Skin,
that the Medicaments may penetrate to the wounded Nerve or Tendon. Your
Medicaments proper in these Grievances ought to be such as are of hot, dry and
subtle parts, to consume that Ichorous water which first affects them, and
causes the Putrefaction. In the beginning use ol. ros. with a little Bay Salt
dissolved and dropped into the Part scalding hot; upon which may be applied a
Pledgit spread with basilicon dipped in the same Oil, and the Part embrocated
about cum ol. lumbric. and emplast. e bolo over it as a Defensative. But if the
Inflammation and Tumor be great, apply this Cataplasm: farinae hord. and
fabar. an. iiij. sem. lini and foenugraeci pulv. an. j. flor. ros. rub. flor.
cham. sambuci, and summit. absinth. an. iij. boil these in Wine, or in the
common Lixivium, adding oxymell. iij. ol. ros. j. Misc. so roll up the Part
gently. If there be much pain, dress it twice aday. If the Part requires
Medicaments of more drying and subtle parts, dress with balsam. sulphuris
terebinth. or else, ol. sabinae and terebinth. an. ij. Misc. or oleum costinum,
rutae, sabinae, aneth. scorpion. etc. These are all proper Medicaments to dress
them with; but ol. ros. and Salt have always served my purpose.

In your application of Medicaments you must consider what degree of heat and
siccity is proper for the offended Nerve or Tendon. Caution.
If in your use of these Medicaments your Patient feels not the heat of them,
or feels it vehemently, they are not then rightly fitted: for in the former
case they do not enough dry that Sanies; in the latter they do inflame the
Part. If the Patient feel the heat moderately, the Medicine is good: but if
from the use of the Medicine the Part itch and smart, and the Aperture made by
Puncture gape, then the Medicament is stronger then it should be. If the
hardness go off with the contraction, and the Lips of the Wound relax, it is a
good fign. I shall give you one Observation for the farther confirmation.

A young Surgeon having accidentally pricked a Tendon in letting a Maid blood
in the Saphena near the Ancle, he dressed it up with ol. terebinth. hot.
Observat. of a Tendon pricked.
Her pain increasing, I was consulted, and saw the Surgeon ready to apply
his hot Oils: but upon sight of the Wound, the Lips being turgid and dry, also
the Parts about inflamed, I showed him his error, and prevailed with him to
dress it with unguent. basilic. warm, and to embrocate cum ol. ros. also to
apply empl. diapalm. malaxed with some of the same Oil, and to forbear dressing
it 2 or 3 days: during which she was cured. The over-using hot Oils has been
in these cases very mischievous to many.

If they yield not to Cure by such Medicaments as have been proposed, then you
ought to divide them, to prevent worse Accidents, viz. Convulsions, Spasma's,
Gangrene, etc. After which they cure as other Wounds; only require more care
in the position, and keeping the Member steady, if it be in such a Joint where
there are Nerves and Tendons that move contrary wise.

The Ligaments require much one method with the Tendons; Cure of Ligaments
wounded the same with Tendons. 1. Observat. of a wound in the inside of the
Wrist.
only your Medicaments are here to be more drying, as euphorbium, sulphur viv.
calx lota, tutia, etc.

A Youth about ten years of age, one day in the Sessions-yard leaning over the
spiked Pales to see the Malefactors, was suddenly frighted down by the
Marshall's men: in his falling he was caught by one of those Spikes in the
middle of his Wrist, it passing between the Bone and Tendons: he hung thereby
till he was taken down. They carried him home, and fetched me. I found the
Tendons stretched out to a great length, some of them broken and torn in pieces,
and one of the Bones of the Carpus lying loose in the Wound; which I took out,
and cleansing the Wound, placed the shattered and overstretcht Tendons within
it, and made my first Stitch in the middle, bringing the Lips as close together
as I could. Then I made two Stitches more, on each side one, dressing him up
with a Digestive ex terebinth. etc. dipped in this following Balsam; terebinth.
lbij. olei olivar. lbiij. ol. laurini iiij. cinnamom. iij. euphorbii,
garyophyll. baccar. juniper. an. j. gumm. hederae, sagapeni, ammoniaci,
opopanacis, galbani, an. jss. myrrhae, mastich. colophoniae pulv. an. iij.
distillentur pro usu. Over this I applied empl. e bolo, with a Compresse dipped
in Oxycrate, and so rolled up the Member. Some hours after I let him blood, and
gave him that night a Draught of aq. paralyseos with sir. de meconio and aq.
cardiac. cochl. iij. He rested ill that night, and in the morning was full of
pain. I took off the Bandage, and bathed the affected Member with decoct. rad.
althaeae, malvar. violar. cham. verbasc. byoscyam. and applied a Cataplasm over
the Dressings of farin. hord. fabar. flor. ros. rub. balanst. decocted in
Oxymel, with the addition of ol. lumbric. and rosar. The next day his pain was
much mitigated, the Tendons all drawn up, and the Stitches loose. I thought to
have drawn the Lips close, but found them too painful to admit of it;
therefore I cut the Stitches out, and brought them as close as they easily
would come, dressing up the Wound as before. After some few days, the Wound
being tolerably digested, I dressed it with Unguent dipped in the former Balsam,
and applied over the Wound empl. diasulphuris Rulandii, with Bandage and
Compresse as before. terebinth. resinae pin. ol. hyperici, an. iiij.
sarcocollae, myrrhae, thuris, an. iij. cerae q. s. fiat Vnguentum S. A. Thus I
happily deterged and incarned, and by unguent. tutiae and my ordinary
Epuloticks cicatrized the Wound; and some while after he recovered the use of
his Hand.

A Coachman was wounded transverse the back of his Wrist, 2. Observat. of a
wound on the inside of the Wrist into the joint.
deep into the Joint, so that his Hand doubled inward. I caused a Ferula to be
placed under his Hand to support it; then searching the Wound, pulled out many
fragments of Bones: and having cleansed it, I brought the Lips together by
three distinct Stitches, leaving a vent for Matter in the ends of the Wound,
which were both depending. Then I sprinkled the Powders of Myrrh, Aloes, Thus,
etc. upon the Suture, and applied a Digestive ex terebinth. cum vitello ovi on
the rest of the Wound, with a Defensative over all, and rolled it up. Then I
let him blood, and prescribed him vj. sir. de meconio in a draught of Mace-ale
for his Supper, with hopes to dispose him to rest. But he slept little that
night. The second day after I took off Dressings, and fomented the Wound and
Parts about with an emollient Decoction, as in the former Chapter, and dressed up
his Wound with Digestives as before, embrocating the Parts about with ol.
lumbric. and applying empl. e bolo over the Wound and adjacent Parts. It
digested in the declining ends a little, but continued painful, especially in
the Fingers. The third day after, dressing him again, and seeing the Wound
digested, I took out the Stitches, and dressed the Wound with my Digestive of
terebinth. dipped in my formerly mentioned Balsam, applying a Cataplasm warm over
all the Wound and Hand, as in the former Observation has been set down; then
rolled up the Member again. At the next dressing there appeared more
Inflammation; yet the Wound was not altogether well digested, nor did the
stitcht Lips seem to incarn, but thrust forth a soft white Flesh: wherefore I
cut the Stitches, and digested with Merc. praecipitat. and laid Pledgits spread
with mundif. ex apio, with a Cataplasm as before over all. Thus I deterged, and
afterward incarned with the common Sarcotick, and with calx lota cicatrized
it. Then I put on a Catagmatick Emplaster, and by the use of a laced Glove
scattered the pituitous Swelling, and strengthened it. Yet it continued long
painful, and so extremely weak, that he was necessitated to support it a long
time by wearing the Ferula. Since the writing of this, I am informed he
continues in the same Service; his Wrist is stiff, but serves him to drive his
Coach. 3. Observat. of a Finger bit off by a horse.


A Gentleman aged 54 years, of an ill Habit of body, passing in the Street by a
Coach, one of the Horses snapt off the end of his Finger with the Glove. I
dressed the Stump with the common Digestive dipped in a little ol. ros. warm, and
with emplast. diachalcith. malaxed with a little of the same Oil, and rolled up
the Stump. This Patient kept not his house with this little hurt, but came to
me to be dressed once in two or three days, or dressed himself; he not thinking it
worth the observation of Diet, Bleeding, or the like. One day he came to me
complaining that his Finger would not heal. I looked upon it, and seeing an
undigested crude Ichor dropping from it, and the Parts about blistered, I
scarified them, and dabbled the Wound with ol. terebinth. warm, strewing Merc.
praecipitat. over all, and dressing it up with Pledgits dipped in basilic. etc.
then rolling it up with empl. diachalcith. That night I went to his Lodging
with a Fomentation and other Medicaments prepared for a Mortification, but
found it checked; so I continued the application of unguent. basilic. and ol.
terebinth. and afterward let him blood, and purged him with infus. senae, etc.
After the Wound was well digested, I incarned and cicatrized the Stump by such
Medicaments as in the former Observation have been set down. Thus sometimes
great mischiefs attend little Wounds, through the contempt some of our Patients
have of them.

CHAP. IV. Of Wounds of the Face.
A Lady was wounded down the whole length of the Forehead to the Nose, 1.
Observat. of wounds in the Forehead and Eye-brow.
also transverse the left Eye-brow to the Temporal Muscle; her Eye and Face
were also much bruised. It happened to her traveling in a Hackney-Coach, upon
the jetting whereof she was thrown out of the hinder Seat against a Bar of Iron
in the forepart of the Coach. At the first sight of the Wound in her Forehead,
seeing the Bone bare and her self so disturbed, I doubted whether I should
stitch it, or keep it open with Dossills: but seeing no Fissure or inequality
in the Bone, and considering the Deformity in that place would be great, I
brought the Lips of the Wound close together with one Stitch, and dressed it
with Sarcoticks, resolving, if any Symptom prognosticated ill, to cut the
Stitch, and lay it open again; but if there were none, then at the next
dressing to bring the Lips of the Wound nearer by dry Stitches. On the Eyebrow
I made four Stitches, at such distance as they might be able to retain the Lips
together, taking in a triangular piece of Skin that was divided by a Wound
above it, which rendered it not unlike a double Hair-lip. Then I dressed up the
Wounds with Arceus's Liniment and empl. e bolo, with a Compresse dipped in
Oxycrate, and made my Bandage over all. Having thus dressed her Wounds, I caused
some aq. ros. rub. cum alb. ovi to be beaten together, and dropped in her Eye;
then applied soft folds of Linen wet in the same Mixture over that diseased
Eye, and an empl. e bolo over her Cheek, forbearing the Bleeding her that
night, in consideration that she had bled the space of 5 miles in her returning
back to London. The second day after I took off the Dressings, and finding less
suspicion of Fracture or Fissure in the Wound of her Forehead, I brought the
Lips of that Wound together with dry Stitches, and strengthened those Sutures
of the Eye-brow by the same Medicament, lest the continual motion of the Lid
should relax them: then I dressed it up as before, and made the Bandage begin
behind, bringing both the heads of the Rowler forward, passing one by another,
to press the Lips of the Wound in the Forehead close together, and dressed her
Eye with aq. pomor. matur. wherein a few grains of Vitriol were dissolved; by
which I removed the Suffusion upon the Cornea. Then I applied upon her bruised
Cheek Pulp of the Roots of Orpin beaten in a Mortar, with the White of an egg.
Two days after I dressed her again, and finding that the dry Stitches kept those
Lips of the Wound close together, I cut off the other, and dressed her with
sarcotick Powders, which supplied the place of Epuloticks; and that morning I
let her blood in the Arm about ten ounces, and purged her the day after with
infus. senae, rhab. etc. By this the Defluxion was removed, and in the space of
seven days the Wounds were all perfectly cured, and she returned back the
eighth day.

A Servant of a Nobleman was wounded on the right Cheek over the Os zygoma, 2.
Observat. of a wound in the right Cheek.
down the Muscles of the same Cheek. In cleansing of the Wound, I felt a piece
of that Bone, which had been cut off by a slanting blow: it hung only by some
fleshy Fibers in the Wound. I took it out, and, in consideration the part would
not well admit of Bandage, I made two Stitches, bringing the Lips of the Wound
even together, then sprinkled the Suture with sarcotick Powders, and dressed it
up as the former. The third day after, taking off Dressings, and finding his
Wound agglutinated, I cut out the Stitches, and dressed him with some of the same
Agglutinatives as before. Two days after, dressing him again, I found his Wound
perfectly cured.

Whilst I served amongst the Dunkerkers, where Snick and Snee was as it were a
fashion, I had much of this sort of work; and for your diversion shall set you
down one Instance in that kind.

Whilst our Squadron rode at Anchour in the Groin, 3. Observat. of a Dutch
Hamburger marked with a cross on the right Cheek.
there came in some Hollanders, under the notion of Hamburgers, with three
Ships new trimmed up for the King of Spain's Service. A Boatswain of one of
these Ships happened in company ashore with some of our men, where drinking
together, the Hollander began to prate of Religion, upbraiding one of our men
for wearing a Cross; and after a while, growing more heated with drink, he
became quarrelsome, and swore Sacrament he would not wear a Cross, no, the
Devil take him, repeating it often. One of our men beat him down, and fell
with him; then kneeling upon his Breast, and holding his Head down, he drew out
a Knife sticking in his Sash, and cut him from the Ear toward the Mouth, then
from the Os zygoma to the nether Jaw. Now, said he, you shall wear a Cross,
that the Devil do not carry you away. I was sent for from the next house as a
friend to that Religion, and stitcht the Lips of the Wound close together; then
sprinkling them with a little pulv. Galeni, applied Pledgits with a sarcotick
Unguent, and with Astringents and Bandage dressed him up. The next morning he
was let blood, and the third day after I took off the Dressings, and finding
the Wound as it were agglutinated in the Slits, I cut out some of the Stitches,
sprinkled the Wound as at first, and dressed him up with Sarcoticks, with
Compresse and Bandage. The second day after I dressed him again, and cut out the
remaining Stitches; and in a dressing or two more cured him. This being the
work of Nature, who rarely fails in acting her part, if we perform ours, in
retaining the Lips close together, and defending them from Fluxion. The Patient
was well pleased with his Cure, though there remained some marks of a Cross.
These sort of people wearing them with much pride in their Faces, as marks of
their Courage.

CHAP. V. Of Wounds penetrating the Oesophagus and Aspera arteria.
WOunds penetrating the Oesophagus and Aspera arteria require to be stitched
close, especially those of the Oesophagus, where the sustenance and Saliva so
continually presses into it. Therefore if your Stitches slacken before the
internal Wound be agglutinated, you ought to make new Stitches, or pass
Needles or Pins through the Lips of the Wound, and with strong Thread twisted
about them, as in a Hair-lip, keep them close together, till the Wound be
united. During which, dress it up with Agglutinatives, and prescribe a thin
Diet: so shall you cure the Wound in few days, when as otherwise observe what
follows.

A Child of about six years of age, playing with a wooden Dagger, Observat. of
a wound in the Gullet.
fell upon it, and wounded himself into the Oesophagus or Gullet, so as his
Saliva froathed out of the Wound. I being fetched, stitched up the Wound, and
applied Astringents, with Compresse and retentive Bandage, then put him into
bed, and let him blood in the Arm, advising a Lambative of album. ovor. rec.
cum sacchar. alb. to be taken as necessity should require, with directions to
abstain from all other Sustenance till the next morning. At which time visiting
him again, I was told their Surgeon had taken off my Dressings, cut off the
Stitches, and given a greater liberty in Diet. I wondered what peculiar Art he
had in curing that Wound. But about a month after I was informed, he had been
foiled in the Cure, and had left it to Nature; and that the Child was fed with
Pudding, and such soft Food, part whereof came daily out at his Wound.

CHAP. VI. Of Wounds of the Lims.
ONE of our Mariners in Spain, 1. Observat. of a puncture of the Arm.
fighting on shore, was thrust with a Rapier into the outside of the Arm nigh
the Biceps. A Surgeon in the Town, seeing him bleed much, stitcht the Wound
close, and applied his Restrictives, rolling up the Part well. After three or
four days, the Patient came aboard, and, being in pain, desired me to dress
him. The Arm being swelled and inflamed, I cut the Stitches open, and gave vent
to a bloody Sanies, after which followed a digested Matter. Finding by search
with my Probe the Wound wanted little of passing through, I embrocated and
dressed it up with a short Tent armed with my common Digestive, and endeavored
by good Bandage to cure it. But it not yielding thereto, I passed a
Seton-needle through, discharging the Matter downward; and after that Apertion
was digested, I dilated it, and kept a Tent there a few days; during which the
upper part of the Wound healed up: and the Wound below digesting well, and the
Matter daily lessening, I also healed that up. This I insert, to show you that
such Wounds ought not to be stitcht, but dressed up with Astringents, Compresse
and Bandage: for so these Wounds in a good Habit of body, with Compresse and
Bandage, do frequently agglutinate in a few days; whereas dressed by Tents they
are of longer continuance, and rendered at last difficult of Cure.

While I was in the King's Service in the time of the War in the West-country,
2. Observat. of a wound in the Thigh.
I was fetched to Captain M. who in fighting a Duel was run through the Thigh
with a broad Sword: I was also sent for at the same time to the other. I
hastily dressed this Officer's Thigh with Pledgits spread with Sarcoticks, and
some astringent Powders mixed with the Whites of eggs, applying them over both
the Orifices, and bringing the Lips of them close, with Compresse and Bandage,
and so left him to be by his Servants put to bed. From thence I went to dress
the other, who had many little Wounds, on his Fingers, Hands, and Head. At my
return I visited my former Patient, whom I found in his bed with little pain.
The second day after I attended him, and finding all in good temper, without
pain or swelling, I dressed the Wounds as I had done before, there being good
signs that they would heal up by Agglutination; for there was little either of
Matter, Pain, or Swelling. If it had appeared inflamed with Tumor or Pain, I
ought then to have dilated the Orifice most distempered; and if they had both
suffered, I might have kept them both open with small short Tents spread with
the common Digestives, and have let him blood, and proceeded as in a Body ill
habited: but there was no need; there only required a quiet position of the
Part, which he submitted to, and was happily cured in 7 or 8 days. This was
really performed by the Balsam of his blood, I neither bleeding nor purging him
in the time of his Cure.

A fat Gentleman came from Rochester wounded in the Thigh with a Tuck. It was
much inflamed, 3. Observat. of a wound in the Thigh.
by reason of the Tent in it, which was very long; his young Surgeon
supposing the Wound could not be cured unless the Tent reached to the bottom of
it. I threw out the Tent, and dressed the Wound with a Pledgit of unguent.
basilic. embrocated it with ol. ros. and applied empl. e bolo, then let him
blood. He being feverish, I also prescribed a Clyster, and sent him an Anodyne
draught to dispose him to rest that night. The next day I found him in good
temper, and his Wound inclined to heal. I dressed it as the day before, and
advised him to keep his bed three or four days. About two days after I visited
him again, and taking off the Dressings, saw his Wound perfectly cured: so it
continued, and he walked abroad the next day.

A person was wounded in the inside of the Arm, 4. Observat. of a wound in the
Arm.
the Sword passing over the Joint slanting to the outside of the Arm. He was
first dressed by a Surgeon near the place where he was hurt, and had bled
much. The next day he complaining of pain, I opened the Wound, and found it
tented at both Orifices, the Arm swelled, and a little disturbed; as Wounds in
that place are subject to be, when the blood is shut in by Tents, and not dressed
rationally by Astringents and good Bandage. The Swelling was most between the
two Orifices, and appeared afterward to be the blood choked in by the
streightness of the Bandage, and was not likely to yield otherwise then by
Suppuration. I fomented the wounded Member with Discutients, and kept both the
Orifices open with small Tents dipped in the common Digestive, embrocating the
Parts about cum ol. ros. and gutt. aliquot aceti, and applying over all empl. e
bolo. The third dressing there appeared blood from that Orifice in the inside
of the Arm. I filled it with Praecipitate upon a Dossill, and dressed the Wounds
up as before; then acquainted the Patient with my thoughts of Opening the
Swelling between the two Orifices, there being no likelihood the Matter could
discharge it self by either of them, yet it was not safe to heal them up.
Wherefore I opened that Tumor lying between them by a little Caustic, and
discharged a grumous blood with a corrupt Serum. From that time I left off the
use of Tents, and healed that Wound up in four or five days: and as the Escar
separated, the Ulcer digested, and I cured that latter Opening soon after. That
the Bone was bare under the Tumor, may I suppose yet be felt, from the
adhesion of the musculous Flesh to it.

A person was wounded in the outside of the right Leg below the
Gartering-place, 5. Observat. of a wound in the Leg.
the Wound running upward. After 6 weeks dressing by the neighboring
Surgeons, the Wound being much disturbed by a Flux of Humors, I was
consulted, and found it sinuous (some two inches) upward, and accompanied with
Inflammation and Tumor. The Small of the Leg and Foot were oedematous, and the
whole Member so weakened by the Influx, that it was neither able to assimilate
its Aliment, nor yet to resist the Crudities that fell upon it, and so was like
to be of difficult Cure. In order to which I laid open part of the Sinus by
Incision, and deterged the Wound with mundif. Paracels. mixed with Merc.
praecipitat. embrocating the Parts about with ol. ros. cum aceto, and applying
cerat. Galeni over the inflamed Tumor. I fomented the oedematous Tumor with a
Decoction of absinth. scord. flor. sambuci, cham. ros. rubr. bacc. myrtill. and
balanst. and applied over the Swelling a Mixture of empl. diachalcit. and
stict. Paracelsi, with good Bandage, not renewing those Dressings more then
once a week, to give a breathing to it. By the foresaid method of dressing,
that part of the Wound which I had laid open deterged, and the Inflammation and
Tumor remitted. I afterward divided the remaining Sinus, and deterged it as
the former, and with unguent. diapo^pholyg. etc. cicatrized it, by the help of
a laced Stocking, in the space of about a month. This person had been long kept
in his Chamber by his Wound, and now supposing himself well, he rid to his
Country House, (unknown to me:) but that night his Leg swelled much, and the
Cicatrix, being scarce confirmed, brake out again; upon sight whereof he
returned back the next day, and sent for me. His Leg being inflamed, and the
Cicatrix fretted quite off, I fomented the Member cum decoct. malvar. violar.
plantag. solani, and flor. ros. rub. and endeavored by the application of
basilicon, etc. to digest it: but it not yielding thereto, I applied
Refrigerants on the external Parts, and a fine Lawn wet in a Solution of
troch. alb. Rhas. made in decoct. plantag. equiseti, etc. over the Excoriation,
also unguent. alb. camph. over the Lawn, upon Pledgits somewhat distant from
one another, lest the Matter should be shut in by the adhesion of them, and
fret the Cuticula more off. Thus I dressed it twice aday, he keeping his Leg
upon his bed, to prevent Defluxion. By this method the heat and acrimony of the
Humor being mitigated, I applied over the Lawn Epuloticks more drying, viz.
pulv. corn. cerv. usti, etc. and at last with much difficulty cicatrized the
Ulceration: whereas if this Wound had been treated methodically in its recency,
it might possibly have been cured in few days by Agglutination.

CHAP. VII. Of Wounds of the Breast.
WOunds of the Breast are penetrating, or not. If they do penetrate, then we
are to consider the depth; whether it be only between the Mediastinum, in the
hollow Cavity of that, in the lower part of the Breast; or whether it penetrate
into the Cavities of the Thorax; or what the Parts are that be hurt. How the
Breast is circumscribed, with the Symptoms of each Part when hurt, you may find
in the following Discourse of Gunshot.

The Signs of Wounds penetrating are discovered by the proportion of the
Searching-candle or Probe, Signs of penetrating wounds.
which enters into the Cavity. You may also perceive when it penetrates the
Cavities of the Thorax, by laying a Down-feather upon the Wound, or by holding
a lighted Candle near it, the Patient holding his breath the whilst. In this
case the Wind (or Air) will move the Feather or Flame; if it do not blow away
the one, and extinguish the other. The Air also makes a noise in its passing
forth. Sometimes it is discovered by the quantity of blood discharged by the
Wound or Mouth, or both, with Difficulty of breathing.

Wounds in the hinder part of the Thorax are reckoned dangerous, Prognostic.
by reason of the Nerves and Tendons; and if they penetrate that way, there is
another danger from the great Vessels of blood, which are nearer to the Weapon
in this case then in those Wounds which are made forward: yet all Wounds in the
Breast are dangerous, by reason of the continual motion of the Lungs, and of
the blood that falls down on the Diaphragma, and corrupts it. If the Lungs be
wounded deep amongst the great Vessels, though they escape the first nine
days, yet they commonly terminate in a Phthisis, or Fistula.

A Wound in the external part of the Breast is cured as a Simple Wound. If it
penetrate, Cure.
you are to endeavor first the restraining the blood; then that the
extravasated blood be discharged: and that either by the Mouth, by
Expectoration; or by the Wound; or by Urine. The way by Urine Fabr, ab
Aquapend. says is by a branch of the Azygos, which, says he, passes near the
Diaphragma, by the Spine, to the Emulgents. Those that own the Circulation will
hardly allow of his Hypothesis: however, if the matter of fact be true, that
there is sometimes a discharge by Urine, which I confess I have not yet
observed in my own practice, it will be reasonable to propose, as he does, in
this case, Diuretics, as decoct. capill. Veneris, polytrich. rad. petroselin.
beton. apii, foeniculi, asparagi; also Ptisans, with ol. sulphur. vitriol.
Barlycream, Emulsions, etc. to contemperate the blood. The Ancients gave acetum
with warm Water to restrain the present Flux, and to dissolve the concreted
blood.

The second way is by Expectoration; and thereto serve decoct. pectorale.
Lohochs, sir. capill. Ven. jajub. glycyrrhiz. oxymel, etc. whereof the
Pharmacopoeia Land. is full. This I have mentioned for their sakes who cannot
have a Physician. But here I leave this work to them, those Cures consisting
much in their well ordering and prescribing internal Remedies; contenting my
self in the Dressing of the Wound as it appertains to Surgery. Whether the
wound is to be kept open, or not.
In the treating of which there is a Question, whether the Wound should be kept
open, or agglutinated. They that are for a speedy Agglutination, do urge it,
lest the internal Air corrupt the Parts within, and the heat expire. They that
propose the keeping them open, do design thereby a readier discharge of Matter.
For, says Aquapendent. if the Matter be to be discharged by Urine, it must
pass into the substance of the Pleura, then into the Vein Azygos, so into the
Emulgents, then to the Kidneys, and through the Ureters and Bladder: if by
Expectoration, then it must also first pass into the substance of the Lungs,
then into the Aspera arteria or Weasand, and from thence be coughed up, and
spit out by the Mouth.

In my practice, in these Wounds of the Breast, I consider the Wound, The
Author's judgment.
how it is capable of discharging the extravasated Blood and Matter. If it be
inflicted so, that the Blood or Matter may be thereby discharged, then it is to
be kept open, the welfare of the Patient depending mainly upon the well
dressing and governing it: but if it do not lie well for Evacuation of that
extravasated Blood, then it may do hurt, and so ought to be healed up.

A Person of about 23 years of age, of a good Habit of body, 1. Observat. of a
penetrating wound of the Breast.
being wounded into the Breast, there followed immediately a great effusion of
Blood, almost to the exhausting of his Spirits. Mr. R. Surgeon and my self
were presently sent for. We found him lodged in an Inn near Fox-ball, and
viewed his Wound. It was four fingers above the Cartilago eusiformis, a little
to the left side: he had a small Pulse, and fainted often. Dr. Wedderborn and
Dr. Will. Denton came in while we were providing Dressings. The Wound was large
and penetrating. We made a soft Tent, with a Thread fastened to it; How to
order Tents in penetrating wounds of the Breast.
which in these Wounds you must be sure to do, lest you loose it in the Body.
This Tent we dipped in a Mixture of Powder composed of bol. Armen. sang. dracon.
thus, mastich. etc. cum albumine ovi, and applied over it a Pledgit spread with
the same, also empl. e bolo, with convenient Bandage. The Physicians prescribed
internally such things as restrained the Bleeding, and were proper to resolve
the concreted blood, and withal to relieve his fainting Spirits. That night he
rested ill. The next day when we met, seeing him labor under great Difficulty
of breathing, with pain above the Diaphragma, his Pulse quick, little Urine,
and that high-colored, we agreed he should be let blood presently; which was
done accordingly in the left Arm. The blood flowing with a quick stream, we
took away about 6 or 7 ounces, a mere Serum: but the Patient was relieved by
it. We then took off our Dressings, to look upon the Wound, whereupon we found
some Blood and Sanies discharged. We dressed him with terebinth. lot. in succo
lamii, adding some of the former Powders cum vitell. ovi upon a Tent as before,
with a Plaster and Bandage over it. Thus we continued to dress him until we
saw the Bleeding cease. After which there was nothing for us to do, but to
further the discharge of Matter from within, by keeping the Wound open until
it lessened, and the ill Symptoms went off: the casting in of liquid
Medicaments, which are not easily to be gotten out again, being very
destructive. Therefore we diligently attended in assisting Nature, by keeping a
way open for the evacuation of what was extravasated and corrupted within the
Cavity, committing the Cure to her; who indeed acted her part so well, that in
few days the Wound agglutinated within: and we thereupon leaving off the use of
the Tent, cured the external Wound in few weeks by the common Sarcoticks,
leaving him in perfect health, which he yet enjoys.

Another person was wounded into the Breast below the fourth Rib on the right
side. 2. Observat. of a wound in the right Breast.
He coughed up much blood at times. Sr. Fra. Pruj. was his Physician; who
prescribed him Ptisans, pectorall Decoctions, etc. by which and frequent
Phlebotomy the Symptoms went off. After the Wound digested, the Patient rambled
abroad, and was cured by such Dressings as I left for him at his Chamber, I
seeing him no more until he was wounded again.

Another was wounded in the right Breast, 3. Observat. of a wound in the right
Breast.
coughing up much blood, with great pain and Difficulty of breathing. I took
away ten ounces of blood presently, and ordered him (it being then night) some
syrup. de meconio and jujub. in a Draught of aq. papaver. with a few drops
spir. sulphuris. He slept well that night, and against the morning he had
decoct. pectoral. com. (the hotter Herbs left out,) sweetened with sir. de ros.
sicc. and jujub. of which he drank in the morning, and at other times as he
listed. By his disorder he frequently relapsed, and coughed up blood at times:
I let him blood as often, and kept his Wound open and digested. But he
relapsing again, I began to be sick of him, and dealt with him to send for a
Physician. Sr. Ed. Graves was consulted, who saw his Wound almost cured. We
repeated Venasection; and from that time he recovered, and continued well.

A Footman was wounded into the left Side: 4. Observat. of a wound in the left
Side.
he cought blood, and discharged much by the Wound. A Servant of mine dressed
him with a Tent, by which the Bleeding was stopped from flowing thereout: and by
letting him blood in the Arm, the Coughing of blood was checked. The other
Symptoms were afterward removed by Dr. Walter Needham's Prescriptions. Some few
days after, a Tumor arising about the Wound, I gave him a visit, and felt the
swelled Parts crackle under my fingers. Concluding it Wind got out from the
Cavity within the Thorax, I made an Incision into the Swelling about an inch
long, by which the Wind was discharged. We digested the Wound cum terebinth.
etc. and kept it open two or three Dressings, till the Penetration into the
Breast was incarned; then lessened the Dossill, and healed it as in the former
Observations has been showed.

A Gentleman of about 23 years of age, 5. Observat. of wounds in the Breast and
right Arm.
of a full Body, was wounded in the Breast and right Arm. He was carried into
the next house, and dressed by a French Surgeon. The next morning I found
him much afflicted with a Colic and Dysuria. These Symptoms happening thus
upon his Wounds, gave some occasion to think they proceeded from the Wound
inflicted on the Breast; but were indeed the effects of his ill Habit of body
and manner of living; for he had been a Good fellow, and at that time
over-warmed with Drink, and had layn upon a Pallet that night in a cold
Chamber, which together seemed cause sufficient for his complaint: however
Bleeding was repeated. Fomentations were also applied to the Abdomen, Clysters
administered, and all things done which were proper in such cases; Purging
excepted, in consideration of his Wounds: the one whereof was said to be on the
Region of the Heart, and the other in the Artery of the Arm. The third day
after we prepared to dress his Wounds, and found the one, lying upon the
Sternon, penetrating under the Skin to the Cartilago ensiformis, whereout we
pulled a Tent near two inches long, and proportionably big. The other was a
Puncture on the outside of the Arm, with a Tent crowded into it. I dressed this
latter Wound with a Pledgit spread with a Digestive ex terebinth. and empl. e
bolo, and in two or three dressings cured it. To the other I applied some of
the same Digestive upon a small Tent; and having embrocated the adjacent Parts
with ol. ros. I used empl. e bolo with Compresse and Bandage, and designed that
way to cure it. But the Sinus being depending, and the Wound disturbed by the
unreasonable great Tent, hindered the Agglutination: wherefore after a dressing
or two I snipt it open with a pair of Probe-scissors, and cured it by
incarning, etc. The Wounds appearing so inconsiderable, the Patient was purged,
and the Dysuria remitted: but a few hours after he was seized with a pain in
his left Hip, for which he was again let blood, Plasters were applied, and
Purging repeated. But after all, a Diarrhoea happened, which freed him of the
Sciatick pain. Being thus relieved, he observed no longer the strict Rules
prescribed him, but took the liberty to eat and drink as he listed, and
attributed his Recovery to that.

A person run through the Body the breadth of three fingers under the right
Clavicle, and out below the Scapula, 6. Observat. of a wound through the Body.
was first dressed by a Surgeon near the place where he was wounded. I came
some hours after, and found him in bed faint and weak, but without Pain or
Difficulty of breathing. The next day I met Dr. Bacon Physician, and Mr.
Shocque Surgeon to his Highness Prince Rupert. The Patient had rested very
ill the preceding night, his Wound in his Back had bled very much, even quite
through the Bed; he had also fouled many Napkins in coughing up Blood. We took
the Dressings off the Wound in his Breast, from whence there had been some
blood discharged, and more came out soon after. I dressed up the Wound with a
short Tent dipped in a little terebinth. cum farin. volatili, and a few of our
agglutinative Powders mixed with the Yolk of an egg, and applied empl.
diachalcith. over it. The other Wound under the Scapula was painful, but so
small, that it was not reasonable in our judgments to keep it open. We
therefore laid a Pledgit of the same Mixture with a Plaster upon that, and
from that time dressed it no more; but dressed the Wound in his Breast daily, and
repeated Venaesection as occasion offered. The third day he cought up blood,
and some little issued from his Wound that day and the next. Four or five days
after I waited upon him to his Lodgings in London: by the way he cought some
blood, and so more or less day and night; but by the care of his Physicians it
lessened daily, and his Wound being better digested, I kept the Orifice open by
a short hollow Tent made of a Sparadrope, which was composed of resin. pin.
gum. ammoniac. bdellium, galban. terebinth. and cera, with pulv. ireos, dipping
it in a little mel ros. This way of dressing I continued until the coughing of
blood diminished, from 12 Napkins in a day and night to 10, 8, 7, 4, 2, 1; yea
to 1 in a week. After I saw no blood one way or other, nor any Symptom of ill,
I desired his Physicians and others might be consulted together and severally;
and having all their positive judgments for throwing out the Tent, and healing
up the Wound, I did so, and in a week more cured him. Five or six days after he
sent me his thanks by his Servant: after which I made him a visit, and there
met Dr. Willis, who inquiring of me whether his Wounds were cured, I desired
the Patient that he would show the Doctor whether they were or not. He
presently stripped himself of his Shirt, and showed the Doctor, who both saw and
felt the Cicatrices, and replied, They are well.

A Young man wounded in the Breast, 7. Observat. of a wound in the Breast.
laboring under very great Pain and Difficulty of breathing, with a Cough,
sent for me late one night, and showed me some little blood he had then cought
up. He had been wounded the night before by a man standing at a Door some steps
higher then himself, as it were over him, thrusting his Rapier into his Breast,
within two fingers breadth of the right Clavicle, downward into the Lungs. The
Patient ran into that House bleeding much, and was seized with such Difficulty
of breathing, that he was forced to stretch his Arms at length over his Head,
without which doing he could not breath. He had been let blood twice, and
prescribed Ptisans, etc. but for all this he was very little relieved. I
presently let him blood about ten ounces, and ordered the Apothecary to give
him a draught of aq. papaver. cum sir. de meconio and de ros. siccis, with a
little aq. Saxoniae frigid. and against the next morning appointed them to send
for a Physician to meet me. They did so. When I came in the morning, I found
the Patient marvellously relieved, and resolved to remove (he being then in
Sctoland-yard) to his Lodging in Wild-street. In the presence of his Physician
Dr. St. I took off the Dressings, found his Wound small, and healed up within,
but not cicatrized: which if it had, yet the Wound within was so much below
this without, that it was not capable of discharging the Matter, and so not
worth my attendance,, their Cure indeed consisting in internal Prescriptions.
However he continued me with his Physician, and we bled him again, taking away
about viij. of blood, and proceeded in the method of Cure usual in such cases.
That afternoon the Patient, unknown to me, pursued his intention of removing to
his old Lodging in Wild-street, where going up three pair of Stairs to his
Chamber, he relapst into the former Difficulty of breathing, with pain, and
cought much blood. The morning after we met there together again. The Patient
seemed to us quite spent, laboring under great oppression; and by his pains
about the Diaphragma and Back there was suspicion of extravasated Blood. We
bled him some 4 or 5 ounces more, and repeated Embrocations, Lohochs, pectorall
Decoctions, etc. and got off this difficulty in 5 or 6 days: then I left him.
But after that by disorder he relapsed again, yet was freed again the same way
by his Physician, and recovered to be hanged at last.

Of all these wounded Patients, The Author's Observation concerning the
discharge of the Sanies of the Breast by Urine.
and many more I have helped to cure, I never saw any that I could say passed
their Disease by Urine, nor many of them that vented their Urine well during
the time of their lying under these Wounds; nor have I often seen them who
recover expectorate any such quantity of Matter, as might be thought to proceed
from the great quantity of Blood extravasated. They cought fresh blood most of
them, like to what they discharged from their Wounds, but more florid.

CHAP. VIII. Of Wounds of the Belly.
WE shall now say somewhat of the Wounds of the Belly: the Description whereof
you will find set down in the Discourse of Gun-shot-wounds, with the Symptoms
that attend the Wounds of each particular Part that shall happen to be hurt in
it.

Wounds of the Belly either penetrate, or not. Difference.
The Wounds not penetrating are such as reach no farther inward then to the
Peritonaeum. If the Peritonaeum be also cut through, it is reckoned a
penetrating Wound: in which case, if the Wound be large, the Omentum or
Intestines slip out. These penetrating Wounds are also frequently accompanied
with Hurt of some of the contained Parts, viz. the Intestines, Stomach, Liver,
Spleen, etc.

If the Penetration be large, Signs.
it is discovered by the thrusting out of the Kell or Gut. If the Wound be
small, you must search it with your Probe. What internal Viscera are wounded,
may be guessed by the external Part hurt, but more certainly by their peculiar
Symptoms.

Wounds not penetrating are without danger. Prognostic.
Those in the middle of the Belly are worst, by reason of the Nervous body that
lies there, and consequently more painful to be stitched, and difficulter of
Cure, by reason of the Intestines and Kell pressing most upon that Part. If any
of the internal Viscera be hurt, the danger is great, all such cases being
accounted mortal.

Wounds not penetrating are cured as other Wounds of the Flesh: Cure.
But those which do penetrate require other manner of handling. If the
Intestines or Omentum do thrust out, you must speedily reduce them, lest the
former inflate, or the latter over-cool and corrupt. But if the Gut be so puffed
out that you cannot return it in, you ought to foment it with warm Water, Red
wine, or some discutient Decoction ex summit. origan. puleg. fol. beton.
salviae, flor. cham. sem. anethi, foenic. dulc. anis. etc. If by such means you
cannot reduce it, you must enlarge the Wound by Incision, and restore it to its
place.

If the Omentum be slipped out and tainted by the Air, make a Ligature above the
solid part, and cut it off; then stitch up the Wound, leaving the ends of the
Ligature hanging out of it to cast off. But if it be fresh and warm, reduce it
with your fingers. Authors have proposed several ways of Stitching these
Wounds, which I shall not trouble you with; but advise you to make your
Stitches so deep, that the Peritonaeum may be united with the Flesh: for if you
fail therein, a Hernia must necessarily succeed.

If the penetrating Wound be so small that neither Omentum nor Intestine slip
out, (as it frequently happens when they are inflicted by Tuck or Rapier,) you
may then consider what Symptoms there are of the internal Viscera hurt: and if
there be neither Inflation of the Belly, Colic, Vomiting, or ought
extraordinary by Urine or Stool, you may conclude all well; and being so, your
best way will be to heal up the Wound by Agglutination: for by dressing it with
Tents, you may cause disturbance; and by exposing it to the external Air,
Putrefaction, Colic, etc. may ensue. Therefore I think it necessary that these
Wounds be healed with all expedition, and that the Patient do keep his Bed the
while: for in sitting up, the weight of the Bowels will stretch the
Peritonaeum, and make way through it. And though the external Wound in the
Skin do not yield them passage, yet they will so nest themselves between it and
the Peritonaeum, as to make a Hernia. To prevent which, you ought to hasten the
Cure, and not only to keep the Patient in Bed, but to make good Compression
upon the Wounds, that the Parts may unite while they are recent.

If in such a penetrating Wound the Small guts be wounded, the vehement Pain,
continual Vomiting of Choler, and dejection of Chyle by the Wound, will
discover it: but in that case, the keeping of it open to seek the Intestine
will be a hard task; and when you have found it, what will it signify, but to
increase the Accidents? Therefore it will be better to follow the method of the
Ancients, to embrocate all the Region of the Belly with ol. mastich. and
lumbric. to dress the Wound with Sarcoticks, and to keep it close and warm with
Compresse and Bandage. But if the great Intestines be wounded, and the
Excrements discharge that way, it may be reasonable to lay open the Wound, and
stitch the Gut with the Glovers Stitch, sprinkling it with some of the
aforesaid Agglutinatives; and reducing it back, stitch up the external Wound
of the Belly, as has been said. In all these Wounds Venaesection is necessary,
and may be repeated as occasion shall offer. Regulation in Diet ought to be
with great moderation. Clysters may be administered after the second day of
Chicken or Veal broth wherein Barley has been boiled: to which may be added
Yolks of eggs, mel comm. or Sugar of red Roses, etc. Also Internalls may be
prescribed, viz. Vulnerary decoctions of fol. plantag. equiseti, pimpinell.
pilosell. rad. consolid. to which may be added cons. ros. rub. cons. cydonior.
Bolus's may be also proper of species diatragacanth. with Balsamicks. Wounds of
the Liver, Spleen, and other Viscera, require to be treated much after the same
manner by Internalls. They ought more especially to be kept open, either for
the dressing them, or for the discharge of Matter. Also Cataplasms may be
applied ex far. hord. fabar. flor. ros. rub. coct. cum hydromel. For farther
satisfaction therein, I refer you to Wounds made by Gunshot.

A Man was brought to Lambeth wounded transverse the Belly a little below the
Navell on the left side; 1. Observat. of a wound in the Abdomen.
the Omentum and Intestines were thrust out, and kept close to the Wound with a
Handkerchief in his hand. The Omentum was much out; but not being altered by
the Air, I caused warm Clothes presently to be held upon them very close, and
the Patient to be placed low with his Head, and his Hips raised up: then by the
help of his Friend raising them yet higher, and shaking his Body, I reduced
them. After which, they having laid him down with his Hips raised, and his Body
somewhat declining to the right Side, my Assistent pressing with his hands
something above the Wound, (by which the Lips of it were a little turned
upward, and the Viscera down,) I prepared to stitch the Wound with a strong
Needle somewhat curved at the point, threaded proportionably, taking hold of
the lower Lip; and passed my Needle first through the Peritonaeum, The manner
of sowing the Peritonaeum in this case.
and then to the opposite side, through the Flesh and Skin, leaving the
Peritonaeum; and so along, taking it up on one side, and leaving it on the
other, till I had sowed up the Wound. Then I pulled the Stitches as close
together as I could, and fastened my Thread. The Wound thus stitcht, I
sprinkled the Stitches with pulv. aloes, colophoniae, sang. dracon. mastich.
etc. and applied Sarcoticks with a Plaster over all, made up of some of the
aforesaid Powders cum album. ovi, and with Compresse and a strong Towell braced
them all fast. After a while I let him blood, and ordered him to lie quiet upon
the sound Side, and to keep his body soluble by Clysters, also to be moderate
in eating and drinking. I dressed him after the same manner every other day; and
when the Wound seemed to be cicatrized, and that my Stitches began to fret, I
cut them out the eighth or ninth day; but continued the use of Sarcoticks till
it was firmly cicatrized.

These Wounds are not subject to great Inflammation or Defluxion; but by reason
of the fatness and thickness of the Lips, and by pressing of the Kell and Guts,
the stitching of the Belly is a troublesome work: and yet if the Wounds be not
so stitched that the Peritonaeum and Fleshy parts may unite together, a Hernia
will follow, as I told you, for the Peritonaeum bears a great stress. Therefore
you must be sure to take good hold with your Stitches: and if you doubt their
holding, make dry Stitches over them, with good Bandage.

A Man was wounded with a Rapier into the Belly through the right Hypochondrium
out by the Back. 2. Observat. of a wound in the Belly.
I considered the Wound, and saw the Orifices were small, and little advantage
to be made by keeping them open: yet I put in two small Tents dipped in a little
Digestive ex terebinth. cum vitell. ovi, and dressed them up with empl. e bolo
and Bandage, advising him to keep his bed and be quiet. I also prescribed vj.
sir. de meconio mixed in a draught of aq. papaver. to take that night. The next
morning I found him hot, and his Pulse a little disturbed, but without any
Symptoms of the Viscera wounded; Signs of the inward Viscera hurt by a wound of
the Abdomen.
neither Tension of the Belly, Colic, Vomiting, or ought extraordinary by
Urine or Stool: however I let him blood about 10 ounces, directing him a
Clyster of Milk, etc. to be administered that afternoon, and at night his
Anodyne was repeated. The next day I took off Dressings, and considering there
was no Symptom of hurt within, only the Wound a little heated by the Tents, I
threw them out, and dressed both the Orifices with Pledgits spread with the
abovesaid Digestive, embrocating the Parts about with ol. ros. etc. applying a
Plaster and Bandage as before, and desiring him to keep his bed five or six
days longer. I dressed him afterward again; and finding the Apertures well
disposed to cure, from that time I dressed him no more, but advised him to be
temperate in eating and drinking, and if there were occasion, I would see him
again. My Servant dressed him afterward, and before the seventh day was expired,
he was cured, and walked abroad, not complaining any more of that Wound.

Thus it frequently happens, that a Sword passes through the Body without
wounding any considerable Part. Yet if the Wound had been kept tented, it might
have been subject to Inflammation, by reason of the disturbance there, from
whence ill Accidents might have happened. And what could the Surgeon, have
advantaged the Cure by keeping such little Wounds open, supposing blood had
been extravasated, which is the common pretense? Yet if it be not done, he is
usually condemned by the common vogue. Therefore it is that some of our
Profession, possibly against their own judgments, keep them tented often, to
the ruin of their Patient.

CHAP. IX. Of Wounds of the Head.
I Shall now discourse of Wounds of the Head, not only as they are made by
Cut, Stab, or Bruise, but also of those made by Gunshot; and so by
anticipating part of the Discourse next ensuing, give you the full Doctrine of
them, by what Instrument soever made, without a necessity of future
repetitions. And that you may understand the basis whereon these Cures are
wrought, I shall represent the Head to you as it is framed.

The Head, Parts of the Head considered.
according to Galen De usu part. is the noblest Member of our Body, the
principal Faculties being there seated, for the use of which it was ordained;
and is so contrived, as to be the foundation of Animal Spirits, and also to
contain the principal Organs both of the internal and external Senses.

In the first place the Hairy scalp presents it self to our eyes: The Hairy
scalp.
and therein is to be considered its Thickness, Sense, and Vessels, with the
Muscles that lie under it. The Hairy scalp is thinnest on the top of the Head;
nor is there any Muscle between it and the Scull in that part, unless you will
call the Membrana carnosa a Muscle; which some men of late do, and possibly not
improperly; and the rather, because by it many men move the whole Scalp. If you
doubt of a Fracture there, you may boldly cut into the Hairy scalp: it is of an
obtuse sense, Forehead.
and easily healed up again. But be cautious how you make your Incision in the
Forehead, where a transverse Wound may cause the Eyebrows to fall over the
Eyes. Therefore if you are forced to make Incision, let it be according to the
length of the Fibers. And be careful that you make no Incision upon the
Temporal Muscles, Temporal Muscles.
for thereby Convulsion and other ill Accidents may happen.

Under the Hairy scalp lies the Pericranium, Pericranium.
which we are to cut through in making way to the Cranium. You are to raise
them both together, when you lay bare the Cranium for the use of the Terebra.
For (say Authors) if in perforating the Cranium you tear this Membrane,
Inflammation and Fever may follow; the Pericranium arising from the Dura matter
through the Sutures, by which continuity that may also partake of the
Inflammation.

The Cranium follows, Cranium and Sutures.
which is a Bone composed of many jointed together by Sutures, of which there
are five concern us; Coronalis, Lambdoides, Sagittalis, and two false ones. In
perforating the Cranium, you are to shun these, (if you may,) for through them
the Dura matter passes, as I told you, and is continued unto the Pericranium.
The Sutures divide the Bones of the Cranium, by which one part of it may be
preserved entire, while the other is broken, which otherwise would be in
hazard. These Sutures are weak in resisting Blows, and between them Matter may
be unhappily retained, and cause a Caries, and sooner work through to the Dura
matter then in other parts of the Scull. It is necessary to know them well,
lest, as Hippocrates gives good caution, you take them for Fissures. The way of
finding them is, by passing one String from Ear to Ear, and another from the
Nose to the Crown of the head. The former of these will show you the Coronall
Suture, the second the Sagittall, which usually begins at that point where
these Lines interject, being the part where we make Fontanells, and reaches to
the Crown of the head, and joineth with the Lambdoides. Sometimes it begins
quite at the Nose. The Lambdoides arises at the end of the Sagittall, and
goes forked down the two sides of the Occiput. Of the Suturae nothae, the two
chiefly to be regarded are the Squamosae, which run under the Temporal Muscle
of each side, round about the outermost verge of the Ear. You are also to take
notice, that the Cranium is thinnest in the middle part of the Head, and
thickest in the hinder part, and of a middle thickness in the Forehead. Hence
it is that Wounds are most dangerous in the Crown of the head, where the Scull,
by reason of its tenuity, easily communicates its hurt to the Brain; and also
for that the upper part of the Brain lies there high, one of the largest
Sinus's being immediately under the Scull, and many capillary Veins running so
close with it, as to make themselves Trenches in the internal part of the
Cranium. Wherefore upon a Blow or Contusion in this place, the Veins may easily
be broken, and the blood extravasated between the Cranium and Dura matter, and
ill Accidents follow.

The Dura matter, a strong Membrane, is placed under the Cranium; Dura matter.
the wounding of which is attended frequently by Palsies, and in progress of
the Distemper by Convulsions, with other ill Symptoms; and the greater, if the
Wound be in the middle part of the Head according to its length, there being
many Vessels there, which, if they chance to be cut, will fill the vacant
space between the Cranium and Dura matter with blood.

The Pia matter lies upon the body of the Brain, so close, Pia matter.
that a Wound cannot be made into the Pia matter, and the Brain escape: and from
its many Veins a Flux of blood must follow.

The Brain lies under the Pia matter, Brain.
in whose Ventricles is lodged the Plexus choroides, and under whose basis lie
large numerous branches of Arteries and Veins, which by great Blows of the Head
may be broken.

From the Description of the Head we shall proceed to the Description of its
Wounds, which are strictly so called, where any part of the Skin, Flesh,
Description and Difference of wounds in the Head. Concussions, Contusions, and
Fractures.
Bones, Membranes or Brain is cut or torn.

But where the Skin remains whole, Concussions and Contusions do often
happen, and will deserve to be treated of in this place with the Wounds: not
only because they are the frequent Companions of Wounds; but also because,
when alone, they produce grievous Accidents resembling those of Fractures, nay
often exceeding them. I shall therefore gradually describe Concussions,
Contusions and Fractures, under the following Heads.

1. There may happen Concussions of the Brain from a Blow, Fall, etc. nay
sometimes from a Box on the ear, wherein the Symptoms may arise to a great
height, without breaking either the Skin without, or Scull within. Which
Concussions if they be of the lesser sort, wherein no Vessel is broken or
blood extravasated, so that the person is only stunned, he soon recovers. But
if of the greater sort, with rupture of the Vessels and extravasation of
blood, they produce Stupores, Vertigines, Deliria, and many the like Symptoms,
and are every whit as dangerous, nay often more dangerous then Fractures
themselves.

2. Contusions, when great, do usually produce a Fissure or Crack of the Scull,
either in the same part where the Blow was inflicted, and then it is called
Fissura; or in the contrary part, in which case it obtains the name of
Contrafissura. These Fissures are through both Tables of the Scull, or one
only. If one only, then either outward, or inward, the other Lamina remaining
whole. They are long, short; wide, narrow; straight, crooked; etc.

3. Contusions are considerable whether they be with a Wound, or not. Those
without a Wound are for the most part accompanied with great Concussions, and
sometimes Fissure and Fracture, or Depression of one or both Tables: in which
case the spongy medullary intervall that intercedes between the 2 Tables is
frequently broken into its minute Fibers, and squeezed together. Hereupon
Extravasation of blood follows, and other Accidents that will be taken notice
of in the Prognostics and in the Observations.

4. Next to these are Contusions with Wounds, which are generally attended with
Fracture properly so called, where a piece is wholly divided from the rest of
the Scull. This Fracture sometimes consists of many pieces, some whereof are
deprest upon the Membranes, yea into the Brain it self, while others lie
entangled in the Flesh.

5. Next to these are Wounds made by any sharp Weapon, which, according to the
force, cutteth into the Bone many ways, which Cuts are called Seeds, and are
reckoned amongst the Fractures; and so those made by Pole-axe, Halberd, and
such obtuse heavy Weapons, may justly be termed. But those made by a Sword have
seemed to me Wounds, and not Fractures; and when they do not penetrate the
first Table, require no other Cure then that of Wounds; as may be seen in some
of the Observations. But when the Penetration is deep, I do treat it as a
Fracture, and so I place it here.

6. Out of these proceed several Species of compound Fractures; as the
Ecpiesma, Camarosis, Eccope, etc. which every man's experience will suggest to
him.

Celsus, Signs.
in his 8. Book and 4. Chapter, advises, when you are called to a Patient in
such cases as above mentioned, to enquire whether he was stunned, or fell down
with the Blow, or vomited presently after. You are also to enquire how he was
hurt, whether by Blow, or Fall. For from the force of the Weapon, and manner of
the Fall, you may shrewdly guess at the case. You are also to consider the
Tumor, whether it be great, or small. If there be a Wound, nothing is more
sure then your Finger to discover the Fracture. If you feel any Asperity, if it
be not a Suture, you may be sure it is a Fissure or Fracture. But supposing
there be neither Wound nor Tumor, yet if the Patient suffer under a Palsy in
any part, or lie stupefied or raving, it is most certain the Membranes of the
Brain are oppressed. And if the Hair lie cut in the Wound, you may suppose the
Cranium hurt, it being no small force can divide Hair in that place. The
holding a Thread between the Teeth, or biting a Crust, is mentioned by Authors
as a way to find out a Fracture: but I think it of no great moment, unless the
Fracture be near or under the Temporal Muscle.

Wounds of the Head, Prognostics.
according to Hippocrates, are not without danger, how slight so ever they may
appear to common judgment. Incised Wounds of the Hairy scalp reaching to the
Cranium, cut by a Rapier, are the least dangerous or difficult of Cure. Those
made by a Halberd, Bill, and such like heavy Weapons, are not without danger;
so also those made by Puncture with a Dagger. By how much the nearer they
penetrate to the Brain, so much the more dangerous they are. All Contusions of
the Head are to be suspected, for from those the greatest Symptoms do arise. If
in laying open the Cranium the Patient recover not his Senses, you may suspect
an Extravasation of blood under the Dura matter; in which case his Life is in
great hazard. Those Fractures made by Gunshot do for the most part beat
pieces of the Scull into the Brain, and so may be determined mortal. But be
the Hurt what it will, if it penetrate not farther then the Dura matter, it is
curable, if it be timely laid open, and dressed, as shall be showed in their
proper places.

We begin with the Cure of simple Contusions of the Hairy scalp happening by
Blow or Fall, attended with Pain, Inflammation, and Tumor. Cure.
In order to the preventing or removing of which, you ought in the first place
to shave off the Hair, if there be any, and embrocate the Tumor and Parts
about cum ol. ros. myrtill. and aceto, and apply this or such like Cataplasm on
the affected Parts: far. hord. fabar. an. vj. pulv. nuc. cupress. balaust.
aluminis roch. j. ros. rubr. vj. ol. ros. iij. album. ovor. number. ij. aceti q.
s. fiat Cataplasma. After you have thus dressed the Patient, let him blood in
the Arm or Neck of the same side, and some hours after let a Clyster be
administered; and lay him to rest at night with a Draught of an Emulsion of the
cold Seeds, etc. The next day repeat the former method of dressing; and after
you have thereby restrained the afflux of Humors, you may foment the remaining
Tumor with Red wine wherein have been boiled fol. betonic. flor. anthos,
stoechad. cham. ros. rub. bacc. myrtill. etc. and embrocate with ol. ros. and
cham. But if it grow hard and painful, and threaten Apostemation, foment it
with decoct. summitat. malvae, rad. althaeae, sem. lini and foenugraeci, and
make a Cataplasm of the Faeces, adding far. hord. etc. And if it suppurate,
treat it as a Phlegmon. But if the Pain do mitigate, and the Tumor be
continued with extravasated blood, as in an Ecchymosis, you ought then to
discuss and dry up the Serosity by such like: far. hord. fabar. an. iij. flor.
ros. rub. bacc. myrtill. an. j. summit. absinth. fol. beton. flor. sambuci,
cham. an. iij. sem. cymin. j. pulver. and coq. in vin. rub. addend. mell. com.
ij. ol. ros. and cham. an. q. s. fiat Cataplasma. If by these the Humor does
not dry up, nor the Tumor discuss, open it, and digest and cure it as in its
proper Observation will be showed. If there be a Concussion with the Tumor,
you ought to begin with letting blood, and repeat it as you see occasion, even
to failing of the Spirits; and keep the Body soluble by Clysters; also
contemperate the Ferment in the blood by frequent Draughts of Emulsions, etc.
The external Applications are much the same as have been above said, by
shaving off the Hair, and embrocating the Head and Neck cum ol. ros. myrtill.
album. ovor. and aceto, and applying Cataplasms as above said decocted in Red
wine or Oxycrate. After some days, when the Symptoms are remitted, apply empl.
Vigonis ad contusiones, or this following, which is also his; furfur. tritic.
iij. far. lentium ij. flor. ros. rub. bacc. myrtill. balaust. an. j. calam.
aromatic. jss. flor. cham. melilot. an. ss. nuc. cupress. number. vj. pulver.
omnia, and coquant. in vin. auster. q. s. ad consist. Cataplasm. addendo ol.
ros. cham. an. iij. Or with Wax, etc. you may make it in the form of a Cerote.
Fomentations may likewise be made of the foresaid Ingredients. But in case the
Concussion do not cease by the prescribed Remedies, then lay open the suspected
Part, and proceed as hereafter shall be showed.

In great Contusions without a Wound, if the Tumor be large, feel pappy, and
increase notwithstanding your application of Refrigerants; you may suspect the
quantity of Serum raising the Tumor to proceed from within, through some
Fissure in Cranio. In which case (having considered the Symptoms) make Incision
into the Tumor proportionably. And if you feel no part of the Cranium bare or
deprest, dress it up with Digestives, and make your Applications over it of
such Medicaments as have been prescribed in the former Contusions. And if
thereupon the Tumor do flat, and the Wound digest, proceed in the Cure
accordingly. But if there be Depression, or other ill Symptoms of internal
Parts hurt, lay the Hairy scalp more open, and make way for farther inspection.

In the Cure of Wounds of the Head, Simple incised wounds.
if they be made by a Rapier dividing the Scalp to the Cranium, nay though it
cut the Scull, if there be no Symptom of an internal Hurt, the Lips of the
Wound ought to be brought close together, and healed by Agglutination. The
Stitching of these Wounds is objected against by some, lest Matter should be
thereby pent in, and foul the Bone. But if you can satisfy your self that the
Wound ought speedily to be healed, the work is safe, if done judiciously. A
broad in Spain I have seen them as commonly stitched as other incised Wounds:
and in the Wars we stitched them successfully; and here in Town I have stitcht
up great Wounds of the Hairy scalp. However you ought not to crowd these Wounds
with Dossils, for thereby you may raise a Fever, and prolong the Cure.
Therefore having clipped away the Hair, dress the Wound cum pulv. Galen. and
empl. e bolo, or some Defensative, with Compress and Bandage bringing the Lips
close together; and afterward let the Patient blood, if he did not bleed
sufficiently at the Wound: and the day following administer a Clyster, if the
Body require it. At the next dressing, embrocate the Parts about cum ol. ros.
etc. and dress the Wound with liniment. Arcei upon Pledgits, and it will soon
cure. But if the Lips of the Wound were not retained close together at the
first dressings, it may be necessary to dress it with Digestives ex terebinth.
etc. embrocating the Parts about, and apply Plasters accordingly. Thus in a
few days all these incised Wounds may be cured.

One Smith, Observation of an incised wound transverse the temporal Muscle.
sometime a Tanner in Chester, was afterward a Captain of a Company of
Dragoons, which he picked up in haste, to disturb us in our Retreat from the
Battle of Worcester. He was wounded by some of our Soldiers transverse the
right Temporal Muscle, and was bleeding almost to death, when I was brought to
his Quarters. I stitcht his Wound, taking the Artery up with the Lips, and, for
want of other Remedies, dressed it with a little Wheat Flour and the White of an
egg, applying over it a Compress pressed out of Vinegar with convenient Bandage.
The third day after I took off Dressings, and found the Lips near agglutinated.
I being then better provided by an Apothecary from Warrington, sprinkled the
Lips of the Wound with pulv. thuris and sang. dracon. and applied a Pledgit
spread with liniment. Arcei, and over it empl. diachalcit. The second day after
I cut the Stitches, and applied Epuloticks; and afterward by a Dressing or two
more cured him. I am sure he was well of his Wound before he had recruited his
Spirits he lost with his Blood.

In Wounds of the Head which you cannot cure by the first Intention, Wounds of
the Head with loss substance.
as where they are inflicted by a Weapon with an obtuse edge, or where there is
loss of Substance, as part of the Lips torn off, there you must digest; and to
that purpose the common Digestive ex terebinth. cum vitell. ovi, and farin.
hord. is proper. It may afterward serve for a Detersive, if you add mel comm.
aut rosat. pulv. ireos, sarcocoll. etc. With a farther addition of Myrrh and
Aloes, it is a good Sarcotick. Or you may incarn with liniment. Arcei, which
was by him designed for Wounds of the Head. Unguent. Matrissylvae.
Vigo commends this; ol. rosac. vj. ol. mastich. ij. pingued. vitulin. porcin.
an. iiij. fab. plantag. matrissylvae, beton. pimpinellae, pilosellae, flor.
anthos, an. Mss. vini odoriferi cochl. iiij. coquantur ad consumpt. vini;
colat. add mastich. gumm. elemi, resinae pin. an. j. lithargyr. auri and
argenti an. ij. minii x. terebinth. Venet. iiij. cerae q. s. If in the
incarning the Wound the Flesh grow luxurious, touch it with a Vitriol-stone,
and it will deterge, and dispose it to cicatrize; which you may then complete
with Pledgits of Lint pressed out of spir. vini, aq. calcis, etc.

In Wounds made by Contusion where the Cranium is a little naked, you ought not
presently to crowd in Dossils: for if that contused Flesh be well digested, the
Bone will incarn underneath with the Wound without much difficulty. In those of
the worst Habit of body I have happily incarned, by keeping the Orifice a
little open by a small Dossil pressed out of spir. vini, and defending the
Parts about from Fluxion by Medicaments and Bandage, as has been showed in
such cases. Take care that the Matter be not shut in by your Dressings; for
thereby the Wound may be made more hollow, and the Cure prolonged. To prevent
which, I have been sometimes necessitated to apply a Compress round, leaving a
hole in the middle of it, for the discharge of Matter, whilst the Parts about
incarned by Compression.

But if the Wound be with so great Contusion, that it casts off a Slough, and
leaves the Cranium much naked; though it be not fouled either by the Matter or
Air, yet it will then be necessary to rasp it: for the Bone is naturally smooth
and slippery, as if it were polished, and Flesh difficultly grows upon it.
Wherefore to hasten the Cure, you ought, by the authority of Galen and the most
practical men, to rasp the Bone thin, till you see the blood ready to come out
of it: the Bone will thereby be the sooner supplied with materials for
generation of Flesh. But if your Patient will not admit of Raspatories, then
you ought to keep your Dossils close to the Lips of the Wound, and make your
Exfoliation from the edges, that the sound part may thrust off the rotten Bone.
For neither Crab's-eyes, nor any Medicine inwardly prescribed, or Wine outwardly
applied with Lint, or other Medicaments to the middle of a Bone, will signify
any thing to the Exfoliation of it: nay, the while you are so trifling, the
Matter from the edges will rot the Bone underneath, and in continuance pierce
through the first Table, and run down between the two Tables, thereby doing
much mischief, and so will put you upon the use of the Terebra. After the Bone
is scraped, you may dress them with Pledgits dipped in liniment. Arcei hot. If it
require Digestion otherwise, apply them pressed out of spir. vini, either simply,
or such wherein has been infused pulv. radic. ireos, aristoloch. peucedan. etc.

If in a Wound of the Head made by a Sword the Scull be cut flanting off, or
into the second Table, if there be no Symptoms of Concussion, you ought not to
lay open the Wound to set on a Terebra, but cleanse and dress it up with a
proportionable Dossil pressed out of spir. vini, and digest the Lips of the Wound
as above said, and attend the Exfoliation; then heal it. Some Authors have
advised the Rasping of these Bones; but in this case it is needless: for if the
Bone be dressed as I have said, the Flesh will soon arise in that Cut of the
Bone, and make Exfoliation of what is necessary, and incarn it without your
farther trouble.

If the Cranium be hurt by a sharp-cutting Weapon, Fissure in Cranio.
it cannot be without Solution of continuity in the Hairy scalp: but by a Fall
or Blow the Scull may be fissured or fractured, and the Hairy scalp whole, and
this Fracture or Fissure may be under the Contusion, or in some other Parts. If
the Symptoms do demonstrate that there is a Fracture or Fissure, you are then
without delay to open the Hairy scalp according as the Part will admit,
angularly, or in the manner of a Cross, or of the Letter T, that the Fracture
may be discovered by the raising of it up with its Pericranium. Against round
Incision upon surmise.
For if you shall in doubtful Fissures or Fractures make a round Incision, and
take out the whole piece; then, if there chance to be no Fissure, you have made
your self a long work to little purpose: and if the Fissure run under the Hairy
scalp farther then you made your Incision, you may then be necessitated to cut
it open that length: by which it will appear you have through mistake laid it
open more then was necessary in one place, and too little in another, doing
that which neither Hippocrates nor any judicious Surgeon would ever allow.
Whereas if you had laid it open by a cross Incision, you might by only raising
the Scalp have discovered the Fissure or Fracture: and if yet part of the
Fissure or Fracture had lain undiscovered, you might have stretched your
Incision to it: and in case after all there had been no Fracture nor Fissure,
which often happens, especially in Contrafissures, then you might have laid the
Hairy scalp down again, and easily cured it; which by an excision of part of
the Scalp you cannot do.

As to what may be objected, Objection.
that the raised-up Lip might be troublesome to the Surgeon in his work, and
painful to the Patient; there is no such thing: for if the Incision be made the
way proposed by the Ancients, and that the Fracture or Fissure be all in your
view, you may order the Lips of the Wound as you please.

The Cranium laid bare, you are to fill up the place opened with Dossils of dry
Lint, or pressed out of Red wine or Oxycrate, or a Sponge pressed out of either
of the same Liquours; and apply a Plaster over all of diachalcith. malaxed
with ol. ros. cum aceto, and bind it up.

At the next dressing you must consider the Fissure. Trial of Fissures.
If it be so small, that you doubt whether it be one or not, then wet it with
Ink, and wipe it off again, and the Ink will discover where the Fissure is. But
if it do not, then this Emplaster may be applied: cerae novae flavae, thuris,
ladani, an. ij. farin. fabar. terebinth. aceti, an. j. Misce ad ignem. You
ought to apply it on the suspected Part, and the next day, where you shall find
it moist, there you are to rugine it.

Fallopius tells us, that where the Cranium is contused, certain Spots will
appear red, not unlike those white ones which are usual in the Nails of the
fingers; but after the third day the blood exhales, and that redness cease.
If by the Emplaster you discover the Fissure, or that the Bone contuses, you
are to rasp the contused Part the whole length: to which purpose you ought to
be furnished with various sorts of Raspatories. Whilst you are working with
them, the Lips of the Wound ought to be covered with some soft Linen, that you
neither hurt them, nor yet the Air offend them. Sometimes very small Fissures,
how inconsiderable soever they may seem, are the cause of the Patient's death,
there being often found extravasated blood upon the Dura matter, and the Veins
broken, either by the Concussion from the Blow, or by the rough edges of the
inner Table. Therefore you are to consider the Symptoms, and accordingly lay
open the Wound either by Raspatories, or otherwise cutting into it, so as the
Sanies may be discharged, and the asperity taken away. Fracture in Cranio with
depression.
But if there be a Fracture of the Cranium, you ought to satisfy your self
whether it be in one or both Tables: if in both, then, whether the Depression
of the Bone be great, and what Fissure there is: and accordingly make way to
relieve the Dura matter underneath; for it cannot be without great disturbance,
viz. Inflammation, Fever, and Delirium; from whence Coma, Convulsions, Palsies,
and Death ensue, if neglected. But if there be a Fissure so large as to
discharge the Serosity, you may take more deliberation in laying it open, or
rasping the Bone. If it be otherwise, then the Trepan ought to be applied, to
give vent to the Serum, and to make way for the raising the deprest Bone. But
if the Bone be not much deprest, and the Fissure considerably large, it is then
at your choice whether you will enlarge that Fissure, or continue it for
evacuation of the Matter, and forbear the use of the Trepan, not doubting but a
small Depression of the Bone will either rise, or cast off, by the benefit of
Nature. I know it will be hard to dissuade some Surgeons from applying a
Trepan in this case; for I my self have been glad to comply with some of them,
in setting on a Trepan where the Fissure was sufficiently large, and when all
the ill Symptoms were remitted, and where there was no Depressure of the
Cranium. But what did it signify? Indeed, where the Fissure lies untowardly
for discharge of Matter, or where the Depression of the Cranium is deep, there
a Trepan ought to be timely applied.

In order to the Perforation of the Cranium, Perforation.
the Bone must be cleared of its Pericranium, lest in setting on the Terebra,
or Modiolus, (which are two several names for a Trepan,) you tear the
Membrane. The Lips of the Wound ought also to be covered the while. The Terebra
ought to be set on that side which is most depending. And in case of a
Depression, make your Perforation so near, that you may afterward be able to
raise up that by it. When you have set on your Trepan, press upon it with your
left hand, and turn it round with your right. You must use a little ol. ros. or
Milk to cause it to move the easier, and as it fouls, brush it; in doing of
which it will cool. Before you approach to the second Table, (which you may
know by the blood that appears,) it will be required that you take out the Pin,
and proceed more warily, not listening to the prattling of the Standers by, but
often lifting up your hand, lest by your compression or haste you unawares fall
upon the Dura matter, and wound it. Some Surgeons do bring out the Bone in
the bore; but it will be safer to raise it up with your Levator, when it is so
cut, that it is but lightly retained in some part. During this work, it is fit
the Patient's Ears were stopped with Lint, lest the noise disturb him. The Room
ought also to be close. The Perforation made in Cranio, and the Bone taken out,
you are to smooth away the Asperity which remains in the lower Table by the
Lenticular instrument made for that purpose.

If after this the Membrane be fouled by the Saw-dust of the Bone, First
dressing after Perforation.
you must wipe it off with a soft Sponge, or a little Lint upon your Probe. The
Part being cleansed, you are to dress up the Membrane. About this first
Application Authors differ much. Avicen dressed them with Lenients, viz. ol.
ros. Celsus dressed the Part with siccantia, viz. cum aceto acerrimo. You may
find him positively for it in these words; His factis, (the Perforation being
made,) ea membrana acri aceto respergenda est, ut si intus concretus cruor
remanet, discutiatur, etc. He sprinkled the Membrane with sharp vinegar, to
prevent the Bleeding, and dissolve the concreted Blood lying upon the said
Membrane or Dura matter. But the most part of the Ancients, and many of the
Moderns, have advised Lenients, as ol. ros. that the blood extravasated, and
lying upon the Dura matter, in pus convertatur, may be digested. But in this you
are to be guided by your Eye. If there be Sanies or Putrefaction, mel ros.
spir. vini, and higher Detergents may be used, accordingly as the Putrefaction
is more or less. If there be much blood extravasated, or that you fear
bleeding, that of Celsus may be proper: but if the blood be recent, and exceed
not in quantity, it possibly happened from some Scratch of your Trepan, or some
little Asperity of the inner Table. If there be neither of these, but the
Membrane fresh, and of its natural color, then you are not to grieve that
Membrane now exposed to the Air with Detergents, nor by the acrimony of
Vinegar: for if you shall by scratching of the Membrane make it bloody, and
then dress it with either acetum or mel ros. spir. vini, etc. you shall then
proceed contrary to the common Indications in Surgery, which teaches to
digest recent Wounds before you deterge: and indeed what would you deterge?

Therefore I do advise the use of Lenients, not only by the authority of those
ancient and modern Surgeons, but by my own practice. Galen proposed sang.
columb. and the blood of Turtles dropped warm from their wings. Falop. and
Fabric. ab Aquapend. proposed ol. ros. with resin. abietis: and afterward they
increased the Resin, and lessened the Oil. But if there be Putrefaction through
the long lying of concreted blood, etc. then mel ros. and spir. vini are
proper, yea mel Aegyptiac. and higher if occasion shall offer. But in the
common cases, after recent Terebrations, Resin by its emplastick quality mixed
with ol. ros. perfects the concoction sooner, and by its anodyne quality
secures the Part from Inflammation. It ought to be proportioned to the Habit of
body: dry Bodies require more of the Resin, and less Oil. And by this simple
Medicament I never failed of good Digestion; and afterward by the tempering of
it as I have said I have deterged and digested, always continuing the use of it
until the Membrane was well digested, never finding the least prejudice the
bare Bone received from it. Caution.
But you must take care that you do not use Digestives unseasonably, for
thereby you may relax Parts. Therefore after Digestion add more Resin, and
less Oil. Or you may mix mel ros. with the Resin in stead of the Oil, which
will answer your intention, both to deterge and incarn. Or you may use this to
both purposes; its Composition will commend it self: terebinth. Venet. j. ol.
ros. iiij. mell. ros. iij. croci j. granor. kermes ss. sem. hyperici ij. vini
Hispanic. iij. coq. ad consumpt. vini; colat. add aloes j. Misc. These
Medicaments may be applied upon the Dura matter, and a Button of Lint over, to
fill up the hollow in the Bone: the rest of the Bone may be dressed with dry
Lint or liniment. Arcei, and the Lips of the Wound with a Digestive as
aforesaid cum terebinth. over which apply empl. diapalmae malaxed with ol. ros.

In the use of Medicaments you are to consider the Part and Habit of body, and
add or diminish your Simples accordingly as you design to deterge or incarn,
etc. and so they will perform all intentions. Some Authors have limited us a
time to dress with this or that Medicament; viz. to use Digestives to the
fourth day, from that time to deterge to the seventh, and to incarn to the
fourteenth day. But herein you must make use of your own judgment, persisting
to cherish the native heat. If the Wound penetrates to the Dura matter, you must
consider the force of the Weapon, and make haste to relieve the Parts under the
Cranium. Observation.
Yet a day or two before the Battle of Worcester, a Gentleman attending the
Earl of Derby in his Retreat thither received a large Wound between the
Sagittall and Coronall Sutures by a Sword, it cutting through the Cranium to
the Dura matter. The Membrane was covered with the small Shivers of Bones. He
had only a thin linen Cap over it, his haste not permitting him to be dressed.
And it may be it was the better for him: for if Dossills had been hastily
crowded upon the Bones, severe Symptoms would have followed; whereas the
Shivers lying lightly upon the Membrane, he was free, and being ignorant of his
danger, rid a great Journey. I after took them out, and dressed the Membrane with
Digestives the short time we were together. Gunshot.
But when Fractures are made with Bullets or Slugs, there the Hairy scalp and
pieces of the Cranium are driven in together upon the Dura matter. In which
cases you must presently lay open the Hairy scalp, and raise it up with the
Bones, and relieve the oppressed Membrane. If the Flux of blood be great, cleanse
it with a Sponge dipped in Red wine or Vinegar, and dress it as has been showed.
If the Opening in the fractured Cranium be not sufficient, make one in the most
declining part, and raise up the Bones, and free the Membrane of whatever may
offend it. But do not take out more Bones then needs must: like some of those
Surgeons I have met carrying them about in their Pockets, boasTing in that
which was their shame. For if you look well upon such, you may see many of them
were corrupted by the Matter through the ignorance of the Surgeon. For
recent Fractures of the Cranium do frequently unite like those in other Parts,
if the Matter has liberty to discharge from within. Therefore having raised up
the Bones that are loose, dress the others dry with Catagmaticks, etc. and take
care that they be not overgrown with loose Flesh, and they will happily
agglutinate.

It sometimes happens in great Concussions, that we lay open the Hairy scalp;
and though we discover neither Fissure nor Fracture, yet we perforate the
Cranium, to relieve the Patient: but if notwithstanding the Symptoms of Coma or
Paralysis do not remit, you may shrewdly suspect the Extravasation of blood
lies deeper. For it sometimes happens in Concussions, that the extravasated
blood lies between the Dura and Pia matter, and otherwhile amongst the
Ventricles of the Brain. In which cases, if the Perforation of the Cranium
relieve them not, you must make Apertion through the Dura matter; and if the
blood lie between it and the Pia matter, it may happily be discharged. How that is
to be dressed, I shall show you presently: but for the most part, the long
retention of Matter spacelates the Brain; and as the Patient suffered from the
beginning under the severe Symptoms of Coma or Paralysis, so he dies at last
Convulsive.

In these Wounds of the Dura matter the Lenients of ol. ros. or warm Pigeons
blood are proper: they are anodyne, and digest. Ol. hyperic. and Mastich are
also good mixed with Resin. Fabr. ab Aquapendent. cites Galen, and he
Archigenes, as dressing these Wounds with succ. calaminth. and afterward
sprinkling pulv. milii on the Membrane to incarn it; the milium moderating the
heat of the other. He delivers them to us as siccantia, detergentia, and
incarnantia, The Unition and Incarning of the Lips of the Dura matter is
performed by a Fleshy substance that arises upon the Membrane, which
afterward, as it increases, does unite them, and overspreading that part
grows up to the Cranium, and unites with that Callus, (after Exfoliation of
the Bone,) and becomes one body with it, filling up the place that was
perforated, and in time grows more firm then the Bone it self. But the while
you must be careful that your Lenients make not the Flesh too lax by their
greaziness; for so a Fungus will thrust out thence, which may be vexatious to
you. This in the beginning may be prevented by Desiccants, and wasted by
Mercur. praecip. pulv. cort. granat. balaust. ros. rub. or alumen ust. alone.
But if it grow very big, it must be taken off by Ligature. Yet to tell you
truly, I never met with any such like disturbance as is represented to us by
Authors; nor shall you, if you use your Desiccants timely. For the
Vitriol-stone takes this off with little pain, and disposes the Part to
cicatrize, if it be used with moderation and timely.

The Pia matter is (as I have elsewhere said) a most delicate fine Membrane, and
adheres so close to the Brain, that it can scarce be hurt without a Wound in
the Brain it self: which Wound is for the most part mortal, partly for that
the Membrane is full of Veins, and subject to great effusion of blood; partly
also because the Brain being exposed to the Air, is thereby over-cooled, and
corrpting grows fluid, and is thrust forth by the contraction of the
Meninges, (or Membranes,) which are irritated by the constant pain they suffer
from the putrefaction of the Brain; and so it happens that it works out at
the Wound. So long as any remains in that Ventricle, you must make way to
these Wounds by removing the shattered Flesh and Bones: but if they will not
come easily away, leave it to Nature, lest the Patient die under your hands,
and you be thought to hasten his death. Your Dressings must be with Galen's
Powder and Hares-fur cum albumine ovi upon Pledgits, to restrain the Bleeding,
and retain the Brain within its bounds. Apply over them your Dressings, as in
the Wounds of the Dura matter: Note.
remembering in all these Gunshot Wounds to cut off the shattered Lips of the
Hairy scalp, lest a Gleet drop from them upon the Meninges and Brain, and
heighten the Accidents. If the Brain be retained within its Membranes, the Pia
and Dura matter, and they digest and incarn, then you may proceed in the rest of
the Cure as in Fractures of the Cranium, as has already been said.

In all Hurts of the Head, what sort soever they be of, the Body is to be
emptied; and the rather, if there be Plethora or Cacochymia: for in such Habits
of body Humors are more apt to stir up ill Symptoms. Therefore you ought
timely to let them blood in the Neck or Arm on the same side; and repeat
Bleeding according to the exigency, and the strength of the Patient's body.
Also Cupping (with or without Scarification) of the Neck and Shoulders, with
Fontanells under the Ears, is necessary. Then lenient Purgatives, such as may
evacuate the serous blood, which by reason of its tenuity and heat readily
flies to the affected Part. These Purgatives must be such as have been proposed
in the Fourth Intention of Wounds in general, to which I refer you. Cordial
Species and Electuaries may be proper, if they be proportioned to the
Temperature of the body, hotter or colder, as there are Fever or other
Accidents joined with the Malady; in which cases Juleps and Emulsions are
necessary. Vulnerary drinks are sometimes in use here, if they be fitted
according to the nature of the Part. The Ingredients for these are beton.
artemis. caryophyll. primula veris, lilium convallium, salvia, hyperic.
sanicula, veronica, plantag. flor. ros. rub. nuc. moschat. etc. as in the
Chapter forementioned. Of these you may make Drinks with Wine and Water, or
small Ale: sanic. beton. veronic. artemis. an. j. cons. ros. rub. caryophyll.
an. ss. tormentill. ij. coquantur in aq. font. and vini Rhenani an. lbij. vase
clauso in B. M. colentur per manicam Hippocratis. Give iiij. of this morning
and evening. Or take a few of each of these Plants well dried and cut, boil
them, and then sweeten the Decoction with Honey or Sugar to the Palate of the
Patient, and give him a Dish of it to drink twice or thrice aday. You may
aromatize it with Sanders, cassia lign. or sassafras, etc.

The external Applications have been already set down all along as I treated
of the several Accidents befalling the Head, Externalls.
whether made by Contusion, or Wound affecting the Hairy scalp, Cranium, or
Meninges of the Brain. Yet for the more confirmation of the young Artist, I
shall make a short repetition of what I have delivered concerning the
Application of them, that he may not stagger in following the Doctrine here set
down. I shall also supply you with more variety of Medicaments, that you may
not be to seek for choice elsewhere.

In every Contusion of the Head, whether a Wound be joined therewith or not, it
will be necessary that in the first place you defend it from the Influx of
Humors; and your Medicaments thereto ought to be refrigerant and exsiccant, to
contemperate the heat, and dry up the Humors already extravasated. To which
purpose Hippocrat. prescribes this: far. board. viij. ol. ros. iiij. coct. in
aceto ad consist. Cataplasmatis. In Winter he added flor. ros. rub. pulv. ij.
decocted in Wine. Others have since added bacc. myrtill. and balaust. the more
to corroborate the relaxed Part. Before the application of these the Hair must
be shaved, and the Head and sides of the Neck embrocated cum album. ovi, ol.
ros. and aceto. If there be a Wound with it, you ought to digest it with that
ex terebinth. or this; terebinth. Venet. iij. ol. hyperici vj. thuris ij.
vitell. unius ovi, Miso, or that of far. hord. cribrat. ol. ros. and vitell.
ovi. These ought to be spread upon Pledgits, and dipped in ol. lumbric. hot. The
Fluxion restrained, apply Discutients in the form of Cataplasms, Cerots, or
Emplasters; as empl. Vigonis, de beton. de gumm. elemi, de matrissylva, cerat.
isidis: or, succi beton. ij. ol. ros. iiij. mastich. myrtillor. an. j. pingued.
hirci jss. coq. ad succ. consumption. colat. add gumm. elemi, takamahac. an.
x. terebinth. ijss. cerae alb. q.s. iterum bull. ad consist. Cerat. or, gumm.
elemi iij. opopanac. ij. bdellii ss. resin. pin. j. cerae q. s. fiat Ceratum.
In all Wounds of the Head gumm. elemi is much commended; it mitigates Pain, and
corrects the evil Temper of the Part by a peculiar virtue it has thereunto.
Fabr. ab Aquapend. commends this Emplaster: beton. virid. Mviij. contund.
contus. add. ol. lbiiij. cerae, terebinth. an. lbij. coquantur, and exprimatur;
colat. add succ. beton. lbj. iterum coquantur ad succ. consumption. pro usu.
And after Digestion of the Wound you may deterge with such like; terebinth.
iij. mell. ros. ij. succ. plantag. apii, an. iss. coq. ad succor. consumpt.
dein add far. hord. j. sarcocollae iss. And afterward incarn, by adding
myrrhae, mastich. aloes, an. ss.

If the Contusion were without Concussion or Wound, and through want of timely
repelling it it apostemate, treat it with Lenients, viz. ex rad. althaeae,
flor. melilot. far. hord. vitell. ovor. and ol. ros. And if it suppurate, open
it, and dress it as before said, with Digestives, Detersives, etc.

If the Scull be fractured, lay it bare by cutting, and raising up the Hairy
scalp, fill the Wound with Dossills, and apply over it the Cataplasm of
Hippocr. or such like, embrocating cum ol. ros. etc. as has been said. At the
second dressing, digest it with ol. ros. cum resina, as before is directed. But
if it be sanious, deterge with mel ros. spir. vini, etc. as you see cause, and
dress the Lips of the wounded Scalp with this or the like: terebinth. lot. in
aq. salviae j. ol. ros. jss. gumm. elemi cum oleo super ignem solut. and colat.
ss. croc. pulv. j. vitell. ovi j. Misc. By the speedy Digestion of this Wound
you will facilitate your Cure.

After Digestion, spir. vini will be found of good use, Spir. vini of what use
in these cases.
it having such a siccant quality as is requisite for these Wounds, not only
of the Calvaria, but of the Meninges, either alone upon Lint, or mixed with mel
ros. or sir. de ros. sice. Or use this following; spir. vini vj. myrrhae ss.
aloes j. sarcocoll. thuris, an. ij. or this Balsam; spir. vini lbjss. vin.
malvatici xvj. myrrhae, thuris, an. x. pulv. rad. consolid. j. pulv. centaur.
min. jss. flor. hyperici pulv. ss. terebinth. lbss. infund. in balneo S. A.
apply it warm upon the Meninges. If the Dura matter have changed its color, and
do not deterge with what is proposed, then terebinth. lot. in vin. alb. iij.
mell. ros. spir. vini, an. j. myrrhae, aloes, sacchar. alb. ij. Misc. If these
Wounds tend to Putrefaction, scarifie the Lips of them, and apply this or such
like; Mithridat. vj. theriac. Venet. ij. mell. Aegyptiac. j. pulv. scord.
myrrhae, an. j. spir. vini q.s. The Putrefaction got off, you may then dress
with this Johan. Andraeae a cruce: ol. terebinth. Venet. mell. ros. p. aeq.
apply it warm. All these Medicaments are to be applied upon a Sindon to the
Membranes. A Sindon is a piece of Silk or fine Linen cut round proportionably
to the Perforation made in the Cranium, and is to be placed under the edges of
the Cranium by the Lenticular Instrument, that those edges of the fractured or
perforated Cranium hurt not the Dura matter. A Thread or Silk must be fastened
to it, to pull it out at pleasure. Apply over it soft Dossills of Lint, to fill
up the void space in the Bone, thereby to keep the Dura matter from rising above
it.

In Wounds of the Membrane of the Brain and the Brain it self, succ. beton.
iiij. succ. calaminth. ij. flor. centaur. min. Pjss. hyperici contus. ij. vini
odoriferi lbj. Infuse these three days, then boil them to the consumption of
the Juices; strain it, and add to it terebinth. clarae iij. gumm. elemi
dissolut. in spir. vini ij. ol. hyperici jss. mell. ros. iiij. boil these a
little, then add pulv. myrrhae, aloes, sang. dracon. thuris, an. j. Ol.
Aparici prescribed in Wounds in general is an excellent good Medicament in
recent Wounds of the Meninges of the Brain. Fabr. ab Aquapend. proposes this
in Wounds of the Brain: far. milii ss. ol. Aparici j. Mithridat. vj. bals.
Peruvian. ex Aegypto iij. spir. vini v. and if it require to be more desiccant,
he adds Quaere, whether the dose of Chalcanth. be not mistaken, at least if by
is he mean ol. vitriol.
olei de chalcantho jss. Drop this (says he) warm and your Digestives over the
Wound, then embrocate the Head and Parts about with ol. ros. and lay this
Emplaster over all; far. hordei viij. pulv. cham. iiij. pulv. spicae,
schoenanth. an. iij. pulv. beton. stoechad. an. ij. ol. mastich. lbss. ol. ros.
iiij. oxymel. simpl. v. vini alb. potent. q.s. fiat Emplastrum. If the Bone be
carious, and do not readily exfoliate, you ought to rugine it, and dress it
with liniment. Arcei. If that be too relaxing, spir. vini x. myrrhae j. aloes
jss. rad. peucedan. aristoloch. cort. thuris, an. ss. pulver. and misceantur
pro usu; apply it upon Dossils. In dry Bodies this; pulv. aloes, pumic. ust.
pomphol. an. ij. myrrhae j. pulv. ostr. combust. ij. mix them with mel ros. and
spir. vini, and apply this Emplaster over all; cerae, resinae pin. gum.
ammoniaci, elemi, an. vj. terebinth. iij. pulv. myrrhae, mastich. aristoloch.
rotund. ireos, aloes, opopanac. euphorb. an. j. ol. ros. q. s. fiat Emplastrum.
After the Wound is incarned, you may cicatrize it with one of these, or such
like: plumbi usti cum sulphur and loti, litharg. aur. an. ij. antimon. ust.
and loti, cerussae, an. j. ol. ros. q. s. fiat Vnguentum; or, calcis putaminum
ovor. calcinat. ss. alum. ust. j. croci Martis j. fiat Pulvis. Thus I have set
you down variety of Medicaments, whereof you may fit your selves according to
the exigency of the case. I shall now show you some of my work, wherein I used
but a few.

I Was sent for to a young fellow who had been shrewdly cudgelled about the
Pate. 1. Observat. of Contusion without wound or concussion.
He was sick in bed, and dozed with the pain. I looked upon his Head, and saw
it swelled in several places: some of the Swellings were big and pappy,
abounding with extravasated Serum. I presently looked for the Jugular Veins,
and seeing them full, I opened the fairest, and took away at least a dozen
ounces of blood: then caused the Hair of his Head to be shaved off, and
embrocated all his Head, Neck and Jaws with a Mixture of ol. ros. myrtill.
acet. cum album. ovor. and applied a Cataplasm over all his Head of far. hord.
fabar. flor. ros. rub. balaust. bacc. myrtill. decocted in Oxymel. A Clyster
was that evening administered, and an Anodyne draught disposed him to rest that
night. The next morning I was informed he had slept at times, but I found him
hot, and his Pulse quick. I opened the other Jugular Vein, and seeing him bleed
with a full stream, I permitted it to flow proportionably: then having a
Fomentation ready of Claret Wine wherein had been infused flor. ros. rubr.
balaust. nuc. cupress. etc. I took off Dressings, and stuped them, and thought
to have opened one of these Tumors; but seeing it diminishing, I forbear, and
embrocated his Head again cum ol. ros. myrtill. and aceto, and applied the
Cataplasm as before. By these Applications I dried up the Humor in a great
measure before the seventh day; then added some Cephalicks to the former
Ingredients, and boiled them in Wine and Water, with which I caused his Head to
be fomented, and afterward applied Vigo's Cerat. ad contus. During the first
seven days I permitted him only Water-grewell or Panado, and kept his Body
soluble by Clysters; but afterward gave him more liberty, and purged him: by
which method he recovered, without any manner of laying open. And thus all
external Contusions may be happily cured.

A Person of Quality, 2. Observat. of Contusion with an Ecchymosis opened.
aged between thirty and forty years, by accident of a Fall out of her Coach
bruised her Head a little above the right Temporal Muscle. She was stunned with
the Fall, but did not vomit. She was dressed by some of her Servants with such
Medicaments as those of her own Sex advised. About fourteen days after, being
indisposed, she came to Town, and sent for me. I saw a large Ecchymosis
remaining, and a Tumor of the bigness of a Pheasant's egg: it was soft, and
seemed to be full of a corrupt Serum. There appeared no hopes of discussing it,
and yet it was not safe to permit it to lie longer so near the Bone. Wherefore
I applied a mild Caustic upon it, and dividing the Escar gave vent to the
Serum and some Clots of grumous blood; then fomented it with Wine, and dressed
it up with a Dossil spread with a Digestive ex terebinth. and unguent. basilic.
over it upon the Escar, and embrocating the Parts about with ol. cham. applied
empl. diapalm. with Compresse and Bandage. At the next opening I saw the Ulcer
well digested, and no part of the Bone bare; nor was it painful in the time of
dressing or afterward: yet from the first day I dressed her, she usually
fainted the while, and put us upon a necessity of laying her down in her Bed
some time before we had finished our Applications; where after she had lain an
hour or two very sick, she recovered again, and walked about her Chamber very
well. Her Friends and Relations, who visited her often and saw her thus
distempered, suspected it to arise from the Wound, but I supposed it Vapors,
and prevailed with her to consult a Physician. The Physician being come, I took
off Dressings, and showed him the Ulcer well digested, and disposed to heal,
without the least sign of ill: the Physician also concluded so. But before I
had dressed her up, she fainted, and was carried to her Bed sick. These
Faintings increasing, her Physician began to suspect it proceeded from the
Contusion; but her recovering again so well afterward, confirmed him that they
were Vapors, and that by Purging she would be relieved. She complied, and was
moderately purged once in 3 or 4 days, whereby she was somewhat freed of these
Fits, and I had liberty to cicatrize the Ulcer. After which I made her a
Fontanell in her Leg, and she retired to her House in the Country, where she
took Physic, and recovered perfectly well. If these fainting Fits had
proceeded from the preceding Contusion, they would not so have intermitted and
gone off as they did.

A person of about 36 years of age was wounded upon the Road by a Blow with a
Spintree-bar upon the Os frontis, near the Coronall Suture, 3. Observat. of a
contused wound.
about the length of two inches. I cleansed the Wound with a Sponge, and clipped
the Hair away: then putting my Finger into the Wound, I felt the Pericranium
sound and smooth; and seeing no Symptoms in the Patient of Fracture or
Concussion, I brought the Lips of the Wound close together, dressed them with a
Digestive ex terebinth. upon Pledgits with an empl. e bolo, and Compresse over
it, putting him on a linen Cap, and his Peruke over that. I forbear to let him
blood that night, in consideration that he had bled much upon the Road. The
next morning, finding him in good temper, I did neither let him blood nor dress
him; but the day after I took off Dressings in the presence of Dr. Cox and Dr.
Walter Needham. The Wound seeming near closed, I applied a Stupe or two wrung
out of Red wine, and dressed him with liniment. ^rcei. The second day after I
viewed it again, and seeing the bruised Flesh between the Lips of the Wound
cicatrizing, I dressed them with unguent. tutiae, and continued to do so every
other day. During his Cure, he kept his Chamber, and was healed in very few
days; whereas if his Wound had been filled with Dossills, a Fever would have
followed, and other Accidents which would have confined him longer to his
Chamber.

A Coachman being wounded with a Rapier to the Bone between the Sagittall and
Coronall Sutures about an inch in length, the next Barber dressed him, 4.
Observat, of a wound betwixt the Sagittall and Coronall Sutures.
and called in a young Surgeon to help him. They (as they said) felt a
Shiver of the Bone cut off, and sticking in the Pericranium; whereupon they
divided the Pericranium, and laid the Bone bare, filling the Wound up with
Dossills. The fellow being of a full Body, and the blood fermenting, a Fever
followed, and the seventh day the Lips of the Wound and the Parts about were
inflamed and swelled. They then dressed the Bone with Dossills dipped in spir.
vini and mel ros. and deterged before they had digested; by which the Bone was
stained, and a necessity followed of exfoliating it: whereas such an incised
Wound might have been incarned by liniment. Arcei. But this practice will not
want those that will defend it: and who can help it?

A poor Woman near Ludgate coming out of her Chamber one night, 5. Observat. of
a large wound of the Calvaria.
and pulling the Door to her by the Key, it slipped out, and she tumbling down
Stairs, cut and raised up the Hairy scalp from the beginning of the Lambdoides
downwards. I caused the Hair to be clipped and shaved away from about the Wound,
and cleansed it from the blood, then brought the Lips close together by three
or four Stitches, embrocated the Parts about cum album. ovi, aceto, and ol.
ros. and dressed her up with Agglutinatives, applying over all empl. e bolo and
Bandage; then gave her an Anodyne draught, and left her to rest. The next
morning I took off my Bandage and emplast. and embrocated the Parts about with
ol. ros. cum aceto, applying a Cataplasm ex farin. hord. and fabar. decocted in
Oxycrate, and adding ol. ros. I took away a little blood by opening a Vein in
her Arm, and prescribed her a Clyster of Milk and Sugar that afternoon. I
continued the Cataplasm morning and night, but dressed not the Sutures till the
third day; and by that time the Tumor being diminished, and the Wound inclined
to Agglutination, I dressed up the Wound again as before. At the next opening I
cut out the Stitches, and dressed the Wound with Sarcoticks and empl. beton. over
all, in stead of the Cataplasm; and in a few days cured her of that Wound by
Agglutination.

A Young fellow, 6. Observat. of the Calvaria torn off.
Servant to a Horse-courser, was thrown off his Horse against some of the Bars
in Smithfield, whereby the Calvaria or Hairy scalp was torn up from the
Coronall Suture to the Temporal Muscle, on the left side; the Scull was bared
between two and three inches in breadth. He was led to the next Barber, who cut
the piece off, and hanged it up in his Shop. The day after the Patient was
brought to me. I caused the Hair to be shaved off from about the Wound, and
dressed the Bone and Lips with liniment. Arcei warm, embrocated the Parts about
cum ol. ros. and chamaemel. and applied empl. e bolo over the Wound, with
Compresse and Bandage rolling up his Head. He had been let blood the day
before, without consideration of the great quantity which he had lost from his
Wound. I continued the former way of dressing the Wound and Bone, until they
were well digested: during which the edges of the Bone incarning round, I
rasped the middle of the Bone, and thereby disposed a Callus to put forth.
After Digestion, I deterged with mundif. Paracelsi; and as the Callus thrust
off the Bone, I dressed it with Pledgits dipped in spir. vini pressed out dry, and
afterward by Epuloticks, as unguent. tutiae, etc. cicatrized the Lips of the
Wound even with the Callus which rose from the Bone; and about that time, to
dispose it the better to cicatrize, he was purged. Thus it was cured as Wounds
with loss of Substance; a troublesome and vexatious work to the Patient and
Surgeon; which might at first have been cured by Agglutination, with a less
Cicatrix, and thereby he might have enjoyed the natural tegument of his Hair,
whereas now that part remained bald and unseemly.

A Servant of the King's, 7. Observat. of a contused wound.
of about 28 years of age, being distracted, and suspicious that every man he
saw would do him a mischief, walking abroad one day, thought himself pursued,
and ran into the next house up 2 pair of Stairs into a Chamber, when hearing
some body following him he threw himself out of the Window just as a Coach was
passing by, and pitched with his Head upon one of the Wheels. He was taken up
stunned and shrewdly wounded, carried into the next house, and dressed by a
Surgeon, who also let him blood. The next day I was sent by his Majesty's
command to take care of him, and saw the Dressings taken off. His Wound was
between the Sagittall and Coronall Sutures to the Bone, with great attrition of
the Hairy scalp. I considering the manner of his Fall, with the Frenzy and
Stupour he lay under, opened his Wound by a cross Incision, and cutting off the
cornered Lips, dressed it up with dry Dossills of Lint, with Astringents and
Bandage. I directed a Clyster to be administered that afternoon, and let him
blood that night, repeating it again the day after. Dr. Walter Needham
prescribed him an Emulsion of the cold Seeds, etc. to drink often in a day. By
all which he was notably relieved, and recovered his Senses soon after. I
opened his Wound the third day, and saw the Cranium smooth and natural, the
Lips also tending to Digestion. I fomented it with a Stupe wrung out of
Claret Wine, and dressed it up with a Digestive ex terebinth. cum vitello ovi,
and embrocating the Parts about cum oleo ros. applied emplastr. diachalcith.
with Compresse and Bandage. After I had thus digested the Wound, I rasped the
Cranium to the quick, dressing it up with unguent. Arcei, and the Lips of the
Wound with unguent. diapompholyg. and by the help of the Vitriol-stone I
deterged them: and as the Callus grew up out of the Cranium to unite with the
Lips, I dressed it with Pledgits pressed out of spir. vini, cicatrized it, and
restored him cured.

A Cook-maid, by the fall of a Jack-weight upon her Head, 8. Observat. of a
great contused wound.
was beaten down, and stunned for some while by the Blow: she vomited, and was
carried into her Chamber. There were three Wounds in the Hairy scalp to the
Cranium, with a great Tumor. The Bone seemed to me to be deprest and fissured.
I presently made a circular Incision, and raised up that part of the Hairy
scalp in order to Terebration, and filled up the Wound with Dossills of Lint
pressed out of Red wine; then embrocated her Head with ol. ros. cum aceto, and
put on an empl. e bolo with Compresse: then shaving the Hair from the Parts
about, I applied Pledgits spread with my Digestive upon the Lips of the Wound,
Compresses dipped in Oxycrate, and rolled up her Head. Some hours after I caused
her to be let blood about eight ounces, and that night gave her vj. sir. de
meconio in a draught of aq. papaver. with a little aq. cardiac. The next day I
took off Dressings, and viewing well the bare Bone, I found neither Depression
nor Fissure. I was deceived by the shape of her Head, she being double-crowned,
the Tumor great, and the Sagittall Suture running underneath. I fomented the
Parts affected with vin. rubr. wherein were decocted flor. ros. rub. cham.
flor. beton. summit. absinth. bacc. myrtill. etc. then dressed the Bone and Lips,
the former with liniment. Arcei warm, and the latter with my Digestive ex
terebinth. dipped in ol. hyperici warm: and having embrocated her Head well with
ol. ros. and cham. I applied a Cataplasm exfarin. hord. ulv. balaust. and ros.
rubr. dococted in Oxycrate cum ol. ros. with convenient Bandage. This method I
continued till the Wound was digested, and the Tumor wasted. Then I deterged
the Lips of the Wound with mundif. Paracels. and the Vitriol-stone, dressing
the Bone with Sarcoticks, and applied over all one of Vigo's Cerots in stead of
the Cataplasm. By this method the Bone incarned; after which she retired with
Medicaments to be dressed by some of her Fellow Servants at her Master's house a
few miles off. She sometimes came to Town, and was assisted by me in the
cicatrizing of the Wound, so as has been showed in the former Laceration of
the Calvaria. I did not believe so great a Blow could have been without a
Fracture and great Accidents; otherwise I should not so presently have raised
off the Hairy scalp.

A Tradesman returning from visiting some of his Friends in the Country, 9.
Observat. of concussions on the Forehead and Face.
near Knights-bridge fell off his Horse to the ground, bruising and wounding
his Forehead and Face. He was taken up as dead; but some while after recovering
life again, they put him into a Coach, and brought him to his house. I found
him in his Bed laboring under a great Concussion. He was not capable of giving
any account of his Ailment. His Face and Nose were much bruised; there was also
a Wound upon the Os cribriformis. I caused the Blood and Gravel to be washed
out of his Wound, and with my Knife laid it open a little higher up toward the
Forehead. Then viewing the Bone, and seeing it without Fissure, I brought the
Lips close together, and dressed the Wound with Agglutinatives, and empl. e bolo
over it and his Face; and having caused the Hair to be shaved off the forepart
of his Head, from the Coronall Suture down to his Ears, and embrocated the
diseased Parts with ol. ros. cum aceto, I applied a Cataplasm of farin. hord.
pulv. flor. ros. rubr. balaust. bacc. myrtill. decocted in Oxymel, then let him
blood 10 or 12 ounces. A neighboring Physician visited him that night, and
prescribed him what he thought necessary. The Patient lay dozing all that
night, groaning frequently, and was no better in the morning: he spoke not
willingly to any of us, nor so as we could understand what he said. That day I
took off Dressings, viewed and felt the Parts about. The left Eye was inflamed,
the Lid swelled, and the Forehead bruised. I was not able to make out any thing
whereby I might take new indications; and therefore dressed him up again as
before, ordering a little Breast-milk to be dropped warm into his Eye, and
renewing the Embrocation and Cataplasm. That day he was let blood again, and a
Clyster administered, with what else his Physician thought necessary. The next
day he being nothing better, the deceased Mr. Boun a Surgeon was consulted.
We took off Dressings, and viewed the Wound. The Bone was fair, without the
least impression. Mr. B. concluded that the Wound should be cured without
farther enquiry into it; which accordingly was done in few days after without
Exfoliation. Blistering of his Neck and Shoulders, and Cupping with
Scarification was made; also Fontanells behind his Ears; Fomentations and
Plasters were likewise applied to his Head: but the relief was small. Yet by
these and frequent Purging, after a month or 6 weeks, he was so well as to get
abroad, but was indisposed in his Head. His Eye was cured; but after he had
followed his affairs abroad some weeks, on a sudden that Eyelid fell down, and
some months after he lost the sight of the Eye without any outward soarness, it
being the effect of the Concussion. He was alive at the time of the Fire, and
may be so still for ought I know. If ought was omitted for his Recovery, it was
farther Bleeding.

A Gentleman of about 30 years of age, 10 Observat. of another Concussion, with
a broken Leg.
coming out of Hartford-shire through Tottenham, and riding upon the Causey
near an Inn, one emptying a Chamberpot out of the window as he was passing by,
his Horse started, and rushed violently between the Sign-post and a Tree which
supported part of the Sign. The poor Gentleman was beaten off his Horse, and
lay stunned on the ground. The people fetched immediately a Barber-Chirurgeon
from London. Sr. T.B. upon notice of his Friend's mishap, sent me thither;
where I found the Gentleman lying upon the ground, the people and Surgeon
gazing upon him. I felt his Pulse much oppressed, the right Brow bruised, and
inquired whether they had let him blood. The Surgeon replied, he had opened
a Vein in his Arm, but it would not bleed. I replied, We must make him bleed,
though it be by slitting his Veins. Turning his Head on one side, I saw the
jugular Vein on the bruised side turgid, and opened it. He bled freely. After I
had taken about twelve ounces, the blood ran down from his Arm, which had been
opened before and would not bleed. We bled him till he came to life, and then
he raved and struggled with us. Having stopped the Bleeding, we caused the people
to carry him into the Inn, and put him into a Bed. All the while they carried
him, and were making him unready, he roared and was very unruly, especially
whilst they were pulling off his Stocking from his right Leg; which inquiring
more particularly into, we found broken short in the middle of the Thigh Bone,
close by a bony Wen, (of the bigness of a Tennis-ball.) A great bony Wen.
Upon sight whereof we prepared Dressings, and endeavored to set the Fracture.
He opposed us mainly in the setting of it, and dressing it up. But some of the
people holding him down in his Bed, we set and dressed his Leg as is showed in
the Lecture of Simple Fractures. But his Hands being at liberty, he loosened
the Bandage which we had put on the fractured Bones in spite of our
resistance. We contented our selves in what we had endeavored, and from that
time left his Leg to lie unset, he not permitting so much as a Plaster over
it. We then prepared Applications for his Head, shaved the Hair from that side
of the Temporal Muscle, embrocated the part which seemed to us affected cum
ol. ros. and aceto, and applied a Cataplasm of Bean-meal (which was speediest
to be had) boiled up with Oxymel, etc. he permitting it patiently. That bound
on, I left my Assistent to stay with him, and returned my self to London. The
next day Sr. T. B. sent for Sr. Charles Scarburgh, and carried us with him to
Tottenham, where we found the Patient raving, and by their report he had done
so all night. We understood not one word he spoke. His Pulse was low and
intermitting. Upon which consideration Venaesection was deferred. What was
necessary for him to take, the Physician then prescribed. His Bruise was upon
the Temporal Muscle, a Part not to be laid open upon a bare Surmise; wherefore
we renewed our Embrocations and Cataplasms, and left my Assistent to wait upon
the Patient, Sr. Charles Scarburgh making a Journey farther into the Country.
The next day I returned, and finding the Patient raving as I had left him, I
supposing his Distemper proceeded from an Inflammation of the Membranes of the
Brain, and that by Venaesection only he was to be relieved, I let him blood on
the same Jugular as before about 10 ounces, and so proceeded every day, or
second day at least, the Patient bearing it well, and seeming to be relieved.
His Pulse rose upon it, and he slumbered sometimes, and took his Nourishment,
which before he did not. About the seventeenth day I coming to Tottenham met my
Assistent going to London, who told me that the Patient was grown more sensible
of his fractured Thigh. I persuaded him back, rejoicing to hear that the
Gentleman was so well: but coming near his Chamber, I heard him hallowing. It
troubled me what to do. I knew his Bleeding had much relieved him; but the
people, as also my Assistent, disliked my so often letting him blood, and was
wont abusively to say, Now you shall see our Master let him blood again: they
concluding that I would be the death of the Patient. However I resolved to
bleed him once more, and no more. This I declared, with the necessity of doing
it, and accordingly opened the same Vein again, and held a white
Stone-porrenger to receive the blood, which flowed with a sprightly stream, the
Patient lying quietly the while upon his Back. I put the Porrenger into my
Assistent's hand, and seeing the blood flow with much Vigor, I caught up
hastily a Pewter-porrenger, purposing to take a little in that. (In bleeding
these Veins in the Neck, we usually holding the Porrenger close to their Neck,
it serves us as a Bandage to intercept the descent of the blood.) I put this
Porrenger into my Assistent's hands, with pretense to make Dressing to lay upon
the Vein; but stood at a little distance, looking my Patient in his Face, with
a resolution to bleed him until I saw his Countenance change: which I did, and
then stepped to the Patient to stop the Vein. The while the Porrenger was taking
away, the blood ran out of it on one side, it having been melted, and the hole
so covered by Soder that I did not see it before. During the while he was
bleeding I thought him long, and wondered to see so little blood in that
Porrenger from so full a stream: but seeing the Bed so bloody, it was evident
that when the melted hole pressed not against his Neck, the blood ran into the
Bed, which deceived me. But the Patient upon taking a little of his cordial
Julep refresht his Spirits. I sat a while by him, and left him pretty hearty.
The next day I returned sooner then I used to do, being doubtful how I should
find him: but, to my wonder, he was perfectly well in his Senses, and
discoursed soberly of what passages he remembered in the time of his Delirium.
We presently prepared to set his fractured Thigh Bone, it having lain seventeen
days unset, yet was without Inflammation, Tumor, or Pain. The Callus I suppose
was thrust out at the ends of the Bones, and that had covered the asperity of
them, and the large Bleeding and Disease had made Revulsion and Evacuation. We
brought the ends of the Bone together by an easy Extension, and dressed it up as
is usual in simple Fractures. In less then twenty days the Callus dried, and
his Leg was so strong as to bear him again: and some weeks after he went abroad
about his affairs.

A Youth about ten years of age was struck down by a blow of a Cudgel on his
Head. 11. Observat. of a Fracture with a long Fissure and depression of the
Cranium.
I found him lying upon a Bed deprived of his Speech and the use of his Legs.
Taking the Plaster off his Forehead, there was no Wound nor considerable
Swelling; but searching with my Fingers I felt a Depression of the Bone: upon
which having advertised the Parents of the danger of the Child, and the way of
my proceeding, I sent for the Surgeon dwelling at the next door, who had
applied the first Plaster, desiring to retain him for the more constant
attendance. We made Dressings ready in order to Dilatation; then causing the
Hair to be shaved off, I made an Incision so large as to set on the Terebra, if
occasion should be, for the raising up the deprest Bone. In dividing the Hairy
scalp toward the Coronall Suture, I espied a Fissure running up from the
fractured Bone beyond my first Incision; wherefore I laid the Fissure more
open, out of which I saw a quantity of serous blood flow immediately forth. The
Depression was a piece of Bone as broad as a Threepence sunk under the Scull.
I filled up the Opening with Dossills of dry Lint, and applied over all a
Digestive ex terebinth. and vitell. ovi upon Pledgits, and empl. e bolo, with
Bandage to keep them on. The next day in the presence of Dr. Barwick and some
Country Physician with Mr. Arris Surgeon, I took off the Dressings, and set
the Trepan above the fractured Bone, so to avoid the great Scar that must have
been if I had set it below the Fracture, and considering withal the Poriness
of the Bone below. The Terebra set on, the Bone taken out, and the inner edges
smoothed by the Lenticular instrument, I put in a Levator, and raised up the
deprest Bone even with the rest: that done, I placed in a Sindon dipped in ol.
ros. with a third part of Resin; then with a round Dossil filled up the Bore:
after which I opened the Fissure with my Rugines, scraping away its edges, that
no Sanies or Matter might be detained, and dressed up the Bone with liniment.
Arcei warm, so as to give way to the Lips to fall in; I desiring no more
Opening then was necessary for discharge of the Matter from within. Over these
Dressings I applied empl. diachalcith. malaxed cum ol. ros. and aceto, and with
Compresse and Bandage concluded the second Dressing. From that time all our
threatening Symptoms vanished. Indeed the first Opening and letting blood that
same night recovered his Speech; and after this Dressing the use of his Legs
was also restored: yet we kept him in the dark, and to a slender Diet, allowing
no Flesh. What concerned Internalls Dr. Barwick took care of. The other
Physicians and Mr. Arris coming no more, I continued the same method in my
dressing until Digestion, which was made in 4 or 5 days. Then I added mel ros.
in stead of the Oil, and afterward incarned, by increasing the Resin and
lessening the mel: the Flesh rising in little grains presently after the
Digestion was completed, and after a few days covered the Dura matter. I
hastened the Exfoliation of the Bones by the application of tinctura myrrhae,
and deterged the wounded Lips with mundif. Paracelsi. My work being afterward
to keep down the loose Flesh, I rubbed it frequently with the Vitriol or
Alume-stone, and dressed the Lips with unguent. tutiae, etc. whereby in less
then six weeks the Bones exfoliated, and the Wound being ready to cicatrize, I
left it to the neighboring Surgeon; the cicatrizing of these being for the
most part the work of my Servant.

A person was wounded near the Vertex (by a Blow I told you in the former
Edition, but have been since informed it was) by a Puncture of a Dagger. 12.
Observat. of a contused wound by a Puncture in the Crown.
He sent for a Surgeon, who dressed his Wound and cured it; during which the
Patient went daily abroad without any consideration of it. About the
seventeenth day, toward the Full-moon, as he was coming home one morning, he
felt his Legs faulter, and before he was got up stairs into his Chamber his
Tongue failed him. His Friends and Servants put him into bed, and sent for me.
They declared to me how he had been wounded such a day, and the manner of his
being seized with the Paralysis. I saw a necessity of laying open the Hairy
scalp, and offered to go away, that I might send for some of my Servants to
help me. He apprehending that I was leaving him as deplorable, caught hold of
me, and would have spoke to me, but could not. He made Signs for Pen, Ink and
Paper, and endeavored to write, but could not form one letter. He then threw
himself down in his Bed, breathing out Jes. I prayed his Patience, telling him
I would return suddenly. But before I went I let him blood ten ounces, and
returned again within an hour, and found that he had lost the use of his Arms.
I considered the Wound, and concluding a necessity of setting on a Trepan, I
caused his Head to be presently shaved, and made a circular Incision about the
Wound. Then raising up the Hairy scalp smooth off with my Spatula, I both saw
and felt the Bone, but could discover no fault in it. I dried up the blood with
Sponges dipped in Vinegar, raised up the Lips round with my Spatula from the
Bone, and with a fresh Sponge having dried up the blood, I looked again under
them; but could discover nothing ill in the bared Cranium. I then filled up the
Wound with Dossills of dry Lint, and applied a Digestive ex terebinth. over the
Lips, embrocating the Parts about cum ol. ros. and laid on a Cataplasm e farin.
hord. flor. ros. rubr. balaust. in vino rubr. with sir. de ros. sicc. etc. That
day Sr. Fr. Pruj. gave him a visit, and prescribed him a Clyster, Cordialls,
Juleps, and what else he thought necessary. The next day was Full-moon, at
which time the Brain is thought to rise high, and the Vessels are turgid;
wherefore I deferred the setting on the Trepan, contenting my self with the
letting him blood again. All this while he was in a Fever, and deprived of his
Speech and Lims. The next morning, between 10 and 11 of the clock, in the
presence of Sr. Fr. Pr. Sergeant Pyle, Mr. Arris and Mr. R. who thought himself
concerned for his Servant, and had first dressed him, I took off Dressings, and
looked into the Wound. We found no Fissure, however there was a necessity of
perforating the Cranium. Wherefore without delay I began to work with the
Trepan, which I much prefer before a Trephine, it being an Instrument which
does its work lightly, and cutteth the Bone equally, or how you please, without
pressing so heavily upon the Head, and is approved by all the Surgeons
abroad, being much to be commended before the Trephine. After I had bored the
Bone, and taken it out, I looked into the hole, and seeing the Dura matter
retaining its natural color, without Matter or Blood, I dressed it up with a
Sindon dipped in ol. ros. with a little Resin warm. This way of dressing was
objected against, as I expected; but I dressed it up, and assured them that I
would cure this Patient without applying any other Remedy to the Dura matter
then these two simple Medicaments: but withal, I was much unsatisfied in my
self, that such grievous Symptoms, as loss of Speech and Lims, with a Fever,
should afflict the Patient, and yet no deprest Bone or Fissure, nor ought of
Matter or Sanies appear upon the Dura matter. This, I say, troubled me much, I
fearing some other place, or that the blood lay putrefied under the Dura matter.
But I dressed it up with a soft round Dossil next the Sindon, and the Bone with
liniment. Arcei, continued the Digestive to the Lips of the Wound, and applied
an empl. de beton, mag. over all, then laid him down in his Bed. Going
presently out of his close Room (where I was crowded up with great Lights
burning near me) into the fresh Air, I presently burst out with a violent
Coughing of blood: yet the next day I dressed the Patient again, and found his
Speech and Lims restored; but he was hot, and his Pulse quick. I opened his
Wound, and finding all as well as I could expect, I dressed up the Dura matter
again as before, with the same Oil and Resin: and after I had bound him up as
is usual in these cases, I let him blood 10 ounces, and advised the repeating
of Clysters, etc. as occasion should offer. The Physicians and Surgeons
visited him no more after the first Dressing; but I retained the young
Surgeon that had first dressed his little Wound, he dwelling near the Patient.
After three or four days dressing, this Wound digested, and all the Symptoms
went off. Upon which consideration I diminished the quantity of the ol. ros.
and increased the Resin; making good my word in curing him with those simple
Medicaments; I deterging and incarning as firmly and speedily this way as by
any Sarcotick I ever used. While the Bones were casting off, I cicatrized the
Lips as has been set down in the preceding Observations. Coming one day to
dress him while the Wound was cicatrizing, he being abroad, I substituted the
young Surgeon in my place; yet I saw him twice or thrice dresed afterward.
He was well cured, and remains so to this day.

I was called to consult with Dr. Tho. Cox about a Gentlewoman who was
grievously diseased with a great Pain between the Coronall and Sagittall
Sutures, 13. Observat. of a Concussion of the Brain.
occasioned by a Blow she had many months before received riding under a
Pent-house. The Blow had stunned her, yet she recovering her Senses was brought
to London, and viewed by some Surgeons of the City, who cured her little
Wound, and returned her back: but from that time her Pain increased daily with
a Vertigo, and she returned again to London. We judged it to arise from that
Blow, and concluded the extravasated and putrefied Blood had caused that Pain.
We viewed the Hairy scalp, and took notice that it was thicker in the upper
parts of it then was usual; but we could not distinguish with our fingers any
inequality under it in one part or other. The Humor was pituitous, and yielded
to the pressure of the Finger, as such Swellings do. She endeavored to point
to us the place with her Finger, but could not fix it within so narrow a
compass as we might certainly relieve her by laying it open. At that
Consultation we resolved to begin with Fomentations and Cataplasms to discuss
the Humor, and to make Derivation by Bleeding, Cupping, Blistering, and
Purging: all which was afterward done; but proving ineffectuall, we proposed
the laying open that part of the Scalp which appeared to us most suspicious,
and to set on a Trepan: but she would not admit of it. At length, feeling her
self languishing, she yielded to the making a Fontanell in the Part most
affected by a Caustic. Which I did, and by Dr. Cox's consent I made it to the
Bone, and so large, that I might afterward set on a Trepan; and then dressed
it with Lenients. After separation of the Escar, there appeared neither
Fracture nor Fissure. We moistened the Bone with Ink, and rubbed it out again:
but no mark of the Ink remaining, I rasped it; and no Crack appearing, I
sprinkled the Bone with pulv. myrrh. aloes, etc. and dressed the Ulcer with
basilic. etc. Her Pain increasing, with other Indispositions which threatened
her life, she yielded to the application of a Trepan; which accordingly I set
on, and opening the Scull, found the Dura matter retaining its natural color,
but a smell arose from within as in corrupt Wounds of the Brain. I dressed it up
with Lenients as the former, viz. ol. ros. and a little Resin. The next day I
dressed her again, and found the Wound digesting; yet was she extremely
stupefied with the excess of pain in her Head. The third day I dressed her again,
and in the Opening found good Digestion, and a beginning to incarn, a little
red Flesh arising upon the Dura matter. The next day it was increased, and so
the next: but when I opened it a day or two after, I found the Lips of the
Wound sinking, and little Matter; but that which appeared was of good color.
The Dura matter seemed drier, the little ruddy Flesh was not increased. The next
day the little Flesh upon the Dura matter beginning to look pale, I then left
off the ol. ros. and added mel ros. to the Resin, with a little pulv. myrrhae,
and a few drops of ol. terebinth. and dressed the Lips of the Ulcer with unguent.
basilic. mag. Vigon. cum ol. terebinth. warm, laying over the bared Cranium
Lint dipped in a Tincture of Myrrh, Aloes, etc. and applying empl. melilot. with
a good Compresse wrung out of a Lixivium wherein was boiled some of the greater
Cephalicks, as flor. anth. beton. majoran. origan. etc. But that night she was
seized with Convulsions, and the day after the Lips of the Wound appeared
without heat; all things looked ill; and she died within a day or two after. We
would have opened her Head, but she had forbid it: but in bowing her Head a
putrid Matter of a brown color flowed forth her Nostrills, of the same smell
that I complained of in Trepanning the Bone, only more foetid. I believe this
Putrefaction proceeded from the corrupt blood extravasated between the Pia and
Dura matter; which at first by large Bleeding and proper Applications might have
been relieved. Nay possibly, if we had timely opened the Dura matter, this
Matter might have there discharged it self. But if it had been attempted, and
not succeeded, her Death would certainly have been imputed to that.

A little Girl was brought to me with a soft Swelling upon the left side of her
Head, about two fingers off the Temporal Muscle, 14. Observat. of a large
Fissure, the Dura matter putrefied.
of the bigness and shape of half a great French Walnut. This Swelling happened
from a Fall down a pair of Stairs some weeks before: but, whether through
ignorance or negligence, the Fracture was not suspected by them, though there
were visible Symptoms of a Concussion, as that of Vomiting, etc. The Child even
languishing of it, I acquainted the Mother, that the only way to relieve her
Child was by opening that Tumor wide, and afterward I supposed that there
required as much to be done to the Scull underneath. She prayed my help, and
submitted to the laying open the Swelling, or what else I should think fit to
be done. The way of opening this in a stronger Body had been, to have cut round
the Tumor, and raised off the Skin: but the Child was so weak, that I feared
it might the while die under my hands. Wherefore, to avoid that danger, I
applied a mild Caustic, and delivered the Child to her Mother, who bound on
the Dressings, and carried her home. About two hours after I took off the
Caustic, and finding it had workt well, I divided the Escar, and discharged
about three or four Spoonful of a filthy Sanies. I took off this Caustic the
sooner, suspecting lest it might by longer lying penetrate through, and offend
the Parts within. Upon dividing this Escar, the Bone appeared bare the whole
length, and a long Fissure ran transverse over from the Temporal Muscle
backward: the Scull was very thin, yielding to the least pressure of my Finger,
as a piece of Vellum; so that I might have enlarged it with my Knife, if I had
thought it necessary. I bowed the Child's Head on one side, and dropped in a
little mel ros. with a few drops of Tincture of Myrrh, Aloes, etc. and with
Pledgits dipped in the same lightly covered up the Bone. Then dressed up the Escar
with unguent. basilic. malaxed cum oelo liliorum, and laid a cephalic
Emplaster over all, with convenient Bandage. I continued the same method of
dressing daily, and saw pieces of the Dura matter purge out, and hang in the
fissured edges of the Bone; and for some while a thin Ichor issued thereout.
The Escar being separated, I dressed the Lips with mundif. Paracelsi, and the
Bone with liniment. Arcei, dropping into the Fissure the Balsam prescribed by
Vigo; by which it incarned, and, as the Bone exfoliated, united with the Lips
of the Ulcer. There was a Tumor behind the Ear before I began the Cure: but by
embrocating it with ol. ros. daily, it went off after the Digestion of the
Ulcer above. Thus this Infant was cured: but she being the product of a
diseased Mother, grew lame about a year after of a Pain in her right Hip,
whether it happened by accident of a Fall, or that it was Strumous; but when I
saw it, it was dislocated. I suppose no rational man will believe this
Accident on her Head occasioned that Defluxion on her Hip.

A Gentlewoman fell down with her Child of half a year old in her Arms. 15.
Observat. of Caries through the Cranium, wherein the Pericranium and Dura matter
were grown together.
The Mother was hurt, and the Child a little scratched on the left side of its
Head. It was viewed by some Pretender to skill in such things, and judged
inconsiderable: but from that time the Child grew indisposed, and vomited
often, especially after the receiving her sustenance; and as she grew able to
speak, complained of a pain in that part of her Head; and by reason of her
often vomiting and constant pain in her Head, she languished daily. After 10
years, a small Tumor appeared in that part of the Head where it had been hurt.
They again consulted, and afterward brought the Child to me a very Starveling.
I viewed the Tumor, and felt in it a Pulsation, which at first I thought an
Aneurisma: but pressing my Finger more into it, I felt the Membrane of the
Brain without any Scull the breadth of an old English Shilling. This at first a
little amazed me: but upon consideration of the Fall, and the Symptoms
succeeding, it was evident to me that by the Fall the Scull was fissured, and
being of a thin cartilaginous substance at that time of her Infancy, had
through continuance mouldred away, and the Dura matter thrusting outward, had
by Adhaesion to the Pericranium united in one body with it. This I supposed the
case. The Presage here was a sudden death, if the Cure was not attempted: and
in the attempting it she was in great danger. To begin this Operation by a
circular Incision, the compass of the Tumor in the Scull, was not difficult:
but then to separate these two Membranes, the Dura matter from the Pericranium,
or this from that, was an hard task even in a dead Body; here in a weak Child
much more, where the blood would be apt to blind me, and the impatience of the
Child render it hazzardous, the work of Separation requiring a great Steadiness
in both of us. Wherefore I resolved to lay the Scalp open by Caustic. To which
purpose, I forewarned them first of the danger, either in leaving the Child to
die by its Malady, or in attempting the Cure doubtfully. But they having
consulted others before, were sensible of the danger the Child was in by its
Disease, and readily commended her into my hands, and lodged her near me. I
caused the Hair to be shaved off from the Tumor, and applied upon it the most
gentle Caustic I could design. At such time as I thought it might have made
its way through the Superficies of the Calvaria, I took it off, and with a
Caustick-stone rubbed into the musculous Skin's then washed out the Salts well,
with Wine first, then Milk. After that I embrocated it with warm Oil, and cut
into the Escar, embrocated the Part again, and dressed it up cum unguent.
basilic. with ol. ros. applying emplastrum e bolo over all, with Compresse and
Bandage. That night she was seized with a fit of Convulsion, frequently
vomited, and was very ill. Doctor Fisher was fetched, and prescribed her a
cordial Julep proper in her case, and relieved her. The next morning I took
off Dressings, and raised up the Hairy scalp round from the Scull so far as the
Caustic had spread, whcih gave a breathing to it, and discharged a little
Ichor. From that time her Vomiting ceased, as also the Convulsive fits, and she
began to be more lively then in ten years before. We kept her in bed warm and
close, and prescribed her a slender Diet, allowing her only Spoon-meats. Her
Physician took care in what concerned her health by Internalls. I proceeded to
hasten Digestion, and by Fomentations and the like to cherish the native heat
of the Part. Some places I digested, others I deterged. It was a nice work, but
succeeded happily. Whilst some Sloughs were separating, other parts incarned
and cicatrized. The Patient at length being in a fair way of Recovery, I
invited Sir Chapter Scarburgh and Doctor Walter Needham to see her dressed. The
Dura matter was then incarned, and the edges of the Bone exfoliating; after
which the Wound cicatrized, and contracted to a very narrow compass. The Child
afterward returned to her Friends perfectly in health, and is a witty Child;
but it is thought she will be but a Dwarf.

A Person of Honor about ten years of age, 16. Observat. of a large Fissure by
contusion without a wound.
by accident of a Fall from his Horse, bruised his Head on the right side a
little above the Temporal Muscle. He was somewhat stunned by the Fall, and
vomited. Going to him within an hour after, I felt a large Tumor in that
place, and, judging the Scull to be fractured, proposed the laying it open. But
the Physician not being come, I opened the Jugular Vein on that side, took away
some ounces of blood, and prepared Dressings. Doctor Lowre being come, I laid
open the Cranium by a circular Incision, and discovering a Fissure, filled up
the place with Dossils of dry Lint, pulv. Galeni and empl. e bolo, with
Compress and Bandage over all. The next morning we found our Patient relieved;
a Clyster was administered that day; and the day after, the Physician and Mr.
Hollier being present, we took off Dressings, and saw a large Fissure
stretching from the Coronall Suture to the Temporal Muscle. The Serosity being
discharged thereby, and the Patient freed from the preceding Symptoms, I did
not think it necessary to set on a Trepan: but it being by others thought
reasonable, to prevent farther dispute, I complied with them. But then the
Patient's Relations and Friends desired to be informed what Instruments we
would use, and asked to see them. I showed them a Trepan and Trephine, and gave
them liberty to try both upon a Scull. They did so, and unanimously preferred
the Trepan, which accordingly I set on in the declining part, somewhat distant
from the Fissure; and after Perforation dressed the Dura matter with ol. ros.
and Resin, the Cranium with dry Lint, and the Lips with a Digestive ex
terebinth. etc. then embrocated the Parts about, and applied empl. e bolo with
Bandage. By the application of these the Dura matter digested, and soon after
incarned. But the Serosity discharging by the Fissure, the Evacuation by the
Perforation of the Trepan was small, and thought not sufficient. I being
desirous to justify my way of dressing, yet ready to comply with the common
practice, dressed it up with mel ros. and spir. vini. But the Matter at next
dressing appeared less; and the day after we found the ruddy Flesh upon the
Dura matter pale and withering. I applied again the ol. ros. and Resin, and at
the next dressing saw the Flesh ruddy and better digested; and after a dressing
or two the Membrane so incarned, that I was glad to keep it within compass by
the application of a Dossil of dry Lint: and from that time my business was to
suppress it with Merc. praecipitat. and good Compression. During this the
Cranium was dressed with Pledgits pressed out of spirvini; and while the Bone was
exfoliating, we deterged and cicatrized the Lips, disposing them to incarn with
the Flesh rising from the exfoliated edges of the Bone. At length the Bone
changed color and shook. It appearing afterward loose. I raised it up with a
Spatula, and took it off; we supposing it an Exfoliation. But by the Pulsation
in the Flesh under, it appeared to be both Tables of the Cranium. If you will
ask the occasion of this, I must tell you, that, according to our judgments, it
was the effect of the Contusion, of which there indeed appeared no marks: yet,
without doubt, by the force of the Blow the heat was extinguished in the Bone,
and as a dead Bone it separated. And this sort of Contusions is taken notice of
by the Ancients. It is without danger to the Patient, if there be a sufficient
Discharge otherwise for the Matter, as here there was by the Fissure. This
Pulsation lessened as the Flesh grew callous and hardened, which it did soon
after into a Bone. About which time the fissured Bone cast off its edges, and
that Fissure incarned, and supplied the place of the Bone; the Wound also
cicatrized by the common Epuloticks. This young person had formerly been
subject to pains in his Head and frequent Vomiting from his Infancy, upon which
account we did not hasten the cicatrizing it; but after Purging, etc. we
cicatrized, and he enjoys a better health since.

A young Fellow, 17. Observat. of a Fissure with a Fracture and depression of
the Cranium under the temporal muscle.
a Mason by Trade, being at work with others making a Stack of Chimneys three
Stories high, the Foundation of the house sunk under him. He was taken up
speechless; but being presently let blood by a Noble Lady's advice, he
recovered his Senses, and was removed to his Lodging. The Part contused and
swelled was the right Temporal Muscle, and that side of his Head. He vomited
often, and had shrewd Symptoms of a Fracture. I caused the Hair to be shaved
off, and made an Incision in the upper part of the Tumor, from his Ear
forward, above two inches in length, passing as near the Temporal Muscle as I
durst; and having at the same time divided the Pericranium, I thrust it off
from the Bone; then with a Sponge pressed out of Red wine wiped away the blood,
and saw a Fissure running the whole length of the Wound. I also espied another
Fissure stretching from this downwards toward the external Canthus of that
Eye; and the lower I pressed with my Finger, the more rough the Bone felt. I
was unwilling to cut the Temporal Muscle; but there seeming to me a necessity
of it, I drew my Knife downward, and laid open the Wound in the form of a Roman
T. But the lower Lips, being musculous, would not so turn back to bare the
fractured Bone was I designed; therefore I contented my self with what I had
done, and filled up the Wound with Dossils of Lint, embrocating the Parts about
with ol. ros. cum album. ovi, and applying empl. e bolo over it, with Compress
and Bandage, then laid him to rest with an Anodyne draught. The next morning I
found the Patient in a Fever. He had rested ill, and had vomited often, and
complained of much pain in that lower Jaw. I took off the Bandage and
Emplaster, and dressed the Lips of the Wound with a Digestive ex terebinth. etc.
upon Pledgits dipped in ol. hyperici hot, embrocating the Parts about with ol.
cham. and ros. and applied a Cataplasm ex far. hord. flor. ros. rub. balaust.
etc. as you may find it described in the method of Cure. Then we let him blood
in that Jugular, and advised a Clyster: a Ptisan and contemperating Juleps were
also made him. Having afterward considered of the necessity of making more way
to the depressed Bone, and the danger which might happen by cutting off more of
this Muscle, I resolved to consult Doctor Walter Needham; to which purpose I
sent to him, and he accordingly met me the next day. We found the Patient
restless, and accompanied with an increase of all the forementioned ill
Symptoms. We took off Dressings, and discerned the upper Lips of the Wound
digested, but the lower more dry and swelled, especially upon the lower part of
the Temporal Muscle; upon the pressure whereof a white Matter discharged from
within, between the Cranium and musculous Flesh, where we judged the Depression
of the Bone to be. There was a necessity of cutting off part of the Temporal
Muscle, and that in the form of a Semicircle: wherefore we marked it with Ink
from the upper part, so passing within an inch or more of the external Canthus
of the Eye, and carrying it toward the Ear, to take off that Lip which was
lying over the Depressure. This being so marked, we cut it off. There was an
effusion of blood out of both ends of the Arteries: but having Dossils ready
dipped in in the Royal Stiptick, we applied them; and having filled up the bared
Cranium with our Dressings, we bound up the Wound. From this time his Jaw was
so weak, that we were forced to muffle it up with Chin-cloaths. At our next
dressing we set on a Trepan: after which with a Levator we raised up the
depressed Bone, and dropped into that Wound a Solution of resina in mell. ros. We
then dressed the trepanned hole with ol. ros. upon a soft Dossill; and the rest
of the Cranium we covered with Dossils pressed out of spir. vini, and applied
Digestives over the Lips of the Wound. At the second Dressing Doctor Walt.
Needham was present, and saw the Dura matter under the trepanned Bone incarned
so well, that from that time we only applied a little round Dossill to keep
the Flesh from thrusting out of it. But from the Fracture below much purulent
Matter came away daily: we supposed it was the more increased, by reason of the
hollowness which it had made between the Muscles and fractured Bone, which
being depending, did yet retain its Cavity, notwithstanding our endeavors by
Compress and Bandage. Therefore to prevent the enlarging of that Cavity, we
applied a Caustic on the outside, and the next day divided it; from which time
the Matter discharged it self that way, and thereby the internal Cavity was
disposed to cure. The Fissure that stretched it self from his Ear toward his
Brow did lie so undiscovered, that we neither saw beginning nor ending of it;
nor did we care: that part of it which we saw served to discharge the Serum
sufficiently. I rasped the Cranium, and covered it up with Dossills dipped in
spir. vini, etc. keeping them close to the Lips of the Wound; and by timely
rubbing the aforesaid Lips and every Superexcrescence with the Vitriol-stone, I
kept the Cranium dry, and disposed it to exfoliate. After the discharge of
Matter ceased from within the Cranium, I left the Exfoliation and Incarning of
it to my Servants, visiting the Patient but seldom my self. His Wound was
cicatrized in less then two months: as indeed they all usually are, if they be
treated as they ought. But if they fall into such ignorant and obstinate hands,
who suffer the Cranium to be overgrown with loose Flesh, a great discharge of
Matter will follow, and the Cranium must of necessity corrupt, and consequently
the Cure must be prolonged.

During the Wars I was frequently employed in the dressing some one person or
other, 18. Observat, of a Soldier wounded in the Head.
wherein I have seen all or most of the several sorts of Fractures mentioned
in this Chapter. Particularly at the Battle of Worcester, a Soldier came to us
where we were dressing, with his Sword in his hand, the Blade broken off near
the Hilt, with many Wounds on his Head. I seeing the Hairy scalp of one side of
his Head hanging down his Neck, went to him, and calling my Friend Will. Clarke
to me with a Sponge to cleanse the Wound, we saw six pieces of the Scull
sticking on it: some of them were of the first Table, others of both Tables.
Besides which there were various Fissures, Seeds, and some Fractures, with
Depression, made by Sword, Musket-stock, etc. We free the Scalp of those Bones,
and returned it upward so far as we judged it necessary; then cutting off what
was superfluous, tacked it to the sound parts by several Stitches distant from
one another, leaving a space to dress the Depression and greater Fractures.
Then we dressed up the Wounds with Digestives ex terebinth. etc. and where the
Dura matter lay bare, we applied Pledgits dipped in ol. ros. and to the other
parts of the Cranium liniment. Arcei. The Alarm growing hot of the Enemies
entering the City, I left Will. Clarke to bind it up, and made my way out of
the Town. But this young Surgeon, being taken busied in dressing the wounded
Soldiers, had liberty, after the heat of the Fight was over, to employ his
Charity in dressing some of them, and writ me since this Soldier's particular
Case: viz. The third day he found him pretty hearty, and his Wounds mattering
so very much, that he was necessitated to cut loose two of the Stitches, to
give vent to it: then he dressed the penetrating Wounds with mel ros. and the
Cranium with Lint pressed out of spir. vini; and proceeding accordingly in the
Cure, saw the depressed and mangled Bones cast off, incarn, and cicatrize with
the rest. The Soldier being thus cured by him made a Voyage to the Indies, and
since that served a Soldier in the Tower of London.

An Additional Discourse of Wounds of the Brain. THE greater Symptoms that are
usually said to attend the Wounds of the Brain do show themselves more
uncertainly then a speculative Surgeon would imagine; Uncertainty of
Symptoms in wounds of the Brain.
and in Cuts or Wounds made by sharp Weapons, or sudden strong force, more
uncertainly then in Contusions, Concussions, and Depressions of the Scull; the
highest of them, viz. Vomiting, Stupour, Loss of speech, with a Paralysis of
Legs and Arms, arising more suddenly in these latter cases then in the former.
These Symptoms have appeared in one of the forementioned Observations, where
there was nothing of Fissure or extravasated blood seen upon the Dura matter
after the terebration or perforation of the Cranium. Nay, we see many die
suddenly from a Box on the Ear, and from small Blows or Wounds. In some
whereof, upon opening the Cranium, there has been much blood extravasated; in
others none at all, or ought else that may be thought to have killed the
Patient.
A Young man by reason of a Blow with a Cudgel upon the Forehead presently
took his Bed, Observation.
and became delirous: a Sopor followed, and after some days he died. I was
fetched to see his Head opened. In opening his Forehead, I saw a small Hair like
a Fissure running from the great Canthus of the Eye upward. We took off the
Scull and Dura matter, and found but little blood extravasated, the Pia matter as
little altered.

Others I have been called to see opened, where there had preceded only a
Contusion of the Calvaria, without any Fissure, or more extravasated blood then
is usually seen in every opening or taking off the Cranium: yet the Patient
lay, as I am informed, under all those Symptoms of Delirium, Coma, etc. The
again I have dressed many that have been cut through the Scull, the Shivers of
Bones lying pasht with the Flesh and Hair upon the Dura matter; yet the Patient
has been without any Symptom of such a Wound: which I suppose happened by
reason of the Bones lying loose upon the Membrane.

At Sterling Mr. John Chase was present when a poor Servant-maid came to me to
be dressed of a Wound she had received on her Head by a Musket Shot, Observation,
in the taking of Calendar-House by the Enemy. There was a Fracture with a
Depression of the Scull. I set on a Trepan for the elevation of the deprest
Bone, and for discharge of the Sanies. She had labored under this Fracture at
least a week before she came to me, yet had none of those Symptoms
aforementioned. But after Perforation, and raising up this deprest Bone, and
dressing her Wound, she went her way, and came daily thither to be dressed, as if
it had been only a simple Wound of the Hairy scalp. Mr. Penycuke, an eminent
Surgeon of that Nation, did assist me in this work. I think the Brain it
self was wounded. I left her in his hands, who I suppose finished the Cure.

At the beating up of some of our Our-guards near Truro, Observation.
the Enemy pursuing them, a Trouper wounded between the right Brow and Ear,
espying me amongst the crowd, importuned me earnestly to dress him, and would
admit of no excuse. We stopped at an Apothecarie's house on the right hand going
out of the Town toward Perin. I called to the Apothecarie's Servant to bring
somewhat to dress him. Meanwhile I hastily lifted up the bloody Hair, and saw
a quantity of the Brain lie among it. I took it up with my fingers, and showed
it him: the sight whereof so calmed his passion, that I had liberty to fly from
the Enemy, who was entered the Town. Here the Prognostic was certain, yet there
appeared none of those cruel Symptoms which accompany Concussions or lesser
Fissures.

From Battles and Sieges of Towns and Garrisons we meet with many such Wounds:
in them we hasten our way to the extraction of extraneous Bodies, Manner of
dressing the Brain.
by cutting off the shattered Hairy skin first, then pulling out whatever was
carried within the Cranium. If this be well performed, we then dress up the
Brain and Membranes with a Sindon of Silk or soft Linen of a bigness
proportionable to the Wound, dipping it in a warm Digestive, such as is proper
for the wounded Membranes. For however Surgeons have proposed to dress the
Brain with one kind of Medicament, and the Membranes with another; that is not
possible to be done: for if the Membranes or Meninges should be washed with the
same Medicament, and be offended by the Acrimony thereof, Inflammation, Fever
and Delirium will the speedilier follow. Therefore in the Cure of these Wounds
of the Brain, I consider the Brain as an insensible Body, and that the dressing
of them consists in keeping it within its Membranes, and treating it as Wounds
of the Membranes with Lenients, etc. If this can be done, as in small Wounds of
the Brain it does sometimes happen, (if the Fracture of the Scull has not been
very large,) then the Patient may recover.

But if the Fracture in the Scull be large, and the Wound in the Brain
proportionable, so that the Brain cannot be retained within them, then it
corrupts by reason of the external cold, and offends the Membranes by its
putrid Acrimony, and is frequently the cause of all the ill Accidents that
attend them. The Patient sometimes lives until that Lobe be consumed, or has
wrought it self forth; as for Instance,

A Few days before the Battle at Worcester, 1. Observat, of a Fracture of the
Cranium by Musket Shot.
while we were dressing the wounded Soldiers, one was brought to us shot with
a Musket-bullet on the right side of his Head. My Servant William Clark, now
dwelling at Bridgenorth, in dressing his Wound felt the Shot sticking deep in
the Scull. I hastened to him, and saw the man speechless. We laid the Cranium
bare by a circular Incision, and permitted it to bleed a while; then cleansed
it with a Sponge pressed out of Vinegar, and filled it up with dry Lint. After an
hour or two, the Bleeding being stopped, we opened the Wound again, endeavoring
to get out the Bullet: but it not yielding thereto, we set on a Trepan close by
it in a depending part, and gave vent to a quantity of blood: then passing in a
Levator we raised up the Bullet, and pulled out the depressed Bones, with which
there came away some blood and a little of the Brain. This being wiped away,
there appeared a large Wound in the Dura matter. We dressed it with a Sindon dipped
in ol. ros. and resina, and filled up the Cavity with Dossils of Lint. Having
so likewise dressed up the trepanned Bone, we applied our Digestives to the
Lips of the Wound, with empl. e bolo and Bandage over all. Before we had
dressed him up, he lifted up his Eyes, and asked how he came amongst us.
Several other things he demanded of us. We caused him afterward to be
removed, and continued our care of him. The Wound did digest, and somewhat of
the Brain came away each day; yet his Speech continued: but what became of him
after our Defeat, I do no know.

At the Siege of Melcomb-Regis, 2. Observat. of a fractured Scull.
a Foot-souldier of Lieutenant-colonell Ballard's, by the grazing of a
Cannon-shot, had a great part of his Forehead carried off, and the Scull
fractured into many pieces, and some of it driven with the Hairy scalp into the
Brain. The man fell down as dead, but after a while moved; and an hour or two
after, his Fellow Soldiers seeing him endeavor to rise, fetched me to him. I
pulled out the pieces of Bones and lacerated Flesh from amongst the Brain, in
which they were entangled, and dressed him up with soft folded Linen dipped in a
Cephalic Balsam, and with Emplaster and Bandage bound him up, supposing I
should never dress him any more. Yet he lived 17 days; and the 15. day walked
from that great Corner-fort over against Portland to the Bridge which separates
Weymouth from Melcomb-Regis, only led by the hand of some one of his
Fellow Soldiers. The second day after he fell into a Spasmus, and died,
howling like Dog; as most of those do who have been so wounded. About the same
time a Maidservant was shot into the right side of her Head by a Musket-bullet
deep into the Brain. She lived so long till that Lobe of the Brain wrought out
or corrupted.

At the Siege of Taunton one of Colonel John Arundell's men, 3. Observat. of a
fractured Face, Nose, etc.
in storming the Works, was shot in the Face by Case-sot. He fell down, and in
the Retreat was carried off among the dead, and laid into an empty house by the
way until the next day: when in the morning early, the Colonel marching by
that house heard a knocking within against the Door. Some of the Officers
desiring to know what it was, looked in, and saw this man standing by the Door
without Eye, Face, Nose, or Mouth. The Col. sent to me (my Quarters being
nearest) to dress the man. I went, but was somewhat troubled where to begin.
The Door consisted of two Hatches; the uppermost was open, and the man stood
leaning upon the other part of the Door which was shut. His Face, with his
Eyes, Nose, Mouth, and forepart of the Jaws, with the Chin, was shot away, and
the remaining parts of them driven in. One part of the Jaw hung down by his
Throat, and the other part pasht into it. I saw the Brain working out
underneath the lacerated Scalp on both sides between his Ears and Brows. I
could not see any advantage he could have by my Dressing. To have cut away the
lacerated Parts here had been to expose the Brain to the Air. But I helped him
to clear his Throat, where was remaining the Root of his Tongue. He seemed to
approve of my Endeavors, and implored my help by the Signs he made with his
Hands. I asked him if he would drink, making a Sign by the holding up a Finger.
He presently did the like, and immediately after held up both his Hands,
expressing his Thirst. A Soldier fetched some Milk, and brought a little wooden
Dish to pour some of it down his Throat: but part of it running on both sides,
he reached out his Hands to take the Dish. They gave it him full of Milk. He
held the Root of his Tongue down with the one Hand, and with the other poured
it down his Throat, (carrying his Head backward,) and so got down more then a
quart. After that I bound his Wounds up. The dead were removed from thence to
their Graves, and fresh Straw was fetched for him to lie upon, with an old
Blanket to cover him. It was in the Summer. There we left that deplorable
creature to lodge; and while we continued there, which was about 6 or 7 days,
he was dressed by some of the Surgeons with a Fomentation made of Vulnerary
Plants, with a little Brandy-wine in it, and with Stupes of Tow dipped in our
common Digestive. So we bound him up.

I could tell you of many more wounded into the Brain, but I think these may
serve to prove what I would demonstrate, viz. that the Brain is of it self
insensible; that those Symptoms which accompany these Wounds proceed from the
pain which the Meninges, Dura and Pia matter suffer, which if oppressed by
extravasated blood, or a Depression of the Scull, do quickly suffer the
greatest Symptoms, as Vomiting, Stupor, Paralysis, etc. much more if they be
pricked by any Speel of a Bone, or other extraneous sharp body. When the Brain
it self ouzeth out between them in the manner already mentioned, it is a mild
soft substance and lenient to them, so that the Accidents appear not till that
begins to corrupt between them, and with it the Membranes themselves putrefie;
upon which there follow Convulsions, Howlings, and a dispatch of the Patient.
From which very observation may be seen the folly of dressing these Wounds with
powerful Desiccatives, which, so far as I could observe, did always hurt the
Membranes, but never either digest or incarn the Brain. For, according to
Hippocrates, non coalescet, but as it gets liberty works it self forth, not
unlike unto Barm. At sea those wounded into the Brain die soon after, we having
no convenience of lodging them or dressing them so warm as they require. In the
Wars my employment did not permit me to see the finishing of their Cures; and
here, in my practice in and about the City, I never was called unto any so
wounded where there were any hopes of Cure; therefore must leave that to others
to treat of. But by what I have seen of them heretofore, their Cure consists,
as I have already said, in dressing them as Wounds of the Dura matter, and in
keeping the Brain within its Membranes; without which no Incarnation can be
made on the Membranes.

A TREATISE OF Gunshot Wounds.

OF Gunshot Wounds.
The Sixth Book.
CHAP. I. Of Gunshot Wounds in general.
GReat has been the contention amongst the Learned about Fire and Venom in
Gunshot Wounds, Gunshot Wounds whether fiery or venomous.
some maintaining the one to be in them, some the other; and others holding
that there is neither. That which I suppose might be the occasion of their
suspecting a burning and a poisonous quality, was the deadly Color of these
Wounds, which in those early days, when the invention of Guns was novell,
surprised them, they looking not unlike poisoned and burnt Wounds. Where the
Bullet pierces, it extinguisheth the natural heat, and the Lips of the Wound
are livid or blackish; and if they be not dressed rationally, they inflame, and
are accompanied with Tumor, and Blisters frequently rise about them, also the
Matter is of a foetid smell. In this condition the Wound is commonly the first
day, and so to the seventh; and, if not succored, it gangrenes, and so the
Patient commonly dies. If in those days the Learned were thus deceived by their
aspect, and dressed them as venomous Wounds; it can be no marvel that they
should write so of them; I verily believing, that in their way of treating them
they were directly as poisoned Wounds difficult to digest and cure.

In these our later times, although they do not call them venomous, Errors in
dressing Gunshot Wounds.
yet is it a difficult thing to dissuade many of our Surgeons from dressing
these Wounds with Tinctures of Myrrh and Honey of Roses, and thrusting in of
great Tents: by which way of dressing I have seen these Wounds undigested the
tenth day; one whereof was in the Cheek, with dry and staggy Lips. These lesser
fleshy Wounds being undigested, at last gangrene: and in truth it is not to be
wondered at; I will undertake to show you the Experiment every day, and that in
a Fontanell or Issue made by a Caustic. Cut you through this livid or black
Escar, and put in a Pea in the middle of it, with Tincture of Myrrh and Honey
of Roses, as I have seen some of them dress Gunshot Wounds, and the next two
or three days after, when you dress it again, it will be to your sight not
unlike a Gunshot Wound: continue your dressing with a Pea, and with your
Tincture of Myrrh; and if it do not gangrene, yet it will be inflamed, and slow
in Digestion. And this is from the improper Application in the dressing it. For
if you dressed this Escar in the Fontanell with Emollients and Digestives, as
you ought to do, the Escar would separate with Digestion in the worst Habit of
body: and so it will in Gunshot Wounds with little distemper or difficulty, if
you have timely extracted the extraneous bodies. But the ignorance in some, and
the discontinuance of others in this kind of Surgery, has occasioned these
Errors.

Thus at our entering into Worcester, Observation.
when the King came out of Scotland with an Army of that valiant People, a
Townsman was shot. The Pistol being fired by the Cheek, shot him through his
lower Jaw and Tongue, and out at the contrary Cheek. The Surgeon of the
Town, upon sight of it, concluded it gangrened from the black color, and
declined the dressing it the way he rationally ought: upon which the Part grew
exceedingly painful, swelled and inflamed; it also gleeted much. After two
days I was consulted, and by lenient Medicaments, and good Bandage keeping up
the fractured Jaw, I assuaged the Pain, and digested the Wound, leaving it in
the same Chirurgeon's hands, who cured it. In this person the Wound was burnt
by the flame, the very Powder sticking in some parts of his Cheek. This, with
the Putrefaction occasioned by the hot weather, and the improper Applications,
contributed to our Brother Chirurgeon's apprehension. It is this ugly aspect
that puts the inconsiderate Surgeon out of his method, and so renders
Gunshot more difficult of Cure then otherwise it would be. For if such Wounds
were rationally dressed, they would digest and heal as easily as any complicated
Wound. What I have said of Gunshot, happens at Sea frequently by Splinter,
which though it may have lost its force to make a Wound, yet it sometimes
bruiseth the Skin to the Flesh so forcibly as to extinguish the natural heat,
and to make it black. If this be dressed as a Gangrene with spir. vini and
unguent. Aegyptiac. or lapt up with a warm Stupe, the Escar will grow dry and
parcht, and the Humors which flow plentifully to it will cause an Inflammation
with Tumor, and an Apostemation is the best that can be expected underneath
the Escar, and consequently it will terminate in a hollow Ulcer; but for the
most part it corrupts and gangrenes. Whereas if this contused Escar were
dressed with Lenients according to that Aphorism of Hippocrates, Omne quod
contusum, etc. and the Parts about embrocated with ol. ros. cum album. ovor.
and aceto, and a Defensative applied over all to prevent Defluxion, the Escar
would separate as easily as those made in Fontanells by Caustic, and afterward
incarn and cicatrize with much ease to the Patient.

Many Instances I could give of this kind, Observation.
but shall make choice of one that will give least offense, and that in the
outside of the Leg. It was somewhat broader then a Five-shilling piece in
Silver. How it had been dressed on Shipboard I will not insist; but on the
Shore I saw it black, and the Pretender to Surgery had dressed it with spir.
vini and unguent. Aegyptiac. etc. till it was as hard as Shoe-leather, and the
circumjacent Parts inflamed and swelled. I did not perceive he had ever cut
into the Escar: if he had, it was superficially done. I advised it to be
presently divided, and to be dressed warm with unguent. basilic. cum ol.
lilior. But he replied, he knew how to dress a Gangrene. It was no easy task to
persuade him out of his method: but I prevailed, and thereby the Matter was
discharged, and the Patient more easy, and sooner cured.

CHAP. II. Of the Cure of Gunshot Wounds; and first, of Extraction of Bullets,
etc.
WOunds made by Gunshot are the most complicate sort of Wounds that can be
inflicted: for they are not only a Solution of continuity, but have joined
with them Contusion, Attrition, and Dilaceration, in a high and vehement kind.
To this we may add all sorts of Fractures and Accidents, as Haemorrhagia,
Inflammation, Erysipelas, Gangrene, and Sphacelus; besides the extraneous
bodies which are violently carried into the Wound, and multiply Indications.
Compound intentions.
The number of the Indications in compound Affections must answer to the
variety of Disturbances. Were it a Simple Wound, the Cure of it would presently
be performed (as you have read in the preceding Treatise of Simple Wounds) per
astringentia and exsiccantia, by such Medicaments as are of an astringent and
drying quality. The Cure of a Wound is the Exsiccation of it. But here is
always joined with these that which indicateth the use of emollientia and
suppurantia; according to that of Hippocrates, Omne quod contusum, necesse est
ut putrescat, and in pus vertatur, What is contused must necessarily putrefie,
and be turned into Matter.

That which is fretted and torn must also be reduced to the whole, What is torn
is to be reduced to the part, or cut off.
or cut off, before your ordinary intention of Incarning. Moreover, in these
Wounds, not only the Bullet it self is ordinarily lodged, but many times other
strange bodies are carried along with it; for Extraction of which, judicious
care and industry are required in you. In these recent Wounds we very rarely
have a Flux of blood. Though the Veins and Arteries be wounded, they commonly
lie quasht in the contused Flesh, until separation of the Escar; and about
that time, when you least think on it, they may burst out violently.
Haemorrhagia.
I have seen them thus often break forth. But if such Vessels do bleed upon
the receipt of the Wound, and interrupt you in drawing out the extraneous
bodies, you must endeavor to suppress the Bleeding, for thereupon depends the
life of your Patient: but withal so proceed, that you may extract the Bullet
first; and then be careful, that in the restraining the Bleeding you bring not
on a Mortification by your crowding in Dossills. Too many Instances may be
given hereof: therefore I rather advise you to use an actual Cautery.

A great Haemorrhage happening to a Soldier at the Surprise of Weymouth by the
Garrison of Portland, by a shot through the Heel, Observation.
I endeavored the stopping the blood by Astringents, Bandage, etc. But after
all, I was put to the use of the actual Cautery; which I did apply
successfully, and have since seen Botallus's authority for it. Tutius enim est
(says he) eam ignite ferro constringere. These Wounds are also accompanied
with Pain, which ought to be appeased by Anodynes. Anodynes.
But you must be well advised in the application, lest you extinguish that
small remainder of heat that is left. How you shall deal with all these
Inconveniences, and not add one evil to another, I shall plainly deliver to
you. And first, what must be first put in execution; which is, the Extraction
of Bullets and other extraneous bodies.

The Part is at first dressing to be cleared with what diligence you can of all
such foreign bodies as have made violent intrusion into it, Dress presently
during the heat of battle.
while the Patient is warm with the heat of Battle, and the Wound fresh, and
very little altered by either Air or Accidents: upon which consideration less
Pain must necessarily follow upon the Extraction.

In the Armado Navall of Dunkerk, Necessity of it.
where we Surgeons were often employed in this kind of work, we after every
Fight went together visiting one another wounded men. It was thought amongst
us a great shame, if any thing of this work of Extraction were then to be done:
for after the first and second day the Wound proves tumefied, also the
neighboring Parts are inflamed, and so changed in their temper, that they
conceal from your sight both the Bullet and his companions, so that the place
they are coucht in can hardly be known; or, being discovered, you cannot
without hazard of your Patient, or great trouble of the Part, make Extraction
of them. In which case it may then be reasonable to defer that work, and by
Lenients to hasten Digestion.

Yet if the Wound be near a Joint, or the Shot lodged amongst the Tendons, it is
much to be feared the Pain will not cease, and consequently the Wound will not
digest. In which case the omission of drawing out the Bullet may bring a
Mortification. It has been the cause of the death of many a brave Soldier,
and is the ground of all the mischiefs these Wounds are subject to, as Pain,
Inflammation, Spasm, Convulsion, Gangrene, Sphacelus; what not? every Battle
producing Instances of it, to the discredit of our Profession. Therefore to
prevent the increase of such Accidents, neglect not to make Extraction of it
one way or other.

But if the Bullet be lodged in a less noble Part, as in the Musculous flesh,
you may with more safety content your self till the seventh day, or till the
fierceness of the Accidents be over, and the Wound digested. But withal it
will require more care, for the Wound will be more painful, and slow in
Digestion, then otherwise it would be. Yet be the confession of those that
allow Fire and Poison in it, the Bullet may lie long there, and do little
harm. Nay, I suppose there are not many but have heard of or seen Bullets,
that, without grievance to the Patient, have continued lying long in the Fleshy
parts of wounded men. Conceive this spoken of Leaden Bullets; for Iron or Brass
cannot (by reason of their aptness to rust) remain without doing harm. However,
let nothing of this encourage you; for the Bullet pierces not any Part without
carrying Rags along with it, which corrupt in the Wound, and make
Apostemations, occasioning a prolonging the Cure; as must needs be observed by
all men in their practice.

The Servant of a Nobleman was wounded and shot in the Thigh by Highway-men.
Observation.
The Bullet not having been extracted by his Country-Chirurgeon at the first
Dressing, could not be drawn out by me at the second, but occasioned great Pain
and Inflammation, burning Heat and Watchings. And although he had many other
considerable Wounds upon him to make a Derivation, yet was his Gunshot more
vexatious then all the rest, until I extracted the Bullet, and Rags carried in
with it: yet this was but a Pistol-bullet. But after I had drawn it out, my
Digestion became good; and by equal Bandage, with gentle Compression of the
Parts, I united and healed it in ten or twelve days, which I doubt would not
have been cured in three months.

Nay, while any of the Rags remain in the Wound, it will never cure: but the
extraneous bodies drawn out, there is little difficulty in the healing these
Simple Wounds, if dressed rationally.

An Instance whereof I shall give you in a poor Soldier, Observation.
who was shot at the Castle of Dunbar with a Musket-bullet a little above the
left Clavicle, in amongst the Muscles of that Scapula. The Bullet was drawn out
by one of my Servants, and the Wound dressed up with Digestives. But some days
after, he being brought to Saint-Johnston's, I found it inflamed, and very much
swelled. We dressed it up according to the method set down in this Treatise:
but it apostemated, and mattered very much. After several unsuccessfull
Applications, I made an Incision by the side of the Scapula into the Cavity,
and pulled out the Rags that had been carried in by the Shot: and from that
time all Accidents ceased, and the Wound cured soon after. But if such be
handled as some have lately taught, they are as so many poisoned Gunshot
Wounds.

Now for the taking out of the Bullets, and other extraneous bodies, 2 methods
of extracting Bullets.
there are two methods. First, one to extract them by the way they went in: the
other, to open the way by which they would, if their force had not failed them,
have passed themselves through.

For to take them out the way they were forced in, First, the way the Bullet
went in.
you must place the Patient as near as may be guessed in the posture he was in
when shot: and if, by reason of his weakness or other infirmity, he cannot
without prejudice be so situated, let him be laid in a Position which may as
nearly answer it as may be, lest some part of a Muscle, Tendon or Ligament
obscure what you desire to make manifest. Methods of search.
Then make search for them with your Finger or Probe. The figure of these
Wounds is always round: the Bullet forces the Flesh in with it, and the place
by which it enters presently contracts closer; but its going out is more lax.
You may guess by view of the Wound the largeness of the Bullet; and comparing
the one with the other, make choice of a fit Instrument for Extraction,
wherewith you ought always to be well furnished. Your main care in this work
must be to find out the Bullet: but if you fail of it by searching into the
Wound with your Probe, then try if you can feel it by handling the Parts about:
it being wonderful to consider how these Shots do twirl about, at least seem
to do so, when the Posture is changed in which the Wound was received.

As for example, a man has been shot in the Cheek, and I have cut out the
Bullet behind in his Neck. Another was shot in the outside of the Small of one
of his Legs; the whole Member extremely swelled and inflamed; no possibility of
finding out the Bullet either way: at last by chance I felt it in the inside of
the Thigh above the Knee. And so another being wounded in the outside of the
Arm, I have cut out the Bullet below the Scapula. If the Bullet has not lain
in so long (as in some of these cases) that the Parts are extremely pained with
Inflammation and Tumor, the Pain where the Bullet lodges does sometime help to
discover it.

A common Soldier, shot in the Breast through the Sternon, Observation.
lay roaring very grievously, complaining of a pain in his Back. I was fetched
to him, and turning him on his Side, I saw the Bullet lie like a small Wen or
Scrophula thrusting out under the Skin not far from the Spine. I made Incision
over it according to the length of the Part, and thrust out the Bullet as
easily as I could desire. Then I dressed it with Digestives, the Soldier
ceased his crying, and acknowledged before us his Pain was from the Bullet in
the Skin. For indeed the Lungs and other internal Parts are seldom so
sensible of Pain, though wounded through.

An Instance whereof I saw in one run through them with a Rapier. Observation.
He complained of no other pain then that external one in his Back where the
Sword passed out. Sometime after his being cured, he died of another Disease. I
opened him, and saw his Lungs sound, and that the pain of his Back proceeded
from the edge of the Rib which had been cut by the Sword's passing out. The
Lungs discover their hurt by other Symptoms. The common Soldier died, as most
do that are shot through the Lungs.

If in your searching for the Bullet you light on the Part, though there be no
Extuberance or ought to be felt, yet his Pain there will be a good sign of it.
If no Accidents occasioned that Pain, make your way there by Incision, avoiding
the Vessels, and take out the Shot, and what else offers it self. By this you
do both quit the Part of its troublesome Lodger, and withal make way
commodiously for discharge of Matter; which, in regard most of these Wounds are
sinuous, (the Bullet turning aside when it is hindered in its journey forward,)
for want of discharge, might in those places occasion Fistula's and hollow
Ulcers, not without ill quality.

So a man being shot with a Slug near the external Canthus of the right Eye
through that Bone, Observation.
it seemed to the Surgeon that dressed it to have passed directly forwards,
and accordingly he crowded in a Tent, and daily increased the bulk, to stop the
Bleeding it was subject to. But the Bleeding continuing, I was fetched, and saw
him pull out a Tent above an inch and a half long. I cast in some of the Royal
Stiptick-water, and stopped the Flux of blood. His Cheek was very much swelled,
and had apostemated on that side of his Neck, and discharged its Matter two
inches lower then the Tumor. I cut afterward into that Tumor, and felt the
Slug: it lay partly under the Os jugale or Cheek-bone. It was a wonder to me
how it came there; but I drew it out: and from that time his Wound above and
the Apostemations below cured.

In the work of Extraction, Caution.
take great care you lay not hold of some Nerve or Tendon, and so pluck them
along with the Bullet: for by so doing you will cause intolerable Pain and
grievous Accidents. You must therefore neither open nor dilate your Instrument,
until you take hold of the Bullet without any of the circumjacent Parts.

CHAP. III. Of Dressing Gunshot Wounds after Extraction.
AS soon as you have made a Separation of these extraneous bodies, First
dressing after extraction.
if you judge the Wound to be so well conditioned, that there is neither
Putrefaction, nor any thing tending that way, (as in recent Wounds there is
not,) be not discouraged at whatsoever evil aspect it then has, but consider
its livid color (as I have said) to be usual in these Wounds, where the
Contusion is not only simple in the Skin, but through Flesh and all, as far as
the Bullet or Splinter went, extinguishing the natural Heat: so no wonder if
it has the color of a gangrened or poisoned Wound. Therefore be not disturbed
in your thoughts, but, having taken out the Bullet or pieces of Splinters,
dress it up as a contused Wound with oleum catellor. or such as follows, as
hot as the Part will bear, not giving credit to any that shall persuade you to
the contrary, no, though it be near a Bone; for the Gleet will foul it more
then your greazy Medicaments; therefore dress it with some of these: ol.
lilior. alb. lb vj. boil in this two new-whelpt Puppies until the Flesh fall
from the Bones, then add lumbric. terrest. in vivo lotor. lbj. boil these a
while, then strain them by a gentle compression: to the strained Liquour add
terebinth. iij. spir. vini j. Reserve this for your use. Or this: ol. lini,
cannabin. an. iiij. ol. lilior. chamaemel. an. ij. terebinth. j. Misc. Or this:
terebinth. opt. iiij. thuris, See ol. Apa. rici in Simple Wounds.
mastich. an. iij. myrrhae j. ol. Aparici ij. ol. lumbric. and sambuc. an. iij.
Misc. S. A. ol. olivar. lbj. terebinth. lbss. gum. elemi ij. aeruginis pulv.
ij. or this; spir. vini lbss. terebinth. lbj. ol. hyperici and lini an. lbss.
sang. dracon. subtle. pulv. j. Misc. S. A.

With this latter I cured a Servant of A. D. shot into his Hand. Observation.
This digested the Wound; and after the Slough began to separate, I felt part
of a Bone bare, which I dressed with extract. scord. dissolved in mel ros. with
which I deterged; and feeling the Bone afterward incarned, I also incarned the
Wound, and cicatrized it with unguent. tutiae, etc. and in few days cured it
without any difficulty. Liniment. Arcei with any of the abovementioned Oils is
very good, adding a few drops of ol. terebinth. which by its subtilty
penetrates, and by its heat rouzeth the natural heat in those cold Parts, and
puts them upon Digestion and Separation.

Quercetan commends this: succorum tussilag. oxalidis, an. iij. earicas ping.
number. xx. thur. ij. resin. laric. ijss. axung. gall. anser. an. ij. butyri
recent. lbss. ol. visci pomorum comp. lbj. put these all together in a Vessel
close stopped, boil them on a moderate fire the space of six hours, then strain
them out hot, and evaporate them to a good consistence. This following is
another of his: cerae novae, resin. picis naval. an. iiij. sevi hircin.
medullae cruris vitulini, an. ij. oesypi j. ol. olivar. aut lini lbj.
liquefactis omnibus and transcolatis fiat Vnguentum, quod reservetur ad usum.
He adds j. of Praecipitate to every j. of this. But in recent Wounds this will
not be necessary: for you will find by experience, that these Wounds will
digest and suppurate without it, (and that frees them from Putrefaction.) Nor
will it be always for your credit, if you consider the quantity of Balsams we
use in such Wounds, and what prejudice some people may receive either by its
Salivating them, or otherwise affecting their Spirits. Yet Praecipitate and
axungia with a few drops of ol. terebinth. was a common Medicament amongst us:
but I refer that to you, it being a good Remedy to resist Putrefaction, and
hasten separation of the Escars. You ought to dress up these Wounds lightly
with a proportionable soft Tent, and Pledgits dipped in some of these Digestives
very warm, but not to scald them. After that embrocate the Parts about with
such like: ol. lumbric. ros. myrtill. an. iij. aceti cochl. ij. mix them. In
the dressing, your Applications over the Wound and Parts circumjacent should be
such as have a virtue to hinder the flux of Humors, and strengthen the Parts:
to which purpose, far. hord. and fabar. an. vj. ros. rub. bacc. myrtill. an.
jss. sem. cydon. vj. boil these in posca to the consistence of a Cataplasm,
adding at last two new-laid Eggs, with oxymel ijss. If you apprehend this too
heavy, you may add ol. myrtill. and ros. with Wax as much as is necessary, and
make it into the form of a Cerote. Above the Wound lay one of the following
Defensatives, which you may have always ready by you. bol. Armen. iiij. terrae
sigill. iij. sang. dracon. jss. corn. cerv. ust. or burnt Bones iijss. or Juice
of Sloes dried iij. ol. ros. and myrtill. an. vj. aceti xij. boil these to the
consistence of a Cerote, addendo in fine decoct. album. ovor. iiij. Or this:
pulv. ros. rubr. myrtill. j. bol. Armen. terr. sigill. an. vj. succ. plantag,
solani, an. ij. aceti opt. iiij. ol. ros. and myrtill. an. vj. cerae q. s.
Misc. Apply your Compresse dipped in aceto or Oxycrate: let your Bandage be put
on equally and gently, to retain your Dressings, and hinder the influx of
Humors.

Having thus dressed the Patient, Bleeding.
presently consider of letting him blood, to prevent ill Accidents, and
especially if he lost little or no blood from the Wound, or if there be a
Plethora joined with it. In which case Revulsion made from the same side is
commended by Galen. Revulsio enim quae e directo fit celerrimam utilitatem
adfert: Galen. De Sang. missione.

A Clyster should precede Phlebotomy. Clysters.
It may be made of the common Decoctions; or of Mallows, Violets, Beets,
Mercury, Bay and Juniper Berries, with Oil of Linseed, Honey of Roses, hiera
picra, Elect. lenitiv. etc. But if you have not these in readiness, make your
Clyster with the Broth of Flesh. ol. chamaemel. Sugar, and the Yolk of an egg,
with a little Salt, if your Broth be not salt, or, in case of necessity, salt
Water; or Broth out of the Kettle, with a few Flowers of Camomil boiled in it,
and stained, adding a little Butter or Oil and red Sugar. Any such like may
serve for a good Clyster.

It will also be requisite you be furnished with some Cordialls, Epithemata.
to resist the putrid Vapors, and refresh the Spirits; which you may do
externally by some Epithemata of distilled Waters, as of Balm, Bugloss, Roses,
acetum, with the Powder of the Roots of tormentill. scordium, scorzonera,
contrayerva, or other cordial Species, of which you have variety in the
Pharmacopoeia Londinensis, which may be for your purpose. This following may
serve for an example: aq. melissae, borrag. bugloss. an. ij. aceti rosati j.
speciei diarrhod. j. croci j. Misc. fiat Epithema.

And with some of the foresaid Waters you may make Cordialls also, Cordialls.
by adding Syrup of Citrons, Gilliflowers, and confect. Alkermes. For instance,
aq. bugloss. cinnamom. an. ij. confect. Alkermes j. lap. bezoard. occid. ss.
sir. e succ. citr. cochl. ij. Misc. For the common Soldier a dram of
London-treacle or Mithridate dissolved in Wine may serve. Diet.
As to their manner of Diet, in great Wounds it is necessary to observe a spare
one, as Barly-grewells, Panadoes, thin Broth, or a Potched egg, this much
availing to the preventing of Inflammation. But in this the Patient's custom
must be considered. Also the Air ought to be temperate; for cold is an enemy to
Wounds. Rest is likewise required, as well to the Mind as the Body. Therefore
having dressed him, lay him to rest with vj. sir. de meconio cum cochl. ij. aq.
cardiacae in iij. aq. papaver.

We shall now proceed to the Second day's work, The second day's dressing.
and therein consider the Habit of body, and more particularly what concerns
the Wound. In these Gunshot Wounds it may be convenient the body be gently
purged by Lenients, as is formerly said. Purgatio enim per alvum plerisque
vulneribus prodest. Purging avails much for the carrying off bilious and serous
Humors, which from their heat and tenacity are most apt to ferment and flow
into these Wounds, and cause Pain, Inflammation, and other ill Symptoms. In
which cases cassia, manna, tamarind. sir. de cichor. cum rbabarb. ros. solut.
are prescribed, and may be taken in Whey or Ptisans.

But as for stronger Purgatives, Purging.
Hippocrates says well, Cocta sunt purganda, non cruda: which is more
especially true when you speak of Scammoniate Medicines.

Having thus proposed a general way of Purging, we shall again consider what
is requisite for Dressing the Wound, and prepare our Dressings, and apply such
Medicaments as may be necessary. In order to which you ought to have a
Fomentation ready, Fomentation.
whereout may be wrung a hot Stupe. To which purpose, summitat. hyperici,
centaur. scordii, absinth. an. Mj. flor. ros. rub. chamaemel. melilot. sambuci,
an. Mjss. furfuris Pj. coq. in aq. font. ad lbijss. colat. add vini austeri
lbj. spir. vini vj. fiat Fotus. These will give a breathing to the Parts, and
defend the Wound from the Air while you consider it. If all be well, continue
the use of Digestives. But if it be accompanied with very great Pain, you may
foment with this: decoct. rad. althaeae, malvar. fol. verbasc. chamaemel.
melilot. sem. lini, foenugraec. boiled in Sheeps-head-broth, or other. And of
the faeces of this Fomentation you may make a Cataplasm, adding farin. hord.
lbss. sem. lini. eydonior. pulv. an. j. unguent. basil. and unguent. dialthaeae
an. jss. axung. porcinae vet. q. s. croci j. in fine coctionis addend. ovor.
integr. recent. number. iiij. Apply it over all, or the former Cataplasm. It
cherishes the heat of the Part, furthers Suppuration, and is anodyne. You are
to make the Bandage as before, and continue this way of dressing to the seventh
or ninth day, until you have separated the Sloughs, digested the Wound, and
have a laudable Pus, (as you are wont to call it,) which is album aequale,
leve, and minime foetidum; a perfect white Matter, of good consistence, and not
foetid or ill sented. If the Matter be defective in any of the said qualities,
Praecipitate will be of good use mixed with the latter Unguent of Quercetan's,
or that mixed with unguent. Apostolor. Or this following Unguent may be applied
alone, or with Praecipitate: succ. agrimon. centaur. min. plantag. apii, an. j.
mucilag. hord. iiij. boil these together, adding terebinth. Venet. iij. mell.
com. ij. far. hord. cribrat. iij. croci pulv. j. fiat Mundificativum. To this
you may add Aloes, Myrrh, sarcocoll. rad. aristoloch. gentian. ireos, for the
incarning these Wounds. If you desire rather Injection, the same Ingredients
may serve. But in the use of Injections be sure you do not stop the Orifine to
keep the Liquour in; for so you shall distend the Ulcer, and make it more
Sinuous.

CHAP. IV. Of Accidents befalling Gunshot Wounds, and of Sinuous Ulcers.
BUT from the first to the eleventh day many Accidents are wont to happen to
these Wounds, which not only impede the Cure, but often, without timely help,
destroy the Patient. And these are, vehement Pain, Inflammation, Erysipelas,
from whence Gangrenes and Sphaceli do frequently happen. These latter take
their beginning from Inflammation. Therefore I have elsewhere particularly
treated of Inflammation and Erysipelas, that you, seeing what it is, may in its
beginning prevent its increase. Inflammation.
It commonly proceeds in this case, either from a very ill Habit of body, or
from the ill handling of these Wounds in the beginning.

The Remedy is, timely to prevent the Influx of Humors, and evacuate that
which already affects the Wound. The first way is, by Bleeding and Purging;
both which are directed you in the first day's work. If you omitted that then,
you must perform it now. The second way is, by external Applications. If Pain
be the cause, you must succor it by Anodynes, which may mitigate and repress
the heat of the Part; of which you may have your choice in the Chapters of
Phlegmon and Erysipelas in general; and in the first Chapter of the Treatise
of Wounds, where we have particularly treated of Pains, and proposed their
Relief, etc. viz. in their Beginning with Refrigerants and Repellents, and in
their State by moderate Calefaction and Discutients, and afterward by
Concoction of the Matter; to which Treatise I refer you.

The next and most cruel Symptom is Mortification of the Part, Gangrene.
which very often attends great Inflammations, and is shrewdly to be suspected
when they yield not readily to Discutients or Suppuratives. In these Wounds it
happens most commonly through a Suffocation of the natural heat of the Part,
by reason of the great concourse of Humors, or too refrigerating and repellent
Applications in the time of great Inflammations, which have infeebled and
hindered the transitus of Spirits into the Part. It may be perceived by the
Gleet and change of color, it beginning to look livid; also by a diminution of
the Tumor, etc.

When you see such a change begin, you must presently prepare to withstand a
Mortification by Scarification, not only until the blood come about the Lips
of the Wound, but deep into it through the Escar to the quick, and suffer it to
bleed freely, and make the Part sensibly feel, that by such means you may
disburthen it of part of what would have choked it, and make way for the
entrance of the operation of the Medicine. Then foment the Part with a good
Lixivium made of Ashes, to which may be added Salt and Vinegar. Or you may boil
scord. absinth. centaur. and such like, in the aforesaid Lixivium. After you
have well fomented the place, wash the Scarifications, and dress the Wound with
Aegyptiac. cum theriac. Venet. dissolved in aceto vin. adding calcined Vitriol,
etc. then apply a Cataplasm ex farin. hord. fabar. orobi, lupinor. decocted in
some of the same Lixivium, with an addition of Oxymel to it. But as to this
Matter I refer you to the particular Chapter of Gangraenae and Sphaceli, for
farther directions therein. The Gangrene stopped, hasten separation of the Escars
by Digestives, and then deterge with mundif. ex apio and Paracels. etc. and so
proceed with Sarcoticks and Epuloticks to finish the Cure.

But in the separating of contused Parts, Haemorrhagia. Observation.
as I have often told you, great Fluxes of blood usually burst out upon us.
Thus in a Patient of mine, wounded by a Shot through the inside of the Radius,
upon separation of the Escar a great Flux of blood happened. While I was
stopping the first Orifice, which was nearest the Artery, the blood burst forth
of the other. Hereupon I stopped both the Orifices with some astringent Powders,
(I suppose that of Galen's prescription of Aloes and Hares-fur, I most
frequently using those as the best in such cases,) rolling up the Wound with a
good Compress dipped in a Stiptick Decoction, laying my common Defensative over
all, and did not open it till 3 or 4 days after. See Treatise of Wounds.
How such Fluxes of blood are farther to be treated, you may see in the Chapter
of an Aneurisma.

Gunshot Wounds after separation of the Escar are apt to become Sinuous
Ulcers, Sinuous Ulcers.
especially after great Fluxion, and where Bandage cannot be used to preserve
the Tone of the Parts, as in the upper part of the Thigh and Hip, etc. These
Cavities causing much pain to the Patient, and difficulty and trouble to the
Surgeon, we shall consider their Cure, taking our Indication from the Parts
affected, with the largeness of the Wound, Contusion and Laceration of Parts:
for from such Wounds there must necessarily be loss of Substance, and the
quantity or evil quality of the Matter must needs render it Sinuous,
especially where Bandage cannot be conveniently made to thrust out the Matter.

And if the Bullet or any extraneous body be yet remaining within, and the
Parts extremely tumefied, and troubled with pain and influx of Humors, the
included body will be the more straightened in its passage out, and render the
Cure so much the more difficult. And if a Cacochymia or Lues Ven. be joined
with it, you will scarce cure your Patient without exhibiting Antivenereall and
Scorbutic Remedies.

Therefore to prevent Sinuosities, you are to enlarge the Orifice at first, and
keep it so wide open, that the Matter which is daily there engendered may have
free passage out: which if it may not by the way the Shot went in, then you
must consider how in another place the Sinus may discharge it self. This being
prudently effected, and the Matter thereby discharged, you shall then more
easily perfect your Cure.

But before you make this Apertion, you must consider whether by altering the
position of the Part, or by Compression with Bandage, or by hollow Tents, the
Matter may not be brought out. And to make the Cure of these Cavities the more
facil, you must endeavor to place the Member in such a figure that the Orifice
may be depending. Also you must endeavor by Stupes, Sponges, Compresse and
good Bandage, to press out the Matter, that the Cavities may unite. They should
be wrung out of Red wine wherein have been infused flor. ros. rubr. myrtill.
cort. granat. balaust. nuc. cupress. sumach, acacia. And if the Matter do not
well discharge between Dressings, you must dress it the oftener. Also Injections
may be made with a Decoction of some of these following, myrrh. aloes,
sarcocoll. rad. iridos, aristoloch. spir. vini, mel ros. aq. calcis, alum. and
such like, to dispose the Sinuosities to heal.

Sometimes in a Wound inflicted on the upper part of a Member, the Matter not
being likely to discharge it self thereout, I have by a Seton-needle perforated
it through; and retaining the twisted Silk in the Ulcer till the lower Orifice
was digested, then drawing out the Silk, I kept it open by a Tent a few days,
till the upper part agglutinated; and afterward, as the Matter lessened in the
depending Orifice, I left off the use of the Tent, and healed it up.

SO in a Gunshot Wound on the inside of the Thigh, 1. Observat. of a wounded
Thigh.
passing under that Inguen slanting up to the Os ilion, and apostemating in the
upper parts, it not yielding to Cure by Injections, Bandage, etc. I made a
Cannula, through which I passed a Needle with a twisted Silk, and kept in the
Silk as a Seton, till I had by Gentian-roots dilated the Orifice sufficiently
for the discharge of Matter. To make the Perforation of the Needle more certain
and easy, I applied a Caustic first upon the place, the better to feel the
end of the Cannula. By this Apertion the Matter discharged it self in what
position soever he lay, and he was thereby happily cured.

One was shot in the Face betwixt the Nose and Eye on the right side into the
Ethmoides by a Pistol-bullet. 2. Observat. of a shot in the Face.
After he had been cured some years of the external Wound in his Face, he
became troubled with a fretting Ichor, which discharged by that Nostrill; and
especially at his first rising in the morning out of bed it would run half a
Spoonful of a yellowish color, which had made a chop or gutter at the lower
end of that Nostrill by its acrimony. After some years he felt, upon bending
his Head backwards or forwards, the Bullet to roll to and fro over the Roof of
his mouth. He complained to me of his Grievance at the Hague in Holland, a
little before his Majesty's going into Scotland. I offered to his
consideration the casting in Injections, or passing a Probe into that Nostrill
downwards, to try if either way it might be washed or thrust downwards in the
Gullet, or be excreted into his Mouth. But these ways had heretofore proved
ineffectuall. We therefore resolved upon the cutting through the Palatbone. To
which purpose I placed him in a clear light, one holding his Head steady, while
I cut into the Roof. But the Flesh was so close tied to the Bone, that it would
not yield to my Spatula as I expected: wherefore I applied a bit of a
Caustick-stone, and held it to the place with a Pledgit of Lint a few minuits;
by which I consumed the soft fleshy part over the Bone, and afterward cut into
the Bone such a hole, that in the moving of his Head I could see the Bullet
lodged in the Hole: which encouraging us to proceed in our work, the Bullet was
afterward taken out, and he eased of that discharge of Matter which threatened
a filthy carious Ulcer. My attendance upon his Majesty into Scotland hindering
my prosecution of that Cure, I left him in the hands of a Surgeon there, and
since have often seen him at Court. But the Ulcer did not close up with a
Callus; however the place is supplied by a small Plate without offense.

If the Sinus run transverse the Veins, Arteries, Nerves, Tendons, etc. you may
then, (if you think it not safe to pass a Needle in a Cannula through it, or if
you cannot do it by reason of the make of the Part, you may then, I say,) make
use of that Instrument described in the Treatise of Fistulae and Sinuous Ulcers
in Ano, by which you may cut as assuredly upon the end of the Director which
passes within the Sinus, as if you saw it before you. It is commonly used
where the end of the Sinus lies most distant from the Skin. After which
Apertion it must be kept open by a Tent, for the discharge of Matter, till it
be well digested, and fit to cure. If the Orifice be small, and the Sinus lie
but under the Skin, and in such a place as may be safely opened, it may be
dilated with prepared Sponge, or Gentian-roots, and afterward snipt open by a
pair of Probe-scissors, or cut by a Knife upon the Director within, or laid
open by Caustic. And after you have divided the Sinus, you may digest it with
terebinth. cum vitell. ovor. or deterge by some of the Mundificatives set down
in the Cure of Ulcers in general: and if there be occasion of more Sarcoticks,
you may add mel comm. pulv. myrrhae, thuris, rad. ireos, to make it more
exsiccant. But commonly, the depending part once opened, the Wound cures in
few days by Bandage, etc. as above said.

But if after all your endeavors these Ulcers grow Fistulous, you shall find
the Cure of them in another place.

CHAP. V. Of Gunshot Wounds with Fracture.
HAving declared unto you the way of curing Gunshot Wounds in the soft and
fleshy Parts, I purpose now to proceed to the curing them as they are
complicated with Fracture of the Bones, whose firmness, dryness, stability and
solidity, cannot defend them from these Inconveniences; nay, in the case I am
to speak of, they are rather Discommodities. For when the Bullet strikes like
Lightning, were they softer, it were the better, that the Bullet might pass,
and not shatter them. There is not any of the five sorts of Fractures mentioned
by the Ancients which these Blows will not occasion. Sometimes they will cleave
the Bone assulatim, according to the length; and otherwhile they will break it
athwart; other times they will divide it like the Scales of a Fish. Nay, if the
Bones be drier then ordinary, (as in elderly men, and such in whom nature or
Diseases have made them so,) they will grind the Bone like Meal. Yet I have
seen and dressed a Soldier that has been shot through the Joint of the Ancle
without ever breaking the least part of the Cartilage.

The ways to know when there is a Fracture in the Bone are many. Signs of
Fractures.


1. Hippocrates bids us compare the sound Parts with the Parts affected, and
observe the inequality. 2. You shall perceive a Cavity, if you touch the Parts
above and under the Fracture. 3. If you handle the fractured Member, you shall
perceive a crashing of Bones, by reason of the mutual attrition of the hard
bodies. 4. There will be extraordinary Pain, in regard of the divulsion of the
Nerves, and distortion of the Tendonous bodies; also a pricking in the Fleshy
parts by the sharp ends or Shivers of some Bone. 5. There will be an impotency
of the broken Member, so that the Patient cannot lean upon it. 6. The
antecedent cause (Gunshot) will teach much in this case, then which there
never was (nor ever will be I believe) invented a more powerful one. 7. The
asperity and inequality or roughness of the Bone manifest it to you: but the
search will give you no small assurance.
Concerning Prognostics, you shall understand, Prognostics.


1. Bones receive a quicker Agglutination in Sanguine then in Choleric bodies,
by reason of the benignity of the Serum, which sends out better matter for a
Callus.

2. Bones are broke with less danger in the middle then near the Joint, where
they are both more hard to be restored, and to be kept so restored; and because
of the multitude of Symptoms, (which in such Wounds cannot but supervene,) are
not without great difficulty to be cured.

3. And lastly, those Fractures are most dangerous which are made so deep in
the Fleshy parts, that your hands cannot well come at them, to extract the
loose Bones, and place the other right, and retain them so by Bandage; as those
of the Pubes, Os ilion, sacrum, etc. So also all those Fractures made by
Splinter are exceeding dangerous, they generally shattering the Bone to pieces;
in which case the Nerves, Tendons, etc. are grievously pricked and torn, and
are subject to extraordinary Pain, Inflammation, Convulsions, and Death, unless
immediate Remedy be had by removing those Bones, or by Amputation of the Member.

Amongst the Cruisers in private Fregats from Dunkerk it was complained, that
their Surgeons were too active in amputating those fractured Members. As in
truth there are such silly Brothers, who will brag of the many they have
dismembered, and think that way to lie themselves into credit. But they that
truly understand Amputation and their Trade, well know how villainous a thing
it is to glory in such a work.

In the Roman History you will find it was not allowed at all: Livy tells you
their reward amongst them. But later experience judges it commendable, if it
be necessary, and in such shattered Lims where there is no hope of preserving
the Patient's life otherwise. And then it must be done in its proper time, that
is to say, suddenly upon the receipt of the Wound, before the Patient's Spirits
be overheated either with Pain, Fever, etc. Of the necessity of doing it
speedily I shall here give you one remarkable Instance.

A Scottish Soldier was brought to me out of the field at the Battle of
Worcester shot with a Musket-bullet into the Elbow-joint, Observation.
which fractured not only the ends of the Radius and Vlna, but likewise that
of the Adjutorium. Upon sight whereof I called Will. Clarke (now a Surgeon
at Bridgenorth) and other my Servants about me, to cut off the Arm, and the
while I endeavored to encourage the Soldier to endure it. In answer thereto
he only cried, Give me drink, and I will die. They did give him drink, and he
made good his promise, and died soon after; yet had no other Wound then that.
By which may be perceived the danger in delaying this work to the next day,
when the foresaid Accidents have kept them watching all night, and totally
debilitated their Spirits. Which happens not, if it be done in heat of Fight;
for then, while they are surprised and as it were amazed with the Accident, the
Lim is taken off much easier: and if it be the Arm, some of them will scarce be
kept in the Hold while the Ship is close engaged in Fight. In the heat of Fight
I cut off a man's Arm, and after he was laid down, the Fight growing hotter, he
ran up, and helped to traverse a Gun. And a Walloon earnestly begged of me to
cut off his shattered Leg: which whilst I was doing, he cried, Depeche vous
connous vendrone a terre mous bioron. Also others have urged me to dismember
their shattered Lims at such a time, when the next day they have professed rather
to die. But amongst us aboard in that Service it was counted a great shame to
the Surgeon, if that Operation were left to be done the next day, when
Symptoms were upon the Patient, and he spent with Watchings, etc. Therefore you
are to consider well the Member, and if you have no probable hope of Sanation,
cut it off quickly, while the Soldier is heated and in mettle. But if there be
hopes of Cure, proceed rationally to a right and methodicall Healing of such
Wounds; it being more for your Credit to save one Member, then to cut off many.
This following method is the best.

Cleanse the Wound first from all strange bodies, Cure.
as Bullets, Armor, Apparel, and Shivers of Bones; so shall the Cure succeed
more happily. For instance;

Observation.
A Gentleman-Voluntier skirmishing with the Enemy before the City of Worcester,
was brought to us run through his Arm in the middle of the Biceps with a Sword,
and shot with a Musket-bullet in the same Shoulder under the Os scapulae, which
took away the Coracoides, and tore the Ligaments in other parts of the Joint.
We dressed the Wound inflicted by the Sword with Agglutinatives, healing it by
the first Intention. We enlarged the Gunshot Wound, pulled out the Bullet and
pieces of the Coracoides, etc. and dressed it up with Digestives and lenient
Embrocations, etc. and afterward deterged with mundif. Paracelsi. He being
Will. Clark's acquaintance, he took care of him, and hastened the Exfoliation
of the Bones with mel ros. and spir. vini. Afterward, being near cured, he
made his escape into his own Country. Many Instances of this kind may be given,
if it were necessary.

If the Fracture be near a Joint, the violence of the Blow will many times add
a Dislocation also to it. If that happen, restore the Joint first to its place,
before you meddle with the Fracture. These Dislocations are made by great Shot
or Splinters of wood, whose force shatters the Lims in pieces, or carries them
quite away. But this latter rarely happens, but usually when the Member is
shattered, it hangs by some little part of a Tendon, Musculous flesh, or Skin.
In which case your work is, with a good Razour or Knife presently to plain the
Stump, and pull up the Flesh, Smooth the Stump.
that you may saw off the end of the Bone close to it.

One had his Arm shot off above the Elbow. Observation.
We dressed him up at first in haste, and at the next dressing his Shoulder
proved out of Joint. We could not set it, by reason of the anguish of the
Stump; which was a greater Pain to him then his Wound, and troubled him many
months after. But so it happened, and in short Stumps it is remediless. One of
our Captain-Reformadoes had been served so formerly with his stumpt Arm.

If you will endeavor the remedying it, you must do it by help of a Bandage
made above the Stump. But if it be above the Elbow, how will you fasten it. Yet
in some bodies the Bone will be restored easily: therefore attempt it before
you dress the Member.

In another that had his Leg shot off, Observation.
in the place of Amputation below the Knee, some two months after, when I
wondered the Bone did not exfoliate, I put in my Forceps to try whether any part
of the Bone was loose: and finding it very loose, I took hold of it gently, and
feeling it willing to come away, I pulled it out. It was the Apophysis or head
of the Os tibiae, which makes the Knee. I was surprised at it; but considering
what was loose must away, I pulled it out, to the amazement of the lookers on.
This was relaxt from its Ligaments by the force of the Blow.

In these fractured Wounds made by Gunshot the Surgeon ought to propose two
things to himself; first the Fracture, and then the Wound. To proceed orderly,
you begin with the Fracture, Extension.
viz. with the Extension and Coaptation, that thereby the Fracture may be
reduced to its proper seat: which in all these cases must be performed with
much steadiness and discretion; not with such force as in those Fractures that
are without a Wound, lest the Musculous or Nervous parts, being torn, bruised
or crushed, should suffer extreme Pain, Convulsions, etc. Before you begin this
Operation, if the Wound be not large enough, make it so, that you may be better
pull out the extraneous bodies, whether Slug, Bullet, Rags, Splinters, or
Shivers of Bones; so shall the Extension be made the easier, and be less
subject to Inflammation, though you should not set it at that instant; for a
small Extension will afterward serve. Whereas if the Wound be not so cleansed,
those extraneous bodies, nay the smallest Shivers of the Bone, will raise such
disturbance as will render it incapable of Digestion. Therefore what
Hippocrates says of attending to the 3.7. or 11. day, in case the Fracture be
not reduced before Inflammation, would in these cases never be; for by that
time the best that could be expected would be Apostemations and crude Tumors,
too big to be discussed. Therefore however the Reduction of the Fracture may
have been omitted, yet it will behove the Surgeon then consulted to extract
the extraneous bodies immediately, so shall it lie more quiet, and fitter for
Reduction at his more leisure. But to avoid these Inconveniences, make your
Extension so soon as you may, and restore the Bones to their former place with
what gentle dexterity and lenity you can possibly. If the Wound be narrow,
dilate it, as I have said, by Incision at the first: for these Wounds require
more Dilatation then any other, that not only the bruised and vitiated Blood
and other Excrements may have a free passage, but also by this means the
Shivers of Bones (of which these Wounds use to be very full) may with less
trouble be extracted by your selves, or discharged by Nature.

If you make not this Dilatation in the beginning, you may afterward perhaps
be forced to do it when the Part is accompanied with great Defluxion and Pain,
or when the Bones are corrupt by retention of the Matter: and what condition it
will then be in to admit of Incision, may easily be guessed by any one that
has common sense.

After it is laid open, consider whether the Bone be bare or not; which you may
satisfy your self in by your Eye, Finger, or Probe. If it be bare, you must
apply next to it some dry or exsiccant Medicine; Dressing of Gunshot with
Fracture.
Sicca siccis gaudent; dry to dry. Of this sort are dry Lint, Powders of the
Roots of Iris, Myrrh, Aloes, Thus, etc. Forbear the application of greazie
Medicaments to it, for they make the Bones foul, and hinder Callus. Yet the
Parts adjacent require Digestion; therefore apply over them your Suppuratives
warm, such as have been proposed in Simple Gunshot. Then dress up the
fractured Member with empl. e bolo, or this following: empl. diachalcith. with
the addition of colophon. pulv. rad. consolid. maj. boli Armen. cort. granator.
succ. plantag. cum ol. myrtill. and lumbricor. an. q. s. Misc. and fiat
Emplast. Then apply over the Wound a Stupe or double Clothes wrung out of Red
wine wherein have been infused flor. ros. rubr. balaust. sumach, bacc. myrtill.
summit. absinth. or such like. This Compresse will serve to keep the Lips of
the Wound smooth, and defend it from the injury it may receive by Bandage.

The next thing which is required in these fractured Wounds is Deligation:
Deligation.
for unless they be rightly fitted, none of these Fractures, of what sort
soever, can be well united. In simple Fractures without a Wound, all kind of
Bandage may be admitted; whereof you may see in my Lecture of these Fractures
various sorts, with many Circumvolutions about the Member. And once opening in
seven days will serve their turn. Bandage to be daily loosened in Gunshot
Wounds with Fracture.
But in these another method of binding is required; for here the Bandage is to
be loosened daily, and the Wounds to be looked into and dressed, they being here
to be long kept open for discharge of excrementitious and purulent Matter, with
which they abound, also for the Exfoliation of carious Bones, which lying there
would corrupt the sound ones.

Therefore in these kind of Wounds you must use such a Bandage as may least
shake the fractured Members. Manner of Bandage in Gunshot Wounds with Fracture.
For they being every day to be dressed, the so often rolling them up would cause
grievous Pains, and hinder union. Therefore it is that Authors have invented
so many kinds of Bandage, to answer the Intentions of dressing them, and yet
keep the Member immovable. Your Bandage in this case is to be made of softer
and broader Linen clothes then what we use in Simple Fractures, that it may
comprehend both the Fracture and the Wound, and keep the Lips down, yet not
hurt them by its too hard Compression.

Therefore we make choice of a piece of Cloth folded three or four times
double, to give it the more strength, and of such a breadth as may incompass
the Lips of the Wound and the fractured Parts, also of such a length as to come
once about the Fracture. This Cloth must have three Slits from the ends to the
middle, which middle must lie undivided underneath, to bear more equally the
fractured Member, and the ends must come over one another with a Compress
between over the Wound, to press the Lips thereof equally down, which would
otherwise become crude, and pout out with great Lips. The Compresse also serves
to receive the Matter, and fill up the Inequality. These are so to be fastened,
that you may dress and undress the Wound without disturbing the Member.

But because it happens, that in these Gunshot Wounds the Bones are shrewdly
shattered, and the Wound lacerated, and by reason of the largeness of the
Fracture and Wound it is extremely painful, the Member also is rendered so
weak, that it cannot be kept steady by this Bandage; therefore we make use of
Ferulae or Splints, Splints.
whereof I have made mention in my Lecture of Fractures in general, with the
Judgments of the Ancients, who have been very industrious in contriving ways to
make equal Compression, and leave a way for the dressing of these compound
Fractures.

They are not to be used till the Inflammation and Flux of Humors be off, When
to be used.
which is not until the seventh day; during which we use Splenia, which are
linen Clothes folded four times double, and cut in length and breadth like the
Ferulae. These are to be spread with Galen's Cerote, or any Ointment, that so
they may adhere to the Part only until you have put the Bandage over it. And
this is that I propose in all Fractures where there is Pain, and fear of
Inflammation, and is especially necessary in these.

They will handsomely strengthen the Part, and make such equal Compression,
that the Bones may be kept in their place, the serous Humors pressed out of the
Cavernulae, and the fractured Member lie soft; which is a great help in these
Wounds, the whole welfare of the Patient depending upon the easy Bandage and
Position of the Member. The Pain and Inflammation gone off, and the Wound
digested, (if you think the Member not so subject to Inflammation, or that it
requires a greater strength to support it,) you may use Pastboard cut into
pieces proportionable to lay over those Splenia: or, having fastened the Splenia
by the broad Bandage with three heads, cut a piece of Pastboard fit to receive
the lower part of the Member, and leave a place commodious for dressing the
Wound. Over the other part of the fractured Member you must place another piece
of Pastboard to answer unto the former. These ought to be wet, that they may
lie more pliant. About the Pastboard make a Bandage with three Ligatures, which
you must fasten in the most convenient place for the ease of the Patient. But
if the Splenia be wet in Whites of eggs, and applied, they will strengthen the
Member, and also keep it steady, without those.

If you think those of Pastboard not strong enough, you may use Laminae,
Laminae or Plates.
Copper or Tin-plates lined with soft Linings, to receive the fractured Member,
with Loops in the outside, to receive the three Ligatures answerable to those
which lie underneath next the Plaster, that they may be fastened and loosened
at pleasure, without disturbing the Fracture, in the daily dressing of the
Wound. And if it be in the Thighs, the Plates are best; these Parts requiring
such as are of great strength and length, and of such compass as may take in
the lower half of the Member. These Laminae, or whatever else you use, must
have a large Hole cut in them for the Wound to be dressed through.

But I have always observed inconvenience in these Plates; that there is not so
good Compression made upon the Lips of the Wound through those holes as to
hinder them from thrusting out; whence there arises a Laxity and Indigestion
in the Wound; and besides, the Matter that so discharges heats the Parts, and
in hot weather corrupts and breeds Maggots. Therefore I make the Pastboard or
Laminae over my first Bandage to incompass so much of the lower parts as may
support the Fracture, and come within an inch of the Wound; and over the Wound
it self I fasten a Splenium of Cloth folded four times double, or a Ferula of
Tin, Copper, or Pastboard, lined according as I judge the Part can bear, and
such as may be taken off at each dressing.

The first Bandage next to my Cerote makes an equal Compression by its three
heads meeting over one another: the lowermost presses the Humors from below
upward, and with the help of its next fellow keeps the Bones together, and
forces the Matter out of the Wound: also, by the help this middle Bracer has
of the uppermost, the Matter is pressed out of the upper part of the Fracture and
Wound to the Orifice: it also restrains the influx of Humors from above, by
virtue of the Defensative lying under it. In the dressing these Wounds, you are
only to undo the middle Binder to come at the Wound; having a special care
that this Bandage be neither too hard nor slack, but indifferently made, to the
ease of the Patient.

Having thus proposed to you the way of Deligation, I shall now proceed to the
last Operation performed in these Fractures of a Wound, Position of the Part.
which is a commodious Position or placing of the Member, which (as I have told
you in the Lecture of Simple Fractures) ought to have three Conditions.

1. It must lie soft, lest the Compression offend the hurt Parts, and cause
Pain and Inflammation. 2. Equal: for if the Member be placed otherwise, it
becomes distorted, and the Operation succeeds ill. 3. Lastly, it must lie
higher then the Parts next the body, especially the first three or four days.
For if it incline downwards, the Humors by their own weight will easily flow
to the Part afflicted. How this Position is performed, I have set down in the
Lecture of Simple Fractures, to which I refer you.
The fractured Bones of the wounded Part thus restored to their natural
places, and the Wound digested, also the Inflammation and other Accidents gone
off, which is commonly about the seventh or ninth day, you shall then unloose
the Bandage, take off your restrictive Medicament, and apply the Emplastr.
catagmat. in our London Dispensatory (or some of these underwritten) over the
fractured Member, which may add strength to the Part, and further the
generation of Callus. resinae abiet. cerae, an. lbj. pulv. cort. tiliae iij.
succ. geranii iiij. coq. ad Cerati consistentiam: or this; mucilag. rad.
consolid. maj. visci pomor. and populeon. an. iiij. succ. geranii vj.
osteocoll. iij. pulv. cort. tiliae ij. vitell. ovor. number. xx. terebinth. lbjss.
ol. lumbricor. iij. coq. omnia been permixt. ad Cerati consist. pro usu. But if
you keep up the temper of the Part, you need not doubt of a Callus. I commonly
in these cases make use of empl. stict. Paracels. part. ij. empl. diachalcith.
part. j. Over these apply a double Cloth dipped in Red wine wherein have been
boiled some of the abovementioned Plants. Then place the former Bandage again,
and over it those Laminae of Copper, or Splenia of double Clothes dipped in
Whites of eggs, and wrung out hard. These latter will sit close to the Part,
and after they are dry, will support the fractured Member well.

After the ninth day we suppose the Wound well digested; therefore we forbear
the use of Suppuratives, and use such Medicines as are detergent, as the
mundif. Paracelsi: or, if you please, vincae pervincae, peti, persicariae,
beton. an. Mj. flor. hyperic. verbasc. an. Pj. rad. aristoloch. utriusque an.
ss. thuris, myrrhae, sarcocoll. ireos, an. ij. coq. in vino albo, addendo
colaturae mellis rosacei q. s. This being cast in with a Syringe will deterge
and incarn: or you may make it into an Unguent by the addition of terebinth.
Wax, and ol. hyperic. and apply it upon Dossills, Pledgits, or Tents.

If there be Caries, you may make a Decoction of scordium, vinca pervinca,
peucedanum, gentian. cort. guaiaci, rad. ireos, myrrha, in Wine, adding spir.
vini, or extract. scordii. If the Caries yield not to these, touch it now and
then with some of the following Medicines. ol. myrrhae distillat. per descensum
and purificat. cum spir. vini ss. olei caryophyll. ij. ol. sulphuris jss. Misc.
This will in a short time remove the Cariosity; afterward you may proceed by
Epuloticks.

Vulnerary Plants are here of great use, and may be prescribed as follows.
aristoloch. rot. ij. fol. serpentariae, consolidae utriusquae, geranii, columb.
saniculae, an. Mj. beat them into gross Powder, and boiling them in a gallon of
Wine in a Vessel close stopped, give the Patient thereof morning and evening
iiij. at a time. You may give j. of osteocoll. powdered in a draught of it, or
the Decoction of vinca pervinca made with Wine, for confirming and hastening
the Callus. In the rest proceed as in the latter end of Simple Fractures is
mentioned.

A Soldier being shot by a Musket-bullet into the force-part of the Arm near
the Biceps, it fractured the Bone, and passed quite through. 1. Observat. of a
fractured Arm.
I endeavored by Extension to place the fractured Bone even together, but
could not: upon which I dilated the latter Orifice by a large Incision
according to the rectitude of the Member, to pull out those Fragments of Bones
which hindered their right Coaptation; and putting my Finger into the Wounds to
that purpose, I pulled out a ragged piece of a Bullet; whether it was part of
that which had passed through was the question. Some of the Bystanders thought
he was shot with a brace of Bullets: but I rather think the Bullet was torn by
the Bone, and that this part was it which had made its way through. However, by
this Extraction the main Bone was rightly placed, the Shivers with the
extraneous bodies removed, the Matter happily discharged by this depending
Orifice, and the Patient was cured by the common Intentions of Healing these
fractured Gunshot Wounds. Whereas, if I had taken it for granted that the
Bullet was passed through, and contented my self in having endeavored the
reducing of the fractured Bones, and so dressed him up, it had certainly inflamed
and gangrened. This confirms that Doctrine in setting of Bones, that if any
Bone will not be placed equally amongst his fellows, you ought to cut upon it,
and take it out.

In heat of Fight at Sea, amongst the many wounded men that were put down into
the Hold to men, 2. Observat. of a Facture made by a Splinter.
one of them had his right Arm extremely shattered about two fingers breadth,
on the outside above the Elbow, by a great Splinter. I ought to have cut off
this man's Arm presently: but a sudden cry that our Ship was on fire put me in
such disorder, that I rather thought of saving my self then dressing my
Patients. I hastily clapped a Dressing upon the Wound, and rolled it up, leaving
his Arm in his other Hand to support it, and endeavored to get up out of the
Hold as the others did, verily believing I should never dress him nor any of
them more. But our men bravely quitted themselves of the Fire-ship by cutting
the Sprit-sail-Tackle off with their short Hatchets, (which they wore during
Fight sticking in there Sashes.) So we were freed of the Fire, and by our
hoisting up the Topsails got clear of our Enemy, and I returned to my work.
But I was at a loss what to do with this man, who lay not far off complaining
of his Arm. I would have cut it off instantly with a Razour, (for the Bone
being shattered, there needed no Saw:) but the man would not suffer me to
meddle with his Arm, he crying, it was already dressed.

The Fight being over, and we gotten into the next Port, I caused this
Mariner's Bed to be set up: (which was four pieces of Wood nailed together and
corded, and a Bear's Skin laid upon it, and fastened between two Guns to the
Carriages:) upon this I saw him placed; and having ordered his Arm to be laid
so that I might the better come to dress it, I sent for Dressings, and laid
them orderly upon a small Pillow well stuffed and quilted in the middle. Upon
this Pillow I first laid a soft double linen Cloth, next to that three
Ligatures, then a Pastboard wet in Vinegar, to make it more soft and pliant;
upon that I laid a double Cloth, of such length and breadth as might serve to
encompass the fractured Member, which I cut from each end to the middle into
three Binders: over the middle of this I placed a Splenium of Cloth four
double, four fingers in breadth, and of such a length as to give strength to
the Fracture: over this lay my Defensative spread upon a thick Cloth, of such a
breadth and length as to take in the whole Arm. Dressings thus laid upon the
Pillow, I cut off the other from his fractured Arm, and placed the Pillow with
these Dressings close by his Side; so that I saw his Arm laid as I designed
upon my Restrictive, and his Hand upon his Breast. Then putting my Fingers into
his Wound, I pulled out first a piece of a Splinter an inch thick or
thereabouts, more or less; then Rags and Bones, great and small; I left not
the least Shiver. When I had so cleared the Wound of all the extraneous bodies
and loose Bones, I was amazed to feel what a void space there was between the
ends of the Bones. But I proceeded, and cut off the lacerated Lips, which were
of no use, and dressed up the ends of the Bones with a couple of Dossils dipped in
spir. vini and mel rose. warm. The rest of the Wound, and upon Pledgits
without, with an empl. diachalcith. malaxt with ol. myrtill. over all the
Wound. Then I embrocated the fractured Arm cum ol. myrt. and olivar. immatur.
and a little acetum, bringing my restrictive Emplaster, which lay under the
Arm, over the whole Arm, from the Arm-pit to the Elbow and close round about,
only leaving a space to dress the Wound.

This gave a strength to the weak Member, and was designed to prevent the
Influx from above. Just under this Emplaster there lay a Splenium. To answer
that I applied three more, one on each side, and another above: which four were
of such a size, that they, lying a little off from one another, encompassed the
Arm. They were spread lightly with a little Cerote made of axungia and Wax, to
make them adhere where I placed them.

Then I brought the Bandage which lay under the Splenium, with three heads at
each end. The lowermost of these took in the lower part of the Arm, from the
Elbow upward, with part of the Fracture, and was fastened on the exterior part
of the Arm. This pressed the Sanies from the nether part of the Arm to the
Wound, and hindered the lapse of Matter that way. The middlemost was made to
press the Matter out of the Wound, and keep the Lips down. The uppermost served
to restrain the Influx, as I said, and pressed that Matter out which was
already in the Part. This Bandage was made with great moderation, and so
fastened, that it might be loosened without trouble to the Patient. Then I
brought the wet Pastboard close to the sides, and cut another piece to answer
it, which I wetted in aceto, and by the three Ligatures under made them fast,
but without disturbance to the Patient. If it could not have been so put on, I
should have forborne the use of them, the Cure of these Wounds consisting in the
easy Dressing and quiet Position, without which you will not cure one of them.
The Pastboard as it dried, stiffened, and retained its shape, preserving the
Fracture in the position I left it, and that with a very slack Bandage. Thus I
finished the first dressing, leaving my Patient in much ease. He slept pretty
well that night, and was the next day as well as I could expect. He was let
blood the second day, and kept to a spare Diet: but we allowed Wine as a
Cordial to all our Patients.

The third day I dressed him again, took off the upper Pastboard, and loosened
the heads of the main Bandage; also I took off that Splenium which was over the
Wound, and raising up the Emplaster from the Wound, took out many Dossills,
found it warm and well disposed, and dressed it up quick with my Suppuratives
hot, and an Emplaster as before, I stirred not the Restrictive, but made now a
Compress more particularly for the Wound, purposing not to remove the two
outermost heads of the main Bandage, unless it were sometime to give a little
breathing to the Member: but themiddle I opened as often as I thought fit, to
dress the Wound. The other two had short Splenia to make the Bandage equal.
But I was not then satisfied how the space between the fractured ends of the
main Bond could be supplied with Callus. My Patient was easier then any of my
other with fractured Wounds. When it came to my turn to be visited by my
Brother Surgeons of our Squadron, they did not dislike the Wound, nor my way
of dressing, (for we being used to see one another's Patients, had all much one
way of dressing:) but they laughed at the excuse I made for not cutting off his
Arm, and doubted I should yet be forced to do it. But I kept my Patient flat on
his Back, and that after a while was his greatest pain; for the Wound digested,
and the Tumor was not then considerable. After the Wound was well digested,
and the bruised Flesh separated, I renewed the Dressings, taking all the old
ones off, and fomented the Member with warm Water, to give a breathing to it;
then applied a Catagmatick Emplaster, dressed the Wound with mundificat.
Paracelsi or such like, and bound up the Member as at first, and so continued
my way of Dressing as I saw cause, putting into the Wound only a Dossill or
Tent made upon a Skewer soft and hollow, to give way to the Wound to incarn; I
scarce using any Injection, but by gentle Compression assisting Nature, who
seldom fails in supplying the lost Substance in Wounds, if we disturb her
not by improper Applications. The next taking off and renewing these Dressings
of this fractured Member was occasioned some 16 or 17 days after, by a
troublesome itching of the Part, which was occasioned, I suppose, partly from
his liberty in Diet, partly by the heat of the Weather, and want of
Transpiration. Upon this account I took off the Dressings, bathed the Member
with Seawater, and dressed him up with emplast. de lithargyro. The Wound was
about this time well incarned within, and the Lips beginning to cicatrize from
their edges, I dressed them with Epuloticks, as unguent. tutiae, etc. All this
while I kept my Patient upon his Back, and renewed not the whole Dressing
until I was again necessitated. One day coming from the Shore, (where our
wounded men had liberty to lodge if they desired it, and were dressed by us
there,) I found this Patient with a heat all over his Body like an Erysipelas:
at which he was much affrighted. He had, it seems, drank Wine too liberally
with his Mates, (as they would most of them do, if they were any thing well.)
Unless it rather proceeded from a generation of Callus, Erysipelas upon the
generation of Callus.
in which case it usually happens. I let him blood, and dressing him as in an
Erysipelas, finding his Arm pretty strong, and his Wound healed within, and in
a fair way of cicatrizing, I raised him up, after he had lain about eight
weeks. All which while I believe he never stirred his Arm from the time I first
placed it, but only while I renewed the Dressings; he being the most patient
man in that respect I ever attended: and in truth, without that Submission he
could scarce have been cured.

There was in this Patient a strong Callus filling up the void place of the
lost Bone at least two inches, with little or no shortning of the Arm: but the
Joint of the Elbow was so stiff from the position it lay so long in, that he
could not stretch that Joint whilst I knew him, which was until that Ship was
cast away.

My memory will be much cried up, for remembering so many Particulars in a
Patient so many years since cured by me. But if you confider how remarkable a
case it was, and in my Trade, there will be less wondering at the possibility
of it. You may enquire what was done by me in the Cure of Captain Read, where
the loss of his Jaw was supplied by a strong Callus, and that Cheek made
uniform with the other. It will be long remembered by the then Standers-by,
though not of our Profession.

In our Sea Fights oftentimes a Buttock, the Brawn of the Thigh, the Calf of
the Leg, are torn off by Chain-shot and Splinters. All these are contused
Wounds, and look black, and do too often deceive the unexperienced Surgeon,
he taking them by their aspect to be gangrened, and by dressing them as
Mortifications with Aegyptiac. and spir. vini, does certainly sphacelate them;
and those persons die miserably afflicted.

Whereas if they be considered rightly, though they look like Flesh long hanged
in the Air, of a dry blackish color, yet they have warmth, and by Lenients, as
is prescribed in Simple Gunshot Wounds, they would digest, separate their
Sloughs, and incarn. But they are flow in Digestion, and require good
Fomentations and Embrocations to cherish the native heat, which is much
weakened by so great a loss of Substance. These require oleum terebinth. to be
mixed with your Digestive: but you must have a care you do not inflame them and
cause pain by adding too much of it: a Spoonful to six ounces of your
Suppuratives is enough in the driest Habits. Your judgment will best direct
you, and your Patient's complaint: it being unreasonable to hope that Wounds
can digest, while they are accompanied with much Pain.

CHAP. VI. Of Gunshot Wounds in the Joints.
THE Wounds of the Joints are subject to more grievous Accidents then those I
have heretofore mentioned; Great care to be used about these Wounds, and why.
therefore they require your more particular care; the Tendons and Ligaments
being inserted near the Joints for the motion thereof: there are also
Membranes, which do consequently render them of a most exquisite sense. The
Trunk of Nerves also in every great Joint passes through, for the use of the
Member that is beyond it. To which I add, that the Part being exsanguous, the
natural Balsam of the Body is here more sparingly supplied for the help of the
Cure.

What the Pains are, may be judged by the Wounds in the lesser Joints. Captain
F. in Musselborough Fight was shot in one of his Fingers, and the next day so
grievously tormented, that he walked up and down like a Madman, and could take
no rest until his wounded Finger was digested: yet his Pain was not so great
in his wounded as in his well Fingers.

The greater Wounds are attended with much more vehement Pain, Prognostic.
Inflammation, Delirium, Convulsions, Gangrene, and are commonly deadly.

In these Gunshot Wounds, Cure.
the extraneous bodies and Shivers of Bones must be presently drawn forth:
therefore if the Orifice be not large enough, make it so. But in enlarging the
inner or lower Parts in the hollow of the Ham, Arm, Arm-pit or Groin, have a
care, for they are subject to great Bleeding. The extraneous bodies being drawn
forth, hasten Digestion, by dropping and applying warm upon Dossills or
Pledgits some of these following Digestives: for Tents are to be used with
caution in these Wounds.

terebinth. lot. in spir. vini iiij, thuris, myrrhae, mastich. an. j. ol.
hyperici iij. vitell. ovor. number. ij. croci ij. Or, terebinth. ij. myrrhae,
thuris, corn. cervi usti, an. iiij. ol. scorp. de castoreo, lumbricor. sambuci,
an. ss. vitell. ovor. number. ij. Apply either of these warm. If stronger be
required, you have ol. terebinth. de castoreo, scorpion. etc. ol. terebinth. j.
ol. hyperici cum gum. ij. euphorb. pulv. j. drop this very hot, and apply the
forementioned Digestive over all; then embrocate the Parts about with ol.
lumbric. and hyperici, and lay over all this following Cataplasm: farin. hord.
and fabar. an. lbj. flor. cham. meliloti, ros. rubr. scord. absinth. pulv. an.
vj. Decoct it in the Broth of Offall, if you would have it lenient, otherwise
in Oxymel, adding ol. ros. and chamaemel. Or this; mucilag. radic. althaeae,
consolid. maj. an. iiij. flor. ros. rubr. beton. cham. subtle. pulv. an. ss.
farinae lini, foenugraeci, an. iij. farine hord. and fabar. an. vj. coq. in
vino, add ol. ros. and lumbricor. an. jss. mell. ij. vitell. ovor. number. iij.
The Wound digested, you may deterge with this; farinae orobi jss. thuris, rad.
ireos, an. vj. succi apii iij. mell. comm. and terebinth. an. ij. Misc. fiat
Vnguentum. The Wound deterged, you may dress it with this Sarcotick. summit.
hyperici, equiseti, plantag. beton. an. Pj. rad. consolid. maj. tormentillae,
an. iij. sevi hircini iiij. lumbric. terrest. lot. ol. mastich. an. ij. vini
odorif. q. s. coquant. ad consumptionem vini, postea colentur cum forti
expressione, deinde add resinae pin. j. thuris, myrrhae, mastich. aloes, an.
ss. cerae iiij. Misc. fiat Vnguentum S. A. Ol. Aparici is excellent in these
Wounds, either alone, or heightened by any of the former Prescriptions: so is
the Balsam in the Chapter of Wounded Nerves. If the Bone be bare, you must be
careful that you do not foul it by your greazy Medicaments: and if Pain be
violent, and yield not to Anodynes, cut off the affected Tendon, and whatsoever
corrupts, lest it taint the rest. But in these great Wounds you are at first to
consider how curable they are, and endeavor to preserve the Life of your
Patient by a timely Extirpation, before his Spirits be too much exhausted. Of
which this following Story will give you warning.

A Page of Lieutenant-Generall D. L. Observat. of a Shot through the Knee.
was shot through the Knee. The Bullet entered in by the lower and exterior
side of the Rotula, and passing through the Joint out in the hollow of the Ham,
tare the Ligaments and Nerves, and fractured the Joint as it passed, rending
the Artery in going out. This Wound was mortal the very minuit it was
inflicted, and the party ought then to have been dismembered: but such
Proposalls were not admitted of in the first dressing, whilst there was, as
they judged, hope. Afterward the vehement Pain brought suddenly on severe
Accidents, as Fever, Delirium, etc. and then it was too late to make
Amputation. I made my first Dressing by the Application of a Digestive dipped in
ol. lumbric. warm, and embrocated the Parts about with ol. ros. cum aceto,
applying my Restrictive over all. In the depending Orifice there was a
throbbing of the Arteriall blood, as in an Aneurisma, the blood being choakt in
by the contused Flesh: it therefore was not there to be tented, for fear of
making a Flux of blood; nor yet could we hope to stop the Bleeding by Cautery,
actual or potentiall, that Part being full of Ligaments and Tendons, the
burning whereof would have been difficult, and grievous painful. Wherefore I
dressed that Wound with the same Digestive mixed with pulv. Galeni upon Dossills
with thick Pledgits, and some of the same Restrictive over that, with such
Bandage as that Part was capable of; hoping this way to hinder the Influx of
Humor, and thinking by such Dressings the Wound would digest. But the Pain
increased vehemently, and yielded to no Application, nor was there any
possibility of conveying any Instrument, whereby I might thrust or pull out the
Shives of Bone, if any such were in between the heads of the Joint. Mr.
Penicuke, formerly General Surgeon to the Scottish Army, and other
Surgeons were with me at the dressing of this Patient: but in spite of all
our Endeavors, the Putrefaction increased, and was attended by Delirium and
Spasm. Death followed, as commonly it does in all such Wounds of the great
Joints. I could instance it in many, but the late case of Sr. J. L. may serve
for all. He had many of our most experienced Surgeons, with the eminentest
Physicians to help them; yet they had no better success. Therefore at Sea,
while they are warm with heat of Fight, we dismember them, and by actual
Cautery stop the Flux of blood.

CHAP. VII. Of Gunshot Wounds in the Belly.
I Have now briefly run through the Parts not principal, and purpose next to
say somewhat of the principal Parts, as the Belly and Breast. And that you may
the more certainly know the Part wounded, I shall give you a short Description
of them, and then show you how such Wounds are to be handled in order to their
Cure.

The Belly is called Abdomen, or the inferior Venture. Abdomen described.
It begins from the Bastard-ribs, and extends it self to the Goins; and is
divided into three Regions by our Anatomists, the upper, middle, and lowermost.
The uppermost is called Epigastrium, the middle Regio umbilicalis, the
inferior Hypogastrium. The sides of the uppermost are termed Hypochondria. The
right Hypochondrium possesses all the Liver: in the left is the Spleen.
Between these is placed the Ventriculus, or Stomach. In the middle part of the
Abdomen is the Navell; round about which lie the Guts, and behind those on each
side the Kidneys. In the sides of the inferior part are the Ilia, with the
Pecten or Pubes in the middle: under which lies the Bladder. Thus much to the
internal Delineation.

The Abdomen consists moreover of Parts containing, and contained. Parts
containing, or Teguments of the Abdomen, are either the common, which reach all
over the Body, as the Cuticula, Cutis, Pinguedo, Membrana carnosa: or the
particular and proper to this place, which are the Muscles of the Belly, the
Peritonaeum, and in respect of the Guts the Omentum. The Parts contained are
some of them designed for the Nutrition of the whole Body, others for
Expurgation, and others for Generation. The Stomach, Small intestines,
Mesenterium, Vena porta, cava, Arteria magna, and coeliaca magna, the Liver and
Spleen, serve for Nutrition. The Bladder, Gall, all the Intestines, but
especially the great ones, Kidneys all Ureters, for Expurgation. And for
Procreation, the Vassa praeparantia and deferentia, Prostatae, and Vterus in
Women. These Parts containing and contained are subject to Gunshot; whence
various Species arise of these Wounds. Sometimes the containing Parts, Wounds
not penetrating.
as the Cutis, Pinguedo, Caro musculosa, only are wounded; so as neither the
Peritonaeum nor the other internal Parts suffer any hurt.

And this has happened to many in Service, who have been brought to me as
mortally wounded, whereas upon search I have found the impression only upon a
greazy Leather Jerkin, or their Bellies black and a little scratcht by the
Bullet. Yet even these are subject to Tumor, and so do require lenient
Embrocations, with an empl. e bolo or the like. In others the Skin, and Flesh
under it, is sometimes wounded, and no farther. These are by us called Wounds
of the Belly not penetrating, and are cured as Gunshot Wounds in Fleshy parts:
in which cases all those Applications are approved of which have been delivered
in Simple Gunshot Wounds.

But this I must take notice of to you, as having often observed it, not only
in Gunshot Wounds, but in Abscesses of the Belly, that from the Laxity of the
Parts, they are subject to great Defluxion: especially in Scorbuticall and ill
Habits of body, the Matter is apt to insinuate it self amongst the circumjacent
Muscles, raising them up, and rendering them Sinuous Ulcers difficult of Cure;
and that because we cannot make such Bandage on them, by reason of their
Figure, Site and perpetual Motion, as elsewhere may be made. These thus
briefly considered, Wounds penetrating.
we pass to the other Species: for the Bullet is for the most part carried with
such force, that it not only wounds the Fleshy parts, but also pierces the
Peritonaeum, hurting most an end the Internalls; it being indeed impossible
that the Bullet piercing the Parts containing should miss the contained, which
are soft and tender.

I have seen sometimes in the Wars a Soldier shot scarce to the Peritonaeum,
yet the Contusion has been so great, that the Peritonaeum has come off upon
Digestion: in which case the Bowels commonly suffer under severe Colicks, and
there arises Difficulty of breathing, etc.

If the Bullet penetrates through the Peritonaeum, though no farther, yet the
Contusion makes foul work, and requires speedy relief. But if it has wounded
the internal Viscera, then you must consider what the Parts are that are
wounded, whether the Liver, Stomach, or which of the Intestines; which you may
apprehend from the Site of the Part, and the Accidents accompanying such
Wounds, also by the proper Symptoms of each Part.

According to Celsus, Lib. Signs of wounds of the internal parts of the
Abdomen.
5. Cap. 26. the Liver being hurt, there follows an Effusion of gross blood:
if the Porta or Vena cava be hurt, the right Hypochondrium is oppressed: if the
Artery be wounded, the blood is florid, and bursts impetuously forth, and the
Patient expires with it. But if the Stomach be hurt, Singultus or Hiccough
follows, with Vomiting and Nausea, and the Patient's Sustenance comes out of
his Wound with the Chyle, and cold Sweats show his languishing condition. If
the lesser Intestines be wounded, he will be troubled with poraceous Vomiting,
and what he eats or drinks will pass out of his Wound in less then half an
hour; and so it will continue to do as long as he lives. If the great
Intestines be wounded, the Excrements and filthy Smell will demonstrate it. If
the Wound be on the left Hypochondrium under the Short ribs, you may conclude
the Spleen wounded; the blood which flows forth is black; there is also a
Tension, and Difficulty of breath. If the Kidney be hurt, the Wound is in the
Region of the Loins, near the Vertebra under the Diaphragma. The more certain
sign thereof is from the Pains reaching to the Groins and Testicles, with
difficulty of Urine: and that Urine which he voids is either mixed with Blood,
or else pure Blood. If the Ureters be wounded, the Urine comes out at the
Wound. If the Bladder be wounded, that part of the Belly is tense, he has
great pain in his Groin, and his Urine is discharged by the Wound; the Stomach
suffers by consent, and the Part wounded demonstrates it. If the Womb be
wounded, the Groins and Coxa are afflicted with the Pain, and the blood not
only flows by the Wound, but per Vulvam; they are troubled in Mind, and have
other shrewd Symptoms of Death.

For what concerns the Presage of these Gunshot Wounds, Prognostic.
if they be only in the Region of the Belly, they are not without peril,
especially if in the middle, where the Linea alba is: but if they penetrate,
there is great hazard, for these Parts so shattered seldom recover. What we
have sometimes since seen, of a man discharging his Excrements out of the Colon
on the left Side, and heard of other like Wounds of the Stomach, are rather
Miracles then the work of the Surgeon. But they were happy that were
isntrumental in those Cures. If Celsus in his time determined those Wounds
mortal made by cutting Weapons; how much more must they be such that are made
in our age by Gunshot? Yet Nature, as one says in his Vulneribus, saepe
miracula facere solet, is often as merciful and miraculous in the Cure, as the
Blow was cruel.

In order to the Cure, you must begin with the Extraction of the Bullet, Cure.
lest it sink into the most inward Parts, and there afflict the Viscera; as als
of the Rags carried in with it, lest they beget Putrefaction. That done, you
must reduce the Intestines and Omentum, lest they inflate and corrupt. After
the Extraction of the extraneous bodies, you must hasten Digestion, and
mitigate the Inflammation.

The Intestines and Omentum are disposed to Reduction by warm discutient
Fomentations: but if there be not an Opening wide enough, you must enlarge the
Wound. If the Omentum be corrupted, make a Ligature below that corrupt part,
and cut if off, leaving the end of the Ligature hanguing out, till it shall be
cast off by Digestion.

If there be Haemorrhagia, you must inject such Medicaments as have a
refrigerant and astringent quality: and those may be, aq. urtic. plantag.
spermat. ranar. or Red wine, cum sir. de ros. sicc. with Pulv. bol. Armen.
terr. sigill. sang. dracon. aloes, thuris. Make a Mixture of some of the same
Powders with a new-laid Egg, ol. mastich. and lumbricor. and apply it upon a
Tent fastened to a Thread, as is before described, then spread the rest upon a
Stupe, and lay it over all. But if there be no Flux of blood, digest as fast as
you can.

In order to the Cure, Wounds of the Stomach and Guts.
Fallopius has recommended to our use this following, by the use whereof he
cured Wounds of the Stomach and Intestines. fol. pilosellae, plantag. rad.
tormentill. consolid. maj. flor. hyperici: decoct these in Red wine; strain it
out, and add to the said Liquour mannae, thuris, ol. mastich. resin. abiet.
terebinth. Cypriae, croci and verm. terrest. an. q. s. fiat Sarcoticum S. A.

In all these Wounds of the Belly I have used such like Medicaments as I have
offered unto you, and applied to the Wound it self Digestives, as in Simple
Gunshot, and endeavored by good Fomentations, Embrocations and Cataplasms, to
preserve the natural warmth of the Part.

In Wounds of the Kidneys, Wounds of the Kidneys.
you must inject such Medicaments as have an abstersive and drying quality; as
rad. consolid. irid. aristoloch. rot. also myrtill. caud. equin. plantag.
balaust. Decoct these in aq. chalybeat. adding afterward some Red wine and
sir. de ros. sicc. thereto. Then dress up the Wound with a Digestive ex
terebinth. cum integr. ovo, with a little terra sigill. thus and Mastich, and
embrocate with ol. hyperici; applying empl. diachalcith. malaxt with ol. ros.
or a Cataplasm ex far. hord. fabar. and orobi decocted in Oxymel, and made up
with a new-laid Egg and ol. ros.

If the Liver or Spleen be wounded, Wounds of the Liver, Spleen, etc.
there will be a great Flux of blood; in which case I offer this to you:
plantag. pentaphyll. polygon. millefol. myrtill. ros. rubr. decoct these in
chalybeat Water. You may use it as an Injection, with an addition of sir. de
ros. sicc. or you may add to it pulv. thuris, sang. dracon. bol. Armen.
acacia, and so it may be applied as a Liniment upon Tents or Pledgits.

Thus you are to dress all the Wounds in the particular Parts of the Belly.

The Wounds of the Womb are accounted deadly, the very least of them, and so
are all the abovesaid made by Gunshot; yet you are to proceed in the
univerfall Regiment, and with Clysters, Bleeding, and good Vulneraries,
endeavor to dispose the Parts to Sanity.

CHAP. VIII. Of Gunshot Wounds in the Thorax.
AMongst the principal Parts which are subject to Gunshot, the middle Venture
or Thorax is reconed, with the Parts contained in it, viz. the Heart, Lungs,
great Artery and Vessels, with the Mediastinum.

These Wounds are distinguished as those of the inferior Venture. Difference.
Sometimes the Wounds are only of the external parts, without penetrating
into the Breast; othertimes they penetrate through the Ribs and Pleura: in
which latter case the principal Viscera are wounded, or not wounded.

If the Wound do not penetrate into the Cavity of the Breast, but is only in
the Musculous flesh, Not penetrating.
it must be cured as Wounds in the Fleshy parts. If there be a Fracture with
it, it must be treated as a Wound with Fracture, taking care to extract the
broken Bones, lest they prick the Pleura, and cause Inflammation.

But if the Bullet has penetrated deep into the Cavity, it may be discerned by
the passing forth of the air with noise: Penetrating. Signs.
there will also follow a Flux of blood by the Wound, or Mouth, or by both;
unless the blood fall down upon the Diaphragma; and then the Difficulty of
breathing and such like Symptoms will demonstrate its Penetration. And if the
Lungs be wounded, there will be a Cough, with Difficulty of breathing, and
frequent Sighing: if there be an effusion of blood, it will, accordingly as it
is much or little, flow forth of the Wound, or be cought up, sometimes both:
the Patient will incline to lie much upon the Wound. If the Heart be hurt, the
blood flows impetuously, and is reeking hot, their Spirits sink, and cold
Sweats bedewing their Face foreshew their approaching Death.

The wounded Diaphragma is accompanied with Difficulty of breathing, also a a
Hoarsness, with great Pain about the false Ribs; the Diaphragma is drawn
upward, and the Spine is affected.

If the great Vein or Artery be hurt, a terrible Flux of blood follows. If it
flow from the right Side, the Cava is hurt; but if from the left Side, we
suppose it the Artery. You will discover it by its Saltation and florid color.
If the Porta be wounded, the Patient dies at the instant; and so he does of all
the rest. If the Spinalis medulla be wounded, the Nerves are resolved, and a
Palsy follows, but more immediately in the Part under the Wound.

Almost all these Wounds made by Gunshot are mortal; but it is not consistent
with Religion or Humanity, to leave such people without help: for sometimes we
happily prolong the life of some of them, and now and then cure one.

I shall therefore proceed to deliver you what concerns their Cure, Cure.
both as to the internal Remedies given by the Mouth, and to those which
relate externally to the Wounds.

In the first place, you must make Extraction of the Bullets and other
extraneous bodies, Shivers of Bones, etc. to give way for the discharge of
Blood and Matter contained in the Cavity of the Thorax: then dress the Wound
with a Tent dipped in this or such like; bol. Armen. corn. cerv. ust. ol. ros.
and sambuc, farin. volatile. cum ovo integr. Misc. Spread a Compresse with some
of the same, and apply it over the Wound. If the blood stop not by this
Dressing let blood in the Arm, and repeat it as often as you see cause,
applying some of the Astringents set down in the preceding Chapters. Or you may
inject some astringent Decoctions, which is otherwise then was advised in
Wounds made by Puncture: for in Gunshot Wounds the Orifice is wide enough for
the Injection to return out again, insomuch that not only the astrictive
Intentions ought to be pursued, but also the detersive; here being loss of
Substance. Therefore in case of Bleeding you may inject a Decoction of fol.
plantag. ulmi. urticae, vincae pervincae, ros. rubr. fol. myrtill. in aq. germ.
querc. adding a little bol. Armen. and sir. de symphyt. Or for present occasion
use Red wine, it being excellently good in such bleeding Wounds, either given
inwardly by the Mouth, or cast in by a Syringe. Having thus stopped the blood,
you are to digest the Wound with such like: terebinth. lot. in decoct. hord.
ij. pulv. thuris, myrrhae, an. ij. sem. foenugr. pulv. j. ol. hyperici q. s.
Arm short Tents with some of it; then apply over it a Pledgit with some of the
same, or with such Suppuratives as in Simple Gunshot Wounds are prescribed,
and embrocate the Breast and Parts about with a Mixtrue of ol. amygdal. dulc.
lumbric. and unguent. dialthaeae, applying over all an empl. diachyl. simpl.
malaxed in some of the same. After Digestion you will find it necessary to
deterge and incarn. It is not material whether the Detersion be made by
Injection or Unguent, there may be use for both; to which purpose I have set
you down both sorts, and shall begin with an Injection, as supposing the Matter
may thereby be disposed to discharge by the Wound. The milder may be a
Decoction of pilosella with mel ros. If stronger be needed, extract. scord.
dissolved in vino albo; or, fol. pilosellae caud. equin. plantag. tormentill,
consolid. aristoloch. rot. rad. iridis, and sarcocoll. boil these in aq. font.
adding Wine thereto with mel ros. q. s. The Unguent may be this following
Mundificative: terebinth. ij. farin. hord. cribrat. j. thuris, sarcocoll. rad.
iridis, an. iij. mellis ros. iiij. Misc. S. A. and dress the Wound in the
Fleshy parts with the same. The Wound deterged, incarn and cicatrize as is said
in other Wounds; but keep a Cannula in it until it cease to run. Celsus
proposes, that in all these internal Wounds the external Parts be vesicated,
to make more powerful Revulsion from; within: and the Medicament he proposes
thereto is Sal been contritus cum cerato mixtus, quia leviter cutim erodit,
eoque impetum materiae quo pulmo vexatur evocat. This his Proposal may be
proper in Wounds made by sharp Weapons, as by Arrows, etc. But here in these
Wounds there is vexaction enough outwardly to make a Revulsion, if that
signified any thing. In the dressing these you must be careful to cut off the
Sloughs without, lest from them a stinking Gleet distill upon the Viscera
within. In order to the Cure, Clysters are also required, to keep the Body
open: and the more temperate Pectorall Decoctions are here proper, such as that
in the London Dispensatory. To them may be added sir. violar. de cichor. de
liquiritia, jujub. capill. ven. de symphyto, and such Lohochs as may take off
the harshness in the Aspera arteria. Their Diet ought to be slender, and their
Drink: medicated Ale or Hydromel wherein Pectorals have been decocted are
proper in all these Wounds; so are also Emulsions: and after the Fever and such
like Accidents are diminised, Asses and Goats milk may be necessary; yea a Diet
of Cows milk alone, or mixed with distilled Milks, and sweetened with Conserve
of Roses. But this will be work for the Physician, when they come ashore. Many
Instances may be given of Gunshot in the Breast: but few do recover that are
shot into the Lungs.

At the Battle of Worcester there was one brought to us shot with a
Musket-bullet through one side of the Sternon, Observation.
which passed out between two of the Ribs on the other side, without any
visible Symptom of danger. We dressed the Wounds with a Digestive dipped in ol.
lumbric. warm, and kept the lower Orifice between the Ribs open for discharge
of the Matter, it being the depending Orifice. He was let blood, and prescribed
Pectoralls, etc. as occasion offered. His Wound digested, and was afterward
deterged with mel rosar. etc. After our Defeat he was dressed by Will. Clarke,
now of Bridgenorth; and, as I have been since informed by him, was concealed by
some Housekeeper until he made his escape.

From the Defeat of the Scottish Army near Dunbar there came many of the wounded
to Saint-Johnstons, Observation.
and amongst them there were several wounded into the Breast. They who were so
shot as to have the Ribs broken, were in extreme Pain from the Shivers; whereas
the rest whose Bones were not hurt had scarce any Pain at all, but what
proceeded from Difficulty of breathing; they all coughing up a stinking Sanies
both before and after the separation of the Sloughs. One of them cought a very
great proportion daily of thin Matter, of a brown color and rank smell. None
but this died under my hands; the rest after some while retiring to their
homes, where (as I have often heard them say) their Leeches performed great
Cures, by virtue of some Plants which they gave internally, and which with Fats
they made Balsams of. Yet I believe this man died tabid.

CHAP. IX. Of Symptoms of Gunshot, (omitted in the Fourth Chapter.)
THE Symptoms attending Gunshot are Pain, Phlegmon, Erysipelas, Fever,
Delirium, Syncope, Gangrene, Convulsion, and Palsy. The Pain occasions
Inflammation, whether it be Phlegmon or Erysipelas; of both which I have
elsewhere purposely treated. But that of Gangrene I thought fit should
accompany Gunshot, they of all Wounds being most subject to it. The Fever it
symptomatical, so is the Delirium, and will go off with the Pain; but may, with
the forementioned Inflammations, be relieved by Bleeding and lenient
Purgatives, such as I have mentioned. And to fortify the Spirits against
Fainting, which proceeds from putrid Vapors affecting the Heart, there are
Cordialls and Epithemata already prescribed. So that there remains only
Convulsion and Palsy to be here treated of.

Convulsion is, An involuntary Contraction of the Nerves to their original,
Convulsion.
by which Contraction the Member is also drawn up; and it is said to be caused
by Repletion and Inanition. In this our case it arises from putrid Vapors, or
acrid Matter offending the Nerves, which is often found in these Wounds. The
Part affected is the Brain, which being thus provoked causes an involuntary
Contraction and Rigidity in Parts dismembered, as near the Knee or Shoulder.
There the Contraction cannot be discerned but by a Trembling, which Trembling
is usually attended by a Convulsion of the Joints. It likewise follows upon
great Inflammation, especially in the Nervous parts. The Prognostic here is
always fatal, a Convulsion upon a Wound being he forerunner of death.

In the Wars I was called to see a poor Soldier, Observation.
who had his Arm shot off near the Shoulder. The bruised and shattered Stump
seemed to his Surgeon to be gangrened, and accordingly he dressed him with
Aegyptiac. as a Gangrene: from which sharp Dressings the Wound gleeted, and, by
reason of the Pain, inflamed. He had roared some days through the vehemence of
that Pain. When I came to him, I saw a great Trembling of the Part, and a
frequent twitching upwards of the Tendons and Musculous flesh in the Stump;
also the Flesh in the whole Stump was of a whitish color, as if it had been
scalded. I dressed him up with Anodynes, as Liniment. Arcei cum vitell. ovi, and
fomented the Part with fol. malvar. violar. thaps. barbat. decocted in Milk,
embrocating it cum ol. lumbric. and ex ped. bovinis, and applied empl.
diapalmae cum succis over all; then anointed the Parts about, as the Neck and
Spine, with unguent. nervin. I also blistered the Legs and Thighs: but it was
too late, he died howling.

Paralysis is generally defined, A privation of sense or motion, or both,
Palsy.
in some Part or Parts, and affects the Brain and Spinalis medulla. But in
Palsies which arise from Wounds the Parts immediately affected are the Nerves
of that place only. This does not take away the life of the Patient, though it
may sometimes threaten a Mortification through defect of natural heat in the
Member.

In a Sea Fight an Irish Mariner having discharged his Gun, Observation.
which was hony-combed, and loading it suddenly again, whilst he was ramming in
a Cartridge, the Powder took fire, and shot the Rammer out of his hand, tearing
the Palm of his hand, also some of his Thumb and Fingers. The Wound was not
considerable, but the force of the Blow extinguished both sense and motion of
the Member. I dressed him up with our common Suppurative, (of which at such times
we had great quantity ready,) and applied over all a common Restrictive, so
rolled it up, there being then no time for Bleeding him. But after the Fight I
let him blood, and a day or two after purged him, then fomented and embrocated
the Member with ol. lumbric. cham. anethi, lilior. unguent. nervin. and such
like, and did all that we Surgeons of the Squadron thought fitting; but
without success. One night after he was cured of his Wound, lying asleep in his
Hammock, he was wakened by the wet he felt upon his Breast and Belly; and
getting up to a Candle, he found the Dressing upon his Hand all bloody, as also
the place whereon it lay. I being called took off his greazy Dressings, and
found the Palm of his hand and Fingers gnawed by Rats. They had eaten through
the oiled Clothes, and had gnawed his Hand more, if he had not wakened by the
trickling of his blood. I dressed his Wounds with Digestives to hasten
Suppuration, supposing the discharge of Matter might contribute to his
Recovery. After I had cured them, I made him a Fontanell in that Arm, and
bathed the Member frequently, also cupped and scarified it; and afterward
applied Plasters of Pitch, to stir up a heat in the Member. He was a young
man, and otherwise of a strong Constitution, and was not over-solicitous to
have it cured, as designing to make some profit by it. To which purpose he took
an opportunity of landing, and hastened away to Madrid: where having gotten
some reward for his service, he returned to the Navy, and had more use of his
Arm.

Paralysis does often happen in great Contusions and Luxations; of which more
elsewhere.

AN APPENDIX To the Treatise of Gunshot Wounds.
To the Reader.
HAving thus finished the Treatises of Wounds, I considered with my self that
my Design was to help the Sea-Chirurgeous, who seldom trouble their Cabbins
with many Books. I therefore thought it convenient to make this as
comprehensive for their use as I could, by comprising in it all those things
which may easily be foreseen to be of use to them in other cases besides
Wounds. We know by our experience, that Burnings by Gunpowder and other
materials do too frequently happen at Sea; and also, by ill Dressings of
Wounds, Gangrenes and Fistulae arise, and that much the sooner, if broken
Bones, especially those with Wounds, be not well brought together, and so held.
All which matter we occasionally handled in the foregoing Work: yet not so
much, but that, for their farther Instruction, I thought it requisite to
anticipate something of other Discourses which I intend for the Press, by the
following Appendix; which, if well perused, may perfect the Surgeon in what
remains to be known concerning Wounds, and save him the labor of reading many
Authors.

CHAP. I. De Ambustis, or, Of Burns with Gunpowder, etc.
FOrasmuch as it often happens, that in close Fights at Sea men are sometimes
burnt by Gunpowder by their Enemies, and by various Accidents amongst
themselves; I shall therefore deliver to you the most plain way of curing them.
For, however people cry, It Is nothing to cure a Burn: yet, by what I have seen
of these Cures from Country or City, they are often very ill performed. Whether
they are burnt by Gunpowder or any other way, their Cure is much alike, they
only differing secundum magis and minus. Only if they be burnt with
Gunpowder, they must pick out the Powder first; else they will carry the same
blew Mark, if it be in their Faces, which some people use to do in their Hands
and Arms, which I have often been employed to take out, when done wantonly in
their youth; but could never remove them otherwise then by taking off the Skin.

If the Burn be superficial, it raises the Cuticula up in Blisters: if it go
deeper into the Skin, it causes an Escar: if it burn deeper into the Flesh, the
force of the fire makes a hard Crust with a Contraction. In all these the Pain
is excessive.

Once as I was dressing a gangrened Leg with warm Spirits of terebinth. etc.
Mr. Arris and Mr. Hollyer Surgeons and others being close about me, and I
upon my Knees, the Candle being too near the hot Spirits, caught the flame, and
burnt my Thumb and Fingers before I could get free from those behind me to
throw it into the Chimney, which was some distance off. I felt much more Pain
for the while in the superficial Scalding, then where it was burnt to an Escar.

The Indications of Cure are of two kinds: viz. either by Refrigerants to bath
or anoint the Part, Cure of a Burn.
until the Heat be off, and the Escar separated, and then to digest and
cicatrize; or by calefactive Medicaments to relax the Skin, and resolve and
dissipate it, which by accident will assuage the heat and Burning. Refrigerants.
The Refrigerants are, aq. solani, plantag. hyoscyam. lac ebutyratum; and all
the cooling Juices and Unguents, as unguent. album, nutritum, populneum, rofat.
etc. These must be used warm, until the Heat and Pain cease, or the Fire be
taken out, (as the common expression is;) else they will rather cause Pain.
Calefactives.
Hot Medicaments assuage the fiery Heat and Pain by Rarefaction. Which in the
first place may be done by the holding a burning hot Iron or Fire to the Part:
so whilst the Fire calls forth that Fire it made, it becomes its Alexiterium.
But the common remedy is, to apply Salt and an Onion beaten together. But this
is not to be done after the Blisters are risen, nor by any means where the Part
is raw; for so you will exasperate the Pain, and increase the Inflammation.
There are many other things do extinguish the Fire. Fimus equinus does it,
fried in ol. nucum, uvae immaturae, sambucus, and ebulus in oleo coct. calx
viva extinct. and cum unguent. rosaceo mixta ad consist. unguenti. These are to
be renewed often, until the Pain and Heat be off, which they in few days
effect. If these Applications do not prevent the rising of Vesiculae, you must
cut them as they arise, lest by their erosion they make hollow Ulcers, and
inflame with sharp Pains, Fever, etc. But where they are burnt to a Crust or
Escar, you must hasten its fall with Emollients, then digest, incarn, and
cicatrize.

Here is required Bleeding and Evacuation by Lenients: but if there be
Cacochymia, you must purge more powerfully. A spare Diet is requisite, Regiment
in Burns.
with all otehr Regulation proportionably according as the Burn is greater or
less. I shall give you for your farther information two remarkable Instances of
Burns: the first in the Wars, occasioned by Accident thus.

A Soldier in the time of service being in the Fort-Royall at Worcester, 1.
Observat. of burning with Gunpowder.
hastily fetched his Bonnet full of Gunpowder; and whilst he was filling his
Bandeliers, another Soldier carelessly bestrides it, to make a Shot at one of
the Enemies which he saw lying perdue. In firing his Musket, a spark flew out
of the Pan, and gave fire to the Powder underneath him, and grievously burned
the Hands, Arms, Breast, Neck and Face of him that was filling his Bandeliers.
And as to himself, he likewise was burned and scorched in all the upper part of
his Thighs, Scrotum, the Muscles of the Abdomen, and the Coats of the Testicles
to the Erythroides, so that the Cremasters were visible. And indeed it was to
be feared, that, when the Escar should cast off from his Belly, his Bowels
would have tumbled out. We dressed the several Parts of them both with mel
saponis, and embrocated the Parts about cum ol. ros. and albumine ovor. beat
together, and let them blood. I did not see the issue: but Will. Clarke, who
was then one of my Servants, and assisted me in the dressing them, staid there,
and attended their Cure, after the Defeat of our Army. And he lately told me,
he cured the latter of these with unguent, tutiae, etc. and the former made his
Escape out of Town.

A young Gentleman of aoubt ten years of age, 2. Observat. of a Burn with
Gunpowder.
boarded it a School a few miles off, the Evening before the fifth of November
having filled his right Pocket full of Squibs and Crackers, threw one of them
into the Chimney amongst the Embers. It took fire: but whether it scattered the
Fire, and some spark of that flew into his Pocket, or whether it was the
Cracker, but those in his Pocket took fire also, and his Clothes burnt. At the
sight whereof his little Chamber-fellow ran out for help. In his absence a
little Boy from some other Apartment took the alarm, came in, and seeing his
School-fellow in a flame, catched up a Basin of water, and threw it upon him;
then ran away for help. Others came in and rescued him out of his burnt
Clothes. A neighboring Surgeon was sent for who dressed him. The next day
they brought the Patient to Town. I found him burnt into the Flesh from a
hand's breadth below that Arm-pit down that Side, with part of his Belly, and
from thence it spread down to the Os ileon and Gluteus, and along the Thigh
almost to the Knee. And by endeavoring to free his Pockets of the Crackers, he
also burnt his Hand from the Fingers ends along the inside of his Arm to his
Elbow-joynt. The Parts which were burnt to an Escar I anointed with mel eum
succo cepar. and pulv. iridis mixed, and fomented the Parts about with a
Decoction of hyoscyam. malvar. solan. violar. sem. cydon. psy^ii, adding to it
a third part of lac ebutyratum, and embrocated the other Parts with unguent.
stramon. He should have been let blood, but would ont. Clysters were admitted,
and Pearl-Juleps and Ptisans prescribed, his Fever being very great by reason
of the Pain. As the Blisters arose, we snipt them. Those which were raw I dressed
with fine Lawn dipped in the foresaid Decoction; and with a Feather dipped in
unguent. de stramon. mixed with ol. amygd. dulc. anointed the Lawns: by which
means those places which were superficially burned healed. As the Parts deeper
burnt threw off their Escars, I digested them with the Yolk of an egg and a
little terebinth. lot. in aq. solani, adding some farin. hord. finely scarsed
cum ol. amygdal. dulc. Upon others I applied unguent. diapomphol. and anointed
the fretted edges with unguent. de stramon. To others I used unguent. album
campb. mixed cum albumine ovi. Thus each part required to be particularly
considered, and special care was taken that no Matter should be any where pent
in. Several indications in a large burn.
In these large Burnings there are required variety of Intentions at one and
the same time. Some require Anodynes, others Detergents and Digestion, others
Desiccants. Some of the Parts require to be dressed twice aday; others but once.
Some of them I dressed with this Unguent: ol. sambuc. lbj. cerae iij. litharg.
aur. ij. cerussae j. calcis lot. vj. thuris and sarcocoliae an. iij. fiat
Vnguentum S. A. Upon some of these Lawns I laid afterward Pledgits dipped in a
Solution of troch. alb. Rhas. made in a Decoction equiseti, ros. rub. and
summit. rubi, to cicatrize them. Thus I happily cicatrized this young
Gentleman's Ulcers even and smooth without the least Inequality, nothing
remaining but the red color to make it discernable.

And I must tell you, in these great Ulcers it will require your care that no
Hypersarcosis grow upon them, for thereby the Cicatrices will be deformed. I
have had some Persons of good quality come to me so deformed with these, that
they have suspected them to be Wenny; and where they have happened upon Women's
Breasts, they have supposed them Cancerous. In others, from ill Surgery, the
loose Flesh has grown so high and callous, that one of them who came into my
hands required to be burnt again in order to his Cure. Medicines for Eyes
burned.
In the Face there is a special care to be had as also in the Neck and Breasts
of the Female Sex. A great care must be had likewise of the Eyes, that they be
not daubed with greazy Medicaments, and that the Lids be not dressed with too
drying ones, lest they contract and make a Blearedness. In the Cure of the Eyes
you may use Pigeons blood, Breast-milk, aq. solani, plantag. ros. poma, sem.
cydon. foenugr. troch. alb. Rhas. tutia. lap. calam. thus, sarcocoli. washed or
not washed. I have seen the Ears for want of care adhering to the Scalp, also
the Fingers to one another, and in others close contracted to the Palm with
hard Callus. In that case of the Ear, I divided the Callus by Incision, and
applied soft bits of Linen dipped in aq. spermat. ranar. between the Scalp and
lower part of it, which was rumpled up. Afterward I rubbed the unequal Callus
with the Caustick-stone; and as the Escars separated, i cicatrized them with
the Vitriol-stone, unguent. desiccat. rub. etc. and left the Part in its
natural shape. Where the Fingers have been all grown to one another almost to
the middle Joints, I have separated them by Scissors and Knife, and afterward
by the Caustick-stone rubbed the Cicatrices off, and healed them smooth.

A Boy came out of the Country with all the Fingers of his right Hand close
contracted. 3. Observat. of Fingers burnt.
I cut the Cicatrix of each Finger, and caused a Roll of wood to be placed
under his crooked Fingers, which being carried with Bars to the inward part of
his Wrist, and fastened by Screws, thrust the Roll gradually forward, till it
had born all the Fingers before it, and by a complete Extension restored them
to their former liberty. The Wrists and other Joints would be subject to the
same inconveniences, if they were not prevented by the knowing Artist, without
whose help the best Medicaments signify little.

CHAP. II. Of Gangrene and Sphacelus.
THe most cruel Symptoms that attend Gunshot and great contused Wounds are
Gangraena and Sphacelus.

Gangrene is a tendency to Mortification: it invades the softer Parts,
Definition.
as the Skin, Flesh, etc. and is the beginning of a Sphacelus.

Sphacelus is a perfect Mortification, with the extinction of the native Heat
and privation of Sense, not only in the Skin, Flesh, Nerve, Artery, but the
very Bones.

They differ from one another, as the Mortification is more or less.
Difference, Causes.


The Causes of Gangrene are various, viz. whatsoever destroys the natural
Heat: as Interception of the motion of the blood by over-strict Bandage in
Wounds and Amputations, want of timely extracting of extraneous bodies in
Gunshot, etc. from whence Pain and Fluxion do arise; so excess of Cold in
hard Winters, also in Old age, and the like. A Gangrene does arise also in
Phlegmons, through the unseasonable application of over-cold Medicaments; or
for want of timely Digestion; or by excess of Heat, such as becomes
causticall, as we find in Carbuncles and all Escars. But that which most of all
contributes to it is the Degeneration of Humors in unsound Bodies: in some of
which not only all great Operations, but even the application of a Caustic,
cutting a Corn, or pairing a Nail of a Toe to the quick, will endanger
Mortification. Some I have seen (you may call them Scorbuticall persons if you
please) who upon the appearance only of a small black Spot on the Foot without
Tumor, have suffered a very quick unavoidable Mortification. But I would not
have you therefore conclude every Scorbuticall Spot a Gangrene: for this latter
lies dry in the Skin without either Inflammation or Pain.

In one of the abovesaid cases, where the Gangrene was stopped by the speedy
assistence of Art, an Apoplexy followed in few days after: of which more anon.

The Signs of a Gangrene are, change of the natural color in the Skin to a
pale livid, with diminution of Tumor; Blisters also arise, Signs.
and the Part turns black soon after. In Wounds, the Lips sink and are
flaccid; a Gleet follows, and the Flesh within withers; also the Pulse and
Sense in the Part do both languish.

A person having been shot in the Arm, and the Wound undigested, Observation.
I being consulted advised the laying open of the Wound, and extraction of the
Bullet, Rags, etc. but was overruled by others, and it was deferred to farther
consideration. Two days after I visited the Patient, and asked the Surgeon
whether he had laid open the Wound. He replied, there was no need, for he could
turn his finger in it, and pull out the Bullet and Rags, if it was necessarry.
As I was going out of the house, I met the Physician, who inquiring of me the
Patient's health, I replied that the Surgeon had unwittingly given me the
certain sign of his Death. For in magnis vulneribus and pravis, fi Tumores non
appareant, ingens malum. That was a great Wound, and not being digested, should
have been accompanied with Fluxion and Inflammation; the Lips should have been
full, the Orifice contracted: but on the contrary, the Heat was decayed, the
Lips were lank without sense, and at that time Sphacelated. A day or two after
he died, too certainly justifying my Prognostic.

Sphacelus is distinguished from a Gangrene by the total Corruption and Stink,
it being also insensible both of Knife and Fire. If a Gangrene proceed from
Pain, the Tumor and preceding Inflammation will show it, and the sudden
sinking of that Tumor is the beginning of the Gangrene. If the Gangrene be
from Cold, the Part is first benumbed, then accompanied with a pricking Pain,
also a Redness, which by degrees turns black, and a Horror and Rigor
seizes upon the Patient. If it be from Interception of the Spirits by reason
of over-strict Bandage, there is neither Fluxion nor Pain, but a Flaccidity
joined with an Insensibility in the Part. If it be from Old age, the Patient is
lean, nature visibly decayed, his Legs and other extremities are first seized,
and the Part is most commonly without Tumor.

All Gangrenes are dangerous, Prognostic.
as threatening the Life of the Patient they affect. Those that begin in the
external Parts by reason of Inflammation are of least danger, if the Habit of
body be tolerably good, and the Mortification timely treated. Those that arise
deep within the Wound from Gunshot or fractured Bones are extremely
hazzardous, especially if they be in or near the Joints, though the Habit of
body be good.

Gangrenes arising from Parts abounding with too much Humidity are in great
danger, for thereby the natural Heat is soon overcome: for which reason
Grangrenes in very fat and Hydropicall bodies, especially in the latter, are
rarely extinguished. So also those arising from an internal cause are
exceedingly more dangerous then those that arise from an accidental. Yet in
all these there are some hopes of Cure. But in Sphacelus there is no remedy,
save only by a speedy separation of the sphacelated Part: for if any of it
remain, it soon creeps up by the Nerves, etc. and infecteth the whole Member,
and is accompanied with Watching, Raving, frequent Faintings, Convulsions,
Hiccough, and cold Sweats; which foreshew the Patient's approaching Death in
the Treatise of Tumors.

In the Cure of Gangrenes, Cure.
I shall begin my discourse of that which arises from Pain with Flux of
humors and Inflammation. These most frequently attend great Contusions,
Gunshot Wounds, etc. and by suffocating the native Heat produce Mortification.
In which cases a cooling and slender Diet ought to be observed: the Humors
abounding in the body must be evacuated by Bleeding and Purging: Revulsion
ought also to be made to avert the Humors from flowing to the diseased Parts.
For the rational performing of which I refer you to the Chapter of a Phlegmon
in the Treatise of Tumors.

Cordials and Epithems are also necessary, to resist the Putrefaction, and
strengthen the Vitalls, from what cause soever the Gangrene arises. For your
choice of which I refer you to the Chapter of a Carbuncle, which is another
sort of Gangrene. Having thus provided in general, we shall in the next place
consider the Part affected, whether it be only a Tumor, or a Wound with a
Tumor, etc. In which latter, if the Tumor and Inflammation have been very
great, and it change color suddenly, and sink, the Pain continuing, you may
conclude a Gangrene beginning. And if there be a Wound or Abscesse, and that
Wound, etc. grow more painful, if the Flesh also loose its ruddiness, and look
pale and withered, and the Matter change to be thin and gleety, you may suspect
it corrupting: in which case it will be necessary that you scarifie to the
quick, and make it bleed freely. By your Patient's sensible feeling, and by the
fresh trickling down of the blood, you may judge of the Mortification. But if
the Gangrene have crept deeper, or arose from the bottom of the Wound, then
scarifie accordingly unto the fleshy Parts: and if there be any Abscesse lying
under the Muscles or Lips of the Wound or Ulcer, let it out. If in making such
Scarification you chance to cut some Vessel, whereby a Flux of blood
happens, have a care you choke not the Heat of the Part by crowding in
Dossills; for so the Mortification may be increased. To avoid which, I do
rather advise the actual Cautery, for thereby you will not only stop the
Bleeding, but dry up the Putrefaction. After the use of it, dress up the Wound
as has been advised in the Chapter of Burning. If in scarifying you prick a
Nerve or Tendon, you will increase the Gangrene. So you may do if by the
actual Cautery you burn them but in part, or if you apply sharp Medicaments on
them when newely hurt by Scarification. For we frequently see great Fluxion
arise from little Disturbances of the Nerves and Tendons. Therefore consider
well, and if such lie in your way, you had better cut them off or burn them
through, then scratch or prick them. For the confirmation hereof, you may see
some Instances in the Cure of Ulcers amongst the Nerves and Tendons in the
Treatise de Strumis. Whilst I was writing this, I cut off some of them in one
Patient: they lying over the carious Bones would not admit of the coverture of
a Pledgit without grievous Pain; but those once divided, the Ulcer grew easy.
But if you meet with none of these Accidents, then, after Scarification,
cleanse it of the clotted blood, by washing it with Brine, a strong Lixivium of
Wood-ashes, or Tincture of Myrrh, etc. and fill up the Scarification with Merc.
praecipitat. troch. polyidae, musae, or with Dossills dipped in ol. garyophyll.
terebinth. etc. actually hot. Unguent. Aegyptiac. is also hereto useful,
whether it be that made by the Pharmacopoeia Londinensis, or by other Authors,
with the addition of sal Ammoniac. nitr. theriac. camph. etc. The usual
Fomentation is a Lixivium wherein have been boiled summit. absinth. centaur.
min. carduus benedict. scordium, vincetoxic. rad. aristoloch. rot. rad.
gentian. spir. vini, etc. or that of aq. calcis, with a Solution of Merc.
sublimat. or aq. lap. medicament. Cataplasms are also of use exfar. hord.
fabar. lupinor. lentium, pisor. Mithridat. etc. boiled in a Lixivium, with an
addition of Oxymel, etc. While these are applied to the gangrened Part, a good
Defensative should be laid upon the Joint or Parts above; of which you may
find choice in this Book.

In the dressing of these Mortifications, you ought to consider well in the
application of your Medicaments, that you do not in the extinguishing one
Gangrene raise another, by the too long use of sharp Medicaments. Therefore,
when you shall feel the Ulcer warm, and find it cease gleeting, it may be
reasonable to forbear the use of them, and to dress it up with warm
Digestives, as unguent. basilic. cum ol. terebinth. hot: and after Digestion
deterge with mundif. ex apio magist. or such like, according as the Sloughs
require; then proceed by Sarcoticks and Epuloticks, as in such Ulcers has been
showed.

OF Gangrenes from strict Bandage you may see several Instances in this Book.
The Cure differs not from that of others made by Fluxion: 1. Observat. of a
Gangrene from strict Bandage.
but they are much more hopeful, considering the cause may be so easily
removed by the loosening of Bandage. I shall give you one Instance here of a
fractured Leg set in the Country by one pretending to Bone-setting. It had been
bound up with Splints. About the third day after, I passing that way was
desired to see him. The Fracture was of both the Focills of the left Leg. He
had been in great pain from the time of the setting: it was extremely swelled
from the Knee to the Toes. I saw it was occasioned by the too straight Binding.
I therefore loosened the Bandage, and took off the Splints, the ends of them
sticking in the Skin, as also did the two Ligatures which encompassed the
Fracture. Many Blisters were raised, not only about the Fracture, but also
about the Foot; some whereof were blew, and others of a dark red color. I
scarified them, permitted them to bleed, and fomented the Member with Stupes
wrung out of hot Milk: by which I gave a transpiration to the Humors, then
dressed the Gangrene-spots with unguent. basilic. hot, and applying an anodyne
Cerote over all the Leg, laid it upon a soft Pillow, with Splenia of Clothes
under it, which I fastened about the fractured Member; and bringing the sides
of the Pillow close to the Leg, it was supported with much ease: then I let the
Patient blood. By this way of dressing, the blood circulated, the Pain
accordingly diminished, and so did the Swelling, and the gangrened Parts
digested off, and healed by the application of unguent. diapompholyg. etc.
After the diminution of these Accidents, the Leg was dressed up closer, and the
fractured Bones united together, according to the method set down in the
Treatise of Fractures; where also you will find a Gangrene arising from Fluxion
occasioned by the Shivers of Bones, with the manner of its Cure.

Of Gangrenes arising from Gunshot I have showed you sufficiently in the
preceding Treatise, and in the Observations of Phlegmon have treated of those
rising from Inflammation, to which I refer you; and shall now give you some
arising from other Causes, and first from Fluxion.

A Gentleman of a full Body having accidentally broken his Shin by a Fall, 2.
Observat. of a Gangrene on a contused Wound.
the Wound inflamed, and grew very painful. It not yielding to their
Applications, I was fetched, and saw the Heat decaying, and Blisters rising
about the Lips of the Wound, also a thin Ichor dropping from the contused
Flesh. I cut out the bruised Flesh, scarified the Wound, and dabbed it with ol.
terebinth. then filled it up with Praecipitate, and applied unguent. basil.
warm with some of the said Oil, and a Cataplasm over all of wheaten Bread-crums
decocted in Brandy, with the addition of Saffron, Yolks of eggs, and mel
communis; then let him blood, prescribed a Clyster that afternoon, and laid him
to bed with an Anodyne draught. The next day I came better provided: but in
taking off the Dressings, I saw the Wound dry, and felt it warm, and took
notice of a small Escar made by the former Application over it. The Lips of the
Wound inclined to a Digestion. I fomented it, and dressed it up with unguent.
basilic. cum ol. terebinth. and repeated the use of the Cataplasm: by which
Dressings the Wound digested, and the Parts about recovered their natural
Heat, and he was cured by Detersives, Sarcoticks, etc. as a hollow Ulcer.

A Woman came out of the Country to me with an Ulcer in her Leg. 3. Observat.
of a gangrened Leg.
It had been of a long continuance, and by reason of her Journey it inflamed
and swelled. When I saw it, the Heat was decaying, and the Tumor was sinking;
Blisters were risen near the Lips, and the Skin under some of them was of a
purple, and under others of a blew color. The Ulcer it self being putrefied, I
scarified it and the Parts about so far as I thought necessary, permitting them
to bleed freely, and thrust out the rotten Flesh: then I fomented them with
Brine, sprinkled the Scarifications with Merc. praecip. and dressed up the Ulcer
with Dossills dipped in a Solution of unguent. Aegyptiac. in spir. vini, to which
I added some of the said Praecipitate, and applied a Cataplasm of medull. panis
tritic. pulv. summit. absinth. flor. centaur. rutae, scord. cham. decocted in
Brandy-wine. After I had thus dressed her, I let her blood, and disposed her to
rest with a Cordial draught. Her Body was the next day made soluble by
Clysters, and afterward by lenient Purgatives.

At the next dressing I was provided with a Fomentation and Cataplasm, as is
proposed in the method of Cure. I scarified again the Lips and Parts about, and
designed as much to the Ulcer: but in taking off the Dressings, I felt it warm,
and a kind of Escar made by the foresaid Dressing. I therefore dressed it with
unguent. basil. and ol. terebinth. hot, and applied the Cataplasm over all. By
these Applications the Ulcer and Parts about were restored to their native
Heat, and the Soar digested, and afterward healed with Sarcoticks, as is
usual in such like Ulcers.

A Lady aged about 63 years, of a very fat gross Body, 4. Observat. of a
gangrened Elbow.
was seized with an Apoplectick fit, which afterward terminated in some kind of
Lethargy, with loss of Memory. During which, she lying in bed, and leaning for
the most part on her Elbow, bruised it, and at length the Putrefaction reaching
to the Skin, it inflamed, and seemed to have Matter. Some Pretenders to
Surgery, judging it a simple Apostemation, thought it not worthy the
consulting a Surgeon, but opened it and put in a Tent with basilicon, and
left it to an Apothecary to dress by their direction, not forbidding the
Patient to lie upon it. It being thus dressed, the Putrefaction within increased,
and spread up toward that Axilla, and she died of that Mortification before it
was discovered by them, so that the Surgeon came in only time enough to
embalm her.

A Gentleman of about 60 years of age, 5. Observat. of a ^^^acelated Leg.
having been long diseased with an Ulcer in his right Leg about the Ancle, came
up to Town, and sent for me. The Lips of the Ulcer were without Tumor or Heat:
the Flesh within the Ulcer was livid, and in some parts of a blackish color,
and discharged a gleety Matter. Indeed there were all the signs of a Sphacelus:
yet the Patient talked of going abroad the next morning; and by his other
discourse seemed to be somewhat delirous. I fomented his Leg with a Stupe wrung
hot out of Spanish Wine; and whilst I provided other Dressings, I prevailed
with him to send for an eminent Physician dwelling near his Lodging, to whom I
represented the condition of the Ulcer, and undressed it in his presence,
scarifying the Lips and Parts within, then washed it with ol. terebinth. hot,
and applied Merc. praecipitat. etc. with a Cataplasm e medull. panis tritic.
pulv. summit. absinth. with scord. etc. decocted in Brandy-wine. The next day a
Consultation was held of two Physicians, Mr. Arris and Mr. Hollyer Surgeons,
with my self. We took off the Dressings, and found the Ulcer sphacelated, but
not much spread externally. The Patient had rested ill, and was delirous, and
his Pulse weak. We scarified the Lips and Ulcer, and permitted them to bleed;
then fomented the Member, and dressed the Mortification with Merc. praecipitat.
and applied a Cataplasm as above prescribed. We continued our Endeavors daily:
but the Venom spread up and down that side of the Foot amongst the Bones and
Tendons. The Physicians prescribed Cordialls. etc. but his Delirium, etc.
increased, and he died before it had encompassed any part of the Leg.

Cold extinguisheth the natural Heat of a Part, and frequently happens to poor
people traveling in Frost and Snow. Some Instances I have seen of this
Gangrene. The Recovery of them is not very difficult, if timely treated;
otherwise they sphacelate, as other Gangrenes do. When any particular Part
begins to decay in its natural Heat, the common Remedy is, to rub it with
Snow, and afterward to foment it with Decoctions of Turnips or of the hotter
Plants, such as are usually found in every Kitchin-Garden; then to embrocate it
cum ol. lini, rutae, aneth. and ol. terebinth. mixed with them; and after to lap
it up in woollen Clothes. But if any Part be directly gangrened, we scarifie
and dress it as has been said in the method of Cure. If the whole Body be
over-cooled, the Cure consists in the using Brandy, aq. vitae, and other good
Spirits, theriac. and Mithridate dissolved in Wine, and laying the Patient by
the Fire, but not too near, or putting him into a warm Bed, and d sposing him
to sweat.

Of Gangrene through deficiency of Heat in Old age I shall only give you one
Instance, 6. Observat. of a Cangrene through old age.
and that in a person of a very great age. He is yet alive, and kept so by the
great Kindness of a noble Kinsman, with whom he has a good Chamber well
furnished, good Firing, Diet, and Attendance. This Gentleman was seized the
last Spring with a simple Inflammation about the Ancle without Tumor. Upon
notice thereof I went the next day, and saw it turned black three inches in
length, and about two in breadth. We fomented the Part with a Decoction of warm
Plants, to which we added Brandy; then scarified the Escar, and dapped it with
ol. terebinth. and after dressed. it with a Mixture of the same Oil cum unguent.
basilic. embrocating the Parts about with ol. lumbricor. etc. and applied a
Plaster ex theriaca. Thus the Escar separated, and my Kinsman Jaq. Wiseman
dressed and cured it. Before this was cicatrized, the inside of the other Leg
upon the Ancle-joynt inflamed as largely, and turned black: but by the same way
of dressing a separation was made of that Escar, and he was cured by my said
Kinsman according to the common method of Ulcers: but it was well-nigh the work
of four months. Since that, new Inflammations have begun to arise more then
once, but hitherto have been timely remitted.

From an indisposition or malign quality of the Humors within our Bodies
Mortifications frequently arise; insomuch that we can scarce make a Fontanell
in some Bodies without running the hazard of a Gangrene: nor indeed can they
be kept from Defluxion after they are made, without the assistence of our Art.
Instances hereof may be seen in several places of this Book, particularly in
the Treatise of Ulcers with Intemperies.

A Woman of about sixty years of age, 7. Observat. of a gangrened Arm.
extreme fat, and of a Scorbutic Habit of body, sent for a Surgeon to make
her a Fontanell in her Arm. He cut it, and put in a Pea. She discharged him,
and dressed it her self. About ten or twelve days after the Fontanell growing
painful, she sent for the Surgeon, who seeing it gangrened, sent for me.
The impression of the Pea into the Fat before it was digested had corrupted
that, and the Parts about were thereby infected. We scarified the Lips, and cut
into the Fat I believe above an inch deep. We dressed it with ol. terebinth.
actually hot upon an armed Probe, filled up the Incision with Praecipitate, and
applied a Cataplasm of Mithridate. By this method of dressing the Heat was
restored, and it digested in few days, and I left it to the Surgeon, who
cured it.

In a person of about forty years of age I applied a mild Caustic below on
the inside of the Knee, 8. Observat. of a gangrened Knee.
to make a Fontanell. The Escar being small, I divided and digested it with
little or no Pain; and the Escar began to separate kindly: but it afterward
grew painful and gleeted, and the Ulcer corrupted very deep before the first
Escar separated.

This happened whilst the Patient dressed it her self with those Dressings I
left her Servant, she not taking much heed of it, till she was so lame that she
could not stir out of her Chamber; and then she sent for me, and to my
amazement I saw it gangrened. I presently cut out the loose Escar, fomented it
with Wine, and dabbed it cum ol. terebinth. hot with an armed Probe, then
lightly scarified it in the bottom and edges, and after dabbed it again with
ol. terebinth. filled it up with Praecipitate, and fomented it till I had made
a Cataplasm cum medull. panis triticei, pulv. summitat. absinth. and scord.
decocted in Wine, with an addition of Brandy, Saffron and the Yolk of an egg,
which I applied over it, having first embrocated the Parts about it cum ol.
ros. Thus in three or four dressings I took off the Fluxion, and the scarified
Lips digested; but the Ulcer it self lay dry, till the Sloughs made by the
Praecipitate cast off by Digestion. From that time it incarned, and being
contracted nearer I dressed it with a Pea. It was very remarkable, that whilst
the Ulcer was distempered she was free from her other Complaints; but after it
was digested she relapsed into her former Distempers, and lay some days ill of
a bilious Cholick. In several others I have seen the like in spite of all my
endeavors to prevent it. So also in making Fontanells sometimes by Incision in
people where there was no likelihood of pressing on a Tendon, I have been glad
to throw out the Pea, and heal them up again.

But as people are sometimes subject to Gangrene by making of Fontanells; so
others we hear of that have been gangrened from paring of a Corn or Nail on
their Toes. Amongst the Observations of a Phlegmon you may see somewhat of it
arising from a less cause.

I was once sent for to a Person of Honor about sixty years of age. 9.
Observat. of a gangrened Toe.
He was of a full Body, and seemingly healthful; but in his latter years had
omitted Exercise, by reason of a Stone in his left Kidney. One morning in
making himself ready he perceived a black Spot on the upper part of his Foot
leading toward the Toe next the little one. It was no bigger then a Spangle,
without Tumor, Pain or Inflammation. It appearing bigger the next morning, he
sent for his Physician and Surgeon; they cut into it, and found it
insensible. From that time it was rationally dressed; but it enlarged it self
amongst the Tendons, and especially toward that Toe, and affected the Bones. I
being then consulted, and joined with that Surgeon, we cut off that Toe, and
checked the Mortification. After which with much difficulty we extinguished the
Gangrene in the other Parts by the various Applications prescribed in the
method of Cure, and healed the sinuous Ulcer. During which the Physician purged
him frequently, and prescribed an Antiscorbutick Decoction of sarsa, China,
lign. guaiaci, with the Plants proper in such cases, to dispose him to sweat;
which he did some days. One evening whilst he was sweating, I being
accidentally present, he told me he felt a numnesse in the Balls of his toes of
the other Foot. I looked upon them, and seeing them all black and dry, cut into
them, and found them insensible. I supposed they might have been burnt by the
Bricks: but neither the Patient nor the Apothecary that sweat him having
discovered any thing of it before, we concluded it from the malignity of the
Humor, for they were directly gangrened; and by that method I cured them some
weeks after. But three or four days after that he was seized with an Apoplexy
about eleven a clock one Sunday morning. He recovered out of that Fit, but died
that afternoon in another.

Some other Instances I could give of this kind; but this may serve to show you
to what little purpose Amputations are in these cases. But if the Body be
youthful, and the Habit of body tolerable, if Gangrenes resist the
Applications above proposed, and penetrate more inwardly, you may then attempt
them by the actual Cautery. For, according to that Aphorism of Hippocrates,
Actual Cautery.
Illi affe^^us qui medicamentis non sanantur, ferro sanantur; qui ferro non
sanantur, igne sanantur; qui igne non curantur, hos existimare oportet
insanabiles; Those Diseases which will not cure with Medicaments, are cured by
a Knife; and those which yield not to that, are cured by Fire; and those which
will yield to neither, are counted incurable.

The actual Cautery does indeed not only resist Putrefaction, but
corroborates the Part.

But after all our vigilance and industry in contriving Remedies to resist the
Gangrene, if it does yet delude us, and terminate in a Sphacelus. There is then
no more need of taking indication from antecedent causes, or changing of
Medicines according to the variety of the causes that introduced it. For
whether a Gangrene arise from an hot Intemperies or cold, moist or dry,
Sphacelus is always the same, extinction of the native Heat, and destruction of
the Member. The Mortification creeps on, and not only infecteth the Member,
but the Spirits to the very Heart, with its corrupt Vapors mortifying the
Vessels all along the sound Parts, and leaving the Member immovable, Extirpa.
ion.
without sense or heat, rotten, black and cadaverous. Wherefore there is
nothing more to be thought of in this case but timely Amputation or cutting off
the Member; the Cure of this Disease not confisting (as I said) in outward
Applications, but manual Operation: and what success may be therefrom
expected, is much to be doubted. At satius erit, with Celsus, anceps auxilium
experiri, quam nullum. It is a miserable kind of help; yet it is the
determination of all Authors, that in Sphacelus membrum corruptum abscindendum
est. In this case it becomes the Surgeon to acquaint the Friends with this
kind of Remedy, and withal to make his Prognostic accordingly. But before we
proceed in this Operation, we shall take notice of what some knowing Authors
have writ hereof. For in those places where Amputation cannot be made, as in
the Buttock, Shoulder, Back, etc. Fab. Hildanus proposes the use of potentiall
Cauteries applied to the mortified Part, and often renewed, till the last Escar
reaches to the live Flesh. Yet he condemns Arsenick, as being venomous, and
producing many dangerous Symptoms. It is true, that I my self have often used
that method of Cure in Sarcomata with good success: but in a Mortification
there appear to me many greater Inconveniences that attend it. First, from the
Caustic it self, as he proposes it, of Salts: it will melt in the working,
and is more disposed to spread in the Skin then penetrate deep into the Flesh.
This every young Surgeon knows in his making of Fontanells, that he cannot
apply a bit of Caustic so little, though he use all his Art in defending it,
but that it will have spread much farther then he designed it. Then the
separation of such Escars is too slow to effect the design: and in an ill Habit
of body such Medicaments are apt of themselves to procure a Mortification
rather then Cure. Whereas on the contrary, an actual Cauterie answers all
Intentions: it not only consumes the Mortification, but dries up the
venomous Humor, thereby preventing its farther progress; and also
communicates warmth to the languishing Parts, by virtue of which the
Separation is much farthered, and by working upon the gangrened Sloughs
performed more easily, as you may see in my Practice elsewhere. But where
Amputation it self is fecible, nay altogether necessary, as in the Lims, there
arises a new question, whether it ought to be done in the sound Part, or in
the dead. Fab. ab Aquapend. advises the dead Part within a finger's breadth of
the live, (as also do many others.) Then with a Cautery they burn up all the
remaining Mortification. Others do perform the Operation with a hot Knife, the
figure of which you may see in Hildanus. Aquapend. speaks so confidently of his
success in the practice of this way, that utterly to deny the thing were to
give him the Lie. I shall only make this Objection, that the Sphacelus does
seldom affect the Member so equally round, as that an Operation in the dead
Part is fecible: nay, which is worse, when once the Mortification seizes on
the great Vessels, it runs up so fast under the Skin, that before any
considerable part of the Member is outwardly gangrened on the one side beyond
the Knee or Elbow, the other side will have reached to the Inguen or Axilla.
This I confess frustrates all manner of Amputating, whether in sound or
mortified Parts. Yet generally speaking, the Gangrene does not grow so fast,
but that if you make Amputation two fingers breadth, more or less, within the
live Flesh, you may prevent it; and that far better then it is possible to be
done by the other way of operating. For if you work there by actual Cautery
with a hot Knife, your Knife will stick fast in the Flesh till the moisture be
wholly dried up, and then you must repeat many Knives and Cauteries, in every
one of which you will meet with the same inconvenience: yea, before you can cut
through with your hot Knife, it is very probable that you will near the Bone
meet with some Parts that are alive and sensible, especially when you come to
the Periosteum; (for the Membranes do not usually corrupt at the same rate of
swiftness with the Flesh;) and then all your pains and trouble with be as
great or greater then if you did it in the sound Part. As to the other
inconveniences, I shall refer you to Hildanus, who has taken pains in
confuting this Opinion.

Both these ways of Amputation seem to me much more difficult and painful then
our common way; which makes me presume they proposed them to prevent the
effusion of blood.

But modern Surgeons have answered this Objection by good Bandages and
Deligation of the Vessels, and when we cut above the Knee, by clapping
Cauteries to the Vessels only; which sufficiently answers that Intention. Thus
have I seen in my first Sea-voiages Amputations made above Knee, and afterward
practiced them with great ease and safety.

Now since not only in this Chapter of Gangrene, The manner of performing
Amputation.
but frequently elsewhere in this Book, we have mentioned Amputation, I think
it necessary to take this occasion of showing the manner of performing it; the
rather, because the Operation is much the same, whether it be done upon the
account of Gangrene, or for other reasons. I shall therefore in general terms
insert the whole Doctrine of Amputation, though briefly, not mattering whether
the Examples instances be Sphaceli or not, all Instances being alike
instructive.

In heat of Fight, whether it be at Sea or Land, What is to be considered in
heat of fight.
the Surgeon ought to consider at the first Dressing, what possibility there
is of preserving the wounded Member; and accordingly, if there be no hopes of
saving it, to make his Amputation at that instant whilst the Patient is free of
Fever, etc. Therefore that you may the better make your judgment of the
Wounds, I shall give you some few Remarques of such as require Amputation. viz.
If a Leg or Arm be shattered by Splinter or great Shot, the loss of Substance
will direct you. If the principal Muscles be torn off, and the Bone fractured
in pieces, or if the Wound be with Musket Shot in the inside of the Joint of
the Elbow, or in the Knee or Ancle, with a Fracture of the Bones of the said
Joint, nay, supposing it has not fractured them, yet if the Bullet be so
lodged that you cannot extract it, you shall then presently make Extirpation of
the Part. If it be the Arm, cut it off in the place where it is so shattered,
and saw off the end of the Bone smooth, your Assistent the while pulling up the
musculous Skin and Flesh. If the Ancle be thus maimed, you shall then cut off
the Leg within three or four fingers breadth under the Knee, in regard so long
a Stump would be troublesome. But if the Leg be shattered off by the Calf, do
not put your Patient to the pain of new Amputation for the shortning it a
hand's breadth or a little more. Save what you can of a shattered Hand. And if
the Toes with part of the Foot were shot off, cut off the lacerated Parts
smooth, but with care to save as much of the Foot with the Heel as you can; it
being much better then a wooden Leg. But if the Arm or Leg be not so shattered,
though the Wound be large on one side, and hang gaping down with great Fracture
of Bones, yet be not discouraged, the largeness of the Wound will make for your
better pulling out those extraneous bodies, Shivers, Splinters, Rags, or ought
else, and for the easier discharge of Matter. Dress it as a Wound by a Splinter.

If the great Joint be so shot by Musket-bullet, that you think it not
reasonable to cut off the Member, be sure you make Extraction of the Bullet,
and free it of all extraneous bodies, leaving not the least Shiver to prick the
Nerves or Tendons: and make such way presently, that you may be able to dress
the wounded Nerves, Tendons, etc. without making new Incision, when the Part is
inflamed and unfit for it.

If after some days the Wound do not digest, but inflame and gangrene, and the
Gangrene do not yield to your Applications as has been proposed in Gangrene;
then, as in a Sphacelus, you are to proceed with the Extirpation of that rotten
Member while the Patient is free from Delirium, and has strength to bear the
Operation.

Seat him so as it may be for your convenience. At Sea they sit or lie, I never
took much notice which; nor do I remember I had ever any body to hold them; but
with the help of my Mates, and some one or two that belonged to the Hold, I
went on with my work. At Sterling I made an Amputation above the Knee, and had
as little help; besides my Servants, there was only a Sea-Chirurgeon assisting
me. We stopped the Flux of blood by actual Cautery, and the Wound digested and
cured without any ill Accident. Yet where we have convenience to proceed more
formally, we always place the Patient to our most advantage, where he may be
held firm, and in a clear light, and so that our Assistents may come better
about us. The Member is to be supported by some one, whilst another stands
behind the Patient, and draws up the Skin and Musculous flesh. Then make your
Ligature two fingers breadth or thereabout in the sound Part; so that if you
amputate in case of Mortification, you may be sure to quit your self of it.
This Ligature is omitted by many of our Surgeons here in the City, they
only making a turn with a Tape, pinning it on as a mark to circumcide by: and
in stead of the Ligature I propose, they make a Gripe, which Gripe is commonly
made by some Assistent who has strength to do it. Indeed this is good, where a
shattered Member is to be cut off, to smooth the Stump; in which case there is
no great fear of Bleeding. But in Amputations it seems to me to be very
inconvenient: for I never yet saw any man so gripe, but that still the Artery
bled with a greater force then was allowable; yea, when Mr. Woodall griped, who
was so applauded, and in truth made for the work. It being so, in what a huddle
is the Stump then dressed? But suppose the uneasy posture and the long griping
tires the Griper, or that his Hand be crampt the while, what condition is the
Patient then in? Whereas by this ancient way of Ligature the Vessels are
secured from Bleeding, the Member benumbed, and the Flesh held steady, ready to
receive the impression of your crooked Knife, (or Razour, which I have often
amputated with.) This Ligature made, the Assistent strengthens it, whilst he
draws up the Musculous flesh. In the mean time the Operatour, with a sharp
crooked Knife, by a turn with his hand cuts the Flesh off round to the Bone;
then with the back of it he scrapes the Periosteum from the Bone; if there be
two Bones, then with a dividing Knife he separates the fleshy Membrane from
them. The Bones freed of the Periosteum, Guido proposes a linen Cloth, and
Hildanus a kind of Purse, to be brought over the upper divided Flesh, to pull
it upward, and make more way for the Saw. But I think that needless. The Flesh
divided, the Parts separate enough of themselves, besides the Assistent's
pulling up the musculous Flesh and Skin is sufficient. That done, you are at
liberty, whether you will cauterize the Vessels by a Button-cautery, or by
Ligature stop the Bleeding, or by Agglutination. The use of Chalcanthum I do
not approve. To apply Escaroticks to the ends of the Nerves and Tendons newly
incised, causes great pain, weakens the Part, and makes way for Gangrene; it
not being likely you can so apply them to the Artery, but that you must burn
the Parts about, which are, as I said, the Nerves, etc. The way Hildanus
proposes, by drawing the Vessels out by a Forceps, is not a work to be done in
heat of Fight, nor without a clear daylight. If you attempt it on Land, his
Arm would be bowed, and his Leg stretched out, that the Vessels may be the
longer after Extirpation, that you may the better take hold of them. Ambros.
Par. proposes a more easy and sure way of Deligation, by passing a Needle with
a strong twisted Thread through the Skin near the great Vessels; making your
Stitch over the said Vessels by piercing through the raw Flesh and Skin: then
make your Ligature upon a fold of a Rag. Thus you bind the Artery and Vein.
These several ways have been practiced by eminent Surgeons for the stopping
the blood of the Arteries in Amputation: but the late discovery of the Royal
Stiptick has rendered them of less use. But in heat of Fight it will be
necessary to have your actual Cauterie always ready, for that will secure the
bleeding Arteries in a moment, and fortify the Part against future
Putrefaction: they requiring after Cauterization no such strict Bandage as that
thereby you need to fear interception of the Spirits. When we cauterize the
Artery, we do then touch the end of the Bone, it hastening the Exfoliation. The
next thing is the loosening the Ligature, and bringing the Lips close over the
Stump. Then whether you should with a cross Stitch hold them so, or content
your self by Bandage as well as you can, is by some controverted. They that
object against the former say, it causes Pain and Inflammation. So does Bandage
also, if it be made too straight. Therefore they should object against that
also. The most that I have seen without the cross Stitch have the next
dressing been broad Stumps, some of them with Lips turned outward by the
Bandage; in the least of them the whole Stump has been bare: whereas in those
in which I have made the cross Stitch, the Lips have been found close to the
Bone at the next dressing, covering the great Vessels, and a third part or
half of the Stump has been well digested, and by the second dressing has been
near agglutinated so far as it lay under that Skin, and without Inflammation
happily cured. Whereas the broad Stump is a certain sign of a long Cure, and
commonly the death of the Patient. The exposing these incised Parts too much to
the Air causes Pain, and the want of native Heat makes them gleet: or if they
do digest, the discharge of so great a quantity of Matter commonly exhausts the
Spirits of the Patient. If the musculous Flesh and Skin are well pulled up in
time of Amputation, and brought over by a moderate Extension as far as they
will easily admit, you will find it not painful. You ought to pierce the Skin
with a Needle and strong brown Thread ceared about half an inch from the edges
of the Lips. Having made them cross from side to side equally tie them with a
moderate Astriction, then apply a Pledgit on the cauterized Vessels with pulv.
irid. suce. cepar. cum melle. But if no Cautery was used, then Buttons of Tow
spread with your Restrictive, and dipped in pulv. Galeni, must be applied to the
Mouths of the Vessels. Afterward sprinkle the Stump thick with this Powder;
bol. Armen. farin. volatile. picis naval. an. iiij. aloes, thuris, mastich.
sang. dracon. an. j. gypsi jss. pil. lepor. corii raspati, an. iij. Misc. S. A.
You may mix some of the same cum album. ovor. and apply it upon a thick round
Stupe, which has first been wet in Oxycrate and dried; and over that another
Stupe spread with the same so broad as to come over the first, and up a pretty
height above the Stump. This latter must be snipt deep in the edges, that it
may lie smooth about the Member. An Oxe-bladder ready cut and wet is to be
turned over it, and a cross Cloth next the Bladder, to hold the Dressings
steady. Then with a Rowler with two heads begin upon the Stump, and roll up to
the next Joint, and so again about the Member, to retain your Dressings firm.
Then fasten it so as that it may not be capable of falling off. But before you
make this Bandage, you ought to apply your Defensative over the Parts above the
Stump. Some apply it before they begin the Amputation: but then it is apt to
wrinkle, and to sit uneasy. In the dressing of the Stumps, you ought so to
apply your Medicaments, that you may without much bungle roll up the Member.
Then place it to the ease of the Patient, one holding his Hand some while upon
the Stump. Your Defensative may be of the same which is prescribed in Gunshot
Wounds: or, far. hord. bol. Armen. an iij. sang. dracon. jss. flor. ros. rubr.
balaust. nuc. cupress. pulv. an. vj. acet. x. album. ovor. number. viij. ol. ros.
and myrtill. an. j. cerae q. s. Boil these Powders in acetum, then add the
rest to it, to make it of the consistence of a Cerote. The third day take off
the Dressings; and then you may cut the cross Stitch, and sprinkle the Wound
with pulv. Galeni, and dress it with this Digestive: terebinth. lot. in
decoct. hord. iij. ol. lumbr. jss. gumm. elemi dissolut. in praedict. ol. ss.
farin. hord. cribrat. ij. vitell. unius ovi, croci pulv. j. Misc. Apply to the
Bone a Pledgit of dry Lint, or pressed out of spir. vini. After the Wound is
digested, you may deterge with mundif. Paracels. or apii, or this; terebinth.
Venet. lot. inspir. vin. iij. pulv. rad. irid. aristoloch. rot. sarcocoll.
thuris, mell. ros. an. j. Then incarn and cicatrize, as has been said in
Compound Wounds.

Whilst I was a Prisoner at Chester after the Battle of Worcester, Observation
of the ill consequences of wounds in the Joints.
I was carried by Col. Duckenfield's order to a man that out of much zeal to
the Cause, pursuing our scattered Forces, was shot through the Joint of the
Elbow; the Bullet entering in at the external part of the Os humeri, and
passing out between the Vlna and Radius. He had been afflicted with great Pain
the space of six weeks. I found the Wound undigested, and full of a loose soft
white Flesh, the Bones fractured, and not likely to unite, many Shivers lying
included within the Joints, and incapable of being drawn out: the lower part of
the Arm was oedematous to the Fingers ends as full as the Skin could well
contain, and the upper part was inflamed, also about the Os humeri and Axilla a
perfect Phlegmon was formed. The Patient thus tired with Pain, desired to be
cured, or have his Arm cut off. To which purpose he had procured the
Governor's leave for my staying with him. But while that Phlegmon was upon the
upper parts, there was no hope of a prosperous Amputation, nor of Cure while
those Shivers of Bones lay pricking the Nervous parts within the Joint. The
Phlegmon was too forward for Repercussion, and yet not likely to suppurate in
less then a week's time. Wherefore I endeavored by Emollients and somewhat
Discutients to succor the grieved Shoulder and Parts thereabout by hindering
the increase of the Phlegmon, and to give some perspiration to the Part. Then
with good Fomentations I corroborated the weak and oedematous Member below: to
which end I also raised his Hand nearer to his Breast. Also by Detergents and
Bandage I disposed the Wounds and fractured Part to a better condition, made
way for discharge of Matter, and endeavored to extract the Shivers of Bones;
then applied Medicaments to remove the Caries. After some days the Abscesse
suppurated in the upper part of the Shoulder and in the Arm-pit; and while the
Matter discharged from thence, the Tumor discussed, and that upper Orifice
cured soon after. But the continual Pain in the fractured Joint kept that
Opening in the Axilla from healing. The Patient growing weaker, and without
hopes of Cure, I was necessitated to proceed to Amputation. To which purpose I
sent to Chester for Mr. Murry, a knowing Surgeon, (since Mayor of that
City,) to come with Instruments and other necessaries whereby I might the
better do the work. He accordingly came, and we prepared Dressings ready;
which were Stupes or Pledgits of fine short Tow well workt, some like Splenia,
others were round, and bigger or less. We wetted them all in Oxycrate, and
dried them. We also made some Buttons of Tow, Compresses of linen Clothes dipped
in Oxycrate, three or four Rowlers with one or two heads; provided Needles
threaded and ceared for making the cross Stitch, and lesser Needles threaded
for common use, with Filleting for Ligature, and Bladders ready cut and wet in
Oxycrate; also a Defensative of the abovementioned prescription spread upon a
soft linen Cloth, to apply upon the Parts above more distant, and a Mixture of
the astringent Powders with Whites of eggs, to spread upon the Splenia and
Buttons, which Buttons were also dipped in some of the same Powders. Then for the
round Pledgits which were designed to be applied next to the Stump, Mr. M.
proposed that they might be spread with a Mixture of Umber and calx viva with
Whites of eggs, according to Doctor Read in his Observation of an Amputation
he performed upon a Servant of the Lord Gerrard's at Gerrard's Bromley, whose
fame yet lives in that Country, and will amongst us Surgeons as long as his
elaborate Lectures have a being.

The Apparatus thus made, and the Patient some while before refresht with a
draught of a good Caudle, his Friends took him out of his Bed, and placed him
in a Chair toward the light. One of his Servants held his Arm; another of his
Friends held his other Hand. Then Mr. M. drew up the Skin and Musculous flesh
of the Arm toward his Shoulder, whilst I made a strong Bandage some three or
four fingers breadth above the affected Part. Then with a good Knife I cut off
the Flesh by a quick turn of my hand, Mr. Murry pulling up the Flesh whilst I
bared the Bones. After which with a few motions of my Saw I separated the Bone,
the Patient not so much as whimpering the while, After this Mr. M. thrusting
his hands downwards with the musculous Flesh and Skin which he had drawn
upwards, I passed a strong Needle and Thread through the middle of the flesh
and Skin on both sides, within half an inch of the edges, and brought the Lips
close within a narrow compass: and having tied that Ligature fast, and cut off
the String, I passed the Needle again through the two contrary sides, which I
tied as close; then loosened the Ligature above, and applied the little round
Stupes of Tow spread with a quantity of Galen's Powder mixed cum album. ovi. The
long Pledgits were applied from the middle of the Stump each way upwards along
the Arm, over which I put on a Bladder and a cross Cloth, then rolled up the
Stump, and made the Bandage under his other Arm and over his Neck. This Bandage
prevented an Accident which has since happened to a Patient here in London,
where many of the best Surgeons were concerned. He being thus dressed up, we
put him into his Bed. The third day we took off the Dressings, and found the
Stump well digested, and at least two Spoonfulls of Matter discharged. We then
dressed it up with a Digestive ex terebinth. lot. in decoct. malvar. the Yolk
of an egg and ol. ros. spread on a large Stupe of Tow, on which was sprinkled a
proportion of Galen's Powder: then embrocated the Parts about with ol. ros.
applying emplast. e bolo over all, with moderate Bandage, and afterward
deterged with that of Paracels. and with Sarcoticks incarned the Wound. During
which the Bone exfoliated, and the Stump soon after cicatrized. Then having
procured a Pass to come to London, I hastened away. Observation.


At the Siege of Weymouth I was called at break of day to an Irishman of
Lieutenant-Col. Ballard's Regiment, who shooting off his Musket, it brake, and
tore his Hand to pieces after a strange manner. I designing to cut off his
Hand, sent presently to my Quarters to one of my Servants to bring both Saw and
Knife, also Dressings, of which at those times we had always ready. They being
brought, I took a red Ribbon from off my Case of Lancets, and bound it about
his Arm some four fingers breadth above the Carpus; and having cut the Flesh
round off, I bared the Bones, and separated the Flesh between them. Then I
sawed off the Bones, and untied my Ligature, and bringing down the musculous
Flesh and Skin over the end of them, without making any cross Stitch, I dressed
up that Stump with Restrictives and good Bandage, and returned again to my
Quarters. I had not been one hour gone, but I was sent for again to this
Soldier, he being (as the Messenger said) grievously pained. I wondered at it,
and hastened away: but before I came to his Hut, I heard him crying. I enquiring
the cause, it was some while before he would answer me. But at last he told me,
he was not able to endure that red Ribbon that I tied his Arm with. I was at
first surprised to think I should leave the Ligature upon his Arm, that being a
sure way to bring a Mortification upon the Part. I therefore put my hand in my
Pocket, and feeling the Ribbon on the Case of Lancets, showed it him. He seemed
at first to doubt it; but after he saw it was so, he laughed, and was from that
time in ease. Two days after, our men were chased out of the Town and
Chappell-fort. I was at the same time dressing the wounded man in the Town
almost under the Chappell-fort, and hearing a woman cry Fly, fly, the Fort is
taken; I turned aside a little amazed toward the Line, not knowing what had
been done: but getting up the Works, I saw our people running away, and those
of the Fort shooting at them. I slipped down this Work into the Ditch, and got
out of the Trench; and as I began to run, hearing one call, Surgeon, I
turned back, and seeing a man hold up a stumped Arm, I thought it was the
Irishman whom I had so lately dismembered: whereupon I returned, and helped him
up. We ran together, it being within half a Musket Shot of the Enemie's Fort;
but he out-ran me quite. I afterward cured him in few weeks by the method
already proposed in the preceding Discourse.

CHAP. III. Of Fistulae.
A Fistula, according to the vulgar denomination, is a Sinuous Ulcer supposed
to be of two or three months continuance. But to speak strictly, those only
are Fistulae which are at least of so many years growth, and are accompanied
with a Callus. Every part of the body is subject to these Ulcers; but
especially the Arms, Legs, Thighs and Hips. The worst sort of these, at least
that ever I saw, was from Gunshot Wounds with Fracture, where there has been
loss of Bone, or where through long continuance the Caries has chambered the
Bone: in which cases the Lips of the Wound and the Wound it self become
callous, by keeping them long open in order to the Exfoliation of the Bone, in
which case the Lips grow hard, and become thick and inverted. In these the
Sinus's are more or fewer in number, accordingly as the Abscesse or Wound was
more or less sinuous.

This Callus of the Fistula is hastened by the transpiration and resolution of
the thin and subtle Humors, Cause.
and the incrassation of the more pituitous; by the congestion of which a long
Pipe of Skin is made, which brancheth it self inwards from the Orifice quite
through all the Cavities of the Ulcer: from whence it has its name.

The Differences of these Fistulae are made not only from the Parts affected;
Differences.
as some are in Fleshy parts, others in Tendonous, or in the Bones or Joints,
or in the Breast, Belly, etc. but also from the figure, magnitude, and number
of the Sinus's; as sometimes there is only one, then again two or three,
crooked or winding till they enter the Bones themselves.

They are known by the view, and by the touching of the Parts, Signs.
or by searching with a Probe, and from the discharge of a thin serous foetid
Matter, also from the arched Hollownesse they have. If by your searching the
Parts are pained, or if blood follows your Probe, the Fistula is not confirmed:
but if neither happen, then it is.

All Fistula's are hard to cure, Prognostic.
and those of long continuance with great discharge of depraved Humors from
the Viscera are worst. Those amongst the Bones and great Joints are very
difficult to cure, by reason of the Sensibility of the Parts, which for the
most part admits neither of Dilatation nor Incision. Those which are in such
places where you may safely lay them open, or remove the Callus, are more easy
of Cure.

The way of Cure is performed either by manual Operation, Cure.
or by Medicaments. But before you proceed in either, you are to consider that
these Fistula's are subject to Pain and Defluxion: wherefore you are in the
first place to proceed by Evacuation of those Humors which may disturb you in
your work; and that is done by Purging and Bleeding, good Traumatick
Decoctions, with observation of Diet, etc. as is said in the universal
Regiment of Ulcers.

To proceed in the Cure by manual Operation, you are to consider the Part
affected, whether the Callus be only in the Lips, or in the basis of the
Fistula, or throughout the whole length of the Sinus. And this is discovered,
as I have said before, by the Probe, etc. If there be neither Pain nor Matter,
and the Fistula be tending only down directly to the Bone, it will then be
best to let it alone, accounting it as an imperfect Cicatrix, and that it will
in time grow more close: but if it be otherwise, you must then remove the
Callus in order to the Cure.

If the Sinus be in a place where it may conveniently be laid open without
Dilatation, divide it with Knife or Scissors the whole length. If after laying
it open the Sinus be not throughout callous, remove that which is, and heal it
according to the common method of Ulcers. But if the Orifice of the Fistula be
so straight and narrow, that you cannot lay it open, you must then dilate it
with Tents of Sponge, Gentian, Aristolochia, Eldern-pith, etc. until the Sinus
be large enough for your purpose. And to further this work, it may be proper
that you outwardly apply such Medicaments as may by their emollient and
digestive quality resolve and dissipate the Matter impacted in the Parts about
it: and these are rad. althaeae, lilior. enulae campan. sigill. Solomon.
cucumer. agrest. sem. lini, foenugraec. medull. ossium. axung. porcin. axung.
human. anseris, gallin. unguent. dialthaeae, gum. galban. Ammoniac. etc. Of
these you may make Fomentations, Cataplasms, or Cerots. You have also to this
purpose empl. de ranis cum and sine Mercurio, empl. de mucilag. diachyl. cum
gum. The Fistula thus disposed for laying open, you must consider whether you
may not remove the Callus by Cathaereticks: to which purpose Celsus proposes
lachr. papaver. Cadmia, atramentum sutorium, aerugo, sandarach. alum. We
commonly use lap. caustic. Vigon. troch. de minio, arsenicum, ol. chalchanth.
Or thus: cerae, resinae, an. j. sublimat. ij. or more or less; mix this upon
the fire, and dip a Sponge in it, but not too hot, lest you burn your Sponge:
then press it out, and cut it into such a form as may serve your purpose.
Guido commends aq. fortis as most excellent for destroying the Callus of all
these Fistula's. But if you had rather have an Injection, you may make this or
such like: unguent. Aegyptiac. ss. sublimat. ss. arsenic. j. lixiv. sapon. j.
aq. ros. ij. aq. plantag. iiij. boil this ad tertiae partis consumpt. cast in a
little of it with a Syringe three days together, shutting the Orifice up with
Wax or some Plaster: so shall you consume all the Callus. But you must
consider well the situation of the Fistula, lest by its too far penetrating it
hurt the Bone or Parts underneath. After the application of these stronger
Medicaments, you must by Lenients mitigate the Pain, and defend the Part from
Defluxions, which for the most part attend such Escaroticks. These are,
Decoctions of fol. malvae, bismalvae, violar. verbasc. hyoscyam. sem. cydonior.
hord. or ol. vitell. ovor. butyrum, axung. porcin. unguent. basilic. cum ol.
lilior. dialthaea, etc. And apply over them Refrigerants; as empl. e bolo,
oxelaeum, diapalm. cum succis; or some of the Defensatives mentioned in this
Treatise. When the Inflammation is repelled, and the Sloughs cast off, you may
deterge with this: terebinth. in aq. vitae lot. iij. succ. apii, cynogloss. an.
vj. mell. ros. jss. decoq. ad succ. consumpt. deinde add rad. aristoloch. rot.
pulv. ij. far. lupinor. ss. you may add to it pulv. ireos, myrrh. sarcocoll.
thuris, and thereby incarn: then cicatrize with unguent. desiccat. rubr. etc.
If the Bone be carious, you ought to consider how far the Caries has entered
into it, and proceed in the removal of it either by actual Cautery, or
Rugines, scraping the Rottenness off: then by Catagmaticks hasten the
Exfoliation of the Bone, and proceed in the rest of the Cure with Sarcoticks
and Epuloticks. But if the Fistula be near or over some noble Part, or if there
be Nerve, Tendon or Artery near, or if it be deep in the great Bones or in the
Joints, where you may not safely proceed by actual or potentiall Cautery, and
it will not yield to milder Medicaments; you shall do better to palliate it by
some Waters and Unguents, which may dispose the Part to quiet, purging the
Patient sometimes, and observing the universal Regiment in Diet, etc.

AN Officer of the King's Army labored long of a Fistula, Observat. of a
Fistula with Caries in the Os tibiae.
occasioned by a Gunshot Wound in the upper part of the Os tibiae near the
Knee, where it had formerly been shattered, many fragments of Bones casting out
at times. He had been sometime my Patient in France; but here I finished what I
there attempted, and had not time to do. After general Evacuation, I applied
a Caustic the whole length of the Sinus, whereby I took off that Callus, gave
vent to the discharge of that foetid Ichor made in the Ulcer, and took out
several pieces of the rotten Bone which were shut in there. That done I
scraped away the remaining Rottenness, and dressed the Bone with Catagmatick
powders, etc. by which means after some time a Callus thrust forth, and united
with the neighboring Flesh, which incarned with the Lips, and was afterward
cicatrized by the common Epuloticks.

It often happens, that in the time of the Exfoliation of carious Bones, as
in Gunshot Wounds and old Ulcers, while we are attending Exfoliation, the Lips
grow callous, so that the Cicatrix is deep, and the Lips lie at some distance.
In which case heretofore I have taken much pains to smooth them: but have since
by experience found, that in time those Lips sink of themselves, and as the
Callus rises up to them the Cicatrix becomes firm and seemly, without giving
the Patient that trouble of removing them by Cautery or Knife.

A TREATISE OF FRACTURES AND LUXATIONS.

OF FRACTURES.
The Seventh Book.
CHAP. I. Of Fractures.
A Bone is a similar Part of the Body, and the hardest and driest of all. The
Office and Use of Bones.
The general Use of which is, Stabilimentum ac fundamentum reliquis omnibus
Partibus largiri, to be a firm Prop and Foundation, upon the strength whereof
all the rest of the Parts are built. The whole Sceleton considered jointly, may
be looked upon as performing that office to the Little world, that Atlas has
been fabulously reported to do to the Great one: it bears the whole bulk of
it, and sustains it in all its motions; none of which could be performed, if
either the Bones were not, or not so articulated and joynted as upon defection
they appear to be. Nam si ossa abessent, non flecteremus manus, non nervos and
fibras. Nay, if the least Bone be but a little maimed, the use of the Part is
hindered. But they are not only Fulcimenta, as Galen says De Vsu partium, sed
etiam Defensio, but also a Defense. The Cranium, veluti Galea, as a Helmet
defends the Brain from external injuries. So Pectus Ossibus clauditur; the
Heart, Lungs, and great Vessels of the Thorax, are guarded by a Wall of Ribs.
The Spina is a Bulwark to the Marrow included in it: and such a defense is the
Os pubis and the Os coxae and Ileon to the Womb and Bladder. Others otherwise
serve the uses of Nature. As the three little Bones in meatu Auditorio, by
firming the Tympanum, are a great help to the Hearing: the Os hyoides assisteth
the swallowing, by managing the Root of the tongue and the Epiglottis: the
Rotula serves the motions of the Knee: and the Teeth prepare the Meat by
Mastication. Not a Bone but has its particular end set out. There was a reason
of the Temper, of the Magnitude, of the Number, of the Substance, of the
Situation, of the Connection of them; the wise Creator as much shunning
superfluity as deficiency. Indeed, the whole Fabric is so full of Excellency,
that it would take up much time to express it. But that is not my business.
The Subject I have undertaken to treat of is their Misfortune: and that is
twofold; to be fractured, and dislocated. That of Fractures I have proposed for
the first part of my present Discourse; and that only in general, it being
sufficient for my design.

To proceed methodically, Definitions of Fractures.
I shall begin with their Definition of a Fracture, who, according to Galen de
Methodo medendi, make it to be Vnitionis sive continuitatis solutio quaecunque
in osse. But this being too general, and taking in all Cariosity and Ulcers of
the Bones, which hardly belong to this Head of Surgery, the Moderns have
more closely defined it to be, Ossis divisio seu ruptura a causa violenter
irruente. But this likewise seems to me to be liable to many Exceptions. I
shall name only this, viz. That a Cut made into a Bone by a Sword or a sharp
Instrument seems to be rather a Wound, then a Fracture. And for this reason
Guido de Cauliaco makes it to be continuitatis solutio in osse non a re
qualibet facta, sed ab ea quae contundit. But I must still beg pardon, if I be
not yet satisfied with this Description, because it leaves out all such
Fractures as are made by any accidental bowing of a Bone, either in a Wrench,
or any other case where, without any Blow or Contusion of Parts, the Bone snaps
in sunder, and then wounds the neighboring Muscles, even to the thrusting of
it self very often quite through the Skin. These are (cases of Battle excepted)
the most frequent of all Fractures; yet not without some violence to be reduced
to any of these latter Definitions. I shall therefore choose to define a
Fracture in the following words; The Author's Definition of Fractures.
It is a Solution of continuity in a Bone, suddenly made, either by Contusion
or Flexure. By Contusion I mean, either a Blow by a blunt Instrument, or a
Pressure by a great Weight; either of which usually bruiseth the Flesh about
the Bone, as well as the Bone it self. In Contrafissures indeed the Bruise is
not immediately upon the Fracture, but in the place where the Blow is given. In
Flexure there is seldom any Bruise, but what is made by the edges of the Bone
it self after it is snapped in sunder. All other Fractures are reducible to
these.

Amongst the Greeks it was commonly known by the name of Catagma. I purpose not
to trouble you with the nice Distinctions in Fractures, nor yet with their
various Names. Galen in his Book de Method. medendi complains thus in his time:
Non desunt ex Medicis junioribus, qui ambitiose omnes Fracturarum differentias
propriis nominibus interpretantur; There want not (says he) young Physicians
who affect to give proper names to all the several kinds of Fractures: At non
Hippocrates hujus fuit sententiae; nor shall I spend my time so, but, according
to Galen, do take the Difference in Fractures to arise, Differences.
1. a figura, 2. a magnitudine, 3. ab ossium fractorum varietate. First, from
their Figure: and that is either right, quae fit per longitudinem; or
transverse, per latitudinem; or oblique, which is as it were compounded out of
the two former. Secondly, a magnitudine, according as the Fracture is greater,
or less. The third Difference is, ab ossibus ipsis, that is, from the Bones
themselves that are broken, whether it be the Arm, Leg, Ribs, etc.

Causes of Fractures internal there are none, Causes.
unless they proceed ab humoribus corporis erodentibus; and of that sort you
may read many in Schenckius, Fabr. Hildanus, and others. I my self have seen
some, and lately. But these, being from Erosion, are rather to be called Ulcers
with Caries, and therefore more fit to be discourst of amongst Ulcers of that
kind, to which I refer you.

Of Causes external there are many; as the too violent Assaults or Strokes of
all external things, which may bruise, break, shatter, or bend. In this number
of Causes may also be reckoned Falls from on high, etc.

The Signs of a Fracture without a Wound are for the most part very evident.
Signs.
The first and most certain is, when in our handling the Part we feel the
pieces of Bones severed asunder, and hear them crackle. Secondly, the Impotency
of the Member. Thirdly, vehement Pain. Fourthly, a Distortion of the Part. It
may also be discovered by comparing the one Member with the other; the
fractured being the shorter. But if there be a Wound joined to the Fracture,
then if the Bones thrust themselves not forth, yet you may easily know the
Member to be fractured, if you search with your finger or Probe. There is also
a Curvednesse, which may be reduced to a Fracture. I have seen it in Children
often, as in D. C's little Daughter in the Old Baily, and Mr. N's Son in
Blackfriars, and others. It is as it were when you break a green Stick; it
breaks, but separates not: so is cured by a due Extension, with little Trouble
to the Surgeon, or Pain to the Patient after the Extension is made.

If the Fracture be secundum longitudinem, it will appear first by the
unnatural thickness of the Member, then by the Pain and Inequality of the
Part.

As to the Prognostic or Presage, Prognostics.
a Fracture of the Bones cannot be without danger: for of necessity the
Solution of continuity must be great. If a Wound be made in a Fleshy part, it
is then proportionable to the Weapon that made it, and non ultra: but if the
Bone be broken, propter rigiditatem and continuitatem non potest frangi, nisi
totum frangatur. The Fracture is more dangerous in a great Bone then in a
small; and the greater, if both the Bones be broken, as the two Focills in the
Leg, or if it be the Arm, where the Radius and Vlna are: yet if it happen in
the middle of the Bones, it is the less dangerous. Those in or near the Joint
are more painful, and difficultly cured: and if any Shivers press upon the
Nervous parts, ill Accidents commonly follow; but of all the Fractures that
with a Wound is most dangerous.

As to the time of Cure, the lesser Bones are perfected in fourteen, eighteen,
Cure.
or twenty five days, the bigger in forty or fifty, according to Guido. Yet
let me advise you not to be too hasty in taking the Patients out of their Beds;
for in some Bodies the generation of Callus is very slow, and a new Distortion
may happen, and ill Accidents follow. I have been called into Consultation upon
such an Accident, the Patient did recover, but by lying very long within doors
contracted such an ill Habit of body, as was not got off in a long while after.

In the Cure of Fractures Unition is required: but that cannot be made, unless
Pain and Inflammation be prevented. For a Fracture of the Bones is not made
without an internal wounding of the Periosteum and Parts next to it, whence
grievous Pain arises, which stirs up Defluxion, and is attended often with
great Inflammation; and from the weakness of the Member many Excrements are
made and received, which it is neither capable to assimilate, nor yet expel.
And the mischief is so much the greater, by how much the Bones lie deeper under
the Muscles, where they cannot be set, by reason of the great quantity of Flesh
interposing between them and the hand of the Artist. The Intention pursued in
this case is the Union of Bones, as I have already said; which is not performed
by the first Intention, unless it be in little Children, but by the second,
viz. an intervening of Callus.

The Method I thereto propose is, first, to join the fractured Parts together;
Intentions of Cure.
secondly, to keep them so joined: thirdly, to preserve the Tone of the Part;
fourthly, to generate Callus; fifthly, to correct Accidents.

That the Parts may be rightly joined together, there is need of Extension, 1.
Intention.
and Coaptation. For in Fractures, especially transverse ones, the Bones are
commonly distorted, the rectitude of the Member lost, some Parts are prominent,
and others hollow, the fractured Bones lying one upon another; and so the
Member is made short: and quia musculi perpetuo membra trahunt versus suum
principium; Extension.
therefore Extension is necessary, that the Parts which are indirect may be
brought right, and the Parts that stick out may be reduced to their Cavities.
And although sometimes the Member seems not to be short, as if it consists of
two Bones, and one broken, or that the fractured Bones do not lie one over
another; nevertheless you ought to make due Extension in all Fractures,
because the Bones never lie exactly equal, and most frequently they ride one
over another. The want of which Extension is one reason why the fractured
Thigh-bones happen to be so often shorter then they should be, as Celsus has
it in these words; Si femur perfractum fuerit, breve erit; his reason is, quia
nunquam in antiquum statum revertitur. And I find in Galen, that Hippocrates
says the same of the Leg and Arm; and withal tells us, it is so, nisi ante
confirmationem extensio debita abhibeatur, and commoda deligatione ossium
coaptatio servetur. By which you may observe, the fault is want of good
Extension, and keeping the Part in its right seat: for unless that be done,
you shall hazard the starting again of the Bones, and thereby their fractured
ends may happen to be broken off by mutual Attrition in the act of joining
together: and if those pieces do chance to fall in between the main Bones, they
will then hinder their uniting: and if those Shivers slide outwardly toward
the Membranes, they will cause extreme Pain. This inconvenience is therefore to
be shunned by the help of Extension. But again in Extension there must be
observed a mean, as Vigo notes: Ad magnam quidem Extensionem futurus Spasmus
valde suspectus est. Yea sometimes the very Muscles are torn asunder, as Galen
tells us: and Albucasius cries out, Cave Extensionem vehementem and
Compressionem fortem, sicut faciunt multi stolidorum: multoties enim faciunt
Apostema calidum and contractionem in membro. By which it seems in his time
there were such people, who thereby drew sad Accidents, as Convulsions and
Inflammations, upon their Patients. But if the Extension be less then it
should, then, as I said before, the ends of the Bones rub one against another,
and are broken, or not seated in their proper place. Therefore the bigger Bones
having large Muscles, which draw the Member forcibly to their Original, do
require the stronger Extension; and such are those of the Thighs, Legs and
Arms. And if both the Focills of the Arm be broken, the Radius requires the
more Extension, because it has no Muscles to draw it upwards, its motion being
only secundum pronum and supinum. In Extension it behooves us to observe
debitam figurationem, that the Member be extended in ea figura quae minimum
facit dolorem, says Galen: which is done, if the Fibers of the Muscles be
stretched according to their rectitude. Children, and such as are of a soft
Habit of body, do best suffer Extension: elderly and dry Bodies the contrary.

In the next place is to be considered the most reasonable time wherein to
reduce the Fractures. And herein we all agree, the sooner the better, and that
to avoid Inflammation; and according to Celsus, Si in primis diebus non
restauratur, inflammatio oritur, etc. If at the first or second day the
Fracture be not reduced, it is in danger of Inflammation and Mortification: for
indeed after the second day, it is supposed the Fracture is accompanied with
great Defluxion, and so yields not to Extension without hazard of drawing such
ill Accidents upon it self.

Therefore Fallopius in his Exposition upon Hippocrates De Capitis vulneribus,
and by his authority, tells us what we shall do in such a case. Si os non
fuerit in suo loco, says he, ideo ad septimam, qui est primus terminus
Inflammationis, vel usque ad nonam, qui est secundus, debemus been advertere:
and oportet impedire inflammationem. If the Bone was not restored before the
time of Inflammation, then we ought to attend till the seventh day, which is
the first period of Inflammation, or until the ninth day, which is the second
period: and all this time we ought to restrain the Defluxion, vel per
lenitionem doloris, vel expressionem and deligationem loci. Lenimus autem
medicamentis oleosis, quae habent vim refrigerandi, vel per deligationem
pluribus fasciis; either by lenient Medicines, or by Deligation. We lenifie
with soft cooling Oils: we make our Deligation or Bandage by many turns of the
Rowlers. These are to be done until the seventh or ninth day. Inflammation
abating gives you opportunity for reducing the Fracture. Instruments of
extension.
The Instruments for Extension are threefold. First, the Chirurgeon's Hand, for
gentle Extension: and let him place his Hand near the Fracture; otherwise he
shall hurt the sound Part by too much Compression, and not avail himself much
in his Extension. Secondly, for the middle Extension there are Funes and
Habenae, a sort of Bandage fit to pluck at in order to Extension. Thirdly,
there are Organa and Machinamenta, Engines used often by us, but invented by
the Ancients: and they are for the most strong Extension. But before you make
your Extension, consider whether the Member be not fractured in more places
then one. An old Gentleman came out of the Country, and by a Fall going down
Ludgate Hill brake his right Arm a little above the Wrist transverse; and near
the bending of the Arm was a second Fracture oblique. This double Fracture has
happened to others in the Leg. It requires your circumspection, lest the one
escape your sight, and the Member be left deformed, and weakened in its action.

The Extension made, the Extenders are to be loosened gently, Coaptation.
and the Operatour must with his hand endeavor as gently to press down the
ends of the Bones, and join them smooth and even together. And if there be any
little Shiver that will not be placed even with its fellows, cut upon it, and
take it out. You shall know the perfect Coaptation of Parts by these Signs.
Signs of good Coaptation.
First, if the fractured Member answer to the sound; secondly, if by your
handling of it you feel no Inequality; and thirdly, if Pain be abated.

The second Intention in curing of Fractures is, 2. Intention.
that the Parts brought together may so be preserved: and that is performed by
Bandage, which ought to be so made, as not only to keep the Parts so joined
together, but to defend them from Inflammation. And to this purpose I commend
to you that of Hippocrates from my own practice. It consists of three Rowlers
made of linen Cloth, not too course, lest thereby it should offend the
fractured Member; nor yet too soft and fine, lest it break.

With the first Rowler you are to begin upon the Fracture, 1. Rowler.
and take three Turns there. Then roll upward to the sound part, and so a
little higher, and there end this Rowler. It will keep the Fracture a little
steady, until the other Bandage be made, and restrain the influx of Humors
which might cause Inflammation.

The second Rowler ought to be as long again as the first, 2. Rowler.
and must be rolled contrary to the first; as for instance, if the first was
made to the right hand, this must be turned to the left: so that if the Muscles
by the first Bandage were wreathed too much on one side, they now may be
restored again to the other. This second Rowler must begin upon the Fracture,
and after a Turn or two there, must be carried downwards, that so you may
press the influx of Humors from the fractured part. And so having made three
or four Turns downwards upon the sound part, you may roll upwards again by the
Fracture, and making a Circumvolution upon the Fracture it self, pass upwards,
until you come to the end of the first Rowler. And there Hippocrates
terminates this second Bandage, because there is fear of the descent of Humors
a part superiori: and these two Bandages do more defend the Part from
Inflammation, then strengthen the Fracture. But they being made, Splenia.
Hippocrates puts over them Compresses of linen Cloth three or four times
doubled, of such length as to reach over the Fracture; but so narrow, as that
five or six might be placed round about the Fracture, the distance of a finger
one from another. These are to be spread with a little Cerote, only to make
them stick. They are called Plagulae and Splenia from their figure, and do
supply the defect of agglutinative Medicaments, and lessen the Pain, by
hindering the Compression of the Bandage.

The third Rowler of Hippocrates fastens the said Compresses; 3. Rowler.
and its first Turn is made upon the Fracture, the one head being carried
upwards, and the other downwards. And you are to take notice, that the Bandages
are to be drawn more straight upon the fractured Parts then elsewhere, that the
said Parts being more weak, may be kept from Defluxions.

Celsus in his eighth Book, Celsus's way of Rolling.
and tenth Chapter, proposes another way of Bandage. First, he dipped a Cloth in
Red wine and Oil, and applied it over and about the Fracture, and over that he
brought six Rowlers, his two first being those of Hippocrates, and so he rolled
them; then he used a broad double linen Cloth, spread with Cerote, to keep them
close down. And his reason is, because the fractured Bone has always a
propensity that way whither it tended when fractured; therefore, says he, you
are always to put a Compresse of linen Cloth, dipped in Wine and Oil, ei parti
quae contraria est parti in quam membrum inclinat. And over this he brings the
four remaining Rowlers; so as the following Rowler be rolled contrary to the
former, and the third end in inferiori part, in the lower part, reliquae omnes
in superiori terminum habeant, all the rest end above.

These are the Bandages of Hippocrates and Celsus, men of the greatest
Authority in Surgery, and are followed almost by all that have writ since,
and are of excellent use in Fractures in and near the Joints, where there is
fear of Inflammation. But then in your Binding you must observe such a mean as
confists with the ease of the Member bound. Signs of good Bandage.
A small and lax Tumor appearing at the extremity of the Member a day after,
is a sign of good Bandage; but if there appear no Tumor, or if the Swelling be
great and hard, then the Bandage is naught; the first showing the Bandage not
to be straight enough, and the last too straight. Therefore you should often
visit your Patient, to inform your self how the Bandage is.

But if no Accident happen, When to loosen Bandage.
you shall not unbind the Fracture until the seventh day: and then, if all be
well, the Bandage will begin to slacken of it self; and if it be not well, you
may then see your error, and timely help it. And that is one reason, why
Fractures should be opened about that time. Another may be, for that often in
Fractures there is an intolerable Itching, through the detention of Humors,
which are made sharp by Deligation, (Perspiration being thereby hindered,) and
that is wont to terminate in a most painful Excoriation and inflamed Redness.
In which case you are to bath the affected Part with warm Water, that the
Matter may be evaporated: and then the Member is to be bound up again. But here
you are to put Ferulae or Splints in stead of the Splenia or Compresses.
Whereas in Fractures with great Contusion, or in and near the Joints, I have
continued the use of Compresses wet in Whites of eggs during the whole Cure
with good success. And lately a Youth about ten years of age, Observation.
laboring under a carious Ulcer in his Foot, the last great Frost brake his
Thigh Bone according to the length of the Member. This Fracture was covered
with empl. e bolo and Splenia moistened in album. ovor. with Bandage, etc. as
is proposed in this Treatise; by which the fractured Bones were kept even and
close together with much ease to the Child, and agglutinated firmly by the
Callus intervening. Mr. Yowel, sometimes a Servant of mine, set his Thigh Bone
for me, I being at that present otherwise employed.

But all the Ancients after the seventh day did use Splints; and so have I
where they might safely be used: for they not only keep the Member steady, but
straight. And of these some are made of Tin, others of Scabbard, Pastboard, and
of Wood, sowed up in linen Clothes. Those of Tin do very well, by reason of
their lightness. Those of Scabbards are apt to bow, and so those of the
thickest Pastboard, especially if they chance to be wet. And those of Wood are
heavy, and apt to inflame the Member. Yet through the Artist's care they may be
all used with good success, yea from the first day of the Fracture. As in the
case of a Reverend Divine, who brake both the Focills of his left Leg within a
few fingers breadth of the Ancle. This person labored under an Asthma, which
grievously shook the fractured Member; wherefore I was necessitated to put on
Ferulae the very first dressing, which I continued the use of during the whole
time of his Cure. He lately told me, that he never felt the least pain in that
Leg since I took off the last Plaster, which is more then ten years since. But
Hippocrates used them not until the seventh day. For before that day there was
more need of hindering the Inflammation, then of strengthening the Fracture;
post septimam contra, but afterward the contrary is required.

The third Intention in curing of Fractures is, 3. Intention.
in preserving the Tone of the Part. Natura enim os unire nequit, nisi pars sit
sana; Nature cannot knit the Bones while the Parts are under a Distemper: and
that cannot presently be removed. For though fractured Bones be very well set,
yet there will remain some Cavernulae, which will be apt to fill with Sanies,
which the Part through its weakness can neither well assimilate nor expel,
and so is like to be burdened with excrementitious Humors. Therefore
Phlebotomy may be here of special use, and the keeping of the Belly soluble by
Clysters, or otherwise, and a slender Diet must be prescribed. This is the work
of the Physicians. But they not being always at hand, I thought fit to mention
it, and so to proceed to our own work, in keeping up the Tone of the Part. And
hereto we have need of such Medicines quae materiam influxam desiccant, and
inflammationem repellunt, which dry up Serosities, and repel Inflammation. And
these in a word are Astringentia, of which we have choice. Hippocrates used
Cerote, then Red wine: Celsus, as you have heard, used Oil of Myrtills and
Roses, Red wine, and Whites of eggs together: others again used Whites of eggs
alone; and others added Oil of Myrtill, balaust. ros. rubr. sang. dracon. bol.
Armen. and with a little Wine made it up to the consistence of a Liniment, and
applied it upon Clothes over the Fracture. By the use of this latter Medicament
I cured a man whose Arm was soar bruised, and fractured in many pieces, by the
fall of a piece of Cannon, which brake loose in a Storm, while we were
preparing to lay aboard our Enemy. Over this Restrictive I applied Splenia of
double soft Linen with Bandage, as in Compound Fractures, and happily cured
him. If the Inflammation be not great, I then take empl. diapalmae, and some of
the forementioned Powders, with a little Oil of Myrtill and Vinegar, made up to
the consistence of an Emplaster, which I spread upon Cloth pretty thick, and
apply over the Fracture. It not only restrains the Defluxion, but strengthens
the Fracture. The Medicaments proposed are all very good, and excellently
preserve the Tone of the Part, if they be proportioned according to the
greatness of the Malady.

There is yet farther requisite to the performance of this Intention, Position
of the member.
a right Position of the Member: and that, according to Galen, debet esse
mollis; the hurt Part ought to lie soft: for that hard lying presses upon the
bruised Bones and Flesh, and causes Pain and Inflammation. Debet esse aequalis,
ne distorqueat; It must lie smooth or equal, because an uneven placing
distorts or draws awry the Part. Sursum versus, ne humores descendant; It
should lie somewhat high, lest a painful Defluxion fall upon it. Oportet
congruam membri figurationem considerare: It behooves, says Hildanus, to
consider the convenient figure of the Member, that the Muscles be kept in their
right Site, which is most free from Pain. Haec autem est figura media; which if
it be not observed, exiguo post tempore membrum dolere solet. What those Pains
are, you may possibly guess, but no tongue can express. Therefore you ought
to handle the Member very tenderly; and if the Fracture be made in cubito,
place it in a Case made of Pastboard, with a soft Pillow under it, and bring it
up to the Breast with a fine Towell, or the like. But if it be the Leg that is
fractured, we then place it in a Bed, or in a Cradle, or upon a Pillow quilted
in the midst with Junks to support it; having a special care that the Hollow
of the Ham and Heel be filled up, lest the weight of the Foot hurt the Heel,
from whence grievous Pain does ensue, and sad Accidents may follow, as at large
you may read in Fabr. Hildanus.

The fourth Intention is, 4. Intention.
Callum generare, to make Callus; which is to be endeavored after the fear of
Inflammation is over, quia natura partis laesa non potest Callum generare; and
that cease circa diem septimam, about the seventh day, sooner or later. And
if after that time the Fracture be to be set, possunt diversa and mala
accidentia generari, says Vigo. Yet after the seventeenth day of the Fracture
I have set the Thigh Bone, and cured the Patient, without any ill Accidents: he
is yet living to testify it.

How the Callus is made, you may read at large in Fallopius, in his Exposition
of Hippocrates. And though it be not Bone, it is so hard, says he, that if the
Member hap again to be broke, potius in alia part frangitur, quam ubi Callus
est genitus, it breaks anywhere rather then in the Callus.

Two things are therefore required: first, that it be supplied with fit matter;
secondly, that that matter be not washed from the edges of the fractured Bones,
aut for as evocetur, says Galen. As for the matter to make Callus, most
Authors do agree, Diet for the ingendring of Callus.
that there be a greater liberty in Diet. At quo tempore (says Galen) Callus
gignitur, nutriendum corpus est cibis boni succi, and qui multum nutriant. And
that must be viscous: his reason is, quia ossis alimentum crassum. And for that
reason Authors commend at this time Offall of Flesh, and Broths of Kid and
Veal, and the like, boiled with Rice or Wheat. They also allow sweet Wines. But
this liberty in Diet I think is better forborne, for thereby we often see great
Obstructions arise, especially there where our Patients are inclinable to feed
plentifully. Therefore in such Fractures where the Patient is constrained to
keep his Bed, I propose a slender Diet, and of such things as are of easy
Digestion. For without that liberty surely we cannot fail to complete our Cure;
the Bones having naturally a Porinesse in them, in which is always contained a
matter fit for their Nourishment; and ex illo ipso nutrimento in fracturis
generatur Callus, of that Nourishment Callus is made. So if we be careful to
prevent Inflammation, and the like Mischiefs, which disturb Nature in her
actions, and apply such Remedies as may dry the proper Nourishment into Callus,
we shall not fail then of our desire: and those remedies, according to Galen,
ought to be Emplastick and moderately hot. For, says he, ea Callos tum
promovent, tum augent: quae digerendi vim obtinent, ea magnos jam Callos
diminuunt. Therefore it behooves us with care to fit our Medicines to the Age
and Constitution of our Patients. For those which are proper for Men of ripe
age, if applied to Children and tender Bodies, would so dry the Callus, that
they would quite diminish it, and frustrate our Cure. In Children Albucasius
commends to us the application of Whites of eggs alone, or with a little farina
volatilis: in those of more years, pulv. myrrhae, aloes, acaciae, gum.
tragacanth. thus, labdanum, etc. Emplastrum stict. Paracels. diapalm.
oxycroceum, severally or mixed, are proper. But this latter Vigo is very angry
with, and says it is a Diabolical Emplaster, too hot for the Summer, and not
very proper for Winter. Vigo's emplastr. ad ossium fracturas is excellent; and
so is our Catagmaticum in the London Dispensatory. As to internal Medicines,
there are many; but I shall only recommend to you osteocolla, and that by the
authority of Fabr. Hildanus, who often experienced it. The Dose was j. in aq.
rad. symphyti: and with this so given he cured a compound Fracture in one above
sixty years of age. At in juvenibus and succulentis non putat convenire
osteocollam.

Thus I have proposed fit materials for the generation of Callus: now lest
that the matter of which it is to be generated should be hindered from thrusting
forth, it behooves you to alter the Bandage, the Member not requiring to be
rolled now so straight; by which means the nutritious Juices will have liberty
to flow in, and there by graduall Digestion to thicken into a Callus. In taking
off your Dressings, you are to consider whether the Callus generated be such as
is required. how the fault of the Callus is to be remedied, if it be greater or
less then it should be, you shall hear presently.

If the Fractures be simple, whether transverse or secundum longitudinein, they
are cured by the same methods; only these latter require a more strict
Bandage, otherwise the Bones will be apt to rise and make a gibbous Member.

The fifth Intention is, 5. Intention.
the correcting of those Accidents which happening in Fractures retard their
Cure: and they are many; as Pain, Inflammation, Apostemation, Gangrene,
Itching, Excoriation, Callus more or less then should be, Weakness of the
Member, and depraved Figure. If Pain invade the place, then Lenients are
proper, and such Remedies as restrain Defluxion, and hinder Inflammation; of
which sort I have mentioned some, and for more variety refer you to those which
are set down in the Chapter of Phlegmon. If Gangrene appear, slacken your
Bandage, and foment the Part with a Lixivium in which have been boiled
scordium, absinth. centaur. and the like. You may also apply over all a
Cataplasm of Barley-meal, Lupines, with the addition of such Ingredients as
have been prescribed in the Chapter of Gangraenae. But if Itching affect the
Part, then foment it with warm Water, which will give a breathing to it by the
Pores; or with Salt Water, quae propter salem expurgat, and poros aperit. The
Itching neglected is wont to terminate in excoriationem dolorosam, in a very
painful Excoriation, cui occurrendum est exsiccantibus and refrigerantibus;
such are unguent. alb. camph. nutritum, populeon, etc.

As to the Callus, it is sometimes just, sometimes greater or lesser then it
ought. To lessen Callus.
If it be too great, you will perceive it by its bunching out; as also it will
be painful to the touch or pressure; and besides it renders the Part unapt for
motion. In this case abate the Patient's Diet, make your Bandage more strict,
and foment with Discutients, also apply empl. de cicuta, de ranis cum Mercurio,
etc.

But if the Callus bell ess then fit, To increase Callus.
the signs are, quod ad motum redditur debilis, the Bone is weak, and if the
Part be touched you scarce feel the Callus. And this was thought by the Ancients
to proceed from slenderness of Diet, or that it was not enough incrassating.
But I think it rather proceeds from improper Applications, or too straight
Bandage. Yet if the Patient be in years, and of a spare Body, you may both
increase and incrassate his Diet: but withal slacken your Bandage, and invite
forth the Humors by warm Water, not too hot, donec pars rubescat, and in
tumorem attollatur, until the fractured Parts a little swell; tunc enim
defistendum. But if the Member be extenuated, it is either from the too
straight Bandage, or overmuch bathing with warm Water: therefore you must now
bath with fresh Broths, and other good Embrocations. Also a Pitch-plaister
applied, and presently pulled off again, will by its adhesion to the Hair and
Skin cause Pain, and likewise an attraction of Aliment to the Part, and so the
Member may be nourished.

Sometimes also after the Fracture is cured, the Member is found to be of a
depraved Figure, by reason the Bones were not well set, or through ill Bandage,
or some inordinate motion, aut propter inscitiam Chirurgi. To resolve this
Callus, some Authors have adventured to prescribe sundry Medicaments; but they
have hitherto proved unsuccessful. Yet if it be true what a Surgeon lately
affirmed of empl. de minio, the work would be very facil. But Celsus and Fabr.
ab Aquapend. after the prescribing various Remedies conclude at last thus: If
the Patient be young and lusty, and the Callus but six months old, there is yet
one refuge, that is, fracturam de novo rumpere: and in order thereunto, you are
to foment the Part with Decoctions ex althaea, rad. lilior. fol. malvar. taps.
barbat. cicuta, etc. and then rursus os frangitur manibus vel digitis,
impellendo seu comprimendo. But if the Callus be so hard that it yields not to
your hands, then says Fab. ab Aquapend. frango eum instrumento attrahente in
diversas parts. But this, Albucasius, a Surgeon as hold as any, and one
that had seen the effects of such rash undertakings, utterly condemns, saying,
it is operatio valde vituperabilis, perducens ad mortem: therefore he advises
the Patient not to give ear to such vain people, but rather content himself
with such help as emollient Decoctions, Liniments, and Emplasters may effect.
Which in truth is safer, if you consider, that after the Callus is so confirmed
that it will not yield to Extension, then if you should break it anew, or any
other way separate it; yet it would no more yield to a right Coaptation, then a
Hair-lip or my two Fingers will to Agglutination without separating the
Callosity; which is not possible to be done in Bones.

I could have here inserted many Instances of my work in the Cure of the
several Fractures of particular Parts: but it would signify little more then
I have already written, their Cure consisting in the very same Extension and
Coaptation, and they being subject to no other Accidents then what I have set
down: all which I have writ as plainly and feelingly, as if I had been
performing the work in your presence. Yet as a rarity I shall give you one
Instance.

SOme years before the Fire, 1. Observat. of a fractured Face.
I was sent for to a poor Widow inhabiting near Bridewell, whose little Son, of
about eight years of age, playing about the Wharf, was struck by one of those
great Cart-horses full in the Face, beating the Ethmoides quite in from the Os
cribriforme, without any great Wound. The Boy lay for dead a while, and dozed
longer. It appeared a strange sight at first to me, his Face being beaten in,
and the lower Jaw stickling out: nor did I presently know how to help him, or
by what art to make my Extension. But after a while, he a little recovering his
Senses, was persuaded to open his Mouth. And there I saw the Os palati and
Uvula beaten so close backwards, that it was not possible for me to get my
finger behind, as I designed; and other way of Extension there was none. Upon
which I presently formed an Instrument bended up at one end, by which I got up
behind the Uvula; then raising it a little upward, pulled it forward with the
Bone into its former place very easily. But I no sooner let go my Extender then
the fractured body returned back again. I then contented my self in dressing up
the Face with a restrictive Cerote, to prevent the Influx of Humors, and let
him blood, and within a few hours after caused an Instrument to be made,
whereby the great fractured body was more easily brought into its natural
place, and also kept there by the hand of the Child, his Mother and my Servants
helping him some while: other way there was none. Thus by their and our care,
the Tone of the Part was preserved, and a Callus thrust forth, which as it
hardened, the Part grew stronger, and the Face was restored to a good shape,
better then could have been hoped for from such a Distortion in that place. The
Patient is yet alive and well.

A Page attending a Noble Family, riding behind the Coach, fell down, 2.
Observat. of a fractured Clavicle, etc.
bruised his Face, and broke his right Collar-bone. He was taken up and carried
to the next Pretender to Surgery, who seeing his Face much swelled, and his
Nose bloody, concluded it fractured, and filled up his Nostrills with Tents,
binding them up with Plasters; and finding his lower Jaws standing unequally
with the upper, concluded them luxated, and that part of the Sternon under the
Collar-bone was broken down. Things being thus represented, I was sent to view
this Youth: and pulling off the Plaster, and the Tents out of his Nose, I saw
neither Wound nor Fracture. His Jaws did not answer equally to one another; but
by his frequent motion and champing with them, it was evident they were neither
luxated nor fractured. But by his Fall the Bones of his Face seemed to be
pressed inward, and the uppermost Jaws were crushed nearer one another then
they should: and this made the Inequality which our Surgeon thought a fault
in the lower Jaws, and by his pulling them had like to have broken or
dislocated them. The next day he called in a Surgeon to justify his
proceedings. But there appearing nothing of Luxation or Fracture in the Jaws,
we looked upon the Sternon, and found it well; but that Collar-bone was broken
oblique, which we set and bound up, with resolution not to open it till it
should be united. All things being in this hopeful condition, we advised him
to keep his Bed, and left him to observe the Directions of his Physician, by
whose prescription a Clyster was administered that evening, which he voided into
a white earthen Chamberpot, which his Surgeon looking into called it blood,
and alarmed his Friends. But a discreet person looking afterward upon it,
concluded it only the Clyster tinctured with red Sugar, Hiera picra, etc. I
being soon after fetched, confirmed the same, and appeased that clamor. About
the tenth day our Surgeon, contrary to former order, undressed the fractured
Clavicle: upon whose binding it too slack the Bone started, and from that time
it grew painful; so that he dressed it again four or five days after: but the
Pain increasing the more, I was fetched, and upon opening saw one end of the
Clavicle riding over the other, and pricking against the Skin. The Callus being
confirmed, the Patient was removed from his Chirurgeon's house to his Mother's
in the City, where being in great Pain, his Surgeon dressed him again; and
the streighter he made the Bandage, the greater was the Pain. He not imagining
the cause, imputed the fault to the unruliness of the Patient, and declared
that the Fracture was yet in the Bone, and that it was incapable of Cure. Upon
which I was sent for, and seeing the Pain to proceed from the end of the
fractured Bone pricking in the Skin, and the more when it was bound, I caused
half a Wallnut-shell to be plaistered over it: and having thereby defended it
from Pressure, he made use of his Arm, and complained no more of Pain. I then
designed to cut off that end of the Bone, if it again pained him: but from that
time it continued easy, and he recovered the use of that Arm very well.

Thus have I done with that which concerns Simple Fractures. Compound Fractures.
In a Fracture with a Wound, if neither the Bone be bare, nor yet prominent
through the Skin, then you are by Extension to bring the fractured ends of the
Bone together, as was proposed in the first and second Intentions of Simple
Fractures. And the Lips of the Wound are likewise to be brought together by
Suture, if it be any whit large, and not too much contused. Which manner of
dressing is contrary to what is taught in Gunshot Wounds with Fracture; the
method being to be altered upon that occasion for the reasons there alleged.
Then endeavor, as in our third Intention, to keep the fractured and wounded
Parts together by Dressings, which may as well mitigate the Pain, as keep off
Apostemation, by repelling the Matter flowing to the Parts, and drying up that
which already affects the Fracture and wound: qualia sunt Astringentia, that
is by Astringents; with which I have sufficiently furnished you in the
Discourse of Simple Fractures Galen, by the authority of Hippocrates,
recommends Cerote of Roses. But if there be no Pain, you are to endeavor the
strengthening of the Fracture, and preventing Defluxions, by Clothes spread with
that Composition of astringent Powders, mixed with the Whites of eggs and Red
wine, which is already proposed. Then follows Deligation of the Part: and in
this case Bandages are to be made of softer and broader Linen then we use in
Fractures without a Wound, that they may comprehend both the Lips of the Wound,
and keep them down, yet not hurt them by too hard Compression. Minus
astringendae sunt fasciae quam si vulnus non adesset, says Celsus. And
therefore it is that Hippocrates and Celsus make so many Circumvolutions; cum
melius sit saepe circumire quam astringere, says Celsus again. The third day
they loosen the Bandage: then ferulae vel non apponendae, ne vulnus comprimant,
says Albucasius; or if they be put on, super vulnus apponi non debent. Rather
in these Fractures do we use Deligation, pluribus fasciis, with many Rowlers,
says Albucasius. And so all along he proceeds in his Discourses of Fractures,
as if he had been rather bred under Hippocrates or Celsus, in Greece or Italy,
then where he was. But in truth this way of Deligation is not only very
troublesome to the Surgeon, to put on and off, but so very painful to the
Patient, that it is almost impossible that he should ever be without a Fever,
if his Wound be every day to be so rolled and unrowled. Therefore in these
Compound Fractures we choose rather to follow the method of some of the Moderns,
who, in stead of these many long Rowlers, make choice of two or three short
Clothes, folded three or four times double, to give them the more strength. We
also make them of such breadth, as to encompass the Lips of the Wound and the
fractured Parts; and of that length, as to come once about the Fracture, and so
stitch together on the most convenient side. And under these may be placed
Compresses of fine Tow, or double Clothes; which will not only keep the Lips
of the Wound down, but fill up the Inequality, and further the expulsion of
Matter. And so the Wound may be dressed, and the fractured Member relieved at
your pleasure, without giving the Patient the pain to have the fractured Member
removed, or your self the trouble of rolling and unrowling so many long Rowlers
as the Ancients proposed. With this method I have cured Arms and Legs, so
shattered by Splinters from Cannon-shot, and with such loss of Substance, that
I even despaired of their Cure. But in some of these I have made use of
Hippocrates's Plagulae; and often, for the more strengthening the shattered
Member, have been glad to make use of some Splints from the first day; but so
as their compression was gentle and equal, and so placed that the Lips of the
Wound might be kept even, and that the discharge of Matter was by them
furthered. But if the Wound be transverse, it then requires more caution, lest
the Matter should at any time be pressed back into the Wound, and so not only
dilate it, but foul the Bones.

Thus much for a Fracture with a Wound where the Bones are not exposed to the
Air. But if the Bone be bare, and thrust it self out of the Wound, you shall
endeavor presently to reduce it; and after it is restored to its natural
place, let the Wound be stitcht and dressed, as I proposed to you even now in the
Compound Fracture.

A Commander at Sea, 2. Observat. of a fractured Leg.
valiantly fighting in the midst of the Enemie's Fleet, had his Leg fractured
by the fall of his Mizzen-top-mast, it breaking his Leg transverse near the
Ancle, the edge of the Bond thrusting out through the Skin. He not suffering
the Bone then presently to be set while it was warm, afterward, when it was
swelled and stiff, it did not yield to Extension, but became painful and
inflamed. After some few days he was brought to London, and I was sent to him.
He was of an ill Habit of body, subject to the Gout and Dysenterie; and the
Fracture being accompanied with great Defluxion was not in a condition to admit
of Extension. Therefore, according to Fallopius and Hippocrates, before cited
by me in this Treatise, I proposed to his Surgeon to proceed by Lenients, to
mitigate Pain, Inflammation, etc. and by Bandage to hinder Defluxion. Which we
did; and his Surgeon continued that method a few days, by which the
Accidents were remitted. When we met again, finding the Patient in ease, we
took off the Dressings, and agreed to make Extension, and reduce the Fracture.
The Patient was of a dry tough Body, and the Member yielded difficultly to the
Stretch: upon which consideration we satisfied our selves with a moderate
Extension, doubting that upon a more forcible one ill Accidents might follow,
(as an Inflammation presently did. (We dressed it up as a compound Fracture: and
after some days dressing a Callus thrust forth, and united the Bones. That
Callus being confirmed and dried, we hastened the Exfoliation of the foul Bone
by a little Aegyptiacum and pulv. myrrhae dissolved in spir. vini, applied hot
upon an armed Probe. Thus the Bone was exfoliated, and the Ulcer cured by the
ordinary Intentions in such cases. Yet the inward leaning of the Bone continued
a weakness in the Member a long time, as is usual where the Fracture has not
been timely or well reduced. To remedy this, I caused a Bar of Steel to be
fixed in his Shoe with joints, and by a Bracer of Cloth to be laced on, or
tied with Ribbons on the outside of his Leg; by which it was marvellously
strengthened.

But if the end of the bared Bone do chance to thrust it self so out, as that
without great force it cannot be restored to its place; tunc e duobus malis
minus est eligendum; then that end of the Bone which has thrust it self so far
out is to be sawed off: and if this be done timely, before a Gangrene has
seized upon the Part, it may be performed with good success.

In St. 4. Observat. of both the Focills of the Leg fractured.
Clement's Parish behind the Church, some years since, while I was one evening
preparing my Dressings for the setting a fractured Thigh Bone in a little
Child, I was hastily fetched to assist one Mr. Powell, a Barber-chirurgeon, in
the setting a Fracture of both the Focills of the Leg in a Man about sixty
years of age, of a tough dry Body. There I met Mr. Tatham, an industrious
knowing Surgeon. The Fracture was oblique, almost secundum longitudinem; and
the Os tibiae or greater Focill had shot it self out by the inside of the Ancle
a great length. We endeavored by a strong Extension to reduce this fractured
Bone into its place; but it yielded very difficultly to our endeavor: yet we
reduce it, and afterward cleansed the Wound of what Shivers or pieces of Bones
we met with, and brought the Lips of the Wound together by Suture, hoping
thereby to keep the fractured Bone the closer. Then we dressed the Wound with our
Digestive warm, and with an empl. diachalcit. malaxt with ol. ros. and over the
fractured Parts we applied the Mixture following spread upon a double Cloth:
flor. ros. rubr. balaust. baccar. myrtill. bol. Armen. sang. dracon. an. q. s.
pulveriz. cum albumin. ovor. ol. ros. and acet. Misc. ad consist. mellis. This
we fastened by Bandage, as has been showed in Compound Fractures: and for the
more strengthening the fractured Member, we placed Splenia over that Bandage,
with Ferulae upon them; and having fastened them by three Ligatures, we placed
the Member as much to the ease of the Patient as we could contrive, upon a
Pillow quilted in the middle, with Junks to keep it steady. But these great
Fractures with large Wounds, and near the Joint, are always subject to grievous
Pain; and this much more, for that the Tendons and Musculous flesh were soarly
torn, and stretched by the great Extension: so it was not likely to be attended
with less mischief then afterward befell it. We let him blood that night, and
gave him an Anodyne draught to dispose him to rest. But he slept little, his
Pain continuing with much disturbance: a Fever also followed, and within two or
three days he became delirous, and in the absence of his Attendents got out of
his Bed; upon which the great Focil flew out as at first, and the poor man fell
down on the floor as half dead. We were both presently fetched, and taking off
the Dressings, we saw the Bone distorted, the lower Stitches broken, and the
Wound of an ill aspect, as it were tending to Mortification; also the Bone
thrust out so far, that there was no hopes of its being any more reduced by a
new Extension. Upon which consideration we resolved to saw off the end of it:
and to that purpose having prepared all things ready, we cut out the remaining
Stitches, and turned the Foot on one side toward the Small of the leg,
thrusting the Bone more out; the one sawing the end off, whilst the other with
a Spatula defended the Tendonous flesh underneath from being wounded by the
Saw. That done, we cleansed the Wound from the Saw-dust, as also from the
Shivers of little Bones which we had not discovered in our first dressing, they
lying pricking the Periosteum, between the fractured Bones and Membranes, by
which those sad Accidents had been hastened. The Wound thus cleansed, we turned
the Foot right into its natural place, there being no need of Extension: which
being done, we scarified the Lips of the Wound, and washed them cum spir. vini,
with a little Aegyptiac. dissolved in it, and applied to the ends of the Bones
Pledgits dipped in the same, and pressed out. We also dressed the rest of the Wound
cum unguent basilic. with a little ol. terebinth. warm, and applied a Mixture
of an Emplastrum Paracels. and diachalcit. over the Wound and Parts about, and
then a Compresse and Bandage over that, as in Compound Fractures. The great
work was now, how to support the Foot, and keep it even with the rest of the
Leg, there being so great a distance between them without any Bone. But we
having placed the Leg upon a quilted Pillow, laid him again in his Bed, and
fitted it in a Wainscot-case, where it was kept steady and equal, and lay
conveniently for our daily dressing him. This done, we committed him to the
care of his Friends to keep him there quiet, and ordered him cordial Juleps,
etc. After some hours we let him blood again. From that time his Pains
lessened, and his Fever and other ill Symptoms went off as the Wound digested.
But after some days the Heel became very painful, and a Slough was discovered
to us inflamed with an Ulceration sticking to the very Bone. The Patient not
permitting to have the Case, wherein his Foot and Leg was, stirred, it had not
been raised up, as for perspiration it ought to have been; whence this Ulcer
became very troublesome to us. For a present Relief, we laid him upon his Side,
and dressed the Ulcer with Lenients, to hasten separation of that Escar. And
because the Patient grew soon weary of this Position, which also was
inconvenient for our dressing the great Wound, we therefore designed an
Instrument of Tin to receive his Foot and Let, this Heel to lie hollow in a
place cut for that purpose, whereby we could daily dress it without disturbing
the Patient, only placing him down lower toward the Bed's feet, that the Heel
might lie over it. The side of this Instrument, that came up by the Wound, was
to be taken off at the time of dressing his Wound, and afterward placed close
again; whereby he was dressed without disturbing the weak Member. It lay also
soft, by reason of the Folds of Linen we placed under and between the Leg and
Instrument: it was also kept straight, in hopes it might be supplied with
Callus. But the Wound became sinuous, and the Matter fouling the Bones hindered
the growth of Callus; and while we waited for Exfoliation, the Lips of the
Ulcer became callous, which prolonged the Cure. The Ulcer in the Heel we
digested: and after we found the Bone would not incarn, we dressed it with
unguent. Aegyptiac. with a little Merc. subl. dissolved in it; by which
dressing we hastened the Exfoliation of the Bone, and cured the Ulcer. The
Wound above was a larger work: but after the generation of Callus it cured as a
Fistula with carious Bones. The Patient lived many years after: but through the
ill disposition of the Ulcer, the callus was hindered in its growth, whereby the
Leg remained the shorter, almost as much as had been sawed off of the Bone. Yet
this was better, I suppose, then to leave the Bone distorted until Digestion,
as in such like case I have seen done. But if the Bone be not so much distorted
as that you may come to saw off the end of it, or if you cannot reduce it after
the ordinary way; then you may with a Chizell-like instrument thrust between
the fractured ends of the Bone, and use it after the manner of a Lever, for the
reduction of the Prominencies. But then it is supposed these fractured ends of
them are within the Wound, and have not much over-shot one another, and the
Fracture is transverse or oblique: otherwise this may will do little good; nay
may possibly rive up the piece of Bone, and make another kind of Fracture, and
grievously pain the Patient to no purpose. And that you may easily do, if the
ends break off upon your hard and unsteady Extension. Therefore it becomes you
to be very wary in making this Extension; else, I say, you may put the Patient
to sad Pain, and do him little good.

But to conclude, after your Extension is made, and the Bone reduced, you are
to feel if there be any Shivers of Bones loose, and pull them out. And if you
perform this Operation in a Fracture newly made, then you are to prevent
Inflammation, and all other Accidents, by dressing up the Patient with such
Medicines as have been proposed in Compound Fractures; and make your Bandage
so, that you may come to dress the Wound, as occasion shall offer, with as
little molestation of the fractured Member as is possible; having a care you
grieve not the tender Parts with Splints, until the Inflammation be over, and
the Wound well digested.

Then afterward it is to be endeavored, that the Bones robbed of their
Periosteum may again be incarned or exfoliated; which is the work of Nature,
yet ought to be helped by Medicines which have a manifest hot and drying
quality, and a peculiar faculty thereto, of which there are enough set down in
the Treatise of Gunshot Wounds.

The Bones exfoliated, and Cure of the Ulcer will succeed of course, or may be
performed by Epuloticks, of which you may have choice in this Book.

CHAP. II. Of Luxations in general.
IN several Observations in this Book I have had occasion to take notice of
the inconvenience many people have fallen into through the wickedness of those
who pretend to the reducing luxated Joints by the peculiar name of
Bone-setters: who, (that they may not want employment) do usually represent
every Bone dislocated they are called to look upon; though possibly it be but a
Ganglion, or other crude Tumor or preternatural Protuberance of some part of a
Joint. In which cases their rash Extensions do frequently cause sad Accidents.
But their more gainful way is, by extending and dressing up Joints rather
wrencht then dislocated: in which if they escape undetected, they must needs
reap great credit, the Patient recovering so soon the ease and use of them.
Whereas if the Joints happen really to be luxated, scarce one of them knows
how to reduce them. In consideration of this daily abuse, and the inadvertency
of the young Surgeon, whose not timely discerning the Luxation renders it
more difficult to reduce, I have thought fit to say somewhat to this part of
Surgery; and first in general.

He that will give an account of Luxations, Connection of Bones.
and the manner of their Cure, ought first to describe the Connection of the
Bones to each other: on the diverse manners of which depend the great variety of
methods in reducing and handling of them. These Connexions we find to be of two
sorts; 1. Symphysis, 2. Articulatio.

I. Symphysis in its original signification denotes a Connascency or Growing
together; Symphysis.
and perhaps is meant of those Bones which in young Children are distinct, but
after some years unite and consolidate into one Bone. So the Os ileon and Os
pubis are two distinct Bones in a Child, but unite into one in a Man: the
Epiphysis of the Os femoris is a distinct Bone from it in a Child, whereas in a
Man they do entirely unite. But custom and the usage of Authors has found
out another sense of the word, fitted to adult persons; in whom it is used to
mean such a Connection, or two Bones together as is immovable: and of these
there are two sorts. 1. An immediate Conjunction, or Juxtaposition, (if I may
so call it,) without the interposition of any other Body. Of which we find
three Species. First, Sutura, or the indented Conjunction of Bones in the
Scull. Secondly, Harmonia, when without toothing or interfearing they do join
immovably in a straight line: as the Bones in the upper Jaw. Thirdly,
Gomphosis, or the Connection of a Tooth to its Socket.
2. Mediate, where the Connection is made by interposition of another Body. Of
these we likewise find three sorts: which notwithstanding are not so peculiar
to the Symphysis as it is opposed to Articulatio, but that they may be found in
that also. They are these that follow. First, Syssarcosis, when two Bones are
joined together by the intervention of Flesh. An instance of this in the
Symphysis is, the Conjunction of the Teeth to the Mandible by the Flesh of the
Gums. In Articulations we see it in the Elbow or any other Joint, where one
Bone is connected to another by Muscles. Secondly, Synneurosis, when the
Connection is made by a Ligament. Of this in Symphysis we find instances in the
Connection of the Ossa pubis together, especially in Women, by a ligamentous
substance. In Articulations it is either round, as that which unites the head
of the Os femoris to the Coxa; or broad, as the Tendon of the Patella, which
unites it to the Os tibiae. Thirdly, Synchondrosis, which is an Union by
Gristles. A Symphysis of this kind we have of the Sternon to the Ribs.
Articulations are most of them so joined, there being few Bones destined for
motion which have not cartilaginous heads for the facility thereof. These two
latter sorts of Union are compounded in some Articulations; as in the Ossa
coxae, where you have Tendons and Gristles both to join them together. This is
by Galen called Neurochondrosis.

II. Articulatio.
Articulatio is a Connection of Bones with aptness of Motion. Something has
been anticipated already concerning this Head, because of its coincidence with
Symphysis, in the forementioned instances. But take it as it is in it self, and
you will find it to have this difference. There is, 1. A conspicuous Motion,
which where it happens, the Conjunction is called Diarthrosis; as in the Elbow,
Thigh, and Knee. 2. An obscure one, where the Conjunction is called
Synarthrosis; as in the joining the Carpus to the Metacarpus, the Tarsus to the
Metatarsus. And both these are divided into the three following Species. First,
Enarthrosis, where a good round Head enters into a Cavity: whether it be
Cotyla, or profound Cavity, as that of the Os coxae receiving the head of the
Os femoris, or Glene, which is more shallow, as in the Scapula where it
receives the Humerus. Of more obscure motion is that Connection of the Os tali
with the Cymbiformis, which is an Enarthrosis. Secondly, Arthrodia, where the
Cavity is very superficial: as between the head and the first Vertebra of the
Neck, in Diarthrosis; and between the Carpus and Metacarpus, in Synarthrosis.
Thirdly, Ginglymus, which is a mutual Indenting of two Bones into each other's
Cavity: of which the Elbow is an instance, in Diarthrosis; the Vertebrae of the
Back, in Synarthrosis.


Many other things might be said on this subject, were it pertinent to my
present design, which is only to regard the Union and due Conformity of
Joints, in order to the Doctrine of Luxations, in which the Articulations are
chiefly concerned. For when those that are united by Symphysis, as the Sutures
of the Head, and the Bones of the Maxilla superior, are dislocated, there is
always a Fracture concomitant, and the whole is treated as a Fracture. When the
Teeth are dislocated, or to the dislocated, a Tooth-drawer is consulted.

Articulations therefore, whether by Diarthrosis or Synarthrosis, are the
Subject on which my present Discourse concerning Luxations is founded.

When therefore two Bones, Definition of a Luxation.
which being naturally united make up a Joint, are separated from each other,
we call it a Luxation.

The Ancients called it a Slipping of the Head of a Bone out of its Cavity.
Which is true of the great Joints, but not of all: for the broad end of the
Clavicle, where it rests upon the Scapula, has neither Head nor Cavity, yet
is capable of Luxation.

Luxations admit of several Differences. Differences.


1. From the Subject; viz. whether it be a place of obscure motion, or a
manifest one. An instance of one is, when the Clavicle recedes from the
Scapula; which the Arabians call a Disjunction. Of the other, where an Elbow,
Shoulder, etc. is disjointed; which is most properly termed Luxation. There is
also a peculiar Luxation proper to Children, viz. when the Epiphysis of a Bone
separateth from the Bone, they being not thoroughly consolidated into one; which
however is treated like a Fracture, and consequently deserves no place in this
Discourse. 2. From the Degree of it; viz. whether it slip out wholly, or only
in part, viz. to the margin of the Cavity that contains it. To this latter
sort may be referred those Elongations which are the effect of an Humor
soaking upon a Ligament, (as that of the Coxa,) thereby making it liable to be
stretched, and to be thrust quite out upon every little force. 3. From the
Situation and Figure of the Part, as whether upward, downward, forward,
backward, on the right side, left side, etc. of which more in the following
Chapters. 4. Differences may also be taken from Accidents attending them; as
Inflammations, Wounds, Fractures, etc.
Causes of Luxations are internal, Causes.
or external. The internal are the Humors which affect the Joints, and
either by relaxing the Ligaments give way to the Bone to depart from its
natural seat; or by a contraction of the Tendons put it upwards out of the
Cavity. Both these sorts I have seen in Children, and it is likely it was in
some of them hereditary; as Sennertus has well observed, a gibbosis gibbosos,
a claudis claudos generari. The external Causes are, Blows, Falls, violent
Extension: in which latter cases Infants sometimes suffer by the hands of
Midwifes, or at more age by the negligence of Nurses.

The Signs of Luxation may be taken from the loss or imperfect motion of the
Joint, Signs.
and from the different resemblance it has with the contrary sound Member;
there appearing to the eyes or touch a Cavity in the Part whence it receded,
and a Protuberance where it is lodged: the Member is also rendered longer or
shorter, according as the Bone is distorted.

The Signs of Reduction are the contrary to what have been before delivered.
Signs of Reduction.
There is also a crashing noise made by the Bone in its return to the Cavity.
But this is not always a certain sign; for it may proceed from an Eruption of
some part of the margin of the Cup or Cavity. In which case the Luxation is for
the most part rendered incapable of Restitution. But this Fracture makes a
different noise from the other, and may be easily distinguished by the
discerning Artist.

In Children and moist Bodies luxated Bones are easiest reduced, Prognostic.
but are with great difficulty retained: in elderly and dry Bodies the contrary
happens.

Luxations of long continuance are difficultly reduced, and are for the most
part as hardly retained, the parts growing emaciated. Those of the Vertebrae
occasioned by external Accidents are for the most part mortal: whereas some
of those by Congestion are frequently cured.

The Bone luxated makes compression on the neighboring Parts whither it
slippeth; Cure.
and accordingly as those Parts are of more or less sense, so are the Pain and
Accidents that attend it. You ought to hasten the restoring it to its place as
soon as may be. The work is purely Chirurgicall, it having no dependency upon
Nature, but the Extension and forcing back of the Bone into its proper seat is
done by the Hands of the Artist. There are four Intentions necessary to the
Cure: 1. Extension, 2. Reposition, 3. Deligation, 4. Collocation, or placing of
the Member in a right Position.

Extension is first required, 1. Intention.
because of the situation of the Bone, which being out of its due Socket
renders the motion of the Muscles useless, or rather hurtful, which the more
they pull the Bone, the more they distort it, and contract the Joint. This
therefore cannot be committed to Nature, but requires manual Operation.

The Extension being well made, 2. Intention.
you are at the same instant to restore it to the place it fell from. And to
do this, you must consider well the luxated Joint, and which way it slipped
out; for it requires to be returned in the same manner. If it lie on the right
Side, it must be pressed back to the left: and so if it be luxated forwards, it
must be forced backwards. The Shoulder requires one way, the Elbow another,
and the Knee or Ancle another. If the Luxation has been of any continuance, or
if the contraction of the Muscles be great, it will be reasonable that you
first relax them by emollient Embrocations, viz. unguent. dialthaeae, axung,
human. etc. lest by your violent forcing in the Bone you affect the Nerves, and
cause a Paralysis, etc.

Being satisfied in the Reposition of the Bone, 3. Intention.
you shall then take care to keep it so: and that is performed by Deligation.
But before make the Bandage, you ought to apply such Medicaments as have virtue
to resist the Influx of Humors, and strengthen the Part: and those are
Astringents, and such as have been proposed in the foregoing Chapter of
Fractures; viz. bol. Armen. sang. dracon. farin. volatile. balaust. flor. ros.
rub. cum albumine ovi, aceto, aut vino rub. If there be great Pain, you may
embrocate cum ol. ros. lumbricor. mastichin. and apply empl. e bolo, diapalm.
de minio, etc. Then place a Compresse wrung out of some of the aforesaid
Liquours on that Part whither you suspect the Bone may again tend, and roll it
on close accordingly as you see occasion.

The last Intention is Collocation, 4. Intention.
or placing of the Member; and that ought, for the ease of the Patient, to lie
soft, and somewhat raised up, neither much extended, nor too much bent, a
middle figure being best to prevent Pain. Yet if it be the Shoulder that is
luxated, the Elbow ought to be kept to the Side, and the Hand upon the Breast.
If no Accident happen, you must not dress it again till the seventh day; and
then you may alter the Position, and move the Joint a little to and fro, and
dress it up with such Medicaments as may give a breathing to the Humor, and
corroborate the weak Joint. In case it itch, bath it with Salt Water; otherwise
with a Decoction ex summitat. absinth. flor. cham. ros. rub. balaust. bacc.
myrtill. juniperi, nuc. cupress. etc. to which may be added spir. vini. All
greazy Applications relax the Tendons, and prolong the Cure.

Luxations made by Congestion do require Emollients to resolve and breath forth
the crude Humor affecting the Joint, Ligaments and Tendons: to which purpose
rad. althaeae vj. rad. cucumeris asinini iij. summitat. majoran. Mij. coctis in
brodio ex pedibus vitul. and contusis add pulv. sem. foenugraeci and lini an.
j. ol. lilior. axung. human. an. part. aeq. fiat Cataplasma. You may also use
emplast. diachyl. cum gummi, de mucilaginibus, de ranis cum Mercurio, etc. That
Matter being thus resolved, you may then proceed in the Reduction of the
relaxed Bone: and after you have reduced it, apply such Medicaments to it as
may dry up the superfluous Humidity, and strengthen the Joint: of which sort I
have given you an example in the fourth Intention. There will also be required
some extraordinary Bandage to retain the Bone in its place: but of that I shall
have more fitly occasion to discourse in some of the following Observations, as
also of Paralysis, etc. which frequently attend great Luxations.

CHAP. III. Of Luxation of the lower Jaws.
THE Processes of lower Jaws are two on each side. Processes of the Jaws
described.


1. One more acute, called by Anatomists Corona; which has no Socket properly
so called, but plays in the Hollow of the Cheek according to the motion of
the Temporal Muscles, whose Tendon is inserted into it. 2. Another more
obtuse, with a roundish Head, called Condylus. This has for its Socket the
first Sinus of the Os temporum, in which it moves; and is kept close to it by
the Muscles which lay hold either of the Corona before mentioned, as the
Temporal, or of the outward broad Angle, as the Masseter, or the inside of the
broad part of the Jaw, as the Pterygoides. These Muscles, by their perpetual
tendency to a contraction, (which is the nature of all Muscles,) keep the Bone
steady in its situation; but much more so when they are voluntarily contracted
for Mastication, Speech, etc.
It is remarkable, that though Nature has made other Muscles to open the Jaws,
as well as these to shut them, yet they are in themselves slender, and not
inserted into this part of the Jaw, but quite before at the Chin; so that in
their motion they do not pull down this part of the Jaw, but the forepart
only: whereas the attollent Muscles being laid nearer to the Condyli on each
side, keep them so close to their Sockets as to make them a Joint, or center of
motion: from whence, according to the custom of Levers and Balances, it
falls out, that those little diagastrick Muscles, by being applied to the
remoter part of the Jaw, which makes the circumference, become equipollent to
all the bigger Muscles before mentioned; nay, are sometimes so valid, that upon
over-stretching, as in Gaping and Yawning, they pull the Condylus out of its
Socket. Sometimes the attollent Muscles themselves do pull it, when we
violently gnaw any large Bone, Gristle, or other thing that is hard, and
withal so big as to be necessarily detained in the forepart of the Mouth.

This Luxation can be made but one way, viz. when it slippeth over the
fore-side of the Sinus, and passes into the Cavity of the Cheek under the Os
jugale; it being so defended by Bones, that other ways are impossible without
a Fracture.

When this Luxation happens, Signs of Jaws luxated.
the lower Jaw is thrust forward, the Teeth are prominent beyond those of the
upper, the Patient can neither swallow nor speak nor chew, nor indeed shut his
Chaps. If you see him presently before any Tumor supervene, you will find the
Temporal Muscle rigid. If one side only be dislocated, the Mouth is
distorted, as if the Patient had a Spasmus; the forepart of the Jaw is thrust
down on one side, etc.

The Reduction of the Jaws is said to be difficult, Prognostic.
and that if they be not timely reduced, ill Accidents do happen, viz.
Paralysis, Strangulation, etc. To which I can only say, that I never met with
any difficulty in the replacing them, nor yet saw any such Accidents as by
Authors are mentioned: but certainly they are in danger of famishing, for they
can neither eat nor drink while the Jaws are luxated.

In order to the Reposition of the Jaws, Reduction.
the Patient ought to be seated firm, and his Head held steady, lest it start
back in the time of Reduction. Then place a couple of Wedges of Wood close
between his great Teeth, as far as you can thrust them, and your Thumbs close
by them, and your Fingers externally under both the Jaws, extending them
moderately; and at the same instant press the farther parts of his Jaws
downwards, and raise up the fore part. If his Teeth be too sharp for your
Thumbs, put a fold of Linen between. If only one of the Jaws be luxated, move
it to the contrary side, and keeping it in that posture, place your Hand as
aforesaid, with your Thumb upon his great Teeth, pressing that part downwards,
and raise the forepart upwards by a quick moderate Extension, and you shall
feel it reduced, and may conclude it so by the equal meeting of his Teeth, and
by the opening and shutting of his Mouth, also by his ready Speech. If after
Reduction you suspect his Jaws may prolapse, you may apply a Defensative with
Bandage; or in case of Pain, embrocate the Temporal Muscles and Parts about
with ol. lumbricor. mastichin. etc. But hitherto I never saw occasion to apply
any thing.

A Woman aged about fifty six years was sent to me from a worthy Lady in a
neighboring County: 1. Observat. of a Luxation of both Jaws.
both her Jaws were luxated, the obtuse Processes of them were slipped forward
and shot under the Os jugale, and her Chin was thrust forward and inclining
down toward her Collar-bone. She had been so three days, during which she
could neither eat, drink, nor speak. I placed her in a Chair, and Dr. Lenthall,
who came with her, held her Head. Then I placed my Hands on the outside and
under her Jaws, and my Thumbs upon her great Teeth, with a Compresse of soft
Linen under each; and whilst I pressed hard down the farther parts of the Jaws,
I raised up her Chin, and reduced them in a moment: and to satisfy her that
they would not slip down again upon an ordinary motion of them, I persuaded her
to eat and drink; then dismissed her without application of Plaster or Bandage.

A Gentleman of about forty years of age, 2. Observat. of a Luxation of the
right Jaw.
of a sickly weak Constitution, had his right Jaw distorted, by which his Mouth
being drawn awry, it was supposed a Spasmus, and various Applications had been
made to that purpose. One morning, walking amongst my Patients, I met his
Apothecary, who telling me the case his Patient was in, I replied, his Jaw was
certainly luxated: upon which I was the next day consulted, and saw it so. I
laid my Hand on the outside of that distorted Jaw, and placed my Thumb with a
Rag wound about it upon his great Teeth as far as I could thrust it, and laying
my other Hand upon his sound Jaw, I drew the distorted one straight out; and
whilst I pressed down the hinder part, I made Extension, raised up his Chin,
and reduced it. He did not at that instant believe it, but he was soon after
confirmed by the use he had of it. It continued well without any manner of
Application to it.

CHAP. IV. Of Luxation of the Clavicle, or the Collarbone.
THE Clavicle is a crooked Bone made in the figure of an s. one end of which
being thicker, The Clavicle described.
and almost three square, is inserted into a Cavity purposely fitted for it in
the first Bone of the Sternon, and bound in by a strong ligamentous Membrane.
The other end, being broad and flat, is joined to the Acromium, where it not
only serves to keep the Shoulder at due distance from the Sternon, but also
assisteth those several Processes which are provided by Nature to preserve the
Shoulder Bone from slipping upwards from its Cavity.

This Bone is capable of a double Luxation, one at the Sternon, and that only
outwardly, where it rises from the Breast, and lies like a Lump. The broad
end near the Acromium is also subject to a twofold Luxation, viz. upward, and
forward; being defended from all other Distortions by its neighboring Bones.

This Luxation is for the most part occasioned by a Fall and pitching upon the
Shoulder. Cause and Sign of a luxated Clavicle. Prognostics.
It is discerned by the Prominence it makes.

The Clavicle is not so subject to Luxation as other Bones; but being luxated,
it is most difficultly retained after Restitution, by reason of the smoothness
of its heads, and the little hold they have upon the Acromium and Sternon: and
if it be not restored, the use of the Arm is impaired in some of its motions.

The Reduction of the Clavicle, Reduction.
which end soever of it be luxated, must be made by drawing that Shoulder
backwards, and by pressing the luxated end even with the Acromium, or to the
Cavity of the Bone of the Sternon, whence it departed. Neither of the places
affords it much room, therefore it will require your greater care: for if you
place it not exactly, it will scarce hold right till you make your
Applications. Therefore you must have ready Emplasticks, Compresses, and
Bandage. Splints are also of use, whether they be of Pastboard, the Scabbard of
a Sword, or Tin. The Bandage ought to be a Rowler with two heads to come over
the Shoulders, and under the Arm-pit, making so many Circumvolutions as may
retain the Dressings close. This being well made, his Arm must be kept up with
a Napkin or Towell, and his Hand placed upon his Breast. If all be well, you
ought not to loosen the Bandage till you judge it united, which may be guessed
at by the ease and use of that Arm.

I Was fetched to a young Fellow, 1. Observat. of a Clavicle luxated.
who by a Fall from his Horse was supposed to have broken his left Shoulder.
Upon view of it, I saw the end of the Clavicle separated from the Acromium, and
lying prominent without any manner of Fracture; but the head of the Os humeri
was bruised, and remained sugillated long after. I caused one standing behind
him to pull back the Scapula, and with my hands forced down the end of the
Clavicle, and placed it to the Acromium; then applied an Emplaster of
astringent Powders mixed cum album. ovor. etc. over the Clavicle and Shoulder,
with a piece of Pastboard wet in aceto and Whites of eggs; over which I applied
a dry one, and upon that a Compress wet with some of the former Liquour, and
rolled it on with Bandage as above said; then wet that part of it over the
Clavicle with Whites of eggs, to strengthen it and retain it firm. That done,
his Shirt and Doublet were put on, and his Arm tied up, as has been said. Then
I put him to bed, and let him blood in the other Arm, and kept his Body soluble
by lenient Purgatives. After he had lain four or five days in bed, I observing
the Bandage tight, and the Pain and Accidents diminished, permitted him to
rise, and walk up and down in the house. About the eighteenth day I took of
Dressings, and saw te Bone right in its place, the Parts about being only
marked with the extravasated blood. I embrocated them with ol. lumbric. and
spir. vini, and applied an empl. stict. Paracelsi and diapalmae, rolling it up
as before, and from that time dressed it no more, but saw him afterward well
abroad.

Another having by accident of a Fall in wrestling started the end of the
Clavicle from the Sternon, 2. Observat. of a Luxation of the Clavicle.
I made Extension after the same manner as above said, by pulling his Shoulders
backwards, and pressing the while with my hands upon that end of the
Collar-bone, till I had replaced it, then dressed it as before said. But the
next day, finding the Patient in Pain, and the Dressings raised up, I concluded
the Bone distorted. Whereupon I caused a Tin-plate to be made in the form of
the Clavicle, and to reach form one Shoulder to the other, cut at the ends, to
receive the fore-parts of the Shoulders, and keep them out. Then I took off
Dressings, and restored the Bone again to its place, and repeating the former
Applications, placed the Tin-plate over the Compresse, and rolled it on close.
This Plate sat easy, and served to keep out his Shoulders, also retained the
Bone in its place, whereby he was happily cured without more dressing.

CHAP. V. Of Luxation of the Shoulder.
THE head of the Shoulder Bone being round is inserted into so shallow a Cavity
in the Scapula, Description of the Shoulder-bones.
that were there no other Guards for it, it would fall out or be thrust out
almost upon every occasion. But Nature, that found that Shallowness necessary
to the variety of motions which is intended for the Joint, found other ways of
securing it from running out. Viz. 1. upwards it is prohibited from an
excursion by the Acromium, the Process anchriformis, and the broad end of the
Clavicle, which reaching over the latter to the edge of the former, adds to
the strength of the place. Nor is this all, for Nature has made a strong
Ligament which reaches transverse from the Process anchriformis to the
Acromium; and to confirm all, has laid underneath these not only a strong
circular Ligament, which involveth the whole head of the Shoulder, (being
indeed a collection of the Tendons or the Muscles, which lying under and upon
the Scapula particularly serve for the motion of the Humerus, or else lying
upon the Humerus, do take their origin from the Scapula,) but also a Tendon of
one of the heads of the Biceps, which passing through a peculiar Notch or
Trench of the Humerus inserteth it self into the head of the Scapula. Over all
these lies the Musculus deltoides, binding all in so strongly, that if the
Elbow chance to be so pushed that it forces the Os humeri upon this Fortress,
it sooner breaks into shivers then makes a way through. 2. The principal
Guard it has from falling inwards and downwards is its pendulous posture,
together with the many Muscles that keep it in that posture, and chiefly the
Tendon of the Biceps externus, (as it is called in our Hall,) and of the
subscapularis, with the rotundus minor. Yet are not these so strong, but that
between the Tendon of the subscapularis and the Biceps externus it is apt to
fly out into the Axilla. All other ways are so barricadoed with Bones or
Tendons, that the Luxation is very difficult: yet I have seen it lie forward
somewhat under the Pectorall Muscle; but whether it was forced thither in their
attempting to reduce it out of the Axilla, I cannot certainly say, but do
suppose it might.

The Causes of this Luxation are for the most part external, Causes of
Luxation the Shoulder.
by some violent force, either in Wrestling, Running, or by a Fall from a
Horse, or the like. In the time of War it may happen by the force of great Shot
or Splinters. Some instances whereof you may see in the Treatise of Gunshot.
But it sometimes happens from an internal Cause, viz. a Catarrh or Fluxion
of Humors upon the Muscles or Tendons, which gradually relaxeth them to such a
degree, that the head of the Os humeri slideth down into the Axilla.

Its descent into the Axilla appears by an unusual Cavity in the head of the
Scapula, Signs.
where it naturally is full and round. You may also feel the head of the Os
humeri lying in the Axilla hard and round: the Patient's Elbow hangs from his
Side, and cannot be brought so close as the sound without great Pain, nor can
he bring his Hand to his Mouth, or stretch it upright against a Wall. If the
head of the Shoulder be distorted forward, that part will appear prominent,
with an unwonted Cavity behind, if you compare it strictly with the other
Shoulder: the Elbow also hangs backwards, and will not endure to be brought
forwards.

If the Luxation be made by a Relaxation of the Tendons, the Patient's
complaint will inform you, and the Emaciation of the Arm will make the foresaid
Symptoms more apparent.

A Luxation of the Os humeri from an external Cause is not very hard to reduce
in Children or soft Bodies, if timely undertaken: Prognostic.
but contrary in elderly people and tough musculous Bodies: and such are
frequently slow in recovery of their former strength and motion. Sometimes a
Paralysis seizes them, and they emaciate: but by timely Endeavors they do
recover. If in the Reduction or otherwise any part of the Cupula chance to be
fractured, the retention of the Os humeri is not an easy task. Luxations made
by Fluxion may be easily reduced, but are most difficultly retained in the
Capsula.

The Reposition of the luxated Shoulder is performed either by the Hand,
Reduction by the Hand.
Bandage, or force of Instruments. He that will reduce it by Hand must put it
in a motion contrary to that it went out by. In its going out, it is first
thrust or pulled forwards, till it come beyond the edges of the Cupula; then it
falls down below the Cupula, and is by the Muscles pulled backward. He that
will reduce the Bone this first way must reverse these motions; viz. first
bring it forward, then upward, then thrust it in. By the observing this method
I have reduced the Shoulders of Infants and little Children so soon, that the
Standers by have hard them knap in before they knew they were out. But the way
of reducing the Shoulder in those of more growth must be, if done by one man
alone, by placing the Patient in a low Seat, and clapping his Fingers under his
Arm-pit, his Knee or Thighs to the outside of his Elbow, and his Head to the
point of his Shoulder. By his Fingers strongly bent together, he pulls the
Bone both forward and upward. By his Thigh or Knee pressing his Elbow to his
Side, he does likewise help to raise it and bring it forward. The pressure of
his Head keeps down the Scapula, that it may not rise with the Bone. But
because this application of the Knee, Head, etc. is not easily practicable but
upon little and slender men, we generally commit the pressing of the Elbow
toward the Ribs to another man.

After this manner the Elbow is brought quite back to the Spine: which being
done, his other Hand must be placed under the Axilla, to raise the head of the
Humerus forward and upward, whilst the Surgeon with his hands presses down
the Scapula to receive the Bone.

When the head of the Os humeri lies distorted forwards under part of the
Pectorall Muscle, the Patient's Elbow must be drawn backward, and held close to
the Spine, whilst the Surgeon presses with both his Hands forcibly upon the
head of the Bone.

There is yet another way of restoring the luxated Shoulder by the Hand thus:
You are to make choice of a proper lusty Fellow on whose shoulder you must hang
the Patient by the luxated Arm, bringing his Hand over to the Fellow's Breast.
If the weight of the Patient be not sufficient to make the Extension, some
other body may hang upon him, or pull him by the Legs downward.

But because these ways of Reduction by the the Hand are not always fecible,
Reduction by Bandage.
especially in strong muscular people, we therefore make use of Bandage and
several sorts of Engines. The most common way of Bandage is by that of the
Girt, which Girt has a Boulster in the middle, and the ends are tackt firmly
together. In the use of it the Patient must be placed so, that part of the Girt
with the Boulster is to be placed under the Arm-pit, and the other part over
the Chirurgeon's Neck, that he may thereby with all his force raise up the head
of the Humerus: which that he may the better do, his Assistent must sit behind
the Patient, and pull his Arm backward with all his might; and if the
Surgeon presses with his Hands upon the head of the Scapula at the same
time he raises up the Humerus, he shall reduce it more easily.

There is another way of Reduction by Bandage, and that is, by laying the
Patient flat on his Back on the ground, the Surgeon sitting behind him, and
making Extension by the foresaid Girt or other Bandage placed under the Axilla,
whilst his Assistent lies along at the Patient's Side, and presses with his
Heel upon the foresaid Bandage, and at the same instant takes the Patient by
the Hand, and pulls his Arm with all his force. Thus by their several
Extensions the head of the Shoulder Bone may be raised and reduced.

Instruments proper for the Reduction of the luxated Shoulder are, Reduction by
Instruments.
Ladder, Coulstaffe, Pulleys, Glossocomium, etc.

The way of Extension by a Ladder is, that the Patient climb up three or four
Steps of it, and put his lame Arm over one of the Staves, placing it between
his Side and the head of the Humerus; and that a strong Fellow take hold of
that Arm, and pull it forcibly down backward, whilst the Patient hangs by it.

The way by a Coulstaffe is safer. The Staff must have a Bunch in the middle
somewhat Wedge-like, and covered with a soft Boulster fit to place under the
Patient's Arm-pit. In order to the Extension, the Patient must be seated near
some Post or Pillar, in which the Pulley must be fastened to extend his Arm;
and the Bandage must be made a little above the Elbow: which being fastened, and
the Coulstaffe placed, and supported by a couple of Fellows, the Surgeon
must stand on the contrary side, with his Hands on each side of the Scapula, to
press it downward, and keep the Patient firm in his Seat, and govern the
Operation, taking care that the Wedge be placed right whilst the Extension is
making, lest they break the Bone, or otherwise mischief him.

The Glossocomium, commonly called the Commander, is of use in the most strong
tough Bodies, and where the Luxation has been of long continuance, and will
not yield to the other ways of Extension. There ought to be great care in the
use of it, for many shrewd Accidents have happened thereby.

The Humerus luxated by Relaxation of the Ligaments and Tendons is restored to
its place after some of the was above said, but does require your industry to
retain it after it is reduced: more of which by and by.

A Lady going on evening out of her Coach into her house, 1. Observat. of a
luxated Shoulder.
trod upon her Gown, and fell down. I being fetched, found her sitting in the
same room grievously complaining of her right Shoulder. Lookig upon it, and
feeling the head of the Humerus lying in her Arm-pit, I endeavored to reduce
it by Circumrotation: but it not yielding thereto, I caused one of her Servants
to pull her Elbow back toward the Spine, then to thrust it forward. During
which I stood on the contrary side, with one of my Hands upon the head of the
Scapula, and the other under the Os humeri; and at the same instant my
Assistent thrust it forward. I forced it into its place: the people standing by
heard it knap in, and the Patient declared it by the ease she felt. Then I
applied an empl. e bolo round the weak Joint, with a proportionable Compresse
wrung out of Oxycrate, and rolled it on. After which her Servants led her to
her Chamber to bed. The next morning I visited her. She had rested well, and
was so easiy, that her Physician, Sir William Gideon, would scarce believe that
the Bone had been luxated. The Lady prepared to remove to her Country House,
and undertook the Cure her self by some Plasters of her own. But during the
application of them her Arm grew weaker, and emaciated very much, and was
painful about the insertion of the Muscle Deltoides, and so to her Hand, with
a nummednesse in some of her Fingers. Whereupon she returned back, and
consulted Physicians. One whereof, supposing the Bone still dislocated, advised
the consulting a Bone-setter. I being present, he acknowledged the Bone well
set. What he would have said had I been absent, may easily be guessed by his
former dealing with others of my Profession. From that time Antiparalyticks
were prescribed, a Fontanell was made in that Arm near the Muscle Deltoides,
also Embrocations and Plasters were externally applied; whereby she recovered
the use of her Arm.

A Nobleman who was a Commander of Horse in that Army which came out of
Scotland into England, 2. Observat. of Reduction by the Foot.
was by some accident thrown off his Horse, and would not be raised off the
ground till I came. He complained of his right Shoulder. I looking upon it,
felt the head of the Humerus lie distorted in his Arm-pit. I endeavored to
reduce it by my Hands, as above in the former Observation: but it not yielding
thereto, I caused Mr. James Davies, who was Surgeon to those Guards, to pull
off his Boot from his right Leg, and to lie along upon the ground by his
Lordship, to make Extension that way. Whilst he was making ready, I clapped a
Compresse under the Patient's Arm-pit, with a Towell over it, and placed my
self at his Lordship's Shoulder, and made Extension by the Towell, whilst my
Assistent took the Patient by the Hand, and thrust his Heel into his Arm-pit
with all his might. We having thus reduced the Bone into its place, I applied
an emplastrum e bolo over the Shoulder, and a Compresse of Tow pressed out of
acetum under the Arm-pit, and rolled them on. That done, his Servants made him
ready, and helped him upon his Horse. I made him a visit that night at his
Quarters, designing to let him blood in the contrary Arm: but his Shoulder
being easy, and not hurt in any other part, I took my leave of him, tellig him
his Shoulder ought not to be dressed till after six or seven days. But this
person forgetting what I had said, thought himself neglected, and complained to
his superior Officers of me. Whereas in truth, if the Bone be well set and
bound up, it is not material whether it be any more dressed or no. Thus in an
Army we are frequently rewarded, if we do not attend them as their meniall
Servants.

One morning Mr. Faucett, Surgeon to his Royal Highness, 3. Observat. of
Reduction by the Hand.
sent to my house, when I lived in the Old Bailey, to come to him into
Blackfriars, to help him to reduce a luxated Shoulder of a man lodged there.
The head of the Humerus was fallen down into his Arm-pit. The way of Reduction
proposed by Mr. Faucett was by a Girt. We placed the man on the ground, and
that part with the Boulster under the man's Arm-pit, and put the Girt about Mr.
Faucett's Neck, who stood over him with his Hands upon the Scapula; and whilst
I drew the Patient's Elbow backward close to his Spine, and thrust the head of
the Humerus upward, Mr. Faucett raised up the head of the Bone with all his
force, and it knapt in. The Bone being thus reduced, Mr. Faucett slipped the Girt
off his Neck, and dressed up the man's Shoulder with Astringents and Bandage as
has been said. 4. Observat. of Reduction by the Coulstaff.


In the year 1657. whilst I was riding to a Noble Family in the North, I was
desired upon the Road to make a visit to a man who had some days before put his
Shoulder out of joint. I did so, and saw his Arm miserably stripped of its
Cuticula by the Bandage which the several Bone-setters had endeavored to make
the Extension by; yet the Bone lay lodged in his Arm-pit. I applied over the
Arm cerat. Galeni, and gave direction to have a Coulstaffe made ready against
next morning, with a Wedge-like prominence in the middle of it, covered with
soft Clothes; and that the Bone-setters should meet me at the Patient's house.
The next morning we met, and having all things ready, I caused the Patient to
be seated with his luxated Arm near a strong Pillar, which supported part of a
Mantle-tree; then took off the Dressings, and fomented and embrocated his
Shoulder with Emollients; then folded a Cloth about his Arm a little above his
Elbow, and fastened a Bed-cord over that, and tied the ends of it about the
Pillar, and with a Bed-staff twisted it, showing one of the company how to
twist it, and make Extension of the Arm by it. Then I placed the Coulstaffe
with its Wedge close under the prolapsed head of the Humerus, two strong men
the while supporting the ends of the Staff proportionably high, I standing on
the contrary side with my Hands on the Scapula to draw it back, and press it
downward to receive the head of the Humerus, and to govern the Operation, the
Bone-setters looking on. All things being thus ready, the one twisted the Cord,
and thereby extended the Arm; the other held the Coulstaffe firm and close to
his Side. During the Extension our Patient roared, and one Bone-setter called
to me to forbear the Extension, saying, Why will you strive against the Lord?
and turned from us, declaring that I would kill the man. But the head of the
Humerus was then moving; upon which consideration I bid the man twist on: and
at that instant the Bone knapt in, and we loosened the Bandage; then dressed it
up with empl. e bolo with Bandage, and put him to Bed. There being little more
required, I went on my journey.

In the year of the great Sickness, 5. Observat. of Reduction by a Pulley and
Coulstaffe.
whilst I was in the North-country, a Gentleman sent his Servant to me, who had
some half a year before luxated his right Shoulder. He had been with a
Bone-setter, who took some pains in stretching it, and made him believe he had
set it: but upon sight of it, I concluded it luxated, and felt the head of the
Humerus lying in his Arm-pit. I being then lame of my fractured Leg, and
indisposed with coughing blood, advised the man to return to his Bone-setter,
and tell him what I had said. He did so, and traveled from one Bone-setter to
another. Every one of them attempted the Reduction, and pretended they had set
it. But the Patient returning still to me with it unset, I sent for a Pulley,
and causing it to be fixed to a strong Post, and a Coulstaffe to be held under
his Arm-pit by two strong people, we made Extension of the Arm, and reduced the
Shoulder, as in the former Observation has been showed, without much
difficulty. Then I dressed it up with a restrictive Emplaster and Bandage as
above said, and he recovered the use of his Arm.

The deceased Mr. Edward Molins and my self were sent for to a Fencer who had
put his Shoulder out of joint. 6. Observat. of Reduction by Glossocomium.
We endeavored to reduce it by the help of the Girt and our Hands: but he
being of a strong muscular Body, we could not move it. We therefore embrocated
the Shoulder cum oleo ex ped. bovinis, and dressed it up with cerat.
dialthaeae. The next day we came prepared with a Glossocomium, well known to
the young Surgeons by the name of a Commander, and reduced the luxated Bone;
then dressed up his Shoulder as above said. This foresaid Instrument is
frequently used in reducing these Bones in strong tough Bodies, and where the
Luxation has been of long continuance: but the use thereof requires great
caution, for sometimes sad Accidents have happened theregby.

Luxations from internal causes are for the most part irremediable: yet I
shall give you a couple of Instances of my attempts therein.

A young Woman having been long diseased with a Pain in her right Shoulder, 7.
Observat. of luxation by Congestion.
with an Emaciation of that Arm, came to me recommended by Doctor Chamberlain
Sen. Her Shoulder seemed to me luxated; but her Surgeon not being of that
opinion, I declined the meddling with her: yet being afterward solicited by
some of her Friends, I sent her to a Chirurgeon's house, who was one of the
Masters of Anatomy, whither I followed, and met several Masters of that
Faculty there at a private Dissection. They together viewed and felt her
Shoulder, and unanimously concluding it luxated, prepared for the Reduction of
it; and having reduced it by Pulley and Coulstaffe, dressed it up accordingly.
But the Ligaments and Tendons were so relaxed, that afterward upon slackning
the Bandage it relapsed.

A Child of about four years of age having had his left Shoulder luxated from
his infancy, the Arm emaciated and grown useless, 8. Observat. of Luxation by
Congestion.
I being at last consulted did presently reduce it by lifting up the head of
the Humerus with my Fingers: but the Tendons being extremely relaxed, the Bone
slipped down again as soon as I removed my Fingers. Wherefore I sent for Mr.
Smith a Trusse-maker, and appointed him to fit the Child with a pair of Bodies
stiffened on the lame side, wherein was fixed a Bar of Steel with a head like a
Soldier's Rest, which by a Screw was raised proportionably to support the head
of the Humerus. This being made, I placed a Fontanell in that Arm, and rolled
up the other Arm from the Hand to the Shoulder, and braced it to his Breast,
designing thereby to force Nourishment into the lame Arm, and necessitate him
to use it. But the Child growing froward, they set it again at liberty. Upon
notice thereof I deferred farther proceeding in the Cure, till the Child should
be more governable; advising the Parents to repeat the use of the former
Prescriptions of their Physicians as they should see occasion.

CHAP. VI. Of Luxation of the Elbow-joint.
THE Joint of the Elbow is made by the concurrence of three several Bones:
Description of the Elbow-joint.
1. the Os humeri, 2. the Vlna, 3. the Radius. The Os humeri ends broad
toward the Cubit with a double head, the inward fitted for the reception of
the Vlna, the outward for the Radius. The inward head is exactly shaped, and
covered with a Gristle, which renders it smooth, and fit for the motions of
the Vlna, which with a suitable Cavity plaieth about it, inserting upon every
extension of the Arm its utmost Process (called the Olecranon of Ancon) in the
large Cavity that is situate on the backside of the Humerus. In every Flexure
its lesser Protuberance plaieth into a lesser Cavity in the exterior part of
the said Humerus. The Radius meanwhile, being round and flat, with a very small
Excavation does play upon the outer head. These Heads have yet a farther use,
viz. by their respective Processes to make a station for several Muscles: the
outer Protuberance giving original to all the Extensors of the Hand and
Fingers; the innermost to all the Flexors of the same. The Joint it self,
besides the Ginglymoide connection of the Vlna to the Humerus, is tied fast by a
strong Ligament, and well bound in with Muscles. Viz. on the inside it is lined
with the strong and thick, but very soft, end of the Brachiaeus internus, whose
Ligament, though hard and thick enough, yet has a soft Pillow of Flesh
interposed between it and the Joint, that so the pressure may not hinder the
motion thereof, but rather give way to it. Yet is the pressure strong enough to
keep the place firm, which the accession of the Tendon of the Biceps does much
more corroborate; so do the Pronator radii teres and Supinator longus, etc. The
outer part is well guarded by that great strong Muscle which usually is
reckoned for two, viz. the Biceps, and Brachiaeus externus, which uniting
together have a fleshy soft inside, but with a strong broad Ligament fixed on
the outside to the Olecranon. There is also a little Muscle called Anconeus,
which reaching from the end of the Humerus obliquely transverse does insert it
self into the Vlna corroborating the Joint.

The Radius also is bound close to the side of the Vlna and to the Humerus by
two remarkable Ligaments; viz. the circular one that involveth the Joint, and
the broad one that uniteth it and the Vlna together: it is also bound down by
the neighboring Muscles, especially the two Supinators and the Pronator teres.

He that considers the figure of the Vlna, and the strength whereby it is
tied to the Humerus, will think the Luxation of it almost impossible: Yet even
this also is sometimes made by the force that may be put upon it, and that four
several ways, if we may believe Authors; as ouotwardly, inwardly, and to each
side.

If the Luxation be forward, Signs of the Elbow luxated.
the Arm hangs straight out, or rather outward, and he cannot bend it; a
Prominence appears in the Bout or inside of it, and an unwonted Cavity where
the Elbow should be. But if the Luxation be backward, the Cavity will be in the
forepart, and the Arm curved. If the Luxation be on the inside, the Cavity
will be on the outside; and so the contrary, if it be externally distorted.

The perfect Luxations of this Joint do rarely happen. Prognostic.
When they do, they are difficultly restored: and if there be a Fracture of any
of the Processes of the Joint, the case is deplorable.

If the Cubit be luxated forwards, Cure.
the Arm must be extended, but not in a straight line, lest you break the tip
of the Vlna, but obliquely. To which end, two persons being employed, one to
hold the Humerus, the other to pull the Arm below, a third person must guide
the Elbow so as to keep it bent, and to direct the Bone. Which is done by
pressing a Boulster upon the bend of the Joint, or by a Girt or other Bandage
pulled behind, or by one in the nature of a Stirrup, in which the Surgeon
may put his foot, and make Extension that way.

If the Luxation be backwards, the Extension being made obliquely as before,
the Reposition is easily guided by the Chirurgeon's Hand. Yet since the
extending Muscles of the Cubit are very strong, it will be necessary that the
Muscles serving the Cubit be first well embrocated with lenient Ointments: but
if notwithstanding you cannot reduce it by Hand, the Ladder or other Engines
must be used. And after Reduction apply Restrictives, etc. for these Luxations
are subject to great Fluxion, Inflammation, etc.

THE former of these Luxations happened to a Servant-maid in Whitefriers
carrying a Pail of water. Her Feet slipping, 1. Observat. of a luxated Elbow.
she endeavored to save her self; but falling backward, she pitched upon her
right Hand, and distorted the head of the Bone inward a great way. The poor
creature was carried into the next house, being an Alehouse, and Mr. Clarke a
neighboring Surgeon and my self were fetched. Dressings being made ready,
and the Wench seated, one of the company stood on the contrary side of her,
with both his Hands upon that Arm below the Shoulder, and held her firm. Mr.
Clarks made Extension below the Cubit, and my self with a boulstered Girt upon
the prominent Bone in the Bout of the Arm pulled it backward. After we had thus
come to the very brink of the Joint, Mr. Clarke bowing the Arm suddenly
forward, I drew it back into the place; then embrocated it cum ol. ros.
myrtill. and aceto, and applied empl. e bolo with Bandage, and left her Hand
upon her Breast. But she was lame long after.

If the Cubit-slip out side-way, the Reduction may be made by Extension and
impulse of the Hand.

That of the Radius is also reduced by the like means; so that examples need
not be given: only in the other of a curved Wrist, I shall give one Instance.

A Lady being overthrown in her Coach, 2. Observat.
the lower Process of the Vlna called Styloides was distorted from the Radius,
and one of the Bones of the Carpus shoved between. I made Extension of the
Wrist, and pressed that Bone of the Carpus to its fellows smooth, then thrust the
Process of the Vlna close to the Radius, and applied round the luxated Joint
an Emplaster of a stringent Powders cum album. ovi, Splints, and Bandage, as in
a fractured Bone, and placed it on her Breast, and thereby restored it to good
use and its natural figure.

CHAP. VII. Of Luxation of the Carpus, Metacarpus, and Fingers.
THE Carpus is composed of diverse Bones. One lies out of order. Three of them
are joined to the Processes of the Radius and Vlna, four to the Metacarpus, and
all of them bound in by a strong Ligament, by the strength of which the Joint
is made more firm. Yet these Bones may be all thrust out together, or any one
of them single, inwardly, outwardly, also toward either side.

This Luxation is discovered by the Tumor it makes in the place where it
lies distorted; also by the Flexure or Extension of the Fingers. Signs of the
Carpus luxated.
Viz. if the Bones be moved inward, the Flexors of those Fingers are so
stretched, that the Extensors cannot stir them: and so contrary, if the Bones
start outward, the Extensors are immovable: and if they be luxated sideways,
the Hand leans either to the Thumb or little Finger.

The way of Reduction is, Reduction.
to lay the Hand and that part of the Arm flat upon a Table, and make Extension
above and below: during which the Surgeon presses down the prominent Bones
with his Hands into their several Cavities. The Bones reduced, remove the
Hand, and place it upon a Ferula, and dress it up with Restrictives, Compresse
and Bandage.

The Fingers may be luxated backward, Luxated Fingers.
forward, or on either side. The single Luxation of the several Bones may be
demonstrated by their Protuberance, and by the complaint of the Patient. They
may be easily reduced by Extension, they having no Process to hinder: and being
reduced, the common Restrictive and Bandage will retain them so.

CHAP. VIII. Of Luxation of the Hip.
THE Joint of the Hip is a Connection of the head of the Os femoris to the
Acetabulum of the Os ischion, Description of the Hip.
which is done by two strong Ligaments: one outward and membranous,
encompassing the whole head of the Femur, from the edges of the Acetabulum to
the farther end of the neck, where it touches the great Trochanter: the other
inward, of a round figure, like a Cord tying the utmost apex of the Caput
femoris to the inner side of the Acetabulum near the center. This Articulation
is confirmed and strengthened by great strong Muscles; viz. on the outside by
the three Glutes, on the inside by the Triceps, together with the Levidus, and
the four little Rotators. All which being duly considered, it must needs
follow, that the force must be great that does drive this out of its place. Yet
when the weight of the Body and the undue position of the Thigh do concur, they
frequently make that Luxation: so likewise does sometime external force.

It is remarkable, that this place admits not of a Semi-luxation as others
do; the head being so round, and the Cavity so glib, and deep, that whatever
the force be, if the head be not thrust quite out, it will slip in again as
soon as the force cease. It does slip out four several ways, outwardly,
inwardly, forward, and backward. Yet these two latter I never saw; but by
Congestion the Ligaments and Tendons may be so relaxed, that it may fall out
either way.

If the Luxation be inward, Signs of a Hip luxated.
the head of the Femur may be felt round and hard a little beneath the Groin.
But if the Patient be in bed, you may judge of it by turning up the clothes at
the bed's feet; the Leg will appear longer then the other, and the Knee and
Foot lie turned outward. If the Luxation be outward, that Leg will be much
shorter then the sound one, and the Toes truned inward.

In a relaxation of the Hip, the Leg hangs for the most part directly down and
loose, is weak, turns either way, and is much emaciated.

Luxations of the Hip are difficultly reduced, and being so, Prognostic.
are extreme apt to prolapse, by reason of the overgreat Extension or Ruption
of the internal Ligament, which should hold the Bone in its Acetabulum. And if
it be not reduced, it will be subject to great Pain and Fluxion from the
over-stretching of the Muscles, and pressure upon them with its great head: yet
after some months those Muscles become callous, and having yielded to the
Extension, the Patient makes a shift to go upon it, though lamely. But the
Member suffers an Atrophia, and is shorter then the other.

When the Luxation happens by Congestion, it is subject to Apostemations, and
the head of the Bone corrupts by lying slabb'd in the Humor, and the Patient
languishes and dies emaciated.

If the Thigh Bone be luxated inward, Reduction of the Os femoris.
and the Patient young and of a tender Constitution, it may be reduced by the
Hand of the Surgeon: viz. he must lay one Hand upon the Thigh, and the other
upon the Patient's Leg; and having somewhat extended it toward the sound Leg,
he must suddenly force the Knee up toward the Belly, and press back the head
of the Femur into its Acetabulum, and it will knap in. For there is no need of
so great Extension in this kind of Luxation; for the most considerable Muscles
being upon the stretch, the bowing of the Knee as before said reduces it. Yet
in tough Bodies it may require stronger Extension: and in that case the Patient
must be laid upon a Table flat on his Back; and a Pin of a good thickness ought
to be fixed in the middle of the Table, to stand up between his Legs close to
that Inguen, that the Extension may be made thereby. During which, the
Extension must be made by two men, the one pulling him by that Arm-pit, the
other by the Leg: which latter Extension must be made obliquely toward the
sound Leg.

If the Luxation be backward, he must be then laid upon his Belly, and the Pin
placed as aforesaid in his Twist: it ought to be as thick as a Rowlingpin, and
covered with Cotton, that its hardness may not be offensive. The Extension may
also be made upward by a Towell or Girt between his Thighs: and the while that
Leg must be stretched by Pulleys or such like strength, and the Bandage fastened
above the Knee.

The Bone once reduced, dress it up with Restrictives and good Compresse and
Bandage, then bind it to the other Leg, and keep him in bed: for these Bones
are apt to start, especially if the Ligamentum teres be broken. If after
Reduction and such Regulation the Bone do start again, I should forbear any
farther forcing it, to avoid the danger of Apostemation, etc. For, as I have
said, they may recover strength to go on it, though it be never reduced.

A Luxation made by Relaxation or Resolution requires good drying and
corroborating Fomentations, Emplasters, Epispasticks, Fontanells, etc. The
Habit of body ought also to be treated by Internalls as in the King's Evil;
and if it apostemate, to be dressed as such Abscesses.

CHAP. IX. Of Luxation of the Knee.
THE Joint of the Knee is made by the connection of the lower head of the Femur
and the upper head of the Tibia and the Patella. Description of the Kneejoynt.
The first of these by a double Protuberance is inserted into the double Cavity
of the latter, and suffers constriction on the anteriour part from the great
and large Muscles, which running to and beyond the Patella, join that to the Os
tibiae, and bind it down upon the Articulation, so as of the whole to make a
Joint. On the hinder side it is guarded with the two Ham-strings so called,
viz. the Tendon of the Biceps outwardly, and of the sartorius, gracilis,
semimembranosus and seminervosus inwardly: between which, through a little
Cavity made for that purpose, all the great Vessels have their passage to the
Legs. Now the Joint being thus strengthened does scarce admit of any Luxation
forward, unless the cause be exceeding violent. Backward and on each side it
is subject to both Luxation and Semiluxation.

The Signs of the several Luxations of the Knee are apparent to the eye, Signs
of a luxated Knee. Reduction.
by the Protuberance in the one part, and Cavity on the contrary.

They are not difficult to reduce, nor subject to such Accidents as those of
the Elbow.

Those Luxations which happen on either side of the Knee may be reduced by a
moderate Extension with your Hands. The Luxation backward is restored by
extending it a little: then bend the Leg suddenly backward, bringing his Heel
to his Buttock, and you shall hear it knap in to its place. It being so,
stretch it out again, and embrocate the Joints and Parts affected, and apply
Astringents with a Compresse in the Ham, with good Bandage. I shall show you
the manner of reducing the perfect Luxation more particularly as follows.

A Gentleman of about 30 years of age, Observation of a luxated Knee.
riding upon the Road some few miles out of Town, was by the rushing of a Cart
tumbled with his horse into a Ditch, and brought back to London extremely lame
and bruised. I being fetched to him found him in bed. The head of the Os tibiae
was shot under the Thigh Bone, and lay stretched out straight, exceedingly
swelled, and much blood extravasated amongst the Muscles of the Calf of his
leg. I caused the Patient to be laid on the contrary side: then one of the
company held him down, and kept that Thigh steady, whilst I took him by the
Foot and Calf of his leg: and after I had a little drawn it to me, I forced it
backward toward his Buttock; by which very motion it knapt into its place.
That done, I extended it again, placing the while my Hand in the Hollow of his
Knee. The motion of that Joint to and fro, and the filling up that Cavity under
the Rotula, were certain signs of its Reduction. I embrocated the Leg cum
albumine ov. ol. ros. myrtill. and aceto, and applied empl. e bolo over all,
with a Compresse in his Ham, then rolled it up, and laid his Leg upon a Pillow
to the ease of the Patient. That done, I let him blood in his Arm, prescribed
him an Emulsion of the cold Seeds, etc. and kept his Body soluble by Clysters,
and advised him a slender Diet. The third day I repeated Embrocations with the
foresaid Oils cum aceto, and thereby repelled the Humor so, that there only
remained some remarques of the extravasated blood. I then embrocated those
Parts cum ol. cham. lumbric. spir. vini, and applied empl. stict. Paracels. and
diapalmae on the weak Joint. From the first application he grew daily easier,
and by these latter the Joint waxed strong, and he rose and walked with a Crutch
in his Chamber: and some time afterward I saw him walking abroad with a Stick
in his hand.

CHAP. X. Of Luxation of the Ancle-bones.
THE lower end of the Tibia being joined to the Fibula makes a ginglymoide
Cavity in which the Os tali is inserted: Description of the Ancle-bones.
the two Ancles being on the inside the Product of the Os tibiae, make the
outer on the Fibula. Underneath lie all the Ossa tarsi in order; viz. the Os
calcis under the Talus, the Os cymbiforme before it. Outward of that, joining
to the Os calcis, is the Os cubiforme; and between the Os cymbiforme and the
Metatarsus lie the three Ossa cuneiformia.

This Joint is involved in strong Membranes and Ligaments, and bound in by
diverse strong Tendons: viz. behind by the Tendon of the Gastrocnemius, and yet
close underneath in the Hollow of the Calcaneum by the Flexores pollicis and
tertii internodii digitorum lateralis; inward by the tibialis posticus; outward
by the preconei; forward by the tibialis anticus. These joined to the strong
Ligaments that everywhere bind up the Part, and assisted by the figure of the
Bones, do make a Joint that would not easily be dislocated, did not so great a
weight lie thereupon. But from great weight and force it suffers four ways.

If the luxated Bone be distorted inward, Signs of a luxated Ancle.
the Sole of the foot lies turned outward; so likewise if the Luxation be in
the exterior part. If the Luxation be forward, the broad Tendon of the Heel
lies hard and stretched out, and the Foot appears shorter, because the Joint
is moved forward, and possesses most part of the Foot. But if the luxated Bone
be distorted backward, it lies over the Heel-bone, in which case the Sole of
the foot seems bigger and longer. Accordingly as these Signs are evident, the
Luxation is perfect or imperfect.

The Reduction is not difficult; Prognostic.
yet these Luxations are subject to great Pain, and are accompanied with Tumor
and Ecchymosis, and the Patients are long lame of them.

The way of Reduction in tender Constitutions may be by Extension with your
Hands, the one taking hold of the Leg, the other of the Foot. Reduction.
During which Extension, the Surgeon must press the Bone the contrary way
to which it was fallen. In case the Extension by your Hands suffice not, you
may make use of Pulleys or other Engine. The Bone being reduced, apply
Restrictives with Bandage as above said.

Sometimes the Ancle-bone is apt to turn out on either side, by reason of
Relaxation of the Tendons: in which case, though you do reduce it, yet upon the
least walking on it the Bone slips out again. Some years ago such a one was
brought to me; I reduced it easily, and it as soon slipped out again: whereupon I
caused a Shoe to be made by which the Ancle was kept steady, and at length by
application of Astringents, etc. it recovered strength.

The Bones of the Metatarsus and Toes are frequently fractured, but rarely
luxated, by reason of their strong Ligation by so many Tendons. But if it so
happen, their Cure is the same with that of the Fingers and Hand.

CHAP. XI. Of Luxation of the Spine.
LUXations of the Spine, which are most usually from inward Causes, as in
Rickety Children, also in the King's Evil, and other Tumors happening upon
those Bones, require internal Remedies, so are referrable to a Physician. The
Chirurgicall part consists in the application of Plasters, as has been
showed in the Treatise of the King's Evil; also in good Bandage, which chiefly
belongs to the Bodies-maker.

When it happens from force, a speedy Reposition is required, about which
Galen, Hippocrates, Oribafius, Celsus, etc. speak much, who all may be
consulted. The case is so rare, that I think it not needful to add any
Discourse here; much less that of Hildanus, about reducing the Spine when
luxated inwardly. He that pleases may look into the Author.

OF LUES VENEREA.

OF Lues Venerea.
The Seventh Book.
CHAP. I. Of Lues Venerea.
LUes Venerea is a venomous contagious Disease gotten either Immediately or
Mediately from an impure Coition. Definition.


I say Immediately or Mediately, because it is very manifest, Ways of Infection.
that not only the Persons so copulating are infected, but also the Children
derived from such Parents, and Nurses that suckle those Children, and any other
Child that sucks upon those Nurses; and so forwards. It is frequent to mention
other secundary ways of the propagation of it; as lying in the same Bed with an
infected person, lying in the same Sheets after them, or wearing their Clothes.
Nay it is affirmed by some, that men have been infected by the same Clothes
they themselves wore when they were diseased. Drinking with one so diseased, or
sitting on the Close-stool after them, are likewise numbered among the causes of
infection.

These are all such convenient excuses for the more shie and coy Patients who
will not otherwise be brought to confess their distempers, that it is pity to
discountenance them. Nor will I deny the differences of Constitutions to be so
great, and some of them so liable to this Disease by some other previous
indisposition of body, that they may be infected with the tenth part of what
another would escape sound from. And this especially I do acknowledge in Women,
the softness and tenderness of whose Sex being frequently attended with thin
and sharp serum in the blood, renders them liable to very quick impressions:
yet in Men, and indeed in the generality of Patients, we find the Disease not
so active as to conveigh it self from one subject to another without actual
coition, or something very equivalent to it. And as to wearing of the same
Clothes, it is notorious that many hundreds cured by us Surgeons here in the
Town, do commit that error (if it be one) without the least inconvenience. Nay
in sound and firm constitutions impure coition it self is not always sufficient
to infect. Of which I have seen the frequent Experiment during the three years
I served in the King of Spain's Navy, where our Mariners as soon as their
pockets were full of money would be getting ashore to the Negroes, and other
common women, that usually attended their Landing, and served their pleasures
in the neighboring Broom which grew very plentifully on some of those shores.
I have known, and dare say, more than twenty men lay with one and the same
woman the same day, and only some of them infected, the rest going free, though
they all equally deserved it.

But Nurses may either infect Children or be infected by them. Children that
have had no Ulcers in their Mouths or Lips, nor any other visible symptom of
the Lues, have notwithstanding betrayed their own infection by transmitting it
to the Niple of the Nurse. In which case it is frequent to see serpiginous
Ulcers arise one after another, growing at length into so many round crusty
Ulcers: also Nodes thrusting out of the back of the Hands, Shins, etc.

Infections of Children are more obscure, for though many of them after they be
born have such Scabs and Ulcers as do sufficiently manifest the Disease, yet it
is not always so: for generally they do often come into the world very clear,
and with the appearance of very sound bodies, which notwithstanding have been
certainly infected and have dyed of it, or at least have been very infirm; and
though they were brought to their ends by some other apparent Disease, yet the
Pox has been judged the foundation of all.

I shall give you a three-handed instance that may confirm several parts of
this Discourse.

A lusty young fellow brought me to see his Wife, which I did in the company of
Dr. Mapletoft; we found upon her face a great cluster of round crusty Venereal
Ulcers, yet not only her Husband was seemingly sound, but her Child also, who
being half a year old appeared lusty and strong, played merrily in the Nurses
Arms, but that day dyed suddenly: nor could I impute that accident to any other
cause, but the forementioned infection.

Yet I would not have any man rash in judging all Ulcers to be Venereal that do
resemble them, for I have seen Nurses with chapt Niples, and serpiginous Ulcers
on the Breasts, and Maids likewise in the same condition, who have been cured
without any respect to the Lues.

I have seen also many Infants broken out about the Lips, Face, Head and Body,
with many suspicious pustulae and Ulcers, that were born of chaste Parents. In
our public healings we present many such, if there be any diseased glandules
found about the musculus mastoideus, I supposing them rather to be strumous.

Having thus far treated of the original of the Lues, Its Nature.
it will be now seasonable to describe the Disease it self. For the doing of
which it will not be necessary to run through all the nice diversity of
opinions which Sennertus and other Authors have reckoned up; such an attempt
would better become a Chair in the University than a Practical Treatise: I do
only in short say, that it is a Disease produced not by excess of any of the
four qualities, but by the actual communication of a downright venom, which
usually affects that part of the body which it first touches, and afterward
the blood it self, by the virtue of which all the solid parts are by degrees
tainted.

The Species or rather Degrees of this Disease have by Palmarius been reckoned
four according to the degrees of Infection. Its Degrees and Symptoms.
In the first he supposes only the Hair to fall off without any other hurt of
the body; a case, I doubt, very rare. In the second the Skin grows rough and
spotted with many little protuberances. In the third downright Scabs appear in
the Head, Face, etc. In the fourth the solid parts are infected, as the Bones,
etc. But these degrees are either ill ordered, or at least not justed to the
appearance of the Diseases that occur in this age. Therefore I shall endeavor
to rank the Degrees or Symptoms of it according to the events which we usually
observe in our practice.

Therefore when a Man has had to do with an impure Woman, either he has some
heat or inflammation on the Penis with excoriation, which arises soon after
coition, and is caused by the affriction of a virulent humor; or else he finds
a heat in his Urine, and in a day, two or three, a Gonorrhoea, or issuing of
virulent matter out of the seminal Vessels through the Vrethra. This
inflammation is very apt to produce excoriation and ulceration, upon which
chancrous Ulcers arise; and sometime when the Infection has been vement, or
the Inflammation neglected, it tends to a Gangreen, and Cyrstalline Bladders
arise, and the part mortifieth.

Sometimes a Gonorrhoea succeeds not; only the infection taking rather along
the Cutis to the Groin, does make impression on the neighboring Glandules, and
produce a Bubo, which according to the degree of its malignancy either proves
easily curable, or else improves in its venom and terminates in a Phagedenous
Ulcer with jagged lips. At this time of the Disease I have seen many round,
hard, venereal Ulcers upon the Scrotum and Perinaeum. Sometimes where none of
the other symptoms have preceeded, a small chancrous Ulcer arises between the
Prepuce and the glans, above or below, on one side, or in the entrance of the
Vrethra; one while eating through it, otherwhile destroying the fraenum, etc.
These Ulcers are sometimes only corrosive, and sometimes callous, or a
callosity without an Ulcer.

The attendance of a Chancre is commonly a breaking out all over the body like
a flea biting, which terminates in various sorts of Tetters or Ulcerous Scabs;
or it may be that Pustules arise in one or more places of the body, as Head,
Face, Arms, Thighs or Legs, or Ulcers in the Tonsil, Palates, etc. and at the
same time I have seen a Gumminess upon the musculus mastoideus, drawing the
neck on one side.

Then wandering pains begin toward night to affect either the Shoulders, Arms,
Legs, or Head; sometimes this last is affected alone to great excess. And about
this time Verrucae, Condylomata, Marisca or Ficus appear in the Podex; also
Ozaena and Ulcers of the spongiest part of the Os ethmoides and gristles of the
Nose; also about this time Tumors by congestion arise in the Breast, Arms,
Legs, and become Ulcers of difficult cure.

The pains growing more fixed, Gummata or Nodes usually arise and continually
afflict them, but toward night grow more intolerable, and at length the Bones
corrupt.

Coincident with several of these latter degrees are the noise in the Ears,
Deafness, a Polypus, Ophthalmia Fistula, Lachrymalis, fierce Catarrhs, Colicks,
Diarrhoea, and Tabes.

These dreadful Symptoms have frequently possessed the imaginations of some
people, who having taken the way to get the Pox are soon persuaded that they
have it. These men will strangely imagine all the pains and other symptoms they
have read of, or have heard other men talk of. Many of these hypochondriack
have come to Sir Fran. Pr. in which cases he has been pleased to send for me
to consider of their complaints with him. They commonly went away from us
unsatisfied, nor could they quiet their minds till they found some undertaker
that would comply with them; which done, they were never the better, the
imagination in which the Disease was seated remaining still uncured; whereupon
presuming they were not in hands skilful enough, they have gone to others and
so forwards, till they had ruined both their Bodies and Purses.

There have been three of these people with me lately; one a Tradesman, who
told me that since his Wifes death he had fallen into ill company, and being
heated with drink, strayed and got a Clap, for which he had been under several
hands; that it had cost him 40 pounds amongst them, but he was still worse and
worse. I asked him if he had ever a Gonorrhoea? Yea, said he, with great pain
in my Back, which still continues: also such a pain in my Nose, that I fear it
will fall. Upon more particular enquiry I found no such thing; only upon
straining to make Urine or upon the Close-stool, he had an involuntary effusion
of Seed, which was an old infirmity he had quite forgot. I endeavored to
satisfy him that he escaped better than he deserved. Whether he continued in
the same opinion he seemed to have received from me of his condition I sometime
doubted, but lately have seen him and been assured, that since he spoke with me
he had taken no Physic, nor felt any cause for it, he continuing very well.

Authors upon the first entrance of the Pox into Christendom generally looked
upon it as not only incurable, Prognostic.
but also so highly infectious that they ran away from it as much as the Jews
did from a Leprosy; but Latter Ages and long experience have made it less
formidable: yet even to this day it must needs be acknowledged difficult to
cure, in consideration of its malign and contagious quality, and the
ungovernable disposition of the Patients.

If the habit of body be strong, the cure of all these Species of Lues Venerea,
whether they be Chancre, Pustulae, Serpigo, Herpes miliaris exedens,
Phagedaena, Ozaena, Ulcers in the Palate or Tonsils, they are all much easier
cured than the same are in any other chronick Disease: but to eradicate the
virus that it do not return with more malignity, is somewhat more difficult.

If the Patient has been formerly clapped, it will be the more difficult to cure
him the second time, and worse the third.

If he has passed through long courses of Mercurial remedies ineffectually,
his cure will be difficult; and if he has been Salivated by Unction and
relapsed, the Cure will be hard, by reason the Mercury is become familiar to
him, and his body is for the most part emaciated and squalid.

Gummata and Nodes are more difficult of cure than the Species abovementioned,
and those whose Bones are corrupted are yet more difficult of cure: but if the
habit of body be strong and the Viscera sound, all the species of this Disease
are curable if the Patient keep his Chamber, and submit to the rules of Physic
and Diet, without which submission we can scarce cure the lesser Species; and
accordingly as they have been slubber'd over, the malignity that remains will
at one time or other show it self either in some Chronick Disease, as Asthma,
Catarrhe, Colic, Diarrhoea, Stranguria, Rheumatismus, Hydrops, etc. or in some
species of the Lues Venerea, when possibly the Patient will not be so willing
to acknowledge the Disease, and what hopes is there then of his Cure?

Also if the Viscera be unsound, or the Patient Hectic, a Marasmus will attend
it, and the Cure is impossible.

CHAP. II. Of the Remedies generally used in the Cure.
THE Medicines alter according to the degrees of the Malady, and other
circumstances, in which the following Discourses will inform you. My present
business is to give a general view of them all, with their Natures and Uses.
Now the known Remedies, all or some of which we used in this Cure, are
Bleeding, Purging, Vomiting, Salivating, Sweating, Its Cure.
Cordials and Opiats; to which we may add Dietetical directions, especially
Alterative Drinks, and Topics.

Concerning Phlebotomy, though it do not cure the Disease, yet in the very
beginning of it we usually let Blood, to calm the fermenting Humors, and
dispose them for Evacuation, and prescribe a Clyster before or after.

If the Disease be of long continuance, By Bleeding,
and they have been let Blood some months before, yet if we design Salivation,
we do again let them Blood, if the Body be not too much emaciated. For in some
of those a Feavor has happened in the time of raising the Salivation: and in
Bodies of stronger habits I have often seen them to break out in heat all over
in the beginning of the Flux, so that then I have been necessitated to let them
Blood when it was not so proper. When this Disease appears in the Groin with
a Bubo, we do not let Blood; yet some have advised it in the Foot, as a way to
lead the Humors thither.

Purging is more universally necessary, Purging,
few Cases being to be put in this Disease where it is not required. For
whosoever is Infected, either is already Cacochymical, or will quickly be so,
if by a sudden evacuation of the corrupted matter you do not prevent it. It is
also useful in keeping the Blood low, which the higher it is the more apt it is
to be inflamed. Of Purges, some are only Lenitive, fit for weak and extenuated
Persons, also to dispose the Body for more strong Purges. The Lenitives are
Manna with Cremor Tartari in Whey or Posset Drink, also the decoctions of
Tamarinds, Cassia, with the infusions of Sena, Rhubarb, etc. Sir. de pomis
purg. de cichoreo cum Rhabarb. Elect. lenitivum, Diaprun. Diacatholicon, etc.
Sarsaparillae iij. scobis Guaiaci j. fol. beton. M ss. flor. Paralyseos P.i.
Tragae com. ij. fol. sennae ss. coquant. lent. igne; colat. add Rhei, agarici
trochiscati seorsim in aq. cichorei infus. an. j ss. Colaturae add Sir. infus.
Ros. pallidar. vj. Mannae j. f. potio. fol. senae mund. ss. Turbith gummosi,
Jalap. hermodactyl. an. j. Zinziberis, Cinamomi an. j. coq. in sufficienti
quantit. decoct. sarsae, etc. ad vj. Colat. add Sir. de spin. cervina j ss. f.
Potio. Elect. Diacatholici ss. diaprun. solut. ij. diasennae j. cum sir. de sp.
cervina q. s. exhibeatur in cochlearia. These, besides their use where stronger
cannot be given, are also preparatives for bleeding, and thence to stronger
Physic, viz. such as follows. Fol. Sennae iv. Turbith gummosi, Hermodactyl.
an. ij. Hellebori nigri, pulp. Colocynth. an. vj. ras. Guaiaci, sas. safr. an.
j. cort. Guaiaci, baccar. Juniperi recent. cort. exterior. citrian. ss.
Cinamomi, Garyophyllat. an. ij. infund, in aequal. part. aquar. melissae,
ulmariae, card. benedict. per horas 48. deinde f. ebullitio levis cum express.
fort. In colatura dissolve Aloes rosat. ij. ss. Diagrid. j. coagulentur ad
formam extract. pro usu. Dos. ss. ad j. Turbith gummosi, sennae, Hermodact. an.
iij. Diagrid. ij. Zinziberis j. Mastiches ss. Saccbari opt. iij. Pulveriz.
omnia subtle. and per setaceum trajiciatur. Dosis j. in vino alb. vel jusculo.
Or. Folior. Sennae, Rhei an. ss. Agarici trochiscati, turbith, Hermodact.
Crystalli Tartari an. ij. Jalapii, Mecoacae an. ij. f. pulvis subtle. and cum
sir. de sp. cervina, and de pomis purg. q. s. f. Electuar. dos. ij. The
stronger are Pil. e duobus, Cochiae min. Extract. Rudii, pull. Cornichini, etc.
These ought to be joined with Calomel. viz. Mer. Dull. gr. 15. aut 20. Extract.
Rudii vel Cochiae min. j. vel ss. fol. auri q. s. cum sir. Ros. solut. f. pill.
Extract. nost. ij. gum. Guaiaci ss. Mer. dull. gr. xiv. ascendendo ad j. cum
sir. de spina cervina formentur pill. In gross Phlegmatic Bodies you may purge
with pull. Cornichini and Mer. dull. In case of pain we add a grain or more of
Laudanum. Mercury thus mixed with purgatives is it from which we must expect our
main success. For though the other may purge strongly, they of themselves have
not virtue to check the malignity even in the lesser species of this Disease.

This I the rather add, because of the wickedness of many Pretenders, who will
in this Cure declaim against the use of Mercury, in which if they speak
honestly, and follow their Judgments (and do not give it at the same time when
they speak against it, as many do) they will prolong their Cure to no purpose,
and meet with disgrace at last; it being very sure, that no species of it will
be cured without it. I know Fernelius, and some of his Disciples writ
vehemently against it, but the whole current of the Able Practitioners have
written on the other side. And by what I find by my experience, I dare say,
that Fernelius never cured a confirmed Pox without it, unless the Patient had
been in some other hands before who had sluxed him; in which Case some
sudorifick course prescribed by him might get the Credit of a Cure, whose
foundation was laid in Mercury. I write this the more confidently, because of
the many attempts I have my self made, and seen endeavored by some worthy late
Practicers in our Faculties without Mercury, but by omitting of it, our Cures
were rendered tedious and unsuccessful, the Ulcers the while spreading and
breaking out fresh in some parts while we were endeavoring to Cure them in
others, the Disease becoming more fierce in some of them whilst their Bodies
were purged with Catharticks without Mercury. Nay, where one of those
Inveighers against Mercury gave it in a Course of seven weeks, he could not by
all his endeavors of Mercurial Emplasters, Unguents or Waters outwardly
applied, nor with his Sweating Diet-drinks, etc. cure one small Herpes in the
Face, yet was better paid for his Physic than I was for the Cure.

Vomiting is of use in great disorders of the Stomach, Vomiting,
when the foulness of that requires it, or when the Ulcers of some particular
part require a sudden revulsion. So likewise when after the use of much Mercury
outward or inward to salivate, it does not arise kindly, we by this means cause
a motion upward, and derive the humor that way.

They are generally strong if the party can bear them, viz. some Preparations
of Mercury, as Turbith mineral. etc. or. Antimonial, as Crocus Metallor, in
stronger Bodies; but in weaker Constitutions we give such as we may.

The next thing which offers it self to our consideration, Salivation,
is, Salivation, without which sew great Cures are done in this Disease. Nay,
when a great Evacuation by Salivation is not intended, we are forced to dispose
the humors that way by Mercury, that being so disposed they may be rendered
more obedient to purging and sweating Remedies. For the truth of this, I need
not produce any Authority, common experience will make it evident to you; but
of this hereafter.

The methods of Salivating are diverse, but all by Mercury; besides which
faculty of raising a Salivation, it heals, attenuates, resolves, provokes
Urine, and moves noxious Humors upwards and downwards, by which not only the
more subtle but the more gross and feculent excrementitious humors are
expelled, and that according to its several Preparations, either inwardly
given, or outwardly applied.

Inwardly are prescribed various Preparations of Mercury, viz. Merc.
sublimatus, dulcis, Merc. praecipitat. albus, rubr. citr. niger, viridis, etc.
There are also different Preparations of some of these, as the Turbith
Minerale, the Amalgamations of Mercury with Gold, Theriaca Metallor. etc. They
Purge, Vomit, and Salivate, or are Sudorifick, and are stronger or weaker in
their Operations, according as they are freed of their corrosive quality. The
strongest of them are capable of being rendered sweet, and of being dispirited
both of their Vomitive and Salivating qualities.

When we design Salivation by Mercurius dulcis, we give it from 20 to 25
grains, and sometimes to thirty, either in a spoonful of white bread and milk,
or in cons. ros. rub. cons. boraginis, confect. Alchermes, or some such like
Cordial Electuary. When we suspect it may work by stool, we prescribe it in
Elect. Diascordii, or Theriacae at night going to bed, and then it also serves
to alleviate their pains, and dispose them to rest. If after the taking it 4 or
5 days their chops do not swell, it may be reasonable to move it upward by a
few grains of Turbith Minerale. Accordingly as their chops swell they will
salivate. If their mouths be much ulcerated and sweeled, the Salivation may
last 18 or 20 days, during which they are to be kept warm, especially about
their head, neck and chops, and to drink Chicken-broth, or Posset-Ale.

In the Declination of the Flux, we prescribe them a Decoct. Sarsa. and before
it cease, we purge them with some Cathartick Apozeme, and proceed in the
rest, as shall be showed in its proper place.

But the Salivating with Merc. dulcis alone will scarce cure the middle Species
of this Disease. For though the Ulcers do cicatrize, and wandering pains remit
thereby, yet they will return, or new pustules will arise, as that Salivation
declineth, or presently after. And indeed I have found better effects by the
frequent purging with it mixed with some good Cathartick, than by the only
Salivating with it alone.

Merc. Praecipitatus albus may be given proportionably, as has been said of
Merc. dulcis.

Arcanum Corallinum, as it is generally sold in the Shops, may be given from
three Grains to 5. One dose of it prescribed by me to a Woman Diseased with
Serpigo, etc. vomited her often, and Salivated her twenty days, contrary to my
intention, but cleared her skin of its foulness.

Red Precipitate is also Vomitive, but being well washed may be taken as safely
as the White Precipitate. But since I practiced here in the City, I have not
used it. Praecipitatus viridis is also Vomitive, and the most churlish
preparation of Mercury; the dose is much about the same as that of Arcan.
Corallin. Hartman prescribed it to eight Grains.

Turbith Minerale, as it is sold in the Shop, is a rough Medicine, but being
somewhat dulcorated first procures Vomiting, then Salivation, and is proper to
make a sudden revulsion in such cases where there is a necessity of giving a
speedy relief to an afflicted part, and contributeth to the cure of this
Disease in such cases where Merc. dulcis has not force. That which I commend
to your Use is made out of Vigo's Precipitate, and may be given from twelve to
eighteen Grains, but I rarely prescribe it to any that have not first taken
Merc. dulcis. It takes off nocturnal pains, and resolves Gummata and Nodes
which have not been of long continuance, and hasteneth the Cure of the most
malign Ulcers that accompany this Disease.

Mercury Amalgamed with Gold does Vomit and raise Salivation, but is generally
corrected and made a Sudorifick: So the Turbith Minerale is made Diaphoretick.

Bezoardicum Minerale, and Aethiops Mineralis are also Diaphoretical, and of
their Use you may see more hereafter.

Mercurius sublimatus corrosivus dissolved in Aqua fontis given inwardly does
also raise Salivation and Vomiting, if the Dose be proportioned. It is much
commended by some Practitioners, but I never made trial of it.

This following I have frequently prescribed, and so may you if you please:
Merc. sublimat. ij. Cinamomi, galangae, curcumae an. ij. croci j. aq. fumariae
lbij. infundantur in Balneo per horas 24. deinde colentur pro usu. The Dose is
3 or 4 spoonful in a morning, and is to be repeated many days, they drinking
Posset Drink, as in other Vomitives.

There is also a way of Salivating by dissolving of Merc. sublimat. in a Bath;
the use and manner of making it you may see in the Chapter of Elephantiasis.

Crude Mercury is also frequently prescribed internally to raise Salivation,
and is given from one Scruple to two or higher, cum terebinth. Veneta. The Pill
Barbarosae, which is a mixture of crude Mercury with Troch. Alhand. pull. Jalap.
diagrid. etc. and is commonly called the Blew Pill, purges powerfully, and
frequently raises a Salivation. I made some trial of it, but it never answered
my expectation; yet may Cure the lesser Species at the long run, if the Patient
keep his Chamber, and observe a strict method in Diet, Sweating, etc.

These following Pills were prescribed by Sr Theodore Mayern to raise a
Salivation. Terebinth. Venetae cocturae induratae Rhei electi. pulver. ss. Pull.
Sarsaparillae, j. Myrrhae, gum. Guaiaci, Mastich. succin. albi an. ij. fol.
auri no 36. Mercurii Philosoph. vel alias ex cinnabar. resuscit ati ad pondus
omnium, bals. Peruvianae q. s. Dos. j. ad ij.

There is also a way of raising Salivation by suffumigation, the prescription
whereof is as follows: Cinnabar. ij. Merc. crud. j. Mastich. Thuris,
Sandarachae an. ss. Styracis, Calam Benzoin an. iij. f. omnium pull. subtle. qui
excipiatur Terebinth. q. s. formentur Trochisci ad pondus iij. pro usu.

When the Lues Venerea is grown inveterate, and affects the most solid parts
with Gummata, etc. and the habit of body debilitated and vitiated by the
frequent exhibition of Mercury, it then requires a more powerful Remedy, viz.
Salivation by Unction. There are various sorts of them published by Authors,
who have treated of the Cure that way; the principal Ingredient in it is
Quicksilver, it is that which does the Work, the additional Materials may be at
your own choice, every one compounding them as they think fit. You have an
Example of one in the Pharmacopoeia Londinensis, under the name of Unguent.
Neapolitanum, that has four ounces of crude Mercury to two pounds of Ointment:
By others, Axungiae porcinae vj. Butyri rect. iij. Styracis liquidae iij.
Hydrargyri triti and extincti j. cerae q. s. This following is weaker. Axung.
porcin iij. Terebinth. j. pull. Ireos, Thuris, Mastiches an. ij. Olei Cham.
Lilior. an. ij. Laurini j. Styracis calamitae ss. argent. vivi ij. M. sa.
Authors have generally proportioned the quantity of Mercury according to the
strength of the Patient, and some of them have undertaken to direct you how
much of the Unction you shall use at a time, but that would be extremely
troublesome to observe, and may prove dangerous to the Patient at last.

The Unction which I have used for the most part this last twenty years has
been made by a prescription of Sir Alex. Frasier, whose Practice with it I had
frequently seen with good success. In it there is 6 ounces of crude Mercury to
16 ounces of the Materials. If you shall make up an Unction at that rate, you
will find your curiosity in the choice of the Ointments to mix with the Mercury
not to be so very necessary, for I have sometimes raised a Salivation very well
by mixing 6 ounces of crude Mercury extinguished in Terebinth. with 16 ounces
of Axung. porcinae, and for Common People a prepared Axung. with an addition of
Ol. Terebinth. has served: For the better sort of People Axung. porcinae vj.
Unguent. Nervin. iv. Unguent Laurini, and Dialthaeae an. jss. Ol. Vulpini j.
Styr acis liquidae iij. pull. rad. Ireos Florent. Gum. Guaiaci an. ss. Ol.
Caryophyl. q. s. Argent. vivi extinct. cum Terebinth. vj. Ms. The preparation
to this way of Salivating is by bleeding and purging, if their bodies will bear
it; otherwise bathe them, and keep their bodies soluble the while by Clysters,
Lenitive Bolus's of Cassia, Manna, cum sir. violar.

In order to your farther prosecution of this course your Patient ought to
lodge near your house in a close warm Chamber; If the feason be cold the
windows must be covered with blankets, and the bed near the fire, and
encompassed with a screen if the Chamber be large. You ought also to have a
strong healthy Nurse, such as has been accustomed to the employment, that she
may in the absence of the Surgeon know how to wash the Patients mouth, and
direct and encourage him in such Rules as may be necessary in the time of
Salivating.

The most proper place for Unction is a Stove, if it may be had, and the
Patient can bear it; if he be weak his Bed must be used, otherwise for want of
a Stove he must sit encompassed with a screen (as I said) by the fire side but
not too near it. If in the anointing he use his own hands, he may save his
Chyrurgeon much trouble, and do the work better than it can be done for him:
But if other help be required, then we arm our hands with bladders or gloves,
and fall to it. The old, and still most common method advises to begin at the
Feet, and thence to arise to the Legs, Thighs, Hips, and so upwards on the
Spine to the Neck, taking in Hands, Arms, Shoulders. The Belly ought to be
avoided. And indeed much of the other trouble in weak bodies may be spared, for
in such the anointing of the Legs and Arms, (or Thighs, if modesty prevent you
not) will obtain the same; and it is sufficient if the Mercury mix once with
the blood to such a degree as to cause a Salivation. Whatsoever the manner of
the Unction be, the parts first anointed ought to be covered before you proceed
to the next, as the Legs with stockings, Thighs with trouzes, etc. till at last
his neck be well wrapped with a napkin tacked up to his Cap round about to his
ears, and fastened before to keep his chaps warm. After this a warm Bed will be
convenient, and a draught of Posset Drink in order to a breathing sweat. Having
so reposed himself an hour or two, he may rise and provide for his dinner,
which must consist of meat of easy digestion, roast or boiled. To his dinner
he may drink Beer or Ale with a toast, the rest of the day he must be confined
to Posset Drink. Unction may be repeated twice a day if you see cause. But if
the chaps swell apace you must moderate your hand, and it may be quite hold it
off, lest you bring on the Salivation too fast, and endanger the Patient: when
he comes to this state you must keep him to the use of Posset Drink and Broth,
which ought to be ready in quantity. Also burnt Wine, aq. Theriacalis, etc.
must be ready to prevent fainting. His mouth must be syringed with a decoct.
hordei cum liquiritia, rad. altheae. etc. New Milk held in his mouth, or
Chicken-broath will ease the pain, and digest the sloughs that arise. A rolled
clout ought to be placed between his teeth to keep his Chaps from closing. He
must be raised high in his Bed, if his weakness constrain him to it, and kept
forward that his Rheum may run out and not down his throat; but if he can rise,
he will spit better and more plentifully. Salivations by Unctions commonly last
24 or 25 days, sometimes to the 30 day.

In the height of it our work is to keep up their strength; and if through
Costiveness they spit less, give them a Clyster that they may spit better, and
attend the washing their mouths; but as the sloughs begin to separate, which
will be toward the declension of the Salivation, prescribe them a decoction of
Sarsa, etc. to drink at least thrice a day; and before the slough's quite cast
off, purge them with some cathartick Apozeme made in some of the foresaid
decoct. Sarsae, and as they are able to eat meat, put them into a drying diet
and sweat them, etc. as shall be showed in its proper place.

It happens sometimes in anointing, that their Mouths are much ulcerated, and
their Breaths smell strong, yet their Cheeks do not swell, nor they spit
considerably; in which case forbear the anointing and consider the cause of it,
and if the Body be strong and Plethorick, vomit them with Turbith, or infus.
croc. metallor. but if they be weak or costive, administer a Clyster, and if
afterward it arise not, dispose them to sweat with draughts of warm
Posset-Ale, or bathe them, for that way it will be sometimes raised when by the
other it will not. But if they have faintness or palpitation of the Heart,
shortness of Breath, Fevour, etc. your best way will be to purge it off by some
infus. of Sena, etc. or decoct. Senae Gereonis, with the addition of sir. Ros.
solut. sir. de Spina cervina, etc. and keep up their spirits the while with
Cordials and good Broaths. If their Lungs be oppressed, let them blood, and
prescribe Lohochs; but if there be also a suppression of Urine, or that they
make but little Urine and high colored, purge them with Barnet or Epsom water
turned into Posset, and quicken it with some purging Syrup. If by these ways of
purging the accidents remit and the Salivation rises, it is well; but if it do
not, yet there being a colliquation made, you may by well purging, strict diet,
sweating, etc. obtain your end. While you are removing the abovesaid
accidents, you must have a special regard to the Ulcers within their mouths,
for it is from the fixing of the Mercury that those malign Ulcers are made,
which the less sensible they are of them the more corrupt they are.

Sometimes in raising the Salivation by Unction it passes downwards by Stool,
in which case we prescribe Theriaca, Diascord. Laudanum opiat. etc. which being
given at night will not only strengthen their Bowels, but dispose them to rest,
and encourage them to go on in the anointing. A vomit of Turbith Minerale after
the unction has been somewhile used, does frequently raise the Salivation; and
after it is once well raised, you may heighten or continue it by the
application of some of the Emplasters following. But if after all your
endeavors to raise the Salivation it does discharge it self in a Diarrhoea
with great evacuation, you are then to defent the Intestines from the acrimony
of the humors by Clysters of Chicken broth, Milk with ol. Olivar. vitel.
Ovor. lest a dysentery do follow. Suppositories of Deer Suet, or ol. Hyperici,
etc. cast up with a Syringe, are proper to appease the tenesmus. Inwardly we
prescribe large draughts of Chicken broth, decoct. corn. cervi usti, Milk and
Water boiled with a stick of Cinnamon.

After the Flux is stopped, you must consider the strength of the Patient, and
the quantity of the unction which was applied, and the greatness of the
evacuation. If it was to the extreme weakening of the Patient, do not insist
long upon the thoughts of salivating again, but proceed with Sudorificks, etc.
as abovesaid; not doubting of success in the cure. For such Diarrhoea's do for
the most part contribute as much to the cure as if they had salivated.

There is yet another way of Salivating, and that is by the application of
Mercurial Emplasters about the Arms, Legs, etc. They were first designed I
suppose for the more tender and delicate sort of people who would not admit of
the unction. There are various prescriptions of them, whereof I shall offer you
one, viz. Empl. Diachyl. ireat. lbj. Empl. de minio viij. Gum. Caranae,
Tacamahaccae an. iv. Benzoini, Styracis, Calamitae, Succini, an. ij. Styracis
liquid. and Balsam. Peruvianae an. q. s. Misceantur super ignem, deinde amove,
and addantur merc. crudi viij. cum terebinth. extincti, and fiant magdaleones.
These being spread-upon Cloth thick and applied, you must then put them into a
warm bed, and with a draught of warm Posset Drink sweat them daily, and treat
them as has been said in the salivating by Unction. If it arise not by the
first Plasters you must apply fresh once in four or five days, and if there be
occasion you may hasten the salivation by a few grains of Turbith Mineral. I
have sometimes salivated persons by these Emplasters, but for the most part I
use them to raise a Salivation, or continue it in such where I began it with
Internals, and to that purpose it is of excellent use.

The humors being evacuated by Salivation and Purging, Sweating,
Sweating will be necessary; Therefore we shall now say somewhat of their
manner of Sweating. They may sweat in Bed, or out of it. The Bed is proper for
the weaker sort, and there they may sweat by Bottles of warm Water or Bricks
heated and placed about them, or they may sweat under a Frame. If they sweat
with Bottles or Bricks, they must have many clothes, as Blankets, etc. to cover
them close, and the Bottles or Bricks may be wrapped in Napkins and applied,
accordingly as you design more particularly to sweat any one part. Generally
they are placed on each side near the axilla, the Ischia and at the soles of
the feet. If you sweat with Bricks, let them be heated rather by boiling water
than fire, left in the bed they burn the Patient.

The way by a Frame is this; You are to sold a well aired Sheet four double,
and lay it under the Patient, then his Shirt being stripped off, the Frame must
be placed over him, and a Sheet over that Frame, and as many Blankets over that
Sheet, and both Sheet and Blankets must be brought over the end of the Frame,
and be tucked down close to the neck; then a pan of well burnt Charcoal or
Spirit of Wine must be put into the lower end of the Frame: this done shut the
door and take care that the heat be kept in, especially about the Patients neck
lest it stifle him. His head ought also to be covered warm that it may sweat.
If he took not his Sudorifick before he was placed under the Frame he may take
it now; the Diet-drink must be warmed, and may be commodiously given with a
Glass-pipe. There is required a couple of Servants to attend the Patient during
his being in the Frame: The one of them must attend him with a warm Napkin to
wipe the sweat off his Face, and to give him clothes to rub his body, which
clothes ought to be thrust in and taken out at the one side of the Frame. This
Servant ought to have regard to his Master, that upon the least complaint he
may give warning to his fellow to renew the fire or take it out according as
there shall be occasion. The fire being removed and the sheet next the Frame
somewhat cool, the one of his Servants shall hold the clothes close to the
Patients neck and shoulders, whilst the other draws the Frame away. Then shall
they both tuck the Blankets and covering close to him, and give him another
draught of his Diet-drink, and continue him in his sweat half an hour or more
if he can admit it; then gradually cool him and pull away the wet folded sheet
from under him; then rub him with dry clothes and put on his shirt; and if he
be disposed to slumber an hour, he may; otherwise he may rise and dine at his
pleasure. They commonly sweat 3 quarters of an hour in the Frame, and an hour
in Bed after the Frame is pulled away.

These are the ways of sweating in Bed.

The ways of sweating out of Bed are by Stove, Tub, Chair or Cradle. The Stove
is the most easy in regard they may sit, stand or walk up and down; but when
they go out of them to bed the danger is in taking cold, whence new pains do
sometimes arise. Therefore those Stoves that are near to a good bed are best;
the other which you must go up or down stairs to, are not allowable. Tub and
Chair were the old way of sweating, but if the Patient swounds in either of
them, it will be troublesome to get him out; possibly he breaks his shins, if he
did not hang some while by the neck before they got him out. To avoid which
they must take them out upon the least complaint of fainting, and have some
Cordial to relieve their Spirits.

In the Cradles they are subject to accidents by the disjointing of the Frame
or breaking of the Girts, etc. but in every of these I have sweat my Patients
with much safety, and so may you.

Bathing is of great use in the cure of this Disease, Bathing,
whether it be new or old. In the recent it serves to contemperate the great
heat and acrimony of the humors, especially in the Gonorrhoea.

In squalid and dry bodies where the Lues has been long confirmed, Bathing is
necessary to humect and rarifie the humors and dispose them to salivate. They
are also proper after the Patient has passed through the strict course of
Salivating, Purging, Sweating, etc. The body being thereby dried and emaciated,
is hereby cooled, moistened and restored to its natural temper.

In order to the Bathing we generally let Blood and Purge, if there be
plethora; but in poor emaciated dry bodies a Clyster may serve, or their bodies
may be kept soluble by a lenient Bolus of Cassia, Manna, Sir. Violar. etc. and
before the Patient enter into the Bath he may drink a draught of Caudle or
Broth, and in the Bath he may take a spoonful or two of Hartshorn Jelly, etc.

The Vessel we bathe in is a Tub, wherein he may sit up to the neck. For want
of such, a Barrel may serve, the one end being beat out and a Stool placed in
it to sit upon. The Bath Liquor is according to the occasion and quality of the
Patient, sometimes it is all Milk, othertimes Milk and Water, or only Water,
with a Bag of wheaten Bran, which serves the Patient as a Cushion, and makes
the water milky. They are sometimes perfumed with Lig. Cassiae, Rhod. sant.
citrini, Calam. aromat. Junc. odorat. flor. Ros. damasc. etc. The Baths of Milk
are apt to sour, therefore ought to be renewed daily, the other will last
longer sweet. In the time of Bathing there ought to be plenty of hot and cold
water to continue the Bath of a moderate temper, neither too hot nor cold. Some
Hoops should be fastened over the head of the Tub, whereon a Blanket or Sheet as
a Canopy may be cast, in case the Air be cold. A Servant or two ought also to
be attending in case of fainting, lest he sink into the water. Therefore upon
his complaint raise him up, and casting a sheet about him put him into a warm
bed, where he may refresh himself, and at his leisure arise and cloth himself,
and dine or sup as his Appetite requires. They may bath twice a day, but never
upon a full Stomach.

During the Cure of this Disease it will be requisite that the Patient keep his
Chamber, and that it be made temperately warm; The taking of Physic and
rambling abroad in the cold being extremely prejudicial to their Cure, and is
frequently attended with a diarrhoea, or noise in their Ears with deafness.
There is also a special care to be taken concerning their Diet, Diet,
that on those days they purge, their Dinner be of good nourishment, boiled or
roasted. We also allow them good Broth, and Beer or Ale to raise their
strength, so as they may be able to bear the evacuation which is required. But
in the time of their sweating we confine them to a very slender and drying
Diet, only sufficient to support their Spirits. A chop of a neck of Mutton, or
two Ribs dry roasted was the old stint. I permit them to make choice of some
one sort of meat and keep them to that, which amongst the better sort is a
Partridge, and that without sauce. Their suppers may be Biscuit, Raisons of the
Sun and a few blanched Almonds, and their drink decoct. Sarsae, etc. But in
weak and extenuated bodies China-Broths, or a mixture of Milk with their
Diet-drink may be necessary.

Exercise is of use in the beginning of this Disease, and may serve to rowze
the Native heat to thrust forth the malignity and waste superfluities. But
after the Disease is more confirmed, violent Exercise is hurtful, exhausting
the Spirits too much, and renders them less able to resist the Malignity.

Sleep is allowed in the day to refresh them, they being for the most part
disturbed in the night by their pains, which are therefore called Nocturnal.

In the time of Salivation they must sleep when it affects them. To sleep also
after Bathing and Sweating is necessary to refresh them.

Venery ought to be avoided during their course of Physic, it being one main
cause of the unsuccessfulness of it: Yea, the very thoughts of it is
destructive to their healths; nay, though he believe himself Cured I would not
have him over-confident that way, till he has passed a Spring or Autumn. For
if he be married, and bed with his Wife, and afterward relapse, he may
possibly fancy that she infected him; which may not be unlikely, if he bedded
with her before he entered into Cure. However it was, the consequences of it may
be very ill, and may cause a loathing in him of her Bed, when it is possible he
was not well Cured, and would have relapsed with a Gonorrhoea or Chancre,
though he had not touched any Woman.

The passions of the Mind ought to be calmed, and the Patient to be well
satisfied in the Integrity and skill of his Physician or Surgeon, that he
may the more cheerfully submit to the Rules prescribed in order to his Cure.

CHAP. III. Of the Specificks in this Disease.
IN the former Discourse I have had occasion to speak of the Deococt. Sarsa.
etc. as sudorificks. Indeed those kind of Decoctions are the great hinges on
which the Cure depends, as being supposed to contain in them besides the
Sudorifick Virtue other Specific qualities. Which appropriation of some
Simples to the Disease more than others makes it necessary, before I proceed
any further, to discourse of the nature of these Specificks, which I reduce to
three heads, viz. either Vegetable, Antimonial or Mercurial.

The Vegetables are usually reckoned these; Specificks,
guaiac. lign. and cort. lign. sassafras. rad. china, sarsaparilla, saponaria.
Of these all but saponaria are known Sudorificks, and may be easily supposed to
perform all that is pretended to by them by that only faculty, unless we please
to add dulcification. Whether Saponaria be a Sudorifick I know not; nor indeed
whether ever it cured the Pox otherwise than in conjunction with the former
Specificks and so any other Herb will do it. Lanreola is in the West of England
much commended. I suppose what it does is only by strong purging, and when it
is mixed in Diet-drinks, it serves to keep the Body open. What other Virtue it
has I know not.

Antimony and Mercury are Medicaments of so large a compass, that they take in
all the intentions of Physic. Hence we have Vomits, Purges, Sudorificks,
Salivations. Vomiting and Purging are certainly of great use in this Disease;
so is also Sweating, which is very effectually procured by several preparations
of both these, viz. Cerussa Antimon. diaphoret, etc. Bezoard. Minerale,
Aethiops Mineral. etc. They have the vogue of exceeding other Medicines both by
their strength and power of dulcification. And therefore it is that in purging
also we make so much use of Mercurial preparations. But that Mineral has also
another faculty more eminent than all these, so peculiar to it self, that we
find not yet any other medicine, Mineral, Vegetable or Animal that can imitate
it, and that is Salivation; by virtue of which it melts down the serum of the
blood, and with it all the acid venom contracted in it by this disease,
bringing it away by the mouth.

These are the so highly commended Specificks of which the former are the
constant Ingredients of the decoction to be taken during the whole Course, but
are accommodated to the Palate and other necessities of the Patient by the
addition of other Simples. Mercury is also boiled either crude or prepared: So
is Cinnabar and crude Antimony: which practice I have declined, and therefore I
shall not say more of it. I shall only proceed to inform you how to mix other
Simples with these already mentioned as occasion shall require.

First therefore for aromatization we add sem. anisi, foenic. dull. coriand.
calamus aromaticus, lig. Aloes, cassia; for other gratefulness Liquorish,
Raisins, Ivory, Hartshorn. In complication of Diseases if the Head be
affected, we add Betony, Sage, Rosemary. If the Breast, adianth. tussilago,
scabiosa, marrubium, Hyssop, Figs, Dates, Sebestens, Jujubes. If the Heart,
rad. angelicae, borag. Violets, Balm, scorzonera, scordium,
Clove-gilly-flowers, Saffron. If the Stomach, Wormwood, Agrimony, centaur.
card. benedict. If the Liver, Rhubarb, Turmerick, Liverwort, Succory,
Dock-root. If there be Dropsy joined with it, then Briony of both sorts,
Spurge, Laurel, Esula. For the Spleen, Dodder, Fern, Capers, Tamarisk,
Spleenwort, Germander, Calamint, Hellebor, etc. In the diseases of the Kidneys,
the five opening roots, also rad. althaeae, gram. rusci, alkekengi, eryngii,
the cold seeds, etc. If Colicks infect the Patient, bacc. laur. juniperi,
Galangal, Zedoary, etc. Then there are the greater and lesser Scorbuticks, also
rad. bardanae and petasitidis, which are believed to have virtue to mitigate
pain in the membranes of the bones, and resolve nodes; also rad.
caryophyllatae, consolidae, bistortae, tormentillae, and many others which are
thought proper to be added to Decoctions, and to medicate Ale or Hydromel. All
which several forms of Medicines may be varied according to several intentions.
In weak Stomachs we add Wine to the decoctions. In emaciated bodies Milk. Of
the Sarsa decoctions I shall for the ease of the young Surgeons, set down
some particular prescriptions, such as I have seen prescribed by worthy
Physicians, and have practiced with my self successfully.

Sarsaparillae viij. lig. guaiaci iv. cort. ejusdem ij. lig. sassaffr. jss.
ras. corn. cervi, 1. Decoct. Sarsa. etc.
eboris an. vj. infund. per noctem in aq. font. lbxx. deindc coq. in vase
clauso ad tertiae part. consumpt. addend. sub finem fol. saponariae cum
radicib. M. ij. fol agrimoniae, veronicae utriusque an. M. j. passular.
enucleat. vj. sem. foenic. dull. coriand. an vj. liquiritiae Hispan. ij.
aromatizetur colatura cum pauco cinamomi pro usu.

Sarsaparillae vj. lig. sancti iij. cort. ejusdem j. lig. sassafr. ij. rad.
bardanae, 2. Decoct. Sarsa. etc.
scorzonerae an. j. santal. albi, citri an. ss. fol. laureolae praeparatae cum.
aceto M. ij. passular enucleat. iv. rad. glycyrrhizae j. sem. foenic. dull.
coriand. an. ss. infund. in aq. calid. lbxij. coq. ad tertiae partis
consumptionem.

3. Decoct. Sarsa. etc.
Rad. sarsaparillae vj. lig. guaiaci iij. cort. ejusdem. j. rad. chinae nodos*
iij. lig. sassafr. jss. ras. C. C. eboris an. j. rad. bardanae iij. santal.
rub. alb. calam. aromat. an. vj. passular. ma. exacinat. M. j. sem. anisi,
foenic. an. ss. infund in lbxvj. aq. font. per horas 24 in loco calido in vase
been clauso, deind. coq. lento igne ad consumption. tertiae partis, addendo sub
finem decoctionis summitat. uphrafiae, beton. salviae sic. and flor. 3.
cordial. an. P. 1. cassiae lig. ss. nuc. moschat. no 2. coletur pro usu.

Sarsaparillae viij. scobis guaiaci iv. sassafr. ij. rad. bistortae, bardanae,
4. Decoct. Sarsa. etc.
tormentillae, consolid. masc. an. ij. fol. agrimon. scolopend. utriusque,
ceterach, endiviae cum toto an. M. j. sem. anisi, foenic. dulc. coriand. an.
ss. passul. ma. enucleat. iv. liquiritiae ras. jss. post debitam macerationem
in aq. font. lbxx. coq. lent. igne ad medias, aromatizetur cum pauco cinamomo.

Sarsaparillae iv. lig. guaiaci iij. cort. ejusdem ij. sassafr. jss. rad.
petasitidis, bardanae an. ijss. lig. Rhodii, 5. Decoct. Sarsa. etc.
santal. citr. an. j. seen. cardui benedict. juniperi recent. an vj. cort.
exterior. citri siccat. ij. infund. in aq. font. lbxij. per noctem, and
coquantur ad dimidias.

Sarsaparillae vj. chinae iij. sassafr. j. lig. nephrit. ij. ras. C. C. and
eboris an. ss. santal. albi ss. rad. petroselini, graminis, rusci, 6. Decoct.
Sarsa. etc.
eringii an. j. liquiritiae ij. dactyl. exossat. no vj. sem. carui, coriand.
an. iij. infund. in aq. font. lbxiv. coquantur s. a. and aromatizetur cum lig.
Cassia.

Rad. sarsaparillae vj. ras. C. C. santal. alb. an. ij fol. sapon. agrimon.
beton. an. M. j. liquiritiae Anglic. Hispan. an. ss. f. infus. and decoct. in
aq. font. lbix. ad lbvj. vase clauso. Colaturam effund. super fol. cochlear.
hortens. M. vj. post debitum refrigerium fiat secunda colatura. 7. Decoct.
Sarsa. etc.


Sarsaparillae ij. scobis guaiaci j. cort. ejusdem ss. lig. sassafr. j. rad.
tormentillae, bardanae, 8. Decoct. Sarsa. etc.
vincetoxici an. ss. ras. buxi and lig. Rhodii an. iij. baccar. juniperi
recent. ss. sem. cardui benedict. and oxalydis an. ij. flaved. citri j. f.
infus. in duabus partibus aquar. petroselini, parietariae, melissae, and una
vini albi, uttiusque ad lbvj. and post macerationem coquantur ad medias:
colaturae add guttas aliquot sp. vitriol. aut sulphuris, and reservetur pro
usu.

Sarsaparillae iv. lig. guaiaci interioris resinosi iij. cort. ejusdem j.
sassafr. vj. rad. bardanae, scorzonerae, contrayervae, tormentillae, 9. Decoct.
Sarsa. etc.
petasitidis an. jss. macerentur in lbiv. vini albi tenuis super cineres horas
24. deinde additis aq. font. lbxij. coq. ad medias, addendo sem. anisi, foenic.
dulcis, coriand. an. iij. liquiritiae ij. coletur pro usu.

Sarsaparillae x. rad. chinae iv. rad. filicis foem. rec. iij. santal. albi ij.
ras cornu cervi, eboris an. jss. infund. per hor as xij. in aq. hord. lbxx. and
coquantur ad tertiae partis consumpt. sub finem addendo passular. ma. enucleat.
lbss. deinde fiat colatura per manicam Hipp. addendo pro singulis libris
liquor. sacchari optimi j. sem. coriand. j. and reservetur in lagenis lapideis
subere obturatis in loco subterraneo faigido.

After Decoctions some of the following Electuaries may be prescribed to
provoke sweat, Electuaries.
the Patient drinking a draught of some of the forementioned Drinks warm after
them.

Sarsaparillae pulver. ij. lig. guaiaci interioris resinosi ss. C. C usti,
troc. he viperis an. j. santal. citr. tormentillae, succini an. ss. antimonii
diaphoret. ad pondus omnium, cum syrup. de pomis alterant. de rubo idaeo an.
part. aeq. f. electuarium. Dos. j. superbibendo decoct. sarsae ad sudorem
provocandum.

Sarsaparillae pulv. vj. rad. chinae nodosae ij. oculor. cancr. cerussae
antimonii an. iij. gum. guaiaci ss. Bezoard. occident. j. ambregriseae gr.
viij. confect. alchermes j. sir. e cortic. citri q. s. f. opiatum.

Bezoard. minerale j. pull. viperar. ss. Ms. f. bolus cum sir. de cort. citri.
Sum. mane superbibend. haust. decoct. sarsae, etc.

Antimonii diaphoret. gr. xiv. lapid. contrayervae, ol. sassafr. gut. iij.
confect. alchermes q. s. f. bolus, capiat ante ingressum hypocausti.

In case of pain or diarrhoea from Mercury, Antimonii diaphoret. ss. laudani
gr. ijss. cons. ros. rub. j. sir. garyophyl. q. s Ms. sumat hora somm. Or,
Diascordii j. lap. bezoar. orient. gr. vij. C. C. usti gr. x. confect. alcherm.
j. cum ol. cinamomi gut 5. f. bolus; sumat hora somni. Or, Cons. rub. vet. j.
theriac. Venetae ss. cons. lujulae ij. laud. gr. iij. confect. alchermes j.
sumat bis in die.

These following Prescriptions are Sir Theodore Mayerne 's.

Guaiaci iv. cort. ejusdem ij. sarsaparillae vj. gum. guaiaci, Electuar.
Antisiphyllicum.
troch. viperar. an. ss. C. C. primar. recent. succini albi, coral. rub.
margaritar. an. j. santal. citr. lig. Rhodii, ras. buxi, rad. aristoloch.
utriusque, gentianae, valerianae utriusque, Asclepiadis, scorzonerae,
angelicae, imperatoriae, tormentillae, contrayervae, zedoariae, poeoniae maris,
cypri, enulae campanae an. vj. folior. sicc. scordii, chamaedryos,
chamaepityos, centaur. min. melissae, rutae, calendulae, anthos, lauri,
veronicae utriusque, ulmariae an. x. cort. citri and aurantior. siccat. an.
ijss. sem. anisi, foeniculi, card. benedict. nigellae Romanae, poeoniae an. v.
baccar. junip. ij. myrrhae, styracis, calam. benzoin. croci an. ss. fiat omnium
pulv. subtle. cui add pro singul. vj. mellis despumati lbj. fermentetur per
duos aut tres menses. Dosis ss. superhansto decocto sarsae, etc. ad sudoris
provocationem semel quotidie per xxx. dies: and si catharticam cupis, add
pulver. sennae, turbith and hermodactylor. an. j. pro dosi.

Ras. lig. guaiaci lbvj. cort. ejusdem, ras. buxi an. vj. sassafr. chinae an.
x. cort. median. ulmi, fraxini, radicum vincetoxici, scorzoner. tormentillae,
bardanae. pet asitidis, baccar. juniperi an. lb ss. santali citri, lig. Rhod.
an. iv. rad. cichor. iij. sem. cardui benedict. coriand. praep. an. ij. fol.
agrimoniae, pimpinellae, beton. salviae, hepaticae an. M. ij. sem. halicacabi,
melissae, milii solis an. iij. flavedinis exterioris cort. citri siccat. iv.
turbith, sennae, hermodactylor. an. vj. vini albi tenuis lbxxx. incisa vel
contusa macerentur 24 horas in praedicti vini lb x. and coq. ad medias. Liquor
calidus indatur doliolo, and affundatur residuum and obturetur; sinantur
residere per quatriduum, postea bibat vj. mane and sero.

Ras. guaiaci x. cort. ejusdem, sassafr. an. iv. sarsae viij. passul. ma.
enucl. lbj. rad. bardanae siccatae, tormentillae, scorzoner. contrayervae an.
iij. bacc. juniperi ijss. fol. agrimonii, pimpinellae siccae an. M. j.
coquantur in sacculo laxo in gallonibus vj. ad 4. partis consumptionem; postea
infund. in alio sacculo in praedicti liquoris ferventis colati gall. iv. fol.
sennae, sem. carthami contus. an. lbss. cort. and rad. esulae iv. hermodact.
turbith gummosi an. vj. sem. anisi, foenic. dull. coriand. an. iij. and suspende
malum aurantium garyophyllis transfixum; fiat in doliolo castae capacitatis
fermentatio, and postea obturetur vasculum, and bibatur mane and vesperi cum
diaeta tendi and exsiccante.

utrumque sacculum post debitam coctionem and infusionem nec non mediocrem
expressionem in liquore praedicto, and coquantur in cervisiae recent. gall.
viij. ad quartae partis consumptionem pro potu ordinario. Aromatizetur cum
aurantiis duobus transfixis garyophyl. and flaved. cort. citri and pomor.
fragrantium.

Succor. recent. express. fol. bardanae, A qua Antisiphyllica Sir Theod. Mayern.
petasitidis, cardui benedict. card. Mariae, calendul1ae, ulmariae, scabiosae,
melissae, canabis aquat. tapsi barbati, salviae, beton. fraxini, chamaedryos,
pimpinellae, hyperici an. lbij. dent. leonis, cichorei, lujulae, acetosae,
oxylapathi, nasturtii aquat. cochleariae utriusque, becabungae an. lbiij. rad.
recent. filicis foemin. lbij. bardanae, petasitidis, caryophyl. pentaphyl.
tormentillae, enulae campanae, cypri, valerianae utriusque, poeoniae maris an.
lbj. calami aromat. ireos Flor. gentian. zedoariae, aristoloch. utriusque,
vincetoxici, cort. citri, aurantior. an. vj. ras. lig. sancti, sarsae an. lbij.
cort. ligni sancti, buxi totius, sassafr. lig. Rhod. santal. citri an. lbss.
baccar. juniperi lbjss. sem. anisi, coriand. foenic. dull. poeoniae an. vj. vini
albi tenuis lbvj. aq. fontis lbxx. Radices and ligna macerentur in vino super
cineres calidos per horas 24. addantur postea succi and aquae, and destillentur
in vase aeneo amplo cum capitello, and coletur post validam magmatis
expressionem. Fiat liquoris expressi destillatio ad mellaginem, quae addito
saccharo aut melle despumato reservetur in vase been clauso. Magmati affunde
aq. fontis lblx. and post duorum dierum macerationem destilla pro aqua
secundaria minus forti, quae cum primaria in morbis minis contumacibus misceri
potest, aut cum decocto secundario guaiaci pro potu ordinario.

CHAP. IV. Of the Cure of the Symptoms.
THat which now remains to be considered of, is, the right application of
Medicaments in curing such Symptoms as the LVES is subject to. Fallopius, and
others, who taught to Cure this Disease by Galenical Remedies, have taken much
pains in contriving Medicaments for the curing the Chancre, Herpes, etc. but
that will be needless here. The method of Cure I have proposed by Internals
will enough contribute to the Cure of all the External symptoms; so that only
which is required from us, will be the resisting the fluxion till our Internal
Remedies have taken place.

In Inflammations, Swellings and Excoriations of the Penis and Pudenda:
Summitat. rubi, equiseti, ling. cervinae, fol. plantag. an. M. j. flor. ros.
rub. M. ss. coquantur in aq. font. ad lbiv. Colaturae add mellis com. lbss.
aluminis roch. iij. iterum sinant. parum bullire, and decoctum despumetur.
Foment the diseased parts, and inject of it between the prepuce and glans, or
in the pudendum. If there be required more detersion (through the neglect of
the Patient in not discovering the Malady more timely) add mel Aegyptiac.
proportionably as you see cause, and dip pledgets of lint in the lotion, and
apply them upon the Ulcerations. If the Ulcer be in the Vrethra, aq. germinum
querci, plantag. and fragariae an. ij. troch. alb. Rhasis pull. ij. If that
place be affected with a Chancre, then add mel Aegyptiac. instead of the
Trochisk. But if Chancres arise in such places where you can see to apply your
Medicament, touch them with lac sublimat. or apply pledgets of lint dipped in it,
and pressed out. If this prove too sharp, dress them with the former decoction.

If a Swelling arise in either or both the Groins, and no other symptom of
Chancre, etc. afflict the Patient, endeavor suppuration by such like
emplaster: gum. galban. ammoniaci an. ij. opopanacis, sagapeni an. j sem.
sinap. pyrethri pulv. an. vj. sapon. com. ij. picis Burgundiae iv. ol. lilior.
ij. cerae q. s. f. empl. After suppuration open it, and treat it as has been
elsewhere said in the Chapter of Bubo. But if there be a Chancre, etc.
accompanying it, do not attend suppuration, but purge it off with Antivenereals.

In Ulcers of the Tonsils and Palate. Trachelii totius M. iij. caprifolii,
prunellae, veronicae masc. an. M. j. flor. ros. rub. P. j. santal. rub. lig.
juniperi an j. f. decoct. in aq. hord. lbiv. coq. ad tertiae partis
consumptionem. In colat. dissolve sir. de rosis siccis, diamori. an. iij. mel.
elatim. ij. f. lotio. With this the Ulcers may be washed daily, either by a
syringe or gargling. But if the Ulcers be behind or over the palate, the best
way to cleanse them will be to pass the injection up into the nostrils. During
the while the Patient must hold his mouth full of water to prevent coughing or
kecking. If the Ulcers be sordid, dress them with lac sublimat. upon an armed
probe. If there be Caries in the os palati, Laminae.
touch it with aq. divina Fernelii. In case the bone he corrupted through, it
will be necessary that the place be supplied by some plate, or paste: The
former are made of Silver or Gold by our Workmen to good advantage.

Those of Paste may be made as follows: Laminae catagmatiae.
mastich. pellucid. pulver. j. emolliatur in sp. vini, olibani, sandarac. gum.
guaiaci naturalis, sang. draconis, rad. iridis Florent. myrrhae, C. C. usti,
succini an. j. Ms. and f. pasta, ex qua formentur lamellae. Which being fitly
applied to the part will dispose the Ulcer to heal, and serve those ends you
design it. But if some part of that bone be carious: Laminae praescriptae j.
aristoloch. rot. j. rad. pucedani, gentianae an. ss. caryophyl. ij. pulveriz.
and misceantur cum pauco terebinth. Cypr. s. a. pro usu.

In Ozaena or Ulcers of the Nose, and Os ethmoides, the matter usually mixing
with the excrementitious humors dries in the passage, and thereby prohibits
the discharge, and increases the Ulceration, and also the Caries: therefore
you are in the first place to supple and remove that by casting up mucilaginous
decoctions of this sort: hord. mund. j. rad. althaeae ij. sem. cydon. iij.
liquiritiae ij. coq. in aq. font. ad lbij. colaturae add olei amygd. dulc.
iij. injiciatur saepe in die. The mucus being thus removed, inject some of
these following:

Sarsaparillae incisae iij. infunde per debitum tempus in lbiij. aq. plantag.
deinde coq. ad medias: ante finem add fol. agrimon. salviae min. summit. rubi
an. M.j. flor. ros. rub. balaust. an. M. ss. colatura saepius chalybeatur, and
add alum. roch. ij. f. injectio. Mel Magistrale.


Succi beton. ij. succi scrophulariae maj. vj. succor. pimpinellae, caprifolii
an. iij. mel. rosat. colati iv. mel. com. iij. coquantur ad consistentiam
mellis pro usu.

aq. calcis lbj. mel. magistralis iij. Ms. Which aqua calcis is thus made.

calcis vivae lbj. aq. pl^^iae lbxij. coq. ad tertias, filter it through a
brown paper for your use. Or, aquar. ros. rub. beton. majoranae an. iv. sp.
vitrioli dulcicati gut. xxx. mel. magistralis suprascripti ij. These will
deterge the Ulcers, and the while you may by Antivenereals hasten the
exfoliation of the bones, and consolidation of the Ulcers. In the extirpation
of verrucae, mariscae, condylomata, ficus, etc. aq. divina, lac sublimati, sp.
vitrioli, and lap. causticus are proper. Where these will not ferve your
purpose, the Ligature and Knife or actual Cautery will: but the recidiveation
of them must be prevented by Antivenereals.

To cure fluttering noise in the Ears, etc. arising in this Disease.

cort. guaiaci j. cort. sassafr. ij. castorei iv. flor. lavendulae jss.
caryophyllor. ss. sp. vini rectificat. viij. f. infus. in vase vitreo per horas
24 super cineres calidos; colatura usui servetur: indatur auribus quotidie
tepide cum bombyce.

To alleviate pains. axung. suillae iv. ol. scorp. ij. ol. chamaemel.
rorismarini, salviae chymic. an. ss. olei petrolei, spicae an. j. laudan.
Londinensis j. plus aut minus, misceatur; and embrocate the part affected.

If there be Gummata, apply empl. e bolo, etc. To prevent Ulceration till
internals take place. If Nodes be the cause of the pain, foment them with sp.
vini, wherein Opium and Saffron has been dissolved: Or, empl. de Vigone quater
duplicato mercurio iij. rad. bryoniae nigrae siccatae pull. vj. cinnab. iij.
croci iv. opii ij. ol. nuc. moschat. j. terebinth q. s. Or, a solution of
argent. viv. in aq. fortis, cum axung. porcina and cera f. ceratum. If you will
proceed higher, and ulcerate the skin, this liniment of Hartman will do it.
unguent. aurei P. iij. merc. sublimat. P. j. If you apply it thick spread, it
will eat to the bone, and if it be not kept within compass it will ulcerate the
skin as far as it spreads; but being discreetly applied it seldom fails: But in
my Practice I rarely use any of them, unless it be in people who by reason of
their weakness are not able to bear a severe course of Physic; for in others I
commonly resolved them by virtue of the internal Remedies: they resolving
either in the time of salivating, or sweating. Nor do I lay open the Gummata,
unless they be in Cranio, and there indeed we ought to open them, to prevent
rotting of the bones and membranes underneath. But when Ulcers with Caries come
under my hands, I dilate the ulcers, and make way to the bones, and treat them
as has been set down in the Chapter of Ulcers with Caries; they not differing
otherwise, save that in these the Patient ought to continue in the use of
Antivenereals during the Cure.

In consideration that these diseased people are confined to their Chambers
during their Cure, it will be reasonable to make their confinement as pleasant
as we can; to which end the following Perfume may be useful.

gum. guaiaci j. masticb. benzoini an. ij. styracis, calamitae, lig. rhodii,
aloes, flor. ros. damasc. santali citri, juniper. summitat. rorismarini,
lavendulae, majoranae an. ss. f. omnium pulvis crassiusculus, qui cum aq. ros.
irroretur; huic addita duplo quantitate carbonum salicis cum mucagine
tragacanthae in aq. naphae extractae.

Observations of the lesser Species of Lues Venerea.
A Young Man having been debaucht into lascivious Company, 1. Observation of
inflammation and excoriation of the Penis.
complained to me the day after, and showed me the Prepuce much inflamed and
swelled and turned backward; there was also an excoriation between the glans
and part of the prepuce. I fomented the penis with red wine, and applied
pledgets of lint pressed out of the same on the excoriation, and unguent. album
camphorat. over all, leaving a passage for urine. Then let him blood in the arm
about ten ounces. A Clyster was administered some hours after, and that night at
his going to bed I sent him a Bolus of. cons. ros. ss. mer. dull. j. and purged
it off the next morning with Manna in Posset Drink, and dressed him the same
morning with decoct. plantag. summitat. rubi, equiseti, etc. By this method of
dressing, and by the repeating the use of the mer. dull. alone, and with
purgatives, I dried up the ulceration and inflammation, leaving the prepuce lax
as formerly. I had thoughts of prescribing him a longer course, but he
continued well without it.

Another came to me with an inflammation of the prepuce, 2. Observation.
it was swelled over the glans, and by the quantity of fetid matter which
discharged I supposed a Gonorrhea, at least a great excoriation between the
prepuce and glans. I fomented it with decoct. plantag. summit. rubi, equiseti,
etc. and injected some of it with a Syringe, and lapped a stupe about it, and
continued that method of dressing it twice a day; sometimes adding a little mel
Aegyptiac. to the decoction. I also let him blood, and repeated the method of
purging, as in the former Observation, till I had healed the ulceration, and
relaxed the swelling. Then returning back the prepuce, and observing that the
fetid matter had proceeded only from an excoriation between the prepuce and
glans, I dismissed him without putting him into other course of Physic.

One came to me with an Inflammation and great swelling of the glans and
prepuce, this latter being turned back in coitu straightened the glans, 3.
Observation of inflammation of the prepuce.
and hastened those accidents of inflammation, etc. and would soon have
gangrened in spite of all applications. To prevent which, I prepared to divide
that part of the prepuce which made the stricture. It was not easy to find the
way to it, by reason of the inflation of the upper tunicle; but having passed a
director under it, I cut through the stricture, and gave liberty to the glans,
then fomented the diseased parts with the decoct. plantag. etc. and rouled a
hot stupe over it, then let him blood, and treated him as venereal. The next
day I found the swelling discussed, and the prepuce lie flaccid and natural;
the wound cured in the skin a few days after by the common applications. This
turning back of the prepuce is frequently seen in young Lads, who wantonly
handle it. Sometimes it happens in Conjugal Rites, and not being returned
soon over again, it straitens the glans, and accordingly hastens the accidents
of inflammation. The Cure is effected by timely fomenting with emollients; but
if that way fail, you must divide the prepuce as abovesaid. In some of those
who have the prepuce very short, the fraenum is also so strait, that upon the
erection of the Penis, the Glans is pulled downwards, so as they cannot endure
coition. The remedy is by cutting the froenum in pieces. If you suspect that
the divided ends may be troublesome, clip them off at the same time, then put a
dossil of dry Lint close between the Glans and that part of the Prepuce to
prevent the coalition of them.

A young fellow came to me with the Prepuce inflamed, and a mortification on
the upper part of it, 4. Observation of the Prepuce gangreened.
which had spread the compass of a broad Shilling on that part over the Glans.
In scarifying the Eschar I found it had penetrated through: upon which
consideration I made separation of the Prepuce with a pair of Scissors cutting
it off round, then dressed it cum pull. Galeni and albumine ovi, the next day I
gave him a Lenitive Bolus, which purged him moderately. In the making
extirpation of the Prepuce I had permitted him to bleed freely, and by the
Lenient purge his body was cooled, so that at the next opening I found the Sore
digesting. I dressed it with digest. ex terebinth. and the excoriation about
the Glans with unguent alb. camph. The day after I purged him again with the
same Lenitive and calomel. By the reiterating of those purgations he was freed
of the malignity. The Penis was cured by the common applications in such cases
proposed in the method of cure.

One coming to me with a Chancre on the outside of the Prepuce with callus, 5.
Observation.
I sprinkled it with mer. praecipit. and applied a pledget of unguent.
diapompholig. over it with bandage, then let him blood and purged him with
decoct. amarum, giving him mer. dull. every other night, sometimes two nights
together. After the application of the Precipitate 2 or 3 times, I dressed the
Chancre only with a Pledget pressed out of aq. calcis, by which, with the help
of the Internals, it was soon cicatrized and the calluus resolved. The relics
of the Disease which I supposed to be lurking in the body I carried off by the
continued use of the Antivenereals, and concluded the course with decoct.
sarsae, sweating, etc.

A man of about 26 years of age, 6. Observation.
of a full body, came to me with a Chancre between the Glans and Prepuce on the
right side. I dressed it with lac sublimati. I let him blood and purged him
with an infusion of sena, rhab. etc. in a decoct. tamarind. with sir. de spina
cervina, and sir. ex infus. ros. cum agarico. The same night after his first
sleep he took j. calomel. in ss. cons. cichorei, and the next morning I purged
it off with some of the former infusion. The second day after I purged him with
pil. cochiae min. ss. mer. dull. j. and from that day purged him proportionably
as his strength would bear, increasing or diminishing the one or other of them
so as to avoid making his chaps sore. The Ulcer being thus cured and no
hardness remaining, I then prescribed him a decoct. sarsae, etc. and designed
the sweating of him; but he finding himself well thought it unnecessary, and
did not drink four quarts of his Diet-drink, yet continued without relapse.

One of about 40 years of age of a gross body had a small Chancre on the left
side of the Glans, 7. Observation.
I sprinkled it with mer. praecipit. and applied over it a pledget of unguent.
diapomphol. then let him blood, and the next day purged him with pull.
cornichini ij. which gave him 14 or 15 stools. The day after I purged him again
with pull. cornichini ss. mer. dull. j. I dressed the Chancre with a solution of
mel Aegyptiac. in a little of the decoct. plantag. equiset. etc. upon Lint, and
left some of it with him to dress himself daily. I also left with the Patient
some papers of pull. cornic. with and without calomel. which he took
interchangeably. He had a strong body, and being pleased with the working of
the Physic he took it daily, and many days after the Chancre was cured, and
the hardness resolved: but the weather growing cold he neither drank his
Diet-drink, nor sweat; nor in truth did I think it so very necessary. A month
or two after he showed me a round crusty Ulcer rise upon his Arm, and such
another upon his Thigh and Breast; I let him blood and repeated purging, and by
3 doses of Turbith Mineral given at distant times, purging him between each
dose, I avoided the making his chops sore, and dried the Ulcers, and by a
course of Diet-drink and Sweating secured him from relapsing.

A man of about 36 years of age came to me with some small corrosive little
Ulcers on the Fraenum, and on each side of it; 8. Observation of a Chancre in
Vrethra and Fraenum.
also a large Chancre in the very entrance into the Vrethra with a hard callus
round that part of the Glans. I touched the Ulcers with lac sublimat. and
applied over them pledgets pressed out of the vulnerary decoction. I let him
blood soon after, and gave him that night j calomel. and purged it off the next
day with an infus. of Sena, etc. For the more speedy relief of the fraenum I
gave the next morning ss. of Turbith Mineral; it vomited him thrice: after
which I gave him a draught of the infus. of Sena, and purged it downwards. By
this I checked the erosion in the Ulcers, but the fraenum was so far fretted,
and withal so painful, that I divided it, and with the Vitriol stone rubbed the
broken ends thereof, and continued dressing it as abovesaid, and by frequent
repetition of Antivenereal purgatives, I cicatrized those Ulcers about the
fraenum. The Ulcer within the urethra healed also much about the same time. The
callus on the top of the glans joining to it was a longer work, but was
resolved by the said way of purging: after which I put him into a strong
decoction of sarsa, and sweat him with antimon. diaphoret. etc. purging him
with pil. cochiae min. and praecipitat. alb. every fourth day, by which course
I confirmed his cure.

A young fellow whom I had cured of a Chancre between the Glans and Prepuce, 9.
Observation of Chancre with inflammation.
and was putting him into a course of Diet-drink and sweating, pretended some
extraordinary business for two or three days, in which time he came to me with
an inflammation and excoriation of the penis, with a small ulceration on the
top of the glans, and would have imputed it to my not having well cured him:
but its recency with the inflammation demonstrated sufficiently that it was a
new Clap, and I was obliged to him that he came to me again for cure. Others of
his metal have not been so kind. I repeated venaesection, and dressed him with
the decoct. plantag. summitat. rub. etc. as it is set down in the method of
cure, and purged him with pil. ex duobus and calomel. increasing and
diminishing the one and the other to avoid the making his chops sore: then by a
course of Diet-drink, sweating and purging finished the cure.

One of about 36 years of age came to me with the Prepuce inflamed and swelled
over the Glans, the end of the Prepuce being carnous, 10. Observation of
Chancres and Ulceration.
and contracted so close, that I could scarce get in my Probe. The glans felt
hard and unequal, and much fetid matter discharged from between it and the
Prepuce, which certainly demonstrated Chancres and great ulceration of some
continuance. He had also swelled Glandules in both his Groins. I fomented the
swelling with decoct. malvae, tap. barbat. sem. lini, foenugraeci, etc. and
injected the vulnerary decoction with unguent. Aegyptiac. and put in a short
tent of rad. gentianae dipped in oleo lilior. into the contracted Prepuce, with
directions that he should put in a fresh one so often as he should urine, or
syringe himself. To which purpose he had many prepared bigger and lesser. That
day I let him blood, and directed a Clyster, and purged him the next morning
with pil. cochiae min. and merc. dull. and repeated the said Physic according
to his strength, proportioning the merc. dull. so as to avoid salivating. By
this method and by his course of Diet with Sudorificks, the Ulcers healed, and
the carnosity resolved; but the entrance into the Prepuce continuing narrow, I
passed in a pair of probe scissors as high over the glans as the narrow
entrance would admit; then pulling back the exterior tunicle I cut the inner
straitened coat, till I had so enlarged it that it turned back. That done, I
applied my Restrictives upon the wound and rouled them on, leaving the glans
only covered with the circumvolutions of the rowler. The third day after I
dressed it again, and saw the wound digesting and healed in some parts, I
dressed it with the digest. ex terebinth. cum vitello ovi, and applied a folded
linen dipped in albumine ovi over it, and rolled it as before. I afterward
cured the wound with unguent. tutiae, and then permitted the prepuce to return
to its place. In this case I have sometime made two or three stitches at equal
distance, by which the lips have been sooner united. In those where the prepuce
is not retained back, the wound cures and leaves the prepuce deformed and
troublesome in coition, upon which account I circumcised one lately that came
out of other hands. You ought to be careful in the dressing ulcerations between
the glans and prepuce; for it sometimes happens, that they grow together,
yea, in such cases the very entrance into the Vrethra will contract extreme
narrow, and sometimes close up.

A poor Gentleman supposing his difficulty in urining proceeded from the Stone,
11. Observation.
silently endured it till the urine was in a manner suppressed: then I was
fetched, and saw the prepuce stretched over the glans, and the entrance into it
carnous, and scarce wide enough to admit of a probe. I made a dilatation by a
small pair of Plyers, then passed in a probe, but could neither get into the
Vrethra, nor pass considerably between the glans and prepuce. The work required
dispatch, therefore having drawn out the interior tunicle, and thrust backward
the external one, I caused my Servant to make a Ligature upon the prepuce close
by the end of the glans, and with a knife cut off the hard carnous end of the
prepuce. I thought to have turned it back, but found the interior coat of the
prepuce firmly grown to the glans round, as if it had been one body, and the
entrance into the Vrethra almost quite closed up by a hard cicatrix. I brought
the incised lips of the coats of the prepuce together, and retained them so
round by a few stitches; then having wiped away the blood with a sponge, I made
an apertion through the cicatrix, enlarging the entrance of the Vrethra, and
gave way for his urine; then put in a piece of a searching Candle to keep the
passage open. I dressed up the prepuce with pull. Galeni upon pledgets of lint
dipped in albumine ovi, and brought a fold of linen over it, leaving a passage
for urine. That afternoon I took out the wax-candle, and put in a leaden pipe,
which was easily retained for discharge of urine, and the while cicatrized the
apertion there. The wound in the prepuce being digested and cicatrizing, I cut
out the stitches. This Person pissed out seventeen piples in few days after.
Infants are sometimes born without this apertion, in which case if it be not
speedily made, the urine makes its way through some part of the ductus, or the
Infant dies miserably.

A young Blade was commended out of the Country to a Physician here, 12.
Observation of Chancre, and Glands in both Groins.
who committed him to my Care. The prepuce was swelled and inflamed, between it
and the glans there were many Chancres, as I supposed by the hardness I felt,
and by the discharge of fetid matter, and from thence I judged the inflammation
and swelling in the prepuce to arise. The Glandules in both his Groins were
swelled. To have waited for suppuration in these had certainly caused the
putrefaction of the other diseased part, it being then in great danger through
the so long concealing of it. Wherefore I began with fomenting and syringing of
it with the decoct. plantag. summitat. rubi, etc. with an addition of j.
Aegyptiac. to six ounces of the decoction, and continued the dressing of him
with that twice a day. The Physician prescribed him a Clyster that night, and
the next morning we let him blood in the Arm, and purged him the day after with
extract. Rudii and calomel. and the next day repeated a Clyster. The day after
he was purged again with extract. Rudii and j. calomel. After this manner he
was treated from the 16 of August to the 15 of September following, he drinking
a decoct. sarsae upon a Sudorifick Bolus those mornings he did not purge; and
from the third day of his purging he made that decoction his constant drink,
unless it was those mornings while he was purging, and then he drank a thin
broth. By this method the Glandules in his Groins resolved, and the Chancres
cured: the callosity also on the glans and end of the prepuce resolved, and
became naturally lax as before. Then we kept him strictly to his Diet-drink,
and sweat him in a wicker-chair with Antimon. diaphoret. gum. guaiaci, and a
warm draught of his Decoction, and purged him every fourth day with an infus.
senae, etc. and so proceeded to the 4th of October. Those days he sweat he
dined upon a roasted Partridge, and at night was allowed Biscuit and Raisons of
the Sun; and when he purged he dined upon boiled meat and drank small Ale.
During the whole course he kept his Chamber, and by so doing was perfectly
cured without making his Chaps sore in the least.

A young Woman was put into my hands, 13. Observation of Inflammation and
Chancre in pudendo.
having a great inflammation and swelling in pudendo, with a large round
Chancre between the ductus urinarius, and the interiors of the vagina uteri,
with great excoriation of the parts without. I let her blood, and the next day
purged her with an infus. senae in a decoct. cassiae and tamarind. with sir. de
sp. cervina, etc. and sent her the while a pint of the decoct. plantag.
summitat. etc. to stupe and syringe the diseased part, which she continued the
use of till she was cured. The day after her purging, I gave her 12 grains of
turbith min. which vomited her often, and purged her thrice. That afternoon a
Clyster of Milk and Sugar was administered, and the next day she took another
Clyster. The Flux continuing on the parts I gave her gr. viij. turb. min. with
cons. ros. rub. in the form of a Pill, it vomited her more moderately. A
Clyster was again administered that evening. The next morning I found her more
easy. I then purged her with the former infus. senae the two following days,
by which I prevented the swelling of her Chaps. During this the excoriation
dried, and the Chancre was disposed to Cure. From that time I purged her with
the Extract set down in the method of Cure, adding to each dose j. more or less
of praecipitat. albus, by which method she was cured in few days. I then put
her into a strict course of Diet and Sweating, and thereby confirmed the Cure.
I shall forbear giving many instances of this Sex, in consideration that there
is little difference in the Cure, only these are more subject to fluxion, and
so require more powerful revulsion, and that your Topics be more drying, lest
excrescences arise upon the excoriated parts.

A Man aged about 38 years, of a plethorick body, 14. Observation of Chancre,
with carnosity of the prepuce.
came to me with the prepuce contracted close over the glans, it was carnous
and hard, especially on the right side, under which part I supposed there lay a
Chancre. I concluded it venereal, but he not acknowledging it, I prescribed him
pil. coch. min. j. calomel. j. to take at twice intermitting a day between, but
let him blood in the arm first. The foresaid Pills working agreeably with him,
he was supplied with more of them, and drank a decoct. sarsae between while,
and took his desired liberty of walking abroad. By this method he sensibly
perceived the callosity resolve, and was satisfied that I could cure him if he
pleased, but was thereby rendered the more secure, and careless in taking that
prescribed Physic; so that after the space of three weeks, when he came to me
again he had many scabs on his head, herpes on his face, and other sort about
his thighs and arms, and the callosity not much lessened on the penis. At sight
whereof I prevailed with him to let me know his Lodging, which being at last
granted, I sent him 12 gr. Turbith min. and purged it off that Afternoon with a
draught of Sir Alex. Frasier's Potus amarus. I repeated the Turbith once in
three days, and gave him the bitter decoction between. Thus I dried the Ulcers,
and they shell'd soon off: The callosity also resolved easily, and the prepuce
relaxed and turned back: yet some Callus remained a longer time upon the inner
tunicle of the prepuce; but by Diet-drink, Sudorificks, and repeating the Vomit
or Purgative Pill once in four days, he was in six weeks perfectly cured.

Now lest you may think I am too strict in giving so many Internals in the Cure
of so small an Ulcer as a Chancre, 15. Observation of Callosity.
or rather a Chancrous Callus. I shall give you one instance, and the only one
that I ever failed in the Cure of. It was in the year 1654. an Apothecary since
deceased, engaged a Physician and my self in the Cure. The Chancre was of the
bigness of a cherry-stone seated on the neck of the glans; the Physician
prescribed Pil. Rudii and mer. dull. to be given every other day, and a decoct.
sarsa. etc. as it is usually made with its additional ingredients. Those
Mornings he did not purge, he was to take j. Antimon. diaphoret. in cochl. 1.
sir. limon. He having thus prescribed a method of Cure, the Apothecary
prosecuted the course, and indeed there was little for me to do; but the
Patient desiring my daily attendance, I dressed him with a pledget dipped in lac
sublimat. a medicament not inferior to any in such a case. The first 14 days
we passed on very secure, not doubting success, but from that time observing
the Callus not to resolve as I expected, I began to enquire into the Patients
manner of Diet, and into the Physic he took. As to his Diet, he lodged in the
Apothecary's house, who kept a good Table, his drink was decoct. sarsae, but so
small, as it was little better then water. But to that I was answered, it was
the second decotion. I then enquired for the first, which he showed me in a
four ounce glass in the window, and told me, the Patient drank three of those
in a day tribus horis medic. I was surprised at this new way, and did not
wonder at my small success. I thought it not reasonable to take notice of it to
the Patient, but spoke to the Apothecary to forbear the giving the second
decoction, and to make the first proportionably, as it was by the Physician
prescribed, and to repeat the Purgative oftener. In this latter I prevailed, but
the former he justified, and continued that method to the last. By the frequent
purging, and the application of a Cerate made with the solution of crude
Mercury in aqfortis, that Callus Chancre resolved after we had spent near six
weeks time. I then put the Patient upon sweating, and advised a more strict
diet; but before the Patient had spent full out a fortnight he grew weary of
the course, and concluding himself well brake off: but he relapsed soon after;
whereas if he had been briskly purged, and afterward kept to a strict Diet,
and a strong decoction of Sarsa, and sweat, he might have been perfectly cured
in a month without any application to the Collosity.

In strong Contitutions he Malignity of this Disease is sometimes discharged by
a Bubo in the Groin, in which case it ought to be drawn outward by
Cupping-glasses, and brought to Suppuration. Yet where it is not very forward
(and is accompanied with Chancres, or other virulent Ulcers, as in one of the
preceding observations,) I do not attend its suppuration, but proceed in the
Cure with Antivenereals, as I have there showed you: but where there is only a
Bubo, I proceed as follows:

One about 40 years of Age, 16. Observation of a Bubo.
of a strong sanguine complexion, came to me with a swelled Glandule in his
right Groin; it was of the bigness of an Almond in its shell, somewhat
painful, but without heat. I supposing it Venereal, applied a Cupping-glass to
it, and afterward an Emplaister of Pic. Burgund. saponis nigri, axungiae
porcinae, and aceti an. part. aequal. granted the Patient liberty of Diet, by
which, within 3 or 4 four days the tumor fixed and grew bigger, and heated the
skin, and by the continuance of that application, it increased with
inflammation and much pain. I then applied this suppurative Cataplasm. rad.
lilior. albor. cepar. sub ciner. coctar. an iv. far. tritic. ij. axung. porci,
anseris an. iss. croci pulver. j. The Tumor increasing and not growing soft, I
added to the same Cataplasm ferment. vet. ij. pulpae fiicum extract. in sp.
vini, by which it afterward suppurated. I opened it in the declining part by
incision, and discharged a slimy crude matter. I dressed it with unguent.
basilic. upon a Tent, and afterward added merc. praecipitat. Whilst I deterged
the Ulcer I let him blood, and purged him with an infus. senae 3 or 4. days;
but after the first days purging, I gave him j. calomel. overnight, and the
infusion the following morning. During the time it was cicatrizing, I purged
him with pil. coch. min. and calomel. every third day. The other days he drank
a decoct. sarsae; and after the Ulcer was cicatrized, I gave him a few sweats,
and concluded the Cure.

A young Man came to me having a Bubo in his right Groin. I applied an
Emplaster of Galbanum spread upon leather, and continued it there some days,
17. Observation of a Bubo.
giving him the liberty of Diet. In a short time it suppurated. I opened it by
Caustic, and discharged a slimy matter. I dressed it up with Lenients to
hasten separation of the Eschar, and applied an Emplaster de mucliag. which
empl. melilot. After the Eschar digested off, I deterged with mund. Paracels.
purged him with extract. Rudii and calomel. every other day, and prescribed a
decoct. sarsae, lig. guaiaci, etc. which he drank those intermitting days.
After the ulcer was cicatrized I sweat him, keeping him that while to a
stricter diet, by which method he was secured from relapsing.

A Man about 34 years old, of a full body, came to London, and lodged himself
and Wife in the house of his Physician, 18. Observation of a Bubo.
he being indisposed with an inflammation on his belly to the left Groin,
pretending he had overheated his body by disorder in drinking. He was advised
to keep his bed, and dispose himself to a breathing sweat. After a day or two
he complained more of his pain, upon which account I visited him, and saw the
inflammation discussed on his belly, but there remained a tumor in his Groin
near suppurated. A Cataplasm was applied to it ex rad. lilior. etc. by which it
suppurated a few days after, and I opened it by a Caustic, and gave vent to a
crude sanious matter. Whilst I attended the digestion of this, the Patient took
an opportunity to show me some small Chancres upon the Penis near the Fraenum.
I dressed them, and gave him a solution of mel Aegyptiac. in decoct. plantag.
etc. to cure them.

The abscess not digesting nor yielding to detersives, I acquainted the
Physician that I had discovered the Disease, Venereal, and implored his help.
He purged the Patient with pil. Rudii, mer. dull. and prescribed him decoct.
sarsae, etc. by which the Ulcers in pene were cured, and the abscess grew well
disposed to heal. But upon the Physicians and my discoursing with the Patient
of his Disease he grew passionate, and denied it to be Venereal; and a day or
two after removed out of his lodgings two or three miles into the Country, and
to avoid the Discovery of his Disease, he dismissed me, and entertained another
Surgeon, who complied, and promised in few days to cure him without the help
of internal Remedies: But after all his endeavors another Surgeon was
Consulted, by whose advice the Patient was put into a course of Antivenereals
at last, and cured of that, but grew otherwise Diseased, and lived not many
years.

A young Man was brought to my house, of a Plethorique body, Diseased with a
hard compacted swelling in his left Groin; it was a Bubo, 19. Observation of a
Bubo.
and like to suppurate, I applied an empl. diachyl. cum gummi. About a week or
ten days after he came to me again, it was then suppurated; I opened it, and
having discharged the matter, dressed it with unguent. Basilic. upon a tent,
and applied over it some of the foresaid Plaster, and dismissed him and his
Apothecary with directions how to proceed. After two months I was fetched to
this Patient, and saw that Bubo terminated in a Phagedenous Ulcer about three
inches in length and proportionably broad with indented callous lips. The Ulcer
it self was sordid, and has corroded round under those lips; he had also on the
scrotum four large round Ulcers and others like them in perinaeo. It was my
wonder to see this Disease so rage, considering the course I had prescribed was
the same I had cured so many by: and he had taken so much merc. dull. that it
was grown familiar to him and seemed to increase the virulency in the Ulcers. I
began the work with cutting of the jagged Lips, and filled the Ulcer with
pledgets spread with unguent. basilic. dipped in precipitate, and dressed the
other Ulcers after the same manner with empl. diachalcith. to retain them on. I
did not let him blood because I had permitted those callous lips to bleed
freely, but I directed a Clyster to be administered that afternoon. I purged him
the next day and two or three after with a decoct. amar. of Sir Alex. Frasiers,
and then gave him gr. xvj. Turbith mineral. in a Pill made up with cons. ros.
rub. which vomited him well and purged him twice. That afternoon a Clyster was
given him of fat broth cum vitello ovi. After the first application of merc.
praecipitat. I dressed the Ulcer in inguine with unguent. basilic. and merc.
praecipitat. mixed. The other I dressed with pledgets pressed out of lac
sublimat. By the repeating of the Turbith min. once in four or five days, I
disposed the Ulcers to heal, and by Clysters and purging draughts between while
I prevented salivating.

After the Ulcers in the scrotum and perinaeum were cicatrized, I put him into
a strict diet and kept him to the drinking of decoct. sarsae, etc. with good
sudorificks, and by purging him once in four days he was happily cured and
continues so to this day.

Two young Lads, 20. Observation of Bubones, Chancres and pains in the
shoulders.
intimate companions, came out of the country alike clapped by one and the same
wench; they having both failed of their Cure there, were commended to my care.
They had both swellings in their left Groins and callosities about the glans
remaining from preceding Chancres. They were also afflicted with verrucae and
mariscae in podice, and pains in their Shoulders. These swellings in their
Groins were without pain or inflammation, so not like to come to suppuration.
Therefore without more ado I let them both blood and purged them two or three
days with Sir Alex. Frasier's Potus amarus, then gave them each a dose of
Turbith mineral. which vomited them well, and took off their pains. The next
day I snipt off the mariscae and verrucae, rubbing their remaining roots with
the caustic Stone; and having cleansed them, I dressed them up with Lenients,
and after separation of the Eschars cicatrized them with the Vitriol Stone and
unguent. epulotic. During the Cure of these I repeated the Turbith min. once in
four or five days, and between while carried down the matter by Clysters and
Lenient purgatives, by which method I resolved the callosities and the glands.
Then I put them into a decoct. sarsae with sudorificks, and with extract. Rudii
and calomel. every fourth day finished their Cure.

A Physician and my self were fetched to a man whom we found in bed. 21.
Observation of heat, pustulae, etc.
He was not sick, but broken out all over his body with heat. The Physician
advised him to dispose himself to a breathing Sweat upon a draught of warm
Posset Drink, wherein was boiled ras. C. C. etc. A Cordial Julip was also
prescribed as is usual in ebullition of the serum sanguinis. Three or four days
after I visited him again, and found that heat raised into many pustules, which
had also overspread his head, and terminated there in as many ulcerous scabs
amongst his hair. These were visible symptoms of the Lues, and appeared so to
me at the second visit I made him; but he did not acknowledge it till some few
days after, and then he showed me some corrosive Ulcers on the penis near the
fraenum, and some verrucae in perinaeo, yet denied that it was an infection of
a late date. He was contented we should proceed in the Cure, to which purpose
he was let blood and the next day purged with an infused Potion. After which
was purged him with calomel. etc. proportionably as his strength would bear,
avoiding the making his chaps sore. By this method the Ulcers dried and the
Scabs shell'd off, the Ulcers on the penis were dressed and cured as has been
showed in the preceding Chapters. We then prescribed him decoct. sarsae, etc.
with antimon. diaphoret. bazoard. min. etc. and some few days he seat; but he
supposing himself cured brake off from our method: whence it came to pass that
the malignity afterward showed it self in different forms. Sometimes in an
ophthalmia threatening his eyesight, in which case he consulted oculists and
others, but after all was cured by us with the forementioned purgatives. After
that he was afflicted with a fierce Catarrh, in the cure of which he ran long
courses of pectorals, but was only relieved by us with Antivenereals. But not
prosecuting that method of cure, he was some months after grieved with a Colic
which lasted a long time, and a hernia humoralis attended that: upon which
considerations he at last submitted to a more strict method, and was freed of
his Colicks and other symptoms by purging with Catharticks, mixed with calomel.
The course was finished with decoct. sarsae, drying diet and sweating.

A Woman aged 27 years being quick with Child was broken out in her head and
face and several parts of her body with serpigo and various pustulae and scabs.
I let her blood, and the next day purged her with an infusion of sena, 22.
Observation of a woman with child venereal.
rhab. etc. to which was added manna and sir. ros. solut. and from that time I
prescribed her praecipitatus albus from 15 gr. to 25 every other night, or
proportionably, to avoid salivating of her. But I not having the liberty of
visiting her as I ought, it swelled her chaps and she fluxed 18 or 20 days, and
was thereby freed of her pustulae, etc. In the declination of the Flux I purged
her with a decoti. senae, polypodii, hermodact. sem. carthami, etc. made in a
quantity of Diet-drink, which she drank thrice a day, and took the while a
medicated broth for her nourishment. After her chaps were cured I put her into
a decoct. sarsae and a drying diet, and sweat her moderately with antimon.
diaphoret. gum. guaiaci and bazoard. occident. cum cons. melissae, and sir.
limon. in forma boli, purging her between while with the forementioned apozeme,
and cured her. She afterward went our her full time, and was delivered of a
found Child: I made it a fontinel in the neck. It dyed of Convulsions in the
Country at three quarters of a year old.

A Woman big with Child having many ulcerous scabs on her head and other parts
of her body with great erosion, 23. Observation of another woman with child.
I let her blood and prescribed her a decoct. sarsae with some of the milder
purgatives, senae, polypod. hermodact. rhab. etc. and after wards prescribed
her a few doses, viz. j. calomel. every other night, till I had checked the
malignity; then prescribed her this: Bezoard. miner. ss. gum. guaiaci gr. xv.
antimon. diaphoret. gr. viij. cons. borag. q. s. f. bolus. After which she
drank a draught of decoct. sarsae and sweat moderately. By this way of
proceeding her disease was palliated, and she went out her full time, and was
brought to bed; but the Child dyed convulsive within three weeks. After which
the Mother was removed to more convenient lodgings and cured as has been said
in the former observation.

A Nurse by giving suck to a diseased Child was infected with great ulceration
and chops with verrucae on the Nipples and parts about the Breasts, 24.
Observation of a Nurse infected.
upon which account the Child was taken from her, it being suspected she had
infected the Child. She had also a node upon her right hand and some breakings
out upon her limbs. I enquiring into the cause saw this poor woman's Child which
was born within the year very well complexioned and sound. I caused her to be
let blood, and purged her with pil. cochiae and merc. dull. three or four times,
intermitting a day or two between; then vomited her with Turbith mineral. and
repeated it once in four or five days. To the Ulcers and ulcerations I only
applied alittle unguent. diapompholig. spread thin upon linen to prevent their
fretting and sticking to her shift, for they cured the Internal Remedies. But
the Nodes not resolving, I raised a Salivation by the Turb. min. and afterward
confirmed the Cure by purging, dry diet, decoct. sarsae, lig. guaiaci, etc.
with Sudorificks.

I was sent for to a Child that was broken out all over the Body with some
branny and mattery scabs, 25. Observation of an Infant.
the disturbance whereof had extremely emaciated the Infant. The Mother was
also diseased in the same manner, and big with Child; I prescribed her a
purging Apozeme, and gave her praecipitatus albus every other night the first
week, and afterward prescribed her a medicated Ale with sarsa, china, lig.
guaiaci, etc. for her constant drink, and gave her many days Aethiops mineral.
j. at a time, and kept her body soluble between while with a lenitive Bolus.

I purged the Infant with sir. de Rhab. and afterward with calomel. from gr.
iv. to gr. vj. either in the pap of a roasted Apple, or a spoonful of Milk
proportionably as I saw he could bear it, it purged him twice or thrice, and
sometime vomited him. His grewel and pap were made with a decoction of sarsa,
china, etc. by these Remedies I dried the mattery Scabs, and the Infant was in
a great degree freed of his Itch. I also caused him to be bathed in a tub of
warm water seven or eight days. In the declining of his Itch a Phyma arose near
the podex, which being suppurated I opened by a Caustic, and ordered the
dressing of it daily with unguent. basilic. spread upon linen. This discharged
matter plentifully for the space of a month, and then it lessened and cured.
During this method of Cure, the Infant grew and recovered strength; but upon
the omission of the Mercurials new eruptions appeared, which were removed by
Aethiops mineral. and moderate purging, but it died since. His Mother by
continuing the prescribed method was Cured, and was in due time brought to bed
of a healthful Child, and both the Mother and Child continue well to this day.

A Woman who suspected her self Venereal was brought to bed of a seeming
healthful Child; 26. Observation.
it thrived very well for some months, and the skin was clear, yet it had a
sontanel made in the Neck for caution. This Infant being about four months old
brake out in the Head, afterward in the Face, and most parts of the Body with
such eruptions as showed it to be Venereal, yet the Mother seemed untainted. I
proceeded with this Infant by purging it with the infusion of Rhabarb. and
between while with praecipitat. albus, which sometime vomited him, and gave him
a stool or two. It relieved him much, and disposed the scabs to dry. I
prescribed him medicated grewels, and a decoct. sarsae, ras. C. C. eboris, etc.
for his drink; also Bezoard. miner. to take sometime, by which he recovered of
his Distemper, but died afterward of the small Pox.

By the same method I cured a Girl of two years old, that was broken out of
her Body with Pustulae and mattery Scabs, and had a marisca juxta podicem,
which I have always observed to be a certain Symptom of the Lues.

One newly come out of a course of Physic, 27. Observation of a Herpes exedens
in the Face.
showed me a small dry Scab on one side of his Neck, and enquired of me whether
I thought he was Cured. I returned a favorable answer, not being willing to
engage in the Cure of a Disease which he supposed himself so well of, but gave
him a little Pomatum to dress tha Scab. Some while after other Symptoms
arising, he put himself into to other hands, who treated him for the space of
eight weeks, and dismissed him cured; and upon that assurance he married: but
within few days a new pustula thrust out and ulcerated. He writ to me to send
him somewhat to palliate it till he should be at more liberty to put himself
into a course of Physic. I sent him a Box of pil. Rudii with calomel. and an
unguent to dress the Ulcer, but he not taking the Pills, the Ulcer terminated
in a herpes exedens, and at last he sent for me. He had a callosity on one side
of the Glans as big as a small Kidney Bean, he had also some small round
corrosive Ulcers about the fraenum, and was troubled with a noise in his ears
and deafness. I undertook his cure and began with a Clyster, then let him,
blood and purged him the day after with an infus. senae, etc. the next morning
I gave him 25 grains of praecipitat. alb. in a Bolus with cons. borraginis, and
that afternoon a Clyster: to the Ulcers and callosity in glande I only applied
pledgets dipped in a solution of mel Aegyptiacum in some of the decoct. plantag.
equiseti, etc. The herpes exedens lay round and hard in the skin and was
crusted over with a thick scab, which I loosened by bathing it with a decoct.
malvae, etc. The Scab being taken off the Ulcer appeared sordid and corroded
round, and the Lips were high and callous. When these happen in the Thighs or
other parts which are not so visible, I do not concern my self in the dressing
them otherwise than to defend them from adhering to their Linen, till they be
dried by internals: but in this place I was obliged to remove the callous lips
and the several excrescences in the Ulcer to render the cicatrix smooth. To
which purpose I rubbed them with the caustic stone, and wasted and dried the
hypersarcosis by the application of red precipitate; and afterward by the use
of the Vitriol stone and Epuloticks I cicatrized the Ulcer so even, as at this
present there are no marks of it. During the work I purged him often with
praecipitat. alb. and pil. coch. min. and sometimes vomited him with turbith
mineral. by which I also resolved the callosity and cured those little Ulcers
near the fraenum. After I had thus freed him of those maladies which affected
the skin, I put him into a decoct. sarsae, etc. with the observance of a strict
diet, and sweat him often with a Mercurius diaphoret. and purged him once in 4
or 5 days, by which he was also freed of that tinnitus aurium and restored to a
perfect health.

A Man aged about 40 years, of a gross body and disorderly life, 28.
Observation of sweetning the blood.
frequently consulting men of our profession but never observing any strict
method of cure, came one day to advise with me about his Disease, which was a
dry scurf with an itch on several parts of his body, as also some wandering
pains on the scapulae, etc. Amongst other discourse he told me an eminent man
in the cure of the Lues venerea had offered to cure him by sweetning of his
blood. The method he proposed thereto was by purging, bleeding and sweating,
without giving one grain of Mercury. I did not believe his blood would be the
better, yet if he thought so he might proceed in that course, and when he
should be let blood I desired he would send for me. He did so, and I let him
blood according to the directions ten ounces. It was of good color and
consistence. About six weeks after when he had finished his course of Physic,
he sent to me again. I let him blood about the same quantity as before. His
blood was like that some of our Physicians call pleuritical, it had neither
color nor consistence; yet I thought not the worse of it (so he was cured) for
upon a return to his wonted diet the blood would recover its sormer color: but
he relapsed some weeks after, and I let him blood again, and it was as at first
of good color and consistence. He was well pleased to see his blood look
better, but was so much dissatisfied with his late treatment that he would not
be persuaded again into a strict course of Physic, yet I undertook the cure,
and purged him frequently with pil. e duobus and calomel. and sometimes gave
him the latter alone: he also drank a decoction of sarsa, etc. but with these
he went abroad and thereby prolonged his cure, yet at last that malignity was
so spent.

A Man of about 30 years of age having several Herpes and serpiginous Ulcers on
his thighs and about his body with nocturnal pains in his head and other parts,
29. Observation of Herpes, Ulcer in his tongue and various pains.
also a large Ulcer on the middle of his tongue, I let him blood, and the next
day purged him with the bitter drink. The morning after I gave him a dose of
Turbith minerale, and the third day after repeated it again, designing to
salivate him; upon which account I repeated the Turbith five times. He had
taken much Mercury and only slavered with it, but the while he was freed of all
the symptoms save that of his tongue, and that seemed inclinable to heal.
Therefore I purged off the Mercury with the bitter decoction for several days,
till I had run him very low. Then I put him into a strict course of diet with
decoct. sarsae, etc. sweating and purging him the space of sixteen days, during
which the Ulcer in his tongue cured. I designed bathing and a more nourishing
diet, but his affairs abroad hastened him away. He was longer in recruiting his
flesh than was usual; but by a milk diet he recovered it, and has from that
time continued well.

A Country Lad was taken notice of by some of his fellow servants in the house
where he lived to have a sore nose; 30. Observation of Ulcers on the uvula,
tonsils and nose.
he told them it was scratched in playing with a Kitten; but in progress of
time the inflammation and swelling increasing very much, he was brought to me
one afternoon while I was diverting my self thus. I hearing them say it was
occasioned by a scratch, I did not much mind it; but so soon as I heard him
speak I took notice of his hoarseness and took him to the window, where looking
into his mouth I saw the tonsils ulcerated and the uvula black with the
mortification, and part of it separating. His nose was also stuffed with crusly
Ulcers. I questioned him privately how long it was since he had a Gonorrhoea or
Chancre, and who cured them. He confidently denied he ever had any, however the
Lues was visible and required a speedy remedy. He was presently let blood, and
I gave him two papers of mer. dull. j. in a paper, with directions to take the
one at night in a spooonful of bread and milk, and the other in the morning,
and two hours after to drink Posset Drink with an ounce and half of Manna
dissolved in it. I directed the dressing of the uvula and those Ulcers of the
consils with aq. divina Fernelii daily till my interal prescriptions disposed
them to a healing condition. To which purpose I repeated the mer. dull. with
some of the purgatives between while, and in the space of ten days cured those
Ulcers in his throat. His nose was syringed with decoct. hordei, by which the
crusty matter which stopped his nostrils was removed. Then we syringed with some
of the Errbia set down in the method of cure. After the Ulcers in his throat
were digested, I hastened the exfoliations of the bones in his nose by the
giving him 2 or 3 doses of Turbith, which made a light Salivation. strict diet
and sweating Toward the declination of it I purged him with the bitter
decoction, and by diet drink, etc. finished his cure.

Coming one day to put him out of his course of Physic I saw the edges of one
of his nostrils sore, which I supposed a new erruption: it surprised me to see
it so soon break out again. I was angry with the Nurse, suspecting there had
been some neglect in the prosecution of his course of Physic; but the Nurse
replied, he had made his nose sore by picking of it. For a farther trial I
advised the Patient to forbear so ding, and to keep his chamber a while longer;
he did so, and 3 or 4 days after I visited him again, and saw that nostril
well, and was satisfied that he had picked it. I advised him to be more careful
of his health, and dismissed him.

One of about 20 years of Age came to me with his Head overspread with crusty
ulcers; also some serpiginous ulcers about his Body, 31. Observation of
Pustulae, and a Node on the back of the hand.
and a Node upon the back of his hand, with a gumminess on the tendons reaching
to his fingers, in so much as he could not bend one of them. In endeavoring his
Cure, heretofore he had run long courses of Physic, and was much emaciated
thereby. I began with the fomenting and embrochating his hand with discutients,
and applied the mercurial Empl. set down in the method of Cure, and purged him
with diagridium, bezoard. minerale, calomel. in cons. ros. Damasc. and the
night after gave him an Opiat Bolus with gr. j. Laudan. Thus I proceeded
according as his strength would admit, and prescribed him decoct. sarsae, and
medicated Broaths, by which I dried and shell'd the ulcerous Scabs, and eased
his Pains. After I found his strength recovered, I gave him 10 gr. of Turbith,
and observing that he bare it well, I repeated it a second and third time, and
thereby salivated him about 17 or 18 days: all which time I nourished him with
the aforesaid Broaths and Posset. During the Salivation, the gumminess
resolved, and the Node diminished much. As the Salivation declined, I again
prescribed him the decoct. sarsae, and purged him with the bitter Apozeme; then
by a strict Diet, sweating and purging, the Node resolved, and his hand was
restored to its former state, and I dismissed him perfectly Cured.

One of about 40 years of Age, having a Herpes exedens on his right brow, 32.
Observation of a Herpes exedens, verrucae, etc.
a marisca in podice, and some verrucae about the glans; also some wandering
pains on his shoulders; I let him blood, and purged him with the Cathartick
Electuary, and Mer. dull. three or four days, and dressed the Herpes, as has
been showed in some of the preceding Cases. And after his purging I cut off the
marisca close with a pair of Scissors, and rubbed the remaining Root with a
Caustic stone, then dressed it up with Lenients, by which it was digested, and
afterward cicatrized it by the help of the Vitriol Stone, and the common
Epuloticks. Whilst this was digesting I vomited him with turbith mineral.
repeating it once in 3 days, and increasing the Dose from 12 or 18 gr. till I
had dried the Herpes, and the crust shel'd off. During this, I cut and burnt
off the Verrcuae, as has been said in the like Cases. These being also cured,
I purged him with the bitter decoct. four or five days, then with decoct.
sarsae, and that Sudorifick of Bezoard. miner. gum. guaiaci, etc. I sweat him,
and kept him to a strict Diet, purging him once in three or four days. His
pains remitted after his taking the first Dose of Turbith, and by this latter
course his Cure was confirmed.

A Nurse was brought to me, who by giving Suck to a Diseased Infant, 33.
Observation of Herpes in the breast, etc.
had the Nipple and Parts about of her right Breast very much excoriated, and
four round, hard, crusty Ulcers somewhat more distant. She had a Node with
pains on her right Leg, also a Serpigo on her right hand and fingers. She had
not been troubled with a Gonorrhoea, nor was the Pudendum ever Diseased, which
confirmed to me that she had gotten the infection by suckling the Child. I
began her Cure with letting blood, and purged her with the purging extract and
calomel. and after I had repeated it 3 or 4 times, and given her some Calomel.
alone at distant times I vomited her with Turbith mineral. and repeated it
three days after, and thereby her Chaps swelled, and she salivated eighteen or
twenty days: During which, Clysters of Milk with the yolk of an Egg, were often
administered, and her mouth frequently washed with decoct. hordei, etc. Before
she had salivated six days her Node and Pains removed. As the Salivation
declined, she was purged with the bitter decoction, and her Cure was finished
by decoct. sarsae, etc. as has been showed in the former Observations.

A Man of about thirty years of Age, 34. Observation of Herpes, etc.
diseased with mattery scabs about his head, many pustulae and serpiginous
Ulcers on his thighs, and several parts of his Body, put himself into my hands.
I let him blood, and that afternoon I prescribed him a Clyster, and the morning
after purged him with pull. cornichin. and the next morning early he took 25 gr.
of praecipitat. alb. and a Clyster that afternoon. The day after I purged him
with pull. cornich. ij. praecipitat. albi j. and the next two mornings gave him
j. of Aethiop. mineral. in a Bolus with cons. cort. citri, and a draught of a
decoct. sarsae, etc. after it to dispose him to a breathing sweat. The third
day I gave him 15 gr. of Turb. mineral. which vomited him often, and purged him
twice, and in the afternoon griped him, and put him upon a Tenesmus; to remedy
which a Clyster of Milk cum vitello ovi, and ol. chamaemel. was administered,
and Chicken-broath and warm Posset Drink was his drink that day and the next.
The day following, I gave ss praecipitati albi, and Turbith min. gr. vj. in a
Bolus which vomited him thrice. That afternoon a Clyster was repeated, and the
day after he was purged with an infused Potion of sena, rhab. etc. and repeated
the Aethiops mineralis and decoct. sarsae, as before, three mornings together.
Then I gave him 15 gr. of Turbith, as at first, which vomited him often, and
from that time the Ulcers dried, and in the worst of them the scabs were ready
to shell off. I then purged him with the bitter decoction four or five days,
and kept him strictly to the decoct. sarsae, drying diet and sweating, with
Aethiops min. and purged him once in four days with pull. cornichini, and
praecipitat. alb. and so concluded his Cure in seven weeks.

A young Fellow sorely diseased with Herpes and fretting Ulcers from his right
hip and buttock down that thigh, 35. Observation of Herpes and serpig. Ulcers.
having used many Remedies externally and internally, I applied a cloth spread
with unguent. enulat. over the ulcerous parts to defend them from sticking to
his shirt, and let him blood that day, and purged him the next with an infus.
senae, etc. and the day after I gave him 11 gr. of Turbith min. The day after
that I purged him with pull. cornichin. and praecipitat. alb. and repeated it
every other day, by which his Ulcers soon dried, and the scabs shell'd off. His
skin growing smooth, he concluded himself Cured and left me, but in less than a
month he relapsed, and came to me gain. I repeated bleeding, and purged him
with an infusion of sena, etc. and afterward gave him three or four Doses of
Turbith mineral. it made his Chaps a little sore, and somewhat he slavered.
This freed him of his serpiginous Ulcers. Then I purged him with the bitter
decoction, and sweat him with decoct. sarsae, etc. purging him once in three or
four days with Antivenereals, and at last dismissed him Cured.

A Man of a full Body, 36. Observation of a Herpes exedens.
having been long afflicted with Ulcerous Scabs, Serpigo, and other foulnesses
of the skin arising sometimes in one part of his Body, and sometimes in another
(his Surgeon being dead) was recommended to my Care. The Ulcer that then
troubled him was on his chin, the compass of a broad shilling, and covered with
a thick scab. It seemed to me to be Vevereal, but I was told otherwise, and
durst not dispute it. I thought my self very unhappy in being put upon the Cure
of such an Ulcer, without the help of Antivenereals. I fomented it with decoct.
hord. summitat. althaeae, malvae, and sem. lini, and applied a Pledget of
unguent. rosat. over it with bandage to retain it on. The next morning the Scab
came off, and there appeared a sordid Ulcer with ragged callous lips round it,
also many excrescences rising up in the middle, which made the Ulcer not unlike
a Honeycomb, as I have elsewhere described it. I sprinkled the Ulcer with Red
Precipitate, and applied over it small dossils of dry lint, and some pledgets
spread with unguent. tutiae vig. over them, and repeated this way of dressing
every other day, till I saw the flesh in those little cells ruddy. Then I
dressed them with little pellets of lint, and covered the excrescences with
precipitate, and bound up the Ulcer as before, not opening it again till the
third day. Thus I wasted them, and the Ulcer cicatrized here and there as they
were consumed. I was glad to see it cicatrize any way, and resolved without
more delay to remove the callous lips. To which purpose at the next dressing I
rubbed them with a Caustic Stone, and clipped off the sloughs, then sprinkled
them with precipitate, and after separation of those sloughs, I rubbed the lips
with a Vitriol Stone, and by the one and other I smoothed the Ulcer, and at
last cicatrized it with pledgets dipped in Lac Virgin. but the cicatrix appearing
unequal, I rubbed the remaining eminences again with a little Caustic, and
left it at last cicatrized more smooth to the Patients satisfaction. I was glad
I had preserved my Credit with him. But it being Venereal, I suspected that it
would show it self again in the same place, but it appeared in a Node upon his
skin, as you may read in some of the following Observations.

A Man of about thirty two years of Age, of a strong Constitution, 36.
Observation of Herpes exedens overspreading all the Body.
came to me upon a supposition of having the Kings Evil. His Face was
o're-spread with Herpes exedens, some of them crusted high with dry scabs upon
his nostrils and lips; his head was covered over as it were with one scab, and
in truth his whole body so diseased with eating Ulcers, that he could neither
fit nor lie without very great pain; his shirt, drawers and stockings being
stiff with the matter that flowed from them. Upon enquiry into the Original of
his Malady, I discovered that he had contracted a Gonorrhoea beyond Sea, and
had been diseased with pustulae, etc. above half a year. I prescribed him a
Clyster that evening, let him blood the next morning in the Arm about ten
ounces, gave him j. Calomel. that night going to bed, and purged it off in the
morning with an infus. senae, rhab. etc. The next morning he took Turbith min.
gr. xij. and drank a draught of Posset Drink after it, which vomited him three
or four times, and purged him much. This poor Man's condition being extreme
uneasy, obliged me to prosecute the drying up those Ulcers with what
expedition I could: Wherefore I gave him Calomel. and Turbith the oftener, and
purged it downward with the bitter drink either the same day or the next,
accordingly as his strength would bear, till I saw the several Ulcers dried,
and the scabs shell'd off: Then I left off the use of the purging drink, and
increased the Dose of Turbith min. till I saw him salivate; which salivation
lasted about 18 or 20 days. In the declination thereof, I purged him again with
the forementioned decoction, and finished the course of Physic with decoct.
sarsae, sudorificks, sweating and drying diet, etc. according to my usual
method. During which I rubbed off the several remaining excrescences (rising
from the Ulcers) with caustic stones, and cicatrized them with the vitriol
stone, unguent. desiccativ. rubr. etc. and dismissed him Cured.

One came to me having an Herpes exedens on his Chin, 37. Observation of Herpes
serpigin. etc.
and many eruptions about his Body, with wandering pains on his Shoulders, Arms
and Legs. He desired to be cured, but would not be confined to his Chamber. I
declining to meddle with him upon those terms, he put himself into the hands of
an Empirick whom he had formerly known in Italy. He undertook the Cure with
great promises. But after the taking that Empiricks prescriptions a much longer
time than he had undertaken to Cure him in, the Symptoms remaining, the
Patient grew peevish; and the Empirick to recover his Credit with him altered
his method, by which it seemed the Ulcers Cured. But in the while his Chaps
swelled, and in taking cold a Diarrhoea with a tenesmus followed, and with much
disorder he was brought to a Lodging near me.

I caused him to be put into a warm Bed, and prescribed him a Bolus sudorifick,
and with a draught of warm Posset put him into a sweat, and some hours after
advised a Milk Clyster cum vitellis ovor. etc. to lenifie his bowels, and laid
him to rest with elect. diascord. and the next morning I purged him with an
infusion of sena, rhabarb. etc. and repeated the opiate, by which the griping
of his guts were remitted. But in this while the swelling in his chaps was
sunk, and he complained of a noise and pain in his ears, and though his mouth
was very sore yet did he not spit. I much suspecting how I should cure him
without salivating, gave him 4 grains of arcanum Corallinum, by which he
vomited often, and thereby I raised the swelling in his chaps and he fluxed
near three weeks. All which time I kept him to warm posset drink and Cordials,
and administered Clysters as occasion offered them. As the Flux declined I
purged him with the bitter decoction, and by a drying diet, sweating, etc. I
cured him.

One aged about 26 years having breakings out in his head, right brow, and
several parts of his body with pains on his shoulders and legs, 38. Observation
of pustulae, Ulcers and nocturnal pains.
I let him blood, and the next day purged him with a cathartick potion. Then in
consideration he had failed of his cure in other hands through his
irregularity, I caused the unction to be applied for some days, but he not
salivating well thereby, I gave him ss. Turbith miueral. and raised it higher,
and continued it between three weeks and a month, during which his pains ceased
and his skin became clean. In the declining of the Flux I purged him with the
bitter drink, and put him into diet-drink, sweating, etc. and designed to
finish his course by bathing; but he supposing this latter course needless,
broke off unknown to me. About two months after he was brought to me more
diseased, and upon enquiry into the cause I found he had taken too great a
liberty of eating and drinking during his Cure. To avoid which inconvenience
now I lodged him in a house where there was a more strict guard of him; then
repeated venaesection and purged him again with the bitter apozeme 7 or 8 days,
and gave him calomel. every other night during his purging: then prescribed him
a dose of 15 grains of Turbith min. and repeated the Turbith min. so often as I
might conveniently do without fluxing him. After I had thus freed him of all
those symptoms, I put him into a more strict diet, and by diet-drink and
sweating him with gum. guaiaci, etc. also purging him once in three or four
days, I secured him from relapse and concluded the course by bathing him.

A Man aged about 50 years, 39. Observation of an ophthalmia.
of a seeming healthful constitution, having been long subject to inflammations
in his eyes had tried ineffectually the several endeavors of Oculists and
others by various collyria, purging, bleeding, blistering, shaving the head,
fontinels, etc. At length he consulted me, relating to me the manner of his
life and the various remedies he had taken. I suspected the distemper in his
eyes arose from some relict of the Lues Venerea; upon which surmise I readily
undertook his Cure. I began it with the washing his eyes with a solution of
troch. albi Rhas. in aq. ros. rub. and applied emplastr. ad Herniam on his
Temples. The next day I let him blood and prescribed him a Clyster. The morning
after purged him with pil. Rudii and merdul. and disposed him to rest that
following night with an anodyne draught. The morning after I gave him bezoard.
mineral. gr. xv. gum guaiaci gr. viij. in cochlearia cum sir. limon. and a
draught of decoct. sarsae, lig. lentis, cum flor. anthos, euphrag. etc. as is
set down in the method of cure, to dispose him to a breathing sweat, and
advised the drinking the foresaid decoction daily excepting when he purged,
which was every fourth day. By this method his eyes were cured in the space of
ten days, but he prosecuted the method longer.

A young fellow grievously afflicted with an inflammation of both his eyes,
with pustulae and Ulcers in the tunica cornea and adnata, 40. Observation of an
ophthalmia.
also bleardness of the lids, he was returned from the Oculist as incurable;
upon which account I was desired by his friends to employ my endeavors in the
taking off the fluxion, and to dispose his eyes to some ease, they concluding
his sight lost. I let him blood at that instant, and purged him the next day
with an infus. senae, etc. He was of a strong constitution and seemed to
require such evacuation. The evening after his purging I nade him a seton, and
brought a fomentation to give a breathing to the impacted humors, with which I
fomented his eyes. I also dropped a collyrie into them of aq. chelidon.
mirabilis, etc. as it is prescribed in the Treatise de strumis. While I was one
day dressing his seton and eyes, I questioned him whether he ever had a
Gonorrhoea; he denied it faintly. I urged him farther, and looked upon his
penis and saw a hard callus, the remains of a Chancre. Upon sight of this I
purged him with pull. cornichini and mer. dulcis, and repeated it often, and
thereby took off the fluxion and disposed his Ulcers to cure; and afterward by
Turbith min. vomited him once a week. Between while I prescribed him decoct.
sarsae, with bezoard. mineral. gum. guaiaci, etc. and regulated his diet
accordingly. By this method I cured his eyes, and he gradually recovered his
sight to walk about the streets, and of late years can write and read.

A poor fellow came to me diseased with a fistula lachrymalis, which at first
sight seemed by its callous lips to be cancerated, 41. Observation of Fistula
lachrymalis.
but being informed that he had heretofore been clapped, I readily undertook his
cure, and began with letting him blood, and purged him with pil. cochiae min.
and calomel. During his purging I deterged the Ulcer and disposed it to cure by
removing the chancrous lips, and made way to the bone, which being carious I
dried with an actual cautery, and from that time dressed it as has been showed
in those observations of fistula lachrymalis in the said Chapter de strumis,
and completed the Cure by antivenereals as in the preceding observation has
been prescribed, and dismissed him perfectly well.

One about 28 years of age had heretofore been afflicted with an abscess on the
outside of his right leg, 42. Observation of a Phagedaenae on the Leg.
which not yielding to the common endeavors of Surgery by laying open,
digestion, etc. I was fetched; and seeing the Ulcer of a great length, the lips
of it jagged and callous, I cut them off and dressed the Ulcer with the common
digestive, and sprinkled the Ulcer it self (which was sordid) with merc.
praecipit. and pledgets of dry Lint, an empl. e bolo over it, with a compress
wrung out of red Wine, and rouled it up. Having thus dressed up the Ulcer, I
enquired into the original of the distemper, suspecting it to have risen from
some malign Fevour, or the relics of some ill cured Clap. But the Patient
denying that he ever had either of them, I endeavored to inform my self of the
method prescribed by those under whose hands he had been, and discovered that
he had taken mer. dulcis, antimon. diaphoret. and decoctions of sarsa, etc.
which method I again repeated, and proceeded in digesting of the Ulcer some
days, and put on a laced stocking, but I could not make good digestion in three
days. I considering the evil quality of the Ulcer and the manner of life the
Patient had formerly led, concluded the disease certainly venereal, and that
the merc. dull. etc. prescribed him was not of sufficient force to quell such a
malignity. For daily practice shows that mer. dulcis given once in two or
three days will not check the lesser species of the Lues; and where it is not
powerful to cure, it makes the erosion greater, and the disease becomes more
inveterate. Upon which considerations without farther enquiry into the disease
I attempted the cure by antivenereals, and gave him gr. 12. Turbith min. in a
bolus with cons. boraginis; it vomited him 4 or 5 times, and purged him twice,
and put him upon a tenesmus, which I took off that afternoon by a clyster of
Milk with the yolk of an Egg, and endeavored to excuse the churlish working of
the medicament. The next day I saw the good effects of the Physic in digesting
of the Ulcer, and resolved to prosecute the method or quit the Patient. I
dressed up the Ulcer with unguent. basilic. cum praecipitat. emplaster and
bandage, designing to effect this Cure by Internals; to which purpose I
repeated a Clyster that day and the next, and the fourth day gave him 16 gr. of
Turbith mineral. in a Pill, which wrought as the former, and directed a Clyster
again in the afternoon. That night he spit much, and in the following morning
complained of a soreness of his Chaps; but I not observing him likely to flux
purged him the day after with Manna in a draught of Posset Drink, supposing I
should make a greater revulsion by vomiting him twice or thrice, than by the
raising a slight Salivation; but he growing impatient with the soreness of his
mouth, I changed that resolution, and gave him 18 grains of Turbith, and
thereby fluxed him 19 or 20 days. In the declination of it, I prescribed him a
decoction of Sarsa, and purged him with an Apozeme made in some of the same
decoction. During the Salivation the Ulcer cicatrized by the application of the
above mentioned Epuloticks, and I finished the Cure by drying Diet and
Sudorificks. After which he removed into the Country, and by a Milk-diet
recovered his strength, and his Leg became useful to him; but he continued the
wearing his laced stocking sometime longer. When these Ulcers are treated as
Scorbutical, the Patient dies tabid.

One of about forty years of Age, 43. Observation of a Herpes miliaris in
planta pedis.
having been long troubled with a Herpes miliaris which had spread it self on
the soal of one of his feet, came to me for Cure. He had taken Mer. dulcis,
Antimon. Diaphoret. etc. Medicines proper enough to Cure the milder Species of
the Lues Venerea; but the Patient being irregular, and not acknowledging it
Venereal, failed of his Cure. At the first sight of the Ulcers I concluded them
Venereal, and resolved to proceed with him by such a method, or leave him to
seek his Cure elsewhere; and began by purging him with Pil. Rudii, and mer.
dull. and afterward prescribed him a few Pills of Aethiops mineralis cum
terebinth. One of which he took every morning, drinking a draught of a
medicated Ale after it. After he had taken six of these Pills, I began with the
Cure of the Ulcers, dressing them with the fotus and liniment set down in the
Cure of Herpes; but that not answering my expectation, I washed the Ulcers and
parts about them with warm Milk; then having cleansed and dried them, I rubbed
the lips of them all with a Caustic Stone, till I had eradicated and smoothed
them fit for to cicatrize, and then washed out the lixivial salt to prevent its
farther penetration. From that time I dressed them up with Merc. praecipitat.
and put on a laced sock. The third or fourth dressing the sloughs crumbled off,
and the Ulcers appeared well cicatrized. But within few days they all brake out
again. At the sight of which I concluded the Ulcers Venereal, and prevailed
with him to take Mercury, and began with a j. Calomel, and the next day gave
him a Dose of Theriac. metallor. and repeated it two or three days, I designing
that way to Cure these Ulcers. But the Theriaca not moving him by stool or
vomit, he wrangled with me, supposing I could not cure him but by such
Medicaments as worked one of those ways, whereas we know by experience, that
Mercury frequently cures those Ulcers by altering the quality of the Humors;
but I complied with his desire, and gave him a Dose of Turbith gr. xij. in a
Pill that vomited him five or six times, and purged him twice or thrice. The
next morning he complained of the soreness of his mouth. I advised him to drink
warm Posset Drink, and to take a Clyster, but he did neither. I being engaged
in the Cure, thought it best to hasten a Salivation before he should be aware
of it, and gave him two Doses more of the Turbith, increasing each Dose two
grains. These made his Chaps sorer, and would have fluxed him, but he being
ungovernable it caused a Tenesmus, and ran down in a Diarrhoea with a large
evacuation, and terminated in a dysentery. Upon the sight hereof, I would have
prescribed him such Remedy as is usual in those cases, but he was so impatient
at the accident as to admit of no excuse from me, nor any of my Prescriptions.
Indeed the Herpes was dried, and he had an eminent Physician his friend who
relieved him by his Prescriptions, and restored him to health soon after, and
could as easily have then prevented the relapse; but the Patient being well,
concluded he should continue so, and brake off abruptly from him without any
observation of Diet-drink, Sweating, etc. and became so good natured as to make
me a Visit in acknowledgement of his Cure. But about a month after he sent for
me, complaining of an itching he felt in the soal of his foot, he supposed from
his too much walking the day before; I looked upon it and saw a heat rising in
the skin. I believed it a return of the Disease, but having resolved not
farther to engage my self in the Cure, I left him with a favorable
construction of it. The next news I heard of him, was, that one pretending to
Surgery had undertaken the Cure of it by bathing it with a Decoction of
Broom, and boasted so confidently of the Cure, as if he had already performed
it, calling them a few Kibes. But whilst he was picking of these out, the
Patient showed me a swelling upon the shin bone, and desired my judgment of
it. It was a very well grown Node, and I guessed by the Patients thin Chaps
that it was no small disturbance to his rest, however it was a confirmation of
the quality of his Disease, and might serve to alarm him to provide for his
Cure. I was then taking a Journey into the West-country, and at my return was
informed that the died under some Empiricks hand in his course of Physic.

One of about forty years of Age, 44. Observation of many Herpes exedens and
Nodes.
having Herpes exedens very large on several parts of his Body, came to me much
emaciated thereby, he having been many years afflicted with them. He had also
some Nodes lately risen on his Legs. I purged him with decoct. Epithymi, and
afterward gave him praecipitat. albus j. to 25 grains daily, and washed the
several Ulcers with Lac Virginis, and dressed them up with pledgets dipped in the
same to dry them, till I could by Internals cure them. But in few days I
perceived this Patient had been so accustomed to the taking Mercurials, as the
praecipitatus albus was of no force, therefore I forbore the longer use of it,
and gave him 10 grains of Turbith mineral. it vomited and purged him
moderately. The next day I saw the Ulcers drying, and from that time dressed
them only so as to defend them from sticking to his linen, the third day I
repeated the Turbith, and the fourth day after gave him another Dose, and
between while Clysters were administered, and sometimes we purged him with Manna
in a draught or two of Posset Drink. Thus the Ulcers were cured and the scabs
shelled off. I then purged him with the bitter decoction four or five days, and
confined him to a drying diet, and decoct. sarsae, sweating him for some time
with Diaphoreticks; but he finding himself well brake off from this Course
before he had been fourteen days in it, which occasioned some little eruptions;
but by the taking of a few grains of Theriac. metallor. with our purging
Extract, and sometimes Bezoard. minerale, with a decoct. sarsae, they were
dried up, and in progress of time the malignity was wasted without keeping of
his house.

One of about forty five years of Age, of a lean dry body, 45. Observation of
Ulcers in the Arm and Leg with Caries.
had an Ulcer on the outside of the Biceps on the left Arm, which upon search
with a probe I discovered to be carious. He had also three distinct Ulcers on
the os Tibiae of the right Leg a little above the ancle, which were also
carious. That on the Arm took its original from a Node, as the other on the Leg
did from a Gumma. They had been some years ulcerated, and I suppose the
malignity discharged it self there, for other Symptoms of the Lues he had none
at that time. I began with the Cure of these Ulcers by the application of
Causticks to remove the external Callus, and make way to the bones. That in the
Arm lay deep, and required detersion and dilatation, which was the work of some
weeks; but the others on the os Tibiae lay superficial; and as the Eschars
separated in some of them, bits of bones came away with them. Where any
remained entangled in loose flesh, I sprinkled that flesh with precipitate
daily, and with that and the Vitriol Stone made way for the taking out the
remaining bones, and with much ease cicatrized those Ulcers, the exfoliation of
these from the main bone having indeed been made to my hand by the strength of
Nature, and required no more from me than the making them way to come forth.
But that caries in the bone of the Arm lay slab'd in matter, and was not so
easily come to; and when it was, it did not yield to the ordinary application.
Thererefore after I had sometime kept it unsuccessfully dilated, I passed a
canula in and by an actual cautery, dried the caries, and from that time
dressed it dry with dossils pressed out of sp. vini, and waited its
exfoliation. And to hasten the work I began to purge him with an infus. senae,
etc. and afterward with calomel. which I repeated often in a lenitive bolus,
and put him to the drinking a decoction of sarsa, etc. and with sudorificks
sweat him: but after some days observing the bone did not exfoliate, I gave him
two or three doses of Turbith, and made a revulsion thereby. From that time the
Ulcer dried, and an exfoliation was made of some small rotten bits of bones,
and the callus which thrust them off united with the musculous flesh, and the
Ulcer incarned as I diminished my dossils, and cicatrized soon after. The
Ulcers being cured thus, I concluded the course of Physic by purging, diet and
sweating.

One about 30 years of age of a gross body having been much pained on his right
leg with a great node upon the shin, 46. Observation of a Node laid open, with
the consequence.
put himself into the hands of an Empirick for cure; who after a long course of
purging, sweating, etc. failing in his cure, employed me to lay it open. I
obeyed, and having encompassed the tumor within a line, I applied the white
caustic. The next day I found the tumor sunk, but the caustic had penetrated
to the bone according to the length and breadth that was designed. I cut the
Eschar round, and raised it with the Periosteum, and saw the bone sound, and
naturally white and smooth. I dressed it with pledgets dipped in liniment. Arcei
warm, and the remaining Eschar with unguent. basilic. to hasten its separation.
After some few days the Eschar separated, but the Ulcer grew painful and
enflamed, and would not digest: upon which consideration I enquired into the
internal prescriptions, and finding them not of sufficient force I prevailed to
give a few grains of Turbith minerale, and thereby made a revulsion. From that
time I digested the Ulcer with that common digestive ex Terebinth. etc. and
cured it as an Ulcer with caries; during which the malignity was eradicated by
Antivenereals.

I am not against the applying of medicaments to further the resolving of
nodes, but the laying them open till they have made their way by apostemation
seems to me unreasonable, it being not only painful but also a prolonger of
the cure. For supposing you do remove the node and cure the Ulcer, yet unless
you do eradicate the malignity, other nodes will arise. Whereas if
Antivenereals be rightly administered, you may resolve the nodes by them at the
same time. I once saw a very large node upon the os frontis resolved merely by
a course of diet-drink, purging and sweating. Sir Fa. Pruyean was the
Physician, and Mr. Pearce the Apothecary attended the Patient for his Master
Laxton as I suppose. The course was long and more strict than our Patients will
now endure; but by Mercurials we do more certainly resolve them, and in a less
time.

One of about 40 years of age, 47. Observation of Ozaena, Ulcer in the Palate,
Nodes, etc.
of a strong constitution, afflicted with nodes in his Arms and Legs, an ozaena
and an Ulcer in his palate, in both which the bones were carious, had been
eight weeks in Physic under the hands of an Empirick, and being at a loss
consulted me. They showed me some Instruments they had devised to hook out the
bones; they also showed me some little bits of bones which they had broken off
from the whole. I admired the ignorance of the Empirick to glory in such work,
but am since satisfied that a confidence in prating is a sufficient basis to
build a practice upon amongst some kind of people. As to his Instruments they
were well enough contrived to pull out bones, but it would have been more for
his credit to have designed some way to have kept them in. For in some of those
places the least diminution of a bone causes a deformity; and in others, as
those of the Palate, there will want a supply of callus, and so consequently it
would not only spoil his drinking but his voice. Upon which consideration those
Instruments were laid aside, and errhina were prescribed, as in the method of
Cure has been showed, of which he snuft up or injected some into his nostrils
often in a day. In order to his cure I resolved to salivate him by unction; to
which purpose I let him blood and purged him with a lenitive bolus, and
afterward bathed him 3 or 4 times; then caused him to be anointed, and thereby
raised the Salivation; all which time I had regard to the washing his chaps and
keeping up his strength. About the 24. day the Salivation declining I purged
him with the bitter decoction, and then put him into a decoct. sarsae, etc. and
sweat him, proportioning his diet drying according as his mouth healed. During
the time of his salivating the Ulcers in his Nose cured, and so did that in his
Palate, but the bones they had pulled away left the marks; yet that in the
Palate was supplied by a small Plate which was retained by a Sponge. Some of
his Nodes discussed during his Salivation, and the other in the time of
sweating. He being thus cured we ended our course of Physic with bathing.

One of about 28 years old being grievously afflicted with a Catarrh, 48.
Observation of the Uvula and Palate eaten away.
having used many remedies unsuccessfully, a Seton was advised to be made in
his neck. I bieng sent for to make it, found the Patient in bed so emaciated as
it was impossible he should continue it there without great pain. I desiring
some way to be useful to him enquired into the quality of his Disease, and
looking into his throat saw the tonsils extremely ulcerated, the Uvula and that
part of the Palate eaten away. I concluded it Venereal, and before I stirred
from him discovered it was the effects of a Chancre ill cured.

I took leave of him, and acquainted those that sent me of the nature of his
Catarrh. They having satisfied themselves of the truth put him into my hands.
There was no great matter of credit to be gotten in endeavoring a cure, where
the Patient should be left to snuffle all the days of his life; but I obeyed
them, and prescribed him that night j. mer. praecipitat. albus in a spoonful of
white bread and milk. I directed the washing his throat with one of the Gargles
set down in the method of Cure, and dressed them daily with lac sublimat.
prescribing him a decoct. sarsae to be drank with a third part of milk, at the
least thrice a day. I repeated the praecipitatus albus morning or evening also
a Clyster sometime to keep his body soluble. By this method I cured these
Ulcers in the space of three weeks. Soon after as he recovered his strength, I
left off the use of the milk and prosecuted the course by a strict diet,
decoct. sarsae, diaphoreticks, etc. then fitted his Palate with a Plate of
silver which he could put up and take out at pleasure. It formed his voice and
served to lead the drink its right way. Some months after I saw him fat and
well, and he assured me that the ulcerated parts were so contracted together
that he had no farther use of the artificial Palate. 49. Observation of Ulcers
in the Tonsils, Palate, etc. with a Node on her leg.


A Woman of about 28 years of age having been some while vexed with the lesser
species of this Disease, put herself under some hands for cure; but during that
method she complained of a soreness in her throat, which increasing, she
consulted others, and afterward others, but unsuccessfully. (I suppose from
her own irregularity.) Some months being passed, her friends recommended her to
me. Both her Tonsils were much ulcerated; there was also an Ulcer upon the back
part of her Palate and Uvula. She had also a Node upon her right leg, and
wandering pains; also a fluor albus. I prescribed her a Lotion as in the former
observation, and dressed the Ulcers with lac sublimat. I let her blood and
directed her a Clyster that night, and the next morning j. calomel. I repeated
this latter daily, she drinking a draught of decoct. sarsae after it, disposing
her self to a breathing sweat, and once in four days was purged with an infus.
senae, etc. Thus I dried those Ulcers, but by the frequent repeating the
calomel. her chaps grew sore, and she salivated, which I was not troubled at,
her Node requiring it. Upon which consideration I gave her 12 grains of Turbith
minerale and raised it higher; and some days after when I saw the Salivation
decline and the Node unresolved, I applied a Mercurial Emplaster the whole
length of that leg, and thereby continued the Salivation longer till that
resolved the Node. That done, I purged her with the bitter decoction, and put
her into a strict course of diet-drink, and sweat her. After her mouth was
cured, looking into her throat I saw the right tonsil cicatrized, but there
remained unequal lips, which were troublesome to her. I also felt with my Probe
a sinus running downward; it was made by a coalition of the flapping lips. I
suspecting these might cause some fluxion, or at least such an uneasiness as
might beget in her a suspicion of relapse, I laid open that sinus and cut off
those lips with the other cicatrices, and by rubbing the basis of the Ulcer
with a Vitriol Stone cicatrized it afterward smooth, and dismissed her cured.

A Woman of about 28 years of age much emaciated was brought to me broken out
all over her head, 50. Observation of a relapse with Nodes, etc.
face, and several parts of her body and limbs. It began with a virulent
Gonorrhoea, the cause whereof not being discovered, it continued long upon her,
and after some months was accompanied with a pain in her head; for remedy
whereof she consulted her Physician, but she being her self ignorant of the
cause could not inform him, and consequently suffered very long under it: but
after these eruptions the Gonorrhoea stopped, and the pain in her head ceased.
What these breakings out were she had been lately informed, and desired my
help. I let her blood and purged her with decoct. senae Gereonis, and by a few
doses of praecipitat. alb. and a purging dietdrink I dried up these pustulae
and Ulcers, and designed then a decoct. sarsae with sudorificks; but she
believing her self cured retired to her own house. Within half a year after she
came to me again, afflicted with pains in her head, and Nodes on her shins, and
Ulcers in her tonsils. I let her blood and advised a Clyster, and dressed the
Ulcers in the tonsils as has been said in the like case, and prescribed her
calomel. j. in ij. diascord. and purged her the next morning with a solution of
Manna in Posset Drink. After I had by calomel. somewhat digested those Ulcers I
raised a Salivation by Unction, which she bore very well, and was thereby freed
of her Nodes. In the declination of the Flux I purged her with the bitter
decoction five or six days, then put her into a decoct. sarsae, and afterward
by drying diet and sweating, etc. the pain in her head went off, and the Ulcers
of the tonsils were (long before I dismissed her) well and perfectly cured.

A Woman aged about 30 years came out of the country upon a supposition of the
Kings Evil. 51. Observation of Ulcers in the fauces with a Gumma on the Musc.
Mastoides.
She had a hard swelling encompassing the muscle mastoides on the right side of
her neck of a great thickness. She complained also of a soreness in her throat,
and of a stinking tough phlegm which she frequently hauked out, especially in
the mornings. I looked into her throat and saw an inflammation upon the further
part of the Palate and Uvula, but no Ulcer in the tonsils. The inflammation of
the Palate gave me cause to suspect some latent Ulcer, and that her Disease was
Venereal; but she denying it, I prescribed her a decoct. hord. with sir. de
ros. sic. and diamoron, also an empl. de mucilag. with de ranis cum mercurio to
apply to the Gumma. Dr. Lenthall who brought her to me, prescribed her an
opening apozeme and to be let blood in the Country. Thus we dismissed her, but
within few days after she returned to us again, the Ulcer having seized upon
the Uvula and spread it self to the edges of the Palate. Upon sight thereof we
disputed not of her disease, but considered of her cure. She had of late years
been subject to great discharges of the menstrua, and was thereby rendered of a
lax and weak constitution, and her body having been so lately purged and bled,
there required no other preparation than of a warm room, which was provided
with all expedition. For those Ulcers that arise on the interior part of the
Palate, soon corrode their way through, if the alarm be not taken from the
inflammation that preceeds, a little mischief there being for the most part
irrecoverable. To prevent which we gave her that night j. of calomel. and
repeated it so often as we might conveniently do, and prescribed her a decoct.
sarsae to drink with milk. We also prescribed her some of the Lotions set down
in the Method of Cure, some whereof we cast up with a Syringe into her
nostrils, and with other she gargled her throat often in a day. But the cure of
the Ulcer was completed by frequent taking of merc. dulcis. The Gumma also
lessened, but she having recovered some measure of strength, and her chaps
being already sore by the calomel. which she had taken, we gave her 2 doses of
Turbith, beginning with 7 grains and so higher, by which we raised the
Salivation, and thereby resolved the Gumma. In the declining of the Flux we
purged her with an Apozeme wherein was decocted sena, polypod. rhab. agaric.
turbith, jalap, etc. with the addition of sir. de spina cervina. Then with
drying diet-drink, sudorificks, etc. we finished the course and cured her.

A young man was commended to my care having an Ozaena in his nose affecting
the septum and alae; it seemed to be most on the right side, 52. Observation of
an Ozaena.
with inflammation and great swelling. In undertaking the cure of these Ulcers
you ought to be cautious in delivering your prognostic; for the bones and
cartilages are soft and covered with a thin membrane, which being once corroded
corrupts quickly, and the least defect in them leaves a blemish in that part
of the nose. The external inflammation is a shrewd sign that the Ulcer is deep,
and consequently that the bones and cartilages are carious: therefore let not
the rectitude of the part deceive you, for that may be supported by the
swelling and crusty matter within, and upon the removal of them the nose or
sides of it frequently sink; and if any deformity therein happen while they are
under your cure contrary to your prediction, they will certainly impute it to
your neglect or ignorance. In this Patient I suspected the right ala from the
external inflammation, but promised my utmost endeavors, and began my work
with injecting a decoct. ex rad. althaeae, sem. hord. cydonior. and embrocated
the external parts with unguent. popul. also applied a Cerote of the same; then
let him blood, and directed a Clyster that evening. After his first sleep he
took 25 grains of calomel. in cons. ros. and was purged the morning following
with an infusion senae, etc. afterward I purged him with calomel. and pil.
Rudii, till I had removed the fluxion off his Nose. After the crusty matter
separated from within, I syringed and cleansed those ulcers with one of the
decoctions set down in the method of cure. Having thus disposed his Nose to
cure, I gave him a few doses of turbith and raised a salivation, but the ulcers
cicatrized before he salivated, yet I fluxed him 17 or 18 days. In the
declination of it I purged, and sweat him with decoct. sarsae, and there
appeared a small bending in inward of the right ala, I supposed from the Caries
had been in that cartilage; it was thrust out to his own satisfaction by a
small hoop made by a bit of a searching candle painted of a flesh color, but
after some few days he left that off, it not being worth the while.

One of a full Body, 53. Observation of a Node, and of Ulcers in the Tonsils.
and strong Constitution, who had been long diseased with the several Species
of the Lues Venerea, and been cured by me some months before of a Herpes
exedens, came now to us with a large Node upon his shin of the right leg. He
was purged by his Physician, and prescribed a decoct. sarsae, etc. also
Antimon. diaphoret. Embrocations and Emplasters were applied the while to
resolve the Node; but after six weeks course of Physich the Node remained
almost as painful as before. Upon which consideration it was concluded to lay
it bare. I did lay it bare with the white Caustic, and divided the Eschar to
the bone, and at the next dressing raised the Eschar off, then rasped the Node
off, and dressed it dry, as has been set down in Ulcers with Caries, The lips
of the ulcer I digested with unguent. Basilic. applied warm, and afterward
incarned the bone, and cured the Ulcer in the space of two months, not without
great pain to the Patient and trouble to me; whereas I might have resolved it,
and eradicated the malignity, and freed him of the Lues almost in half the
time. Within one half year he came to us again, not complaining of his Leg, but
with Ulcers in both his Tonsils. These were certainly Venereal, and I concluded
they would be so acknowledged, and that I should have an easy work of these.
But the Patient would not be confined within doors, nor admit of other Physic
than a decoction of sarsa, and a few pouders of antimon. diaphoret. Three
quarts of the foresaid diet-drink were allowed him daily. I have sometime seen
him drink it up in a Morning as fast as if it had been Tunbridge waters. I once
enquiring the reason why he drank them in such haste, he replied, he was to
dine with some good Fellows, and that he did it to make way for better liquor.

Thus he governed himself till the Ulceration increased, so that it was great
pain to swallow any drink. He complained exceedingly to me that I could not at
least palliate those Ulcers, whereas in truth I used my utmost endeavors by
all the Medicaments I could devise; but they spread, and were accompanied with
such defluxion, as at last when he strove to drink, part of it would gush out
of his nostrils. Upon which consideration the Physician was fetched, and a
submission was promised to his Rules. The Cure was begun by a Clyster, bleeding
and purging, with an infused Potion, and the day after 25 gr. of Calomel. was
given him in a spoonful of white bread and milk, and repeated daily or every
other day, Clysters or Purgatives being prescribed between while to carry the
matter downwards. By this method his Ulcers were disposed to Cure, and he
finding his throat easier had thoughts of dining abroad with his Friends. Upon
notice whereof I got leave of the Physician to give him 14 gr. of Turbith
mineral. which accordingly worked very well. I repeated it the next day to 16 gr.
it likewise vomited him, and made him spit and his Chaps swelled: The next day
he perceiving that he fluxed, desired the Physician would prescribe him Physic
to purge it off, which was promised him; but a day or two after the flux not
rising sufficiently, I brought him a Bolus of a mixture of turb. min. with
cons. borrag. which increased the Salivation. He sent for me, and offered me
fifty pound to take it off; but I assured him there was no danger of his Life,
and encouraged him to submit to it cheerfully. He did so, and salivated 18 or
20 days as plentifully as I ever saw any. The salivation declining, he was
purged with an infused Potion, and Diet-drink was brought him, he promising us
that he would keep his Chamber, and observe a strict method in Diet, Sweating,
etc. But he no sooner found his Chaps cured, but he returned to his wonted
liberty: and being told that he would most certainly relapse if he did not
prosecute the Course prescribed by his Physician, he replied laughing, It Is thy
Course and not the Physicians, that he was very well, and if I would dine with
him I should be a witness of it. I took leave of him, and saw him no more in
half a year; and about that time he became more extremely diseased: for it is
most certain, that Mercurial Remedies serve only to dispose these humors to be
evacuated by decoctions of sarsa, etc. with Sweating. How he was at last
perfectly Cured you may see in some of the following Observations.

A Woman of about forty years of Age, of a strong Constitution, 54. Observation
of an Ozaena.
having been long diseased with an Ozaena, was at length commended by Doctor
Bate to the Cure of Doctor Jasper Needham and my Self. The matter had corrupted
part of the Septum, and other bones within her Nose, and made its way
externally between the ridge-bone and cartilages of the Nostrils, and fouled
the said bone to the very brows. The gristles being thus separated from the
foresaid bone, and having lost that part of the Septum, which should have been
their supporter, it sunk downwards, leaving such a breach, that the Injections
which we cast into her nostrils with a syringe spurted out there. After we had
thus discovered the evil quality of the Ulcer, we considered how to proceed in
the Cure; and in regard of the difficulty of the Cure, and the length of time
which might be required in the exfoliation of these bones, we resolved without
further dispute to salivate her by Unction. To which purpose we let her blood,
and purged her with an infus. senae, etc. during which Errhina were prepared of
a lenient quality, such as have been proposed in the method of Cure, to loosen
the crusty matter; and we enlarged the external Ulcer along the ridge-bone, as
far as it was carious, in order to the exfoliation of it. We digested those
lips, and dressed the bone dry according to the method set down in the Treatise
of Ulcers with Caries. After we had by Errhina and Lotions cleansed the
internal Ulcers of their filth, we then proceeded by detersive Injections, as
prescribed in the method of Cure, and put a Canula in each Nostril made of a
goose quill covered with a bit of empl. diachyl. simp. spread on a soft rag.
These served to bear up the cartilages of the Nostrils level with the end of
the bone (which before stood as it were looking over them) that they might be
in a capacity (if it was possible) to unite with it: While we were thus
disposing the Ulcers to Cure, we proceeded in the anointing her Legs and Arms,
and thereby raised a Salivation, which continued upon her more than three
weeks. During that time the Ulcers cured within her Nose, and the cartilages
stood firm, and even to unite internally with the bone without the use of the
Canula, but the bone there not being exfoliated, we continued the salivation
longer by prescribing Mercurius dulcis, etc. and all that while we took care of
her mouth, that no inconvenience should happen to her Jaws, etc. and kept up
her Spirits with Broaths, Posset-ale and Cordials. After we saw the bones
exfoliating we purged her with an Apozeme, and prescribed decoct. sarsae with
Sudorificks to sweat her. During which the bone exfoliated, and the Ulcers
cured with a Cicatrix not unseemly. We then concluded our Course of Physic,
leaving her more healthful and strong than she had been in many years.

A Man of about 36 years of Age had a large Ulcer on the roof of his mouth with
a Caries on the os palati, also many Nodes, viz. 55. Observation of Nodes,
Gumma and Ulcers in Os palati.
a great one upon the left temporal muscle reaching to that brow; also two on
his right Arm, one whereof was on the os humeri, and the other on the Vlna; one
very large upon the shin of the right Leg, and another on the outside of his
left: which latter was soft and inslamed, and was by some proposed to be
opened, but it seemed to me to be a Gumma. He had been long afflicted with the
Disease, and was lately come out of a Salivation raised by mer. dull. in which
he had spit very much. I touched the Ulcer with aqua divina warm, and advised
the dressing it twice a day after the same manner; to the inflamed Gumma I
applied an empl. e bolo to prevent its apostemating. The rest of the Nodes I
designed to scatter by a salivation with unction. To which purpose I let him
blood, and directed a Clyster, and the next morning purged him with j. Calomel.
in a lenitive Bolus; and to dispose him to rest, I gave him some nights j.
Calomel. in j. diascord. whereby the Ulcer in his palate was the better
digested. Having thus prepared his Body for the Unction, I caused his limbs to
be anointed daily till his Chaps swelled much; then I desisted, and advised
Posset Drink, Broth, etc. to be always ready for him to drink, and keep up his
Spirits. There was also care taken to syringe and wash his mouth. During his
Salivation, the Ulcer in his palate cast off a scale of a bone half an inch at
least in length, and presently after cicatrized firmly; his pain ceased, and
the Gumma resolved, and all the Nodes diminished much, save that on his shin;
yet he did not spit a quarter so much in this Course as (he said) he had done
in the former raised by merc. dulcis. I continued him in the Salivation about
twenty days, then purged him with the bitter decoction five or six days, and
from that time kept him strictly to his Diet-drinks, and with Sudorificks sweat
him, and proportioned his Diet more drying accordingly as his Chaps healed till
I thought him cured, and then I gave him more liberty to nourish his body, and
to drink the decoction of sarsa with milk twice a day, and bathed him 4 or 5
days; and kept his body soluble with a lenient Electuary. Thus I dismissed him,
yet there remained somewhat of that Node on the shin, but it being without pain
I supposed it would resolve, as indeed it did within a fortnight after, and he
continued well.

One of about thirty years of Age, 56. Observation of Nodes.
of a full Body, having been long afflicted with Nodes and excessive pains on
diverse parts, especially onh is head, put himself into my hands for Cure. I
designed a Salivation by Unction, to which purpose I prepared his Body by a
Clyster, venesection and a purging Apozeme; then caused him to be placed near
the fire, and to anoint himself from the soals of his feet to his groins, and
so the arms and shoulders, and having put on his stockings, drawers and
wastecote he was laid in a warm bed, and with a draught of warm Posset-ale
disposed to a breathing sweat. Thus I proceeded daily in the anointing him till
I had wasted two pound of Unction, but he had formerly taken so much Mercury,
that it seemed to be familiar to him, upon which account I proceeded in the
anointing of him, but it ran downwards one night in a Diarrhoea. I was fetched
to him early in the morning, and was informed he had had near sixty stools.
During the time I was with him they were mucous and bloody, with much pain, he
having a tenesmus with it, which put him upon a continual excretion. I caused a
Clyster of milk with yolks of eggs to be cast up, and prescribed decoct. C. C.
calcinati to be made, and drank with milk, to some of which I added a few drops
of liquid Laudanum. I also injected in ano three or four spoonfulls of ol.
hyperici with a syringe, and advised it to be often repeated to defend the
interior coats of the intestine from excoriation. I prescribed him a Pearl
Julep and elect. diascord. as it is set down in the method of Cure, to be taken
once in three or four hours; thus in four or five days the Diarrhoea stopped.
Then I prescribed him a Sarsa-drink, with an addition of milk till he had
somewhat recovered his strength, purging him in the interval with elect.
diacatholic. etc. By this Diarrhoea he was freed of his pains, and of some of
the Nodes. Those which remained were much lessened, and by a strict Diet,
decoct. sarsae and sudorificks were quite resolved, and he enjoys a good health
to this day.

It may here be objected by some, that if this Person had been more purged or
well bathed before the anointing, the Salivation would have risen easier, and
thereby the Diarrhoea might have been prevented. I do confess that the bathing
does much facilitate the raising of the Salivation, but we cannot have always
that convenience. Besides, where we do bathe, these accidents have happened,
and will befall any one of us in spite of all our endeavors. Yet I must tell
you, when a Diarrhoea thus happens in the raising a Salivation, it renders
your Cure certain if you prosecute the method as I here did. For whether the
Mercury work upwards by vomit or salivation, or downwards by stool, it is not
material, so the peccant humors be evacuated and disposed to be carried off by
Sudorificks, etc. But if the Patient grow froward upon such an accident, and
will not submit to a regulation in Diet, Purging, Sweating, etc. the humors do
again ferment and render the Cure more difficult.

One of about forty five years of Age, 57. Observation of Ozaena, Nodes, and
Gummata.
having been long afflicted with the Lues in its most inveterate Symptoms,
Nodes, Gummata, and an Ozaena, had passed through many courses of Physic, came
to me extremely extenuated. He had one Node upon the Os Lambdoides very great,
and another upon his right eye-brow; others upon his arms and legs. I began
with the letting him blood, and sent him a Clyster that evening. I syringed his
Nose with decoct. hordei, rad. althaeae, sem. cydon, etc. and after I had
cleansed it of its crusty matter (with which some bones came forth) I daily
injected some of the Lotions prescribed in the method of Cure. I bathed him
five or six times, and the while kept his body soluble by Clysters, or by a
lenitive Electuary, and allowed him boiled Mutton, Veal or Chicken for his
Dinner, and a couple of new laid Eggs for his Supper, a small Ale for his
drink. I also prescribed him a grain of Laudanum, or some anodyne draught to
appease his nocturnal pains. After I had done bathing him, I caused his Legs
Arms, Shoulders, Spine, and Hips to be anointed daily, and sweat him in a warm
bed with a draught of Posset Drink. After he began to spit I anointed him more
sparingly, only his Legs and Arms, and when I saw his Chaps swelled
sufficiently, I forbear the anointing, and kept him to his Posset Drink and
Broth, washing his mouth with decoct. hordei, rad. althaeae, liquiritiae, etc.
He salivated very well near a month, but before he had spit fourteen days the
pains diminished, and the Nodes lessened, and that filthy matter ceased to
discharge out of his Nose: Also a Gumma which seemed ready to burst dried up.
In the declination of the flux I put him into a strong decoct. sarsae etc. with
Milk, and nourished him with good medicated Broaths. As his strength increased,
I purged him with the bitter decoction some days, and after his Chaps healed I
kept him strictly to the Sarsa-drinks without the Milk, and sweat him with
antimon. diaphoret. gum. guaiaci, bezoard. orient. and ordered his Diet as
drying as he was capable of, purging him as customary once in four or five
days. Thus in the space of eight weeks the Ozaena was perfectly cured, and all
the Nodes resolved: but notwithstanding he complained of pain in all his Limbs,
and was so weak that he was scarce able to go, and bemoaned his condition,
supposing he should never be cured. I was of an Opinion that he was cured, and
that those pains proceeded merely from the emaciation of the muscles; but I
referred it to a consultation, where it was declared positively, that he was
not Cured, and that he ought to salivate again. These proposals dismayed the
Patient, and disturbed me not a little, for in truth he was too weak to
salivate. I persisted in my former Opinion, and prevailed with the Patient to
retire two or three miles into the air, and there to drink a decoction of
Sarsa, etc. with Milk, and to give himself liberty to feed upon meats of good
nourishment, and advised him to bathe in milk and water sometime. He did so,
and I supplied him with papers of ingredients to make the decoction, also with
a lenitive Electuary of Cassia, tamarinds, manna, etc. to keep his body
soluble. In a few weeks he grew fleshy, his pains wasted, and from that time he
enjoyed a good health many years.

One about twenty eight years of Age was afflicted with an Ozaena of an old
date. 58. Observation.
It had perforated the septum, and cast forth some rotten bones, one whereof he
showed me. He had also Nodes on both his legs and on his right arm. He was
emaciated by reason of his continual pains, and the much Physic he had
unsuccessfully taken. I injected a decoct. hordei, etc. into his nostrils, and
after the crusty matter separated I prescribed him an Errhine to snuff up his
nostrils often in a day. And having resolved to salivate him by Unction I
disposed his body thereto by Clysters, Lenitive Bolus's, (to which latter I
added calomel. to take off his pains) and prescribed him decoct. sarsae, etc.
with milk, also a liberty in diet, and bathed him the while. Having thus
somewhat recruited his sprits, I caused him to be anointed, legs, arms, hips,
and shoulders, till I had raised a Salivation. Then I kept him to Posset Drink
and Broth. I also allowed him a pint of Ale daily, sometimes burnt Wine or
other Cordials by which he was enabled to salivate near a month. During that
time the Ozaena cured, and some of the Nodes resolved. As the Salivation
declined I purged him with the bitter decoction, and then put him into a
decoct. sarsae, and sweat him with diaphoreticks, and purged him once in four
or five days, he observing the while a strict diet. After all I bathed him
again a week or ten days, and permitted him a norishing diet, and kept his body
soluble cum elect. nost. laxativo ex cassia, pulp. tamarind. manna, etc. Some
of his Nodes remained till I bathed him; but if they had not then resolved, yet
I should not have doubted of his being well cured. For it does sometimes happen
that great Nodes dry and harden into such an exostisis as will not yield to any
remedy. And indeed they being without pain we need not be so sollicitous in
their removal, for beyond Sea I have seen some well cured, the Nodes continuing
upon their legs knotted like a Crab-tree-stick.

A woman of about 50 years of age, 59. Observation of Lues Vener. compl. with
Caucer, etc.
of an ill habit of body, having passed through various courses of Physic, was
brought to me complaining of pain in her arms, and nodes on the back of both
her hands; also a cancerous tumor on her right breast. She importuned me to
put her in a course of Salivation by Unction, and took a lodging near me. I
thought it necessary enough for her, and told her I would prepare her body for
it, and consult her Physician in the manner of salivating her. Accordingly I
let her blood, then purged her with a solution of manna and cremor tartari in
posset drink, and bathed her four or five times; then gave her alternately two
or three doses of calomel. to try how the Flux would rise. But she growing
impatient in the delay sent for a Physician, to whom she related the original
of her Disease, and that she had taken the spitting Pills formerly
unsuccessfully, therefore desired to salivate by Unction. Some objection was
made against it, as doubting her viscera were naught. But he complied, and
promised to visit her as occasion should require. I sent her a pot of Unction
the next day, wherewith her legs and arms were anointed, and she returned to
her warm bed and was disposed to a breathing sweat by a draught of
Posset Drink. By this method the Salivation was raised and she fluxed
moderately about 20 days, during which her pains remitted, the Nodes resolved,
and she recovered the use of her hands. The Cancer lay also quiet. The
Salivation declining she was purged with the bitter decoction, and some days
after drank a sarsa drink, and sweat. In the going off of her Flux she
complained of a shortness of breath, and was afterward subject to fainting.
Whereupon her Physician was consulted, who supposing it hysterical prescribed
as follows: Galbani, sagapeni an. j. asae. foetid. ss. castor. j. bals.
Peruv. q. s. f. pil. quarum capiat j. omni nocte. Galbani vj. fiat empl. pro
umbilico. Superbibat post pilulas julapii sequ. iij. Aq. brion comp. ij.
pulegii, mirabilis, hyssopi, an. iij. tincturae croci ij. sacchar. albis. ss.
ms. f. julapium. After she had proceeded in this course eight or ten days, she
complaining of her stomach and of an offensive smell she thought arose from
thence, her Physician prescribed her as follows: Salis vitrioli iij. capiat
statim in possetala: si semel tantum vomuerit, capiat j. ejusdem in eadem
posset ala, and so to repeat it the third time if her strength would bear it.
She did so, and was laid to rest with this following draught: Landani gr. j.
aq. menthae jss. cinamomi pulveriz. ss. diascordii ij. f. haustus hora somni.
The day following the Physician found her much relieved, and prescribed her
this decoction: Sarsae iij. santali albi ij. chinae jss. guaiaci j. digere
horas sex in aq. com. lbviij. vase clauso, dein decoqu. ad medias, addendo sub
finem ingredientia decoct. pectoralis. Bibat copiose and frequenter, addendo
singulis haustibus mixturae sequentis cochl. j. vel. ij. Aq. limac. brion.
comp. an. ij. tinct. croci ss. sp. castores jss. ms. This potion was also
prescribed her 3 or 4 days after: Tamarind. ss. coqu. in aq. com. sub finem
addendo senae iij. rhab. ij. sem. anisi ss. cape colaturae iv. mannae vj. sir.
de rhab. j. sir. de spina cervina j. f. potio. By these prescriptions she
somewhat recovered, and removed from those lodgings to others more airy in the
same street. And there another Physician was consulted and joined with the
former: he approved of what had been done, and gave hopes of her recovery; and
together they prescribed as follows. Gum. galbani, ammoniaci, myrrhae, bals.
Tolut. an. j. croci gr. iv. cum opobals. Giluaditui ss. f. pil. quadruplo deaur
andae: cap. bis terve quotidie. Gum. guaiaci cathartici j. sir. e capil.
Veneris q. s. fiat mixtura mollis, quam capiat tertie quoque mane ad quatuor
vices. Aq. ceras. nigr. vj. e flor. paralys. aq. cinam. hord. an. ij. margar.
praeparat. ij. sacchar. crystal. ij. ms. f. julapium, de quo bibat ad placit.
Some while after she removed nearer the Country for the benefit of fresh air,
and to drink Asses milk, which she had already begun to do, and might have
recovered if her viscera had not been all rotten.

A poor fellow aged about 50 years had grievous pains in his head, 60.
Observation of Nodes and pains.
and diverse nodes and gummata in several parts of his body. He had lately come
out of a course of Physic, and was so wasted as he could scarce stand, and had
lost the nails of his fingers and toes. I directed him a Clyster, and that
night sent him an opiat to calm his pains and dispose him to rest, viz. of
laudan. mer. dull. gum. guaiaci, etc. as is set down in the method of cure, and
repeated it as occasion offered; and prescribed him a sarsa drink with milk.
But after 2 or 3 days observing that he was much oppressed in his stomach
nauseating all that he took, I gave him a vomit of infus. croc. metallor. with
oxymel. scillit. by which I emptied it of much viscous phlegm. From that time he
recovered his appetite, and by good nourishment and mitigation of his pains he
recovered a tolerable measure of strength. I then caused him to be anointed
legs, arms, hips and shoulders, and repeated the anointing daily till I had
raised a swelling in his chaps. He salivated well, and was kept to warm Broth,
Posset Drink, and sometime Ale and burnt Wine. During the Salivation he fainted
often, and was seized twice with Convulsions, and with much difficulty I kept
up his Spirits: but he got through it by the help of good Cordials, aq.
theriacalis, etc. In the declining of the Flux I purged him with the bitter
decoction, and finished the cure with decoct. sarsae, sweating and drying diet
and purging. Passing by this man's house one day in the company of D Walter
Needham, we went in, he was working in his trade, he showed us his legs and
arms, there was not a node left; he also showed us new nails thrusting out, the
Patient then declaring himself well, and indeed so he continued a month or two,
and then pains began, nodes and gummata also arose. I attempted the cure by
crude Mercury as it is usually given by some under the name of the Blew Pills
with a strong decoction of sarsa, rad. bardanae, fol. saponariae, and with
laureola. Indeed I consulted several that pretended great matters in the cure
of this Disease, and omitted nothing whereby I could hope to relieve him,
applying also Emplasters, and caustical Medicaments to the Nodes, by which I
did resolve the biggest and most painful of them: but the malignity increasing,
the Patient made it his request to me to salivate him again by unction.
Whereupon I let him blood, and directed a Clyster, then bathed him four or five
times, and raised a salivation by only anointing his Legs and Arms according to
his desire. He salivated very well, and during the salivation he was freed of
his Pains and Nodes, and by the prosecuting the Course by diet-drink, sweating
and purging, he seemed perfectly well; but yet he relapsed. I afterward
perceived his Wife had been all the while infected with the same disease; but
whether he got it from her, or through neglect of observing this latter Course,
his necessity in following of his Trade constraining him to be daily abroad and
in his Shop, (and without a strict observance in that Course you will scarce
cure. the lesser Species of the Lues) I contented my self in the expenses I had
been at, 61. Observation of Ozaena and Nodes.
and left him to others.

A Man of about thirty years of Age, came out of a long Course of Physic to
me, having an old Ozaena whereon some bones had cast off: he had also pains in
diverse parts, and several Nodes. I resolved to salivate him by unction, to
which purpose I let him blood, purged him, and anointed him, Legs, Arms, Hips,
Shoulders, etc. by which in few days I raised a salivation, kept him to
Posset Drink and Broth, and took care of his mouth. His Nose was also dressed
daily, as has been showed in the like case. In the declination of the Flux, I
purged him with the bitter decoction, and prescribed a strict drying Diet,
decoct. sarsae, purging and sweating, and dismissed him cured of the Ozaena, and
the Nodes and Pains resolved. But some months after he relapsing came to me
again, and acknowledged that he had not been so regular in his Diet as I had
directed (and in truth I had heard he had bragged of it) and that he would
enter into a new Course of Physic. I let him blood, and purged him six or
seven days with the bitter decoction, then vomited him with turbith minerale
three or four times, prescribing Clysters between while. After I had thus
heated his Chaps, and disposed the matter for Sudorificks, I put him into a
decoction of sarsa, and with merc. diaphoret. sweat him twice a day, and kept
him to a strict drying diet, and by this method I cured and secured him from
relapse; and so shall do as many as will submit to it: an instance whereof may
be seen in many of these Observations. 62. Observation of an Ozaena and Ulcers
in the Tonsils, and Nodes.


A Man of about thirty six years of Age came to me with an Ozaena, Ulcers in
both the Tonsils, and Nodes, with pains in several parts of his Body, which
together had extremely emaciated and weakened him. I syringed his Nose with a
lenient Lotion according to my custom, and afterward prescribed some of the
other Errhina for daily detersion. I also dressed the Tonsils with lac
sublimati. In order to his Cure, I let him blood, and prescribed a Clyster, and
that very night sent him j. merc. praecipitat. albi, which he took in a
spoonful of white bread and milk, and repeated the giving of it three or four
nights after one another, carrying it off by Clysters daily. During which I
allowed him medicated Broaths, Posset-ale, and a Pearl julep. After I had thus
disposed his Ulcers to digestion, so as that he was in a capacity to eat meat,
I permitted him to eat such as was of good nourishment, and prescribed him a
decoction of Sarsa, etc. with an addition of Milk to drink daily, and every
other morning gave him a few grains of Theriac metaltor. in ss. cons. melissae,
and thereby vomited him moderately, And purged him once or twice, and continued
the use of Clysters accordingly as I saw cause, and bathed him often, I suppose
eight days. Thus I removed his pains, and cured the Ulcers, and purposed to
have put him into a strict Diet, and to have finished the course by
Sudorificks, etc. but some of the Nodes remaining, and the Patient having long
before met with great difficulty in his Cure, earnestly importuned me to
salivate him by unction, alleging it the sure way to prevent relapse. I seeing
his desire, and supposing it might be reasonable, did comply with him, and
caused his Legs and Arms to be anointed daily till his cheeks swelled. Then I
kept him to Posset Drink and Broth, and took care in the washing his mouth. He
salivated well about sixteen or seventeen days, but then growing weak and
faint, I caused his feet and legs to be bathed with warm water, and fresh linen
to be put on, and by Clysters disposed the matter downwards, and kept up his
Spirits with Cordials. Having thus refresht him I purged him proportionably to
his strength, and finished the Cure by a course of drying diet, decoct. sarsae,
Sudorificks, etc. in three weeks. But he being extremely pained in all his
Limbs suspected his Cure, but the Nodes being resolved, and the Ulcers so long
before cured, I encouraged him to take his wonted norishment, supposing these
proceeded from the emaciation of the muscles; yet I prescribed him a medicated
Ale, and advised bathing a few days: he did so, and found as his strength
recovered so his pains lessened. He removed afterward to Paris, where he
enjoyed his health and a quiet mind, till one night upon change of lodgings he
was bitten with Musketoes, and seeing his face next morning so swelled, he
consulted Physicians and Surgeons, who would needs persuade him it was
Venereal, but it proving otherwise he escaped the grand Course, but was bathed
often.

A Woman of about forty six years of Age was commended into my hands, 63.
Observation of a Gumma,
The hairy scalp on the os frontis had been some while ulcerated, and the bone
corrupted the compass of a broad shilling. I laid it open by a circular
incision, and dressed it up dry. The second day after I took off the dressings,
and saw the bone full of a loose flesh arising out of the cavities. I scraped
the bone, and dressed it up with unguent. Aegyptiac. warm, and digested the
lips the while, Having thus disposed the bone to exfoliate, I began the
internal Cure by bleeding and purging, and prosecuted it by salivating her with
Turbith mineral. and in the declination of the flux I purged her with the
bitter decoction, and finished the course by a decoct. sarsae, drying diet and
sweating, and in the while exfoliated the cranium, and cicatrized the Ulcer.

A young Woman came to me with an inflamed Tumor upon the Fibula of her right
Leg; it seemed to have matter in it, 64. Observation of a Gumma resolved.
but upon a farther enquiry I discovered it a Gumma. I applied an Emplaster e
bolo to defend it from fluxion, and caused her to be let blood. The next day I
purged her with decoct. senae, etc. and prescribed her an anodyne draught that
night. The day after I purged her with extract. nost. mag. and calomel. and the
next day sent her 10 grains Turbith min. in a Pill, which vomited her five or
six times. The next day a Clyster was administered, and the fourth day after
Turbith again; and so repeated the Turbith with Clysters proportionably: and in
the interval purged her sometimes with the bitter Apozeme to avoid salivating.
By this means I resolved the Gumma, and perfected the Cure by Diet and
Diet-drink, Sudorificks, etc.

A poor Fellow came to me with a Carious Ulcer on the os frontis, 65.
Observation of an Ulcer, with Caries of the os frontis.
which had been of a long continuance: the bone was white, yet corroded much,
and filled with an Hypersarcosis, as most of these sort of Venereal Ulcers are.
He was let blood, and purged four or five days with the bitter decoction, and
took every other night j. calomel. After I had thus purged him, I laid open the
Ulcer by a circular abscission, and dressed it up dry. The second day I opened
it again, and scraped the bone and loose flesh off, and applied dossils pressed
out of the tincture of Vitriol, and dressed up the recent lips with the
digestive ex terebinth. cum vitello ovi. After I had thus digested the Ulcer,
and disposed the bone to exfoliation, I raised a salivation by a few doses of
Turbith minerale; during which his Landlady discovering his Disease would not
permit him to lodge longer in her house. Whereupon he removed unknown to me to
a Common Alehouse some distance off. Walking thither in a cold winter day to a
Lodging as cold, the salivation checked, and a shortness of breath with
frequent fainting followed, and increasing upon him he died in spite of my
endeavors, and those I consulted.

A Man aged forty four years, 66. Observation of a Caries in the Os frontis.
of a Plethorick Body, half a year after he had been Cured of a Chancre, began
to complain of a pain in the sore-part of his Head. A Tumor appearing in that
part some time after, he consulted a Surgeon, who opened it by incision, and
dressed it with a dossil of lint, and left him to his Surgeon to cure: But
in progress of time the Ulcer enlarging, and the bone growing more carious, the
Patient consulted another Surgeon, who told him it was the work of Nature,
and that in time the bone would cast off. The poor Man believing what was said,
took care to have it dressed accordingly by the same young Surgeon, till the
Caries had infected the bone almost the whole length from the coronal suture to
the brows. And then he came to me for Cure, and having lodged himself near me,
I went to dress him, and saw a great discharge of a setid matter, and the lips
of the Ulcer lying hollow over the rotten bone. I cut them off round so far as
the bone lay carious under them, then dressed up the wound and bone with
dossils of dry lint, etc. Then knowing that there was no hopes of curing him
without the use of Antivenereals, I ordered a Clyster that evening, and began
the next morning to purge him with an infusion of sena, rhab. etc. (for I had
permitted him to bleed sufficiently in the extirpation of the callous lips.)
The third day I renewed dressing, and saw a pulsation of the dura matter through
several small apertures in the carious bone. Upon sight whereof I had thoughts
of setting on a Trepan, but there being no immediate danger, I proceeded with
Mercurials, and gave him j. Calomel. that night, and purged it off the next
morning with a draught of the bitter decoction, and repeated the same Apozeme
four or five days, giving him Calomel. every other night. Whilst I was purging
him the matter abounded much, and flowed downwards into a remaining sinus
between his brows, to prevent which, I made a bandage with good compression on
that part, and dressed the rotten bone with dossils pressed out of sp. vini,
and continued that method of dressing daily. And that I might hasten the
exfoliation and cure of this Ulcer, I gave him the morning after Turb. min. gr.
xij. which both vomited and purged him. I repeated it once in two or three days
till I had raised a salivation, during which the sinuous Ulcer healed by
agglutination, and the matter accordingly lessened daily, and lost its fetid
smell; the bone also cast off in its circumference, and loosened in the middle,
so that I brake those forementioned apertures into one another, and raised up
one piece of the cranium consisting of both tables, and made way for the Callus
to thrust off the remaining sides of the bone, part whereof cast off soon
after, and the Ulcer incarned, and is now cicatrizing. There was a Node upon
the right jaw, which is partly resolved. The Patient is yet in a Course of
Diet-drink, sweating and purging, in order to the confirmation of the Cure,
which I think there is no doubt of.

A Man of about thirty four years of Age was commended to my Care. 67.
Observation of Ulcers and Nodes, with the ill consequences.
He had several Nodes on his Legs and Arms, one whereof upon his right Leg was
big and much inflamed. He had also some breakings out about several parts of
his body, and Caries in both his jaws. He had passed through many hands, and
came then out of a salivation raised by some Mercurial Pill, and (as he said)
had spit between 4 and 5 quarts a day the space of three weeks. I designed
salivation by unction. In preparation thereto I let him blood, purged and
bathed him, then caused his Legs and Arms to be anointed till his Chaps
swelled, and the salivation arose moderately; then I put him to the drinking
Posset-ale and Broth, and took care of his mouth. All things thus likely to
succeed well, I having a Command to make a Journey of four or five days into
the Country, recommended him into careful hands, purposing at my return to
raise the salivation higher, if there were occasion. About the sixth day after,
at my return, I found my Patient much indisposed with a shortness of breath,
and frequent fainting. The swelling in his Face was sunk, yet was his mouth
much ulcerated, and his jaws so contracted, that he could scarce open them to
take in a spoonful of broth. His spitting checked, his body costive, and the
urine he made was little and high colored. I caused a Clyster presently to be
administered, and sent for a quart of aq. antisyph. of which I gave him some,
and advised the taking it once in two or three hours. I syringed his mouth with
decoct. hordei, liquiritiae, and mel. magist. and put a folded rag between his
jaws, which I had before advised his Nurse; but she was one of his choosing, and
ignorant in this work.

I also advised him to hold some of the gargle often in his mouth as hot as he
could endure it, and made up a mixture of some mel magistralis with sp.
vitrioli to dress some other of the Ulcers which required detersion. I also
prescribed him a Lambitive of ol. amygd. dull. etc. to help expectoration. The
next day I purged him with a decoct. tamarind. cassiae fistul. senae, etc. to
which was added sir de ros. solut. manna, sir de sp. cervina, and repeated it
the second and third days. It wrought moderately, and somewhat relieved him. In
the washing his mouth with a syringe forcibly, I put him upon excreating a
great quantity of a filthy matter, amongst which there seemed somewhat like
that we call purulent. I not imagining whence it should come, indeed never
having seen the like, consulted Doctor Denton, who advised me to purge him with
Barnet-water a quart or more at a time, with a spoonful or more of sir. de
spina cervina in the first draught, and so to proceed accordingly as it passed.
I did so, and observing it to pass both by urine and stool; I repeated the use
of it five or six days, and the while kept up his strength with good Broaths,
etc. After I had thus emptied his bowels, that discharge of matter ceased, and
he recovered. Then I bathed him, and prescribed him medicated broaths, etc.
also decoct. sarsae, and kept his body soluble by lenient purgatives once in
three days.

By the frequent syringing and gargling his mouth, and dressing the Ulcers I
healed that, but by reason of the contraction of his Jaws, the ulceration and
Caries increasing upon the old diseased parts of the Jaws some of his teeth
dropped out, and at last I was forced to cut the contracted Callus, and that way
enlarged his Jaws. Whilst these various accidents affected the Viscera
internally, his Nodes and Pains discussed, his skin also was freed of its
foulness, and he seemed perfectly cured; yet to secure him from relapsing, I
prevailed with him to continue his Diet-drink, and to sweat with autimon.
diaphoret. etc. and to purge between while. To which purpose I supplied him
with Materials, and he retired a few miles out of Town, and prosecuted the
Course, and came from thence to Town well flesht, and enjoys a good health to
this day.

A Man aged forty eight years, having been long diseased in the Country, 68.
Observation of Lues Venerea, with complication of Diseases.
and taken much Physic unsuccessfully, was afterward advised to the Bath,
whither he went; but those waters not being suitable for his Disease, he
returned to London much emaciated, and very sick and weak, and consulted two
Physicians and my self. He had Nodes upon his Arms, Hands, and Fingers, and
indeed had no use of them. His other Limbs were affected with pain. He had an
ozaena of an old date, whence several rotten bones had cast off. His Jaws were
also carious. There was small hopes of his recovery, yet we were obliged to
attempt it some way, and in order thereto Lodgings were provided for him near
me, and we began his course of Physic with an infus. senae, rhab. etc. but his
stomach was so weak that he had of long time nauseated all sorts of sustenance,
and vomited this potion. Upon notice whereof we prescribed him sal vitrioli,
and emptied his stomach of much viscous phlegm. A Clyster was administered that
evening, and we laid him to rest that night with an anodyne draught. The next
morning he was let blood in the Arm, and purged the day after with a soulution
of manna, crem. tartar. in a draught of Posset Drink, and the next day we
bathed him in water lukewarm: he fainted in it, and was seized with a
shortness of breath after he was in bed, which lafted about an hour; yet we
proceeded in the bathing him daily the space of a week, and relieved him in
those fits with Cordial-waters, and kept his body soluble by Clysters. Having
thus prepared him for other remedies, we prescribed him calomel. but which way
soever he took it, he vomited it soon after. We then sent a pot of unguent.
Neapolit. by a servant who rubbed part of it on his Arms, Thighs and Legs, and
disposed him afterward to a breathing sweat with a draught of Posset Drink:
Thus he was anointed several mornings, till his chaps swelled and his mourth
ulcerated. Then we took care in washing his mouth with lenient decoctions, and
nourished him with medicated Broaths and Posset-ale, permitting him sometime to
take a little burnt Wine, aqua theriacalis mag. to support his spirits. By
which method he salivated 26 days, and was freed of his pains; the nodes also
resolved, and he recovered the use of his hands, and the rotten bones cast off
from the eithmoides, etc. The Salivavation declining, the bitter apozeme was
prescribed him. Decoctions of sarsa with an addition of a little aqua mirabilis
was also allowed: But our Patient had been obstinate and ungovernable in the
whole course, and was now at last so averse to every thing was prescribed him,
that in truth he neither purged, drank his diet-drink or sweat as he ought; and
through that omission the serous humors abounded, and began first to swell his
Legs, then his Thighs, and somewhat his Belly. His Arms and Hands afterward
swelled, and at last his Eyelids and Face, and an Itch brake out over all his
body, which by his rubbing and scratching excoriated the skin in several parts,
and was very vexatious to him. At the first appearance of these anasarcous
swellings, various internals were prescribed, but he only took Cordial-waters,
in which we infused sometimes purgatives, whereof this following was one: Spec.
diamosch. amari jss Aloes j. sp. vini lbj. eliciatur tinctura s. a. capiat
cochlear. iij. pro vice, repetend. ad placitum. Some such like tincture was
also added to aq. lumbricor. etc. We having no other way of purging him, the
serosity increased, and overcoming the natural heat he dyed.

One of a strong constitution having been diseased seven years with the various
species of this Lues, 69. Observation of the Tonsils, Ozaena and Nodes.
and had passed through many hands beyond Sea and here, and has been taken
notice of by me in one of the former Observations for his irregularity in that
course of Physic, came to me again within a year after lamentably afflicted
with Ulcers in his Tonsils, Palate and Nose, etc. (I being then imprisoned by
the Fanatics in Lambeth house) he consulted others, but came afterward to me,
desiring my opinion of his Disease, and what hopes I had of restoring those
ulcerated parts to their former use and shape. The Ulcers in the Tonsils and
Nose were large, and accompanied with inflammations and tumor, and thereby
occasioned a great difficulty in swallowing his drink, the most part of it
running out at his Nostrils. On the ridge of his Nose there was a herpes
exedens with a caries in that bone, and upon the left side of his Nostril
another, which had penetrated through that cartilage, and an ozaena within
which had corrupted part of the ethmoides and the lower part of the septum,
insomuch as there only remained the exterior skin to divide the Nostrils, and
that being ulcerated could not defend it self long from being eaten in pieces.
He had also some Nodes upon his Legs, but the Ulcers in his Nose were they
which threatened the danger, yet there were hopes of curing them if a course
were speedily taken. He returned somewhat satisfied, and the next day sent for
two eminent Physicians, and procured leave for me of my Keeper to meet them. I
representd the condition of the Ulcers to the Physicians, and proposed to them
the raising a Salivation by unction as the speediest way to prevent the farther
erosion. They had no great opinion of Salivating, but did comply with me, and
promised the Patient to visit him often during course.

The Patient had been let blood, and purged by their prescriptions; upon which
consideration I prescribed him j. Calomel. in a spoonful of white bread and
milk to take that night, and advised them to bath him the next day; also to
repeat the Calomel. for some nights, hoping thereby to check the corrosive
quality in the Ulcers; and I also advised to repeat his bathing in order to the
salivation I intended by the unction. Care was also taken to keep his body
soluble by Clysters, or lenient Bolus's. I directed one of my Servants to dress
the Ulcers, some with lenients, and others with detersives.

Whilst the Ulcers were thus disposing to Cure, my liberty was procured, and I
again attended the Patient; and having prepared all things ready, began to
raise the salivation by anointing his Legs, Arms, Shoulders, Spine and Hips,
and repeated it daily, and afterward put him into a warm bed, and disposed him
to a breathing sweat, with a draught of buttered Ale to gratify his palate.
The rest of the day he drank Posset Drink, etc. During the anointing, some of
the Lotions were syringed twice or thrice a day into his nostrils. Gargles were
also used to wash his throat, and the Ulcers of the Tonsils and uvula touched
with lac sublimati. Those Ulcers without were deterged and smoothed fit to
heal, as Nature should be disposed thereto. And that little bit of skin which
served to divide the nostrils likewise healed.

I continued anointing this Patient till I had wasted near three pounds and a
half of the unction, yet his Chaps would not swell, nor did he spit a quart in
24 hours. But during this anointing he was freed of his pains, and the Ulcers
cured as well as I could desire. But how far this would serve to eradicate such
an inveterate Lues, I much doubted. The Physicians seemed also to distrust my
undertaking, considering I did not salivate him as I had proposed. The Patient
also became weary of the frequent anointing. Upon which considerations I was
somewhat troubled, and endeavored by Clysters to move it downwards, wishing it
would end in a Diarrhoea; but it not moving that way, nor any other way
disturbing him, I concluded his not salivating to proveed from the quantity of
Mercury he had formerly taken, and that possibly it was become habitual to him.
Supposing it might be so, I caused some Mercurial Emplasters to be applied to
his Feet, Legs and Arms, and sweat him again in his Bed moderately. And after
these, seeing the Salivation not yet arise, I gave him Turbith min. gr. xvj. in
a Pill with cons. boraginis. It vomited him twice or thrice inconsiderably. But
from that time he began to be sevourish and faint, and the matter much
indisposed, by which I judged it necessary to purge off. To which purpose a
Clyster was administered, and the Plasters taken off, and fresh linen put on. He
took the bitter decoction five or six days, making large evacuation that way.
During which his mouth was frequently washed, and disposed to Cure; and I put
him into a decoct. sarsae, and strict diet, sweating him with antimon.
diaphoret. etc. as before has been prescribed in such like cases. I continued
him a month in this Course, and being then satisfied that he was well Cured,
and secured from further relapse, the Physicians were sent for, and saw the
several Ulcers cicatrized; that on the ridge of his Nose where the bone had
been bare was healed smooth without any visible exfoliation. If the Cartilage
on the side of the Nostril did exfoliate, it was cast off into the Nostril, for
the cicatrix lay close and transverse as a small seam. Within his Nose there
was a great vacuity, but nothing of Caries or bare bone, nor did he blow any
thing of filth as formerly he had done. And that his Palate and Tonsils were as
well, appeared both by his voice, eating and drinking. His Legs were also as
free from Nodes as pains. The Physicians judged him Cured, yet would not yield
the Cure to the Salivation: but in other cases of that kind, where I afterward
proposed Salivation, they would reply upon me, that I did not Salivate such a
one, meaning this Patient: To which I always answered, The Cure consists not so
much in the spitting a great quantity, as in putting the matter upon such a
ferment as might fit it to be carried off by the Sudorificks, Purging, etc.

This Person retired afterward into the Country, and returned to London at
the end of two years, and acknowledged to me his Cure by settling Thirty Pounds
a year upon me during his Life, and paid me Sixty Pounds for the two years
passed.

I am not ignorant that there are a people who pretend to Cure all the
forementioned Species of Lues Venerea without running such long Courses, or
keeping their Chamber: But it is their undertakings which make us so much work;
yet truly, I do believe, that all those who are of a fleshy and strong
Constitution, may be Cured without Salivating by Unction, if they would
patiently submit to so strict a Course of Diet, etc. as that way requires.

CHAP. V. Of Gonorrhoea.
GOnorrhoea in general may signify any flux of Seed from the body; Gonorrhoea,
what it is.
but custom has appropriated it to that which is involuntary.

The Ancients have confined that appellation to a loss of Seed which happens
without erection or tentigo; or if you will have it in Celsus his words, sine
venere vel nocturnis imaginibus. But Moderns have given a larger account of
Gonorrhoea, and do find many differences of it.

As First, That which comes from a fault of the vessels; as first, Its
differences.
from natural coldness or great refrigeration, in which case they lose their
retentive faculty; or secondly, which is more frequent, thirdly, from violent
straining; fourthly, from the laxity of the seminal vessels in general;
fifthly, from erosion of the caruncle in the urethra which covers the exit of
the vesiculae seminales, and vasa deferentia, and is indeed the sphincter of
them; sixthly, in epileptick cases we find profluvia seminis, which seem to be
caused by the strength of the Convulsion.

Secondly, That which comes from fault in the matter of the Seed, viz. Vrethra
and the excoriation of it; 3. when it is infected with a virulency in the Lues
Venerea.

It is this latter species that is the most usual employment of our profession,
the diseases of those parts being most frequently gotten by the too predominant
vice of the age. I shall therefore confine my discourse to that subject, not
only because it is one of the first symptoms of the Lues Venerea, but also for
that through the Patients slighting and neglecting its cure, many ill accidents
do happen in process of time, which renders it much more difficult to cure than
any other species of the Pox.

A virulent Gonorrhoea is an involuntary emission of seed, Definition.
occasioned by venom contracted from an unclean woman.

Seed thus emitted is doubly peccant, both in quantity and quality. The latter
is always proportionable to the degree of the infection and to the increase of
putrefaction.

The quantity is likewise always far greater than vessels in their natural
estate are able to breed or to discharge, which has caused a great deal of
contention among Physicians about the seat of this disease, or the original of
it. And indeed it is very odd to consider that a man upon coition shall
sometimes have nothing outwardly appear upon him, either by way of chancre,
bubo, or any other evil, but shall find his urine hot, with a flux of sharp and
acrimonious seed from within, the continuance of which shall spend his
strength, erode the urethra, make caruncles and other mischiefs. On the
contrary, if stopped, shall cause inflammations in the testicles, or else a
bubo or chancre; and if these happen not, shall infect the whole body, breaking
out in scabs and ulcers, or making nodes, intolerable pains, rotting the bones,
etc.

Where this venom should enter, what parts it should originaly infect, and how
insinuate it self, and afterward cause such great separations of spermatick
matter, etc. is worth our while to enquire.

The way of its entrance in a woman is intelligible enough, but in a man it can
be no other than either the passage of the urethra, or the pores of the skin of
the penis, pubes and inguina.

The former seems not very likely, Manner of contracting it, 1. In Men,
because it is not suitable to many other circumstances of the disease, which
does seldom or never originaly infect the urethra it self, or the prostatae,
etc. and never ascends into the bladder; whereas on the other side we find
visible affections of the glans, praeputium, inguina, etc. to be the first
effects of the infection.

We have therefore reason to believe that the venom lurking in the vagina uteri
of an infected woman, does upon the friction and warmth that happens in coition
fasten upon those parts which it touches, viz. If it ly high within the
vagina, or the penis enter not far in coition, the glans and prepuce suffer to
the production of a Chancre. If the coition were closer, and the venom have
possessed the labia pudendi, then the whole skin of the penis is infected, and
the pubes it self; where insinuating into those pores, it does not produce so
visible effects as it does in the prepuce and glans, because the skin is
thicker. But then it is transmitted not only into the mass of blood in general,
but also into the spungy glandules of the inguina in particular. If these or
either of these be sufficiently swelled, and nature strong, the venom may
discharge here; but if this happen not, then it creeps into the blood, and
there produces fermentations suitable to its nature. The matter of the venom
being originally corrupted seed, does therefore raise seminal fermentations,
but withal one that is peccant after the nature of the venom that excited it;
by which means it happens that spermatick matter of a vicious sort abounds in
the blood, exhausts it of its best spirits, and derives the flower of it to the
seminal vessels. This matter is too much and too sharp to be long contained
there, where it immediately provokes and stimulates nature to an excretion; and
according to the degree of its acrimony and corruption the seed will be more or
less, thicker or thinner, white, yellow, green, etc.

I know Bartholinus has made a Gonorrhoea to be nothing else, but an Ulcer of
the prostatae. Which Opinion is sufficiently confuted by Doctor Wharton, who
gives him the insoluble objection of the Tumor of the Testicles, which
happens always upon the untimely stopping of it. By the pounding up of the
water, it is easy to find which way the current came.

In Women, 2. In Women.
the manner of the Infection is much more intelligible. Where the Infection of
a corrupt venomous Seed enters into an Vterus, that is heated partly by
coition, and partly by its own appetite, it is greedily sucked in, and as
fatally to the misfortune of the Woman. There its first attacque is upon the
innermost or glandulous membrane of the Womb, usually acuating its ferment, and
causing a large precipitation of serum from the blood. This is at first by
modest Women mistaken for a fluor albus (unless the matter have been so highly
virulent as to cause immediate inflammations) and is so treated till worse
Symptoms arise, and all is betrayed. What those are, we have already showed you
in part, and more will appear hereafter.

The preceding sign of it is heat in Urine, Signs of it in Men;
then succeeds the Disease it self, viz. an issuing of white matter in small
quantity, which by degrees increases, and grows more corrupt and virulent,
changing its color somewhat to a yellow or green: and about this time it is
accompanied with a painful erection, and for the most part with a contraction
or pricking in the Vrethra under the fraenum.

In Women also heat of Urine is felt with a dropping of matter from the Womb,
at first resembling a fluor albus, but after a few days it increases, In Women.
and becomes purulent and fetid, with diversity of colors, making an
inflammation with excoriation; also a bearing down of those parts, and pain in
the back.

A Gonorrhoea is more or less difficult of Cure, Prognostic.
according to the malignity from which it received its Original. Those that
become suddenly virulent, and accompanied with stranguria, are most difficult
to Cure. If they do stop with out any manifest cause, either a Chancre arises,
or a hernia humoralis. If the Cure be slubber'd over, or long delayed,
caruncles arise in the Vrethra, and in progress of time a carnosity, etc.

In the Cure of this Disease, Cure.
we ought to have a special regard to the accidents abovementioned, viz.
inflammation, excoriation, stranguria, etc. Therefore in the first place, we
endeavor to contemperate the heat, then purge off the vicious humors;
afterward by moderate detergents and desiccants cleanse and dry the diseased
parts, and restore them to their natural temper.

In order to the contemperating of the heat, and acrimony of the humors, a
cooling and moistening diet ought to be prescribed, viz. Broaths of Mutton,
Veal, Chicken, etc. wherein may be boiled Endive, Lettice, Purslane, Sorrel,
etc. Barly-cream, Grewels, Panados are also proper during the pains. Their
drink ought to be Ptisans, Emulsions, Juleps, or medicated Ale: a small Ale, or
white Wine diluted with water may also be permitted.

All exercise of the Body is prejudicial to their healths, and consequently
their rambling abroad prolongs their Cure.

A quiet mind, with a patient submission to their Physician and Surgeon is
also required: and that they forbear Venery, as they value their own and their
Mistris's healths.

The Evacuation may begin with a Clyster of the common decoction cum electuario
lenitiv. ij. butyri recentis and ol. amygdal. an. jss. cum vitel. ovi. You may
afterward let them blood in the Arm if you judge it necessary. Then purge them
with elect. diacathol. diaprun. solut. diacassia cum manna, or with a decoction
cassiae fistulae, tamarind. hord. mundat. liquirit. florum trium cordial. to
which may be added manna, sir. ros. solut.etc.

After purging, it will be necessary to dispose the humors to quiet by some
anodyne draught: Emulsions are also proper during the whole Course. Of which
sort this may be an Example. sem. canabini jss. sem. quat. frig. maj. an. j.
sem. papaver. alb. ij. amygd. dulc. excort. n. 16. decoct. hordei q. s. fiat
emulsio; dulcoretur cum sacchar. albis. aromatizetur cum aqua cinamomi: sumat
vj. hora somni, repetatur ad libitum.

If the heat of Urine, and other accidents increase, it may be necessary to
give j. calomel. in a bolus, with some of the forementioned Electuaries, and to
repeat it as you see cause once in two or three days.

If by these the accidents do not remit, bathe them in a semicupium, with an
emollient decoction, or milk and water, and to prevent erosion in the Vrethra,
inject decoctum hordei, wherein has been boiled sem. althaeae, cydonior. or
some of the lesser cold seeds; and if you will, you may anoint those external
parts with ungunet. refrigerat. Galeni. But do not insist too long in the use
of lenitives, lest a Chancre arise; but purge off those vicious humors with
pull. cornichini, pil. cochiae, Rudii, pulver. diagridii, troch. Alhandal. etc.
with or without out calomel. and if there be required strong revulsion, vomit
them with infus. croc. metallor. mer. vitae, or with a few grains of turbith
minerale.

The virulency thus removed, the use of Turpentine comes in request to deterge
and heal, which would not be so reasonably admitted sooner, lest through its
heat and tenuity of parts it lead down the impure matter, and burden the
diseased parts. It may be given to the quantity of a dram, two or three,
washed in aq. plantag. parietariae, etc. adding a few grains of camphire to it;
or you may add purgatives to it, viz. pull. rad. jalapii, trochisci Alhandal.
diagridii, etc. Or, terebinth. lot. in aq. plantag. j. acidi tartari j. corn.
cervi usti, ocul. cancror. diagridii an. ss. f. Bolus: Or terebinth. Venet.
lot. in aq. ros. rub. ij. tartari vitriolati ss. salis succini, rhab. pull. an.
ss. cum pull. glycyrrhiz. f. Bolus. And in its mor decrease: salis prunellae
iij. crem. tartari vj. camphorae j. terebinth. Cyprae. ijss. sumat ad quant.
castaneae mane and vesperi. In case of relapse, add pull. rad. jalapii to it.

At this time, Clysters of terebinth. are proper, which in the time of its
virulency would be mischievous.

If by some of the foresaid Medicaments, the Gonorrhoea be not perfectly cured,
you may prescribe astringents. The time of giving them is in the very
declination of it, when there only appears a little thin waterish humor
which glueth the entrance of the urethra. If you give them sooner, you may
stifle in the matter, and raise a hernia humoralis. The astringents usually
prescribed are, Bol. armen. sang. dracon. mastich. corn. cerv. usti, of sepiae,
croc. mart. astringentis, troch. alkekengi, etc. made into Pills: viz. succin.
mastichis an ij. sang. dracon. lap. haematit. coral. rub. an. j. balaust. sem.
plantag. an. jss. croci martis astring. j. pulveriz. omnia, and cum bals.
Peruviano and sir. cydon. f. massa pilul. dos. ss. ad j. After which the
Patient may drink a draught of the following decoction: folior. polygon.
millefolii an. Mj. rad. althaeae, nymphaeae an. j. flor. ros. rub. papaver.
rhead. an. Pj. sem. quat. frig. maj. an. iij. sem. plant. protulac. lactucae
an. j. sem. byoscyam. papaver. albi an. iv. baccar. myrt. sumach, sem.
halicacabi an. ij. f. decoctio. in s. q. aq. fontis; colaturae add sir. cydon.
de rosis siccis.

If after the Gonorrhoea be cured, you suspect you have not enough secured the
Patient from the malignity of the Disease, you may purge him with some of the
forementioned Catharticks with Calomel. after which you may proceed with
Sudorificks; as has been showed in the former Observations.

One came to me, 1. Observation of Gonorrhoea.
complaining of a heat in his Urine, with a suspicion of a Gonorrhoea,
contracted as he supposed the night before. Upon view of the penis there
appeared a redness on the end of the glans, and he crushed out a moisture like
matter. I concluding it a Gonorrhoea began the cure without delay. In the first
place I let him blood, and some hours after administered a Clyster. I prescribed
him that night a barly-cream for his supper, and in the morning purged him with
manna and cremor tartar. in Whey. The next morning the Gonorrhoea appeared
visibly, and his Linen was much stained with the matter. We repeated the
hordeat that night, and prescribed him j. calomel. cons. cichor. ss. ms. which
he took early in the morning, and about three hours after a draught of the
decoct. tamarindor. etc. as it is prescribed in the Method of Cure, and some
hours after that drank so much more of the decoction, by which he was well
purged. That night I laid him to rest with an anodyne draught. The next morning
I found the Gonorrhoea increased with heat in Urine and painful erections. I
repeated the former Apozeme, and to prevent erosion I injected the decoct.
hordei, as is above mentioned, and repeated at night the anodyne draught: but
finding the accidents still to increase I prescribed him the morning after
calomel. gr. 15. turbith gr. 6. with cons. ros. in a bolus, with a draught of
Posset Drink after it: and in case he vomited, to drink Posset-ale after each
vomit. But he had formerly taken much Mercury, and this dose moved him little.
A Clyster was administered that afternoon, and at night an emulsion ex sem.
canabin. etc. which he had liberty to drink as often as he pleased in the
night. The second day after I repeated turbith min. The next morning I
perceived a remission of pain, etc. which I imputed to the mercurial dose, and
would gladly have repeated somewhat of that kind: but to avoid fluxing I purged
him the day after with pull. cornichini; it worked plentifully. I repeated it
again the next day with j. calomel. and at night he drank the emulsion as
before. Thus the virulency and accidents were checked. From that time I purged
him with that Electuary of sal. prunel. cum terebinth. but observing it to run
again I added pull. jalapii to it; and by the repeating that, and afterward the
same Electuary as it is prescribed without Jalap, I cured the Gonorrhoea.

I was sent for to a man grievously afflicted with a Stranguria. 2. Observation.
He had been let blood and purged with lenients; he had also drank emulsions,
and bathed often in a semicupium, but without remission of pain. Upon this
information, and assurance that he had not the Stone, I suspected it might
arise from some, Gonorrhoea suppressed, but he would by no means acknowledge
that. However I gave him early next morning j. calomel. cum cons. cicohrei in a
bolus, and a Clyster that afternoon. It gave him three or four stools. That
night I prescribed a draught of emulsion. The next morning I found him much
relieved. I gave him alternately two doses more as at first, with Clysters in
the afternoons, and continued the use of emulsions, and thereby freed him of
the stranguria. A day 2 or 3 after he came to me, and showed me a Gonorrhoea
weeping. It had been too soon stopped by astringents, and that caused the
stranguria; which now returned again, but with no great malignity. I purged him
with the Electuary ex terebinth. sal. prunellae cum pull. jalapii, and
afterward I confirmed the Cure with the same Electuary sine jalapio, and the
decoct. millefolii, etc. casting up an injection at last of a solution of mel.
Aegyptiac. in aqua equiseti: by all which he was cured.

One came to me diseased with an involuntary effusion of matter; it seemed to
me a Venereal Gonorrhoea, 3. Observation.
but he having consulted others who thought it arose from some scorbutical
affection I advised him to put himself into their hands, my knowledge extending
only o the cure of the venereal one: and supposing it to be so, yet I could not
hope to cure it in so few days as they had promised him. Thus we parted, but
after a longer trial with them than was promised, he returned to me again not
better than at first. Upon which consideration I undertook to serve him as well
as I could. He had been sufficiently treated with lenient purgatives. I began
with a dose of pull. cornichini, which purged him at least 15 or 16 times. That
night I disposed him to rest with an anodyne draught. The next day he was less
pained in making urine, and the running was lessened. Upon which account I
purged him more moderately, but that way of lenient purging gave way to the
increase of the virulency; which being also observed by the Patient, I purged
him with more large doses, and those of the stronger Catharticks, viz. pil.
Rudii with calomel. and sometime with pull. cornichini, or the Electuary ex
terebinth. cum jalapio. By the use of this last I purged off the Gonorrhoea,
and stopped the running by some few doses of pil. croci martis astringentis. He
continued well about a month, then it relapsed again. Upon sight whereof I
repeated the former course, and stopped it; yet it brake out afterward seven
times for the space almost of a year. I cured it as often, by purging him with
the Electuary cum jalapio, so that it continued well at last. Whether it was
venereal at first, I cannot affirm: Nay so far as I could judge by his habit of
body and manner of living, he was not that way inclined; but what way soever it
proceeded, he was perfectly cured and continues so.

I was commended to a Patient who lay much afflicted with a virulent Gonorrhoea
accompanied with the severest accidents, 4. Observation.
viz. Priapismus with contraction of the penis, stranguria, etc. insomuch that
he was necessitated to rise often in a night to cool himself. He had been in
such hands as had purged him and let him blood. I began with a Clyster, and the
next morning gave him Lenitive Electuary, diaprun. etc. with the addition of
calomel. and bathed him that day, and prescribed him Emulsions, and prosecuted
the foresaid method of bathing and purging 4 or 5 days with little remission of
the accidents. Wherefore I left off bathing, and prescribed him gr. iij. mer.
vitae in a pill, which vomited him much and purged him. I disposed the Patient
to rest the following night with gr. jss. Laudan. aq. cinam. hordeat. and aq.
papaver. cum sir. paralyseos. The next morning I prescribed him an emulsion
made with Chicken broth, as well to nourish him as contemperate the acrimony.
I also repeated emollient Clysters, such as has been set down in the Method of
Cure. Having thus somewhat refreshed him, I prescribed him calomel. j. turbith
min. gr. iv. which vomited him twice that day. I kept him to Chicken-broath and
Clysters, and at length repeating these Mercurials, I freed him of all those
accidents; and with the white Electuary ex terebinth. cum pull. jalapii I purged
off the Gonorrhoea, and with the other ex terebinth. the astringent Pills, and
decoct. lig. lentiscini cum rad. bistortae, consolid. tormentillae, etc. I
concluded the Cure. This very man was the most severely afflicted with the
foresaid Gonorrhoea I ever saw: yet some years after was again clapped, and
passed under several hands till the malignity spread it self all over his head,
face and body, and was at last Cured by me.

One of about 30 years of age of a full body, came to Town diseased with
Caruncles, 5. Observation of Gonorrhoea with Chancre.
intending to be my Patient; but within a day or two after he came to me with a
recent Gonorrhoea contracted the night before. I began the Cure that very
instant by letting him blood, and prescribing a Clyster that afternoon, and
prosecuted the course by emulsions and purging. But the Patient being
irregular, the Gonorrhoea became highly virulent with all the accidents of
pain, etc. and whilst he was purging with pull. cornichini and calomel. a
Chancre appeared between the Prepuce and Glans very big and hard. He pretended
it rose that night. I gave him the next morning a dose of turbith min. which
vomited him 5 or 6 times, and purged him twice. I dressed the Chancre with a
Pledget dipped in lac sublimati, I repeated the Turbith the third day, and
afterward again till I salivated him, I thinking that way the most speedy in
such Libertines. During his salivating an Artery amongst the great Teeth on the
right Jaw burst forth, and bled very much before I had notice of it: I stopped
it by directing him to hold the yolk of hard roasted Egg between his Jaws close
upon the place where I suspected the Artery to lie, and so by compression
restrained the bleeding. The next day I set him in a clear light, and
discovered the blood to arise by a carious tooth which I stopped with Lint dipped
in ol. vitriol. so that it bled no more. During the Salivation the Chancre
resolved, and the Gonorrhoea stopped. In the declination of the Salivation I
purged him with the bitter Apozeme, and afterward finished the Course with
decoct. sarsae, etc. sweating him. Whilst he was in this course of sweating,
the Gonorrhoea appeared again weeping, but the malignity being wasted, I cured
it with the white Electuary, and astringent Pills.

One of about twenty three years of Age came to me with a Gonorrhoea,
accompanied with Virulency. 6. Observation of a Gonorrhoea with Chancre.
I advised him a Clyster that Evening, and the next morning let him blood, and
prescribed him a laxative ptisan (as it is set down in the method of Cure) to
purge him moderately, which he took and repeated three or four days, taking j.
Calomel every other night. During which I prescribed a lenient injection of
summitat. malvar. violar. decoctted in aq. hordei. Those accidents of pain thus
mitigated, I purged him with pull. cornichini and calomel. and after its
operation, I prescribed him an emulsion ex sem. canabini, etc. and repeated the
use of the purgative and emulsion, till I had taken off the virulency. Then I
sent him a Pot of the white Electuary exterebinth. jalap. etc. and a draught of
the emulsion after it each night. During this Course, the Patient supposing
himself secure, took his liberty abroad in eating and drinking, till a great
inflammation happened on the prepuce, with a swelling and excoriation of the
glans, also a large Chancre between the prepuce and glans: Upon sight thereof I
let him blood, and fomented the prepuce with decoct. summitat. rubi, plantag.
etc. and dressed him up as is usual in such Cases, and gave him ij. of manna
with crem. tartar. next day in a draught of Posset Drink. It purged him seven
or eight times. The second day after I prescribed him a Dose of turbith, and a
Clyster that Afternoon, and afterward proceeded in the repeating turbith. min.
and raised a light Salivation, by which the hardness was resolved, and the
Chancre Cured. After which he drank a decoct. sarsae, and observed a strict
diet, and sweat, as has been said in the like cases. After I had thus Cured
him, a weeping of the Gonorrhoea appeared again; it was no more than I
expected, it commonly following after such courses of Physic: but there being
no malignity in it, the Cure was soon effected with that white Electuary cum
terebinth. etc. and he continued well.

A young Woman newly married, complained the second day after of a heat in her
Urine, which increasing upon her with a fluor albus, I was sent for, 7.
Observation.
and heard her complaints, and saw some linen she had worn, much stained with
matter. I advised her to bathe the excoriated parts with milk and water, and to
dress them with unguent. refrigerant. Galeni, prescribed her an emollient
Clyster, emulsions, etc. and took my leave without discovering to her the
nature of her Disease. A day or two after, I took an opportunity to acquaint
her Husband with what I had observed of his Wives condition, and questioned his
health. After a little demur, he told me, he had some months passed a
Gonorrhoea, and supposed he had been Cured, but of late, since the complaint of
his Wife, he had observed some little weeping, and showed me somewhat like the
relics of Gonorrhoea. It was inconsiderable, yet seemed enough to infect her.
He put himself into my hands, and recommended her also to my Care. I let them
both blood, and purged her with a laxative ptisan of Cassia, tamarind. etc. and
sent her an injection of a solution of lap. medicam. Crollii in aq. plantag. a
dram to a pint, and continued the use of emulsions, and afterward bathed her
some days in a semicupium, and kept her body soluble with lenitive Bolus's, to
which I added 10 or 12 grains of praecipitat. alb. After I had thus
contemperated the heat, and healed the external excoriations, I purged her with
deagridium, and praecipitatus alb. some days, increasing the one or other, and
sent her decoct. summitat. rub. equiset. plantag. etc. with a solution of
unguent. Aegyptiac. these parts requiring powerful dryers. After I had thus
purged off the malignity, I prescribed her the purging Bolus of terebinth. cum
pull. jalap. and afterward confirmed the Cure with astringents, as in the
method of Cure has been set down. Her Husband was cured by purging with the
foresaid Electuary.

They have both enjoyed their healths well since, and have Children.

Whilst I was Curing one of a Gonorrhoea by purging, etc. and thought I had
Cured him, a Tumor rose in the left Testicle. 8. Observation.
Upon complaint of it I sent for a Truss, and the while let him blood in the
Arm, and made up a Cataplasm of far. hordei and fabar. with oxycrate, mel.
commune, and applied it. That afternoon a Clyster was administered, and the use
of the Cataplasm was repeated twice a day; during which he was purged with
diagridium and calomel. by the help whereof the Tumor in the Testicle
diminished daily, but by the sharpness of the acetum the scrotum was heated and
blistered in several parts. Upon sight whereof I directed some Vinegar to be
prepared with Litharge, and made up a Cataplasm with it instead of the
Oxycrate, and applied that, defending the vesication with pledgets of unguent.
album. By this Cataplasm the humor was dried up, and the Testicle restored to
its natural tone; but the Gonorrhoea discovering it self in the mean time, I
purged it off as is abovesaid, and concluded the Cure with the white Electuary,
and astringent Pills: the Patient drinking a draught of decoct. lig. guaiaci,
lentisci, etc. after it.

One about eighteen years of Age was afflicted with a swelling in his right
Testicle with inflammation and hardness. 9. Observation.
I supposed it Venereal and risen from a suppression of a Gonorrhoea, but he
denied it. I let him blood, and sent for a Bag-truss, and the while prescribed
a Cataplasm ex farin. hord. and fabar. an. vj. pull. summitat. absinth. flor.
sambuci and chamaemeli decocted in oxymel: It was applied, and retained close
on by a Bag-truss. By the application of this Cataplasm a few days the Tumor
was removed, and restored to its natural state, but before this Tumor was
quite resolved, I took occasion to look upon the Penis, and saw it running; yet
the Patient persisted in the denying it: but before I prescribed him ought in
order to the Cure, it was more demonstrable, and he acknowledging it, I purged
him with extract. Rudii and calomel. four or five days, and afterward with
that Electuary ex terebinth. cum jalapio, by which I purged off the venomous
matter, and with Clysters of terebinth. and astringent Pills I cured him.

A young Fellow was brought to me, 10. Observation.
having a great inflammation and swelling in his right Testicle; he
acknowledging that it arose upon the Cure of a Gonorrhoea. I let him blood, and
sent for a Bag-truss, and the while prescribed an Anodyne Cataplasm ex foliis
hyoscyami decocted cum pull. flor. ros. rub. croco, axung. porcin. medull. panis
tritic. cum vitell. ovor. which was applied, and kept on with a Truss. The next
day a Clyster was administered, and the dressing repeated. The day after he was
purged with j. of calomel. in a lenitive Bolus. We continued the application of
the Cataplasm till the inflammation and pain relaxed. Then made up a Cataplasm
ex farin. fabar. hord. etc. as in the former Observation, and from that time I
purged him with pil. cochiae min. and calomel. and supplied him with a Box of
the same Pills, and a Pot of that Cataplasm to dress himself: and he finding
himself well mended, removed to his former lodging, and rambled about his
affairs. Fifteen or sixteen days after, when I thought he had been Cured, he
came to me with a Callous Chancre on one fide between the glans and fraenum,
the Tumor in scroto being resolved. I confined him again to his Lodging, and
purged him daily with the foresaid Pills, increasing and decreasing the Mercury
or Cathartick, till I totally resolved the Chancre. Then with decoct. guaiaci
and Sudorificks I concluded the Cure.

A Man being diseased with a Gonorrhoea, put himself into some hands for Cure,
11. Observation of a Gonorrhoea, with Hernia humoralis.
but whether through irregularity in the Patient, or that they were too hasty
in the use of astringents, however so it happened, that upon the stopping of
the Gonorrhoea a Tumor arose between the Testicles, but it especially affected
the left Testicle, and the perinaeum with great inflammation and hardness. I
let him blood, and advised a Clyster, and prescribed him a Cataplasm ex
summitat. hyoscyami, cicutae, althaeae, flor. cham. sambuci, sem. lini, etc.
The next day I purged him with manna and crem. tartar. in a draught of
Posset Drink, and the day after prescribed him 12 gr. of turbith. min. which
vomited and purged him well. By the repeating of the same Dose once in three or
four days, and by the continued application of the Cataplasm, I resolved the
Tumor which threatened the welfare of the Part; the suppurations in these
Tumors commonly leaving an opening into the Vrethra, which is difficult to
agglutinate. After the resolution of the Tumor the Gonorrhoea returned. It was
Cured by that white Electuary which is purging, and has diagridium in it.
During which he drank this following decoction: lig. guaiaci iij. lentisci iv.
chinae nodosae ij. sassafr. j. ras. C. C. eboris an. vj. santal. rubri j. rad.
tormentillae, bistortae, consolid. maj. Ireos Florent. an. jss. passular. maj.
enucleatar. iij. lig. cassiae, calam. aromat. an. iij. liquiritiae Hispan. j.
infundantur, and coquantur in suf. quant. aquae fornanae ad lbviij. colat. add
sacchar. rosat. q. s. ad dulcorandum pro usu.

A young Fellow having long suffered with a hernia humoralis, which had
apostemated and broke out on the outside of the right Testicle, 12. Observation
of a sinuous Ulcer in the right Testicle.
and having passed through negligent hands, was at lest, as an object of
Charity, recommended to me by Doctor Walter Needham. I looked upon the Tumor,
and made a search into the Ulcer, and informed my self that it was not only
sordid but sinuous from the production to the lower part of the Testicle. But
would not acknowledge that it arose from a Gonorrhoea, or upon any Venereal
accout. He was hypochondriack, and importuned me earnestly to cut off both his
Testicles. Whether it was in despair of their Cure, or as a punishment for
their offense I know not; but he tole me, it was to that purpose he came to me.
I seeing him so resolute, advised him to come such an hour the next day, and I
would prepare for him. He came and perfisted in the same resolution to have
them both cut off. I having made dressings ready as for the work began with the
ulcerated Testicle, passing my director in the sinus, bending it downward, and
cut that sinuosity open the whole length, then passed in my probe Scissors to
the sinus up ward, and divided that, and by this opening he began to shrug, and
being made sensible of the pain, was well contented that I should dress him up,
and cure the Testicle. I complied, and dressed up the Ulcer with dossils dipped
in precipitate, and applied between the wounded lips pull. Galeni cum albamine
ovi. But the blood burst forth so forcibly after I had bound it, that I was
necessitated to dress it again. I did so with dossils dipped in the Royal
Stiptick, and from that instant it bled no more. The second day after I took
off the dressings, and seeing the Ulcer sordid I dressed it with detersives,
and having thereby in few days disposed the Ulcer to Cure, I purged him with
pil. cochiae min. and calomel. and left the finishing of the Cure to my
Servants, who performed it accordingly.

CHAP. VI. Of the ill Consequences of a Gonorrhoea Cured.
IN the preceding Chapter of a Gonorrhoea, The Consequences of a Gonorrhoea.
I showed you the accidents that Disease is subject to in its recency; I shall
now declare to you the sad consequences that attend it in its seeming
declension, when it is left imperfectly Cured, and is, as some of those Blades
call it, a weeping, only a weeping not worthy the keeping Chamber.

From which neglect of Cure, those seminals from whence the Gonorrhoea issued
are rendered more lax, and in progress of time the matter fermenteth upon the
old Leven, and becomes much more acrid and malign, discharging a matter, as at
first in the nature of a Gonorrhoea, heating and corroding the Vrethra, from
whence Caruncles do frequently arise, and are attended with many ill
consequences, of which I shall give you a relation, and begin it with that of a
Caruncle.

Caruncles are a sort of loose flesh, Caruncles.
arising in the Vethra frequently in the time of a Gonorrhoea, by reason of the
erosion made by that virulent arid matter; but if that Gonorrhoea be well
treated, the erosion is Cured, and those little grains of flesh dried up.
However their growth is then so small, as they are rarely taken notice of till
the declining of the Gonorrhoea, and then a small weeping with a few rags
appearing in the Urine gives the first suspicion of them.

If this matter be not timely dried up, the Caruncles increase, and a
difficulty of Urine gradually succeeds, and it comes forth forked, or in a
small stream dribling: but this happens in some people not till many years
after the Gonorrhoea; for they arising from a dry membranous part do grow
slowly (and do sometimes waste of themselves, or are washed off by the Urine)
upon which account that trouble in pissing happening sometime many years after
a Gonorrhoea, gives them occasion to suspect that it arises from gravel; and
as the Disease increases, it is thought the Stone, but by a searching candle a
more certain discovery is made, those Caruncles being to it so many rubs in the
way.

If at this time their Cure be neglected, Cornosity.
some drops of Urine, or in coitu the Seed remaining amongst these Caruncles,
heateth the part, and increases their growth, and not only renders them
Callous, but at length the whole ductus, and then it is called a carnosity;
which straitning the passage stops the virulent matter in its motion,
whereby it is forced back to the Seminals, in which case the Testicles for the
most part do suffer: but if it be the vesiculae seminales, or prostates which
are oppressed, they inflame, and by adhesion to the neighboring parts pass their
matter that way, sometimes through the tunicles of the Intestinum rectum, and
then the matter is discharged by stool; or it may be, the matter passes
through or near the podex, and then it is supposed a fistula in ano, and this
way the Urine is sometime discharged with it. These are the Ulcers which render
fistulae any scandalous. If the matter passes in perinaeo, for the most part
it perforates the Vrethra, sometime like a Flute, and the Urine comes
thereout, othertimes it corrupts within, and discharges the putrefaction
into the pelvis.

Whilst the Vrethra is straightened with a carnosity, the Urine is frequently
suppressed, and then the bladder endeavoring to disburthen it self becomes
subject to fluxion, and grows sometime carnous, and of a strange
preternatural shape, stretching out of the pelvis. In the opening such a
diseased Body, I saw the bladder adhering close to the upper part of the os
pubis, and that part of the peritonaeum. In another there was frequently
discharged a matter with the Urine not unlike corrupt Seed.

One riding a Journey was hurt by the stumbling of his Horse, and became so
indisposed, that he was brought back to Town. Physicians and Surgeons were
consulted, and supposed him bruised internally. They let him blood, and treated
him accordingly, but without success. The day after I was fetched to him, and
found him laboring with great oppression, shortness of breath, fainting, etc.
I viewed his body naked, and endeavored to inform my self of his bruise, but
there was no symptom of any. I seeing he was not likely to recover, took my
leave, and desired a Servant of the house to give me notice of his death. He
died that night, and I went the next morning and opened his Body. All the
Viscera were sound, and no blood extravasated, but within the pelvis I saw a
great quantity of purulent matter, like that which issues forth in a
Gonorrhoea. I divided the os pubis, and opened the pelvis, and saw near the
Prostates a bag broken, which I concluded to be one of the vesiculae seminales.
Upon search into the Vrethra, I found he had been long diseased with the
relics of a Gonorrhoea, viz. Caruncles and Carnosity.

The Female Sex do also extremely suffer upon the same account, the corrupt
seminal matter frequently excoriating the pudendum; whence excrescences of all
sorts do arise, and the sharp matter dropping from the matrix, frets and
ulcerates the external parts of the labies, etc. An instance of this sort you
may see in some of the following Observations.

The Vagina uteri is also sometimes excoriated, and excrescences frequently
grow there of great bigness, one whereof I took off very large of the shape of
a Mulberry.

In others I have seen the vagina uteri much ulcerated, and discharging great
quantity of fetid matter with pain and inflammation. The alae of the pudendum
of one were gangrened, but I removed that, and cicatrized several of the
Ulcers; but one Ulcer within the Vagina corroded into the bladder, and a
mortification followed, and put an end to her misery.

Another upon a suppression of that corrupt seminal matter was seized with a
dysuria: the cause not being discovered, the kidneys were blamed. The disease
increasing to a stranguria, a stone in the bladder was supposed. I was fetched
to make a search, but felt none. The accidents of pain, inflammations, etc.
increasing, she died. I opened her body, and saw the bladder, vagina uteri, and
intestinum rectum all gangrened: The musculi lumbares, and those of the abdomen
looked as if they had been parboyled: The rest of the viscera were reasonable
sound.

As from a suppression of that malign matter, apostemations do arise between
the interior Tunicles of the vagina uteri, so I have sometimes met with
scirrhous Tumors, which I have sometimes palliated by Antivenereals, when they
were thought Cancers. All these mischiefs increased to such height through the
ignorance in them that treated them.

Thus I have given you an account of the several symptoms as they arise one
upon the neck of another, by which you may distinguish how they differ.

The cause of them is also apparent, that they arise from a Gonorrhoea ill
managed.

The signs of Caruncles I have also showed you are discoverable by a searching
candle, they lying in the way give a stop to the candle in its motion to the
Bladder. Yet let not that make you over confident that there is no Stone in the
Bladder, for it frequently happens that there is also a Stone therein;
therefore you ought to inform your self of the peculiar symptoms of that
Disease before you oppose it. For so also from that Stone a dribling of the
urine is common, and in case of pain the urine comes forth forked and in a
small stream. But in Caruncles it comes forth more forcibly than in those of
the Stone, and they make much urine at a time, and are in ease after they have
urined, which does not happen in the Stone.

A Carnosity has the same signs that Caruncles have, but the urine being more
straightened by the carnosity makes the symptoms the more severe, insomuch as
there is frequently a pain in the glans, and in straining hard to urine there
accompanies it sometimes a prolapsus any, which are especial signs of the
Stone in the Bladder. But the preceding Gonorrhoea and symptoms of the
Caruncles will sufficiently guide you in making the distinction between them
two. To distinguish the Abscesses and Ulcers in Ano attending this Disease from
those which arise from the Hemorrhoids, the Treatise of Fistulae Any will
instruct you.

The extirpation of Caruncles is no easy work, Prognostic.
and if there be a Carnosity joined with it, the Cure is much more difficult.
And so accordingly as there are other symptoms complicated with them, so much
more is the Disease rendered deplorable and difficult to cure.

In the cure of this Disease the same method ought to be observed in Diet which
has been delivered in the cure of a Gonorrhoea; Cure.
also evacuations by Lenient Purgatives: At least you ought to begin with such
to prepare the body; as hordei mundati iij. rad. graminis, polypod. querc.
filicis foem. an. iv. scolopendrii utriusque, cichorei, endiviae cum toto,
adiant. hepaticae an Mj. cort. radic. cappar mediani fraxini, tamarisci an.
Mss. passular. ma. enucleat. iv. liquiritiae ras. j. sem. anisi, foenic. an.
ss. coq. in sufficienti quant. aq. font. ad lb iij. colatura calida infund. per
noctem fol. senae jss. agarici trochiscati, rhei electi an iij. santali
citrini, cinamomi an. ij. f. iterum expressio mediocris. and clarificetur cum
succo limon. and gutt. aliquot vitrioli. In colaturae xviij. dissolve cremoris
tartari iij. sir. de spina cervina ij. sir. ros. pallid. j. f. apozema. With
this or such like you may purge them five or six days, and let them blood if
you see cause. Emulsions and contemperating Juleps may also be of use to
mitigate the heat of Urine. Vomits are also of great use for revulsion, and
those of Turbith I have always observed to be most efficacious. All the
Antivenereals prescribed in the cure of Lues Venerea are proper here, we being
indeed often necessitated to salivate by Unction. After which drying Decoctions
and Sudorificks are proper as aforesaid, with purging; and after all we
conclude the cure with such as have virtue to heal and fortify the relaxed
seminals, of which sort these following are: Fol. menthae Miij. millefolii,
plantag. equiset. an. Mij. sem. 4. frigid. maj. confus. an. ij. sem. plantag.
acetosae, agni casti, canabis, papaver. albi an. ss. terebinth. Cypr. vj.
sacchari albis. lbj. lactis recent. C. ij. f. distillatio. Gum. guaiaci iij.
terebinth siccat. ij. rad. bistortae, tormentillae and nymphaeae pulv. an. j.
succini, coral. rub. margarit. lap. Gagati, ocul. pull. an iv. camphorae ss.
terebinth. Cypr. q. s. f. massa pilular. capiat ij. mane and hora somni,
superbibendo iij. vel 4. aq. superscriptae. Or, rad. tormentillae, bistorti,
symphyt. an. iij. succini alb. coral. rub. margarit. eboris, cornu cervi usti
an. j gum. guaiaci ij. sem. agni casti, canabin. papaver. albi, plantag.
acetosae an. j. sem. anisi, foenic. coriand. confect. an. iij. f. pulv. sumat
j. cum lact. viij. mane and vesperi. Gum. guaiaci not. ij. mastich. benzoin.
an. j. mer dull. sexies sublimat. j. bragrisiae ss. croci j. ol. absinthii gutt.
6. aloes rosati ad pondus omnium, and cum sufficienti quant. hals. not. f.
m^ssa pilular. de qua capiat j. singul. noctibus in forma pil. iv. colophoniae
ex terebinth Cypr. in aq. plantag. and ros. rub. ad duritiem coct. mastich.
granot. select. an. ss. gum. animae pellucidissimae, gum. guaiaci, benzoini,
succini albi an. ij. unguium alcis ij. bals. Tolutani jss. terebinth. e Chio
accipienda reliqua, quae in pulverem subtle. redact. in mortario calido misce,
addendo sub finem bragrisiae j. f. massa pil. ex qualibet j. formentur pil. iv.
and usui reserventur: harum capiat vj. quotidie mane and vesperi, superbibendo
haust. sequent. decoct. rad. sarsaparillae vj. cort. ligni sancti ij. sassafr.
rad. tormentilae an. jss. santali rub. citrini, ras. corn. cervi, rhinocerot.
flor. anthos an. ss. fol. agrimonii Mij. thae. chinae Mj. rad. liquiritiae jss.
maceris ij. f. omnium infus. and decoct. in aq. font. lbxij. ad tertiae partis
consumptionem pro potu ordinario. These were all prescribed by Sir Fra. Pruyean
to several Patients laboring of these Diseases under my hands.

Having thus offered to you Internals, we shall now proceed to show you the way
of extirpating these Caruncles. The methods thereto proposed by Authors are
various: I shall reduce them to two, viz. the one by medicaments, the other by
mere force with wax-candles, probes of Lead, Silver, or Steel to tear and break
them in pieces.

Whilst the Caruncle is recent, you may by the compression of a well
proportioned candle crush it to pieces, and by the use of moderate detergent
and exsiccant injections dry and heal the part: but if there be an issuing of
matter, as in virulent Gonorrhoea's, you must first remove that matter by
purging, etc. before you can hope to extirpate the Caruncles. Nay, if the
matter should flow much upon the use of the Candles, you must forbear further
proceeding with them, and make evacuation and revulsion of that peccant matter,
as has been aforesaid, and then proceed again in the work.

In order to the search, you may place the Patient sitting upon the side of his
bed, chair or stool, with his thighs opened, and his heels drawn back, so as he
do not press upon the perinaeum. He must also at the same time lean forward
with his body. Then make choice of a proportionable candle, and having smoothed
the end, and a little bended it, anoint it with oil (of Lilies if you please)
pass it gently in, and move it easily forward, that by the warmth it gets in
the ductus it may ply accordingly with it. If you meet with a stop, press
moderately; if it will not go by, draw it back, and take the exact distance the
Caruncle lies off, and mark it with your nail; then anoint it with Oil, and
pass it again into the urethra, and when you come at that stop, raise the penis
with the other hand; if it will not pass over that Caruncle, try another candle
made taper at the end: But if you be satisfied that it passes beyond the
Caruncle, it is a good sign, pull it out again; and if the parts be heated, you
may inject decoct. hordei, etc. and prepare your candles for the consuming the
Caruncle. The Medicaments I propose thereto are as follows: cort. mali
granat. acid. in umbra siccat. and pulveriz. ij. aluminis pulver. j. emplastri
de cerussa j. misce super ignem. Or, mer. praecipitat. rub. j. lap. calamin.
iij. vitrioli calcinati jss. empl. diachalcith. vj. ad ignem liquefacti. You
must scrape off the wax from the end of the candle, and dip the wiek in either
of the plasters whilst they are scalding hot; then after they are cold shape
them and smooth the ends for your use. This following Medicament has great
credit amongst Authors: aeruginis, auripigmenti, aluminis rochae, chalcitidis
an. iv. Infuse them in strong Vinegar, then grind them upon a Marble very fine,
dry it in the Sun, and temper it again with Wine-vinegar to the eighth time,
drying it each time till it has lost much of its corrosive quality. argenti
spum. ij. olei ros iv. coq. ad empl. consistentiam, then add of the abovesaid
powder ij. it being well mixed, and of a good consistence, you may dip the
bared ends of your candles in it for the abovesaid use. Your great care in this
work must be, that the emplaster be of such consistence as that it adhere as
firm to the wiek as the Wax, for otherwise it will cause vexatious work. I
commonly send a proportion of the foresaid Powder to my Wax Chandler who mixeth
it with a proportionable quantity of Wax, and makes me so many dozen of
Wax-Candles; which Candles being so medicated do very often serve me in wearing
off recent Caruncles, and also in cicatrizing the part.

If the Caruncles be of an older date, and be so big and tough that you cannot
pass with any of the Wax-Candles, forbear farther attempting it, and endeavor
by emollient Injections, Embrocations, etc. to supple and dilate the ductus.
Rad. althaeae, lilior. an. ij. sem. lini, foenugraeci contus. an. j. coq. in
aq. fontis ad lbij. Colaturae lbj. ol. amygd. dull. noviter extract. j. ms.
Inject some of it warm twice or thrice a day with a Syringe, having a thick
blunt Pipe. You may also foment the Perinaeum with the residue of the said
decoction; or he may sit upon a Close-stool over some of the same decoction, or
ex radic. and fol. althaeae, matric. viol. sem. lini, foenugraeci, flor. cham.
sambuci, meliloti, summitat. pulegii, origani, etc. When he comes off,
embrocate the Perinaeum with ol. ex pedibus bovinis, and apply over all some
such like Cerote. unguent. Agripp. dialth. oesipi, butyri recentis an. ij. ol.
lilior. amygd. dull. an. j. sem lini. alihae. pulver. an. vj. gum ammoniaci ij.
cerae q. s. To which may be added Argenti crudi extincti in terebinthina iij.
or that Emplaster ad salivationem. After three or four days make trial again
with a proportionable Candle, and if you can pass the Caruncle take the exact
mark and pass in a medicated one upon the Caruncle, and leave it remaining
there, cut off the end within an inch, and flat that end; then turn that broad
end over the top of the Glans, and fasten it close with a linen rag: you ought
to leave him more of the same Candles fitted for his use, that in case he urine
he may take it out and put in another. Whilst he puts in the Candle he must
stand somewhat stradling, and bow his Body forward, but as to his posture he
will make choice of that to his own convenience. The best time to begin this
work may be at night, the Candle being then likely to stay in its place without
disturbance. In the morning when you draw out the Candle inject some lenient
decoction, and pass in a white Wax-Candle of a proportionable bigness to the
other you drew out, to make good the way you have got, and yet to lenifie the
heat in the ductus; but if it be not disturbed, go on as you did to wash the
Caruncle.

But if after the use of Emollients you cannot pass the Caruncle, you may well
conclude it callous. In which case you may pass a Canula into the Vrethra to
that Caruncle, and whilst you hold that there steady, you may convey a grain of
caustic into the Canula, and press the caustic to it; and whilst you hold it
there, you will perceive its operation by the pressing forward of the Canula.
The Caruncle thus consumed, cast in a Lenient injection daily; and if you take
notice of his urine, you may see the separation of the sloughs as rags in it.
After which you may by the common medicated Candles wear away the remainder,
and with Injections cicatrize it. But if after the extirpation of one Caruncle
you meet with another behind it, and cannot pass it, nor a Canula so far as
where the Caruncle lies, you may then attempt it by the Leaden Probe. Anoint
it first, pass it to the Caruncle, then by pressing upon it break it off. You
must expect a bleeding, and it is not done without pain, the Vrethra being of
exquisite sense: that pain sometime accompanied with rigor and sevour. In
order to the stopping of the flux of blood you may inject the Royal
Stiptick-water with aq. plantag. ros. rub. etc. proportionably as you see
cause: or in case the pain be great, beat the white of an Egg with aq.
spermatis ranar. and inject it. Externally you may apply such like defensative.
boli Armen. sang. dracon. cort. granat. aurant. myrtil. balaust. pull. an. j.
acet. ros. ij. album. ovor. succor. plantag. equiset. q. s. ms. But I never saw
any inflammation or tumor arise from the use of these Probes. Fevour I have
sometime seen upon the use of them where there was no blood shed; in which case
bleed them in the Arm presently and prescribe Clysters, and forbear the use of
your Probes some days.

After you have torn off the Caruncle, and that the fear of inflammation is
over, you may make a search, and if the Caruncle be extirpated proceed in the
drying it to a Cicatrix, which may be by a solution of troch. albi Rhas. in any
of the forementioned distilled waters, or as I said with the Royal Stiptick. A
proportionable thick leaden probe of a fit length and flat head rubbed with
quick-silis also effectual. Small Probes are apt to be made brittle by the
Mercury and break within the Vrethra. But if you suspect some part of the
Caruncle remaining, use the medicated Candle, and it will not only waste it,
but dry it to a firm Cicatrix.

If there be carnosity with Caruncles, your way is to dilate and supple it by
Emollients as above said. If a suppression of urine happen, a large Clyster
suddenly injected up has frequently forced the Urine out of the Bladder: but
if that fail, a Catheter must help you, or an incision in Perinaeo through the
carnosity. If a flux of virulent matter be accompanying the Stranguria, the
last remedy is Salivation.

If by reason of the long continuance of the Disease the Vrethra be so
straightened with the carnosity and Caruncles, Abscess.
that the purulent matter cannot pass forth, which often happens when the Urine
does, you may well suspect an abscess will arise in some part; which if it
happen within, there is danger of putrefaction. If the matter raises a tumor
externally, and it do suppurate, yet it commonly leaves incurable Ulcers.
Therefore you ought upon the least suppression of this matter to make revulsion
by Antivenereals; yea rather than to fail, raise a Salivation, and prosecute
the Cure as his habit of body and greatness of the Disease requires. And the
while make way with Emollients to dilate the Vrethra, or give vent by incision
in Perinoae, timely to discharge the matter.

The female Sex are not subject to such external apostemations. The Caruncles
do not cause suppression, nor is the Vrethra so subject to them. Sometimes they
happen by a scalding of the urine, but they are of easier cure. Yet the
Pudendum is subject to excrescences of all sorts and figures. The Vagina Vteri
is also subject to Ulcers, Excoriation, Excrescences and scirrhous Tumors,
with great flux of humors, the Stranguria and Inflammation, etc. therefore
require your great care timely to resist them by Antivenereals. Mer. dulcis,
and those milder preparations being apt to lead the humors downwards are not
so effectual here as the rougher sort which vomit. How they are farther to be
treated by internals, and each disturbance removed or alleviated by external
Medicaments, you may see among the Observations following.

One of about 30 years of age, 1. Observation of a Caruncle.
troubled with a weeping and dribling in making urine, came to me. I suspecting
Caruncles made a search, and found two little rubs in my way, and behind the
Testicles in Perinaeo met a full stop, which the Candle would not pass; upon
which I drew it out. He had been purged sussiciently by other hands. I began
the Cure with cmollient Injections as above prescribed, and fomented and
embrocated the Perinaeum, and after a day or two I carried half a dozen of
medicated Candles and made another search and took a measure of the place where
the great Caruncle lay which made the full stop, and left him that Candle with
others, showing him how to pass them in, and encouraged him to make use of them
in my absence, and to try what progress he could make; also advising him to use
the Injection before and after the use of the Candle, and to continue the
Embrocation and Plaster as he saw cause. During which his body was kept soluble
by Clysters and healing Decoctions; also balsamic Pills were prescribed. After
three or four days I returned, and found the Patient had passed over the stop,
but he had a little heated the Vrethra by over-doing. I then left off the use
of the Oil in the Injection. He would have injected Milk, but I strictly forbad
that, in consideration of the mischief I have known it do in curdling in the
Bladder. After the heat was calmed, he used the Candles with more moderation,
keeping the passage open he had made. One night when he was going to bed I made
him a visit and brought with me some medicated Candles, and having first
flatted the upper end of one of them I passed it into the Vrethra and turned
that end over the Glans, and with a soft Linen cloth over it bound it close
on. He slept with it until toward morning, then pulled it out, and urined. In
the morning I made a search and sound the passage open. I injected some of the
emollient lotion and passed in one of the common searching Candles, and bound
it on as the former, and advised him to keep his Bed, or at least his Chamber
that day, and in case of urine to pull it out and inject a collyrium of aq.
plant. and sir. de ros. siccis, and to put in another Candle the same night
armed as before. By this method the main Caruncle wasted, and the lesser which
lay in the way to that was consumed by the passing and lying on of the same
Candles. I feeling no more rubs left off the use of the Candles, and sent him
an injection of aq. plantag. rubi, equiseti, wherein was dissolved a few grains
of lap. medicament. Crollii, by which the relics of the Excrescences were
dried up, as also the weeping, and the Patient remained cured. Thus by showing
the Patients how to use the Candles, they themselves have sometimes prosecuted
their Cures at a great distance from me with good success.

One having had many Gonorrhoea's and been frequently under Cure of Caruncles
came to me. 2. Observation.
Upon sight of the Penis I saw he had an issuing of much matter as in a
virulent Gonorrhoea. I made a search for my own satisfaction, and met with
several excrescences, and a full stop before I reached to the Perinaeum. The
Vrethra was tender and did not admit the Candle without pain. I began with the
letting him blood, and purged him the next morning with Whey, Manna and Cremor
tartari. After which I bathed him four or five times in warm water, keeping his
body soluble the while with Clysters, or a bole of cassia, ol. amygd. dull. sir.
viol. and the like. After he had done bathing I gave him 25 grains of mer. dull.
at night, and a Clyster the next day, and repeated the mer. dull. every other
day, and syringed him with a lotion of aq. plantag. with a solution of troch.
alb. Rhas. But afterward observing the mer. dull. not to answer my expectation,
it having as I perceived been no novelty to him, I gave him gr. 8. of turbith
min. which vomited him three or four times, and gave him half a dozen large
stools, by which I believed the Mercury he had taken before worked downward. I
ordered him a Clyster of milk cum vitel. ovor. that night to quiet his Bowels,
and another the next day, and the day after gave him 12 gr. of turbith miner.
which vomited him four or five times, and purged him twice or thrice. By the
repeating of this Medicament tiwce or thrice, intermitting three or four days
between, I lessened that flux of matter very much, but it making his chops sore
I purged it off with the bitter Decoction, and put him into a decoct. sarsae,
lig. lentis, rad. consolid bistort. etc. and gave him of that Electuary with
terebinth. sal. prunellae, etc. also Clysters of terebinth. sometimes at night
going to bed. Injections of lap. medicamentosi Crollii were afterward used, by
which the running ceased. I then made a search with a Candle, and having marked
the main stop I proceeded in the use of French Candles which were made Taper
fashion, and passed one over the great Caruncle bound in on, and left it lying
upon it, and directed the Patient to take it out upon occasion of urining, and
afterward to pass it again. By the use of that there was room made for the
application of my own Candles, which I armed with that composition of merc.
praecipitat. etc. and thereby did wear off that Caruncle. Afterward I met with
others, which I also extirpated the same way; and with the solution of lap.
medicamentosi Crollii and the use of Leaden Probes, I smoothed and cicatrized
them.

I was sent for one night to a man that labored of a suppression of Urine,
with great pain about the os pubis. I intended to have passed a Catheter, 3.
Observation.
but saw the head of the Glans hard as a Cartilage, and the entrance into the
Vrethra so narrow as I could scarce get in a small Probe. I was at a loss how
to relieve him. I presently caused a large pint of milk to be warmed for a
Clyster, and syringed it up quick, and of a sudden the urine forced its way out
in a great quantity. The Patient supposed himself to have the Stone, but I
assured him the contrary, his disease being Caruncles with carnosity, no better
than the Pox in those parts, and more difficult to cure than any of the
forementioned species of it. I let him blood that night and purged him the next
day with a decoction of Cassia, tamarind. etc. with an addition of Manna, sir.
ros. Damasc. and afterward bathed him three or four days, and then anointed
with the mercurial Unction his Legs, Arms and Perinaeum, etc. by which I raised
a salivation. It lasted about thirty days, during which he made urine with more
ease; yet upon search I found the Caruncles, but the carnosity in the Glans,
etc. resolved. During his salivating I cast emollient Injections into the
Vrethra daily, and afterward while he was in his course of sweating and
purging I began to work with the Candles, and made way with little difficulty
till I came into the Perinaeum, and there I spent some days in endeavoring to
pass a small taper-candle without success. Wherefore I attempted it by the
force of a Leaden Probe, and brake the Caruncle off. It bled 3 or 4 ounces, but
I stopped it by injecting aq. sper. ranar. with a few grains of lap.
medicament. Crollii, then embrocated the Perinaeum and parts about with ol.
ros. cum aceto, and applied an empl. e bolo over them. The next morning I found
he had not urined much better. I injected again, and passed in a Candle, and
perceived that Caruncle eradicated, but I met with another behind which I could
not pass, I again used Injections and passed in a taper-candle, by which I
gradually proceeded, and afterward by armed ones I freed that passage, and his
urine came away in a full stream. I prosecuted the cure with medicated Candles
and drying Injections, and continued the use of sudorifick decoctions and
astringent Pills till he was cured. Yet some while after he came to me again
complaining that there was a Caruncle near the end of the Bladder which
hindered his passing the Candle into the Bladder, such has been the complaint
of others, but that Caruncle was natural.

One came to me having had many Gonorrhoea's, 4. Observation.
and in his later years much difficulty in Urine. I made a search, and found he
had Caruncles, and one within half an inch of the entrance into the Vrethra. We
agreed upon the Method of Cure, and I was to begin my work the next day, but
heard not from him till about a year after. It seemed he had been that while in
other hands, who had proposed an easier method of Cure but sailed. Yet the
urinary passage was thereby more enlarged, so that the Patient could better
admit of the Candles, and was also the more observant to my Rules; but then
again there was a slux of matter which required to be removed. To which purpose
I began with a dose of turbith miner. and by the repeating of it made revulsion
and salivated him. During the Salivation I fomented and embrocated the
Perinaeum and injected emollient Decoctions, and by Candles prosecuted the
extirpation, passed the lesser Caruncle, and afterward pressing upon the
bigger with a proportionable big Candle I brake it, and permitted it to bleed,
and then passed a medicated Candle over that broken Caruncle, and by the
pressure of it wore that Caruncle off smooth. There was another Caruncle that
lay behind this in Perinaeo, which I also made way over by a taper-candle, and
afterward by the pressure of my medicated Candles I wasted them. During which
he passed through a course of purging, sweating, etc. and finished the Cure by
the use of Astringents as well inwardly as outwardly.

A Man who had been long diseased with a weeping Gonorrhaea was commended to me
for Cure. 5. Observation.
By making his urine and search I found that he had Caruncles. I proceeded by
Injections and Embrocations to make way for my Candles, and cleared my passage
into the Vrethra to the Perinaeum, and endeavored by taper-candles to make my
way over the rest. But the Patient not keeping his Chamber made my work irksome
to me. Whereupon one morning I took a Candle proportionable to the ductus, and
having smoothed one end I dipped it in Oil, and passed it readily to the
Caruncle, and whilst it was stiff I pressed hard upon the Caruncle to break it,
and did so; but at that very instant the Patient was seized with a rigor, and
in pulling it out the blood followedl. I Injected a solution of pull. bol.
Armen. in aq. sperm. ranar. and stopped the bleeding; but after that rigor the
Patient burned and lay distempered all night, and in the morning I found him in
a Fevour, yet he had no considerable pain in the urinary passage. I applied
Refrigerants externally to the Perinaeum, and let him blood, and consulted a
Physician. He was brought very weak by this Fevour, but recovered, (as I thank
God I never had one dyed upon this account.) From that time he would make no
more use of Candles, but put me upon the use of Injections, of which I tried
many sorts; the best was a solution of lap. medicament. Crollii, by which he
made water better, and to this day enjoys a good health.

One about 50 years of age who had labored long with Caruncles, 6. Observation.
finding his Urine to come daily much more difficultly away, sent for me. I
made a search and found a rub before I had entered an inch into the ductus. I
began by purging him with an opening apozeme of cassia, tamarind. rad. gran.
etc. and let him blood, then having relaxed the Vrethra by Emollients I
proceeded with the Candles, and by degrees made way till I came to a Caruncle
near the Testicles. I endeavored to pass that with taper-candles, and after
some while made way and applied armed ones for some days, and wore that
Caruncle down, and passed in toward the Perinaeum, where the passage was
extremely strait, and a Caruncle stopped our going forwards. In pressing upon it
the Patient was immediately seized with a rigor. I pulled out the Candle
whole, and without blood. The next day I found my Patient in bed without pain
or Fevour; yet I let him blood, and gave him a Clyster. The day after I purged
him with the aforesaid Apozeme. The next day I made a search, and passing a
Wax-Candle into that strait passage he began again to fall into a rigor.
Whereupon I desisted, and contented my self in the making good the way I had
gotten by putting in a proportionable thick Leaden Probe (which had been rubbed
with Quicksilver) some days, which Probe had a flat head as broad as a
threepence to retain it from slipping in. I repeated the use of Emollients and
mercurial Emplasters to the Perinaeum, and withal made revulsion by a vomit of
turbith mineral. and by repeating it I raised a Salivation, which lasted longer
than I intended, but it served my purpose so well as I afterward made way over
that Caruncle in Perinaeo without danger, and by armed Candles wasted it. Then
with detergent Injections and medicated Candles smoothed and healed the ductus,
and left him a free and easy passage for his Urine, and concluded that course
of Physic with purging, sudorificks, etc.

I was fetched to a young Woman who had been long diseased with a Gonorrhoea,
7. Observation of excrescences.
and cured thereof, but from the internal excoriation thereby the pudendum was
overspread with many excrescences of a spongie soft flesh of different size
and shape. Those on the more external parts were callous. I prescribed the
injection of summitat. rubi, etc. and let her blood, purged her with whey and
manna, and afterward with the bitter decoction, sometime giving her a j.
calomel. over night in a Bolus with cons. borraginis. Having thus as I thought
prepared her body, I began to proceed in the extirpating of the excrescences,
but observing the fluxion great, I deferred the work, and made revulsion by a
dose of turbith. mineral. which the third day after I repeated again, and
between while prescribed Clysters and lenient purgatives, and added unguent.
Aegyptiacum to the injections. By this method I diverted the fluxion, and began
my work with the cutting off those excrescences in the most external parts, and
eradicated them by caustic stone, and ol. vitrioli, and so proceeded with one
after another as they lay in my way till I was prevented with the bleeding of
them. Then washed the parts with oxycrate, and stopped the blood with dossils
dipped in a solution of lap. medicament. some hours after; the bleeding being
stopped, I rubbed the remaining roots of them which I had cut off with a vitriol
stone, then with a pair of scissors or knife, according as they were seated cut
off the rest, and stopped the bleeding as before, and from that time consumed
the remaining roots by the help of the vitriol stone, oil of vitriol or
caustic stone, and appeased the pained parts with decoct. hordei, sem.
cydonior. etc. and afterward cicatrized the ulcerations, as has been
elsewhere showed in the like cases. But it was a difficult work, and not
effected without turbith mineral. which was repeated often, and afterward
decoct. sarsae, sweating and purging, etc. finished the Course.

A Woman of about forty years of Age, of a full body, 8. Observation of a
scirrhous tumor in Vagina uteri.
having been some years diseased in the matrix, as was supposed with a Cancer,
consulted me; I made a search, and felt a hard Tumor on the right side of the
Vagina Vteri of the bigness of a Pullets egg fixed between the Tunicles,
neither ulcerated nor painful to the touch, yet there seemed to discharge much
serous matter from thence. There was also a descent of the Vterus. Upon a
further enquiry into the cause of this Tumor, I perceived she had been
frequently subject to diseases in those parts, and that they were Venereal.
Upon which account I supposed this Tumor to be so, and having well informed my
self that the courses of Physic she had taken before were upon another
account, I presuming a better success by Antivenereals attempted the Cure, and
began with Venesection, taking about viij. of blood from her Arm. That day a
Clyster was administered, and the next day I purged her with elect. diacassiae
cum j. calomel. and afterward repeated calomelanos three or four times every
other night j. with cons. ros. rub. and prescribed her an emulsion ex sem. 4.
frigid. maj. cum sem. papaver. alb. etc. in a decoct. sarsae, aromatizing it
with aq. cinamomi hordeat. and sweetened it with Sugar. I also prescribed this
injection: fol. plantag. virg. aureae, alchimillae an. Mj. summit. centaur.
utriusque an. Pj. rad. iridis ij. coquantur in aq. fabror. ad lb iij. colaturae
add sir. de rosis siccis, and de pilosella an. ij. injiciatur mane and
vesperi. Afterward observing that the calomel. did work downwards, and
rendered the pudendum more slabby, I gave her a dose of turbith. min. ss. which
vomited her four or five times, and purged her as often. I repeated it the
fourth day, and perceiving the revulsion it made, I increased the dose, and
gave it the third day after, and again till it salivated her, and thereby took
off the fluxion and pains. In the declining of her Salivation, I put her to the
drinking of a decoct. sarsae, and purged and sweat her with Bezoard. min. gum.
guaiaci, etc. and by a strict diet concluded the course, and resolved that
Tumor as she then thought. Whether it totally discussed I know not, but she
has continued since very well.

A Man aged about fifty years, 9. Observation of a Gangreen upon suppression of
Urine.
by the suppression of Urine and virulent matter was gangrened on the right
Testicle, and that part of the perinaeum lying next to it, the Urine passing
thereforth. I scarified the gangrened parts, washed out the blood with salt
water, filled the incisions with merc. praecipitat. and dressed it up with
unguent. Aegyptiac. hot, with a Cataplasm over all of medul. panis triticeae,
pull. summitat. absinth. scordii, etc. decocted in Brandy-wine. I then let the
Patient blood, prescribed him a Clyster, and a Cordial Julep. The next day I
saw the Escar separating in perinaeo, and was satisfied that the Urine came all
that way. I fomented with the Fotus prescribed in the Chapter of Gangreen, and
dressed it with unguent. basilicon, and a few drops of ol. terebinth. mixed
with it, and continued the use of the Cataplasm. By these applications the
slough separating I deterged with mundif. Paracels. and purged the Patient with
elect. lenitiv. and calomel. and prescribed him a decoct. sarsae. After
detersion I incarned with the smae mundificative, adding to it pull. thuris,
sarcocollae, myrrhae, aloes and sir. de ros. siccis, and with the Vitriol Stone
dried the loose flesh, and cicatrized it with aq. calcis, etc. In the time of
incarning his urine passed somewhat by the natural way, and at the last it
passed better. The Cure was finished by purging, sweating, etc. as I am
accustomed to do in such cases. He is since married to a young Woman.

In the year 1652. 10. Observation.
at my return to London from the Battle at Worcester, I somewhile assisted that
most excellent Surgeon the deceased Mr. Ed. Molins in dressing his Patients;
amongst which I saw his Practice in the most difficult cases of this Disease,
whereof I shall give you one of his Operations.

An Old Fornicator, hoaving been long diseased with a Carnosity, which had
resisted all endeavors, and in a manner totally suppressed his Urine, sent for
him; he went, and caused the Patient to be taken out of Bed, and placed upon a
Table, with his Legs drawn up, as in cutting for the Stone; be cut into the
Vrethra near the neck of the Bladder, it was hard as a gristle. His knife did
not readily divide it, but so soon as he had, the Urine gushed out, which being
discharged, he put his finger into the Vrethra, and afterward enlarged the
incision upward more to the Scrotum, then dressed it up with his green Balsom
warm, by which in few days it digested, and the Patient was relieved: the lips
grew also daily softer, and the wound healed apace, but all this while the
Urine had no other passage, the common ductus being so closed up by reason of
the Carnosity, that we could not make any way into it with our smallest probes
or candles. Upon which consideration it was thought necessary to keep this
opening in perinaeo for the discharge of Urine, and in order thereto it was
dressed up with a Dossil, an Emplaster and Compress, which the Patient took off
at times to ease Nature. But this not satissying him, he frequently complained
of his unhappy condition; insomuch that Mr. Ed. Molins being wearied with the
Patient's solicitation, took me one morning along with him, where again he
placed the Patient as before, and attempted to make a way from the Apex into
the Vrethra, but it was in vain. Whereupon he caused one of his Servants to
hold the one leg, and my self the other while he took up the Testicles, and put
the one into my hand, and the other he placed in the hand of his Servant; then
with his knife divided the Scrotum in the middle (we holding each Testicle the
while in our hands) and cutting into the Vrethra slit it the whole length to
the incision in perinaeo; then with a needle and thread stitch the skin over
the Vrethra, as also the Scrotum, leaving the Testicles covered, as before, and
dressed them with agglutinatives, by which they were cured in few days: But the
Urine nevertheless continued to flow by the opening in perinaeo.

A lean withered old Man, near seventy years of Age, 11. Observation
having in his younger years had many Gonorrhoea's, complained in his later
years of difficulty in making his urine, and that he vioded much matter. He
sent for me, and would needs have his disease to be the Stone, and that matter
to proceed from an ulcer in his bladder. I endeavored to inform him better,
but observing him so wise, I was well enough contented he should report it so,
and concerned my self no further with him, than by the prescribing him an
emulsion. About a year after, his urine being in a manner suppressed he sent for
me again; I made a search, and found the entrance into the Vrethra eaten away
below the fraenum with part of the prepuce, and the passage there into the
ductus difficult to find; and after I got in, it was so strait and stuffed with
Caruncles, that I could make no way either by probe or wax-candle. I ordered
him presently a Clyster, supposing thereby to force the Urine out; but it would
not. I then proposed the cutting into the ductus below, but he would not. The
retention of the matter in the seminals soon after raised a Tumor beneath the
Scrotum, which being exceeding painful, he was contented I should make an
opening to let his Urine out. I placed him in a clear light, with his legs
drawn up, as in the former Observation has been said, and made incision into
the Vrethra near the neck of the bladder: which having done, and satisfied my
self by my finger, and discharge of his Urine, that I had made opening enough,
I dressed him up with the Spanish Balsom, there being no blood lost in the
work, save what came from the skin, the Vrethra it self being cartilagineous.
From that time I only dressed the wound with a dossil dipped in the smae Balsom,
and applied a pledget over it, with an emplast. diachalcith. and bandage to
retain it on. To the swelling above I applied a Cataplasm ex ra. and fol.
hyoscyami, cicutae, etc. by which the Tumor resolved, the matter indeed
discharging with the Urine by the opening. There was not much care taken in
dressing this Ulcer, for in seven or eight days it contracted, and being
callous could not unite, if the Urine would have permitted it, but it had no
other passage. The Patient was hereby greatly relieved, and had no other
trouble but to Urine this way, which I thought he would have been well pleased
with, and rejoiced in the having such an easy discharge: Yet after some months
he made me many visits, maundring as if I had done him a discourtesie in
leaving such an opening. Whereupon to quiet him, I gave him some searching
candles, and wished him to go home, and try if he could find any passage from
the Apex into the Vrethra to the Bladder; if he could, I would readily heal
that Ulcer in perinaeo, otherwise I wished him to consider how he would Urine:
upon which he became more satisfied. He lived some years after, and died of Old
Age.

One having been long troubled with a difficulty in Urine, 12. Observation.
was at last seized with a Tumor in perinaeo hard and painful. I was fetched,
and seeing it would tend to suppuration, I dressed it with a Cataplasm ex rad.
althae. lilior. etc. and having suppurated it, I opened it by incision, and
discharged a quantity ofmatter. In the dressing of it daily I observed much
gleet, which I discovered after a while to be Urine mixed with the matter, and
upon search found Caruncles in his Vrethra. I perceiving the cause of the
abscess proceeded in the Cure with candles, etc. as has been set down in the
method of Cure; and having cleared that passage, and made a free way for the
Urine, I made search into the abscess, and laid it open by incision according
to the length of the perinaeum, and from that time hastened the incarning and
agglutination of the Ulcer as well by internals as externals, and in few weeks
cicatrized it smooth and firm.

One having contracted a Gonorrhoea beyond Sea, 13. Observation.
and not being well Cured thereof, in progress of time Caruncles arose, and a
difficulty of Urine followed. After he had spent some time in endeavoring his
Cure abroad, he returned toward England; but in his journeying through those
hot Countries, an abscess arose amongst the seminals, and discharged its matter
under the pubis, and afterward between the Testicles, and in three or four
places of the perinaeum, and on both sides of it, by reason of which the
Patient lay long by the way, and was at last with much difficulty brought to
London. Sir Fr. Pr. and my self were sent for. We saw the Patient miserably
emaciated, and so diseased as I have said. Decoctions of sarsa, with Pectorals,
Emulsions, Cordial Juleps, Balsamicks, also lenient purgatives with calomel.
were prescribed, and much pains was taken in the Surgery, but he not being
capable of the great Remedies our work proved unsuccessful, and he removed into
some of the neighboring Villages to drink Asses milk, and to try how he could
nourish himself in the fresh Air, where I think he died.

Another who had spent his younger days loosely, 14. Observation.
languished in his old age with a carnosity, whereby the Urine was straightened in
its passage forth, and the seminal vessels within the pelvis corrupting
inflamed the neighboring tunicles of the rectum intestinum, and passed its
matter into that gut and discharged it by stool; yet not so entirely, but that
it afterward made a way lower out between the anus and perinaeum, by which ways
he had also pollutios. His case was deplorable, but the way to cure him if
possible had been to have made revulsion and evacuation of that matter by
Salivation, and afterward by laying open those sinus's as in fistula any: but
his was a poor man and not governable. He lived some years by the charitable
assistance of Mr. Ed. Molins and my self, and at last was found dead in the
street.

The same year I came from the Wars to London, I was sent for to one who
labored of an abscess in ano. 15. Observation.
He discharged a purulent matter in great quantity. I consulted the late
deceased Mr. Ed. M. who upon search with his finger in ano concluded it to
arise from some abscess in the prostates, and to be the effects of a Gonorrhoea
ill cured. Which being confessed, we dressed the Ulcer, and prescribled some little
remedies. A day or two after we met again, made a search with a Candle into the
Vrethra, and discovered Caruncles, which was also apparent by his pissing. The
Patient was much pained by the searching, and desired that work might be
forborne till this Ulcer in ano was better disposed. Upon which my friend
declined his visits. The discharge of that virulent matter fretted the parts
without, and enlarged the opening into the rectum intestinum, so as upon
passing my finger in ano I felt it, and by a curved Probe, found the sinus tend
to the perinaeum. Upon which part I applied a caustic, and afterward made
incision into the lower part of the sinus, whereby the matter was partly
discharged. But the had little advantage thereby, his disease being Venereal
required a severe course of phsick: but he not submitting to it, the matter
afterward apostemated that buttock, and discharged it self through many
orifices. He lived seventeen years thus and followed his employment abroad.

One having been many years afflicted with the relics of a Gonorrhoea, it at
length brake its way downward and raised an abscess under the pubis, 16.
Observation.
and through want of sufficient vent corroded the Vrethra, so that his Urine
came thereout. He had also a continual weeping of a virulent matter by the
penis, and passed his urine in a small stream and frequently forked. I began
the Cure with a purging decoct. of cassia and tamarind, etc. then let him
blood, and afterward purged him with pull. cornichini and mer. dull. and repeated
it once in three days: all which time he continued his own way of dressing the
Ulcer with precipitate. But after I had a while purged him with Mercurials I
scraped off the crusted precipitate, and dressed it up with Pledgets dipped in
tinctura vitrioli, and applied a compress over them with good bandage, and
renewed the dressings once in three or four days, during which I gave him 10
grains of turbith mineral. by which I made revulsion of that peccant matter.
The second day I repeated the turbith, and gave him another dose of the same
the third day after, and purposed to have raised a Salivation; but finding the
Patient not able to bear any thing of that kind I forbore the further
proceeding thereby, and by Clysters and lenient purgers carried the matter
downward. The Ulcer being cicatrized and the callus resolved, I threw off the
bandage, and concluded him well thereof. Whilst I purged him to carry off the
Salivation he spit the more, and his mouth grew sore, which put me upon
indulging him the longer, but as his mouth healed I purged him again, and kept
him to the drinking a decoction of sarsaparilla, etc. and began to make way
with Candles to extirpate the Caruncles; but the fistulous Ulcer being cured,
he would not believe the extirpating the Caruncles necessary. Wherefore I
submitted to his pleasure, and finished that course of Physic.

FINIS.
A TABLE Of the several OBSERVATIONS In the Eight foregoing TREATISES.
TREATISE I. Of Tumors. CHAP. III. Of Inflammation, or Phlegmon.
Observation 1. OF the beginning of a Phlegmon in the right Hip Page 17 2. the
beginning of a Phlegmon in the right Breast, occasioned by the biting of a
Coach-horse ibid. 3. a Phlegmon beginning in the Thigh Page 18 4. a Phlegmon
beginning in the Thigh with Herpes ibid. 5. a Phlegmon in the Thigh discussed
ib. 6. a Phlegmon in the Arm discussed ib. 7. a Phlegmon in the Arm suppurated
Page 19 8. a Phlegmon in the Breast of a maid suppurated Page 20 9. a Phlegmon
in the Hip ibid. 10. a Phlegmon in the Hip gangrened by improper applications
Page 21 11. a Phlegmon gangrened after opening ibid. 12. a Phlegmon beginning
in the Arm by too strict Bandage ib. 13. a Phlegmon by over-strict Bandage Page
22 14. a Phlegmon by over-strict Bandage gangrened ibid. 15. Phlegmon
erysipelatodes Page 23 16. the like ibid. 17. a Phlegmon by Translation ib. 18.
casus non vulgaris de Sarcomate in arteria axillari reperto Page 24

CHAP. IV. Of Tumors from Milk.
Observation 1. Of Apostemation in the Breast after Childbed Page 27 2. the
like ibid. 3. the like ib. 4. the like Page 28 5. the like in both Breasts Page
29

CHAP. V. Of Abscesses, etc. arising from Distempers of the Vterus in Childbed.
Observation 1. Of an Abscess in Inguine, etc. after Childbed Page 30 2. an
Abscess in planta pedis after Childbed ibid. 3. an Abscess in Abdomine after
Childbed Page 31 4. an Abscess in the Thigh after Childbed Page 32 5. the
like Page 33 6. several Abscesses after Childbed ibid.

CHAP. VI. Of an Erysipelas.
Observation 1. Of Erysipelas in the Arm after venaesection Page 37 2.
Erysipelas upon a Fontanell, and its consequences Page 38 3. Erysipelas in an
Asthmatick person ibid. 4. Erysipelatodes in the Leg Page 39 5. Erysipelatodes
with a small Phlegmon ibid. 6. Erysipelas repelled Page 40 7. Erysipelas in the
Face ibid. 8. Erysipelas on the Head suppurated ib. 9. Erysipelas in the Face
Page 41 10. Erysipelas on the Ear ibid. 11. Erysipelas in the Face, and
suppurated in the lower Eyelid ib.

CHAP. VII. Of a Furuncle or Boil.
Observation 1. Of a Furuncle on the Wrist Page 42 2. a Furuncle on the Thigh
Page 43 3. a Furuncle on the Nose ibid.

CHAP. VIII. Of Epinyctis and Terminthus.
Observation 1. Of Epinyctis on the Arm Page 44 2. Epinyctis on the Wrist ibid.
3. Terminthus on the Knuckle Page 45

CHAP. IX. Of Inflammatory Tumors of the Glandules.
Observation Of Phyma. 1. Of Phyma under the right Jaw Page 46 2. the like ibid.
Of Phygethlon ib. Of Bubo. Of tumefaction of the Glands in Inguine, occasioned
by a Fontanel in the Leg Page 47 1. Of a Bubo in the right Axilla Page 48 2. a
Bubo in inguine with its consequences ibid.
Of Parotis. 1. Of a Parotis after a fall. Page 50 2. a Parotis behind the
right Ear ibid. 3. the like ib. 4. a Parotis behind the left Ear Page 51 5. a
Parotis behind the right Ear ibid. 6. a Parotis behind the left Ear ib.

CHAP. X. Of a Carbuncle.
Observation 1. Of a Carbuncle on the Back Page 53 2. a Carbuncle on the right
Breast Page 54

CHAP. XI. Of Paronychia.
Observation Of Paronychia benigna. 1. Of Paronychia about the inside and root
of the Nail Page 56 2. Paronychia on one side the Nail ibid. 3. Paronychia on
the pulp of the Thumb ib. 4. Paronychia under the forepart of the Nail and
Finger ib.
Of Paronychia maligna. 1. Of Paronychia in the pulp of the Forefinger ib. 2.
the like ib. 3. Paronychia in the pulp of the Thumb Page 57 4. Paronychia in
the Forefinger ibid. 5. the like ib. 6. the like Page 58 7. Paronychia on the
first joint of the Finger ibid. 8. Paronychia in the Forefinger ib.

CHAP. XII. Of Pterygion.
Observation 1. Of an Excrescence about the nail of the Forefinger Page 60 2.
Excrescence on the Thumb-nail ibid. 3. Vlceration about the nail of the great
Toe Page 61 4. the like ibid. 5. the like ib. 6. the like Page 62

CHAP. XIII. Of Pernio.
Observation 1. Of Chilblanes and Kibes Page 63 2. Chilblanes in Face, Ears and
Hands ibid. 3. Kibes Page 64

CHAP. XV. Of an Ecchymosis.
Observation 1. Of Ecchymosis on the Shin Page 68 2. Ecchymosis on the left Leg
Page 69 3. Ecchymosis on the Arm ibid. 4. Ecchymosis on the left Thigh ib. 5.
Ecchymosis on the left Side, Hip and Arm Page 70

CHAP. XVI. Of an Aneurisma.
Observation 1. Of Aneurisma near the trachea arteria Page 73 2. Aneurisma on
the inside of the Leg ibid. 3. Aneurisma on the forepart of the Thigh Page 74
4. Aneurisma in the Arm Page 75 5. the like; with the deligation of the Artery
Page 76

CHAP. XVII. Of an Herpes.
Observation 1. Of an Herpes behind the Ear Page 79 2. an Herpes on the Breast,
etc. ibid. 3. an Herpes on the right Hand ib. 4. an Herpes on the right Leg
Page 80 5. Herpes miliaris in the palm of the Hand ibid. 6. Herpes miliaris in
the sole of the Foot. ib. 7. Herpes miliaris and simple Herpes ib.

CHAP. XVIII. Of Oedema.
Observation 1. Of a pituitous swelled Hand Page 83 2. an oedematous swelled
Leg Page 84 3. oedematous swelled Legs and Feet Page 85 4. an oedematous
swelled Thigh ibid. 5. an oedematous swelling with Apostemation Page 86 6. an
Oedema in the Thigh Page 87 7. the like ibid. 8. phlegmatic Tumors in the
Thigh and Ischion ib. 9. an Oedema in the Belly Page 88 10. another Tumor in
the Belly ibid.

CHAP. XIX. Of a Scirrhus.
Observation 1. Of Scirrhus in the Legs Page 93 2. Scirrhus under the lower Jaw
caused by a Fracture ibid. 3. Scirrhus on the outside of the right Thigh Page
94 4. Scirrhus on the Breast, etc. ibid.

CHAP. XX. Of Warts and Corns.
Observation Of Warts. 1. Of a Wart extirpated Page 96 2. the like ibid. 3. a
Wart on the joint of the Finger, with the ill consequences of it ib.
Of Corns. 1. Of a soft Corn Page 97 2. the like ibid. 1. Of Apostemation from
a Corn ib. 2. the like Page 98 3. the like ibid. 4. the like; with the ill
consequence of it ib.

CHAP. XXI. Of a Cancer.
Observation Of varieties of Cancers Page 99, 100, 101 1. Of a cancerous Gland
in the Breast Page 105 2. a cancerous Gland in the left Breast ibid. 3. a
cancerous Gland in the right Breast Page 106 4. a cancerous Gland behind the
Ear ibid. 5. a cancerous Gland in the left Breast ib. 6. a cancerous Gland in
the Breast, the extirpation attempted by Caustic ib. 7. a Cancer in the right
Breast Page 107 8. a cancerous Breast cut off Page 108 9. a cancerous Breast
cut off ibid. 10. a Cancer in the left Breast Page 109 11. a Cancer on the
right Side near the Breast Page 110 12. a cancerous Tumor on the Breast Page
111 13. a cancerous Tumor on the Head ibid. 14. a Cancer on the left Cheek
Page 112 15. a cancerous Excrescence of the lower Jaw ibid. 16. a Cancer on the
Jaw Page 113 17. a Cancer under the Tongue Page 115 18. a Cancer on the Tongue
Page 116


CHAP. XXII. Of Noli me tangere.
Observation Of a Noli me tangere on the Cheek Page 118

CHAP. XXIII. Of Waterish Tumors.
Observation 1. Of Ascites Page 122 2. the like ibid. 3. the like Page 123 4.
Anasarca in the Legs and Feet ibid. 5. Anasarca in the Legs Page 124 6. a
watery Tumor in the Back ibid.
Of Hydrocele. 1. Of Hernia aquosa with Anasarca and Ascites Page 126 2. Hernia
aquosa with Anasarca Page 127 3. an Ascites with anasarcous Swellings in
Scroto, etc. ibid. 4. Hydrocele Page 129 5. the like ibid. 6. the like ib. 7.
the like Page 130 8. Hydrocele returned Page 130 9. Hydrocele with Sarcomata of
both Testicles ibid. 10. the like Page 131
Of Hydrocephalus. 1. Observation of it Page 133 2. of the same ibid. 3. of the
same ib. 4. of the same Page 134

CHAP. XXIV. Of Scabs and Itch.
Observation 1. Of Itch and Scabs Page 136 2. the like ibid. 3. the Itch ib. 4.
the like ib. 5. the like Page 137 6. Scabs and Itch ibid.

CHAP. XXV. Of Lepra, or Elephantiasis.
Observation 1. Of Elephantiasis on the left Brow Page 138 2. Elephantiasis in
the Arms, etc. Page 139 3. Elephantiasis from Head to Foot ibid.

CHAP. XXVI. Of Gutta Rosacea.
Observation Of Flushing in the Face with red Pimples Page 142
CHAP. XXVII. Of Flatuous Tumors.
Observation 1. Of a flatuous Tumor on the right Thigh Page 145 2. a flatulent
Tumor on the outside of the Thigh ibid. 3. the like ib. 4. a flatulent Tumor
on the Knee ib. 5. a flatulent Tumor round the Rotula ib. 6. a flatulent
Tumor on the Knee Page 146 7. a flatulent Tumor near the Toes ibid.

CHAP. XXVIII. Of Hernia.
Observation 1. Of Bubonocele and Hernia ventosa Page 154 2. Hernia
intestinalis Page 155 3. Hernia intestinalis by Relaxation ibid. 4. Hernia
intestinalis Page 156 5. the like ibid. 6. the like ib. 7. Hernia ventosa ib.
8. the like ib. 9. the like Page 157 10. the like ibid. 11. Bubonocele ib. 12.
the like ib. 13. the like Page 158 14 the like ibid. 15. the like ib. 16.
Hernia intestinalis Page 159 17. the like ibid. 18. the like ib. 19. Hernia
umbilicalis ib. 20. four several Herniae ib. 21. Hernia umbilicalis Page 160

TREATISE II. Of ULCERS. CHAP. II. Of a Simple Ulcer.
Observation 1. OF a Simple Ulcer in the Leg Page 170 2. the like ibid.

CHAP. III. Of Ulcers with Intemperies.
Observation Of an Ulcer with hot Intemperies Page 172 an Ulcer with cold
Intemperies Page 173 an Ulcer with moist Intemperies Page 174 an Ulcer with dry
Intemperies Page 175

CHAP. IV. Of Ulcers with Pain.
Observation 1. Of an Ulcer on the Shin Page 177 2. an Ulcer on the Arm with
Pain from Sordes ibid. 3. an Ulcer on the Thigh with Pain from Putrefaction
Page 178 4. an Ulcer in the Arm with Pain from a Fontanell dried up ibid.

CHAP. V. Of Ulcers with Fluxion.
Observation 1. Of an Ulcer on the right Leg with Fluxion Page 180 2. an Ulcer
on the left Leg with Fluxion ibid.

CHAP. VI. Of Ulcers with Hypersarcosis.
Observation Of an Ulcer with loose Flesh Page 182
CHAP. VII. Of Ulcers with Caries in the Bones.
Observation 1. Of an Ulcer in the Thigh with Caries Page 185 2. an Ulcer with
Caries in the Tibia and Fibula of the right Leg Page 186 3. an Ulcer with
rotten Bones in the Hand Page 187 4. an Ulcer in the Jaw Page 188

CHAP. VIII. Of Ulcers with Callous Lips, etc.
Observation 1. Of an Ulcer on the Ancle with callous Lips Page 189 2. the like
Page 190

CHAP. IX. Of Putrid Ulcers.
Observation 1. Of a putrid Ulcer on the Leg Page 191 2. a putrid Ulcer on the
Calf of the Leg ibid.

CHAP. X. Of Phagedaena, Nomae, Dysepulota.
Observation 1. Of an Ulcer on the Ancle hard of cure Page 194 2. an ulcer on
the Leg hard of cure Page 195 3. the like ibid. 4. a phagedaenous corrosive
Ulcer Page 196 5. the like Page 197 6. the like Page 198 7. an Herpes exedens
Page 199

CHAP. XI. Of Ulcers with Varices.
Observation 1. Of an Ulcer in the Leg Page 200 2. Ulcers with Varices in both
Legs ibid. 3. a varicous Ulcer on the left Leg Page 201 4. a Varix in the right
Breast ibid. 5. a varicous Ulcer with great tumefaction ib.

CHAP. XII. Of Sinuous Ulcers.
Observation 1. Of a Sinuous Ulcer in the Leg Page 203 2. a Sinuous Ulcer
penetrating the right Breast Page 204 3. an Ulcer penetrating the Breast ibid.
4. Sinuous Ulcers on the left Side penetrating Page 105 5. a Sinuous Ulcer in
the Breast ibid. 6. a Sinuous Ulcer penetrating the left Kidney ib. 7. a
Sinuous Ulcer penetrating the right Side Page 206

TREATISE III. Of DISEASES of the ANVS. CHAP. I. Of Haemorrhoids.
Observation OF caecae or blind Haemorrhoids. 1. Observation of them Page 216
2. of the same ibid. 3. of external Haemorrhoids Page 217 4. the like ibid. 5.
the like Page 218
Of apertae or bleeding Haemorrhoids. 1. Observation of them ibid. 2. of the
same ib. 3. of the same ib.


CHAP. II. Of Procidentia Any.
Observation 1. Of a Procidentia Any Page 220 2. the like ibid. 3. the like ib.
4. the like Page 221 5. the like ibid.

CHAP. III. Of Condyloma, Ficus, etc.
Observation 1. Of Rhagades, Ficus, Thymi Page 223 2. a preternaturall Body
growing from the Os coccyx extirpated Page 224

CHAP. IV. Of Phyma.
Observation 1. Of an external Phyma Page 225 2. the like ibid. 3. Phyma Page
226

CHAP. V. Of Sinuous Ulcers and Fistulae in Ano.
Observation 1. Of a Sinuous Ulcer Page 229 2. the like Page 230 3. the like
ibid. 4. a Fistula in Ano Page 231 5. an Ulcer in Ano ibid. 6. a Fistula in Ano
Page 232 7. the like Page 233 8. the like ibid. 9. the like Page 234 10. a
putrid and fistulous Ulcer in Ano Page 236 11. an Ulcer in Intestino recto with
stricture of the Anus Page 237 12. a Sinuous Ulcer near the Anus Page 239 13.
an ill-conditioned Ulcer in Ano Page 240 14. a Cancer in Ano Page 241

TREATISE IV. Of the KING's EVIL. CHAP. IV. Of the method of Curing the Evil.
Observation Of Discussion. 1. OF Strumae discussed Page 264 2. the like Page
265 3. Vitiligo and Strumae ibid. 4. Strumae ib. 5. the like ib. 6. the like
Page 266 7. Discussion and Suppuration mixed ibid. 8. the effects of Merc.
dulcis in Children ib.
Of Suppuration. 1. Of Struma suppurated Page 267 2. the like ibid. 3. the like
ib.
Of Incision. 1. Of Incision of a Meliceris Page 268 2. Incision of an Atheroma
ibid. 3. Incision of a Steatoma ib. 4. the like ib. 5. a Struma on the Ey-brow
incised ib. 6. the like Page 269 7. a Struma on the right Jaw ibid. 8. a Struma
on the Os frontis ib. 9. the like ib. 10. a Struma on the Neck ib. 11. Sarcoma
cured by Excision ib. 12. Noli me tangere cured by Excision Page 270 13. a
Struma on the right Cheek ibid. 14. Atheroma on the left Cheek ib. 15. a Tumor
on the right Cheek Page 271 16. the like ibid. 17. a Tumor by the upper Lip
ib. 18. a complicated Tumor taken out by Incision ib. 19. a preternaturall
Tumor on the left Breast Page 272 20. a complicated Tumor in Inguine taken
out by Incision ibid.
Of Eradication by Caustic. 1. Of a Struma so eradicated ib. 2. the like Page
273 3. the like ibid. 4. the like Page 274 5. the like Page 275 6. the like
Page 276 7. a strumous Tumor above the right Scapula ibid. 8. Strumae and
Sarcoma eradicated Page 277 9. Struma with a Fungus of an Artery ibid. 10.
Bronchocele Page 279 11. the like Page 280
Observation 1. Of an Ulcer on the Head Page 281 2. Ulcers about the Chaps
ibid. 3. Ulcers in the Neck, and Atheroma in the Arm Page 282 4. Ulcers in the
Neck ibid. 5. strumous Ulcers on both sides the Neck Page 283 6. strumous
Ulcers on the Axilla and Arm Page 284 7. Ulcers on the Head, Neck, Lips, etc.
ibid. 8. an Ulcer with Caries in Cranio Page 285 9. Atheroma with Caries on the
Cranium ibid. 10. the like Page 286 11. Spina ventosa in Cranio ibid. 12.
Struma with Caries in the Os zygoma ib. 13. strumous Ulcers with Caries in the
Os zygoma Page 287 14. an Ulcer with Caries behind the Ear ibid. 15. external
Ulcers from a Spina ventosa Page 288 16. a Spina ventosa in the left Jaw ibid.
17. Spina ventosa in the inferior Maxilla Page 289 18. the like ibid.
Observation 1. Of Gumma on the Tendons Page 291 2. a strumous Swelling on the
Ancle Page 292 3. a strumous Tumor by Congestion ibid. 4. the like, and a
strumous Tumor in the Thigh Page 293 5. an Abscess on the Elbow ibid. 6. an
Abscess on the Hip ib. 7. the like ib. 8. the like Page 294 9. the like Page
295 10. a Protuberance in the bone of the Knee ibid. 11. a Tumor on the inside
of the Knee Page 296 12. a Tumor on the Knee Page 297 13. the like ibid. 14.
the like Page 298 15. Tumors on the right Knee ibid. 16. a strumous Ulcer on
the Ancle ib. 17. several strumous Ulcers with Caries Page 299 18. a Struma on
the right Foot Page 300 19. a Struma on the Thigh, and several other Tumors
Page 301 20. a Tumor on the Foot Page 302 21. a strumous Tumor on the Heel
Page 303 22. Strumae on the Arms, Leg, and Heel ibid. 23. an Abscess in the
Foot with rotten Bones Page 305 24. strumous Ulcers on the Foot, Arms, etc.
ibid. 25. a strumous Tumor on the Thumb Page 307 26. strumous Ulcers on the
back of the right Hand ibid. 27. an Ulcer on the left Hand ib. 28. Ulcers on
the Thumb and great Toe Page 308 29. strumous Ulcers on the Wrist and great Toe
ibid. 30. strumous Ulcers on the Foot with rotten Bones Page 309 31. strumous
Ulcers with rotten Bones Page 311

CHAP. V. Of Ophthalmia.
Observation 1. Of Inflammation and Fluxion in the Eyes Page 316 2. the like
ibid. 3. the like, with Ozaena Page 317 4. Defluxion in both Eyes, etc. ibid.
5. the like, with Strumae on the Neck Page 318 6. soar Eyes with a Pustula
ibid. 7. the like ib. 8. Defluxions upon the Eyes, Catarrhs, etc. ib. 9. the
like, with Strumae about the Neck Page 319 10. Inflammation and Pustula in the
Eye, and a Struma on the Foot ibid. 11. soar Eyes and a swelled Lip Page 320
14. soar Eyes, etc. ibid.
Of Lippitudo. 1. Of Lippitudo humida Page 321 2. the like with Hypersarcosis
ibid. 3. Lippitudo sicca ib.

CHAP. VI. Of Aegilops.
Observation 1. Of Aegilops with Inflammation Page 322 2. the like Page 323 3.
Fistula lacrymalis Page 324 4. the like ibid. 5. the like Page 325 6. the like
ibid. 7. the like ib. 8. Anchylops ib. 9. the like Page 326 10. Anchylops with
a Polypus ibid. 11. Ozaena ib. 12. Hordeolum Page 327 13. the like ibid. 14.
Sarcoma upon the supercilia Page 328 15. an Excrescence upon the lacrymal Gland
ibid. 16. Thymus ib.

CHAP. VII. Of the Tonsills.
Observation 1. Of both the Tonsills extirpated Page 330 2. the right Tonsill
extirpated Page 331 3. the like ibid. 4. both Tonsills extirpated ib. 5. the
left Tonsill extirpated Page 332 6. both Tonsills extirpated ibid. 7. the like
Page 333 8. the Uvula elongated ibid.

CHAP. VIII. Of Ranula.
Observation 1. Of Ranula under the Tongue Page 334 2. the like Page 335 3. a
Tubercle in the Tongue ibid.

TREATISE V. Of WOVNDS. CHAP. I. Of Wounds in general.
Observation OF a Leg pricked with a Thorn Page 347 a double Wound by a Rapier
Page 350

CHAP. II. Of Wounds of the Veins and Arteries.
Observation 1. Of a Wound of the internal Jugular Page 354 2. an Artery
wounded ibid. 3. the like Page 355 4. an Aneurisma broken open ibid. 5. a Wound
of the Surall Artery ib. 6. an Artery pricked in letting blood Page 356

CHAP. III. Of Wounds of the Nerves, Tendons and Ligaments.
Observation Of a Tendon pricked Page 359 1. Of a Wound in the inside of the
Wrist ibid. 2. the like into the Joint Page 360 3. a Finger bit off by a horse
ibid.


CHAP. IV. Of Wounds of the Face.
Observation 1. Of Wounds in the Forehead and Eyebrow Page 361 2. a Wound in
the right Cheek Page 362 3. a Dutch Hamburger marked with a Cross on the right
Cheek ibid.

CHAP. V. Of Wounds penetrating the Oesophagus and Aspera arteria.
Observation Of a Wound in the Gullet Page 363

CHAP. VI. Of Wounds of the Lims.
Observation 1. Of a Puncture of the Arm Page 364 2. a Wound in the Thigh ibid.
3. the like ib. 4. a Wound in the Arm Page 365 5. a Wound in the Leg ibid.

CHAP. VII. Of Wounds of the Breast.
Observation 1. Of a penetrating Wound in the Breast Page 367 2. a Wound in the
right Breast Page 368 3. the like ibid. 4. a Wound in the left Side ib. 5.
Wounds in the Breast and right Arm ib. 6. a Wound through the Body Page 369 7.
a Wound in the Breast Page 370

CHAP. VIII. Of Wounds of the Belly.
Observation 1. Of a Wound in the Abdomen Page 372 2. a Wound in the Belly Page
373

CHAP. IX. Of Wounds of the Head.
Observation Of an incised Wound transverse the Temporal Muscle Page 378 a
Wound by a Sword between the Sagittal and Coronal Sutures Page 382 1. Of a
Contusion without Wound or Concussion Page 386 2. a Contusion with an
Ecchymosis opened ibid. 3. a contused Wound Page 387 4. a Wound betwixt the
Sagittal and Coronal Sutures ibid. 5. a large Wound of the Calvaria Page 388 6.
the Calvaria torn off ibid. 7. a contused Wound ib. 8. a great contused Wound
Page 389 9. Concussions on the Forehead and Face ibid. 10. a Concussion, with a
broken Leg Page 390 11. a Fracture with a long Fissure and depression of the
Cranium Page 392 12. a contused Wound by a Puncture in the Crown Page 393 13. a
Concussion of the Brain Page 394 14. a large Fissure, the Dura matter putrefied
Page 395 15. Caries through the Cranium, wherein the Pericranium and Dura matter
were grown together Page 396 16. a large Fissure by Contusion without a Wound
Page 397 17. a Fissure with a Fracture and depression of the Cranium under the
Temporal Muscle Page 398 18. a Soldier wounded in the Head Page 399


An Additionall Discourse of Wounds of the Brain.
Observation Of a Wound upon the Forehead with a Cudgel Page 400 a Fracture
with depression of the Soull Page 401 a Wound between the Brow and Ear ibid. 1.
Of a Fracture of the Cranium by Musket Shot ib. 2. a fractured Scull Page 402
3. a fractured Face, Nose, etc. ibid.


TREATISE VI. Of GVN-SHOT-WOVNDS. CHAP. I. Of Gunshot Wounds in general.
Observation OF a Wound through the Jaw and Tongue Page 408 a Wound on the
outside of the Leg ibid.

CHAP. II. Of Extraction of Bullets, etc.
Observation Of an Haemorrhage relieved by actual Cautery Page 409 a Bullet,
etc. extracted in the Thigh Page 410 a Bullet extracted above the left Clavicle
Page 411 a Bullet taken out of the Back by Incision ibid. one run through with
a Rapier cured ib. a Slug extracted near the Cheek-bone, shot in at the Canthus
of the right Eye Page 412

CHAP. III. Of Dressing after Extraction.
Observation Of a Wound in the Hand Page 413

CHAP. IV. Of Accidents befalling Gunshot Wounds, and of Sinuous Ulcers.
Observation 1. Of a wounded Thigh Page 417 2. a Shot in the Face ibid.

CHAP. V. Of Gunshot Wounds with Fracture.
Observation Of a Wound in the Elbow-joint with Fracture Page 420 an Arm run
through, and a Shoulder fractured Page 420 an Arm shot off Page 421 a Leg shot
off ibid. 1. Of a fractured Arm Page 425 2. an Arm fractured by a Splinter ibid.

CHAP. VI. Of Gunshot Wounds in the Joints.
Observation Of a shot through the Knee Page 430

CHAP. VIII. Of Gunshot Wounds in the Thorax.
Observation Of a Wound through one side of the Sternon Page 436 several
wounded in the Breast Page 437

CHAP. IX. Of Symptoms of Gunshot.
Observation Of a Hand torn with a Rammer Page 437

An Appendix to Gunshot Wounds. CHAP. I. Of Burns with Gunpowder, etc.
Observation 1. Of Hands, Arms, Breast, etc. burned with Gun powder Page 441 2.
a Hand, Arm, Side, etc. burnt with Gunpowder ibid. 3. the Right Hand Fingers
burnt Page 442

CHAP. II. Of Gangrene and Sphacelus.
Observation Of an Arm sphacelated Page 443 1. Of a Gangrene from strict
Bandage Page 445 2. a Gangrene on a contused Wound Page 446 3. a gangrened Leg
Page 446 4. a gangrened Elbow Page 447 5. a sphacelated Leg ibid. 6. a Gangrene
through old age Page 448 7. a gangrened Arm ibid. 8. a gangrened Knee ib. 9. a
gangrened Toe Page 449
Of the ill consequences of a Wound in the Elbow joint Page 454 of a Hand torn
by a Musket breaking Page 455

CHAP. III. Of Fisiulae.
Observation Of a Fistula with Caries in the Os tibiae Page 459.

TREATISE VII. Of FRACTVRES and LVXATIONS. CHAP. I. Of Fractures.
Observation OF a fractured Thigh Bone Page 469 1. Of a fractured Face Page 472
2. a fractured Clavicle, etc. Page 473 3. a fractured Leg Page 475 4. both the
Focills of the Leg fractured ibid.


CHAP. III. Of Luxation of the lower Jaws.
Observation 1. Of a Luxation of both Jaws Page 483 2. a Luxation of the right
Jaw ibid.

CHAP. IV. Of Luxation of the Clavicle.
Observation 1. Of a Clavicle luxated Page 485 2. the like ibid.

CHAP. V. Of Luxation of the Shoulder.
Observation 1. Of the right Shoulder luxated Page 488 2. a luxated Shoulder
reduced by the Foot Page 489 3. Reduction by the Hand ibid. 4. Reduction by the
Coulstaff ib. 5. Reduction by a Pulley and Coulstaff Page 490 6. Reduction by
Glossocomium ibid. 7. a Luxation by Congestion Page 491 8. the like ibid.

CHAP. VI. Of Luxation of the Elbow-joint.
Observation 1. Of the right Elbow luxated Page 493 2. the Elbow luxated ibid.

CHAP. IX. Of Luxation of the Knee.
Observation Of a luxated Knee Page 496

TREATISE VIII. Of LVES VENEREA. CHAP. IV. Of the Cure of the Symptoms.
Observation 1. OF inflammation and excoriation of the Penis Page 21 2. an
inflammation of the Prepuce ibid. 3. the like of the Glans and Prepuce ib. 4.
the Prepuce gangrened Page 22 5. a Chancre on the Prepuce with callus ibid. 6.
a Chancre between the Glans and Prepuce ib. 7. a Chancre on the side of the
Glans ib. 8. Ulcers on the Fraenum and Chancre on the Urethra Page 23 9. a
Chancre with Inflammation ibid. 10. Chancres and Vlceration ib. 11. a Chancre
on the Prepuce Page 24 12. a Chancre, and Glands in both Groins ibid. 13.
Inflammation and Chancre in pudendo Page 25 14. Chancre with carnosity of the
Prepuce ibid. 15. Chancre with Callosity Page 26 16. a Bubo ibid. 17. the like
Page 27 18. the like ibid. 19. the like ib. 20. Bubones, Chancres and pains in
the Shoulders Page 28 21. Heat, Pustulae, etc. ibid. 22. a Woman with Child
venereall Page 29 23. the like ibid. 24. a Nurse infected ib. 25. an Infant
infected Page 30 26. the like ibid. 27. an Herpes exedens in the Face ib. 28.
sweetning the Blood Page 31 29. Herpes, Ulcer in the Tongue and various pains
Page 32 30. Ulcers on the Uvula, Tonsills and Nose ibid. 31. Pustulae and a
Node on the back of the Hand Page 33 32. Herpes exedens, Verrucae, etc. ibid.
33. Herpes in the Breast, etc. ib. 34. Herpes, Pustulae in several parts ib.
35. Herpes and serpiginous Ulcers Page 34 36. ulcerous Scabs, Serpigo, etc.
ibid. 36. Herpes exedens overspreading the Body Page 35 37. Herpes exedens,
Eruptions, etc. ibid. 38. Pustulae, Ulcers, and nocturnall pains Page 36 39. an
Ophthalmia ibid. 40. the like ib. 41. a Fistula lacrymalis Page 37 42. a
Phagedaena on the Leg ibid. 43. Herpes miliaris in planta pedis Page 38 44.
Herpes exedens and Nodes Page 39 45. Ulcers on the Arm and Leg with Caries
ibid. 46. a Node laid open, with the consequence Page 40 47. Ozaena, Ulcer in
the Palate, Nodes, etc. ibid. 48. the Uvula and Palate eaten away Page 41 49.
Ulcers in the Tonsills, Palate, etc. with a Node on the Leg Page 41 50. a
Relapse, with Nodes, etc. Page 42 51. Ulcers on the Fauces, Gumma on the Musc.
mastoides ibid. 52. an Ozaena Page 43 53. a Node, and Ulcers in the Tonsills
Page 44 54. an Ozaena Page 45 55. Nodes, Gumma and Ulcers in osse palati ibid.
56. Nodes and pains in several parts Page 46 57. Ozaena, Nodes, and Gummata
Page 47 58. Ozaena Page 48 59. Lues Venerea complicated with Cancer, etc. ibid.
60. Nodes, Gummata, and various pains Page 49 61. Ozaena and Nodes Page 50 62.
Ozaena and Ulcers in the Tonsills, etc. ibid. 63. a Gumma Page 51 64. a Gumma
resolved ibid. 65. an Ulcer with Caries on the Os frontis ib. 66. a Caries on
the Os frontis Page 52 67. Ulcers and Nodes, with the ill consequence ibid. 68.
Lues Venerea with a complication of Diseases Page 53 69. Ulcers in the
Tonsills, Ozaena, etc. Page 54

CHAP. V. Of Gonorrhaea.
Observation 1. Of Gonorrhaea Page 60 2. the like Page 61 3. the like ibid. 4.
a virulent Gonorrhaea Page 62 5. Gonorrhaea with Chancre ibid. 6. the like ib.
7. a Gonorrhaea, and the Wife infected by it Page 63 8. Gonorrhaea, and Tumor
in the left Testicle ibid. 9. the like Page 64 10. the like ibid. 11.
Gonorrhaea, with Hernia humoralis ib. 12. a sinuous Ulcer in the right Testicle
Page 65

CHAP. VI. Of the ill consequences of a Gonorrhaea.
Observation 1. Of Caruncles Page 72 2. the like ibid. 3. the like Page 73 4.
the like ibid. 5. the like Page 74 6. the like ibid. 7. Excrescences on the
Pudendum Page 75 8. a scirrhous Tumor in vagina uteri ibid. 9. a Gangrene upon
suppression of urine Page 76 10. a Carnosity cut ibid. 11. Caruncles Page 77
12. a Tumor in perinaeo ibid. 13. Caruncles Page 78 14. a Carnosity ibid. 15.
an Abscess in Ano ib. 16. an Abscess under the Pubis, and the Urethra corroded
ib.


Those Chapters that are omitted have no Observations in them.

FINIS.

