CARMEN-TERNARIUM SEMI-CYNICUM. A DOS, of RHYME and REASON: Presented by Major
Geo. Wither, to some of his noble Friends, Members of the most honorable House
of Commons.
1.
FRiends, by your leave; and, in a Cynick-time,
If I present you with a Doggrell-Rime,
Impute it not, I pray you, as a crime:
For, whatsoever occasion her excites,
My Muse weighs what, and unto whom she writes;
And, though she grumbles, neither snarles, nor bites.
2.
It Is now, a Pentecost, and six weeks more,
Since I was last a Suitor at your door;
For, 'twas your Christmasse Eves-Eve heretofore:
Yea, 'twas the Morn that next ensued the day,
Wherein you did convene to fast, and pray,
That, what you now are planting, prosper may.
3.
God grant your Suits may better thrive then mine;
God give you of your hopes a better sign;
And, more to you, then you to me incline:
For, if much longer, I be now delayed,
My just Demands, to me had best been paid,
If, at the first, they had been quite denay'd.
4.
This, is (in print and writing) since the Edition
Of that, which first made known my sad condition,
At least the twice ten hundredth Repetition;
Yet, most Complaints, that I have tendered,
Seem; as if neither heeded, heard, nor read,
And, take effect, like Prayers to the Dead.
5.
This, is above the six and thirti'th year,
Since first, my Muses flung defiance, here,
Against their ways, who now your foes appear;
Yet, they who slight your Cause, have better fared;
They, who destroy you, have had more regard,
And, often you hear them, when I am unheard.
6.
This, is the nineth or tenth now-minted-way,
By which, I Have took occasion to assay;
How, I might find acceptance, when I pray;
Yet, nor choice Times, nor Seasons, Rimes nor Prose,
Service to you, hot Sufferings, by your foes,
Produce ought hitherto; but empty-showes.
7.
This, is the seventh year, since I begun
To suffer with you, and to be undone,
For, being, to your Cause, a Faithfull-one;
Yet, have my Foes prevailed, by their Charms,
To make my faithfulness increase my harms,
And, crushed me, nigh to death, even in your Arms.
8.
This, is the third month, since a hopeful sign,
Made show, as if you jointly did incline
To be aspitious to such plaints as mine:
Yet, still, cross accidents make vold my suit,
With my estate, destroying my repute,
And, I get naught, but blossoms without fruit.
9.
Two twelve months since, and twice within that space,
Your House, has in compassion of my case,
Referred the naming of me to some Place,
That, till the Public shall repay my debt,
I, by my labors, might subsistence get;
But, no effect thereof, appears, yet.
10.
A place was once proposed, for which, to clear
My debt, I offer made: But, one sat there,
Who, whilst I beat the bush, did catch the Hare.
Another, I was named to; but, ere I
Could get the same reported, they, who try
The surest course, found means to put me by.
11.
To twenty other places, I of late
Was named, wherein, I might have served the State,
If, I, like other men, had Friends or Fate:
But, they that have enough, must, yet, have more;
They, who are needy, must be still kept poor,
And, he gets most, that had too much before.
12.
Nor would I grudge, might I my own receive,
To miss the best preferments you could give;
For, I can find my self work whilst I live:
And, should be better pleased to possess
My self, in an obscured quietness,
Then, in the greatest of your Offices.
13.
And, peradventure, better thrive should I,
If, I could still believe, undoubtingly,
That, in this world, my portion does not lie:
For, whatsoever promise she does make,
Or, whatsoever likely course I take,
I, either nothing win, or lose my stake,
14.
Yea, whosoever are put out or in;
Whether you feast, or fast, or lose, or win,
My portion, to this day, the same has been;
And, neither Orders, Votes, nor Ordinances,
Nor ought else, hitherto, my cause advances;
But, multiplies, cost, troubles, and mischances.
15.
They, who heed this; and, mark how long I sue
For that, which you your selves acknowledge due,
Suppose my Friends unkind, or, very few:
And, so shall I think too; if, when I see
The grand-affairs dispensed withal may be,
You, more consider not, my wants and me.
16.
For, though the Public cause should be preferred,
Some hours, for private causes, must be spared,
Lest, none be left, the Public to regard.
Your Public actings too, (as I conceive)
Would better thrive, did you more often relieve
Their sufferings, whom, your long demurrers grieve.
17.
Three months (at full) you have delayed to hear
All private pressures, how extreme soever;
Yea, though your faithful friends the Suitors were:
Yet, you could, then, allow spare time for those,
Who were your wilful and condemned Foes:
And, grace you did vouchsafe, to some of those.
18.
To none I grudg your mercy: yet, withal
I wish, that you to mind would likewise call,
How, to your friends, worse things then Death befall:
For, Penitents condemned, can but die:
Which, were it in my power, disdain would I,
To ask, what any mortal could deny.
19.
To see our selves, with many mischiefs hemn'd,
Pursued by Foes, and of our Friends contemned,
Is worse, then guiltlesly to be condemned.
Yea, to behold their Families undone,
Who, for the public, did that hazard run,
Deserves more pity, then a dying-grone.
20.
Although the Public Wants, be very great,
The Publike-Justice, it does ill befit
That, some, large-Favour find; some, never a whit:
That, some, should likewise have immediate pay;
Some, interest at full, for all delay;
Some others, nothing, after six years stay.
21.
That he, to whom the State does nothing owe,
Should rich, by three or four employments grow,
Whilst they pine, who, thereon did all bestow:
And, that those who have spent more precious time,
To serve you, then the whole earth can redeem,
Should scarce find one half-houre, befriending them.
22.
Consider, I beseech you, how ye may
(Before all Opportunities are slipped away)
Preserve their being, who assist you may;
And, let them not be needlessely destroyed,
By whom, your safety, may be best enjoyd;
And, with whose hopes, yours, also, will be void.
23.
Nor think your selves excused, if you deny
To yield me at my need, a due supply;
Because, five hundred want as much as I:
For, no good Principle, they build upon
Who shall resolve, they will be kind to none,
Because, they cannot succor every one.
24.
We who are Standers-by, do plainly see,
That, if self-seekers might removed be,
(Or, would in just, and righteous things agree)
Both Means, and Time enough might, yet, be found,
To make the sick Republike, quickly sound,
And, ease the smart of every private wound.
25.
Yea, we perceive, that if division were
Well made, of what the common purse may spare;
(Of places, which at your disposure are)
And, of your time and pains; you might have eased
Your selves much more; your best friends, more have pleased,
And, kept off troubles, which on us have seized.
26.
New States and Governments, best founded are
By Justice, and by Mercy; and, to spare
A Largess too, it now convenient were:
At least, we may expect, as well as you,
Subsistence out of that which is our due,
To keep us able, who were always true.
27.
For, what will it avail you, when your friends,
Who, might be serviceable to your ends,
Want means to further what the State intends?
Or, with what courage, can those men go on,
To help you, in that work which is begun,
If, they must perish, e're it shall be done?
28.
What can they hope for, when their Foe shall reign,
Who, whilst their Friends rule, sue seven years, in vain,
(Not Favors) but, bare Justice to obtain?
Yet, get naught visible, wherewith to cherish
Their children (which through want are like to perish)
Except perchance a Pension from their Parish.
29.
My case is not so bad: But, if you thought
How near thereto, I Am drove; how low I Am brought,
And, what hard lessons I am daily taught,
You would excuse this discomposed-strain,
Believe my head broke, e're you saw my brain;
And, let me sue, and wait, no more in vain.
30.
For, if extremities compel me should
To sum up all, which I in scraps have told,
(And justly might have added, if I would)
They, who observe the love to me pretended,
How known I am, and yet how ill befriended,
Would quite despair, to see their troubles ended.
31.
Fair promises, prove neither flesh nor fish;
My gains are, hitherto, not worth a rush;
But that befalls me, which my Foes do wish.
For, when to do me right, fit time there was,
Some friends lackt power; some, were not then in place;
And, some, that had the power, had not the grace.
32.
Your Ordinance, the Lords concurrence lackt,
And, my estate, and credit, will be cracked,
Unless, with speed, you turn into an Act;
Few minutes may complete it, which I pray
Vouchsafe; For, by the late three months delay,
I, six months interest, am like to pay.
33.
Bis dat, qui cito dat, the Proverb says;
And, it is as true, that, he, who long delays
A Favor or a Gift, naught gives, or paies.
For, by delay, thus fares it with most,
That, by vexation, labor, time, and cost,
The profits of slow Benefits, are lost.
34.
But, I, this Theme, have long enough persude:
Lest, therefore it may tire you (to obtrude
Much more upon your patience) I Will conclude:
Yea, for a few days, here I Will make a stop;
And, if I then, accomplish not my hope,
I Will play but one Card more; and, so, give up.
35.
As much for others sakes, as for mine own
This sense, of private sufferings, I have shown:
And hope, it will with good effects be known,
For, when I mind what work you have to do,
And, how few, put their helping hands thereto,
I can excuse you; and, have often done so.
FINIS.

