A Proclamation In the Name of the King of Kings, To all the Inhabitants of the
Isles of Great Britain: And especially, to those who have Hypocritically
pretended to Justice, Mercy, Honesty and Religion; (as also to them who have
lived in open Profaneness and Impiety) summoning them to Repentance, by
denouncing GOD's Judgments, and declaring his Mercy, offered in the
Everlasting Gospel.

Warrantably Proclaimed, and Preached, by GEO. WITHER. Though not by any Humane
Ordination.

Whereto are added, some FRAGMENTS Of the same Authors, omitted in the first
Imprinting of the Book, Entitled, Scraps and Crumbs; and a few which were
Collected since that Impression, and during his Imprisonment.

LONDON, Printed in the year, 1662.

A PROCLAMATION In the Name of the King of Kings,
To the Inhabitants of the Isles of Great Britain; especially to all those who
have Hypocritically pretended to Justice, Mercy, Honesty and Religion; as also,
to them, who live in open Profaneness and Impiety; summoning them to Repentance,
by denouncing GOD'S Judgments; and thereto encouraging them, by declaring his
Mercy, offered in the Everlasting Gospel.
ON the first day of the Week, the second day of the first Month, in the
second Year of revived Monarchy in these Islands, and in the eighth Month of
my Confinement, for discharging my Conscience; My Consort being then with me in
the house of my Imprisonment, and intending to read some parcel of holy
Scripture for our instruction and refreshment; The first place presenting it
self to her view, and then read, was the seventh Chapter of the Prophecy of
Jeremiah; the Contents whereof, and part of the next, seemed to my
understanding, when I had heard them, to be so pertinent to these Nations in
this Generation, that I was immediately inspired with a strong persuasion, that
the effect of those words, heretofore dictated to Jeremiah by the LORD, was
then spoken to me, by the Spirit of the same GOD; and, he having given me fifty
years Experience of the Transactions between Himself and this People, since I
came to years of discretion; and also called me to be a Prophet by that
Ordinary Anointing, whereof every true Member of Jesus Christ is partaker; I
thereupon thought my self as truly obliged in Conscience, to proclaim it to all
the Provinces, Counties, Towns, and Cities of these Islands, as the said
Prophet Jeremiah was to publish it in the Gate of the LORD's House at
Jerusalem. Therefore, in obedience to that Internal Motion, I now declare and
apply it in the same terms, changing and adding only the names and
prevarications therein mentioned, into those which are proper to this Time and
Place. The Effect of the said Prophecy, is this which next follows
paraphrastically expressed; and in the Name and Fear of GOD, I thus proclaim
it, Mutatis mutandis.

JEREMIAH, the 7th Chapter, and part of the 8th.
THe Word which came to the Prophet Jeremiah from the LORD, came to me, by the
said Prophet, saying; Stand in the Gate of this City, wherein the LORD has yet
his House, there Proclaim this Word, and say; Hear the Word of the LORD, and ye
Inhabitants of Great Britain, who pretend to worship the LORD. Thus says the
LORD, the LORD of Hosts, the GOD of Israel, and your GOD: Amend your ways and
your doings, and I will cause you to dwell in this place. Trust ye not in lying
words, ( or, in your formal sanctity and will worship) saying, The Temple of
the LORD, The Temple of the LORD, ( nor say in boast, here is only his true
reformed Church, and with us are his Ordinances) for know, The Temple of the
LORD are these, even they that obey his Word; in them he dwells, and among them
is his approved Worship. If you amend your ways and your doings; If you
thoroughly execute Judgment between a man and his neighbor; If you oppress not
the Stranger, the Fatherless, or the Widow, nor shed innocent Blood in this
place, nor walk after other Gods in your heart, to your hurt, ( nor worship the
True GOD according, to the superstitious Inventions of men) then will I cause
you to dwell in this place, which I gave unto your fathers, for ever. But,
behold, ye trust in lying words, that cannot profit: Will ye murder, commit
Adultery, swear falsely, sacrifice to false Gods, and walk after such as ye know
not, and then come and stand before me in my House, or think in your hearts you
were delivered from your late troubles, to do all these abominations? Is that
House which is called by my Name, become a Den of Robbers in your eyes? Behold,
I have seen it, says the LORD. Consider now my Place which was in Shiloh,
where I set my Name at the first: Consider also the City of Jerusalem, and my
Temple therein: heed what I did to those places for the wickedness of my People
Israel: For, in regard ye have done such works as they did, says the LORD;
and, forasmuch as I spoke unto you ( as I did to them) rising up early, yet was
not heard, not answered when I called upon you; I will now do unto those
Temples upon which ye have imposed my Name, and to that Superstitious Worship,
wherein ye trust, as I have done to Shiloh and Jerusalem: For I will cast you
out of my sight, as I ( long ago) cast our Ephraim, ( and as I lately cast out
many of your brethren.) Therefore pray not for this people, that they may
totally be delivered ( from the temporary visitation, which their wilful sins
have, as it were, constrained my Justice to bring upon them, lest my Mercy
should be quite contemned) life not up thy prayer, nor make intercession on
their behalf, for I will not hear thee to that purpose.

See thou not what they do in the Cities of these Isles, and in the streets
of LONDON their chief City? (Observest thou not what Swearings and Forswearings
there are? what Dissemblings? what Apostacies? and how few are now secure from
the Spiritual and Temporal Oppressions of this Generation? (As they did in
Jeremiahs days) the Children gathered wood, the fathers kindled the fire, the
women kneaded the dough to bake cakes for the Queen of Heaven, and to pour out
drink oblations to other gods, that they might provoke me to anger, says the
LORD: (So the Children, the Fathers, the Women, and the People of all sorts and
degrees, contribute toward their Superstitions, according to their abilities,
after the mode of these times; and pour out their drink Oblations of cursed
healths, to those Idols which they have set up and honor, to the provocation
of GOD's wrath.) But do they provoke me to anger says the LORD? do they not
rather provoke themselves to the confusion of their own faces? Verily they do
so: therefore, thus says the LORD, Behold, my anger and my fury shall be
poured out on this place, upon Man and Beast, upon the trees of the Field, upon
the Fruits of the ground, and they shall consume, as if they were burnt up with
an unquenchable fire. Thus also, says the LORD of hosts, the GOD of Israel;
(make your selves merry with your carnal delights, and Superstitious vanities:)
Put your burnt-offerings to your Sacrifices, and eat Flesh; Add more of your
formal Thanksgivings, to your formal Humiliations; Revive the late interrupted
Traditions of men; Please your selves in them, and Gormundize upon the Profits
you raise out of them, until you are fat; yet know, GOD delights not in them.
What I spoke unto your Fathers, and unto your selves, in the days wherein I
brought you out of Egypt, (out of the bodily and ghostly servitude of that
mystical Egypt, and out of that Babylonish Captivity, whereunto you are
preparing to return) I commanded nothing concerning such sacrifices as you have
offered, ( nor gave I unto you any such Ordinances, as are many of those which
ye imposed as mine) But, this I commanded you, saying, obey my Voice, and I
will be your GOD, and ye shall be my People: walk in the ways that I have
commanded, that, it may be well with you; nevertheless, ye have not hearkened
nor inclined your ear, but walking after the evil Counsels of your own hearts,
went backward and not forward. Ever since that day, wherein I delivered you
from your Spiritual Thraldom, and in which I would have delivered you from your
Corporeal slaveries; I have even from that time until this day, sent unto you
my servants the Prophets ( of all sorts, and with various dispensations) rising
early, and daily sending them, as I did heretofore to my People Israel; yet,
you hearkened not unto me, nor Inclined your ear unto them; but, hardened your
necks, and did worse then your Fathers; ( yea, worse then other transgressors
whom I formerly destroyed, and by whose fall, ye ought to have taken warning)
Therefore thou shall speak unto them these words: Even thou into whose heart I
have put it, to make application of what I heretofore spoke by my Prophet
Jeremiah, shall Proclaim unto them these words, though they have not hearkened
unto them; yea, thou shall call again upon them though they will not answer thy
expectation; And, thus thou shall say unto them: This is a Nation that obeys
not the voice of the LORD their GOD, nor receive Instruction, notwithstanding
the Judgments whereby I have lately proved them many years together; and which,
in part, yet lie upon them; for, Truth is perished, and cut off from their
mouth.

Cut off therefore, your hair; lay aside your Ornaments, and cast them away;
Forbear your Pride, your Luxury, your Oppressions, and the Trophies of your
vanities, in this time at least of penury and Afflictions; and take up a
Lamenta^ion in the high Places, wherein ye have exalted your own Inventions:
For, the L0RD has rejected and forsaken the Generations of his wrath. The
Children and Inhabitants of these Isles, have done evil in my sight, says the
LORD. They have set up their abominations in my house to pollute it, and in
those places whereupon they have imposed my Name, instead of what I commanded.
They have built high places, wherein are committed things as abominable as the
sacrificing of sons heretofore in Tophet in the valley of the son of Hinnom.
They have set up set ways of worshipping me, as were not commanded by me, nor
ever entered into my heart: Therefore, the days will come says the LORD; that
those Places shall not be called by their old names, but places of slaughter,
and in them shall be Burials, until there be not room to contain more. Then,
the Carcasses of these Nations shall be meat for the Fowls of Heaven, and for
the Beasts of the Earth, and no man shall fright them away. Then, also, will I
cause to cease from the Cities of Great Britain, and from the Streets even of
her chief City, the voice of mirth and gladness the voice of a cheerful
Bridegroom and his Bride; and the sound of those Musical Instruments wherein ye
are now so delighted, with all the altar'd Relics of Superstition. Moreover,
thus says the LORD, a time will come wherein they shall take the bones of your
Kings, and the bones of your Princes, ( as it lately befell to others) and the
bones of your Priests ( and Prelates) and the bones of your Prophets who
seduced you, and the bones of the Inhabitants of your chief City out of their
Graves, and spread them before the Sun and Moon, and before the Host of
Heaven, and before the face of those false gods whom you have loved, served,
walked after, sought and worshipped, and they shall never be gathered together,
nor buried, but be as dung upon the face of the Earth. And, death shall be
rather chosen then life, of all those who remain of this evil Family,
wheresover they remain in the places whither I have driven them, says the LORD
of Hoasts. Thou shall say thus likewise unto them; Thus says the LORD, shall
they fall and not rise? Shall they cause him so to turn away from them that he
shall not return? If not, why then is this People slidden back by a perpetual
backsliding? holding fast their deceit, and refusing to return? I hearkened and
heard, but they spoke not aright, no man repents himself perfectly of his
wickedness, saying, what have I done? but every one runs on in his course,
as the Horse rusheth into the battle. They are more brutish than the brute
Creatures; for, the Stork knows her appointed time; the Turtle, the Crane,
and the Swallow know the time of their coming, but my People know not the
Judgment of the Lord; yet, they say, We are wise, and the Law of the LORD is
with us; yea, they boast as if they were the most glorious, and best reformed
Church of Christ upon Earth.

The remainder of this Prophetical rebuke and Invitation to Repentance, I leave
to be perused in the said prophecy of Jeremiah, and applied by every Reader as
GOD shall give him understanding, that the Mystical Balm of Gilead therein
mentioned, may be timely sought after; and that Physician found, by whom our
Maladies may be cured; To which purpose, I will proceed with what I have more
to say, in order to the making you desirous and capable of receiving benefit by
that Universal Gospel, which the Angel flying through the midst of Heaven, was
to Preach to every Nation, Kindred, Tongue and People throughout the World;
and, after a more general reception thereof (it being that which will destroy
the whole Mystery of Iniquity, Root and Branch) the Angel next immediately
following, will bring tidings, that Babylon is fallen.

This foregoing Branch of the Prophet Jeremies Commission; being, (as it were
by way of Exemplification) delivered out to me upon the occasion aforesaid, I
was internally moved to publish it to these Nations in this my Generation, as I
have now done this day; And I have performed it warrantably, with a good
Conscience, because, I am infallibly assured, that, it was recorded for all
Nations and Generations to the end of the World, as well as intended for the
Inhabitants of Judah in Jeremiahs days; and that it ought to be applied to all
those who are found guilty of the same, or of the like Prevarications; and
this I believe, in regard he who does nothing in vain, would not have
preserved, during so many Ages, this Record of his Judgments, and of the
particular passages between him and his People; and caused it to have been so
dispersed throughout the Earth, had it not concerned all his People in all
Times and Places. Therefore, it evidently appearing unto me, that GOD moved me
to apply it to these Nations, I have accordingly made Application, in this
manner; conceiving it will operate the more effectually, by being expressed in
the Prophets own powerful words and sense; and much better heeded and regarded
then in mine only; or if it had been undertaken by my own Premeditated Design,
though I have seen enough to warrant the justness and necessity of making such
an Address upon a morral account. I have not hereby charged upon these Nations
any transgression which was charged upon the Inhabitants of Judea and Jerusalem
by the Prophet Jeremiah, (nor any Prevarications resembling their sins or to
them equivolent) but, such as GOD, my own Conscience, and most men know (or may
know) these Nations are guilty of; nor do I exclude my self out of that number
which needs Repentance, but, have performed my duty faithfully without respect
or disrespect of Persons according to my understanding. And, being conscious
that it is my duty so to do, I will now, by the Authority of those Credentials,
which GOD has written in my heart (and which are in part, publicly shown)
make use of them in such Immergencies and Contingencies as occur, faithfully
adding what I believe he has further Commissioned me to declare, so far forth
as my Experience and his known Instructions, jointly considered, shall
indubitably warrant. And that is, at this time to send out among you an
Exhortation to be wary, that you still harden not your hearts as in those
former days of Temptation and Provocation, wherein ye provoked GOD's wrath:
but, that you hearken unto his Voice whilst the day of Grace lasts. But,
alas! I am between hope and fear, it is almost too late with many; For, they
who are worst, have so high a conceit of themselves, that there is more hope of
mere fools then of them. They think themselves to be safe and clear-sighted,
when they are indeed, miserable, poor, blind, and naked; they suppose they are
settled upon the hill of Sion, whereas, they are yet but as it were upon the
mount Gilboa, even in slippery places, where they cannot long stand fast; For,
we have almost so generally indulged Oppressions, Injustice, and Vanities, that
they seem to be the principal supporters of our Safety, Power, and Honor; yea
to be essential to our Laws and legal Customs, as also so great a part of our
Revenues, and the means of our Subsistence, that, we can hardly live without
them. Verily break off in due time from your sins, and from all the occasions
of transgressing; Hear, repent and turn speedily to the LORD our GOD, not
presuming nor despairing.

In the first place, I do humbly (though I might do it Magisterially) beseech
you my dear brethren (who seeming to be Professors of the Gospel, have
dissembled or Apostatized, or any way given occasion of Scandal) be exemplary
to others in a signal Repentance: For, nor your formal, nor your former
Righteousness, will avail, if you have Apostatized from it. Though not in
respect to my words, yet for the Honor of GOD, whose servants you are thought
to be, and for your own safety sake, repent and turn to the LORD unfeignedly,
all ye, who have hitherto taken the Name of Christ in vain, and profaned it,
by not living the Life of Christ according to those Doctrines of his, which ye
have professed; nor acting, nor suffering constantly according to that honesty,
and Piety, whereof ye made fair outward shows: For, many of you have made
sordid Gain by a pretended Godliness; and like the Religious Whore, of whom
Solomon speaks, have made your seeming holiness, and formal Devotions and
Conformities, to be Preambles and Brokers to your Avarice and uncleanness.
There have been very great failings of late in that kind among the best of us;
so much self-seeking, dissembling and Apostatizing, that, there was little
truth in our words, or deeds; and very great and severe are those chastisements
which GOD has already laid upon us for our transgressions, and greater are yet
to come, if we more heartily repent not. All GOD's Judgments aforementioned,
and threatened against Judah, by the Prophet Jeremiah, might have been prevented
by timely Penitence; and so may those wherewith we are threatened, and these
also be quite removed, which yet continue. But, neither our Righteousness in
time past, from which we have Apostatized, shall profit us; nor shall our sins
which we have heretofore committed damnifie us, if we reform our ways: For,
GOD has not only said it, but sworn it also by his own Life, Ezekiel. 33. 11,
12. etc. As I live says the LORD, I have no pleasure in the death of the
wicked, but rather, that he may turn from his wickedness and live; The
Righteousness of the Righteous shall not deliver him in the day of his
Transgression, nor shall the wicked fall by his wickedness in the day that he
turns from it: neither the Righteousness of the Righteous shall be remembered
when he commits Sin, without Repentance; nor the wickedness of the wicked be
mentioned, when he forsakes his Sin; but he shall surely live, though I
formerly said unto him, thou shall surely die. GOD, who will not be mocked,
has begun to execute Judgments at his own House, and we prolong and increase
them, by continuing and increasing our Trangressions; yea, and not only by our
little awe of his Judgments, but by not rightly considering his Love, and by
defect of that mutual and hearty love to each other which most essentially
denominats us to be Christ's Disciples; for, we have thereby multiplied our
sorrows and Troubles, more then all our Adversaries could else have done; And,
though we had no other Oppressors or Persecutors, that alone is suffcient (if
it continue) to make us utterly destroy our selves. Consider this, my dear
brethren, with what it has already brought upon us, that ye may speedily
repent: GOD vouchsafe his Grace to assist you therein, and to me Perseverance
also, in unfeigned Repentance and Amendment.

Repent likewise, all ye, who say in your hearts, There is no GOD, and sport
away your Salvation, by such horrible Imprecations, as GOD damn me; For, though
you not only think, but speak and act also, as if indeed there was no GOD, you
will one day find there is one, and that he has several ways manifested
himself unto you, both openly and in secret (by his Judgments and Mercies upon
your selves, and others for your example) though you will not yet acknowledge
it, but run on impudently, into all manner of impiety and profaneness,
promising unto your selves Peace, when destruction hangs over your heads. For,
as the Prophet says, Jerem. 49. 12. and 25. 29. Behold, says the LORD, they
whose Judgment was not to drink of the Cup, have already drunk thereof; and
shall you go unpunished? you shall not go unpunished, but shall surely drink
it. I have begun to bring evil upon those who are called by my Name, and shall
you utterly escape punishment? you shall not escape; for I will bring a sword
upon all the Inhabitants of the Earth, says the LORD.

But, I will conclude with an Evangelical Consolation; and that which I shall
declare unto you is an Epitome of the Everlasting Gospel, which ascertaineth
that Jesus Christ is the Eternal Mercy of GOD, and the Redeemer of all mankind
according to the Covenant of Grace, the same to day, yesterday, and for ever.
This, I am authorized to Preach unto you by an unquestionable Ordination and
Commission; For, I declare it according to that Original Commission, which was
given to all who were or should be the Ministerial Disciples of Jesus Christ,
thereto qualified by the Gifts given to men from above, though not Ordained by
men: For, I declare it not by that Light alone which the Son of GOD potentially
set up in me when he assumed the Humane Nature, (and wherewith he enlightens in
some degree every one who comes into the World, for the Salvation of his own
Soul) but, by having his Gospel declared and witnessed also unto me by that
Light in the Lanthorn of his Word, which ought to be a guide to every man's
feet, and the direction of all men in their ways, left the other Light, being
but like that, which the Moon receives by reflection from the Sun, may be
darkened by the interpositions of the Flesh and the World, or by the delusions
of the Devil. GOD's Threatenings, Mercies, and Promises, are all, or for the
most part, conditional; and may be, or may not be, according as we demean our
selves, when he calls and offers his preventing and assisting Grace;
wherein he is never wanting to perform his part of the Covenant made with
mankind in Christ Jesus. He is long-suffering, slow to Anger, would all men
should be saved, and desires not the death of any sinner. There is no end of
his Mercy, unless to them only, who wilfully forsake him first (after he so
sufficiently rewards the Will) when he says, Give me thy heart, which he may
give up unto him, by virtue of the Talent which he has received; And, even to
them who then resist his gracious offer, he is not extremely severe, until they
do (as it were) compel his Justice to limit his Compassion, by justly
hardening them into a final Impenitency, that his Mercy may not be made
contemptible, to the disadvantage of others, by their yiedling to the Flesh,
which by his aid they might have subdued; and by their ungratefully adhering
to, and believing his, and their greatest Enemy, rather then trusting to his
Word, who placed them in a happy Condition; and, when they forfeited it by
their own default, had so much compassion on them (even whilst they were his
Enemies) as to give his only begotten and dearly beloved Son, ^o be
disgracefully Crucified to death for their Redemption. This Love being well
considered, ^s so strong a Motive to Repentance, that, they with whom it
prevails not, will be little moved with Preaching Everlasting Damnation in
Hell Fire.

If ye be not sensible of this unspeakable Mercy, nor of Spiritual Judgments,
let the sense ye yet have of those that be Temporary, and Corporeal, make
entrance for the former into your serious and timely consideration. Beside many
other Plagues that now lie upon you, GOD has lately threatened to deprive us of
the Fruits of the Earth for our Trangressions; we fear a Famine; and it having
already begun to pinch us, we pretended a General Humiliation here in England,
that our fear might be removed: But, what follows? we continue still in our
unrighteousness and unmercifulness, prosecuting our former courses, rather with
more then less violence. The Oppressed are not eased, but more oppressed.
Prisoners are not set free, to whom the Laws allow Freedom; but, Jayls are
daily replenished with new guests, barbarously treated, Even harmless men and
women suffer merely for their Consciences in relation to GOD, or upon
misinformations and misprisions only, unheard, and uncondemned by a legal
conviction. Which proceedings are contrary to the Laws of GOD, of Nature, and
likewise of these Nations, if they have any in force. For, if the Complainants
sad cries, which I hear (and hear of) be as creditable, as they are lamentable,
many honest Families are (and will be) exposed to beggary, and even rich men
will probably be made beggars also. They are shut up from their dearest
Relations; and they themselves being despoiled of all their livelihoods, and of
means to supply necessaries by their labors, are destitute of all
accommodations. They are lodged worse than dogs, thronged up together in
sickness and in health, nothing left or provided for them to feed on (except
they will eat their own flesh) but what GOD providentially conveyes unto them,
by the charity of his Servants; of which charity they are sometimes defrauded
by their hard-hearted Keepers, and that which comes to hand, is handed-in also
with much difficulty. These cruelties are aggravated with many other oppressive
concommitants, which make them almost inexpressable and unsufferable; yea the
more unsufferable, in regard, that during the Sessions of Parliaments and
Courts of Justice, which were wont to be their ordinary Refuge, the Oppressed
can have no Relief; and these Grievances are kept also from the King's ear, who
is their last hope next under GOD.

Let us take heed how we fall into the hands of the living GOD, when his Wrath
is kindled, lest he utterly and suddenly consume us, as he did Sodom and
Gomorrah, for showing so little mercy to others, who have lately received such
extraordinary mercies from him. Learn by Examples, though ye have neglected
Precepts, seeing what has been heretofore, may be so again hereafter, and in
regard Cases that have a resemblance, will bring down the like Judgments. When
Jeremiah the Prophet was a Prisoner for discharging his Conscience (as I, and
many others are at this day) the Famine so increased, that there was no Bread
then left in the street of the Bakers at Jerusalem. It will therefore concern
us that we be wary we continue not in the like sins, lest ere long, there be
little Meal in our Markets, and a greater scarcity of Bread in the shops of our
Bakers at London: For, as there are among us very great failings, so there are
very great appearances of GOD's high displeasure; who has more dreadful
plagues ready to execute his Commands, than Famine, Pestilence and raging War,
joined all together; and he will here inflict that whereof we are most
sensible, and those hereafter, if we repent not. Consider this all ye who
forget GOD, and return: for, he is at all times ready to meet every one in
mercy (without excepting any) who returns unto him by hearty repentance: yea,
he takes all opportunities whereby he may show Compassion, with preservation of
his Justice; and is so inclinable to Mercy, that he often withholds his Judgments
from wicked persons and places, for the sakes of a few Righteous men among
them, though they persecute and seek to destroy them for whose sakes they are
preserved; and vouchsafes temporal Blessings (as he did to Ahab) for outside
Humiliations. He is not, as his Enemies do scandalously report of him, a hard
Master, who looks to reap where he sowed not, and to gather where he strewed
not; but so just, that he will require no more at any man's hands, but according
to what he has given; nor punish any one for the sin of another. There is no
better means for us who are Subjects, to live safely in Holiness and
Righteousness without fear, than to adhere constantly to GOD's Commands without
dread of men, and to obey our Superiors in obedience to the LORD: Nor any
surer way for Kings to possess the Thrones of their Kingdoms upon Earth, in
honor and safety, without jealousies, than to provide, as much as in then
lies, that GOD may possess his Throne in the Hearts and Consciences of Men
without Rivals; and to endeavor to be just, as he is just; and to be merciful,
as he is merciful, acording to their measure: For, whatsoever the Parasitical
Flatterers of Kings would make them believe, they may be more secure from
dangers at home and abroad, by those poor conscientious men who are despised,
than with twenty times so many Ruffians and God-damn-me's; though assisted also
by the formal devotions, and fained sanctity of superstitious worshippers, who
seem glorious and powerful in outward appearances. I have observed, by what
Histories testify, that those great Kings and Conquerors of the world, to whom
GOD heretofore translated the Kingdoms of men, from their former possessors
(when he changed Governors and Governments) enjoyed them in peace and honor,
so long, and so far forth, as they tolerated the Servants of GOD to worship Him
according to their Consciences, though they themselves were Heathens and false
worshippers.

The Mercy of GOD leads to Repentance, and extends to and over all his
Works. This I am warranted to proclaim by virtue of his grand Charter, and by
his Commissions, heretofore issued-out for the comfort and encouragement of
every true penitent Believer in the days of his fiercest Indignation. These are
the glad Tidings of the Universal Gospel, which caused the Angels to rejoice
and sing at the birth of Jesus Christ, this song; Glory be to GOD on High, On
Earth peace, good will toward men. Let us join with that celestial Quire in
magnifying of this great Mercy which so much concerns us; for it is our noblest
Interest, and that which most advances GoD's Glory: Let our Burden to that
Song be, Amen, Hallelujah, Praise the LORD: Let us be zealous in defending this
Universal Charter, and not be seduced by those who seek to abridg itto such a
narrowness, and to such an uncertainty, that if they should be believed, we had
more cause to howl and lament than to sing: This Gospel is the sum and scope of
that Testimony, which was, and is given by those two Witnesses, the two Olive
Branches, and two Candlesticks, which stand before the God of the Earth,
bearing witness against the Beast rising out of the bottomless-Pit, who was to
war upon them, and slay them, and leave their Bodies (as a dead Letter)
unburied three days and an half in the Streets of the great City, until the
Spirit of Life from GOD should enter into them and make them ascend up into
Heaven, in the sight, and to the amazement and vexation of their Enemies.

Therefore they, whosoever they be (though pretending to be of GOD's Counsel,
and to be acquainted with his Eternal Decrees) shall preach contraty hereto,
and think they honor GOD by bounding His universal and infinite Mercy, deal
with Mankind, concerning His Charter of General Redemption, as many among us
now do concerning the Kings late Act of Indemnity and general Pardon,
pretending thereby to do him honor, where^^ intends both to his dishonor and
disservice. It is this misunderstanding, and limiting the infinite Love of GOD,
which has been the chief occasion of the narrowness of men's love to each
other; and of much of that discord and bloodshed which has been in the world:
For, such as men make their Gods to be, such will they themselves be; in
regard, as David says, They who make them are like unto them. This I add, not
impertinently, nor by the suggestion of a contentious spirit, in opposition to
the judgment of others; or with an uncharitable censure of those who do yet
think otherwise; But I have thus in my mode preached it, in zeal to GOD's Truth
and Glory; who sees my heart, and will punish me for it, if it proceed from any
other cause. He is perfectly merciful; so merciful in his Justice, and so just
in his Mercy, that neither of them infringes the other; and has left us upon
record two unquestionable exemplary Evidences, which manifest that his Mercy is
sincerely intended to every true penitent, to be his Consolation when
Judgments are epidemical and universal: For, though he spared not the old
world, but brought a general flood upon all the ungodly, yet, he even then
spared Noah and his family; and when he made the Cities of Sodom and Gomorrah
an example to wilful transgressors, he then also spared Lot who lived among
them, and whose righteous soul they had vexed with their filthy and wicked
conversation. Thus will he likewise deal with all those, in all times, who have
an upright and contrite heart (though they have been grievous offenders) so far
forth as it shall be for his Glory, and their eternal happiness.

Hear, and heed this Proclamation; for it is of GOD, who is pleased in these
days to preach Mercy by his most contemned Servants; and cause them otherwhile
to act in such Modes, and by such Dispensations, as to the world seem
ridiculous; and as probably he did (in most men's eyes) when his beloved Son
rode meekly through Jerusalem, on the foal of an Ass, at the time wherein he
first came to take a visible possession of his Kingdom upon Earth: which humble
deportment his now pretended General Vicar, and the proud Kings of the Earth,
would have scorned upon the days of their Inauguration. Which the Prelates,
though raised out of the lowest of the people (as Jeroboams priests were) and
though pretending to be the successors of Christ's humble Apostles, would have
disdained to be carried in that meek manner to their Instalments. But many
other things appearing contemptible to flesh and blood, will be permitted ere
long to make preparation for the coming of King JESUS, whom they scoff at, who
sit in the Chair of the Scornful. It has pleased GOD in this unusual manner,
to make me (though unworthy) to be his Herald in publishing this Proclamation;
who having been many years your Despised REMEMBRANCER, lives yet, to serve GOD
and his Generation; known to the World by this Name,

Given forth at Newgate, one of the most eminent Gates of your chief City, in
the 8. month of my Imprisonment there. GEO. WITHER.

Here is added, A Second Course of those Fragments of that Beggars Feast, which
was daily made him by a good Conscience, whilst he was Prisoner in Newgate, and
which were omitted at the Imprinting of the Book, called, Scraps and Crumbs:
With some few Collected since the said Impression.
I.
To those Friends, unto whom this Author has been scandalously misrepresented
in private, by some false Brethren and others.
THough hereof I have just occasion had,
I do not merely for mine own sake add
This Crum; but likewise here, for your avail
Insert it, lest my Sland'rers may prevail,
(By bringing me into your disrespect)
To make my Cautions take the less effect.
Give therefore heed to what I now express,
And let GOD move belief as he shall please.
As David said, The wrongs of open foes
I could have born, but near my heart it goes,
When I am grossly injured by them,
Who did my loving Friends and Brethren seem,
And cannot choose (although I do sustain
Even that with patience) but thereof complain,
In hope, it may occasion give to some
Who failed in that kind, henceforth to become
So sensible of what was heretofore
Mis-done, that they will so offend no more:
For, unto them, this is the worst design
Which I intend by this Complaint of mine.
Two sorts of men there are, with both of which
I Have had to do; and (though not very much)
More than enough it seems. One sort of these,
Those Persons are, by whose maliciousness,
Most, who are conscientious men reputed,
Are for that cause traduced and persecuted;
And (when they thereunto shall be inclined)
A staff to beat a dog, who may not find?
It Is care to escape the venom of their tongue,
So impudent they are in doing wrong,
And brutish in their Censures: yet but few,
Except some like themselves, believe that true
Which they report; and they themselves do know,
That they asperse me with what is not so.
Of such men therefore, here complain I not;
Because, by these, I have not often got
A disadvantage, which would equaled be
With what might happen by their praising me.
The poysnings of the other, more infect,
Because, received they are without suspect,
And, vented with a counterfeited show
Of better ends than those which they pursue.
Some of these being partners with those sinners,
Who were of our late Troubles first beginners,
Did, with a mask of Piety and Zeal
To GOD, the King, and to the Commonweal,
Drive on their own designs; And (having made
Of seeming Godliness, a gainful Trade)
Their opportunities now being gone,
Of preying upon those they preyed upon,
Would make a prey of them, whom they pretended
In times preceding, much to have befriended.
So feeds the Pickrel, when, he cannot find
A Roach or Dace, on fish of his own kind.
And, some of these, because I will not be
Enslaved to that, from which I should be free,
Have (thereto moved by Avarice and Pride)
Without just cause, me lately vilifi'd
To some of my best Friends even unto them
Whose Charity supports me at this time:
And, should it be believed, might much more
Undo me, than all they who heretofore
Have been my open Foes. Moreover, some,
That I might wholly succourless become,
Are pleased to say, I am not so bereft
Of my Estate, but that enough is left
For my support. Wherein, if they speak right,
They render me so gross an Hypocrite,
That I deserve no Friend; And if I am
By them beli'd, then much are they to blame,
Who have, as far as in them lies, to starving
Exposed me and mine, without deserving.
But, this I fear not: for, if that supply
Shall fail, which I have had by Charity,
He, who by other hands, has Mercy shown,
Will from henceforth relieve me by his own:
And, these are thus confuted, without feigning,
If they know ought of mine, that is yet remaining
Within my power; Or, but so much as may
(If ever it be mine) my Debts repay,
Save what is yet wholly lost, I give it all
To him, who thereof make discov'ry shall;
And hereby, both confirm this Gift for ever;
And urge him that Discov'ry to endeavor
Who raised that Report; so he thereby
Shall have some profit, if it be no lie.
I do perceive, to have me quite destroyed
The Devil many Agents has employed
In several modes; which that prevent I may,
Naught more or better have I now to say,
Or do, which will avail me, but to fly
To my Protector, to your Charity
Who know me, and unto that Evidence
Which I have given of my Innocence
To you who know me not; in hope you will do
As in like case you would be done unto:
And that when their malevolence has wrought
Till it shall purge its own corruption out,
It will abate, and some effects produce,
Which both to them and me may be of use.
If me you judge, as you would judged be,
No more needs to be said thereof by me;
Especially to him who truly knows,
Who gives deeper wounds, than open foes.
This Case of mine concerns now and then,
Not me alone; but other honest men.
Such like false brethren, in all Ages were
Among the Saints, and suchlike still there are.
Therefore these Lines at this time were bestown,
As justly for their sakes, as for mine own,
Since, of what here I for my self do plead,
Some other, thus abused, may stand in need.
II.
A causual Meditation on Eaith, Hope, Fear And Love.
TO keep me watchful, whilst my Foes
My person here shall fast enclose,
By Meditations I assay
To keep the dread of them away;
And whilst my Contemplation flew
At various Objects, in her view,
(Among such Musings as were brought
Into my mind) this came to thought.
Faith, Hope, and Fear, and Love are that,
Which renders every man's Estate
To be exceeding good or bad,
Extremely pleasureful or sad,
According as that Object proves,
Which he believes, fears, hopes, or loves.
Make GOD the bottom and the top
Of thy Fear, Love, Belief and Hope,
And thou art then safe, whatsoere
Thou do believe, hope, love, or fear:
But, if the World their Object be,
Or, any other thing but He,
Thou art destroyed: For, by these four,
Misplaced, thou give them a power
To ruin thee, who else had none
Whereby a mischief might be done.
If on the World thy hopes depend,
Despair will be their latter end;
When her fair-speakings are believed,
Thou will be certainly deceived;
If her thou love, she will for that
Requite thee with despiteful hate;
And, if thou fear her, she will endeavor
To make thee slave to fears for ever.
This by experience I found true,
And thereof thus forewarn I you.
Affect no Pleasure; for it is vain,
And terminates at last in pain.
Fear not, when thou shall be oppressed
In doing well; for, such are blessed.
Trust not in Wealth; for, it has wings,
And flies away like other things:
Nor Honor; for, it often spends
Its stock, and in dishonor ends.
Rely not upon Prodigies;
For, they are partly Truths and Lies;
And, Signs and Wonders can afford
No such assurance as GOD's Word.
Place not your trust in Kings; for, when
They speak like Gods, they act like men.
No, nor your best Works trust you in,
For all man's Righteousness is sin.
Your Faith, Fear, Hope, and Love on none
Ground therefore, but on GOD alone;
And, when thus, you hare learned to do,
Persuade all other men thereto;
Not terminating Meditations,
In mere unactive speculations;
For, they but like those flashes are,
Which we mis-call a shooting-Star.
Here, whilst my Flesh is in restraint,
Lest else my Soul grow dull and faint,
Her, with such thoughts I entertain,
And find them not to be in vain;
Though more I needed, I confess,
These Musings, when I suffered less.
I might be safely rich again,
Could I be still employed then
As I am now. But, who is able,
To thread a Needle with a Cable?
They, who in Winter keep at home,
In Summertime abroad will come;
And, though a Prison seems a curse,
Our Liberty often makes us worse.
We pray, when Winds and Seas do roar;
When calm, do as we did before,
Even GOD's choice Worthies, when releast
From Sufferings, foully have transgrest;
If in this, or some other kind,
They were not often disciplined.
He, that with troubles hemmed about,
The Battles of the LORD had fought
Unfoil'd; as soon as he had ease,
(Neglecting such like means as these)
Did grossly fall; and so shall we,
When idle and secure we be.
Had he been musing on GOD's Law
When in her Bath, he naked saw
Vriahs Wife; or, at that time
Composing of a Psalm or Hymn,
It had secured him from that sin,
Which let a lustful Devil in.
LORD! that I be not so surpised,
(Though these my Musings are despised)
Preserve me, (whether weal or woe
Befalls me) still employed so;
Or, in what else thou please, that is tending
To keep me always from offending:
And to thy Glory, and to my Salvation,
Vouchsafe to sanctify this Meditation,
III.
To those who enquire, why this Author is now imprisoned in Newgate?
INto this Jayl, you ask me, why I Am thrown?
But to my self that is not fully known;
Unless it may be charged as a Crime,
For putting Truth and Reason into Rhyme;
Or, giving unto some, for doing wrong,
Such Epithites as unto them belong;
Which is by very few thought criminal,
And, by most men, to be no fault at all.
Yet, since you are my Friends, I bold will make
To give you Counsel, which I could not take:
Touch not a gald Jades back, although it be
To cure him, if you will be ruled by me;
And if your Conscience force you not thereto,
No notice take, when other men misdo.
For, they, who most ungodly courses run,
(And boast of what they wickedly have done)
So rage at him, who dares to reprehend
Their Actions, howsoever they offend,
That oft-times by their power they bring on him,
Those Penalties which were deserved by them,
A Whore professed, though she would have men know
She is a Whore, will not be called so.
(Yea, though she could not live, were it not known
She lived by abusing of her own)
But, be so wroth with him, who so shall say,
That she will scratch his eyes out, if she may:
At least, if she can do no more, will rayl;
Or, had she power, commit him to the Jayl,
And for a Sland'rer prosecute him there,
As justly, as they do, who keep me here.
IV.
A Hymn of Thanksgiving, for deliverance from a dangerous and sharp Sickness,
during his Imprisonment.
LORD! they who thy Affection measure
By what thou give into their possessings,
Of Riches, Honors, or of Pleasure,
Or, of such other temporary Blessings,
And mark how here thou deal'st with me,
May think I am despised of thee;
For, when I seemed oppressed before
With loss of Liberty and Wealth,
So that I could well bear no more,
Thou thereto addedst loss of health,
Embittered and made sharp, with as much pain
As Flesh and Blood were able to sustain.
2.
Yet neither was thy Love impaired,
Whilst in that manner I afflicted was,
Nor doubted I, nor ought despaired
Of thy continuing and assisting Grace;
But, as the violence and length
Of pain deprived me of strength,
My Spirit thereby stronger grew;
Yea, so thou did my Faith increase;
(So Fortitude and hope renew)
That Sufferings were not pleasureless;
Because I knew I underwent thy Rod,
Who art as Well my Father, as my GOD:
3.
I know thee not alone by hearing,
But, also by thy being in my heart,
And, by thy thereunto declaring,
How just, wise, good, and merciful thou art:
Thou take no pleasure in our pain,
Nor do, nor ever did coustrain
The soul of any to a path,
Which leads him from a happy conrse;
To Sin, Shame, Sorrow, or to Death,
Or, renders his condition worse.
For, that thou more delighted art to save,
Than to destroy, I good assurance have.
4.
For ever, let thy Name be blessed;
For, when my patience did begin to fail,
And pain, a cold-sweat forth had pressed,
As if in me, fire had been mixed with hail;
Thou in my first Fit, easedst me
By means lest means despised might be:
And when I was shut up alone,
Of all external helps deprived,
(Where means of Cure or Ease was none)
Then, by thy Self I was relieved;
That I might always confident be made
Of thy help, when no other can be had.
5.
When so extremely I was pained,
That I could hardly for one minutes space,
Endure the torment I sustained,
In any posture, or in any place,
Thou hug'dst me fast asleep; and then
Gav'st Ease, I know not how, nor when;
Which so amazed me, when I awak't,
That, I at first, could hardly tell
Whether, I for a Dream might take it,
Or, whether I were sick or well;
For, in the fire I thought as soon I might
Have slept (erewhile) as in my bed that night,
6.
Therefore, to thee, for this Compassion
I do now consecrate a Hymn of Praise:
Be pleased, O GOD of my Salvation,
To be thus my Physician all my days.
Let this preserve me from the fear
Of what I may yet suffer here:
And when this Mercy shall be known,
Thereby assured let others be
That such Compassion shall be shown
To them, as was vouchsafed to me,
If in thy Truth and Fear they shall abide,
And, without wavering, in thee conside.
V.
To them who say, or suppose, that a vain desire of Fame, was this Authors
principal motive, to the Composure of what he has written and published.
I Hear, some think (and, for their sakes am sorry
They think so) that Ambition of vain glory,
Is that, which principally moves my Pen
To dare more than the Quills of wiser men;
And, that an irch for popular Applause
Was of my bold Reproofs the chiefest cause.
If this be true, I am as mad as they
Who think so, and take the nearest way
To my destruction, for a windy puff,
Which in a moment will be quite blown off,
And leave me comfortless, in that condition
Which threatens inavoidable perdition.
But, these will find their error, when they know
By trial, from what Root my Actings flow;
And that I had in what I have expressed,
A nobler Aim, than mere self-Interest,
Or any outward ends, although in them,
My own well-being I shall not contemn.
I am not ignorant that whatsoever
I actively or passively endeavor,
To honor GOD, or for my Countries good,
May, to my damage, be misunderstood;
Nor that most men, mis-censure what I Have writ
To be Composures without fear or wit
And that, if I should be thereby undone,
(Which likely seems) I may be thought upon
With very small regard, alive or dead;
Or any way at all be mentioned,
Except by some few, who perhaps will say,
I fooled my Liberty and Life away.
But should I minded be, when I shall have
My portion among other in the Grave,
What greater share shall I have in that Fame,
Which after Death might memorize my Name,
Than they, who in Oblivion lie forgot,
Where Pen nor Tongue their Actions mention not?
In my time, sixteen persons I have known
Who did my Christian and my Surname own,
And one Captain George Wither, a man valiant and witty, and one of the sixteen
here mentioned, was hewed to death at Kingston upon Hull by his own Solidiers
in their fury, because he had killed one of their fellows in the like fury.
of them often guilty proved to be
Of Crimes, imputed falsely unto me,
By those who knew us not; and he, whilst here
He lived, had in my repute a share:
But, after few years, none will know, among
All these, to which of us, those things belong
Which we have acted. Nay, though ten times more
I had deserved (than any heretofore,
Made memorable by a glorious Fame)
A feigned person, who no real Name
Or Being ever had, save what, perchance,
Was thereunto ascribed in some Romance,
May seem to be more honored by that fiction,
Than any who attained the highest perfection
In Piety or Morals: For, I Have seen
Some Readers, with such Legends to have been
So far transported, that it them could move
More sighs and tears, compassion, honor, love,
Esteem and admiration, to confer
On those Idea's, than bestowed are
On real Suff'rers, who, did undertake
To do and suffer freely for their sake.
And what a trivial prize or purchase then
Is an esteem, or vain applause of men?
My Actings have exposed me, during life,
To hazards, losses, much reproach and Grief;
And, what shall I the better be, or worse,
When I am dead, whether men bless or curse
Speak well or ill, that I should quite destroy,
For such toys, what in life I might enjoy?
By being silent, I preserved from blame
Might be, and more esteemed than now I am
If I could for advantage swear and lie,
And flatter Fools and Knaves in Elegy:
Sure, he who shall observe, as I have done,
What scorns, and what despights I Have undergone;
What I have felt, and what I do foresee
Will probably on Earth my Wages be,
Yet thinks I run these hazards for vain Fame,
Must like wise, either think, that mad I am,
Or, that I Have only learned in the School
Of long Experience, to be more than Fool.
But, though most are deceived in their Design,
And in their thoughts, I am not so in mine.
I know my Work; I likewise know that End
Whereto it does, or at least, ought to tend:
And, therefore hope, that till my life's conclusion,
I shall be kept from such a gross delusion.
He, that for GOD's Cause, or for his Elects,
Pretends to do, or suffer; yet, expects
More honor, or ought else, than his just share
With them, who of the same Communion are;
Expects more than his due; Exceeds the bound
Of that self-love which in true Saints is found,
And, what he acts, or suffers, no Reward
Can merit; for, he forfeits his Reward.
All, that he shall endeavor, on that score,
When Rich he thinks to be, will make him Poor;
And, by what he expected to be famed,
He shall become contemptible and shamed.
GOD's Mind, I therefore study to fulfill,
Seeking no Pay, but what, and when he will:
And, knowing that is my Aim, much care I not
What, in this world, he gives to be my Lot.
I no more value Praises than Reproach;
And, whether in a Carr, or in a Coach,
I ride to my last home, I little care,
So with a quiet Conscience I come there.
If well in life I use them, it is no matter,
How far asunder men my Limbs do scatter,
Or in what Public place they set my Head,
To terrify some fools, when I am dead:
For, every part of me will meet together,
When GOD shall pleased be to call me thither,
Where CHRIST now sits enthroned; and whither he
Ascended to prepare a place for me.
I prize nor Life, nor Death, but, as thereby,
I, more or less, GOD's Name may glorify.
And, whilst my own heart knows this to be so,
I care not, whether it is believed or no
By any man, uless, that, to infuse
The like mind into him, it may conduce.
If, I have acted for a worthless prize,
Learn by my foolishness to be more wise,
If I have aimed to suffer, or to do
For such ends as I should; do ye so too.
Because then, what you heretofore of me
Misdeem'd, will thenceforth your advantage be;
And, no more harm to me, than that man found,
Who had an Ulcer cured by a Wound.
VI.
A Meditation, occasioned by considering the manifold Temptations to distrust
in GOD, whereby his best Servants are otherwhile proved and exercised.
THe best of men, some failings have; and I,
Not only many, through Infirmity;
But, flowing also from those Negligences,
Which very much have heightened my offenses;
Because I know, what power to me he gave,
To do those things which I neglected have:
Especially, when my Distrustfulness
Has made me doubtful of GOD's Promises.
Who, to assure them, has vouchsafed both
A written Word, and sealed it with an Oath;
And, also new experiments, which may
Ascertain it, vouchsafes every day.
David, the most courageous Combatant
Against suchlike Temptations, did often want
That Confidence, which was by him professed,
And, thereby hazarded his Interest
In GOD's free Promises. By Saul, said he,
One time or other I destroyed shall be;
And, what was promised, had so outright
Forgotten, in his carnal pannick fright,
That to GOD's Foes he for protection ran,
The part there acting of a frantic man,
And of a drivling fool; yea, worse than so,
Dissembled then, yet escaped with much ado.
That Course, whereby he thought to be assured
Of safety, an indangerment procured
Beyond all former hazards; for, he lost
Not only Goods, Wives, and all hope almost
Of Rescue, but was also like to lose
His Life, and to be stoned by some of those
(In their distemper) who enraged became,
To see their Habitations in a flame,
Their dear'st Relations captived, and to those
Enslaved, who were their old malignant Foes.
In which strait, if GOD had not him befriended,
Whom he distrusted, there, his Life had ended.
There is our Case; for, though that many times,
Our Fears, our Foes, our Troubles, and our Crimes
We have, beyond hope, been delivered from,
And promised in every time to come,
That like deliverance; yet, when ought fails
Which we expected, or a Foe prevails,
(For our probation) we are hurried straight
Into a causless, and a foolish fright:
GOD's promised Assistance we decline,
Catch hold of any politic Design,
Run this, and that way, to the World, the Devil
For help and Counsel, or act any evil
In such a giddy fit, though we have seen,
And often felt, what those effects have been
Which will ensue. Nay, if long time we bear
A present suffering, and new troubles fear,
Our Faith is at a stand, and we begin
Immediately to let Despairings in;
Make Principle of Faith, give way to Reason,
And seem Phanatick Whimsies, out of season,
Or airy Refuges, beseeming none
In straits, but mere Fools, to depend upon.
Though in the Saints of old to fall off thus,
It was a Crime; it is greater sin in us,
By so much, as the sinning against Grace
Does our transgressions of the Law surpass:
And, neither Theft, Adultery, or Murder,
From GOD and Penitence will draw us further,
If we avoid it not: For, to be made
More cautelous, we have not only had
Examples of old times, and seen since then,
What has befallen many thousand men
In such defections, but, we likewise are
Experienced in our own particular
Estates and persons, what will them betide,
Who in the days of Trial start aside,
And, by the Gospel are enlightened more,
Than other Generations heretofore.
This, makes me, in my present troubles, wave
Those ways, whereto I some Temptations have,
My person to redeem; and to prevent
The future mischiefs, that seem eminent,
This makes me scorn, to creep, or fawn, or sneak,
Or, (whatsoere I threatened hear) to speak
To an unworthy person, though I could
Prevail, perhaps, upon him, if I would:
For, were my Poverty ten times as much,
The King of Sodom shall not make me rich;
Nor, were I sick to death, would I implore
Those false Gods, which most men do now adore
For health or life, though I thought they could give
That, which I most desired to receive.
This, among other Notions of this kind,
(Which needful are to fortify my mind
Amid my Sufferings) makes me muse on these
Our common failings, that, if GOD so please,
They may be by his Grace, with my endeavor,
A means to keep me firm to him for ever;
And, by declaring what Experiment
Has taught to me, make others confident
In sufferings for his Cause: and, not afraid
What is, or what can here on them be laid:
For, as where many Cowards are together,
They still beget more terrors in each other;
So men of Courage, more courageous grow,
When, to each other, they example show
Of Christian Fortitude: To which good end,
These fruits of my spare hours I intend.
VII.
Another Scrap, to them, who carp at this Author's frequent writing.
Why should you be displeased, and have a loathing,
Of that which may do good, and cost you nothing?
Or, which you may pass by, without offense,
Or, giving you occasion of expense,
Unless you please? For, that which I compose,
On no man, I against his will, impose.
GOD is our Shield, our Fortress, and that Friend
On whom alone we always should depend;
Yet, he expects an Activeness in those,
On whom a Christan Armor he bestows;
And, that we put it on, when there is occasion
Of War defensive, or, of an Invasion;
As also, that, we always keep it clean,
And our selves ready, by good discipline:
For, of their Talents they will be bereaved,
Who make not use of what they have received:
Yea, they will be surpised, who, times and places
Neglect, wherein to exercise their Graces,
When means is offered; since it will make room
And entrance for Temptations when they come,
If we are negligent in doing that,
Which to our Perseverance does relate.
The Roman Legions, which resided here,
(When no foes to oppose them did appear)
Bestowed their spare hours with much diligence,
In making Preparations for defense
In times of need; New Fortresses did raise,
Built Bridges, Causeys, and made easy ways
For future Marches, whereby, to and fro
In safety, they, and other men might go.
And, we must do the like, if we would be
From future dangers and surprizals free;
To which end, things that seem of little use
At present, may hereafter much conduce.
Our Patience will wear out, our Courage slack;
Our Spirits faint, and cause us to draw back
From needful Sufferings, unless in some measure
We daily shall improve spare time and leisure,
To fortify our hearts by meditation,
Which is the nourishment and preservation
Of Hope and Faith. This, when my Friends are gone,
(Whose Consolations I do feast upon
Whilst they are present) if I those can void,
With whose Impertinences I am cloyd,
Moves me to gather up, that, into words,
Which their and my Experiment affords:
Lest that be lost, which else might serve in stead
Of Cordials at a sudden time of need.
This, moves me, when my Foes threat and revile,
To muster thus (as 'twere in rank and file)
My scattered thoughts; and then to march up close
Even to the Vanguard of my furioust Foes:
For, when we look grim Terrors in the face
Without dismay, it makes them to give place.
And, though the Champions of the world do laugh
To see my weapons, but a Sling, a Staff,
And Peble-stones o they will prevail, when they
Shall either perish, or else run away.
This moves me (when alone) lest else the Devil,
Or my own Flesh may tempt me to some evil,
(When they shall idling find me) to retire
Into my self, and search what vain desire,
What hope, or fear, or doubtings there do lurk,
Which either may advance, or counterwork
Those Principles of Grace, which by good use
And practice, I to habits may reduce.
This, that those Notions* may not fly away,
Which I find helpful, makes me often employ
My leisure times, in what, it seems, has so
Increast my Scriblings, that they nauceous grow
To many Readers; and, perhaps to some,
Who might by them advantaged become.
But I am pleased; for, that, my taste delights,
Which is disgustfull to their Appetites;
And what at this time they disrelish, may
Yield profit with delight, another day.
VIII.
An Echo from the Thunders, in the celestial Temple, reverberating, in part,
the effect of what was uttered by their Voices.
SIx Trumpets have been sounded forth,
Six Vials poured on the Earth,
Six Thunders have their Voices spent;
Yet, they blaspheme, who should repent,
And night and day a direful cry,
Still beating on my ears have I,
Of men oppressed between their paws,
Whose God is Gain, whose Lusts are Laws;
And, dreadful sounds of Vengeance too
Are echoed wheresoev'r I go.
Though men are deaf, yet speak I must:
Hear therefore, lifeless forms of dust,
And senseless things, that ye may bear
Your Witness to what I declare:
For, what hereafter shall ensue
Will make deep stamps on some of you.
Woe, woe, ere long to C. C. C.
To P. P. P. P. P. and P.
Like Woe to S. to M. and L.
For, they have made this Earth a Hell,
Wherein, unless Christ quickly comes,
Few Good men shall have resting rooms;
And little Faithfulness will here
Be found, when he shall next appear.
But Time has almost wheeled that round,
Wherein the seventh Trump will sound.
And then shall Righteousness alone,
With Power and Glory fill the Throne,
That JESUS, who (when by his Birth
He was first visible on Earth)
Much troubled Herod, and with him
The City of Jerusalem;
And is that Universal Prince,
Of whom all Tyrants ever since
Have been afraid, will come ere long,
To set that right, which now is wrong,
And put an end to their Oppression,
Who charge his Subjects with Sedition:
For, though some slighted them when they were seen,
His Harbengers have here already been.
IX.
A brief Reproof of them, who take pleasure in Scandalous Invectives, whereby
others are personally defamed.
THere is a mangie Humor and an Itch,
(At this day very troublesome) with which
Most men are so infected, that unless
We find a speedy cute, 'twill so increase,
And leave so few from this Contagion free,
That we shall all appear mere Scabs to be.
Now, there is nothing more delights the ear,
Than when it shall those vilified hear,
Whom they affect not, whether they are blamed
Without just cause, or worthily defamed;
Especially, if those in ought dissent
From their Opinions, (Although eminent
For many Virtues, and with them agree
In all things, which with Truth essential be)
And, since our Diffrences did us divide,
Few men there are of note on either side,
Of good or ill desert; but (right or wrong)
They so aspersed are by Pen or Tongue;
And Truth, if spoke, so blended is with lies,
With fraud, or else with Ambiguities,
That, if what is in Pamphlets published,
Should be hereafter by our Children read,
They Will think this Age (if they do credit it)
Had neither Honor, Honesty, nor Wit;
So scurrilous, and so malevolent
Are their Invectives, and so impudent.
There are of Truths and Falsehoods put together,
Such medlies made, without respect to either,
And misappli'd in such a barbrous wise,
Men's Persons or their Cause to scandalize,
That, whether they did wickedly, or well,
They, in their outward Fames are parallel;
And, frequently, by seeming to intend
That, which may their Antagonist befriend,
A Foe disguised, destruction does devise
For them, whom he pretends to patronize:
Shows make of Peace, where they bear no Goodwill,
And, those to save, whom they intend to kill.
This Bitterness and Falsehood multiplies
Those Discords and those Animosities,
Which have thus far undone us, and this course
Will make that which is bad, grow daily worse,
Until it shall exasperate this Nation
Beyond all means of Reconciliation;
For, till there shall as much respect be shown
To other men's Good-names, as to our own,
And, we are pleased to hear good spoke of those
Who well deserve, although they are our Foes,
We never shall be Friends; nor friendship merit
From any, till we qualify this spirit.
It Is gentle speaking that appeaseth Wrath;
A bitter language, no such virtue has.
Yet, let none think, this means to usher-in
A Reprehension of reproving Sin,
Or, that, it well beseems not any man
To render Vice as odious as he can:
For, no debasement can make Wickedness
More ugly, than essentially it is.
Though just Reproofs have not allowed been,
Where persons are more aimed at, than their sin.
Their Practice, Justice does to none allow,
Who at their Neighbors, from an unseen Bow,
Shoot poysned Arrows; and, Bandetti-like,
The Passengers from such a Covert strike,
That none can truly know how they are named,
Or where those dwell, by whom they are defamed.
In taxing Vices, let nor Tongue nor Pen
Act sparingly; but spare alone the men,
(As much as possible) unless they shall
Engage themselves, by quarrels personal
Against the Truth; Then spare them only so,
That thereby Truth may not receive a blow.
A causless Scandal, nor a Lie admit,
Though thereby Truth may some advantage get;
For, she or they, will honor lose thereby,
Who think to do her service by a Lie.
Some Good-men (not a little to their shame)
I fear are this way otherwhile to blame,
As much as they whose refuge it in Lies,
(And care not by what means they gain their Prize)
For, when that an Impostor does express
What some-way suiteth with what they profess;
Oft-times by that Wile, gilded Pills are swallowed
As wholesome, which are poysned and unhallowed,
And, them deprive, who are deluded so,
Of outward peace, and Peace of Conscience too.
Take therefore heed of those, who by their mingling
Truths with apparent Falsehoods, and by gingling
Some Silver among Counters, may by shows
Of their befriending that, which they oppose,
Obtrude upon you somewhat that is evil,
Relating unto things Divine or Civil;
At least, to make you hearken with content,
To what brings undeserved Disparagement
On other men: For, all things baneful prove,
Wherein there is want of Prudence, Faith, or Love,
X.
A Disclaim, by way of Advertisement, of a Paper, falsely imputed to this Author.
THere are Verses printed on one side of sheet, Entitled, The Wheel of Time
turning round to the Good Old Cause; which many, who know not me, nor my
Principles, nor my Writings from other men's, have ascribed unto me, who do
abhor publishing any thing without my Name, which may be scandalous; especially
to individual persons, either by name, or by marking them out in such manner,
that the Vices I reprove can be justly appropriated to them, and to no other:
Neither did I ever purposly compose ought which might endanger the public
Peace, or hazard the quiet of private persons, whereof that Paper is suspected.
And indeed, I conceived it at the first view, to have been the composure of a
malicious person, who thereby intended to make those in Authority jealous of
some Innovation intended by sober and conscientious men, who I hope will make
patient suffering their Refuge, in all their Probations. Therefore, as soon as
I had perused it, I wrote these following Verses on the backside thereof, and
gave it unto a Friend, to communicate thereby my sense thereof, to others, if
he pleased.

He, that divulgeth ought without a Name,
Which individual persons does defame,
Although the Truth he writes, deserves blame:
Yea, he, that without soberness and reason,
Speaks what is true, and speaks it out of season,
Against the Dignity of Truth speaks Treason.
Yet, Saints, may by oppressions, now and then
Be so provoked (for they are but men)
That, they may thus offend by Tongue or Pen.
If it be so, let him who forth has sent
Those Lines, his folly heartily repent;
For, they portend an Evil-Consequent.
G. W.

XI.
To them who object it as a fault, that this Author has written several Poems,
since he resolved to write no more.
I Sometimes think my work is done, and then
Resolved am to lay aside my Pen;
Yet, when I do discover some remain
Unfinished, I take it up again:
For, when I promise, what concerns none
(In any manner) but my self alone,
It Is always in mine own power, to dispense
With every such Resolve, without offense;
Then, specially, when else, perhaps, I may
To GOD, my self, or others in some way
Infringe my Duty, by the prosecution
Of that unprofitable Resolution.
For this cause therefore, I now think it fit,
Not only such Resolvings to remit,
But, also, by these Presents, to declare
That, whensoere a just Cause does appear,
To write, or speak, or do, what I believe
GOD may have honor by, or Men receive
A future benefit, I will assay
(Whilst I have life) to do it as I may.
This Promise binds me; and, I must confess,
That, if in time to come, I shall transgress
Against this Resolution, there is in me
No power whereby I from it can be free.
Reprove me therefore, if at any time
I break this Promise; for it is a crime.
XII.
Of Governors and Governments; and how we ought to demean our selves toward
them.
ALl Power is of the LORD, the GOD of Heaven;
And Man has none, but, that which he has given:
To raise, pull down, to change or innovate,
In governing a Kingdom, or a State,
Belongs to Him alone; and naught to do
Have private men, but to submit thereto
When He a Change has made, whether he has
Vouchsafed it in Mercy, or in Wrath.
Therefore, the Persons, or the Government,
To change I never sought, nor had intent;
But, to submit to that, what ever it be,
Which GOD was pleased to set over me.
Both Men and Forms, if well compared together,
Do prove so like, and so unlike each other,
That often the Constitution which at first
Appeared the best, becomes at last the worst;
And, as the Elements do change into
Each other, so the Governments will do,
According to the Affections, and the Powers
Of those, who are the present Governors.
All kinds of Government, in some respect,
Are but one and the self-same in effect,
And, when refined, will corrupt again,
So long as actuated by mere men,
Who, overswayed by their Lusts and Passions,
Are always subject to Prevarications,
And so often also, as the People's sin
Compels GOD's Justice to bring Changes in.
This, when the Supreme Power was here divided
(So, that some this way, and some that way sided)
Made many Wisemen, both in resolution,
As also in their ways of prosecution,
Exceeding doubtful, that a sad Result
Might follow, in a path so difficult;
I therefore, then, endeavored to adhere
To that, wherein most Justice did appear
When I had cause of doubt; and did comply
Where I saw with most visibility
That Power did then reside: For, so I thought
(And still believe) I was divinely taught
By Precept and Examples; and I joined
Therein, to those, who seeming of that mind
And judgment, did in show the same profess
With zeal, and with much conscienciousness.
And, some few, doubtless, acted to that end
Sincerely, which the rest did but pretend.
But, I was cozned by the greater part:
Yet, went on in simplicity of heart,
Till I so far into a snare was run,
That, back I could not go, nor further on
Without a Mischief; or, a breach had made
Upon that Faith which I engaged had.
For, few I saw pursuing any thing
Concerning GOD, the People, or the King,
With true integrity, to which-soere
Of those three they pretended to adhere,
With whether side soever they then closed,
Or, whatsoever they in show proposed.
I saw, that either by an open scuffling,
Or, by a politic and secret shuffling.
Both sides had so the Knaves and Court-cards laid,
That cheating Games were likely to be played,
And, that our Losses, who intended best,
Would be the losing of our Stakes at least.
Some, for Religion did pretend to fight;
Some, for the Royal, some for Common-Right;
But, I perceived Self-Interest was that
Which principally most men aimed at;
And had not thereof a bare jealousy,
For, 'twas apparent by that Policy
With which they prosecuted their Intent.
What else by them could probably be meant,
Who juggling with both sides, to none were true,
But as their own advantage might ensue?
Who, siding with one Party, sent a Brother,
A Son, or else a Nephew to the other;
Who mutually did their Designs advance
With Correspondence, and with Maintenance?
With Counsels and with Treasure strengthening those
Unseen, whom they did openly oppose?
And otherwhile, by murdring their own Friends,
Made bloody passages to their self ends?
Thus did they, yet, some of those now appear
In better case, than we, whose Actings were
Most innocent. But, though we suffer first,
The better seeming Game will prove the worst.
For my part, though it cost me all I had
To keep my Conscience clear, a shift I made;
And, am as well contented with my Lot,
As they are, who have by my Losses got.
Trust rather therefore thine own Conscience, then
Upon the Counsel of sev'n wiser men:
For, in a dubious path, no humane light
So well directs us how to walk upright,
If so far forth as GOD does means provide,
We take his Word and Spirit for our Guide.
Be faithful to the prsent Government
That GOD permits, to whatsoere intent
He does permit it, or what-ere it be;
For, (as I said) LORD of all Power is He;
And, every Government is good, save when
It is usurped by unrighteous men;
And, we must bear it then, till he shall please
Who laid it on us, to vouchsafe us ease;
Because (though He permits it) our Sin
Was that, yea that alone, which brought it in.
We may, and must endeavor in our places,
(According to those Talents and those Graces
Which GOD bestows) to offer that which may
Help keep them in a safe and Righteous way,
For their sakes and our own; and, without fear,
Speak to that end, what we shall know or hear,
(Though they offended be) so we apply
Our Balm with prudence and sobriety.
Our seeking to reform it, by a course
Not lawful, will but make it much the worse;
Whereas, if we with patience do attend
On GOD, he will better, what we cannot mend,
Or, else, with His own hand, destroy it quite,
Even when their Tyranny is at the height.
These are my Principles: These, without fear,
Have kept me, and will keep me still, who ere
Shall govern me; and whether Right or Wrong,
Be done me either little-while, or long.
XIII.
A Scrap added to the former, since the sending of the Authors Remonstrance to
the house of Commons.
THough Liberty I Have lost, with my Estate,
Yet, as things are, I wonder not thereat;
Nor marvel that my Poem, for which here
I suffer, to the World must not appear:
For, I confess, it speaks not in a strain,
Which Flatt'rers with esteem can entertain;
And they by whom I have accused been,
Would miss their Arm, were that in Public seen;
Occasion likewise I should not have had,
Of that advantage, which is thereby made.
But, one thing (which till now I thought not fit
To mention) I admired at, and do yet;
Even this, That, being of all else bereft,
The same Tools in my power should still be left,
Whereby offense was given, and by which
My Vindication will be furthered much.
It was a Mercy, but, sure, not of men,
That, I bereaved was not of my Pen
When I was first restrained, and also sent,
(As many are) to close Imprisonment;
Which, at this time had greater mischief done,
Than all that I, till now have undergone.
And this, I here express, not to outbrave
Man's fury, but, that GOD may Glory have
By that Assurance, wherewith, me he arms
In present sufferings, against future harms.
For that cause, in this manner, is revealed
That, which a wiser man would have concealed;
And, though, I somewhat over peremptory
May seem; yet, when Truths honor, and GOD's Glory
Do lie at stake, I know a servile speaking
To be a foolish and uncomly sneaking;
Not only disadvantaging the speaker,
But, rendering also righteous Causes weaker.
All men to Casualties exposed be,
And, things befall to others, as to me;
Even unto them, who are above my sphere,
And, were occasion of my lodging here.
When I had been above six months, debarred
Of Liberty, unpitti'd, and unheard;
Accused for Libelling, because I had
A private Recapitulation made
Of what I knew, as well by sight as fame,
(And, for which, yet, unheard, confined I am)
Five Persons, of no mean degree, were sent
To be my Fellows by Imprisonment
Within this Jayl; and, at this present are
Charged with suspicion of no less Crimes here
Than Theft and Murder; And, there is one among
That number, which at this time does belong
To that Society, which I am said
To have defamed, and therefore here was laid;
Though I in private only, had declared
In genral terms, what common fame aver'd.
And, which now seem not so incredible
As they were thought, nor things impossible.
Yet, with unfeignedness, desire I do,
They may be guiltless found, if they be so,
And quit, without endeavoring to smother
Two Crimes, by perpetrating of another:
For, guilt to cover, and damn Innocents,
Is not in these days without Presidents:
And, Presidents (although not worth a straw)
By some are made equivolent to Law.
Their Youth I greatly pity, though the Rage
Of my Oppressors pity not my Age,
Nor care to what straights I may be exposed,
Whilst here, despised of all, I am enclosed.
Now they, and I, until we shall be tried
All scandalous conjectures must abide;
And, if upon the Test, their Act appears
Mistook; why may not mine as well as theirs
Mistaken be? since I more likely am
Than they, by Prejudice to suffer blame?
And have less outward means of vindication,
From an unjust and causless imputation?
But, they, and I, shall have, when our time's come,
That, which GOD has appointed for our Doom.
He will be Righteous, though men are not so;
Whatere He pleases, therefore let Him do.
We, by the Justice, which will then be done,
Shall know, what is likely to ensue thereon
To other men, who live in expectation
Of Justice, or of due Commiseration.
And, if with meekness, upon GOD we rest,
That, which threats worst things, will produce the best.
They whom I have displeased, may now be merry;
For, I have scribled until I am weary:
And shall, perhaps, no more be troublesome
This way, when what is conceived to light shall come;
But, then permit them from thenceforth, to do
What they intend, till they are weary too.
In this mode I have little more to offer,
To say, or do, but down to lie and suffer;
Assured, that (if no good effects that have
Which I have writ) A Poem in my Grave
Composed and hither sent, would be no more
Effectual, than my Writings heretofore.
I have expressed enough to men of Reason,
Who know when sober Truths come forth in season:
Now, therefore, if GOD please, let them who shall
Desire them, take Pen, Credit, Life, and all;
But let them therewith know, that they will be
So dealt withal, as they shall deal with me.
It Is now known, what I Have done, what I can say,
And, what I suffer, but not what I may.
Qui jacet in Terra, non habet unde cadet.
" The World can him undo no more,
" Whom she has quite undone before:
" But, he whom GOD shall smile upon,
" May lose all, yet not be undone.
A few Lines more I Will add: I hear some say,
This will occasion rending quite away
All Liberties at once, and many think,
That henceforth neither Paper, Pen, nor Ink
Will be allowed me, nor a Visitant,
Which may supply me with what I shall want:
Yea, that I may be thither sent, where none
Shall see, or hear, what must be undergone;
And, that naught can be hoped for, but Perdition
In such a place, and such a sad condition.
Yet, this I fear not: For, there is no place
On Earth, or any such distressed case,
As no Redress admits. There Is not alone
For every Grief, a Cure, for every one
In every Country; But, each man about him
Has also that, within him, or without him,
Which known, and by GOD's aid applied, cures
All Maladies, and all Distemperatures.
The greatest Tyrants power extends not to
All those things, which he has a Will to do.
Nor is there any Misery, or Place
Whereby I can be shut up from GOD's Grace.
What more I may now, or hereafter bear,
Increases not my terror or my care:
Nay, so far am I from the dread of that
Which may befall in such a sad estate;
That when I think on what the Rage of men
Shall do at worst; And what GOD will do then,
It keeps me pleased. For, to deliver me
(What ere betides) a thousand ways has he.
He, that can make safe passage through the seas,
And, through a Fiery Furnace, if He please,
Pre-apprehensions gives me, of that Grace
Which will vouchsafed be in such a Case.
Joseph was long in Prison; yet GOD sent
A means to free him from Imprisonment,
In such a mode, that, if within our Creed
It be, 'twill very well deserve our heed.
The World can neither bring me to despair,
Nor me deprive of Hope, Faith, Love, or Prayr;
Nor take away, or unto me restore
Ought, making my Assurance less or more.
GOD clothes the Lillies, and does Sparrows feed;
He can turn Stones to Bread, if there be need:
And, could I down to Hell by men be driven,
When I came thither, I should find it Heaven.
The Bugbears, wherewithal the World assays
To skare me, could not in my childish days
Affright me. I was exerciz'd in youth
(For loving Honesty, and writing Truth)
With strict Imprisonments, and made ere since
A Stone (to very many) of offense,
Kicked to and fro, till thereat many broke
Their shins at least, yet harm I never took.
GOD has preserved me now fifty years,
In his Work, in all troubles, wants and fears;
From Poverty and Shame in worst of times;
From mine own Follies, Vanities and Crimes;
From Famines, Pestilences, raging War,
And Tyrants, worse than those three Judgments are,
Without dismay, even when it so befell,
That men in greatest power sped not so well.
In plain terms I did often represent
Their failings, to the late Long Parliament,
Yet escaped their fury, though I could not escape
Their Fraud, nor Partnership in that mishap,
Which their Improvidence occasioned then,
Both to themselves, and many better men.
But, that will for my welfare prove at last,
As certainly, as that which in time past,
I told them would befall, is at this day
Fulfilled upon them, every several way;
And, will continue, till their Fiery Trial,
Has brought men to that real self-denial,
Which them will qualify to carry on
The Work which GOD intends shall be done.
I likewise did presage to Oliver,
In bold words to his face, and without fear,
What would at last befall him: and I knew
(Though he dissembled it) what would ensue
For such plain-dealing: yea, I soon did find,
By what course my destruction was designed;
But, whilst he thought, I thought my self befriended,
GOD taught me to prevent what he intended,
That, I might suffer, as now at this time,
What gives more cause of glorifying Him.
By these Experiments confirmed I am,
My GOD will always be to me the same,
That he has been, and ratify that Truth
In my old Age, that I believed in Youth,
By making that, which likely seems to double
My sorrows, to help others in their trouble,
With constancy and patience to sustain
Their Burdens, whilst upon them they remain.
And, peradventure, they will be so wise,
Whose Indignation, yet upon me lies,
That, when they heed what GOD for me has done*
And may do, they will consider so thereon,
That they who were my Foes, my Friends will be,
And save themselves, by their deliv'ring me,
GOD can effect this for me, if He please:
For, He does many stranger things than these.
But, let Him do his Will. What ere is done*
He is my Trust, and, Him I Will rest upon.
If such a Famine, as is threatened, comes,
There will be need of such like Scraps and Crumbs.
But, these, to none can toothsome be, unless
They thirst and hunger after Righteousness:
For, they will relish unto all men else,
Like fleshless bones, or fishless Oyster-shels:
Perhaps, to some few, they will serve instead
Of Physical Receipts in time of need,
If, carelessly they be not cast aside,
But, prudently and seasonably applied.
To that end, they endeavored to save them
From being lost, by whose means ye now have them.
They Relicts are of that continual Feast
My Conscience makes me; and probatum est
To every one of them subscribe I may;
For I have proved them by night and day.
They are but part of larger Meditations
(Thus worded, for my daily Recreations)
For whilst to write them down, I did assay,
The greatest portion of them flew away.
VERSES written by Mr. George Wither upon three Trenchers with Oker, during his
close-Imprisonment, and carried to the Lieutenant of the Tower by the said
Prisoners Keeper.
George Wither, close Prisoner, to the Lieut. of the Tower.
SIR, I have been a Prisner now six times,
For no worse faults, than just Reproofs of Crimes.
Nigh fifty years acquainted with the power
Of Jaylors; and, shall shortly know the Tower,
To be the best, or else the worst of all
Confinements, which did hitherto befall.
All my defensive Arms are took away,
Now therefore, I assume such as I may:
And, since my Lot affords no better Tools,
A Trencher marked with Oker, Lead, or Coals,
Shall be my Buckler, Sword, and Advocate
To you, in this my much oppressed estate.
These, long experience taught me to provide,
When such a strait was likely to betide;
And, if you take them from me, you will do
More than your Order does oblige you to,
Or Charity allows: for, I Am not free
To come to you, nor will you come at me;
Though wise, and good, and honorable men,
Have thought me worth a visit (now and then.)
When I was in the much despised Jayl
Of Newgate; some from thence were freed by Bail,
Though charged with Theft and Murder; and I may
Expect that Privilege as well as they:
But, kissing goes by favor; and I lack
The Silver Key, which way thereto does make,
And by the want whereof, I find this place
Affords not unto me, the common grace
Allowed to Rogues; nor so much as a Slave
In Turkey, or in Barbary may have:
For, they have Bread and Water at the least,
And Place assigned them, wherein to rest,
Without extorting more than can be had
(Unless their Flesh could into Coin be made)
Whereas the Mercy which this place affords
(In Age and Sickness) had been naked boards,
And stones for bread, had not my Wife, by giving
What Charity bestowed to keep her living,
Prevented for a week, what was designed
To me, thence-forward, if we caanot find
Enough beforehand, weekly to bring in,
And save the stripping of me to the skin:
By which means, that Impeachment now intended,
May not be drawn up, till my Life is ended;
So, they will lose their labor, who assay.
To mould my Punishment another way:
Which I conceived, would more vexation be
To some, than all my Sufferings are to me,
Prisners should gently used be, (if mild)
Not currishly oppressed and reviled:
For (though neglected) we have still a Law,
Whereby such Jaylors may be kept in awe.
Know, Sir, that much abuse to me is done;
Which is not an Abuse to me alone,
But likewise to your self, and to the nature
And privilege of every humane creature.
For which cause, being willing to prevent,
Both your Dishonor, and my Detriment,
I this way have contrived to declare
My mind; and that, I my Affronts can bear;
Though (to my knowledge) since my name was Wither
I was not Villain called, till I came hither;
Nor from ought, for preserving healthy, debarred;
Though, often my usage has been very hard.
The mercy of preceding times was such,
That Prisners here, were not oppressed so much:
For, all Close-Prisners, (for what Crime soere
Accused) supplied with all things needful were
In their degrees; even a^ the Princes cost:
Which Privilege, though now it seems lost,
Custom had made so legal^ when due,
That, till of late, it was de^y'd to few.
And, whenever claimed your Predecessors,
If they denied it, we^^ thought Transgressors.
They who infringed (...) Custom, first did bring
Dishonor to the Nation, and the King.
Them, closely imprison, who have naught
To feed them and thereof, then take no thought)
Is worse than killing them; yea, such a sin
As has by ^nfidels abhorred bin.
Where Is nothing left, there nothing can be got;
And, to oppress, because men have it not,
Is an inhumane, and a brutish evil,
That Is found in none, but an incarnate Devil.
Sir, by profession, you a Christian are,
And, I hope, this mind, is from you so far,
That you all civil usages will daign,
So long as in your keeping* I remain.
A Cat no more can yield you, but her skin.
If Sheep do pay the Fleeces they are in,
They Will grow again, so you from Curs preserve them,
And shut them not so close up, that you starve them.
That which concerns other men, and me,
This day, another day your case may be:
For, Changes are not fixed with such a Pin,
But, that those things may happen, which have bin.
Consider it: If Mercy you extend,
'Twill make a better man than I your Friend;
And much more honor you, than all your power,
As Alderman, Lieutenant of the Tower,
And Member of the Commons, if severe
You prove to me, beyond what I can bear:
For, if through want, I perish in these bands,
My Blood will be required at your hands;
And, you will find, that I am owned by Him,
Who justifies, when man does condemn.
Do as your heart inclines: If you deny me
Things needful, GOD himself will then supply me
With strength to bear it, till I shall enjoy
That Freedom, which no mortal can destroy:
And when the World has done the worst she can,
Good men will say, I was an honest man,
To GOD, Prince, Conscience, and my Country true,
Whatever, on my Trial, shall ensue.
Yea, though with rigor I may suffer all
That Is threatened, and seems likely to befall,
I do not yet perceive, which way GOD can
Be honored more by any mortal man,
Than by the Joy and Courage he may give him.
When others think they most extremely grieve him,
If I had suffered less since I begun
To serve Him; I his Work could not have done;
And, what I now shall suffer, may add more
Unto his Honor, than all heretofore.
And, from that, whereto Conscience does invite,
My Punishment, will not one man affright
Who owns my Principles; and shall have grace
To act them soberly, in his own place.
Sir, I have twenty times as much to say,
But, here I am compelled to make stay:
For lo, this Trencher will contain no more,
And, Paper must not come within my door.
Your Prisoner, Geo. Wither.

Hearing it reported, that the Diurnal women cried the news of his Impeachment
for Treason, he composed this Epigram.
I Am preferred from Newgate to the Tower;
And, as the Summers heat mends Ale that is sour,
So, here my state is mended; and what follows,
May be, for ought I yet perceive, the Gallows.
Hark! what is that which now the woman cries,
Who, this day sells weekly Truths and Lies?
How! an Impeachment against Major Wither?
These words, methinks, seem not well put together.
But, let them pass, until I know the reason;
Perhaps, a kind of whisteling of Treason
I am thought guilty of: and if some say
The Fox's ears are horns, who help it may?
These Novels, only please, or else affright,
Children and Fools, who know not black from white,
Nor right from wrong; and quite contrary things
They Will tell next week, to what this week forth brings.
However, Friends, be not thereof afeard,
He that shall stand accused, must be cleared,
Or else condemned, before that any one
Can justly say, that right or wrong is done.
The Commons do intend to vindicate
Their Honor; and I am not grieved thereat,
For, it concerns them; and the Reputation
Of their House is the Honor of the Nation.
If that which I have writ, seditious be,
Or scandalous, 'twas not so made by me:
But, rather, by some Members of their own;
For, to all other men, it is unknown;
And was by me, composed with an intent,
Both Scandal and Sedition to prevent,
As that Remonstrance truly has averd,
Which to their Speaker I long since preferred.
I did but part of that in private write,
Which genrally was famed, that make I might
Good use thereof: And, if that be a crime,
I know it was not so in former time,
Nor will be so hereafter, unless we
To universal Ruin destined be.
If their Proceed against me be severe,
The more my Innocence will appear
To prudent men; And, if I wronged ^e,
The more GOD will be merciful to me
He that beneath his Wings has his abidings,
Needs not to be afraid of evil tidings,
Though they cried, Fire and Brimstone is descending;
For, Angels always are on him attending.
If they, as conscientious be, as wise,
Upon whom now an Imposition lies
To charge me; They, perhaps, when they have weighed
What I have done, with what I Have writ and said
In my defense; will to that sense incline,
Whereby the Honor of their House, and mine,
May jointly be preserved, and make good use
Of that which has been deemed an abuse.
I know discreet men cannot be so mad,
To make that worse, which is already bad,
Or, not to leave one single person free
To speak Truth plainly, when just cause may be.
For, they so understand, what does belong
To Freemen, and to Slaves, to right and wrong;
That, to excuse the breach of any Laws,
I shall not need a Favor worth two straws,
If Justice may take place, (as I conceive
It will, when they my Innocence perceive.)
Yea, peradventure, they, who yet seem Foes,
Will be to me so friendly in the close,
That they will by their Justice, honor gain,
And, me into their favor entertain.
One bitter herb spoils not a pot of Broth,
(Though some the single taste thereof may loath)
But, makes the same perhaps much wholsomer
Than if it totally omitted were.
The best among us, at the best are sinners,
And, in true Penitence, but new beginners,
Who need forgiveness: and, GOD will bestow
Such Mercy, as to other men we show.
It Is ^ot the cutting-off of one man's ears
Will stop the Voice which every body hears;
Nor possible, if Tongue and Life they take
From me, to make all men afraid to speak:
Nor is it in Whirlwinds, which the Rocks do rend,
Whereby GOD will into men's hearts descend,
Sunshine makes us those Robes aside to lay,
Which furious Tempests cannot tear away:
And, they whom Threatenings cannot work upon,
By Gentleness and Kindness may be won
To yield up their own Judgments, and their Will,
Sometime for good, and otherwhile for ill.
GOD by his Grace, preserve me from that snare,
And then, come what come will, I nothing fear.
For, chiefest causes of the greatest Evils,
Are these; kind Foes, good Witches, and white Devils.
Ingenii Largitor Venture.
Hunger will break Stonewalls, and make Fools witty;
When others will not we our selves must pity:
For, he that wholly does himself neglect,
Cannot his Neighbor heartily affect,
And, if we love not those whom we have seen,
The Love of GOD in us has not yet been.
By what Expedient, I shall henceforth get
A means to vent my thoughts, I know not yet.
My Black-lead took away; and worn out quite
My Oker-pensil is; therefore Goodnight.
All I can now do, is to sit and think,
What might be writ with Paper, Pen and Ink.
GEO. WITHER, Close-Prisoner.

FINIS.

