Three Private MEDITATIONS Which being, for the most Part, of Public
Concernment, are therefore Published, by their Author GEO. WITHER.

The First, is a Private Thanksgiving, consisting of three Hymns, whereby, GOD
is magnified for his Mercy vouchsafed in the late Engagement between the
English and the Dutch, in June 1665. Composed after Celebrating the Public
Thanksgiving commanded by the King.

The Second, is a Sacrifice of Praise and Prayer, by him offered to Almighty
GOD, for his providential respect, to Him, his Wife and Children, during his
Imprisonment in the disgraceful Goal of Newgate, when left destitute of all
ordinary means of subsistence, by being deprived both of his Estate and Liberty.

The Third, Entitled NIL ULTRA, is a Soliloquium, wherein, this Author,
expresses the improbability, of an effectual proceeding further, to prevent the
Sins and Plagues increasing, by ought, which he can offer to consideration.

Imprinted in the Year, 1665.

A Private THANK-OBLATION Consisting of Three Hymns, whereby Almighty GOD is
magnified for his Mercy vouchsafed in the late Engagement between the English
and the Dutch, in June 1665. after Celebration of the Public Thanksgiving
commanded by the King.
The first Hymn, is a Preparation of the heart, to the duty intended.
NOw, what to GOD's praise belongs,
I will sing in holy Songs;
Who, shall from his heavenly Quire,
With such strains my heart inspire,
That, (though distant) I, and they
Therein, join together may:
For, his influenced Grace
Is not bard, by Time or Place.
2.
Let his Rays of Light Divine,
In me, and upon me shine;
Let his holy spirit shake
Drousie flesh, till it shall wake;
Touch my Lips, unlose my Tongue,
That his Praises may be sung;
For, till roused up, from on high,
Dark, and dull and dumb am I.
3.
Humane words, cannot impart
What GOD speaks to my heart,
Nor my faultring tongue declare
All his Operations there,
Yet, I am compelled sometimes,
In plain Verse, and broken Rimes,
Thus, to stammer out such things,
As to me the spirit brings.
4.
To extol what GOD has done,
Here, I mus^ng am alone;
And, do praise him in my heart
For what none can claim a part:
But, what to his praise belongs
I Will now sing in Vocal songs
And, will so his praise declare
That, no man shall therein share.
The Second Hymn being an imperfect Narrative and confession to Gods glory, of
what he has done for us, in the late Engagement; how little, we have merited
the mercies vouchsafed; and how merciful GOD has been to both Nations.
LORD, in a public meeting, I, this day
Have joined, a Sacrifice of Thanks to pay;
And, being warmed at the common fire,
(By what external notions could inspire)
To perfect that which is begun,
(And ought in duty to be done)
I, now withdraw into my heart,
To speak to thee, who therein art;
And learn, how, I may to thy praise,
So sanctify my words and ways,
That, henceforth, they may more conduce unto
Thy glory, then they heretofore could do.
Oh! let my Meditations be
Made acceptable unto thee.
2.
For Victory conferred, we praised thy Name;
We hear, our foes have likewise done the same.
And doubtless, whosoever lost or won,
To thee, are praises due for what is done,
Yea, no less praise for what is lost,
Then that, for which we triumph most;
The one our pride may elevate,
The other, humble us, for that
Which was mis-acted, or mis-spoke:
For, Thou, who heed of both have took,
So graciously, oh Lord, have shared betwixt
Both Nations, sweet with bitter, intermixed,
That, no man, this day duly keeps,
Save he, who therein sings and weeps.
3.
For, all Transactions, which concern in gross
Our public, or our private gain, or loss
(And, which unto our knowledge, fame does bring)
Well-weighd) gives cause, no less to weep, then sing.
The good successes we have had
Abate some fears to make us glad;
The hopes, which those events do give
(Of what we willingly believe)
So high our expectations rear
As if, he we were above all fear.
But, when we hear the many Lamentations
For loss of Limbs, Lives, and beloved Relations,
To sadness, all our Joy it turns,
And, he, who much rejoiced mourns.
4.
A final Conquest is not yet obtained;
That, rarely with one Victory is gained:
For, they who loose at first, at last, may win,
By mending faults, with which, they did begin.
And, they who did at first prevail,
Find, oftentimes, their hopes to fail
Because to trustless things they trust,
Or else, employ to feed their Lust,
That, which thy Majesty intends
Should strengthen them to better ends.
When, therefore most Victorious we appear,
Let us rejoice, but, with a trembling fear,
Lest, when the rolling wheel shall turn,
We, who rejoice, find cause to mourn.
5.
Thou art but little pleased (if ought at all)
To see us triumph, when our foes do fall;
Especially, when they (though ours they be)
Are thy known enemies, no more then we.
To be our GOD, we thee profess;
They (to our knowledge) do no less.
We say, our trust is in thy Name,
They may as truly, say the same.
Their sins are many; we are sure
(Or may be) that, ours are not fewer.
We have not yet, our hopes at full enjoyed;
Nor are their expectations quite destroyed;
To praise thee therefore, we and they,
Are equally obliged this day.
6.
We say, the Dutch to us ungrateful be,
Our Conscience tells us, we are so to thee.
They with our Nation cruelly have dealt;
Our inhumanity, thy Saints have felt.
Their Avarice, makes them oppress;
Ill husbandry and idleness,
Have made our ways, as grievous prove,
To those, who seek for peace in love.
And, we, and they pursue the course
Most likely, to make bad things worse.
Then, Lord, which off us, justly can expect
That, our Contests, should have a good effect?
Or, that the one should have a place
Above the other in thy Grace?
7.
Had it so pleased thee, thou at first Shock,
Both Earthen Pitchers, might have justly broke;
But they, (as if they had been made of leather)
Are only bruiz'd by being knocked together:
Which, in mere love, to us and them,
Thou did vouchsafe, to give us time,
With more advisement to take heed,
What, by Contention will succeed;
Lest both before their quarrels end,
Be broke like pots, which none can mend.
Lord, were there but that mercy, and no more,
In that, which we pretend to praise thee for,
It merits from this, and that Nation,
An everlasting Thank-oblation.
8.
For, in this mercy, unto both extended,
Are very many mercies comprehended,
So complicated, one within another,
And, to thy Judgments, linked so together,
That, if we could be brought to learn
How, they both Nations do concern;
To what, each Judgment does direct,
What every mercy might effect;
What, we should seek, what we should shun,
And, what, ought timely to be done;
The wisest men among us, could not tell
Whether, those things which us have pleased well,
Or, that, which grieves us most, shall best
Thy loving kindness manifest.
9.
The Trophies, which most men delight to raise,
As testimonies of a thankful praise,
For what thou daign'st, are but a medly mirth,
Of wholesome simples, mixed with coursest earth,
Or, with such noisome weeds, as grow
Upon dunghils here below,
That, to thy nostrils and thine eyes,
Offensive fumings vaporize,
Which do provoke thine anger more,
Then many errors heretofore:
And, that which for thine honor, some pretend,
Is for their own praise, or a baser end;
Either, to satisfy their Lust,
Or, praise false gods in which they trust.
10.
My GOD, look not severely upon this,
Or, on ought else, that has been done amiss;
For, no oblation can from us proceed,
Which will deserve a favorable heed.
Some of our offerings, now and then,
May beneficial be to men,
Or, to thy Saints on earth extend,
If we confer them to that end
For which, they seem to be bestown
(And, in their welfare, seek our own:)
But, to advantage thee, the precioust thing,
Which, we to please, or to appease, can bring,
Adds nothing; though thou pleased art,
With what comes from a faithful heart.
11.
Be mindful still, that we are flesh and blood,
Whence, nothing can expected be that is good,
Till by his Cross it shall be mortified,
Who, to redeem it from corruption died.
Remember whereof we are made;
That even the best of us are bad;
Our seeming sanctified joys,
Uncomely actions and rude noise,
Which make thy best beloved sorry,
Instead of adding to thy glory.
Oh! let hereof, a free unfain'd confession,
(A burnt oblation made by true contrition,
And, hallowed by Christ's blood) purge hence,
All, that* which gives to thee offense.
12.
The more thou shall enlarge our wealth and power,
Our selves, let us lay down so much the lower;
And, rather use them to unite together
In love, then in destroying one another.
He, in the best mode gives thee praise,
Who, orders aright his ways;
Who, justifies thee in thy will,
By thereunto, conforming still;
And brings to thee a contrite heart,
Ascribing thereto no desert:
This is, most gracious GOD, a sacrifice,
Which thou did never (never wilt) despise;
And, such a sacrifice, I pray
Make that, which I present this day.
13.
Unfaigned thanks my heart returns to thee,
For that, which thou have done, what e're it be,
Against, or for us: hearty thanks we owe
Both for what thou withholdst, and do bestow.
Prosperity is no true sign
Who is a Favorite of thine;
Nor any one do thou reject,
Whom frequently thou do correct,
Unless he be more wilful far
Then frail, as very many are;
And whether thou do give us wounds, or heal,
It will at last conduce unto our weal,
If we, (but as we may) persever
In contributing our endeaver.
14.
Two of thy greatest Plagues, on us, now lie;
The third is threatened, and seems very nigh:
Thy other Judgments also scatred are
So thick, though these three Kindoms evry where,
That, by them, very few or none,
Have escaped being seized upon;
Or, being pincht, in what relates
Unto their Person or Estates:
Yet, sin does most men so besot,
As if thy frowns they feared not;
And, are more zealous others to destroy,
Then, of the means their own peace to enjoy;
A madness, which worse plagues procures,
Then pestilential Calentures.
15.
Arise oh GOD, advance thy Throne on high;
Thy self, let thine own actings glorify.
Thy Justice and thy Mercy so unite
That, they may honor thee in all men's sight.
Rebuke those who delight in war,
And, to thy Saints injurious are:
Give peace to those, who peace affect,
And, them from all their foes protect,
That, Righteousness and Peace may hither
Return, and here, still reign together.
Thy foes, are now become exceeding strong,
Thy coming, therefore, Lord, defer not long.
But, I have done: for, thou, with power
Art coming, and wilt keep thine hour.
16.
Dear GOD, this petty sacrifice of mine,
Was took out of a Treasury of thine,
And, of mine own, I, naught can thereto add,
Except my heart, which, from thee, too, I had.
Kept to thy self, now, let that be,
And, never left again to me,
Or wander thither, where it may
Unto the world be made a prey;
Or, by the temptings of the Devil,
Be drawn unto the love of evil;
Then, this (and that, which I have heretofore,
To praise thee offered) thee, shall praise much more,
Then many things, done, heard, and told,
In Temples, decked with silk, and gold.
The third Hymn, proceeds to a thankful Illustration of GOD's deserved Praise,
by acknowledging his Almightiness; his observing what has been openly and
secretly done in every part of the world, by both the said Nations, and that no
praise is justly due to either of us, but shame rather, for ought performed in
the said Engagement.
MOst Almighty LORD of Hoasts,
High Protector of our Coasts,
Who, commandst, as thou do please,
Fire and Water, Earth and Seas;
Who, lookst down from heaven, upon
All that here on earth is done,
And, survey'st her darkest parts,
Even the Crannies of men's hearts.
2.
Thou beheldst the Prepartions
Of these wilful Neighbring Nations;
Thou, have heard what they have spoken,
Heedest what such words betoken:
Thou have searched out their Designs,
With what thereto them inclines,
And, know whether of the two,
Is the worst, if one be so.
3.
Thou, observest what was done;
Not in Africa alone
Or, both Indies; but, what was
Done, likewise, in every place:
Why the English and the Dutch
Are divided now so much:
What is false, with what is true;
And, to which most blame is due.
4.
Thou remembrest, what Relations
Have been long between these Nations,
What professions to each other,
They did make when knit together;
Yea, what they professed to thee,
Which now seems forgot to be,
As if they were not such men,
Or such Christions, now, as then.
5.
To prevent what is begun,
Much, by thee, was timely done;
But, their Avarice and Pride,
Them, did more and more divide.
To self-will they did adhere
Like men without wit, or fear;
So, thou leftst them both, to do
What they were inclined unto.
6.
Then, with Streamers and with Flags,
Foolish vaunts, and shameless braggs,
They weighed Anchors from the shore,
Which, by some, was seen no more;
And, with an unchristian rage
Against each other did engage;
Fire and Water, in that hour,
Striving which should most devour.
7.
Dread of Death, that man amazes;
Noise, and smoke, and sudden blazes
This man blinds, and deafneth so
That, he knows not Friend from Foe.
Some, are slain by their own Tools,
Wisemen speed as ill as Fools;
Here, a Valiant Soldier dies,
There, a Coward sprawling lies.
8.
Loud the thundering Guns did roar,
Sails, and Masts, and Keels were tore;
Ships, were either split, or fired;
Men, by thousands, there expired,
This man sinks, and that man swims,
Some escapd, with loss of limbs,
But, to whether best befell,
Thou alone, oh Lord, can tell.
9.
Horrid sights, and sounds without,
Them assaulted round about,
Which, in some, did thoughts begin
That, raised greater Frights within;
And, though wounds did grieve them sore
That, tormented them much more;
For, their pains, none can declare,
Who, in spirit wounded are.
10.
This, we know, that thou art just,
As is every thing thou do:
Thou, art kind, and love so well,
That by woundings, thou do heal.
Thou art wise, and actest so,
That, we thereby, we wise might grow;
And, by what was lately done,
Might new mercies be begun.
11.
Not to us, LORD, for the same,
Be the praise, but, to thy Name:
Unto us, for what was done,
Naught belongs, but shame alone.
We, were so much terrified,
That, we knew not what we did,
Nor yet seem to understand,
What work, thou have now in hand.
12.
This Correction was in Love,
Which, if both should so improve
As (if they had grace) they may
By true penitence, this day
Our, endeavor to be Friends,
To thine honor, so much tends,
That, it would for both these Nations,
Prove the best, of their Oblations.
13.
Victories, do not belong
To an Arm of Flesh, though strong.
It Is nor Policy nor Force,
Ships, nor Troops of Men and Horse;
No, nor formal thanks and prayrs,
That prevents Death or Despairs;
But, it is thy powerful Arm,
That secures from fear and harm.
14.
Therefore, praise, for all well done,
I ascribe to thee alone:
All, that men have brought to pass,
Merits nothing but Disgrace;
And the best that we can do,
Will but Ruin add thereto,
If we keep our crooked ways,
Or, shall grudge at thy due praise.
ARESOLVE, Occasioned by somewhat spoken concerning this Thank-Oblation, and
this Authors other Writings.
IT may be, many will these Hymns contemn,
Because, they do not relish well to them.
They likewise, may Inferior Gods offend,
Because in this Oblation, I intend
No praise to them, but that, praise should be given
To magnify alone, my GOD in heaven.
The first of these, I leave to their own mode,
In offering up Oblations unto GOD:
For, if well-pleasing unto him they be,
They cannot be distasteful unto me;
And, whatsoever they of me shall say,
I may be thereby profited some way.
As for the latter, there is little need
That, I, to their deserving should take heed:
For, Prophets, Priests, and Poets of their own
Enough they have, to make their merits known.
These, to extol their Patrons, can, and may
Write more, and speak much more, then I dare say,
Who, (whatsoever advantage thence may flow,)
Can praise no man, for what I do not know.
These, do as their Inspirers, them incline,
And, I do, as I am inspired by mine.
Moreover, it becomes not him, who sings
A Song of praise unto the King of Kings,
The Attributes of men to intermingle
With his (as to those works he works single)
That, were to follow their absurd example
Who worship GOD and Baal within one Temple,
Or Chroni^cle the Deeds by HERO's done,
With Tales of Robin Hood, and Little John:
For these respects, I know men Sober-witted
Will me excuse for what may seem omitted;
And, as for those men, who so prudent are not,
Whether, they me excuse, or no, I care not.
To my Dearly Beloved Children.
ABout twenty years now past though I had then temporal possessions, which I
might probly have given and bequeathed, I composed and intended for your
Legacy, A Soliloquie and Prayer which I had spread in Writing before GOD on
your behalves; and I believe it shall continue for ever in his view: But, there
being but one Copy thereof, both you and I were deprived of that Composure,
when the Book for which I here suffer was taken out of my Closet. Therefore,
being now likely to be so separted from you, how much soever it may concern our
temporal or spiritual well-beings, that I may thenceforth perhaps never see you
more. I send you this Sacrifice of Praise and Prayer, next following, to be
instead of that which is lost; for it contains in effect somewhat, (as to the
Petitionary part) of that which was spread before GOD (as aforesaid) in a
larger Scrol. Take it into your serious considerations, and lay it up among
your Evidences; For it will speak to your advantage, when I can speak no more
for you; when other men who can speak for you, will not; when many perhaps will
speak against you, and when you shall not be able to speak for your selves.

GOD, sanctify unto you this brief Memorandum, and you to his glory, that we
may all meet together in him to our everlasting joy. Be obedient to your
Mother, the enjoyment of whose Company, will more then recompense the loss of
mine; For GOD has endowed her with so much maternal prudence and love, that by
her counsel, (if you despise it not) your Posterity may be continued on the
Earth until Christ comes to gather together his Elect. Remember the counsel of
your earthly Father, that the promise made by your heavenly Father to the
Rechabites may be enlarged to you and your Posterities; For, your and their
personal obedience to GODs Covenant made with all Mankind in Christ Jesu, will
be required (according to that assisting Grace which he vouchsafes) toward the
accomplishing of what I have prayed for concerning you. The blessing of GOD be
with you, and Farewell.

Your Affectionate Father, GEO: WITHER.
Newgate Feb. 15. 1662.
A Sacrifice of Praise and Prayer Offered unto Almighty GOD, by George Wither
for his gracious Providence, in providing for Him, his Wife and Children,
during his Imprisonment in the disgraceful Gaol of NEWGATE, and when left
destitute of all ordinary means of subsistence, by being deprived both of his
Estate and Liberty.
LORD, though my Prayers and my Praises, be
Unworthy to be offered up to thee,
Thus (as I am obliged) I assay
To add unto thine honor what I may,
By publishing both with my Tongue and Pen,
Thy Loving kindness to the Sons of men;
Especially, in those particulars
Whereby thy kindness unto me appears.
Praised be thy blessed Name; For, thou art speedy
In showing thy compassion to the needy;
And leave not any suffrer in despair
Who, timely seeks thy help by faithful prayer,
In patient waiting during his probation,
For thy appointed hour of Salvation.
Of this, thy never failing Clemency,
Few men have had more evidence then I,
Or in all straights, vouchsafed more seasnably
A needful, and a competent supply
Yea though my sufferings have been great and many
And, I, in flesh as sensible as any
Of every grievance, thou have by their length
Improved so my patience and my strength,
That, often such grievances, were not alone
As tolerable as if they were none:
But, such as also, have my joy increast
When I to other men seemed most oppressed.
For, though I have completed now, well-near,
In weal and woe, the three and fiftieth year,
And six Confinements, since I first begun
That work, which I thought needful to be done;
Thou have preserved me so, and me so armed,
Against all changes, that, none me has harmed:
Which, unto me, a knowledge does derive
Of what thou art, that is more then speculative;
That, what experimentally I speak,
In other men, may more impression make,
Then when I Notions only shall declare,
That were infused into me, through the ear.
And it is not thy least Mercy, that of late,
Thou do their seeming Charity abate,
Who, thought, they might thereby have tempted
To wrong my conscience, and be false to thee, me
By smothring, or Adulterating that
Which, to Truths vindication may relate:
For, when with needful food men bait their hook,
The heedless hungry Fishes are soon took;
And, whether, we confide in thee or no,
Whilst we have Oil and Meal, it is hard to know.
Nor, I, nor mine, (though robbed of all) ought lack,
That Is needful for the belly, or the back.
Thou have my Wife and Children clothed and fed,
When I could give them neither Cloth nor Bread;
And, from the earth, when (in seed branch and root)
I seemed likely to be rooted out,
My Withred sprouts, were then by the re-planted,
Where they enjoy the nourishment they wanted:
So timely, and in such a manner too,
Was that vouchsafd, which thou were pleased to do,
That, for it, my well-wishers praised thy Name;
And vexed thereat, my envious foes become.
Especially, in that place, where their worst
And last despights, were manifested first;
For, there, and in their sight, by whom undone
I seemed to be, that mercy was begun.
The Families, from whom I was designed
To take my Being, thou have now twice joined,
And, their two Surnames, being joined together,
Denominate my Grandson, HUNT L' WITHER,
Who, is in possibility to have
Earth of his own, wherein to make his Grave;
And find a livelihood whilst here he lives,
If he, thy Bounty thankfully receives;
(And, no whit farther shall be trusted in,
Then that should be, which has supplied been
Instead of what I lost) For, Lord, in thee,
(And, not in what thou giv'st) our trust should be.
My only Daughter, when left portionless,
And without any likely hopefulness
Of more then thou did on her Birthday give her;
Yea, when I was disabled to relieve her
Thou did, even in that great necessity,
Espouse into a Loving Family,
Enobled, by a Pedigree, or Steem
Which has no blemish to disparage them;
Or, such wants, as may make the reputation
Of Births, and Titles loose their estimation.
Oh! let thy so uniting them together,
Make them a mutual blessing to each other;
And, by considring with due thankfulness,
What thou have done for me in my distress,
Make both my Children, and their whole descent
With thy good pleasure, at all times content;
That, they to others, good example giving,
By their woell-doing, joined with right believing,
(And likewise heeding how thou do proceed
With such as in thy Fatherhood confide)
They never may despair, though quite berest
Of what their earthly Fathers might have left:
And, from my personal experiments,
Let them, thereof to mind them, take some hints.
For, when I by the world, seemed quite forsaken
And, she, with Lands and Goods, from me had taken
My Liberty; that, what then grieved me
Might more embittered, and redoubled be
By what my Children suffered; when, they had
Mo means of comfort, and, thereby grew sad:
Thou, did for that a Remedy provide,
By making them, a Bridegoome, and a Bride
(Whilst I imprisoned was within that place
Which added to my Poverty disgrace)
To my good liking, and their own content,
Without self-seeking, or dispargement.
This providential mercy, did appear
The more, in that, they likewise married were,
(As I awhile before, presaged they should)
Without such portions, as I lately could
Have given them, when thou did me disable
Not without cause. And, it is considerable
That, they kept both their Weddings in the sight
Of those, who them pursude with most despite;
Even in my plundered house, and at that time,
In which my wife, had not to welcome them
A dish or spoon, but what a neighbor lent;
Or Meat, but what by thee was thither sent.
Yea, thou have, when the world denied us bread
Me, and my Consort, competently fed.
(E're since, the world deprived us of our own)
By them, whose faces are to us unknown;
To evidence, that all thy Saints are friends,
To him, who on thy providence depends,
And to the utmost of his power persevers
In just and conscientious endeavers:
Yea, though corruption so in him prevails,
That of his duty many ways he fails.
He, hoping those Experiments, to some
May comfortable in like streights become,
Thus, for their sakes, in words expressed they be;
For, without words, all things are known to thee.
All this considered, I obliged am
To take unto my self deserved shame,
When, therewith I well heed, how often, by sin,
To thy Commands, I have rebellious been;
As also, that exceeding graciousness,
Which thou to me vouchsafest ne'rtheless:
And, it begets in me a greater fear,
Then when thy Chastisements upon me are;
For, in correcting me, thou art more mild
Then is a loving Father to his Child,
When he not only chideth, but entreats,
Kind language, mixing also, with his threats;
Whips him, then kisseth; and sometimes to see
Him weep does shed as many tears as he.
LORD, for those mercies, graciously afforded,
(Well meriting, by me to be recorded)
Accept this petty Sacrifice of Praise,
And, make us truly thankful all our days,
(Not only in our verbal Thank-oblations
But also, in our lives and conversations)
For, though we cannot golden gifts prefer
Yet, we may offer Frankincense and Myrrh;
And from him, who has not a Lamb to give,
A Dove, thou with acceptance wilt receive.
Vouchsafe us, in each temporary trial
A constant progress with true self-denial;
Let not the Benefits we have received
Be underpriz'd, because we were bereaved
Of those externals, which we have enjoyed,
For, their enjoyment might have us destroyed;
Yea, those whom thou make poor thou love as much
As those, whom thou art pleased to enrich;
And, by thy Grace* we may advantage make,
Of whatsoever thou do Give or Take.
Keep me and mine from that Prevarication
Which turns thy proffered grace, to Reprobation
Incline us to desire, and to embrace
All means of perseverance in thy Grace,
And, never let the asking, or the granting,
Of any necessary gift be wanting.
Make us to shun and hate, all things, whereby
We may offend thy awful Majesty;
Nor limiting thy Mercy, neither slandring
Thy just Decrees, as causes of our wandering:
For, no man to be wicked is enforced,
Or left by thee, until he leaves thee first;
Which* all men will confess when from their eyes
That scurffe is rubbed, which yet upon them lies.
So knit us in one True love knot together
By loving thee, and love to one another.
That, we in all Temptations fast may stand
And Satan, nor the world dissolve that band;
For, where Love, in the heart keeps residence,
Diff rence in Judgment, gives no more offense
Then differing faces, although more delight
We take in those, who love and judge aright.
When we offend, Correct us as our Father
With all thy Temporary scourges, rather
Then suffer sins, by sins to be corrected,
(Which is the greatest Plague can be inflicted)
And that, we faint not underneath thy Rod,
With stripes, mix mercy still, my gracious GOD.
I ask nor Honors, Liberty, nor Wealth,
Nor temporary pleasures no nor health,
Save, so far only, as hou know the use
Of such things to thine honor may conduce
With our eternal safety, and the Good
Of those with whom we have a Brotherhood.
And, hereto, I will add, but this Request
(Which comprehends all that can be expressed)
For me and mine. Oh! let it LORD, be plac^t,
Where it may stand, as long as Time shall last,
Within thy sight; and though, nor I, nor they
For whom I sue, can merit what I pray,
Vouchsafe it, for his sake, in whom I have
So much confided, as his Boon to crave.
Let us Dear GOD, from whom our Children sprung,
And, all their Offspring, whether old or young,
Who, from our loins have being, or shall come
Into this world, until the day of Doom,
By him be so preserved, at whose cost
Redeemed we were, that no soul may be lost,
Or be deprived of thy promises
In passing through this life's wilderness,
Either by Adams fault, or our own guilt;
And then, of other things give what thou will:
For, this I value more, then if I had
Thy Grant, we should all Kings and Queens be made,
Possessing in this life the largest measure
Of temporary honors, wealth, and pleasure.
For they are Baubles, in respect of that
My sanctified Ambition aims at.
They who obtained most of them, were but slaves
Who dropped with Infamy into their Graves;
And often less misery, to them befalls
Who get their bread, by robling under stalls;
Or, in this world, advanced are no higher
Then raking dirty rags out of the mire.
Thus, I in brief, have summed up my Request;
Grant this, and let who pleases, take the rest.
LORD, I know none, who, ever heretofore
Did in this mode, thy Majesty implore;
And, from what he believes of thee it comes,
That, so to do, thy servant now presumes.
Forgive me if this absolute Petition
Extends beyond the bound of my Commission;
For, nothing I intend, what ere I crave,
Save, what thou art well-pleased I should have,
Whose will I so prefer before mine own
In all things (if to me my heart is known)
That whatsoever may succeed thereon
Now, or hereafter, Let thy will be done.
My soul thou have inclined to belive
His Promises, who said, Ask, and receive;
Help then my unbelief: For, if the grant
Of this Petition shall that fullness want
Which is desired; no want of Love in thee
Occasions it, but, some defects in me;
And, that Obstruction, which thereon is cast,
Shall by thy Love removed be at last.
He that in Faith and Love can to this Prayer
Say, for himself, Amen, shall never despair;
For, it implies, he is no stranger to
What, man may hope for, and what, GOD, will do.
Newgate Feb. 1661.
An Advertisement.
WHen that private Poem, was taken from me' for which I am now a Prisoner, many
Printed Books, Writings, and Evidences, being my proper Goods, were therewith
unlawfully taken away; among which, there was a Manuscript in Verse, Entitled
A Legacy to my Children, consisting (as I remembember) of about three or four
sheets, wherein, that which is prayed for in the preceding Meditation, in
relation to my Posterity, was much enlarged with Expostulations and Petitions
thereto pertinent. The Restoration thereof, I would acknowledge to be a favor,
though it ought not in justice to be detained, because it contains nothing
offensive to the Civil or Spiritual Government now Established: And this
Advertisement is inserted, in hope, one of those to whose hand it may come,
will be a means of restoring unto me both that Manuscript, and an Elegy, which
was also therewith taken from me. I would likewise be thankful to the Restorer.

Geo. Wither.
At my House in the Savoy, June 1665. was this Advertisement added.
NIL ULTRA. Being a Soliloquie, wherein this Author, sxpresseth the
improbability of an offectual proceeding further, in his endeavors (to prevent
the Sins and Plegues increasing) by ought offered to consideration.
Psalm 1. 3. When Foundations are destroyed, what can the Righteous do?
I, At a Nonplus, am this day,
And, know not what to think or say,
Or, what part I am next to play:
That, therefore, which I now express,
Whether the mask I miss or hitt,
To public view I will commit,
And, leave to GOD, the giving it
In his own time, a good success.
2.
We neither love his Laws nor him;
Those men, whose Deeds we did condemn
We (by our imitating them)
Have justified in all their works.
They, who have seemed self-deniers,
In their professing Truths, are liers,
Like Lillies look, but scratch like Briars;
Talk, Christian-like, but, live like Turks.
3.
Some, say I dote; and that it is so,
I almost am persuaded too,
When I consider what I do:
For little less then doteth he,
Who gives them bread, who look for Chafe,
Casts pearls to swine, who long for Draff,
And strives to save them, who do laugh
When sinking down to hell they be.
4.
Examples we have had of old,
And, daily, we fulfilled behold,
What, has been often, of late foretold;
Yet, more and more besotted grow.
Nor Chastisements nor Mercy showed,
Though often withdrawn, and often renewed,
Nor what has for our sins ensude,
Can make us heed the things we know.
5.
What can by me, be said or done,
To stop them, who still headlong run,
To meet the mischieves coming on,
And, which already are in view?
Since, men will neither see nor hear
What is apparent every where,
Nor have Grace, Courage, wit or fear,
Who can prevent what may ensue?
6.
How can Good sequels be expected,
Where Truth and Reason are neglected,
And, gross crime, not alone suspected,
But, acted also, with shame?
Where, men all prophanations dare,
In all well-doing, cowards are,
And seem to have nor sense, nor care,
Either of good, or evil Fame?
7.
When, what relates to earth and heaven,
Seems of it proper use hereaven,
(And what for common use was given,
Made, only, for the Abusers sake)
What humane wit, can save them from
A sad inevitable doom,
Who, false to other men become,
And, pitfalls, for themselves do make?
8.
When first I did converse with men,
They were exceeding wicked then;
But, now seem worse by five in ten:
For, till of late, I never heard,
That, such abominations were,
So impudently acted, here
Within this clime, as now they are
By probable Reports, aver'd.
9.
If, Justice executed were,
If, we were what we would appear,
In thought, in deeds and word, sincere,
Oppressors, and self-seekers fewer;
It might be hoped, that, those few,
Who, to good principles are true,
Might more successefully pursue
What would at last, our weal procure.
10.
But, whilst we see, one crying sin
Brings every day, another in,
VVence new CorruptioNs do begin,
What, can the Righteous hope or do;
But, meekly wait on GOD. (until
Her measure, wickedness does fill)
Submitting all things to his will,
And, adding their Amen, therero?
11.
Whilst we each mangie humor claw
Turn Grand Oppressions into Law,
Stand nor of GOD, or men in awe,
And, Truths, by Violence confute;
We bring but fuel to that fire,
Or, breath to blow the flame still higher,
Wherein, our hopes will quite expire;
And, Prudence then, is justly mute.
12.
For, when GOD threatens Desolations,
If men turn due humiliations,
To Triumphs, and vain Recreations;
What, can be justly then expected?
But, changing hopes into despairs,
More Breaches, instead of Repairs,
And, that our formal thanks and prayers,
Should be offensive, and rejected?
13.
Often, under Trust is hatched Treason,
Wise to be thought, is to want Reason,
Sincerity is out of season,
Foundations, likewise, are orethrown:
To speak the Truth is now a Crime
To look for Justice, it is no time,
(To be a Knave, the way to elime)
And, sin, almost full ripe is grown.
14.
My witness, therefore, having born,
(Among men in the hope forlorn)
I Will, all alone, sit down and mourn
For that, which cannot be prevented.
My Lot, I le meekly take with those,
Whom, GOD, shall unto that expose,
Which may befall both Friends and Foes,
And, therewith will remain contented.
15.
This, now, is all that can be done;
That, therefore, I resolving on,
Will let the world awhile alone,
And, GOD, therein, to work his will?;
I Will only take that Ammunition,
Which gives no just cause of suspicion,
And (without seeking their perdition)
Let filthy men, be filthy still.
16.
Thus far forth, I have trod the Maze,
Without offense to any cause,
That's justifide, by Righteous Laws;
But, now, no further can proceed:
For, so, confusion here abounds,
That, Good and Evil, it confounds,
And whirles us in an endless Round,
Which fruitless makes both word and deed.
17.
For, they who dance upon the brinck
Of Hell it self (and fondly think
They are secure because they wink;)
Their open danger cannot see,
But, are so vexed to hear me tell
Their Heaven borders upon Hell;
That, for my wishing of them well,
They wish but little good to me.
18.
Perhaps too, as the Round now goes,
They who my good intents oppose,
(And are both mine and their own foes)
May seek to take my life away:
If they so do; when that is done,
I shall beyond their reach be gone;
And he who all deeds looks upon,
Will suddenly, their spite repay.
19.
Yet, I shall make no such Request,
As may not with their we^l consist:
I, neither by the Sword, or Pest,
Or Famine, wish avenged to be;
Or by ought else, which might destroy
The life which here they do enjoy,
(Though they that Mercy mis-employ;)
This, rather shall my Prayer be.
20.
Let GOD confound their pride, their hate,
And all their Plots annihilate
Who shall design to practice that
Which may to his dishonor tend.
Let none of those endeavors thrive,
Whereby ungodly men contrive;
How, they another may deprive
Of his just freedom, Foe, or Friend.
21.
This deprecation, does not reach
Men's Persons, or that Love impeach
Which Christian Verity does teach:
For, to avenge themselves of wrong,
That, gives liberty to none;
But, to do good for evil done
Required is of every one,
To whom a Saintship does belong.
22.
The public welfare I prefer
Before mine own particular;
And this for truth I may aver,
Who ever shall the same deny;
My Country, or my Sovereign Lord,
Neither by actions, or by word,
Or by my Pen, or by my Sword,
To self ends, injured have I.
23.
I have not broke my Faith to those
Who did a Trust in me repose,
Whether they proved my Friends, or Foes,
But, did with Loyalty submit
To do, or suffer under them
Who exercise; the Power Supreme,
Which is at the dispose of him
Who gives and takes, as he sees fit.
24.
I never did for Love or Hate
Act, or Design, to innovate
The Government of Church or State,
But did my duties in my place;
And when I feared, that for our sin
An Anarchy was creeping in,
Endeavored, when it did begin,
How, to preserve the Common-Peace.
25.
When Civil Powers were so divided,
That then, both Fools and Wise men sided
As Interest or Conscience guided,
I sought not to enlarge the rent;
But, being called Aid to bring,
To, (and by) them, whose counselling
Had been Authorized by the King,
I, to perform my duty, went.
26.
Retired from Court and City then,
I lived among plain Countrymen,
Employing otherwhile, the Pen,
My private Musings to record;
Which, I had more desire to do,
Then that which I was called unto,
Till I was importuned so
That, I at last, put on my Sword.
27.
To do my best, forth armed I came,
(My Conscienee warranting the same)
And purposed nothing worthy blame,
By unjust violence, or guile.
For, in sincerity I thought
A course we followed as we ought,
Whereby, means might to pass be brought,
Divided Friends to reconcile.
But, so divisions them enraged,
Who were in that Contest engaged,
And, such ill consequents presaged,
That, I my Troop did soon disband;
And, hopeless I should ought assay
Successful in a martial war,
My Sword, and Arms quite flung away,
And took my Pen again in hand.
29
Such new Adventures this began,
That, I appeared to be than
Betwixt the Fire and Drying Pan:
For, such proceedings I espied;
That, they who wi^h the best intent
Pursued the way in which they went
(And ill to neither party meant)
Found least respect, on either side.
30
To see what was done well; or ill,
I had just cause, against my will,
To be there, an ey-witness still,
Where grand Affairs transacted were.
As well the Person as the Name
I knew of most men, who by Fame
Were said to merit praise or blame,
And, who did best or worst appear.
31.
Self-love, base Avarice, and Pride,
I saw among themselves divide
The public Rights, on either side;
Their, Foes befriending out of season,
Well-meaning Innocents destroying,
Their power to favor guilt employing,
And, often, to a self-destroying,
Against their Friends committing Treason.
32.
I saw both GOD and Man offended,
Much finding fault, but little mended,
Good Life and Piety pretended;
But, few whose words and works were one:
They who most quarreled with each other,
In evil so agreed together,
That to repose a trust in either,
I found but little cause, or none.
33.
The worse men were, they seemed the better,
To serve their ends, and much the fitter
To be enriched, and made greater.
Him who did most indulge their sin,
Or, to inflame their lust brought fuel,
Or, were unto their foes most cruel,
They kept about them as a Jewel;
And, such, their chief esteem did win.
34.
Such as had neither Grace nor Wit,
Such as Job judged men unfit
Among his Shepherds dugs to sit,
Even such as were, the other day,
More worthy of contempt then those
Who lived by picking Hips and Sloes
(With such food as on Hedges grows)
Were honored; yea, few more then they.
35.
These having scratcht up wealth and power
In Court, and City, Town, and Tower,
Did act as if our fatal hour
Were hither making an advance:
The mean while, men, here and abroad,
At Hazard played, in such a mode,
(At hide, at Even, and at Odd)
As if all things were ruled by chance.
36.
Thereby, my hazzards greater were
Then those which I had cause to fear,
When War most dreadful did appear:
For, at what I before had done,
One party only, took offense;
But, I have anger, ever since,
All parties, who have lost the sense
Of what they seem to carry on.
37.
This, made me dip my Pen in Gall,
Imparrially reproving all
Without regard what might befall
To me, whilst just things I intended:
For, always I regarded so
Their honor, and their profit too;
With whom my Muses had to do,
That, none have cause to be offended.
38.
It ne'retheless, on me so brought
Their hate, whose welfare I had sought,
That of mine own, they left me naught
Which might my likely want supply:
No place whereon to rest my head,
No certainty of daily bread,
But, in my old Age to be fed
And clothed, by pure Charity.
39.
In which strait, GOD provided so
That, I yet live his work to do,
Well pleased with my portion too;
Yea, more then when it larger seemed;
For, what is bereaved was but Lumber,
Which did with many cares becumber,
And, is not put into the number
Of things which merit best esteem.
40.
I therefore, whatsoever befell,
To high and low did plainly tell,
(Whether they took it ill or well)
Such things as I thought needful were;
And often expressed with my Pen,
What might mind me and other men,
More heed to take, both how, and when,
Unto our selves, we traitors are.
41.
And, Time to come, when I am dead,
Shall find, there will be still much need,
To tolerate one in my stead,
That may pursue what I begun.
When God so pleases, let him come
To do him service in my room,
And, let the work he calls me from,
Thrive better, then it yet has done.
42.
My time is almost wholly past;
And, thinking this may be the last,
For a Nil Ultra here it is placed
As having no more now to say:
But if my life God longer spare,
And shall my heart a new prepare,
His pleasure further to declare,
I Will take this Bounder-stone away.
43.
I suit it thus, unto these times,
In that with which most fancies chimes,
Expressing that in gingling Rimes,
Which I suppose to be in season:
Else little heed they give thereto;
Or, if plain Truths observe they do,
Good meanings are mistaken so,
That, safe it is not to speak Reason.
44.
Things may result sometimes perchance,
Even from a trifling circumstance,
Which will be helpful to advance
The effecting of a Grand Design.
Once e're Elisha would begin
To speak, a Fiddler was called in;
Of use, that seemed then to have been
For his Work; so, may this for mine.
Man proposes, but GOD disposes, and his will be done.

God save the King.
Here follows a brief Defense in answer to private Objections, lately made
against some passages in this Authors Writings, heretofore published.
I Am informed by good friends, that among those Expressions which I thought
pertinent to this Generation, I have here and there intermingled that which is
distasteful to many who are not therein of my judgment, and that I have
thereby lost their good esteem. This I find experimentally so true, that not a
few have neglected me, more to my grief in relation to them, and for their
sakes then for mine own, who am not ignorant how I might both have prevented,
and may yet repair that loss hereafter. Nevertheless, whatsoever I am, or may
be thereby exposed unto, my resolution is, neither to desert those Principles
whereto I conscientiously adhered, until I am convinced of error; nor to
deceive any man by seeming that which I am not: For, I so abhor to comply for
mere outward respects with any Person or Society, in things which I cannot yet
believe are agreeable to Gods revealed will, and Christian prudence; and so far
also from recanting what I have conscientiously professed, though to my
personal disadvantage, tho I lose all my seeming friends yet left, (who have
not Love enough to be peaceably minded toward their Brethren, who are
conformable, according to their understanding, to the whole will of God
revealed in his word) that, as I will neither obstinately resist, or wilfully
neglect the means of better information; so I will not recede from the
Christian Liberty due to me, and all other men.

Many suppose there is no salvation, save in that particular Church only,
whereof they are Members: But, I do believe, (as to me it seems implied in the
87. Psalm) that the City of GOD extends it self into every part of the world,
even into Egypt, Phylistia, Tire, Ethiopia, yea and into Babylon also; and,
that under every outward Form and Dispensation whatsoever, GOD has an elect
people, who are Citizens of Syon, though their particular Churches, which are,
as it were, distinct Wards of that spiritual Corporation, may have many
blemishes, ignorances, errors, and defilements for the present. In many
things, we err all: They, who know most, know but in part; yea, the Apostles
long time after they were chosen by our Savor, judged not aright of his
Kingdom, nor were free from being ambitious of a Prelatical Preheminency, but
subject to many misapprehensions; and some of them seduced for a while, by an
Antichristian persecuting spirit; as many persons in Congregational and
National Churches have ever since been, and zealous without knowledge, in
Practices and Principles tending to that Babylonish Confusion, which will
universally come to an end e're long, though it has lately begun to be
reinforced. True Faith cannot be evidenced without good works; which being
imperfect in the best men, we have no such certain mark, whereby unfeigned
Disciples may be known, as by their being loving to each other, and charitably
affected toward all men; yea, although they are our personal enemies: and this
mark of distinguishment Christ himself has left us.

Upon these and such like considerations, I have been as wary as possibly I
could, so to use my Christian Liberty at all times, and in all places, that I
might not offend a weak believer: And, we have so many among us, who dissent
from each other, that it makes the performance of that duty very difficultly
inoffensive; and has put me to more trouble in the flesh, and occasioned more
outward inconveniences, by infringing my just private liberty, then many of
those sufferings put together, which are very grievous to other men. I dare,
and do openly profess, (tho some think it needless) my belief and judgment, as
often as I see just occasion is given: yet I do not voluntarily separate my self
from any Persons or Congregations, who are not apparently and maliciously
wicked in their lives or doctrines; but separate from their damnable errors and
sins only, as much as I may: yea, my Conscience makes me afraid, I may justly
offend by not complying in some things Indifferent, Civil or Divine, which are
not repugnant to Gods revealed Word, though not thereby commanded.

Where I know not any weak brother to be then present, whom I may thereby
offend, (and when I am thereto inclined for no carnal respects) I can
communicate with any professing belief in Christ Jesus, either in Humiliations,
Thanksgivings, Breaking of Bread in commemoration of our Saviors Passion, or
in Prayer, where nothing is so idolatrously or superstitiously enjoined or
practiced, that it derogates from the honor of God, or is contrary to the
Canon of his Word, or may in my understanding seem destructive to true Piety or
Morality: For, all other such deficiencies or superfluities, as we may suppose
to be in the outward worship of God, do but exercise love, humility, or
meekness, and I look upon them where such be, as I do upon mine own failings or
performances. Whatsoever, where I come, which I find to be so done or spoken,
that I may absolutely conform thereunto, without offense to God and mine own
Conscience, I therein join; and when ought is acted or said, whereto I cannot
fully assent, I lift up my heart in secret prayer to God, beseeching him to
vouchsafe pardon to me, and them for what is ignorantly offended in; and to
rectify both mine and their erroneous understandings, who are then present:
which practice of mine, if not worthy to be exemplar, I hope deserves, at
least, a charitable censure.

Most of the quarrellings amongst Christian Professors, are about matters of
less moment then tithing mint, and annise, and occasion the neglect of
weightier matters, as it will appear, if well heeded; as also, that most of our
Contests spring from self-love, though pretended for God; and tend more to
satisfy the ambition and covetousness of men, then to advance his honor or
true piety. For, it is evident, that a superintendency over divine Rites, and
the Worship of God, is unduly assumed by many, surreptitiously obtained, and
magisterially usurped by some who had no lawful call thereunto; yea, and
viciously exercised (in my judgment) by all those who endeavor to compel men
(otherwise then by loving compellations) either to the omission, or to the use
of this or, that Discipline or Form of Prayer, against their Consciences. They
who think no Oblation's accepted of God, but those set forms, or extemporary
Devotions which they affect, are equally guilty of a superstitious error: For,
both the one and the other, may be complete or defective, warrantably or
unwarrantably exhibited, according as they are performed. Extempory Prayers are
set forms to all who hear them, except to the speakers only; and perhaps also,
to some of their knowledges, who speak them, the greatest part of those Prayers
are set forms, and otherwhiles, in that regard the more acceptable: For, that
form which the Spirit of God has at any time dictated, never leaves it to be
less effectual then it was at first, if it shall at any other time be offered
up on the like occasion by those, who with the same devotion, and a true sense
of what is wanting, shall faithfully pray for it in the same words.

Some have affirmed in my hearing, that by declaring my private judgment
touching matters controverted, I exposed my self to more sufferings, then were
necessarily adventured: yet I do not so believe: For all that I have publicly
affirmed in subjects of that nature, whereupon troubles ensued, was by me
intended for Gods Glory and the common good, (though turned to my personal
detriment in appearance) and they have hitherto, brought upon me no mischief,
which God has not converted to my spiritual advantage; whereas, many of those
things, which my Censurers practice and profess, have occasioned uncharitable
separations, without any benefit to themselves or others; yea disturbed their
own and the public tranquillity, to the daily enlargeing of breaches, and to
the hazard of an universal irreconcilable Discord; if the probable evil
consequents, be not timely prevented, by an amicable declaring what we are
persuaded in our own heart, as we find just occasion; and by leaving other men
to the same Liberty, until they shall be as conscientiously inclined to believe
otherwise: and then perhaps many will suspect their own discretion as much as
now they do mine; and make it to themselves questionable, who required their
former actings or sufferings, at their hands. Let this be considered by all
those Censurers of my open heartedness, to whom this shall come; and let my
friends be many or few, as God pleases; for my trust is in him only; his
honor is my chief aim; from him I cannot conceal what I believe; and from men
(as touching things relating to his Service, and the peace of his Church) I
will not; nor dissemble my belief: as it should more appear, if it were always,
as free for me to publish my thoughts, as I am to write them, at this present.

It is for such respects, questioned by some, What I am as to Religion? and of
what Society I profess my self to be; whereto I answer, that I profess my self
a Catholic Christian: mistake me not; I do not mean a Roman Catholic, which
are terms contradictory to themselves, being so united; because, the addition
of Roman to Catholic, destroys that Denomination. I am a member of that
Church which is Universal, and of every particular Church in those places where
I reside, so far forth only (and no further) as it is a member of the Church
Catholic, professing and practicing in purity, the Faith, Doctrine, and
Discipline thereof. I am not of Paul, or Apollo's, or Cephas, or any Society,
but as they are of Christ Jesus; whom I desire to know (as Paul said he did)
not only as he was in the flesh, but as he is spiritually to be known also;
and to avoid that dividing into parties, which from the Apostles time until
this day, has tended more to the nourishing of Discord, and confirming of
Errors, then to edification in Piety and good life.

I separate from no Church, adhering to the foundations of Christianity, not
wilfully professing and practicing what may be destructive thereto, though
there be some defects or corruptions therein. I join not in doing or approving
what is not approvable in my understanding, yet am as far from a
disaffectionate separation on my part, as from separating my self from my self,
or a limb from my body, though painful and loath some unto me, by a wound or
some disease: For I shall cherish it until it so corrupts and gangreens, that
it may destroy my whole body; and then I shall willingly be rid of it. In like
manner, waiting in love upon Gods good pleasure toward me and every weak member
of Christ's mystical Body, I will endeavor to preserve my self and them in
unity, and leave the anathamizing or judging others to him only, whose members
they are, or pretend to be.

The Title of a Catholic Christian aforementioned, I affect not out of
singularity, but admit of it by way of distinction only, to answer their
questionings, who ask of what Religion, or of what Church I am: And I profess
an absolute adherence to the Catholic Church only, because that only is
infallible, and the Sanctuary of God upon earth, wherein his Mystcries are
preserved in purity; and wherein I may have assurance of salvation by
continuing therein. I wave the confining my belief or practice to any one
National or Congregational Society of Christians, not out of a factious
inclination, or petulent disesteem of any: But having a desire to be
instrumental in uniting men dissenting in judgment both unto God, and to each
other in Love, I conceive that endeavor would be suspected of partiality, and
not so effectually prosecuted, if I made my self a party with any one
Fraternity more then with another: some of whom strain at a Gnat, and swallow a
Cammel; or so presume of their infallibility, that they exclude all as
Reprobates, who dissent from them in Doctrine or Discipline; having also more
affection for those who are zealous in the Opinions and Formalities which they
approve, (though held in unrighteousness for carnal ends) then they have for
them, who are conscientious professors of the Truth in godliness and
sincerity, according to their measure of faith and understanding, if they
dissent from them but in a Crotchet. For these and such like respects I suffer
not my self to be bound up with any Congregation, as aforesaid) but so far as
the Christian Liberty, and the exercise of Charity toward all men may be
preserved: as also the Peace and Credit of all Societies professing Jesus
Christ, so far forth as it ought to be; for though he may have somewhat to
allege against them, (as he had against the seven Churches in Asia, to whom
he wrote by St. John) they are all in some degree Nurses of Piety and good
manners: And many thousands have had, and have in them, initiations into that
which is best approvable. Our National Church was my first Nurse, and I confess
with thankfulness, I from thence first drew nourishments, strengthening me
toward eternal life; that I had there also, dry Nurses, some of which fed me
wholesomely, and some to the endangering my being poisoned or starved. But I
have but one Spiritual Mother, which is the Catholic Church aforementioned.

There are other Objections whispered; some against my late published
Meditations upon the Lords Prayer; some against my Tract, entitled, The
Persecution of the Tongue among Brethren, a manuscript not yet published; and
some others, which I shall by Gods assistance, vindicate as soon as I have
leisure, from misapprehensions; and make it evident, there are many who have
heretofore complained of severity in those, by whom they were persecuted for
their Consciences, who would quickly (had they power answerable to their will
improve it into that Persecution, which is the Mark of the BEAST in the
forehead, or in the hand. But, having for just cause, added this here, I will
conclude for the present, heartily beseeching GOD, that his Peace may be
established and continued among his Saints for ever.

FINIS.

