THREE GRAINS* OF Spiritual Frankincense, Infused into Three Hymns of Praise;
AND Humbly offered toward the public Thanksgiving, commanded by Authority of
Parliament to be celebrated throughout the Commonwealth of England, the 30. of
this present January, 1650.

IF Scorners term these Ballads, 'twill not much
Regarded be, though there be many such:
For, they, perhaps, are Fools, or Children, yet;
And may be wiser, when they shall have wit.
If any thinks these Odes are over long,
Let him not do his credit so much wrong,
To say it, till he sees what may be spared;
And, pass thereon his judgment, afterward.
There can arise no great discommendation,
By lengthning out a pious Recreation:
Nor merit they much heed, that can be weary
To sing of Dangers past, and to be merry.
LONDON, Printed by R. Austin. 1651.

To the Right Honorable JOHN BRADSHAVV Esqu. LORD PRESIDENT OF THE Council of
STATE.
My Lord,
THe Parliament having lately graciously considered my humble Suit and long
patience? (and I, by the refreshment thereby obtained, getting some leisure to
entertain my natural Genius) an earnest Desire immediately possessed me to
perform somewhat, which might show me thankful to God, and to those friends, by
whose Mercy, I and my Family have been preserved, from perishing under our late
Pressures; and he who wrought that Desire in me, offered therewith to my
thought, an Undertaking suitable to my inclination; with hope, that he would
enable to the perfecting thereof in due season, though interruptions will be
many, and the time, whereto I must confine my self, very short.

The Supreme Authority has enacted a public Thanksgiving throughout this
Common wealth, on the thirtieth of this January (being the last day of the late
Kings life, as also the first of Englands resuming her long lost Liberty) a
Day, which may by good reason be made an everlasting Anniversary, in
remembrance of that, and other great Deliverances. And, therefore I thought it
would neither be an impertinent expression of my Gratitude, nor unacceptable
where I owe it, to prepare proper Hymns for that days Celebration, with some
other brief Commemoration, to keep in mind GODS late Mercies to this
Republique, when that days solemnity shall be forgotten; and thereupon
composed (among other assaies, yet unfinished) the three following Hymns,
which I thus communicate, before the perfecting of what is further intended; in
hope it may be a means to prepare the hearts of some for a more due observation
of that Day, by giving them space to consider, how pertinent they are to the
duty then required; and that they may be thereby in readiness for those who
shall be willing to make use of such helps to Devotion.

Hymns are so proper to public acknowledgements of extraordinary
Deliverances, and Mercies (spiritual, or temporal) that by the Primitive
Churches, Jewish and Christian, they were this way commemorated, and left upon
record even to this day; as appears in Holy Writ, by the Hymns, Songs, and
Psalms, of Moses, Deborah, Hannah, David, Esaias, Hezekiah, Simeon, Zachary, and
Mary, with others. The practice also of Christian Churches, in, and after the
Apostles time, makes it evident, that they sung Hymns and Songs upon the
several occasions, happening from time to time. And though Scorners, and
ignorant persons do in this Age vilisie, or contemn the gift of Poesy; yet the
most knowing, and most pious, among all Nations, have always practiced, and do
still approve the use of that Faculty, to rouse up spiritual affections in the
soul, toward the illustrating of Gods Praises: and they who despise it, are
dispisers of that Gift, which God has given for his own glory, with our
advantage: For, it is none of those accomplishments, which may be acquired by
mere human industry, (though it may be much bettered thereby) but is one of
Gods Peculiars, and infused in the mothers womb, as is generally confessed by
learned and understanding men, many of which have long studied for it in vain,
by mere helps of Art.

Upon these considerations, and by the example of many Prophets and Poets, (for
in some other languages, one word signifies both) who very well knew that
advantages may be made by the right use of that Faculty, upon such occasions of
praise as have been vouchsafed to this Nation; I have thereby sought to
illustrate Gods Mercies; with an assurance, that it shall prepare the hearts of
many, to a more cheerful performance of what is commanded, and help to charm
down those distempers which trouble the Common Peace, and hinder our
reconcilement, both to God, and to each other; and I hope it will not seem
Arrogance in me to offer them to that use.

For, though it be no rare thing to see many run on errants before they are
sent; and to obtrude their undigested Conceptions upon public Auditories; yet
private persons, qualified by their Education, Conversation, and Gifts, may
with modesty and submission make tender of that which they conceive edifying;
yea, and ought, (as I think) so to do, their consciences persuading it to be
their duty: because I find it was a Liberty, Apostolically allowed, and taken
for private Christians to communicate their several Gifts in public
Congregations; and that he who brought a Hymn, brought that which was
acceptable, as appears in that place, where the Apostle prescribes what Order
is to be observed at such Meetings. According to that approved practice, I
offer the ensuing Hymns, composed and fitted to the Meridian of vulgar
capacities; and yet (I hope) not so inartificially composed, as to make them
despised of the learned. I have also out of such tunes as the people are
acquainted withal, chosen those which are best suitable to the matter and
occasion, sitting the first Hymn to a strain, beseeming the beginnings of
Exultation: The second, to higher strains of rejoicing, and the last to the
fullness of praisefull Thanksgivings; all which I humbly submit to your grave
Censure.

And I dedicate, and first send them to your Lordship, for many good Reasons.
First, by your approbation of their usefullnesse, I shall be the more
comfortably confirmed in that hope which I have thereof already. Secondly, your
exemplary respect may make others perhaps take the more heed of them; and by
growing acquainted with them for your sake, respect them afterward for their
own. Thirdly, you were one of the most eminent personal instruments under God,
of that Justice upon which the many Mercies followed, which are the subject of
these Hymns; and I thought they would be the more acceptable unto you, in
regard no man had been in greater danger, if God, by not appearing for us, had
permitted our Adversaries to prevail. Lastly, an Obligation lies upon me, to
give you some visible testimony of my thankfulness for benefits conferred.

For, Sir, notwithstanding it offends your modesty, to hear me make offers of
acknowledgements, (though it be in private) yet I will now take the boldness
to tell it openly, that, if God by his compassion, moving in the heart of your
Lordship, and one other Noble Friend, (whose modesty has likewise yet stopped my
mouth) had not freely vouchsafed supplies during my late streights, I and my
Family, (considering in what hazard all my other hopes then lay) had, in
probability, long since been quite ruined, or exposed to most despicable wants;
as would be manifest, if the circumstances of my suffering should be fully
declared, and I should not now perhaps have had courage enough in me to have
composed these Hymns, or to have sung a joyful song in the Land of the
Living, this day.

They are, therefore, not so much mine, as yours, and his; Take them therefore
at your own, and with them my prayers, that God would return your mercies a
thousand fold into your bosoms, And make them comfortable unto you, both all
the days of your lives, and at the hours of your death. I have nothing else to
retribute but Prayers, except it be by adding so much to the honor of your
Justice and Mercy, as the single testimony of an honest man (never aspersed
with flattering) may confer: If that be any thing worth, I can truly say, that
I have seen you active in the most eminent prosecution of human publiqke
Justice under the Sun; and that I am a witness also of your extraordinary
private mercy, by being twice thereby delivered from probable destruction. Upon
contemplation whereof, I am warranted to assure you from him who can make it
good, that if you persevere (whereof I doubt not) in your heroical progress,
all the power, threats, and mischievous practices of your most enraged and
malicious Adversaries, shall be but as fire and materials cooperating with
better Ingredients to make refined Gold for your immortal Crown; and that
their revilings, snarlings, and detractions, shall make it more glorious then
Diamonds, Pearls, and Rubies, and shine brighter many Ages hence, then it can
now. It shall questionless be so; and therefore if ought happen hereafter,
that may seem bitter to the flesh in more then ordinary measure, or threaten
any terrible event, be assured, they are but operations of that Fire which is
used in preparing the essential Materials of your expected Crown. He so
presageth, whose predictions you have seen verified in more dubious matters;
and he is also unfainedly

Your Lordships most humble servant, GEORGE WITHER.

Hymn 1.
This first Hymn (prepared for the public Thanksgiving, enjoined on the
thirtieth of Jan. 1650.) may, most properly, be sung at the beginning of Divine
Exercises, public or private, the same day.
Sing this as the 100 Psalm.
1.
WIth aweful Joy, and joyful Fear,
To sanctify, O Lord, this day,
Before thy Footstool we appear;
And, our Thank-offrings here to pay:
Which though it be no other thing,
Then thy Free-mercies to confess;
Or, Songs, unto thy praise to sing;
Vouchsafe acceptance, nay-the-lesse.
2.
Within our selves, we are so poor,
That, we have nothing of our own,
But, what we had from thee, before;
Which, by our sins impaired is grown:
For, our wit, beauty, strength, and health,
(The goods of body, and of mind)
Our time, our honors, and our wealth,
To serve our lusts, have been resigned.
3.
And, therefore, till thou shall renew
Thine Image, by our fault defaced,
We, and our Offerings, from thy view,
Deservedly, may forth be cast.
There is no music in our Songs,
That Is worthy to be heard of thee;
Because, our hearts, eyes, ears, and tongues,
Profaned, and untuned be,
4.
Yet, by those favors, heartned on;
Which were on us bestown,of late,
A Hymn, we jointly have begun,
To sing this Day, at Mercies gate.
Lord! those eternal doors unclose,
Through which thy special graces flow;
The cords of our Corruption lose,
And, let thy Spirit on us blow.
5.
Then, every word, we hear, or say,
With ey'ry thing, that is done, or thought
(In celebrating of this Day)
Shall do thee honor, as it ought:
And, they that study public harms,
Or, flout, what we are doing here,
Shall be so bound up, by these Charms,
That when they flout us, they shall fear.
Hymn 2.
This other Hymn (composed for the same Day) may be sung before the Sermon
(or, between the Sermons, where two are preached) or, before the second
Chapter; or, after any pause (or change of Exercises) in Devotion.
Sing this as the 113. Psalm.
1.
OH God! how good! how kind art thou!
What help, what grace, do thou bestow
On us, in our distressed estate!
Our tears to triumphs, thou have turned,
We now do sing, who lately mourned,
And, by our Foes, were jeered at.
When we were weak, poor and forlorn,
Exposed to dangers, fears and scorn,
Our Comforter, thou did become:
And, when we dreaded shame of face;
Spoils, death, or wounds, joined with disgrace;
Those fears, we were delivered from.
2.
As thou, from base and servile bands,
And out of cruel Pharoahs hands,
Thine Heritage redeemd'st of old:
Even so, from those, who sought our harm,
Thou broughtst us off, with out-stretch'd arm,
With signs and wonders manifold.
They so, were blinded, Lord, by thee,
Who, might have seen, but would not see;
Nor hear when they were counseled well:
And He that fraud, and force employed,
To make our Laws, and Freedoms void;
In our own view, like Pharaoh, fell.
3.
This is the Day, whereon our Yoke
Of Norman Bondage, first was broke;
And, England from her chains made free.
This is the Day, vvhereon the Lord,
Did manumit us by the sword,
And, it is now signal, by decree.
Slaves, they deserve to be, therefore,
And to be barred for evermore,
The Freedoms of this Commonweal,
Who shall not thankful, now appear,
And vindicate with sword and spear,
Gods just Replies, to our Appeal.
4.
By thee, our Freedoms, Lord, we got;
Oh! to our keeping, leave them not:
But, still their Guardianship retain.
And, let not those, who under thee,
Sub-keepers, of those Freedoms be,
Nor, our sins, forfeit them, again:
On those alone, that are unjust
Or shall be traytrous to their trust,
To this Republike, or to Thee,
Let thy avenging justice fall;
And, on all those who hinder shall,
That Peace, with Truth, may settled be:
5.
Write in our hearts, thy sacred Law;
And, let no future failings, draw
Our former cursed bondage back:
But, our depraved wills renew,
And, to thy service, keep us true;
Which, will our Freedoms perfect make.
The Kingdom, Power, and Praise be thine,
As long as Moon, and Sun shall shine:
Be, likewise, thou our Heritage:
And, in this Nation, let there be
No other King, or GOD, but thee,
What e're they are, who thereat rage.
Hymn 3.
This third Hymn, may most properly be sung the same day, after the conclusion
of the last Sermon; or, at the consummation of any other Devotion.
Sing this as the 148. Psalm, doubling the last strain of the Tune.
1.
ALl you, that present are,
Come, let our hearts, and tongues,
The Praise of God declare,
In new-Thanksgiving songs;
Come, let us sing
Strains, that may make, the walls to shake,
The Roofs to ring:
Still sounding higher,
Till thereby, we, with Angels, be
Joined in one Quire.
2.
Related, we have heard,
What he, for us, has done;
With how much disregard,
Our Foes, he looks upon:
And, we have seen,
How, he befriends, when righteous ends
Pursued have been
We, likewise view
What will befall, to those that shall
Their lust pursue.
3.
We see, or may behold,
That, he our Armies leads;
And (as in times of old)
His Banner over them spreads,
And for our sakes,
Through threats and spights, through depths and heights,
Their passage makes,
Whilst, to his praise
Their Foes to naught, are justly brought,
In plainer ways.
4.
He, made both Seas and Wind,
To them assistance lend;
And, what they had designed,
Sun, Moon, and Clouds befriend.
Force, he repells;
He makes them bold, to march where cold,
And hunger dwells:
And, when their fear
Did most abound, they mercy found,
And Victors were.
5.
To him does Praise belong;
For, he did them subdue,
Who numerous were, and strong,
When we were weak, and few;
And, when our Foes
Came bragging on, and thought all won,
They all did lose.
Still, be it thus;
Lord! always, so, them overthrow Who malice us.
6.
His wise-foresight prevents,
The Politicians wiles:
He, crosses their intents,
He, at their Projects smiles:
In his due time,
^
Contrived by them:
And, in that snare,
Which, for our feet, they closely set,
Still caught they are.
7.
Vain sons of men, therefore,
Your brutish grumbling cease;
Pursue false hopes no more,
But follow after peace.
More prudent grow;
Reform your ways, and sing his Praise
As now we do:
Oh! whilst you may
In God rejoice, and hear his Voice
While it is to day.
8.
Let all men do the same,
Of whatsoever degrees;
And magnify his Name,
As all obliged be.
His Righteousness,
His Power and Grace, in every place
Let all confess:
And lay aside
Their own deserts, their selfish hearts,
Their stinking pride.
9.
Your strength to him submit,
You, that have conquests won:
Wise men ascribe your wit,
To him, even him alone.
For, he supplies
The Fool with skill, and, when he will
Befools the wise.
And, certainly,
Unto to your Foes, he, gives the blows
By which they die.
10.
Rich-men, your precious things
Bring forth, your Thanks to show;
Before him, (Oh'ye Kings)
Your Heads, and Scepters bow;
And, as it is meet,
Come from your Thrones, and cast your Crown:
Beneath his feet:
For, Kingdoms all
To him pertain, and he again
Resume them shall.
11.
Oh! let all things that were,
That are, or shall ensue;
(Or, but in thought appear)
Thy Praise, O God, forth-shew;
Till Times last bound:
And, let it run, when time is done,
An endless Round;
Where, needs not be
Privations Night, that we true Light
May better see.
12.
Mean time, let not his praise
Be merely, in our Voice,
As if we thought to raise
A Trophy, out of Noise:
But, let us more
Our Thanks express, in Righteousness,
Then heretofore:
Else (this is plain)
False shows we make, and, do but take
GODS Name in vain.
FINIS.

