This Synopsis of Heraldry is with all possible humility and submisiveness most
humbly Dedicated to your Honors

by Robert Wiseman

blazon or coat of arms HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE MUTARE VEL TIMERE SPERNO To
the Rt and most Honble Henry Somerset Lord ^erbert Baron of Chepstow Raglan and
G^^er Earl and Marquess of Worcester Ld President and Ld Leiutenant of Wales
and the Marshes Ld Leiutenant of the Counties of Gloucester Hereford and
Monmorth and of the City and County of Bristoll Ld Warden of his Maties
Forest of Dean and Costuble of the Castle of St Briavell in the said forest
one of his Maies mosst Honble Privy Council and Knight of the most noble order of
the Garter etc.



depiction of mounted knight Ancient



blazon or coat of arms PIE REPONE TE To the Right and (...) Marqvese of (...)
Viscount (...) most Honoble (...) etc.



depiction of mounted knight Ancient



To the Nobility and Gentry,
My Lords and Gentlemen,
I hope it will be pardonable that I here present you only with your noble
Coats and Surnames, since my papr will not admit of Room to set down your
Titles and dignities, the which are so generally known that it would be
impertinance in me to pretend illustration upon those renowned monuments which
will remain to all ages. And also, it being a rule for instruction, I was
forced to set Coats in order according to my purpose (though not altogether
according to the antiquities of the Coats) I hope it will suffice if
diligently and carfully observed, to Blazon any Coat that is presented to your
view which is only the aim of

My Lords and Gentlemen your most humble and most respectfull Servant. To:
Wiseman

Le Blazon Or a short and easy way to attain to the art of Heraldry.
The Explanation.
I have here Endeavored to put much in a little room, and to be as short as I
could in giveing you a method to blazon any Coat whatsoever. (I hope it will
not seem hard) all the Colors are hatched according to the first seven
Escocheons, and taken care to name every Charge at least once as for example.

In the Crosses I have named the first a plain Cross, and then have named no
more but the Alterations, as wavy or Ingrayled etc. and so of a Saltire and
bend, and so of Lions, I have done the like of all other charges, but if any
other charge accompany a Lion, or other charge then the Lion is not named, but
the other things that are found. As S.r John Hoskins Coat (of Herefs) is
written over between (Party per pale the Cheveron and the Lions are named in
other places) therefore I say between, that is Party per pale azure and Gules,
a Cheveron between 3 lions Rampant or.

Or thus he bears argent 3 lozanges in ffesse Gules, within a Bordure sable,
by the name of Mountagu, of which there are several noble Familys. you see the
bordure must be named, and if it be invecked ingrayled waved etc. it must be
expressed, if entoyre, you must say of so many bezants, if Enaleuro^ of so many
birds. To Blazon you must begin with the Field, and say he bears Or Argent or
Gules etc. and then name the Charge and the Charge charged, nameing their true
position number and figure, and for a better rule, observe that all common
Charges in the mixed bearings are borne in upon or with Chief, Pale, bend,
Cheveron, Cross, Saltier, Canton Fess Giron, Pile, Escocheon, bordure, or
orle, or one Common Charge in upon or with another

Observation. in Heraldry, the rule is never to put Metal upon Metal, nor
Color upon Color, otherwise the Arms are ffalse.

Of Terms in Heraldry, Lions, Griffons, W^lues, and Bears. are Rampant if
Exactly in pale but if more bend ways Lions, Wolves, and Be^res are Saliant,
Griffons sergreiant, lions are also ^^gued and Armned Gules, or Azure or, the
like. Griffons are armed, Eagles likewise, Swans membred, Hawks are Iessed and
Belled, Cocks are armed Cressed and Velloped, Capons are armed Cressed, and
Iowlopped, All these things are to be expressed when they are met with (that
is) when the tongues bills and Claws are found of differing Color from the
body.

And when any liveing creature pro^eed from the bottom of any ordinary, it is
(...) and when over two Colors, then Ies^^ when it proceeds from the middle of
any ordinary or common Charge, it is said, naissant

of Furrs, Ermine is white, powdered (...) black. ermines is black powdered
with white. Ermynois is yellow, powdered with black Pean^^ black, powdered with
yellow. vayre is of argent, or Azure, but if of other Colors, it is to be
express^d vayre of such colors.

Fesse, Bend, and Cheveron, have their d^^^^^^es as you see in their order.

Their proportion, is thus, the Pale occu^ieth a Fifth part of the escutcheon
but if charge (...) part the bend likewise, the fesse chief and saltier
likewise, the pallet is half the Pale, (...) the fourth part, the Bar half
the fesse and (...) Baronetts have allways the addition of (...) sinister hand
gules, to their coat, and single Ladys bear their Coats in the form of a
Lozange.

Any Gentleman that bears a Coat may imp^le his wives Coat with it as (...)
as she lives, and if she be an hei^ (...) and his heirs for ever, and so
it come^^ (...) ^^^y persons of Quality have many (...) to blazon them you must
say he bears quarterly of 4 6 or 8 Coats, beginning at ye first and soon to
ye last.

Coats are blazoned either by Metalls precious Stones or planetts, the latter
are commonly made use of in blazoning the arms of Princes and pers:ons of
Honor.

Colors Mettalls Precious Stones Planetts Yelow Or Topaz Sol White Argent
Pearl Luna Black Sable Diamond Saturn Red Gules Rubie Mars Blew Azure Sapphire
Jupiter Green Vert Emrald Venus Purple Purpure Amethyst Mercury

observe to give the true name to all Charges of this. simple circle

if they be then they are called Or Bezants Argent Plates Sable Palletts Gules
Tortevxes Light blew Hurts Vert Pomeyes Purpure Golpes Ten Oranges

These are the differences of houses that are added to Coate-armour, to
distinguish the descent of Families. (...) ^^ey be of the first. (...) third
house etc. (...) (...) (...) 5-pointed star bird concentric rings fleur-de-lys
(...) (...) (...) 5-pointed star superimposed on crescent bird superimposed on
crescent concentric rings superimposed on crescent fleur-de-lys superimposed on
crescent (...) (...) crescent superimposed on 5-pointed star 5-pointed star
superimposed on 5-pointed star bird superimposed on 5-pointed star concentric
rings superimposed on 5-pointed star fleur-de-lys superimposed on 5-pointed
star (...) crenellations superimposed on bird crescent superimposed on bird
5-pointed star superimposed on bird bird superimposed on bird concentric rings
superimposed on bird fleur-de-lys superimposed on bird 5 crenellations
superimposed on concentric rings crescent superimposed on concentric rings
5-pointed star superimposed on concentric rings bird superimposed on concentric
rings concentric rings superimposed on concentric rings fleur-de-lys
superimposed on concentric rings 6 crenellation superimposed on fleur-de-lys
crescent superimposed on fleur-de-lys 5-pointed star superimposed on
fleur-de-lys bird superimposed on fleur-de-lys concentric rings superimposed on
fleur-de-lys fleur-de-lys superimposed on fleur-de-lys

There is a Care to be taken concerning the honorable parts of the Escocheon
and ye less Honorable, as to location, which are observed as follows A B C D
E F G H I

A The dexter chief. B The precise middle chief. C The sinister chief. D The
honor oint. E The fesse point. F The (...) point. G The dexter base. H The
precise middle base. I The sinister base.


When any ordinaries are drawn with any of these lines the Blazoner is to say
a Bend. Fesse, Pale, Cross, Bordure or what it is, invecked ingrayled wavy or
the like. Invecked heraldic motif Ingrayled heraldic motif Wavy heraldic motif
Nebule heraldic motif ^^^taild or Crenelle heraldic motif Indented heraldic
motif D^ncette heraldic motif


These are the man^er of Helmetts Crowns, and Coronetts that such persons
bear, as you see ye titles under these examples. King helmet Earl helmet
Knight helmet Esquire helmet
King crown Prince crown Arch Du^^ crown Duke crown
Marquess coronet Earl coronet Viscount coronet Baron coronet


or heraldic device argent heraldic device sable heraldic device gules heraldic
device azure heraldic device uert heraldic device purpure heraldic device
ermine heraldic device ermines heraldic device raqre heraldic device potent
heraldic device checkey heraldic device party per pale Walgrave
heraldic device per fesse Zusto
heraldic device per bend Hawley
heraldic device P B crenelle Boil
heraldic device senester Zurith
heraldic device per cross ^ock
heraldic device per saltier Res^wold
heraldic device (...) quarter heraldic device canton heraldic device girone
heraldic device Gironey of 8 heraldic device escocheon heraldic device an earl
Bartram
heraldic device orley heraldic device royders heraldic device flasques
heraldic device flanches heraldic device Countercomponed heraldic device
purflewe heraldic device Gabonnied heraldic device entoyre heraldic device
enaluron heraldic device a pile Chandos
heraldic device 2 piles Hollis
heraldic device transposed heraldic device P flory heraldic device cotized
heraldic device
a plain cross Ramsford
heraldic device wavy Ducken^feild
heraldic device ^^^ided heraldic device fimbraited heraldic device upon 3
grees Jones
heraldic device moline Moleneux
heraldic device patonce heraldic device flurry Ward
heraldic device Avelane heraldic device potent Allen
heraldic device P fitched heraldic device Patee fitched Cadwallader
heraldic device formy flurry heraldic device bottony heraldic device ingrayled
Mohun
heraldic device couped perced Grill
heraldic device Croyded Woodnoth
heraldic device triparted heraldic device double parted heraldic device
reguled Laurence
heraldic device
a saltire Aston
heraldic device counterchanged Hunt
heraldic device surmounted Andrews
heraldic device a pale Hinckley
heraldic device a pallet heraldic device endorse heraldic device paletts wavy
heraldic device radient rayone heraldic device a bend Scroop
heraldic device wavy Wallop
heraldic device crenelle Wallyes
heraldic device ingrayled Colepepper
heraldic device flory Highlord
heraldic device Cotized Bowyer
heraldic device a benler heraldic device a garter heraldic device a cost
heraldic device a ribon heraldic device a B sinister heraldic device a scarpe
heraldic device a batune heraldic device a fesse heraldic device a bar
heraldic device a Closet heraldic device barulet heraldic device 3 lozanges v^^
Mountagu
heraldic device 3 bars wavy Samford
heraldic device dancetty Delamare
heraldic device Di Chief Hungerford
heraldic device bare of 12 Thynne
heraldic device nebule Blunt
heraldic device
a chief Worlesley
heraldic device a C indented Butler
heraldic device bend and chief heraldic device saltire and Chapter Bruce
heraldic device a cheveron Stafford
heraldic device ingrayled vo Dudley
heraldic device couped Jones
heraldic device a cheveronel heraldic device a couple close heraldic device
braced Fittz hugh
heraldic device reversed heraldic device a file 3 points Barrington
heraldic device
a Lion dorma^t heraldic device couchant heraldic device sejant heraldic device
passant heraldic device P.gardant Bromfeild
heraldic device saliant Felbrige
heraldic device rampant Stapleton
heraldic device regardant Givay
heraldic device coward Ro^ch
heraldic device chained Meredith
heraldic device 2 L. passant Somery
heraldic device 2 P gardant Ducy
heraldic device Counterpassa^t Glegg
heraldic device Combatant Wycomb
heraldic device enda^^^ Achilles
heraldic device R^^pant Ettr^^^
heraldic device escallops Russell
heraldic device crowned or Tyson
heraldic device crosseletts Long
heraldic device within a B Henley
heraldic device be^let Church
heraldic device ba^yemells Fairfax
heraldic device counter cha Vaughan
heraldic device between Hoskins
heraldic device 2 L rampant heraldic device 6 lionesses heraldic device demi
lion heraldic device 3 demi. L ^^nnet
heraldic device issuant Markham
heraldic device naissant Emme
heraldic device
(...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...)
rampant Barnard
heraldic device muzzled Barwick
heraldic device
a wolse Sali Dawne
heraldic device passant Low
heraldic device a grayhound Holford
heraldic device current Palmer
heraldic device a Talbot Burgoine
heraldic device heads Burton
heraldic device
Reynards Kadmil
heraldic device catts in pale Keate
heraldic device squerrells Lovell
heraldic device connyes Strood
heraldic device
a stagg lodged Harthill
heraldic device at gaze Jones
heraldic device tripping heraldic device springing Gilstand
heraldic device B in full corse Robertson
heraldic device hinds C T Cotingham
heraldic device St H cooped Rigmaiden
heraldic device caborsed heraldic device truncked heraldic device atires
heraldic device unicorn Harling
heraldic device tripping Musterton
heraldic device current Farington
heraldic device Cooped Shelley
heraldic device a camel pass Camel
heraldic device
a bore Trewarthen
heraldic device erected Booth
heraldic device in 3 Cupps Boles
heraldic device 6 ram C T Harman
heraldic device rams heads Bendish
heraldic device holy lambs Row
heraldic device an elephant Elfinston
heraldic device erased heraldic device 3 horses P Stamp
heraldic device cooped Marsh
heraldic device asses passant Askewe
heraldic device erased Hocknell
heraldic device a mule Moile
heraldic device calves Veale
heraldic device a bull Berile
heraldic device erased Carselack
heraldic device truncked Baynham
heraldic device caborsed Gore
heraldic device a goat Baker
heraldic device atired or Gorley
heraldic device
an eagle Reddingfeild
heraldic device displayed Win
heraldic device eagletts Ernly
heraldic device eggles close Child
heraldic device erased Awbrey
heraldic device conjoined Seymour
heraldic device eagles claw Canhanser
heraldic device alaquise heraldic device gosse hawk We Will
heraldic device sparrow hawk Atterton
heraldic device owls Prescot
heraldic device on a bend Savill
heraldic device a raven Corbet
heraldic device cornish choug Oneslow
heraldic device burstards iij Nevill
heraldic device swallows Watton
heraldic device volant Swallow
heraldic device marrtletts Wray
heraldic device a F between Croke
heraldic device on a chief Wild
heraldic device cocks Cock
heraldic device capones Capenhurst
heraldic device in their pride Pawn
heraldic device turrkey cocks Yeo
heraldic device bees volant Bye
heraldic device harvest fly Bolowre
heraldic device
a griffon Evelin
heraldic device sergreant Read
heraldic device in chief Dand
heraldic device L counter P heraldic device a Wivern Drake
heraldic device dragons H Cutler
heraldic device mermaid Ellis
heraldic device
otters Lutterell
heraldic device seals feet Yarmouth
heraldic device a leopard heraldic device lea. heads Wentworth
heraldic device Jessant a f Morley
heraldic device
dolphin nai^. Fitz James
heraldic device Hauriant heraldic device Eeles naiant Ellis
heraldic device pikes e^dorsed heraldic device trouts fretted Trowtback
heraldic device sea crabs Bridger
heraldic device an escallop Prelate
heraldic device shells Malet
heraldic device welks Shelly
heraldic device
pine T fructed Pine
heraldic device a limb of a tree reguled Penruddock
heraldic device stocks radicated Retowre
heraldic device laurel lea. Leueson
heraldic device holly L pendant Inwine
heraldic device pears Sinkley
heraldic device pine apples heraldic device grapes Maroley
heraldic device apples in base Harlewin
heraldic device a rose Beverley
heraldic device a C. between 3 Bish
heraldic device on a canton Broadstone
heraldic device hurts Baskerville
heraldic device garbes Preston
heraldic device flower de lis Digby
heraldic device in ^ quarter Ashmole
heraldic device lillies Winchester Coll.
heraldic device trefoiles Williamson
heraldic device slipped Lewis
heraldic device sinq:foiles Foley
heraldic device Gilliflowers heraldic device blewbottles Chorley
heraldic device caterfoiles Platt
heraldic device
culuering Leigh
heraldic device battering Rams Barley
heraldic device long bows Bows
heraldic device pheons Rowden
heraldic device a S in pale Dimock
heraldic device conjoined Stapleton
heraldic device in point Paulet
heraldic device lances in B Carlo^
heraldic device spear heads Rayce
heraldic device Cronells Wiseman
heraldic device bills Gibbs
heraldic device Helmetts Miniett
heraldic device a L between Compton
heraldic device bells Porter
heraldic device hawks bells Ent
heraldic device chapletts Richardson
heraldic device shackbolt Nuthall
heraldic device lozanges Hyde
heraldic device mascles on a B Carlton
heraldic device Wa^budgetts Hill
heraldic device tourteanxes Courtney
heraldic device counterchang Hook
heraldic device mullets Danvers
heraldic device in chief Freake
heraldic device charged Sheppard
heraldic device masts coped Cromer
heraldic device sails Cavil
heraldic device a rudder heraldic device anchor Goodred
heraldic device a Lighter heraldic device a shipp heraldic device
P scrips Palmer
heraldic device a T tripled Oldcastle
heraldic device arches Arches
heraldic device fountains Sturton
heraldic device tents Tenton
heraldic device a frett Karington
heraldic device frette Whitmore
heraldic device bare bend heraldic device
R. Palmer sculp

Printed at the Theater in Oxford, and to be sold there and by Dan Major at the
Flying horse near St ^unstans Church in Fleetstreet London

Imprimatur

Tho Jeames
Provicecan: 1678

