BRITISH APPEALS, WITH GODS Merciful Replies, On the behalf of the
Commonwealth of England.

Contained in A Brief Commemorative Poem, Composed for a Memorial of some of
those many signal Mercies, lately vouchsafed to this Rebublike; especially,
for those deliverances upon the appeals of the Parliaments, and Royal Forces
at Naseby; of the English and Sccottish Armies near Dunbar in Scotland, and for
the late Surrender of Edenburgh-Castle, etc.

By GEO. WITHER, Esquire.

Febr. 1. 1650.
Let this Poem, entitled the British Appeals, etc. be speedily Printed.

William Lenthall, Speaker.



Printed for the Author, and are to be sold by Nathaniel Brooks, at the Angel
in Cornhill, 1651.

BOUND BY J.MACKENZIE BOOKBINDER TO THE KING

To the Sovereign MAJESTY OF THE Parliament of the English Republike, (by the
grace of God) Keepers of the Liberties of England; Protectors of the true
Christian Faith, and (within their Territories) Assertors of all the just
Privileges of the Humane Nature, against the Usurpations of Domestic and
Foreign Tyrants, etc. AND, ALSO, To the Right Honorable Council of STATE,
established by their Authority.
THe praise of God, and of praise- worthy Men*
Are proper subjects of the Poets pen;
And they, of old (though disesteem'd of late)
Had power heroick-titles to create;
Or, Attributes of Honor, to confer
Where, Worth, most eminently, did appear;
And, none, have been more glorious under Heaven,
Then those, which they, deservedly, have given:
No, not those high-priz'd Attributes, with which
The Pope his Royall-Vassalls did enrich:
For, this Power, they enjoyed, long before
Popes were; so shall, when they must be no m^^^^
And, of their Holiness, had thus much odd^
That, ere they could (...)
Such as they were; and heretofore great Kings
Ambitious were, of their Canonizings.
But though impostors use to make a show,
With counterfeited Jewels, mine, are true;
And this, now being a Triumphall-day,
Expecting all things in their best array,
My Muse, in her Addresses you salutes,
With such New-titles, and high attributes,
As none have yet ascribed; that, I may show
To others, what I know to be your due.
For (though your Justice, and your Mercy be
The Essence of your Glory) Wisemen, see,
That, these are accidents which do belong
To Power; and, which, may help to make it strong,
And, should not be refused, when they are brought
By other men, and by your selves unsought:
Nor, will they judged be, to overswell
A modest height to him that heedeth well,
What is, in Petty-States, ascribed to them,
Who are invested with a Power-Supream.
But these, are but a Preface to my gift,
Which, I present, out of a nobler drift,
Than by these Circumstances can appear;
For they mere Harbengers, or Ushers are
Unto that Trophie wherewith I assay
To imp, the Publick-duties of this day:
And help to magn^fie his glorious Name,
To whom, your Piety devotes the same.
Y^^, these high Titles are not fixed here,
To make you great, in your own eyes, appear;
But, honorable, in the sight of those
(...) whom your just commands you shall impose:
(...) to be viewed as Remembrancers,
(...) hat high trust, which God on you con^ers.
(...) to serve sinister ends you take them,
(...) titles of dishonor make them.
As largely, and as well, as my weak-wit,
(My leisure and the short time) would permit,
I offer, here, a brief commem'rative,
Of those things, for which, Thanks, this day we give:
That, to Gods praise, they may be thought upon,
When this our short Solemnity is done:
That, unborn chlidren, may commemorate
His Mercies in the birth, of this new State,
When they shall read, by what throws, rent and torn
The mother was, before it could be born:
And, that, by knowing, what their Freedoms cost,
They may not let them carelessly, be lost:
Or, be unthankful, as now many are,
And, thereby, in that blessing, lose their share.
In lofty strains, I do not strive to sing,
But, in a plain song, humbly forth to bring
Such Charms, as profitably may be read,
By those, who of my Counsel, have most need;
And, such, as may be useful, to expel
Those evil spirits which amongst us dwell,
To interrupt the setting of that Peace,
Which brings an universal happiness.
I owe a thanks to God; and thanks to you;
And though I cannot pay the half that is due,
Where least I owe; I, truly, have assaid
That, of a great debt, somewhat might be paid.
Despise it not, therefore, though much it lacks
Of what should be. Quench not the smoking flax;
Break not the bruised Reed. But, acceptance
Vouchsafe, to this imperfect Presentation;
And, as I shall deserve it; so, let me
Preserved in your good opinion be.
^an^^ry 30. 1650. Geo. Wi^^^^

TO The VVel-affected of the Commonwealth of ENGLAND.
When the late Act of Parliament came forth, commanding the celebration of a
public Thanksgiving, upon the 30. of January last, for Gods manifold mercies
to this Republic; and for those especially in the said Act expressed: though
my own affairs were at that time in their crisis, and my urgent necessities
required their immediate prosecution: yet my heart being moved with a strong
desire to prepare somewhat (according to my faculty) which migh help stir up
this Nation* to glorify almighty God for our manifold and great Deliverances;
as was piously enjoined by Supreme Authority: I resolved to trust him with my
own business; and, wholly to set apart the remainder of that Month to compose
a Commemorative Poem toward the illustration of his extraordinary favors to
this Commonwealth, in his glorious goings forth with our Armies; and in such
other manifestations of his gracious Providence, as have conduced to the
accomplishing of our just, and reasonable hopes. And, though I have not therein
answered what may perhaps be expected in such an undertaking; yet having done
what my ability and the shortness of the time (made shorter by many
accidental obstructions) would permit; I hope you will favorably ex^^^^ me,
in regard it may nevertheless, be in some (...) useful to the better
performance of the Du^^^^ (...) after the Day is past, by bringing to re^^^^^
many of those mercies which occasioned that days solemnization; and I presume,
it wi will find good acceptance with you, whose eye God has opened to see his
wonderful loving kindness, and, whose hearts are not hardened to the^
destruction, or shame, for shutting their eyes, wilfully against the light,
which heretofore shined up on them.

I have no hope to prevail upon such, as are perverse: for like Jannes and
Jambres, they have obstinately opposed our deliverers, and have (...) the
Egyptians in resisting God. They have sometimes acknowledged his Finger in the
miracles, wrought for us; as that people did, and yet persist in then obduracy.
They, have seen the Rods of power and discipline, turned into, Serpents; and
that which was in the hand of lawful authority, to devour those, which were
grasped by impostors. They have seen, as the Egyptians did, their Lakes, ponds,
and Rivers, turned into blood: and all their fields, waters, and
habitatitations filled with those, which were hieroglyphically signified by
Frogs, Lice, Flies and Locusts. God, in like manner, has proved them, by his
judgments, and by plagues, upon their beasts, their fruits, their treasures,
their persons, and their hopes of posterity: he has punished them, as well
with a gross darkness, and other privations, as by arming against them, all the
Elements. They have seen their late King (for continuing in his hardness of
heart) like Pharaoh, drowned (as it were) in the Red Sea, even in that sea of
blood, which by his wisfullnesse has overflowed these Islands. Yea they see
those waters which gave passage for his people, to escape their (...)ry, stand
on both hands ready to swallow (...) up; yet they being more blind and mad
(...) Pharaoh and the Egyptians (because, they (...) for examples) the^ (...)
purposes, as in despite of God, and will not acknowledge his Actings, though
they see them; nor his Voice, though they bear it, nor his hand though they
feel it: Now, if all these things have not softened their hearts; and if neither
the Pillar of fire which they see going daily before us, nor the Cloud, out of
which God looks often very terrbly upon them, can move them to praise God with
us, in our public acknowledgements of his mercies; I must not think my charms
will operate much upon them: and, therefore, to Gods good pleasure, I will
leave them, and you, who are better affected, to the enjoyment of his mercies;
whereof I humbly expect and confidently believe to be a partaker.

Your faithful, and ancient Remembrancer, GEO. WITHER.

The British Appeals, with Gods merciful Replies, on the behalf of the
Commonwealth of England, etc.
The Argument.
The Muse, begins, with filial fear,
To raise a joyful trophie, here.
The differences, does express
'Twixt formal, and true thankfulness.
Brings out those mercies to your view,
For which our praisefull thanks are due.
Warns, all men, timely, to take heed,
What, God has done; and may succeed,
To those, that will not understand
The work which he has now in hand.
Then after some thanksgiving-songs,
Informs, what further, yet belongs
To thankfulness, and open lays
The event, of right and left hand ways
MY soul, in honor of the Eternal King,
Of Judgment, and of Mercy now shall sing:
Of Mercies, and of Judgments, and, again,
Of Mercies, that they may not be in vain.
And that out of my poverty, I may
Add to the public offerings of this Day,
A supplement, to fill up vacant places;
To fill up, extraordinary Graces.
To make us mindful, what is further due,
To keep sheedfull, what may else ensue,
And perfect that, which others have begun,
Concerning what, the Lord of Hosts, has, done.
I sing, the breaking of that Brazen yoke,
Which, from our gauled necks, was lately broke;
The gracious Verdicts which the Court of heaven,
To our Appellant-combatants, has given;
The thrusting of the Proud out of the Throne;
The setting up, of humble men, thereon;
The malice, craft, and wilfulness, of those,
Who were our open, or our secret Foes;
And, therewithal, the matchless love, of him,
Who from their Tyrannies did us redeem,
Shall be my Song: and I desire it may
Be set and tuned, unto such a Key,
As, that, my Readers, may perceive, thereby,
The useful power of hallow'd-Poesie,
In raising, Gods neglected mercies, from
Forgetfulness, to shine through times to come.
My Structure therefore, shall be rather strong,
Then Lofty; that, it may continue long:
And though my Weakness, may not reach to that,
Which my Intentions have been aiming at;
Yet, I am hopeful, that I shall be able,
To offer an Oblation acceptable:
For, God in willingness, takes much delight,
(Although, it can but set a stone upright,
As Jacob did) vouchsafing acceptance,
To every Faithfull-Offrers free oblation;
And equalling the raising of one stone,
Eve'n with the Temple, of great Solomon.
I, Voices hear, of wondrous things abroad;
Of multitudes of Mercies, from our God;
Mercies, too great, for Scorners to believe;
Too good, for men unthankful, to receive:
Such Blessings, as no former Age had greater;
Such, as no time ensuing shall have better
Yet, every day almost brings forth new matter
Of exultation, both by land, and water.
Good news, employeth almost every month;
Yea, weekly from the East, the West, the South [come)
(And thence, from whence 'twas said no good can
Even from the North, Glad tidings are brought home.
To those, who for their own escapes, have mourned,
With Zions Ruins, God, has back returned
Those Signal Victories, which, you have heard,
In Public, by a Public Act declared;
With their dependent-Mercies: now, I Will add
What from my private notions may be had;
O give attentive heed, to what is said;
And let it with do seriousness, be weighed:
For, I shall mention, (if time fail me not)
Things neither to be slighted, or forgot.
But whence comes this? alas! now I am ready
To write, I find my shaking hand unsteady.
A shivering does surprise me; and a fear,
As if some Apparition, did appear,
Obstructing my Designs, and, to assay
The turning of my thoughts, another way.
What ails my heart! that in this uncouth fashion,
There strives in me, a Contradicting Passion?
Which like the twins, within Rebeccas Womb,
^eem to be struggling, which may overcome.
Why is my heart, (which has enough to do,
Wi^h one at once) thus overcharged with two?
Two Passions, as destructive to each other,
As fire and water, clos^d uptogether:
And so divided, that, it hardly knows,
To whether, most reluctance, it owes.
This, is a day of triumph; wherein, they
Who, have achieved them, set us Trophies may
(...) ou^ward Joy and such as could not win
Externalis, may keep Holyday within,
^heretofore, they so good husbands were,
^o store up ought, for entertainment there,
It is a day, wherein, I ought to sing,
A Song of praise; and purposed to bring
Expressions forth, which might be to this Nation,
A lengthening out of Thanks, and exultation,
By making Gods free mercies, thought upon,
When all this generation, shall be gone:
Yet, now I should perform, what I decreed;
I, am unable, further to proceed.
Of glorious victories, the Guns, the Bells,
And this days due solemnization tells,
To make us with more seriousness, to heed
Gods owning of our Armies, at their need;
And those glad tidings, which divulged are,
Invite to mirth; yet somewhat, bids me fear;
Yea, though my lips are tempting of a smile,
Mine eyes (I know not why) drop tears the while,
Seeming to tell me with a silent voice,
That we with trembling should this day Rejoice:
Yea, though I feel my heart is truly glad,
Of what I hear; it is as truly sad,
For what I know, for what I daily see;
For what has been; or may hereafter, be.
Distempred, thus, I very seldom grow;
And, therefore, it, the more affects me, now,
With Jealousies, and Fear, left, somewhat may
Ere long befall us, to beeloud this day.
With me 'twas never thus, but when from Spain
Our late unhappy King, returned again,
Depraved and made giddy by that Cup
Of Poison, whereof there he took a sup.
And, then, I felt these Passions. I confess
My joy was then, as great, my fear no less;
Though neither much appeared to the eye,
Or to the ear of any stander by.
It fares, now with me, as on that morning
Which, first, informed us, of his safe returning;
For, when the voice of his arrival came,
The City Bon-fires, blazed into a flame
Which menaced the Clouds; the Clouds powered down
A flood, as if the City they would drown.
The Common people, were transported so,
(As it is their guise) that wisemen could not know
Whether they might be thought, exceeding glad,
Or, rather, to be somewhat less than mad.
The Earth seemed joyful of his safe return;
The heavens for something hidden seemed to mourn.
And, as in those, there then appeared to be
A diffring Passion, so, it was, with me.
Though, none more wished the Kings returning
Though I was truly glad, to see him come, (home,
And for this safe arivall showed, then,
My joy, as much, as other sober men,
Yet, joy and sorrow strove in me together,
As if they labored to supplant each other:
And, long time kept me, in a doubtful pause,
Of whether His Return would give most cause;
And by what has succeeded, it appears,
My joys were far more causlesse than my fears.
The same distempers, are, this day in me,
Great, are my joys and hopes, great also, be
My griefs and fears: God render them, success,
And consequences, of more happiness,
Then, followed after that; and take away
The effects, and causes, of my fears, this day.
God, turn all to the best; and give us grace
To cleave to him, what ever come to pass.
God, give us Will, those Achans to remove,
Which, to the public Peace, destructive prove.
God, grant my hopes, hereafter may be truer,
The causes of my fear, much less, and fewer:
And, that, the Counsels, Charles did then neglect,
May be received, now with more respect;
Left his example, that should make us better,
May make us worse, and our damnation greater.
For God will not be mocked; nor will he spare
For ever, though a while he does forbear.
Where greatest Mercy, he, vouchsafes to show,
The greatest of his Judgments will ensue.
He that improves not, every gift God gives,
(According to the measure he receives)
Shall lose the Talent upon him bestown,
And into utter darkness too be thrown.
Then much more, they who shall Gods Grace requi^
With wilful disobedience or despite:
And for that cause, it has been said, the Lord
Is merciful, and therefore should be feared.
This being true, what Realms, or Nations be
Obliged more to fear him now, than we?
If, mercies, be inducements to his fear,
(As all men well informed, know they are)
What people, now, inhabits on the earth,
That, has more cause of trembling, in their mirth,
Or, of more filial dread, when they draw nigh,
The holy name, of God to sanctify?
For whom has he so many wonders wrought
Since out of Egypt, Jacobs God was brought,
As for this Isle, if we reflect upon
Those things aright, which, he for us for us has don?
And, who can blame me, if I sing with fear,
This day, when we consider, what we are?
What, God is? what, they seemed, who have been,
Destroyed for our sakes? what we, have seen
Done, for us? by what means, at, what a season?
In what great streights? how far, beyond our reasons
Or our deserts? (Deserts said I? nay, when,
We had deserved worse than other men)
What passed bondage, we are freed from?
What likely slaveries, for time to come?
And what a heap of blessings we have had
^howr'd down, to make us, in his favor glad?
Who, can? (these things considered) who I say,
Can blame me, if, I am afraid, this day,
Amidst our Triumphs? and aloud should cry,
On other men, to fear as much as I?
For such a fear, no portion does destroy,
Of ought which is essential to our joy:
But helps to keep it, from an overcasting,
By future clouds, yea makes it everlasting;
Rather preventing harm, than harm portending,
And, from a dull security, defending.
Already, I discover, that this fear,
Which, at the first, destructive did appear,
To my Design, (by making up a Medley,
Which, on a day of joy, looked somewhat sadly)
Proves useful to my purpose, and makes way,
To render that, which I intend to say,
Much more effectual, than it would have been,
Unless it had been thereby ushered in.
To make impression of a joyful fear,
In those, who shall of Gods protections, hear.
I feel my spirit on a sudden freed,
From all Distempers: therefore I Will proceed,
With what I purposed, and enumerate
Some of those Mercies, which we celebrate
Thi^d^y, in hope to represent them so,
That, out of them a filial fear may flow,
So tempring every Reader, that none shall,
Neither presume, nor by despairing, fall:
Yea, so to set them forth, I will assay,
That, in Remembrance, they continue may:
That I, who write them, and that they who read them,
May with more seriousness, hereafter, heed them,
More often meditate them, to increase
Our Joy into a perfect thankfulness,
And, that, as in a glass, our eyes may see,
How worthless, how unthankful, yet, we be;
How these good things, which, God, in mercy, ga^^
To save men's lives, often send them to their grave,
If not to Hell: how likewise to improve
Gods judgments, and, the Pledges of his love,
To our best benifits, and how to raise,
Such Monuments, and trophies, to his praise,
As, answer their intents, who set aside
This day, to be, in public, sanctified.
Without those ends, the formal observation,
Of one set-day is but a profanation;
Or, mere hypocrisy: It, makes men think
They offer incense, when they offer stink:
It makes them dream that they have something give^
To God; when, they have but affronted heaven:
It proves like that Peace Offering of the Whore,
Which made her sin more boldly than before;
And to return again, to her offense,
With less reluctance, and more impudence:
To fast a meal or twain, and to put on
A sadness, for a day, is cheaper done,
Than, to deny our selves; or, to supresse,
Our Avarice, or our ambitiousness.
To say, the Lord be thanked; or to sing,
A song of praises; is, an easier thing,
Than to express a hearty thankfulness,
By works of mercy, and of righteousness:
As, giving to the poor, or, taking care
Of those that under great oppressions are:
And, it is alas! with us, too frequent, seen,
That some who formally disposed have been
To outward duties, acting joy, and sorrow,
This day (with seeming zeal) come forth, to morrow,
And prosecute their avarice, their pride,
(With whatsoever, they seemed to lay asid^
The former day) and, entertain as bad,
If not worse spirits, than, before they had:
Pursuing wilfully, Distructive ways.
What e're the Preacher, or, the Charmer says.
He, that could find expedients to prevent
These Prophanations, Well his time had spent;
And, thanks might merit, for so having done;
(Although, he peradventure shall have none,)
I, therefore, to that purpose, will assay
To set my Meditations, for this day,
To such a Tune, as may have likelihood,
Of those effects, if rightly understood;
For (though it move, but two or three, to dance
True measures) my Design it shall advance:
And, he, that does accept a willing heart,
More, then the best performances of Art,
Will, perfect his own work, in me, begun,
Though, that, which I perform, be weakly done.
It is not my intention to begin
Where, Gods or'eflowing mercy, first broke in,
Upon this Nation; For, that, would appear,
A work not for a day, or for a year,
But, for an Age: and, my poor Snuff of Light,
Would leave me, in an everlasting night,
E're I could half those Mercies overlook,
Whereof, in few years, I have notice took:
Nay, in each Circumstance, should I display
Those, only which, of this Thankesgiving-day
Occasions were: I, might dilate thereon,
Till three such lives, as I have lived were gone.
I, therefore, will but offer up a Beam,
Out of the Sun; a drop, out of a Stream;
One Grain, out of that golden-mine, by which,
Our God, has made us, in his Favors, rich:
Or, make a brief Collection, at the most,
Of so much, that, this day, may not be lost;
But give thereby a Longer lasting motion
To real Thankefulness, and true devotion.
Should I suppose a Tripled Golden chain,
One fold whereof sufficed to contain,
These British Isles, with all those Seas enclosed,
Which, may be in a, Circle so supposed;
And, that, as many Links, thereon were found,
As there are half-half Inches, in that Round
Of Land, and Water: therewith, should I think,
I saw enameled, upon every Link,
Ten hundred Thousand mercies; I, might read
All those Inscriptions thereon Charactered,
As possibly, as make a full relation,
Of, Gods proceedings, in our preservation.
I, therefore, will but set forth, here, and there,
Such Links of Providence, as do appear
To most men's view; that, somewhat may remain
Still visible, of Mercies Golden Chain:
Looking, no further back, in my design,
Then, to the year Six hundred thirty nine
Beyond a Thousand; and, I will relate
But, only, an Epitomy, of what
Has been vouchsafed since then; For, by the Pa^^^
You may conceive, what Lion I could draw:
And, if the whole proportion I should Lymn,
I could not do my work, within the time.
About, that year, The Tyrant (who now lies
Beneath our feet) with over weening eyes,
Had viewed himself; and Puffed up with Pride,
Began, to think, of being Dei fide;
Or, at the least, of being somewhat more
Then Man, or King; or, then what heretofore
He was esteemed: and, much endeavored, too,
That, we (if possible) should think him so.
His Tripple-Kingdom, upon him bestown,
For, others; he, usurped as his own;
Inchroching by undue Prerogatives,
As well, upon his Loyal Subjects lives,
As on their Freeborn Persons, and Estates;
With what else, to their Liberties relates:
Nay, upon that, which is more dear then these,
(Upon the freedom of our Consciences,)
He made assaults; well knowing, that would bes^
Procure him (and secure him) all the rest:
And, how to prosecute it, he, was taught,
By them, who knew the way, to what he sought.
A Council, he had picked up, who might well
Be called his; and, with Achitophel,
Be judged Peers; but, that, of him, in Wit,
They came far short; and, have not so well, yet,
Their houses Ordered; nor, secured so
Their Persons, as, he had the hap to do.
His Flattering Priests, and Poets, urged him on,
To what, they found him willing to have done:
For, by the first, there seemed to be infused,
A Conscience fitting him, to be abused:
And, by the last, He, and his Queen became
So often represented by the name
Of Heathenish Deities; that, they, at last,
Became (even when their Mummeries were past)
Like those they represented; and, did move,
Within their Spears like, Venus, Mars, and Jove*
And, had they only failed, but, in thus
Themselves befooling; Gods, delivering us
From being Vassals, to such Mimick-Players,
Had merited our public Thanks, and Prayers.
For, when the Roman-Emperours begun
To fill the Stage, they, Vilify'd the Throne;
And, those oppressions, quickly followed there;
Which, on the like beginnings, entered, here.
He, being thus transformed, into a thing,
No Longer worthy to be called a King.
(Tho, fairly painted, and well varnished over,
The wickedness of his Designs to Cover)
A Deep foundation Laid, for such a Throne,
As, he, Ambitious was to sit upon;
And, had so couched his Plots, (as he supposed)
And, so with power and Policy, enclosed,
His Interest (ere heed thereof was taken)
That, few believed the Structure could be shaken;
Or, that, a possibility had been,
Of those Events, which we have lately seen:
Nor were they Possible until, Gods hand,
Did shake the Rock, whereon the Pile did stand.
For, that, secure his Actings might become,
Himself, as well abroad, as here at home,
He fortified; and Engineers did keep,
To render his Designs, as large, as Deep;
Neglecting little, which by right or wrong,
Might, in his undertakings, make him strong.
With Forain Princes, and each neighboring State,
(To whom, himself he might ingratiate)
He secretly complied; (by whatsoere
Relations, they might opposites appear.)
At home, himself, he strengthened many ways,
With what concerns him, who the Tyrant plays:
As, by depressing them, who might be foes
To his designs; by, high Advancing those
Who might promote them; by, disabling much
The one, and making of the other Rich:
By projects, and Employments, which might add
To them, and, take from others, what they had;
And, by all practices, which might mantain
This Cursed Principle, Divide and Reign
His ends he followed, whatsoere it cost,
In Treasure, or in blood, by others Lost.
Witness, the late Inhumane Massacre,
In Ireland: when, in few days murthere^ were
Hundreds of Thousands; and as many mo^,
Soon after, by Abetters thereunto,
A Massacre, beyond (without compare)
Those, which in Sicily and Paris were,
Though both united; yet, it is believed
(Upon good grounds) to be at first, contrived
By him, or with his knowledge: But of this,
There is an Host, or Cloud of Witnesses,
That, he did palliate, and look thereon
Without Compassion, when the Deed was done;
And, has occasioned that Sea of blood,
Whereby since then these Isles have been o'erflow'd;
Even by abusing these unhappy Nations
With vain pretenses, and false Protestations.
Yet, much more great, the deluge would have been,
Had not God's mercy interposed between,
His Cruelty, and us, when, he assayd
To tempt the Scottish Nation to give aid
To his Designs; by promising, to add
Four English Counties, to the bounds they had.
When, likewise with the Armies, in the North,
He tampered, bloody mischiefs to bring forth,
Of^ing them largely; when, moreover, that
Was in designment, which, he aimed at,
In Scotland, where, (about the self-same time)
A Bloody Banquet, was prepared, by him.
Before these things (and, e're we felt those harms
Which followed) he, found means to seize our Arms;
And by mere power, ingrost into his hand,
The stores of Powder, throughout all the Land.
He, likewise had contrived, how, to draw
To serve his ends, the Masters of the Law,
By placing, or displacing; and, thereby,
Had, almost, fixed, a Legal Tyranny.
By maskings, and loose Revellings, at Court:
He, closely wrought upon the younger sort
Of wanton Students; and allured thereby,
The flower, of all the young Nobility
And Gentry of his Kingdoms to incline
To him, in whatsoere, he should design.
His Councel-Table, was bespread with snares,
To catch, and hamper those, at unawares,
Who stood for Liberty; his Courts, were made
Both Instrumental to the Bribing Trade,
And Bawdes, to help advance unjust designs,
By false decrees, wrong Judgments, mulcts, or Fines:
For, Justice, was afforded, there, to few
Save such, as to his Interests were true:
And, most of those (without attending long)
Had what they su'd for, whether, right or wrong.
His overgrown Prerogative, Laid hold
On our Proprieties; and, scarcely should
Ere long, a Natural-action to this nation,
Allowed have been, without a dispensation,
Or Fine, First paid: No; not, to eat, or drink,
To go, or come; to speak, or safely think,
Should we have been permitted; had not God,
To his usurpings, put a Period.
For, many, to Account. not for deeds done
Have called been, or, for bare-words, alone;
But otherwhile, to Question, some were brought
For those things, also, which, to have in thought
They were suspected: yea, such was the Rage,
Of Tyranny, that, Children under age,
For Childish words (spoke without ill intent)
Were, not alone, to severe Chastisement
Made Liable; but, forced to suffer, too,
That painful death, which wilful Traitors do:
As (by a cruel act, of all abhorred)
Appears at Sarum, yet, upon record.
No marvel then, if neither Soap nor Fir^
Nor Raking rotten Rags, out of the M^^e;
Or Freedom, in such poor and Trivial things,
As are Tobacco-Pipes, and Fiddle-strings,
Could be allowed in this Commonweal,
Without a Fine, or Patent under Seal.
His Peerage (some excepted) was endowed,
With Privileges, but, to make them Proud,
And fit, them to oppress or to enslave
The people, unto him, from whom they have
Their empty Titles. Upon some of these
He did Confer the highest Offices,
By great sums, purchased; that, so, they might
By selling dear (because they dearly bought)
Engaged be, to share in his oppressions;
And, strengthen by in Justice, their possessions:
To make them still, have need of his protection;
And, ^^eave to him through Fear, if not Affection.
To this Intention, they had also share:
In those Base Projects, which injurious were,
To publike-right; and, they employed their power
To beggar, to disgrace, or quite devour,
All those, who did not readily befriend,
His purpose; or, else, freely give, or Lend,
Or stand engaged, to Answer his desire,
In whatsoever he pleased to require:
And, he, that sought a remedy, by Law,
For these Intrusions, did but only draw,
More mischiefs on himself: For, 'twas a flower,
Slipped from the Crown; and, by the Royal power,
Derived; that, they should be secured, by might,
From wrongs receiving, and, from doing right.
But, God, for this Injustice, now has broke,
That S^^pter: From their heads; their Crowns has took
And, shall destroy all those who will not see,
That want of Justice, and of Mercy, be
The Signal causes, of those desolations,
That fa^^ on private-Persons, Kings, or Nations.
And, they, who for Gods Justice, upon these,
(Together with, the great deliverances
Thereby, vouchsafed) cannot, yet perceive
Just causes, of the Public thanks we give;
Of their concernments, take so little heed,
That, to awaken them, I will proceed.
The Tyrant, had some other Instruments,
(To further him, in his unjust intents)
In order to our Bondage: among whom,
None did more mischievous to us become,
(Nor, any, for him, play their Prizes better)
Then, his proud Priests: nor, was he more a debtor
To any, then to them: and, I dare say,
So dearly for it, he, to none did pay.
His Prelates, and their Underlings, he bought
To serve his ends, (by giving what they sought
And what he had in Gift) or, else perchance,
He might in Vain, have piped them a dance.
Instead of Preaching Christ, they Preached us down
To Slavery; and Idolized the Crown:
Then, to require what they had done, for him;
He, fooled away three Royal-Crowns, for them:
They (seeming confident he should prevail)
Upon his Kingly Person did intail,
Divinity; that, arrogate he might
His Usurpations, by a Sacred right:
He, to retaliate what they bestowed
With Temporal possessions, them endowed:
And these by their false Doctrines did besot
The Vulger so; that, in them it begot,
Idolatry; and therein they hold on,
Their Dotage, though their Deity is gone:
Yea, though their Idol, quite destroyed they see,
And, Dagon-like, without a head to be.
To make his Clerick Engines serviceable.
(Yet further) he, did strongly them enable
With Power Canonical; which would have brought
More mischiefs on us, then most had in thought;
And, such, as might at length, have entrance made
For all, that superstition, would have had;
(Althought 'twas Cloked with a formal zeal,
Of Piety, their purpose to conceal;)
And, when these preparations, had unhallowed
Our Churches; Popery, would soon have followed:
The People, should have been, once more, an Ass,
For Prelates to have ridden as it was;
Kings should have been but Blocks to help them on,
And, Emperors, their Stirrups wait upon.
But, mark Gods, Justice, and retaliation,
To these; for, it is worth your observation:
The Prelates, justly, lost their tempralties,
For smooth 'ring Truth, and Preaching vanities.
For seizing that, which Legally is known,
The Peoples right, the King has lost his own:
And King and Prelates, joining both together,
In Tyranny, have ruined each other.
Thus far, you see Gods mercies; and, thereby
May see, his Justice, too, with half an eye,
And what must have succeeded ere this day,
If these, had t^ved their wicked way;
And, we are graceless, if we praise not him,
By whom, We had deliverance from them:
For, by those Hydra's heads, not yet berest,
(And by that Poison, which is in them left)
It is apparent, We should scarf have had,
A day of rest until our Graves were made.
On us, by his Assistants, he had brought
Such Slavery, that, we had scarcely ought
T^^ call our own; Or, at the least, left Free
From those Intrusions, which were like to be:
Yet, worse it would have been; as, might appear
Beyond dispute, should I make mention, here,
What, I have known, and seen, in preparation,
To bring a further Bondage; on this Nation.
Most, are forgetful of what is past; and, some
By never heeding it, are now become
Unthankful Murmurers, repining at
Their present Contributions, to the State:
Because, the Payments, yet imposed, are more,
By much (as they conceive) then heretofore:
(Considering, neither what necessities
Now are; nor, from whose Faults, they do arise.
There is, indeed, a very Large expense,
Occasioned to make our Just-defence,
Against the many practices of those
Who, settlement of Peace do still oppose:
And by long lasting Wars, at Sea, and Land.
(In several Kingdoms) thereby, to withstand,
Our present enemies (and to prevent
Their future purposes) vast sums, are spent:
But, this, was by Constraint; and, we have hope
These Issues of expense, will quickly stop;
If we with Patience, for a while, could bear
With those Disbursments which Compelled are:
And, would consider, at how much more cost,
We were, that, all our Freedoms might be Lost.
As, also, what great Burdens, it would bring,
To readmit a Tyrannizing King,
With all those swarms of Locusts, and of Flies,
Which are begot, and fed by Tyrannies:
With what must be exacted to maintain
The boundless Cravings, of his hungry Train.
We like the Sons of Jacob, were oppressed;
And, God, is making us, a Path to Rest,
As, he did them, so, he, does lead us through
Much Hardship, and great difficulties, now:
And some of us, like them, (nay, worse then they)
Even almost at the Period of our way,
Would back return; and, brutishly Complain
As if our Ease, were sharper then our pain.
Now therefore, I will here insert a Note
Expressing part, of what we have forgot;
That, when our former Burdens we review,
We may, more thankfully, our Peace pursue.
We were oppressed by his vain expense,
Of Large Revenues, which, for our defense,
And for the Nations honor, were with him,
Entrusted; For, by his consuming them
Upon vain Lusts; constrained we were, to add
Supplies, oft-times; for which, Returns we had
Of many new occasions, to increase
Our Burdens, rather then to make them Less:
And still whatever was on him bestown
He took without Thanksgiving, as his own.
Great Subsidies, which such like payments gained
By false pretenses (as by dangers feigned.
Or some like that,) by him, were, also, spent
In prosecutions, to the detriment.
Of all the Nation; and so, all that Cost
Was, thereby (as to us) much worse then Lost.
By many, other ways, he did enlarge
Our Burdens, and this Nation over-charge.
By Universal Loans; with an Intent,
Never, to render back, the money Lent.
By Privy Seals; which, he did seldom pay
Except, for other borrowings, to make way.
By Contributions, termed Free; although,
We paid them, whether, we did List, or no.
By houshould-Compositions, (for the Table,
The Kitchen, Sellar, and the Royal Stable)
Which, of themselves, (if we consider shall
What, Officers exacted, therewithal)
Might have maintained a King, much better than
All Scotlands Royal patrimony can.
Yet, this too, (as I find, by Inquisition),
Was taken, by a forced Composition.
To these, may added be, what he encroach'd
By Projects, and by Offices new Broached
By selling-places, by dround Lands, and Fenns;
By Fines, for Cottages of other men's;
By wrong pretended right, to Lands concealed;
By Vlnage, and by clothes, and Drapries sealed;
By Patents, Corporations, Fees, and Toll;
By several Writs and money by the Poll:
By Coat and, Conduct-money; and, by that
For Ships, which, was extremely Grumbled at.
By Tunnage, Poundage, Customs, both in use,
And pretermitted; to the great abuse
Of Trade and Merchants; who, tho paying of these
To be secured from Pirates on the Seas,
Were left unguarded; to the frequent spoil,
Of Private men, and weakening of this Isle.
Moreover, out of our Estates, he made
Large profit, by the forfeitures, he had;
By Bonds Recognizances, and, by Suits;
By Tenths, by Lycences, and by First Fruits,
Escheats, Amercements, Mulcts of several sorts,
In several Causes; and in several Courts.
By Wards, and Marriages; by suing forth
Of Liveries (which now are nothing worth)
By Honorary Titles, Sold to such
As were not thereby honored so much,
As honor was disgraced; by great sums paid
For Corronation-Knights; by Coynage, Aid;
And, by a multitude of ways beside,
(Too many, hereby, to be specified)
This Nation was oppressed. All which, though now
Of their late Griefs, forgetful, many grow,
(More notice taking, of what Lies upon
Their backs, at present, then, of what is g^^^e)
Would, if sum'd up, a greater Burden prove
Then We have born, our Bondage to remove
Considering his vast Incomes, needlessly
Were wasted, on his Lusts; or, that thereby
He might Inslave us: whereas, all we spent
Was by Constraint, or, that, We might prevent
Bell, and the Dragons, ravenous designs:
And, therefore, whosoever, thereat repines,
Does neither his own welfare, understand,
Nor, that great work, which God, has now in hand.
But, if our Citizens, who have forgot
Their former Pressures (and, begin to dote
Upon an Idol-Majeslie) would take,
More heed; they doubtless, more esteem would make
Of Gods late Mercies; and, an offering Bring
To expiate their cursed Murmuring.
If, they would mind, at what uncertainties,
They did possess their goods, and Liberties;
What Interruptions, formerly they had;
What Innovations, as concerning Trade:
How often, their Charters, upon slight pretense,
Were questioned, to put them to expense:
What Presents, they have been Constrained to give,
For Favors, which, they never could receive;
What Bribes, to get their grievances removed;
And how unfruitful, Nay-the-less they proved;
What Scorns, and What disgraces, in time past,
On them, have undeservedly been cast;
How often, when Legally, they sought their own,
They were abused, and into Prisons thrown,
Till they were glad, to quit a long-due-debt,
Lest, else, a greater mischief they might get.
Would they remember, their late sad Condition.
Occasioned, by the Cruel Inquisition
Set up at Lambeth; by the merciless
Starchamber Court; and by th'Imperiousness
Of his Court-Marshal; where their Innocence,
Was racked and tortured, by the Insolence,
Of Officers; of Clarks; Apparators;
Of Pursuivants; and Cutthroat Messengers.
Were it remembered more, how they, complained,
Of grievances by their late King sustained,
And his ill Counselors: (whom we now see
Not half so worthy, of our blame as he)
They would not in their Courage, be so poor;
Nor, so unlike, to what they were before.
Yea, would they but recall, how furiously
They Acted (even almost to mutiny)
Against the King; and to the encouragement
Of this (then, Highly honored) Parliament;
How zealously, Horse, money, Arms, and Plate,
They, then, Contributed, to Vindicate,
Their nigh-Lost Liberties; how often, they fought,
To bring to Pass what, now to Pass is brought;
And, therewithal, would seriously take heed,
That whatsoere did thereupon succeed,
Beyond their first aim, was, Gods work (not our)
They would confess his Justice, with his Power,
And Mercy: For, all these were manifest,
When, of his Throne, the King, he dispossessed;
And took away both Crown, and Life from him,
That, our, and his long-sufferings, did contemn.
These things, could they consider somewhat more,
They would more thankful be, then heretofore;
And, not so irreligiously persever
To murmur, that, God blessed their own endeavor;
Nor, be so mad, to Aid those, underhand,
Who, Gods, declared purposes, withstand;
Lest, their Ingratitude, he should repay
With greater Plagues, then, he has took away:
And, give them, in his anger, such a thing,
As they deserve, another, Tyrant King.
If, Likewise, they, who in the Country-s^ng
Thanksgivings backward, (and with murmuring
Require Gods mercies) would, by looking back,
On what is past, more heedful notice take
What, yearly, out of their Estates was taken,
In Lamb, Veal, Butter, Poultery, Eggs, and Bacon;
In Wheat, Oats, Hay, and such like things as these,
(From which exactions, they are now at ease)
How often their Teemes, and Carts, were forced from
Their husbandries, and Harvest-works at home:
To their great detriment, for hyre, but small,
And, many times, for no reward, at all:
How often, their Saddle-Horses, as his own,
Were, by his Courtiers. Posted up and down
As for the Public, upon Public Warrants,
When, they were, only, sent on Private arrants:
How, by the multiplying of his Game,
Oppressed, and inslaved, they became,
To their great Detriment; yea, many times,
To their undoing, for suspected Crimes:
And, how, their Nimrods (or chief Foresters)
With their insulting Under-officers,
Compelled many, for their preservations,
Quite to forsake, their Ancient Habitations,
Or leave their Fields, or Woods, unto the spoil
Of Useless Beasts, and Beastly-men, the while.
Would they, these things Consider; and, that those
Taxations, which the State does now impose;
With all their late oppressive Plunderings,
Large Contributions, and Free Quarterings,
Were first occasioned, by his Tyranies;
(Or, their own False-hood, or Neutralities)
They would not, like the murmuring Israelites,
Render abuse, Reproaches, and despights,
To their Deliverers; because, a few,
Among them, to their trust, have proved untrue;
And, to their own loss, by their selfishness,
Defer that Peace, which, else, they might Possess.
Nor would they, so unthankfully, desire
To their Egyptian Thraldom, to retire,
And to their Garlic; when there feet, were brought
So near, unto that Rest, which, long they fought:
Muchless, when they had (as it were) been fed
With Manna. and, Mirac'lously been led
Through many Streights (for wonderment, no les^
Then, Israel Passed, in the Wilderness)
Would they, by Stagg'ring, in a Good-proceed,
Both re-inslave themselves, and all their seed.
Now, if (as other Voluntary preachers
Presume to do) I, may to teach my Teachers
Take boldness: I would seriously advise
Some, of our Clergy, to become more wise:
Even those, who, by a peevish frowardness,
Neglect, not only, that due Thankfulness,
Which is commanded; but, make others too
Prevaricate, from what they ought to do;
By slighting what Authority injoyns,
And prosecuting of their own Designs.
Oh, God! What bold, what strange Apostacy
Is this? And from a Christian Ministry,
How disagrees it, that they should profess
Or, teach, or sooth up an Unthankfulness?
And, whence, proceeds it, but from their old vice,
Of Selfishness, or Pride, or Averice?
Which, (as it has, well near, already, done)
Will loose them all, that, they insist upon;
If, they proceed to prosecute those ends
Which they and their Fraternity intends,
God, bears me witness, I envy them not
The least Advantages which to their Lot,
By right, pertain; But, rather, would improve,
My Vote, (with real heartiness, and Love)
To give them double-honour, and advanc^
What is their due, by sacred Ordinance:
For they who serve him without By-Respects*
Had never cause to say, that God neglects
Their service; though he sometime sends them forth,
Neither with money, or with money worth:
As, every one observes, who takes heed,
How plentifully at all times of need,
He them supplies, that, his allowance take
With thankfulness, and work, for Conscience sake,
Without Capitulating, whether they
In Pensions, or, in Tithes, shall have their pay.
What is it Angers them? Are they displeased,
(Though, of their former Grievances, now eased)
That, they, themselves impow'red do not find
To Act the Prelates, in another kind?
And, to succeed them in their vast Possessions,
Which was the chief end of their Oppositions?]
Are they, again desirous of a King?
How so? Since, they are those, who, first did bring
Those things to controversy, whereupon,
That Justice, which they murmur at, was done?
What, can they hope, by bringing back again
That Power, whereof, they lately did complain?
But, greater mischiess, and a heavier yoke,
Then that, which from their Necks, was lately broke?
Considering, what Confed'rates, they now have
This Nation, and Themselves, to re-inslave?
Are they afraid those Tithe-pigs may be lost,
Which have so many Tracts and Sermons cost
To prove them sacred? That Is, a needless fear,
As, yet; For, by our Laws confirmed they are:
And, till supreme power, shall by Law revoke them,
They, may receive them, as they lately took them:
And without question, all such due supplies
Will still vouchsafed be, as many suffice.
Nor have they cause to murmur, though it may
Provided, for them be, some other way
Since, by their Scottish Discipline, they find
Their claimed Tithes, are seldom paid in kind.
Is it, their zeal against New-Heresies,
The Ranters Tenants, or the Blasphemies,
Whereof the Scot injuriously avers
Our State, and Army to be favorers,
Which makes them discontent? I think not so,
What er'e they may pretend: for, they well know,
The Parliament has lately made a Law,
To keep Blasphemous Libertines in aw;
And to correct their Manners, who transgress
Against the Rules of Moral Righteousness;
And, from our Armies frequently they hear,
That such, by them severely punished are.
Let them take heed, lest their Endeavor flows
From Causes which may prove much worse then those
There mentioned; even from an Interest*
Pursued, to raise the throne of Antichrist
A new found way: or else, from some vain hope,
In every parish to erect a Pope.
Let them take heed, lest er'e they be aware,
Their Carnal policy may them ensnare:
For by that power, whereat their Parties aim,
They seem to be affected with his Claim
Who, to Gods throne aspires: or else, to that
Which will produce a double-headed State.
Or, that, at least, from thence, this may redound;
That, (if the Royallists can cure their wound
By what, is now designed; They, and their Friends
The Romanists may thereby gain some ends
Obstructive to our Peace; though totally
Destructive to their New Presbytery;
Which they seditiously have preached and praid,
To build up by their Ground-works, lately said.
Oh! therefore, let them speedily return
To their lost Path; for their backslidings, mourn;
Observe Gods Providence, approve his ways,
And join with us, in singing of his Praise.
Let them stir up their Flocks to Thankfulness,
Like others of their Calling, who profess
The self-same Faith; and help us, to redeem
The losses of Advantages, and Time,
Occasioned by their Schism; that, we and they
May friendlike walk together in one way,
Partakers, of that happy peaceful being,
Which is deferred, by our disagreeing.
For, were all well considered, all men would,
Without the least obscurity, behold,
What cause we have, to sing Gods Praise, this day,
For taking of our Slaveries away:
And, in the first place, for removing Him,
Who, wore, unworthily, the Diadem,
Of Supreme Government. But, least, some, yet,
May our fore-past-condition so forget,
As to believe, we might have been secured,
From that, which under Kingship we endured,
By regulating it (which, I once thought,
Till, I by Providence, was better taught)
Let them, with me, take notice, and, well weigh
How many hundred years, we did assay
This Remedy in vain; and, heretofore
Spend all our pains, to wash a Blackamore.
Let them look back, and heed, how often we Fought,
And by fair-means, and humble Prayer, sought
A firm establishment, of what, we knew,
(And had often proved) to be our proper-due:
How many Charters, and, how many Laws,
Were made, by Kings, in favor of our Cause:
How many Curses, and sad Imprecations,
Were laid upon their wilful Violations:
How many times, their Royal words, we had;
How many Oaths, and Vows, were sworn, and made;
Yet, faithlesly, still, broken, afterward,
Without remorse of Conscience, or, regard
Of God, or Men; and, still, revoked, as soon
As opportunities were fastened on,
To prosecute, again, their Tyranny.
And, let us likewise, heed impartially,
How much, our late King, labored to make void
His free Donations; and, to have destroyed
His own Concessions: what dire Imprecations
He likewise, ventred on; what Protestations,
He dared, with a purpose to deceive;
And, with a hope of making us believe,
He, meant us well; when, he did all the while,
Intend his Own-advantage, and, our Spoil:
Improving, still, (what, er'e, he did pretend)
All our Indulgences, to his first end,
Even to his Death: witness, his, laying Plots
To make a Rent, betwixt us, and the Scots;
Yea, and, among our selves, that very time,
In which, we Treating were, of Peace, with him.
Hoping, at last, by one device or other,
To make us, do his work* and fall together.
And, of those Juglings, now, the fruits appear,
In Ireland, Scotland, Holland, France, and here.
What could, we have, expected, from a King,
So wilful, and so false, in every thing?
Or, from the Offspring, of a Generation,
So long time, rooted in Prevarication?
So long, irreconcileably professed
An enemy, to Public Interest?
And, claiming, so Imperiously, to be,
From all the Bands of Law, and Reason, free?
What hopes could we have had, that, we should ever
Have tamed this Leon, by our best endeavor?
Or, any of his Whelps? or, means have found,
Whereby, they might have been, securely bound,
From Crushing all our bones; if, they again,
Should slip, their Collers, or else break their Chain?
For my part, I so well found, what he was;
That, though I had large offers of his Grace,
And studied his chief good; yet, still I found,
His Heart so hard, so double, and unfound,
(Even to his last breath) that, I must confess
It was Gods mercy, and, our Happiness
That, he so fell; and, 'twill be to the Glory
Of this our Nation, in their future Story,
That, whereas others have Clandestinely,
By Poison, or by Murder, secretly,
Removed their Tyrants; we, with open face;
By Public Justice; in a Public place;
In presence, of his friends, and, in despite
Of all our foes, and every opposite,
Tried, Judged, and Executed, without fear;
The greatest Tyrant, ever reigning here.
Take Then, Gamaliels counsel, and submit,
To that, which Providence, adjudgeth fit
Should come to pass; left else, perhaps, you may
Be found resisters of your God, this day.
Halt not 'twixt two opinions, as ye do;
But, heed his walkings, and, conform thereto.
if, to this Government, you do adhere,
Let, it, by your Obedience, now appear:
If, you Dissent; make public your Protest,
As we have done; unite your Interest,
To Him, whom you desirous are should Reign:
And, if you dare, come, and appeal again
To God, That, he may quickly send you thither,
Where, you may perish, or repent together:
For, we are confident, the work begun
Our God, will prosper, still, as he has done;
And, that when such as you, are in your place,
We, shall behold the fullness of his Grace.
But er'e you grow so mad to run that way,
Be pleased to hear, what I have more to say.
What profit will you get at last by that,
Which you have indiscreetly aimed at,
Tho it should thrive; and, you, should hither bring
With all his Rabblement, the Scottish King?
Should they with all their strength unite together,
And like an Inundation, flow in hither;
Set your Fair Towns, and Villages on fire,
(As you, in probability, desire)
Which would be done, (though you desired it not)
If, there to your assistance they had got:
If, with a Lousie Army they should cover
Your fruitful fields; spread your fair Meadows over
With their Devouring-Troops; your houses fill
With Nasty sluts, and Grooms against your will;
Making your Parlours, and your Halls to stink
With sluttery, like a dunghill, or a sink:
If you should see your hardly-gotten-stores,
Devoured by loose Commanders, and their whores;
Their Brutish followers rudely take the bread,
With which, your Little-children should be fed,
Out of their hands; and keep you so in aw,
That you should scarcely dare to lodge in straw,
(Although your own) whilst those bold guests did lie
In your soft beds; and some stand empty by:
Should you behold them, proudly domineer,
Where you this day, both Lords, and Masters are:
Should you, who may, in peace enjoy your lives,
See your estates, your Children, and your Wives,
Incroach'd upon; the first of them possessed
By those, who feigned friendship had professed;
The other, even before your face, mis-us'd;
The last, perhaps, immodestly abused:
And you your self, if that appear disliked)
Disgracefully, both flouted at, and kicked.
Should you bell ol ^ such things, which (if they come
Upon those terms that are desired by some)
Would surely follow; what should you then gain
By that, whereof you seem to be so fain?
Think you, the most Malignant Cavaliers,
The worst of Papists, and of Presbyters
(United in a Trinity together)
Will bring you purity of worship hither?
Or, can the wisest man alive conceive,
What Linsey-woolsey-stuff the Kirk must weave,
To make a Garment, which will fit and please,
A body, made up of such Crooks as these?
Or frame a discipline that will agree,
With such dissenting parties as those three?
Can you be so imprudent to suppose,
That your New feigned friends, and Ancient foes,
(Disgraced and engrag'd as now they are)
With any good intentions will draw near?
Or give you precious things, to make you brave?
Or better Fields and Gardens, then you have?
Or that your entertainment, whilst they stay,
Will cost you less then what we monthly pay
Unto our Army, which by that expense
Is yet maintained, for our just defense?
Or can you dream (if at their choice it stand)
That, having found the sweetness of this Land,
The Scots, will be so mad, as thence to go
To feed on Thistles, and to lie in Snow?
Or think you, they, had lately, gone away
So quietly, but to obtain their pay,
To render them more able to come back,
When more it might for their advantage make?
Do you believe that, they intend to bring
Their lately Crowned, and new-converted King,
To vindicate the justness of our Cause?
Our ancient Freedoms, and our English Laws?
Or, that, they (having little of their own,
To keep him) so much cost would have bestown,
But, that, they are made hopeful to advance
As well their own wealth, as his maintenance
From your Estates? Can your Dull brains, admit,
That, he, or his, for ever, will forget,
His Fathers head? his own deserved disgrace?
And, on what Terms, you forced him to embrace
A loathed Covenant, which, he did take,
More for a Kingdom, then for Conscience sake?
Or can you be so blind, as not to see
That, all things, which in your possession be,
Will scarce suffice to make full recompense,
For Damages, and losses, ever since
These wars began; when, he makes Computation
Thereof, and shall demand a Reparation?
Especially, when all his needy-Train,
And Greedy-party, shall to him complain
For satisfaction, of their Vast Arrears?
Losses, and Expectations, like to theirs?
Believe it, E're that debt, will quite be paid,
They, who are yet, of no such thing afraid,
Will find, that most (or all of them) shall be
Contributers thereto, as well as we,
Who are proscribed: And, that, if they are rich,
It will not then, considered be so much,
How they affected stood, as what they have,
To satisfy the lusts, of those that crave:
And, all they, who are Neuters, now, or Friends
In secret, unto that, which he intends,
Shall, find small means, to help distinguish them
From those, whom he, for Traitors, will condemn.
And, their false friends, will then retaliate
Their former hate, and falsehood to this State.
Oh! left, this come to pass, more thankful be
To him, who has begun, to set you free,
From former Bondage; and, from what you may,
Occasion, by an Ill-advised way.
Observe well, whether that, which God has wrought,
^or this poor Nation, could to pass be brought,
(...) strength, or Wit of men; had he not been,
Our helper; and, assistances brought in.
How, had so many, been so often, by few,
Defeated else? how, had the Foes they flew
And took, so often, more then doubled those,
Whom, they in open Battle, did oppose?
^ow, else, had we so often saved been
(...) bringing of one Single-vote, between
Our spoil, and us? how, having had, a Foe
(...) strong, so Crafty (and, a Party too
Of his, within our bosoms) had we thus,
Prevailed, and escaped, what threatened us?
Yea, and, among so, many murmurings;
Among so many disencouragings,
As we have had? and, (which is worse then so)
Amidst, A People, not so wise, to know,
Who, seeks their Weal? how, had we stood so long
But, that, God gave us hearts, and made us strong:
Had I, a memory, and time to spare,
But half those Evidences to declare,
Which, of Gods Providence, my observation
Has taken heed of, by the dispensation,
Of mercies, to this Land, since, he begun,
(...) prosecute, what he for us has done,
(...) Order to our Peace; you, would behold
(...) chain of Graces, richer, then of Gold,
Pearls, Diamonds, and Rubies; and, believe
^o other Nations ever did receive,
More tokens of his love. Could I disclose,
(...) Mischievous and deep Designs of those,
Who laid the first foundation of this War;
(...), how far on, their Projects carried were,
In England, and in Ireland, ere our eyes,
Observed the chief ends of their Policies:
How, first, the Lawyers and Ambitious Priests,
Were wooed and won to serve his Interests;
And, active to become, In making void
The Just proprieties, that we enjoyed,
In Civil things; and, render our condition
More flavish by inducing Superstition.
How, next he wrought upon, those Hypocrites,
Who, seeming Patrons, of the peoples rights,
Became, at last to be the worst of those,
Who to the Publike-Liberties, are foes.
Could, I expression make, How, God improved,
His mercies to this Isle when he removed
Strafford, and Canterbury; how, their Plot,
To ruin us, by aiming at the Scot,
(As their first mark) was made the means of (...)
Which we were hopeless of arriving at,
(By such a far-fetcht Compass) and, brought on
What we did never purpose to have done.
Should I, at full, illustrate here, how, they
Came, first, to do their own work; then, took (...)
To Further ours; and, by mere standing still,
Enabled us, to do (against their Will)
What they pretended, with no true intents;
As has been manifested by the events.
Such, as their fraudful Juggling, in receiving
The King near Newark; thereby, us hereaving:
Of those Advantages, for which we Fought:
And, for which, we their help had dearly bought.
Such, as their wresting, that, which they professed
Four our Joint Good, to private-Interest;
Making the Covenant, seem a just occasion,
Of Prosecuting an unjust Invasion.
Such, as their Practices when, here they Lay
Like Snakes within our bosoms, to betray
(...) ruin us; by working upon those,
Who were too Credulous, of their fair-shows,
(...) Piety, and Love; For, whilst they were
With kindness, entertained amongst us, here,
They were but Spies and Agents to promote
Their own designs; And, doubtless, had it not
(...) God prevented been we had been more
(...) this by them enslaved, them heretofore,
(...) by those Actings, which we saw by them
Pursued when they, were weakened from the dream
Which they pretended, (and which we did take
(...) truth, till we, from dreamings did awake)
All men may evidently now perceive
What, we, of their Intentions may believe.
If, I, could make you apprehend the grace,
Which God vouchsafed when he pleased was
To move the King a Parliament to call,
That should be made destructive unto all
His own Designs; permitting, that he should
(...) his Fine-Devices, be so fooled,
As to restore, (of that Just-power it had)
(...) much, as that, It could not be un-made,
Without it own Assent; you would believe,
That, Mercy, was a visible reprieve
From our undoing. For, that made the way,
To other Privileges which long lay,
Unheeded, or unpractised; because,
Prerogative, had swallowed up the Laws,
Or, seized upon the Power, by which, we might
Regain possession, of our Ancient-Right.
But, having, thereby, got that Power again,
Which, we are hopeful, they shall still retain)
They (for abusing Kingship, heretofore)
Enacted, that, we should have, Kings, no more.
Should I, sum up, what dangers did appear,
And, what, Gods open, and close mercies were,
When Gloucester was besieged; when, many thought,
They, other habitations must have fought;
And, sent the Goods, and Treasure, they could spare
To Amsterdam, to be secured there.
When, Bristol was resigned; and, all the Land
(Save one poor Corner) in the Tyrants hand.
When, in the West, one General, began
To grow afraid, and from his Army ran,
When, by another, something was was misdone,
Of no mean consequence, at Dennington.
When, other Chiefs, (by rambling up and down)
With their Brigades, their Credits had, over thrown:
And, did begin to Act destructively.
To them, whose good success, they did envy.
When, they, who for our Succor, feigned to come,
Conspired against us, here, and, then went home
To prosecute their mischiefs,. When, the Foe,
Became so strong, and, We, so weak did grow,
That, for our Re-enforcement, we were fain
To take all comers; and, some to constrain;
In whom, we could but sorily confide.
When, in our Houses false friends did reside,
More to our cost, and to the hazarding
Of all; then all, the Armies, of the King.
When, Our first Champions (who did over-ween
Their own deserts) swollen bigg with Pride, and Spleen,
Jeered our New-Model'd-Army, as if none
Could do such wondrous feats, as they had done,
When, from the Parliament, by shameless lies,
Weekly perpetuated by supplies)
The peoples hearts, were wooed away, to those,
That were, and are, and will be, still their Foes*
When Fury had possessed many so,
That, like a sudden Torrent, they did flow
Impetuously, up to the Senate-dore;
Yea, break in thither, and, there foam, and ro^^
Should I proceed on further, and, with these
Make mention of Gods great deliverances,
When, he at Hull, the first and second time,
Did Nullify a Royal Stratagem.
When likewise, there appeared a dangerous Rent,
(...) City, Army, and in Parliament;
Not only, those dividing from each other,
^ut from themselves, to ruin altogether.
When, both the Armies unto God appealed,
As to their Sovereign Judge, at Naasby-field:
When, all things, that were dear unto us, lay,
Upon the doubtful Trial of one day.
When God, at Brainford, by a poor man's wit,
And Valor, (which none has considered yet)
(...) our Chief-city. For, had not, He, been,
The King, had then surpised it, by design,
With all our Train (left for him in the way
(...) Hammersmith) whilst, our Commanders lay
^^cure at London; who, did, little fear,
(...) great a danger, had been, then so near.
(...), should I tell, with every Circumstance,
God's mercy shown in our Deliverance,
When (after quenching of the General flame)
^^fested, with new, Mischiefs, we became.
When Wales revolted; when, with Surrey, Kent,
And, Essex followed that bad president.
When, Scotland (their confederate) came in
(...) second, what their falsehood did begin;
(...), after all their great hopes, and vain Braggs,
Were glad, to beg the saving of their Craggs.
When, our perfideous Seamen, did betray
Their trust; and with our Sea-guard stole away.
When, our unfriendly Neighbors, looked on,
The Treason, as well pleased with what was done;
(...), did, increase our hazard, by supplying
(...) Foes wants; and, by under-hand-complying*
When, all our Ports, upon the Irish Coast,
(With every Inland Town) save two, were lost.
When our sick Army, likewise, near Dunbar
Enclosed by their Adversaries were,
Without the least, Reserve, in their distress;
Weak Weary, Wounded, Hungry, Harbourless,
Wet, Cold, and Straightned so, that in their Power
(Both by the Foes opinion, and by Our,)
They seemed to be; till, God looked through the cloud
And, then, the Lowly, trampled on the Proud.
And, lastly; when, Surrender up was made
Of Edenborough Castle; which, we had,
At such a season as much more then doubles
The Benefit; considering, what troubles,
(What dangers) might have followed; had (...)
So opportunely, that Strong-Fortress got:
And this great mercy, was the Just occasion,
Of this days meeting and Solemnization.
When these Deliv'rances, and of this kind,
Some others, I do fully call to mind;
With all the Circumstances, too, whereby
We might illustrate every Victory,
To Gods due praise; and, to the annihilating
Of our Endeavors; therewith Meditating,
What, we have gained; and what it might have cost
Had any of our hopes, in these, been lost;
(Or, his Assistances withheld been
During those straights, which, we were sometimes (...)
I cannot, but unfainedly confess,
His Goodness, with a hearty thankfulness;
And, for the Honor of his Name, assay,
To keep, an Everlasting Holyday.
To these Considerations, I might add,
How many are displeased, and almost mad,
With Rage, to see that, still, in their dispignt.
God looks upon our Thrivings, with delight,
(...), still, makes void their Malice; still, unknots,
From time to time) and Nullifies their Plots.
(...) Constantly, He, Leads our Armies on
With Victories; as if, the Work were done
Before they came; and, left them nothing else
(...) do; but, take the prisoners, and the Spoils.
(...) strangely. He, in Ireland, did begin
(...) make us Room; when, we had scarce, therein
(...) of Landing, wherein, we might say
(...) could have been secured, for one day.
(...) swiftly, he has prosecuted there,
^vengements, for the bloody Massacre,
(...) our dear Brethren; and, what fair hopes, he
Vouchsafes, that fully it avenged will be.
(...) great a Mercy, it was that now the Scot,
(...) Re-invading us prevented not
(...) making, in their Land the feat of War;
Which, they intended should be settled here:
(...), what this Blessing is, they truly see,
(...) feel, this day, where, now, both Armies be.
But, over and above all this, there is, yet
(...) Mercy, which, if we forget
(...) mention, to God's praise, we do amiss:
(...), much it will avail us; and, it is this.
(...) Bloody Irish, whose chief interest,
Depends upon the, ten horns of the Beast,
And, Sea of Rome) have with all diligence,
Endeavored for assistances from thence:
(...) was there want, in them, of Willingness,
(...) second their desires; yet, nay-the-less,
They have obtained, hitherto, thereby,
(...) Aid, considerable, or supply:
(...), God, who, our Avenger is become,
(...) cast on that Leviathan of Rome,
(...) Chain; and, Fastened in his Nostrils too,
^Hook which hinders what he fain would do.
God, likewise, ever since, our wars begun,
(As if, to find them Work, till his were done)
Has so distracted every Christian King,
And every* Commonwealth, near neigh'bouring,
With Jealousies, and discontents at home;
With Wars abroad; Or, with Invasions from
Their foreign foes; that, what they would have do^^
They dared not: but, stood, only, looking on,
To see our Fall; to watch, how we did play
Our Game; and, where, their best Advantage lay,
What, but a Providence, and, such a one,
As may ascribed be to God alone,
Could so have timed, and Ordered every thing,
That, they, advantages to us might bring?
What, Denmark would have done, their foe, the Swed^^^
Did, by an Act unlooked for, impede.
What, France intended, was made also vain,
By their Domostique Jars, and, wars with Spain.
What, Spain, could have been highly pleased with^^
Was hindered, both by France, and Portugal.
The Powerful, and wary Netherlanders,
Were grown so jealous, of their own Commanders,
That, though they were unfreindly, at the first,
(And, Countenanced our Foes, in what they durst)
Yet, peradventure, seeing (or else fearing)
A mischief, over their own heads, appearing;
They, have not put opon us, worse conditions,
Then, very well became such Politicians.
But, had not God, in season, took from thence,
That rash, and overmuch entrusted Prince,
Who had almost enslaved them; we, and they,
Or, both of us, had (probably) this day,
Been much imbroyl'd: and, therefore, they, and we
Should, for that timely favor, thankful be.
The Portugal, has had his bridles too,
Restraining him, from, what, he fain wuld do
(...) Hollander, and Spaniard daily keep
(...) hands in action, and his eyes from sleep;
(...) that which he has done in opposition,
(...) us, will but accelerate perdition,
(...) those whom he secured, against our State;
(...) bring them, to repent, when it is too late:
(...) 'twill but keep our (...) abroad, a while,
(...) show the world, Gods favor to this Isle;
(...) make it heed, what work, he has begun;
(...) make them know, that, what is left undone,
(...) but for trial of their faith, and our;
(...), to illustrate so, his boundless power,
(...) they may be assured to confess,
(...) love, his wisdom and his righteousness.
And for assurance, that, it shall be thus,
(...) what earnest, God has given us,
(...), we had long time, controverted, here,
(...) interest; and made the same appear,
(...) humble pleadings, and by hearty cries,
(...) God against our late Kings tyrannies;
(...) saw no good success: we brought our cause,
According to our ancient English Laws)
Before him by appeals. And by the sword,
(...) last decision, which those Laws afford)
(...) the same, to proof; both parties being,
^^ntented, and in that appeal agreeing.
^orthwith, both Drums, and Trumpets thereupon,
^unded a Charge; the battles joined, fell on;
(...), God before whose throne our cause was tried,
(...) victory, gave sentence on our side.
This Judgment (not by all, approved at first)
^^me traitors, and some friends would have reversed,
And fought to wave it, as a doubtful trial;
Although throughout the world, without denial,
And throughout all times) even to this day,
(...) disputes, decided are, this way.
But to assure us, that the sentence came
From God; he, has, again, confirmed the same
By seconding that act of providence,
And, making us, victorious, ever since.
Thereto, therefore, adhering; we have thrown
With confidence, the tyrant from his Throne:
Making him also, pay the forfeiture
Of life, our present title, to secure.
And, therein, not alone our Consciences,
Do warrant us, and, all those witnesses
Of providence, which have therein appeared:
But, to the world, the same is, likewise, cleared,
By all those powerful Kings, and neighboring States^
Who, have observed, how God vindicates
Our cause; and they have now pronounced us free*
As we of right, and by Gods verdict be.
For, their Ambassadors, who now reside,
With us, our liberty have justified,
By their acknowledgements; and, witness bear
Thereby, to what Gods sentence did declare:
Yea, by their free concession of the same,
They make themselves as liable to blame
As we; for, if our Nation justly may
Be counted Murderers; now so must they:
At least, as accessaries to that deed,
By which we from our servitude, were freed.
If, Righteously, our winnings we possess;
They, are partakers of our righteousness,
By those acknowledgements; and, God, shall them
Reward, for their so justifying him:
If they by no sinister actings mar
That blessing, whereto, way, it may appear.
However; we, obliged are to praise
Gods mercy, that we see in our own daye^
Such blossoms of the fruits, which we expect
That, our endeavors have so good effect;
As, that the pow'rfullst Princes of all those
Whom we suspected Neuters (if not foes)
Are so convinced as to mediate
An amicable Juncture, with our State,
In time sincerenesse; or, dissemblers are:
Which, were an evidence of greater fear,
And baseness, then, we either can detect;
Or, shall, without some future cause, suspect.
Oh! what a blindness, what a frowardness,
Does some of our own Nation, yet possess,
That, other men can so far off, discern
What, God, has done for us; and thereby learn
Both to be wise in time, and kiss the son
Before his burning anger is begun,
And yet they, still, continue obstinate:
Grumble at providence, bark at the State,
Like dogs against the moon, and snarl at all
Who will not as they do, good things, miscall.
It may be, such as these, when they shall see
What Is here expressed, will be mad at me:
Menace, defame and hate, revile, and curse,
Or, peradventure, mean me, what is worse)
Yea, some who wish me well, may think I might
Have wiser been, than, to provoke despite,
Or, needlessly, (as they suppose) engage
Against the violence of brutish rage.
But, I defy that wisdom, which persuades
A private heed, which public right, invades.
(...) never yet, an ease, or safety, found
(...) ought, which to my Conscience, gave a wound.
Already too too many such, now are,
Who either seem ashamed, or, else fear
^o own Gods Mercies, or, the public causes,
Without some reservations, blinds, or pauses,
^o save that interest, which to enjoy,
^n^eas'^^bly, themselves, they may destroy.
By this self-love are miseries begun:
Within this channel, hitherto, they run;
By this, we lose Gods love; by this, we make
Our courage feeble, and from other; taken
That confidence in us which might engage
Their faithfulness; and, them to us oblige,
With willingness, to help establish that,
Which for the Publick-weal, is aimed at.
For my part I intend a resolution,
To further what we have in prosecution.
I see Gods mercies, and I understand
His purpose, in the works he has in hand:
And therefore, whosoever displeased shall grow,
Will publish forth, what of his love I know.
It is my duty, it is my proper call;
(If I have any in this world, at all.)
Yea born I was, (if born I were for ought)
To do the work, which, I to do have fought:
And, if my Faculty (such as it is)
Was given me for ought, it was for this
Which I am doing, and I will employ it
This way, as long, as I with health enjoy it.
What ever, I have publicly professed,
Was really intended; not in jest.
Neither for praise, or profit, or to please,
(Except what frailty does inject of these)
Nor out of contradiction unto those
Who shall dislike it, do I this compose:
And, therefore neither, carnal hopes, or fear
Shall make, me, my known duty, to forbear.
For no respect, to Parliament or King,
Or to my self, have Im any thing
Diffe blingly, spoke hitherto my thought;
Although much mischief on me it has brought*
And I hope never to be frighted from
A (...) expression, whatsoever come.
But to declare the truth, and speak my mind,
As often as, I just occasion find;
^n spite of all the spiteful world can do,
And all the rage of Powers Infernal too.
And whence springs this my confidence? not from
Those grounds, whereby, most men, do now become
Courageous in their actings: nor from our
Prevailings hitherto: nor from that power
We have acquired: or those advantages,
Whereby we are made hopeful to possess
Our wished ends: nor trust I to the events
Of our endeavors, or our best intents:
For, all these things, although they promise fair,
May find a change, and leave us in despair:
^n this alone my boldness does consist:
^ see Gods presence, and his interest,
^n all that is done: I have a glimmering, too,
Of that, which he designs e're long, to do,
Though yet delayed: and, therefore, whatsoever
^efalls me, am resolved to persevere
^n driving on his work, though I should see
As great a change, as may supposed be.
Yea should I perish in this Cause, and knew,
When I were dying not one, thereto true;
^ should, even then believe, that, God, alone
Would finish that, which he has now begun;
And make his glory, be the better seen
By those Obstructions, which will intervene.
Thus, having added somewhat to prevent
The prejudice, which threatens my intent:
And sum'd up also, (as my weakness could)
A part of that for which we render should
Our thanks this day; I pu^pose to compose
Some formal Odes of thanfullnesse, for those
^^o (...) desirous be, when they rejoice,
To witness their intentions, by the voice.
This, prudent men, thought very pertinent
(And an inseparable complement)
For such a duty: though, fanatic fools,
Who have nor wit, nor music in their souls,
Perceive not, with, what good effects we may
Use them in our devotions, at this day.
Gods, Prophets, who, knew best what did belong
To praises; did express them, often, in Song,
And, left them written, as the best Records,
To memorize, what present time affoords,
Worth recommending to Posterity:
Or, of safe keeping it in memory:
For, seeing Hymns beget no expectation
Of ought proceeding from an inspiration,
Upon emergent cause; but are a story,
Expressing, briefly, to the almighties Glory,
Matter, of fact, (as that which has been done,
Lately for us, or many ages gone,
For, others, whose well-being did relate,
To us) those Odes continue still in date;
And should sometimes, repeated be, to show
What, God has done; that, hopeful we might gro^
Of like Protection: and, be comforted
By those examples, when our hopes are dead.
And necessary it is, that, those Records
Should be preserved, still, in their first words,
That, future times, a certainty may see
In those things, which commemorated be.
And out of question, (to the end of days)
He, who sincerely sings the, to Gods praise,
Shall feel within him (being so disposed)
That spirit move, by which they were composed.
Therefore, though Scorners, and those dull soul'd things
Whose judgment knows not, whether better (...)
The Nightingall or Cuckoo, flout me shall,
And in contempt, these Hymns my Ballads ^^ll;
^ will not be discouraged by these;
From saying, or, from singing, what I please;
But, in an awful, Joyful strain, begin
A song, to usher this days praises in.
Yea, in those forms, which are by them abhorred;
^, and my household, thus, will praise the Lord.
Sing this as the 100. Psalm.
1.
WIth aweful Joy, and joyful Fear,
To sanctify, O Lord, this day,
Before thy Footstool we appear;
And, our Thank-offrings here to pay:
Which though it be no other thing,
Then thy Free-mercies to confess;
Or, Songs, unto thy praise to sing;
Vouchsafe acceptance, nay-the-lesse.
2.
Within our selves, we are so poor,
That, we have nothing of our own,
But, what we had from thee, before;
Which, by our sins impaired is grown:
For, our wit, beauty, strength, and health,
(The goods of body, and of mind)
Our time, our honors, and our wealth,
To serve our lusts, have been resigned.
3.
And, therefore, till thou shall renew
Thine Image, by our fault defaced,
We, and our Offerings, from thy view,
Deservedly, may forth be cast.
There is no music in our Songs,
That Is worthy to be heard of thee;
Because, our hearts, eyes, ears, and tongues,
Profaned, and untuned be.
4.
Yet by those favors, heartned on,
W^^ch were on us bestown, of late,
A Hymn, we jointly have begun,
To sing this Day, at Mercies gate.
Lord! those eternal doors unclose,
Through which thy special graces flow;
The cords of our Corruption lose,
And, let thy Spirit on us blow.
5.
Then, every word, we hear, or say,
With ev'rything, that is done, or thought
(In celebrating of this Day)
Shall do thee honor, as it ought:
And, they that study public harms,
Or, flout, what we are doing here,
Shall be so bound up, by these Charms,
That when they flout us, they shall fear.
Thus, having by an humble preparation,
Made, first our way to God, for acceptance
Of our intended praises; and, that done,
A little meditated thereupon;
Or, exercised our thoughts, on other Notions,
Which may be pertinent, to these devotions;
We, in a second Canto, will relate
Some heads of that which we commemorate:
And, thus, express our thankfulness to God,
In exultations, of a higher Mode.
Sing this as the 113. Psalm.
1.
OH God! how good! how kind art thou!
What help, what grace, do thou bestow
On us, in our distressed estate!
Our tears to triumphs, thou have turned,
We now do sing, who lately mourned,
And, by our Foes, were jeered at.
When we were weak, poor and forlorn,
Exposed to dangers, fears and scorn,
Our Comforter, thou did become:
And, when we dreaded shame of face;
Spoils, death, or wounds, joined with disgrace;
Those fears, we were delivered from.
As thou, from base and servile bands,
And out of cruel Pharoahs hands,
Thine Heritage redeemd'st of old:
Even so, from those, who fought our harm,
Thou broughtst us off, with out-stretch'd arm,
With signs and wonders manifold.
They so, were blinded, Lord, by thee,
Who, might have seen, but would not see;
Nor hear when they were counseled well:
And He that fraud, and force employ;d,
To make our Laws, and Freedoms void;
In our own view, like Pharaoh, fell.
This is the Day, whereon our Yoke
Of Norman Bondage, first was broke;
And, England from her chains made free*
This is the Day, vvhereon the Lord,
Did manumit us by the sword,
And, it is now signal, by decree.
Slaves, they deserve to be, therefore,
And to be barred for evermore,
The Freedoms of this Commonweal,
Who shall not thankful, now appear,
And vindicate with sword and spear,
Gods just Replies, to our Appeal.
By thee, our Freedoms, Lord, we got;
Oh! to our keeping, leave them not:
But, still their Guardianship retain.
And, let not those, who under thee,
Sub^^^ers, of those Freedoms be,
(...) our ^ins, forfeit them, again:
On th^se alone, that are unjust
Or shall be traitors in their trust,
To this Republike, or to Thee,
Let thy avenging justice fall;
And, on all those who hinder shall,
That Peace, with Truth, may settled be:
5.
Write in our hearts, thy sacred Law;
And, let no future failings, draw
Our former cursed bondage back:
But, our depraved wills renew,
And, to thy service, keep us true;
Which, will our Freedoms perfect make.
The Kingdom, Power, and Praise be thine
As long as Moon, and Sun shall shine:
Be, likewise, thou our Heritage:
And, in this Nation, let there be
No other King, or GOD, but thee,
What e're they are, who thereat rage.
Warmed by these Charms, I do begin to feel
Another motion, in an higher wheel,
Inclining my invention, to indite
Expressions, raised to a loftier height;
That (if it can be done) I may awake
Some other, in my praises to partake.
Be silent then; For, I intend a strain,
That shall reach heaven, and, echo, down again
Such repercussions, hither, through the air,
As will within our Foes beget despair,
Of their designs; and, those, to us, unite
In praises, who, in Englands peace, delight:
Sing this as the 148. Psalm, doubling the last strain of the Tune.
1.
ALl you, that present are,
Come, let our hearts, and tongues,
The Praise of God declare,
In new-Thanksgiving songs;
Come, let us sing
^trains, that may make the walls to shake,
The Roofs to ring:
Still sounding higher,
^ill thereby, we, with Angels, be
Joined in one Quire.
Related, we have heard,
What he, for us, has done;
With how much disregard,
Our Foes, he looks upon:
And, we have seen,
^ow, he befriends, when righteous ends
Pursued have been:
We, likewise view
What will befall, to those that shall
Their lust pursue.
We see, or may behold,
That, he our Armies leads;
And (as in times of old)
His Banner over them spreads,
And for our sakes,
through threats and spights, through depths and heights,
Their passage makes,
Whilst, to his praise
Their Foes to naught, are justly brought,
In plainer ways.
He, made both Seas and Wind,
To them assistance lend;
And, what they had designed,
Sun, Moon, and Clouds befriend.
F^rce, he repells;
(...) them bold, to march where cold,
(...) hunger dwells:
And, when their fear
Did most abound, they mercy found,
And Victors were.
5.
To him does Praise belong:
For, he did them subdue,
Who numerous were, and strong,
When we were weak, and few;
And, when our Foes
Came bragging on, and thought all won,
They all did lose.
Still, be it thus;
Lord! always, so, them overthrow
Who malice us.
6.
His wise-foresight prevents,
The Politicians wiles:
He, crosses their intents,
He, at their Projects smiles:
In his due time,
He still unknots, all hidden plots,
Contrived by them:
And, in that snare,
Which, for our feet, they closely set,
Still caught they are.
7.
Vain sons of men, therefore,
Your brutish grumbling cease;
Pursue false-hopes no more,
But follow after peace.
More prudent grow;
Reform your ways, and sing his Praise
As now we do:
Oh! whilst you may
In God rejoice, and hear his Voice
While it is to day.
8.
Let all men do the same,
Of whatsoever degree;
And magnify his Name,
As all obliged be.
His Righteousness,
(...) Power and Grace, in every place
Let all confess:
And lay aside
their own deserts, their selfish hearts,
Their stinking pride.
Your strength to him submit,
You, that have conquests won:
Wise men ascribe your wit,
To him, even him alone.
For, he supplies
^he Fool with skill, and, when he will
Be fools the wise.
And, certainly,
unto to your Foes, he, gives the blows
By which they die.
10.
Rich-men, your precious things
Bring forth, your Thanks to show;
Before him, (Oh ye Kings)
Your Heads, and Scepters bow;
And, as it is meet,
^ome from your Thrones, and cast your Crowns
Beneath his feet:
For, Kingdoms all
^o him pertain, and he again
Resume them shall.
11.
Oh! let all things that were,
That are, or shall ensue;
(Or, but in thought appear)
The Praise, O God, forth-shew;
^ill Times last bound:
And, let it run, when time is done,
An endless Round;
Where, needs not be
Privations Night, that we true Light
May better see.
12.
Mean time, let not his praise
Be merely, in our Voice,
As if we thought to raise
A Trophy, out of Noise:
But, let us more
Our Thanks express, in Righteousness,
Then heretofore:
Else (this is plain)
False shows we make, and, do but take
GODS Name in vain.
These Hymns I offer up, to be instead
Of some short Chronicle, for them to read,
Who have not means to get a larger Book,
Or leisure-time, long Tracts to overlook.
And many, peradventure, who should else
Never have heard a word, of what this tells,
Shall thereby know it, and thence, take occasion
To magnify Gods Mercies, to this Nation.
Here I had made an end, but that I find
Another Christian duty, which to mind
I must present. All these, forepast Expressions
Of Gods great mercies, and our fair Professions
Of thankfuinesse, but words, or actions be,
Which hypocrites may do, as well as we,
(As to the outward man) and, many times,
By them, that service, best performed seems.
These, are but offerings of our lips, and tongues,
Or exercises of the breath, and lungs,
In which, we formally may act a part,
With little fervor, and without a heart.
If we upon inquiry find it thus,
In those Thanksgivings offered now by us,
^verball, and mere corporal oblation
^ll be to God, but an abomination.
We, therefore shall do well, when we have ended
^e public duties, unto us commended,
(...) Power supreme) in private, to retire
(...) to our selves, and of our hearts inquire
^^w things are there, and whether all be so
^earnest, as it ought to be, or no.
(...) we perceive a failing, let us, then,
^^nfesse it, as becomes repentant men:
^^^d take occasion, thence, to magnify
^ods love the more, and humbly vilify
^^r ways before him, for the favors done,
^ill, then, most thankfully be thought upon,
^hen we consider, that, the Grace bestown,
^as not, without our self-desert, alone:
^^t, when we rather merited his wrath.
^ercie, by guileinesse, more luster has,
and Gods commiseration will appear
^^ice greater, when it is known, how vile we are.
Oh! let us therefore, take more care to see,
^^th what we are, and, what we ought to be,
whom, God, has so much favored: let us know,
^^at we our thankfulness are bound to show
(...) well with other members, as with tongues,
^^d, with what, ever else to us belongs.
^^e ought to bring a circumcised ear,
^^ot deaf to truth, or, readier to hear
(...) false report, then, that which represents
^^he grievances, and wrongs of innocents.
(...) pitiful, and an impartial eye,
(...) look upon, the poor man's misery,
and turn from vanities: well cleansed hands:
^tive, in executing, Gods Commands:
(...), not to bloodshed swift, but, ordered
^he paths of Christian holiness, to tread;
And every other Member, serving to
Those duties, which they were ordained to do.
Let every man consider, what, he was;
What, he at this time is; unto what place
God, has preferred him: unto what end:
What, he has done; and, what, he does intend:
Whether, to other men, he has done so,
As, he would others, unto him should do.
Whether his Power be faithfully employed,
To further that, for which it is enjoyed;
Or, to enrich himself. Whether, his wealth,
His reputation, wisdom, strength, and health,
Have been improved aright; and, whether, he
Is really the same, he seems to be,
By those external actings, which express
His Justice, Piety, and Thankfulness.
For, it is not our conformity, to that
Which is this day, commanded by the State,
(Or, other like performances) alone,
That, makes acceptable what is done.
It Is not Religion, stewed into a vapor;
Taking, of Notes, at Sermons, in a paper;
Or, giving sixpence, or perhaps, a shilling,
Wherein, consists a laudable fulfilling
Of this daies-duty: no, beloved Nation,
It Is Justice, Justice; Bowels of compassion;
Sincerenesse in your deeds; truth in your hearts;
And, purifying of your inward parts;
Which makes a Sacrifice to be approved,
Or Sacrificer perfectly beloved:
And, it is the want of these, that, most estranges
From GOD; and brings the most destructive chang^
Which, being true; all men (in what they may)
Should to perform the duty of this day,
Be diligent: But most conduce, it shall
Unto the Publike-good, in general;
That such as have chief Power, in either Nation
Should take themselves into Examination,
And search, what in them wants, to express
A hearty, and unfeigned thankfulness:
Let, therefore those, on whom, at this time, lies
The greatest Trust, reflect, a while, their eyes
Upon themselves; to make inquiry, whether
There be not in their publike-actings, either
Some falsehood, or some failings, which may need
A Reformation, and a better heed:
Whether, they have not swallowed, what may choke
Themselves, at last; Gods, righteous wrath provoke;
And, frustrate all our former Preservations;
Our present Joys, and future expectations.
Let them examine, how much, yet, they want
Of making good their vowed Covenant,
Not in the Scottish, but the English sense)
Which has relation to our just defense,
And, to that mutual aid, which, to each other
We vowed; when, we were thereby joined together.
Let them examine, whether, they have not
That part, of their Engagement, so forgot,
As, to desert their friends, in the executions
Of their just Vow, and, made their Prosecutions
More mischievous to them, then unto those
That, were appa^ently our guilty Foes:
And, whether, whilst this Lot, on them attends,
Men, may not cheaper, be truth's foes, then friends.
Let them examine, if there be not some,
Who to their Counsels, and Committees come,
^eldome, or never; but, to set those free
From Prosecution, who, most guilty be:
And, whether, many of them, do not know
Who, these men are, and often, find it so,
Much to their grief; because, they are unable
To hinder, what they know unwarrantable.
Let, them consider, whether, some effects
Of partial, and of personal respects,
Have not often times, destroyed an Innocent,
The just dooms, of the guilty, to prevent:
Whether, this Lord, that kinsman, or their friend;
(Or, he, that can promote their private end)
This Lady, with the fair bespotted face;
That gallant, in the suit bedawb'd with Lace;
Or, seeming Converts, who, perhaps, are come
To Fine, for means, to mischief us, at home;
Let them I say, consider whether, these
Are not received with more civiliti^s,
And, with much more respect, then many are,
Who, from the first beginning of this war,
Have served faithfully; and ever stood
Firm, in all Trialls, for the Publike-good.
Let them examine, whether, they and we,
Partakers, of one Common-Justice be,
According to our right: Or, whether they
Allow not to themselves, what they deny
To some of us, who, have the self-same Cause;
And, claim the self-same equity, and Laws.
Let them examine, whether, none of them,
Seek opportunities, and watch for time
How, to surprise their House, to gain a Vote,
Which, in a full Court, never had been got;
Because, their motions, had been, then, gainsaid,
By many, and, their purpose, better weighed.
Let them examine, how, they do pursue
Their self-denying Votes, which, gave a show
Of honorable, and of good intentions;
Though frustrate, by unlooked for preventions.
Let them examine, if these Common-weals
Can hope for benefit, by just Appeals,
Against Oppressors, who shall Office bear,
When in Supreme Authority they are,
And while they shall be privileged so,
That, they may Judges be; and Parties, too,
In those Appeals; and, how, their bribery,
Or other injuries, can possibly
Be proved; where, all Appellants, against these,
Shall find so many disadvantages
To struggle through; and while those they impeach,
Are in a Sanctuary, out of reach.
Let them examine, if the distributions
Of places, gainful by their executions,
Are equally divided; or, bestown
So frequently, for any merit, known,
As, for some nigh relation, unto those
Who get the power, such places to dispose:
And, whether, one, may five, or six, deserve,
Whilst, many of our friends, are like to starve,
Who, might have been relieved; yea, made our debtor;
And, served the Common wealth, perhaps much better.
Let them examine, whether, they, who lent
And, freely gave, till all they had, was spent,
The Public to secure; are cared for, so,
As they have been, who, fought our overthrow:
Whether, they see not many more arise
To speak for them, upon emergencies;
To represent their seeming-sad conditions;
To offer, and to second, their Petitions;
To get Provisoes, pardons, or Reprieves,
(And, means to keep their children, and their wives)
Then do for those, when their distress appears,
Who, freely, spent their blood, to save our tears.
Let them examine, whether, some of them
Do not by their proceedings, both condemn
And, help destroy themselves; when, in their Choises
Of Publike-Ministers, they give in Voices,
Or Names, for by-respects, or kindreds sake;
Enabling them, Confed'racies to make,
For private interest: let them, together
Take consultation, and examine whether
They favor not, among them, such as drive
Those actings on, whereby, they may contrive
The ruin of our Cause. Let them, moreover,
Examine, whether, none they can discover
Who constantly endeavor, to bring in
Those, who most worthily, deprived have been
Of their late trust; that, they might them assist
In strengthening their corrupted interest:
And, whether, an indulgency to these,
May not procure some disadvantages
To that Militia, which, has been, of late,
Established, to fortify the State:
And, let them, if they find it to be so,
Prevent the mischief, e're it further go.
Let them examine, whether, Avarice,
Ambition, malice, pride, or some such Vice,
Has not been so indulged, as, that it may
Deprive us of the comforts, which this day
We have hope: yea, let us all, apart,
And, jointly, seek true Peace, with perfect heart.
These memorandums, I am bold to add,
That, our Thanksgivings, may be thereby made
More perfect; and, more acceptable, too,
By minding, what, we further have to do:
That, by these Observations, I may keep
My friends, from singing of themselves asleep,
In that security, which will destroy
The truest sweetness, of our present joy:
That, we might save Supreme Authority,
From that contempt, that blame, and obloquy,
Which, may be cast upon it, by our Foes,
Or, by the secret faithlesnesse, of those,
Who (by pretending for it) have much wronged
Their Actings, and our miseries prolonged:
^^d that we may not by our heedlesnesse
(...) those things, which will mar our happiness,
^^wle Elegies, and roar out Lamentations,
^^ead of songs of praise, and Exultations,
Lord! give thou hereunto, those good events
Which, may, in somewhat, answer my intents:
and, take with acceptance, I, thee pray,
^^is my imperfect, this may weak assay.
^sten thy work, and bring it to conclusion;
^aw us, out of that chaos-like confusion,
(...) which we are: As, in our preservation
^ou have appeared, so in our restoration
(...) unity, please, likewise, to appear;
^^at, Peace and truth, may keep their dwellings here.
Let Parliament, and people, from this day,
^^ise thee, by Reformation of their way.
(...) City, Country, and both poor and rich,
^^deavour with sincerity, as much.
^^t our victorious Army, do the same;
^^tributing unto thy glorious Name
(...) their prevailings; persevering, still,
(...) faithful executing of thy will,
^^d seeking publick-peace without design
^ought, which may to selfishnesse incline.
and, make us all, with as much willingness,
(...) forth thy praises, for the righteousness
(...) thy severest Judgments; as, to sing
^anks, for those blessings, which thy mercies bring.
And, my dear countrymen, let me not pray
^^r you in vain: nor sing my songs, this day
(...) Beasts, and Rocks, and Mountains, to be heard,
As they have often been) without regard:
^^st, I have cause to change my joyful Odes,
(...) mournful Epicedes, and Palinodes.
(...) ill presaging Raven to this Nation,
^ would not be (croaking of desolation
And sad events) I, rather with the Dove,
My winged Contemplations, would improve
To bring such Olive-leaves, as may declare
Your overflowings, quite abated are:
But, all that is allowed by my Commissions,
Is, only to declare, on what conditions,
We may have Peace; and, what events, God has
Designed, both to the right, and left hand path.
Let me not, therefore, whistle to the wind,
And, emptiness, in my good wishes find.
For, why should this day of our visitation
Be overpassed by this generation?
Why do the Gentry rage? why murmur so
The brutish Common people, as they do?
New Vanities, why do they still devise?
Themselves befooling every day with lies?
Though, every days, experience does declare,
How false their hopes and expectations are:
If they would learn to love, and to believe,
God, thereunto, a blessed Event should give;
And make them know, and see (with comfort too)
What, he is doing, and intends to do.
But I begin to feel within my breast,
A Rapture, pressing on to be expressed.
Oh! hear me therefore, and let none despise
To heed it: for I Will now sing Prophecies,
Which (whatsoever you think) shall be as true,
As if a wiser man had told them you.
If you shall (oh ye Britains) reunite,
In love, and, but, according to your might,
Add your endeavors, cheerfully, to do,
What Grace and Reason, will invite you to,
Your way shall prosper: and, (my soul for yours)
Neither all earthlies nor Infernal powers,
Shall able be to make a future rent,
Betwixt you; or to shake that governme^^
Which God will settle here: but it shall stand
^s long, as there is, either sea or land:
and be renowned among all other Nations,
^hroughout the world, and through all Generations.
This Island, then, the Darling shall become,
^ot only, of all States in Christendom;
^ut, likewise, of all those within the sound
^f every wind, that blows within this Round.
^ shall be made the Magazine of all
those things on earth, which men do precious call:
and, of all virtues, moral and divine,
that may be found, where Sun and Moon do shine:
^or, God shall take delight, to multiply
^is blessings on it, and to beautify
^ut cities, fields, and persons, with each thing,
that honor, ornament or peace may bring.
But, if against the Light you shut your eyes;
^ood counsel, if you frowardly despise:
(...) you from God, shall turn away your heart;
^he way of Justice, and of truth pervert:
(...), timely mercies you neglect to show
^o those that need (God, having unto you
^ouchsaf'd so many favors, and, protections,
(...) your great straights, and manifold afflictions)
^r, shall abuse the power or trust bestown,
^o set up vain devices of your own,
^stead of what concerns the throne of Christ;
^r, this free Nations, lawful interest;
^r, shall maliciously pursue a course,
that, leads away, from better things, to worse:
^hen, know your doom, for, here I Will tell it you,
and speak it out, without Aenigmaes too.
God, with a black-sad cloud shall overcast
^our hopes; and, on you, breath a sudden blast
that will shrink up, (before you are aware
^ll those fair bloomings, which this day appear;
Set back your Dialls, nip your forward Spring,
Which promised rich harvest fruits, to bring:
And, as his mercies, have exceeding been,
So shall his Judgments, when they do begin.
Yea, should you conquer, till, you did not know
Abroad, or, here at home, one able foe.
Should all those Princes, and those powrfull Sta^^^
Who court you now, prove firm confederates;
Or, should you stand possessed of all their powrs,
Of whom, you are, or may be Con querours;
Yet, mark well this (unless, we shall with speed,
Reform some things, which Reformation need:
And with more Courage, with more verity,
More self-denial, and sincerity,
Witness our thankfulness (which, by Gods grace,
I hope, will in due time, be brought to pass)
A thing, which no man yet, knows what to call,
(Or whence 'twill come) our hopes endanger shall
Yea, such a thing, as is not yet in thought,
(And which most men will slight and set at nough^
When first it shall appear) will overthrow
Our Glory, and lay all our honor low,
Till we repent: but, then, we shall arise
From our disgrace again, to be more wise:
And they who in their hearts abide sincere,
Shall see this change, without much harm, or fear*
More, I might say, but, my set time is gone.
Take this, among you; and, Gods will be done,
FINIS.
In the last page of the Epistle l.21.r. settling. p.6.l.^^.r. J^ seed.
p.7.l.29. r. either and or.


