THE TWO INCOMPARABLE GENERALISSIMO'S of the world, with their Armies briefly
described and embattailed, visibly and invisibly opposing each other.
The one is the old Serpent the Devil, General of the Church Malignant.
The other is the Lord JESUS CHRIST, General of the Church Militant.
Argument.
ACcording to the Enmity decreed
Between the woman's and the Serpents seed
In Paradise, each other does defy,
This hatred lasts to Eternity:
No marvel then that War is now begun
Unnaturally 'twixt father and the son.
CLad all in angry Arms of discontent,
Because of his perpetual banishment
From bliss, above fiv^ ^housand years ago,
And in revenge of that same fatal blow,
Given him by that pure unspotted Ch^^^
Borne of a woman whom he so beguil^^
The old infernal Serpent ever since,
Has proved a hateful Rebel to his Prince,
And all enraged with malice and despite,
He leads his captive soldiers thus to fight.
In Van, or Front march Infidels without
The Church, then Persecutors, and the rout
Of Heretics within; the Middleward
Profane, and all ungodly men do guard;
The Rear consists of an accursed Crew,
Terrible indeed, and hideous to view
(As Conscience awaked once can tell)
Deadly sin, damnation, death and hell.
The wings, or sides this body that enclose
Are fleshly lusts, and worldly pleasures Foes,
That by force of strong persuasion kill,
More, than the Tempter can with all his skill*
The Colonels, Captains, Drums and Trumpeters,
And other such inferior Officers,
Are infernal spirits hovering in the air;
Th'word of command's Presumption and Despair.
Thus Summum Malum, Summum Bonums Foe,
Sets up his Standard here on earth below;
And with his false suggestions, every hour
Draws to his party a Malignant power
Of Potentates, as well as baser sort,
His earthly fading kingdoms to support,
And sends abroad his nimble Mercuries,
Intelligencers, Scouts, and Aulick lies,
And promises rewards for all their pains,
As pleasures, treasures, dignities and gains:
But all these proffers prove but a flim-flam,
He leaves them at the last like Doctor Lamb;
And when delights, and life are gone and past,
Then comes the sad Catastrophe at last,
Endless and easelesse torments in hellfire,
This is the Serpents and his soldiers hire.
AGainst this Hydra-headed Army stands
The Prince of Peace, with his victorious bands;
Not that this glorious Conqueror does need
Created help, to effect a noble deed;
For He Himself did long ago subdue
The Prince or darkness, and the infernal crew;
But to communicate He does delight
To silly Mortals His own match^esse might,
Which so upon them daily He conferres,
That in the end they are more than conquerers;
Yet none but slaves, and conquered by sin
He makes His sould^ers, and the field to win,
After He first has pulled them from the jaws
Of death and hell, and given them new Laws
And principle^ divine; then does dispose
Them thus in order against His Churches Foes.
The Vant-guard does consist of Saints, and brave
Heroic Martyrs, who despise the grave;
The true Professors of the Gospel next,
(With scoffing Chams and lying Doegs vexed)
March in the Middleward; But O the Rear,
(That which most the infernal force does fear)
Consists of the Generals own merits,
Which succor sends unto the fainting spirits
Of all His soldiers, who else would be lost;
The wings on each side of this glorious Host,
Are stretched far above all earthly things,
Spiritual graces making lively springs
Of hope and joy with promises so sure
Of heavenly life for ever to endure.
The Officers to this High General,
Are brave Commanders, blessed Angels all,
Who at their Captains beck like lightning move;
Th'word of command is this; I fear, and love.
Thus stands the Christian armed against his Foes,
Giving, and sometimes taking many blowe^,
And that not by imaginary force
But as really as did Foot and Horse
Near Winchester of late, where souls apace
Fled to the frowning and the smiling face
Of this great General; For only He
Binds, and makes men and Angels free.
And by His mighty power does so keep
His soldiers happy souls that fall asleep
That stinging death shall never hurt them, why?
Because they dye to live eternally.
To the Reader.
NOw may thine eye convey unto thy heart,
Thine own condition (Reader) on whose part
Or side, to take up arms thou do intend,
Or be unto thy self a Foe or Friend;
For under one of these two Generals
The service of all men and Angels falls;
You see the Captains and their wages both,
O love the one then, and the other loath.
G W.

London Printed, for James Butler, 1644,


