MS Phale and Company Enter ^ Cave they meet a Solitary

M Delegaard Returns back M.S. Phale Receives a letter.

M.S. Phale Examins ye Footman yt bro by^ Let from her ^ro^^^

M. Ponsin Gives his Mother acc^^ of M.S. Phale's Rescue.



POOR ROBIN'S JESTS: OR, The Complete Jester.

Being A Collection of several Jests not heretofore published.

Now newly composed and written By that well-known Gentleman, Poor Robin,
Knight of the burnt Island, and well-willer to the Mathematics.

Together with the true and lively Effigies of the said Author.

Licensed Feb. 2. 1666. Roger L'Estrange.

LONDON: Printed for Francis Kirkman and Richard Head.

To the Intelligible Reader.
DId not Custom claim an Epistle, I might have saved my self this labor of
writing one; and yet let me tell thee, that good Wine may be sold within,
although there hangs no Bush at the door. Now thou do expect (I suppose) that
I should say something of these Jests; if I should tell thee that they were all
good, I think thou would not believe me; and if thou should say they were
all bad, I profess I should not believe thee. I suppose they are not like to
the women in the World, because here is more good ones then bad ones; whereas
amongst them, there is more bad then good: if after the perusal of them thou
find fault, reflect upon thy self, whether thou have not more Vices then
Virtues within thee, and forbear to censure too rigidly, lest a wiser head then
thy own commending them, thou for thy pains be accounted a fool.

But me thinks I hear some longear'd fellow to say that the most of these are
but Collections, the Works of other men; and therefore the less to be regarded:
why Apes-face, let me ask thee this Question; Is the Honey the worse, because
the Be sucks it out of many flowers? or is the Spiders Web the more to be
praised, because it is extracted out of her own Bowels? Will thou say the
Tailor did not make the Garment, because the Cloth it was made of, was weaved
by the Weaver? It Is true, many of these Jests were delivered before by others;
but with so much prolixity, and in such a rough style, as was both tedious and
unpleasant to the Reader; but now they are so ordered, that the worst of them
all may pass with approbation, if thou do not mar their sense, by thy
ill-favored reading of them; which if thou should do in my hearing, I
profess, as I am a true man, an honest man, and no Tailor, I should be very
angry with thee for thy labor.

And now let me tell thee, that besides the old, here is a great many new ones;
yea, spick and span new, scattered amongst the others (like Plumbs in a Cake)
to make the old ones to relish the better: and indeed Jests are like Cakes,
which should have in them the sweet Plumbs of pleasant language, spiced with
delight, and sugered with pleasure; but the nearest resemblance is, that Jests
and Cakes are both of them best when they are broken.

Now if thou likest them, so; if thou dislike them, then so, so: but if thy
teeth stand like an old Park-pale, here one rotten, and there one out; forbear
to read them before thy Sweetheart, lest when thou grinnest, thou discover so
much, as to help thee, thou be forced to flee to the old Proverb for refuge,
That those whose teeth are out kiss softly.

Much more might be said, if there were a necessity for it; but if thou be
not wise, then thou art otherwise; now if thou be wise, then a word to the
wise is sufficient; and if be otherwise, all the words that I can use, will
not make thee a wise man.

Next, a word or two to the women, and then I will conclude: Two sorts of the
Female Sex would I advise by all means not to read this Book; viz. those women
that have made their Husbands Cuckolds, and those that paint their faces. For
the first sort, those women that wear Cork-shooes, which makes them to be
light-heel'd, let them not dare to touch it, lest they meet with some passages
in it, which may make them to blush as red, as if they had been drinking of
burnt-Claret; when they consider with themselves, that by their doing, and
being done, their Husbands, who (had they had honest Wives) might have lived
and dyed handsome, fine, smooth-foreheaded men, now by these wagtails are
metamorphosed into such-kinde of Creatures, as Bulls, Oxen, Stags, Rams, Goats,
Humble-bees and Snayles.

Then for those that paint their faces, if they should laugh themselves into an
extraordinary Sweat, it might chance to spoil their complexions, by reason of
their Fucus melting off; let them therefore forbear, forewarned, forearm'd: for
all other sorts of women, let them read and welcome, laugh till they bepiss
themselves, it is but washing their Smocks again; so fall too, and much good
may it do you.

Yours in all civil Mirth, POOR ROBIN.

Will. Summers in Commendation of this Book.
I Who did live in the days of eighth King Harry
(That in his time six several wives did marry,)
And often did make him laugh his belly full
With Jests I put upon Cardinal Wol-Sey,
do now appear again in print
For this same Book, to tell you what is in it;
It Is with a medley of such queint Jests stored,
The best that any Age did yet afford:
For other Commendations it don't need them;
They Are good upon my word, and therefore read them.
Scoggin on the Book.
I Nither to have lived in great fame,
But these queint Jests will quite eclipse my name,
And put me down (so far they do excel)
Even as a Bucket is put down a Well:
For those whose Wits are dull, whose brains are dry,
Here is at least a twelve-months fresh supply.
Me thinks I see when Tom and Will does read them,
How all the Company with attention heed them:
Such store of mirth it breeds when they sit quaffing,
That Jenny breaks her twatling-strings with laughing.
My Commendations of them in this Verse,
Is like my greazing the fat Sow of the Ar --
For they are stored with so much mirth and sport,
The longest Verse does in their praise come short.
Dick Tarlton on the Complete Jester.
NExt to Will Summers, and my Brother Scoggin,
Let me amongst the rest put my dry bob in;
For you will say there were some reason for it,
If you had seen me in Queen Besses Court,
Where I did live in great renown and bravery,
And pleased most people with my harmless kna --
But some will say, what needs all this clatter?
Here Is nothing has been spoken to the matter.
It Is true indeed, the thoughts of my past glory
Had made me almost quite forget my story;
Which was (if I am not therein mistook)
To give my approbation of this Book:
All I shall say, is, those that discommend it,
Let them (if they can do the same) come mend it.
Pasquil upon the following Jests.
MY being was in the days of Mother Bunch,
Who sold good Liquor, Sider, Ale and Punch,
Metheglin, Perry, Vsquebah and Coffee,
As good as ere was drunk by Persian Sophy:
And sometimes Brandy, Chocolet, Stepony,
Which thither did invite many a Croney;
Where whilst they sat a drinking of their Ale,
Each man by turns did tell a merry tale;
Which I had printed in one Book for sport too,
Neither in Twelves, nor Octo, but in Quarto:
That Book of mine and if you do resort to,
'Twill make you laugh, and smile, and if not fart too:
But yet I must confess, I cannot deny it,
This following Book (unless I should belly it)
Surpasses mine in so many degrees,
As Water is by Wine, or Chalk by Cheese.
Long-Meg of Westminster on the Book.
AMongst the men, next give a woman place too,
Who once did live in great renown and grace too;
And for being tall, and kept a filthy stir,
Men styled me Long-Meg of Westminster.
Many mad pranks I played, and many a gamble,
Whilst in this lower Orb I had my ramble;
For which my name grew great, and thundered so,
Louder then Cannon-shot, or Bell of Bow.
And be it known unto all Christian people,
It mounted higher far then is Pauls-steeple:
That since the days Eve wooed our father Adam,
Was never known a stouter strapping Madam.
But now I fear as sure as Eggs are Eggs too,
And that men's Bodies are born by their Legs too;
These Jests puts down my fame, have me out-stripped,
As Schoolboys puts down hose when they are whipped.
Hobson, the merry Londoner, in praise of this Book.
FOrth from the hollow Caverns of old Tellus,
I come to spend my breath, like wind from Bellows,
To tell the world this Book it has no f^llows;
Read it, 'twill cure the jealous of the Yellows,
The rich of Pride, the sad of Melancholy,
The poor of Spleen, the simple-man of folly:
It is the only Universal Doctor,
'Twill cure thee of the P -- if thou have knocked her.
There Is no disease of care, nor yet of grief too,
But reading this, it gives the mind relief too:
Then if for to be cured, thy mind be willing,
Pull out thy purse, the price is but a shilling.
Archy in praise of this Book.
AMongst the train of nimble wits next march I,
King Charles the Martyrs Jester, famous Archy:
Valiant I was, as was french Knight de Amadis,
And full of mirth, as Egge-shell with meat cramb'd is;
And which of the matter sets a higher rate too,
Jested my self into a good Estate too.
Now since my censure must pass on this Book,
I durst avouch, if that thereupon you look,
You Will find rare jocund tales, both new and old too,
By several men, and at several times told too.
For what Tailor of Coriats works once uttered,
The were good as tosted Cheese, or Fish that is buttered;
Might in a better sense of these be taken,
They Are good as powdered Beef, or Eggs and Bacon.
Poor Robin on himself.
LAstly, for to bring up the Rear
In my own person I appear,
To make it known unto the world
What falsehoods have on me been hurled:
One says I Am this, another that,
And most do prate they know not what:
For like to Geese in mud that paddle,
Each broods his Eggs, and all prove addle.
One says that I a Parson am,
He heard me Preach, and knows my name;
And if that lies be true, then he
Has hit the truth assuredly;
But if that it be otherwise,
Then truth is truth, and he tells lies.
Another in me a Lawyer sees,
That in false case I never took fees;
But sure the man's in's judgement's blind,
For why, such Lawyers few can find.
Another does affirm me for
A Doctor, or a Quacksalver,
(Or if you will a Mountebank,
Where Jack Pudding on Stage is crank)
And that I do cure each disease,
Lost Maiden-heads, or what you please:
But were I Doctor, I Would be trying
To cure that party of his lying.
Another says it is a Knight
Poor Robin's Almanac does write:
Another says it is a Squire;
And I say each of them's a liar.
One did report I was a Vulcan;
Because (they say) I love a full Can:
Another in his words did vary,
Said I was an Apothecary.
A third, whose brains were something adler,
Aver'd for truth I was a Sadler.
A fourth has an Opinion newer,
That I love Beer, and am a Brewer:
But he had been a truer hinter,
That I love Wine, and am a Vintner:
For though in trade from truth they vary,
I must confess I love Canary.
Now I have told you what I am not,
But what I am, to tell I cannot;
For he who can himself conjecture,
Is wiser then our late Protector,
Who had forgot he was a Brewer,
And could above him none endure:
Nor think I he could prophecy,
When dead, his head should mount so high;
Or that his Trunk with two on's fellows
Should buried be under the Gallows.
But they who do desire to know me,
If they such love or kindness owe me,
Come to Limehouse near to Dicks-shore,
A mile from Aldgate, if not more;
Near unto Sign of the White Lion,
Hard by's a Shop, if you cast eye on:
^ may be found without all doubt,
Always within, if not gone out.
There do I sit some certain hours,
Contemplating the starry powers:
And from that place as may be guest,
Brought up Will Summers and the rest
Brom Elyzium, or from Limbo,
To make Verse like rhyme in Crambo,
(...) commendation of this Book,
As you may read, if there you look.
Now I imagine in all reason
I Have writ enough at this same season:
And those who like not this Epistle,
Lay the book down, and go whilstle.
P.R.
WRitten at Lime-house near Dick^ shore,
The day of the month, five and a score:
The month April, the hour Eleven,
Year Sixteen Hundred Sixty Seven.


POOR ROBIN'S JESTS: OR, The complete Jester.
The Lady and Tenant.
A Lady inviting some of her Tenants to Dinner at a Christmas, as soon as Grace
was said fell to commending her meat; saying, there was a Sir-loyn of Beef, the
Ox whereof cost ten pounds, and a Capon that cost half a Crown, etc. A poor man
sitting at the lower end of the Table, hearing her discourse, fell straightways
upon the Capon, before the others were past their roast Beef: the Lady seeing
that, called to him, saying, My friend, eat some of that roast Beef. No Madam
(said he) an Ox of ten pounds is too dear meat for me, a Capon of half a Crown
will serve my turn well enough, I thank you.

Another.
THe same Lady carving a wing of a most dainty Bird to another of her Guests,
told him that those sorts of Birds were worth no less then five pounds a dozen:
To whom the fellow said, If you please Madam, I will content my self with Beef
or Pork, and give me my share of those Birds in money.

Will. Summers and Cardinal Woolsey.
WIll. Summers that was first Cardinal Woolsey's Fool, hearing that his Master
was like to be Pope, came running to the Cardinal, and with great expressions
of joy, told him what he ha^ heard: Why art thou so overjoyed at this news,
said Woolsey to his Fool? Marry quoth Will, because that I hope when you are
Pope, you will do as St. Peter did when he was Pope. What was that, said the
Cardinal? Why St. Peter, when he was Pope he brought in Lent, and all the
Fastings days because his Father and Brothers were Fishermen; and I hope when
you are Pope, you will put them all down, because your Father and Brothers were
Butchers.

King Henry the Eighth.
KIng Henry the Eighth having beheaded two or three of his Wives, and desirous
still of more change, sent a Messenger into Germany, to treat with a very
honorable Lady there in way of Marriage; she that had heard how he had served
other of his Wives before, returned this answer by the Messenger, That to be
his Queen she would willingly venture her body, but she was very loath to
venture her head.

This Scholar deserved Wine.
A Young and pregnant Scholar who was Nephew to an Archbishop of Canterbury;
the Bishop sent him from his own Table a Dish of Fish, and bad that he should
make a pair of Verses ex tempore upon that subject; which the Scholar presently
did in this manner: Mittitur in disco mihi piscis ab Archiepisco*
Po non ponatur, quia potus non mihi datur.


The Archbishop, and they that were at Table with him, laughed heartily at the
conceit; but one Gentleman who understood not Latin, wished it had been in
English, that he might have laughed with them; whereupon the paper was sent back
to the Scholar, that he should turn it into English, which he did thus: There
was sent me fish, in a dish, from the ArchbishHop
was not here, because he sent no beer.


An impertinent Host.
AN Host (a small Wit) had bargain'^ with an humorous Painter for the new
drawing of his Sign, which was to be that of St. George and the Dragon; an^
most earnestly and often, even to the interruption of his work, importuned and
entreated him to have an especial care, that he drew St. George with a most
killing Countenance (to the life) and ever and a non renewing his desire, the
choleric^ Painter looked very sternly upon him, and taking off his Pencil from
the frame, said Mine Host, be quiet, and leave your prating or (the Devil take
my wife) if I do not make the Dragon kill St. George.

The Cutpurse and Watch.
A Company of Gentlemen being drinking together in an Alehouse, a bold
Cutpurse intruded himself into their company: at last' one of the Gentlemen
mist his Watch; and knowing he had it when he came into the room, a Constable
was straight sent for, where by mutual consent it was agreed amongst them, that
all the Company there present should be searched for it; amongst which was this
Cutpurse, but he had before conveyed it into such a secret place in his hose,
that nothing was found about him; but long he had not sat there, when the Watch
which had a Larum in it, rang such a peal, as gave notice to them all who was
the Thief; which he seeing, gave the Gentleman his Watch again, saying, What
ill luck had I to escape the Constable, and be taken by the Watch?

The Gallant Cutpurse.
ANother Cutpurse being in a very gentile habit, or as we ordinarily say, as
fine as a Lord, had in a Crowd nipt the Bung of a Countryman, and taken away
all his money; which the Countryman perceived well enough, but seeing him so
brave, durst not charge him with it. Soon after, his hand was taken in another
man's Pocket, and a cry being made of a Cutpurse, a Cutpurse, he was thereupon
hurried away by the multitude before a Justice of the Peace, with whom the
Countryman went along for company; where when the accuser had done his tale,
the Countryman stepped up before the Justice, and told him, That his worship
(meaning the Thief) had also stolen away his purse. Marry, said the Justice,
and I Will tell ye friend, we shall make so bold ^ to hang his worship for the
same.

One cured of his money.
ONe who had gotten a pain in his limbs rid down to the Bath to be cured of the
same; but being come thither, h^ chanced to light into some drunken company,
where first he spent all his money, afterward sold his Horse, and spent that:
upon his return he told some of his friends that he was perfectly cured, For
though be ri^ down to the Bath on Horseback, yet he ca^ up again from thence
on foot.

Sir Harry Vane.
SIr Harry Vane Junior having made Speech in the long-Parliament, abo^ the
beginning thereof; when he had done, Sir Arthur Hazelrig stepped up and said,
Well Gentlemen, if young Sir Harry Vane lives till he be old -- and breaking
off there abruptly, one said, Sir Arthur, and what then? then (said he) he will
be old Sir Harry Vane.

The Jesuit and Friar.
A Jesuit preaching at the great Church in Padua, toward the end of his
Sermon, he fell into a large commendation of the Order of the Jesuits,
extolling it above all the religious Orders that then were, or ever had been in
the world, giving God thanks, that he had the happiness to be of that Order;
and in the close of his discourse, he told his Auditory that he would acquaint
them with a Vision which he had lately seen: The other night (said he) I
dreamed that I was in Hell, where me thought I saw Popes, Emperors, Kings,
Queens, Cardinals, Bishops, Abbots, Monks, Friars, and some of all sorts of men
both Ecclesiastical and secular, but not one Jesuit amongst them all; which
made me to bless God that ever I was born to be of so blessed a Society; which
though it had sent so many thousands of that holy Order to the Grave, yet never
any of them went to Hell; and so he concluded his Sermon with a fresh Encomium
of the Society of Jesuits. The next Sunday after, a Dominican Friar preached in
the same Church, and he also, toward the end of his Sermon fell upon the high
praises of the Order of the Jesuits; repeating much of the Jesuits Sermon the
day before, and bewayling himself that it was not his fortune to be of that
holy Order, whereof none ever went to Hell, as the Reverend Father had told
them the day before; at last he told the people, that he also had seen a
Vision, and dreamed likewise one night that he was in Hell, where he saw Popes,
Emperors, Kings, Cardinals, and all sorts of Orders, as the Jesuit had notably
showed them the day before; but not a Jesuit (said the Friar) could be seen
amongst them all: then thought I to my self, O what a blessed Order is this,
that there should not be a Jesuit there! and still I cast my eyes all over
Hell, wishing my self had been a Jesuit and not a Dominican, to see not one
piece of that Order there: At last me thought I beckoned a little Devil to me,
and asked softly in his ear, whether there were any Jesuits in that place or no?
He answered, That there were none there, but that they were kept in a Hell by
themselves, which is a great room under this, where (said the little Devil)
there be abundance of them; and they come hither so fast, that my Master
Lucifer scarce knows were to bestow them; and besides, they are so unruly, that
if they were not kept by themselves, every body would be soon weary of this
place: adding withal, that his Master durst not let them have any Gunpowder,
for fear they should blow up Hell it self.

Three Wishes produced but a Ladle.
A Poor Countryman had so spent his time in true and honest pains, contented
and not murmuring, that Fortune seemed to smile upon him, as often as he came to
worship at her Temple, whither he often resorted; the gracious looks of the
Goddess encouraged him to ask something more then before he used; and yet
considering with himself, that too bold a Votary might be repulsed, he modestly
bounded his request with this suit, that her goodness would confer three wishes
upon him, which from the Oracle was answered, Ratified, wish, and be happy. The
joyful man acquainted his Wife straight, who having been the constant companion
of his Labors, was to meet share in his good fortunes; and desired of her
Husband that one of those wishes might be left to her disposal. The good old
man willing to gratify her, granted her request: so to the Fair they came*
whither they were bound, and the woman casting her eyes round about, to see
what she should make the choice of her wish, at last (remembering what she
wanted at home) spyed a handsome wooden Ladle, which she forthwith wished for,
and as soon the thing was in her hand; which her Husband seeing, and impatient
at the miscarriage of the first wish, wroth with his Wife for her simplicity,
wished the Ladle in her Breech which out of hand was instantly ther^ But the
poor woman (like a Fly with a stra^ in the same place) was so tormented,
besides the shame, that she desired her Husband, that as he ever hoped to
partake ^ ^he delights of the opposite place, he would remove this impediment:
to which the U^orious man condescended, and in chari^ to his Wife, wished it
out again: So as the three wishes went in and out with Ladle.

A providential Father.
THere was a Gentleman who was very discreet, and searching into the Natures
and dispositions of his Family, and finding amongst his Daughters that one, and
one of the least and youngest, was ripest, and more requiring then the rest;
very providentially provided her a Husband. The Virgin overjoyed that her good
hour was come, could not contain and be content that the Servants should invite
the Guests, but her self would needs speak to some of especial familiarity with
her, unwilling any should forestall the news to those, whom she wished in the
same happy condition with her self; which when she had done to her
play-fellows, (for she was not well weaned from that society) they wondered,
and said, (good Lady!) Mrs. Dorothy, how comes it to pass that you are so
forward, and leap over your Sisters heads? we should never have believed it,
but from your own sweet lips. Truly (said she, simpering, and with her
Handkerchief at her mouth) it were presumptuously done, but that my Father, who
knows me of an Egg, gave very good reason for it, for he said, (I know not what
he meant by it) That some Eggs would hatch in an Oven, and that in hot weather
things w'ont keep without salt.

The Vintners Boy.
TWo Gentlemen being drinking in a Tavern, chanced so ^o fall out, that from
words they proceeded to blows; whereupon soon after ensued a suit of Law: the
main witness to prove what was done, was the Vintners Boy, who being
sub-poena'd and sworn at the day of trial, began to tell his tale in this sort:
My Lord (said he) I live at the sign of the St. Paul's head, my name is John,
and by reason I draw to Gentlemen of the best Wine, they have given me the
appellation of honest, so that I am now commonly called honest John. My Lord
seeing him so impertinent in his preface, called to him, and bid him speak to
the matter, for that was quite besides it. I Will warrant you (said John) you
shall find it to the purpose presently, and thereupon proceeded: My Lord, these
two Gentlemen came in there to drink, the one of them his name is Mr. B. the
other Mr. F. it was about three of the Clock in the afternoon, and we had newly
risen from dinner: we had to dinner that day a piece of boild powdered Beef,
and buttered Turnips, and part of a roasted Breast of Mutton cold; I could not
eat very much of it, by reason I had gotten a cold with sitting-up late two or
three nights before. My Lord hearing him fly out thus again in his
impertinences, bid him speak more home to the matter, or else hold his tongue
for a Do. My Lord (said John) I was sworn to speak the truth, and all the
truth, and I am resolved to do it; and so went on: These two Gentlemen asked
for a room, and I showed them up into the green Chamber, it was two stories
high, upon the left hand as soon as you are up two pair of Stairs. Honest John
(said my Lord) if thou art so called, trouble us not with these impertinences,
but come to the matter. I am about it, quoth John, and so proceeds: As soon as
they were in the room, they said unto me, Now honest John bring us up a pint of
the best Canary, which I did; it was of the furthermost Pipe but one in all our
Sellar, and we had no better wine in all the house; it cost my Master four and
twenty pound the Pipe: as I was going up the stairs, my Master called to me,
and asked me whither I was carrying up that pint of wine, and I told him to the
two Gentlemen. John (said my Lord) that is not the question I asked you, but
what passed betwixt these two Gentlemen? I shall tell you, quoth John,
presently: When I had carried them up the wine, and that they had tasted of it,
they told me that I was as good as my word, and that it was of the best Canary.
But, said my Lord, what is this to the purpose? Yes (said John) it is to the
purpose, and if your Lordship pleases to come thither at any time, I shall draw
ye of the same wine, and then you will say that honest John's words were true
indeed. My Lord seeing no good to be done with John, bid them set him aside,
which John took in very great dudgeon, professing he had spoken nothing but the
truth, neither durst he speak any thing but what was true, his Master bidding
him before he came to have a special care of what he said. After some other
Witnesses being examined, the Counsel on the Plantiffs side began to speak in
the name of his Clyent (as the usual custom is) saying, My Lord, we came into
this Tavern with a peaceable intention, only to drink a pint of wine with that
Gentleman, where we were by him abused, beaten and misused, and put in danger
of our life. John hearing him to say so, could forbear no longer, but stepping
up, said, My Lord, that fellow with the coyfe there tells a most damnable lie,
for he says he was beaten and misused in our house, when (I can justify) that
he never was in our house in all his life.

(...)
A Ric^ (...) ^ntestate, his son came up to London to take out Letters of
Administration of his Estate, but being unacquainted with the customs belonging
to the Spiritual Courts, he went first to a friend of his, telling him, That
his Father dyed detested, leaving only him and two young Infidels, and
therefore he was devised to come up to London to a Concealer of the Law, that
he might thereby deminish the Estate.

Good to save something for last.
ONe who was much conceited of his wit, had made several Encomions on his
Mistress, beginning first with her head, and so proceeded upon each member,
until such time as he came to her feet, missing no part save only her neck;
the reason whereof being demanded, O, said one, there is great reason for that,
He reserves the neck-verse for himself, knowing he shall have occasion for it
hereafter.

TWo men walking through a Churchyard, one of them affirmed that the Grave was
Hell; the other who had a shrewd cursed wife lately buried there, pointing to
her Grave, said* Then one of the greatest Devils in Hel^ (...)

Too true, the more's the pity.
ONe that was a common swearer, being sub-poena'd upon a trial at Law, where a
Book was tendered him whereon to take his Oath, he told them they might save
that labor, For there was no oath but he could swear it without Book.

Nothing asked, nothing given.
ONe asked a certain boon of a Gentleman, for which his main reason to enforce
it, was this; Alas, Sir, you may very well grant it me, for this is nothing. To
whom the Gentleman replied; Sir, I shall grant you your request, for (according
to your own words) it is nothing that you ask me, and so nothing I grant you.

Children and Fools tell truth.
ONe was chiding his Prentice for being so great a gurmundizer, telling him
that his Mistress did not eat the fourth part so much as he, and yet she was
plump and fair; to whom the Prentice said, I only eat at set meals, but my
Mistress has Cullises before Dinner, and sweetmeats after dinner, and puts
more into her belly then ever you see or heard (...)

A double mistake.
A Gentleman lodging in a strange Inn, having store of money in his pockets,
put his Breeches under the Bolster, when he went to Bed to secure them: but the
next morning (having gotten a pretty dose over night) he had quite forgotten
where he had bestowed them; and having fruitlesly searched a pretty while,
despairing of finding them, he called for the Chamberlain, asking him if he
knew what was become of them? Sir, (said the Chamberlain) are you sure that you
brought any in with you? Why, quoth the Gentleman, do you think that I came
without Breeches? Sir, said he, if you are sure that you brought them with you,
you had best search your pockets, and I question not but you will find them
there.

Some seeking to praise, dispraise.
A Gentleman having invited (about the Lent-time) some friends to his house,
his Lady provided such cheer as was seasonable, the Collops and Eggs, and as it
fell out (a Hog being slain) she had a service vice of the puddings, which
being deservedly commended by t^^ ^^ests; Nay, said the Gentleman, frie^^^ be^^
known to you, my wife is abomination good pudding-wife.

A Tailors Hell.
A Certain Tailor, who had in his lifetime damned many a piece of Stuff to
Hell; at last chanced to fall extremely sick, and being in a trance, he thought
he saw all the Feinds of Hell mustered in his Chamber, where they displayed a
Banner of sundry colored Silks which he had stolen, wishing that he might
find them all in Hell. This Vision so affrighted him, that upon his recovery
he reformed his life, carried home what was remaining of any Garment, and laid
a special charge upon his Journey-man, that if any stuff brought in fell out
too large, if he saw his fingers inclined to filch, that he should put him in
mind of the Vision. Not long after, a Captain of a Ship brought to him some
Velvet to make him thereof a pair of Breeches, which being too much, he snipt
away three quarters of a yard of it under his Shopboard: his Journey-man seeing
this, called to him, and said, Remember Master the Vision: Peace knave (said
he) peace, there was not one such color as this in all the whole Flag.

Anger without cause.
A Gentleman sent to an Arras-maker, bidding him to work him on a piece of
Cloth the figure of a Castle with a Dog in it, sitting upon his tail and
barking, and at the Castle-gate a man standing in armor; all which the
Workman promised to do, and not long after brought it unto him. But when the
Gentleman saw it, he began to fume, asking the workman where was the Dog that
he bid him to make? O Sir, said the workman, I suppose those that are in the
Castle are now gone to dinner, and the Dog may be in some corner gnawing of a
bone.

A costly truth.
A Wealthy Citizen had a riotous spendthrift to his son, whereupon he vowed
that when he dyed, he would give all his Estate to the poor. In a little whiles
time his son, what with Dice, and what with Drabs, had spent all the
maintenance that he had; whereupon he told his Father that he might now give
all his Estate to him, and yet keep his vow, for he could not give it to one
poorer then himself.

A witty theivish answer.
A Fellow that was weary of going on foot, spying a lusty Gelding in a Pasture,
was resolved to ride, but having no bridle (and a halter being ominous) he was
enforced to embrace the Brute about his neck, and with all speed made to the
road: But the Owner being in some grounds not far off, and espying the cheat,
made after him undiscovered, and being very well horsed, over-took this rank
Rider; and requiring of him the reason of his speed, the other said, Sir, are
you in a good hour the Master of this wild Jade? In a good hour I am, replied
the Gentleman, for half an hour later I believe had alterd the case. In troth,
Sir, (said the Theif) it is the joy of my heart that you have thus happily
over-taken me, for this headstrong Jade might very well have run away with me:
Or else, said the Gentleman, you have run away with him, for therein was most
danger; but howsoever I will ease you of that trouble; and so dismounting him,
forced him to walk on foot to the next Village, where at the Whipping-post he
had the price of his postage scored up upon his (...)

More afraid then hurt.
A Gentleman in a Duel-having received a small scratch, being unaccustomed to
wounds, sent for a Chyrurgion in all haste to dress him; who having opened it,
bid his man with all speed possible fetch such a salve from such a place in his
Study. Why, quoth the Gentleman, is the hurt so dangerous? O yes (answered the
Chyrurgion) if he returns not the speedier, the wound will heal it self, and so
I shall loose my fee.

A mistake.
A Mechanic in the late times of libertism, when every one took a freedom to
himself to preach and prate what he would; this fellow usurping the Pulpit,
would needs be in his comparisons, how that the wicked kept company and flocked
together, even like, says he, as you see the Crows how they fly in the Air by
themselves, and the Rooks fly in the Air by themselves; the White Herrings they
swim in the Sea by themselves, and the Red Herrings they swim in the Sea by
themselves.

Another.
A Young Maid being come out of the Country to live in London, upon a discourse
concerning Lent, and what Countries were best provided for Fish; she very
soberly attested, that where she was born (being near the Seaside) the
Fishermen there with their Nets did catch so many Red Herrings, as served all
their County, not only for Lent, but for Wednesdays and Frydays all the year
long.

Wit without Book.
ONe having read a very pithy, learned and witty Dedication before a flat,
dull, foolish Book, he very much admired, and said, how they should come to be
so matched together: In truth, said another, they may very well be matched
together, for I profess they are nothing of kin.

Of Witches.
A Company being in a place together discoursing of Witches, one of them
affirming that there were no Witches; a woman then present with more
earnestness (I suppose) then truth, contradicted him, saying, That there were
Witches, she knew it by experience.

Of the Wall.
ONe walking in London-streets, met a Gallant, who cried to him a pretty
distance beforehand, I will have the wall. Yea, (answered he) and take the
house too, if you can but agree with the Landlord.

An alone Jest.
ANother passing along London-streets, saw written upon a Paper that was fixed
on a Door: This House and Shop is to be let: which he having read, asked a
Shopkeeper at the next Door, If that Shop were not to be let alone? Yea, (said
he) you may let it alone if you please.

The Spaniards wooden God.
A Country man in Spain coming to an Image enshrined, the extruction and first
making whereof he could well remember; and not finding from the same that
respectful usuage which he expected, You need not be so proud (said he) for I
have known you from a Plum-tree.

A friend at need.
SOme Guests being at Dinner at a Gentleman's table; amongst other discourse,
the Mistress of the house asked a Gentleman, how many Children he had. Madam,
said he, my wife has eight. Now fie, said she, these men are always putting of
causeless suspicions upon women; why could you not as well have said that you
had eight? Tush, quoth her husband, why do you blame the Gentleman? he has
spoken very discreetly, for it might redound to his shame to name all his own
Children, and therefore he only tells you how many his Wife has.

Who are Debtors.
ONe notwithstanding that he owed much, was boasting that he was out of Debt;
to whom another said, That may very well be, for those only are in debt who
mean to pay it.

A wise question of a Mahumetan.
A Persian in England attending on the Ambassador, anno 1625; who perceiving
wealthy people in London, in the time of the Plague tumultuously posting to
their Country Houses: What (says he) have the Englishmen two Gods, the one
for the City, and the other for the Country?

A hungry Banquet.
ONe invited some friends in a complementing way home to dinner with him, which
contrary to his expectation was accepted of; in their way as they went, he told
them though they found short of meat at his house, yet they should have good
sauce; which he made good in the performance, for when they came to his house,
there was not any Victuals, and hunger (you know) is of all other the best
sauce.

Health before Wealth.
A Rich man told a poor man that he walked to get a stomach for his meat: And I
(said the poor man) walk to get meat for my stomach.

The building of Cripple-gate.
TWo men walking by Cripple-gate, one of them asked the other from whence the
name of that Gate was derived, to which he answered, That there was a Cripple
of famous memory, who stole the golden Weathercock from Paul's Steeple, before
it was a Tower, which was, said he, the highest piece of desperate valor that
ever was performed, but that his Piety was as notorious as his Sacrilege, for
with the same Weathercock he built this Gate, which ever since retains his
name.

The Friars Doctrine.
A Friar being to preach, took for hi^ Text this Theme, Erat qu^dam homo, which
is in English, There was a certain man* Out of which words, say^ he, you must
not that the Text says there was, it does no^ say there is: for now adays men
are uncertain, both in promise, oath, word an^ deed; yet however you find by
my Tex^ that a certain man there was, but if yo^ search all the Bible over, you
cannot find this Text, That there was a certain woman.

Earl Gowry
WHen Gowry (who attempted to ki^ King James) was had to the To^er, a friend of
his told him, Ah, my Lord I am sorry you had no more Wit. Tu^ (quoth he) thou
know not what thou saye^ when saw thou a fool come hither?

A shirking shift.
A Nimble Tailor coming to an In^ something late at night, was by reason of his
handsome outside lodged in a better room and bed then he deserved; for the
Candle being left with him, he very succinctly made him a good Shirt of one of
the Holland Sheets, dispatching the remaining shreds in the fire. In the
morning he found very much fault with his lodging, for that he had but one
Sheet; the Wench swore she thought she brought two: and none ever imagining the
conversion of the Linen, he came cleanly off, though he came lowzily on, being
better able to shift ever after.

A Parson outwitted by a Woman.
A Woman whose Neighbor was dead, was sent by the deceaseds wife to a Parson,
to speak to him to preach a Funeral Sermon; she that would dispatch her
business thoroughly, having a promise of him to do it, would likewise be so
inquisitive as to know the price of it: The Parson told her twenty shillings
was the lowest. Why, said she, an Ass once spoke for an Angel, and will not you
speak under a piece? The Parson feeling himself a little galled, told her she
was better fed then taught. True, said she, for my husband feeds me, and you
teach me.

The Countryman and Mastive Dog.
A Poor man having a Pike-staff on his shoulder, and travaili^g thorough ^
Country Village, a great Mas^ive Cur ra^ mainly at him, so that hardly he could
defend him from himself. At the length it was his chance to kill the Dog: for
which the owner immediately apprehending him* and bringing him before a
Justice, alleadge^ that he had slain his Servant, which defended his life,
house and goods, and therefore challenged satisfaction. The Justice leaning
more in favor to the Plaintiff, as being his Friend, Neighbor and familia^
then to the justice of the cause, reprove the poor fellow very sharply, and
peremptorily commanded him to make satisfaction, or else he would commit him to
pr^son. That were injustice, replied the poor man, because I killed him in
defen^ of my own life, which deserves much better respect then a Million of
such Cur^ Sirrah, sirrah, said the Justice, then you should have turned the
other end of you Staff, and not the Pike; so the Dogs li^ had been saved, and
your own in no danger. True, Sir (quoth the fellow) if the Dog would have
turned his tail and bit ^ with that, and not his teeth, then we both had parted
quietly.

Much ado about nothing.
A Brace of Students who were kept short of the Colledge-fines (for that ^as
meat for their betters) while their Seniors were sharing that money, walked in
their Grove, (taking the fresh Air without any contradiction of Superiors:) At
last one makes a supposition, If thou or I now should happily find a purse of
Gold, how should we divide it? They were you must conceive of different
degrees, one Master, the other Bachelor of Arts. The Master of Arts like the
Lion, asked the greatest part; the other said no, Simul occupantes, aeque
dividentes: Equal purchase, equal share. The Master would not forgo his
privilege of Seniority; the Junior insisted upon his title of half: at last it
grew so hot, that they fell to cuffs, and banged one another very soundly,
until weary of their blows, they began to examine each other of the ground of
their falling out, which was no other then about the divident of a purse of
gold which was never yet found.

Truth mistaken.
A Lady sent her servant to the Playhouse, to inquire what Play was acted that
day; the Players told him, It Is pitt^ she is a Whore. The fellow
misunderstanding them, that they spoke this of his Lady* and not the name of
the Play, when he returned, refused to tell his Lady, but said They were a
company of Rogues to abuse his Lady, who was as honest as any of their Mothers.

A shrewd mistake.
ANother seeing in a Play-bill upon post, A great man gulled, and unde^neath,
By his Majesty's servants, read it thus A great many gulled by his Majesty's
Servant^ adding to it these words: By my soul as tru^ a thing as ever was writ.

A witty retort.
MR. Burbage the Player riding a Gallop up the Strand, one called t^ him out of
a Tavern-window, asking his what Play was to be acted that day: he being angry
to be stopped upon such a frivolous business, told him he might see that upon
every Post. O cry you mercy (said the other) indeed I took you for a Post, you
rid s^ fast.

Mr. Beaumont and Mr. Fletcher.
MR. Beaumont and Mr. Fletcher those Gemini of Wit and Learning, being about to
make the Play called, The Maids Tragedy: whiles it was yet in the Embryo, they
being walking in the fields contriving their design, of which one part was
concerning murdering a King, one saying he would have him stabbed, the other
poisoned; A Country fellow who undiscerned heard their discourse, concluding it
no less then high Treason that they were about, followed them to the next Town,
and observing the Tavern whither they went to drink, hyed him to the Constable,
who taking a strong Guard along with him, apprehended the two Gentlemen; but
being had before a Justice of the Peace, they making the truth of the matter
appear, were soon dismissed; when returning to the Tavern, they had great store
of mirth to see their Tragedy to have such a Comical beginning.

THe same Play being to be acted in the time of the Rump-Parliament; in that
part thereof where a Lady was to be sworn to secrecy concerning the murder of
the King asoresaid; some being of Opinion to bind her to it one way, and some
another: A Gentleman Spectator hearing the Controversy, bid them to give her
the Covenant, and he would warrant them that would do it.

Valorous Love.
A Butcher being once at a Play, called, The Greeks and Trojans, seeing Hector
over-powred by Myrmidons, got upon the Srage, and with his Battoon took the
Trojans part so stoutly, that he soon routed the Greeks, and rayled upon them
loudly for (...) company of cowardly slaves to assault one man with so much
odds. He stroke moreover such an especial aquaintance with Hector, that for a
long time Hector could not obtain leave of him to be killed, that the Play
might go on; and the cudgelled Myrmidons durst not enter again, till Hect^^
having prevailed upon his unexpected second, returned him over the Stage again
into the yard from whence he came.

Of Mr. Johnson.
BEn. Johnson the famous Comoedia^ having been drinking at the Devi^ Tavern; as
he came down stairs his for slipped, so that he fell down three or four ste^ at
once, and in his fall beating against a door, made it to fly open, in which
were a company of Gentlemen a drinking: having recovered himself, and gotten
again upon his feet, he said unto them, Since it was my chance Gentlemen to
fall into your company, I intend for to drink with you before that I go.

Another.
AT another time Ben. Johnson being in place with a company of Gentlemen, who
were busy in riming; one of them concluding his Speech with Nebuchadonozer,
another said it was impossible for any one to make a rhyme to that: Yes, said
Ben. that may be done thus: A mischief light on you Sir.

A Poetical Jest.
MR. Randolph (whom all must acknowledge for one of the prime Wits of his age)
having been drinking hard late one ^ight, the next morning went to an Ale^ouse
to quench that thirst which commonly burns in a man after immoderate drinking:
there was in the same room with ^im two Mizers, who had adventured upon ^e
costly charge of a penny a piece for their ^ornings draught. Now Mr. Randolph
by ^ason of his drought spitting very dry, one of these Mizers perceiving it
white, imagining it to be a piece of Silver, stooped to take it up; which Mr.
Randolph seeing, said unto him, I pray, Sir, do not rob the Spittle.

A good Jest do you see?
A Certain Vintner was extremely troubled with the word do you see, so tha^ upon
all occasions he would be sure to u^ it: upon a time being put to it to say
Grace he began, The eyes of all things, do you see do look unto thee, do you see?
and tho^ providest their meat, do you see? in due season, do you see? and so on
do you see, t^ he came to Amen do you see. But before (...) had done, no man
could see for laughing which so vexed him, that he swore he wou^^ not say Grace
do you see? so long as he liv^ for this, do you see? that a man should laughed at
for his good will, do you see?

Another of that kind.
MUch of the same nature was that of Judge, whose customary word to a^ material
thing was, in that kind. He being once to give a charge at the Affizes, beg^
thus: Gentlemen of the Jury, you oug^^ to inquire after Recusants in that
kind, (...) such as do not frequent the Church in t^ kind; but above all,
such as haunt Alehouses in that kind; notorious Whoremasters in that kind,
Drunkards and Blasphemers in that kind, and all notorious offenders in that
kind, are to be presented in that kind, and as the Laws direct in that kind,
must be proceeded against in that kind; which set all the people into such a
laughter of that kind, that being charged by the Crier to silence, they could
not, till they had ended laughing and crying together: And a Gentleman after
the Court arose, being asked how he liked the Judges charge, said, It was the
best in that kind, that ever he heard.

Queen Mary and Heywood.
QUeen Mary lying upon her deathbed, Mr. Heywood the Poet came to see her, to
whom she said; Ah Heywood, here they intend to kill me, for my Physicians will
force me to sweat, which is so great a pain to me, that I will rather dye then
to endure it. Madam (said he) be contented, you must sweat, or else I swear we
shall all sweat for it.

French arms and French harms.
A Stranger coming up to London, chanced to happen into a house of iniquity,
which had the Flower-de-luce to its Sign, where he got a Clap with a French
Coul-staff; whereupon at his going forth, he wrote this Verse over the Door:
All you who hither chance to come,
Mark well ere you go in;
For French-mens arms are Signs without,
And French-mens harms within.


A galled Horse will wince.
ONe called a man Ass before his wifes face, whereat she was nothing
displeased; soon after he called him Ox, at which she began to curse and to
swear: A^ Mistress (said he) now I see you begin to wince, when I touch your
husband in the galled place.

A new way to get Money.
NO longer ago then in the year 1666, a certain Quaker, upon a certain day,
came a wooing to a certain Widow, living in a certain place not far from
Aldgate: In the conclusion of his wooing discourse, he told her he had
forgotten to bring his purse with him; and being to buy some wares before his
return, Can thou not (said he) lend me an Angel of the worldy Mammon till I
s^^ thee again? Yea, (said she) I will lend the an Angel; but this spirit of
light could never see the way to the House any more afterward, for neither he
nor the Angel ever appeared to her again.

All covet, all loose.
A Poor Clyent went to a rich Lawyer to have his Counsel in a certain Cause,
which after some long attendance he obtained; but going away without paying
him, the Lawyer asked him for money: Sir, said the Clyent, I have no coin, but
will it please you to take a Hare? The Lawyer who had rather play at small Game
then stand out, told him that he would: Then (quoth the fellow) you must run
apace, for this morning one run quite away from me.

Cromwell and the Scotch Parson.
WHen Cromwell was with his Army in Scotland, one Andrew Cant a Scotch Parson
was to preach before him; who in his Prayer used these expressions, Lear^, we
beseech thee, look down here upon our General before us, and (...) thou have
put a sweard into his hands, see, we beseech thee, to put it into his heart,
for the geud of the three Nations.

No Plague greater then a cursed Wife.
IN a great Plague-time, a Constable passing by one of his Neighbors houses
heard his wife soundly basting him; wherefore that night he set up a Red-cross
upon the door. The man next morning seeing it, was highly offended, and
complained thereof to the Alderman of the Ward; who whereupon was sent for to
answer wherefore he did it. To which the Constable said, Yesterday passing by
his house, I heard his wife soundly belam him, and I think there can be no
greater Plague in a house then that.

A Bull.
A Citizen riding from London to Cambrige, upon his return, some of his friends
asked him what he saw worthy of notice in his Journey: Truly, said he, I saw
little memorable, but only at a place called Stableford, where was a Church
tyled with thatch.

The Gallant and Gentlewoman.
A Young Gallant having some discourse with a Gentlewoman, of which she doubted
the truth of it; he to confirm it, said, Upon my soul, Madam, it is true. To
which she replied, Pray stake down some other pawn, for that is forfeited long
ago.

The Sick-man.
A Man lying desperately sick, was advised by his Physicians to prepare himself
for Heaven, for he was not like to continue long in this world: I (says he)
God pardon me as I forgive all them that have injured me; and for such a one
who has much wronged me, I pardon him with all my soul; but if it please God
that I recover this sickness, I will be revenged on him, if it be possible.

Hanging ends all trouble.
A Plain Countryman riding up to the Term, met by the way a Prisoner, who was
going to the Gallows to be hanged; to whom he said aloud, Thrice happy man
thee, that have nothing at all to do at the Term.

The Countryman and his Ass.
A Countryman driving his Ass before the Court-gate, beat and misused the poor
Beast; which a Gentleman or two seeing, bid him be more mild, and favor the
dumb Creatu^e: with that the Clown straight ways do his cap, and made a low
courtesy to the Ass, saying, I beseech you, good Mas^er Ass, pardon my
boldness all this while, for I never thought that you had friends in the Court
before now.

A Bull.
TWo Neighbors walking in Smithfield on a Market Day, one of them espied a
goodly Stear: Look yonder (said he to his fellow) did you ever see a braver Cow
in your life, then is that same Bull?

The Country man and his wife.
A Countryman having been at London, saw there many brave women and other fine
Lasses, far surpassing his homely Jone at home; wherefore upon his return, when
his wife gave him a mess of hot broth to Supper, he bid her take it away, for
he had seen such fine Lasses at London, as had quite taken away his stomach:
his Wife asking him if he did not also see fine men there, he replied, Yes: Why
husband (said she) those fine women were made for those fine men. Nay then wife
(said he) reach me my porridge again.

The Maids mischance.
A Country-maid riding to the Market in Leaden-hall-street, in the Marketplace
her Mare stumbled, and down she fell over and over, showing all that ever God
sent her; whereupon being much abasht* at rising up again, she turned her round
about unto the people, and said, Uds foot (Sirs) did you ever see the like
before?

A Painter.
ONe desired a Painter to paint him the Picture of a fair Whore: Sir (said he)
you may spare that cost, for if she be a right Whore, she will paint her-self.

The Scold.
A Countryman who had a scold to his wife, when she dyed, he would needs have
these two Lines written upon her Grave for an Epitaph: Here in this ground lies
buried a wife,
Who was a Plague to her husband all the days of her life.


No life to Leachery.
CErtain merry Blades seeing a fair Gentlewoman standing at her window, one of
them said, I could willingly pawn my Cloak for a nights lodging with yonder
Gentlewoman: A Beggar standing by, and over-hearing him, said, I, and thither
should my Crutches go too.

Saving in this case the greatest gains.
ONe being in danger of drowning, another that stood on the shore said to him,
If you gain but to yonder tree, you are safe enough. Tell not me (said he) of
getting or gaining, for I care now but only to save my self.

A Bull.
ONe commended a Greyhound of his for an excellent running Dog: Sir, said
another, I have a black Bitch at home, I am confident is a better running dog
then he.

The young man and his father.
A Young man receiving an hurt on his face which much disfigured him, his
father said, it would not have grieved him half so much if it had been in his
arm, leg, or any place but there. To whom he son replied, Oh father, receivers
must ^e no chusers.

The Cuckolds Cap.
A Country-woman whose Hen had newly hatched, was persuaded that the Chickens
would thrive the better if they were kept in a Cuckolds Cap; whereupon she went
to most of her Neighbors to borrow one; but they denying they had any, she in
a chafe said, Well, before I will be thus troubled to borrow, I will ere long
have one of my own.

The Countryman and Friar.
A Friar being belated in his Journey as he traveled the Country, desired
lodging of a poor man, who very charitable to such people, lodged him in his
own bed; the Friar being weary fell fast asleep, and the man and his wife
having no other lodging went to bed to him: the next morning the man arose
betimes, and went to work, leaving the Friar abed with his Wife: being at his
work he fell into a great laughter, and being by one of his fellows demanded
the reason thereof, I laugh, said he, to think how shamefaced the Friar will be
whom I left abed with my wife.

The Friar and the Pope.
A Preaching Friar came once to see Pope Sixtus the Fourth, who showed him all
his Treasure and Jewels, and withal saying, I cannot say as my Predecessor St.
Peter did, Gold and silver have I none. Truly, answered the Friar, neither can
you say as he did to the sick, lame, and impotent people, Arise, take up your
Couch and walk.

The Archbishop and Countryman.
AN Archbishop of Cullen riding with a great train after him, by a place where
a Countryman was a ditching; the Swain burst out into an exceeding great
laughter; which the Bishop perceiving, commanded him straight before him, and
asked him, Why he laughed so? Marry I laugh (said the Pesant) to think that St.
Peter, who was the Prince of the Apostles, should live and dye so poor; and
that those who pretend to be his Successors should ride in so great Pomp and
State. The Archbishop seeing himself thus nearly touched, said, My friend, I
ride not with this great train as I am an Archbishop or Priest, but as I am a
Duke and Prince of the Empire. The Swain hearing him say so, burst out into a
greater laughter then before; and being again demanded the reason thereof, I
laugh (said he) to think that if this Duke, you name your self to be, were in
Hell, where do you imagine the Archbishop would be?

The Noble-mans Arms.
THere was a Nobleman which gave the Half Moon to his Crest, and had it fairly
engraven upon a Wall: one of his Pages seeing it, wrote underneath with a Coal,
Be it never at full. His Master having knowledge of what he had written, asked
him the reason thereof; who answered, Marry, Sir, because the Moon being once
at full, of force it must decrease.

A Bull.
A Gentleman and his man riding along the way, the man chanced to spy a fellow
astride upon a Cow, and said to his Master, Look yonder, Sir, is one on
horseback upon a Cow. That, said the Gentleman, is a notorious Bull. Nay, Sir,
(said his man) it is a Cow, I kn^w by her teats.

Another.
ONe being invited to a Breakfast, there was set before him a Rib of Beef
hardly roasted: being afterward asked by one what cheer he had; Why, said he,
we had an excellent Rib of roast Beef, but I could eat none of it, because it
was raw.

A merry old man.
ONe asking a merry Blade how old his wife was; he answered, Her mark is not
yet out.

A Bull.
TWo men being at Bowls, the one of them fell a swearing grievously. To whom
the other said, Wherefore do you swear thus? it is the great mercy of God that
the Bowling-green does not fall upon our heads.

The hungry Traveller.
TWo Travelers meeting together at an Inn, had a Capon served them in for
their dinner: the one of them being very sharp set, to while the other off,
asked him whether he had a father living or no? the other answered, No; and
withal entered into a long discourse, how, where, and when his father dyed. In
the mean time the Questionist had eaten up all the best of the Capon; which the
tale-teller at last perceiving, half angry said unto him, Now I pray you tell
me, have you a father living? He answered, No. Then tell me (quoth the other)
how he dyed: He very earnest at his victuals, briefly answered, Suddenly,
suddenly, very suddenly.

The Tailor and Weaver.
A Tailor and a Weaver being at a Farmouts house together, had a hot Custard
set before them: the Tailor being hungry, very nimbly took a spoonful thereof
and put it in his mouth, which so much scalded it, that it made his eyes to run
over with water: the other looking on him, asked him why he wept? he not being
willing to be known that he had burnt his mouth, told him that he had but one
Uncle in all the world, and he was hanged, and whenever he thought of him it
made him to weep. The Weaver thinking he had said true, put a spoonful in his
mouth, and burnt it also, that his eyes likewise watered: the Tailor perceiving
it, spoke to the Weaver, and said, Tell me wherefore do you cry? The Weaver
perceiving how he was beguiled, Marry, said he, I weep because you were not
hanged when your Uncle was.

The skilful Physician.
THere was a Physician who pretended by his skill in casting of Urines to tell
what distemper any man was troubled with; a woman whose husband had fallen down
a pair of stairs, went with her husbands ^ater to this cunning Leach, who
having by discourse pumpt out as much as he could of the Woman, at last guest
that he fell down eight stairs; but the woman making it appear that it was
eleven, he asked her if there were all the water: she confessing there was some
left, O then (said he) there went the three stairs away.

The Gardener and his wife.
A Gardner being to be hanged, his wife followed him to the Gallows to give him
her last kiss; who spying her said, Out upon ye you idle queen, we are to like
thrive well at the years end, when there cannot be a meeting in the Country but
you must be at it; home and weed houswife, home and weed, and do not stand
loytering here.

A Tinkers Character.
ONe said that a Tinker was no coward but a man of Metle, and that a canting
Rogue was an enemy to Hostlers, because he was of the Infantry, and always went
on foot.

Of early rising.
A Father chid his Son for lying so long abed in the morning, telling him that
such a one with early rising had found a bag of gold; to whom the son answered,
Too early rose he (father) that lost it.

Of Roger Bale.
ONe Roger Bale a poor Carpenter, but a good Workman, was for his skill
employed chief Master in the building of a Bridge, whereby he gained so much
that he became a rich man. And in ostentation upon one of the main Posts
thereof engraved these words, (Roger Bale made this Bridge) another came after,
and wrote underne^th with a coal ( This Bridge made Roger Bale)

Of Wood the great eater.
WOod the great eater of Kent having over-cloy'd himself with feeding too much
upon a wager, being invited to some more teeth-exploits the next day, he
complained that he had lost his stomach; Well, said one that stood by, if a
poor man happen to find the same, he is for certain utterly undone.

The Parson and his man.
A Certain Parson sent his man one Sunday morning to one David's a Butcher, for
some meat for his Dinner: Mean while he went to Church to Preach, and having
taken out his Text, was reciting many authorities out of Scripture for the
proof of the same, And now (says he) what says David to this matter? Just as he
said this, in steps his man at the Church-door, and hearing him talk of David,
said aloud, N^ more meat (he swears) unless you pay his the old score.

Of Musicians.
A Gentleman being asked his opinion concerning Musicians, said, that si^ were
a Consort, five Musicians, four Fiddlers and three Rogues.

A cunning Lass.
A Bridegroom the first night he was in bed with his Bride, said unto her When
as at such a time I solicited thy chastity, had thou then condescended, I
would never have made thee my wife, for I did (...) only to try thee. Faith
(said she) I imagined as much, but I had been cozened so three or four times
before, and I was resolved to be cozened so no more.

The slender-witted Gentleman.
IN Spain and those other Countries where the Pope has Dominion, the Bishops
marry not. A Spanish Gentleman who had ^ slender-witted son, on a time he
taught him how to entertain guests with some discourse, as to ask them, How
does your Wife and your Children, your Brother and Sister, etc. The next day a
Bishop came to this Gentleman's house, and the Wise-acre his son thus saluted
him: I pray you (my Lord) how does your Wife and your Children, your Sons and
your Daughters, your Brothers and your Sisters? etc.

Easier to come down then go up.
A Certain Preacher who desired higher preferment, on a time after his Sermon
was ended, coming down the Pulpit, a Gentleman proffered him his hand to help
him down; Pardon me, Sir, (said he) may it please you rather to help me up, for
I can come down alone fast enough.

The Friar and Woman.
A Friar being very busy in his Sermon, espied a woman as busy in talk to one
of her Gossips: whereupon he called to her and said, Thou woman in the tawny
Gown there, leave thy babbling. The woman angry to be reprehended thus openly,
quickly answered, I beshrew his heart that bableth most of us two.

The Dominican and Franciscan Friars.
A Dominican and a Franciscan Friar traveling together on the way, came to a
Brook, where the Dominican requested the Franciscan, (because he was barefoot)
to carry him over upon his back, to which he willingly condescended, and being
in the midst of the Channel, he said to the Dominican, Tell me Brother, have
you any money about ye? The Dominican thinking he looked for something for his
pains, answered, Yes; then said the Franciscan, You know my Order allows me to
carry no money about me, and I am resolved not to break my Vow; and thereupon
threw the Dominican off of his back into the water, who soundly drenched, all
too late repented his overmuch credulity, in trusting to the Franciscans
carrying him over.

The learned Conies.
SOme Scholars on a time going to steal Conies, by the way they warned a Novice
amongst them to make no noise for spoiling their Game. But he no sooner espied
some, but he cried out aloud, Ecc^ Cuniculli multi: Whereupon the Conies ran
with all speed into their berries; his fellows chiding him therefore, Who the
Devil (said he) would have thought that the Conies had understood Latin?

A poor Scholars pittance.
A Thin slice of cheese being set before a Scholar, as soon as he saw it, he
laid his finger on his mouth, and being asked why he did so, he answered, Lest
my breath should blow it away.

Of Dr. Mathews.
One Dr. Matthew a very learned man, but of little stature; one seeing him pass
along the Street, called him in jest, Minimus Apostolorum; which he
over-hearing, merrily answered, yet is Matthew Maximus Evangelistarum.

The turning Doctor.
AN old Doctor which had been a Protestant in King Edwards days, a Papist in
Queen Mary's days, and a Protestant again in Queen Elizabeth's, seeing a Lady
dance a Galliard, commended her dancing very much; to which she answered, That
she knew she danced well enough, only she could not turn so well as he.

Physicians and Lawyers.
IT was once a great controversy in the University of Leyden, between the
Physic and Law-Doctors, which should have precedence, and go foremost at
Commencements: The Chancellor being deputed to decide this Controversy, asked
them whether at an Execution the Fellon or the Hangman went foremost; and it
being answered the Fellon; Then ye Lawyers (said he) go ye foremost as Thieves,
and ye Physicians follow after as Hang-men.

A Musician.
A Musician who had a very good voice was in consideration thereof profer'd a
good exhibition in a Cathedral Church which he refused, and went to another
place: within a year after he came thither again, but with his voice much
impaired, and now he offered his service upon those conditions which he
formerly refused; but he had answer made him, That where h^ wasted his steel,
he might go and wast his Iron.

A mistake.
A Citizen having been abroad in the Country, came home to his wife all bemi^ed
with dirt; who asking him how he came in that sad pickle, Why, said he, as I
was riding along in a fair way, my Horse stumbled, and threw me over head and
ears in dirt.

The Knight and Gentleman.
THere was a Knight who spent much, and owed much, who had a young Gentleman
living by him, that was so good a fellow as he seldom eat at home; yet
notwithstanding retained a Steward in continual standing wages: The Knight upon
a time merrily asked him what he means to keep a Steward, having so little use
to put him to: The Gentleman no less merrily answered, Your worship has great
reason, for in truth my Steward and your Treasurer may very well be whipped at
the Carts-tail for Vagabonds.

The Yeoman and Gallant.
A Plain Yeoman riding upon a large lean horse, a Gallant that met him thinking
to put a Jest upon him, asked him what a yard of his horse was worth: the
Yeoman thereupon alighted, and lifting up his horse-tale, said, Enter into the
shop, and they within will show you.

Jack Franck.
MY Lord Maynard kept a Fool whose name was Jack Franck, that went in a py'd
Calve-skin suit; he being one day in the Highway, a Gallant came riding by all
bedawbed with Silver-lace, who spying Jack, asked him whose Fool he was: said
Jack, I am my Lord Maynards Fool; and now I have told ye whose Fool I am, pray
tell me whose fool you are.

A witty answer of a Jester.
ONe asked a Lords Jester what virtue he thought was in a Turkey-stone; to
which he answered, That if you should chance to fall from the top of a house,
you to break your neck, and the stone to have no hurt.

A mistake.
A Certain Nobleman being invited to dinner at a Knights house, amongst other
cheer there was a Chine of Beef, which did so please him, that he said he would
speak to his Slaughter-man to cut all his meat out into Chines.

The Printers man.
A London-Printer sent his Prentice for a mess of Mustard, who asking where he
should fetch it; he very surly answered him, In France; I will, Sir, said the
Pren^ice; and taking a Mustard-pot in his hand, went forthwith down to
Billingsgate, where finding a Ship bound for France, he embarked therein, and
away he went, where he continued so long time before he returned as made up
that day twelvemonth, when coming to his Master, he delivered the foresaid pot
full of Mustard, saying, Here Master is a mess of French Mustard for you.

Of the same.
THe said Prentice going up into the workhouse, found there a Dutchman working
at the Press; and snatching the Balls out of his hand, gave him a good cuff on
the ear, and said, Why how n^w Bu^ter-box, can a man no sooner turn his back ^
fetch a mess of mustard, but you must straig^ step in his place?

A Fishmonoger a Member.
IN the late times, at such time as the Forces had taken Abberdeen in Scotland
being betwixt sleeping and waking, which they were debating whether they should
keep or flight the Town: He thinking they had been talking of keeping
Habberdin, ste^ up and said, For that I think there is ne^ a one here knows
better than my self, y^^ must put it into clean Rye straw, etc.

A vindication.
HE being at another time one of a clo^^ Committee, a friend of his told his he
heard that he had spoken High-treas^^ there; to which he answered, He lies, for
I ^^ver spoke one word good or bad in all that time*

Countryman and Faulkner.
A Plain Countryman and a Faulkn^^^ journeying together, the Countr^man told
him that his Hawk had dung'^ the Faulkner told him he should have samuted. Anon
after the fellow stumble^ and fell into a Cow-share; and the Faulk^er asking
him how he came so bewrayed, ^e answered, He fell in a Cow-mute.

A mistake
A Gentleman being in company was commending a Tobacco-box of his: ^ne asked
him whether it were a wooden ^ne or no; No, said he, it is made of Pear^^ee.

Double meaning.
A Certain Weaver who had often broken the eighth Commandment, and from all his
Customers would be sure ^o steal something more or less, which he ^id in a
privy place he had in his house that ^e called Hell: Now when any of his
Cu^tomers used to charge him with such theft, he would protest and swear, If I
have any ^ore then my due, I pray God I may find ^t in Hell.

The Maid a Washing.
A Maid washing clothes by the Rivers side, as she stooped many times her Smock
would cleave close to her Buttocks; one that came by seeing it, said, Have a
care Maid, for Bayard biteth on the bridle: No (quoth she) not so, he does but
only wipe his mouth, imagining you wi^^ come and kiss him.

The Devil upon Dun.
ONe preferred a rich Miser a Dun hors^ to sell him, who utterly refused hi^
because of the color, saying, The people call me the Devil already, and if I
should ride upon him, they would say there is t^^ Devil upon Dun.

The Justice and fellow.
A Justice of the peace called one th^^ was brought before him arrant knav^ who
replied, I am not so arrant a knave ^ your Worship (and there he made a pawse,
^ feigning to spit, and then adjoined takes me to be.

A wise reply.
ONe told his Neigbour that he had Pope in his Belly; who answered, Better so
then to have a Devil in my heart.

The Maid and Physician.
THere was a Maid who had taken a dra^ too much of the Bottle, and not we^^
knowing what she ailed, carried her wate^ to a Physician, who bid her be of
goo^ cheer, For (said he) within these few months ^^u shall have the cause of
your grief in your arms.

King Edward the Sixth.
KIng Edward the Sixth, though he drew no strong Bow, yet he shot well at a
^ark; and when Dudley, Duke of Northum^rland, commended him once for well
^^ooting, You shot better (said he) when ^ou shot off my good Uncle Protectors
^ead.

The Cooper and his Wife.
A Hasty Cooper beat his wife with a hoop for pissing the bed: the Neigh^ours
to reconcile him to her, told him she ^as the weaker Vessel; Therefore (quoth
^e) do I hoop her, because she should hold water.

The French for a Cuckold.
AN Englishman asked a French-gallant what was French for a Cuckold: who
answered (Cocque:) Then, said the Englishman, is it not true French to say,
Monsieur vous estes Cocques? the Frenchman finding himself touched to the
quick, an^wer'd, It is true French in the plural number, but not in the
singular.

R.H.
A Gentleman was commending the Wine at the Rose in Newgate-market I cannot
tell (said one) what praise the Wine deserves, but I am confident there no
better Wine in London, then the Ale (...) the Unicorn in Queens-head-alley.

The Traveller and King Henry the Eighth.
A Gentleman of King Henry the Eight^ privy Chamber went to Travel, and upon
his return, the King asked him dive^ questions concerning his journey; among
others, what he had seen memorable in t^ City of Venice: To which he replied,
the truly he had taken little notice thereof For, said he, I only galloped
post thorough^ by night, and so came away.

The Captain in 88.
THe Naval fight against the Spaniards 1588, was pourtrayed in a curio^ suit of
hangings (which are still preserve^ and adorn the Parliament House) together
with the lively Effigies of the most emine^^ Commanders and Captains in that
fight A Sea-Captain, who had been in that service, looking on the Hangings, and
not fin^ing his Effigies there, seemed very angry, saying, he deserved a place
there better then some others that were in it: To whom one said, Be content
Captain, and make not this ado, you are reserved for another Hanging.

The Justice of Peace and Constable.
A Lubberly Constable went to apprehend a Shoemaker within his house; but the
Shoomakers wife so well bestirred her, that she soundly basted the Constable,
whiles in the mean time her husband got away. The Constable thereupon went to ^
Justice of peace, and complained unto him of the battery, and of the Shoomakers
wives misusage; alleging that if such a thing were not severely punished, it
would ^end much to his Worships disgrace: Whereto the Justice answered, Seeing
as thou say the disgrace will be mine, I forgive the Shoomakers wife.

The Countryman and Astrologer W.L.
A Countryman having his wives honesty in suspicion, went one morning betimes
to an Astrologer, to be resolved of his doubts; the Wizard was not then up, and
the Countryman having extraordinary occasion, untrust a point upon the
threshold: At last the Astrologer came down, and smelling what was done, in ^
great chafe, he said, If I knew who it was tha^ did this nasty trick, I would
have him severely punished. The Countryman hearing him say so; Nay then (said
he) a die^ Wizard, I Will home again to my Jenny; if y^^ know not who it was that
shit at your door, ^ am sure you know nothing of my wives honesty.

The Countryman and Doctor.
ANother Countryman suspecting that ^ young Shepherd was over-familia^ with
his Daughter, he went to a Doctor who was famed for a great Sooth-sayer i^ that
Country, and presented him with ^ couple of Capons, desiring to be resolved
(...) his foresaid jealousy. The Doctor having received the present, took a
great Book, an^ turning over diverse leaves, made a rumbling to himself as
though he conjured: at la^^, taking his spectacles off his Noise, he asked the
Countryman both their ages, who told him that his Daughter was fifteen years
of age, and the Shepherd two and twenty: Nay, then (said the Doctor) if they be
of that age, byrlady friend, it may very well be so indeed.

The fellow and his Dogs.
A Gentleman sending a brace of Greyhounds to a Knight, the Knight asked the
Messenger that brought them, if they were good Dogs or no: Good Dogs, quoth the
fellow, here is this (pointing to one of them) the best that ever ran upon four
legs; and this other here is five times better then he.

A Nobleman and his Page.
A Nobleman sent his Page with a Peacock between two curious Venice-Dishes to
another Earl. Now it chanced that as the Page went to take off the upper dish,
to show the Earl the present, it fell down and broke all to pieces; however,
the Earl received the Peacock, and sent one of his Gentlemen with the Page, to
excuse him to the Nobleman: Who hearing of the mischance, asked the Page
angerly, how he broke it: the Page trembling, let the other fall out of his
hand, which likewise broke all to pieces, and then said, Even thus and like
your honor I broke it.

The poor Man and hasty Cook.
A Poor man in the City of Paris, went to a Cooks shop to have had some meat;
but the Cook was so busied about serving higher Guests, that in the mean time
the man's stomach was satisfied with only the smell of the meat, and so would
have gone away: but the covetous Cook would be paid for his dinner; which the
man refusing, at last it was agreed to be decided by the next person that came
by, which chanced to be the arrantest Idiot in all the City: he calling for a
couple of pewterdishes, bid the man put his money betwixt them, and then decreed
that the Cook should rest satisfied for the smell of the meat, with only the
gingling of the money.

A wise reason of a Fool.
A Fool lying asleep in an open field, had pricked his staff in the ground
before his face, to fence him from the wind* and telling one the reason why he
did so, the other said, That could no ways shield him: Why (said the Fool) can
the wind think ye blow thorough the staff?

A rich Heir.
A Rich Heir was by his Uncle begged for a Fool, who used always to have him
with him, whithersoever he went: It chanced one time they were at a Gentleman's,
who had the picture of a Fool drawn in his Hangings. The Fool watching his
opportunity, with a penknife cut that Picture out of the Hangings, and being
reprehended for it, he said, You have more reason to thank me for it; for if my
Uncle had spyed it, he would have begged the Hangings, as he begged my Lands.

A witty answer of a Fool.
A Serving-man made his Masters Fool believe he would cut off his head: The
Fool thereupon ran straight to his Master and told him of it: who answered,
Fear not, he shall not cut off thy head, if he do, I Will hang him the next day
after. Nay, I pray (replied the Fool) rather hang him a day before.

Another.
ONe chid a Fool for throwing dust into his eyes: the Fool answered, Truly I
took you for a Letter.

A witty answer of a madman.
A Countryman coming to London, went to see the mad-folkes in Bedlam; one of
them asked him what place he came from; he replied, from Newarke: The madman
then asked him what business he had in Town; he told him only to see them. And
come you hither only to see us, said he? believe me (brother) I am not here
for so great folly.

The Fool and Dog.
A Fool was bitten by a Dog: the next day the Fool found him asleep in the
grass, and knocked out his brains; saying, He that has Enemies, let him have a
care how and where he sleeps.

Good to watch as well as pray.
A Gentleman being at his prayers in the Church, a Cutpurse picked his pocket;
and complaining thereof, one told him, If he had watched as well as prayed he
had not lost his money.

The valorous heart.
A Valiant person in these late Wars, being to go encounter with the Enemy, he
fell a trembling; at which his men much marvailing: See, see, Sirs, (said he)
how basely my flesh quakes to think what a peck of troubles my adventurous
heart will put it in anon.

The Lawyer and his Clyent.
A Lawyer told his Clyent, that his Adversary had removed his suit out of that
Court into another: Let him remove it to the Devil, said he, if he will, I am
sure for money, you will follow after it.

Money gains the Victory.
A Sergeant at the Law being at supper with a Gentlemen, who had a Nist prius
to be tried the next day: the Gentleman in discourse stated his case to him,
and the Sergeant by several arguments made it to be most clear on the
Gentleman's side: But when it came to hearing, this Sergeant was retained
against him, and the cause went clear against the Gentleman; who thereupon told
the Sergeant, Sir, you were not of this opinion yesternight. No matter, said
he, for that, what I talked at my supper was for my recreation, but what I speak
here is for my Fee.

Nothing without money.
ONe went to a Lawyer for his advice without money, but the Lawyer was deaf on
that ear; the man being more earnest with him to have his advice: Will you have
your Lamp burn (said he) without oil?

The case is altered, quoth Ployden, how that Proverb came up.
THere was a Statute in Queen Elizabeth's days, that whoever had Mass said in
their house should pay fifty pounds: Mr. Ployden being in his heart a Papist; a
Noblemans Coachman undertook to bring him into that praemunire; and getting on
Priests weeds, went to Mr. Ploydens, who taking him for a Priest, he was there
admitted to say Mass: The Council being informed of the business, Mr. Ployden
was sent for, and the thing laid so home to his charge, that he confessed it,
and deposited down fifty pounds on the Table. Then one of the Council said unto
him, You may see Mr. Ployden what a blind Religion you are nursed in; for he
that said Mass at your house was no Priest, but only such a Noble-mans
Coachman. Nay then, quoth Mr. Ployden, the case is altered; for no Priest, no
Mass; no Mass, no fifty pounds; so swept up his money, and away he went.

The Parents and different Child.
A Man and his wife who were both great drinkers, had a Son very temperate;
whereupon one said, that it was contrary to Nature, that the horse should trot,
and the Mare trot, and that the Colt should amble.

The Gentleman that was in earnest.
A Gentleman passing up Fleet Street, met with another Gentleman, who gave him
so great a justle, as had well-^igh thrown him into the Chanel; but recovering
himself, he stepped up to the other Gentleman, and asked him if he were in jest
or in earnest; he replying, In earnest; Very well, said he, I am glad it is so,
for I tell you true, I like no such jesting.

The Turkey-Pye.
A Poor Gentleman had a Turkey-pye very often served to his Table; a
serving-man being to carry it in again, neglected it; whereupon his Master
calling for it, and asking why he did not bring it in: he replied, It has been
here so often, I thought by this time, it could have found the way in alone.

A Fart.
MAny Clowns being eating of a Posse^ together, one of them burned hi^ chaps
for greediness, with pain whereof he let fly a fart; Go thy ways, said he,
tho^ art the happiest of all thy fellows, for had thou still remained within,
tho^ would have been most miserably scalded.

Dead and Alive.
ONe asked a Boy, how many horses hi^ Father had, who answered, five, with four
that are dead.

The Gentleman and Boy.
A Gentleman riding on the way, saw a Boy keeping of Piggs, and asking him
whose they were, he said, his Mothers; then asked he him who was his Mother,
the Boy said his Fathers wife; then asked he him who was his Father? Nay, for
that Sir (said he) you must ask my Mother.

The Novice Prentice.
A Country-Boy that was new bound Prentice, seeing a Lord Mayors show, and
wondering much at the bravery thereof, Who said he would live in the Country,
seeing we must all come to ride in such State?

The Bastayd Boy.
A Young Bastard was throwing of stones, amongst a multitude of People; to whom
one said, Have a care Sirrah, or you may chance to hit your Father.

Like Mother, like Daughter.
A Country-woman much blamed her Daughter for gadding up and down among
Alehouses: Indeed Mother, said she, you have reason to be jealous of me, for I
have often heard it said, that I was your Daughter before ever that you was
married to my Father.

The Wench with-Child.
A Country-Wench was gotten with-child, and would by no means confess that she
had the use of any Man; but being told it was a thing impossible; Why, said
she, may not I have a Child without a Man, as well as a Hen lay Eggs without a
Cock?

A loud Lie.
TWo Gentlemen being talking of fishing, one of them said that he had caught a
fish in his time as big about as the Maypole in the Strand; which being hist at
a^ a notorious lie, he called his man in to justify it, Ralph (said he) did
not I at such a time catch a fish as big about as the Maypole in the Strand? I
cannot tell, said Ralph, for the bigness of it, because I did not measure it;
but if it was not so big, I am sure it was as long.

The Countryman and Scrivener.
A Countryman who had never been at London before, was gaping into a
Scriveners shop; the Scrivener standing at the Door, asked him what he would
buy; Gaffer, said he, what is it you sell? the Scrivener told him loggerheads:
said the man, I perceive you have quick trading, that you have but one left in
the shop.

The Man and his Hare.
ONe meeting a man carrying a Hare at his back, and asking him if he would sell
it; he anwerd no, I will not sell it, but give me twelve pence and take it.

The Gentleman having sore Eyes.
A Gentleman that had sore eyes was wished to forbear drinking wine, as very
destructive to his eyesight; but he by no ^eans would yield unto it, affirming
it was lesser evil to shut up the windows of his ^ody, then to let the whole
house fall down or want of reparation.

The Scottish Parson.
A Scot was preaching how that all men are one another Neighbors and Bro^hers
in Christ, even the Turk, the Jew, ^he Moore, the Canniball, the far Indian;
and then concluded, Yea and the very En^lishman is our Neighbor too.

Another.
BEn Johnson having overnight taken a Cup too much of the juice of the Grape,
^he next morning his head aching he wore a Cap, and meeting with Master Drayton
his ^^llow-Poet, told him he thought he should ^ye, and therefore desired him
for the love that had been betwixt them, to prefix these two lines upon his
Grave, for his Epitaph: Here lies Ben Johnson
That was once one.
that shall I do Brother Ben (said Master ^rayton) and for the love I always
bore to ^our Muse, I shall add two more of my own, which shall be these.

Who whilst he lived in his bravery
Was exceeding full of Knavery.
Ben Johnson.
MAster Noy the Attorny-General ma^^ once a great Venison-Feast at a T^vern:
Master Johnson having a mind some of it, being in a room below w^ some of his
Companions, wrote these vers^ and sent them up to Master Noy.

When all the World was drowned, no Venis^ could be found;
For then there was no Park:
Lo here we sit without ere a bit,
Noy has it all in his ark.
These verses produced not only Venison, (...) also half a piece in Gold to
wash it do^ in Sack.

Another of him.
BEn Johnson intending to pass tho^^ the Half Moon Tavern in Aldersg^^^ street,
(where is a thorowfare into Barth^^mew-close) the Tavern-door being shut (...)
he was denied entrance; whereupon made these verses: Since the Half Moon is so
unkind to make me go about,
The Sun my money now shall take, the Moon shall go without.


And thereupon went to the Sun-tavern (...) Long-lane end; where afterward he
proved a good guest, forsaking the Half Moon for their discourtesie.

Another.
BEn. Johnson kept an unlucky Boy, who when he sent him of an arrand, would
usually loyter by the way, and then come home with some lie for an excuse to
his Master: It fortuned one day that his Master looking out at an upper window,
saw his Boy very devoutly playing at Nine-pins; whereupon when (...) came home
his Master deeply charged him with Idolatry; the Boy denying that ever he was
guilty of Idolatry in his life: No sirrah (said he) did not I see you fall down
and worship that great wooden Idol the Nine-pin? but I assure ye, if ever ye
commit Idolatry again, I shall punish ye worse then those are punished that
commit adultery.

Two Poets.
TWo Poets went to Rhyme one with another, whereof the one was name Johnson, the
other Silvester: Silvester fi^ began in this manner.

My Name is Silvester.
I lay with your Sister.
The other answered, And my Name is Johnson.
I lay with your Wife.
But that said Silvester is no Rhyme; Rhyme ^ Rhyme not, said Johnson, I protest
it is tr^^ though.

Master Randolph.
THo. Randalph the wit of Cambridg^ coming to London, had a great mind^ see
Master Johnson, who was then drinking (...) the Devil-Tavern near Temple Bar,
wi^^ Master Drayton, Master Daniel, and Mast^^ Silvester, three eminent Poets
of that a (...) he being loath to intrude into their company, and yet willing
to be called, peeped i^ several times at the door, insomuch the Master Johnson
at last took notice of him and said, Come in John Bo-peep. Master Randolph was
not so gallant in clothes as they, however he sat down amongst them; at last
when the reckoning came to be paid, which was five shillings, it was agreed,
that he who made the best extempore verse should go Scot-free, the other four
to pay it all: whereupon every one of them put out their verses; at last it
came to Master Randolphs turn, whose lines were these: I John Bo-peep, to you
four sheep,
With each one his good fleece;
If you are willing to pay your five shilling,
It Is fifteen pence apiece.


Another of Master Randolph.
MAster Randolph one day and a Gentleman being in company, they happened to
have some angry words pass betwixt them, insomuch that the Gentleman at last
drew out his sword, and striking at Master Randolph, cut off his little finger,
which was no sooner done, but scarcely before it ^^^uld be dressed, he made
these verses.

Arithmetic nine digits and no more
Admits of, then I still have all my store:
But what mischance has t'ane from my left hand,
It seems did only for a cipher stand;
Hence when I scan my verse, if I do miss,
I will impute the fault only to this:
A fingers loss, I speak it not in sport,
Will make a verse a foot too short.
John Tailor.
JOhn Tailor the Water-Poet, was once aboard of a Ship called the Hector, where
he was by the Master so followed with Wine, that it was easily perceived by
every Seaman, who thereupon began to play upon him, and to abuse him; whereupon
John in a poetical rage, thus invocated the Patron of the Ship.

O thou noble Hector, the valiant Son o^ Priam,
Grant that all these men may be as drunk I am.
Sir Thomas Moor.
ONe presented Sir Thomas Moor once with Book, for his approbation, who
perusing it, and finding nothing in it worthy the reading, told him it would be
far better if it were put into verse, which accordingly he did, and brought it
again to Sir Thomas, who taking it, and reading a few lines thereof; I marry,
said he, now I see here is some rhyme, before there was neither rhyme nor reason.

Another
THe same Sir Thomas Moor, for denying the Kings Supremacy, was committed
Prisoner to the Tower of London; At his ^^rst landing, the Gentleman-Porter
demanded his uppermost garment for his Fee; Sir Thomas then pulled a white Cap
off of his head which he wore, saying, Here take it, this is the uppermost
garment I have.

Another
ONe commended to Sir Thomas Moor, the clearness of his Beer, and the well
relish of the hop; to whom Sir Thom^^ said, If it had been a little clearer,
one could not have discerned it from water; and if it had hopt a little
farther, it had hopt into the Thames.

Another.
SIr Thomas Moor being once a drinking, spied a Fly in his Glass, wherefore
with his knife he took it out, but having drunk put in again; saying, Though I
do not love them in my drink, perhaps some others do.

Another.
WHen Sir Thomas Moor was Lord-Chancellour of England, being at his house at
Chelsey, some one had gotten a little Dog from a begger-woman, and presented it
to the Lady Moor; The beggar-woman complained thereof to Sir Thom^, who could
not persuade her to part with the Dog: But Sir Thomas told her it belonged to
his Office, to do Justice to every one; and thereupon he commanded his Lady and
the beggar-woman to come into his great Hall, placing the one at the one end,
and the other at the other; Then took he the Dog, and holding him in the middle
betwixt them both, he bid either of them call him: but no sooner was the Dog
let loose, but he ran to the beggar-woman, whereupon he adjudged the Dog to
belong to her, and told his Lady that if she would have him, she must buy him
of the right owner.

Another.
NOt long after Sir Thomas was condemned, he sent for a Barber to the Tower,
intending to have his Beard cut; but before such time as the Barber came, word
was brought him to prepare himself, for he must dye the next day; Wherefore
when the Barber came, he told him he had thoughts to have cut his Beard, but
having now so short a time to live, he was resolved his Beard should take the
same fortune with his head.

Another.
Afterward when he was upon the Scaffold ready for to dye, going to lay down
his head upon the block, he bid the Executioner stay a while, till such time he
had laid his Beard over the block: for though, (said he) the King gave you a
Commission to cut off my head, he gave you no Commission to cut that.

A Noblemans health.
CErtain Knights being drinking a health to a Nobleman of this Kingdom, one of
them to honor it the more, put into the Glass some pieces of gold: (...) last
it came to the share of a merry-disposed Gentleman to drink, who having
swallowed up all the wine, turned the gold into his hand, and put it in his
pocket, saying, I never drank of any drink in my life, but I could always make
bold with the toast.

A Deformed wit.
ONe seeing a man of excellent learning, crooked and deformed in body, said,
Lord, what a poor Cottage does yonder good wit inhabit!

The toothless Miser.
AN over-pin'd Miser complained that he had almost lost all his teeth in his
head, with the Rheum; one that stood by answered him, it was more likely for
want of use.

A New-fashion'd Coat of arms.
ONe seeing his enemies Arms fairly drawn on a wall, took a pensil to draw the
like underneath; So in the first house he drew his enemies chief coat, and all
the rest of the Escutch^on he figured with twenty kinds of Pots, Cups and
drinking-Glasses, and underneath wrote thus: These my forefathers left me, and
I will increase them.

The Thiefes question.
ONe having done a robbery in one Shire, was taken in another, and brought
before a Justice there, who refused to meddle with him, but returned him to the
Shire where he had done the Robbery: the Thief thereupon said unto him, I pray
Sir if that be the Law, let me ask you one question; If a man be taken abed
with his Neighbors wife this night, what must he be sent thither again the
next night?

A Rougish trick to a Stranger.
A Stranger coming to a Brook, asked a Countryman on the other side, if it
were passable or no: Yea, Sir (said he) you may pass very well: But plunging
in, he stuck there so fast, that he had much ado to get out again, whereupon
he cursed and swore very bitterly at the man: truly Sir, said he, I had thought
you might, for my Neighbor Parkers geese and mine pass over it every day.

The Countryman.
A Fellow that was hanged, was carted back again to the Town to be buried, and
the Coarse being set down, a great many men and boys stood gazing on it. By
chance a Country-fellow came by, and seeing them stand so gazing, Away, away
(Sirs) for shame, said he, you are able to put an honest man out of
countenance, so to gaze on him.

Of one spitting in the fire.
ONe sitting by the fire to warm him in very cold weather, said that the fire
was his friend; and quickly after spit into it: to whom one that sat by him
said, Indeed Sir you do not well to quench your friends love by spitting in his
face.

A deep Question.
ONe having read in the story of the seven Champions, how St. Georg^ had killed
the Dragon, and delivered from death Sabra the fair maid of Egypt, he said he
wondered how men could invent such lies: for there never was any Dragon,
neither was there ever any St. George; to which anothor replied, For St. George
or the Dragon, it mattered not whether there were ever such or no; but the
greatest matter was, whether there was a maid.

Of Madam Carlton.
MAdam Carlton, commonly called or known by the name of the German-Princesse,
being by the procurement of her Husbands friends committed prisoner to the
Gate House; one of those her back-friends went to give her a visit, telling her
he had a great desire to see her, having heard much of her extraordinary
breeding: to whom she replied; Alas Sir, I am sorry you have lost your labor,
having left that in the City amongst my Husbands kindred, who had such
extraordinary need thereof.

Another of Her.
ANother of these her visitants among other discourse, told her, that marrying
and hanging went by destiny; to whom she answered, that she had received from
the destinies marriage, and he in probability might hanging.

Hugh Peter's and Oliver.
OLiver the late Usurper riding abroad one day in his Coach, Hugh Peter's was
mounted on a Steed, and followed after; it chanced a sudden shower of rain to
fall, whereupon Oliver being unwilling his Chaplain should be wet, sent him his
Co^t to keep him dry: which Hughkin modestly refused, returning this answer to
the Messenger, that he would not be in his Coat for a thousand pound.

Pride and Hewson.
PRide and Hewson, two of Cromwels pageant Lords, the one formerly a Drayman,
the other a Cobbler; these two meeting together, Pride told Hewson he saw a
piece of Cobblers wax sticking upon his Scarlet Cloak; No matter for that, (said
Hewson) a handful of Brewers grains will wipe it off well enough.

The Parson and the good Wife.
A Parson preaching a Sermon on a Good Friday, said, Now which of you all in
honor of this good day, will not forgive his enemy with all his heart? A woman
hearing him say so, stepped forth and said, Sir I do? Whom, said the Parson?
Marry (quoth she) whosoever will do so much as kill the knave my Husband.

The Parson and Churchwarden.
A Parson riding into the North of England, it was his chance to stay at a
small Village on a Sunday, where they had no Minister at that time: whereupon
he offered to bestow a Sermon on them; which the Churchwarden being informed
of, went to him, and asked him if he were Licensed to preach; Yes said the
Parson that I am, and there-withall drew out of a Box his License, asking the
Churchwarden if he understood Latin? No (said he) I do not, yet however let
me see it, perhaps I may pick here and there a word out of it. No quoth the
Parson I will have no words picked out of it, for that is the way to spoil my
License.

Dr. Adams, and Dr. Low.
TWo Ministers, whereof the one was named Mr. Adams, the other Dr. Low, being
to preach before a great Auditory, the Doctor chose for his Text this place of
Scripture, Adam, where art thou! he having done, Master Adams stepped up, and
took for his Text the following words, viz. Low here am I.

Dr. Heylin.
DR. Heylin the famous Cosmographer, being sent for to his Elder Brother^ by a
Serving-man, who had a long time retained to that Family, as they journeyed
along they lost themselves in a Wood: the Serving-man being quite at a loss,
desired the Doctor to ride before; which he (a^ good reason was) refusing, the
man in ^ pelting chase, said, I have heard my old Master your Father say, that
you writ a book of a^ the whole World: now if you so well knew a^ the World, me
thinks you might easily find the way out of a Wood.

Dr. Done.
DR. Done having privately married Si^ George Moors daughter, whose name was
Anne; falling into his Fatherinlaw^ displeasure, he with a Diamond-ring wrote
thus on the glass-window; John Done, Ann^ Done, done and undone.

Of Pope Adrian.
POpe Andrian the sixth being minde^ to throw Pasquins Image into Tyber^ to
take away the cause of Libelling, which was then used under the name of th^^
^mage, The Duke of Sesa said unto him, ^f your Holiness throw Pasquin into
Tyber, he will then turn Frog, and croke both day and night; whereas now he
only crokes a day time*

The Pope and St. Peter.
IT is said of a certain Pope, that when he was dead he went to Heaven^ates and
knocked there. St. Peter de^anding who he was, he said the last de^eased Pope:
then said St. Peter, If you be ^he Pope, why do you knock, since you ^ave the
keys to come in at your pleasure? ^o whom the Pope answered; that his
Prede^essors indeed had the keys, but since that time ^e wards were alterd.

The Spanish Bishop, and Shepherd.
A Spanish-Bishop seeing a Shepherd sunning himself, said unto him, I wonder
^at Shepherds now adays are not as they ^ere in time past, when great Prophets
and Kings refused not to keep Sheep, and ^o them also the Angels told the birth
of ^ur Savior; to whom the Shepherd an^^er'd, Neither are Bishops now adays as
in old ^^me, at diverse of whose deaths Bells are said to ^ng of themselves, and
now can scarcely be ^^de to ring with men's strength.

Bishop Bonner.
BIshop Bonner being at the time of the Reformation degraded from his
Bishopric, one thinking to put a jest upon him, desired a piece of his tippet
to heelstall his hose: to whom Bonner answered, that his tippet was not fit for
that purpose, but told him he had a foolish head of hi^ own, which would serve
very well to line his Hat. Another time riding abroad, one met him and said,
good morrow Bishop Quondam; to whom Bonner replied, Adi^^ knave semper idem.

The Spanish-Fryar.
A Spanish-Fryar had a Bishopric in India granted unto him, but he desiring
not to go out of his own Country, th^^ spoke to the Kings Secretary: Sir,
knowing that a Bishops place is a dangerous thing (...) undertake, and being
conscious of my own insufficiency, I am in the mind that to take i^ upon me, is
the highway to Hell; and to go to Hell by India is a great way about,
wherefore I pray assign me some nearer Sea, or no^ at all.

The Bishop and his Chaplain.
A Bishops Chaplain helping his Lord on with his Rotchet, it being the first
time, and he not very perfect at it, he said unto him, My Lord, methinks your
Sleeves are ^ery strait: True (answered the Bishop) for I have been these
twenty years in getting them (...), and never till now could do it.

Reason for this.
ANother said that the chief reason why the Anabaptists would have had the
^ells down out of the Churches, was, because of the Ropes, being conscious to
themselves what they had deserved.

A useless Library.
A Scholar having a great Library, and seldom or never coming at it to Study,
one said unto him, It seems (Sir) that (...) and your books are at a truce.

Peter Martyr.
PEter Martyr Chronicler to the King of Spain, having a long time sued for a
^ishoprick, and hearing at last that four Confessors were made Bishops at once,
said, Faith amongst so many Confessors, one Martyr would have done very well.

The Bishop and Student.
A Young Student in Spain for some ^ demeanors he had committed, ^ summoned
before a Bishop who had a ve^ reverend beard: who after several Reason and
Arguments in his defense, at last ple^^ed Conscience. What, you talk of
Conscience (says the Bishop) and have never beard yet? I cry you mercy, quoth
the S^^dent then, for I perceive if Conscience g^ ^ beards, your Lordship has
got a very large (...)

A Request answered.
ONe desired a Gentleman to speak ^ him to a certain Bishop, that his Lo^^ship
would be pleased to forgive him a De^^ to whom he answered, his Graces power ^
to bind, and not to loose.

The Abbot, and the Messenger.
THere was a Bishop that sent six ^ Capons to an Abbot, whereof the Messenger
eat up one of them by the way* The Abbot having read the Bishops Letter and
understanding that he had sent him ^ Capons, bid the Messenger thank his
Lordship from him for five of them, and as for t^ sixth pray thank him thy self.

King Henry the eighth, and the Abbot.
HEnry the eighth being abroad on hunting, through the eager pursuit of his
Game lost his attendants; at length he wandered to the Abbey of St. Albans, where
(unknown) he dined with the Abbot, and fell so stoutly on, that the Abbot
taking notice thereof, said, he would give a hundred pound he had so good a
stomach, for quoth he my stomach is so queasie, that I am ready to Surfeit with
the pestle of a Lark, or the wing of a Partridge. The King remembering his
words, the next day sent for him up by a couple of Pursevants, and without
showing any reason clapped him in the Tower, where he was fed for a Fortnight
with only bread and water: at last the King sent him a Rib of roast Beef, on
which he fed so heartily, and made so deep an impression, that the King
stepping from his Coverture wherein he stood to see what the Abbot would do,
demanded of him his hundred pounds; saying, Since I have been your Physician,
and recovered your stomach, pay me my money; which the Abbot was forced for to
do.

Another of King Henry the eighth, and the Abbot of Glastenbury.
THe same King Henry having a months ^^nd to the Abbot of Glastenburies Esta^e,
(who was one of the richest Abbots in England) sent for him to his Court, and
told him that without he could resolve him three Questions, he should not
escape with his life: The Abbot willing to get out of his clutches, promised
his best endeavors. The Kings Questions were these: First, of what compass the
world was about: Secondly, how deep the Sea was; and Thirdly, what the King
thought. The Abbot desired some few days respite, which being granted, he
returned home, but with intent never to see the King again, for he thought the
questions impossible to be resolved; This his grief coming at last to the ears
of his Cook, he undertook upon forfeiture of his life, to resolve those
Riddles, and to free his Master from danger; The Abbot willingly condescended.
So the Cook got on the Abbots clothes, and at the time appointed went to the
Court, and being like the Abbot in Physiognomy, was taken by all the Courtiers
to be the same man: when he came before the King (omitting other circumstances)
h^ thus resolved his three questions; first of what compass the world was
about; he said, It was but twenty four hours journey, and if a man went as fast
as the Sun, he might easily go it in that space. The second, How deep the Sea
was? he answered, Only a stones cast, for throw a stone into the deepest place
of it, and in time it will come to the bottom. To the third, Which I conceive,
says he, your Majesty thinks the most difficult to resolve, but indeed is the
easiest, that is, what your highness thinks; I answer, that you think me to be
the Abbot of Glastenbury, whenas indeed, I am but Jack his Cook.

King Henry the Eighth, and Will. Summers.
KIng Henry going once by water, took Will. Summers his Jester along with him
for his divertisement. It happened the weather to prove very tempestuous, so
that being in some danger, Summers said to him, Harry, Harry, I had rather be
thy Fool by Land, then thy Companion at Sea: which made the King when he came
on Land, to laugh heartily at his timorous disposition.

Another.
AT such time as King Henry was in opposition with the King of France, it
happened that Summers was then in the French Court, in whom for his pleasant
discourse that King was highly delighted; and going upon a time to the House of
Office, to have the merryer Stool called Summers along with him, and said unto
him, Look here Summers, how I value thy King, whose picture thou see hanging
here in my privy; I see it well, said Summers, and withal I observe, that you
never look upon it, but at the sight thereof you are ready to bewray your
Breeches.

King Henry the eighth and the Prior of Dunmow.
KIng Henry going once to the Priory of Daumow, he observed therein two Monks
which were reputed for very Holymen: whereof the one was exceeding fat, the
other extraordinary lean; and asking the Prior the reason thereof, he
answered; If it please your Majesty, this Monk who is so exceeding fat, thinks
only of God and the joys of Heaven: and the other who is so extraordinary
lean, meditates continually on Death, Doomsday, and Hell.

King Henry the thirds base Son.
KIng Henry the third had a base Son named Geoffery, who in all his
protestations used these words, By the honor of the King my Father; to whom
Walter Malpas the Kings Confessor, said: Methinkes you might do well sometimes
to remember your Mothers honesty, as well as so often to mention your Fathers
Royalty.

The Portugal Friar.
A Portugal Friar discoursing in his Sermon of a great victory his Nation had
obtained against the Spaniards that day twelvemonth, he said, Then both Armies
camped near unto the River, We Christians on the one side, and the Spaniards
on the other.

An Atheistical speech of a Frenchman.
A Younger Brother of a good Family in France, having committed a Robbery, was
for the same convicted, and Sentence of death pronounced against him: at which
he grew very much disquieted, and something outrageous in his discourse;
Wherefore the Friar who was appointed to be his Confessor, sought by Religious
persuasions to comfort him, bidding him be of good cheer, for his next meals
meat should be in Heaven; Faith, quoth the Thief, I have small appetite at
this time to any Heavenly food; therefore if you will take the dinner for me,
I will give you five pounds to discharge the shot.

The Irish Lord and Tory.
AN Irish Lord named Mac Mahowne had taken one of the Tories Prisoner, and for
some secret grudge he bare unto him, would by no entreaty spare his life, but
commanded he should be hanged presently, and made a Friar to shrive him; who
examining him of his sins, asked him which was the heaviest, and did most
burden his Conscience; The Tory answered, that which he most repented of, was,
that the last week when he had Mahowne at his mercy in the Church, that he did
not set fire to it, but out of pity to save the Church let him escape; which
he counted the worst Act that ever he did. The Friar bid him to change his
mind, and die in charity, or he would never go to Heaven; N^y, quoth the Tory
I will never change my mind whatsoever becomes of my Soul. Whereupon the Friar
went to Mahowne, and desired him to defer the fellows Executill he were in a
better mind, for if he died being so much out of charity, his Soul was sure
to go to Hell: The Tory hearing the Friar entreat thus for him, desired of
Mahowne, that seeing he was so unprepared to die, and the Friar so well
disposed, and ready to go to Heaven, that he would hang the Friar, and let him
tarry till another time. Mahowne hearing this mad answer, forgave him his
offense, and pardoned him that time.

The winking Parson.
A Parson in a certain Church in London, used commonly to pray with his eyes
shut; one demanding the reason why he did so; it was answered, Because he would
be thought to know the way to Heaven so well, that be could find it blindfold

Cardinal Wolsey and the Nobleman.
A Ruffling Nobleman in the time of King Henry the eighth came into the Court,
with a Suit all bedawbed with Gold and Silver-lace, saying, Am not I a lusty
man that can carry five hundred acres of land on my back? To whom Cardinal
Wolsey said, You might better have employed some of it in paying your Debts;
It Is true indeed, quoth the Nobleman, for the Lord my Father, ought the goodman
your Father thr^e half pence for a calves-head, hold, there is twopence for
it. Wolseys Father being a Butcher.

The Welshman that fasted against his will.
A Welshman who was not much used to the Religious observation of fasting
days, was entertained into a Gentleman's service; where according to the
custom, he was made to fast the Eves of diverse Saints; as Saint Peter, Saint
Paul, Saint Bartholomew, etc. All which he grudgingly performed: at length came
the Eve of all Saints, for which he was very willing to fast, as supposing no
more would come after; but on Saint Andrews Eve it was told him he must fast
again, which he utterly refused, saying he had fasted for all the Saints
together, and therefore he would fast no more: but it was told him that he must
fast for Saint Andrew also; Why then quoth he, pray tell me, where was Saint
Andrew when all the Saints were together?

A good Jest of a Welshman.
A Welsh shentleman who had one of his own countrymen waiting on him, being at
a Fair, and drawing out a Purse with store of Money in it, was espied by a
Cutpurse, who never left dogging him, till such time he had eased him of that
burden; But his man espying him, drew out his knife, and cut off the Thiefs
ear: who feeling it to smart, asked him what he meant by it: No great harm
friend, said the Welshman, (showing him his ear in his hand) only give hur
Master hur Purss, and hur will give hur ear again.

Another.
A Young Cockney-Squire, who loved to eat of Partridge, would to have it the
more reasonable (as he thought) keep a Hawk of his own, and to that purpose
went to a shop where they were to be sold; the Master of the shop perceiving
him to have no great skill, sold him an Owl instead of a Hawk: which he having
kept a day or two, the Owl began to cry, Hoo, hoo, hoo, hoo; the Squire
hearing her, said, I have got a good pennyworth, for I have a Hawk and a
Hawkner too.

Dulman and the Lords Ape.
A Certain Knight kept a Dulman to his Clerk, and having some occasion to write
to the Lord chief Justice, he sent this Clerk with the Letter: who coming to
the chief Justice place, saw at the Gate an Ape sitting there in a coat made
for him, as they use to apparel Apes for sport. The Clerk seeing one in such
bravery, imagined it to be my Lord chief Justices Son, and therefore pulld off
his Cap, and bowed very lowly unto it, saying, My Master commends him to my
Lord your Father, and has sent him here a Letter; The Ape took it, looked
thereon, and afterward upon the man, making many mocks and mows, as the
property of Apes is to do: whereupon Dulman because he understood him not, went
back again to his Master, saying he had delivered the Letter to my Lord chief
Justices Son, who sat at the Gate in a fair coat. His Master asked him what
answer he gave him, he said he gave him an an^wer, but it was in French, or
Latin, for he understood it not; but Sir, said he, you need not fear your
business, for I saw by his looks that he would do your errand to my Lord his
Father.

Welshmens prerogative.
ONe said that Welshmen are without compare on Saint David's day, because that
none wears Leeks but they.

Of a Welshman.
A Welshman was for theft arraigned and convicted, but by the favor of the
Bench had his book granted him: being burnt in the hand he was bid to say, God
save the King: Nay, said he, God bless my Father and Mother, for had not they
taught me to read, I might have been hanged.

Another.
THere was a Welshman who wanted both money and victuals, and being in this
extremity, yet thought it better to steal then starve: wherefore spying a Bull
with a cut tail in a Pasture, there being a Fair but six miles off, he made a
virtue of necessity, and took the Bull along with him thither. It happened that
the ma^ket was so slow, that the owner came before he had sold him; but he in
the mean time mistrusting the worst, had procured another Beasts tail, and so
fastened it to the Bull that it seemed to be his own; the owner walking by, and
viewing the Bull well, said to a Neighbor of his, Had this Bull a cut tail I
would swear it were mine; the Welshman overhearing him, said, Sir, will you
swear this Bull is yours? Yea said the owner, I should have sworn it if it had
had a cut tail: I will try that presently, quoth the Welshman, and thereupon
steps to the Bull, and with his knife cuts off his tail, just above the place
where he had fastened the false one; and throwing it away, said, Now Sir, will
you swear that it is your Bull? The man seeing the Bull bleed extremely,
thought it was best to be gone, and so left the Welshman to sell the Bull as he
pleased himself.

Another.
A Welshman having received some affront in Smithfield, made no more ado but
brake the fellows head who gave him that affront, for which he was taken and
forced to pay ten Groats, (his whole estate:) being at liberty, and both hungry
and thirsty, he went to a Cooks shop, and called for as much belly-Timber of
each sort as came to five-Groats. The Cook himself, his house being empty,
seeing his Guest alone, sat down to bear him company: in their discourse, the
Welshman told him how he had lately been abused, and would know of him whether
it were a just thing for a man to pay ten Groats for drawing of blood; Yes,
quoth he, it is so according to law: then said the Welshman, Here is five
Groats to pay, ^reake my head, and give me the rest again; which was all the
satisfaction the Cook ^ould have of him for his Victuals.

Of a Milk-woman.
A Milk-Woman in London, that had by mixing water with her Milk gotten the sum
of an hundred Pounds, to increase it more, ventured the same in a voyage at
Sea, but by chance of Tempest the Ship was cast away; which the woman hearing
of, Then farewell hundred Pound, (quoth she) lightly come, lightly go; I got it
by the water, and I lost it by the water.

The impertinent babbler.
ONe having made a long, tedious and idle discourse, before a grave learned and
Reverend Person of this Realm, concluded it thus; Sir, I doubt, I have been too
tedious to you with my many words: In troth (said the Gentleman) you have not
been tedious to me, for I gave no heed to any thing you said.

Doctor Trigg and the wench.
A Young Wench who had taken a dra^ of the bottle, went with her water t^
Doctor Trigg, who told her the Baker ha^ been too busy with her, and left a
peny-lo^^ in her belly; No indeed Sir (said she) you ar^ mistaken, it was not
he, it was my Fathers man.

On spitting in the face.
A Country Farmer was very angry with a Gentleman for Hawking in hi^ ground;
whereupon the Gentleman spit in his face; the Farmer therewith more incensed,
asked him the reason why he did so; Friend, said the Gentleman, you have no
reason to be angry, because I gave you warning, for I hawk'd before I spit.

Another.
ONe by chance spit in another man's face, whereat as being sorry for his
offense, he said, I cry you mercy Sir for spitting in your face, but if you
please to l^e down, I will tread it out again with my foot.

The Master and man.
UPon Saint Stevens day it is the custom of many people to let their horses
blood; A Gentleman's man asking his Master if his horse should not bleed that
day according to the fashion: No Sirrah (said he) I would have you to know that
my horse is not sick of the fashions.

Whereabouts Cuckcolds horns grow.
THree Gossips chatting over a pint of Canary, one of them said, I wonder
whereabouts Cuckolds horns do grow; one of them said in the forehead, another
in the nape of the neck; and that may very well be, said the third, for my
Husbands bands are all worn out behind.

On one named Sampson.
TWo or three Gentlemen were drinking together, whereof the one of them was
named Sampson; being in discourse concerning the differences betwixt the
English and the Dutch, one of them said, What need we to fear the Dutch, since
here is Sampson able to conquer them all? true (said Sampson) that I may do, if
you please to lend me one of your jaw-bones.

The Lord and his Steward.
A Passionate Lord called his Steward knave; to whom the Steward mildly
replied, Your honor may speak as you please, but I believe not a word that
you say, for I know my self an honest man.

On Claret.
TWo Gentlemen coming into a Tavern, one of them called for quart of Claret:
the other said to him, What, do you love Claret? for my part i will see it burnt
before i will drink a drop of it.

A Witty clash of words.
A Gentleman invited some of his friend^ into his Cellar to taste of his Sack,
but wanting a Cup, one of them proffered to lend him a Can: No (said another)
we will not drink in a Cain, for then we shall not be Abel to get up again.

On Mr. Stone.
ONe Mr. Stone riding by a deep River, his Horse stumbled and cast him into it:
a Companion of his that was riding along with him, seeing him swim to save his
life, laughed heartily, and being asked his reason therefore, answered, That it
would make any man laugh to see a Stone swim.

On a Recorder of London.
ONe named Peper was brought before a Recorder of London, who mistaking his
name, called him Piper; whereupon Peper being something offended told the
Recorder of his mistake; Why, said the Recorder, what difference is there
betwixt Piper in Latin, and Peper in English? Yea, said Peper, there is as
much difference as there is between a Pipe and a Recorder.

On a foolish Book.
A Learned witty Dedication being placed before a dull foolish Book, a
Gentleman said, he wondered how they came to ^e matched together; In truth, said
another, they may well be matched together, for I protest they are nothing akin.

Of Gaming.
ONe advised his friend who was a great Gamester to give over play, affirming
it to be a great sin and folly; to whom the other replied, that it was rather a
special virtue and remedy against the seven deadly sins; for first (said he)
how can that man be proud, who having lost a hundred or two of pounds at dice
with a Nobleman, will afterward be so humble as to venture his tester with a
Lacquey? Or second, how can he be covetous, that will not safeguard his utmost
penny from Play? Or in the third place, how lusty to women, that continually
tires himself out at play? Or fourth, how a glutton, that dares not bestow a
tester on his belly, for fear he should need the same at Play? Or fifth, how
envious of other men's goods, that is so careless of his own? Or sixth, how
angry, that puts up a thousand curses from others, without returning ere a
word? Or seventh, how slothful, that sits up whole days and nights at play?

The wordless Song.
ONe was saying, that a Fiddler who lived in such a place had a most rare Song
with never a word in it; A Scholar hearing of it, went thither, desiring the
Fiddler to sing it, and he would take it in shorthand.

Of going to Bedlam.
A Country-Fellow coming to London, asked a Shopkeeper who stood at his door,
which was the next way to go to Bedlam: the Citizen told him the nearest way
was to be mad: and that is the reason, quoth the Fellow, that you horn-mad
Citizens can direct us in the way so perfectly.

An Ignoramus.
QUeen Elizabeth minding to favor a young Gentleman whose Father had been in
some disgrace, said unto him, I hope you will now raise up your Fathers house
again, and make amends for his default. The young Novice answered, An't like
your Majesty, one end of my Barn is sore decayed indeed with the last winds,
but my Mother has promised to be at the charge of reparation.

Every one to his Trade.
A Rustical Husbandman challenged kindred of an eminent Bishop of this Land,
requesting him to bestow an office upon him: Cousen (said the Bishop) if your
Cart be broken, i will mend it; if your Plough be old, i will give you a new one, and
seed to sow your land; but an Husbandman I found you, and a Husbandman i will
leave you.

King James and the Welshman.
KIng James riding late home from Theobalds to White Hall chanced to be caught
in a shower of rain, whereupon command was given to his retinue to ride faster:
amongst the rest was a Welshman a retainer to the Earl of Pembroke, who being
badly mounted, flutterd and spurd with his legs to keep pace with them, and
made such a bustle with be laboring his horse, that the King asked him who he
was? Ant please her Majesty (the Welshman replied) her is as good a Shentleman
as the best of them, but her Cattle cannot travel so fast.

Of the French Kings Letter.
FRancis King of France, in a Letter which he sent to the Emperors Ambassador
wrote thus, To the Ambassador of Kings, and King of Ambassadors.

The Tailors man.
A Tailor sent his man to a Gentleman with a long bill for some little money
due to him, who rather willing to cavil then to pay, in a great rage said: Why
Sirrah, does your Master think I am running away, that he is so hasty to send
for his money? No Sir, said the Servant, my Master does not imagine you to be
about to run away, but he himself is, which makes him so earnest with you and
others, to get money to carry along with him.

How Tailors came to be of the bloud-Royal.
WHen King Henry the fifth was Prince of Wales, he was a very dissolute Prince,
and with a company of Roysters that belonged to him, would oftentimes Rob on
the High way; and though for the most part they bore away the prize, yet
oftentimes they met with stout opposition. It happend one time that they were
so hardly matched, that his party received many blows, and amongst the rest he
had some cuts or slashes given him on a doublet he then wore, which for the
rarity of it his Father took special notice of: therefore, that it might not be
espied, it was carried to a Tailors to mend: the Tailor having viewed it, and
considering it could not be well mended without taking in pieces, threw it unto
his Journey-man to un-rip, and he being poor and proud, Taylor-like, scorning
such inferior work as to un-rip, threw it to the under-prentice, who in
slashing the seames, chanced to find a Lowse, and thereupon cried out, I have
found a Lowse in the Princes doublet; his Master hearing of it, bid the boy
give it to him, that by eating thereof he might become of the blood royal: the
Journey-man hearing him say so, claimed likewise a share, as being the person
that should have mended it; so that there rose great contention betwixt them,
which of them should have the Lowse: at last, to save the effusion of blood,
both of them choosing rather to feed then to fight, it was agreed betwixt them
to cut the Lowse in two, and either of them to eat half, by which means they
might both become of the Royal-blood: the under-Prentice who had found the
Lowse, thought it hard measure that he should have no share amongst them, but
to live and die a poor Peasant: at last, casting his eyes aside on the Sheares,
he espied them all stained with the blood of the Lowse which had been shed in
the dividing of her, wherefore licking the blood off with his tongue, he also
became of the Royal-blood; so that by eating that which had sucked the blood of
the Prince, Tailors have ever since been of the Blood Royal.

Of a Tailor.
A Tailor playing at cudgels, and having his legs well beaten, the company
laughed heartily at him. Why laugh you Gentlemen? quoth the Tailor, It is not
my legs I stand upon when I get my living.

Another of Tailors.
ONe commended Tailors much for their dexterity, saying, they had their
business at their fingers ends; and I, said another, think them to be mere
Woodcocks, because they have both of them long bills.

Another.
ONe said that a Tailors feet must needs stink, for when he was at his work
they were always in his breech.

The Gentleman and Beggar.
A Beggar asked an Alms of a Gentleman, who gave him a Tester: the Beggar
thanked him, and said he would pray to God heartily for him; but the Gentleman
bid him pray for his self, and not for him, for be did not use to take any Alms
usury.

Another.
A Gentleman walking over Lincolns-Infields, was followed by a Beggar, and
earnestly importuned with the Terms of Good your Honor, pray your Worship,
sweet Master bestow something on me: he to try this Beggars humor, said, that
they used to call such as gave them nothing, Rogues and Rascals: no indeed,
said the Beggar, not I, I scorn to do it: well said the Gentleman, I Will try ye
for this once; but the Beggar returned him such a peale in his ears, that he
was glad to mend his pace to get out of the hearing of it.

The Loving Wife.
A Kind wife followed her Husband to the Gallows; and being halfway, he
desired her to trouble her self no further, but to go home; to which she
answered: Yes, dear Husband, now I have seen you thus far on your way, faith
i will see you hanged too before I will leave ye.

Of a Witch.
A Witch being condemned, and at the Stake to be burned, desired her Son to
fetch her some drink, telling him she was exceeding dry: O mother, said he, it
is well you are so, you will burn the better for that a great deal.

The unbelieving Cuckold.
A Fellow looking out at a window, espied his wife and another man very closely
at it in lascivious embraces; and hearing her tell the man how dearly she loved
him above all the men in the world, the Cuckold said aloud unto him, Believe
her not friend, for she has told me as much a thousand times, and a thousand
at the end of that, and yet I have still found her false.

The Judge and his Tenant.
A Judge who bare great sway in the Country where he lived, was about a
sumptuous building; for the bringing in of which materials, diverse Countrymen
were requested, with their carts and horses: amongst others, one that dwelt
near him went with his Cart and Horse. The Steward, as was the manner of the
Country, had provided two Tables for their dinners, for those that came gratis
special cheer, but for those that came for hire very ordinary. Being in the
Hall, he in his Lords name invited them to sit down, telling them one board was
for them that came in love, the other for those who came for money. This
Husbandman hearing how the business was orderd, sat down at neither; and being
by the Steward asked why he did not place himself, the Hind replied, he saw no
Table provided for him, for he came neither for love nor money, but for very
fear.

Marrying a Scold worse then hanging.
A Duke being highly offended with his Slave, would have hanged him; but at
last he bethought himself of a worser punishment, as he thought, saying, No,
hanging is too mild a torment for him, I will Plague him worse, I Will marry him
to a Scold.

The Fool best liked.
A Young youth having been to see a Play, was asked when he came out of the
Playhouse, which amongst those brave fellows he liked best; the Youth said he
liked the Fool best, because he made most mirth, and could have wished with all
his heart, that they had been all fools for his sake.

On disturbing the Players.
AT such time as the Rump began to bear sway, the Players were soon disturbed
by the Soldiers, and had the thanks of the House for this their service, being
not willing that any should play the fool but themselves. Amongst others,
Alderman A -- moved in the House that the Soldiers might have the Players
Clothes for their pains: to which motion Harry Martin stood up, and told the
Speaker that he liked the Gentleman's motion very well, but feared that they
would fall out for the fools Coat.

Of Harry Martin.
THis Harry Martin being condemned for the execrable murder of the King, was
after sentence brought before the House of Lords, to show cause why he should
not suffer the Execution of that sentence; to which he returned answer, That he
came in upon the Kings Proclamation, and well hoped, that he should not suffer
for that which he obeyed, having never observed any of the Kings, nor his
Predecessors Proclamations before.

A sharp nip.
A Young Gallant in company was up with a great deal of foolish and profane
talk; to whom a Gentlewoman said, How much is the world mistaken in you, that
reports you to be an unthrift, when you are so good a Husband, that you will
not spend your wit and words at once?

A watchful Mayor.
A Mayor of London dyed the same day that he was sworn; of whom one said
merrily, He was a very vigilant Mayor, that never slept all the time ^f his
Mayoralty.

Of speaking Latin.
TWo Gentlemen were talking Latin in the company of a Gentlewoman, who being
suspicious that they spoke of her, desired them to speak in English, that she
might understand them, For I am persuaded, said she, you are talking no good,
because I know when men speak Latin, if it be but two words, one of them is
naught: whereupon one of them said presently, Bona Mulier: to which she said, I
know Bona is good, but I Will warrant ye Mulier signifies something that is
naught.

The riotous Gallant.
A Young Gallant new come to his means, rioted in a very high manner; his
Mother blaming him for his unthriftiness, in a ^elting chafe he said, Faith
(Mother) taunt ^e so but once more, and for very spite ^'ll sell all the land
and living I have. To whom his Mother answered, If you sell it for six pence,
you will be no looser by it, for it ^ever cost you a groat.

A witty Jest.
TWo Gentlemen's servants being drinking together chanced to fall out; and ^t
last, amongst other discourse, fell to vy^ng the Nobleness of their Masters;
one of them saying, My Master spends more in Mu^ard then yours does in Beef. To
whom ^he other replied, The more saucy men his ^ollowers.

A sharp retort.
AN ancient Knight of a Noble Family meeting with other Justices upon a
Commission, one upstart Justice, the son of ^n Husbandman, espied the Knights
Satin ^oublet out at the Elbows, and said unto ^im, Fie, Sir, what mean you to
wear ^uch a torn doublet? Go to sirrah (said the Knight) you came so lately out
of sack^ cloth, that you know not what Satin means.

The Lawyer and his man.
A Lawyer riding into the Country, had a man attending on him, who had been his
servant near a dozen years: Sir, said he, I have been with you thus long, and
yet am very ignorant in the chief matters of your Profession, I pray resolve me
which i^ the chief point of the Law. To whom hi^ Master said, If you will pay
for our supper to night, I will tell it you: to which the servant willingly
yielded. Well then, said his Master, good witness is the chief point. So at
night when they came to their Inn, his Master was very liberal in calling for
Wine, good Cheer and Tobacco, insomuch that the Reckoning at last amounted to
thirty shillings; which the Master told the man, he was to pay: Not I, says his
man. Wherefore? why, did not you promise to do it, said the Lawyer, if I would
tell you the chiefest point in the Law, which I did? His man replied, Where Is
your witness?

A fair woman, a Heavenly Creature.
A Gentleman riding by, where many Gentlewomen sat at a street-door; a Mastiff
dog came running out, and flew upon him: the Gentleman turning him about, said
to the Gentlewomen, This Cur is Hell, and all you Heaven.

The upstart Gentleman.
AN upstart Gentleman, who by his money had purchased a flourishing Coat of
Arms, was mocking at the plain Coat of an Esquires, of an ancient house: to
whom the Esquire returned this answer, I wear the Coat which my great, great,
great, great, Grandfather left me; but had I been to have ^ought one as you
did, it should have been guarded after the newest fashion.

Of a vain boaster.
A Talkative man, who took himself to be a grand Wit, was boasting that in what
Company soever he came, he was the leader of the discourse, and that none durst
speak in his presence, if he held his peace: No marvail, said one, for they are
all struck dumb at the miracle of your silence.

Another.
ANother fellow was boasting himself to be a great Wit, saying, he was judged
to be all Wit: Is it possible, said one, that people do think you to be all
Wit? if it b^ so, then the Anagram of your name is Wit-All.

A chaste Gentleman.
A Gentleman had been to see the Peak, and in his return at night in his Inn a
Wench stepped into the Chamber, and profer'd him her service all night: to whom
the Gentleman answered, No, he would not enter the Peak twice in twelve hours.

Nothing without money.
A Gentleman coming to Court in his Coach, as he was lighting out of it, asked
a Page that retained to some person therein, what it was a Clock: Sir, said the
youth, what will you give me then? Why said the Gentleman, must you have money
given you to tell that? Sir (quoth the lad) I would not have you mistake your
self, we Courtiers do nothing without money.

The Traveller and Cobbler.
A Conceited Traveller having his shoes torn, went to a Cobblers to have them
mended, to whom he used these expressions, God save you Master mend-all, I have
brought you here a pair of Cram-a-Crees, beseeching you of your benevolence to
fix me on four preservatives against the cold evil of the Indies. The Cobbler
thinking coined Silver was better then such coined Language, returned him this
answer, Sir, your Eloquence passes my Intelligence; yet if you please, I will
Cobble you on four pieces for six pence.

On Mr. Prat.
SOme Thieves had stolen Sheep from one Mr. Prat, and killed them in a Wood;
at their departure they had written these lines, and fixed them in a Paper ^o
the body of a Tree.

Master Prat,
Your Sheep were very fat,
We thank you for that.
Out of eleven
We took but seven,
Pray thank us for that.
Amongst the Briars and Thorns
We have left you the head and the horns,
Pray thank us for that.
The wool with the skins
To buy your wife pins,
Pray thank us for that.
Mr. Prat found the Verses, but could never after that hear of his Sheep.

On John Brown.
THere was a University-Capper in Oxford, named John Brown, who whilst he was
ringing in one of the Belfries of the said City, the Clapper of the Bell fell
upon his head, and almost killed him: at arch wag seeing this mischance, and
conceiving it mortal, writ over the place where this mischance happened, these
lines: Here lies John Brown the Vniversity-Capper,
That lived by the Bell, and died by the Clapper
But John Brown afterward recovering, an^ seeing the Verses, writ this
underneath.

John Brown is alive, and lives in hope
To live by the Bell, when thou dy'st by the Rope.
The Gentleman and Musician.
A Musician to bid a Gentleman good morrow, was singing under his window, The
fair wife proved a Shrew.

The Gentleman hearing him, rise out of his bed, and said, The fair wife you
speak of, you must look somewhere else, but the Shrew is abed with me.

The gra^eless Son.
ONe was complaining that no man ever had such an undutifull Son as he had.
Yes, said his Son, (with less grace then truth) my Grandfather had.

The modest Captain.
A Captain going to visit a Knight, he before many Guests commended the
Captain, for many wonderful acts, which he did at the Siege of St. Quintins.
The company much admiring thereat, the Captain answered, that what the Knight
said was not wonderful, for the Armor he then wore was as thick as betwixt
London and St. Quintins. Why, said the Knight, were you not there then? No
indeed, said the Captain. No matter, quoth the Knight, but if you had been
there, I am sure you would have done as much as I said.

Fool-hardiness.
ONe having received a deep cut in the head, in a Foolish fray, went to a
Chyrurgion to be dressed: who searching to see if his brains were not perished,
and not easily finding them; said the wounded man, Trouble not your self to
search for my brains, for if I had had any, I should not so rashly have entered
in so an unluckie a brawl.

Of Lent.
A Parish in the West-Country called Lent, happened to be on fire; one passing
by and bemoaning the sadness of the accident, asking what was the name of the
Town; and being answered Lent; Lent? quoth he, I pray ye then in with Frydays
and Saturdays too, that the Fire may consume them all together.

Dreams Fables.
ONe told King Henry the eighth that h^ dreamed he would give him a bag of
Gold; but, said the King, you are no good Christian if that you believe dreams
to b^ true.

Put always the Cart before the Horse.
AN old man with a long white beard, being to take his Oath at a Trial in Law,
the Judge asked him how old he was; My Lord, said he, I am six and fourscore:
And why not fourscore and six? said the Judge: Because quoth he I was six
before I was fourscore.

Of an old man.
AN old man complained that he had but one tooth left in his head, which was
fallen out lately with eating of a ripe Figg: to whom one said, But your tooth
was more ripe.

A quick answer, to a vain Boaster.
ONe boasted that there was not any one of his name in all England, and yet he
himself was a Gentleman: to whom said one, I am sorry Sir you have such a name,
that there is not one good of it.

Great bribes, do great matters.
A Controversy in Law was at last referred to a Gentleman to decide, and both
Parties bound to stand to his award; the Plaintiff, to win him to his side,
presented him with a new Coach: and the Defendant to gain his favor gave him
four brave Horses. The Gentleman liking the Horses better then the Coach, gave
the verdict on the Defendants side: whereupon the Plaintiff asked him how it
came to pass the Coach went out of the right way: the Gentleman answered, he
could not help it, for it was the Horses had drawn it so.

Nothing like money.
A Poor man in a Rightful cause had sued a rich man, so that at the last it
came to a Trial: the rich man knowing his cause bad, bribed the Judge with a
dozen of Apostle spoons, which at the time of trial almost turned the Scales on
his side; the poor man perceiving how the matter went, down on his knees in the
middle of the Court, and holding up his hands, said; Now the Lord Jesus be on
my side, or my cause is lost, for the twelve Apostles are against me.

The Serving-man and Mr. Jordan.
A Servingman being sent of an errand to one Mr. Jordan, to tell him that his
Master would speak with him, meeting him by the way, with more have then
manners said thus to him: Mr. Piss-pot, my Master must needs speak with you
presently. The Gentleman angry to be thus abused, said, Sirrah do not you know
that my name is Jordan? Why (quoth the Servingman) pray what difference is
there betwixt a Piss-pot and a Jordan?

Of dying in Debt.
ONe that had often asked an old Debt, was still put off with words, that he
would pay him ere it were long; which made him to say, I suppose at last you
will die in my Debt; to which the other answered, I have lived now this forty
years, and am sure I never died in any ones Debt yet.

Of telling a Lie.
ONe seeing his Friend looking out at a Prison-window, asked him why he came
there: who answered, that it was for telling a Lie: at which the other
marvailing, he explained his meaning, saying, that owing such a one a sum of
money, and not paying him at the time promised, he arrested me for the same,
and put me in Prison, by which means I am here for telling a Lie.

Of a Calves head.
SOme Gentlemen being set at dinner, where amongst other dishes was a
Calves-head, one of them was very much commending it: and amongst other good
properties, for the clearness thereof; to which he was answered by one, that it
was very clear indeed, yea so clear that he might see his own face therein.

The Country-fellow and Ship.
A Country-fellow new come to London that had never seen a Ship in his life,
coming to Tower-wharfe, he there had the view of several; wondering what they
should be, he asked one of the Ship-boys what that great thing was called in
which he was; who told him it was a Ship. Then asked he him how old it was; who
answered him, Two years old. Good Lord, said the Countryman, but two years old?
what a great thing it will be by that time it comes to my age!

The Drunkards cause of spewing.
SOme Gentlemen being a bowling, a drunken fellow was got into the Green, whose
Stomach being overcharged, he fell a spewing before them all; for which one of
the Gentlmen blaming him, Marry (said he) it would make any man spew to see how
you bowl.

Of greedy eating.
A Fellow being sent of an errand to a Country-Gentlemans house, had Victuals
set before him, on which he fell so greedily, as made the Gentleman to stand
and admire at his teeth and stomack-exploits; and therefore in a kind of
Ironical speech he spoke to him, and bid him to eat heartily. I thank you, Sir,
said the fellow, so I do, I think I eat like a man. Nay, quoth the Gentleman,
that thou do not* for I never saw a man to eat so before, I think thou do
rather eat like a Beast.

Woodcock and Swallow.
TWo Gentlemen were bowling together, whereof the one was named Woodcock* the
other Swallow. Mr. Swallow having thrown a good cast, was boasting thereof: to
whom the other said, It is not one Swallow that makes a Summer. No, said
Swallow to him again, neither is it one Woodcock that makes a winter.

The Gentleman and Mare.
A Glownish Gentleman had so far prevailed upon the affections of a Gentleman's
Daughter, that the Marriage was agreed upon; but he besides the Portion
promised, would have into the Bargain a goodly Mare which was grazing in a
Pasture before the house; and so high he stood thereon, that upon the refusal
thereof he told the Gentleman, that if he had not the Mare, he would have none
of his Daughter; upon which the Marriage was quite broken off. About a
twelvemonth after, this penurious wooer chanced to meet the Gentlewoman at a
Matket, and would needs have renewed old acquaintance with her: but she
pretending ignorance, told him that she did not know him. No, said he, do no^
you know me? why I was once a Suitor to you. O cry you mercy, said she, I think
there was once such a Gentleman a suitor to my Fathers Mare, but I assure you
never any such a one a suitor to me.

Of picking a bone.
SOme variance happening betwixt a Gentleman and his Wife, she refused to sit
down to dinner with him: whereupon to affront her, having eaten the meat off of
a bone, he sent it to her by a Servant, bidding him to tell her, that there was
a bone for her to pick: to requite this frump, she sent him word back again by
the same Servant, that she had three Children since they were married together,
whereof one of them was none of his; and bid him to tell him, that that was a
bone for him to pick.

The Gentleman and Butcher.
A Company being at Bowls, of which was a Butcher and a Fantastical gallant, in
their play they chanced to fall out, so that the Gallant up with a Bowl, and
struck the Butcher such a blow on his head, as laid him shaking of his heels:
whereupon one of the standers by said, I have seen many a Butcher knock down a
Calf, but I never before saw a Calf knock down a Butcher.

The Master and Maid.
A Master was once had before a Justice of the Peace for getting his Maid with
Child; the Master pleaded that his Maid came into the bed to him: Why then,
said the Justice, you should have gone out of the Bed from her. Yea (said the
Master) would you have done so, if a handsome Maid had come to Bed to you? no
I Will warrant ye.

Another.
ANother Maid (who lay at her Masters Beds feet) was by him gotten with Child;
whereupon her Mistress rated her soundly: the Wench to excuse her self, said,
That her Master would do it: But then (quoth the Mistress) you should have
cried out. Why (replied the Wench) I have often heard my Master and you about
the same business, and I never heard you for to cry out.

An illiterate Churchwarden.
ONe of great wealth, but no learning at all, was by the Vestry chosen
Churchwarden of the Parish; he to excuse himself as being an illiterate man,
desired them they would excuse him therein, For (said he) that Office requires
a learned man, when I protest that I can write nor read no more then the Pope
of Rome.

Of Mastery 'twixt man and wife.
A Man and his wife were striving for mastery; or as we say, who should wear
the Breeches; when in the interim one knocks at the door, which occasioned a
cessation of blows for a time: whilst the goodman steps to the door, and asks
the party who he would speak withal? who told him, The Master of the house:
Stay friend, said the goodman, but a little while, and I shall resolve thee,
for as yet the case is doubtful; and so stepping in, his wife and he went to it
again, till at last she yielded him the Victory; which being obtained, he goes
again to the door, Now friend, said he, thou must speak with me, but I could
not tell thee so much before, till my wife and I had decided the con^^oversie.

A Bull.
A Tradesman having accidentally struck his wife a blow, whereof she dyed; ^ne
being told of it, said, That being he did ^ot do it willingly, the killing of
that woman ^uld ^e found but Manslaughter.

A tale of a pack of Cards.
A Precise Gentleman kept a Serva^ that was a great player at Cards, wh^ was
complained thereof to his Master by one of his Fellow Servants. The Gentleman,
who would not endure such wickedness as he thought to reign in his Family, had
his man in examination, charging hi^ very deeply for a great Gamester: Sir,
said the Servant, I am so far from being a player at Cards, that I know not
what a pair of Cards means. No, said the Gentleman to the tell-tale, did not
you say he was a great player at Cards? Yes and please your Worship, quoth he,
he is so, and so addicted to them, that he seldom goes without a pair in his
pocket. Upon these words the Gentleman commanded his pockets to be searched,
wherein was a pair found indeed. What is this? said the Gentleman, did not you
say you knew not Cards? then pray what things are these? O that, quoth the man,
is my Almanac, which I carry continually about with me. Pray, said the
Gentleman, make it appear how these Cards can be an Almanac. Why thu^ Sir,
said the man; there are in these things you call Cards, as many suits as there
are ^^y! for Heavens sake! It is I, It is I, our di^tressed Sister, and
unfortunate Journey-man Richard, who innocently sporting together, have most
unhappily Twined our selve^ in this manner; out of which it is impossible for
us to get free, without some Assistance from your helping hand: Therefore, I
beseech you as a tender Brother, have some Compassion for your miserable
Sister, and her unhappy Companion, in the Condition we are now in, and our
utmost Endeavors shall be, for the future, to retaliate your kindness in the
highest manner we shall be ever capable of performing, (the Fellow groaning and
sighing all the while, not speaking one Word for himself, but expecting to be
sent immediately into another World, for the affront put upon his Master, in
being so over familiar with his Sister) her Brother starting to hear his
Sister's Voice fancied himself to be in a Dream* by reason of some Familiarity
that had passed between them, at other times; but her repeated Importunities
and crying out, soon convinced him of the reality of what he before had but
barely imagined. And considering withal, what an Odium their Family would
undergo, first turned his Sister upon the Man, resolving to pin them both to
the Ground with his Spit, and was just ready to pierce it through their Bodies,
had not another of the Family, who perceived now the worst of the danger,
fortunately ^topping his hand: prevented the fatal stroke, and interceded for
their Pardon. The Brother at first could not easily be appeased, but his
Passion abating, and considering the best way would be, to keep it as private
as they could from the Ears of their Neighbors, he promised to unloose them:
but with this proviso, That they should tie themselves faster together by a
Matrimonial Conjunction, and by that means prevent the Scandal which
unavoidably would be brought upon their Family. To this they very joyfully
consented, and lovingly Kissing on the Ground, swore Constancy and Fidelity to
each other, and in a few days after, were married and lived very happily
together.

425.
A Constable carried a big bellied Woman before a Justice, and said, An't
please your Worship, I have brought you here a Maid with Child. The Wench
called him Fool and Knave; she being reproved, said, he must needs be one of
'em, for said she, If I am a Maid, he is a Fool to think I am with Child, and
if I am not with Child, he is a Knave for saying I am.

426.
A Person looking upon some Pictures, which hung up against a Wall, and among
the rest there Was the Picture of King Solomon and the Queen of Sheba, an old
Woman coming by, nestles up close to him; Pray Sir, says she, what pretty
Picture is that? Whereupon the Gentleman resolved her, but she pretended
Deafness two or three times, desired him to speak a little louder, and the
fourth time she got his Watch out of his Pocket, and dropping him a low
Courte^ie, told him she was very well satisfied

427.
A debauched Fellow was brought before a Justice of the Peace for Swearing, the
Justice commanded him to pay his Fine, which was two Shillings* for two Oaths,
whereupon he pulls out half a Crown, and asked the Justice the Price of a
Curse, who told him Sixpence: Then a Pox take you all for Knaves and Fools, and
there is half a Crown for you, who the Devil would stand changing of Money.

428.
A Miser having a Sheep stole from him by a poor Man, would needs send him to
Prison, saying, There was not such a damned Rogue in all the World: Pray Sir,
says he remember your self, and judge not me

429.
A wise Mayor with his discreet Wife, went to ^e the Queen's Ape, as she came
in the Ape caught ^t his Wife, and made Months at her, but the Mayor told the
Ape He was an unmannerly Gen^^^man, to mock an ancient Woman as his Wife was ^d
old enough to be his Mother.

430.
One When the Hangman went to put the Hal^r about his Neck, desired him not to
bring the ^ope too near his Throat: For, says he, I am so ^cklish about that
Place, that I shall hurt my self, ^ with over-laughing, that it will go near to
throt^ me.

431.
One was stopped, by the Constable, he asked him that was his Name? He told him
Adultery. ^hen Sir I Will commit you; Sir, says he, If you do, ^ur Wife will be
angry, for committing Adultery ^on your Watch.

432.
The Watch passing by, out of a Window one ^rew a Piss-pot upon their Heads;
they being ^gry, he a^ked who they wore? They replied ^e Watch. Why then, Harm
watch, harm catch.

433.
One came to the Tower-gate, just as it was shut, ^d the Wardens going in with
the Keys, Ho, ^llow, says he, open the Gates: None of your ^llow but a poor
Knave; why then poor Knave. ^ay, no Knave neither Sir; Why then says he, ^ was
a Knave that told me so.

434.
A Horse stealer was brought to be examined before the Justice, who finding the
Felony apparent, ^ell, Sirrah, says he, If thou art not hanged for ^is, I Will
be hanged for you! I humbly thank your ^orship, (replied the Thief,) and when
the time ^es, I desire you not to be out of the way.

435.
A Welsh man arraigned and convicted, by Favor of the Bench, had his Clergy
granted him, (...) when he was burnt in the Hand, they bid him say Cot save the
King: Nay, says the Welsh-M^^ Cot bless her good Father and Mother, for ^ they
had not brought her up to Read and Write, her might have been Hanged for all
hur King.

436
A simple Fellow being arraigned at the B^* the Judge was so favorable to him
as to give hi^ his Clergy, and they bid him Read: Read* Truly my Lord, says he,
I can Read no more than the Pope of Rome.

437
Another Fellow had the Favor of his Clergy also, and being illiterate, a
Scholar stood behind him to instruct him, and the Words were Lord have mercy
upon us; so the fellow held the Book, and the Scholar bid him say after him O
Lord, says the Scholar, O Lord, says the Fellow, and hi^ Thumb being upon the
other part of it, the Scholar said, Take away thy Thumb: Then says the Fellow,
O Lord, take away thy Thumb. Then says the Judge, Legit aut n^ Clerice? Non
Legit, says he, Then the Judge said, Take him away Jailer.

438
A new married Man being in bed with (...) Wife, and thinking her a Virgin told
her he (...) afraid he should hurt her, and therefore wou^ rise and fetch an
instrument to order affairs (...) easier Way; but she speaking simply, and to
e^ him, said, Good Husband don't trouble your se^ for my Father's Journey-man
has saved you the Labor a Twelve Month ago.

439
A Man and his Wife being in Bed together, toward Morning pretended some
uneasiness desired to Lie in her Husbands Place, so Good Man being Willing to
please Her, came ^ Her, making some short stay in his Passage: had not lain
long there, but she desired him to change places, and asked him to come over
her again: Nay, nay, says he, stay there, I had rather go a mile about first.

444.
A Citizen more tender of his Wife than himself, used to make her go to bed
first in the Wintertime, and lie in his place to warm it, and the^ called her
his Warming pa^, which she not well relishing, went according to her usual
custom to war^ his bed, and left something smoking in the place: He suddenly
leaped into it, and findin^ himself in a stinking pickle, Wife, says he, I Am
beshit: No, Husband, says she, it is but a Coal dropped out of your warming-pan.

445.
A Country fellow came to a Turner's Shop to buy a Mat; many were showed him,
but he liked none: Then to jeer the Bompkin he called his Wife and Daughter
Mat, and told him, there was all the Mats he h^d: No, says he, they will not
do, for I must have one that has not been lai^ upon.

446.
A Man having married an old Woman, he told her, he had let something wherein
he should be a great loser: with that she let a lusty Fa^t; O now, says he, I
must confess you have made me a great Savor.

447.
One hearing of the Story of St. George that killed the Dragon, said sure 'twas
a Lie, nay some believe, there was never a St. George nor a Dragon. I, says a
simple fellow, Pray God there be a Maid.

448.
Some Gentlemen being a drinking, a Wench came up to attend them: she being not
enough, in anger they knocked for more, the Master coming up, asked what they
called for: Said they, must we be thus attended? Have you no more whores in the
House but this? Yes, Sir, pray be patient, I Will send up my own Wife
immediateley.

449.
Two Widows sitting by the fire, were chatting together of their dead Husbands,
says one, let us have another Candle, for my poor Husband loved Light, God send
him Light everlasting; and says the other, my Husband loved a good Fire, I wish
him Fire everlasting.

450.
Sir Thomas Moor had many Daughters but no Sons, so that his Wife did often
wish for a boy, which at last she had, which was very simple; A^ Wife says he,
thou have often wished for a Boy, and this will be a Boy so long as he lives.

451.
A Maid that had more Beauty than wit, stood viewing herself naked in a glass,
at last she sets the Glass a pretty distance off from her, so that screwing her
Body, she saw the reflection of something in the Glass; whereupon she said,
well, it is no matter, though the shadow be Wry-mouthed, yet the Substance is as
right as my Leg.

452.
A Country man told his Wife, 'twas her Fault his Daughter played the Whore,
for she should have locked her up: Lock me no Locks says she, for the Devil
take that Key that cannot unlock it.

453.
A Fellow wooing a Wench, she sat so long between his Legs that he fell fast
asleep: She rose up and put the Churm between his Legs, h^ waking hugged it and
said, Well, and how dye now? Th^^^ing the Wench had been there.

454.
A Gentleman had o't solicited his Wife's Maid for a little of that which Harry
gave Doll, but she denied it still, saying, he would hurt her, and then (...)
should cry out; after all was done, Look ye no^ says be, did I hurt you? Well,
says she, or did cry out then?

456.
A Wench was got with Child, and her Mistress would know who got it, she said,
no Body; says her Mistress, you Whore, do you think any Woman can be with Child
without a man? Why, says she, may not I have a Child without a Man, as well as
a Hen lays Eggs without a Cock.

457.
A married man having got a Wench with Child, was told by the Justice, that he
thought such a man as he, would not have defiled his Bed so: You mistake, Sir,
says he, there was no defiling of the bed in the case, for it was done in the
Field.

458.
Another was accused for getting his Maid with Child, and that he went into the
Maid's Bed to do it. He to excuse it, swore, he never went into his Maid's Bed,
for the Bed was his own.

459.
One asked his Trading Wife, what was the reason he must have his Life burdened
so by her ill Courses? Pray Husband, says she, let not that trouble you, for
you know that I bear more Burden (...) you every day, and yet I am contented.

460.
A virtuous Lady being once in a musing vein, sat with her Legs Pretty wide;
says her Husband, Sweet heart, your Cabinet stands open; say you so, says she,
why do not you lock it then? For I am sure, none keeps the Key but your self.

461.
A Gallant espying a handsome Maid, says he, Swe^t heart, give me leave to kiss
your Hands an^ Feet: O lack, Sir, says she, you are in extremes to aim both
high and low at once, for I have o^^^ heard there is virtue in the middle, and
there you may kiss, if you will not you may let it alone.

462.
A Lawyer would not only conte^^ himself with a s^fficient Dose of the Juice of
the ^^^pe, but after he came home, (which was generally late, and when his Wife
was a bed) would slip into Bed in the dark to his Maid, and steal the forbidden
pleasures of Adultery. This he continued to do often, using when he rose from
her to go to his Wife's Bed, to give her half a Crown. At length, his Wife
finding it out, watched his coming home one Night, and privately ordered the
Maid a Lodging up one pair of Stairs higher, and went her self into the Maid's
Bed: When her Husband came home as usual, without a Light, he goes softly to
the Bed, and there without any words, falls to work very hard with his Wife,
and when he had done, gives her half a Crown, and rises to go down Stairs to
cool himself, before he went to his wife: In the mean time she rises and goes
to her own bed, and falls fast a sleep. But in the morning before her Husband
was up, she calls the Wench, pays her her Wages, and bids her be gone. The
Husband hearing a noise below, rises, and comes down, just as the Wench was
going out of Doors, and asking what was the matter? Was answered by his Wife
without any reason, that she had paid her off and she was going away. But she
had not gone out of Sight, before the Mistress called after her, and said, Ah
Lack-a-day! Hus^y, I Would like t'ave forgot the Half-Crown I earned for you last
Night, but here it is; and so gave it her before her Husband, who, you may
imagine, guessed then the meaning of her going away.

463.
A French man who having lived a single Life too long as he thought to his
advantage, was resolved to marry a Wife to dress his Vict^^ls, order his
Household Affairs, and take care of other necessaries, etc. At l^st he pitches
upon one, but she being a proud fin^ky* Creature, cared to do little or
nothing: So that after he had been married a Month, and the Honey-moon was
over, he desires she would dress the meat he had bought for Dinner: At which
she mumbl'd, and looked like the Devil over Lincoln, saying, Truly she expected
to have a Maid to do that for her, for she was never bred up to such slavery:
At which the contented Husband seemed very well satisfied, and replied, very
well, my Dear. If dat you vil not do it par me, begar, me vil do it par you. So
did it accordingly. The next day the Bed wanted to be made, and she would not
do it, however he would do it for her: When Saturdy came, the House wanted to be
cleaned, then she would not do it, but he was forced to do it himself. A little
time after, he takes his Wife abroad in the Fields as usual, and sitting down
pretty tired under a hedge, Monsieur spies a pretty C^abstick; at which he drew
his Knife, and desired his Wif^ to cut it for him, but she complained of being
weary, and said she would not rise, not she; Ve^, Madam, says he, I Will do it
for ye; so rises, and cuts the stick and trims it fit for use; when coming to
her, he, said, see my dear vat pretty Stick is dis; take i^, do take it, and
beat your self with it; No no cries she in a Passion, what do you think I Am a
Fool, or mad? Well den says he, I Will do it for you, and so he belabour'd her to
some purpose, that ever afterward she became a good Wife, and was willing to
do what ought to be done her self, without putting her Husband to the trouble
of doing it for her.

464.
An Attorney's Man having got a Wench with Child, who being brought to Bed of a
Son, he was puzl'd to contrive for its maintenance: But at last he found out a
way, which was thus; He with four more of his Companions were at a Tavern, and
an old Woman comes up, saying, will you buy any Ribbon, Gentlemen? Aye, says
our Spark, and buys some, giving her half a crown to go down and change,
instead of which, she left her Basket behind, wherein they found a Child, which
they obliged themselves equally to maintain, and put to Nurse.


