Immanuel: OR THE MYSTERY Of GOD, Manifested in the FLESH.

Sung in the several CANTOES Of URANIA. ASTRAEA. MELPOMENE.


By WILL. WISHARTT B. D. Scoto-Britan. and Preacher in both Kingdoms.

LONDON, Printed by R. Hodgkinsonne, for Philip Nevill dwelling in Ivy Lane.
1642.

TO THE HIGH AND MIGHTY MONARCH Charles, Of Great Britain, France and Ireland,
etc.
ANAGRAMMATA REGIA:
Carolus Steuartus, Solus sacra tuetur: Charles Steuart, Th'Altars Rescue:
Charles Steuart, L'-tres haut Caesar.
TO thee, great Britains, France and Irelands King,
To thee, great Faith's defending Sovereign,
To thee, great Patron of Parnassus spring,
To thee, great Neptune of our Northern Main,
To thee, great Owner of th'Hesperian Plain,
To thee, great Patron both of Arms and Arts,
To thee, great Mover of great Albion's wain,
To thee, great Monarch, both of hands and hearts,
To thee, great Sun, who to our soil imparts
Light, vegetation, life and influence,
To thee, great Pan, who break'st Bellona's darts,
To thee, great Mirror of Magnificence,
My pure Urania sacres those poor drops
She sucked from Pindus and Parnassus tops;
It Is true, to thee she can no good impart,
Yet shall she sing, Thy servant's
WILL. WISHARTT.

To the Reader.
WHat wise Jedidjah did not understand,
What Jakehs Son could never yet conceive,
Apelles pencill in Apollo's hand
On those succeeding tables shall engrave.
What way a young man with a maid can have,
What way a Serpent strayeth on a stone,
What way a Ship does slope the Oceans wave,
What way an Eagle scales the welkins Zone.
How glory comes from confusion,
How meat com'th from the eater, sweet from sour
How life does spring from deaths pavilion,
And how a Lamb does curb the Lions power,
Stand all indented on that cursed Tree,
Where ink and blood have writ, J. N. R. J.
The Contents of the several Chapters or Cantoes contained in the 3 ensuing
Weeks-Works, or Books, expressed under the Titles of URANIA, ASTRAEA, MELPOMENE.
viz. In URANIA, or the first Week.
Cant. 1o. The Rogation, or the Authors Prayer. fol. 1 Cant. 2o. The Prodrome,
or Forerunner. fol. 5 Cant. 3o. The Annunciation, or Salutation. fol. 17 Cant.
4o. Immanuel, or the Birth of Christ. fol. 27 Cant. 5o. The Advent, or
Circumcision. fol. 39 Cant. 6o. The Epiphany, or the Sages. fol. 51 Cant. 7o.
The Massacre, or murder of the children. fol. 59
In ASTRAEA, or the second Week:
Cant. 1o. The Unction, or Baptism. fol. 69 Cant. 2o. The Duel, or,
Temptation. fol. 79 Cant. 3o. The Doctor, or the Law interpreted. fol. 91 Cant.
4o. The Powers, or Miracles. fol. 102 Cant. 5o. The Proselytes, or Converts.
fol. 117 Cant. 6o. The Metamorphose, or Transfiguration. fol. 126 Cant. 7o. The
Hosanna, or riding to the Temple. fol. 136
In MELPOMENE, or the third Week:
Cant. 1o. The Conspiracy, or betraying of Christ. fol. 147 Cant. 2o. The
Agony, in Gethsemen. fol. 158 Cant. 3o. The Surprise, or Apprehension. fol.
168 Cant. 4o. The Assize, or Trial. fol. 178 Cant. 5o. The Cross, or Death.
fol. 189 Cant. 6o. The Triumph, or Resurrection. fol. 200 Cant. 7o. The
Trophec, or Ascension. fol. 211
URANIA.
Here does a worm-ling to his wondrous maker
His Souls best service and affections sacre.
A Lion to a Lamb prepares the Way.
The Angel Gabriel greets great Bethleem's May
The chaste Parthenia brings forth her Son.
Immanuel's sealed by Circumcision.
A blazing Star makes Sages seek their King.
In Ramah Rachel weeps, and scorns to sing.
The Rogation.
CANTO 1o.
THE very Heavens are in thy sight impure,
O thou dread Sovereign of all Creature!
Thy Wisdom's such, and eke thy power so large
That thou layst folly to the Angels charge:
O then! how idly foolish and how vain
A thing is man, even in his choycest strain?
Whose habitation is in dust and clay,
Where Vanity bears such imperial sway
As mak^ his strength but weakness; wisdom, folly;
Thoughts, fond; and actions, every way unholy:
How can thou then, thou sacred strong of strongs,
To whom untainted Majesty belongs,
Once sip the runnals of that source, whence gall
Springs up from Worm-woods poysond Mineral;
Or hear the cries which wretched he poures out,
Whose best apparel is a men struous clout?
No, sure I am it cannot be, but thou
Who, in thy self, art still unchanged and true,
Must on some rarer object fix thine eyes
Ever thou dispense with our impieties;
Yea, sure I am, it is that Lamb, alone,
Who joynd with thee in triple-union,
Whose intercession, and sweet warbling ayrs
Makes thee attend the tenor of our Prayers.
Look therefore, great GOD, on that Lamb whose cry
Speaks better things then Abel's butchery,
Look on that blood, which spread on Israel's doors
Saves from that Plague which Pharaoh's sons devoures:
Look on that thread, which being tied about
Zarah's right hand, inspr'd him to come out,
Holding his brothers heel in's grapling fist
To testify he strugled to be blessed;
And finally, look on that scarlet Lace
Which ti'd to Rachab's window, gave her Peace
Amidst that foyl, and death-denouncing wound
Which Jericho's vainglory did confound:
Look on all those, and through all those on me,
In him whom those did all presignifie,
And by thy Spirit, enrich this spirit of mine
With learned Judgment, and with Art divine,
That whilst I undertake this task, to tell
The World, how her dread Lord Immanuel
Thy eternal Word; yea, thy eternal Son,
Was made in Time our very flesh and bone;
I may dilate that story in such guise
As may enforce the learnd, the sage, the wise,
To lead the Squadrons of their carnall-sense
All captivate to thy obedience.
And, to this end, rowse thou my mind on high,
Teach thou my hands to touch, and eyes to see
The secrets of thy sweet-coelestiall-Court,
Which may my Soul above the Pole transport
In such a sort, that whilst the Poetasters
Of brainsick passions, and of fond disasters
Do ravish worldly minds, and muddy brains
With forged sighs, false tears, and feined strains
Of wanton Love, lascivious shows and songs,
Vain Madrigals, dissembling woes and wrongs;
My Muse, quit-claming the Castalian Font,
Where the Pyerian maids, of old, were wont
To sip their Nectar: And those swelling tops
Of Pindus and Parnassus, whose sweet drops
Ravished great Homer, by their sacred kisses,
To sing Achilles and the wise Ulysses;
Made Maro from his Mantua to descry
The sighs of Dido, and the sack of Troy;
And taught Love's pander in a ravished trance,
To vent his fabulous Metamorphos'd dance:
I may with sacred measures, notes and numbers,
Which on sublunar-themes nor sleeps nor slumbers,
The grave sweet honors, and the eternal praises
Of my Redeemer rouse from errors mazes;
So, whilst that some their pens and pains inure
To limb the Gnydian Idols pourtrature,
And in the vains of their lascivious rhyme
Make Cupid prince, and Genius of the time;
Whilst others subjects are but fictions, dreams,
Imaginations and conceited theames,
Clothed up in such a charming phrase, that vice
Robs virtue of her chair, she looks so nice:
My care may be t'unfold that boundles Ocean
Of Peace, of Mercy, and of Lovesick-motion,
Wherewith the Man-God, my Redeemer, has
Released my Darling, both from Sin and Death:
But since my wit is weak, my pen unable,
My judgment shallow, and my hand unstable
To give a true characterizing strain
Unto thy Greatness, Goodness, Mercies-Main,
O grant, that whilst thou openest thus my mouth
T'unfold the Tenor of thy sacred Truth,
I be not like those stones which by the way
Unmoved themselves, the beaten rode display;
Nor like that Canall, and that watery Spout
Which from the fountain to it is bubling snout
Conveys pure streams of cool refreshing water
For the use of others, whilst it self's no better:
No, first inform my mind, then clear mine eye
That I may learn what depth of Deiry
Thy VVisdome has entrencht within the Vail
Of flesh, and made it there reside and dwell:
Then touch my lips, and guide my babbling pen,
That I may warble to the sons of men
The sweet Hyblaean Nectar of thy Power
That brings us sweetness from our bitter-sowre;
So shall I teach thy Saints thy ways aright,
Whilst thy all-seeing eye vouchsafes me sight.
The Prodrome.
CANTO. 2o.
I Sing the wonders of that wondrous GOD,
Who being essentially one is Trin'ly od,
Not in that first born Word-begotten Matter
Whose after-byrth was fire, air, earth and water,
From whom, and to whom, as their native sourse
Time reconveys his childrings circled course:
Nor gaze I, that re-colonizing Boat
Wherein old Noah, twelve months pent, did float
On steep high Mountains, and Ryphaean woods,
Like Neptune, trampling on those swallowing floods
Which from Heav'ns-sluces, Earths hid vains, and Seas
Deep-channels, did God's wrath anatomize.
Nor mind I now to lim that wondrous Love,
Which burning in Elohim's breast above,
Did Shem and Heber's sacred line re-bring
From Shinar's soil, and fair Euphrates spring
To Attend the loadstar of th'Eternals call,
Amidst those plains where Jordan's course does craule;
Nor shall my bubling pen those plagues express
Which from the heavens in wraths enraged excess
On Z^an's field, and Mizraim's flowery Tent
Were, as postilions, of their wrath down sent:
Nor sing I those divine decrees and wonders,
Whose voice contemper'd with a thousand thunders,
Breeds more respect in Israel's haughty heart,
Who notwithstanding acts the truants part,
Then all those Laws which Numa could afford,
Or yet the Spartane or Cecropian Lord: L. and S.

No, those already, have in matchless Ore
Traverst both Vestae's lap, and Thetis shore,
And by the pencill of a glorious Gawl D. B.

Have drawn the curtain of our azur'd All
In such a sort, that time shall never bring
So sweet a draught from Hippocrene's spring,
Save that, which Albian's Mercury Trismegist J. S.

Has quintessenc'd from Ampelonaes breast:
No, no, my care shall be, in heav'n-bred trance
To gaze his more then wondrous excellence,
From whom, all things, as from their common father,
Do all their essence and their being gather;
That true beginning, midst, and end of all
Who but beginning, midst, or end, at all,
Is, ground and top of that uncoupled chain
Which links poor sinners to their Sovereign:
The blessed Son I sing of God and Man,
Who born in time, yet was ere time began
The Son of God, the eternal living rock
And royal offspring of great David's stock;
That blessed Redeemer, whom the Prophets old,
By heav'n-bred revelations often foretold,
On whom their figures, shadows, Types and Tropes
Built all their truths, moralities and hopes;
The God of Gods, I sing; and King of Kings
From out whose mouth a two ed'd smyter-springs,
Dividing twixt the marrow and the bones,
And manifesting th'hearts hid motions;
Whose words are mysteries, whose works are wonders,
Whose eyes are lightnings, and whose voice is thunders,
Whose hayres are whiter then the new fallen snow,
Whose sparkling eyes like flames of fire do glow,
Whose loins are girt with gold of better fine
Then Titan lusters in his midday shine,
Whose foot's of burning brass, and trampleth down
The rage of Lethe, Styx and Acharon:
Him, him I sing, Earth, Earth attend my song,
That so the hony-suckles of my Tongue,
May, like those showers which on the Meads do trill
Celestial Nectar, to the world distill:
For though my pen in peace should snort and ly,
The Rocks, the Mountains, and the Stones would cry.
Crant therefore, o my God, Grant, grant betimes
Peace to my Soul, and soul unto my Rhimes,
Yea, quintessence my soul, and eke advance
My care-free spirit in some celestial trance,
That, purged from passion, thy divine address
May guide me through this desert wilderness
Of humane weakness, that my Pen (from thee)
And Lines may borrow such a dignity,
As may express in lofty quavering songs
The lofty praise which unto thee belongs.
But stay my Muse, and lanch not to the Ocean
Whose never ebbing Tide and restles motion
No Pilot yet could know aright, or keep
Himself from Naufrage in so vast a deep;
For this is sure, That in this voyage stands
Charybdis gulf, and Scilla's shelf and sands;
'Twixt which, the whistlings of an easy gale
Must guide thy Bark, and not a blustrous sale:
Yet keep not always peace, my Muse, for now
It Is time to clear thy care-eclipsed brow,
And by the numbers of thy sacred fury
To stray along th'enamel'd coasts of Jurie;
Go then from Dan to Bethel, thence anon
To Aroer, Keilah, Adullam, Ziff, Maone,
To Shilo, Gilgall, Mizphe, Ramah, Nob,
And these sky-threatning towr's, whose spires do rob
Their white from Pelops shoulder, and their Ore
From Peru, Ganges, and Hydaspes shore;
And while thou viewst those coasts and pleasant fields
Which milk and honey in abundance yields,
Veil, veil thy top-saile, and in reverence greet
That sacred Flamyn, whose heav'n-ravish'd sp'rit
Does at Joves Altar with a zeale-bred fire
Evaporat his Souls sincere desire.
Hail flowery Jordan then, and you sweet torrents
Of christall-water, whose Meandring currents
So many Saints have sip'd; and O thou soil,
Whose arms gave rest from that tumultuous toil
Wherein our Fathers forty years did stray;
And O you sacred-walls, where eft-soon lay
That mighty God and Man, whose chrimson shower
From out his side, made him our Savior;
Yea, O you hills, you dales and fields each one,
Where Earths-sole- Phoenix, Heav'ns-true- Paragon
Did, from his Cradle to his Cross, endure
Our sinnes-disease, and griefs-distemp'rature:
Hail, hail: I cry you all a glad good morrow,
Let neither blustering winds, nor rain-bred sorrow
Your Meads unflowre, or yet your woods disleave,
Or choke your torrents in their bubling grave:
No, let nor hail, nor snow, nor frost, nor Ice,
By their tumultuous violent prejudice
Your brows enage, or yet your Tresses scorn,
Till from your tops your golden fleece be shorn:
But rather let the heavens, with smiling face,
Your Nayids and your Napa's, so embrace,
That by the tincture of their milk-sweet rain
Your floury virdure may still fresh remain,
As long as Titan takes delight to post
From Japan to the great Herculaean coast.
But above all; Hail, hail, thou ghostly-Father, Zachary.

The Almighty's Flamin, his anointed rather;
Even thou, who by thy lot, within this shrine,
With hallowed Judgment and with Art divine
Attendst thy service, and observ'st thy station,
To expiat Isreal's sinful conversation.
O how my ravished Soul does now admire
The glorious fabric of this glorious Quire
Wherein thou standst! for Porphyr, Gold and Mabre
Strive t'eternize the curious workman's-labor;
No, whilst within this house, my greedy eye
Does glut her self on Arts brave industry,
No sooner can I rest my thoughts upon
This carved seiling, or that graven stone,
But lo, a rare, rare Deity ties my Sense
To ruminat his matchless eminence;
For whilst I call that Majesty to mind,
Whose grace and glory, peace and truth has shined
Within those walls, what need I more to seek
Nile's Hyeroglyphicks, or the Delphian Creek,
The Rabbi^-Talmud, characters of Perss,
Turks Alcaron, or Sybillaean verse:
No, those are all but fancies and inventions
Of humane frailties, and of frail intentions,
Which, like their owners, perish in that rust
Which Time and Canker portrays in the dust:
But here, and here alone, I know, within
These vaulted-Arches; Man, infect with Sin,
May read the Programs of th'Eternal's Love,
Made manifest for Adam's sonns behove.
Son, says the Sire, what proud ambitious strain
Has led thee hither, that thou should profane
Jehovah's sacrifice and solemn Rite,
With babbling Riddles of a brainsick sprite;
Look but, I pray thee, what dread adorations
The Idol godlings of the godles Nations
Require within their shrines and shadowing Grove,
And thence learn thou to dread The Almighty Jove:
Shall Jupiter, Ammonius or Apollo,
Or wandering Cynthea, whom the Sylvans follow
At Daphne's trypod; Dodona, or there
Whereas the Argolick sages did repair
Require a grave and reverend Majesty
To enact their hel-born magic mystery?
And shall not he (who is one and trinally od,
Of kings chief King; and, above all gods, God)
Receive a reverend form and sacred guize
Of worship in his daily Sacrifice?
Or tell me Son, have nere thy ears as yet
Heard how his Ark did scaily Dagon smit,
And all the Princes (with a deadly wound)
In Ashdod, Gath, and Ekrons coasts confound?
Or know thou not poor Vzzah's fatal story?
Or Abthu, and Nadab's fatal glory?
Who in their vain presumptions fell, and falling
Bid man observe the compass of his calling?
All those stand written in truth's sacred book
That we may read (when upon them we look)
His fearful glory, and unapproched might,
Who sets us in his never slumbring sight;
Out therefore, get thee out from hence, and stand
With Israel, in his porch, whose heaved up hand,
Dejected heart, and humbly-patient ey
Attends the Missa of this Mystery.
At this rebuke I go, yet scarce am gone,
When lo, the relicts of a mourning groan
Cut in a thousand parcells, seems to call
Me back, to gaze some divine spectacle;
Returning then amazd, behold I find,
After the rushing of a mighty wind
A light ore-shadow Zachary more clear
Then that which gilds our mid-daies hemispheere,
In midst whereof, at Zacharies right hand,
Behold a glorious Cherubim does stand,
Whose smiling eyes and countenance excels
All human beauties, and all creatures else;
About his head a semi-circled Crown
Of Iris parti-colour'd coat was drawn,
Which to my poor amazed wandering eyn
Seemed died in opall, yellow, blue, and green:
The curled hayrs which on his head do grow,
Are whiter far then new fallen flaughts of snow,
'Twixt which the sparks of gold bespangled brands
Makes Ganges blush, and Tagus loath her sands;
His eyes like stars, in dark Cymerian night,
Dart forth their flashings with a wondrous light,
And like that troop which trips about the Pole,
In restles wanderings here and there they role;
Next this, with two Seraphick wings he flies,
Whereon the heavens have daind t'immortalize
Their rarest beauties, in the rarest hue
Of crimson red, and pure vermilion blue;
Down from his middle, to his feet, is drawn
A precious vail more clear then any lawn,
On which stands portray'd, by celestial Art,
That lovesick Foul which tares her tender heart
And yields a Runnall of her dearest blood
To glut her Paricids amidst their food;
A little lower, Jesse's son does stand
With peeble stones, and sling-staffe in his hand,
Trampling Goliah's glory in the dust,
Who in his strength and sinnewy force did trust:
Lo here the Phoenix aromatic cole
Burns her to dust, and yet revives her soul;
And there Arachne from her belly spins
The tissue-mantle that obscures our sins:
These and a thousand other several passions
Of several figures, several forms and fashions
Stand checkered all, as emblems of that Love
Which weds our frailties to a spotles Jove.
At this great sight old Zachary stands mute,
Confusedly amazed, amaz'dly irresolute,
For, by a pallid ghostly fear, his sense
Of speech and hearing, lose their influence,
At last, like to the Delian Princess, when
She fluttereth over the Atlantic Ocean,
He curbs the fit that conquered him before,
And to his reason thus he opes the door.
O! what is this that I behold, faith he,
Is this a feigned evanishing Majesty
Of Molech, Milcom, Chamosh, Ashtaroth,
Of Baal, Dagon, or that spirit which does
(Transformed in light) bewitch, with darkness spell,
Those howling ghosts which on Earths center dwell?
No, sure I am, those Idols are not such,
They neither hear, nor see, nor talk, nor touch,
They smell not, taste not, and in all their bands
There is no heart that knows or understands:
As for that hellish Prince, or fearful spirit,
Lights hateful foe, who darkness does inherit,
I know that here he never dare aspire
To view the secrets of this sacred fire,
Whose Censers in their sweet exhaling cloud
Presignifie, that Shiloe in his blood
Shall such a fragrant Sacrifice reveal
As shall bruise down the head that bites his heel.
What then, it is some vision sent from heaven?
But those have ceased, and our deserts have driven
That sacred Chore and great Angelick train
To shun the lewd societies of Men.
Whilst thus old Zachary's mutinous thoughts are all
Beleaguered by Opinion's General,
Fear: He whose fear restrains the Lions jaws,
And curbs the rigor of the Tigers paws
Cries, by his Angel, Zachary fear no more,
For lo thy prayer's heard, and come before
His glorious eyes, who shuts our tears each one
In bottles of due retribution:
Recall therefore thy Spirits from gates of death,
For, lo thy barren wife Elizabeth
Shall bear a Son, and thou shall call him John,
Heaven's Holy Ghost shall always rest upon
His head, and his celestial power shall sacre
Thy Son, a Minion to the worlds great Maker:
Nor wine, nor strong drink shall he taste at all,
Nor shall a rasor make his tresse to fall,
But as a Nazarite both in name and spirit,
He shall Eliah's talent re-inherit,
And as a Lion he shall roar and cry,
Prepare before Messiah's face the way.
In him thou shall rejoice; for many one,
Jew, Prosolyte, and far-bred nation
Shall joy in him, for by his heavenly Art
He shall the sinner from his sins convert;
He shall the father to the son rejoyn,
The son against father shall no more repine,
Each lofty Mountain and declining valley
Through which our bubling brooks do crawl and dally,
Shall change their state, for those shall be made low,
And these exalted to an eminent show,
Things rough shall be made smooth, things crooked straight,
And on rous things shall lose their pondrous weight,
And all the sucklings sleeps in natures lap
Shall see the lightning of his thunderclap,
That all the world may learn to adore and kis
Immanuel, whose harbenger he is.
O how cannot be, says Zachary, that I
Whose loins are fruitles, juceles, barren, dry;
Or that my wife Elizabeth, whose raines
Have stopped the fruitful current of their vains
Should recollect, recover and rebring
A living Runnal from a withered Spring.
No Zachary, says the Angel, know that he
Whose glory, wisdom, power and Majesty
Turns heavens bright Spears about earths drossy ball,
Shall make thy tragick-Theatre comicall;
And lest, that like a bull rush beaten reed,
Thy faith should faint, or hope should lose her Creed,
Recall the memoyr's of the days of old,
How Nature has been by his power controlled,
And thou shall see, that to the supreme powrs
We stand subjected, and what ere is our.
For, let me ask, whence comes these Nectar'd drops?
Which, like pure Balm, do drench Pomonaes tops;
Who makes the Oceans mutinous waves reflote?
Or who enamels Vestaes petticote?
Who does the fields refresh, or flowrs re-flowr?
Who, Bride-like, busks Apolloes Paramour?
Who leads brave Titan captive through the sky?
Or who decks Cynthia with a silver die?
Who brings old Boreas from his frozen Cave,
Who makes his fury all the world out-brave?
Who can command the light, in darkness Camp,
To checker portraits in a dornick Champ?
Or who can shut again Lights glistring ey,
To snort in midst of darkness Canopy?
All these, like ancient Hieroglyphics, may
God's wondrous power to the world display:
But since thou by a faithles fear, wilt try
His might, go manage thy security
By Sarahs loins, the faithful Abraham's wife,
Whose barren belly is a well of life;
Behold Rebecca, and the barren Anna
Mother to Samuel, wife to Elkana;
And by the histoyr' of their strange exchange
Command thy reason, and thy sense t'estrange
Their course from Nature, and repose alone
Thy faith and hope, even against hope, upon
His never failing word, whose power can frame,
From senseless stones, a seed to Abraham.
It Is true, that Nature, since the world began,
Strugleth against Faith, within the natural man;
And, like a mutinous Hagar, strives to steal
The lot, from Isaac, to her Ishmael:
And he, who has not learned to deny
Himself, his reason, wit, and industry,
And with the welcome of affections kiss
Submit himself to God, and all that is his;
May well expect, but never shall embrace
The dignities of Glory, or of Grace.
And now, since by a further doubting thou
Have called his word in doubt, who is only true,
Lo I, who stand before his glorious eyes
Who, though unseen himself, yet all things sees,
Must tell thee, that till these things come to pass
Which he has spoke, who shall be, is, and was,
This just deserved Rod on thee shall fall,
That thou shall neither hear, nor speak at all,
But shall be dumb, till with thine eyes thou see
The Accomplishment of this my Heraldrie.
Thus, having with dread Majesty engraven
In Zacharies heart, this sowre-sweet-newes from heaven,
Like lightning, when it darts along the skies,
His wings support him, and away he flies.
The Annunciation.
CANTO 3o.
STay, stay your course, you crystal heavens; and you
Swift rolling Spears, whose vaulted Arches bow
An azur'd brave Pavilion over Ear ths bail:
Stay, stay your motions, sweetly musical.
Arrest your course likewise, you twinkling stars,
Who dallying in your gold rich ammel'd Carrs
Do, like brave Torches, and still burning Tapers,
Light natures Chapel at her evening Vespers;
And Amphitrite, thou where Sirens dwells,
And celebrate their Nymph-like festivalls,
Braule thou no more in that tumultuous guize,
That sacks the Merchant's far fetched Indian prize,
But like a Bride, who knows her Bride-groom's diet,
Greet thou thy Neptune with a sacred quiet;
And whilst thy waiting hand maids-cristall brooks
Desert their Fountains and their floury crooks,
To bring a Consort of their watery Calls
To gratulate thy Nymph-like Nuptials,
Then clasp them in thine arms with joyful heast,
And bid them welcome to thy Virgin feast,
Till reconvey'd with Tritons for their train
Thou sendst them to their bubling sourse again:
Empamper'd Vesta, on whose embroidered kirtle
Hangs Alloes, Cassia, Spicknard, Balm, and Myrtle,
Carowse that Nectar which the Heavens do weep
To all those sucklings in thy lap do sleep,
That they may dance, amidst thy pearlelike shower,
A Masquedrade before thy Paramour.
Thus, like a bold-fac'd Herald, I proclaim
To Nature, and her Universal frame,
Even from Boots in his whirling Carre,
To pale Orion's tempest boding Star,
A sacred quiet, and a sweet cessation
From all their influence, course, and operation,
Till he, whose Royal and Imperial Throne
Transcends our azur'd skies, and heavens each one,
Do, from the Senate of his own good pleasure
Send Man the Message of his Souls rich treasure:
Six times has now fair Phaebe cut a caper
In opposition to her brothers Taper;
And six times couched again, within his arms,
Sh'hath glut her self with his delightful charms,
Since, erst, a heaven-born Legate has declared
To Zachary, That, for his faiths reward,
From out his wife Eliz'beths barren womb
The great Messiahs Prodrome, John, should come:
Now, now, Time big with fullness, does require
That he, who first did blow our Souls bright fire,
Should contribute truth, life, and light unto
Those shady Tipes which did his Son foreshow,
That so the graceless World, by him, might plant
Within their hearts his gracious Covenant.
Time then being full, Night, in a sad Seagreen
Or pitchy-purpled mantle, like Deaths Queen,
Had taken her Brother Morpheus Mace in hand,
And sent a drowsy rest over all the Land:
The ever-sacred, ever Virgin Mother,
Whose glory neither heaven nor earth can smother,
Great Arimathea's joy, and Bethels Crown,
And Palestina's dread, sweet, rich Renown,
Still ruminating heavens unshun'd decree,
How from a Virgins belly there should flee
A Soul dread Monarch, and Celestial Prince
Whose blood should purge our leprous foul offense!
Prevent the rosy mornings warbling train,
And hyes her to a neighboring Grove amain,
That there, in darkness shady lap, she might
In divine contemplations spend the night.
Yet stay, my Muse, stay but a little while,
And view this grove, which Eden-like does smile;
That by the survey of so sweet a shade
My muse may some way make my Reader glad.
Near to that place whence hoary Jordane slides
From Hermons hill, and makes his twin-born Tides
To meet in Marons lap, in view does lie
The ever fruitful pleasant Galily,
Whose right hand's dipped in those tumultuous waves
Which, by Tiberius name, the world out-braves;
And in her left hand, for a nose-gay, has
The Cedar sweetl'ore shaded Nazareth:
Here, scarce a furlong from her Eastern gates,
Which on the newborn Titans rays awaits,
Nature has formed, though with artlesse Art,
A Grove, in whose each portion and each part
There Is such a model of her power inborn,
As, matchd with this, laughs all the world to scorn:
For, here, the clymat sweetly tempered hot,
Has thrust away the winters petticoat,
And like a Lover, in a flourishing green,
Makes lusty May continually be seen:
Yet least the scorching blinks of Titan's ey
Should parch or wither Florae's tapestry,
Sweet Zephyr sends a musky sighing breath
To shelter Vesta from the Lyon's wrath:
Here long lived Oaks, and noble Palm Trees sprayes,
With amorous Myrtles, and immortal bays,
Never disleav'd, but still re-growing, new,
Their clasped arms in thousand Arbors threw;
There still did dangle to the gazers eyn
A thousand fruits, some sweetly ripe, some green,
Which in their color, taste and shape did mock
The Lemon, Orange, and the Apricock:
Ayr's daughter Echo, which the woods does haunt,
From high rebabling Rocks does here rechaunt
The sweet contemper'd Notes and married lays,
Which Linots, Larks, and Nightingales displayes;
All which amidst their warblings, flat and sharp,
Exceeds Arion's, or the Thracian's harp,
And yields a descant sweeter far than that
Which Linus or Amphyon modulat:
Anon, along this grove, in pomp does slide
A Runnell with a rofie broydered side,
Whose sand's pure gold, whose peeble's precious stones,
Whose chiding murmurs were majestic groans,
And whose least draught is sweeter then that drink,
That now, in Creta, decks Cerathus brink:
Here down she lies, beside those streams, whose gushing
Makes sweeter music with their gentle rushing
Then Juball's hammers, when they framed that sound
Whence Syren-musick's Gam-Vt first was found;
And sadly sitting in this grove alone,
She lends her ear to that division
Which from the murmuring brook's sad accent flows,
And thence unto a higher strain she throws
Her contemplation, yea, from thence she scales,
And censures heavens imperial festivals.
Father, says she, of light and learned Arts,
Great all of all, who unto all imparts
Some parcel of thy self, that thou alone
May still be all in all is Communion:
Voutchsafe to hear thy handmaids voice a space,
Who truly humbled, here, before thy face
Does lick the dust, at thy imperial feet
To testify that her poor heart's contrite.
Whence comth't that these poor drops of crystal water,
Which Earth, from out her hollow breasts, does scatter
Can yield so sweet bewitching notes, and sound,
As turns the wanton's-myrth, t'a-harts deep wound?
Or whence com'th't that those byrds, whose artles bill
With C-sol. Fa-uth's notes the Spheeres do fill,
Do greet the approach of lights advanced cariere
With sweeter strains than Art instructs his quire?
What? have those creatures force, or power at all
Coutch'd in their bosoms, that can either thrall
The giddy mind to taste a sober quiet,
Or rouse the afflicted from their dismal diet?
No no, it is thou (and thou alone) whose voice
Can make the Soul to fear, or yet rejoice:
For as thy hand has formed the heart in Man,
And as thy eyes from highest heavens do scan
Our hidden reins; so, by thy power thou guides
Our Souls swift current, in their several tides;
For whilst thy iight and countenance does shine
With Sextile aspect, Quadrat, or with Tryne,
On our dark hearts; O how they joy to advance
Their light, before thy' lightning countenance!
And whilst, again, Sins drossie globe does stand
Just interposed betwixt thy shining brand
And our dark hearts, O then Cymerian-night
Succeeds in lieu of thy celestial light:
Hence, by that sweetness which we find in thee,
We loathe the blinks of natur's royalty,
And find her treasures but a bubling sourse,
Which from thee, for thee, to thee bends its' course:
Hence flow our griefs, hence brooks and desert dales,
With seeming murmurs, pittiously bewailes
Thy absence, and their mourning sables wear
Till thou return, and clear their hemispheere:
Come therefore thou A lmighty-Spirit of spirits,
Great-Light of lights, whose Majesty inherits
That wondrous Light, to which, no flesh attains,
Which in this muddy vail of flesh remains:
Come, come I say, and by thy Spirit inspire
This Spirit of mine with thy celestial fire;
That in thy Light my Soul may clearly see
That great unsearched Deep of Majesty,
Which, dwelling in thee, does exchange my story
Of Death and Darkness, to true Light and Glory.
Scarce has she from the flames of zeale-bred fire
Evaporat these accents of desire,
When lo, from heavens high Senate, there does fly
A Legate of Hierarkick Majesty,
Who, with due reverence, and obsequious Rites,
The blessed Virgin thus salutes and greets.
Hail sacred Nymph; Hail Virgin-Bride, and thou
On whom the heavens dread Sovereign does allow
The favor of a freely-granted grace,
The Lord's with thee, rest therefore still in peace;
Blessed be thou, and blessed beyond all those
That ere from Grandam- Evahs loins arose:
Let Heavens thy bliss extend as far, inscorn
Of Earths best hap, as ever the pearly Morn,
The radiant Noon, or rheumy Even can see
Or Neptunes brauls, or Vestaes tapestrie:
For, from thy womb a Monarch-Prince shall spring,
Sin, death, and hells eternal taming King;
The sacred Founder of man's Sovereign bliss,
The worlds rich Ransom, Peace, and Righteousness;
He shall be called Great, and Strong of strongs,
The most high Son, to whom of due belongs
The keys of David, Solomon's Ivory Throne,
And Jacob's Lot-divided-tents each one;
His shafts shall thrill the foes which him assail,
His force shall all The Infernal furies quail;
Each knee in heaven and earth shall to him bow,
And every tongue confess him God most true;
For by his blood he re-unites again
Earths wandering Subjects to their Sovereign.
Look how one daz'led with the splendour bright
Of Titan's rays, being lately brought to light
From darkness of a black Cymerian deep,
Where never a Cranny suffered light to peep;
Being too too soon re-cleer'd, stands gazing so
As one disself'd, and doubtful where to go:
Even so the Maid, at this unlook'd-for tale,
Half dead with terror, first grows ashy pale;
Then re-comforted, with dejected eyes
First views her Nuntio, and then thus replies:
O, how cannot be, that I, within whose breast
Lusts sparkling flames did never plead for rest;
Whose Virgin-modest, chaste, and tender ear
Did never infamous Ruffian bablings hear;
Yea, I, whose thoughts unsported never was wed
To the wanton pleasures of a Marriage bed,
Should bud such blossoms, or such fruits forth bring
As makes the barren to rejoice and sing!
Peace Mary, says the Angel, peace, and fear not;
The Holy Ghost ore-shaddowes thee; then dare not
With curious search of humane Reason's strength
To limit him, whose ways, for breadth and length,
For height and depth, are all a boundless treasure,
Acknowledging no limit, bound, nor measure:
For, willt thou look on his unsearched Spirit,
Invisible, immortal, infinite,
All Majesty, all self-omnipotent,
Pure, wise, just, good, impassive, excellent,
Eternal Monarch, All-commanding all,
End of all ends, of Firsts The Original,
Great Light of lights, Cause of all causes, and
Chief Life of life's, unseen, all-seeing brand,
Who, ever the Worlds Idaea first was framed,
Ever Eurus blew, ever Seas or Earth was named;
Even from Eternity, did in One combine
One Trine-une essence, one essential Trine:
Him shall thou find, ever Time could stretch his station,
In unsearch'd, deep, eternal Observation
Foreknow his creatures in their several ends
And several courses, that the same attends;
Yea, as his aye and all foreseeing eye,
Fore-knew his creatures from eternity:
So has he made his pleasure and good will
A still enflamed Limbeck, wherein till
Man's ways are so confined, composed, controlled,
That all his Mercure's turned to perfect gold:
This is his work, though wondrous in our eyes,
Even his whose throne transcends our starry skies,
From contrair's to extract a contrair' story,
Whose contestation still effects his glory:
Thus did he, in the worlds first birth, forth bring
This universall-All from out nothing,
And, by his word, he made lights glistring Lamp
Shine in the midst of darkness shady Camp:
Thus does he now in times last time, from far,
Call things that are not, even as though they were,
And makes his Mercy sup'r abound in store,
Where Sins abundant plenty dwelt before.
No, hear me Virgin, pause; for pause thou must,
He that revives the Phoenix from her dust,
He that from darkness center springs the day,
He that from gates of death does life display,
And he, who, without woman, first did make
Of Adams rib, an Evah, for his sake,
Shall without knowledge of a Man provide
To make the' a-sacred Mother, Virgin, Bride:
Thus spoke he, and then disappears; and now
The maid's alone, who on her knees does bow,
And with her hands lift up to heavens high throne,
She sighs this sacred exultation.
Lo here I am, thy servant, mighty Lord,
Be It unto me according to thy word,
If thou on me have placed thy hearts delight,
Then let thy handmaid prosper in thy sight;
Yet, O thou great and everlasting Father,
How shall I wonder, or evanish rather
At this thy wondrous work thou do express
On me, the chiefest worm of wretchedness!
For thou have looked upon the base condition
Of me, thy servant, in so wondrous fashion,
That henceforth all succeeding times shall call
Me blessed, because of this memorial:
Thy mighty hand has done for me great things,
And great's thy name, thou royal King of kings,
For, by the strength of thy right hand, thou scatters
Man's vain imaginations like spilt waters,
Thou thrust'st the mighty down from Ivory seats,
And makst the abject to possess their states,
Thou fill'st the hungry with thy blessings store,
And make the full through penury to roar,
Thou make thy promise a continual creed
To Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, and their feed:
Yea from the stem of Jesse thou make known,
To all that fear thee' thy salvation:
Blessed be thou then, thou God of Israel, who
Have visit and redeemed thy people, so
That by the splendour of that Bright day star
Which thou have made to shine, both near and far,
The tender mercies of our tender God
In wondrous plenty visits us abroad,
And gives us matter (while the world's great frame
Endures) to praise and magnify thy Name.
Immanuel, or Puerperie.
CANTO 4o.
GReat God, who by thy words great power brought
From nothing's-Chaos this our all things by rth;
Great Spirit, whose secret certain prescience
Fore-knows and guides all humane accidents;
Eternal Light, from whose all-seeing ey
Nothing is hid, no not eternity!
If ere thou made my silly simple Soul
In sacred rage to rise above the Pole,
Now, now reflect, bright Sun, thy golden rays
On my poor Moon, eclipsed by thy delays;
Ravish my Spirit, Life of my Soul, revive
My starving thoughts, that I may truly give
A perfect strain, and perfectly record
The Incarnation of thy 'ternall Word,
That so in sacred fury I may limb,
Though with a coal, the firstborn Prince of Time;
And to the after-age in verse express
God living, suffering, rising, in the flesh.
But, ay me! where shall stripling I begin
T'unfold this Daedal' Labyriuth, wherein
Nature shall sooner lose her self, then gain
A steady course amidst this Ocean:
For nature never has as yet expressed
His firstborn being in th'Eternal's breast,
And how shall humane wisdom now forth tell
The second byrth-right of Immanuel?
It Is true, some doting Atheists, big with tumors
Of brainsick Heresies, impoys'ning humors,
Like blind men, groaping in the day, have run
By light of Nature, to display this Sun;
But all in vain: the more they scan this point,
The more they find their judgments out of joint.
Here one, conceiting, God cannot be born, Ebion.

Has therefore laughed his Deity to scorn:
Another, seeing him true Gods true Son, Marcion.

Denies him Man by Incarnation:
A third, beholding him both God and Man, Eu^iches.

Confounds his Natures by a natural span:
A fourth, enforced by force of truth to see Nestor.

God joined with man in Pers'nall unity,
Has, from his true distinguished Natures frame,
Given him two Hypostatick persons theme,
Which, like Hippocrates undissever'd twins,
Together quicken, live, dye, ends, begins.
But has not Esaias much more clearly told
To Judahs King, that Time should once unfold Esaias 7.14.

From out a Virgins womb, a glorious Prince,
Whose Passion should expiate our offense,
Immanuel, God with us, and even
Man of the Virgin, and a God from Heaven;
Not God alone, but Man also; or rather
God of himself, Son gotten of the Father;
Both God and Man; in whom, both real Natures
Of God and Man, distinguished by true features
And several functions, stands dissever'd so,
As no division can their seat ore-throw;
And so distinguished, that albe't there be
Two Natures there distinguished really,
Yet to aver two Persons thereupon
Were Satan's dark prevarication.
No, no, Immanuel, and that God with us,
Our Advocate, our Judge, and our Jesus,
Abiding what he was, ever Time; become
In Time, what he was not; and being the same
Was in our flesh, without Confusions wonder,
Or rending of his Person ever asunder;
Inaugurate by Heavens dread Monarchs love,
A Prophet, Priest, and Prince, for our behove:
A Prophet, by whose documents we learn
The things which Nature never could discern
By force of Reason; for The Almighty did
In secret silence his best Counsels hide,
Till his Eternal word, made flesh, should frame
The glorious promulgation of the same:
A Priest also the Virgins Son must be,
T'accomplish the Almighties dread Decree
Of Mercy and of Justice both, so that
The Almighty might in both b'inviolat:
A Sovereign Prince he needs must be also,
To lead Captivity captive, and ore-throw
That Prince of Darkness, who by Sins proud hands
Kept both our life and liberty in bands;
That as by him, our fears, our foes, and all
Captivities are captivate and thrall;
So he, in God, may make us to possess
True Joy, true Peace, true Life, and Righteousness.
Stay then (poor Muse) thy course, soar not too high
To search out that unsearched mystery,
To know whose great unparalleled perfection
No Flesh has yet attained by flesh-direction:
Content thy self in modesty to view
His birth; and at his Pedestall to bow,
Whose glorious light our darkness does expel,
And being God, youchsafes with Men to dwell.
Come then, and in a safe approach behold
Him whom the heaven of heavens could not enfold,
Now couched within a Crib, and make poor beasts
The witness of his Genethliack feasts:
A wake then, Bethleem, let me ask thee where
Are all thy pleasant shades, and dainty fare?
Thy sumptuous tables, and thy quilt-strawd beds
Whereon thy guests of late did rest their heads?
Where Is now thy pomp, thou house of David? where
Are love and mercy banished, that there
Where David's seed, and David's Lord likewise
Should dwell, thou should his Royalty despise?
O, sure I am, it cannot be, but now
The house of David only does allow
His name, but not his nature; for I see
Ev n in the throng of his Posterity,
His Darling thrust to doors, and forced to lay
The worlds dread Sovereign in a cratch of clay:
But o the deepnes, and the riches, both
Of Wisdom and of Providence, that does
Shine in thy ways (o God) whilst thou do make
Thy Counsels known, for our salvations sake!
This pur-blind world does think that Fortune guides,
And Chance governs the ever-changing tides
Of humane actions, but it is nothing so;
Live as we list, and go where ere we go,
Th'ore-ruling pleasure of thy secret will
Governs our actions both in good and ill:
In Nazareth Christ was conceived, but lo
In Bethleem he must be born, and show
Himself first Man, and there first breath our air,
Who makes the bread of Life our Souls rich fare;
That as he was a Naz'rite by conception,
Both separate from sin and sins infection,
So he, in Bethleems magazen, might len'
The bread of life unto the sons of men:
One place must not engrosse him, who was born
For all; no, that were mock'ry and base scorn,
T'intrench his splendour in one private place,
Whose rays must cherish all the world with grace.
Rome, then, was Stage where worldly honors grew;
Athens the Ocean where the Arts did flow;
Jerusalem the great Pontificate
Where Rabbis in the Chair of Moses sat:
But lo! for Bethleems sake he now disdaines
The trophies of those Metropolitans:
Not that the place could add to his renown;
For Place can neither dignifie nor crown
The Person; but the Person does decore,
And make the Place more splendid then before:
So he, who from out Darkness did display
The worlds first luster, and baptized it Day,
Even he who from out Deaths devouring jaws,
And from the roaring Lions cruel paws
Makes life's sweet wellspring richly to abonnd,
From Penuries despised womb and wound;
Makes Righteousness and Mercy, Truth and Peace
Each one another sweetly to embrace:
In whatsoever chance or change, therefore,
This mortal life involve me; the rich store
Of his refining Providence shall still
Enrich my Table, and my Cup full-fill;
Yea, make me sleep in safe and quiet rest,
Because he turns all things to my best.
Yet let me stay a while, and view this change
Which through the world in Triumphs pomp does range
And makes fair Sions sons, like Sinayes Clown,
To yield due homage to a Strangers Crown:
O God, whence comes this wondrous alteration?
Whence springs the current of this desolation?
That they who erst were blessed in fleecy flocks,
Whose Rivets were of milk, whose steepest Rocks
Distilled a honey sweeter then the Mead
Whereon their nibling troops did prank and feed;
Being blessed at home, abroad, and in each plain,
Blessed by the air, by sunshine, and by rain,
Whose force did daunt the Earth with trembling aw,
Whose Scepter writ their neighboring States their law
Whose terror made their proudest enemies then
Against them march one way, fly before them ten;
Should now, as Vassals, sigh, and pant, and groan
Under the load of strange Subjection;
And bow their necks, to bear the grievous Loans
Of Tributes, Taxes, Impositions?
O, now I see, it is not so much thy Care,
Great Caesar, to augment thy glories share,
That these importning cruel Subsidies,
Like roaring thunders, through the world now flies;
As it is the Almighties pleasure, now, even now,
Because the time is full, from heaven t'allow
The worlds great Monarchy to thee; that so
The sons of Jacob may discern and know
The visitation of their looked for Grace,
And wisely learn the things which preach their Peace:
For I must tell thee, Israel, that since
Thy Diadem's subdued t'a foreign Prince,
And since the Helm of thy Government stands
Within the circuit of a Strangers hands,
The time is come that Shilo's golden ray
Should light thy darkness, and begild thy day;
And that the Star of Jacob now should shine
Not in an earthly grandeur, but divine:
Hence, hence it comes; yet in obedience strain
The Virgin goes to Nazareth amain;
But ore-charg'd by her burden, 's forced to stay
And bear her Son at Bethleem by the way:
Where, o, what is Caesar's, Caesar has, and what
Is due to God, to God is consecrate;
For Caesar has his penny, God his Son,
The Devil his bane, Man his salvation.
What, shall I then dis-know thee, o thou Prince
Of my salvation, since for my offense
Thou art subjected to these foul despisings,
That Sin or Satan send from their devisings?
In this so great and rare Nativity
Let Junctyne, Origin, or great Ptolemie,
Copernicus, or Tich^bra, or they
Who with the starry Influence do play,
Look on this Non-such-birth, and, if they can,
Display his midnight, or meridian:
It fears me much, their judgments shall come short
Of what this Theme and Birthright does import;
For, rule the Cuspe of his eight house, who will,
His death shall our deaths Dominator kill,
And maugre hell and earth (which him assail)
He breaks the Dragons head, and curbs his tail; Isa. 7.14. Isa. 11.10. Genesis
49.9. Genesis 49.23.

For Virgo bears him, he in Libra lives,
The Archers wound him, Leo him revives:
For though man's reason cannot think, but all
His Stars were dignified, both great and small,
Yet lo, his Mother, void of friend and Kin,
Must make a Stable her bed-chambers Inn;
The Parlours all are filled with uncouth guests,
Their Chambers all are stuffed with sumptuous feasts,
Proud pomp, stern riot, foul and loathed excess
Have took up Bethleems rooms both more and less,
And Superfluity dances such a round,
That for Necessity no place is found;
But she whose table in the heavens was decked,
Must bear her Son, disdained and disrespect:
Now, now the Ox may say, I know my owner;
Now says the Ass, This is my masters corner;
But Israel and Bethleem cannot know
What homage to their Savior they ow:
For every Prophet's honored, save at home;
And he, although amongst his own he come,
Yet was he not received; but despised,
Although in him the Godhead be comprised.
But, ay me! ay me! why should we rebuke
Thee, Bethleem, for that thou did ore-look
Thy long, long look'd-for Monarch, and disdained
That God within thy doors should be maintained?
We, we our selves are guilty, much, much more
Of pride and lewd contempt, at whose hearts door
He knocks by his word each day we live,
And yet the sluggards answer to him give,
It Is night, say we, from sleep why do thou wake me?
A Lion by the way shall tare and take me,
My clothes are off, how can I put them on? Cant. 5.3.

My feet are washed, and shall contagion
Of Earths bedurting puddle make them foul,
And so my quiet and my rest control?
No, no, this is no fitting time to talk,
In bed I rest, go thou abroad and walk:
O God of mercy, grant us mercy, for
Our sins are risen to so huge a score,
That perish needs we must, unless that thou
Who made the Cock, for Peter's cause, to crow,
Crow by thy Spirit in us, and so make clean
Our hearts; that thou in them may still remain.
Thus was my Savior in disdain received,
Whilst worms and wretches were with pomp embrav'd;
He Is made an abject, subject to disdain,
That we poor wretches might be born again;
He Is wrapped in rags, his bed's a crib of Clay,
That we might wear his Righteousness always;
His harbor is a Cave, yet does hee'nlarge
The heaven of heavens to be our heritage,
And he, who in himself is Lord of life,
Has but one maid, for mother and midwife;
Man, when at first he sinned, did put on clothes,
Yet such as subject were to dust and moaths,
But Christ new born is clothed with rags, though clean
Yet, sure I am, both peevish, poor, and mean,
And yet's no sooner clothed with our flesh,
Than subject to our cursed nakedness:
Jacob, to gain his Father Isacks blessing,
Arrayed in Esau's clothes, obtained his wishing:
But Christ, arrayed in my flesh, (that he
Might steal a blessing from himself, to me)
Takes on him both my curse, my sin, and shame,
And joins me Co-heire to his Diadem;
That as my clothes do tell me, I am Man,
His clothes may tell me, I Am a Christian:
Up then, my Soul, up, up, and change thy cheer,
For lo, how base so ever this Babe appear,
By him thy Manna from out heaven thou have,
And eke by him Rephydim to thy taste
Sends out her cooling rills; Heaven's made thy house,
The World thy walk, the Creatures serve thy use.
Twice now has Salem, by her Enemies,
Sighed out her Funeral dying obsequies;
First by the host of stern Nebuchadnezar,
Then by the trophies of triumphing Caesar:
An Idumaean now in Sion's known,
Jordan now counts her streams no more her own;
And, what is the worst of ills, Jury sits mute,
Augustus taxes, she does contribute:
Judge yet a righteous judgment sure will I,
And rest upon Gods providence, for why?
He draws great Caesar here t'enact but that
Which many Prophets erst prognostioat;
And chiefly I will scan that sacred truth
Which he, of old, proclaimed by Michu's mouth:
For lo, it is written; Bethleem, though thou be Mich. 5.2.

Despised in Judu's void of Majesty,
Yet out of thee shall rise that Ruler, who
Shall by his wounds, and stripes, and bloody flow,
As Judah's righteous Shepherd, straight regather
All wandering Isreal's flocks to their true Father.
Then, O the deepnes of thy ways, my God!
Who knows thy Paths, or treads thy Judgments road?
How secret are thy Counsels, actions just,
And favors great, to such as in thee trust!
Where, but in Bethleem, that is the house of bread,
Should our Souls bread of Life be harbored?
Or where, but in the house of David, may
The heir of David, David's Scepter sway?
No, holy David, now from far I smell
What made thee thirst to sip of Bethleems well, 2 Samuel 23.

And having got a draught from thence, did yet
Powr't on the ground, and would not drink of it:
Now, now I see, it was this living water
Which Bethlehem does from her bosom scatter
That thou did long for, and desire to taste,
That it might give a cool refreshing Rest
To those impoyson'd scorchings which did burn
In thy affections, and Souls sacred Urn;
Yet would thou not so much as drench thy lip
Therewith, but made it on the ground to trip,
That so a sweet drink-offring it might be
For safety of their lives who brought it thee;
Recalling to thy mind, that time drew near
Wherein thy Son should in our flesh appear,
And from thy Stem a glorious sprig should spring,
Whose blood should quench the fiery Serpents sting,
And from his side should send the sweetest water
That ever Fountain from her sourse should scatter.
Come then, sweet babe, and by that nectar'd draught
With which the art richly furnished and fraught,
Revive my Soul, refresh my scorched desires,
Which thirst, for thee, more then the Heart requires
To taste the current of those crystal brooks,
Whose windings kiss the earth's meandring crooks;
Come, come; and by this document of thine,
Wherein thou lay'st aside thy glories shine,
Teach us, who are but worms, and dust, and ashes,
To lay aside our prides empampring flashes,
Whose smoke of vanity and humane glory
Do turn our best hopes to a tragic story;
For, if the Master have no fitter fare,
Why should the servant grudg his sober share.
No, no, my soul, content thy self, it is he
Who knows no sin, that is now made sin for thee,
And being richly-rich, is now made poor,
That his distress might thy true wealth secure:
He Is base, that thou may be exalted; scorned,
That thou with glory may be still adorned;
He dies, that thou may live; and lies in grave,
That death dominion over thee may not have:
Why should thou then or frown, or faint, or fret
For change or alteration of thy state;
No, know that thy Redeemer lives above,
And that he does chastize whom he does love,
For standing waters putrify and rot,
When they who in a restless current trot
Live to themselves, and also to others use,
Without contagious sench, or dregs abuse;
If then we suffer with him, so shall we
Reign with him, in his matchless royalty,
And if his Cross we shall deny, he shall
Deny us to his fathers Angels all;
Why should we then, for mis'rys blustering blasts,
Quit-claim that glory which for ever lasts;
No, let our Crown be here, like his, of Thorn,
Glory thereafter shall our heads adorn,
And if, with him, we taste a cup of gall,
His bowls of new wine suit our festival.
The Advent.
CANTO 5o.
AS they who for their Zenith have the Pole,
When Titan first renews his Caprioll,
In their Horizon, on their tip-toes stand,
To get the approach of his long looked for brand,
And write the welcome of his good new year
In bloody Rubricks of their Calender:
So now, whilst long and desolate night, of deep
Discomforts, have made Syon's daughters weep;
Their glorious newborn Titan's happy birth,
A wakes the powers both of heaven and earth,
In a melodious harmony to ring
A peale of Hale-lu-jahs to their King.
And so it is, for whiles these shepherd boys,
Who Pan-like pipe their pastoral Oades and Joys
On oaten reeds, had softly laid them down
To watch their flocks from stealth's confusion,
Lo! th'Angell Gabriel, from heavens glorious throne,
Is sent t'unclasp heavens long clasped sanction,
And tell them that their greater Pan was borne,
Whose stafe and sheep-hook should be made of thorn:
Fear not, says he, my friends, I come t'unfold
The sweetest news that ever yet was told
In heavens high Senate, or in earths deaf-eare,
Let such then as have ears to hear me, hear;
For lo! In Bethlehem there is born, to day,
That Hyerarchick-prince, whose hands must sway
The trinall-Mace of heaven, of earth, and hell,
And all those armies in then bosom dwell.
Thus has he spoke, and straight a glorious Chore
Of Angels in a Diapason's loare
Second his message, with the sweetest sound
That in D-la-sol, or in E-la's found:
Glory, say they, be to the Lord on high,
To men all peace and all prosperity,
And upon earth let blessings and good will
Each hungry maw and empty cup full-fill:
Never did the fractions of a rattling thunder,
When first it bursts the roarid-clowd asunder,
Bring more affrightning terror to the ear
Of some weak stripling, conquered by fear,
Then does this Vision wound the soul and sense
Of these poor shepherds, fraught with ignorance:
Yet up, say they, go let us quickly try
The truth of this so strange a Heraldry;
For sure he must be some great Potentate,
Of whom so great things be prognosticate,
And he whom these Seraphick Chores adore
Must own an earthly Monarchy, and more:
To Bethleems walls then in all haste they run,
Before Aurora could display the Sun,
And find the Savior of the world displayed,
And in poor Bethleems arms despised and laid,
Not ushered nor attended, but with wake,
Neglect and penury, for our plenties sake.
Here, O what find they! or, what find they not?
A Lamp of light, eclipsed with darkness blot;
A newborn Babe, yet got before all time;
A spotless Lamb, yet spotted with our crime;
A King of Kings, yet served as a slave;
A Lord of life, yet vassal'd to the Grave?
A very God, yet clothed with flesh and bone;
A Prince, yet harbored in Confusion.
What Is here, I pray, that carnal eyes or sense
Can honor with Religious reverence?
A Carpenter, a Handmaid, and a child,
A Cottage, and a Crib with beasts defiled;
Yet lo! for all that baseness, they behold,
They tell to Mary, what the heavens have told
To them: whose heart does all those sayings hide,
Till God and Time her doubtings should decide.
But, ay me! happy, happy Virgin-maid,
Me thought of late my staggering Mase had strayed
Too far, in pointing out thy humbled station
In thy Sons dark eclipsed Incarnation:
But ah, I see sublunar griess do still
Renew their Tides; for ever they obbe, they sill
And glut themselves with our afflictions load,
Until our grave become our last abode:
Needs therefore must I rouse, once more, my quill,
And make her drink once more the Nectar'd rill
Of divine Numbers, that I may express
Those tears, that toil, and bitter woeful case
With which thy harmless heart is pierced through,
Whilst thy dear suckling our first griefs does borrow.
Seven times has Titan now, with swift Cariere,
Run all th'Ecclyptick of his bandilier;
And couching seven times in th'Atlantick deep,
Has lulled as often Earths drowsy globe asleep:
Lo now his eight, and new approaching Ray
Has called on Phaeton to proclaim the Day;
And by the sacred Ceremonious Rites
Of Legal sanctions, now the Heaven invites
The ever blessed Virgin-maid to sacre
Her Son, by Circumcision, man's Peacemaker.
But ah, great Nymph, what do thou now? and why
Greet'st thou thy Son with such a cruelty?
That even in stead of those sweet warbling aires
That should his griefs beguile, and charm his cares,
Thou make the Runnals of his precious blood
Distain the ground in so impetuous flood?
What, have thou quite forgot that pitious strain,
Which Nature, wafting in affections Main,
On all that tender Progeny bestows,
Which from her bowels and her belly flows?
Or, tell me, do thou think that this poor vail
Of flesh, wherein th'Eternall's Son does dwell,
Although it truly was assumed in thee,
Can ever partake thy sinful Leprosy?
No, no, I fear, dread Nymph, I wrong too sore
Thy Loves deep Ocean, and thy Faiths rich store;
For never a drop of that his Crimson dye
Falls to the ground, but with a Sympathy
Of griefs, of tears, and sorrow-ringing-knell,
Thou did his scriechings and his tears bewail:
Yea, what is more, I find thee, Royal Dame,
So wrapped 'twixt Faith and Fear's obstrep'rous flame,
That whilst th'intend'st by Circumcisions stroke
To consecrate thy Son to bear our yoke,
No sooner do thou precognosc his tears,
Or yet presage his smart by thy weak fears,
When lo, me thinks, I hear thee sweetly say,
My hope, my help, my love, my life, my stay,
Ah, shall I live, and be reserved to see
My hearts delight, and Souls sole balm thus be
Both cut and carved, by the butch'rous knife
Of any Flamine, who did e're take life?
No, no, my Love, my Darling, my Delight,
Love cannot so her Gordian knot bequite,
As once to make thee but become a pray
To bloody rigor in a legal way:
Back Phoebus, back for shame, go hide thy head
And golden Tresse in Thetis watery shade,
Look not on such a savage sight, nor see
So foul a Scean presented unto thee:
Earth, stop thy mouth, and do thou drink no more
These crimson drops of blood, and spotless gore,
Which my poor babe distills; but rather mourn,
And to thy wonted Chaos straight return:
And, O thou Flamine, whosoever thou be,
Whose hand's accustomed to this butchery,
Here I adjure thee by that sumptuous All
Which Heaven or Earth does sacred count or call,
Touch not my Son with such a bloody knife,
For in his wound I bleed, and lose my life;
But rather, kneeling at his De'ties throne,
Know that his wounds and scars should be thy own:
Yet whilst again thou ruminat'st the Abyss
Of Gods unshun'd decree and Righteousness,
O, how I see thee bound thy frail desire,
And what thou can not comprehend, admire.
For since The Eternal gives this strict command,
That every male inhabiting this Land
Of Promise, should by Circumcisions badge
Be known a Co-heire of his heritage;
O how thou daunt'st thy thoughts, and curb'st thy tongue
As sacrilegious instruments of wrong,
And though thy flesh a while had the upper hand;
Yet now I see the Spirit does countermand
The frail suggestions of thy natural will,
And to his righteous lore subject them still.
For thus, me thinks, I hear thee plead: Although
It Is hard to see my Son dismembered so;
Yet since it is God, who has my comfort been,
Whose Love my life does every way maintain,
Whose never failing Care does still advance
My Cup, my Table, and Inheritance,
Who thus exacts thy body to be rent,
What am I, wormling, that I should relent
The meanest parcel of his blessed pleasure
For all the worlds rich pomp and perishing treasure?
No, no, I am no Zippora, to say,
Thou art a bloody Mate to me this day:
But since thy will must, or by us be done,
Or else upon us, let Subjection
Be our best service; for it is known that thou
Exalt'st the humble, and the proud do bow:
No, no, my Son, bow, bow thy self, obey
The yoke which he upon thy neck does lay;
He is thy Father, and thou art his Son,
His grace must guide thee, till thy race be run:
Cease therefore you my tears, my sighs, and all
My sorrows, to your rest your selves recall;
For though my Son, my Love, and Darling rather
Be dear to me, he must obey his Father,
And by his sufferings in the flesh allay
His fury, whose disdain works our decay:
It Is true, thou in thy self can have no need
By Circumcisions stroke and wound to bleed,
For in thee no such sinful spot does dwell
As needs Circumcision for a Seal;
Only for us, poor sinners, you are content
To seal thy self with our sins Sacrament,
Abraham was the first put on
This, as the seal of his adoption,
Thou by this Seal wilt show thy self that seed
In whom our blessing first was promised:

Thou came not to destroy it is liberty,
But to fulfill it; by the Laws great Seal
Thou take our debt on thee, and art our bail.

Our Forefathers salvations map might see,
You Are made the whole worlds Savior altogether, Heb. 13.8. Rev. 3.8.

To day, to morrow, and the same for ever.
And what is more, thou must be circumcised,

That we may learn to circumcise our hearts
As well's our outward and our carnal parts, Deuteronomy. 10.16.

For God is no ways like to frantic man,
Who only does the outward countenance scan,
But rather chooses to behold the heart,
And what in it does sweetly smile or smart,
That by a righteous recompense he may
Our actions and affections both repay:

Thy true humanity rightly to discern;
Thou must be circumcised, and in the sight
Of Priest and people both, declare the right,
That thou art true man, having flesh and bone,
Like us in all things save corruption.
Thus have I weakly with a darkened cole
Lim'd out the secret passions of the Soul
Of this great Nymph, and hoped to have bid farewell
To all the terrors which her Soul could feel;
But o I see my self entrenched again
In those meandring paths of toil and pain,
Wherein poor worldlings run a circled course
Of joys and greefs, of better and of worse.
O how my pen denies to point that story
To which it cannot yield deserved glory,
For in this Scean of hers nothing is common,
But all dread wonders, she a wondrous woman:
Come then, brave Nymph, come, let me ask thee why
Thou do in danger and difficulty
Revisit Salems sacred Temple, that
With legal sanctions, and I wot not what
A world of Ceremonious Rites, thou may
Thy presupposed Impur'ty purge away?
Well might thou, Mary, and besides thee none,
Have claimed immunity and exemption
From all those shadows and Levitick shows
Which Sin and Trespass on their owners throws;
Not that thou in thy self art void and free
From sins infective spot and leprosy;
No, no, that were a grace of too great note
For any Child that Adam ever begot,
Since all who from old Adams loins descend
In Adams loins do still by sin offend,
He only being except, who from thy womb,
A second Adam, to the world has come:
No, this is all that I aver, That by
That heavenly spring which from thy womb did fly
There flowed no such contagious spot and stain
As once could make thee legally unclean:
It Is true, those Mothers which in sin conceive
A Race by sin re-oblig'd to the Grave,
And by their sin unto the Law stand tide
May by the Law seek to be purified:
But since thy Darling by himself never knew,
Save for our sakes, how sin does man subdue,
What need thou by Turtles of Purgation
T'enact the Scean of thy Purification?
Then, to unloose this riddle, let us look
What Moses has recorded, in that book
Wherein Gods written Law does give direction
For the purgation of our sins infection:
There it is writ, that if a woman bear
A man-child to the world, she shall appear
Before the Lord, but not until the Sun
Full forty times about the world have run;
And when she dares t'approach and come before him,
E're she do bend her knees and go to adore him,
She must present a Lamb, and Pigeons two,
The true confessors of her sinful flow,
And these the Priest must on the Altar burn,
And to true pur'ty her impur'ty turn;
And if she have no Lamb to sacrifice,
Two Turtles or two Pigeons shall suffice:
Here, here I see thee, Nymph, with severe aw
Obtemper the strict sanction of this Law,
And as thou had been by thy birth unclean,
Thou will thy self thus purify again,
Offering two Pigeons, void of gall or harm,
And thy unspotted Lamb born in thine arm.
O blessed Lamb of God, how do thou now
Turn these poor types to what is re'lly true,
And as the Index of the clock does tell
The several motions of three, six, nine, twelve,
So by these creatures, thou the great Creator
Make them be ciphers, thee significator.
A Lamb did Abel, when the world began,
First offer to thy Father; you are the Man
Presignified, whose blood has better die
Then Abel's, in his causless butchery:
E're Noab from his pitched Ark came forth,
He sent a Pidgeon of unspotted worth
To view the new workls state, she turns again
The witness of a calm decreasing Maine,
And in her Bill, an olive branch, to show
The Almighty's wrath had stopped his surious flow:
Thou art the Man; aspotless Pidgeon rather,
Who in thy mouth bringst fromth'Eternall Father
The unexpected Sacrament of Peace,
That seals the Sermon of our Love and Grace,
And as the Turtle in her widdow-while
Is never seen so much as once to smile,
But with continual mourning does bemoan
The loss of her enamored Paragon;
So thou bewailing that the masterpiece
Thou did, at first, seal with thy own impresse
Should, by a strangers stamp, be stolen away,
And in destructions wandering paths to stray,
Come now at last, and over Bether trips
With loves exulting scalads, shows and skips,
And cannot rest, till in thy arms strict hold,
Thou do thy dearest Minion reinfold.
Hence, hence it is, dread Nymph, that sacred thou,
Not for a new Moons sake, nor for a vow,
But for obedience to the Law wilt go
To Salem's Temple, and in public show
Be purified; and in thy arms, present
The blessed seed that seals our Government:
That as unto the firstborn did belong
The double portion, and revenge of wrong;
So in his double portion we may have
Grace upon Grace, and our destroying Grave
May so be shut, that we may sing and cry
Death, where is thy sting? Grave, where is thy victory?
And that this second Temples lofty frame
May far exceed the first house prototheam;
And that which God by Haggai's mouth did speak,
May now, in time, a full perfection take:
Lo here the man, to whom the hid desire
Of all the nations, in a zeal-bred fire
Are captivate; does stand, that all the oppressed
By sin, in him, may find true ease and rest:
The first house, sure, by ceremonious rites
And Typick emblems of spiritual sweets
Did lead the Priests and people both, to run
And hope the approach of this imperial Sun;
But now the body's come, the shades evanish,
And Titan's newborn rays night's clouds does banish
And though the Oracles be dumb, though th'Ark
Preserve no Manna, nor no budding Mark
Of Priesthood; for on him all those relied,
He finished them, they him presignify'd:
Yet lo, this day, the never erring Word
Of God, is brought to pass, and does afford
More lively consolation to the Soul,
And those sad raptures which our peace control,
Then all the bathings, purgings, exhalations
That great Jedidiah put for expiations
Could furnish to the sin perplexed heart,
For Antimony against the Serpents dart:
For now the long contesting jar does cease,
That kept at ods, Truth, Mercy, Justice, Peace,
Whilst in our flesh, our first begotten brother
Makes all those Graces kiss each one another:
Blessed then be God, who when his Church is tossed
'Twixt swallowing Calpe and Abila's coast,
Has sent his Son as Palinure to guide
And bring her safe to shore against Neptun's pride,
And make her, when she is shut from out Shem's tents,
In Japhet's state-house hold her Parl'aments:
For he has sworn that he will never forsake her
Till, like a faithfull-Bridegroom, homehee take her.
The Epiphany.
CANTO 6o.
WHere am I now! what splendour strangely rare
Is this, which darting through the Heavens and air
Dazles my sight with such a glorious ray,
As makes my Muse to stumble at midday;
For whilst of late my weakly warbling quill
Did only from her Virgin-snowt distill
The tear-drown'd ditties of a Virgin mild,
And woeful accents of a wailing Child;
Lo now perforce I soar, and tread a march
Along the confines of the Etheraeal arch;
And in the abortive birth of rhyme, descry
The radiant troops of heavens brave Infantry:
Not that I mean by search of curious art,
T'investigat each circle, zoane and part,
Wherewith our azur'd heavens being cut asunder
Do parallel our earthly globe that is under;
No, no, who shall with roaving strains aspire
To search these tapers of Celestial fire,
T'unfold the Zodiak, in his fourfold Trine
And heaven-divider, Equinoctial Line,
Our Tropiques colors, and our Zeniths hight,
Our Pole, Horizon, and our Nadir right,
With Dand's daughters, may attempt to bring
From Lethe's never emptied sourse and spring
Their buckers full of water, but in vain,
For by the way they empty still again.
I cease therefore t'inquire why Saturnes sphere
Revolves his course but once in thirty year;
Why Jupiter, by twelve years mild aspect,
Does churlish Saturnes froward frowns correct;
Why cruel Mars, with proud out-braving pace,
Does in two twelve-months moderate his race;
Why Titan, heavens Lieutenant, once a year
Confines and crowns his still renewed Cariere;
Why Paphian Venus, and old Juno's foe
Are not ashamed once every year to go,
And tread a March behind Apollo's wheels,
Like Lacquayes waiting on their Masters heels;
And why Luciua, in her Love-bred-passion,
Should, each Month once, in fresh newfangled fashion
Greet her Apollo, that by his bright shine
Of twelve stolen kisses she may make thirteen:
No, leaving those, and their unsearehed sourses,
Their Apogae's and Pyrogae's in courses,
Their Progress, Transits, and their Applications,
Directions, Revolutions, Separations,
Their Quadrats, Sextiles, Trines, and Oppositions,
Conjunctions, Lights-translations, Prohibitions,
Their House, their Exaltation, and Triplicity,
Their Term, their Face, and such essential dignity,
How Fortitude stands here, and does importune,
And how Debility, there, threats a misfortune,
How this S^ar's fixed, that strayes and proves erratique,
How this Conjuction's partile, and that platique,
I leave to Chalda-Star-gazers, and those
Whom Nile and Tigris in their arms enclose;
And in a modest path shall only bring
My Muse to quiver on a maiden string,
How he by whom heaven's stars both rise and fall
Makes Stars do homage at his Pedestall.
Come then, thou great irradiat morning Star,
By whom Oryon and the Pleyads are;
Thou Star of Jacob, by whose power and might
The Stars were made against sisera to fight;
Thou, thou whose dread and uncontrolled command
Enforced the Sun in Gibeah to stand,
And Moon i'th'Vaile of Aialon to stay
Till thou thy force did to thy foes display;
Thou whose right hand seven rut'lant Stars do hold,
And crown'st thy Church with radiant Stars of Gold;
Even thou whose light so decks thy smallest Saint
That he exceeds the Stars o'th'Firmament,
And by thy light do make their light more rare
Then brave Aurora when she cleeres the air;
And finally, Great thou, whose dreadful rage
Has thrust that wandering Star from out lights stage
(Whose name is Wormwood) and have placed his Cell
In chains of darkness, and the depth of hell,
Come thou, I say, and by that Spirit of thine
Whose light lends light to every Star to shine,
Rouse up my Muse to that all-conquering Verse
Which may in sacred hymns and Odes rehearse
The unmatched love, and the immortal glory
Of thee my God, in pain-born Rhimes best story.
For, when thou, like the Bridegroom of our Soul,
Did for our sake thy Majesty control,
It Is true that no external pomp or show
Which lacquaies humane greatness here below,
Did wait upon thy birth, or yet advance
Their footstools to support thy radiance;
Thy head, no royal Diadem did wear;
Thy back, no curious Tissue roab did bear;
Thy bed did smell no incense; thy reposes
Knew neither Turn-sols, Lyllies, Pinks, nor Roses:
But all thou had, thy nakedness to ore shade,
Was a poor hole, to hide thy glorious head;
Yet as the heavens of late, in love sent forth
Their Gabriel, to Annunce thy wondrous birth;
So now, in still unwearied love they send
This blazing Star thy cradle to attend,
By whose direction three great foreign Sages
Scorning their homebred wealth and heritages
Are now content to come from far, and see
Earth wedded to the Prince of Eternity:
Thy star they saw, and wrapped with dread amaze
To see a star dart forth so splendid rays,
And smother all her neighbr'ing lamps as far
As Titan does his sister Cynthia's carre;
Straight way they run, and with industrious care
They search their ancient Annalls, every where,
Their Oracles, and Sybils, more and less,
Their Journals, and their Ephimerides,
To see from whence, and for what wondrous cause
This radiant Torch so rich a splendour shows:
But all is in vain, nor Art, nor Nature may
I'ts site, light, motion, to the world display;
For all of those are in this subject rare,
Divine, miraculous, extraordinare:
But he from whom Nature first begged her light
And hidden Science, by his artlesse might
Inspires those Sages, and does make them see
This Star's the Prodrome of that Majesty,
By whom the Sons of Japhet now are led
Within the Tents of Shem to hide their head.
Fie on thee Juda; Salem fie on thee,
Why did not thou, as well as they, foresee
The glorious sunshine of thy Visitation,
And greet the worker of this great Salvation?
But ah! thy snorting dreams did thee deceive,
For thou did still imagine thou should have
A Prince of such a temporal arm and power,
As to a honny-sweet should change thy sour:
But lo, whilst thou in darkness love to sleep,
A Nation com'th from far, and stately keep
Their festivals of Joy thy Tents about,
Whilst thou, and eke thy children are thrust out.
O God, whence com'th't, that those, above the rest,
Have known thy Star, and so themselves addressed
In paths of toil, and tedious pilgrimage
To searrh thy birth, as they did see thy badge?
Could Nature, or her handmaid Art discover
Thy Star, or it distinguish from another?
No surrely, no, Combine them both in one,
And both shall teach us but confusion:
For without grace, the natural Man's a fool:
And Arts chief Doctor, when he sits at School,
And does investigate Heavens, Earth, and Air,
And all those hoasts which Capriolls here or there
In Natures precincts, still the more he sees
Arts hidden secrets, Natures mysteries,
And sees not God, the more his wit shall serve
To glut his fancy, but his soul to starve:
Thus they, being led by the Celestial light
Through rocky Deserts, and the toyls of night,
Do come at last to Bethlehems walls, and there
This Torch stands fluttering over them in the air,
Till by thy guiding grace they do epsy
The place wherein this Monarch-Prince does lie.
No sooner do they this sweet Babe behold,
Then by heavens inspiration they are bold
T'unload their asses, and their Camels backs,
T'untrusse their fardles, and ungird their sacks,
And lay these sumptuous presents, richly sweet,
Gold, Mirhe, and Incense at the Sucklings feet:
Whether they by Prophetic spirit did see
His Kingdom, Priesthood, and his Prophecy,
Or, if that by affections natural Vain
They thus do greet him as their Sovereign,
I struggle not too much; Let this suffice,
That in Religious awe they bow their knees,
And with a sacred sweet consorting voice
Thus do they greet him, and thus they rejoice:
Thrice great, thrice blessed, and thrice holy Lord,
By whose Majestic uncontrolled Word
What e're was framed within the point of Time,
Or has a being in the a^^r'd Clime;
Whose right hand does from all Etern'ty bear
Our clasped Issues unshun'd Calendar;
Whose wisdom, power, and deep providence guides
The Delian Princess in her several tides:
How boldly may we now rejoice and sing,
And call the carroling beav'ns thy praise to ring,
Who make thy wondrous light to shine, even there
Where death made darkness his Cubiculare:
Of old, whilst Jacob was desired to bless
Joseph's two sons with a Prophetic kiss,
He wisely crossed his arms, and his right hand
He puts on Ephraims head where he did stand,
And on Manasseh made his left hand stay,
And so, by practice, he did prophecy
That Japhets seed should dwell in the tents of Shem.
And eke Manasseh bow to Ephraim:
This day we see that Vaticiny true,
Whilst we, wild prodigals, our necks subdue
To thee our God, making Manasses share
Rich as the vintage of Abiezer:
Since Israel therefore will not hear, hear then
You Heavens and Earth, and shame the sons of Shem;
For we will praise The Eternal, and record
The never failing goodness of the Lord.
O blessed Babe, how great art thou! what store
Of blessings girds thy Loins for evermore!
For thou art he who do exalt the horn
Of Judah, and his Palaces adorn
With bowls of Nectar, and Ambrosian diet,
And make her graze in pastures of true quiet;
The Scepter of true Government's on thy shoulder,
And thou shall crush thy foes to dust and powder;
On David's throne, thou, as his Son, shall sit
In Judgment and in Truth t'establish it:
Yea, Peace and Plenty shall thy steps attend,
And of thy Kingdom there shall be no end:
O loving Child, how lovely-faire art thou!
How sparkling are thy eyes, how sweet thy brow!
How fragrant are the odours that distill
On thee from Gilead and Hermonims hill!
Amongst the flowr's you are chief; the Rose, the Lilly,
The Pink, the Turn-sol, and the Daffadilly
Have no such odorif'rous smell or taste
As thou reverb'rat'st from the West to The East:
Live' then, sweet Babe, the miracle of Time,
Earths mighty Champion, Balm of humane crime;
Let thy great voice, in Peace, resound throughout
Earths flowery kirtle, and Seas glassie spout,
That so thy favor, in each part, may be
Immortal Nectar to Posterity.
O what are we, great God? what is our deserving?
That, to confirm our faith so prone to swerving,
Thou do thus shake heavens solid Orb, and make
Thy self a Vassal for a Vassals sake?
O that we could discern aright, and know
What duty, service, fear, and love we owe
Thee, for that endless love wherewith thou have
Reclaimed us from our wanderings to thy rest!
Teach us, o teach us so to run our race
In patience, and in patience to possess
Our Souls, that thou, at thy great day, may clear
Our Egypt to a Goshen's hemisphear;
And change the tenor of our tragic story
To the Catastroph' of an endless glory.
The Massacre.
CANTO 7o.
DIstraction, tumult, tears, oppression, jarre,
Wrath, causlesse envy, cruel murder, war,
Yea, all those woes which Fury can forth bring
Are now the Discant which my Muse must sing:
For whilst of late The Eternal did invite,
By secret motions of his sacred Sp'rit,
Three Eastern Sages wisely to embrace
The Occasion of their long long-look'd-for peace,
Like to Apollo's Priests, intranc'd, they rove
From Herod's Palace to the Courts of Jove,
And with a thundering voice they roar and cry,
Where Is Juryes King? where, where is that Royal boy
In whom the heavens have daign'd t'exalt the Throne
Of Sions hopeless Desolation?
His Star has brought us from our homebred joys,
From ease, from rest, and from our quirks and toys,
And made us tread those paths of sad exile,
T'imbrace the comforts of our widow-while.
Scarce had they breathed those accents of unrest,
When vulture-feare lays hold on Herod's breast
In such a sort, that cursed Erynnis crew
Do both his senses and his soul subdue:
What Is this I hear, quoth he, what threats be those
Those wandering Pilgrims to the heavens up-throwes?
What brainsick tidings of a newborn King
Are those which now through Jewryes Coasts do ring?
What, shall my eyes be thus reserved to gaze,
Even in my glorious prime, the darkened rays
Of black disgrace eclipse my glory so,
That I from Honor, it from me must go?
No, no, great Caesar has, in due regard
Of my deservings, for my sake ensnared
Old Hircanus (by force of Parthian wrath)
To drink his last draught in the Cup of Death:
And have not all his offspring, which do wander
About the Stygian lake, even Alexander,
Antipater, and Aristobolus,
With Mariamnes, and Antigonus,
Fair Alexandra, and each Ghost elsewhere
Who in the helm of Sion claimed a share,
Been sent, as Vassals of my wrath, to plead
In heritance in cloudy Deaths dark shade?
And lest that, Hydra-like, their power or wit
Should breed a Rival on my Throne to sit,
Have not my wits, more subteliz'd than theirs,
Plucked up that grave Sanhaedrine, by whose cares
The state of Salem fortified her stage
Against the storms of Fortunes spightfull rage;
So that no bud nor branch may thence re-spring,
That may my power to a period bring:
Whence com'th it then, that such a sad affright
Of alteration turns my Day to Night,
And makes a lightning flash of sad-^v'rthrow
Disturb the Ocean where my hopes did flow?
It may be that the heavens, whose boundless powers
Controlls these currents, and these tides of ours,
Have grudged to see me great, and therefore send
Those Heralds to proclaim my Glories end:
For this I know (which former times have taught)
That mortal men, whose minds are always fraught
With care to conquer, in their deepest care
Are but like bubbles blown along the air,
Which by our breath's no sooner blown and cherished,
Then by a counterp^ffe it is gone and perished;
Else wherefore did the Fates so proudly thrust
Great Niniveh and Babel to the dust?
Why have they trod on Carthage with their foot,
Or laughed to see brave Ilion's lights blown out?
Yea, pushed at Craesus, and Darius Crown,
And thrust the Macedonian from his Throne?
But that the world may learn, that honor's strain
Is hardl'acquir'd, but quickly lost again:
Shall I therefore, like to a Child, whose ear
Has tied him in the bands of causlesse fear,
By hearing of a foolish doting fable,
Apprentice all my thoughts to this unstable
Narration? and trust that for a truth
Which has no warrant, but a wand'rers mouth?
Or shall I, like Endimion, in the deep
Of base security lie still and sleep;
When Heavens, by that great care of me they take,
Do by these warnings bid me thus awake?
No, against the Heavens I spurn not, yet I scorn
A Monarch, and much less a Babe new born
Should in Judaea to that state arise
As may my Glory and my Crown surprise:
I will therefore look what a treacherous art
Dissembling fury, in a hollow heart,
Can add to high exploits, and then employ
My wits to search the corner, where that boy
Can lurk, whose fame thus makes the world aghast,
And drunk with expectation: and at last,
By sad experience I will make him hear
That Crowns are weighty things for babes to wear.
Whilst thus 'twixt Fear and Envy's mutinous host
The subtelizing Tirants soul is tossed,
Rage breaks, at last, the gap, and opes the way
To vent the passions which his soul dismay:
Go, says the subtle fox, go, quickly call
The Talmudists and Rabbis, great and small,
The Priests, the Prophets, Pharisees, and Scribes,
Through all Judaea's several coasts and tribes;
Make them revolve, consider, search, and try
The time and place of his Nativity,
Whom these distracted Pilgrims have so far
Searched, by prognostication of a star:
For wheresoever, or whosoever he be
Whose light thus threats t'obscure my Majesty,
I can conform my mind unto my fate,
And kiss the foot that tramples on my state;
And if the heavens will needs blot out my name,
I Will do him homage who procures the same.
Thus has the viper, big with fierce envy,
Breathed out the flashes of his cruelty:
But God, who dwelling in the heavens unfolds
The heart's hid secrets, rheines, and deepest holds,
Laughs this dissembling project all to scorn,
And by his spirit does secretly suborn
The Sages to retire another way,
That so he may the Tyrants rage display;
He warns also Joseph and his Bride
To take the child, and step a while aside
To Egypt, that Gods will might so be done,
Who says, From Egypt I have called my Son. Exodus 4. Hosea 11.

O God, how deep's the Ocean, rich the store
Of mercy, thou lay'st up for evermore
To such as truly do rely upon
Thy Providence, for their salvation!
The Sword, by day, may fiercely rage and smite,
The Pestilence may rove abroad by night,
The Cedars may be plucked up from their station,
The Mountains may be hurled from their foundation,
The winds may blow, the Seas may rage, and even
Black darkness may eclipse the lights of heaven;
But he who with a fully fixed mind
On thee does stay his Soul, shall surely find
He needs not fear the crafty hunters snare,
Which for his downfall's stretched here and there;
For when the world was drowned by Nereus waves,
Thy Noah, like a Neptune, them outbraves;
When fire sacked Sodom, lo, thy Lot survives,
And in his Zoar, like a Vulcan, lives;
When Jericho's vain trust o'returns her walls,
Thy Rachab sits, and sings her festivals;
When Syrian Captains would command thy Seer,
Thy Seraphins do guard him in their Quier;
When Babels scorching flames shall threat thy Saints,
They stand unstained, and all their Aetna daunts:
And what needs more? the Lions in their den
May ramp and roar against the sons of men,
But he who shall within thy shadow hide
His head, and in thy Tents and Courts abide;
Though heavens, earth, air and seas, and all were shaken,
Shall never perish, never be forsaken.
Yet stay my muse, arrest thy course a space
To Attend the tenor of this tragick-case,
Which, with an unexpected troup of fears,
From secret ambush does assault my ears:
What roaring griefs and tear-drownd plaints be those
The neighboring Eccho's to the heavens up-throwes?
What mourning groans, and sad lamenting cries
Be those, which over this high mountain flies?
Ay me, what is this, be those the caroling voices
Of a proud conquering army, whose rejoices
Evaporate up to the azur'd round,
Reverberat the earth's environed ground?
Or is it the gleanings of that grievous cry
Which conquer'd-wretches, in their butchery
And soule-depriving smart, do cut asunder,
Like clouds condensed, when they melt with thunder?
No sure, it is no voice of triumph, nor
The voice of such as are tryumphed over;
These woeful screeches rather represent
The ditties of some harmless innocent
Which by the torturing butchers butch'rous clap
Are stabbed or stifled in the mothers lap:
And so it is, for cruel Herod has
Subsign'd and sealed a warrant for the death
Of all those Infants, which in Bethleem's coast
Of two years time, or under age, can boast:
For so the reverend Seer, Hieremie, Jer. 30.5.

Has in his never failing Prophecy
Foretold; Behold a trembling voice of fear, Jer. 30.5.

And not of peace, shall so assault the ear
And inward parts of Israel, that lo
The bravest worthy in her streets does go
Shall lay his hands upon his loyn's, as she
Who labors in her byrths perplexity: Jer. 31.15.

But chiefly in poor Ramah shall they hear
The voice of bitter weeping, and such dire
Laments, that Rachel scorns to be comforted,
Because her children are with death transported.
Is It possible, o Sun, that thou should see,
Or yet behold such inhumanity?
Is It possible, o Earth, thou can sustein
The burden of such soul-less wicked men?
Or is it possible that a humane tongue
Can be the trumpet of such monstrous wrong?
Whilst harmless Infants on their mothers knees
Join mouth to mouth, and wanton eyes to eyes,
The smiling child cries to his Nurse, mam mam,
And she replies, thy min and mam I am,
They greet each other with a thousand toys,
And still enjoy their still renewed joys,
And in a speechless compact, promise never
Their love-bred obligations to dissever:
When lo like Tigers, or whelp-robbed Bears,
Which in the fenns of Caucasus appears,
The cruel actors of this tragick-Scean,
Do write the epacts of Death's last amen
With bloody letters of Erynnis note,
Upon the Dames and Nurses petticoat;
The child, not knowing what is the traytor's mind,
First laughs upon him, like a Lamb enclind
To doubt no evil, since no ill he knows,
But being struck, his winding arms he throws
About his mothers neck; she, for to save him,
Does, in her bosom, hug, at once, and grave him:
Another, whilst he sleeps in the swaddling bands,
Is fiercely plucked out by the Butchers hands,
And, as a Fawn or Kid, he is cut asunder,
And made unto the world a woeful wonder:
A third, plucked from his mothers twisting arms,
For all her vows, her oaths, her cries, or charms,
Is stabbed, and then disjoynted, like that meat
That Cooks and Bakers do prepare to eat:
Thus, like the subtle spiders that do tear
The flies they catch within their tifney snare,
So do these damned Rascals dance a ring
Of cruel murder, to their monstrous King.
Woe, woe, now does the childlesse mother cry,
Why have the heavens reserved my tear-drown'd eye:
To be the sad spectator of this wrong?
Or why do I possess my life so long,
That I, to those who first did open my womb,
Should in my arms behold a fun'rall tomb?
Awake, awake, my deer and lovely Boy,
My hope, my hap, my love, my life, my joy,
What, do not thou now hear me call upon thee?
And know thou not that I Am enamored on thee?
What, shall I have for all my watchful care,
Thy births hard labor, and my burdens share,
Thy restless rocking, wiping, washing, wringing,
And cure of all thy wayward cries with singing,
But dead dumb silence? will thou never awake,
And fain a smile for any poor comforts sake?
Alas! thou can not: now thy lips are pale,
Thy eyes are blind, and stamp*d with deaths black seal,
Now art thou cold, and weighty as a stone,
And deaf unto thy woeful mothers groan,
Like those who dwelling near to Nilus fall
Hear not his horrid Catadupes at all:
Thrice cursed be the heart that first did breed
The woeful sanction of thy homicide;
And thrice, thrice cursed be the bloody hand
Did execute the cruel cursed command
Of that vile monster, whose unsatiate wrath
Has drunk my Darling's blood, and stopped his breath:
But o how happy, happy thrice art thou,
Poor tender babe, who, by this torture, now
Have entered in thy Masters rest, and made
His arm the pillow that upholds thy head.
And, woeful monster, Herod, though of late,
For preservation of thy Crown and State,
Thou have triumphed on Bachels children so,
That thou do laugh in scorn at their overthrow,
Think thou that he who first did form the eye
Cannot the Center of thy mischief see?
And he whose finger first did plant the ear
Cannot thy cursed souls hid whisprings hear?
Be not deceived, he who from heaven descries
And fans the secrets which our hearts devise,
Shall, in short time, repay thy murdering stroke
With quenchlesse fire, and Conscience torturing yoke:
Did not, of old, the Memphian Tyrant load
The sons of Jacob with a grievous rod?
And yet, when he esteemed his fury crowned,
Jacob's redeemed, and Cairo's Monarch's drowned:
And did not proud Adoni-bezek, by
The stroke of an impetuous tyranny,
Make seventy Kings, whose thumbs and toes were cut,
Like dogs to snatch their crumbs before his foot?
And yet, i'th'end, he reaped for his offense
The selfsame strain of torturing recompense:
And did not base Abim'lech, in desire
To sit at Stern of Israel's Empire,
Power out, like water on a fatal stone,
The blood of seventy Brothers, all save one?
And yet a flash of Sechems bramble, so
Reverberat his pride, with just overthrow,
That nothing could it is rapid flame restrain,
Till Thebes drank Abim'lech's blood again.
Thus have we heard, thus do we wish and pray;
But, knowing that Jehovah's just always,
We stay our imprecations, and believe
That he, in time, will our trespass forgive,
And render thee thy just deserved doom,
Both in this world, and in the world to come.
Here ends URANIA, Or, The first week.
Gloria Patri.
ASTRAEA.
On Jordans sweet enameled verge, a Dove
Anoynts our Savior Prince of peace and love.
He in the Desert's Hungry, Tempted, Fed.
Sinay's deep-Riddle is interpreted.
Heaven, earth, seas, air and hell confess their God.
Nature's subdued b' a supernat'rall rod.
Tabor's illuminat with an unwonted glory,
And Salem's streets exalt Hosannah's story.
The Unction.
CANTO 1o.
AS when a thick and foggy cloud of rain
Locks up her sluices in their sourse again,
Industrious Bees do haste from out their hives
To seek that Nectar which preserves their lives,
And suck from tops of many a fragrant flower
A sugered syrrop quintessenc'd from sour;
So after all those tears and woeful toil,
Those murdering blows, and that cursed damp and foil
Which Herod's vultur-like ambition has
Powered out on Rachels children in his wrath;
Now, now it is more then time (my sacred Muse)
That with a living touch thou should peruse
Those paths wherein the miracle of time
Has left us traces of our glories prime.
Up, then, awake, and tell me, who is this
That in Judaea's desert wilderness
Does, like a yawning Lion, roar and cry
Make straight Messiah's path, prepare his way?
What, has the Thisbite re-appear'd again,
Whose heavenly message never returned in vain,
Whose voices dire event thrust down to hell
The sin sold Ahab and his Jesabel,
And made all Baals Priests ashamed to see
The dotage of their fond Idolatry?
It seems it is he; for lo, his richest share
Is but a Coat composed of Camels hair,
His girdle is of leather, his chief meat
Are Locusts and wild honnie's delicate;
And for all this his poverty, he still
Does all the neighboring dales and valleys fill
With this sad accent, Turn, repent, amend,
For lo! Gods heavenly Kingdom is at hand:
Yet it is not he; such transmigrations now
Dare plead no place amidst a Christian crew;
For, by th'Eternals uncontrol'd decree,
As dust we are, so to the dust go we;
And till the time that heavens shall be no more,
Our bodies are not what they were before;
Nor shall our souls, or life's true quick^ing spirit
Their wonted dwelling houses re-inherit.
Who is it then? Now I perceive it is he
Concerning whom the Prophet Malachy
Has, by a divine wisdom, thus foretold:
(Wonder you fools; come, come you wise) Behold,
Before the coming of that dreadful day
Wherein the Lord his glory shall display,
Eliah first shall come, and by his voice
The father in his children shall rejoice,
The children to their fathers wiser Will
Shall bow their necks, and be obedient still;
Lest coming to them with a searching fan,
His vengeance finish what their finnes began:
Yea, sure I am it is he, for now I find
The Scribes and Pharisees, whose judgement's blind, I. ^.

Run to his Baptism, though in scorn, that so
They may th 'Eternals Counsel overthrow;
But all in vain; he with a soaring eye
Rips up their hidden deep hypocrisy,
And by his threatening, duly mild, and grave,
Their hid dissimulation does outbrave.
O vip'rous brood, o froward generation,
O Serpent-Issue of a sinful Nation,
Who has fore-warned you to eschew the doom
And escape the scorching wrath that is to come?
Bring forth therefore, bring forth, I charge you here,
Those fruits of new birth, which makes faith appear;
And glory not, that Abraham's sons you are,
For he who calls what is not, as though it were,
Can make those senssesse stones, if he have need,
Bring forth to Abra'm a Religious seed:
No, rather know, that these be now the times
Wherein the hand of Justice fannes our crimes,
And trenching axes, laid unto the Root,
Cut down the withered sticks are void of fruit:
It Is true indeed, I baptize you with water,
But lo! there is one to come, who, what I scatter
Shall recollect; he reaps where none was sown,
And but advantage, will not have his own;
He Is great indeed, and mightier far then I,
I am not worthy his shoo-straps t'untye,
With water I baptize you, o but he
Shall baptize with a fire of Deity,
For in his hand he holds that searching fan
Wherewith he does his barn-floores treasure scan;
If we be found true wheat, his hand shall keep
Our souls from falling in the infernal deep;
But if like chafe we prove, his swallowing ire
Shall thrust us headlong in a quenchlesse fire:
Stray then no more through those poor desert fields
Which neither state, nor pomp, nor glory yields,
To gaze on me, a Reed tossed too and fro,
Where any whirl-windes puff delights to blow;
But rather, in a wise discretion, learn
Your gracious Visitation to discern,
For this is he that should be sent; expect
None other to relieve your souls defect,
Look on his ways, and by his works go try
The true prognostics of his Majesty;
By him the blind have eyes, the lame their hands,
The deaf their ears, the dead are loosed from bands,
The Leaper's cleans'd, and, what is more, the poor
Receive the Gospel, and the Cross endure:
And that your Judgments may lack all excuse,
Behold, the stone you builders did refuse
Shall be approved, and on the Corners top
Shall stand, that there, by faith, by love, by hope,
His children may a living house be made,
To hold him for foundation and for head:
Lo where he comes! my soul does sweetly know him;
Bow, bow your haughty necks, yield what you ow him,
For he is that great immac'lat Lamb of God,
Who having laid aside his wraths sharp rod,
Does by a lovesick Mercies bloody gore
So purge our sins, that sin stands ours no more.
Never did the swallowing Nilus rapid waves,
Provoked to anger by the Aeolian slaves,
Hurl down his streams to the Asphaltick lake
With greater force, than does the Baptist shake,
By those his roaring thunders, the proud knees
Of these dissembling Scribes and Pharisees:
Yet scarce has he, like that fore-running star
Which does proclaim the approach of Titan's carre,
Fore-warned the world of that Imperial Sun
Whose race in Truths eccliptick line is run,
When lo, that spotless Lamb, whose spotless love
And sufferings weds us to the Lord above,
Comes straight unto him, and in modest fashion,
Without or pomp, or pride, or ostentation,
Requires to be baptized in Jordan's flood,
The typick Emblem of his saving blood:
But John remembering what he was, replies,
O sacred thou, whose throne transcends our skies,
Why do thou crave to be baptized of me,
Since I should rather be baptized of thee?
The servants state is not above his Lord,
Nor can my weakness that true strain afford
Of due obedience that belongs unto thee,
O get thee from me, for thy eyes undo me.
Peace, says Immanuel, John, thy flesh is weak
Th'Eternals hidden Counsels to partake,
For never has flesh his riddles truly viewed,
But he who with his Heifer first has plough'd.
Would thou then know wherefore I do desire
To be baptized of thee, who can with fire
Rebaptize thee? Know that my Charge is such
As without Unction none usurps to touch;
I do not run unsent, my Father has
Before all time decreed, That by my death
The sting of death, and of deaths Lords great power
Should so be curbed, that they no more devour:
That I may then obey my Fathers will, Ambros. in Luc. c. 3.

And all the law of Righteousness fulfill,
Which may contemper Mercies mild sweet yoke
To Justice proud, though just revenging stroke,

Betwixt the Creature and the dread Creator,
I must be baptized first, that so I may
My heavenly function to the world display:
Add hereunto, that in this flesh of mine,
Which from the earth is earth, from heaven divine,
I must the state of of every thing renew,
And to my Gospel Moses Law subdue;

And by a newborn faith his soul must cherish;
The heavens shall be renewed the old fly away,
The Earth renewed shall smell like maiden-May;
The Law is old, a new command I give
That men henceforth by faith, love, hope, must live;
And as the Covenant's changed, so must the Seal
Make room for Grace, and bid the Law farewell;

To make his mansion in the heavens above,
Lo here his badg and cognizance I take
On me, not for my own, but for his sake,
That when my father Man's great Seal shall see
On my forehead, and man made one with me,
He may from man his furious wrath withdraw,
And make him Heir, by Grace, not by the Law;

By which as Canals of celestial sweets
The Almighty pours his Grace upon their Soul,
Men may their haughty hearts and necks control,
To bow unto his Ordinances; for,
No soul shall enter in at mercies door
But he that to the Gospels folly shall
Subdue his heart, and its affections all. 1 Cor. 1.21.

And finally, as for the Jews I have

So now by Baptism, for the Gentiles, I
Must undergo this Jordan's watery die,
That Jew and Gentile, bond and free, and all
Who for Salvation hunger, thirst and call;
By me may have a reconciling Peace,
And, in me, access to the throne of Grace.
No deeper blush has golden Phoebus when
He hides his head in Peru's Ocean
Then death o're-shade the Baptiist's face, while as
His weakness is displayed in wisdom's glass;
Submitting then himself his thoughts and all,
To the injunctions of his General,
They both go straight to Jordan, that therein
Christ may be sealed a surety for our sin.
No sooner has this mild sweet-coupled pair
Trod on the frisled locks of Jordan's hair,
When lo the Sun, forsaking th'opal morn
Does his meridian-poynt with pomp adorn,
And, like a Prince, set in his royal throne,
He calls his neighboring tapers one by one,
Who by their intermixed torches seven,
With matchless-splendor, clear the cope of heaven.
Those steep proud hills, whose lofty swelling tops
Drink, for their mornings-draught, Aurora's drops;
Such as the Law-grac'd Sinay, Carmell old,
Where Seraphims God's Prophet did enfold;
Horab and Nebo, whose soft arms do keep
Moses and Aaron in their dusty sleep;
Jegar-sha-duthae and mount Pisgah, whence
Moses viewed Jacob's fair inheritance;
The balm-rich Gilead, and mount Moriah, where
The faith of Abram made him mercies heir,
Linked all together, clasped their hands to hand,
And on their stately tip-toes trip, and stand
To see him baptized, whose fierce indignation
Subverts the Sinewy props of their foundation.
Jordan himself, like Nereus eldest son,
VVrap'd in a roab of pearl and Nacre's stone,
No sooner sees his sweet approach, when lo,
He curbs his streams from their accustomed flow,
Who whilst they turn their back upon the deep,
To see their maker, seemed for joy to weep:
Straight way there com'th that dainty swelling stream
That fatt'h and lean'th proud Misraims Diadem,
The fair Euphrates, and Hydaspes, who
Through Media's channel joins with gentle Po;
Chesel, Araxis, Volga, and that rill
That waits on newborn Titan's hests and will,
Rhine, Ister, Danube, Tanais, Tagus, Iber,
Meander, Xanthus, Tygris, Po, and Tiber,
Peneus, Orontes, and each Runnall else
Which either softly slides, or proudly swells,
Do all to Jrodans flowery bank repair,
And of their intertexed locks and hair
Compose a sumptuous Arrasse, richly sweet,
To wipe the water off their Masters feet;
In this enpamper'd crew great Jordan stands
Bending his knees, and heaving up his hands,
And to his Maker, in a pearle-like tear,
Breaths this Congratulation in his ear:
Eternal Issue of The Eternal Sire,
Deep wisdom of that God whom th'heav'ns admire,
Almighty Lord, all-seeing God, all is Maker,
Here at thy footstool we do humbly sacre
Our selves, our service, and our dearest love,
As vassals to obey thy dread behove.
Whilst Nature, thus, and all her tender broods,
Hills, valleys, deserts, silver brooks and floods,
Intranc'd with joy, conspire to solemnize
This masque before their glorious Makers eyes,
Behold our Shiloe, glad to undergo
That state wherein he should our sins overthrow,
Steps down to Jordans silver streams, and there
By John's enstall'd Copartner of our Care;
And now, no sooner does he step from out
The liquid Current, and the crystal Spout
Of Jordan, when to all the peoples eye
Heavens act their part in this Festivitie,
And by their rich applause confirm and seal
The Covenant of Mercies Commonweal;
For lo, heavens azur'd Arch is slop'd in twain,
And from Jehovah's throne comes down amain
A silver-feather'd Dove, who rests upon him,
And hugs his head, as being enamored on him;
With all from heavens high Senate comes a voice
Inviting all the world thus to rejoice:
Rejoice O heavens, be glad O earth, and all
That in the world do creep, or breath, or crawl,
For here is my welbeloved Son, in whom
My wrath's appeased against sinners: Come, O come
Today, if you will save your souls, draw near him,
And whilst he opes his mouth in wisdom hear him.
Now, now I see that harmless Dove un-stay'n,
Who being sent out, returned home again,
Holding within her bill an olive branch,
To show that Neptune then his wrath did quench,
Was but a Type sent to presignifie
The rest, the peace, the joy we have in thee.
O how you are fair, exceeding fair, my Dove,
Thy eyes have made my Soul even sick with love,
Thy neck is Ivory, Raven-black thy locks,
Thy dwelling's in the top of Shenirs rocks;
Fair Sharons Rose, Engeddyes sweet Camphire,
The dew of Hermon, Gileads dainty Mirrhe,
The Balm, the Alloes, and the Spice also
Which Abanah, and Parphars valleys show,
Yield not so sweet a smell as do thy lips,
Whilst thou on Bethers tops make known thy trips:
Stay then my Darling, go not hence away,
The shady night can no more wrong the day,
Whilst with a sable furre she lops his eye
To snort in midnights velvet Cannopy;
Then thou shall wound me to the death, if ever
Thou shall thy Rays from my pale Moon dissever:
Stay then my dear, and by that Spirit of thine
Repair, renew, reform this soul of mine,
That like the harmless Dove, who without gall
Still loves, and knows not how to hate at all,
My Soul may by the radiance of thy love
Still wed her self to thee, who from above
Have brought the sacred Olive of our Peace
T'establish mercy, where fierce wrath had place.
The Duel.
CANTO 2o.
Often have mine ears been filld, and eyes been fed
With Raptures of that highly honored
Al^mena's son, whose high and conquering hand
By victories obtained by Sea and Land,
Has made the trophies of his praise appear
In all the stamps of Titan's bandilier:
Often have I wondered at the martial acts,
Heroic exploits, and same-famishing facts
Of Hector and Achilles, and that crew
Of Greeks and Trojans, whose memorials grew
To such a height, that Homer's golden pen
Could never fully point them forth, but when
He shut his eyes, lest by their active glory
He should betray the tenor of their story:
Often have I stumbled to behold the great
Distemper of the puissant Roman state,
By Shylla and by Marius set on fire
For satisfaction of their fond desire,
Yet never quenched, or yet blown out again,
For all the arms or arts of France and Spain,
Till Pompey and great Caesar, by the streams
Of Rubicone, drenched these Aetnaean flames:
But wherefore do I gaze this heathen stage?
Did not The Almighty in that self same age
Raise up a Theater of brave Heroes, far
More eminent in Peace, more bold in war
Then any heathen who did e're make bold
Or Mars his helm, or Mercur's pipe to hold:
Great Joshuah, how did thou stay the Sun
In Gibeah; and in Ajalon, the Moon,
Till Jacobs wormlings to the ground down brings
The pride of five combined Canaans Kings?
Shamgar, how did thy oxen-taming goad
Serve against the Philistims for sword and rod,
When Jabin's yoke the wearied necks did gall
Of Jacob's seed, and gloried in their fall?
How did brave Deborah by the conquering hand
Of Barak, Jabin's boasting troops withstand,
And made their General Siserah, in the tent
Of Jael, try Ambitions just event?
How did brave Gideon's barly-cake and lamp,
Couched in an earthen-pitcher, daunt the Camp
Of Midian, that so their night-bred dream,
Proved but a presage to their mornings Scaene?
How did bold Sampson, peerless-pearle of Arms,
Burst Gazae's gate-bars, and unlock the charms
Of Dalilah, and make an Ass jaw bone
Drunk with the blood of Gath and Askelon.
In end, what Nymrod, or what Anak stern,
Could ever their fame or honor so etern
As has the Son of Jesse, who at first
Did kill a Lion, and a wild Boar burst;
Then, by a peeble, which he lately took
From the sweet verge of a pure glyding brook,
Did so subdue th'heathen Goliah's rage,
Who did blaspheme th'Eternal's-heritage,
That now we see nor bragging breaths nor boasts
Can save or kill as does the Lord of hosts:
All those like stars in dark Cymerian night
Adorned their Orb with some small gleams of light,
But being obfuscat by a cleerer ray,
Have been the Prodroms of this better day:
Our never setting Sun is now arisen,
And by his rays irradiats our Horizon
In such a sort that those glow worms may go
And spend their luster and their per'shing show
Amongst the purblind woeful ignorants
Of Mexica or Magallanae's Tents:
Our way's made known, why walk we not therein?
Our Truth's declared, why live we then to sin?
Our life's proclaimed, why are we then dismayed?
Of death or hell why should we be afraid?
Has not our Goell, our great kinsman come,
To pay our morgage, and redeem our sum?
And that upon our blood-shedder he may
The stroke of Justice awfully repay,
Lo to the desert now he hies him, (there
In all our sufferings as copartiner,)
That David like he may that Giant foyl,
Who in th'Eternalls host has wrought such spoil,
And ever blessed be his glorious Name,
Who coming up from Jordans crystal stream,
No sooner from his foot does wipe the water,
When to the Arabians desert wild Theater
He Is led by that same spirit which like a Dove
Did from the heavens proclaim him; our souls Love,
That in our flesh, as he our seal did take,
So in it he might triumph for our sake:
For no such mediator we must have
As scorns our griefs, infirmities, or grave;
But such a one, as being exempt from sin
In all things else, must run the race we run.
Thrice three ten years has my Redeemer now
Lived in the world, and yet for ought I know
Satan, until this time, durst never be bold,
Against him to set a snare, his foot to enfold:
His private life, 't may be, procured his ease,
His public charge, must taste of trecheries:
Like Jacob, who with Laban whilst he stays
Had Peace and rest, and amorous quirks, and plays;
But being called by God, to get him home,
False hearted Laban after him can come
And search his stuff, prepared to do him wrong,
Unless the mighty God, of strongs the strong,
Had curbed him in his night bred Visions so,
That maugre envy, he must let him go:
Whilst Moses stays in Egypt, Pharo's daughter
Preserves him safe from Pharoh's threatened slaughter;
But when he comes for Isreal's relief,
He amongst the sons of persecution's chief:
Whilst David kept his fathers Ewes, in peace
To God he warbled Hymns, and Odes of grace;
But called to Court, and to the stage of fame,
Wrath, rancour, envy, plyes his Diadem:
So whilst my Savior, both by Incarnation
And by the highest heavens Inauguration,
Stands as the very son of God and Man,
Anointed our Redeeming Sovereign,
Lo, neither can the seal nor gift of grace,
Exempt him from hels envy'n any case;
For grace cannot prevent, it may repel
The stratagems of Perdue Centiuell,
But still the more the Lord with grace decores us,
The stronger fetters Satan sett's before us:
O God, therefore, since thy Son is not free,
But grace it self must taste of enmity;
What careful watchings should we wormlings take
Against this perfidious spiritual Amaleck,
Who daring to assail the head, shall sure
The heels destruction, if he can, procure:
Since then I see it is that glorious Spirit,
Which he from all etern'ty did inherit;
Even that great spirit, of the Almighty God
Whose word comforts us, under whose sharp rod
The very hell does tremble, whose high hand
None of thy creatures could e're yet withstand,
Who rides on the blustering winds swift wings,
Who makes the Clouds his messengers, who brings
Or penury, or plenty by his rain,
Who walks dry-foot on the Ocean,
Why should we in tentations deepest jarre
Fear Chance or Fortunes lying Calendar?
For, all the powers of darkness and of hell
Cannot make one hair of our head to fall,
Till he whose power and pleasure placed them there
Bids either Justice smite, or Mercy spare;
For he it is who leads us to our fight,
And sends us blows according to our might,
And wheresoever we fight, he goes along
Both to encourage us, and make us strong,
And when we have fought our fight, gives us reward,
As his deep wisdom has for us prepared:
I magnify my Savior then, who here
Does boldly in Tentations lists appear,
And by his rare example tells us how
To keep our posture, and our foes subdue,
The Philistims by Sampson smarting sore
And often, did his Dalilah implore
She would by all means possible but try
Wherein his strength and sinewy force did lie,
That, knowing that, they might him so dis-arm,
As never after they might fear his harm:
Then, O how careful should we be to learn,
And, in our halcyon days and times, discern
The traps, the snares, and the bewitching tricks
That Is put before us by the Prince of Styx;
That so, foreseeing his Engines, we may
Or burst his snares, or safely fly away.
Lo how, Colossus like, in Horebs plain
He stands; thence skips to Neboes top again;
From thence to Sions pinnacle he flies,
Like lightnings flashes, darting through the skies:
Never did Proteus with more change of shape
Beguile the world, than does this trickling Ape
With change of colors, feature, form, and all,
My Masters fixed sense sense seek to enthrall;
Three deeply poisoned darts are in his hand,
Which flesh and blood alone could never withstand;
The lust of heart is one, Life's pride another,
The lust of the eye is third, their firstborn brother,
And he who from all those can keep him free
Has more than flesh and bloods excellency;
For he who in the Van does play his part,
May in the Main battalion shrink and smart;
And who has fought them both, may in the Rear
Prove worthy nothing, but a sod Cashiere.
The first da^t, then, about his head he shakes,
And'gainst our Master this assault he makes;
If it be true that heaven has spoke, says he,
If thou be Gods true Son, then let me see
Some token of it, that I may believe
He has a care of thee, that thou may live:

Wandering, and wondering in this Mansion;
Earth yields no bread, the brooks do yield no water,
The Downs no Locust, Combs no honney scatter,
Clouds yield no Manna, Ravens take no care
To feed thee with their fleshpots, late or ear,
Sarepta's widow does not break her Cake
Which for her own last dinner she did bake:
Is this The Almighty's care, is this his love,
Which he of late did unto thee improve
As to his Son; that thou should starve, and dye
By famine and extreme necessity?
No, get thee up, exchange these stones to bread,
Eat freely then, and be thou satisfied;
For skin to skin, and all the worlds rich choice
Man will renounce, before his life he lose.
Full forty days I have been here (proud Clown) R.

Replies my Savior, and have beaten down
This flesh of mine, with fasting all the while,
That in this Lent of mine I might beguile
Thy pur-blinde eyes, whose chiefest aim and strain
Is but to crush my flesh, because humane:
Moses my servant, near this place, before
Fasted as long, whilst Sinay's tops did rore:
And he who Baal's folly did proclaim,
Full forty days did try the same extreme;
Yet neither the one nor the other sought to thee
For help in their extreme necessity;
But, by my Fathers strengthening power, they
Were without outward means maintained always:
My Father without bread or water can
Maintain that life which he has given to man:
The heavens on Israel did Manna power,
Like Coriander, in a snow-white shower;
To some he does life's means, miraculously
Beyond their expectation, multiply,
That when they looked to have kept nothing in store,
Their nothing still increased and grew the more:
Then, to distrust my Fathers providence,
To Abuse my power, and under the pretense
Of working miracles to obey thy will,
Were base in me, and a prodigious ill:
Indeed man lives by bread, but that is not all,
Each word which from my Fathers mouth does fall
Must either bless the bread to man, or then
It shall not nourish him, 't shall prove his bane.
Thus has the venomous snake his first dart flung,
Yet has it neither wounded, hurt, nor stung
My Savior, for his still uncharmed ear,
Without impression, that assault did hear:
A second dart therefore the Traitor tryes,
And that it may prevail, he proudly flies
Unto the top of Salems Temple, there
To crush by pride, what is not crushed by despair;
The first tentation's ground was starving want,
Now does presumptuous plenty charm in chant,
For where one poor extreme can never do it,
He has another, and he puts us to it:
Jerusalem is now the worlds chief glory,
The Temple is Jerus'lems highest story,
The Pinacle's the loftiest step of that,
There is my Savior by the Tempter set.

Says the proud murderer; but behold, at once
Thou did reply; Thy Fathers providence
Would shelter thee from Natures indigence:
Come then, come, let us try thy Fathers power;
Cast thy self down from top of this high tower,
For well I know what is writ in David's book,
And thou may learn it, when thou list to look,
That he has given his Angels astrict charge
To bear thee in their arms, as in a Barge,
To keep thee safe and sound in flesh and bone, Psalm. 81.

Lest thou should dash thy foot against a stone.
How long shall I now suffer thee (damn d dog) R.

Says my Redeemer, like a wallowing hog
Disturb my sacred Cisterns? by such wiles
The Sons of Adam always thou beguiles,
It is no new thing to hear thee blaspheme,
This is the program of thy Academe,
Grace has abounded, man may sin the more;
Elected and Redeemed, trip still therefore;
The spirit of bondage and of fear is gone,
Burst then the fetters of Adoption:
O how it wounds me, thus to hear thee tare
My sacred Oracles with poisoned air,
As if in them there were not couched such truth
As could both comfort age, and confound youth!
I know it is written, but I know as well
There Is something written there thou do conceal,
And dare not utter, for it would declare
The snaky sophism of thy subtle snare;
[In all thy wayes] thou do omit this stance,
Yet here is the rule of Gods great providence;
If man would wish, or hopefully expect
The safe protection of the blessed elect,
He must not wander in his fancies measure,
Or tread the wandering path of his own pleasure,
But in the path of that Saint-beaten rode
That Is pointed out unto him by his God,
If so he walk, he shall be safe and sure,
If otherwise, his death he shall procure.
Art not thou now ashamed, so treacherously
To wrest th'Eternals truth, impudently
To cut asunder that which God conjoyns,
And with an endless falsehood gird thy loins?
Take then from out that sacred Scriptures fountain
A stone cut without hands, from out the mountain,
To split thy forehead from out David's sling,
And curb the poisoned venom of thy sting:
Behold it is written both to man and thee,
Tremble and fear, do not presume too high;
For who so wanders from this beaten rode,
Does tempt the Lord, and lift his heel against God. Deuteronomy. 6.16


His last and final dart against our King:
The blast of fainting, and of black despair,
Nor of presumptions fire-ball, thrown i'th'aire,
Have not prevailed; yet will he not be quiet,
But aiming at his envies richer diet,
He sets my Savior on a steep high mountain,
From which each river, and each bubling fountain,
Each pearly mead, and shady sheltering grove
Where either Serpents hiss, or Satyrs rove,
Each vinyard drunk with grapes, or cloi'd with clusters,
And every place where pleasure makes her musters,
And every other sense-contenting thing
Which to a carnal mind content can bring,
Are in an eyes short twinkling set before him,
And promised to him, if he would adore him:
See thou not those, says he, all those be mine,
View, take, possess them, I will make them thine,
And with their title I will here endow thee?
If thou will once but bow thy knees unto me.
Now, now, and never till now, did my Redeemer
Wax fierce with fury against this bold blasphemer: R.

What? Bow to thee, thou foul abortive slave?
Thou dust eater? thou canker of the grave?
Thou down-faln star? thou filthy proud glowworm?
Whose fall yet fills both Earth and Seas with storm:
Proud beggar slave, thou say the world is thine;
And yet it is the Lords, and all therein,
The treasures of the winds, the clouds of Rain,
The wine pressed grapes, and all the sheaves of grain,
The fishes of the Sea, the fowls of the air,
The beasts of the Earth that nibble here and there,
The floods, the rivers, watery ponds and lakes
Which from the clouds, or ocean, welspring takes,
The walled Cities, and rich stored shops,
The honny combs, and those Elixar'd drops
Of balm, myrhe, incense, Nard, and sweet perfume
That serves to deck the bride and the bridegroom,
The warrior, the master of the school,
The young, the old, the wise, and eke the fool,
The Counsel tables, and the Courts of Kings,
And all the treasures that the earth forth brings
Are only his; he gives them, and when
He thinks it fitting, takes them back again:
Those thou have set before me, yet do hide
The hidden moaths that frets their inner side;
As if I did not know, what weal and woe
Dance in a circle wheresoever they go;
What? can our wealth or want my mind betray?
Can peace bewitch me, or can war affray
My fixed thoughts? thy eyes are cloid with gravel,
And so thou losest both thy toil and travel:
Can sickness, health, life, death, vain glory, shame,
Or any other worldly anatheme
Make me forget my Father, or forgot
One jot of that true worship which I owe
Unto him? No, go, get thee gone, avoid
Proud Satan, for thou know not things of God,
But things of men; from this I will not swerve,
That Is writ, The Lord thy God alone go serve,
And worship; yea, beside him worship none,
For that shall turn to thy confusion.
The Doctor
CANTO 3o.
AS when the Sun, obliqu'ly looking on
A roride cloud, frames a Parelion;
But looking with a straight opposed aspect
On Phoebe, makes herhis full rays reflect;
So when from Jordans streams our great Messiah
Went to the desert; our late born Eliah,
Although the bridegrooms friend, yet seemed to weep
For fear a hyreling should disperse his sheep:
But seeing him victoriously return,
This joy-bred fire does in's bosom burn;
O how my Soul does now rejoice (says he)
To see the Son of Man march valiantly,
Returning from the desert, Satan's den,
Clothed with the spoil of sin, for sinful men!
Lo where he comes, full of grace and truth,
No man in such abundance opes his mouth;
He was before me, though he now does follow,
Eternity his Majesty does hollow,
From out his fullness we do all receive
Grace upon grace, and what good else we have;
The Law was given by Moses, but by him
Comes grace, and truth, and peace, wherein we swim:
No man at any time has seen the Father,
Save this his son, from whose hid hands we gather
That hidden Manna, and those Quails by which
Our souls are fed, and we to life made rich:
He comes to the world, for it he made,
Yet in it has no place to rest his head;
He comes to his own, yet they refuse him;
He comes to the builders, they abuse him:
But unto all that do receive him, he
Shall give this glory and prime dignity,
That they the sons of God shall all be called,
And, as true heirs of heaven, be there enstall'd;
Even unto such as in his name believe,
To whom nor Nature, flesh, nor blood can give
The new-births note, but only that great God
Who in our flesh has made his full abode:
And that it may be known that this is he,
Go you my sons, go, get you up, draw nigh
Unto him, clasp him in your souls soft arms,
For he is the Antidote for all your harms.
At these fore-warnings John and Andrew go
And greet him thus: Great Rabbi, let us know
Where thou do dwell? so shall we joy to see
The mansion of thy true felicity.
Where I do dwell? says he; let him that would
My dwelling know, look on the foxes hold
And sparrows nests; for they have rooms wherein
Their young ones nestle, and their down begin;
O but the Son of man has no place where
To rest his head, save only this poor air
That every creature breaths, and this is all
He counts his; and this at last shall fall:
If you will therefore follow me, quit-clame
What ever in this world does sumptuous seem,
Take up your cross and follow me, and so
You shall my dwelling, and my riches know;
For who so shall reject my Cross, and blame't,
Of him in glory I shall be ashamed;
But who so shall my Cross with patience bear.
He shall with me in glory rest coheire.
No sooner has he spoke these words, when lo
As swift as arrow shot from Indian bow,
Andrew does to his brother Simon run,
And with these tidings of Salvation
Accosts him; Brother, I have found the great
Messith, whom the world expect'd of late,
The Savior Christ, the holy, and th'annoynted
Great Peacemaker, by Prophets all forth pointed;
Come, come, I pray the let our hearts draw near him,
And while it is called to day, o let us hear him.
Simon arises, and with Andrew go'th
To see the miracle of Time and Truth;
But ere he can within true distance come,
Christ calls him by his name; You Are welcome home
Thou son of Jonah, says he, this thy name
Of Simon, hence I change, with better fame,
Thou shall be called Cephas, that is, a Stone,
For thou shall help to lay a foundation,
Against which the Devil and the gates of hell
May freely push, but never shall prevail.
A little after this, in Galile
As Jesus walked, he did Philip see,
And bids him follow him; he straight obeys,
But by the way Nathaniel he espyeth;
Nathaniel, says he, come, we have sound
The man, of whom the Scriptures do abound,
Whom Moses and the Prophets have foretold
According to the promises of old:
Nathaniel gladly girdeth up his loins,
And with his fellow Philip journey joins;
But e're Nathaniel can come near unto him,
Christ spies him, and with these sweet words does woe him:
Come, come Nathaniel, come thou void of guile,
The Sun on such another does not smile
In all Judaea's Coasts. What Is this I hear,
Says just Nathaniel? e're I can come near
One calls me by my name: whence do thou know me?
For in the face, till now, I never saw thee.
Nathaniel, says Christ, that is nothing; for,
E're Philip called thee, I thee knew before,
When under the fig tree thou naked stood,
Copartiner with Adam in his blood.
O now, my God, Nathaniel says, I see
Thou art the very Son of the most High,
And promised King of Israel, who should give
Life to all such as in thee do believe.
The night now come, Christ to the mountain goes,
Where all the while he to the heaven upthroweth
His supplications, with strong cries and tears,
And graciously is heard in what he fears:
Next morning to his service he does call
Matthew, and Thomas, Barthol mew, and all
The rest of those Disciples, whom he meant
To make the Preachers of his Covenant?
O happy, blessed, blessed, happy Call!
It does no sooner touch their ears at all,
When straight it does their starving souls renew,
And their affections to his will subdew:
Speak always so my God, and by thy grace
Say to my fainting Soul, seek thou my face;
And my poor Soul shall answer as appear'th,
Speak what thou will o Lord, thy servant hears:
When thou at first did lay the worlds foundation
Thou did but speak, and all this all is creation
Did to thy great Imperial word obey,
Lo, here shined light, their shady darkness lay;
Here Hill's proud tops did on their tiptoes stand,
There did the Ocean roar against the sand;
Here on the floury bottoms fragrant mead
The nibling troops securely prank and feed;
There in the bosom of the glassie deep
The scaly nations softly swim and creep;
The ayrie legions scud along the skies,
As if they meant the Welkin to surprise;
And every thing that has or life, or sense,
To thy command'ment gave obedience:
And whilst thou come an old world new to make,
No other tool nor mattock thou will take
But that same word of thine, that thou mai'st still
By thy great Word thy glorious Will fulfill.
Since by thy Word then, which is only wise.
Thou dostillighten thy Disciples eyes,
O let me hear thee, in great Moses chair,
Confound those Rabbis whom the world admire,
That by thy Doctrine I may learn that wit
Which never natural man could teach as yet.
To Nazareth he goes, and entering there,
Unto their Synagogue he does repair,
And reads in Esayes volume, this sweet text; Esaias 61.1.

Jehovahs Sp'rit is me, let all vexed
With sin afflicted hearts, come hear my word,
For I am the anointed of the Lord,
Whom he has sent his Gospel to proclaim,
To free the Captives, and restore the lame,
Give sight unto the blind, bind up the bruised,
And give them grace, who do not quite refuse it.
This day, says he, this Text is now fulfilled,
This day is grace down from the heavens distilled,
And happy he, who hears and believes
In him who this Salvation freely gives;
But vengeance shall his portion be, who stops
His ears against my heaven elixer'd drops:
Do not you call to mind, how that of old
From Ebals threatening tops it was foretold,
A thousand curses should fall down upon
A sinful froward generation;
But who so should their souls enclinet obey
The sacred Sanctions of the mount Siney,
Ten thousand blessings from Gerizims store
Should on their heads be multiplied, and more:
Now is the time, and here am I the man
From out whose mouth or curse, or blessings can
Receive effect or force to save or kill,
They hear my word, and they obey my will.
Blessed is he therefore, whose heart is pure,
For of my heavenly kingdom he is sure;
Blessed are they who hunger for my grace,
They shall be filled, and satisfied with peace;
Blessed are they who do in secret mourn,
Their sorrows to their solace shall return;
Blessed be you, when men, for my name sake.
Shall of your life and goods proud havoc make;
Blessed be you, when against you men speak evil,
And call you sons of Beliall and the Devil,
For what they derogat from your regard
They add against their will to your reward,
Yea blessed, and more then blessed shall you be
When you be thrust from their society,
Thrust from their Synagogu's, excommunicate,
Rebuked, blaspheam'd, and all disconsolate,
Be not dismayed, but rather be you glad,
The Prophets old no better service had,
The Son of man himself shall so be used,
Contemned, reproached, disdained, and foully brus'd,
And sure I am, that when the master has
No softer shelter, and no surer path,
The servant should not grudge, nor yet disdain
If with his master he shall share like pain:
But woe to such whose riches shall abound,
Whose heart and hands are in their store house sound;
I tell you truly, they have their reward,
No after pleasure is for them prepared:
Woe, woe to those who laugh, and never weep,
Destruction to their souls does softly creep:
Woe, woe to such as vainly cry, peace, peace,
Thinking the mountain cannot change his place;
For sorrow, grief, and plagues shall on them come
Like travel on a woman's burth'ned womb;
Stolen bread and water sweet are to the taste,
But gall and worm-wood's easier to digest:
Bless you therefore such as do curse you, for
If you shall bless your friends, and do no more,
What honor can you crave of God, by them
Who live estranged from God? they do the same:
Do good to those who harm you; pray for those
Who persecute your Souls with griefs and woes;
Give to all such as ask you, freely len*,
And look for no requital back again;
So shall you show your selves the Almighty's sons,
When you be clothed with his perfections:
You are this worlds chief salt; while you have savor
Your work with God and Men shall find true favor;
But if you lose your savor, then your taste
Shall all your service to the dunghill cast:
You are a City, set upon a hill,
Which to the worlds proud gaze stands object still;
Dream not you can be hid, all eyes are on you,
And all men's motions do depend upon you;
If whilst they wander in an oblique Car,
Your course prove constant, like a fixed Star;
If whilst they stumble in Cymerian night,
You walk in Goshen, like the sons of light;
Whilst muddy cares do their best joys control,
If your affections rest above the Pole;
If whilst their runnalls, Marah like, prove tart,
Your springs drink sweet, and so rejoice the heart;
If whilst they hold in hand a fruitless goad,
You bud ripe Almonds, like to Arons rod;
If whilst a stranger calls you, you repine,
And know no shepherds voice but only mine;
In all your ways if you shall still intend
Your masters glory and no other end,
Then o how happy, happy thrice you be!
Life is your lot, your term eternity.
Then fear not man, whose hand can do no more
But kill the body; fear God rather, for
When he has killed the body, yet he can
Power out destruction on the soul of man,
And send both soul and body down to hell.
In chains of darkness, and of death to dwell.
It Is true, those precepts which I now do Preach
Exceed the narrow bounds of humane reach;
Yet though the flesh be weak, the Spirit's strong,
And grace can rectify stern natures wrong:
Think not I come to put the law at under,
Or what the Lord has joined to cut asunder;
No, no, the Law and Gospel be two brothers,
The sons of one man, though of several mothers,
That, Hagars brood, who unto bondage bears,
This Sarahs son, who is free, and nothing fears;
That Is Sinays suckling, who with terror shakes,
This Syons nursling, whom no fear awaketh;
That first, this last, that strong, but this the stronger,
And so the elder must needs serve the younger;
The Law requires works, the Gospel Faith,
Both have one aim, though in a several path,
For he who sweetly speaks in them both
Is but one God, and one same sp'rit of truth;
Works without faith are like to fig tree leaves,
Which seem to shelter, but in end deceive's;
And faith, unless good works do crown her head,
May seem to live, yet's spirit'ally dead;
For as faith laying hold on the Mediator,
Makes man stand just before the just Creator,
So works joined unto faith, tells, that faith's true
Which works by love, and does men's lusts subdue:
Then preach them both, keep both, and so you shall
Your selves and others both to rest recall.
Do not you know when many run a Race
With panting breasts, and sweat-besmeared face,
He only who proves constant to the end
Obtaines the Crown; but if he shall offend
And stumble at the stumbling stones in the way,
His stumbling makes his honor to decay:
If men, then, for a temporal Crown take pain,
And strive so hardly for a sading gain,
How much more should the uncorrupted Crown
Of glory, honor, and dominion,
Make you to run your race without cessation,
Since your reward's eternal consolation:
Be careful therefore that your masters name
By your neglect be not exposed to shame;
And that whilst others by your words be saved,
You of your masters joy be not be reaved.
A certain Sower on a time went forth
To sow his seed of rich and pretions worth;
And as he sowed, some by the way-side fell,
And that the souls of the air did quickly smell,
And picked it up; Some fell in stony ground,
That took no root, because no earth it found;
Some amongst thorns did fall, that straight did spring,
And yet was choked by their o're-shadowing;
Some fell in fertile ground, and taking root,
Did to the Sower bring expected fruit
According to his travel, toil, and pain,
The thirty, sixty, and the hundredth grain.
I am the husbandman, my word's the seed;
If that does perish, it does not proceed
From Sower, from the seed, or from the season,
For those were all combined in right and reason
To work a happy harvest, But man's heart
Is that unhappy ground, in whose each part
Such hidden store of deep corruptions lie
As turn'th my toil unto fond vanrtie:
For sometime Satan vultur-like does pray
Upon the word, and bears it quite away;
Sometime man's obdur'd heart more hard then stone
Rejects my word by induration;
Sometime the thorny cares of humane life
Mixed with the word, are at such mutual strife,
That what at first takes root, does very now
To persecutions storm and tempest bow,
In such a sort, that root, and stalk, and blade
In this their conflict's quickly vanquished;
The fertile ground's the faithful heart, that does
Return unto the industrious hand that sow'th
So rich an increase, that for every ten
The master has a thousand back again:
Watch therefore, lest while as you sleep there come
The envious man, who in the good seeds room
Sowes darnell, cockle, and those cursed tares
Which cursed and malignant ground forth-beares:
For to your master you must make account
Of what you sow, and eke what does surmount,
He will not have his own true seed alone,
He needs must have reduplication;
The heavens and earth may perish, but one jot
Of this my Doctrine shall not be forgot,
Till all things be accomplished, which either
Concerns my glory, or my glorious Father.
The Powers
CANTO 4o.
WHen Moses followed Jethroes fleecie flocks,
And made them graze on Horebs golden locks,
At unawares he looked aside, and spies
A bush on fire, whose flame to heaven up flies,
The bush still burns, and yet remains unburned,
To dust and ashes it can not be turned:
O what a strange, prodigious sight, says he,
Is this which now is presented to mine eye!
A crackling thorn, a fierce consuming fire
In mutual conflict, yet do both conspire
To show the world the strangest, rarest theme
That e're was tossed in natures A cadeam!
I will therefore go view 't; but by the way
A voice proceeding from the bush can say,
Stay Moses, stay, do not approach too nigh,
Corruptions can not dwell with Majesty;
Cast thy shoes off thy feet, for it is found
The place whereon thou stand'st is holy ground;
Yet since I see thee beg with fresh desire,
To search the secrets of this scorching fire,
Hear what I tell thee: Lo, this burning bush
Does represent my Church, which by the push
Of Pharoah's proud oppression's brought so low,
That she does almost faint by his ov'rthrow,
Yea, that she is not consumed in that flame
Comes from my power, who am what I am;
Her hid corruptions call for my corrections,
My promise to her Fathers pleads protection;
The one she bears, the other in short time
Shall wound her foes, and expiate her crime;
My word shall teach her, and my power shall heal
The wounds and bruises of my Israel:
What here was promised to the Church before
The Law from Sinay's thundering tops did roar,
Is now accomplished in the Gospels day,
For by his word he points her first the way,
Then by his dread mirac'lous power does cure
The sad distempers of her imposture:
Who doubts his power, let him but make bold,
And view the wondrous works he wrought of old;
Consider Moses hand put in his bosom
By Leprosy tnrn'd white like Aprils blossom,
Consider Nilus streams turned unto blood,
Consider Israel fed with Angels food,
Remember how Rephidim's rock's a poole,
And Mara's rill made sweet in Isreal's bowl,
The Sun in Gibeah stands a whole day still;
An Ass controles her foolish riders will;
Fire comes from Heaven, and dryes Eliahs trench;
A son is given to Shunam't gracious wench;
Jonah's preserved by a swallowing Whale;
The Lions stoop and crouch to Daniel;
Three children walking in a fi'ry flame
Lose not one hair, their clothes are free fro the same:
All those as wonders did attend his Law,
And to his word did yield respective aw;
And shall the Gospels message of our peace
Lack her attendants? no, in any case,
His power shall still accompany his word,
And by those two shall all things be restored,
That man's endured heart, by those two, may
Read Lectures of his truth, and love each way:
Come then proud Scribe, come doting Pharisee,
Come wrangling Lawyer, come along with me,
And see what wonders are in Juda done,
Then judge, if your Messiah be not come:
In Cana's village, last day there was made
A Nuptial banquet richly furnished,
Not with luxurious superflu'ties store,
But with satieties plenty, and no more;
The bidden guests do come, amongst many other
Christ Jesus comes, and his Virgin Mother,
That by his presence he might sanctify
Gods Ordinance, and Man's society;
The friends are placed, the tables richly cloyed,
The bowls of wine are here and there convoyed,
And no things lack, that true content would have,
Or measure wish, or moderation crave,
Yet as it often unto men befalls,
Some cross does still attend their festivalls,
Their wines are spent, his mother tells him so;
Woman, says he, what is this I have ado
With thee? my 'pointed time is not yet come,
Yet for thy sake I Will show my self to some;
Cause bring me here fix water-pots of stone
Which you use for Purification:
They bring them to him: Fill them now, says he,
With fountain water, that I may them see;
Fill, fill them full, fill them unto the brim,
And with true fountain water make them swim:
It Is done: he looks on them, and anon,
O strange, mirac'lous, rare Conversion!
Without his word the water's turned to wine,
Sweet as the Malmsey, rich as Muscadine:
Drink woman now faith he, drink, drink, and fill
To others also; Cana's grapes distill
Not such a wine as does my word, therefore
Bid them come drink who love to thirst no more:
But all is in vain, I bid men drink: for why?
Nothing but blood will man's souls thirst allay.
O God, what heavenly hierogly phick's here
Of that sweet Nectar, and Ambrosian cheer
Which thou, our souls Bridegroom, shall for us make
When to thy Cana thou shall us home take!
For there our mariage-supper is prepared,
Legions of Angels shall thy Bride still guard,
The fatling's killed, thy bowls of wine are drawn,
Thy table-cloaths are dainty Cyprian lawn,
Thy bed of love is made, and richlier hung
Then that where th'Epithalamy was sung
To Solomon and Pharoh's daughter, for
Their best magnificence and proudest store
Endured but for a time; but this for ever
Shall satiate his guests, and finish never:
In Cana water was exchanged to wine,
But in thy house whosoever shall sit and dine
Shall with the fatnes of thy house be filled,
And drunk with that sweet rill thy side distilled
Whilst on the Cross thou stretched thy arms abroad
T'imbrace thy Bride, and heave her to her God:
O then, since all things that be necessare
For such a wedding feast, thou do prepare,
Prepare our hearts also to meet thee, when
Thou call'st us from out Meshechs sinful den,
That so the Bridegroom and his Virgin-bride
May in the Tents of love for ever bide.
From Cana to Capernaum next day
My blessed Savior undertakes his way,
Where dwelt a reverend grave Centurion
Whose servant's sick; in whose compassion
The Captain coming unto Christ, does thus
Entreat him: Master, master pity us,
For lo my servant's with a Palsy taken,
And of all hopes of health is quite forsaken;
Since then all hopes of humane helps be gone,
And we be left to mourn his griefs alone,
I pray thee let thy helping hand supply
His great distemper and necessity.
Go, says my Savior, get thee home, for I
Will quickly come, and cure his malady.
No, says the grave Centurion, take no pain
Great master, to turmoile thy self in vain,
I am not worthy that thou (glorious thou)
To come within my roof thy self should bow,
Speak but the word alone, and he shall live,
For, that thy word can heal him I believe;
Lo, I am one set in authority,
Subdew'd to one, and many unto me;
To one I say, go hither, and he go'th;
TO another, do this, and that straight he does;
Unto a third, I say come, and he comes;
Thus what I will is done, and none presumes
To disobey what I command, my word
For their obedience is a law assured.
When Jesus hears those words, he stands amazed,
And on the following troops a while he gazed,
And says at length, In truth and verity
Such faith in Israel I did never see;
But this I tell you, that the time's at hand,
When many from the West and East shall stand
Within my Churches faithful glorious pale,
And be baptized as sons of Israel,
And with old Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, they
Shall eternize a solemn holy day;
While as the children of the kingdom shall
In utter darkness mourn a Madrigall:
Go, therefore says he, to the Captain, go
And as thou have believed, even so
Be it to thee: and at that very hour,
The servants life and health was made secure:
O God, how do thou by this grave dispute
To Japhets children freely contribute
The promise of eternal life, if they
By faith shall on thy words their rest rely:
Give us therefore what of us thou requir'st,
And then require of us what thou desir'st.
Now babbling fame has took her wings to fly
Through all the neighboring Regions far and nigh,
And make the glorious powers of this man
Control the Earth, and daunt the Ocean,
For whatsoere he does is quickly told,
And in fames Ephimerides enrolled.
To shun therefore the peoples vain applause,
Whose changing currents oftener ebbs then flows,
Down to Tiberi^'s sea he goes, that thence
He may show favor to the Gadarens:
But whilst he is in the ship, his former toil
Persuades him in a sleep to rest a while;
His eyes are scarcely shut, when lo, dark clouds
Obscure the heaven, and proud Aeolian thuds
Distemper so the Main, that Neptunes locks
Wax hoary-white with dashing against the rocks;
Here one pround wave does Babel-like arise,
And with tumultuous threats affronts the skies;
Another, here, falls to so vast a deep,
That Pluto's wak'ned from his morning sleep:
A midst this surly gust the poor ship's ross'd,
And with impetuous winds and tides so crossed,
That his Disciples in their fear do rore,
And for their health their masters help implore,
Help, help great master (say they) help, awake,
And on thy perishing train some pity take,
For if thou do not now extend thy power,
This swallowing tempest will our souls devour:
He straight awakes, and unto them he says,
O you of trembling hearts, and fainting faith!
What do you fear? Peace winds, faith he, the are still,
Peace raging Seas; and they grow calm at will;
By this the Ship is brought unto the shore,
And neither winds nor seas molest them more.
O thou controller of the winds commotion!
O thou dread daunter of the undaunted Ocean!
Speak peace to our tumultuous souls, for why,
Unless our sp'rituall tempests thou allay,
Unless thou swage and calm their storms in time,
We sink and perish, for we cannot swim.
No sooner were the winds by is word appeased,
No sooner's Neptune by his word asswag'd,
When Jesus with his few Disciples go
To Gadara, that they his power might know:
But by the way, that Sp'rit who works our spite,
And in our ruins takes his chief delight,
Having entrenched in his prodigious roles,
The mortal bodies, not the immortal souls
Of two poor men, while as they see him come
Like ramping Lions, and like Boars in foam,
The approach his presence, and in fury cry,
Jesus thou son of God, who dwel'st on high,
What have we here to do with thee? for this
Of our just torment in the deep abyss
Is not the full time, and we suffer wrong
If there before due time thoudost us throng.
What is your name? says he: they answer, Legion,
For we be many in this humane region,
And as thy Father is the Lord of hoasts
So we, as many, love to scour their coasts:
Come out, come out says he, you cursed crew,
And of these wretches take your last adiews.
If we must needs go out, then let us go
Say they, and enter in those swine, for lo
When thou ejects us from this Isle of man,
Thy little world, we must do what we can
To rob him of his best approved pulse,
And nestle there because we lose himself.
Go, go says he; they go, and take possession
Of those poor beasts, and in so fearful fashion,
That they no sooner feel their grievous yoke,
But to the Sea they run, and there they choke:
O glorious thou, who to the world did come
TO unlose those snares which Satan thrusts on some,
And leave some others to those sp'rituall bands
Which in eternal darkness prison stands,
Restrain our enemies rage, control his power,
Lest his assaults do our poor souls devour.
Never did a swarm of honey sucking Bees
Pursue a Waspe from out their Colonies
With greater spite, or more enraged spleen,
Then does that blockish beastly Gadaren.
Republic thrust my Savior from their coast,
Because of these few swine which they had lost:
O the blind change and choice of the sons of men,
Who ere they lose this worlds poor pelf, will len'
Their Souls a pray to Satan and betray
A lasting glory for a moments pay!
With speed therefore my Savior homeward goes,
Because they loathed his power and his truth;
And there behold a crowd of sick folks lie
A waiting him to cure their Malady;
For some even from their mothers womb lay lame,
Some Leprous, some Lethargique and some maim,
Some with an Apoplexy were o'retaken,
Some with a paralitioue blow were shaken,
Some with a Dissenterie do decay,
Some with a Calcule on their reins do cry,
Here one had eyes, but now he is dark and blind,
Here one was wise, but now is distract in mind,
A menstruall flux does here distain a woman,
A burning Ague to another's common;
All those he heals, and so doing has
Gained many a Pros'lyte to the Christian faith:
But above all, I stand amazed to spy
How at Bethesdaes poole huge heaps do lie
Of poor, weak, sick, diseased persons, who
Attend her motions and her watery flow,
For here an Angel, at some special season,
Beyond all reach of humane sense and reason,
By moving of the waters gave release
To all that were diseased in any case,
Providing always, that they stepping down
Should drench themselves in her first motion:
An hieroglyphick of our Baptims washing,
Whose watery streams can never cleanse our tashing
Unless th'Arch-angell of the Covenant
Join his dread power to the Element,
A man oppressed full eight and thirty year
With strange diseases, is at last brought here,
On whom Christ Jesus having fixed his eyes,
Does not enquire what were his maladies,
Where those his griefs did hold him, or how long
He had been bound with that infirm'ties thong?
But only asks him if he would be cured?
Of that, says he, great Master be assured,
I hunger for my health, but can not stir
To taste this waters first distemperature,
I cannot help my self, and none I have
To help me, when their helping hand I crave,
Another always stepping down before me
Is cured; and I, as if all did abhor me,
Must this my grief and languishing sustain,
Till he who wounds me bind me up again:
Rise, rise, then says my Savior, rise and walk,
I pity thy distress, I hear thy talk;
The poor man rises as Christ does appoint,
And is restored to health in every joint:
Behold, says Christ, poor man, now thou art whole,
And from thy crown unto thy very sole
There is no bruise; go, go, and sin no more
Lest worse befall thee, then thou felt'st before.
Glad should I be, if my poor Muse had breath
To follow my Redeemer in that path
Of strange stupendous miracles, whereby
In flesh he did express his Deity:
But wearied now, she needs must rest a while,
And draw away her Pencill from that toil
Which he from place to place did undertake,
To ease our sorrows for his mercies sake:
Only this one poor thing she must relate,
How he did L^^arus re-animate,
That in his Resurrection we may see
Our Resurrections rich felicity.
As Chyrstall brooks have still the broader course
The nearer they approach great Neptunes sourse;
So now the nearer that my Saviors days
Draw to an end, the more he still displayes
His heavenly wisdom, and mirac'lous power,
When opportun'ty did the same procure.
Sickness to man is prodrom of his death,
From which no natural man exemption has:
Even Lazarus, whom Jesus loved, is now
Sick to the death, and to the grave must bow:
Whilst he is sick, his sister Mary sends
A messenger to Christ, who first attends
Him in his doctrine; and thereafter says,
Sir, he whom thou do love now almost pay'th
His debt to Nature by his death, for lo
A burning Ague works his overthrow:
I know thou love him, and he loves chee,
Let then thy love to him extended be,
For thou art love it self, and from thy love
It is, that we do live, or breath, or move.
I know, says Christ, he is sick, but not to death,
Although this fit of Fever out his breath,
Yet shall the glory of the Lord appear
In his return to this life's hemispheare;
And that the Son of God may glory have,
Let him be sick, yea, fick unto the grave:
A little after, to his friends he says
Let us go hence, my staying here delay'th
The work of God; for L^zarus our friend
Lies fast asleep, and I do fully mind
T'awake him up again, for none but I
Can rouse him from the graves deep Lethargy:
If he do sleep, say his Disciples, then
He shall be well, for sleep does soften pain:
But here they do mistake, they meant that sleep
Which on our we^ried eyes does softly creep;
But Christ did mean that sleep which in the grave
Shall on each mortal man dominion have:
No, no, says Christ, to speak the truth, indeed
Our brother's dead, and death does on him feed,
And I am glad, for your sakes, that I was
Not there, when death o'return'd his short hour-glasse.
Alas, my Savior, how can thou be glad
To see man under his afflictions sad!
Do thou delight in our distresses? no,
Thou take no pleasure in our griefs or woe;
But as a loving father, who does see
His only son in that perplexity
Where wounds and blows on the one side threaten death,
And Triumph on the other promises
Eternal honor, has more joy to know
The fame which from out those his wounds shall flow,
Than he is sad to see his crimson blood
Expatiat like a Dalmatian flood:
So, from our light afflictions whilst thou spies
The trophies of thy glory to arise,
Thou do much more rejoice, than thou can grieve,
To see us wrestle, and in end survive.
To Bethany he hastes then, for there
Mary and Martha had their chief repair;
And being come, Mary with speed does run
To greet the approach of this Imperial Sun,
She sees him, and down at his feet does fall,
Master, says she, had thou been here at all
My brother had not died: Mary, says he,
Thy brother shall rise up again, trust me:
I know, says she, that at the general doom
He shall arise, and unto Judgment come:
Mary, says he, hold but thy peace, and thou
Shall see Gods glory manifested now;
Where have you laid him? come, come, let me see;
They point the place: He, with a tear-drown'd eye
Weeps out his souls sad sorrows, but for what
They neither know, nor can prognosticat:
Is this the grave, says he, where Laz'rus lies?
Is this the Tomb which his dead corpse implies?
It is, say they: then roll away this stone
Which holds him in his dusty mansion:
No, no, says Martha, now the time is past,
This is the fourth day since we made it fast,
Corruption e're now has made him stench,
His putrefaction no perfume can quench:
What, Martha, says he, have not I e're now
Told thee, that if by faith thou should subdue
Thy soul, thou should behold the power of God
Change Moses serpent to an useful rod:
They roll away the stone; to heaven does he
Lift up his heart, his hand, and weeping eye,
And with a loud voice he does thus encall
His Fathers hearing; O great All of all,
O dread Creator, and o loving Father,
From whom all creatures do their essence gather,
I thank thee that thou now have heard me, nay
I know that thou do hear me every way;
But that this people may believe, that thou
Who in thy self art very truth, and true,
Have sent me thy right hands great strength to prove,
And to the sons of men make known thy love,
To thee I cried, and yet to thee do cry,
That thou would their hard hearts once mollify:
This said, he straight on Lazarus does call,
Come forth, come forth, stay no more there at all,
I have the keys of life and death, therefore
To thee my quickening spirit I restore.
No sooner has he spoke these words, then he
Who lay in death and graves captivity
Comes forth bound hand and foot with those poor ties
Which laugh to scorn life's superfluities:
Now loose him, says he, loose him, let him go,
For God is Lord of life and death also.
O what a world of miracles do here
In coacervat troops of power appear!
He weeps and spends his tears, this tells he is Man;
His word awakes the dead, God only can;
He makes the bound to walk, and blind to see,
All this to express his sacred Deity;
Yet will not loose the bonds, nor move the stone
Himself, but gives to men direction
To act that part, that by this Riddle he
May teach the sons of men a mystery,
That he who without man did man first make
Will not man, but by man, save or forsake, Qui fecit te sine te, non servat te
sine te.

For though God works his work mirac'lously,
Yet t'ordinary means he does man ty.
And now in end, to show how Christ of late
The deaf and dumb did both re-consolate,
How for the payment of a Tributes penny
A Dolphine from the deep affords him money,
How graciously th'Adulteresse is freed
And both from sin and shame stands purified,
How that poor man who from the womb was blind
By clay and spittle does his eyesight find,
How Jairus daughter and the widows son
Of Naine were revived, how he alone
Did feed five thousand with five barley loaves,
How dry-foot on the Seas, proud waves he roaves:
I dare not longer undertake to tell,
Lest under such a weight my spirits fail:
Let this suffice; those few which here be shown
Make both his Godhead and his Manhead known.
The Proselyt's.
CANTO 5o.
AS when a grave and sage Gymnosophist,
Minding to put his Scholar to the list
Of public dispute, whence he hopes to gain
The honor of his long turmoyling pain,
Prescribes him first some disputable Theme,
To be contested in the Acadeam;
Which being tossed in Dialectique manner,
By quircks and Sophismes of a subtle strainer,
Gives correspondent hopes, or fears of what
The public The'ter can emarginat:
So Nicodemus having often times heard
Of that rich glory, and that rich reward
Which Christ had promised to all such as should
By his directions be governed and ruled,
Goes privily by night to him, to try
Who was the stronger, Christ, or the Pharisie?
Master, says he, I see thou art a man
Come out from God, for certainly none can
Or speak, or do, as thou have spoke and done,
Without some divine inspiration.
Is It so, says Christ, brave Nicodemus? now
I needs must tell thee what thou do not know:
Except a man be born again, it is sure
He shall not enter in at Glories door.
Be born again! says he, what is this I hear?
What man can make this paradox appear?
Can he that is old return to 's mothers womb,
And thence, being born again, a child become?
This Maxim seems very strange to me,
It over-tops my weak capacity.
What, do thou think this strange, does Christ then say,
That man must needs be born again? Nay, nay,
Unless a man be born again by water
And by the Spirits inward hid lavacre,
He cannot enter in Gods kingdom, for
What Is born of flesh, is flesh; and what is more,
What is born of the Spirit 's likewise Spirit,
Without this birth no man can heaven inherit;
The wind blows where it lists, thou hear'st the sound
Thereof, but can not tell where't may be found,
From whence it comes, or whither it does go,
So hidden are his waves who makes it blow:
Come, come, says Necodemus, tell me where
Thou can be bold this Doctrine to aver?
Thou speak to me of being born again,
But of a new birth I conceive no strain,
Thou prat'st to me of heavens great Kingdom, but
Of that Monarchick state I see no jot;
Make me then see a reason and a cause
Of what thou speak, else hold thy peace and pause.
Well Nicodemus, now of truth I see
That Nature is to Grace an Enemy,
And what the natural man thinks wisdom, that
Does God as folly excommunicat;
And what the Lord counts wisdom, that does Nature
Abhor, as void of her perfections feature:
What if I should be bold but to demand
Of thee this question; what strong power and hand
Did frame thee in thy mothers womb, when yet
In darkness, as a Non-ens, thou did sit?
Whose fingers there condensed thy bones? what power
Did fill thy veins with Bozra's crimson shower?
Who made thy nerves and artyrs so to tie
Thy bodies compact and society?
Who framed thy brains great Chaos, liver, spleen,
Thy boiling choler, or thy moyst'ning phleagm?
Who made thy eyes so watchful Sentinels?
Who made thy nose Judge of so various smells?
Who made thy tongue to speak, or ears to hear?
Who made thy knees to bow, or back to bear?
And last of all, whence had thou that poor breath
Whose presence lends thee life, whose absence death,
Whose influence warms thee with celestial fire,
And whose unmoved motion does aspire
In a poor minute to run round about
Earths drossie globe, and Seas green glassie spout,
Then in an eyes poor twinkle strives to know
The treasures of the winds, hail, rain, and snow,
Thence falling down does view that woeful deep,
Wherein the Vessels of Gods wrath do weep;
Thence scaling all the heavens, does scan the course
Of all the Stars in their imperial sourse;
Thence soaring higher, flies above the Pole,
And all the Stars where Charles great wain does role,
And in the highest heavens does steal a glance
Of great Jehova's glorious countenance,
And with a ravished strain does strive to see
His one true Essence, and his persons three;
That in the volume of his face she may
The programs of his frowns and favor spy:
All those within thy hollow bosom dwell,
And yet by natures help thou can not tell
Nor when, nor where, nor how this bulk was made,
Begun, advanced, enlarged, or finished:
Why do thou then require that nature should
Investigate or labor to unfold
The secret footsteps and that hidden way
Wherein the Almighty does his power display?
Do thou not know that in thee two men dwell,
The spirit and the flesh, whose tides do swell
So boistrously each one against the other,
That cruel Cain when he had killed his brother
Was never stuffed with more vindictive spleen,
Then do these two betwixt them entertain;
Water has no more force to drown the fire,
Fire to drink water does no more aspire,
Air in earths caverns has not such a roar,
Earth does no more airs levity abhor,
Heat against cold, and moisture against drougth
Does not so largly open their yawning mouth,
The light with darkness keeps no better coil,
Death striving against life has no such toil
As have these two, whilst their unstay'd desire
To ruin one another does aspire;
Hence does arise so fierce a conflict, that
Unless the one the other subjugat,
With laboring Rebecca, in her push,
Man may exclaim, If so, why am I thus?
For lo, the good man would, he cannot do;
And the ill he would not, that he is thrust unto:
Yet whosoever to the flesh shall give
Obedience, and in her Statutes live,
Shall from the flesh reap nothing but corruption,
And drink the bitter dregs of her destruction;
But he who by the spirit is made free
From carnal lusts and their captivity,
Shall by the obedience of the Sp'rit have peace
When all the turmoiles of the flesh shall cease:
But ay me! now I see this world is gone,
And drowned in the deep of induration;
For though the light has plentifully shined
In all her corners, yet men have repined
Against the light, and made their deeds so evil,
That they are slaves to Belial and the Devil.
Thus has he gravelled Nicodemus sp'rit,
And of a Pharisee made a Proselyte:
For nature being convinced must hold her peace,
And humane reason unto God give place.
Hence forth from Judah he does take his way,
And in Samaria purposes to stay:
Faint in his journey by the extreme heat,
Which Earth to Titan did reveberat,
He comes to Sichars well, but all in vain,
One drop of water he can not obtain:
Here down he sits, straight from Samaria come
A woman to draw water for her home,
Woman says he, I thirst extremely, pray
Lend me some water, this my thirst to alay,
The jorney's long, and eke the season hot,
Let me then drink some water from thy pot?
Some water, says she, that is strange o man,
That thou a Jew, I a Samaritan,
Can seek refreshment or a drink from me,
Those keep no commerce nor society:
Woman says he, o that thou could but know
That gift of God, and who it is that now
Does beg of thee some water for his thirst,
Surely thou should have been my beggar first,
And I to thy petition, would have given
A cup of better water brought from Heaven;
For who so drinks this water, thirsts again,
But who tastes my unemptied Ocean
Shall never thirst; for from the Eternal's throne
It spring'th, and tak'th eternal motion:
Master, says she, you talk to me of water
Whose bubling sourse some better streams does scatter;
But to my taste I never yet could see
A welspring of more precious dignity;
Our Father Jacob dig'd this well of old,
He drunk of it, his children als' were bold
To fet it to their Cattels use, art thou
Greater then they? I pray thee let me know,
That when I thirst hereafter, I may drink
And draw the waters of that better brink:
Go, says he then, and make thy husband come,
That when thou drink'st he also may have some:
I have no husband, says she. Now I hear
Thee speak the truth; for it is more then clear
That husbands five thou have already had,
And he whom now thou have, thou have not wed;
Thus have thou sinned, and in thy sin do lie,
Drunk with the dregs of sins security;
Yet though sins seed time seem a delicate,
Her harvest and her gleaning's desolate:
Master, says she, a Prophet now thou art,
For thou display'st the secrets of my heart,
Messiah when he comes can do no more,
But tell us all things; this thou do before:
I am the man, says he, expect no other
The only son of God, by flesh thy brother;
Yea, amongst many brethren the first borne
And of great David's house the exalted horn.
She hears those words, and leaves her water pot
Behind her, and to poor Samaria's lot
She hies her self with all the speed she can,
And calls them from their trades, each man by man:
Come, come says she, now blessed be the Lord
He has made true the tenure of his word,
Which promises, that in the end of time
Messiah's blood should expiat our crime;
Come, I have found him; and what is strange behold,
What I have done in all my life, h' has told,
Yea, he has fanned the secrets of my heart,
And made my soul, by grief, for sin to smart,
I never heard so grave and learned a Preacher,
So strickt a schoole-man, and so wise a Teacher.
Never does the Phaenix, when she first does fly
From out her Urn, with self-bred infancy,
With richer troops attempt her first-wing'd march
Along the conclave of th'ethereall Arch,
Than now my Savior from Samaria ^^th
To Attend his doctrine, and enrich their faith;
He sees them hunger, and he opes his mouth
To feed them with those clusters of his truth:
Your fathers, says he, worshipped in this mountain,
Here did they dig sweet water from this fountain,
But now the time draws near, and is at hand,
When neither here, nor in Judaea's land
God shall be served alone; through all the world
The chariot of his glory shall be hurled:
God is a Spirit, all that do him fear
In sp'rit and truth unto him must draw near;
You worship what you know not, o but we
Know whom we worship in sincerity,
And though salvation's to the Jews first shown,
Yet shall the Gentiles for Gods sons be known.
O now, say they unto the woman, we
Believe him not for what you testify,
But having heard him with our ears our self,
On him we build our souls eternal health,
For now we see he is that Christ should come
To ransom Israel with a precious sum.
Thus turning to Judaea's coasts again
Great multitudes do follow him amain,
For they by him mirac'lously were fed
When in the desert they were hungered:
But whilst he does their hidden thoughts espy,
With a loud voice he boldly thus does say;
Alas! I now perceive it for a truth,
This people do draw near me with their mouth,
Whilst as their hearts are far from me, for lo
Not for my Doctrine sake they do me know,
But for the barlie loaves they did partake,
When I did feed them, for my mercy sake:
But travel not I pray you, for that meat
Which is as quickly gone, as it is eat;
But labor for that bread, which lasts for ever,
Which I the son of man to you deliver:
Your Fathers in the deserts did eat Manna,
And praised the giver with a loud Hosanna,
Yet did they perish, dye, and eke consume
In their stifnecked murmuring A mertume;
But he who eats the bread that I shall give him,
Shall never perish; for it shall revive him:
I am the bread of life, which came from heaven,
My father unto you this bread has given;
That by his bread of life, which is supernall,
He may your souls maintain to life Eternal:
As many then as come to me shall neither
Have thirst nor hunger, for my glorious Father
Sent me from heaven, not my own will to do,
But man's hard heart unto his yoke to bow;
That so man may eschew his burning wrath,
And escape the sorrows of the second death:
No man has seen the Father, but the Son
Who in the Fathers bosom dwells alone,
He does reveal him unto whom he pleases,
Whose cross he lightneth, and whose soul he eases:
No man ascends unto heaven but he
Who came from heaven, and does in Majesty,
(Though base on earth) yet when he thinks sit,
Does on his Fathers right hands glory sit;
And at his second coming saves his sheep
From sinking in that never fathomed deep,
Whereas the sulpher of th'Eternalls breath
Lays hold upon the vessels of his wrath,
And makes the faithful and the righteous all
Be filled with glories endless festival.
The Metamorphose.
CANTO 6o.
FOre-chosen Jacob, Isaac's second Swain,
Jah-struggling champion and victorious man,
Thou royal she apheard, and tresprudent Siere,
Whom Palestina's Princes did admire,
Vouchsafe me but to approach thy dying throne,
And charge thee with this Gordian knot alone,
And like Apollo thou thy front shall see
Decked with a garland from the Laurel tree.
Whence come the Enthusiasm, and that sacred sury,
Which made thee all thy carnal senses bury
In Lethe's lap, and with religious rage
Divide Chams tents to Isreal's heritage.
Whence had thou wisdom and sweet inspiration
To precognose, and with true divination
Foretell that Juda's tribe should bear the sway
Till Shilo should eclipse his Majesty?
How made thou Joseph, like a fruitful Vine,
That does her arms about her Bridegroom twine,
Drunk with the grapes of Ephraims royal cup,
Which weak Manasseh's hands could not bear up?
But above all, I stand amazed to see
Lewd Levi's scatt'rings dare to approach so nigh
To Joves Ariell, offering there upon
For sin and sinners expiation!
Is Dinah dead, or Sechem's blood gone dry,
That thou do thus forget his villainy,
And without smarting for his foul offense
Exalt him to the Highpriests eminence?
It Is strange that divine Justice should permit,
Him who in the chair of sinners so has sit,
Without corrections rod possess the throne,
And sing the carrols of exemption!
O now I see, thy tongue was not thy own!
A higher power has it ruled and thrown,
Even He, great He, whose ways we cannot spy,
Because his will's the square he works by;
Who where he will have mercy, there he pardons,
And where he will with draw his grace, he hardens:
From his good pleasure then, and no where else,
It is, that Levi's tribe the rest excels,
And on his Ephod, whiter then the snow,
Has tied his breast plate, where in sumptuous show
Stands Vrim and great Thummims true direction
For light of knowledge, and for life's perfection:
So then from loins of that unhallowed stem
Which Jacob thrust from Isreal's diadem,
The Lord has chosen a successive race
Of royal Priesthood, who before his face,
Shall in that course which David did prescribe,
Burn incense and their sacrifice contrive,
With never altered, though alternat order,
Till Melchizedeck come and crush their border:
All those, like Comets when they first appear
In our sublunar regions hemispheare,
Did draw men's wandering eyes and wondering hearts,
To scan their sequels, whether smiles or smarts;
But all in vain, nature can never unty
The clasped books of heavens great mystery;
For till the Word was Flesh, great Judah's throne
Never knew her perfect exaltation;
And Aarons rod did never her top bow down
With reverence to Melchizedecks Crown:
But when thou came, those figures, types, and tropes
Had real Essence, for unreall hopes;
For where the Sun does shine in lights array,
All clouds evanish, night gives place to day:
Since then thou art true light, and since with thee
Darkness dare plead for no society,
O let me but be bold this once to follow
Thee to thy Tabor, that my sp'rit being shallow,
May by the luster of thy glories shine
Taste of that light that never shall decline.
But aye me! whilst I see the hill so steep,
The gulf of my poor misery so deep,
The flesh so frail, the sp'rit so soon o'retak'n,
The flax so quenched, the bruised reed so shak'n,
The load of sin so great, my faith so faint,
So strickt the forfeit, of the Covenant,
I cannot choose but fear, lest by the way
My hasting do defraud me of my pray,
Unless thou help who helped the faithful thief,
For I believe, Lord help my unbelief:
Come then dread Savior, let me search the time
Wherein thou did to Tabors fastege clime;
Thy Scriv'ners differ, many therefore doubt
Thy journies Epoche how they shall find out;
One says that it was fully six days after
That thou did make their souls overflow with laughter,
By promising that some who stood thee by
Should not see death, nor taste mortality
Till they, being witness of thy raptures story,
Should see the Son of man come in his glory;
Another says, the days were almost eight
After that promise, that thou scal'dst this height;
Thus do some weak minds stumble, whilst they spy
Amidst thy truth, so great variety:
But foolish we, in vanity still wallow,
We strain a Gnat, yet do a Camel swallow;
We grope at noone day, and make known our blot,
Whilst in a rush we seek a Gordian knot,
For where the eight day's near and six are spent,
By true arithmetic the seventh is meant;
Upon this day when heavens and earth were made,
And all their frame and fabric finished,
The Eternal seeing all his creatures good,
Proclaimed the seventh days rest, and so it stood;
Upon this day, from Mysraims darkened Cell
God did redeem his first born Israel;
Upon this day, from Baalz phons shore
To Migdoll, he his people dry-foot bore;
Upon this day, from Syna's thundering jaw,
He gave the Sanctions of his sacred Law;
Upon this day, in Cana's wedding shrine
He turned fountain water unto wine;
And as upon this day he next shall come
To Judge the world, and render life to some,
So on this day he takes delight to go
To Tabors top, that there he might forth show
A glance of that great glory which we shall
One day possess in his great marriage hall;
For, when six ages of the world are run,
The seventh shall finish our Redemption.
Thus having found the time, we next must view
The place wherein Christ Jesus does allow
To cloth himself with glory, for a while,
And cover Jacobs hands with Esau's guile:
The place is Tabors mountain top, whereon
He manifests his glories vision;
For till we climb above earths drossie ball,
We are not fit to enjoy heavens Festival:
On top of Moriahs mountain Abram reared
An altar to that God he loved and feared;
On Carmels top Eliah, pray'th for fire
And heavens obtemper his devout desire;
On Horebs top, and in that hollow cave,
Whilst he from Jesabel his life does save,
Earth trembles, winds do roar, and flaming coals
Of fire, for his protection raves and roles;
On Pisgahs top, meek Moses lies down,
And sleeps in his first corruption;
On Nebo's top did Aaron sweetly lay
His bones, whilst as his soul to heaven did stray;
So on mount Tabor will my blessed Savior
First pray, and then transform his true behavior,
That by him we may learn, when we draw near
To God in aspirituall Hemispheare,
To cast distractions, worldly cares and pains
Behind our backs, and make our chiefest strains
To rest on high; and whilst we talk with God,
TO obnubilate our heads within his cloud,
Leaving our Asses on the plain below,
Whilst we to heaven our sighs and sobs upthrow,
The circumstance of time and place descried,
Wherein the Son of Man was clarifi'd,
It Is fit we look on his attendants next,
That so our swarving faith may once grow fixed;
Those were three great ones, Peter, James, and John,
Those sons of thunder, this a precious stone;
If any shall enquire, why to those three
My Master manifests his Majesty?
I answer, first, that Scripture does command
That every Truth accomplished shall stand,
By Declaration of some two or three,
And from their mouth receive stability:
Next unto this, to them he shew'th indeed,
His future sufferings should no way proceed
From lack of power to confound his foes,
But from his love to mankind, hence he throws
A way his robe of weakness, and grows rich
In glories vesture, whose embroidered stitch
Bezaleel, for all his skill and art,
Never paralelled in whole, or yet in part:
And finally, to those three first is shown
His glory; for they be the first must own
His fellow sufferings: least then orflings they
Should sear his Cross, and so his cause betray,
He gives them here a glance of that reward
Which for their after sufferings was prepared;
Thus on Mount Tabors top and lofty stage,
Those three receive the greatest privilege
That ever mortals in the flesh did see,
Being chained in bonds of base mortality;
But o! no sooner have they climbed up there,
When lo, their Master kneeling in his prayer,
They fall asleep, so weak is this our flesh,
That what the sp'rit desires, it does empoish;
Yet seldom does the flesh in quiet sleep,
But some distemper to the soul does creep;
Whilst Adam slept, his rib was stolen away;
And sleep did Noah's nakedness display;
Whilst Sampson slept, his Nazarisme's gone;
The Church asleep, disknow'th her holy one;
In Jaels tent while Sisara sleeps, he is killed;
Jonah from sleep must wake ere the sea be stilled;
Yea, if the master of the house do snort,
The thief digs through, and the goods transport;
It Is good therefore that men should watch and pray,
That Christ may be their light, both night and day:
From sleep then can those three no sooner wake,
When of their Master they do notice take,
And find his count nance clarifi'd as far:
Beyond his wonted feature, as that star
Which gildes our midday, does exceed that lamp
That cuts her capers in our midnight Camp;
And all his body decked with brighter beams
Then Cynthia, when she is drunk with Neptunes streams:
The new fallen snow was never half so white,
The Fullers soape makes nothing so perfect;
Jobs snowy water, David's hyssop drops,
When from the Alembicks cloud it softly hops,
Could never make a cloth so fresh and new,
As are his vestures in Celestial hew;
Yea, with him Moses and Eliah walk
In glory, and comfort him with their talk
Concerning those dread sufferings which he was
TO endure, by Pilate and by Caiaphas:
Never could the heavens afford two fitter guests,
To talk with him of fastings or of feasts,
Then were those two; for Moses gave the Law,
And with Eliahs heaven commanding aw
The following Prophets made the world to try
The power of the Eternals verity;
Yet unto Christ both Law and Prophets tend,
From him they had beginning, he is their end:
Now, to the world I see he did not come
T'undoe the Law, or Prophets, but to sum
Them both together, that to both he might
Be guide by day, and loadstarre in the night:
Wherefore then should we in our deepest joys,
Forget our Cross, or in our crossing toys
Forget our glory, since our Savior
Amid'st his richest glory can endure
To hear of crosses, sorrows, stripes and wrongs,
In stead of trophies, triumphs, shows, and songs;
It Is fitting then that in our peace we think
Upon that wormwood cup we once must drink,
For humane minds do best digest their gall,
When expectation cooks their Madrigall.
Peter awake, beholds this glorious Trine,
And like a man awaked from out his wine,
Cries to his master, it is good we be here,
O that I could three tabernacles rear,
The first for thee, my Shilo and Messiah,
Then one for Moses, then one for Eliah;
So should we spend our time in rest and peace,
Feeding upon the glory of thy face,
And being satiat with thy glories store,
Return to our sublunar toyls no more:
Now Peter tell me, art thou truly 'wake,
Or sleep'st thou still, that thus thou do mistake?
Shall Tabor be thy dwelling place for ay?
Or shall my Savior from his sufferings stay?
Shall Moses and Eliah still remain
On Tabors top, and not return again
To that Celestial joy from whence they came?
Fie on those stag'ring wishes, fie for shame,
It Is shame that men should give their fancies scope,
But greater shame to sleep their eyes being open;
Or therefore speak the truth, or sleep thou still,
A drousie brain does judgments project spill;
And yet I pardon thy ecstatique mood,
What thou did speak, thou no ways understood.
Now scarce has Peter from a zeal bred fire
Evaporat those accents of desire,
When lo, from heaven a bright irradiat cloud
O'reshades the place whereas my Savior stood,
And from on high did sound this loud, loud voice,
Be glad o heavens, and o thou Earth rejoice,
For here is my first born son, my best beloved
Hear him, for in him only, you are approved:
At this dread sight, and at this roaring call,
The three Disciples to the earth down fall;
And like a man who with the Palsie's taken,
Their spirits are troubled, and their senses shaken:
But he who is rich in mercy, drawing near,
First touches them, and so disbands their fear;
Then bids them rise, they by's word made strong,
Do hope their former comforts to prolong:
But ah, in vain! Jesus stands there alone,
His Glory, Moses, and Eliah's gone.
O what a cloud of witness standing here,
Our humane frailty to the world mak'th clear
Those Saints of late did sleep, then were over joy'd
Then with a quivering fear were overcloy'd:
Now recomforted, but God know'th how long:
It Is strange to see what a tumultuous throng
Of changes and vicissitudes lay'th hold
On him who lives and moves upon the mold!
For nothing's stable here beneath the sun,
Perfection's cloyed with imperfection,
Strength is contempered with humane weakness,
Wisdom with folly, health with smarting sickness:
But when we shall arise to our better rest,
And in our Masters glory shall be placed,
Then shall our imperfections fly away,
And true perfection shall recleare our day,
For then the glory of our God shall hide
The spots and wrinkles of his virgin-bride,
And what in her is now with weakness mixed
Shall then in never fading strength be fixed;
For being changed unto his image, we
Shall sigh no more because of misery,
But being exalted to our all in all,
Our joys shall flourish still, and never fall.
The Hosanna.
CANTO 7o.
Never did my Savior keep such pomp and state,
Never was his train so populous and great,
Never did he take such Majesty upon him,
Never was so many eyes at once fixed on him,
As now, while as the day draw'th near wherein
His night of death should our life's day begin.
Till now he path'd his journeys all on foot,
And measured Judahs cirruits all about
Without or noise, or train, or Prince-like stage
To attend him in a royal equipage;
But now being ready his pure blood to spend,
And bring our souls Redemption to an end,
He clothes himself with Majesty indeed,
As best befitted royal David's seed:
From Bethphage therefore he two servants sends
To Syons suburbs, and thus says, There stands
An Ass, and by her side her Colt unty de,
Go bring them hither, for I now must ride;
If any ask of you, why do you so?
Say, I have need; and they shall let you go:
His two disciples go, and as he told
So find they all things, therefore they make bold,
And bring the Ass unto him with all haste,
So forth he go'th to keep the Passeov'rs feast:
The ass and colt whereon he rides, his store
Of pomp and acclamations were before
Prognosticat by Zachary, and all
According to the Scriptures verdict fall;
The Colt whereon he rides, did never till now
Her tender back to any burden bow,
Yet to his burden now she stoopeth down
As one accustomed to subjection;
The best apparel which the people wore
Are made his foot-cloths; Some do run before,
Some follow after; bows are plucked from trees,
Applauding clangor to the heaven up-flies,
And noble Palm Tree sprigs are thrown in the way,
That all succeeding times may bless that day;
Hosannah to the Highest, is their word,
And blessed be he that comes from the Lord:
And yet in all this masque and royal guise
There Is nothing but a crowd of mysteries;
For, by the Ass the Jews are understood,
And by the Colt the Gentiles: for, the food
Of sp'rituall bread and water first must flow
From Judah's fountain, and thereafter go
Unto the way of all the Gentiles, that
God may, in both, be truly celebrate;
The Jews indeed, like to this Ass, even now
Their necks to Moses legal yoke did bow,
The Gentiles, like the Colt, have not as yet
Submitted their proud necks t'obtemper it, Chrysostom.

But having snuff'd the wind up at their pleasure, Hieronim.

Now in their month are caught, toth' Gospels treasure:
The garments with the which The Apostles loathed
Those beasts, declare their doctrine, which betrothed Remigius.

Both Jew and Gentile to espouse that Lamb
Who into the world for their reunion came: Hilarious.

The garments which the people throw in the way,
That after-love unto the Truth display,
Whereby The Apostles and the Martyrs shall
Seal with their blood Truths testimonial:
The Palm Tree sprigs which from their stems are cut
And cast into the way, do point us out
The Fathers faith and constant hope, who by
The storms of worldly torments though they dye,
Yet cannot be cut from that root and stem
From which they hope an eternal di'dem:
Hosanna to the Son of David; shew'th
That he is true man: and what more he ow'th
To heaven, by's heavenly generation,
Is shut up in [the highest] acclamation.
O thou the fairest amongst the sons of men
In majesty and triumph ride thou then,
Because that truth and righteousness thou brings,
And thy right hand shall teach terrible things.
In this so rich a pomp, and pompous store
Unto Jerus'lem rides my Savior:
Jerus'lem was of old the royal seat
Of Kings, Priests, Prophets, dul'inaugurat;
Kings there did reign, for there was David's throne;
Priest there did offer their oblation;
A midst their streers, and on their sacred Temple
The Prophets fixed their oracles so ample:
Hither does now the great Messiah come,
King, Priest, and Prophet, that to all, and some
He might make known the path of life, and be
King, Priest, and Prophet to eternity:
As King he rides along their streets, and there
The clangors of Hosanna pierce the air;
As Priest unto the Temple straight he goes,
And thence the Rancour table he orethrowes;
And as a Prophet there he does foretell
The final fall and foyl of Israel.
Often has he viewed Jerusalem ere now
With small regard, or aspect of her crew;
But now the City's moved, both more and less,
And earnestly do cry, who is this? who is this?
As when the Sages, at the first, brought news
That there was born a Monarch to the Jews,
Herod, and all the town were in commotion,
To hear from strangers mouths so strange a notion,
So now, while as they see him cast aside
The rags of baseness, and in pomp to ride,
In fear, and in commotions path they range,
And what before seemed naught, does now seem strange:
Such be our souls in their still changing state,
While as we sit secure and desolate,
Bound in the fetters of iniquity,
We dream no change nor new economy;
But when with our corruptions Grace does ruffle,
And our impostors she to door does shuffle,
Straight all the anvels of our trembling heart
Do from their rest retire, and find it smart:
What mean'th this strangeness, Suleme tell menow,
With bays has he not crowned thy wrinkled brow?
Has he not wedded thee for his ture Bride,
And left the widow-world to weep? beside,
Has he not given thee thy wedding token?
Has he not earl' and late in thy street spoken?
Has he not, as the hen, sought t'over-shade
Thy chicks under his wings? has be not fed
Thy starving troops, and thy diseases healed,
And unto thee his Fathers will revealed?
Why do thou then disknow him? O, look on him,
And fix thy souls affections still upon him;
Ask Moses what he is, and he shall say
The woman's seed, who should the Serpent slay:
Ask Abra'm, he shall say he is the Pram
Who made his Isaac escape the knife and flame:
Ask Jacob, he will tell you that it is be
Who Shilo-like gives Judah liberties
Ask David, and he truly shall declare
He is his Grandchild, and his righteous heir:
Ask Esaias, and his Prophecy shall tell
He Is very God and man, Immanuel:
Ask Jeremie, he calls him Righteous branch:
Ask Daniel, he tells you he did quench
The fiery fomace, and's the stone that is cut
From out the mount without man's hand or foot,
And boldly daunteth all the worlds Empire,
And at his next return shall burn 't with fire:
Ask John the Baptist, he shall tell you that
He is the Lamb of God, immaculat:
Ask God himself; he cries, This is my Son:
Ask of the Devil, he harpes the self-same tune:
Ask of the winds, and seas, and rotten grave,
The sun, the moon, and all the world can have,
And they shall all confess him to be God,
Who in our flesh does make his true abode.
Amidst this cloud of witness, how can thou
Great Salem, so disknow thy Bridegroom now?
Thy eyes are blind, thy ears are deaf, thy heart
Is hard as flint, lest he should thee convert:
But since all things acknowledge him as God,
I see not how thou can escape his rod,
Who in so clear a night do undervalue
The Son of God, and count'st his Councels shallow.
In this his pomp and royal acclamation
He at the Temple makes his journies station:
And surely now his Temple has most need
Of any thing, to be first purified;
Her gold was turned to dross, her watchmen were
Become dumb dogs, and merely secular,
Her builders were destroyers, and her chief
Governors loved to play the wolse and thief,
Her Nazarites are black as any coal,
Her Highpriests zeal unto the world is stole,
And this her hid impoyson'd sourse and spring
To all the Kingdom does corruption bring;
For as the brains, the liver, and the heart
Being wholesome kept, and sound in every part,
The body in true life and vigor stands,
And every joint it is several use commands;
But those being once exulcerat, then all
The body by Tabasick tumors fall:
So, while Gods house her purity does keep,
Religion makes the land in peace to sleep;
But if the Altars once become impure,
The Commonwealth dy'th of an Imposture:
Here therefore does my Savior first dispose
His fathers house in order, and disclose
The hidden fraud and sacrilegious strain
That Priest and People there did entertain.
Here did the bankrup and the money-cheater,
Erect their reck'nings, and their lewd Theater;
Here did the shepherd bring his sheep to sell,
Here made the drover all his oxen dwell;
Here did the pigeons, there the turtles lie,
And so the Temples turned t'a butchery;
And what is the worst of ills, all this is done
Under the pretext of Religion:
Ah me! how fair is the pretext, but foul
The practices of this Levitique School?
When Simoon and Levi meant to slay
The Sechemites, Religion opened their way;
When Saul saves Agag and his flocks alive,
Religion did to's sin a cloak contrive;
When Herod meant our Saviors blood to spill,
His words spoke Worship, but his heart said Kill:
Those be the ways of Man, but ah, it is shame
That when man sins God should bear the blame:
A three fold whip therefore my Savior makes,
And whips their beasts from their empayling stakes,
Their doves and pigeons he let loose to fl^e,
The Colybists proud banque over turns he;
And to the rod he does this word conjoyn,
Take those things hence, and some where else purloyn,
For it is written, This my fathers house
Should serve for prayer, not for Merchants use:
But where your fathers did my father fear
As in a den of thieves, you rob and tear.
But tell me, Savior, wherefore flame thine eyes,
Whence does this spleen and agony arise,
How is the Lamb now changed into a Lion,
And who has changed to Sinay our calm Syon?
O pardon me me my God, those lashing strokes,
Those whips, those blows, those soul-subduing yoaks
Which those poor sacrilegious Ruffians bear,
Do make it as a lanthorn shine most clear,
That as in Justice thou do mercy show,
So in thy mercy thou do Justice know,
For both in thee do from Etern'ty dwell,
They neither eb too much, nor too much swell;
But by a due contemp'rature they shined,
Mercy with Judgment, wrath with love combined.
Never did a Planet of so mild aspect
Infuse so strange an influence and effect
On a sublunar or an earthly theme,
As does this Reformations rapid stream
Work upon some who did behold it: for
No sooner has my blessed Savior
Joined to the rod and whip of his correction
The salutary motto of instruction,
Then lo, his twelve Disciples straight are led
To rouse their memyr's from oblivions shade,
And call to mind, what David does record,
Thy houses zeal has eat me up o Lord,
And by beholding of that fact and place
They know their Master for the Prince of peace;
But on the hardened heart of the abject Jew,
Whose sides and backs were with his blows yet ble^,
It works nothing but a deep disdain,
Rancor, revenge, and all that cursed train
Of furies, which Erynnis in her Cell
Can beg or borrow from the deep of hell.
Master, say they, what sign do thou now show
That thou do those things? we would gladly know
By what authority, or sovereign might
Thou bringst thy Reformation to this height?
A sign? says he; o froward generation!
O serpent-issue of a sinful Nation!
You seek a sign, as if you would believe,
But this I tell you, you no thing shall have
Save that of Jonah; for as three days he
Was swallowed by a whale in the deep of the Sea,
So shall the son of man for man's trespass
Lie buried in the Earth for three days space;
Destroy therefore this Temple, and behold
Within three days I will the same re-build,
And rear it up again, as free from sin
So free from all corruptions withering.
Thus having spoke, his eyes which did of late
Flash forth the flames of fury and of state,
Drowned now in brinish tears, do still encall
His sorrowing soul to sigh this madrigall:
Jerusalem, Jerusalem, who kills
The Prophets, and do make their bloody rills
Distain thy ground, and grind'st their fainting face
Who all the day long preach to thee thy Peace,
Would God thou could acknowledge in thy day
The things that point thy peace, or thy decay!
So desolation should not lift her hand
Against this City, nor against this Land:
But ah! those things are hidden from thine eyes,
And thou art drunk, yea, drowned in miseries;
For God who always does thy sins abhor,
Takes no delight to chastise ever more,
And always chide with man; yet one sound blow
Of Justice shall repay what he does ow
To men's forgot prevarication,
So righteous is his rod and indignation,
That when men's Cup of sin does overtop,
He fills his Cup of wrath, and man drinks't up.
Here ends ASTRAEA, OR The second week.
Gloria Patri and Filio.
MELPOMENE.
On this last Scean we read a Tragic story:
How Judas did betray the Lord of Glory,
How in Gethseman's garden Christ swet blood,
How he was taken bya multitude,
How he was judged and condemned to die,
How he was racked and nailed t'a cursed tree,
How from the grave he rises up again,
And scales the heavens, Melpom'ne makes plain.
The Conspiracy.
CANTO 1o.
WHEN Haniball at Canna did ov'rcome
Terentiu^ Varro General of Rome;
When Caesar in Pharselia did defeit
Great Pompey, fautor of the Marian state,
No bigger waxed their fame and praise abroad,
Nor did at home their mut'nous envies load:
For seldom does fair Rachel gain the day,
But squint-eyed Leah steal'th the night away:
So whilst Christ Jesos in Judaea does
Display his divine and his humane truth,
By stilling of the Oceans untamed stage,
By curbing of the Hyperborean rage,
By raising of the dead from deaths cold hands,
By losing men and women from hells bands,
By purging of his Fathers glorious Temple,
Whose Reformation makes his fame more ample:
But straight as did his fame mount to a top,
Right so did envy strive to break it up:
The Pharisees, the Scribes, and Priests therefore
Conveen a Council, wherein they deplore
The sad succeeding ills which might ensue,
If they his speedy fame should not subdue:
Satan has once already sought t'assaile,
The crazie bulwarks, and the battered wall
Of humane nature, wherein God does show
The great affection he to man does ow;
Here once again, with a redoubled wrong,
He makes his front more fierce, redoubts more strong,
And, as a recrue, bring'th with him a main
Battalion of Churchmen for his train;
For what one cannot do, that many may,
And sad experience teaches this always:
They come together then, unto one place,
Whom love did never join in the bond of peace;
For they the ways of peace have never known,
They sought not what was Gods but what is their own:
Who can but wonder at this Convocation,
And foul discording concords combination?
Though Cain did his brother Abel kill,
Although against Isaac rise an Ishmael,
Though Esau do his brother Jacob hate,
Though Saul envy the happy David's state,
Though Simeon and Levi Joseph knit,
And thrust him in a deep and hopeless pit,
Though cruel Jesabel, proud Achabs wife,
For Naboth's viney ard do take Naboth's life,
It is not strange for since the Eternal did
The woman's seed from Satan's seed divide,
There has been, is, and ever shall remain
A horrid gulf of hatred them between,
And till the eternal Conqu'rour gain the field
Their conflicts cannot e're be reconciled:
Whilst then we see the worlds great Monarchs all,
Kingdoms, Empires, Republics great and small
Combine themseves against the Lords anointed,
As though Earth's axle-tree were all disjoynted;
Yet let no man who is born a son of thunder,
Be brought to gaze it with the eyes of wonder,
For though the counsels of Achitophel,
The threats of Saul, and Achabs Josabel,
The fi'ry furnace, and the Lions den,
Do rage and roar against the sons of men,
Yet shall the sons of God, by his great might,
Shine as the Sun in his Meridian light;
Their flesh may perish by the fire and sword,
But God preserves their souls alive by is word.
What shall we do, say they, if this man live?
The world runs after him, he will deprive
Us of our honor, and the Roman Nation
Shall quickly drive us from this habitation;
We have nor eyes to see, nor ears to hear,
Nor hearts to understand what danger's near,
Says Caiaphas, for it is more fitting fane
That one should perish, then the jaws of was
Should swallow upon Nation round about,
Disturb our altars, and our liver put out:
This spoke he, not so much of his own wit,
As he, who in the heaven of heavens does sit,
Did by this High Priests mouth his truth foretell,
And how he meant to save his Israel.
O God! how wondrous strange and different be
The different actors of this Tragedy?
For in this plot I do perceive still four
Opposed aspects, on my Savior;
The Almighty in it has his right hand first,
Satan his left hand next and that is accursed;
The great Sauhedrim for the third room plead,
And Judas last, for gain, will lose his head.
God had decreed from all Eternity,
To pay the ransom of our misery
In his sons blood; yet sure they needs must fin,
Whose fingers had the deepest touch therein;
For whilst they, in a hid intent do mind
The son of God in darkness bonds to bind,
The Almighty does their rapid rage ov's throw,
And ties themselves unto Eternal woe:
For as the moystning hope of cloud bred rain
Here drown'th a field, there does refresh the grain;
Or as the warming blinks of Furan's ray
Makes this flower flourish, that to shrink away;
So what the world and Satan minds to harm,
Gods providence does so (...) their charm,
That what they for our prejudice intend,
His wisdom turns to a bless^^ ^^^
O what a world of wonders do concur
While as the Almighties hand o'rerules the stir
Of humane actions for his unseen singers
Do curb the station of their strongest hingers:
Sometimes he suffers sin, and lends her being,
Then takes she Ic'rus wings, and soars a fleeing;
Sometimes he stops her course, and makes her stay,
And then for her intent she finds no way;
Sometime he sers about her such a border,
That she cannot transgress her lim'ted order;
Sometime he sits at helm, and, set at stern,
Does her unequal motions so govern,
That in her proudest strains, let her do what
She will, he still does stand immaculat,
Leaving foul sin to Satan's foul direction,
Whilst he lends only nerves unto the action.
As when the sun has on a dunghill shined
Where many hid corruptions lay combined,
The stench proceeds not from the Suns pure ray,
But from the hid corruption therein lay:
So, whilst by sin man does transgress Gods laws,
God, of the sin, must not be called the cause;
But man, abusing his licentiat will
By concupiscence, does prove guiley still:
O God, how hid's thy way? who can beguile
Thy frown of justice, or thy meicies smile?
For man, amidst them both, is bound and free,
Enfranchiled, and in captivity;
His will is free, for it is no ways ti'd,
Yet notwithstanding, all his works beside
Are captivat; for, man can do no more
Then thy good pleasure pre-(...) before.
Thus be those hellish hounds with envy big
Against David's righteous heir, and Jesse's sprig;
And that they may the better act their parts,
They charge their Sergeants, with diffembling hearts,
To go and take him where soere they could,
And for their pains do promise heaps of gold:
Me thinks I see that foul malignant spirit
Who does eternal darkness pit inherit,
Sitting at top of this lewd Councell-table,
Breath this advice to his unhallowed rabble;
My friends, says he, you descant on a theme
Whereon depends or ignominious shame,
Or never fading honor; strive therefore
T'acquit your selves as men, for I bhorre
That, in such exployts, those which follow me
Should faint for fear, or swerve for infamy;
Dally no more with strangers for this fact,
A homebred traitor's fittest for this act,
For when a stranger stands afar for fear,
A bold Dome stique dar'th, and draws near;
It Is long since I did know the ways of man,
It Is long since I his greatest strength did scan,
Yet did I never find so safe a way
As by a friend upon a friend to pray:
With Adam when at first I meant to wrestle,
I caught the Linot in his breast did nestle,
And by that rib which from his side was taken
I knocked his pate, since then it is always shaken:
Whilst Sampson, as a Na^'rite, kept his hair,
Nor Gath nor Ekron could with him compare;
But when in Gaza Dalilah pinned his harp,
He found that Sorecks Scissers were (...) sharp:
When no man could prevail for Ahais fall
At Ramoth Gilead, then did I enstall
A lying spirit in Zedekiah's mouth,
He played the Prophet, Achab felt the truth:
In vain therefore you do this man assail
By strength of hand: Desire you to prevail?
Conduce with Judas, let him have some gain;
I fire the match, he blows't, lay you the train.
This spoke, like to a Persian Decree,
Dagon does seal the Statute, hence go'th he:
But o, how woeful wretches be all you
Who to this statute and decree do how!
It had been good, that you had never been born,
Better not be at all, than be forlorn.
They call anon for Judas, he does come,
They greet him with applauding welcome home,
They do entreat him that he would betray
His master to them? he at first says nay;
But being urged, he says, what will you give,
And I shall bring him to you safe alive?
They give him thirty silv'rings for his pay,
And he to catch his master goes away.
Of late, that spirit who feeds on endless fire,
Did put a snare of Mammons foul desire
Before my Master, that worlds plenteous store
Might make him worship him: and what is more,
Of late, I heard thee, very Judas, say
To Mary Magdalen, what means this pray
And store of precious ointment? were it sold,
And put in treasure for the poor, it would
Afford three hundred pence to ease their need,
Their backs to cover, and their bellies feed:
Where Is now thy Piety, and pirty gone?
How is thy soft heart turned ^'a heart of stone?
Ah now I see thou art sent to Mammons school,
For he is pe^^^y-wi^e, and thou pound-foole:
[I will deliver him to you] thou say,
But this is more, proud wormling, then thou may,
Had not his Father given him by Decree,
Had he not given himself most willingly,
Had not the holy Ghost anointed him
To be a sacrifice for human crime,
Nor damned thou, nor all the Dev'ls of hell
Could make one hair from off his head to fall:
But now the bargain's made, the price is paid,
The Son of Man to sinners is betrayed;
The Passover that night must needs be killed,
And so the Almighty-father's will sufill'd:
No man does show himself more apt or bent
To snatch the seal of the old Testament,
Then he whostands the better Cov'nants foe,
That he partakes, and lets this other go;
O foul hypocrifie I deep induration!
That cares not for true piety, but fashion,
And by hid fraud seeks to blindfold the eyes
Of that great God, who, unseen, all things sees,
They sit at table; and, the Passeov'r eat,
Jesus beholding this white Dev'll at meat,
Cries, Verily some one that sits nigh by
Has sold me, and this night shall me betray:
Who would not think, but shame in Judas face
Should have bewrayed both him and his trespass?
But sins bad custom has so steeled his brow,
That he, to blush for shame, forgets now:
Of all the rest, each one can search, and say
Tell me, good Master, is it I, or I?
The Master for a time does hold his peace,
Then opes his mouth, and boldly to his face
Lays down the model of his treacherous way,
That so his future state he might display;
It cannot be, says Christ, but needs must come
Offenses; but woe to the man by whom
The son of man shall be berray'd, it had
Been good for him, a millstone had been laid
About his neck, and then perfidiou he
Should have been thrown into the deepest Sea;
Yea, good it had been for him, that his mother
Had never borne him: All this he does smother,
And with a bold out facing count'nar cecry
Speak plainly, Master, rell me, is it I?
Christ having charged him by his accusation,
For his indictment adds this affirmation:
Now thou have said it; what thou do, go do,
Take here the sop I reach thee, go, go too,
And what thou do, do quickly, for the will
Of my great Father I thirst to fulfill,
Nor will I drink more of this grape of wine
Till in the heavens I drink it fresh and fine.
No sooner has he spoke those words, when lo
Satan, man's hateful and orewarching foe,
Enters in Judas, and does take possession
Of his foul heart, for all his fair profession:
Some ignorant by stander would have thought,
Surely this man some special good has wrought,
That thus his Master does the rest ore-top,
And only greet him with this speel all sop:
O, but by outward gifts no man can prove
Either Gods righteous justice, or his love;
For many times the wicked have excess,
While as the righteous perish its distress;
Better it had been for that false Disciple
That he no lamb should eat, or wine could tipple,
Then that by their big morsels Bathan should
Make his foul heart his secret den and hold:
Not that or bread or wine could keep within
Their secret bosoms such a snare for finne;
Or that a sop, dipped in so four a sauce,
Of such a bad effect could be the cause;
No, that were hard, no man should then digest
His daily bread, but Satan should arest
Their souls, as capriues act him, were it so
That by their food he could their souls ov'rthrow:
No, no, that bread and wine were then no more
A common diet, as they were before,
But Sacramental then they were, and thus
Exchanged from common, to a sacred use;
He who did eat them without faith and love,
Did reap no profit to his souls behove;
But he who in true faith those morsels ear,
Received a better and spiritual meat,
Even that true bread of life that came from heaven,
And that true wine which to the Saints is given:
Judas foul heart being emptl'd of all grace,
It was no wonder though the Dev'll rook place
Within his soul, and made him seven times more
The son of Sathow, then he was before.
Let all such then as in Gods house appear
Eat of his bread, and drink his wine with fear,
For as one house together cannot hold
The God of Jacob, and base Dagons mold,
So, in man's secret soul or hidden heart
God will have nothing, if the Dev'll have part:
If Jerubbael serve the Lord above,
He must cut down his fathers heathenish grove;
If Tarshish ships would safe sale home to shore,
A flying Jonas they must hug no more;
And if a Lawyer would go safe to heaven,
He must forget or five, or six, or seven;
For God is one, and loves no division,
A gracious Union is his best provision:
Were Achan living, he would tell thee truth,
That poverty excells that wealth which does
Man's honor unto shame and sorrow sell,
And well-nigh makes his soul a slave to hell:
Rejected Saul, who spared Am'lecks flock,
Were he alive, would still hold Samuels cloak,
And never let him go, till he got grace
By true repentance to redeem his race.
Blessed is the man, who, since he naked come
Into the world, and naked must turn home,
Does, by the shelter of his quiet fire,
Make food and raiment curb his vast desire:
For Worlds, Empires, and Courts, and Crowns, and Kings
Are rich in cares, when Rest has better things;
But peace of Conscience makes the soul rejoice
More then the world and all her fading toys.
The Agony.
CANTO 2o.
WHat man is he would truly know Christ's Passion,
Then let him read that Lecture in this fashion;
First, as a Story; next a Gospel; then
A Pattern; last, a Benefit to men:
A story first it is, where men may know
That God in heaven governs the world below;
A Gospel it is, which teaches us how God
Converts our serpents to an useful rod;
A pattern it is, which does in all our crosses
Command that patience counterpoise our losses;
A benefit at last it brings to such
As by true faith his garments hem do touch:
O that we could first know aright, then trust,
Then imitate, then hold him, as he is just!
So should we be learned Scholars, faithful Saints,
Obsequious Servants, rich Participants:
But ah, our wishes and our weak desires
Cannot suffice to blow those zeal-bred fires
Which on Jove's sacred altars still should burn,
And our oblations unto ashes turn:
Come therefore, let us view that Paschall Lamb
Whose blood disdained the cursed tents of Ham,
And drenching Goshens doors with wraths proud hand
Did smite the firstborn in all Misraims land:
But ay me, where shall I begin to wonder
At thee, dread Monarch, mighty son of thunder,
Eternities sole word, and firstborn son,
Heavens promised, Earth accomplished Holy one?
Thy majesty the very heavens admire,
Thy power in the world does still appear,
Thy Justice all the damned in hell do know,
Only to man thou do thy Mercy show:
Come then, great thou, man's preordain'd peacemaker,
Teach me the fittest way how I may sacre
My pen, r'expresle the fearful agony
Thou suffer'dst for us in Gethsemanie:
Time, place, and person are the fittest square
To make this building truly regular:
If any shall enquire the period when
Thou did begin to suffer for us men,
Scripture does say, it was a darkened hour,
While as the sons of darkness had most power:
The place is known, Gethsemans garden, for
'Twas meet, that where Adam did fall before,
There thou, the second, should in bloody sweat
Repair the forfeit of our lost estate:
The person who sustains this weight of woe,
Is very God, and very Man also,
God, that his worth might Gods wrath sarisfie,
Man, that in weakness he might smart and dye:
O but this time and hour must yet be shown
A little more; sometimes it is called thy own,
Sometime it is theirs; That we may know the right,
Disperse our cloudy doubt, and give us light:
To speak the truth, at first this hour was theirs,
Then thine, then ours; on these three pair of stairs
Time tripping up and down, has made the sourse
Of our redemption to perfect her course:
Their time it was of sin and sinful wrath,
Such was the power both of sin and death;
Thy hour it was of suffering and of smart,
For fear and anguish did oppress thy heart;
Our hour it also was, for then began
The expiation of the sins of man;
Their hour of darkness, and thy hour of death,
Our hour of life, and liberty from wrath:
When thou (great master) first at Cene's wedding
Turned water into wine, at Mary's bidding,
I heard thee check her, and in seeming wrath,
As if she had even sinned to the death,
Say, woman, what have I to do with thee?
My hour is not yet come, get thee from me:
Of late, when from a steep high mountain they
Intend to throw thee down, thou shrunk'st away,
And giving place unto their furious sum,
Thou told'st them that thy hour was not yet come:
Since then, when Highpriests, Pharisees, and all
Thy foes together did conspire thy fall.
Thou told'st them, as a program of their doom,
They toiled in vain, thy hour was not yet come;
How many hours of honor have thou had?
How many times have thou been worshipped?
When Sages from the East did presents bring,
And laid them at thy feet, as Juries King;
When in the desert Angels brought thee meat,
And by their service did proclaim thy State;
When on mount Tabor thy bright face did shine,
And heavens proclaimed thee heir of their divine
Inheritance; when Salems strders didring,
With loud Hosannaes to thee as their King;
Although those hours were all, and always great,
Yet did thou not account their pomp or state
Worthy to have the note of thy great hour;
But when thou come to make our sweet thy sour,
That hour thou take, and only counts it thine,
Because in it thy Father did propine
That cup of wrath to thee, men should have drunk,
If thou from his fierce wrath had fled or shrunk.
While thou, with thy great Father, and his Spirit,
Before all time did all times praise in herit,
All hours were thine, all times; and all times motion
Did bow their knees to thee at thy devotion;
Yea, when unto thy Image man was made,
And for his use the world was furnished,
Thou made the Stars, the Sun, and Moon to shine,
And servefor poor man's use, but not for thine
Man had, and has all times at his command;
Sometime he sits, and sometime he does stand,
Sometime he laughts, and sometime sadly weeps,
Sometime he watches, some time sweetly sleeps,
Sometime he builds, sometime he does destroy,
Sometime he is dumpish, sometime rapt with joy;
All those do stand subdued unto man's will,
At his direction their tides band fill:
But thou no time have chosen, save this one
Poor hour of darkness, this thou call'st thine own;
Nor do thou so for thine own sake, but that
Thou being a Lamb of God immaculat,
In this dark hour of suff ring thou might be
The Asahel of God, the seepe-goat We;
Never did the wounded Dear with more desire
Run to the water brooks to queuch his fire,
Then thou do thirst to taste that woeful cup
Which Adam's withered hand could not bear up;
Man thou did make at first, and him so loved,
That for his rescue from Gods wrath, 't be hov'd
Thee to be Man, and all his sins sustain
To reunite him to his God again:
Such leve as this has not as yet been known,
As thou unto the sonnies of men have shown;
The love that Danid did to Jou'than bear,
Or to proud Absoloms gold-locks of hair,
With this thy love cannot be paralleled,
Thy love's epcinall, mah's by time is quel'd.
The old Passover being finished, now
The Eucharist succeeds in that liew;
They sing a Psalm, and praise that mighty God
Who brought his Israel out from Aegypts rod:
Then says my Savior, Now the hour draw'th near
Of my dread sufferings, all of you stands here,
By me this night shall be offended, for
It Is writ, The shepherd I will smite, therefore
The sheep shall all be scattered anon,
And I to sorrow shall be left alone;
Yet come, thus, thus it needs must be, for so
The Prophets have forespoken long ago.
This Peter hears, and with pride oppressed,
As if his heart were steeled, his bones were brass'd,
He says, though vainly, Master, whither shall
We run from thee? though all the world should fail,
And shrink from thee, yet will I never leave thee
Till dust and earth do of my life bereave me.
Peace Peter, says my Savior, hold thy peace,
Before the Cock crowtwice, even to my face
Thou shall deny me thrice, and by base fear
Of this thy life, thou shall my love forswear.
Thus out they go, and over Kedrons brook,
Whereas Mounr Olive; overshading look
Covers Gethseman's garden, there they stay,
But Jesus go'th aside, and thus does pray:
Father, the hour is come, now glorify
Thy Son, as he has glory given to thee;
All such as thou did give me, I have kept,
And none of them has perished, save that sheep
Or rather child of wrath and of perdition,
For him thou did nor give to my tuition;
This is eternal life, that man should know
Thee for true God, and me thy Son also;
This I have taught them, this do they believe,
Eternal life by this do thou them give;
I pray not for the world, for them I pray
That they in me by faith may always stay,
I do not pray that from the world thou take there,
But that thou in the world do never forsake them,
For while they in the world remain, they are hated,
And for my names sake shall be ill entreated;
But I have kept them in thy name, and they
Both know thee, do believe, and thee obey;
Keep them therefore, o Father, by thy truth,
Thy word is truth, they have it from my month
Nor do I pray for them alone, but eke
For all these Prof lyres, who salvation seek
By faith (begotten by their word) in me:
O let them share in my felicity,
For thou and I, o righteous God, are one,
Let them with us have also unione;
That as thou art in me, and I in thee,
So they may be made one with us truly,
And by their jointure with us two may shun
Sin, death, and hell, and condemnation.
Thus has he prayed, and now returning, he
To Peter, James, and John, familiarlie
Gives this forewarning, Watch and pray, lest that
Your restless foe do catch you in his net:
He go'th again unto his former station,
To taste the first fruits of his bitter passion;
He kneeleth down to pray, but sense of wrath
Makes him to cry, My soul unto the death
Is heavy; Father, if it be thy will
Take this cup from me, let not thy wraths rill
Lay more upon me then my strength can bear,
O hear me, Father, bow thine ears and hear.
But ah! his Agony waxing still more great,
Through his pure vains and pores, a bloody sweat
Does from his body so bedew the ground,
As if from Eor^^a's presseh' had got a wound:
Three several times in this perplexed state
Does Christ the self same words reiterat;
Father, he cries still, O let this cup
Pass from inde, for I cannot drink it up;
Yet if it be thy will, let it be so,
Thy will, and not my own, I came to do,
Father, again I pray thee let this hour
Pass from me, for it is tart above my power;
Yet for this hour into the would come I;
Why should I then decline, an piety?
No, though I smart in this my passion,
Not my will, Father, but thy will be done.
Now all this while do his Disciples fleep,
A Lethargy upon their souls did creep;
And though he waked them thrice yet thrice again
They do return to their Lethargiouest into
But heavens amazed to see his soul so sad,
Do by an Angels comfore make him glad:
Who can behold the passage of this story,
And see the dumpish fits of the God of glory,
And not be struck with more then admiration,
To view the son of God's evacuation?
What grief, what fear, what blood, what sweat is this,
Which wallowing like the Oceans vast abisse,
Can find no bottom, nor restrayning brink,
To curb his woes or make his sorrows shrink?
O Bozra, now I see thy robes are read!
O Ramah, now thy joys are banished!
O Rachel, now thy children are transperted,
And justly thou disdainist to becomforted
From Edoms winepresse whilst of late the come,
Hoping to find somesweet refresh o^ home,
Thou could find none, thou trod'st that press of wine
Alone, and therefore no man's greises like thine:
But ah me blessed Soviour! where be now
Thy wonted comforts, and that strengthening crew
Of consolations, which thou gavist of late
To thy Disciples in their woeful state?
Where Is now the comforts which the Scriptures say
Thy presence does for evermore display?
Where Is now th^^ hope, which in deaths valley, from
Thy rod and shepherds crook were wont to come?
Where Is now the promise of that great comforter
Which thou did promise as our souls supporter?
What shall become of us poor withered shrubs!
Of hysop how shall we endure the rubs,
And counter-pusss of fact all lictions, when
Thou, lofty Cedar, low^es and bows for men,
Under that burden and that load of wrath
That should press man down to the second death?
What was it Savior, tell me, that thus lay
Upon thy back with such impetuous sway?
That made thee, with a sad redoubled groan,
Say that thy soul to th'gates of death was thrown?
What? was it fear of death, and fore felt-paine
That madethee in such measure to complain?
Or was it the shame of thy ensuing Cross,
That made thee utter this distempered voice?
No, no, far be it from me to wrong thee so;
Those sighs, those groans, and grief's redoubled woe,
Did from another deeper sourse and spring
Send forth their runnais woeful bubling:
It was the woeful burden of man's finne,
Joined with th'Etem all wrath, that did begin
This woeful combat in thy soul; for lo,
What we should suffer, thou did undergo!
Hence were thy griefs, thy bloody sweats, and tears,
Hence were thy supplicavions and thy fears,
Hence were the affrighting passions of thy soul,
As man alone, thou could not them control;
The spirit of man infirm'ty may sustain,
But who can bear the Almighties deep disdain?
To see the Son of God sweat drops of blood,
(...)
And yet no wonder though ^ wondrous cause
Produce effect that reason quite diss^nowes;
If hell and death, have pains in toll^^able,
If flesh be weak, and humane faith be feeble,
What wonder was it, though, with flesh aray'd,
Thou of th'Eternalls wrath wast so dismayed:
The wonder is, how thou our true Physician
Knowing our sickness and our sad condition,
Cor Id'st by the drinking of our poisoned Cap
Refresh our souls and eke revive our hope
O that in this thy woeful agony
We could but read our own perplexity!
So should our sighs and tears in time prevent
The Eternal throbbings of deaths punishment;
But since we cannot, as we would, recall
Our misspent time, and so repair our fall,
O teach us in our lives to follow thee,
That with thee we may find conformity
Of comfort in our cross, so shall thy grace
Once make us to enjoy thee face to face;
Yea, let the path or way be what it will,
Let grief, and toil, and tears, and torment, still
Beat down our outward Man, yet let us make
Our inner man more strong by faith, and take
Example by thee, both in life and death,
To seek Gods favor and to (...) his wrath.
The Surpryse.
CANTO 3o.
THrice has the Son of righteousness displayed
The soure-sweet symptoms of a soul dismayed;
And thrice has zeale-bred prayers prevayling power
Recleer'd th'eclypses of his darkened hour;
Thrice has he bidden his Discyples pray,
Lest to tentation they should one the way;
But while he checks their watch, they are still asleep,
Droun'd in the bottom of secur'ties deep,
So frequent are our foyles, our faith ^ unsteady
That flesh is ever weak, though th'spirit's ready;
Yet once more will he rouse them from their rest,
And print this farewell, Sermon in their breast:
My friends, says he, often have, I bid you watch,
Lest Satan in his snare your souls should catch,
But you havedroup'd you have been drouzy still,
Hence forth go sleep, and take your rest at will,
For the hour is come. The Son of Man's betrayed
The Traitounis at hand and for his avde.
An armed Legion com'th, yet none can take
My life from me; but for my poor sheeps sake
I lay it down, and take it up again,
And by my willing death, you life retain:
Arise, let us go hence: Scarce are they gone
When lo the traitor and his legion
Come all along, and to my Savior go,
First to surprise him, then work his over throw,
And first comes Judus, in a poor Lambs fleece,
Though inwardly a raying Wolf be is,
Throwing his arms about his Masters neck.
Does greet him with this foul dissembling check;
Hail Master; to his word he joins a kiss,
And by that signal tells the troop who h'is:
But, o my Savior meekly does enquire,
Friend, wherefore come thou so? do thou desire
By this thy kiss to kill the Son of Man?
The task is foul, go on, do what thou can;
Had thou but as a stranger been suborned
Thus to betray me, I could well have born 't,
Or had thou as a causlesse hateful foe
Conspired to work and perpetrate my woe,
I would not then have grudged, But to see
Him who did dip his hand in the dish with me,
And him who in my bosom lately lay,
Lift up his heel against me, and betray
Me to the death, it is strange! but Father, what
Thou have begun, continue, consummat.
Fie on thee Judas, Satan's first born son,
Had thou but kept one spark of grace within
Thy hellish breast, these words of friendly love
Might have sufficed, thy treacherous heart to move,
And pulled thee down upon thy souls bowed knees
To beg the pardon of thy treacheries:
But ah! as one poor bubbling drop alone
Can hardly gutter flint, or Porphire stone;
So, hardly can one word, though never so ^^ue,
An endured heart to sense of sin subdue.
Whilst thus he sp^^ks to Judas, all the ^est
Of that proud rabble have themselves addressed
To apprehend him straight way, He but says,
Whom seek you friends? Jesus of Nar, areth
Say they: he answers, Surely I am he,
Which words import, he is God and Man truly;
Iam, did from the burning bush foretell
The safe redemption of his Israel,
And this word, He does his human'ty show,
Who by his death should satisfy the Law;
For he is the Man, and truly only He,
Who gives man life and im^ortalitie:
No sooner has he spoke those words, I Am he,
When by those words, consounded, back they fly,
And to the ground do fall, such was the power
And piercing virtue of my Savior:
He does enquire again, Whom would you have?
Jesus, say they, the man of Naxareth:
I surely am the man, says he, the truth
I have already told you from my mouth,
If me you seek, then let those go their way,
From you I shall not fly, but with you stay,
For what is writ of me, fulfill I must,
Let those go safe, lot me sustain the worst.
Not long ago my Savior has foretold
The times were coming, in the which men should
Of two coats sell the one, and buy a sword;
Peter remembers this Prophetione Word,
And seeing Matchas proudly lay his hand
Upon his Master, draws forth his brand,
And ayminght proud Malchus head, that blow
Did crop his ear, and cut it quite in two:
Surely the sword of Peter was but just,
Who stops his ear to God, and man does trust,
May justly lose his ear, his eye, his hand,
And all his body that does God withstand:
But Peter here does wrong, could he but know it,
He beats the stone, and quts the hand did throw't;
The blow on Judas should have been moresure,
Who the Author was of this distemp'rature;
Malchus but acts false Judas falser plot,
It Is pity Judas had not Malchus lot:
Yet, that poor Peter now may wisely know
That good intention's not enough to show
The actions good; and, that shows cannot hide
The hidden frailty of a self-sick pride,
Christ bids him put his transhing sword again
Into his place, for humane streng this vain,
And he who by the sword his will does cherish,
Shall sometime by the sword both fall and perish;
Do thou not know, says he, that, what a cup
My father does propine, I must drink up
Thouh it were never so bitter? were it not so,
This world should perish in an endless woe:
Or do thou think, that if I pleased t'escape,
I could not this earths drossie globe ov'rleap,
And riding on a thousand Cherubs wings
Prepareany ineseue with the King of Kings?
Or think thou not, but if I loved t'remove,
I could command the wings of the morning dove,
And flying hence, could ease my self, and rest
Or in the Opall morn, or Amber west?
Cannot he who upon the winds does ride,
And makes his clouds his messengers beside;
Cannot he who on The Oceans waves does trip,
And lets his footsteps neither sink nor slip,
From out a wormlings paws himself our wring,
Like David's pebble from his whirling sling?
Or think thou that I am left alone?
No sure, I and my Father both are one;
And for my rescue, if I loved to fight,
And show my unresisted power and might,
No earthly Monarch can on earth command
So many millions for his guard to stand,
As I have Angels ready at my call,
To bear me in their arms lest I should fall;
O weak Disciple, thou have had true zeal,
But lack of knowledge makes thy love to fail?
Thou can not interrupt that great decree
My Father has proposed from 'ternitie;
What, shall my Fathers Justice always smoke?
Or shall his indignations heavy ycak
Still lie on Man? shall never mercy, peace,
And righteousness poor Adams seed embrace?
No, if poor man's falvation could be wrought
Without my sufferings, or his soul be brought
Back from the gates of death without my blood,
Then surely this contest might have seemed good;
But since no man on earth, or Sp'rit in heaven
Can finish that contract which ondewas driven
'Twixt God and Man in Paradise, but I,
I see no reason, or occasion why
Thou should so good awork withstand, unless
Thou should in very pride of heart profess
Thy wisdom can outreach th'Etemall story,
Of Man's salvation, and my Fathers glory.
Thus having checked poor Peter, now at last
The Ruffians seize upon him, make him fast;
But ere he goes with them, he does repair
The wound that Peter made on Malchus ear;
For lo he does but touch it with his hand,
And, as the other, it re-joyn'd does stand:
Many great wonders has he wrought ere while,
But such as this did never time beguile;
In all the rest he refcu'd still the poor,
And such as sought him for their bodies cure;
But here he is found of them that seek him not,
And heal'th the rascal would have cut his throat:
O great, o deep, o never matched love,
Which burning in the Almighties breast above,
Has not to strangers only his love shown,
But also to his enemies made it known!
Even so it is, and so has always been,
He makes his rain to fall, and sun to shine
Both on the wicked and the righteous, that
To God they both may sing Magnificat.
Now, now me thinks I see poor Abel fall
By Cain's hand, without a cause at all;
And spotless Jo seph to a Midian sold,
Blasphemed, and cast in prisons deepest hold:
Now, now the Arc of Jacobs God is taken,
And by a cursed ^hilistim is shaken:
Now, now, against Sampson, Timnahs sons do rage,
And now the vineyards hyrelings act their stage
Against the owner and his son, they have vowed
In his best blood to have their hands embrew'd;
But he, like to a Lambeled dumb before
His shearer, opes his corrall lips no more;
But only this, How often have I taught
Both in your streets and Synagogues? and naught
You either did, or spoke against me, Now
With swords, and staves, and spears, I know not how,
You come to take me as I were a thief,
And none has pity, none shows me relief.
How joyful now be all that rascal rout,
Who have beleaguered the poor Lamb about?
How many Io Paeans do they sing?
How do their chimes and bells their praises ring?
How many wags and wantons now do run
To greet the Scean of this confusion?
But whither do the Lions drag their pray,
But to their den, that it devour they may?
And whither do these mastives draw this Lamb,
But to the High Priests house from whence they came?
All his Disciples now are fled and gone,
Only does Peter follow him alone,
That by experience he might search and try
What should be the issue of this tragedy:
Now Christ unto the High Priests house is fet,
And in a squallid corner bench is set,
Peter stands in the ponch, but does not enter
For fear his life, within, should go t'adventer;
But night is dark, and Morphe^^ luls asleep
The eyes of such as to his lap do creep,
The air grow'th strange, and Bo^^as from his hold
Makes Flora's flock to shake, his breath's so cold,
A fire is therefore made of burning coals
To warm their bodies, whose enflamed souls.
Burned hotter with the flames of envies fire
Then does Vesuvius in his fiercest ire;
Here do they warm, here tauntingly they talk
Concerning cold Gethsemans secret walk,
Peter comes in to warm himself a space,
And lo, a handmaid flouts him to the face,
My friend, says she, or I am much deceived,
Or you are one of those who lately braved
Along our streets, whilst yonder fellow rode
Upon his Ass like to a Demi-god:
What do you mean, says Peter, sure not I,
I do not know the man, or's company:
Again, the dam'sell hearing him fay so,
Veilard, says she, I do for certain know
Thou Art one of those who with him still did live
Thy very Sibbols do this witness give:
Thou wrong'st me much, says Peter, this is true,
That yonder man I never saw till now:
But last of all, a man who stood nigh by,
Does thus affront him, Do not thou deny
His late acquaintance, for it is not long
Since in Gethseman thou did Malchus wrong;
By this, the Cock, day's Herald, claps his wings,
And crowing, does proclaim, the morning springs,
And not content with one poor small alarm,
He crows again, and multiplies his charm;
Peter hears this, and softly shrinks a way,
The secret cock that in his bosom lay
Crows louder to him (a great deal) then that
Which lately, did the day prognosticat,
And whilst he softly steps aside to fly,
His Master looks upon him with his eye,
And by that gracious look does now recall
To Peter's fainting souls memorial,
How he had said, Before the cock crow twice
Peter shall swear, and eke deny me thrice:
By this rememb'rance, he who late did sleep,
Now waked, goes out, and bitterly does weep:
O gracious Master, o ingrate Disciple!
How do thy favors and thy frailties triple
Their contrair combinations one t'another?
It Is strange to see such contrairs dwell together.
Of old, while Sin^y gave that thundering Law
Which led all Israel to a trembling aw,
The heavens, the earth, and all that was therein
Did seem to threaten Israel for her sin,
For there the thundrings, lightnings, trumpets, fires
So thrilled the eyes, the ears, and hid desires
Of Jacobs seed, that now for fear they cry
Let Moses speak, not God, for else we die;
But now by thee Mount Syon opes her door,
Which since the worlds first birth was shut before,
And by thee, as his son, he does declare
Mercy to those who Judgments children were:
But Peter, whilst I do behold thy fall
From off that top which thou did lately sail,
What wonder is it though stripling I be shaken,
And with a tempest trespass be ov'rtaken?
But blessed be God, thy fall was not so soul,
But true repentance has restored thy soul;
That all the world may know, As sin breeds death,
The promise of true life Repentanee has.
Look how a well-rig'd Pinnace set to sea
With blind, and Maine, and Misaens liberty,
Lacking a Pilot, who by due regard
Should sit at stern, and point her tre^bling card,
Whilst Dolphin-like she skips against the skies,
As if she would Joves starry throne surprise,
And like a Triton, in the glassie field
Dives down again, and being forced to yield
To Neptunes rage, she visits Pluto's cell,
As if she sought Euridice from hell;
But recomforted by sweet Zephyr's gailes,
Whose following favors fill her empty sails,
In short time she attains her wished shore,
Where winters tempests threaten her no more:
So fares it with the irres'lute breasts
Of Adams offspring, who do build their rests
On their own strength, no sooner do they scale
The Barracad's of Fortunes slippry ball,
When either fainting fear be-leads their heels,
And so they sink; Or else their Chariot wheels
Drawn by presumptuous Palfries, trot so fast,
That hardly can they shun a fall at last,
Unless some strong, strong hand do curb their rein,
And so their ruin and their shame restrain;
For whilst the impetuous fancies of frail man
Sets him to try the worlds vain Ocean,
Unless a steddier hand than is his own
Do guide his course, he is either quite orethrown,
Or dashed in pieces against some sturdy rock,
So furious be the flames of Satan's shock:
Thrice happy he, whom Jacobs God does guide,
And in his secret tent does always hide;
Thrice happy he, whose heart kept in Gods hand
Does neither faintly fall, nor proudly stand,
But in a due contemp'rature of Grace,
'Twixt faith and fear does wisely run his race;
O, surely such a one, when winds do blow,
When seas do rage, and earth no rest does know,
Shall by the secret influence of heaven
So steare his course, and hold his balance even,
That neither death, nor life, nor wealth, nor want,
Nor weal, nor woe can crush his Covenant,
But holding still the gripes of grace h'hath got,
Still eyes his Pole, and so he finketh not.
The Assize.
CANTO 4o.
OF late I heard the High Priests Cock crow day,
Of late I saw Aurora shrink away
From Darkness center, to the Eoan plain,
T'enamell Heavens, and guild the Ocean;
But, ay me! scarcely could the pearly morn
With opall light our earthly globe adorn,
When lo, Ixyons dark condensat cloud
Did Pha'ton ( Titans Coachman) so oreshroud,
That one should think, two nights combined in ire
Had met together to drown out Sols fire;
A presage, sure, that ere that Sun should set,
A brighter Sun should be exanimat:
Yet hopeful day has over come that shade,
And Titans rays, reclear'd, made Flora glad:
But all this while, since yester-nights surprise
Till now that Phoebus 'gins to deck the skies,
My Savior has been bound with twisted cords,
Beaten with blows, wronged by sarcastick words!
Fond Jews, and foolish Soldiers, tell me why
You do outbrave him with such cruelty?
Had he not by his own will more been tied,
Then by the Cart-ropes of your swelling pride,
He, like to Sampson, might have burst your flax,
And made your bonds to melt away like wax:
But now, what eye can choose but weep to see
Those hands which framed the heavens, the earth, the sea,
And by his dainty singers framed man
More nearly fine then art or nature can,
Thus wrung and wrested with a cord or rope,
Even whilst Arachne-like he spins our hope?
But ah me! Man's hard heart's endured so,
That he can no compassions strain allow
On him, who from the heavens vouchsafes to take
Our nature, for our Souls redemptions sake.
Now Annas High Priest, and his son in law
Great Caiaphas, unto a Council draw
The whole Sanhaedrin, Pharisees, and all
Whose suffrage can or life or death empale,
To judge the just one by injustice; He
Submits himself to all their tyranny:
But o you fools and hypocrites, wherefore
Serves all this tumult, and this mut'nous stir?
One blow in secret might have finished
Your wrath against him; such the Baptist had:
But now I see, Envy and Malice both
Concur together to oppress the Truth,
And under show of truth and justice, must
Sentence be given unjustly against the just,
And since the Scriptures be not yet fulfilled,
His blood in secret must not now be spilled.
The Bench is set, the Judges are conveen'd,
The guiltless is accused, and guilty deemed,
False witness now are sought, and many come,
The hall is full, there is no empty room;
At last two sons of Bielal are brought,
They witness against him what he never thought,
Thou sayd'st (deceiver) say they, Let this Temple
Be quite destroyed, and in three days, more ample
I will re-build it, Forty years and six
Were spent in squaring stones, and carving sticks,
To build it first; and now thou say, in three
Days space thou will repair't more sumptuously;
What, can thou do it? But he holds his peace,
And answers not to that their forged case,
And wisely does he so; for, bruise a fool
Even in a mortar, yet his folly still
Shall cleave unto him; wrangling is a vice,
And to the truth brings often prejudice:
The High Priest seeing this, says, I adjure
Thee, by the living God, to tell me sure
If that thou be the Christ, the son of God,
Say either yea or nay? (and there he stood:)
Jesus replies, Thou say it, I am he,
This world another Savior shall not see;
And that thou may my words the more believe,
I tell thee, that hereafter God shall give
The Son of Man this honor, to sit down
At his right hand, in glory and renown;
And thou shall see him come again from thence
To judge this world, by righteous recompense
At those words Caiaphas his clothes does rend
Even from their top unto their lower end,
Although against the laws express commend, Lev. 21.^^.

Which to the contrair ties the High Priests hand^
O, now I see there is an appointed time,
And for each thing beneath the Sun a Prime,
A time to laugh, and so a time to weep,
A time to travel, and a time to sleep,
A time to build, a time eke to destroy,
A time to sorrow, and a time to joy,
A time to rest, a time to run our race,
A time to speak, a time to hold our peace;
Whilst foolish Ruffians did their cavil spue,
He neither said that they were false or true,
But now whilst he his Fathers name does hear,
Setting aside of humane force all fear,
He boldly speaks the truth, and does display
The hidden Godhead in his flesh did lie:
The High Priest has his robe no sooner tore,
When thus he speaks; What need we any more
To cite a witness against him; has not he
Blasphemed God before us, impiously?
I know not what you think him worthy, sure
I think him guilty, shameful death to endure:
To this they all applaud, with acclamation,
O let him die, and perish from this Nation:
Yet once more proudly does the Priest enquire
Him of his Doctrine, and Disciples; Ire
And rapid rage does to his soul possess,
That Truth and Conscience with him have no place.
Christ answers; In your Synagogues have I
Still taught; and by me nothing secretly
Is done or said, enquire of them therefore
Who heard me, let them witness less or more.
By this, one of those slaves who stood near by
Does smite him on the face, most vil'nously,
And ads this motto to his cruel blow,
What, Villain? do thou answer the High Priest so?
Christ meekly replies, If I have spoke wrong
Bear witness of it; but if thus my tongue
Has spoke the truth, why smit'st thou me? 't may be
Some higher hand repay thy villainy.
Ah me! my God, how has this High Priest still
Spoke prophecy, although against his will?
Of late he said, it was expedient that
One for the nation should be immolat;
And now he says, he is guilty to the death,
And so both truth and lie pronounced has:
O what a vaticiny, what a word
Is this that Caiaphas does now afford?
Guilty he was, to die the death he come,
And yet not guilty to the death; as some
Man born in sin, to die the death is born,
Because by sin he is guilty, and forelorne;
But he did neither sin, nor know trespass,
For, Gods (...)'^^ Lamb, and Son he was;
And therefore since he knew not sin, no death
Over him or power or jurisdiction has:
Yet guilty was he, for (...) guilt he took,
And by the way for (...) of the brook,
And so was guilty made to death, for lo,
His bodies death must our souls death ov'rthrow;
Thus was he guilty to the death, and yet
Nor guilt, nor death his innocence did fit,
His was the death, the guilt was ours, and so
Both from the guilt and death we are free to go.
Next to this censure, all those catyss still
With excrements his glorious face do spill;
And though the glorious host of heaven are bold
In him to gaze Gods wisdom manifold,
Yet, muffling up his face, they hood-wink's eyes,
Then crave, in scorn, to hear his Prophecies:
This not enough, they be not yet content
T'afflict his body, and his soul torment,
But what is more, to Pilat's civil power
They lead him, there to have his death made sure:
From out the High Priests house and hall he is led,
And unto Pilat's hall is carried;
Tumultuous crowds of people run along,
To make their malice, and their grief more strong,
And in Iudibrious manner thus do cry,
Here Is Naz'reths Propher, pray you make him way:
Pilat affrighted with the Convocation,
Comes forth and calls the head of the Combination,
And asks the cause of this their concourse, for
Such stir Jerus'lem had not seen before;
Yet ere the Roman Depute will approve
Their combination, he does gravely move
This question to them; What has this man done,
Or against the State, or against Religion?
If he had nor a malefactor been,
Say they to Pilate, sure thou had not seen
Us stand as supplicants before thy door,
Nor had we ever judged him by thy power:
O cruel catiffes, irreligious you,
Who act such murder under pieties show!
To Pilat's house you come, but will not enter,
As if his house were hells condemning center:
Woe, woe to you, Scribes, Pharisees, and Priests,
You rav'ning Wolves, dissembling Hypocrites,
Why do you think by 'xternall rites and shows
To purge that poison in your hearts ov'rflowes?
Why do you make your platter clean without
While as the fountain's poisoned round about?
Why do you guild your graves with precious stones,
Whose richest linings are but rotten bones?
Why do you wash your hands so often with water,
While as your hearts be lust and prides Theater?
It is not Pilat's roof, nor Pilat's wall,
Nor the corruption of his Judgments hall
Can make you so unclean, or so impure
As does your sinful souls distemp'rature;
For what is from without, cannot so much
Defile the Man, as does the hearts hid touch:
But thus the Almighty has decreed, and thus,
You have determined; by a secret push
To catch the innocent unto your snare,
While as your words be soft, and smoothly fair;
But he who in the highest heavens does dwell,
Can both your fraud detect, and pride repel,
And will in his own time your plots repay
Upon your pates, with woe and weal-away.
Jesus now stands before the Pagan Judge,
And from his fury finds no refuge,
Pilat enquires him, Art thou Juries King?
I am, says he, without dissembling;
But in this world my Kingdom has no place,
Nor has this world a portion of my grace:
Pilat then on his Judgments feat fits down,
And once more asks him, of Judaeas Crown,
And tells him that if he that Crown should claim
Then should he wrong Augustus Diadem:
Not I, says he, let Caesar have what is his
And God what is God's; no other thing I wish:
But while this Roman on his bench does sit,
His wife did by her letter him entreat,
Yea, she adjures him that he should not touch
That just man; for, says she, I Have suffered much
Concerning him, this last night in my sleep,
The gods preserve thee, and thy conscience keep,
That unto him thou do no wrong nor harm,
For fear has given my soul a sad alarm:
This Pilat reads, but's deaf to such a tale,
Where will does govern, words will not prevail;
He therefore calls the multitude aloud,
Hear mut'nous you, and hark you envious crowd,
Whom will you that at this your solemn feast
I should let loose to you? what think you best?
Here have we Barrabas, a murdering thief,
Will you that he go loose and have relief,
Or, shall we let this Jesus go, pray tell,
For your desire shall be my Centinell.
O, Barrabas, say they, let him go free,
But for this Jesus, him let us Crucify:
Well then, says Pilat, since it must be so,
Him shall you have, and Barrabas shall go,
Yet bring me here some water? water's brought,
And for dissimulation lacks naught:
His hands he washes; his dissembling heart
Stands still corrupt and foul in every part,
Yet does he call, Come malecontented you,
To this just man take heed what you shall do,
For in him I do find no fault at all,
Why one hair of his head to ground should fall;
I therefore to your conscience do appeal,
To Church, to Council, and to Commonweal,
That from his blood I stand this day as free
As be my hands from their impurity.
Alas vain Pilot! had thou cleans'd thy heart,
As thou have washed thy hands, then sure no part
Of this man's blood should have against thee cried,
Then should both heart and hand been purified;
But since one thing thou say; and do another,
Thy words shall not thy foul transgression smother,
In short time thou shall find what it is to shroud
A bloody heart under thy washed hands cloud,
Water has but a superficial strain,
It cannot purge the heart, nor make it clean,
No, David's hyssop water, nor Jobs snow,
Though never so well dissolved in their thaw,
Nor Abanah, nor Parphars gliding streams,
Nor hoary Jordan, whose author'ry claims
Pre-eminence above all rills; because
In her the Syrians leprosy did pause,
Shall not be able to dissolve that spot
Which by this jurisdiction thou have got:
And thrice unhaphy, cruell-hearted Jews,
Had you the wit to pr^c^gnosce the news
That this man's blood shall, as a passing bell,
One day against your souls and bodies knell,
You neither should have wished his blood to fall
On you, nor on your seeds memorial.
Hence is my Savior from the bench forth sent,
That with a lashing whips sad chastisement
His back and belly, in a bloody gore,
Of forty stripes save one may feel the sore;
And reconvey'd to Pilats house again,
As if he had not suffered wrong nor pain,
He Is stripped naked, Adam-like, while as
He blushed for shame because he naked was;
But fig tree leaves there covered Adams skin,
Here no fig tree can lend a leaf, wherein
My Savior can enwrap his bleeding wound,
Whose gutt'ring drops distains the very ground:
Pilat beholding this, begins to hault,
(Such was the rancour of his false hearts fault)
For sin at first does to the sense seem sweet,
But tart as gall in end, says th'hypocrite;
He labored therefore much to let him go,
But neither heaven nor earth will now say so,
But still, the more that Pilat pleads him free,
The more they thirst the Christ to crucify;
And that his royal dignities they may
Though in a sarcasme, to the world display,
They with a Crown of thorns do deck his head,
His Royalty by this stands fignifi'd,
And he who in our flesh our head became,
In bloody letters writes our anagram:
Next this, a scarlet robe they put upon him,
And in his hand a Rood; then gazing on him,
With [ecce homo] they do bend their knees,
And greet him with those incongrueties;
Hail Master, say they, hail thou Juries King,
Thy Crown and Scepter tells us thou must ring:
But ay me! gracious Savior, whilst they now
Enact the Scean of thy dishonor, how
Do heaven and earth declare thy glorious worth,
And unto thee true Majesty bring forth?
Their Crown of thorns confesses thou art King,
Their purpure robes, our sins true covering,
The reed put in thy hand, as Scepter, shows
What heaven, and earth, and hell unto thee owes,
And whilst in scorn to thee they bend their knees,
They show that all the worlds chief royalties
Shall do thee worship, for the Lord once swore,
And it shall come to pass, Each creature
In heaven and earth shall bow before thy rod,
And every tongue confess thee to be God;
And their last ecce homo, shall at last
Through heaven and earths whole fabric so be cast,
That such as stripped, and scourged, and pierced thee, shall
Before thy footstool with great terror fall,
And learn, unto their grief, that thou art King,
Whilst all thy Saints shall Halelujahs sing
To thee, whose cross, whose cares, whose pains, whose shame
Procures their light, their life, their Diadem.
The Cross.
CANTO 5o.
THrough many sad afflictions, and at last
Through gates of death the righteous man is cast;
Yet never man has tasted of so many
Sad tribulations, nor was death, by any
So born, as by my Savior, from whose birth
Until his sad return unto the earth,
He never found a place wherein to hide
His head from malice, envy, wrath, and pride,
And yet, for all those sufferings which be gone,
He does but now begin his Passion:
Pilat has judged, and condemned him too,
His heart still saying that his tongue's untrue;
And now at last like Abel, to the field
Though innocent, he must be led, and killd:
The place wherein his Cross is made to stand
Is Golgotha, a place infamous, and
All putrifi'd with dead men's skuls and bones
And loathsome vapors of corruptions,
Yet here, and no where else, must he be made
A sweet-smell'd savor both for quick and dead,
And if we to traditions may give trust,
Where the first Adam lay, the second must
By his dread suffering and his woes make full
The hollow caverns of first Adam's skull,
That as in Adam's name's four letters, ly
The hidden ridle of his Impery. A (...). D (...). A (...). M (...).

So by that self-same word and borrowed name
The Second must his Gospels bounds proclaim.
The Jewish criminations, though unjust,
Have made him now a vassal to their lust;
Not to the Altar, but to Calvary,
Not to the Temple, but the Cursed tree,
Not in the City, but without the gate,
Not in a corner, but in public hate,
Not in a valley, but upon a mountain
His precious blood must bubble from its fountain,
That to all corners of the Earth, great he
May offer mercies liberality:
When first his Parents to the Temple went,
And him unto the Lord did represent,
He in that morning, morning-like, was made
A morning sacrifice for quick and dead;
Now in the evening of his life must he
An evening offering and oblation be,
That by his quiet rest and evening sleep
He might us in perpetual quiet keep:
Now is our Isaac on his way, and bears
Upon his back the symbol of our fears,
In such a patient way, th^^ Nature might
Have been ashamed to see so sad a sight:
If faintings, watchings, bloody swears, and blows,
If stripes, and platted thorns, and such like throws
Of inhuman'ty might against man prevail,
It was no wonder though his spirits did fail:
Of old, when Moses sent twelve men to try
Canaans forces and fertility,
Two of those twelve from Eschol did re-bring,
As first fruits of fair Palestina's spring,
Some pomgranats, some figs, and grapes; which, tied
Unto a pole, and on their shoulders laid,
They to the Camp of Israel did show,
As pledges of that good Lands fruitful flow,
The man who walked before, did well resemble
The sons of Sinay, who by weakne^ tremble
Under the imperial Law's ov'rburth ning yoke,
Which galls the necks of Isr'els fainting flock;
He who did walk behind, is Sions child,
His burthen's light, his yoke is undefiled;
His foot nor faints, nor shrinketh in his way,
Till in his Camp his burden down he lay;
The burden of rich grapes which 'twixt them hangs,
Is Jesus Christ, from out whose cluster springs
The Law and Gospel, in a golden cup,
Making men drunk with faith, with love, with hope:
But here before our eyes is truly set
A real emblem, and no counterfeit
Proposed hieroglyphick, of that case
Which all the faithful do in Christ embrace;
My Savior goes before, and willingly
Takes up his Cross, and bears it patiently,
Till fainting by the way, he is forced to lend
Unto an alien his Cross lightest end.
Do not we know what discrepance of old
The name of Jew and Gentile did unfold?
For whilst unto the Laws empire, the Jew
Did both his heart and haughty neck subdue,
Rebellious Japhet wandering in his pride,
Like to the wild Ass turned his neck aside,
But now by this sole cross they are reconciled,
And unto Japhets sons is how revealed
The mystery of godsinesse in such store,
That whilst Christ, as a Jew, does go before,
Cyrenes Gentile sweetly walks behind,
And in the Cross does consolation find;
That Jew and Gentile, bound and free, and all
Who for salvation hunger, thirst, and call,
May know, that by the cross of Christ alone
The way is opened to Salvation.
Thus has he bore his cross, it him must bear,
He under it did groan, it him must rear,
And he whose power the world does underprop,
Must by a cursed tree be now born up;
This engine of the cross was strange and rare,
Appointed by the Romans, in their war,
For such as with a proud uplifted hand
Their higher pow is injunctions did withstand,
And for all such whose hand did foil or stain
Their Temples, or their Idols did profane;
This Cross along the ground is laid, and on
It Is torturing rack, and large dimension
Of height, of breadth, and length, the glorious Christ
Must be out stretched in every joint and wrest,
That as the heavens are high above our head,
And as the East from Welt's distinguished,
And Hels deep center is contrived below,
So in his torturing Crucifix they show
The program of their (...) tyrrannie,
And the great patience of his De^^^e.
Whilst we poor men draw near unto our death,
We wish that Natures hand should stop our breath,
We wish that pain and shame should not at tend,
Nor prove the Lacquaies of our latter end;
And last of all, we wish that our last stage
Should have the blessing of Gods heritage:
Of all those favors his Crosse's deprived,
And all their contrairs stand on it subscribed; (...)

For violence does curb dame Natures hands,
And shame and torture at her right hand stands,
And where a blessing should have said farewell,
The cursed tree does make that prop, to fail;
All those beyond all humane trust do run
Against my Savior with confusion:
Never did fountain from its bubling spout
So rich a runnall to the world send out,
As did the Cinque ports of his bodies wound,
While perforat he lay upon the ground;
Never such shame did any man sustain
As he, yet never did he once complain;
And last of all, what curse is like to that
Where heaven rejects him who is immaculat?
Those, and all those, my Savior beyond measure
Has tasted, at his glorious Fathers pleasore,
That had not he been very God and Man
He surely should have perished in his pang,
But that great Godhead which in him did dwell,
Upholds him still and makes him to prevail:
Thus to the Cross he is nailed, and with him two
Base murdering malefactors in a row
Were to their crosses also tied, that they
By their just sufferings, in some fashion may
His innocence obscure, and make men think
That he with them deserved like cup to drink;
Yet so has Isay prophesied before,
And so it needs must come to pass; what is more,
His Cross must over head import his Theme,
Jesus of Naz'reth, Juries King by Name,
Whose four acrostick letters do imply
This Hierogly prick stamp, J. N. R. J.
O how those three accursed crosses now
Stand in resemblance! that it is hard to know
Who in the trespass or transgression's chief,
The Lamb, or Lion, the innocent, or thief?
But heavens do fully know it, for from thence
Thrice has he had applause and eminence;
Earth know'th him also, for his divine power
Has many times to sweet exchanged their sour;
Devils of hell did also know'm, for lo,
His own words power their legion did ov'rthrow:
So heaven, and earth, and hell, and all must grant,
It Is not the Cross, but Cause that makes the Saint:
O happy thrice, and thrice thrice happy tree!
Though cursed to some, yet art thou blessed to me,
For never man yet reaped or could forth bring
So blessed a harvest from so cursed a spring,
As thou have done, while death from thee did wrangle
A blessed Quadrat from a cursed Triangle.
Many sweet trees have grown up, since the first
Adam did by a trees fruit quench his thirst,
But never tree did any such fruit bear
As on thy branches at this time appear,
Fair Edens fig tree lent her leaves to hide
The first man's sinful, stranefull outer side;
An Olive branch to Noah first displayed
The Oceans rage was stilled and quite allayed;
Aarons poor rod had such a secret worth,
That in one night it budded and brought forth
Ripe Almonds; Moses rod did smite the rock,
And living waters followed all the flock;
A piece of wood is cast in Mara's spring,
And sweeter draughts never fountain did forth bring;
A wooden pole a serpent does uphold,
And who so by the Serpent's stung, makes bold
To look upon it; straightway is made whole
From all that poison in his bones did role;
But all of those compared with thee proves naught,
No such a relish, no such sugger'd draught
Can man bring from them, as is brought from thee,
Immortal life from cursed mortality;
Yet do not I or praise thy self, or ground
Whereon thou standst, for better may be found,
But blessed be the Gardners hand, for that
Sweet bud he did in thee inoculat,
For such a fruit as thine was never seen;
The balme's blood-red, the virtue's always green.
Whilst thus he stands, or hangs upon his cross,
Some woeful women did bewail his loss,
But thus he does entreat them, Weep no more
For me, you Daughters of Jerus'lem, for
To wail my sufferings thus is always vain,
Heavens have ordained it, I do not complain;
But if you weep, weep for those woes which shall
Upon this perverse generation fall,
For since the days of Noah till this hour,
Yea, since fierce fire foul Sodom did devour,
So deep a wrath, and such consuming fire
Was never kindled in the Almighties ire,
Nor did his wrath burn ever half so hot
Against a Nation for her Leprous spot,
As shall against this Nation shortly burn,
Till heavens high wrath their pride to ashes turn;
But o thou heavenly and most gracious Father,
Pardon their sins, forgive their trespass, rather
Then punish this their fault; for, Father, now
I do perceive some know not what they do.
Whilst thus he hangs, and pays our bloody ransom,
Hot in the conflict, like another Sampson,
He cries, I thirst, straight do they fill a cup
With Wine and Myrrh, to him they reach it up,
He smells it, but would nor drink at all,
For now he spies their mercy's mixed with gall:
This being done, his soul is sore perplexed,
And with his Fathers frowns, for us, so vexed,
That he is forced to cry to the ears of many,
O Eli, Eli, lamma Sabachthani!
Which by interpretation is thus taken,
My God, my God, why have thou me forsaken?
One says he calls Eliah, stand aside,
And let us see what Saint in heaven can guide
Him from this cross, surely if any come,
We will believe him, we will make him room;
Not only do those Burreaves him revile,
And against that holy one lift up their heel;
But also that proud mastive, who did at
His left hand suffer, as he perpetrat,
Calls to him, and in proud lu^ibrious manner
Commands him to display his powerful banner,
And as he had saved others, save him self,
And him likewise from splitting on this shelfe;
But Jesus holds his peace, to make it plain
That he reviled, did not revile again;
Though Jesus hold his peace, yet does that mate
Which on his right hand hung, thus open the gate
To his just ire, and rebukes his brother,
He can his fury now no longer smother;
Proud railing rascal, says he, we be here
To suffer for our sins, as does appear
By all the Legends of our murdering ditty,
Justly do men therefore withdraw their pity
From us; but this just man, what has he done?
His innocence is clear, as middayes Sun;
Why do not thou fear God, and in this station
Beg shelter from a deeper condemnation?
But what thou will not do, behold I will,
Lord look upon me in thy mercy still,
And when thou come unto thy kingdom, then
Remember me in mercy, heal my pain;
Jesus beholding this his faith, replies,
Man, I do tell thee, that in Paradise
This night thou shall be with me, and shall taste
The glorious Nectar of my Fathers feast:
Father, once more, all thing are finshed,
Which thy great law requires; diminished
Is nothing which her Sanctions did crave,
And now I Am ready to be laid in grave,
I therefore come to thee, Into thy hands
I recommend my Sp'rit, let not deaths bands
Triumph ore me, for it I vanquished have,
Yet I Will subject my self unto the grave:
By this he bows his head, and gives up
The Ghost; and so has drunken up his cup.
One of those Soldiers who did him attend,
Hoping to gain some honor in the end,
Takes up his Spear to try if Christ were dead,
And in his side does thrust it over head:
Straight, from the wound does flow both blood and water,
Whose still dissever'd streams themselves so scatter,
As never Tigris and Euphrates did
More the one from the other at their sourse divide;
When the first Adam snorted in his sleep,
Great Isr'els Watchman, who poor man does keep,
Took from his side a rib, of which he made
An help unto the man, who was her head:
And now the second Adam on his Cross
Lacks not a bone, but to repair that loss
From out his side, whereon his bride now stands,
Sends forth pure water first to wash her hands,
And that clean hands may have as clean a heart,
He sends her blood to purge her better part,
His water purges and refreshes more
Then that which from Rephidims rock did rore;
His blood speaks better things then Abels did,
When she in Vesta's lap her head did hide;
And truly, such a water, or such blood,
Nor Baalzephom shore, nor Ganges flood
Did ever borrow from earths bubling vain,
While as they pard their tribute to the Main.
Lo, how the son of God in human nature,
Lo, how for Man poor creature, the Creator,
Lo, for the guilty, how the innocent,
Lo, how the lowly, for the insolent
Suffers, pays, covers, satisfies at once
Death, debt, shame, wrath, for our exemptions!
Come wayward Gentile, come rebellious Jew,
Come scoffing Atheist, Semichristian, thou
Prodigious misbeliever, natures slave,
Blasphemous mockers of the cross and grave:
Come, come, I say, and if you needs must scorn
Those hands, those feet, this heart, that crown of thorn,
From whence my Savior in such several rills
Celestial Nectar to the world distills;
If nothing here on earth, you see below,
Can your hard hearts to his obedience bow,
Look up above your head, and see what strange
Commotions through th'heav'nly regions range,
And from their troubles learn in time to tremble,
Least those their palsies prove your deaths preamble;
For whilst his soul does to the heavens ascend,
Which to his Father, he did recommend,
Straight with his last gasp, earth's round globe does shake,
As if her engines axle-tree should break;
The broad enameld courtaine of the sky,
Obfuscat with dark clouds, does droup and dye;
And since he whose right hand first formed Nature,
Has so much suffered for a sinful creature,
The frame of Nature now has sworn to show
That natures God has suffered here below;
Hence hoary Saturn turns his face awry,
And scorns to gaze so great a butchery;
The bounteous Jupiter now amazed stands,
And scorns with Amalthaea to shake hands;
Blood-thirsting Mars throws down his dart, and cries
What Phlegra's this whose Typhon scales our skies?
The wanton now betakes her to her heels,
And pulls her Pigeons from Apollo's wheels,
The witty Merc'ry throws his pen aside,
He cannot see to write for nights black pride,
And Cynthia now beholding Titans Car
Ecclipsed by a brighter morning star,
Runs from the Eoan, to the Hesperian coast,
And grapleth Titan in her arms so fast,
That brave Latona's son nor can, nor may,
But through her sad embrace, take leave of day:
Now is the Temples veil rent quite in twain,
And Jew and Gentile reconciled again;
Now are the flint-hard rocks found cut asunder
That man's hard heart might at it is hardness wonder;
Now are the graves devouring gates cast up,
And long interred dust drinks new lives cup,
That heavens, and earth, and hell, and all may see
That power of th'Eternalls victory,
Whereby he has, as both true God and Man,
For man subbu'd Deaths great Leviathan.
The Triumph.
CANTO 6o.
ERE Cairo's Monarch would let Israel go
From out the furnace of affliction, lo,
The holy one of Israel, big with ire,
Is forced in wrath to blow so fierce a fire
Against him, that a Decad of stern woes
Must fall upon him, ere he melt his snowes,
So deeply were they froze amidst his heart
That nothing but deep wrath can him convert.
Of all those plagues which did on Misraim fall,
Me thinks the last save one was worst of all;
For what are fields, or fruits, or brooks, or trees,
In respect of man's gracious faculties?
And life it self is small, being compared
With utter darkness, wherein man ensnared
By living death and dark Cimerian mist,
Of Goshens child is made a Memphytist:
Such were the foggy mists that now do stand
For three hours space through all Judaea's land,
So that the inhabitants do gaze with wonder
To see the sun obscured from his splendour:
But Titan once more does reclear his eye,
And shuffling off his Sisters canopy,
Does joy to see his eldest brothers bed
With such triumphing trophies honored.
Now whilst the stern Centurion sees the damp
That Christ his death has wrought in Natures camp,
He shrinks away for fear, and does profess
Surely this man has been Gods son, no less,
For who did ever see so firm and strong
Expressions of Deity, even among
Infirmities and weakness saddest strains,
As now burst forth in Naturesbubling vains?
By this, just Joseph, Arimathea's Lord,
Has begged of Pilat, by submissive word,
That he Christ's body might have power to take
Down from the Cross, and in his grave to make
Him rest, who rest and peace had promised
Unto all such as sought to him for aid:
Pilat yields to it; Joseph's quickly gone
Through Salems streets and rich stored shops each one,
And of pure balm and myrhs elixar'd Nard
A hundred weight he buys, and afterward
Embalmes my Saviors body, and does bind
It in a Tyrian lawn, more dainty fined
Than that which Venus puts on the eyes
Of Cupid, to obscure his leacheries;
Then in his Garden corner, with all haste,
In his new-digged tomb he has it placed,
And that the body there might rest secure,
He puts a stone upon the Sepulture.
Amongst many passions of the soul, by which
Man does his guilty mind surcharge too much,
Whilst he does wander in that desert, where
Nothing is reaped in end but grief and care,
That pultrone Fear, for most part, leads the ring,
Where Cruelty has harp'd on Envies string,
For nothing can secure that sordid mind
Where wrath and malice are in one combined:
Hence does the High Priest and his rascall-train
To Pilats hall return yet once again,
And under color of a wise prevention,
Belch out the vomit of their foul intention:
This fellow (say they) while he lived, did say,
Pull down this Temple, and on the third day
I will re-build it: Lest therefore by night
Some steal him from his grave, and so affright
The world with frantic tales of's resurrection,
Let us walk wisely; and against this infection
Prepare an an tidote; for by such toys
The weaker may be led to great annoyes:
Go, go, says Pilus, do what ere you list,
Has not his blood yet satisfied your thirst?
It Is strange to see, that death cannot put end
Unto that wrath which does on rage depend;
The very beasts that live by cruel pray,
Drink blood, eat flesh, but cast the bones away.
But ay me! poor faint-hearted Muse, how long
Will thou sigh forth his obsequies? whose wrong,
Though all the Main were turned to tears and ink,
Could not suffice to write them on her brink:
Weep therefore, weep a space; and weeping, look
Not like a runnall or a bubling brook,
Whose proudest swellings we no sooner spy
But straight they are exhaust, their channell's dry;
But like the Ocean, whose unfathomed deep
Sends forth those restless streams which never sleep,
For here thou have the deepest, deep distress
That ever heart could think, or tongue express;
The son of God, heavens masterpiece, the bright
Transplendent glory of The Almighty's light,
The Eternal Word, which was e're time began,
In time, for man, made man, nay, not a man,
A worm, a wretch, a servant, nay, a slave
To calumny, contempt, to cross, to grave!
Yet peace my Muse, and let not grief exile
Thee from due comfort; let a blushing smile
Comfort thee rather; for, those wounds which stands
Imprinted in his heart, his feet, his hands,
Make him (although despised and disdained
To carnal eyes, where sin and shame's maintained)
A precious Victime, off red up for thee,
To whom of due belonged the cursed tree;
Yea, he is that great star of Jacob, who
Makes Japhet unto Shem's sweet tents to go,
And bids the world write anthems of Rejoices
Because his grave makes ours a bed of Roses,
Where though he for a season rest and sleep,
Yet shall not earth him in her arms long keep,
But, as the Son of God, he thence shall rise,
And lead Captiv'ty captive through the skies,
And thence ascending to his glorious throne
Shall be our all in all, and all in One;
For notwithstanding all that stamp and stir
Whereby his grave is sealed and made sure,
Up, up again he shall, Gods holy one
Can in the grave take no corruption,
But by his Resurrection makes our faith
Triumph the more ore sin, ore hell, and death;
The former times prefigur'd have this truth:
Did he not save one from the Lions mouth?
Was not another thrown amidst the Sea,
And after three days set at liberty?
Yea, were not three at one thrown in the fire,
As vassals of a Tyrants proud desire,
Yet by his power so preserved, that the flame
Did neither harm their hairs, nor garments seame?
Did not he by his mighty power, ere now,
Naims poor widows son to life renew?
When Lazarus had four days ly'n in grave,
Did he not, by his word, his soul receive?
When as the good Centurion's daughter lay
Asleep, did he not turn her night to day?
When Eutichus did from his third loft fall,
Did not his quickening sp'rit his sp'rit recall?
And when Tabitha ( jappa's Nymph) lay dead,
Did not his [Cumi] straight lift up her head?
Those, and a thousand more then those, do stand
As great Herculean trophces in his hand;
Those were but shaddows, he the substance is,
The type was theirs, the antitipe is his,
And all of those bear witness that his power
Can kill and quicken, rescue and devour.
Now does the date of that appointed time
Wherein he should arise from Deaths dark clime,
Draw near, for from the sixth days afternoon,
The Sabbaths whole day he did rest eft soon;
The eight days morn no sooner'gins to break,
But lo the son of Righteousness does wake,
And with a better light the world recleare,
Then ever Titan brought to our Hemispheare;
And as that God who did the world create,
Upon the sixth day did man animate,
And on the seventh day, celebrate his rest,
A type of our Eternal heavenly feast:
So did my Souls most grarious Redeemer
Crush on the sixth day my souls sad blasphemer;
And on the seventh day resting in the grave,
Did from Goliahs hand his Israel save;
And rising on the eight days morn, has made
The woman's heel to bruise the serpents head;
This day of old had small or no respect,
But now to heaven it does our hearts erect,
And justly makes his Gods a there the Sun,
Who in th'Eccliptick of true light does run,
This day more sacred should be kept then any,
Because by it Salvation spirings to many,
And therefore (...) as far,
As Titan has beyond (...) sta^re^
For look how much our second birth is more
Then our first birth, (...) is our Sabbath, for
Upon the sixth day we had our Creation,
But on this Sabbath, light, life, and salvation;
And since upon this day, we from our fall
With him have rise, it is Dominicall,
And merits to be signed with ink that is red,
Because his blood our debt has can celled:
Th'intended period of the time now come,
The son of Jesse, Isreal's brid egroome
Comes from his late bedchamber, richly decked
With Majesty, with glory and respect,
His wedding garments, robes, and rings are on,
His griefs, his passions, and his woes are gone,
His foes are filled with fear, amaze, and wonder,
Like Latmos rent with heavens high rattling thunder;
Seraphick Spirits bow before his face,
Mortality to glory now gives place,
And all the Children of his wedding Chamber
Whose lips are Corrall, and whose locks are Amber,
Whose eyes Carbuncles are in dark of night,
Gladly do now attend this mornings light,
And from the grave they role away that stone
Which Caiaphas had fet his seal upon;
'Twere strange to see, that was could make that sure
That heavens had destined to distemp'tature!
But now the Scriptures are fulfilled; which say,
He gives his Angels charge (...) thy way
To keep thee, lest thy foot should either slip,
Or'gainst a stone at any time should trip:
Yet was it neither Angels might nor power
That did return life to my Savior,
But that same Godhead which in him did dwell,
Restored his life, and did his death expel;
For, though his soul was from his body cut,
His Godhead from his Man hood was not shut;
For, that great tie of Hypostatick union
Shall never be dissolved, or lose communion:
No, no, Man's nature which he did assume,
And unite to the Word in the Virgins womb,
Shall in no after time, or taste Confusion, (...).

Or by a stronger hand 'plain of Division,
Or by a change smell any Alteration,
Or by or death or life have Separation,
But shall for ay that union retain
Where three are one, and one is three again:
No sooner does my Souls brave Sampson draw
Gaza's gate-barrs asunder, then his aw
Makes earths wieghty globe to reatch and reele
About him, like Ixyons giddy wheel,
The dead arise and to the City go,
As witness of his great triumphing show;
The Lions to their dens return apace,
Because great Judah's Lion shakes his tresse,
And all the beasts of neighboring Forests fear,
Whilst they this matchless Lyon's roaring hear;
The chirping birds, whose sweet melodious notes
Bring sweeter crotchets from their carr'ling throats
Then all Apollo's nymphs can strain or sing
Unto his Harps delicious fingering,
Betake themselves unto their wings to fly,
Rather then in an Earthquakes arms to die;
The nibling Lambs which graze on Vesta's kirtle,
And sips her honey, suckles, and her myrtle
Leaving their breakfast, bleat, and cry, and call
Each one to gaze another festival;
Great Neptune and his Thetye now sing dumb,
Because the Sovereign of the Seas is come
To put a hook in their nostrills, and draw
Leucotheo from Achelous maw:
But above all, the long-lived Phoenix seems,
As freshly waked from her reviving flames,
To greet him with the rarest welcome that
E're Lark, or Finch, or Linot modulat;
And at his foot her starry Spangled Crown,
As to the righteous owner, she throws down;
For she revived, has thousand years in store,
But he requickneth lives for evermore:
In end comes Titan, days bright shining eye,
Who lately slept in darkness Cannopy,
And from his Orient or Eoan wave,
Where Neptune does his steps in pearl engrave,
Seeing a clearer Sun in the West arise
To all his Naids and his Napaeis, cries
Look here, and see the rare, yea rarest wonder
That ever Earth held up, or Heavens kept under;
Two Suns arise at once, and in one day
Two Titans to the world their lights display;
The one whereof, although he rise, must fall,
The other knows no Occident at all:
Thus is my Savior up, and mangre hell
And all the powers of darkness there do dwell,
A new light, life, and liberty is given
To all that hunger for the light of Heaven;
It Is true, no article of the Christian faith,
More faithless or reluctant enemies has,
Then has the Doctrine of the Resurrection
Whilst it stands canvass'd by humane direction;
Yea, nature never required a better sport
Then toss this Ball within her Tennis-court;
For faith it self can hardly sound this deep,
How a scattered non ens to an ens can creep,
Although that Nature and the Scriptures both
Have writ the hieroglyphics of this truth;
The Phoenix spicie nest her Mistress burns,
Yet she from out her fatal Urne returns;
When length of time sun-staring Eagles spills,
They do revive by casting off their bills;
Herbs, trees, and plants, which in the winter wither,
In The spring receive both sap and life together;
The Corn we sow does first corrupt and die,
Yet from that death their grains do multiply;
And if it be true, Medaea for the sake
Of Jason, made old Aesons youth to awake:
But Scripture tells us, that the first man has
By sin subdued all mankind unto death,
And that the second man does yield more grace,
Requickning that which died by our trespass;
And unto Abram's seed the Lord has said,
I am the livings God, and not the dead;
Add unto this, that he who first did make
All things of nothing, can from something take
With lesser pain, this little world of Man,
Then when at first he from the dust it span,
Nor is it just, that any coupled pair
Who work together, should not have like share
Of glory after death, who in their life
Against Sin and Satan kept a conjunct strife:
Why art thou then so sad my Soul? and why
Art thou cast down with such anxiety?
Do not thou know that Christ is made thy head,
And thou by faith his living member made;
He is thy husband, thou his wedded wife,
Whilst he does live, how can thou doubt of life?
He is the root, and thou his ingraft-branch,
When thou art judged, he sits on the bench;
He is our Main, which by our faith's hid pores
Refreshing waters to our springs restores,
And till his never ebbing streams go dry
We need not fear to lack a new supply;
Naked from out our mothers womb we come,
And thither naked must we once go home,
Yet we believe earth shall not still enfold
Us in her arms, that were too base a hold
For any, in whose soul the sp'rit of grace
Has made his mansion or a dwelling place:
No sure, suppose these putrid tents of clay
Wherein we sojourn for a night or day,
Must be dissolved, better buildings we
In heaven shall have: For Immortality
Shall this our Mortal swallow and devour
Our weakness then shall be exchanged to power,
Corruption shall to incorruption turn,
And, shame shak'd off, we shall no longer mourn;
For what by Nature we do here inherit,
Shall there renewed be by th'Eternals Sp'rit:
Though then the grave, unto weak natures taste,
Relish no better then the hemlocks feast,
Yet from her arms we reap a richer store
Then ever nature did possess before;
For there the poor have peace from their oppression,
There earths horsleeches shrink from their possession,
There rich and poor, the high, the low, and all
To earthly tempest ly no more made thrall,
But waiting for the return of their Judge,
In secret, for a while, lie still and lodge;
Since then I know that my Redeemer lives,
And that he shall perform what faith believes,
In all the periods of my life's poor date
I for my last and glorious change shall wait,
For He who was dead, is alive, and shall
To me be Alpha and Omega, All.
The Trophee.
CANTO 7o.
CHrist had not come from heaven to earth, but that
He might our dying souls re-animat;
He had not lived on earth so long, to try
Cares, watches, griefs, reproaches, misery.
Had he not meant to write us an example
In patience upon their necks to trample;
Nor had he took our flesh, if not to die,
That by his sufferings he might satisfy
The wrath of God due unto man's offense,
And reconcile that sin-bred difference;
Nor had he died, were it not to rise again
And reunite us to our Sovereign;
Nor did he rise, but that he might ascend,
And so bring our Redemptions to an end;
Thus was he born, thus did he live, and thus
He has both died and rose again for us,
That our new birth, new life, and new death may
By him be turned to an eternal day:
Now if that any ask, who shall persuade
VVeake man, that he such mighty power had?
The trembling earth, the darkened sun, the grave,
The quickened dead, the rent veil, and that slave
Which in earths centers dwells, can all declare
The Virgins son, and eke the Almighties heir,
True God and Man, earths Monarch, heavens great King
Did those stupendous works to effect forth bring:
But if sublunar things subject to error
Can neither work our joy, nor strike with terror
Our hardened hearts, let glorious Angels then
Serve to extirpate misbeliefe from men,
For they did by their presence shake those fools,
Who by their spears, and staves, and murdering tools
Sought to detain the Lord of Life in the grave;
Let all such guardians such reward still have:
Then to some weaker women, whose true care
And love to life had quickly brought them there,
They furnish matter of true consolation,
Declaring his true life, whose death and passion
Had but of late their soul so pierced with woe,
That natural comfort could not cure their blow.
Such as our conscience is, or good or bad,
Accordingly we are rejoiced or sad:
When God to us his countenance does show
Or in a cheerful smile, or frowning aw,
The righteous Man is like the Lion bold,
The wicked shrink for fear within their hold,
And one day, when their joys away shall fly,
Then shall they shrink and fear eternally.
One woman there was of a special note,
The Magdalen of late known by her spot,
But now, by penitential tears made clean,
She greater grace and favor does obtain;
For he whodwelleth in the heavens, does weigh
The hearts of men in scales of Verity,
And looks not on our outward carnal things,
But on that treasure which the heart forth brings:
To this poor woman then they first do talk,
And with her in the way of comfort walk,
That she who sometime was a sinner, might
To after-sinners show the wondrous hight,
The depth, the length, and breadth of mercy, that
Unto the penitent's accumulat;
For God does not take heed to what we were,
But unto what we by adoption are;
For still his mercies supr'abound, and more
Where sins abundant plenty dwelt before,
If he can see our tears our cheeks distaine,
And bubble up from true repentance vain.
Some eight days hence, this Nymph began to weep
And make her tears bedew her Masters feet,
Her eyes as yet have not shut up their sluices,
So deep's the memoyr of her youths abuses,
And eke so fresh the relish of his smart,
Who spent his blood to purge her sinful heart,
That she cannot her throbbing sighs restrain,
Nor from her restless seas of tears refrain,
But when sh'ath weep'd enough, she still weeps more,
And against her sorrows cannot shut the door:
Whilst thus she weeps, she turns unto her stay,
And bowing down, beholds where Jesus lay,
And lo, two Angels there do sit; the one
Where Jesus head did lie and rest; anon
Another she espies there where his feet
Had their impression in the hard rock set;
They see the woman weep, and thus enquire,
Woman, why weep'st thou? what do thou desire?
She answers, Sure I weep not without cause,
For here of late in deaths devouring jaws
My Lord did lie; but now alas he is gone,
And none can tell me whither, no, not one:
They thus reply; what fool art thou to seek
The living amongst the dead? did he not speak,
And preach to you, last day, in Galile,
The son of man must suffer, and third day
Rise up again; he is not here, go, go,
Tell his Disciples that he is rise: But lo,
Whilst thus they parley, Jesus comes, and still
Rebukes her for her misinformed will;
Woman, says he, woman, what do thou mean?
What, will thou never from thy tears abstain?
She takes him for the Gardner, and says, Sir,
If you have took him hence, pray let me hear
Where you have laid him? and be sure, from thence
I will re-bring him, at what-ere expense:
To those fond words my Savior says, But Mary?
She answers him, Rabboni; Without tarry
Falls down before his feet to kiss them; but
He to that fond affection yields not:
O do not touch me, Mary, says he, for
I am not yet ascended: but what is more
Expedient for the world, go quickly tell
My weak Disciples, that the gates of hell
Which gaped against me, now have no more power
To hedge me in, for I have broke their door,
And to my members do propine Life's cup,
That they may dine with me, I with them sup.
O what a mass or magazen is here
Of precious comfort, by a Gardener
Breathed to a woman! O what large extent
Of pardon's sealed to a Peniten^^
For whilst I see her thus so sadly weep,
And him comfort her against her griefs, I keep
In mind that Program which of late he told,
Blessed are they who mourn; for lo, behold
They shall reap comfort: and thrice blessed they
Who ask, seek, knock; for verily I say
They shall receive, and find, and enter, for
To such my Father does not shut his door.
Next this, whilst I behold the great mistake
Wherein her true affection, although weak,
Made her believe, a Gardner she had seen,
I do impute it to her tear-drown'd eyn,
I cannot choose but make my soul to smile
At this so happy fraud and sweet beguile,
For never man did (to my weak esteem)
Give him a fitter style, or truer name,
For where did ever garden, in the stower
Of stormy rage, produce so sweet a flower?
Or where did ever Gardner plant or frame
So rich an imp in such a withring stem?
Did he not first in Paradise re-plant
The promised Primrose of the Covenant?
In Baal-haman graft'd he not that Vine
About the which the Saints their arms do twine?
Is not he Sharons Rose, the Valleys Lilly,
Engeddies Camphire, Bethleems Daffadilly,
Gethsemans Gilly-flow'r, and Golgaths Rheu,
And Arimathea's Turn-sol, ever true?
It is not then a great mistake to call
Him Gardner, who makes those to rise and fall:
O glorious Gardner! whose right hand does plant
The rut'lant stars amidst the Firmament,
Who pav'st the Ocean with thy orient gem,
Plant in my soul thy Artimesian stem,
And, like the lotos in Euphrates bosom,
Be thou the Sun that still re-clears my blossom.
But ay me! what is this I now do hear
Thee say to Mary? Mary, come not near,
And touch me not: Art thou that fi'ry bush
Which made old Moses stand afar? no, tush,
The flames and threats of Sinay now are gone,
And thou art made our very flesh and bone;
Yea, thou have bid us touch, and taste, and feel
How good thou art to Isr'els Commonweal;
And yet, as if thou would some distance try,
Thou stopp'st our wonted famil'arity:
It is not long since thou endur'dst a touch,
Which justly termed might have been, Non-such;
A Traitor kissed thee, a Rascal knave
Did with his buffet and his spit out-brave
Thy glorious face; thy head was crowned with thorns,
Thy hands and feet were pierced, and with proud scorns
Of thy unlooked for death, a spear did part
The water and the blood from out thy heart:
Those touches thou endur'dst; but, ay me* now
Thou call'st for distance; but I know not how
It can subsist with thy unchanged love,
To change a sweet imbracet'a sad remove:
But pardon me, my God, for now I find
That too much love has made her judgment blind,
For since she saw thee put in porta mortis,
Her eyes have still been drowned in aqua fortis,
And in her rapture, whilst she cries Rabboni,
She turns her Benjamini to Benoni;
For though thou still be what thou wast before,
True God and Man, yet art thou now some more
Then man and mortal, but immortal, now
Kodesh laihova is writ on thy brow.
The Vrim and the Thummim on thy breast
Tells, Aaron's dead, and Melchisedeck ^s Priest;
And since true life has triumph over death,
Now must we live no more by sense, but faith;
And by the spirit, not the flesh, must we
Now seek our God, and his felicity.
Some eight days hence Christ's Disciples meet,
And in a private chamber closely sit,
The doors being shut, Christ Jesus comes in,
And greets them with his (...); then does begin
To rouz their (...) Soulles from ^eare to ^aith
Which o^ salva^ion (...) promise has,
To waken Thomas from his misbeliefe,
For lack of faith amongst many sins is chief;
Thomas, says he, thou have of late denied
To trust my Resurrection, till my side,
My hands, my feet, and all my wounds do give
Thee (by thy touch) true reason to believe;
I pity this thy weakness, for I know
The sourse and fountain whence this stream does flow
Is not proud malice, but infirmity,
The sp'rit speaks faith, flesh infidelity,
It Is true, that when those wounds I did receive,
And from my Cross was carried to my grave,
Thou did not see me, for thou rann'st away
When Judas by his kiss did me betray,
But now thou art returned, and so am I,
Thou from thy fears, I from mortality,
And since I see, upon thy fingers end
Thy faith and resolution does depend,
Come, come, thy touch not only shall be fed,
But als' thy other senses satisfied;
Come, come, I say, behold those wounds of mine
And let not misbeliefe against faith repine,
Reach here thy fingers, boldly touch my hands,
Touch those my feet, see how my side yet stands
Wide open with those wounds which did of late
My harmless body cru'ly penetrate;
And be not thou a faith less Did'mus more,
But make true faith ov'rflow thy hard hearts shore:
Thomas no sooner does stretch out his fingers
To touch Christ's side, when lo, from off her hingers
Christ pulls his heart, which then was hard as stone,
And with the touch of true contrition
Makes him bewail his infidel'ty more
Then he was bent to harden it before:
O now I find, says he, and cries aloud,
Thou art the Christ, my very Lord, my God.
O happy Thomas! what a happy change
Is this, which now does in thy bosom range?
Of late thou said, Unless I surely see
The stamps of death in his mortality,
I will not trust (what ever can be sed,)
That he from death can be recovered:
But now behold, what nature could not see,
Faith does perceive; behold, that Mustard tree
Of faith, in thee has been most shrewdly shaken,
Yet from the root it has not quite been taken:
O what a forcelesse force of heavens high thought
This alteration in thy breast has wrought!
For one thing thou did see, believe another,
And this made Faith and Nature join together;
One thing thy eyes did see, that he was Man,
Thy heart believes him God, it is more than can
By natures rules, or documents of art
Couch in thy conscience, or confirm thy heart;
But o the power of the Almighty, who
Unto the weak joins grace and nature so,
That what weak nature cannot work for want
Of strength, grace there does furnish supplement,
And though that faith does build her house on that
Which to the natural eye's unseen, yet what
May help weak nature and procure her strength
She does amasse together, and at length
From both their Magazens draws forth that store
Of grace, which Satan can deface no more.
Thrice happy Thomas, who did thus believe
Because thou saw: but, if that God shall give
The grace to such as never saw, to trust,
Thrice happy they, their faith shall make them just;
For when they by the heavens great power shall
Arise to make their last Judicial-
Account, their unseen faith shall make them see
Death has no sting, Grave has no vietorie.
Thus stands Thomas to the faith converted,
From him a hard heart by a touch is parted:
Christ to the rest of those his brethren says,
Brethren, these times require much strength of faith,
Harken therefore to what I to you say:
It Is long since I first said, I go my way,
And you were heavy that I so should speak,
For then your faith was wavering, faint, and weak;
But now your ears have heard, you eyes have seen
What I have suffered, yet my wounds be green;
Gird up your loins therefore, henceforth be strong,
For he who wrongeth you, to me does wrong,
And whosoever harmeth you, he harmeth me;
I love you, as the apple of mine eye,
Yet must not I always on earth remain,
I to my Father must return again,
And to your Father; to my God I go,
And to your holy one, and God also;
My God is your God, and my Father's yours,
The gates of hell, and all their darkened powr's
Shall not be able against you to prevail,
My Scepter and my Rod their strength shall quail.
Full forty times brave Titan now has run
About the world, and stayed where he begun;
Full forty days has he, yea, each day once
Saluted and adieu'd both Horizons;
Full forty times has Pha'ton's Chariots wheel
Bid Flora both good morrow, and farewell:
Now, now it is time that Jesus should go hence,
To Enjoy the throne of his magnificence;
Not like Duke Joshuah's Sun, which did not set
Till he proud Am^lecks forces did defeat;
Nor like to Hezekiah's Sun, whose rays
Went back on Aha's dyall ten degrees;
No, no, this Sun in Gibeah must not stand,
His foes are foiled already by his hand;
Nor will he now turn back on Aha's dyall,
To give us of our health a second trial;
But like his Grandsire, David's Sun, he now
Come from his late bedchamber, needs-must bow
The heavens, and all their vaulted arches, that
He may regain his first Magnificat,
Unto the mount of Olives out goes he,
And with him his Disciples, four times three
Save one; and many others of both sexes
He with his poor Disciples intermixes:
There does he pause a little, and anon
To him his Scholars move this question;
Master, say they; it is long since we expected
To Have seen Judaea's kingdom re-erected:
But still our expectation has been vain,
Our hoped freedom we cannot obtain,
Will thou at this time that our state restore,
Once let us know, and we enquire no more?
Poor, weak, and wayward Orphans, he replies,
It Is not for you to know the mysteries
Of times and Seasons, which my Father yet
In his unclasped Calendar keeps knit;
But what is more fitting for you I reveal,
Go back to Jerusalem there stay still,
And I to you the Comforter shall send,
Who shall you govern unto the worlds end;
For as my Father sent me, I send you,
O that his grace your souls may so endue,
That your sweet savor, wheresoever you go
May like the Balm of Gilead still flow,
And by your preaching my poor Gospel may
Celestial glory to the world display:
Then stretching out his hands, he does them bliss,
And greets them with this sweet Cignaean kiss;
O great, o holy, o righteous, o all-seeing
Father, in whom we live and have our being,
Now come I to thee, where I was before
The earth had limits, or the sea had shore,
For thou and I are one, thou art in me,
And from Eternity I was in thee,
One glory with thy coeternall Spirit
Did thou and I before all time inherit;
We all are one, that one is blessed three,
A blessed Union of blessed Trinity;
I pray thee, and I know thou do me hear,
Keep those thy servants hearts in thy true fear,
Thy word is truth, and truth is in thy word,
Besides thy word, nothing can truth afford;
Satan did lie against us at the first,
And by his lie, has made man's soul to thirst
After a lying vanity, but I
Have come from thee, by truth to edify
Their ruined souls, and make thy truth again
Repair thy image in their hearts hid plain,
The world shall hate them for thy truth, o then
Strengthen their hearts against the threats of men,
That in true wisdom they may boldly tell
When I am gone, that I Immanuel
The Eternal word, yea, thy Eternal son,
Being flesh of their flesh, bone of their bone,
Have in the flesh, by my sad sufferings, paid
What e're was due to sin, and so allayed
The fury of thy wrath, unto all such
As by true faith my garments hem shall touch;
Give grace also unto that word which they
Shall in my name or Preach or Prophecy,
That in their hearers hearts it may take root,
And in convenient time bring forth good fruit,
That so good works and faith their souls may cure,
And they may of Salvation be made sure.
This said, he with a sweet and dear embrace
Joins hand to hand, his face unto their face,
And breathing on them, bids them all farewell
Till he return their glory to reveal:
He by a bright oreshading cloud is straight
Heaved up, and taken quite out of their sight;
Thus does a shining cloud to heaven up-cary
The Son of God born of the Virgin Mary,
On whom while as the people fix their eyes
Two glorious Angels from heavens Senate flies,
And standing by them, with a sweet impire
Thus do correct their vain and vast desire,
You men of Galile, why stand you here
Groping at noonday in your Hemisphere?
This very Jesus whom you now behold
Within a clouds bright cannopy enrol'd,
Shall from the heavens in this same manner come
To give the world her last and righteous doom,
Thousands, yea, thousand thousands Angels than
Shall shout before the glorious Son of man;
Upon the Cherubs and the Seraphs he
Shall ride, and on the winds swift wings shall flee;
He shall no rapture, nor no whirl-winde crave
To raise his Saints from out their snorting grave,
But, as the worlds great owner, he shall make
The Earths foundation like a whirl-gig quake,
The Sun shall lose his light, the Moon her Ore,
The stars shall fall from heaven, the Sea shall rore,
And every soul that hah or breath or sense
Shall stand before his great Omnipotence;
For He, the righteous Judge, to them shall render
(Both to th'Apostate, and the faithful stander)
Due retribution of what they have wrought
In public word and deed, or private thought:
But since nor Man, nor Angel knows that hour,
Let all flesh labor their peace to procure,
Yea, let them watch and pray, and still take heed,
Lest while they think to live, they prove not dead.
Here, with this Cloud in which He did ascend,
I wrap my Raptures, and my Verse shall end.
Here ends MELPOMENE, or, the third Week
Gloria Patri, and Filio, and Spiritui Sancto.
FINIS.

