The chasing the young QUAKING HARLOT Out of the CITY: Or a turning the Quakers
dark side into the light, wherein is plainly discovered a twofold design
against the public peace, the one by their Doctrine, the other by their Sword:
with an Answer to E.B. Salutation to his Brethren. The Quaker sounded out of
his lying Trumpet. With seven special marks to know the Quaking Harlot from the
other Harlots. Also certain Queries sent to I. Lilburn, in order to prove his
Resurrection to be but a mere Imagination, and quaking delusion. Together, with
a certain Rule to know whether the Quakers Doctrine be a new dispensation of
Gods, or a fiction out of a Quakers Brain. By Thomas Winterton.

Acts 5.36.37. For before these days rose up Theudas, boasting himself to be
some body, to whom a number of men, about four hundred joined themselves, who
was slain, and all, as many as obeyed him, were scattered and brought to naught.

After this man rose up Judas of Galilee, in the days of the taxing, and drew
away much people after him: he also perished, and all, even as many as obeyed
him, were dispersed.

London, Printed by W.G. and are to be sold by Richard Moon, at the seven Stars
in Paul's Churchyard, near the North door, 1656.

The Chasing the young Quaking-Harlot out of the City, etc.
FOr as much as I having put forth a Book, wherein I proved Edward Borough,
and all his fellow quaking Prophets false upon their own grounds the which the
said Borough, nor his Brother James Naylor have given any answer unto,
notwithstanding the said Naylor did attempt a pretended answer, in which he
took no other course to confute me, then charging me to deny the Father, the
Son, the Spirit, and all above nature, and that without ground, or color of
ground, as my Book does clearly manifest; but for the proofs I bring to prove
them false, deceiving, juggling Prophets, upon their own grounds, he says, he
I leave to the wise to judge, himself not being wise enough, he either being
convinced, that it was a truth, or no ways able to take away those Arguments I
brought to prove it.

And now notwithstanding the said Borough, and his fellow quaking Prophets
stand thus condemned by the name of quaking Prophets, to be false, deceiving
juggling Prophets, upon their own grounds: yet the said Borough being so
perfect, as shaming nothing, notwithstanding this heinous charge against him,
proudly assumeth that he has received order and Authority from the spirit of
the living God, to write a controversy to all the Inhabitants of the Earth;
among which he accuses, condemns, and sentenceth Oliver Cromwell Lord
Protector, his Counsel, the Judges, and diverse others, with near ten several
sorts of Opinions, and Sects of Religions, to be all under the wrath, and high
displeasure of God.

But for his fellow Quakers, he salutes them, and says, they are the Lords
choice ones, his holy Seed, with whom he has placed his Covenant that they
shall reign over Hell and death, and the Crave It is said of a People in
Germany, that they held forth such purity and zeal, and heavenly mindedness,
that they seemed to hate the World, and worldly things, till they had got a
considerable party; and then they argued, that the Earth was the Lords, and
that they being his peculiar People, the worthy right owners thereof, none had
nothing to do with it but they.
and having proclaimed open War against God and Magog, he incourageth his
Brethren to prosicute it, (saying) that so they may enlarge their Dominions,
and make the Sons of Esau their slaves and bondmen.

Wherefore for as much as these young upstart-Quakers do thus proudly exalt
themselves above others, I shall endeavor to unmask them, by turning their
dark side outward, wherein lies the strength of their delusion, and discover
to the World that the Quakers drive on two dangerous designs; the one by their
Doctrine, the which leads to the destruction of the well-being of the whole
Creation. The second, by the Sword, in which they have manifested abundance of
dissimulation.

To make the first appear, I shall take notice of four particulars, the which I
have gathered out of their exercise, out of their Books, and by discoursing
with them.

First, That the peoples senses, understanding, and reason, were carnal,
fleshly, and unto condemnation.

Secondly, That Christ lighteneth every one that comes into the World.

Thirdly, That who so believes in this light, it is as a fire and a Hammer, to
break and consume all carnal lust, and fleshly and selfish desires whatsoever,
that now they cannot sin.

Fourthly That now the Scripture is no more a guide for them to walk by, nor
nothing without them, but the light within them, and he that seeks after any
other Guide, but that within him is in the flesh still.

For the first of these, this young Harlot has learned of her Mother, the old
Whore of Rome, how to lay the first stone in this Tragedy the which is in the
peoples ignorance; for as the Mother forbids the people to trust to their
own understanding, but to believe as the Church believes, so the Daughter
denies, as it were her followers the use of their senses, their understanding
and Reason, (notwithstanding God has given these faculties to the Sons of men,
out of which arises their chiefest light, by which they are to try all things,
and hold that which is good;) but tells them that they are carnal, and unto
condemnation, that so they may wholly rely upon their infallibilities; even as
a cunning Fouler, who with the sound of a Bell astonisheth and benummeth the
senses of the Birds, that they have no power to fly away, but yield themselves
up as a prey; so do these juggling quaking Prophets, astonish and benum the
ignorant unstayd-minded people with their lies, that they are as brutish as
those in the 44. of Isay. (that with one part of a Tree roasted their meat, and
warmed themselves, and with the residue they made them a God, and called upon
it for deliverance,) otherwise they might require these deceivers to cast away
their own senses, and their reason, and their own understanding first, and then
there would be no danger of their deceiving others.

For the second, that Christ lightneth every one that comes into the World it
is a truth clear from Scripture, and that this light is seated in the
understanding, and discovers to every one that will both good and evil.

But for the third, that this light does consume and destroy all carnal lust,
is most false, and contrary both to Scripture and reason, for the nature of
light is but to discover, and is not active at all: but in discovering, take it
in the body, light, or eves, they are but to discover and inform the
understanding of what they see; as the ears do of what they hear, so the light
in the understanding acts nor neither, but only determinates of what is
presented unto it, and so delivers up its sense to the will, who as an
executioner, puts the body in action, even as an artificial light: take a
Candle into a dark Room, its nature is to discover what is in that Room; but if
you light a hundred Candles, they will not remove any thing in that Room.

And therefore if the Quakers will have their Disciples purged, they must seek
something else, for light will not do it, an to they are all still in their
abominations, and that the reasons why Naylor is not ashamed to put to print
such notorious abominable lies, and Borough outstrips the Heathen in
revengeful expressions, against all but his own fraternity, quite contrary to
what he had taught, and therefore the less is the wonder though they do
outstrip all false Prophets and deceivers, seeing they are setting up the
greatest abomination that ever was before them.

Howsoever, I cannot but take notice of the subtilty of this young Harlot, who
puts one pure truth among three erors as a bait to ensnare the poor ignorant
people withal, and therefore for as much as I intend to chase their Harlot
through all their muses, I will lend her so much favor, as to presuppose that
light does cleanse and purify.

Yet do I deny that light, or any thing within man, or without him, does or
ever did, so cleanse, purify and make perfect the Sons of men, as that it were
safe and convenient to allow them no other guide or director but the dictate of
their own light and spirit within them, and that ever any of the dear Servants
of God were justly capable of such a condition, their own compliance witness
the contrary, yea, Adam in his chiefest purity, was short of this capacity.

And therefore to strip this young Harlot out of her pretenses, I shall open
this word Perfection, and show what it is, and where it lies, what
imperfection is, and from whence it arises, for herein lies the strength of
their delusion.

First, Perfection is a fullness in the mind and appetite of the Creature,
whereby it can comfortably subsist without supply to either.

Secondly, imperfection is an emptiness in the mind and appetite of the
Creature, so that it cannot comfortably subsist without supply to either.

If Adam had been created in the first, he had not sinned, because man's sin
arises from his enordinatings acting and desiring to satisfy the emptiness of
his mind and appetite so he could not have fulfilled the end for which God made
him for, the which was to dress the Garden; for labor in it self being
burdensome, and emptiness is the only provocation thereunto; for the sweetness
of the morsel sets an edge upon industry, when the full loatheth the Hony-combe.

But the Lord created Adam to dress the Garden, and in order thereunto he was
made subsistent by supply the which he at once thought to satisfy and
therefore was easily persuaded seeing the apple good to satisfy his appetite,
and to be as good to satisfy the ambition of his mind, he by his acting and
desiring enordinately (that is, quite contrary to what the Lord commanded)
purchased defilement to him and his posterity for ever.

But if Adam had been a Quaker, and God had left him to their claim, that it is
to walk by that light within him; If Adam had set fire of all the Trees in the
Garden, as well as eat the fruit of one, he had not sinned he doing it from the
dictate of that light the which was allowed him for his guide: wherefore seeing
the Quakers cannot prove that that light within man, or any thing else, either
within him, or without him, does reconstitute man into a more pure and perfect
estate and condition, then God ever intended to create man in (the which is
unpossible) then is it easy to prove that the Quakers Doctrine does
unavoidably lead to the utter desolation of the whole Creation.

Their Doctrine being that all they believe in that light wherewith Christ
lighteneth every man that comes into the World, the Scripture is now no guide
for him to walk by, nor nothing else without him, but only that light within
him.

1. Now suppose a City, a Kingdom, or the whole World should embrace this
Doctrine; suppose the whole World were as pure as Adam was in Paradise.

1. Whether every one would not be as ready as Adam was, to lay hold of what he
apprehended would best satisfy his empty hand and appetite, yea much more
readier, when they have allowance so to do; and that they may do it without
sin, being free from Law, and power of penalty.

2. And whether it might not be expected, that the generality of the Sons and
Daughters of men (if not all) would not improve and put in exercise their
chiefest strength to procure their best contentment.

And now seeing this is our Quakers Paradise to turn sin our of the World, by
making all Laws useless, let all wise and prudent people consider, whether he
that had a coat to day, might not want one to morrow; and he that had bread to
day, might not be uncertain when he should have any bread again; for who would
give his mind, or be industrious, when all he labored for might be justly
taken from him; yea, whether man would not be quickly made more miserable then
the beast of the field; for as he would soon be brought to eat grass as an Ox:
yet in Winter if he would eat hay he might starve before he could have it; for
who will provide it since none knows who shall enjoy it.

The second design is gathered from the revengfull spirit that appears to be
in these Quaking Prophets, manifested in Edr. Buroughs Salutation to his
Brethren the Quakers; wherein be does sufficiently discover his imperfection,
in changing from one thing to another: For about two years ago in his Exercist
in Whitecros street he declared to the people that those that believed in that
light with which Christ lighteneth every one that comes into the World, that
Light does break and consume all Carnal I ust, and selfish desires whatsoever,
and purifieth the heart so that they cannot sin; and that all strife and
contention and revenge was of the flesh, and of the Devil, and were to
condemnation.

But now in his book entitled, (A feigned) Trumpet of the Lord sounded out of
Sion after he had judged, condemned sentenced all Degrees and Religions that he
knew of, to be all under the high displeasure of God:

But to his Confederates the Quakers he salures them, relling them That they
are the Lords chosen ones out of the Earth, to place his Name among them. And
having with these high conceits filled up four pages, he plainly discovers a
German spirit, that as he had cried down the World, and Worldly things,
together with all strife and contention, and revenge to be carnal, and of the
Devil, and unto condemnation, he has in this small moment of time, by his
infallible spirit turned all these vices into virtues, so that now the whole
World is become little enough for their Dominions; his words are these in the
37. page.

Make War in righteousness, and prepare your selves to do his service, let
not your hands be slack, neither be you sloathful in our Lords design, but
wound the head of your enemies, and manage War against God and Magog,
throughout all Generations; ride on and prosper, and tread down the fenced
Cities, and enlarge your Dominion, and let the Children of strangers, of the
Seed of Esau, be your slaves and bondmen, and fill the Earth with your
presence.

And in the 39. page, O Sion, thou art prepared of thy God to beat the
Mountains to dust; thou art fitted for his service to thresh the Hills. Make no
tarrying, but come away, spread thy self into every corner of the Earth; for
the upright thirst for thee.

And in the 40. page; for thy God has given thee an Instrument with teeth, to
beat the Rocks to powder; he is not wanting to thee in power and wisdom: thou
Son of his love, give up, give up to obey his voice, and love not thy life unto
death, till the Seed of thy Inheritance, and the blood of thy chosen be
revenged upon the head of Jezabel, who has slain thy Elect in all Generations,
and nourished her self with the blood of the Innocent; call upon thy God, and
awake him to revenge, to smite, and to slay thy adversaries, and to consume
their Habitation from off the Earth, who have been too strong for thee: why
should thou not come forth in the power of thy judgments, to judge the
Earth in righteousness, and exalt thy name in glory?

Now for as much as I have not an infallible spirit, infallibly to interpret
what may be intended in these revengefull expressions, notwithstanding my
Imaginary faculty might find ground enough of bad consequence in them, yet I
shall leave them to better judgments, and take the boldness to inquire;

1. Whether Edward Borough does mean Gog and Magog, mentioned in Scripture so
far remote, and unknown, and the Sons of Esau so long ago dead: or whether he
means those to whom he directs his Controversy, specified in the said book,
the which is all those that opposes Quaking?

2. Whether Gog or Magog, or the Turk, or any Heathen, could go much further in
revengful expression, then E. B. does against those he intends in the said
Book, notwithstanding he has formerly taught it was of the Devil, and to
condemnation?

3. Whether Mahomet, when he was of the Quakers age, (the which is under seven
years) was not as unlikely to be numerous as the Quakers are?

4. Whether the Turk's people do not ignorantly believe that Mahomet was a true
Prophet sent from God, and what he spoke was infallibly true; and whether he
did not promise all that would believe and obey him that they should have a
glorious being after this life with many fair women; and those that would
hazard their lives for the inlargment of his Dominions, should enjoy all his
promises; and whether this conceit did not so animate them, that they feared no
enterprise; and whether this was not a great means of their prevailance?

5. Whether if the Quakers should grow considerable, in the so deluding the
people, that they should not trust their own understanding, but wholly rely
upon the infallibilities of these Teachers; whether these people thus
believing, will not be more ready to obey them, then to experiment the
lawfulness of their command?

6. Whether the Turks had not a better ground for their Faith, that Mahomet was
a true Prophet, in that he did such things as none did, as the Quakers, in
believing Naylor and Borough, that can do no more then every one can do except
out-facing?

7. Whether it be subsistent to the well-being of a Commonwealth to harbor
such Opinions, without security, as shall directly lead to the disturbance
thereof?

An Answer, to Edward Buroughs Salutation to his Fellow-Quakers, sounding out
of his lying Trumpet.
O How has Satan filled thy heart, and with what power of imagination has he
possessed thee, that thou should thus exalt thy self like an Eagle, as if thy
nest were in the Stars? Know thou not, that the try umphing of the Wicked is
short, and the joy of the Hypocrite but for a moment? And that the Lord has a
controversy with the proud look, and the lying tongue? of both thou art
extremely guilty as does plainly appear, in that thou condemns all the people
in the world, to be all under the condemnation of the wrath of God; and then
proudly presumes, that thou and thy fraturnity the Quakers are the only
people the Lord delights in: And thus thou make the poor ignorant people glad
with thy lies, the which thou tellest both against God and Man. O thou proud
presumptuous ambitious Quaker! where is thy original, or from whence was thou
hewn but out of a haughty proud imagination; thou art not yet seven years old,
and are thou the only people of the whole Creation in the favor of the
Almighty? Had he no people before thou appearedst? Or did he cast them all away
to take the high presumptuous Quaker? Sure the youngness of thy years makes
thy Impudence a miracle: therefore, woe be to them that live to see thee
prosperous to a manly age. Again, from what Original do thou draw thy
Opinions? for from the Scripture thou do not: for thou deniest the worship of
the Scripture, and the Faith of the Scriptures and the obedience.

First, Thou deniest all matter and form of woship; and where there is neither
of these, there neither is nor can be any manner of Worship.

Secondly, You deny the Faith of all the Saints and people of God in the
Scripture; for James Naylor in the 62. page of his [Love to the Lost] denies
that to be the Faith of Christ that does not set men free from sin while they
lives. Now in the same page, upon another occasion, he cites the 1 Cor. 15.
and he says [the Apostle speaks plain words to that purpose] now the same
Apostle in the 7. of the Romans from the 14. to the end of the Chapter-speaks as
plain words to this purpose, namely, that when he writ that Epistle, he had sin
in him; and yet at this time he was possessed of the Faith of Jesus Christ to
salvation, in as great a measure, as any ever had is clearly proved in
Scripture. And 1 John 1.8. as plainly says, If we say we have no sin, we
deceive our selves, and there is no truth in us.

Thirdly, Thou deniest the obedience of the Scripture, in that thou deniest
actual obedience, yea and the authority of the Scripture too: for whereas the
authority of the Scripture, both in the New and Old Testament, is full of Laws,
Statutes, and Command, if there is no actual obedience then they are but as
common History: therefore thou being opposite to the Scriptures Worship, Faith,
and Obedience, let us examine how they own thy Opinions.

1. Where it can be proved, that that Light whereby Christ lighteneth every one
that comes into the world is as a hammer and fire to break and consume all
carnal Lust whatsoever, or does at all mortify and consume Carnal Lust?

2. Let us examine what Worship it is thou hold hard forth. In the 10. page
of Naylors [Love to the Lost] he fills up three pages about Worship, when less
then one line would contain the substance of the matter, and that was no other
[but as every Creature is moved by the Spirit of the Living God] and here is
all the substance of this large Story, the which he does upon purpose to bemuse
and confound the people, that so they might be kept off from the serious
Examination of the premises; but I resolve not to be deceived by him; and
therefore shall take notice, that if Moses had taught no other Worship to the
Jews, nor Christ and the Apostles to the Gentiles, they had made way for as
great abominations as the Quakers do; for as all Worships would have been one
as another, so every Worship would have been as good as another; yea, the Turk
the Pope and all the Heathen-Worshippers in the world, might approve themselves
upon this Doctrine as true Worshippers, as James Naylor, the Liars, Murderers,
and to Whoremongers, and all whatsoever, every one will say its from the Spirit
of the Living God; and therefore in that James Naylor does acknowledge in his
writings, that there is a Carnal Spirit, and a Spirit of the Devil he should
have given some infallible Character to know the Spirit of God from other
Spirits (as Christ does to know a true Prophet from a false) had not his
wisdom been as small as his honesty.

3. Now seeing the Scripture can say nothing for thee in the good sense, let us
try whether it knows thee in the evil; seeing it cannot prove thee a true
Prophit, let us see whether it can prove thee a false.

Christ in the 7. of Matthew. 15. bids, Beware of false Prophets; and in the
10. ver. he tells us, that we may know them by their fruits the which fruits
was the distinguishing Character to know a true Prophet from a false. Now this
Character was not (...) pretenses of Holiness, for that had the false Prophets:
for the Text says, that they come in sheeps clothing; neither was it
manifestation of the Tongues; for that the false Prophets could do likewise:
But this distinguishing Character was works only, whereby a true Prophet or
Apostle was known from a false; yea, and thus did Christ distinguish himself
from all false Christ's also: and therefore he says, the works that I do, bear
witness of me; and further he says, That if he had not done work amongst them
that never none did their rejecting of him had been no sin.

And therefore when he commanded his Disciples to go preach unto the world, the
which was sufficient on their parts to put their Commission in execution: yet
for as much as this was no distinguishing Character, he commanded them to stay
at Jerusalem, till he had provided on the peoples part something whereby to
ground their Faith upon, that they might be sure they were of his sending; and
in order thereunto, he endued them with such Heavenly Demonstrations, that all
the world could not furnish a false Apostle or Prophet withal. And therefore,
forasmuch as Jame: Naylor did engage [in Beech-lane] to prove himself a true
Prophet, and yet could give no other manifestation then every man in the World
may do [that has but that impudency and art of our-facing] and being told,
that what he said would not prove he was a true Prophet, he bid them prove that
he was not a true Prophet; the which had been needless, because that very
request was a sufficient demonstration of a false.

4. The next thing considerable, is, thy subtilty how to make thy self
numerous, not having the Magistrate sword, as the old Whore thy Mother had,
without which she had been no greater then the ignorant sort would have made
her: for she by harping upon the narrow way to life the Scripture speaks of, in
order thereunto, she afflicts her followers with many chastisements and
purgatories: But forasmuch as thou holdst forth the broad way, that all that
believe in that light, with which Christ lighteneth every one that comes into
the world, they then are to walk by that light within them; and for as much as
thou holdst forth no rule to try whether they believe or no, but only say
they do; thou must take in all that will but say they believe, and they are the
member, of thy body; and being so they are freed from sin: And now it is all
one as if thou should proclaim, Come all Drunkards, come all Whore-masters,
come all Murderers and Liers; come all whatsoever; all your abominations shall
here be turned to virtues, and you shall walk according to your own Lust
without control; And thus by thy subtilty thou think to increase and
multiply; for as there is in the whole Creation three degrees, that is, the
Ignorant, the Learned, and the Prudent: Now the middle sort have ever been
counted for the multitude the which thou thinks thou art sure to have, to make
thee considerable, that so thou may put into execution thy revengful Spirit,
the which is to make Slaves and Bondmen of all thy Opposers.

ANd now that this Harlot may not be lost in her Chase, I shall discover what
marks she has about her, that so all wellwillers to the public, may cry this
is she, this is she:

Her Marks are these.
1. Her Language. 2. Her Weapons. 3. Her Presumption. 4. Her Religion. 5. Her
attendance. 6. Her Kindred. 7. Her favor.
1. For as much as this young Harlot denies matter and form of worship,
notwithstanding the Scripture commands it, and holds, as of necessay matter and
form of word no where commanded, nor in their own nature of any weight, but
only to distinguish one thing from another; and so any thing that will but
distinguish, is as good one thing as another: and therefore no necessity to
change the received civility of a Country, from (you) to (thou) and (thee) but
only to beget a novelty, to ensnare the ignorant: therefore (thou) and (thee)
are the true Languages of this Harlot, so that thou may truly cry, this is
she.

2. Her Weapons whereby she defend her self against those that oppose her
Doctrine; and there are such as will defend any false Doctrine in the World,
yea and any abomination too for every Adulterer, Fornicator, Thief and Murder,
Liar and Blasphemer, yea the Devil himself, if he has but that impudence may
make the same plea of defense, against all that shall question his Doctrine,
that is, that they are carnal, and in the flesh, and to condemnation, and that
they knew not the light of Christ, but stumble at the stumbling-stone, and are
in the cursed ground, and that they cannot believe, though the truth be
demonstrated to them, they having not that spirit, but are in their sin.
Therefore when you hear a Harlot, defend her self in that way, a all the wicke
dest men in the world, yea and the Devil too may do, you may safely cry, this
is she, this is she.

3. Her Presumption in that she attempts to share with the Almighty, who does
all things according to the good pleasure of his will: she claims the same
Prerogative, denying all other Rules to be guided by God, therefore she that
thus presumes; this is she.

4. Notwithstanding she pretends to own the Scripture, and speaks much of
Religion, and yet holds nothing that is demonstrated, either by matter, form,
or effects, without which all is but a notion, and one of dece^^^^^t being but
a noise, or as sounding Brass or a thinkling Cymball: therefore when you see a
Harlot that prates much of Religion, and holds nothing at all, you may truly
cry, this is s^e.

5. Her attendance, the ignorant, and the lewd; the one she insnares by her
pretended fear and novelties, the other are her volenteers, the which come
willingly in the day of their redemption; for the vices will now be turned into
virtues, that it will be scandal now to blame them, if they will but say they
believe; for she has no rule to try whether they believe or no: therefore when
you see a Harlot attended with fools and knaves, you may cry, this is she, this
is she.

6. Her kindred, and that is the Ranters are her elder Sister, whose Doctrines,
though they are in several terms, yet are they both of one nature, and lead
both to one and the same end, the which is to turn the World into a Chaos: the
one by denying propriety, the other by allowing every on to walk according to
their own light, and dictate of their own spirit.

7. She is the youngest of all Harlots; surely she is little a bove five year
old, yet pretend her self to be exceedingly acquainted with the Almighty, and
highest in his favor, and contemns all others, as not worthy to take notice
of his glory; and notwithstanding the tenderness of her years, she has
fulfilled more of the Scripture, in relation to pride and haughty presumptuou
high mindedness, then any ever was before her: therefore when you see a Harlot
so far beyond comparison, in youth and impudence, you may cry, this is she,
this is she.

John Lilburn,
I Conceive you have left your Titles behind you in your Grave, as loathsome; I
shall not therefore raise them to annoy you, but acquaint you, that by taking
some view of your Resurrection, was filled with more wonder then I could
procure patience to withhold me from this attempt; namely, to crave your answer
to 13. Queries: to the which, if you please to give a plain and direct answer,
I am persuaded that it will produce a discovery of your errors, or my
ignorance. And for as much as I am of belief, that God never requires any
thing of man, but what he gives out demonstrable, either by matter, form, or
effect to their outward senses, because whatsoever is not so demonstrable is
not capable of discourse but is as a noise or a sounding Brass, and tinckling
Cymball, wherein is no distinction of parts, a mane essential difference
between Man and Beast; wherefore that our discourse may not be vain, if you
answer my Queries, keep this center, or show the unsufficiency of it, or be
silent.

1. Whether if it be not lawful to presuppose things that are not, to find out
the truth of things that are, and if so, then

2. Whether there had been any need of Christ's coming in the flesh, if Adam
had stood in his created estate?

3. Whether Christ restored to Believers, any more then Adam lost?

4. Whether there be any ground to believe, that any in this life have more
communion with God, or are more pure or perfect, then Adam was in Paradise?

5. Whether Adam in Paradise, did not partake of that light with which Christ
lighteneth every one that comes into the World?

6. Whether this light of Christ, and all other light (within man) (if any
there be) are not seated in the understanding? and whether all man's surest
light is not conveyed through the senses to the understanding. And whether this
will not more clearly appear: if considered, that the stopping of the Current
of the senses, the understanding becomes totally dark, as unto certainties,
it having nothing there to nourish it but Imagination?

7. Whether it argues not darkness in the understanding to determinate any
thing real, or certain, the which was not conveyed by the senses to the
understanding?

8. Whether for want of this consideration, many have not been possessed with
as strong a confidence of a certainty, as all their Powers both of soul and
body could procure yea to the laying down of their lives, and yet a mere
Imagination?

9. Whether John Lilburn was not as confident, that God owned (...) in his
Religion, opposing the Powers of this Nation, as Saul was in his ^^sign to
Damascus? and whether Saul's Conversion to a Christian and John Lilburn
resolving to a Quaker be upon one and the same ground.

10. Whether God did not convey this new light or dispensation to Saul's
understanding through his senses (in that it is said he heard and saw) as a
sure ground to build his faith upon? and also whether he did not give him power
and authority, by signs and wonders to convey to the understanding (of those
to whom he was sent to convert) a sure ground of faith also?

11. Whether if John Lilburn have received the same ground of faith so
conceived to his understanding immediately from God, as Saul had, or by some
other whom God has endued with Power and Authority to convey a ground of faith
as Paul did? then far be it from me for blaming of John Lilburn for being a
Quaker; otherwise

Whether if he have not received the ground of faith, aforesaid, whether it be
not easy to discern, that John Lilburns Resurrection is but a mere
Imagination, or quaking delusion?

Now forasmuch as the Doctrine of the Quakers, differs more from the Doctrine
of the Gospel, (namely faith and obedience) then the Doctrine of the Gospel
differs from the Doctrine of the Law, and so is as strange a dispensation to
the world, as either in its time.

Whether it be not easy to find out, whether the Quakers Doctrine be a
dispensation of God, or a dispensation of man's will?

Whether if it be of God, he will not take the same care for the divulging of
it, as he did of his former dispensations, that is, by such evidences as no
false Minister could procure. As when he commanded his Apostles to preach to
the World, and to baptize them that believed, and to teach them to observe all
things, etc?

Whither, if they had gone barely with this Commission, they could have laid a
sure ground of faith, or could have done any thing to have distinguished their
Doctrine and Ministry from false Teachers, teaching another Christ; and
therefore whether he did not command them to stay at Jerusalem, till he had
endued them with power, to convey a sure ground of faith into the peoples
understanding by signs and wonders, which they did within the reach of the
peoples senses, the which no false Teacher could attain unto; and therefore,
their God have so owned this new quaking dispensation, as he did the former,
namely, the Law and Gospel; whether then of necessity it must not be of God?
But if this new ^^^^ing Doctrine be turned naked out into the World, with
nothing to (...) cover it, but the outfa^^ing Tongue of men, whose best
abilities (...) ^^ch to no higher evidence, whether then it be not clear, that
the Quakers Doctrine is none of Gods, but by the will of men?

Yours, Thomas Winterton.

FINIS.

