

CAMPO-MUSAE, OR THE FIELD-MUSINGS OF Captain GEORGE WITHER, touching his
Military Engagement for the KING ann PARLIAMENT, THE Justness of the same, and
the present distractions of these Islands.

DEUS dabit his quoque finem.
LONDON, Printed by R. Austin. 1643.

To the ENGLISH.
AM not I now in England? Is not this
The Thames? Is not that London? Sure it is.
Me thinks that vast, and ancient structure, there,
Looks just like Paul's, and that like Westminster.
Lo, yon is High-gate, you is Hamsted-mill.
There Bansted-downes, there Kent, there Shooters-hill;
This doubtless is that Country: but why then,
Are here now living so few Englishmen?
Are all those Englishmen which now I see?
All true-bred Englishmen? the Devil they be.
Indeed I find there are a few among them;
And, for their sakes, I will not so much wrong them
To say, that Land has none, within whose veins,
The blood of our old Worthies, yet, remains.
But, out of question, if the greatest part
Were not a mungrell brood, and without heart,
They could not lie so tamely in their beds,
And see what Plagues their Country over-spreads;
Yea, seem content, to be enslaved to slaves,
And, carry guilt, and curses to their graves.
Perhaps they are asleep. Ho! Englishmen!
Awake, and be your selves, yet, once again.
Hark, how the Trumpet sounds! hark how the Drum
Beats up, and calls in English, Come, Come, Come!
Hark! how the ghosts, of your poor Brethren, slain
And massacred in Ireland, do complain!
And call for vengeance! hark! how loud they cry,
And threaten, if you pass their murders by!
Hark; how the country, round about you, mournes!
See, in how many parts, it flames, and burns!
Mark; what a delolation, in one year,
Is broken in among us! and, how near
Our just and everlasting ruin draws
If we become no warmer in this Cause!
And, that, your cooled zeal, may re-inflame,
Take up these Papers, and new light the same.
To his EXCELLENCE the Earl of ESSEX, Lord General of the Army raised for
defense of the KING, Parliament, and Kingdom.
SIR,
Until my Troop was disabled, I served faithfully with my SWORD, under your
Command (an eyewitness of your noble Patience, Constancy and Valor) and
shall again when my Troop is recruted: In the mean time, being engaged
thereto (by that emblematicall device which I bear in my Cornet) I have
endeavored to be serviceable with my PEN, that I might employ every faculty
which God has given me for the King and Parliament, to whom I am obliged by a
double duty: and (I hope) not impertinently to the glory of the Almighty; who,
when most honorable teachers are not regarded, sends men to learn of Pismires
and despicable creatures; and, who for that cause, is now pleased to make use
of such a Vanity as I am: and (it may be) shall by this Engine, more strengthen
your Army, then a full Regiment of horse.

I have not here prefixed your Name, or tendered this to your perusal, merely
for a private advantage: for, what can I hope to obtain, who am but Terrae
filius, a child of contempt? and, whose best endeavors have been hitherto, in
outward respects, (for upon other considerations, I have no reason to
complain) rather mischievous, then profitable unto him.

Neither presume I to add any thing hereby to your Honor (that being far
above the dificiency needing such mean Additions) but, I being yet within the
list of your Army, it seems reasonable, that some Account should be given of
the time spent during my absence from it: and I, having no better fruit ripe,
thus, to present this, held it the duty, SIR, of

Your EXCELLENCIES most humble Servant, Geo. Wither.

CAMPO-MUSAE, OR, The FIELD-MUSINGS of Captain GEORGE WITHER.
The Contents.
A Question presupposed, the Muse
Replyeth, and her freedom shows:
Tells with what heart, with what intent,
This War her POET under-went.
Averros that Reason and the Laws
Will justify him in his Cause:
The public woe, she does express;
Lamenteth, and implores redress:
Fights Combats with Delusive-Reason,
Her Party to acquit from Treason;
Their hearts, incourageth to do,
What, GOD, and Nature, calls them to.
And many matters, here, and there,
Inserteth, which we touch not here.
Then, mentions a Voice of PEACE
That she has heard; and, there does cease;
Intending, ere She will proceed,
To make some proof, how this may speed.
YES; now I Will write again, and neither care
Though nor Apollo aid me, nor the NINE:
Nor whether Mars or Mercury appear
Cross; or in Sextile, Quadrine, or in Trine.
Nor careful am I, whether HE, or SHE,
Be pleased or displeased with my Muse:
For, none to sooth or vex, my Musings be:
But, now I write, because I cannot choose.
To answer each man curious expectation
Who asks why thus I said, why this I do;
Is not the scope of my determination,
Though somewhat here conduces thereunto.
The Sword has had his turn, and now the Pen
Advanced is to play her part again.
The naked SVVORD and PEN my Cornet bears;
Pro REGE, LEGE, GREGE thereupon
To be my Motto for the Field, it wears;
And shows for whom this Warfare we begun.
But, Rymes and Reason growing out of date,
And Pens (less modest now then heretofore)
Such lies and railings have divulged of late,
That I once thought to touch my Pen no more.
Besides (with grief) I have observed, in those
Whose judgments have most need of Reformation,
That there is left no power in Verse or Prose,
To make them wise, or move to reformation.
For Wisdoms Charms, and Reasons best conclusions,
Beget but Furies, and enlarge Confusions
Yet since my musings when I shall be dead,
(And lie unactive in a loanly room)
May peradventure to good use be read,
By men reserved for better times to come:
And, since it will not only be an ease
To mine own heart my numerous thoughts to vent,
But also may some honest Readers please,
Even in these times of general discontent.
Yea, lest malignant censures passed on
My late engagement for the public peace,
Should (if I silent to my grave had gone)
Have caused false-opinion to increase,
My Per I re-assum'd, in hope, to show
My practice never proved my words untrue.
My Pen I re-assum'd; and (full of matter)
Sat down to write: but, ere I ought expressed,
The Trumpet sounding, all my thoughts did scatter.
And gave me, since that hour, but little rest.
Destructive times, distractive muzings yield,
Expect not therefore method now of me,
But such, as fits Minerva in the Field,
Where Interruptions and Confusions be.
Like or dislike, I somewhat now shall say,
Which must be heard; and heard to purpose too:
At least in gaining heed, or making way
For what (if need require) is yet to do.
When sin and self-conceit befools the wise,
They must be taught, by those, whom they despise.
For, let not these Field-muzings be supposed
The fruitless flashings of a Giddie-wit,
Because in measur'd-words they are composed,
Which many judge for serious works unfit:
Nor let them counted be a slight invention,
Though, souldier-like, blunt complements I use,
That I may draw those fools to give attention,
Who will not else, perhaps, regard my Muse.
He that has matter, which concerns the King,
Comes not, and ringles at the door, with fear;
But knocks, until he makes the Palace ring,
And spurns it open, if they will not hear:
Even so do I; and think I have done well
To make my language like the tale I tell.
If I shall mention what some would not hear,
The fault's not mine: for, if men madly do,
I am a thing, which, once in twenty year,
Shall seem, to be a kind of mad man too.
And though, meanwhile, my Calling I pursue,
(Seeming to heed the times as they do me)
Yet, I am always mindful of my kue,
And act my part when I my turn shall see.
One while I chide; sometimes fair words I give,
To praise men into what I sain would have them:
And, when those Favors I misplaced perceive,
I call them back, and am ashamed I gave them.
When thus I fail, my Fancy prompts me then;
But, now, another Spirit guides my Pen.
I will not blame the Times, though bad they be,
Nor to the jeering world bemoane my Lot:
For, to these days my God appointed me,
And guards me so, that mischief hurts me not.
My Birth I had in blessed ELIZA'S reign:
To JAMES, I blazed the sins of wanton Peace,
For those rewards which Truth will ever gain,
Where Nobles rise by Pieties decrease.
To CHARLES, I showed what Plagues were drawing near,
And, saw them come, ere I belief could gain.
And, when they came, I saw the chiefest care
Was, how each Fool his Babble might obtain.
For, warnings are on wilful sinners lost,
Till honor, pleasure, life and soul it cost.
SIN not repented, (but augmented rather)
The Violl, poured forth, began to spread:
The spreading mischief still more strength did gather,
And, every day new Plagues the poison bred.
Divisions then arose, which did increase,
And, into Sub-divisions branch about,
Which overthrew the Pillars of our Peace,
And, drove good Order, Law, and Justice out.
These Evils; with my Pen, I long withstood,
And, bold reproves in Tyrants faces threw:
But, when I saw my Pen could do no good,
With other Patriots my Sword I drew:
For, who that wears a Sword needs fear to draw,
To save the King, the People, and the Law?
I drew it not in rage, or private hate,
Or to incroach on Prince or Peoples-right,
Or to recrute a ruined estate;
But, that both Prince and People, guard it might.
I was not armed to violate the Crown,
Or please the fancies of a fickle brain,
To set one up, and pull another down,
Or Schism, or Superstition to maintain:
But, fought our Fathers honor to defend;
Our Mother, from his jealous rage to save;
To bring their base abusers to that end,
Which Traiterous-flatterers deserve to have:
And, he that arms himself, to this intent,
Shall never be shamed, though he may be shent.
I therefore boldly marched to the Field,
Not unresolved, or stagg'ring in the Cause.
I made my Prayers my shot, Firm-faith my shield;
My Breast-works are Good-Conscience, and the Laws.
I stood not off, when I was called on,
To mark what Peeros or Commons led the way;
To think I might be made, or quite undone,
Or whether side was like to get the day.
But, of the Public Ruin was my fear;
Or, of those Plagues for which the Sword makes room;
And, of the barbarousnesse, which every where
Is like to follow, where his followers come.
And could have wished it had as easy bin
To drive out mischiefs, as to let them in.
The cure proposed, though very sharp it be,
And threatens loss of members, and of blood;
Before it was adventured on by me,
Appeared needful for the Common-good.
According to my Fortune, and my Place,
I therefore furthered it; not discontent,
Though others had the public thank and grace,
For that, which I in private did invent.
Where I then lived, I was the first of those
Who did contribute to my Countries aid;
And (though it may be censured by her Foes
An evil sign) I joy to hear it said
That, in those parts, I was the first of all,
To whom, a total Plunder did befall.
And sure it was for good it so befell:
For, he that is inrowled for the Wars
Shall never prosecute that Calling well
If he entangled be with other Cares.
Affairs of Peace effeminate the mind:
A Barn well filled, and a House well fraught,
Are not with ease, for poverty resigned,
Till they from us, or we from them, are caught.
For, who those things can willingly forsake,
Of which, he feels, he may have daily need?
Who can in wants and wounds, himself betake,
That may at home, with ease, on plenties feed?
Or, who can fight, that is clogged with Carts and Ploughs,
Books, Household stuff, Teems, Oxen, Sheep and Cows?
Such things as these did never affect me much,
But for their sakes, of whom I must have care:
Nor did their loss my heart so nearly touch,
As their neglects, who thereof Causers were:
For, if my Counsels had been duly heeded,
And my Presages timely been believed,
The Rage of War had not so far proceeded,
As me to Rob, and others to have grieved:
Yea, had the Castle (to my care committed,
Without supply of money, meat, or Men,
Save my half Troop) been well and timely fitted
With what was needful, and long sought, ere then,
I should not sure, from thence, have called bin,
To let the Kingdoms foes come safely in.
Nor to their damage, or their detriment,
Who me to that command had freely chose,
Had I unto another place been sent,
Exposing them, unarmed, to their foes:
Nor (when a Ground work I had also laid,
Which had, not only, probably secured
Those parts, from that whereof they were afraid,
But, also, to the bordering Shires assured
Good likelihoods of safety) should my Care
And Propositions have been quite neglected,
By those, to whom they first proposed were;
If they, the Cause, or Me, had well affected:
Nor had so ill (thereby) our Party sped,
Nor had our Foes, by that means, gathered head.
Nay, if an Envy of the place I had,
Or, some design of theirs who brake their Trust,
Had not the way for my removal made
To let in mischief, at a nick so just,
So many had not mustred been, so soon,
(Of my Malignant Neighbors in that Shire)
To force my House; my Goods to seize upon,
And, show such malice, and such fury, there.
Nor had I met affronts, in other kinds,
As I have done; but that, among us, be
Some, that do walk our ways, with other minds,
With other hopes, and purposes, then we:
But, let them take their course, my Course is weighed;
And, Words nor Deeds, shall make my heart afraid.
What I resolved on, has had firm foundations,
Not laid in sands, nor built upon with sticks,
Nor garnished with vain imaginations,
Or kept repaired with fallacies and tricks.
I was not frighted by the Proclamations,
Penned by abusers of the Royall-Name:
Nor startled by those tedious Declarations,
Which with more Wit then Truth, full fraughted came.
I knew how Lawyers and Divines had cheated
The World, ere then; and when the holy-Text,
Or Laws, were misappli'd or misrepeated,
Or, with false Comments, wrested, or perplexed.
And, falsehood moves not me, although it brings
The Votes of Doctors, and the threats of Kings.
My heart, the storms of danger did not shake,
Fair promises (which have so many caught)
On me, the least impression could not make,
Though where I serve, I scarce worth heed am thought.
Nor was I moved much to see, that some
(Who Stars appeared) in their first Love did fail:
Because I knew the time was fully come,
Which tries our firmness by the Dragons-taile.
Nor start I at their Censures, who have said,
That, what I counseled, I have left undone;
That, from my own Predictions I have straid,
And made them err, if they amiss have gone.
For, they that have mistaken Truth-Divine,
And, wrest Gods Word, may soon misconstrue mine.
To say in Words, that so, or so, I meant,
I thought not half so powerful as to show
By active proofs the truth of my intent,
And teach by Deeds, which way men ought to go.
When therefore that great COUNSEL called for aid,
(With whom the King-ship always does reside,
In whose Commands, the Kings are best obeyed,
From whom, the King cannot himself divide)
To serve the King and Parliament, I came
So loyally, that, if it Treason be,
I will not ask a pardon for the same:
Nor thank him for it, who shall give it me:
But laugh at him, who should that Trifle bring,
Disdain to live; and die, and be a King.
For, no man honors; no man loves more
The Soveraigne-Person, then I did, and do.
For him, I therefore feared, before,
What Ill-advisers now have brought him to.
I told him when he was but newly crowned,
(As plainly as my Warrant gave me leave)
Those things, which He, and We, too true have found;
Yet, still, misinformations Him deceive.
Yea, though the style of Rebel now I bear,
My Prayers for him, have hefore the LORD
Stood eighteen years; and, yet before him are,
(To testify my love) upon Brit. Rememb. Cant. 1.
Record,
And all his Captains, Arms and Armies too
Secure him not, as those my Prayers do.
That which I prayed for then, and pray for yet,
I fight for now: Because, I held this, ever,
That, whatsoever to pray for should be fit,
For that, we are obliged to endeavor.
I know, that by Allegiance, I am bound
To what essentially thereto pertaines;
Not to bare Complements, or to the sound,
Which of that Duty, lying flattry faignes;
Much less, to those which totally destroys
This Virtues essence; and, whereby, the King
Our loyalty against himself employes,
And to destruction, his own House may bring.
Such mischeeves, therefore, that I might prevent,
I fided, for Him, with his Parliament.
Thereby to serve two Masters I assaid,
Till I by their Divisions was undone:
And saw three Kingdoms by some Acts ill played,
In danger, to be neither two nor one.
I sided not, but as a Stander-by,
Who has two friends at ods, and loving either,
Fears that in one, the loss of both may lie,
And (in those two) of all his joys together.
If either I oppose, I do it more
To save then wound: and to prevent that blow
Which, he that gave it, in his heart had bore,
If through that other, we had let it go.
And, he that thinks his duty does him wrong,
May find a Friend, but shall not keep him long.
I moved not thus far, but by Command
Of Soveraigne-Pow'r, whereto if it be Treason
To yield Obedience, we must understand,
They Trayters are, who walk by Law and Reason.
The Soveraigne-Person may command that thing
For which, the Soveraigne-Pow'r, if I shall do it,
Me to the Gallows for my pains, may bring,
And, hang me, with my Pardon, when I show it.
Because, when Soveraigne-Pow'r does ought command,
Therein, the Soveraigne-Person is contained
So fully, that by Law, no deed can stand
In opposition thereunto, maintained.
And, he by whom this Truth is not believed,
Is taught by Fools, or else by Knaves deceived.
Nor King nor Parliament do I affect
For private ends: nor did they e're bestow
On me, the least appearance of respect
More then what they to all men use to show:
Nor can I hope that what I do or write
(Till men grow better) an effect shall bring
Sufficient to defend me from despite
Though favored, both by Parliament and King:
How then, or by what bait have I been caught
That I for Balams wages have been said
To contradict the Brit. Rememb.
Messages I brought?
And, from my own good Counsels to have straid?
Or who can say, whose tongue it shall become,
That, my Allegiance, I have swerved from?
As elsewhere I have writ, so write I here,
No hand against the King: that is, no hand
We should against his Royall-Person rear,
Though he enjoined a tyrannous command.
Nor should a private-man, or private-pow'r
Take arms against him, though he should intend
Them, in their innocence to devour,
Not, merely, their own persons to defend.
For, should each petty member of a State,
Be armed at his pleasure, for Offense,
Their breaches of the peace, would ruinate
Themselves, the whole Republicke, and the Prince.
And, should a King from violence, not be free,
Till God shall strike; none so unsafe as he.
Yet, when by wicked Counselors misled,
A King, shall his whole Kingdom so oppress,
That, he, therewith appears endangered;
Me thinks, it were a Tenent reasonlesse,
To say, there were not in a Parliament
Such, as is our (or if no such we had)
No power in his Liege-people to prevent
The hazard of a consequence, so bad:
Or, that they might not lay upon their King
A charitable, and restraining-hand,
To stop him from pursuing that rash thing,
Which might undo himself, and all the Land:
Or, that there were not nat'rally a right
In Them, against his will, for Him, to fight.
When by the fawnings of some cunning-whore,
A nat'rall-Father shall be so misled,
As that he beats his children out of door,
And, causeless drives their mother from his bed,
Believing they are bastards, she unchaste;
And, fired with jealousies, attempteth further,
To burn his house, to lay his dwellings waste,
And, with his family, himself to murder:
As, then, that Family, with an intent,
Him, from his ill-advisers, to withdraw,
(And his, and their destruction, to prevent)
May lay restraining hands, by Natures law,
On such a father, and yet therein be
Preserved from breach of houshold-duties, free.
So, when the Father of our Country, shall
By Flatteries, be drawn to such a course,
As may produce his own and kingdoms fall,
Unless we intervene, by timely force;
And, when, so loyally, the same is done,
That, to our utmost powers, we still assay
Not how to save his life, and rights, alone,
But, how his honor, too, preserve we may:
The Laws of God, of Nature, and of Reason,
Will, doubtless, warrant it, in their despite
Who brand it with Rebellion, and with Treason;
By shameful Terms, from lawful deeds, to fright;
Else, cutthroat Parasites, are only they
Whom for the truest Liege-men, count we may.
That, we have thus ingenuously proceeded,
Nor waging war, nor our distrusts revealing,
Till our affairs those actions highly needed,
(And, made each Grievance fully ripe for telling)
Our consciences assure us; though the slanders
Of our Opposers, have our Truths beli'd,
And led the people through those dark Maeanders,
Which our fair dealings, and their frauds, may hide.
And, therefore, should the King, by wilful stay
Among that crew, miscarry in the fight,
(Which to prevent, we still shall watch and pray)
Upon our heads, the blame should not alight;
For, who that woes the Plague, has health assured?
Or, who can save, what will not be secured?
I came (as I profess) with single heart,
To stay the mischief, which I saw begun;
And, entered, with my Sword, to act that part,
Which, without blame, I knew not how to shun.
For, when God calls for blood, and will not hear
Our prayers, until (his Justice to appease)
Those Beasts among us sacrificed are,
Whose life prolonged, prolongeth our disease;
It Is time we should observe, that we, like Saul,
Those Hockes, and those Amalakites, have spared,
Whose preservation may become our Fall;
If his commands, no better we regard.
It Is time, thought I, that in the gap we stand,
To stop the breach, that else will drown the land,
The Red-Horse then appeared; and thereupon
That Rider forth advanced, at whose command
Those bloody executions must be done,
Which both defile, and purge a sinful Land.
A mixed multitude made up our Train,
Which God, for diverse ends together brought;
Some, to avenge his cause; some, to be slain;
Some, that Repentance in them might be wrought.
Our Army being raised, the Trumpet sounds;
The Colors are displayed, the Drums do beat:
To make a passage, through blood and wounds.
For Justice, Truth, and Peace, we forward set:
And, whilst we marched, my heart, with thoughts confused,
Was over-fill'd; and thus I sadly mused.
Those dreadful Tragedies, must I, O LORD!
Must I, not only now survive to see;
Which were so long time feared, and so abhorred?
But live, in them, an Actor too, to be?
Is that abused Peace which we enjoyed,
So many years (whilst every other State
Was plagued with war, and some nigh quite destroyed)
In these our Islands, now, grown out of date?
Have we prolonged Repentance, till the Flame
Which from the neighboring Countries did appear
(Like Beacons, giving warning of the same)
Spreads, and devoures, with no less fury, here?
And is the time now come, in which this Nation
Must pledge them, in thy cup of indignation?
Who did so much as dream, some years ago,
To see the Devil so, prevailing here,
To conjure up to every man, a Foe,
Among those Friends, that in his bosom were?
Who thought, to see so many brothers rage
Against each other? Fathers without grief,
To ruinate the Pillars of their age?
^o many sons, to seek their fathers life?
Who could have, then, believed this; that, friends,
Familiars, neighbors, kinsmen, mothers, daughters,
Should have, so madly, sought each others ends?
And mention, without tears, their wounds and slaughters?
And, find this hellish poison, to be shed
Almost in every village, house, and bed?
Who did suspect, that men who dote on wealth,
And make a God of Pleasure and of Ease?
Esteeming highly, safety, limbs, and health;
Should madly fool away their part of these?
And side, and quarrel so, about those things
Which most of them, regarded not a whit?
For, what their duties were to God, or Kings,
Or Commonwealth, it troubled not their wit.
Nor does it now, if their discourse and life,
May show what Conscience of such things they make:
And, from this observation, I, with grief,
Infallibly, may this Conclusion take;
That nothing else, this mischief did begin,
But, universal ripeness of our sin.
How could there else, so soon, so many be
So hardened in the cruelties of war?
And, multitudes so forward, as we see,
For Rob'ries, Rapes and Murders, as they are?
Who did a while ago, suspect he had
Acquaintance, neighbors, household servants too,
So wicked, so malicious, and so bad,
To put in act, what now we see them do?
War has occasion given, to disclose
What every man affects. And, every one,
Is opportunity he gains, shows
What things his heart is truly set upon.
Oh! if Wars entrance with such guilt begins,
Before it ends, how great will be our sins?
Observe, and credit this which now I say,
(Though I perhaps not worth regard may seem)
Lest you repent it else another day,
And, find too late, my words were worth esteem.
If Peace we seek not, and pursue it too,
Before there be too great an obduration,
Ere long, so hardened men in sin will grow,
That on his neighbor, none will have compassion,
But, every one, according to his power,
Shall only labor his own Will to gain;
And shall corrupt each other, and devour:
Till wealth, nor wit, nor honesty remain.
Nor ought, but such a rascal Generation,
As merits Gods, and good men's execration.
How happy had we been, if we had feared
Before these fears had ceaz'd us? and how blessed?
Had we with penitence those warnings heard
Which notice gave, of this unwelcome ghuest?
But, now the Breach is made; the Floods break in,
And, we with miseries, are overslowne.
We shall be losers, though the day we win.
When spoils we take, the loss will be our own.
Because, from foreign foes, we feared no harm,
God, for our sins, has raised us foes at home.
Our selves, against our selves, we strongly arm;
And slaught'rers, of each other, are become.
An universal Ruin is begun;
And, he that was most rich, is most undone.
Behold, the Plough, by whom we are all fed,
Is thrown into the ditch: Our Herds decay:
Our Shepherds and our Husbandmen, are fled:
Artificers, may shut up shop, and play.
The Labourer, must either starve, or sight;
The Gownman, must a Swordman, learn to be;
Nor Magistrate, nor Laws, can do us right;
The Creditor, and Debtor, may agree.
The Glutton, must be glad of homely fare;
The Drunkard, must drink water, or be dry;
Old lousy rags, Pride, must be fain to wear;
Our idle Dames, in vain, for bread shall cry.
And, they who late, in finest linen lay,
Shall scarce have leave, to lodge in straw, and hay.
How are our goodly buildings overthrown!
How are our pleasant arbours hackt, and hewed!
How bare and rude, are those neat places grown,
Where fruitful Orchards, and fair Groves, we viewed!
Through Walks and Fields, which I have visited
With peaceful Mates, and free from fear of harms;
Yea, there, where often Fair-Ladies I have led,
I now lead on, a Troop of men in Arms.
In Meadows, where our sports were wont to be,
(And, where we playing wantonly have lain)
Men sprawling in their blood, we now do see;
Grim postures, of the dying, and the slain.
And where sweet music has refresht the ear,
Sad groans, of ghosts departing, now we hear.
In every Field, in every Lane, and Street,
In every House, (almost in every place)
With Cries, and Tears, and Loud-complaints we meet:
And, each one thinks his own, the saddest case.
But, what are private Losses, while we view
Three famous Kingdoms, woefully exposed
To miserable Ruin, and so few,
Lament that plague, wherewith we are enclosed?
My self, and my estate, I shall contemn,
Till we, in freedom, sing our Syon-Songs;
Till we have peace, in our Jerusalem;
And Church, and State, have what to them belongs.
For, what to these, are Oxen, Sheep, and Kine?
Or, any loss, that is but your, or mine?
But how should we have Peace, or Consolation?
Whence can it come? whilst, each of us neglects
The means, of such a blessed expectation?
And from bad Causes, looks for good effects?
Who yet repents? who, all alone, bewailes
His private sins? Or, since this Tempest rose,
Has taken down, one furle of his proud fails,
That we the public Vessel might not lose?
Few of us, yet, have truly laid aside
Our Self-conceit, our Envies, or our Spleen,
Our Avarice, our Wilfulness, or Pride,
And doubtless, whilst among us, these are seen,
In vain, we hope, our miseries will cease;
In vain, we, look for Comfort, Truth, or Peace.
Give me, Oh God! give me those moving tears,
Those deep-fet sighs, and those prevailing groans,
Which may have power to pierce through all the Spheres,
And fetch down Pity, for distressed-ones.
Give me enough for one, that would deplore
The sins of three great Nations; and, lament
For his own share, a little world-full more,
Which he, too long, deferred to repent.
Give me those Tears that acceptable be;
Such, as on Syons evil day were shed;
Such, as in bottles are preserved by thee;
Such, as were dropped, when Lazarus was dead;
Such, as if Tears might so much virtue have,
May three great Kingdoms, from destruction save.
Help us to that Peace-Offring, whence, may fume
Into thy nostrils, that sweet smelling savor,
Whereby, thy Majesty may reassume
These Kingdoms, once again, into thy favor.
With holy Charms, thou have delighted bin;
For, when in mournful Elegies, to thee
The Son of Iesse did bewail his sin,
From all his guilt, thy grace did set him free.
Why may not, then, to me, for whose example
Thy Spirit has his piety recorded,
(Having within my heart, thy Inner Temple)
Composed a Song, like mercy be afforded?
In hope it shall, to thee, O Gracious-God!
My Spirit, groaneth forth this mournful Ode.
ALas! how darkesome be!
How gloomy, and how dim!
Thy Privic-lodgings, LORD, in me,
Which, Joy was wont to trim?
What Ghosts are they that haunt,
The Chambers of my breast!
And, when I sleep, or comfort want,
Will give my heart no rest?
Me thinks, the sound of groans,
Are ever in mine ear.
Deepe-graves, Deaths-heads, and Charnel-bones
Before me, still appear.
And, when a sleep I fall,
In hope to find some ease,
My dreams, to me, are worst of all,
And fright me, more then these.
Ah me! why was I borne
So late? or why soon?
To see so bright, so clear a Morn,
So black an Afternoon?
What in my youth I feared,
What was long since foretold,
And, often with scorns, and sleightings heard,
Fulfild, I now behold.
The Queen of Europes Isles,
The Princess of her Lands,
(Late happy, in thy loving smiles)
Now, near to ruin stands.
For, by their Crying-sins,
Prince, Peers, and People too,
Have brought their feet into those Gins,
Which no man can undo.
Our Cunningst-wits have tried
To help untwist the Snare;
But, when they thought the cords would slide,
They more insnarled were:
And, since it is not words,
That can our Peace restore,
We now betake us to our Swords,
And make the mischief more.
How great is our distress!
How grievous is our sin!
That eve'ry thing does more increase
The Plague, that we are in!
There is yet, LORD, in thee,
A means of ease and aid,
Whereby, we saved from that might be,
Whereof, we are afraid.
O God! thy help command;
(For humane helps are vain)
And, in compassion to this Land,
Return thou, once again.
And, if so much regard,
May to my suit be shown,
Let me behold this Tempest cleared,
Before my Sun go down.
O LORD! return with mercy to these Lands;
Give not thy Glory over to the Foe.
Leave not thy Churches, in their bloody hands,
Who seek, in this, thy Kingdoms overthrow.
Return, before our Spoilers, hand have laid
On every pleasant, every precious thing:
Before the Lions on thy Lambs have preyd;
Before they shall thy Flocks to ruin bring.
Before our habitations do appear
Like heaps of Rubbish, or the ploughed earth:
Before our pleasant fields, and gardens, are
Like Fornace-Fels; or, Highlands in the North.
And, e're our palaces, late neat and trim,
Are made the walks, and haunts, of Zim and Iim.
Once more! once more, oh GOD! in mercy hear
These miserable Pleas, of whose near fall,
Their neighboring Foes in expectation are,
And, to behold it; on each other call.
Thy foes they are, oh LORD! as well as our;
Oh! give not therefore, way to their despite.
Let not their malice, nor our sins, have power,
Upon our Tombs, to build up their delight.
Though they Divide, permit them not to Reign;
But, let our Head, and Body, so accord,
That we, the stronger, may be knit again,
And, in their bosom, sheath our angry Sword:
For, our blessed reconcilement, further shall
Thy Churches triumphs; and, their Babels, fall.
Their date is near, if I aright have hit,
The meaning of that Number, which by thee
Was left, to try the strength of every wit,
Which longs the fall of Antichrist, to see.
To Them, I turn my speech; and thus dare say,
His Friends and Helpers are now moving on,
The cunningst plot, that they have left to play;
And, when that is past, their game will quite be done.
Some SAINTS, their policy will so beguile,
That, they to their Design shall furth'rance bring:
Yea, they shall help it forward, for a while,
Who favor not the Persons, nor the Thing.
But lest your hearts may fail, through long delay,
Give ear, and heed, what, now, my Muse will say.
That year, in which ROMES long-lived Empeire
Shall from the day, wherein it was at height,
Sum up, M, D, C, L, X, V, and I,
In order, as these Letters here I write:
That Year, that Day, that Hour, will be the date
Of her continuance; preserving neither
Top, Root, or Branch of that accursed State,
Nor Head, nor Body, Limb, Horn, Claw, or Feather,
For, here are all the Numerals of ROME
In order, as they are in valuation;
Which cannot make a less, or greater sum,
Without Disorder, Want, or Iteration.
Nor can she longer stand, or sooner fall,
If I mistake not Him, who governs all.
By Number, Weight, and Measure, works He,
Allotting to each thing the Bound, and Season,
Which may both correspond with his Decree,
And, somewhat, also, suit, with Humane-Reason.
In Egypt, thus, a certain time of stay
Was to the seed of Jacob, there assigned;
Thus likewise, to a fore-appointed day,
The reign of Baltashazar was confined.
Thus, from the time of Daniels supplication,
Till CHRIST should come, the time foretold appears
To be, a pre-ordained limitation,
Until the date, of Seventie weeks of years.
And, thus ROMES declination may, no doubt,
Be numbering, till her NVMERALS are out.
Two famous Numbers, are in them contained;
The first, declares that length of time, wherein
The Devil was, by Powre-Divine, restrained
From setting up, the Mystery of Sin.
The later, is the Number of the BEAST;
Which, when the LET was taken quite away,
(Whereby he was a thousand years suppressed)
Does number out his Kingdom, to a day.
It is the number of the NAME, or Power,
Even of a MAN (of that mysterious-Man)
By whom Sin-mysticall is to this hour,
Continued; and, by whom, it first began.
And, he that can begin the thousandth year,
Shall find the Number of the BEAST, is near.
To search out that, it seems not hard to me,
Since I believe, that when of her chief sin
ROME to be guilty, did first prove to be,
Her Declinations did then first begin.
And, sure, of all her sins, the greatest Crime
Was crucifying of the LORD of life;
And, in unjustly persecuting them,
Who tendered Saving-Truth, to their belief:
Then, therefore, I presume ROMES fall begun,
And that GOD, measured, weighed, and numbered has
How many backward Rounds her wheel should run,
When she had gained her glorioust height on earth:
Thus, in those NUMERALS, which are her own,
(And all she has) her Fate was written down.
To bring this work to pass, there is a Let
To be removed, of no mean consequence:
The opening of it cannot, well, as yet
Be borne, among us, without much offense;
And, warrant I have none to make my heart
So bold, as to disclose it: neither may it
With wisdom be revealed, till that Part
Be furnished with Actors, fit to play it.
And of this Mystery, perhaps, the Key
Must be delivered by some Abler-one,
Who shall have power to do, as well as say,
What, GOD, has fore-appointed shall be done.
They first must take the Works, without the Walls,
And then, the great Malignant-Citie falls.
Then, with exceeding infamy, and scorns,
The BEAST, which yet so dreadful seems to some,
Shall lose his Heads, and moult away his Horns,
And, to the world, a laughing stock become.
Then, many things, that have been long concealed,
(And which, to blind the carnal Readers eye,
In seven dark Mysteries, were closely sealed)
To every faithful soul shall open lie,
That Kingdom, which the Jew did long ago
Mould out, according to his erring brain,
And whereof, many zealous Christians too,
Unwarrantable fancies, dream, or feign,
That Kingdom, whereof, yet, but types we hear,
Shall to the world, essentially appear.
Be patient, therefore, you that are oppressed*
This Generation shall not pass away,
Till some, behold the downfall of that Beast,
Which, yet, among us, with his Tail does play.
Then will the LAMB of God begin to take
The Kingdom to himself: And every King
That on his rights, does usurpations make,
To judgment, and to ruin, he shall bring.
No Kingling, then, assume the boldness shall,
Blasphemously (for know it is no less)
To style himself The King-Catholicall,
As if Earths universal Globe were his:
For, though another has usurped thereon,
That Title, does belong to CHRIST, alone.
And, it is no marvel, if the Potentates,
And Princes of this world, shall now combine,
By policy, to strengthen their estates;
And, with the Beast, and Gog, and Magog, join;
No marvel, if enraged they appear,
Through jealousies and doubts, of losing that,
By which, their pride and lusts, maintained were,
And, which, base Fear, and Flattery first begat:
For, all those Kingdoms, and those Emperies,
Througout the world, which their beginning tooke'
By humane wit, fraud, force, or tyrannies,
Shall pass away, and vanish into smoke.
An Army, whereof yet there is little hope,
Shall wrest the Scepter both from Turk and Pope.
Religion, and mere shows of Piety,
Have been so long the masks for base designs:
The great Vicegerents of the Deity,
Have made such Politicians of Divines;
And these together have so fooled and cheated
The consciences of people well inclined,
That, of all Freedoms we are nigh defeated,
Belonging to the Body and the Mind.
Yea, GOD they so have mocked; and on his Throne
And his Prerogative, so far incroach'd,
That of his honor he is jealous grown,
And, will no longer, be by them reproached:
But, to the SAINTS, their liberties restore,
And, give those Kings their Portions with the Whore.
Do You startle at it? as if I had spoke
High Treason? or, as if what now I say,
Without a Warrant, I had undertook
To certify? Perhaps, you think, I may.
Know, therefore, that, I had this information
Not from a private Spirit; but, from his
Known, and unquestionable Revelation,
Which, to the world, long since, revealed this.
Those Kings, which, to the LAMB their crowns resign;
And shall (the BEAST opposing) be content
To reign, according to the Discipline
Which CHRIST commands, shall keep their Government:
The rest shall weep, and wail, and curse their birth,
With wicked Kings, and Merchants of the earth.
CHRIST, and his Law, shall then bear all the sway,
By Governments, resembling that, perchance,
For which the Jews GODS Yoke did cast away,
The King-ship, of the Gentiles to advance.
And, as GODS people, foolishly did crave
In stead of his mild Scepter, to obtain
That Heathenish-Monarchy, which does inslave
And seek, by Arbitrary-Power, to reign:
So, shall all people, then, desire to leave
Their Ethnick-Chaines, and, with his holy-Nation,
CHRIST'S Precepts, and his Discipline receive,
And, be partakers too of their Salvation.
And, when this glorious Kingdom shall begin,
The Fullness of the Gentiles, enters in.
God, has so long deferred the possession
Of that great Bliss; because, our worldliness,
Hypocrisy, and discord, keeps the Blessing,
From ripening into such a Happiness.
Some, in unrighteousness, the Truth retain,
And, make the same thereby, the less believed.
Some, by an Outward-holinesse do gain
The means to have their Heresies received.
While some pursue the Antichrist, without them,
An Antichrist, arises up within them;
Which, if they look not warily about them,
New work for Reformation, will begin them!
But, GOD will finish what he pre-ordain'd,
When Penitence and Sin, their heights have gained,
Oh! that I could express what glorious sights,
My soul has glimpses of, by contemplation,
And to what brave and unbelieved heights,
They screw me, by an unperceived gradation!
That blessed Kingdom, which, by faith I see,
And know shall come; me thinks does now appear
Described by a Pattern unto me,
As if it painted, in dim Landscape, were:
And, my unbounded soul runs rambling over
So many objects, that, if she should give
Account, of every thing she can discover,
I should relate, what few would yet believe;
And give to fools occasion, one time more,
To scoff me; as they have done, heretofore.
Whilst thus I muz'd, behold, the foe came on,
And to possess the bord'ring hills began;
My Colonel, experienced Midleton,
A valiant Scot, that day led up the Van.
A Troop that flankt him on the left I led:
The Word was ordered forth; the soldier shouted;
Our martial music them encouraged,
And, each from other, fears of danger flouted.
Our forces joined in clouds of fiery smoke;
Whence many whizzing thunderbolts were shot:
Our glittering swords, like flashing lightnings, stroke
Each others eyes, and bloody showers begot;
Enough, whereby our courage might be tried;
And, yet, with no great loss, on either side.
For, lest, while of (each part) the Forlorne-hopes
Together strove, our Side might seek to take
A narrow-passe (which might have made some stops,
To their great hazard, in retreating back)
They wheeled about, as if to gain some ground
Of more advantage: so, before the place
We rightly knew, or their intention found,
Instead of a Re-charge, we gave them chase:
Which being finished, and my warmed blood
Grown colder, by our Adversaries flight,
Another Foe, which long my peace withstood,
A Challenge brought me, for another Fight:
And, in the dark, when that days march was done,
A second furious battle we begun.
A strong Brigade, was mustred up together,
And many cunning Engines forth were brought,
Which doubtless, had I come unarmed thither,
Had gained him the Victory, he sought.
To undermine me, he, at first, perplexed
My heart, with many deep and subtle questions:
To win that fortress, he assayed, next,
By strong persuasions, and untrue suggestions.
Then, with confused througs of dangers, fears,
And, other such like Instruments as those,
By violence to storm it, he prepares;
And, force prevailing not, his craft he shows:
Which, taking like effect, he beat the Drum,
And to a Parlie we began to come.
His General was that Deluding-Reason,
Which has so much befoold this Generation,
Defaming Loyalty with terms of treason,
And seeking Truths, and true men's defamation.
This is that Grand-Impostresse, which has had
The power of late, our Clergy to misguide,
To blind the King, to make the Nobles mad,
And lead the Common People quite a side.
This is the Mountebancke that cheats the Land,
With Romish-Drugs, and fills our heads with toys,
That builds Forts, and Churches in the Sand,
And fair and fitme foundations, often destroys.
And this is she that men so blind does make,
The shadow, for the substance, to mistake.
She thus began: Within thy Sovereigns Land
How dare thou, bold Traitor to appear
Without his Approbation, or Command,
With that thy Troop, of armed Rebels, there?
Have thou not heard those Royal Proclamations,
Which threaten those who thus themselves array?
Have thou not read those learned Declarations,
That show thee how thy Leaders go astay?
Have thou not heard the reverend Prelates preach,
That all the Kings Commands must be obeyed?
Have thou not heard approved Doctors teach,
That, all we have must at their feet be laid?
And, that a Mortal cloathd with Majesty,
Is little lower then the Deity?
Thy service and obedience to the King,
Even God himself injoynes: why do thou then
Assistance to his Adversaries bring,
And rather disobey thy GOD, then men?
Nay, thou thy self have that Allegiance taught,
Which now thou violat'st, and could foretell
What mischieves would upon their heads be brought;
Who should against their Soveraigne-Prince rebel.
Yet now, behold, thou neither having awe
Of thine own Conscience, or the royal right,
Of GODS commands, or of the Kingdoms Law,
Do arm thy self, against all these, to fight;
And, by pretenses for the public good,
Defil'st the Kingdom, and thy self with blood.
An Arbitrary-government you blame,
And to the Laws, your Actions seem to tie;
Yet, by your Ordinances, do the same
Which to the King, unjustly you deny.
You, for the Subjects liberty contend,
Yet into Prisons, freemen you have thrown.
To ease them of Taxations, you pretend;
Yet make them greater then were ever known.
You take from whom you please, and what you list;
And no man is assured of his own,
Or dares to contradict, much less resist.
Yea, lately, you so insolent are grown,
That, not the People, only, you undo,
But, many ways, abuse your Sovereign too
To make him rich, fair promises you made;
But, so far off have been from adding more,
That you have taken from him what he had,
And, rendered him less able then before.
To cherish Virtue, or to punish Vice,
Or to protect the wronged, or to relieve
The needy soul; you neither offices,
Nor Arms, nor Rents, to his disposure give,
Gods glory, and Religious purity,
Sincerity to affect, you make a show;
But, thereof, we have small security,
Whilst pious Monuments you overthrow.
And whilst, you favor, cherish, and protect
The Schismatics of every Giddie-Sect.
The King denies nothing he may grant,
But voweth and protests, to maintain,
The true Religion of the Protestant;
And, lets the Subjects dues, to them remain.
Of him you foster causeless jealousies;
For, to the people, or the Parliament,
He has intended no such injuries,
As you, seducers causelessely invent,
He aymeth at the real preservation
Of Rights, Laws, Customs, and of all that is due
To Church, or Commonweal; for which this Nation
A public, or just private claim can show;
And, that, which to preserve, he does assay,
You, Rebels, seek to change, or take away.
He stands obliged, the Kingdom to protect;
But, you his Towns, Arms, Forts aand Ships do ceaze,
Whereby his Office wants a prime effect:
And, you against him, arm your selves with these.
The people you seduce, and you invent
Devices cunningly to drive away
The Lords and Commons from the Parliament,
That your own pleasures there, enact you may,
The Kings best friends for traitors you pursue:
By Sequestrations you have made them poor:
Nay he himself misjudged is of you,
At least, a fav'rer of the Scarlet-Whoore.
And he that was to be your glory borne,
Is now become an object of your scorn.
How can you therefore safely live or die
In such a Cause? How can you, without fear,
Be actors in that bloody Tragedy?
Whereto, thus blindely, you advancing are?
How, will you to your GOD? how, to your King?
How, to this wronged Kingdom, answer make?
When by their power they shall that vengeance bring,
Which will be due, for what you undertake.
Thus far she raved; and, further as I think
She had proceeded: But, I having eyed
My Troopers (and perceiving some, to shrink
At her last words) I rein'd my horse aside
To cheer my Troap; then, wheeled a little back,
And, to confute those falsehoods, thus I spoke.
Trait'resse to Reason, that high heaven-born -Queen,
Whom every earthly Monarch should obey;
Thou who the Cause of all those Plagues have been
Which overflow this Island, at this day:
How long will thou persist, with shows of truth
To color falsehood? and, from thy delusions,
Draw forth (to cozen heedlesse age and youth)
Inconsequents, and frivolous conclusions?
In vain thou seek'st with words to terrify
From what, with good advisement, is begun.
With honor, we have hope to live, and dye,
What ever can by thee be said, or done,
And, in our just resolves will settle fast,
In spite of all the Sophistry thou have.
Imprudent Amazon, why come thou armed
With Potguns, and with Kexes to invade,
A Skonce that is triple fortified, and charmed,
By Spells, which to secure it, Reason made?
Beleevest thou, Lies, Fallacies and Shows
Chewed into paper-pellets, can affright
Ought else but Regiments of Daws and Crows?
Or, things that come to feed, but not to fight?
When to my face, thou falsely dare accuse
My Conscience, which none knows but GOD and I,
And would my own belief thereof abuse,
Behind my back, how will thou me belie?
My Writings too, in favor of thy Cause,
Thou understandest, as thou do the Laws.
Their Author is in being, so am I;
The Laws true sense is that which they shall give;
And, I am he that best can testify
The meaning of my Poems, whilst I live.
I have not swerved essentially from ought
(If well my words, and deeds be understood)
Which I have either counseled or taught,
Pertaining to the King or Common-good.
And though thy friends report that I rebel,
And Balam-like, against my knowledge too,
(When I had both foretold, and counseled well
What would befall, and what men ought to do)
I shall occasions find, my self to clear
Of all, whereof I guilty may appear.
The factions of our Clergy I foresaw,
The progress of their factions I foretold,
Which way the one our Sovereigns heart should draw,
Which way the other, tempt the people should;
And, thereupon my soul (as well it might)
Fearing such mischiefs as from thence do spring,
According to the measure of her light,
Did counsel both the People and the King.
The King proceeded as his Prophets taught,
(For their despite made void my good intent)
The other faction of the Clergy, sought
To work upon the peoples discontent:
And, had not then a miracle been done,
It had, long since, Rebellion here begun.
For, had not GOD beyond all hopes of our,
When plotted mischiefs were to ripeness come,
Vouchsafed us a Parliamentall power,
The sin, which I most feared, to keep us from?
My wit perceives not how the people rage
(Provoked so, as then it would have bin)
Should means have found that fury to assuage,
Which would have brought a true Rebellion in.
Nay, to such heights was coffeehouse raised,
That, if this present timely Parliament
(which never can sufficiently be praised)
Had not enabled been, as well as sent
By GOD himself, a wondrous work to do,
They had ere this, been slaves and rebels too.
But having by mere providence procured
The privilege for their continuation,
To be by an Enacted-Law securd,
Till they saw cause to give it limitation;
Such courage thereby took they, and such hope,
Their good endeavors should not be undone.
As heretofore (through want of time and scope
To perfect things which they had well begun)
That, they had qualified the fiery zeal,
which might have kindled a rebellious flame;
And armed lawfully this Commonweal,
To make a just defense, as her became:
For, it is her safety, that secures the King:
And her destruction, will his ruin bring.
We are not come, our Sovereign to oppose,
But for him, we thus armed now appear,
By Warrant, and Authority from those,
Who to confer it, well enabled were:
Even by that Supreme-Councell, whence do come
All acts that most concern the publike-Weale;
The second Senate, from whose final doom,
We cannot to another Judge appeal:
When that commands, the Kings commands they be,
More binding, then his personal Injunction.
In their contempt, dishonored is he,
And disobed in his noblest function.
In his, we but his Person disobey;
In their, his Power, and Office we gainsay.
We hear indeed, some time, a Proclamation
Injoyning that, or else forbidding this:
But how, I pray shall we have information,
Whose will and pleasure, and whose deed it is?
The Person of the King we seldom see;
His Court is now a place uncertain grown:
With him, no lawful Counselors has he;
How then, of us, can his true mind be known?
Since in his Name, another Will may come,
We neither knowing whence, nor yet from whom?
The Court of Parliament appears to all,
To have therein, the Royal Power, and Name:
It keeps the Place, whereto the King did call,
And virtually abides still the same.
That Order, Ordinance, and that Commission,
Which issues forth from them, to us appears
To be their act and deed, without suspicion
And we obey it as the Kings, and theirs:
Why, therefore, should we be reproached, and blamed,
Because, we are not rather guided by
A printed sheet, wherein the King is named,
To draw us, our known duty to deny?
By telling us, a trayt`erous part we play,
Unless, our King and Country we betray?
Me thinks, it were a motive somewhat odd,
That those few lines, which ill-advice might draw,
Beginning thus, CHARLES by the grace of GOD,
Should more obliege, then equity and Law.
Yet, this is our condition; and, unless
We will suspect our eyesight, and our hearing;
And say we are in state of happiness,
When universal ruin we are fearing;
Or, else, believe (or say and swear we do,
Though false it be) what ere our foes persuade;
And will be Infidels, and Asses too,
Or such tame Fools, as they of some have made,
We must be censured in our noblest action,
To have unjust designs, and side with faction.
Unless with Rehoboams Cavaleers,
We will bring aid and counsel to oppress:
Unless, we will not think that all our Fears,
Are without real ground, and reasonlesse:
Unless, we will believe Achitophel;
The Parasites of Ioash, Iudahs King;
The Priests of Ahab, Baal, and Iezabel,
Which to Idolatry this Land would bring;
Unless, our selves mere slaves we will repute;
Unless, we will against all right and Reason,
GODS Epithetes, to Princes attribute;
Or, falsely, say, our Loyalty is Treason,
Or, do, as Fools and Traitors have appointed,
We fight (forsooth) against the Lords anointed.
Yea, then it must be told me, I rebel;
That, I resist my Sovereign and the Laws;
That Balaam-like the truth I could foretell,
And know the right, yet aid an evil cause.
But, what am I? Thou say, the Parliament
(Though shows of other purposes it carry)
In practice does approve that Government,
Which in the King, they say, is Arbitrary;
Which is untrue. For, Arbitrary Sway
Is that which governs by the Will of ONE:
But, when their Ordinances we obey,
To Reason we submit, agreed upon
By many, chosen out to that intent,
Both by our own, and by the Kings consent.
What ever then that Counsel shall ordain,
Is in effect the Pleasure of the King,
And our united; whereof to complain,
It were a causlesse, and a foolish thing.
And, though we may have grievances thereby
We cannot call them injuries, by reason
'Twas to prevent a lasting misery,
By making us to suffer, for a season,
The Parliament abridgeth no man's right,
Takes no man's Liberty or goods away
To favor some, and others to despite:
Or, that themselves therewith enrich they may;
But, seize it for the Public; and from those,
Who, to the public harm, thereof dispose.
Perhaps, unruly Soldiers, and some too
Who them command, will practice, now and then,
Harsh violence, as Devils use to do,
Who, at these times, come forth in shape of men.
But, from such insolences I am free
And every way so clear; that though our Foes
Of To the value of above 1000. l.
all I had have quite despoyled me:
And, though I was authorized by those
Who power might give my losses to redress
On them who robbed me; I have not sought
Without compassion, or with greediness,
To mend my Fortunes, as, I hear it is thought;
But, only taken, what the present need
Required; my self, and Family to Feed.
Yea, save when we from home had marched far,
And thither, where, perforce, we did endure
The hard, and strong necessities of war,
Through want of means, things needful to procure?
We nothing took without a recompense,
Nor (to my knowledge) either then, or there,
But, with good words, and, without violence;
And, naught but what did need, and them might spare,
Nor did I, or, my Troopers, leave unpaid
Our Quarters any where, whilst we had pay,
And, since our entertainments were delaid,
They have my word for payment, when I may.
And, By thus taking, Soldiers grieve men less
In times of War, then Courtiers did in Peace,
We take not, as Monopolizers do,
And, beggar Many; to enrich but One:
Nor take we from, both poor, and wealthy, too,
As Tyrants, that our pleasure might be done,
Nor as the damn'd-self damming Gavalleer,
Who for his lust, and to the Kingdoms harm,
From good and bad, from friend and so, does tear,
What ever may be reached with his arm,
The Parliament (a Body representing
The Kingdom) takes from none; but of her own
Takes part, for furtherance, or for preventing
Of good or evil, either feared or known:
And, if this be unjust, or lawless taking,
It is not by a Law of Reasons making.
For, as the Body-naturall may take
From hands or feet, or any other part,
To wrap about the head when it shall ache;
Or, warm to keep the stomach, or the heart,
When life is else in danger: right so, may
The Body-politike, without reproof,
From any of her Members, take away.
For it own preservation, or behoof,
Yea, doubtless, if a man his goods may spend,
His body to redeem; or, give consent
Some Blood to lose, or Member, to this end,
That he the loss of life might so prevent;
Much more may that Great-Bodie do the same,
Without the brand of injury, or blame.
The taxes, which our Parliament impose,
Are not to grieve the people: but to aid,
And strengthen them against the power of those,
By whom uneasy burdens have been laid.
If they be greater now, then heretofore,
It is because necessities are greater:
And, now require, we should bestow the more,
To make, hereafter, our assurance better.
And pity were it, but he should be father
To none but slaves, or to a generation
Who should not dare old rotten rags to gather
Without a Patent, and a Proclamation,
Who for his Country, thinks his goods too much;
Or, would his life in this adventure grutch.
As for their loyal offers to the King,
They ready were; and are as ready still,
Their wealth, and power, and all they have to bring
To serve him, if his part he shall fulfill.
They would be loath his treasure to increase,
To purchase instruments, wherewith to slay them;
Or, raise an Army, to disturb their peace;
Or, to corrupt their Captains, to betray them.
They should be loath to give him Rents and Lands,
Buffoones, and men unworthy to advance;
That they might weaken us, and arm his hands,
To make us Subjects A la mod de FRANCE.
But, for his Guard, and for the publike-peace,
Our Goods, our Lives, and all we have is his.
If his Revenues, in their hands they stay,
It is not without reason (as is thought)
But, to secure his Crown, and to defray
The charge of War, which he on us has brought.
If they, from his disposure, now withdraw
Some things, by Him, disposed of heretofore,
It is because their right it is by Law;
And, ought to be neglected so no more.
When things permitted out of good respects,
Are challenged as customary rights;
And, when good meanings bring forth ill effects,
It Is time to take more need of oversights;
And, that, by having erred heretofore,
We may not be undone for evermore.
Ships, Forts. and Arms belong unto the Prince,
Not for himself, but for the public use:
They therefore keeping them for his defense,
(And for the Kingdoms good) what needs excuse?
Or, if they ceazed on them, with intent
To prepossesse them, that they might in time.
Their foes inhumane purposes prevent;
It was no fault, or, else, a venial Crime.
They made their Ordinances not for Laws,
But, for the present need, to be in force;
Lest Law-proceedings being at a pause.
The mischiefs (overgreat) grow daily worse,
And, none denies the Parliament, this power
But, they who seek their freedoms to devour,
Though Libellous Detractors, and that Rabble,
Whom thy deluding Sophistries deceive,
Pretend their purpose is dishonorable,
And, of his dues, our Sovereign to bereave;
Your sland'rous Allegations are untrue,
And raised by those who hate the Parliament;
Because, a Reformation they pursue;
And that, which may their purposes prevent.
Far is it, either from their thought, or our
The King, of his just profits to defeat;
Or to deprive him of that Kingly power
Whose want may make his honor incomplete,
By taking, or by clipping (to his wrong)
Those Rights, which to his Office do belong.
When ought they take, it is to take away
That mischief, which may take him from his Throne.
When they deny, it is not to gainsay,
But, that his lawful pleasute may be done.
When they disarm him, it is but that his foes
Might not with his own weapons him destroy.
When they his Rents withold, it is that those
Should not his wealth to his own loss employ.
Have they restrained his power? they did it not
To limit him; but, that his Parasites,
Should not to his dishonor. him beset;
And, make that Pander to their appetites,
Till by their wicked practices, first, We
Are to their wills inslaved; and, than He.
The worst condition they would bring him to,
Is only this; that, if he or his Son,
By ill advisement, would themselves undo,
No innocent should thereby be undone.
Nor they, if during life, Manasseth-like,
They could repent. This brave Prerogative,
This Privilege, for him, and his, we seek;
That, nothing of his Throne might him deprive.
We labor, that it gloriously might stand,
By Righteousness upheld: and, that his Line
May bear the Royall-Seepter in this Land,
As long as either Sun, or Moon shall shine,
By being made, true Homagers to Him,
That wears the universal Diadem.
They would not have him, or his child, hereafter,
Suppose that an advantage can be had,
By bringing to his bed King Pharaohs daughter;
Or, any with whom, GOD, the Banes forbad.
We would not have him, Rehoboam-like,
Advance his Throne by tyrannous oppression:
Or (led by foolish Counsel) Shadows seek
Till he had lost the Substance in possession.
They would not have him set up golden-Calves,
With Jeroboam; and suppose to save
By policy, and serving GOD, by halves,
That Kingdom, which to him, he freely gave,
Till he, like him, has made the people sin,
And, brought our Endlesse-desolation in.
They would not have him, Ahab-like, misled
By wicked female Counsels; or, by those
Dissembling Priests and Prophets, who have bred
That Plague, which now this Island, overgrows.
Nor would they that (with King Iehosaphat)
Some fruitless complements, or causlesse fears,
Should draw him, to become confederate,
With such as are professed Idolaters:
Much less by those that are unwarrantable,
And, such as flattery alone, imputes.
We wish he may be great, but not (with some)
So great, as from a lawful King, to swell
Into a Tyrant; and by that means come
To gain a principality in hell.
We wish him rich; but, not by tricks, that may
Enrich Projectors more: and, lastly prove
A cheat, procuring him, another way,
A greater damage in his peoples love:
But, of these things, we wish him so possessed,
That they may make him happy, and us blessed,
The Parliament would so our Kings enable,
If they, by their advisement, would proceed,
As that, hereafter, no dishonorable,
Unsafe, or unfit courses they should need.
We blush (and are ashamed, as well as grieved)
That they of whom, we, Justice should obtain,
(When injuries from others we receive,)
Give cause of greater sufferings to complain.
We think, what ere seducing Prelates say,
They should have consciences as well as we:
And, may have souls, which will, another day,
Made subject to the Common Judgment be.
And, we would have them none of those, that shall
Cry to the Mountains, down on them to fall.
We would not have them, to our daily sorrow,
And their dishonor, wronged, by such, as they,
Who keep them still so needy as to borrow:
And never in condition to repay.
We would not have them live, and die in debt,
(as usually they do) without regard,
Whose wants, and whose complaynings they forget:
And whose deserts they leave without reward:
Or, need to be encumbered with so many
Oppressing Officers (who from us tear
But, that like David, he should purge his Court
From impudent offenders; and from all
Those practices, which are of ill report;
And chiefly those, which will for vengeance call:
That so his Kingdom might be safe in GOD,
From Traitors here at home: and foes abroad.
They would not have his Minions rob his Name
Of all that honor which thereto belongs;
And, in requital, make him bear the blame
Of their loud-crying cruelties and wrongs,
They would not have each honorable Place,
Filled up, in stead of Princes with such grooms,
As to this Kingdoms, and our Kings disgrace,
Late filled, and yet defild those noble Rooms.
Fellows, of whom the public fame records
No merit; unless merit be in roaring,
In being trusty Panders to their Lords;
In gaming, drinking, quarreling, or whoring.
For, by these virtues, from a trencher-man,
A Princes Minion, rises, now and than.
They would not at the sacred Counsell-board,
That, Lust, and Pride. and Avarice should sit
Arrayed, and intiled like a Lord,
That has nor credit, honesty, nor wit.
Or, such a Ruffian, as (when suitors, there,
In humble wise their grievances prefer)
Shall swear, GOD damn me, I will nothing hear,
That is informed against an Officer.
Or such, as with notorious impudence,
Shall taunt imperiously, or tartly blame
A man, that is of well known innocence,
When they themselves do merit public shame;
Because in public view, and without aw,
They violate divine, and humane Law.
We would preserve our Sovereigns honorable:
Not by a blast of ayry Attributes;
A shilling for themselves, for him, a penny;
Yet, Raven-like, still, hungry Carions are)
If their estates were settled once aright,
And, managed by men that are upright.
Then, should our Princes never need to send
Theit Privy-Seals, to borrow for their use;
And, when they came where nothing was to lend,
Be much displeased at a just excuse.
Nor should they need to seek, as often they do,
By petty Loans, a general supply;
And (which ill suits with borrowing) threaten too,
If we their expectation shall deny:
Nor take such other courses, as of late
Have been devised; and, which are baser, far,
Then our Collections at the Church-yard-gate;
Yea, baser then our Country Help-Ales are:
And, which a generous mind would scarce admit,
Whilst he had rags to wear, or pulse to eat.
For, who can mention, without Indignation,
Those Rascal Projects, wherewith some pretended
His Majesty's Revenues augmentation;
As when, the Soap, and Pins, they him befriended:
Or, when they raised Fines, by Proclamation,
From Laborers, and Beggars Cottages;
Or, from their new-invented-Corporation,
Salt, Malt, and I Coals, with such like things as these:
Or, if I err not, some, from baser things,
To raise the Kings Revenue, made a show,
Even from old Rags, from Guts for Fiddle-strings.
And, if these Projects had not been enough,
I think, ere this, there had been some device,
To raise a profit out of Nits and Lice.
We scorn, this Kingdom, or our King should be
Dishonored by such beggarly inventions:
To make him rich, a nobler way have we,
When he shall please to like of our intentions.
And, whatsoere thy sland'rous tongue has said,
We, seek our Sovereigns welfare; and, with him
No guilefull, or disloyal Parts have played,
To wrong the Scepter, or the Diadem.
Nor have we raced any Monument
Of Christian-Piety; the Cross except,
That we might those Idolatries prevent,
Which in, among us, by that Relic crept.
And, down (for ought I know) the Cross was took,
As justly, as the brazen Snake was broke.
For, though, when Christianity began,
And Jews, and Gentiles, mentioned with scorn,
Christ-crucifi'd, unto the Christian-man,
That badge was then with approbation worn,
Because, it witnes'd them, no whit ashamed
Of Him, in whom they did profess belief,
Though doomed he was, unto a death defamed,
And suffered as a murderer, or thief:
Yet, since the Popelings have a trick devised,
To lift it up, above the civil use,
And, for a Saint, the same has canonized,
And, stained it, by idolatrous abuse,
We have rejected it, as, now, become
A wanton Token from the whore of Rome.
That Sects, or Schisms, we favor, I deny;
For, Law, and true Religion we befriend,
Against their fury and Idolatry,
Whom you have armed, injustice to defend.
We to be regulated are content,
(Not, by the fancies of one private brain,
Or, by a few, that came ere they were sent)
By those, to whom such matters appertain.
Some Lawyers have the sense of Law estranged
From what it was: some, Priests, and Prelates too,
Both Doctrines and Church Discipline have changed,
From that which was established long ago;
That, therefore, we might in the truth abide,
We by the Fountains would have all things tried*
Though of her Members, faulty some appear,
The Parliaments maine purpose is upright:
And, while preserved their Foundations are,
The Righteous cannot lose their labors quite.
Although the Kings intentions may be good,
(As I still hope they be) yet, most of those
That give him counsel, now, are men of blood;
And, such as duty binds us to oppose.
T were no discretion to commit my Sword
To him, who straight would give it to my foe.
Nor were it wisely done, to take his word,
Who knows not, what he shall have power to do.
For, often, from Reason, other men estrange us;
And, other while, our own corruptions change us,
Thou say, the King has vowed, and protests,
Our Laws, and our Religion to defend.
We ask no more, unless, as in the breasts
Of private men they are, he shall intend:
Or, shall conceive, that he the Law does carry
Within himself: For, that does plainly show
The government he seeks, is Arbitrarie;
Which, humbly we deny to be his due.
I say the Law now arms me. He says no;
And, calls me traitor, for what I have done.
The Parliament affirms I fail to do
My duty, if another course I run:
And how the King in Law more skilled can grow
Then they that made it, I would gladly know.
It were a fancy, to affirm he gained
A knowledge of our Laws by Revelation,
Or that he studied them: then, he obtained
His notions of them, by mere information,
And who are his informers, now, but those,
That, are the chief transgressors of the Law?
They, who essentially the same oppose?
Who, from it, their obedience quite withdraw?
They, whose delinquencie had made them fear?
^o let the Laws true power, or sense be known?
Because, if their true vigor should appear,
These, and their Structures, would be overthrown.
Yes, they from whom, he learned his chiefest skill,
Are they, who tell him, Law is, What he will.
If thou shall say, his Informations are
From those, that in our Laws most skillful be,
And, men unblam'd; admitting, such they were,
Though that is nor believed, nor known of me)
This, I am certain of, my undertaking
Was, by no such mean counsel undergone;
Nor by a warrant of that private making,
But, by a stronger; by a public one:
Even by that Senate; whence our Law does spring:
By that great Court, which is, by all, confessed
Chiefe-Counsell, to the Kingdom, and the King:
The Lady and Commandresse of the rest:
By those, from whom the Laws that bind this nation,
Receive both being, and interpretation.
Should I the judgment of that Court despise
For their, whom yet, I neither heard, nor saw?
Because a few, did other ways advise,
More blamed for arrogance, then famed for Law?
And, is it not of dangerous consequence,
That, to his reverend Parliaments disgrace,
The King, in doubtful points, should leave their sense,
For judgments, which from private spirits pass?
For, if a private spirit vouched may be
Against that Court, for Him: why may it not
Against Him, be as well a vouched for me,
If to contend, I power enough had got?
Grant this and every man as well may hope
To damn a Generall-Councell, as the Pope.
Grant this, and none can doubt the Kings intent
The Protestant-Religion to maintain,
And all the Freedoms of the Parliament;
For, they are in his Bosom, and his Brain.
And what he will, yea, sometime, what his Groom
Shall make him to believe, or understand,
(Though all his dictates be received from Rome)
Is then, the Law and Gospel of the Land.
Most Prelates, and most Judges were the Creatures
Of Princes, and their Minions; therefore, these
Make for them (as their Vassals, and their Debtors)
Religion, and the Laws, even when they please.
And, hence our strifes, and all divisions spring,
Twixt GOD, and us, the People, and the King.
We would not bar our Sov'raignes, any power
Which fortifies, or dignifies the Crown:
Nor lose one lawful Privilege that is our,
When we are well informed what is our own.
The People, did first make both Laws and Kings:
And, for their own security, did make them.
Then, he that shall repute them, to be things
Ordained for other ends, does much mistake them.
Now, for themselves, if Laws and Kings they made,
The makers had been madmen, to intend
They should a meaning, or a Power, have had
To make them useless to their chiefest End,
And give Prerogatives, or meanings to them,
That, should, in stead of saving, help undo them.
True Reason, therefore, warrants me to say,
That, when we see the Law a sense does give,
Which takes any public right away;
Or stretches so the Kings Prerogative,
As that the Kingdom is oppressed thereby,
Or, of the public safety brought in fear;
Or, doubtful of approaching tyranny;
Or, liable to mischiefs may appear;
That sense of Law is false; usurped be
All such Prerogatives: And, nor by time,
Or frequent presidents, obliged are we
To let our Freedoms, be infringed by them:
But, we should claim, and take, what proves our,
As often, as GOD shall give us means and power.
Though some Historians, and the flattring Pen
Have styled the Norman, CONQVEROR; nor he,
Nor any one before him, or since then,
Can say, that we a conquered Nation be.
For, by a Composition, and on terms
Becoming Freemen, we remained possessed
Of Liberty; and WILLIAM threw down arms,
Accepting of that share we valued least.
And, had we not as well by Oath, as Word,
Been reinvested in our Native-right,
That, which we lost unjustly, by the Sword,
At all times, by the Sword, attempt we might
To re-possesse, when GOD makes warrantable,
That enterprise, by making of us able.
For, this, I partly fight: not with the King;
But, with those Miscreants who seek our harm:
And, his abused Name, and Person, bring
Unwary people, by fair shows, to charm.
And, ere they shall accomplish their intent
By slaving Him, their projects to be friend;
Or by dishon'ring of the Parliament;
My life time, in this Quarrel, I will spend.
Or, if I must unhappily survive
To see our English-Honour overthrown,
I will not (if I may avoid it) live
To be a slave, where I did freedom own.
Nor willingly, in any Land remain,
In which a Tyrant (called a King) shall reign.
This Quarrel, above thirty years before
The Sword was drawn, I fought in, with my Pen,
Till I by Tyranny was made so poor,
As that they thought, I never should rise again.
Without an Army, or a Parliament
To side withal; without one able friend;
Without reward; without encouragement,
To further that which I did well intend:
Nay, struggling through much envy and despite,
That Warfare I continue to this hour:
And in this warfare, am resolved to fight,
Whilst I to hold a Sword or Pen, have power,
Till I have compast, what, in hope, I have;
Or, brought my tired body to the Grave.
For, peradventure, we are grown so bad,
So false to GOD, so false in every thing,
Both to our selves, and others; and have had
So many Mercies, whence, no fruits do spring,
That, God will give this present Generation,
To be what most deserve and some desire;
Even to be slaves to that Abomination,
With which their lives are doomed to expire.
If so, then am I called to this fight,
But, only, that my duty might be done:
And in this manner, have been moved to write,
That, for our sin, excuse we may have none,
And, GOD's great work, which he will bring about,
Shall be delayed, till this vile Race be out.
Then, shall the age to come, pick up, and gather
These droppings of my Pen, which now they scorn;
And, wonder, men esteemed them no rather:
And pity those afflictions I have borne.
Then, they shall scan each page, and every Line,
And, find raked up, among my Vanities,
Expressions, which will show, that Sparks divine
Of Heavenly-Fire, in earthly Cinders lies.
Then, they shall come to understand and know,
That many future things I did behold,
Beside that one, which is acknowledged, now,
To be fulfilled, as it was foretold.
But, MUSE, thou art almost without the LIST:
Return again to thy Antagonist.
Thou chargest us, Delusion, with such things
As no way correspond with our intentions,
And, proof whereof, no creature living brings:
For, they indeed are merely thy inventions.
The goods of none we ceaze, or sequestrate,
Because, they to the King, are faithful friends:
But, for their faithlesnesse unto the State,
And, serving Him, to base and evil ends.
Nor of our Sovereign, censure we amiss:
But them we rightly judge, that him misguide:
For, in his actions, that which evil is,
To them pertaines, who draw his heart aside.
In public Acts, The King can do no Wrong,
Because, unto his Counsel they belong.
The King can do no wrong, as he is King:
For, GOD ordained, and man did intend,
Him, not to hurt, or plagues on them to bring,
But, for their good, and good men to defend.
The King, as King, can do no wrong; because
He can do nothing but, what he may do
According to divine, and humane Laws:
And, what the publike-peace invites him to.
The King can do no wrong: because, what ere
He does as King, is never duly done,
But, by some public Vote, or Officer,
Or, they consenting, if he act alone.
For, all he does, whence any wrong proceeds,
Are not his Royal but, his private deeds.
The King can do no wrong: For, if there be
Injustice done; his Officers are they
Who do it: and, by Law they only be
Accomptable. And, therein, praise I may
The wisdom of our Laws; for, had there been
By them, provided Legal Punishment
For Kings; no man would be a King, I ween,
But he, that could not such a Lot prevent.
For, were it so; then, if Court-Parasites
Corrupt young Kings, and draw them to command
That sin, whereto their ill-advice invites,
Kings, at the Bar, for their Offense might stand:
And they might free themselves, from every thing
Which they mis-doe: and lay it on the King.
And, who would be their Officers, if Kings
Were liable to Legal punishment
In person (as a Subject) for the things
Mis-done, by their commandment, or assent:
For, if they shall be Tyrants, or such Princes,
As make but little conscience of their way,
Whom will they not accuse of those Offenses,
To free themselves from suffering, if they may?
And, then, though they accuse men innocent,
Who would not think a King should be believed
Before his Vassal? and appear content
He, thereby, should from suffering, be repreev'd?
Yea, great absurdities from thence might flow,
If Law conceived, the King a wrong might do.
The King can do no wrong: and, therefore, those
Who shall his personal commands obey,
In ought which does his Legal Will oppose,
Should bear, alone, that pain the Law does lay:
Because, the Law of nothing else takes heed,
But only of those things that it commands,
Or, of those evils which it does forbid:
And, for no private will, or pleasure stands.
The King can do no wrong: For, it destroys
The Essence of a King: and does deprive
Of every Privilege which he enjoyes
By virtue of a Kings Prerogative.
And, from Allegiance frees in every thing,
Which he commands, beseeming not a King,
For, unto Kings, is our Allegiance sworn,
Not unto Tyrants, who shall fondly dream
That Kingdoms have been made, and Subjects borne,
For nothing else, but to be slaves to them.
Yet, here mistake me not: we are not (tho
They tyrannize) from all Allegiance free:
But, only, from an Obligation to
Obedience, in those things that lawless be.
We, to their legal wills and pleasures, ever
Must yield submission; and, with due respects,
In every act of Loyalty persever:
And, leave to GOD, their personal defects.
For, well enough great mischiefs it prevents,
When Law takes hold, of all their Instruments.
What can a King to harm the public, do
In his own person? If by Law we may
Lay hold on those, that counsel him unto
A wrong? and those whom he shall mis-employ?
If in the lawfull-powre, a RIGHT there be;
And, therewith, STRENGTH enough to seize on Them:
He hurts us not. And, if too weak are we,
What get we, though the Law might punish Him?
Then, as his Person by our Law, is freed
From every violence (except from that
Which may restrain his Person from a deed
Destructive to his Person, or the State)
So be it ever free. And, blessed be those,
That, serve him, with true service where he goes.
We, no man charge with treasons, none we blame,
That guiltless is of his imputed crime,
And free from just suspicions of the same;
As will be rendered manifest, in time.
The King from all aspersions clear would we,
Which without public damage might be hid,
Though, to himself, those things assumed has he,
Which (as a King) we know, he never did.
What earthly wisdom can a means devise
His honor to preserve, against his will?
Or, do him right, that hearkens unto lies?
Yet, this, we, to our power, endeavor still.
And, free we are, from being justly blamed,
For having, wilfully, the King defamed.
We none seduce, but, labor, how we may
Prevent seducements; by right informations;
And, those effects, to change, or take away,
Which may arise from lying Declarations.
By us, no Member of the Parliament
Was driven thence: But, for their private ends,
Unworthily, some from that service went,
Which every worthy Member still attends.
Some, to the King repaired, in hope, to get
A Title: Some, because they had mis-done:
Some wanted honesty, some wanted wit;
Some went, because their Mistresses were gone
Some fled for company; and, some did fly,
(If I am not deceived) they knew not why.
Thus much I know; that He, who led them forth,
And They, who followed Him, in hope to find
A Cloud, to hide their project, in the North;
Did leave us, nor so sottish, nor so blind,
But that we found their aims; and soon perceived,
What tales, they meant, the people should believe;
What hooks they baited, and what webs they weaved,
The (soone-misguided) people to deceive.
And, he that will, may know, that, neither They
Who followed, neither He, that went before,
Knew reason, why he should depart away.
For, here he might have stayed, honored more,
More safe, more feared, more loved, more happy here,
Then they, or we, by their departure were.
Could any, but mere impudence, aver
That nothing, of our due, the King denies?
When they who chief in our Oppressions are,
Are, at this day, most favored in his eyes?
Can we have hope our safeties to enjoy,
When they are still his Counsel, who intend
Our lawful Rights, and Freedoms, to destroy?
And, thither all their force and cunning bend?
Is true Religion like to be maintained?
While they, who innovated every day,
(And, have their old Affections, yet retained)
Are kept in hope, their former parts to play?
Or, can we think, the Popish Generation
Are armed, for our Religions preservation?
Can we have in us, either heart, or brains,
If we believe this? when to mind we call
How great a multitude of souls complains,
Which in the Irish-Massacre did fall?
If we propose before our ears, and eyes,
The horrid murders of our brethren, there,
Their fears, their sad destractions, and their cries,
When, by their Butchers, they surprised were.
How terrible it was, when they beheld
Their bloody neighbor, rudely rushing in,
And, saw, perhaps, their dear companions killed,
By those, with whom they had familiar bin:
Yea, saw, before they doubted, cause of fear,
A murderer, or a mischief, ev'ry-where.
If we remember, that the mazed Father,
And, trembling mother, in the winter-night,
Were forced, in have, without their clothes, to gather
Their children up, and, with them, take their flight
Through fields, and boggs, and woods, with naked feet,
Less fearing thirst, and hunger, frost, and snow,
Then with those cursed Edomites to meet,
Who neither manhood, nor compassion know.
If we consider, why they first began
Their hellish Tragedy; how great a flood
In every Irish Town, and Village, ran
Of harmless Protestant and English blood;
How, in their tortures, and their fears, they joy'd;
And what great numbers they had soon destroyed.
If we consider this, and that a Nation
So bloudy-minded, and professing too
A worship, which is our Abomination,
Should by His Majesty be favored so,
That after all their mischief, all their spoil
And cruelties, committed in that Land,
They should be called over to this I Will,
To kiss (with good respect) the Royall-hand,
Can we, these things consid'ring, symptoms find,
That, ought, for us, but mischief, is intended,
To soul and body? Can we have a mind
So sottish, as to hope to be befriended
In our Religion, by the Kings protection?
While such, as these, have place in his affection?
Maintains he our Laws, as he has sworn,
When he maintains Law-breakers, in despite
Of common equity? And, as in scorn
Of Justice, at the root of Law does smite?
Or, does he keep his Oath, though he alone
Allows of Laws enacted heretofore?
If he to us denies, as he has done,
What might secure the common safety more?
Or, has he done his duty, in denying
His, and the Kingdoms Counsel, to embrace?
Or, in imprudent, and unjust complying
With Parasites, to his, and their disgrace?
Or, valuing men of Rascal Reputations,
Before the wisest of three noble Nations?
No change in Church or Commonwealth we crave,
But, what Gods Word, and Reason shall allow.
That, we are bound to seek, and ought to have;
And what that is, hereafter you shall know.
Our Churchmens honor we envied not;
But, could, what they enjoyed, have allowed,
Had it been rightly used, and fairly got.
But, they have long been lazy, false, and proud.
And, I foretold them many years ago,
The course they took, in hope thereby to stand,
Should cause their fall. And, if it now be so;
It is the work of God Almighties hand:
And, since it proves, their honor did them hurt,
I am content, to see it, in the dirt.
The King is not obliged to uphold
Their outward pomp; when his great Counsel shall
Inform, that if the same abide it should,
It may become the ruining of all.
Him, does his Oath, or Place, engage, to cherish
A rotten Member? though by doing so,
The whole Republike may grow sick, and perish?
Or Piety receive her overthrow?
Or, should we fancy, that the Law intended,
This Realms whole Body, should not be believed?
When they complained of that which them offended?
And told, which way, they best might be relieved?
Or, can he think, his Oath he broken had,
When they shall him acquit, for whom 'twas made?
When, on the Prelates, Law did first confirm
Their Dignities; the common people thought
They came from God: so wisely they could charm,
To compass, for themselves, the things they sought.
And, every age brought forth a man or two,
Whose knowledge and whose piety made way
For them, who came, another work, to do;
And, whose first founder, now, discern we may.
Then, since we now discover them, to be
Not Christ's Apostles, as we, once believed,
But, Engines for the Papal Monarchy,
And, hypocrites, by whom we were deceived:
Why should we now suppose we do them wrong,
To take away what they have kept too long.
Why should we think it sacrilege, or sin?
To take both wealth and dignities away
From those, to whom they never due have bin?
From such, as would the Cause of CHRIST betray?
Why should his Jewels by his Foes be worn?
Why on his bread should Droans and Robbers feed?
To cloth a wolf, why should a sheep be shorn?
Or they be spared, whose fall is fore-decreed?
Let them learn true humility of CHRIST,
And, study how in Spirit to be poor;
Their earthly honors will not then be mist:
Their want of wealth will be a want no more:
And, they shall honor GOD, and bless the day,
In which he took their needless trash away.
It is my grief, that I am forced to bring
Those Reasons of defense which may appear
Reflecting on the houour of the King,
Which keep I would from all aspersions clear.
But, his dear Favorites have blended so
His Acts with their designs, and their, with his:
That, we their malice cannot fully show,
Without some touch, on what he does amiss.
And, that considered, makes their fault the greater;
And, Him (though their ill-service he approve)
To them, for, what they claim, the less their debtor;
Because, his Honor they but little love:
For (till these times) though Courtiers played the k^
They saved their Honors, who, them sought to sa^
But, whatsoever, by the Parliament,
Or, by my PEN, he seems to have lost
In point of Honor; if he shall assent
To that, which will be nothing to his cost,
But, rather, for his profit; let the same
Be, at my hands required; unless I shall
Find out, not only means, whereby his Name
Shall publicly stand fair, and clear from all
Dishonorable stains; but, also show
How his, may, all his Predecessors glory
Outshine: and, leave to times that shall ensue,
An everlasting honorable Story.
Which, to believe, me thinks, he should be moved,
Since, all I yet foretold him, true has proved.
GODS will be done; within whose powerful hands
The hearts of Princes are; and, let us wait
With patience, till, for us, his Grace commands
That aid, which makes things crooked to be straight.
Meane-while, we must not those just means neglect,
Which to the public safety may pertain:
Nor cease from doing good, though an effect,
Not purposed, make him causlesly complain.
Our Cause we must expostulate; that, We
May, to the world, approve our innocence:
And, that he may, thereby, informed be,
How little cause we give of just offense.
And, to that end, to what I said before,
In our defense, I Will add a little more.
Though others may be fooled with Protestations,
And, words or oaths; which, peradventure, none
Did vow, or make, but he, whose Declarations
Have, lately, for the Kings, among us gone.
The Parliament has many piercing eyes,
That in the dark, descry their foes devices:
And, by discov'ring of their Treacheries,
Ere they come forth, destroys those Cockatrices.
When mischiefs are, by Providence, foreseen,
And, then prevented: they that would have done them,
Make Friends, and Fools, believe they had not been,
Because, they were destroid ere they begun them,
Yet, some, who saw not where the Foxes went,
Can find where they have haunted, by their scent.
What things the King has sworn, I do not hear;
But, should he swear ten times, and ten times over,
There were no cause to dread, what yet we fear,
Me, of that fear, his Oaths could not recover:
For, though I should believe, that he thought true
What he had sworn: yet, what should me assure
That he his own Designs should still pursue?
Or, that unchanged he shall still endure?
And, though his heart bide fixed, how can I know
That, he shall still have power to do me right?
Since they, who seek his Kingdoms overthrow,
Already, are Commanders of his might?
And, so prevailing, that, in him, I see
Nor Will, nor Power, his own true friend to be?
Though others can beyond belief, believe,
And, hope beyond all hope; I cannot, yet,
In Reasonable things, permission give
Unto my Fancy, to befoole my Wit.
In flights-divine, my Contemplation flies,
Without restraint: But, in all humane things,
My Understanding, still, my Judgment ties
To Reasons principles; or clips her wings.
What ever, therefore, other do, or say;
What ever sounds, or shows, I see, or hear;
Each weightie-matter, by it self, I weigh,
With every circumstance, that may appear:
[And, when that all things I have thoroughly proved,
I silent am, or speak, as I am moved.
So did I in this Cause, before I dared
Resolve upon the course, that I have took.
And, ere I hither came, came so prepared,
That, nothing to affright me, can be spoke.
Though all, for whose defense, I hither come,
Should use me worse then yet my foes have done,
(As, I already have been used by some)
I would not leave the path I have begun;
But, merely for the justness of the Cause,
And conscience sake, perform my best endeavor,
To vindicate Religion, and the Laws:
And, in this duty to my death, persever;
That, I may live to see our Freedom saved:
Or, bravely die, before I am enslaved.
For, though some, wilfully; and, weakly, some
Object unto us, that in Primitive,
And purer ages, Christians did not come
With Fire and Sword, the Law of Faith to give:
Nor seek by force of arms, to make defense
Against those Tyrants, in whose lands they taught;
(Much less, came armed, against their native Prince)
To settle that Religion which they brought.
This argument of their is but a cheat,
To cozen Innocence, with a show
That Is empty: For, the difference is great
Betwixt their Cause, and that, we manage now
Which, I should make more plainly to appear,
But, that, too tedious, for this place, it were.
They had no Party, to defend their cause;
They came to preach, where Freedoms they had none:
They were not armed by their Countries Laws:
And, greatest good, by suffering, might be done.
To Russia, or to Turkey, should I go
Our Faith to publish there; the likeliest way
To settle it, would, then, be sufferance, too:
And, meekly, on the block, my head to lay.
Must therefore, we permit the Whore of Rome,
To send her Bastards, and her Fornicators?
(Whom Law forbids within our coasts to come)
To teach her Baudrie to our sons and daughters?
And, make the Kings, and Princes, of these Nations,
Drunk with the Feces of her Fornications?
Because, the Martyrs suffered, by that State,
Whose settled way of Worship, they gainsaid?
Must, down to those, who come to innovate
Our settled Truth; this Kingdoms neck be laid?
Shall we be able an account to render,
For our neglect; now we in danger see,
(Of Romish-Slaverie) our Faiths-Defender,
If we endeavor not to set him free?
Shall we sit still, and whine, when Law, and Reason
Cries out All-arme? until we be, indeed,
Traitors; by fearing Loyalty is Treason?
And bring both Plagues and Curses on our Seed?
Do as you please, my way to me is known;
And, I will walk it, though I walk alone.
For, that without a partial inclination
(To either side) the right I might disclose,
It was, and is my full determination,
To set aside respect of friends or foes.
And, let me be, by both of them abhorred,
If I now utter, or have uttred ought,
For private ends; or, what shall not accord,
In every sentence, with a loyal thought.
To keep me from Delusion, I have prayed;
I have looked up, above me, to discover
What notions, may be down to me convayd;
Of those things which above our heads, do hover.
And, down below me, I have cast mine eyes,
To mark what fogs may up from hell arise.
About me I have looked, on either side,
On disagreeing, and agreeing actions:
The manners, and the speeches I have tried,
Of most Professions all Degrees, and Factions.
And, from them all have made for my directions,
(And for my informations, in this Cause)
A chain of Observations, and Collections;
From whence, my Judgment, her conclusions draws.
Behind me, I have looked, to take a view,
Of what was done, or suffered, heretofore:
What did on this, what did on that ensue:
What makes a Curse, or Blessing, less, or more.
And, I have looked before me, too; and see
Events of things, that shall hereafter be.
I have considered what I had foreseen
In that great Plague, which this Kings Reign began:
What I foretold him; what fulfilled has been;
What courses He, and His, since that time ran.
I have considered, why I did prefer
That hearty-prayer, for Him, which yet stands
As registered, in my Remembrancer;
And has been published, through all his Lands.
I have considered, well, what kind of men
Were then his Counselors; and, who are now;
What Parliaments, and Promises, were then
Made void: and, what effects, from thence did flow.
How fast, injurious Projects were incretst;
How cruelly, the people were oppressed.
I have well weighed, what persons were preferred
In Church and Commonwealth; and, with what slight
Acceptance (if not with a disregard)
All honest services they did requite.
Their Proclamations, did from year to year,
Proclaim to me, much more then they intended
I should have known. And, though I silent were,
I could have told in what they should have ended.
The Life, and sudden Death, of Buckingham;
The Voyages of Rochel, and of Ree;
And other things, whereto I privieam,
Were true Prognostications unto me;
And, to my understanding, more foretold,
Then all the Constellations did unfold.
And, though I live among the Countrey-Clowns,
(As one, who scarcely knew, or heeded ought)
The Spanish-Fleet that perished on the Downs,
I heard of; and, to mind it some what brought.
Sometimes, I have intelligence from Rome;
And, know what in the Conclave has been done.
I have observed other men, to come
On business thence, as well as Senior Con.
I know Archbishop Laud; and he knows me,
The worse for him, by many hundred pounds;
For which, I recompensed look to be,
When he, again, at Lambeth walks his Rounds.
And, I, from these, though they suppose not so,
Some Reasons drew, for that, which now I do.
I heard, of what, within their Cabinet,
The Machiavilian-Counsellers debate;
And, informations, other while, did get,
Of ill-presaging secresies of State.
The German-horse, that should have trotted hither;
Prodigious Straffords projects, deeds, and trial,
With other Characters, speld all together,
Have shown me Truths, that can have no denial.
And, when my heart had rightly pondred these,
Weighed, what they are, with whom we have to do;
Their words, their hopes, their lives, their practices,
What things they seek, whom they belong unto,
With such like notes, as these; me thinks, they be
All blind men, who perceive not, what I see.
And, when I had with these considerations,
Considered too, for what a worthless Crew,
The suits and cries of two most loyal Nations,
Have wanted those effects which are their due:
That He, who for the Sheep, his life should give,
Can give them to the Wolves, and see them slain:
That He, who should our grievances releeve,
Can add unto our torment, and our pain:
That He, because we fear his Dogs will bite,
(And, for that reason, pray they may be tied)
Can therefore, let them loose, and take delight
To see them kill, whom they have terrifide:
These things considered, me thinks, we wrong
The Humane-nature, to be tame so long.
When I perceived our dear Countries Father,
So peremptorily affect his will,
That, he would hazard three brave Kingdoms, rather,
Then his unlawful pleasure, not fulfill;
And, when I saw the Devils, who inspire
This wilfulness into him, ceaze the goods
Of his best subjects; their fair houses fire;
Deflowre their Virgins; shed their Old-mens bloods;
Betray their nearest Kinsmen, slay their Brothers;
Deprive the blameless Infants of their lives;
Enslave their Fathers, kill their frighted Mothers:
Abuse their Daughters, and defile their Wives:
It grieved me, that this Island should afford
One man, who for this Quarrel drew no sword.
But, since I have considered, that, from ROME,
These Plagues, these mischiefs, these unhappy wars,
And all, our present miseries, did come,
With our unequalled Irish-Massacres:
And, that (beside the many thousands here)
Well nigh, two hundred thousand Protestants,
Were slain, and rooted thence, within one year,
By those, to whom the King high favors grants:
And, since it is (not improbably) believed,
They called are to be our Butchers too:
(If we permit our selves to be deceived,
Till they can compass what they mean to do)
Me thinks, we have not been so tame, as mad,
To have so slow a hand, as we have had.
And, lastly, since I weighed, that, not alone
A plot is laid three Kingdoms to undo,
But also, in their spoil, to have undone,
All other true Reformed-Churches too:
That, Gods own glory, and the servitude
Of Christian souls, is in this Cause concerned;
From thence (whatever, other will conclude)
I, these Conclusions, with good Warrant, learned:
That, those whom in this Warfare we resist,
Are neither worse, nor better, but, those Bands,
And those Confederates of ANTICHRIST,
Which are to be his Champions, in these Lands.
And, that, whoever fights on their side,
When this is known, has GOD, and CHRIST denied.
I see, as plainly as I see the Sun,
He draws near, that, on the Rev. 19. 11.
white horse rides.
The long-expected Battle is begun:
The BEAST, to muster up his Kings, provides:
With him, will all his Edomites conspire;
The seed of Hagar, and the sons of Lot:
Philistia, Gebal, Moab, Ammon, Tire,
And, all that with his Mark, themselves bespot.
Those brave white-Regiments, me thinks, I see,
That, on the LORD of LORDS, and KING of KINGS,
Attending in triumphant habits be;
And, which, with him, against our foes he brings.
Me thinks, I hear his Rev. 19. 17.
Angel call the Crows,
To eat the Kings, and Captains of our foes.
If this be so; as, with a heart unfain'd
I do believe it is: how brave a lot
Have we? that were, before all worlds, ordained,
To be, for soldiers, to the LAMB, begot?
With what high courage should we march along
Against this Foe? That, being Conquerours,
We may, with Angels, sing a Triumph-Song,
And, crowned sit, among Celestial Powers?
Why should we be afraid to speak, or write,
What may, from this cursed Army, fetch our King?
Why should we fear, to perish in that Fight,
Which will through Death, to Life immortal bring?
Or, why should any, now, this work delay?
Or, doubt the truth of that, which here I say?
I beg no grace from King, or Parliament,
If an Impostor I shall prove to be:
Or, if men find not, by the Consequent,
That, GOD has spoken to this Land, by me:
And, that the maine of all my Musings were
Inspired by Him; though, often, he permit
My foolishness, among them, to appear,
That, nothing be ascribed to my Wit.
Excuse I crave not, but a just correction,
Or, Approbation, as my words may merit.
If an ill-spirit has been my direction,
What thereunto pertains, let me inherit.
And, if the truth be spoken, do not grieve me,
Without a cause; but, hearken, and believe me.
Suppose not (my dear Countrymen) that here
I have been over-bold, although you see
A bitterness does in my lines appear:
For, in this Cause, great things concerned be:
It does concern our children, and our wives.
The public safety, and the public good;
The honor of our Nation, and our lives,
The just avengement of our brethrens blood:
The freedom of our persons, and estates;
The honor, and the safety of our King:
Our present being, and our future fates,
And, almost, every other precious thing:
Yea, it concerns our souls: and, more then so,
It highly does concern GODS glory too.
Now then, for conscience, or, for shame, begin.
To call to mind the duties that ye owe:
Let what appears without, be found within;
That, by your actions, we your hearts may know.
For your own sakes (if not for GODS, and our)
Be zealous in the cause you undertake:
Lest you, ere long, have neither means, nor power,
Your peace with GOD, or Them, or Us, to make.
For, both to GOD, and man, above all creatures,
The most abhorred, are those hypocrites,
Who can comply with disagreeing natures,
Yet, false to all, but to their appetites.
Take, therefore, counsel from a soldiers Pen:
And (while you may) be warned, be wise, be men.
Ashamed (if not a little mad) I am,
To see so many, in this cause, so cold,
So false, so faint, so cowardly and tame,
That can, in other causes, be so bold.
And (not without affliction) this, I say:
Should this good cause miscarrie, all our foes
Are not more guilty of it, then are they,
Who give it, unperceived, and secret blows.
None do it so much damage; none so wrong us,
As they, who seem to be our faithful friends;
They, who at meat, and counsel, sit among us;
And, serve the public; for their private ends.
Our Scaene of blood, ere this, had else been done:
And, peradventure, never been begun.
In every Village, Town and Corporation,
Let all, that are true Protestants professed,
Let every Canton, Province, Tribe, and Nation,
Which does against the Romish-Whore protest,
A timely League, with one another make;
Unite themselves by firm Associations;
And, by a sacred Covenant, courses take
Both for their joint, and several preservations.
And, to be sure, they make a firm defense
Against their foes fierce fury, and despite;
Let them be clothed, with Love, and Innocence,
Armed, with that armor, wherewith Christians fight;
And, be prepared, always, to resist
The Body, and the Limbs, of ANTICHRIST.
Fear not the fury of your present Foes,
For, by treir mixture, you discover may
They are but part of that great STATVES toes,
Whose Feet were made of Iron, and of Clay.
If they receive but one good knock, or twain,
The Clay, and Iron, will divided be:
The Protestant will be himself again:
For, Light and Darkness never can agree.
Though horned, but like the LAMB, they yet appear,
(Pretending to be armed for innocence)
Their Voices do discover what they are;
And, that the DRAGONS Creature is their Prince.
Oh therefore, as you love your preservation,
Give ear, ye Britans, to this Proclamation.
CHARLES by the grace of GOD, the Sovraigne King,
Of England, Scotland, Ireland, and of France,
Intending in his heart no other thing,
But, how his Regal power he might advance,
In that pursuit, a little straying from
His faithful Parliament, through ill advice,
Was by an ambuscado, sent from ROME,
Surprised lately, in a traitorous wise:
And (whereof all good subjects should have sense)
Imprisoned lies; where both his eyes and ears,
So poysned are, by false intelligence,
That, nothing he, now, truly sees, or hears.
As by those Actions, which his name do bear,
It may, and will apparently appear.
Moreover, they have in despite of Law,
Advanced a Popish Army (by some shows
Of what they purpose not) and, daily draw
The Protestants, each other to oppose:
And, have so fairly cov'red their intention,
That, what they could not, by themselves, have wrought,
We may assist them in, till past prevention
Their Plot, and our destruction shall be brought.
Come therefore, Oh all ye! that are professed
The sons of Reformation! Come away,
From giving your assistance to the BEAST;
Lest, in his Judgment, you be swept away.
On pain of ruin, Come; and help to bring
Our Sov'raigne home: And so, God save the King.
Let him, that would a Christian man appear,
His drowzie soul awake, and rouse his Faith.
Let him, that has an ear to hear, give ear
To that, which through my Trunk, the Spirit says:
And, cursed let him be, till he repent
(His wilfulness) that, when he hears this Muse,
And feels his heart, inclining to assent,
(To what is true) her counsel shall refuse.
Accursed let him be, on like condition,
That through a Self-conceit, or through Pride,
Shall blast these useful Musings, with suspicion
Of ill intents; or, my just hopes deride:
Or, by his envy, malice, or neglect,
Deprive them, of their purposed effect.
Accursed let those Towns, and Cities be,
Which willing entertainment did afford
To our Pursuers; and, were glad to see
Their Armies with them, both at Bed, and Board.
The curse of Meroz, and those execrations,
Which to her base Inhabitants befell,
Alight on their Malignant-habitations;
And, that of Succoth, and of Penuel:
Till they with shame and sorrow, shall repent
Their falsehood to themselves, and to their friends:
Their falsehood to the King and Parliament:
And, help to bring those Traitors to their ends.
And let all Places, which have done their best
Against those Rebels; be, for ever, blessed.
And (if my Sentence, which is here recorded
May pass for good) let every one of those
That has for any services, been Lorded,
Wherein, their GOD, or Country they oppose,
We are his false Badge of Honor, every where,
With infamy, with beggerie, and scorn;
With terrible vexations, and with fear,
Till his un worthy Name away be worn:
Or, till, by some apparent penitence,
By GOD, a pardon shall to him be given:
And, then, let all his folly and offense,
Remitted be on earth, as it is in heaven.
And, so let all the rest, by my consent,
Like mercy find, as soon as they repent.
For, we are all transgressors: he that is best
Is bad, and but a Brier, or a Thorn.
He, that among us has transgressed least,
Deserves more plagues, then he that is worst has borne.
He, that has much offended, has perchance,
Not out of wilfulness, offensive bin:
But, through temptation, or through ignorance;
For which, true penitence may mercy win.
Yea, some, perhaps, who most of all offend,
Were left to their corruptions, for our crimes:
And, when we shall our wicked lives amend,
They shall repent, and we have better times.
Yet, still, most blessed be those men, and places,
Who from this Battle, have not turned their faces.
For ever blessed, and renowned, for ever,
Let Glo'ster be; that, being far from aid,
Did in her firmness, gloriously persever,
When round her Walls, the King his army laid.
For ever, let the town of Manchester
Be blessed and famous; that, with slender Guard,
Without a neighboring-second (and well near
Without all helps) her dangers all outdar'd:
And, by GOD's aid, alone, did trample down
The power, and pride of Darbies armed son:
Yea, where the Popish-Faction, strongst was grown,
Prevailed, in spite of all that spite had done:
And, hopeful bides, that He, who did befriend
Her pains, thus far, will bless it to the end.
And, far above them all, renowned, and blessed
Let London be, who for the preservation
Of three great Kingdoms, woefully distressed,
Has acted things begetting admiration.
For ever, let her Bounty, and her Zeal,
Her Constancy, her Counsels, and her Prayers,
Her Valor also for the Commonweal,
When we were almost sunk into despaires:
Let all these, be remembered, to her glory:
And, let her high deservings by the same,
Be so recorded in some well writ Story,
That, all great Cities may envy her fame.
And, so to honor her, let us agree,
That, all her praises, to GOD's praise, may be.
Let all those Worthies also, that have done,
Or, suffered bravely, for the Common-good,
In this great Cause (until Times round is run)
Be blessed and honored, in their Names, and Blood.
Let valiant Essex, Warwick, Manchester,
Stout Fairfax, Wallor, Roberts, Brook, and Gray,
(Who forward for the public safety were)
Be crowned with a never-dying Bay.
So crowned be Skippon, Mericke, Stapleton,
With Hampden, Massy, Bruerton, and Gel:
The English and the Scottish Middleton,
My noble, and my valiant Colonel.
And, let nor malice, time, nor death, be able,
To make them less then good, and honorable.
Remembered be, with an heroic fame,
Balfore, and Ramsey, Cromwell, and D' Albere,
The Meldroms, and he chiefly of that Name,
Whose worth did in relieving Hul appear.
Let mentioned be with honourable-men,
Much daring Luke, and Hazelrig the bold:
Aldridge, Brown, Barcley, Holborne, Harvie, Ven,
Brook, Norton, Springer, Morly, More, and Gold.
To all of these, whose worth shall real be.
Let real honors be: and, be it so,
To all of good desert, unknown to me;
Of whom there are, I hope, some thousands more,
Whose memory, shall never be forgot:
Though, here, to name them, I remember not.
And if among these Names a Name be found
To any man pertaining, who is known
In his affection to this Cause, unsound;
Or, who intends falsehood, yet, unshowne:
Let that man's mention, and his naming, here,
Instead of hon'ring him, a means become
To make his infamy the more appear;
Or, his ill purposes divert him from:
And, draw him, so sincerely to endeavor
The public safety; that my ignorance
Of his first failing, may, now, make him, ever,
Industriously the Rightfull-cause advance;
And, thank his providence, who, from mine ear,
Those failings kept, whereof, some others hear.
Let them, that shall hereafter counted be
Most honorable persons, never more
Be they, who show the longest Pedigree,
From Kings, and Conquerors, as heretofore:
But, such as are most worthy: and, next them,
Their Offspring, who were Patrons for this Cause.
And let them share more honor and esteem.
Then he that his descent, from Princes draws,
For, if it may enoble, to be borne
Of those, who out of avarice, or pride,
From others, wrongfully, their lands have torn:
How much more, ought they to be dignifide,
That, from the loins of (...),
Whose Swords, their Country (...)
And, to make full my blessing: (...),
Be every Member of the Parliament,
Which has not been unwillingly oppressed,
With burdens, our undoing to prevent.
Blessed, be their constancy, and blessed their pains,
With safety credit, and with consolations,
And, with all blessedness which appertains,
To make them happy, through all Generations.
And, blessed be the KING, with such a heart,
And, such a resolution, to retire
To us in love: that he may have a part
In all that bliss, which we our selves desire.
And, that from these our troubles, I may raise
A Trophie, to his honor, and GODS praise.
Before, my tongue had finished this defense,
To warrant my engagement: that DELUSION
Which had so hotly charged me, sneaked thence,
And, staid not, to give ear to my conclusion.
Her forces vanished, (and she with them)
Consisting, chiefly, of their Sophistries
Who had been pressed out of that Academ,
In which, the Magazine of mischief lies.
It was, first, founded for a Court of Knowledge,
(A school of duties, mora'l and divine)
And, to that end, had a goodly College,
To nurse up youth, by prudent Discipline:
But 'twas, of late, a nest of Birds unclean;
And, is now made the Wolves, and Lions den.
My Foe departing, I began to slight
His Trenches, and the Forts which he had reared:
Those Engines, likewise, I demolished quite,
That make young soldiers of their force afeard:
And, was at leisure, then, my self to please,
With other thoughts; and, thither to retreat,
Where I might be refresht, and take mine ease,
With such provisions, as my men could get.
My Quarter was the Field: my Tent and Bed,
A well-made Barley-cocke: the Canopie
And Curtains, which, to cover me, were spread,
No meaner then the starre-bespangled sky.
GOD set the Watch; the Guard, he also kept,
And, without harm, or fear, I safely slept.
Next morn, before the dawning of the day,
My heart awoke; and, warmed with GODS protection,
(And with his love) did praise him, and, assay
To meet him, with reciprocal affection.
My purpose he accepted, and descended
To imp the wings, that mount my contemplation.
And, kindly, raised, strengthened, and befriended
My soul, by sweet, and useful meditation:
With musings on things present, on things past,
And things to come, he exercised my thought.
Some, of his mercies, gave my soul a taste;
Of sin, and judgment, some, the relish brought.
By some, I did my private duties learn;
And, some, the Publike-safetie, did concern.
One RAY, forth darting from his power divine,
(Whose way of working cannot well be told)
Infused into my heart, a high DESIGN,
Which, with good liking, now, I might unfold.
But hark! the Trumpet calls me to the field:
My horses, are already at the door.
Place to the Sword, my Pen, again, must yield:
At better leisure, I may tell you more.
To what, I further purpose to declare,
This, for an Introduction, is prepared:
And, if I find, you so well tempered are,
That, more (with hope of profit) may be heard;
I Will tell you News, which yet, is but a Dream,
And, VOX PACIFICA, shall be my Theme.
A VOICE, not of a Vain Pacification,
Formed out of Echoes, or uncertain sounds:
But, of a PEACE, of whose blessed confirmation,
There shall be likely Hopes, and real Grounds.
A VOICE, in somewhat, imitating his,
Who (to prepare the great MESSIAH'S way)
Became a Crier in the Wilderness;
And, to beget Repentance, will assay.
A VOICE, that shall prepare the way of Peace.
A PEACE, that shall with Righteousness, embrace:
And, by their sweet embracements, more increase
The Peace of Conscience, and the Peace of Grace.
A PEACE, which, if my hopes effect I can,
Shall reconcile us, both to GOD, and MAN.
A PEACE, not closing up a festring sore,
To ease, but for a while, the present smart:
And, making afterward, the torments more,
By spreading mortal Gangreves, to the heart.
A PEACE, that by a true-love-knot, shall knit
Three NATIONS, with such nearness, into ONE,
That, nothing shall have power to loosen it,
But, wilful sin, impenitently done.
A PEACE, which to the People, and the King,
Shall (if not hindered by some Crying-sin)
Truth, honor, wealth, power, rest, and safety bring:
And, keep us everlastingly therein.
This PEACE I seek; this Peace, that GOD may send,
My soul does pray; and so these MUSINGS end.
Sic dixit, qui sic cogitavit:
Et, praedicando quod putavit,
Haud multum neccat, si peccavit.
All the Glory be to GOD.

