POOR ROBINS Hue and Cry AFTER GOOD HOUSEKEEPING.

OR, A DIALOGUE BETWIXT Good Housekeeping, Christmas, and Pride.

Showing how Good Housekeeping is grown out of Date both in City and Country,
and Christmas become only a mere name, and not to be found by Feasting in
Gentlemen's Houses, but only by Red-Letters in Almanacks.

And how the Money that should go to Feast the Poor at Christmas is spent upon
the maintenance of Pride, with how many Trades are maintained by Pride, and how
many undone for want of Good-House Keeping.

Good Housekeeping is Banished, And Pride is come up in its stead.

This may be Printed, Dec. 17. 1687. R. P.

LONDON, Printed for Randal Tailor, near Stationers' Hall. 1687.

A DIALOGUE Betwixt Good Housekeeping and Pride.
Good-Housekeeping. WEll! I see I must be gone, there is no Remedy.


Pride. Why what is the matter Good-Housekeeping?


Good-Housekeeping. Pox take thee (if thou have it not already) it is long of
thee that I must trudge, for when Pride came up Good-Housekeeping went down;
when Pride came in Fashion, Good-Housekeeping was Banished the Nation.


Pride. Ha, ha, ha, why thou inconsiderate fellow, do thou not know that I am
respected and esteemed by the whole Nation, from the Lord to the Lout, from the
City-Madam to the Country-Milkmaid, and how thou art shut out of doors to make
room for me.


Good-Housekeeping. Now the foul ill light upon thee for so displacing me, who
formerly was respected and entertained by the chiefest and best of all the
Nation, when a Lasty Old Knight, and a boon brave Squire went attended with
ten, twenty, or thirty proper Serving-men, all now Epitomized to a two or three
Animals, viz. a Butterfly-Page, a trotting Footman, and a stiff-drinking
Coachman; when my Lady Minikin takes such a thrifty Order, that all the meat in
the Kitchen shall be cheaper than the washing and Painting of her Visage; when
you may sit a cold by the Kitchin-Fire, and the Hooks of the Buttery-door grow
rusty for want of opening. Well fare the heart of Poor Robin, who in his
Almanac of 1684. plainly described this change from better to worse.

Good-Housekeeping alas is dead,
And Pride is come up in its stead;
The Cook and Butler turned to Grass,
Being useless as the times now pass;
And a Footboy kept in their place
In every Seam bedawb'd with Lace:
Four Horses kept to draw a Coach,
And doors fast barred that none approach
The Buttery-door as needs it must
The Hinges Eaten up with Rust.
The Kitchen that a cold may be,
For little Fire you in it see;
Perhaps a pair of Cards is going
And that is the chiefest matter doing.
Here you see, you Butterfly Upstart, that this Author (well known all England
over, and who I warrant you would entertain me kindly, had he but an Estate to
maintain me) imputes the cause of my expulsion only to you, for Pride's
intrusion is Good-housekeepings confusion, and the Money that should go to buy
Beef, Pork, and Mutton, to feast the Poor at Christmas, is employed on Ribbons,
Knots, and Towers, to make the Baby Pride a pretty Puppet.


Pride. Why thou Techy Envious Outcast, know thou not how many Trades live
by me, and have all or most of their dependency from me? were not I so much in
request, the Mercer, Silkman, Silk-weaver, Tailor, Embroiderer, Perriwig-maker,
Feather-maker, and most of your Tradesmen in the Exchange, might shut up shop
and keep Holy Day for any thing they would have to do.


Good-Housekeeping. And thou foreman of the Seven Deadly Sins, how many
thousand poor People fare the worse for want of me: besides the detriment done
to Butchers, Cooks, Poulterers, Fishwives, Butlers, Serving-men, and hundreds
more besides, who by my Banishment are some of them quite undone, and the rest
much Empoverish'd in their Trades? But here comes my old friend Christmas, I
know that he will take my part.


Christmas. Why how now Good-Housekeeping! you and I have been great strangers
of late; what Fantastic is this you are talking with?


Good-Housekeeping. Why this is the great Favorite of the times, Monsieur
Pride.


Christmas. Ah Good-Housekeeping, what brave times have thou and I known
formerly, when men kept not only great Houses but large Kitchins, and those
Kitchins gave employment for three or four Cooks; the Master of the House being
one that wore no other Shirts but of the Flax that grew on his own Ground, and
of his Wives, Daughters, or Servants spinning; whose Stockings, Hose, and
Jerkin, were of the Wool of his own Sheeps backs; who never by his Pride of
Apparel, caused Mercer, Draper, Silkman, Tailor, or Haberdasher, to break and
turn Bankrupt; and yet this plain homespun fellow, would keep and maintain
half a hundred Servants or more, and every day relieve three or fourscore poor
People at his Gate; and every year when Christmas came to Town, invite three or
four hundred of his Neighbors to dinner, where they should not only feed but
feast, and not feast but banquet.

Where Pig, Goose, Turkey, Capon, Cunney,
What might be had for his Money;
Plum-Pudding and Furmity,
Mutton-Pasties, Christmas -Pie;
Nappy-Ale a full Carrouse
To the Master of the House:
Syder, Perry, and Strong Beer
For to wash down their good Cheer.
These were men whose greatest care was to practice the Works of Piety,
Charity, and Hospitality; and not the consuming Art of Fashionless Fashions:
They never tried their strength to carry four or five hundred Acres of Land at
their Back at once: Then was soft Clothing only in Kings Courts, but now you
know not my Lady from her Maid; and it would make a Horse to break his Crupper
with laughing to see Jone Fiddle-Faddle, whose Portion amounts not to two
Groats and two Pence, yet decked up with Ribbons and Towers as fine as a
Bartholomew-Baby, after she is come from Church (whither she went only to show
her fine Clothes) with a Swill-Pail in her hands serving of Hogs.


Pride. Marry and they are to be commended; to go brave is the only way to get
them Husbands, and when they are Married let their Husbands look after it to
maintain them.


Good-Housekeeping. That man who is sped with such a Wife, had far better to
marry one made of Gingerbread, for when he is an-hungry she will serve to fill
his Belly, and no more then need, for since so much is laid out upon the Tail,
there is little Provision made for the Mouth.


Christmas. Much less to entertain Neighbors at Christmas, at which time
formerly you might smell the scent of Roast Beef and Minc'd-Pies a Quarter of a
Mile off from a Gentleman's House, and hardly get to the Gate for the Crowd of
Beggars; when the Porter would welcome ye to the House with a Pray walk in Sir:
But now you may catch you a heat with knocking at the Gate, for all the Fire in
the Kitchen Chimney will scarcely do it. So now Cooks are out of Employment,
Butlers turned out of Doors, a Servingmans Dinner two Sprats and a half, and
the Trencher-scraper no work to do, because there no Trenchers are foul.


Good-Housekeeping. A very thrifty way, like the man that starved his Cattle to
save Provender.


Pride. I Will justify it, there has been more spent in excess at one Christmas,
then would maintain all my Children in fine Clothes a whole Year after.


Christmas. Your Children with a Murrain! and who knows not that the Offspring
of Pride comes from the Lineage of Lucifer, a goodly Pedigree indeed, which if
rightly considered,

Then Jack and Jill, and John-a-Drones his Issue,
Would not be trapped thus in Gold and Tissue.
Then should Men be Honored and Reverenced for their Bounty, Liberality,
Good-Housekeeping, and other Virtues befitting a Gentleman, and not for a
tawdry outside.

For is it not a foolish vile mistaking
To honor things that are a Tailors making?

Good-Housekeeping. Well, for all this Upstart Pride is now in such request, I
hope to see good days once more, and Christmas come in fashion again, and Cooks
be employed in their Old Trade of Boiling, Broiling; Roasting, Toasting,
Slicing, Brewing, Baking, Frying, Mincing, Cutting, and all to employ People in
eating: for a Cook is then a Man of great repute, as being Monarch of the
Marrow-Bones, Duke of the Dripping-Pan, Marquis of the Mutton, Lord High Regent
of the Spit and the Kettle, Baron of the Gridiron, and Sosle Commander of the
Drying Pan.


Christmas. Now I Will be judge by all the poor People in England, if to spend
two hundred Pound in good Housekeeping at Christmaas, be not more becoming a
Gentleman, then to carry five hundred Acres of Land on his back in a Suit of
Clothes, for which he gains no other praise but only to be said to be more
Proud then wise.


Good-Housekeeping. This Sin of Pride we find the English to have been formerly
too much addicted unto, as we may read in the Book called Eulogium, set forth
about the time of King Edward the Third. The Commons (says that Author) were
Besotted in excess of Apparel, in wide Surcoats reaching to their Loins, some
in a Garment reaching to their H^els, close before and strouting out on the
sides, so that on the Back they make Men seem Women, and this they call by a
ridiculous name, Gown: Their Hoods are little, tied under the Chin, and
Buttoned like the Women's, but set with Gold, Silver, and Precious Stones: Their
Lirripipes reach to their Heels all jagged. They have another Weed of Silk
which they call a Paltock; their Hose are of two Colors, or Pied with more,
which with Latchets which they call Herlots, they tie to their Paltocks without
any Breeches. Their Girdles are of Gold and Silver, some with 20 marks, their
Shoes and Pattens are snowted and piked, more then a Finger long, crooking
upwards, which they call Crackows, resembling the Devil's Claws, which were
fastened to the Knees with Chains of Gold and Silver, and these (says my
Author) were Lions in the Hall, and Hares in the Field; too fine for to fight.


Christmas. But this Pride was only used by Rich men, for Poor People could not
go to the cost of it: but now every Tom-Ladle, and Jill-Flurt do so flaunt it
with Towers, Ribbons, and other gew-gaws, that you do not know Jack from a
Gentleman, nor Minks the Maid from her Lady or Mistress.


Good-Housekeeping. I wish all Skip-Jacks who are of that proud humor, were
served as Sir Philip-Calthrop served one John Drakes of Norwich. This Knight
bought on a time as much fine French Tawney Cloth as should make him a Gown,
and sent it to the Tailors to be made. John Drake coming to the Tailors, and
seeing the Knights Gown-Cloth lying there, liking it well, caused the Tailor to
buy him as much of the same Cloth and Price to the same Intent, and bad him
make it of the same Fashion that the Knight would have his made of. Not long
after the Knight coming to the Tailors to take measure of his Gown, perceiving
the like Gown-Cloth lying there, asked of the Tailor whose it was? Quoth he it
is John Drakes the Shooemaker, who will have it made of the self-same fashion
that yours is: In good time (said the Knight) I will have mine made as full of
Cuts as thy Shears can make it, to which the Tailor agreed; and in short space
made them both up, it being against Christmas Day: but when John Drake saw his
Gown so full of Cuts, he began to swear at the Tailor for making his Gown in
that sort. I have done nothing (quoth the Tailor) but that you bad me, for as
Sir Philip Calthrop's is, so have I made yours. By my Latchet quoth John Drake,
I will never wear Gentleman's fashion again.


Christmas. Indeed he was served right in his kind, for Englishmen know not
what fashion to follow: as was well intimated by Doctor Bourd, who painted for
an Englishman a Proper fellow naked with a pair of Tailors Shears in one hand,
and a piece of Cloth on his Arm with these Rhimes.

I am an Englishman, and naked I stand here,
Musing in my Mind what Garments I shall wear;
For now I will wear this, and now I will wear that:
And now I will wear I cannot tell what,
All new Fashions be pleasant to me. etc.

Pride. Say what you will, and do what you can, yet still shall I be respected.
Do not you know that many will pinch their own bellies to maintain me, and make
Lute-strings of their Guts to clad their backs in Bravery! and can you think
that those who will starve themselves to uphold me, will feast others for the
name of good Householders; surely your over-feeding has made you forgetful:
how many young Worthies will pawn their Honesty to maintain their Finery, and
to make their Tail fine, will make use of their Tail, although they be whipped
for it at the Carts Tail.


Good-Housekeeping. Indeed Pride and Leachery are two fit Companions,, and both
equally destructive to Good-Housekeeping: to maintain which two Vices
Good-Housekeeping is laid aside, and Christmas grown quite out of date, nay
they cannot afford so good a Fish Dinner as was at the Counter-Scuffle.

Eels boiled and broiled; and next they bring,
Herring, that is the Fishes King;
And then a Courtly Poul of Ling,
and Mustard.


Pride. Ha, ha, ha, I had thought my costly Mistress Good-Housekeeping, had my
dainty Dame Christmas, had been vanished away in a Fume of Tobacco, or hurried
out of England in a Coach, for ever since they were known, the other came to be
invisible.

Hereupon Good-Housekeeping vanished away, and Christmas became a mere Skeleton
or shadow, having little more left then the bare Title and Name: with the
thought whereof the Spits and Dripping-Pans in most Houses grow rusty; and the
Caldrons which used to be filled with Beef, Pork, and Mutton to feast Good
Fellows, now grow Cankered; upon consideration of which, that those necessary
utensils belonging to Good-Housekeeping might not be spoiled for want of use,
the Author thought good to send a Hue and Cry after the said Good-Housekeeping
as follows.

The Hue and Cry. Whereas an Ancient, Reverend, Late Worshipful Gentleman,
formerly a great retainer to Noblemen, Knights, and Gentlemen, and much
respected amongst the Honest Yeomen and wealthy Farmers of the whole Country,
known by the Name or Appellation of Good-Housekeeping: has by the sly
insinuations and bewitched persuasious of an upstart Skip Jack called by his
true name Pride, but by his Friends and Adorers by the name of Decency and
Handsomeness: Most unjustly and unworthily has justled, persecuted, and made
to fly the said Good-Housekeeping from his Ancient Habitations, and Places of
residence, together with his old friend Christmas, with his four Pages,
Roast-Beef, Minc'd-Pies, Plumb-Pudding, and Furmity, who used to be his
constant Attendants, but now are grown so invisible they cannot be seen by poor
People, nor good Fellows as formerly they used to be. These are therefore to
desire, will, and require you, if any Person can tell where this
Good-Housekeeping does reside, that he will desire him personally to appear
this Christmas in Noblemens, Knights, Gentlemen's, and Yeomens Houses as
formerly he used to do, whereby he will gain great Credit to all the aforesaid
Persons, and shall be Entertained with the Ringing of Bells, Sounding of
Trumpets, Beating of Drums, and Acclamations of all Good People.

And Fiddlers shall strike up their Pipes and Play,
And every one for joy keep Holyday.

FINIS.

