A Memorandum to London, Occasioned by the Pestilence there begun this present
year MDCLXV, and humbly offered to the Lord Mayor, Aldermen and Commonalty of
the said City.

By GEORGE WITHER.

Thereto is by him added, a Warning-piece to London, discharged out of a
Loophole in the Tower, upon meditating the deplorable Fire, which consumed the
house of an eminent Citizen, with all the persons and goods therein, at the
beginning of our most Joyful Festival, in December, 1662. Also, a Single
Sacrifice offered to Almighty GOD, by the same Author in his lonely
confinement, for prevention of the Dearth-feared, and probably portended, by
immoderate Raines in June and July, 1663.

Quia Legit haec, etc.
Who read such Lines as these?
How few men, do they please?
Moreover, in regard many have reported and believed this Author to be dead; we
have annexed his Epitaph, made by himself upon that occasion.

Imprinted in the Year, MDCLXV.

A Seasonable Memorandum Humbly tendered to the City of LONDON, the Lord Mayor,
Aldermen, and the whole Commonalty thereof, by occasion of the Pestilence,
begun this year, MDCLXV.
BY their Old Remembrancer, GEORGE WITHER.
THe Psalmist, when he saw Truths foes grow strong
A while resolved to withhold his Tongue
Even from Good words; (as I have often done)
But, in his heart, New-musings then begun
To muster so, that, he was forced to break
His resolution, and his thoughts to speak.
So fares it now with me; and I must do
That which my Mover has inclined me to:
Vouchsafe it hearing, and GOD be my speed,
For, it concerns you, and deserves good heed.
This, now commencing, is the fourtieth year,
Since first, the greatest Plague that raged here,
Within our time, was sent for our correction,
To scourge us, with a Pestilent Infection,
That, GOD's intention, being timely heeded
We, by Repentance, might have superseded
Those following Judgments, which have ever since
Inflicted been, for our Impenitence;
And, are still multiplying, as if from
GOD's quiver, Sharper Arrows were to come.
That year, I having lived, till the Sun
Had thrice twelve times, quite through the Zodiac run,
Considered I had spun out half that time
Within your Walls, and might be one of them
For whose Transgressions, that sharp Visitation
Came to destroy, or work a Reformation;
And, thereupon (without constraint) intended
To wait on God, where I had him offended;
That, if to spare my life, vouchsafe he should,
I might as truly serve him as I could,
By heeding both his Actings, and our own;
And making those things unto others known,
Which I should then observe, might best promote
His honor; and from being quite forgot,
Keep that upon Record, (though to our shame)
Which might hereafter, glorify his Name.
During that Plague, not one night, all the while,
Removed I thence, the distance of one Mile,
Or shuned either person, place, or sight,
Which, me, experimentally then might
Acquaint with any thing, whereby to learn
My Duty, or what would my work concern;
By which means, I found reason to confess
(As Job in his probation did profess)
That I, who heard of GOD, but by the ear,
Before that time, then; saw him as it were;
And, had some things, likewise, to me revealed
Which were from many wiser men concealed;
So that I both foresaw, and then foretold
What many thousands did fulfilled behold
Soon after: yea, moreover, some of them
Who, many years, my Cautions did contemn,
(And scofft at my Predictions) justified
That, which in times past, they did much deride.
But, in their old ways, most men did proceed
As if they took a very little heed,
Of any thing, past, present, or to come,
Which might preserve Peace, or prevent their Doom.
What I then saw, and foresaw would befall,
I did record, in that which I did call
BRITANS REMEMBRANCER; and have not been
Regardless, what transactions, here were seen
During tho^^ forty years of Provocation,
Wherein, GOD's Spirit, by this Generation
Has greeved been. Of that large Premonition,
At least four thousands at the first Impression
Were published through these Islands, to prevent
What seemed at hand; and, to the same intent
In several modes, at several times before
This present day, five times as many more
Premonitory hints, whereon ensue
As mean effects, except among those few
For whose sake (next his Sons) GOD, yet has pity
On these three Nations, and on this great City,
Though they have prosecuted and oppressed*
Those, in whose Weal their welfare does consist.
But, this comes not within the Creed of many
Nor can be possibly believed of any,
Whom Pride, Self-love, and Ignorance bewitches
Either with dotage upon Pleasures, Riches,
Or Power exorbitant; because no Grace
Can get admittance, where those fill the place,
For, these, are part of those things where withal
The Devil tempted Christ; and they who fall
By not resisting him in that temptation
Are drawn, at last, to yield him Adoration
(Though peradventure they perceive it not)
And, when he that advantage once has got;
It is not in the power of any one
To dispossess him, bud of GOD alone.
Judgments and Mercies, in the common mode
Move not without the immediate hand of GOD,
Or, some impulses extraordinary
When from his Dictates, wilfully they vary.
The most Convincing Truths, make them but madder;
They, to the wisest Charmer like the Adder,
Still stop their ears; and them he works upon
No more, then if he Sung unto a Stone.
This renders these more brutish then a beast
By whom CHRIST is but formally professed:
For, Beasts will shun the dangers that pursue them;
Meet those who feed them, when their meat they show them;
Know their preservers, yea return them too,
Requitals, in their kind, for what they do:
Whereas besotted men, even when they may
Perceive themselves beleagured every way
With mischiefs; although plainly they may see
That their Endeavors unsuccesful be
In spite of all their policy or power,
And, God, Avengments threatening every hour
By P^o^^gies, and by Events, that from
No mortal hand, to cross their hopes can come,
They either look on them as casualties,
Or, them not to concern, in any wise:
Then, with full sails, run head long on that Rock
Which is in view; at their good counsel mock,
Who tell them lovingly, how to avoid
That, whereby, they shall else be quite destroyed,
If they proceed; or, cast an Anchor where,
They, now in hope of Preservation are:
And, if these be not madmen, there are none
In Bedlam, where we hear is many a one.
Even as a nice and wanton Appetite,
Longs after Kickshaws, and takes more delight
In dishes made up of they know not what,
And not so wholesome, as plain solid meat;
So, most men, with Expressions are best pleased
From whence, one sentence, hardly can be squeas'd
Which well considered, any way conduces
To civil manners or to pious uses,
Though you should strain out all, that every word
For Caution, or Instruction, might afford.
To all such true Phanaticks, this will seem,
To be perhaps, of very small esteem,
Because, it speaks plain sense, and is not decked
And trimmed up with such gawds as they expect.
Yet this, and th^se strains which they much despise.
May be a means to make some fools more wise.
GOD promised to his servants long ago,
He would upon their Children shed forth so
His holy spirit, in the later ages,
That they should be inspired with presages
Of things to come; and (to his Name be praise)
This we have seen accomplished in our days.
Strange Visions have appeared, Truths are foretold,
By men and women too, both young and old,
Which (though to carnal men vain dreams they seem)
With such as know God, they have more esteem,
And will appear to be his Dispensations;
As proper also, to these Generations,
As those, which were dispensed in ages past,
Unto the Jews at first; or, at the last,
When, as phanatik, and ridiculous,
Their Prophets to them seemed, as ours to us.
For, often by their Inspirer, they were moved
To Speak and Act, what was by few approved;
Sometimes, to personate, what was abhord,
Or seemed not with good manners to accord,
Even in their Judgments, who appeared then
The wisest and the most religious men;
Especially, when God imposed on some,
Things to be signal of what was to come.
But, all his Dispensations heretofore,
And now in use (or whatsoever more,
Shall be hereafter) scarcely will suffice
To make us, in these doting ages wise.
God, has omitted nothing to recall us
Or, to prevent that, which may else befall us;
For every year, and upon each occasion
That did occur (to cause a perturbation
Or breach into our Peace) he moved some
So zealous of our welfare to become,
That they their own peace have often hazarded,
(And lost it too) by things endeavored
For our avail; yea, though their pains and cost,
As to themselves) was likely to be lost
Persu'd their Aim, sometimes, by general
Precautions, which did much concern us all;
And, otherwhile, by memorizing that
Which in particular seemed to relate
To Persons or to Places, as it best
Might bring advance to public Interest:
Forewarnings have by GOD vouchsafed been
To you by others, (as they cause have seen)
Who seemed to come with more authority
And trusted with Credentials, whereof, I
Unworthy am; But, whatsoever they
Or I appear, that, which I have for you
Prepared by Gods help, I offer now,
In hope, it will be heeded somewhat more
Then that, which has been tendered heretofore.
This year his former Judgments GOD repeats.
And, once again, your sinful City threats
With Pestilence. He, over us does shake
A dreadful Rod, wherein I notice take
Of three sharp twiggs; and he above knows whether
They shall be singly felt or all together,
Because, he only knows what will be done
To stay that, which already is begun,
And keep out those two, which your City threat,
But, have not yet got entrance through the gate.
London, I fear, unless thou take more heed
In what Course thou hereafter do proceed
(Although that God's Long-suffering toward thee
Continues yet) at once, with all the three
Thou shall be scourged: for mocked, GOD will not be.
I am resolved therefore, whatsoever
May be the Consequent of my endeaver,
Now to proceed in what he moves me to,
And, I in duty am obliged to do;
Because, though my Good will you should abuse.
Your faults, my negligence would not excuse,
Who, look for my reward (if any due)
From him, whose work I do, and not from you.
My first Memorials, in their Title page
Hold forth an Emblematical presage,
Besides much thereby verbally expressed
(Relating to the plague which does infest
Your City now) which worth the observation
May be, in every such like Visitation,
And might have had, if heeded, good effects
(Which have been lost by manifold neglects)
And still may, were things better thought upon
Which thereby, are advised to be done.
But here, to add that, will spend too much time,
And therefore, I referring you to them,
That, now will prosecute, which more then Reason
Persuades me, is at this day in season.
Your City, I have loved and honored,
And, no less now, then heretofore I did,
For, GOD has made it, the most honored place
That is within these Isles, or ever was;
He has enrolled, and renowned her Name
Among the Cities of the greatest Fame,
That either are, or were below the Sun
Since men to dwell in Cities first begun.
Large Pledges, he upon her has bestown
Of his especial Love; some favor shown
Vouchsafed to few of them; and such a measure
Has stored up in her, of his hid treasure,
And intermixed, from time to time, so often
Mercies and Judgments, hardened hearts to soften;
So in Long-suffering, also does persevere
(Though we are at this day, grown worse then ever
That I perceive in her a Seed and Root,
Which to his Glory shall bring forth good Fruit
In his due time; and this inclines me
To send these Memorandums now to thee,
Intending in thy Sickness, here to stay
Once more, when thy false-lovers fly away;
And in, or near, thy borders, to remain
Till GOD restores thee unto health again;
Or, till by being quite deserted here,
I shall be forced to seek my bread elsewhere;
Of which I dreadless am: For, I depend
Upon that powerful, and most faithful friend
Who has preserved me often since my birth,
From worse things then War, Pestilence, and Dearth.
Physicians, and all else, who ere they are
That, of Sick persons undertake the care,
Do challenge and ought also to assume
(Though them, it may be it will misbecome
At other times) a freedom to speak so
And, and as occasion moves them thereunto,
To act what is pertinent to their disease
In way of Cure, although it may displease.
I may, and do, as justly challenge now
(Since neighbor like I mean to watch with you)
Like Liberty; and will be bold to tell
That which I know will help to make you well,
Although, therewith displeased, you froward be,
Harsh words for my good will return to me,
And rage like those, who seem to loose their wits
When they are in their Pestilential fits:
For, I shall sober be, though somewhat sad,
To see those, whom I would keep tame grow mad.
And you I hope, what er'e shall now be said
Will patient be, when well my words are weighed.
Consider well (for now high time it is,
That you and all men should consider this)
I say, consider how you have improved
GOD's Mercy since his ^udgments were removed;
How, that provoking sinfulness abates,
And, that Abomination which God hates:
Nay well consider if it be not more
Abominable, then it was before.
I fear it much, and every day this fear
Increases by what I do see and hear;
For, since I knew the world (which I have known
And heeded, till an old man I am grown)
I never heard this Nation so defamed
As now of late; and sins not to be named
By modest men, with so much impudence
So often acted with so little sense
Of manhood, nor with such impunity
By persons of no vulgar quality
Both old and young men, high, low, rich and poor,
Out acted have transgressors heretofore;
Children are left so loose to speak and do
What their corruption does incline them to,
(And ill example teach) that if their course
Continue long, we shall at last grow worse
Then Sodom and Gomorrah; which GOD knows
I do not mention (as some may suppose)
To scandalize this City or this Nation
But to provoke them to a Reformation.
To that intent, (so far forth as it shall
Concern this City) speedily let all
Who are in power, with prudence and in love
The strength of their Authority improve
Them to indulge and keep from violence,
Whose conversations are without offense;
And, by their executing of the Law
In purity, strive to keep those in awe
Who either shall maliciously transgress
(By an infringment of the public peace)
Or wilfully commit, abet or teach
What, of the Moral Law may be a breach.
That nothing may by you be done unto
Another, which you would not have him do
To you, if in his case; search what you find,
That may on you be charged, in that kind,
And heartily repent it. That, moreover
You may faults, which will else lie hid, discover;
Consider, whether you have not with gladness
Insulted over men oppressed with sadness.
Afflictions heaped up, upon Afflictions,
Or, added Cruelty to due corrections,
By seeking more to satisfy your Lust,
Or Vengeance, then to execute what is just
For Justice sake; or else, to please their Foes,
Condemned Innocents, their lives to lose.
Your ways examine, and search out what crimes
You have of late, more then in former times
Been guilty of: As, whether you have been
Or not, defiled with that scarlet sin,
Which in times past your City did abhor,
As being a peculiar heretofore
Of that Malignant City, where the Whore
Bestrides the Beast: be heedful also, whether
It be not partly, or else altogether
His work, to be in cruelties delighted;
To see meek, honest, harmless men dispighted
For Conscience sake; inhumanly exiled
Husbands from wives, the parent from the child
Imprisoned to the loosing of their lives
Their little Children, their beloved Wives,
And their whole Families exposed thereby
To that unspeakable extremity
Of wants and sufferings, which no flesh and blood
Can bear, without immediate help from GOD.
Whose will is thereby wilfully withstood.
And why all this? not for transgressing Laws
Of GOD or Nature, but alone, because
These could not condescend the world to please
By an infringment of their consciences.
Heed what this may deserve; if you desire
To stop the Plague begun; lest else the fire
Which may be kindled in your habitations,
Do quite consume them even to their foundations.
For, GOD, of his Prerogatives is Jealous
To vindicate all those he will be zealous
Who suffer for his sake, although perchance
They may be blamable through Ignorance,
Or other, humane frailties; for, where he
Sees Faith and Love, their sins he will not see.
As for their Persecutors, though he may
His just Avengments, for a while delay,
The patience of his people he does mind,
And, they who show no mercy, none shall find.
Examine, whether since you made your peace
With GOD, the renovation and increase
Of wilful sins deserved not renewing
Of Plagues removed, and of worse ensuing.
It is not without cause, that God now has
Such complicated Judgments, in his wrath
On thee and thine inflicted, when grown great
In hopes, thou thoughtst thy happiness complete:
Nor is it hidden from thee altogether
For what sin, GOD sends this, or that plague hither.
In truth, all Plagues are due unto each sin
When with Impenitence, persisted in,
Yet, frequently the ROD's wherewith we are
Corrected, show forth in Particular
What we offended in. For Superstition
Was Gideons Family brought to perdition;
King David's pride, made manifest in him
By numbering of the people) brought on them
A Pestilence: GOD visited the earth
For wilful breach of Covenants, with Dearth;
And (as to Zedikiah and to Saul
It did for that provoking sin befall)
The chief offenders and their Children too,
Stand liable to death for sinning so.
Oppression, Cruelty and Idolizing
The Creature (or things of our own devising)
Have been chastised with servitude and fear,
And, when Will-worshipings imposed are
On others, with inhumane violence,
Injustice acted with such impudence
As Jezabels and Ahabs, rarely shall
Such, escape from that, which did to them befall.
But, when that Hipocrites, by lying hid
As Annanias and Saphira did,
(Till GOD discovered them) may possibly
Obscure the grouth of Infant Piety;
When they, who Truths foundations overthrow,
When, her malicious persecutors, grow
So mighty, that the Saints unable are
To calm them, or their furious rage to bear;
Or, when Profaneness and Abominations
Like Sodoms, wholly has corrupted Nations
Or Cities, till there shall appear in men
Nor will nor power, them to reclaim again;
GOD, in such cases, to himself alone
Assumes the punnishing of what is misdone
And very frequently does punish too,
In such a mode as mortals cannot do:
Sometimes, by Sudden Death, when they are in
Their Jollity, or in the Act of sin;
Sometimes, by sicknesses that long endure,
Whereof no man can find the Cause or Cure;
Sometimes, by that, which (till their provocation
Of GOD) had been a means of preservation;
Sometimes, they of their lives have been bereaven
By Lightning, or by Thunderbolts from Heaven;
And, otherwhile (struck with d^spaireful fears)
Are made to be Self-Executioners.
This gives a Hint of that which more affords
Then fully is expressed by my words
To make it plain; but either thou, no doubt
Or, some for thee, will search and find it out;
Or, by the the searching after it, discern
Somewhat, which thee as nerely will concern.
Take heed of neighbors, and familiar friends,
Who fawn upon thee for their own base ends,
And love thee not, (though they respect profess
By many shows of hearty friendliness)
For, some of them, already cause have bin
Of adding much both to thy Plagues and sin.
But, specially, of thine own self take heed
For, thence thy greatest dangers will proceed.
Consider therefore, by thy self alone,
What thou omitted have, and what misdone;
Whether thy folly, falsehood, fickleness,
Apostasy from what thou did profess,
Falling from thy First Love, by mis-advice;
Thy Luxury, thy sordid Avarice,
Or, some vain hopes, deserved not deprivation
Of that, whereof, thou had an expectation;
Heed whether, to have cured, or prevented
One Plague, thy self thou have not complemented
Into a score; (at least, to stop one curse,
Endangered drawing on thee many worse.)
Observe, if ever Beggary and P^ide;
Did both together, upon one horse ride
So frequently as now, through every street,
Or walk so often on the self-same feet;
And, whether mischiefs which at present fall
On some, will not at last extend to all.
Mind well what thou art doing; what is done;
What is designed, but not yet begun,
For what thou both with words and sword have pleaded;
What, thou have most affected, or most dreaded,
What thereon followed, or might have succeeded;
What factions thou have favored, and what still
Would favor, were thy power like thy will.
London, if seriously thou ponderst this
Thou will perceive that what succeeds amiss
Flows chiefly from thy self; and how can those
Be friends to any who are their own foes?
Thy Chiefs, care not how others they inslave,
So, they themselves from servitude may save,
Yet, these in fine, by that which does befall
Become to be the basest slaves of all,
Even Bondslaves to their Lusts, and to the Devil
By getting an habitual love of evil.
They hunt for honor, but, their ^iery Title
Will add to them, less honor then a little.
They covet to be rich; but wealth shall more
Increse those wants and Lusts, that make them poor.
In Policy and Power, their trust is placed
Yet, they become despised fools at last.
Yea, we have seen those whom wealth, wit, and power
Supported, sink down breathless in one hour,
That, we may know, there is an unseen hand
Which often strikes those, who without fear, may stand
Of humane Justice, and beyond the reach
Of Mortals: That, therefore, which this may teach
Let all those heed, who, yet much heed it not:
And, let them (by whom this is often forgot)
Remember there is an all beholding eye,
Which every secret purpose can epsy;
And, Angels always ready at command.
To execute what no power can withstand;
And such, as will for no bribe or respect,
The prosecution of their charge neglect.
Let likewise, those who most oppressed are
Be taught hereby, still patiently to bear
The Cross imposed for trial of their Faith:
(What ever, their oppressor does or says)
In perseverance, let them still attend
On GOD with meekness, till their Trials end,
And leave all Carnal weapons, to their use
Who, must be ruined by their abuse.
I do presume, among you many are
Who, to this wholesome Principle adhere,
And, that if into practice carried on
It shall both supersede the Plague begun
And every other feared Plague prevent
If timely they their other sins repent.
For GOD, will winck at many faults in those
Who love, and leave Revenge to his dispose;
Yea, oftentimes experience we have had
That, worse it makes things which before were bad,
When through impatience we in our own mode,
Attempt to do, what must be done by GOD.
Or, our suffering shall prolong (at lest)
By our self-actings, when we do our best.
This Pestilence, which now is brought in hither,
I am assured, proceeds not altogether
From Causes merely natural, but comes
To execute GOD's just deserved Dooms,
From his immediate hand; and will therefore,
Those Medcines need, which must do somewhat more
To cure, or stay it from proceeding on,
Then can be, by joint Art and Nature done.
If you desire a Sovereign Antidote
The best I know (if you neglect it not)
Is metaphorically called Herb-grace,
And will be very useful in this case;
Some, term it Rue, because twill not begin
To operate, until we Rue our sin.
Take Rue and Reasons then, which signify
Repentance and Discretion; These apply
As you find cause; which, if you do, and Fast
From things that were offensive in times past,
Keep from thenceforth a constant wholesome diet,
And in your hearts endeavor to be quiet,
My life for yours, GOD will your Souls deliver
From every hurtful arrow in his quiver.
Nor this, nor any Plague shall you anoy,
Although as to the flesh, it should destroy,
For, that can add to man's loss or grief
Whose expectation is a better life.
GOD, to this Pestilence has joined War,
And Famine, seems not from us to be far;
Which, if it now shall come will make the trouble
We feel already, to be more then double,
Because, our fellow feeling is no more
Of what they suffer, whom these times make poor*
For, such are our deportments, as if neither
S^o^d, Pestilence and Dearth, put altogether
Were no more, but an Army which did stand
Arrayed, to be at our own command,
To execute our pleasures upon those,
(Although our friends) whom we repute our foes.
And therefore, have rejoiced when they seized
On them, with whom we highly were displeased.
When, unto us, ill grounded hopes appear
Whereby, of Mercies we presuming are;
We are frollick, as if GOD did see
Our gross H^pocrisies, no more then we.
But, let men heed well whether, to acquire
The Sequels which they naturally desire
Is to insult when GOD corrects their foes,
Or, censure his Intents concerning those
Whom he Afflicts; as if for wrong to them
It rather were, then for offending him:
Or, as if sins to others only known,
Were more considerable then their own.
There is observed, much Arragance and folly
In some of thy Relations; from which wholly
Thou for the time past can not cleared be;
Therefore to keep from future scandal free,
And also, for thy Credits reputation
Take these Memento's to consideration.
Consider, if it sober men befits
To sing with Jollity about the streets
Vain Triumph-Songs, when war is but begun
As when a final Victory is won;
Since it is well known, that many who at first
Have thrived best, at last have thrived worst;
And, that GOD justly suffers sometime,
(For Causes which are only known to him)
Those, more then once, before their foes to fall,
Whose Cause he best approves; and who shall
Be conquerors at last: and that, where guilt
Is equal, he lets blood be often spilt,
And war prolongs or makes peace twixt them
Who disagree, as they make peace with him.
Therefore, when you are underneath the Rod,
Remember, you are in the hands of GOD.
When he has crowned your hopes with good success,
Demean your selves with Christian Lowliness:
For, when his Mercies much enlarged are.
He does expect a joyful filial fear:
This, labor to preserve, lest else, the lack
Thereof, may bring reversed Judgments back.
Consider, whether Ships, Arms, men and horse,
With policy united unto Force,
Can prosper to the advancement of their end,
Who, upon those things, or themselves depend:
Who, all their opposites as much despise
As if their Armies were but Gnats and Flies,
Think to subdue them with jeers, mocks and taunts,
Puff up each other, with braggs, shameless vaunts,
And lies devised by their foolish makers
To keep from fainting Cowardly Partakers,
Whose Consciences accusing them of guilt,
(Because, their hopefulst Refuges are built
On Quicksands) they become heart-sick with fear,
As often as any evil News they hear;
And, on earth slight Report of good success,
Instead of pious and meek thankfulness,
Run to the Taverns (which are much more free
To all, then pious Meeting places be)
There, heathen like, nay rather more uncivil,
Offer up Drink Oblations to the Devil.
And, to cheer up each others drooping Souls
Sing songs between their glasses and their bowls;
Or intermix Reports of what was won
Or lost, though that was never said or done.
Such Sacrificers, may find some effect
In part, according to what they expect,
But neither for their Faith or Righteousness;
Nor will our hopes, longlasting be, unless
Use, of the Common means for our defense,
Be Sanctified by true confidence
In GOD, and we with his known will comply,
Bearing what ere betides us patiently;
Improve each Favor and Deliverance,
To somewhat which his Glory may advance;
And whereby, they who are oppressed and grieved
May some way charitably be relieved:
For, it is no beseeming Thank-Oblation
For Mercies, when a City or a Nation
Shall Solemnize it with but little else,
Save Gunshot, Bonfires* Jangling of the Bells,
Or, making others of their Joys partakers,
Only, in smoke and stinck, of Squibs and Crackers;
Or gathering rude throngs of men and boys,
To make about those flames a barbrous noise,
Which must be fed with fuel forced from some
Who had none left to make a fire at home;
Then drink healths to each other in the street
Until they cannot stand upon their feet,
Or else loose their own healths: what thus to do
Can wise men think it will amount unto
But mere dispight of GOD, contempt of grace,
And, throwing (as it were) dirt in his face
For, Benefits received; though they make show
As if they had returned him all his due,
When, they but please themselves, by doing that
Whereby they sing their own Magnificat?
What can be deemed a just recompense
For such ingratitude, for an offense
So foul, so capital, but that instead
Of future Blessings, Curses should succeed?
London, heed this, and if thou wittingly
Of such Profaneness and impiety
Art guilty now, or have been heretofore,
Repent it, and henceforth, do so no more.
But, herein, some will more concerned be
Then thou art, yet, I mention this to thee
With some hope, that, they will the less contem
What Is written here, because, not writ to them.
Much more I have to add, which I forbear
Lest, I by adding more then thou can bear
With patience, may destroy what I design
For this whole Nations welfare and for thine,
By so displeasing thee, with what I write
That, thou slight all whereto, I thee invite:
For, though thy flattrers make thee to believe,
Thou art in better case, then I conceive,
Thy best friends know, that thine own provocations,
Imprudency in some of thy Relations,
(Even of thy Watchmen) who should cures provide
For thy distempers, are so giddifi'd,
And, that their Eyes, their Ears, yea and their brains
(With every faculty which appertains
To thy weal) are obstructed so, by fumings
From their Self-seekings, and their, high presumings,
That thou art, by what these inthee have wrought
Into an dangerous Consumption brought;
For, thy decay of Trade, much has increast
Their Poverty who thereby are distressed:
Thy hands and feet whose labor heretofore
Supplyd thy wants, now, can do little more,
Because, thy ablest members, by whom these
Employed have been, partake of their disease:
And; such Confusions daily do begin
To multiply, and farther to break in,
That, I am at a stand, what more to say
Or, what on thy behalf, I ought to pray.
Yet, one Expedient, I now think upon
Whereby, it may be, somewhat will be done
For they avail, if thou shall not omit
(As GOD inables) to endeavor it.
And therefore, let that which I next express
Be read, and minded with due heedfulness.
In thee, are at this day, the chief Well-springs,
Of all those good, and of those evil things
Which throughout these three Nations are dispersed;
And of the Later, were the Stream reverst
Or damned up at the Fountain; and, the first
Set freely open here, it would become
A Rivolet of Waters, flowing from
That River, which through New-Jrrusalem
His Current has, still issuing out of him
Who, of those Living waters is the head
Which through all Nations will at last be spread.
And London, three times happy, shall thou be
If this Blessed Fountain may break forth in thee,
To sweeten every Cistern in these Lands,
Which now, brimful of stinking water stands,
And breed all these Infections in our Clime,
Which are so baneful ^o us, at this time.
There is a possibility of this
If we our parts do, as GOD has done his;
Or, but endeavor to co operate.
With him, as he enables us, in that
Which he requires (thereto vouchsaving still
Assistance to our deeds, and to our will.)
By this Compliance, that New Heaven and earth
Which is expected, would ere long come forth;
And Righteousness, then from thy habitations
As amply flow out, through all these Nations
As wickedness does now; or heretofore
It did, when ill examples made it more.
This Change, more happiness would hither bring
Then, when in triumph thou broughtst in the King,
And of rejoicing, give more cause by much,
Then we shall have when we do beat the Dutch,
And are from dread of that delivered too,
Which some suspect the French intend to do;
Yea, and from what, more dangers threats then either
Of those two singly, or both joined together:
Even from those, which are possible to come
From Factiousness, and Male contents at home,
But this Joy will increase, and all our fears
Abate, when men do more incline their ears
To what is proclaimed by those Trumpeters
Whom GOD reserved, to make proclamation
Of that, which most concerns this Generation;
And, when the Influences of GOD's graces
By supreme persons, and by powerful places
Shall not obstructed be, as we have seen
Of late, and as they very long have been,
By Antichristian wiles; and those through whom
They are more dangerous to us become,
Because their formal piety makes shows
To be for him, whom, chiefly they oppose.
Thou art abused by misinformations,
Not thou alone, but likewise these three Nations
By those Mintmasters of untruths and lies,
Who cheat the whole world with fallacies,
Yea, much dis-serviced, dishonored too,
Is he, to whom, they yet pretend to do
Good services; and they by their Deceits,
Have him reduced unto may Streights
Which will destroy him, ere he is aware,
Unless, GOD shall unsnarle him from their snare;
And, in what misbefals, thou will have share.
To take my counsel, then, think it no shame,
(Although, a poorer man then he I am
Who saved a City; for, a Mouse may gnaw
That snare asunder, which, nor Lions paw
Nor teeth can break. Go, quickly, quickly lay
Your Skarlet Gowns, and your gold chains away;
Fast, watch and pray; do as King David did;
(When he the pestolential Angel spide)
Of somewhat, unto GOD an offering make
Which is thine own; that he a gift may take
Made acceptable, by, and in his son,
To stay the Plague; which newly is begun.
Shut up your selves awhile, and throw aside
Your factiousness, your malice and your pride;
Lust, Avarice, and them with every Sin
Whereby the wrath of God provoked has been.
Fall down before his feet with humbleness,
Your misdeeds, with true penitence confess,
Especially, those crying sins, whereby
You often have insenst his Majesty.
Among which, no crime can offend him more
Then when you shall (as Cain did heretofore)
Destroy your brethren, because, to GOD
They dare not sacrifice in such a mode,
As they believe he neither does command
Nor takes, with good acceptance, from their hand.
Your Privileges, they do not invade
By violence; but, lovingly persuade
To what they do believe, promoteth best
Gods glory, and the Public Interest.
Be thou as charitable unto them;
Leave that to God alone, which unto him
Alone belongs, when he into the Land
Has cast his seed, permit the Crop to stand
Till harvest; pluck not that away,
Which looks like wheat, though it may prove but Ray
But, weed out that alone, which every one
Knows hurtful to the Corn, and will be none.
Thus, having way prepared to make your peace,
With GOD; in Faith and Love emplore his Grace.
This being done; the next work, which to do
Thou art, as I believe, obliged unto,
Is to improve the power thou have in him
Who over all these Island is supreme,
And with whom; thou do in more favor stand
Then any other City of this Land,
Whilst his esteem of thee, does seem to last
(And ere fit opportunities are past)
Unto his Royal Throne make thy Address,
Emplore him, with deliberate advice,
To hear and heed that, without prejudice
Which may in season, offered be by them
Who fear God, and both love and honor him,
With an intent to serve him faithfully,
Without selfends in every thing whereby
Their services shall really consist
With GOD's, with his, and with their Interest,
For whose sake, he originally gave
All those Prerogatives that Princes have.
For, though men so unbiassed, may dare
To speak some Truths which all men cannot bear,
(When cause requires) they will with moderation
So heed what tends to the preservation
Of common peace, and of the dignity
Belonging to his royal Majesty,
(Whom God has honored by restoring him
Unto his Predecessors Diadem)
That, neither he, nor they, nor I, nor you.
Shall have cause, to dislike what will ensue.
If you believe this, and endeavor so
To prosecute it, as you, may yet do,
Who knows, what he, who has the hearts of Kings
(And the disposing of all other things
Within his power) will do, although this may
Proposed seem, in a despised way.
It Is an adventer* which though partly lost
Will bring in some return, that is worth the cost:
And those streights (if well heeded) wherein he
This City, and all these three Kindoms be
Adventrers needs, and somewhat to be done
Whereof, no likelihood is yet begun.
For, that which must draw order from confusions,
To our Destractions, timely, put conclusions,
And, so, divine and civil powers unite
That, neither, may infring each other right,
Effected cannot be, by hauty words,
By Policy, or temporary swords,
Nor by that Formal Sanctity with which
The Grand Impostors of this world bewitch
Deluded souls (that all things may become
Subjected to their Arbitarry Doom)
But by such Instruments and by such ways,
As those, by which Christ did begin to raise
His Kingdom at the first; and by which here
It shall continue until he appear
With that power, which shall batter and beat down,
More Idol Temples then were overthrown.
Since his first coming; and, root out all those
Idolatries, which out of them arose;
Together with the Thrones of all those Kings,
That are partakers in such worshippings.
And made drunk with her Cup who rides the Beast;
The Subjects of his Kingdom, have oppressed,
And shall oppress them without penitence,
For provocations, by that great offense.
More might be said, but, this shall now suffice;
"GOD make us all unto salvation wise,
" Preserve us in his love, so knit together
"That we in his love may preserve each other;
And, that all we can think, or say, or do
May now, and in the close, conduce unto
The glorifying of his holy Name
Though to our selves, it may occasion shame.
AMEN.
A further Engagement.
MAny years after that Grand Pestilence, in 1625, during which I wrote my Book
called BRITANS REMEMBRANCER, and after publication thereof; some eminent
persons, having respect thereunto; endeavored of their own accord, (without my
seeking) that the Office of their City Remembrancer, then void, might have been
conferred upon me; which motion, though it took not effect, was by me as
thankfully taken as it was by them lovingly intended. Had it been successful, I
should then perhaps have been more obliged upon outward considerations, then I
am now, to continue my abode here during this Visitation, then I was in that
aforementioned. Nevertheless, I yet resolve to partake with this City in GOD's
dispensation, at this time also, unless I shall be constrained by Necessity, to
seek place of abode, and means of subsistence elsewhere.

Yet, I have little external encouragement thereto; for, to me, it appears by
many Symtoms, that some here, are maliciously affected toward me, (who have no
disaffection to any person) as appears in particular, by their declaring
already, that my house is infected with the Pestilence and Shut up; whereas
(God be praised) not so much as one has been there sick of any disease, since
that Plague last begun; nor is it, to my knowledge, near my habitation. What
was designed by the publishers of that Report, I cannot imagine, unless it were
because, they knowing, I had no means of livelihood left (save what was
supplied by the Charity of my Christian friends only) they hoped, I being
deserted of all, might be the sooner exposed to destruction; as I hear some
are, whose condition is more to be considered and pitied, if it be so. But this
troubles me not in respect of my self; For, GOD cannot be kept from me, who is
my only All-sufficient Refuge and Protection: And if this Pestilence, and
Famine, also, Visit my Dwelling, (into which her Sister Poverty is already
come) they shall be welcome; for, they are Angels of GOD, and it is better to
fall into his hands, then into the hands of men.

Written in June 1665.

A Warning-Piece to London, Discharged out of a Loophole in the Tower during
the Authors close imprisonment there.
It was meditated upon the deplorable consuming of an eminent Citizen with his
whole Family, in the night, by a sad and sudden Fire, at the beginning of our
most Joyful Festival, in December. 1652.

The Author conceived, that it would better stir up the hearts of some, by
being sung, then Read: Therefore, he composed it in Lyrick Verse, fitted to the
Tune of the Lamentation, at the end of the singing Psalms, if the last Strain
of that Tune shall be repeated with the two last lines in every Stanza.

WAke London wake, Fast, watch, and pray,
Well heed likewise this Warning-song;
To eat and drink, rise up and play,
Has been thy daily practice long:
Oh! from henceforth, remember more,
Thy Brethren, whom oppressors grieve;
Refresh the sick, relieve the poor;
For none without good works believe.
If hardly saved the Righteous are
Ah! how shall wilful sinners fare?
2. The Rich man, heedlesly discerns
The near approaching day of wrath,
To fill his Warehouse and his Barn,
Is all the present care he has.
At large, he preparation makes
For offerings to his Belly God,
Till Justice an occasion takes
To mix those offerings with his blood;
When fools in folly most delight,
They, often, loose their Souls that night.
3. Our Love is cold, nigh ripe our sin,
And, in their march, GOD's Judgments be;
At his own house they do begin;
Then, from them, who shall now be free?
To make us thereof take more heed,
One house they singled out of late,
And, in a bright flame-colour'd weed,
Upon the top thereof they sat
And when to sleep they laid their heads,
Consumed her dwellers in their beds.
4. Why should not each man to whose ear
This news was in the morning brought,
Upon himself reflect with fear,
Thus, thereon musing, in his thought?
LORD, this unlooked for stroke of thine,
Has often been deserved by me;
This sad mishap might have been mine
This night, had it so pleased thee;
But, (praised be thy holy name)
Here, yet alive, and safe I am.
5. Oh with what terrors, were they stroke
How sadly were they discomposed,
To find themselves when they awoke
With stifling fumes, and flames enclosed
It made their terror much the more,
If to remembrance they did call
What they had done, awhile before,
And, what so quickly did befall.
More dreadful it appears to me,
Then Dungeons, Racks, and Halters be.
6. Thus will they fare, when his last Doom
To pass on sinners, Christ appears;
Thus, in a moment, he will come,
When least the world his coming fears.
Thus whether then her heedless heart
Is either sleeping or awake,
Surprised with a sudden start,
They shall with horrid terrors quake,
When they behold with sad amaze,
All things about them in a blaze.
7. Unless my thoughts misdictate me,
A secret Judgment, in this Act,
May doubtlesly discerned be
To show GOD's hand was in the fact.
For, though his ways are in the dark,
Forth from the Cloud, a flashing breaks
To show us, (if we such things mark)
His purpose, by the Course he takes.
In darkness he has perfect Light,
And all men's deeds are in his sight.
8. But, though this Judgment be severe,
Let not us who escape it, ween
Them, greater sinners then we are;
But, judge what our deserts have been.
Christ doomed not those whom P^^at slew
As more to blame, then other men,
Though with their blood he did imbrew,
That, which they sacrifized then;
And of those persons judged as well,
On whom the Tower of Silo fell.
9. Hereof, small sense have carnal men;
This, for sad news, at Noon they tell,
Return unto their sins again,
And sleep next night at brink of hell:
That, which concerns their safety most,
As quickly slips out of their mind
As letters written in the dust,
Blown out with every puff of wind.
Of others harms, how senseless grown
Are they, who do not mind their own?
10. This came to pass within thy walls
That, thou might thereof take good heed,
Mind, who thereby upon thee calls,
And think, what further may succeed:
It was not from those places far,
Where much to be, thou do delight,
That thou should heed thy dealing there;
And, it befell there in the night,
That, thou, a stricter watch may keep:
For Satan wakes when men do sleep.
11. Hereof, likewise, let heed be took,
That, when thy heart was most supine,
This Judgment, in upon thee broke,
Amidst thy Music, mirth and wine;
And, that, unless for sin thou mourn,
Relieve and comfort men distressed,
Thy Feasts, to Fastings GOD will turn,
And, smite thee when thou fearst it least.
When Sodom sinned without shame,
Down thereon, Fire and Brimstone came.
12. The Drowned world, was warned of old
Of what would in short time befall,
By Words and Doeeds it was foretold,
Yet unregarded still by all.
They married and in marriage gave,
Did eat and drink, as we do now,
Did so, the wrath of GOD outbrave,
And, as we, lived they cared not how:
But, lo, when in least awe they stood,
Out break the Deeps, in came the Flood
13. Thou, LONDON, whosoe re does weep,
Do, on thy Viol, play and sing;
Thy Children* daily revel keep,
Even when their Passing bells do ring.
Themselves on costly Beds they streach,
Regarding not how Joseph fares;
To them, who of Repentance preach
They listen, but with Adders ears.
And, well he speeds, who shall be heard,
If mischiefs be not his reward.
14 In sixteen hundred ten and one,
I, notice took of public Crimes,
With mine own faults, I first begun;
Observed the Changes of the Times:
And, what GOD had on me bestown
Employed for the Common good;
Therein, I sought to find mine own,
Which, was so often misunderstood,
That I, for being so employed,
Have been three times, nigh quite destroyed.
15. In sixteen hundred twenty five,
When thou were sick, I watched by thee;
Then, did my First Forewarning give,
And, this perhaps, my last must be.
For, now, my Tools away are took,
Some things half wrought, some but begun;
Quite being robbed of alll my stock,
Concludes my work, before it is done;
And that Flesh Rugg, by me yet worn,
May soon drop off, or, off be torn.
16. Here, I yet live, where, what me grieves,
But few of thine, have heeded much;
Nor Mayors, Aldermen, or Sheriffs
Or any noble, great or rich;
But, in Long-suffrings being old,
(If not relived by the poor)
By sickness, hunger, or by cold
Death had ere now, unlockt my door.
Lest thou as much neglected be,
Think more on GOD, though less on me.
17. My Public warnings, are suppressed,
As once, was Jeremiahs Roll;
Which GOD, will when he sees it best,
Revive, with an enlarged Skroll:
Meanwhile, by stifled musings tired,
The flames within me closly pent,
Like powder in Granado's fired,
Do tear my heart, through want of vent,
And crack my earthen vessel more
Then all my sufferings heretofore.
18. Within thy West and Eastern Jail.
Now twice ten months confind I Have lain,
Denied both Relief, and Bail,
Which Law allows, and Rogues obtain:
To tell, what others did, or said,
Is thought in me a grand misdeed,
Though being of their harms afraid,
I did but bid my friends take heed:
If this be falls for words well meant,
Woe to ill deeds, with ill intent.
19. Alas! how apt are we to fear,
Or fancy danger, where is none?
Yet how unapt, how loath to hear,
What may prevent a certain one?
Except propounded in their mode,
Who, in their own conceit are wise,
The Counsels both of Men and GOD
They, either frustrate, or despise:
Which being well weighed, is a sign,
That, to destruction they decline.
20. Seven days before the late sad night,
Thy Praetor, seized in my hands
What GOD inclined me to write,
For timely warnings to these Lands;
So, that, which to their weal conduced,
Has hitherto been fruitless made;
And, I more strictly have been used,
Though, I before, hard measure had.
But, GOD, by whom it was begun,
Will guard me, till my work is done.
21. No more seems now within my power,
But, down to lie, beneath my Lode,
Attending my Redemption hour,
With patient waiting on my GOD.
Yet, there is hope, that Prayers may
To what is feared stoppage put;
And, since, to Heaven there is open way,
(Though from the world, I close am shut)
As Jonas did (when in a Whale;
Close prisoner kept) to God i will call.
22. Correct us LORD, but not in wrath,
Purge rather, what misdone has been,
By any temporary Death,
Then by correcting sin with sin,
For all the blood that has been spilt,
Let us, who think our selves most clear,
In private, search out our own guilt,
And, wherein else, we faulty are,
That, by a self-condemning Doom,
We may escape the wrath to come.
23 Preserve thy Church, Lord, bless the King
And, seeing thou have him restored,
Him, out of all his troubles bring,
And, make his will, with thine, accord,
That under his Protection here,
We, without faction, hate or strife,
(In all uprightness, without fear)
May live a sanctified life,
And, he indulge the conscience tender,
As best becomes, the Faiths Defender.
Thus, on what lately did befall,
I sung my Musings, to the wall,
Which gave thereto, as much regard
As most will, when abroad it is heard:
For, little have such lines as these,
Which may a Carnal pallat please.
The wanton huggs a wanton strain,
The miser, that which treats of Gain;
Ambitious men give most applause
To that, which their, Ambition claws;
In lies and follies, fools delight,
And, if this ever come to sight,
It will by none, be relished well
Save those, with whom the Graces dwell.
The more Precautions are in season.
(The more agreeable to Reason)
Their Rage it will the more increase,
Who are inclined to oppress;
And, if I die not in this place,
It will be merely of GOD's grace,
To make it known, the Rage of man,
Is bounded, do the worst he can.
These Musings, and some other too,
Escaped surprise, with much ado,
And, that whereof I was bereft
Me, for awhile, in sadness left;
Yet, much more sorrowful am grown
For others sakes, then for mine own,
Because, the world so misbefriends,
What to her own well being tends.
God, never any Place bereaves
Of saving means, till him it leaves,
Nor is their any man quite lost,
Till he resists the holy Ghost.
He, helpless leaves no willing one
In acting what he would have done;
But, when to selfness, man adheres
Then, as he works, so he fares
GOD, gives first motion to each wheol,
In motion also, keeps it still,
If he with him Compliance feel,
Else let us it go which way it will.
Thus he will do, and thus has done,
Even ever since the world begun.
That, men his works and mind might mark,
He preached by Noah and his Ark,
And, to prevent their threatened doom
Allowed them six^one years to come.
That, Sodom timely might repent,
He, Lot to be exemplar sent;
When Balam misaffected was
He made a Preacher of his Ass;
And by a Whale, he Jonas sent
To bid the Ninevites repent,
Who, more thereto inclined were
Though heathens, then most Christians are.
What did to Isreal's weal belong,
He gave by Moses in a song,
That, when Records could not be had,
They, thereof mindful might be made.
When their Transgressions were nigh full,
To Babel they were sent to school;
Since which time, they still growing worse
(Till they incurred Cains dreadful Curse,
For shedding of their brothers blood,
Who died zealous of their good)
Them, out of their good land, GOD hurled,
To rovee like him about the world;
Deprived (now sixteen hundred years)
Of Prophets and Remembrancers:
And, in this mode, with every Nation
God deals, e're final Reprobation.
LORD! from their wanderings call them home;
Into thy fold, back let them come.
We got advantage by their fall
Let it increase by their Recall,
Since they, and we in every sin,
Have Paralels, a long time been,
Let our joint force, henceforth be spent
To move each other to repent,
That, they and we may in that Place,
Become Partakers of thy Grace,
Where Jews and Gentiles shall be saved,
By our Redeemer, and thy David,
By wiser men, in times of old,
Much was expressed, which I have told,
And, they have both in Prose and Rimes,
Forewarnings given in their times;
Declared in season, how GOD deals
With wicked Realms and Common-weals.
Our own Records likewise declare
GOD's frequent dispensations here;
How constantly, avenging wrath
In every Age pursued, has
The greatest Tyrants in their turns,
Though sometimes, he their doom adjourns,
But, that, no just excuse will be
Either, to other men, or me,
If we shall negligently do
What, GOD inclines our hearts unto,
And may, now, or in future days
Advance man's welfare, and praise.
For, on us lies Obligations,
To bring forth in our Generations,
What needful seems to be expressed;
In such a manner also dressed
As best that Ages temper fits
In which we live, and best begets
A timely heed, in those to whom
We serviceable would become:
Yea, we to them must hand it too;
Else, lamely, we our duties do.
Thus, I according to my power
Have done, and therefore kiss the Tower
From whence, I send this Warning-shot
By Ammunition hardly got.
LONDON, as Moses gave a song to be
Isreal's MEMENTO, I give this to thee;
To show, that (though the world does me deprive
Of what was hers) I somewhat have to give
Which I by GOD's free grace, may call mine own,
And, is not needlessly on thee bestown.
But, e're some change, the means thereof bereave,
Now, both of Friends and Foes, I Will take my leave;
Adue my Foes; for often, by event,
You did me good, though none to me you meant.
To pray for you, I know, I am your debtor,
And, therefore so I do; GOD, make you better,
And so to mark and mind what he intends,
That, we may in his Love, henceforth be friends.
My friends, farewell; and no whit grieved be
Though you should me no more in Babel see,
For, at the Holy Lamb, we fafe shall meet,
E're long, in New Jerusalems high street.
Written in the Tower 1662. The meek, and humble to advise
I write; but not to teach the wise.
You must not therefore, here expect,
Such Strains as these times best affect
For, you may have enough of those
By others writ, in verse and prose.


A SINGLE SACRIFICE, Humbly, offered to Almighty GOD, by the Author during his
lonely Confinement in the Tower, to mediate his gracious preventing the Dearth
feared, and probably portended, by immoderate Rains in June and July, 1663.
That he with Tools might for this work be fitted,
His Jailer, and his Keeper, he outwitted;
For, it was his greatest suffering, to be pent
From means, to give such meditations vent.
SIN, like the Ocean (but, not so well bounded)
These Islands has on every side surronded,
And, many Breaches, lately made it has
Which to the furious Tempests of GOD's wrath
Exposes us (even quite throughout these Lands)
So, that, Hills, Dales, and all in danger stands.
The Air, whose cloudy brow, upon us lowrs,
Dissolves it self, into destructive showrs,
To move us unto tears of penitence
By feeling that, whereof we have no sense.
For, they, who are most sensible of spoil
(by Rains or Droughts) of corn, and wine and oil,
Feel not in heart, the least remorce for sin;
But, when they should bewail it, laugh and grin.
They, who are very froward, and repine
If they loose but their monk^ or their swine,
(And, sometimes vex them selves till they are sick,
For losses, not amounting to a Chick)
And can with many bitter tears, bemone
Small sufferings, for their greatest sins shed none.
In mine own person, I much need not fear
Such temporary Plagues, as threatened are
By Rain or Winds, by cold, or scortching wether,
By sudden floods, or fires; for, I have neither
Estate to lose, nor hope of getting ought
Which, by such things* may be in hazard brought;
And, am at present, with my daily bread,
By his own hand, miraculously fed,
Whose All Sufficiency, should me sustain
Though all the world were to be drowned again.
External things, are little pertinent
To my chief fafety, or my best content:
For, should a Famine; me of life bereave
Death would be more advantage then to live
A life like mine: and as I have been used,
A speedy death, is rather to be thus'd.
Yet, whilst, I may be serviceable made
To him, from whom, this life at first I had,
I am content to live till it expires,
Although it were in storms, in floods or fires;
And, likewise, am so sensible of that
Which to the Common welfare does relate,
That up to GOD a prayer I Will prefer
To crave prevention of what many fear:
For, though I am not suffered to present
A prayer to King, Lord, or Parliament;
Here to GOD's Throne I free access have got,
And he does hear me when men hear me not:
Of which assured, in this loneliness,
My self to him, I humbly thus address.
Almighty and most merciful Creater,
Of heaven and earth, of fire, of air and water,
With whatsoever, consists of form or matter,
Of all invisible, or to be seen,
Of all that is or shall be, or has been,
Felt, heard or understood (excepting Sin,
At whose birth all Privations did begin.)
Thou, by whose wisdom all the whole Creation,
Is ordered, and has still a preservation,
Make acceptable in thy sight, I pray,
What I shall meditate or write this day
And, let not my Requests be flong away,
Though we have often forfeited again
That Grace, which we did heretofore obtain,
And liable to all thy plagues remain.
We must confess, that in these last three years,
Thou have abated many of our fears,
For thine own sake, and for the sakes of them,
Whom thy blaspheamers and their Foes contemn.
Awhile ago, we were surpised with dread
Of hunger, and the scarcety of bread,
By such distempered seasons, as foreshew'd
That Chastisement which here, is now renewed;
And, was removed, ere many had much sense,
Of what some felt, or of their own offense.
Once, we were frighted with such sicknesses
As seemed forerunners of the worst disease;
And, till this hour, a brutish Discord,
Keeps us in daily hazard, that the Sword
Will be again unsheathed: yea, though we are
Preserved still, from what we justly fear,
And that, thy patience might be more disern'd,
Have year, by year, been graciously forewarned
(By Signs and wonders probably foreshewing,
The sad events, that seem to be pursuing.
Our crying sins) yet, we do never the less,
Continue still in our obduratness.
Though, much Instruction, likewise, we have had,
Examples, Premonitions, public made,
And extraordinary Dispensations,
To draw us, from our wilful aborrations,
We so increase them, that, it renders me,
Exceeding fearful to Petition thee,
Those ^emporary Judgments to withdraw
Whereof, we at this present, stand in aw,
Lest they, whom no good counsel mollifies
Thy Justice and thy Mercy quite despise;
And fall into that Reprobated sause,
Which brings unchangeable Impenitence:
For, that, the Consequence has often proved,
When Plagues before Repentance were removed.
The fields were lately clothed beyond our hope
With an appearance of a fruitful crop,
Which moisture by unseasonable showrs,
So evidently, by degrees, devours
That, most men are afraid the teeming Earth
Instead of Plenty, will produce a Dearth;
And, they among us, who do most neglect
Removal of the Cause, most dread the effect.
Yet, humane pity, me does so incline
To make the Common fear, a part of mine,
That, though I am not likely much to gain
Or loose thereby, whether it shine or Rain,
I, (as I am a man) well pleased could be
Thy Peoples votes, might be vouchsafed by thee.
To that intent, I meekly do assay
To mediate; but, now I come to pray,
That Spirit whose assistance is expected,
Withdraws, as if my suite would be rejected;
So, that I know not how to speak or write,
What gain thy gracious acceptance might
Though, fear, my prayers may be turned to sin,
Considering, what Postures we are in.
For, who, the pleading of their Cause dares own,
On whom, a righteous King does justly frown?
They being Rebels too, in whom appears
No penitence, but only slavish fears?
Who, conscientiously, can pray for them
Who persevere all Justice to contemn?
Who turn away their eyes, when thou forth sendst
Foretokens, of what thou for sin intendst?
Who hide them too, so far forth as they may
From other men; or, (if that fails) assay
To misinterpret them, when they do see
The things nor hid, nor disapproved can be?
Who, can with Faith, thy Grace for them implore,
Who, are unmerciful unto the poor?
Who, daily to thy burning wrath add fuel?
Who, both to others, and themselves are cruel?
Who, their afflicted Brethren to dispaiers
Expose? close up their ears against their prayers?
And most injuriouslys with those men deal?
Who, most endeavor, to advance their weal;
Yea, for whose sakes it is, that they are not
Destroyed like Sodom, when thou caldst forth Lot?
Who, are so far, from striving to be better,
That still, to hide one sin, they act a greater,
Till they on one another heap so many
That they have little shame, or sense any;
Although their impudent abominations
Have their Infection spread, through all these Nations?
LORD! who, on their behalf, can mediate
For any of those Blessings which relate
Unto their temporary weal alone,
Who, of their Brethrens welfare, care have none?
Who, do employ their power, but to oppress?
Turn all thy Graces into wantonness?
Fling, as it were defiance aginst heaven?
And, though by thee, they freely were forgiven
Innumerable debts, (and likewise are
By thee enriched more then before they were)
Take never the less, their fellows by the throat,
Who owing them not much more then a Groat,
Forbearance crave, and at their feet do fall,
With, promise, when they can, to pay them all?
What can such look for; but to be bereaven
Of that Grace, whereby they were once forgiven
Their debts; or think deserved but, to be laid
In chains, till every farthing shall be paid?
Who, can to thee be Advocate for those
Who, both to Truth and Righteousness, are foes,
Though they profess both? who, though ever learning,
Can never get the knowledge and discerning
Of what pertains to thy essential Truth,
Because, they being all EAR, or all MOUTH,
Neither hear willingly, or speak of ought
Whereby they may to stedfastness be brought?
But rather itch to hear, and speak, and do
That, which their own self-will does prompt them to;
And, was infused into them by false teachers,
Whom they suppose to be the foundest Preachers,
When they confirm them, in what does belong
To their will worship, be it right or wrong;
And keep up those Diana's, which were made
Their Goddesses, but to uphold their Trade?
These, twixt Beleivers, do contests maintain
For Trifles, which tend more to their own Gain
Then Godliness, or those means to increase
Which may conduce to setlement of peace,
In Christian Charity, and Righteousness.
All, I (with hope to speed) can pray for such
Is, that they may not love the world too much;
Or, by hypocrisy, and lip professions,
(To get themselves a share in her possessions)
Obstruct the blessed work of Reformation
By Factions, to the final extirpation
Of all those Dispensations, which have yet
Some use; and which, whilst thou do them permit,
They to advance thy Glory may improve:
And, by sincerely seeking Truth in Love,
So exercise thy Graces, whilst those last,
That, they will perfect be, when their times past.
My GOD, for these, to this effect I may
And, do (I know) with thy allowance pray;
Because, I hope, it is no malicious pride
Which has to Selfness, drawn their hearts aside.
But, as for them, who have inclinde their ears
So long time, to ungodly Counselors,
So persevered, in the sinners way,
And, therein with delight, so long made stay
That, to the Scorners Chair advanced they are,
Resolving with themselves to settle there;
The Dictates of thy holy ghost contemn,
Absolve the wicked, Innocents condemn,
Term evil, good, the best things evil call,
(Or, make twixt them no difference at all)
Ascribe thy Attributes unto the Devil
And his Vicegerent; make thee, of all evil
Prime Author; Thee, detrude out of thy Throne
To set their Idol, and themselves thereon;
Pervert the lawful use of every Creature,
Till their depraving the whole humane nature
For Vengeance calls, and as it were, inforces
Thy Justice to turn Blessings into Curses;
What can be spoke for these, to save them from
Thy Judgments here, or in the world to come?
I cannot, LORD, thy mercy comprehend,
Nor know how far their malice does extend,
Such things, are knowable to thee alone;
Therefore, concerning these, thy will be done.
The best of us have gone astray so far,
In Provocations, that, perhaps here are
Now, very many in the state of those
For whom, we are forbid to interpose
Our mediations betwixt them and Thee,
As touching Judgments, that now threanned be:
Such, even among thy People heretofore,
Made thee forbid a Prophet to implore
Withholding of those Plagues, which at that time,
Were threatened to be hurled down on them.
Yea then, though thy choice worthies should have pleaded.
That, thy Decree might have been superseaded,
Thou did resolve, their suite should not be heard
For any, save themselves, with good regard.
When sins grow ripe, and Scandalous become,
They seldom escape a temporary doom,
Though thou vouchsafest mercy, as to David
Whereby, the Souls that sinned, shall be saved,
LORD, though that growth, our Guilt attaineth has,
Always remember mercy, in thy wrath.
Some such like Bar, and prohibition now,
From thee is issued forth, for ought I know.
Alas! if so; what possibly can we
Endeavor, till it shall reversed be?
Or else dispensed with? I can never pray
With confidence, for what suspect I may
Is not precarious: And, as qualified
We are, things grantable may be denied,
At least, so long time, as that shall be wanting
Which makes their chief condition of their granting*
It Is not a slavish terror (without Love
And faithful Penitence) that will remove
The Plagues that lie upon us; or prevent
A Threatened Judgment, when it is imminent.
It Is not will worshippings, though much applauded,
By their approvers, and by them begawded
With Superstitious Dressings, that can please
Thy Majesty, and thy just wrath appease:
It Is not our formal whinings, or Orations,
Or, our Confessions, or our Deprecations,
Or, Bablings with the Tongue, without a heart
That, will thy threatened Judgments quite divert,
Till thou have done thy work which is in hand,
Or, till we more conform to thy command;
Whereto, perhaps, that, which we fear, may more
Conduce, then that, which we to escape implore.
For, few do conscience of their duties make
Much longer, then the Rod is on their back.
Yet, somewhat, makes me hopeful, that thou have
Against what I would ask, no sentence past;
And, fain would I obtain from thee, this day,
A Public Blessing, e're I go away,
Which might in some degree, abate the dread
Whereby, now, many are distempered.
To thee, thy Children for a Blessing cry
Upon those Fruits, which drenched in waters lie;
And (though unworthy) Jacob like, I am
Resolved with thee, to wrestle for the same.
Let, not my LORD, be wrath, that I go on
To prosecute the suite I have begun;
For, I with filial fear approach thy Throne.
Direct us, how in this, and such like cases,
We may make acceptable our Addresses,
Lest, we grow overwhelmed with dispairs,
Or, come with over peremptory Prayers:
For, somewhat thou, at all times, have to grant
To comfort those, who consolation want,
When they are sensible of their condition,
And come before thee with unfaind contrition.
Yea, though, when we are outwardly distressed,
We may not absolutely make request
For what seems needful; yet, when we resign
In all our suits, our own will unto thine,
Our wants (if in particular denied)
Are with a Fatherlike respect supplied
Some other way, by mercifully granting
A better thing, then that, which we thought wanting.
For, thou, till he himself shall bar the door,
Excludest no man's prayre, who does implore
In Faith and Charity, that, which may tend
To give him, a well-being without end.
Of this, experiment I often have had,
And, me thou confident thereof have made.
This Creed, thou have been pleased to teach me, LORD,
Both by thy holy spirit, and thy word,
Confirming my experience day by day,
That, I to other men declare it may,
As I in duty, am obliged to do,
When thou my heart inclinest thereunto.
And, by thy favor, now proceed I can
In that, which, when these musings I began,
I neither able was to prosecute,
As I intended; or commence my suit,
In terms, which I could think fit to present
To thee; or, to my self, could give content.
But, now the Bars removed and I can make
A shift to Stammer, what I could not speak.
By thy Assistance likewise, I believe
That, what I now shall pray for, thou will give;
Even every thing (implicitly at least)
Which shall in this my Prayer be expressed:
I, therefore, in thy sight, now spread abroad
My private meditations, in this mode;
And hope, it shall be spread, where many may
And their Amen to that, for which I pray:
And, that their joining in this my Oblation,
Will gain us all shares in thy acceptance.
Oh! I should then sing, with a Joyful heart
LORD, let thy servant, now, in peace depart.
That Everlasting Gospel make more known,
By which, thy Love eternal is forth shown
To all mankind; and which, a glorious throng
Of Angels, published in a Joyful song,
(Unto the glory of thy blessed Name)
When first thy Son aray'd with flesh became;
That, all the world may know, the same Goodwill
Which thereby was expressed, continues still:
And, that, Desire to know both Good and Evil,
Proceeded from our Selves, and from the Devil,
But, not from thee, who, did intend Salvation
To Adam, and to all his Generation;
Not reprobating any of his Race
Save such as wilfully dispis'd thy Grace,
And, justly, caused the product of that
Which, thou did never prenecessitate.
Thy Love to all mankind, compels me often
(Though for it, I maligned am, and scoft)
To preach it to the world, that, men may more
Mind it with thankfulness, then heretofore.
I know this Truth is owned, even among those
Who, unto thee are yet, apparent foes;
And, that, has hinders many to embrace
The Doctrine of thy Universal Grace,
Because, they are not heedful, that, unless
These held some Truths with that unrighteousness
Which they maintain, not many would believe
That Mystery, by which they do deceive.
But, to prevent their wiles, unclose their eyes,
Who cannot yet perceive their fallacies;
And let it be made manifest to them
Who do not wilfully the means contemn,
Which, thou vouchsafed unto all men have,
And always wilt, at first, or at the last.
Let that large mercy, our hearts work upon,
More then thy Judgments hitherto have done;
To which intention, let thy Saints improve
That Influence which thy Eternal Love
Has shed on them, to work throughout this Nation
By Love and Gentleness, a Reformation;
Which will be then more speedy, and sincere*
Then that, which is compelled, and wrought by fear.
Preserve that precious seed, sown in this Land;
Now, many Ages past, by thine own hand;
It has been often watered by the Blood
Of thy Elect; has many Storms withstood,
And took such root, that, now it does extend
By several Branches, to the worlds far end.
Permit it not to suffer diminution
Either by calms, or storms of Persecution.
Let not the lofty Cedars overtop it,
The wild-swine root it up, or tame-beast crop it;
Nor weeds or brambles (among which it grows)
Starve it, or choke it; nor the greedy Crows
Devour it; nor the swarms of Locusts, which
In smoke, ascended from the infernal Ditch;
But, let it, when appearing most oppressed,
Palm-like most thrive, and be the more increast,
Till the earth it fills; and till up-rooted be
All plants, that were not planted there by thee.
This, I first pray for Lord, because possessing
Hereof, does lay the ground of ev^ry blessing.
Correct thou not these Nations in thy wrath,
But, in that measure, which shows mercy has
An intrest in thy Justice. Let them hold
The same proportion which they did of old,
In thy severest chastisements; that, neither
Both Good and Evil, be destroyed together,
Nor, their hopes thereby vacated, by whom
There is a Kingdom looked for, yet to come.
Five wicked Cities might have spared been,
Had twice five, Righteous men been found therein:
Yea, Thou (although in them there was but one)
Defer'dst their dreadful doom till he was gone.
LORD, I hope, here are many thousands yet.
On whom thy Seal, on whom thy Mark is set.
Who trust in thee, whose faith does not yet fail;
Who, their own, and the Nations guilt bewail:
For their sakes, lay aside thy wrath again;
Let thy Sun shine, and let thy Clouds drop Rain
Both on the just and unjust, as thou have
Been pleased to vouchsafe in Ages past;
That, Spring and Summer, Seed and Harvest-times
Until the world shall end, may in all Climes
Be from each other still distinguished,
As long ago, by thee was promised.
At this time also, to this sinful Nation,
Extend thy wonted favor and compassion,
By blowing hence those clouds, whose frequent showrs
Spoil not alone grass herbs and pleasant flowers,
But, threaten also, to destroy those crops,
Whereby the painful husbandman has hopes
To be rewarded for his toil and cost;
Yea, let this Isle, which now despairs almost,
Of such a blessing, be secured from
That Famine, which we are afraid will come.
Both of our Earthly, and thy heavenly bread,
Preserve the means, that therewith being fed,
In soul and body; we may for the same
In flesh and spirit magnify thy Name*
Till Christ shall come. Continue in this place,
The special pledges, of thy special Grace,
Close up those Rents, which malice has made wide;
Unite by Love, those whom self-will and Pride
Have dis-united: For, thy Love was that
Which made thee at the first, this world create;
And, it is the same essential Love (by thee
In thy Elect made active) which must free
The world again, from that confused estate
Whereto it is brought by Envy and by Hate.
To that end, let thy spirit, (unto whom
All Dispensations, till thy Son shall come
Committed are) The hearts of men incline
To be obedient ^o that Discipline,
In every Form, which they believe to be
To them enjoined by thy word and thee;
And, that accept of, which they shall profess
And practice with unbiast Consciences.
Make thy Elect to stand out all the shocks,
Of Tyranny, like never moved Rocks;
And give them prudence, to discern the wiles,
Whereby, their Antichristian foe beguiles
Unstable hearts; and please to pardon that
Wherein through frailty, they shall deviate.
Indow them withal sanctified graces
That may enable in their several places
To do the honor: And, LORD, let the Pride
Of their Oppressors, break so, and devide
Their Power and Counsels, that, they may at length
Be ruined, by their own Wit, and Strength.
Behold, the many troubles of this Nation,
With mercy, and vouchsafe it thy salvation.
Make haste to our deliverance oh LORD,
And, succor us according to thy word.
Let them be turned backward, and with shame
Confounded, who blaspheme thy holy Name;
Who, with their own inventions do defile
Thy Ordinances, and pursue the spoil
Of those who seek thy face. Let them who cry
Aha, aha, and say insultingly,
So we would have it, when thy people are
Oppressed, be caught at last, in their own snare,
That, they who love thy Truth, may to thy praise
Rejoice in thy salvation all their days.
But, gracious LORD, beside that wasting Rain,
Which makes this Nation with much fear complain
And brings me now to thee; there is a Flood
Portending Inundations too, of Blood,
Even blood of Innocents, for whose prevention
To be Petitioner I have intention.
A portion of thy word, concerning Cain
To me, a mystery seems to contain
Implying somewhat which relates to those
Who were, and shall unto thy Saints be foes
Throughout all Times; and does relate, likewise,
To them, who offer thee that sacrifice
In which thou most delight'st: For, ever since
That day, Will-worshippers have took offense
At their Oblations; and proceeded on
In that, which he so long ago begun.
Cain was the first that persecuted them
Who in their worship differed from him;
And, I collect thence, that, even from that hour
Thou did subject them to the temp'ral power
Of all those persecutors, of whom, he
Became the Type, whoever they should be.
And, as I understand that Hystory,
Therein is couched the whole mystery
Of that iniquity, which now is grown
Almost full ripe, and shall be overthrown
In thy appointed time; but, not till then,
Nor by the weapons or the hands of men:
For, thou have marked them to be saved from
Destroying, till their fatal hour is come.
And I conceive likewise by what thou have
In that memorial to the world expressed,
Thou will avenge it, on all, who withstand
Their persons, with a life-destroying-hand,
Though they are murdrers; and, that, this suctjection
Tends to thy glory, and the Saints perfection;
Whereof, some of them, take so little heed,
That of precautions they may have some need.
This has inclined me, conscientiously
To shun opposing them destructively
In whom there is a visiability
Of Sovereign Power, although tyrannical;
Until that some way, it grow doubtful shall
To whom it appertains; as, here of late,
When it was thought, thou did that power translate
To other hands, and when he, who bereft
Them thereof, to an Anarchy, us left.
And, thou, who know my heart, know I did never
To pull down, or to set up Thrones endeaver:
But, only, to preserve the common peace,
Complide with that, which did the Throne possess,
Till thou restor'dst him, who was driven hence,
And, to whom, true, I have been ever since.
Now, also, to preserve, still, as I ought,
That peace, whose preservation, I then sought;
I do implore thee, on behalf of him
Who wears this day, the Supreme Diadem,
That, from those evil Counselors, he may
Delivered be, who do, or shall assay,
To bring him to a wilful resolution,
Of being partner in that persecution
Which they intend: And that, in all temptations
(And maugre all severest provocations)
Thy Saints, may be preserved from contriving
And acting, what may tend to the depriving
Them of their lives or power, who e're they be,
On whom that Power shall be conferred by thee.
And, grace vouchsafe them, always to persist
In that obedience, which may manifest
That, conscientiously they may submit
To what thou have ordained, or shall permit
For their probation; till the fewd and War
'Twixt Good and Evil, at a period are:
And, that, upon thy will they may attend
Until that Good and Evil, has an end,
Which had form us proceeding, and gives place
To that Eternal GOODNESS, which IS, WAS
And SHALL BE, when all evil heretofore
In Being, shall a being have no more.
Meanwhile confer all means, whereby both they
And he, may walk on, in a peaceful way.
Thy Judgment to the King vouchsafe to give
That, he, and we in Righteousness may live:
That, he may to the Prisoners and the poor,
Show mercy; to the wronged, their dues restore;
And be as kind and merciful to them,
Who are oppressed, as thou have been to him:
That, our high Mountains may produce thy peace,
And little Hills, the fruits of Righteousness;
For, whether high or low, all shall receive
Such measure, as to other men they give.
I know this will be done, even by the drops
Of mercy, which to keep alive my hopes,
Are in this place, to me derived from
Thy Bounty, to fore-shew, a shower will come
That shall refresh both me, and those, at full,
Who, at this time, each others case condole.
Be pleased to confirm this my belief,
Redouble still, our Courage as our Grief
Shall be augmented: And although among
Thy Foes, our bodies perish in the throng;
By those external Judgments, which we shall
Occasion to be Epidemical,
Inflict them, rather then permit thy Name
To be exposed to reproachful shame,
By suffering wickedness with proud despite,
To violate thy Justice in thy sight;
Or, wantonize with grace, till it becomes
The saddest of all Temporary dooms:
For, common mys^ries less grievous are
Unto thy Saints, though they in them have share,
Then all their private sufferings, when they see
Their insolence who slighted them and thee,
So winked at, as if thou either would not,
Avenge thy self upon them, or else could not.
Thy Soldiers will be pleased amid thy foes
To die, e're any honor thou should lose,
Since death by them, needs never to be feared,
Who know with what life, thou will them reward.
Let Dagons temple then, be overthrown
Though Sampson die, in pulling of it down:
For all thy Soldiers, seek their glorifying
In conquering, although it be by dying.
Our General, in person, led the Van
That way, when he his glorious Conquest wan,
Bereft Death of his deadly sting, thereby,
And, over Hell, triumphed gloriously.
Preserve those, in thy Truth by Faith and Love,
Whom thou shall please in these last times to prove
By fiery trials: So, what e're wind blows,
Whether, it rains or shines, or hails or snows;
Whether thou shak'st the heavens or the earth,
Or both; whether, War, Pestilence, or Dearth
Shall visit this deprayed Generation,
Thine, shall be free from inward pertubation,
And sing, a blessed Requiem to their soul,
When their Oppressors gnash their teeth and howl.
To that Salvation which thou do design
For thy Elect, preserve thou, me and mine;
And, in our several passages thereto,
Whether, the way in which we are to go
Be either rough or smooth, or short or long,
Keep us content; and let our Faith be strong
Although the flesh is weak. Let our Afflictions
And, our prosperities; with benedictions
So sanctified be throughout our days,
That, thou may in our lives and deaths have praise
A large Petititon (whereof now bereft)
Before thy face, long since ingrost I left,
Whereby, I thee besought to this effect,
For my Posterity; and to direct
And keep them in thy ways: LORD, though to me
The words are lost, they are not so to thee;
My spoilers, cannot hide them from thine eyes,
Nor will thou, my Requests therein despise.
Rememember those, by whom we have been fed,
When we were by the world deprived of brea^
Vouchsafe thou, for their Charitableness,
They, never want a Friend in their distress;
Or comforts, when on their sick beds they lie,
Or, Freedom, though on outward bands they die:
Mind them, when I of them forgetful grow;
Know them, though I their persons may not know;
Their Alms-deeds, which they labor to conceal,
Let thy Son, before all the world reveal;
And, what for me or mine, in these my prayers,
I have desired, grant to them and theirs.
My Foes have some way been my Benefactors,
(Though, therein, they against their wills were Actors
For, that, which to afflict me they design,
Adds more to their vexation, then to mine;
And, that, whereby, they thought me to have harmed,
Against all future mischiefs, me has armed.
In which respect, without dissimulations,
They, are to me, an object of compassion,
And, I beseech thee, so their hearts to turn
That, for their sins, they heartily may mourn.
To operate in them a preparation,
To prosecute the means of their salvation,
Their, too much loving of themselves abate*
Which has inclined them other men to hate,
And more to punish them, who reprehend,
Their sins, then those, who, against thee offend.
Bereave them of that wealth, in which they trust,
And spend, in giving fuel to their lust;
That Power exorbitant, make to be less,
Which does but Pride, and Tyranny increase;
Lest they may make themselves the slaves of sin,
And to be Devils, who might Gods have been,
Forgive them their offenses against thee,
When for them, truly penitent they be:
For, all their wrongs to me I can forgive
As I from thee forgiveness would receive.
This Charity of mine to them, is thine;
Thou, thereunto my heart do now incline;
Then, surely, if thou have a love for those
Who hate thee, yea whilst they continue Foes,
Thou will on them bestow all I can crave,
If they contemn not, that which they might have,
And, who, can then, be hopeless of thy Grace,
Who, in true faith, and love shall seek thy face?
Oh hear me, in what to their welfare tends,
For all in general, both Foes and Friends,
(To whom, Christ's ransom shall not bounded be,
More by their own fault, then by thy Decree;
And who against themselves, shut not that Gate
Which thou to all Mankind, have open set.)
Make us true Lovers, as we ought to be,
And, we shall be beloved still of thee.
Incline us charitably to regard
The poor man's prayers and ours shall be heard.
Make us upright, and then shall rich and poor,
More advantageous be then heretofore
Unto themselves; and they who hate each other,
Shall love, and live in amity together.
None, then shall make a prayer, to enjoy
In private, what weal- public, may destroy.
But, all our suits, (as in destructive Rains
Or Droughts) shall be preferred for what pertains
Unto the common good; and very many
Be benefitted, without harm to any.
I shall, moreover, be permitted then,
To do thee service with my Tongue and Pen,
And, thou, with other blessings, wilt send hi her
What I now pray for, seasonable weather.
LORD! should these meditations be despised,
Or, (as some have been lately) here surpised,
And smothered; I beseech thee, let them not
By thee, be dis-regarded or forgot;
Nor that, which yet remains to be expressed,
Be stifled any longer in my breast:
For, that, has been more torment to my mind,
Then to my Body, to be here confined.
But, each branch only grant of these Requests
As with thine own good pleasure best consists,
And, that in chief, which has preferred been
To work in us, Repentance of all sin;
Lest else, when from one Judgment we are freed,
Another, and another still succeed,
Till e're from all our fear^, thou us deliver,
We feel the sharpest arrows in thy Quiver.
Though all alone, the world has shut me here,
And, from her self, exiled me, as it were,
She, being part of that great Work Divine,
In which there is as well a share of mine
As hers: ( And, though no sense she seems to have
Of what I suffer in this living Grave)
I have a Fellow-feeling of her fears,
As by those private musings it appears,
Which often, heretofore I have expressed,
On her behalf, and now, by this Request;
Which GOD (I know) for his own sake has heard,
Although my prayer merits no regard.
The last great Rainy-day, I first begun
These Meditations; and, e're they were done,
The Clouds were blown away, the Sun appeared,
The face of heaven was from thick vapors cleared,
And, he, who lately mustred them together,
Continues, yet, a seasonable weather
That will renew the hopes (if it holds on)
Which this year promised, when it begun.
For, (to the blessed name of GOD be praise)
The earth begins her face again to raise,
Out of her watery bed, cheered by those Rays
Whose absence made her many weeks of days
Sit melancholy, and aside to throw,
Those dressings, wherewith she is trimmed now.
This, does to me, appear to be a sign
That, to compassion, GOD does sti^^ incline,
And, will, once more make proof what Reformation
Shall be endeavored after this probation.
Oh! in some measure, let this grace effect
That, which be justly, may from us expect,
Lest worse befall: For, GOD will not be mocked;
The doors of heaven, are not yet so fast locked,
But, that, he suddenly may send again,
Not only such another wasting rain,
( Or in the stead thereof a scorching Drouth
And make the tongue, cleave to the parched mouth*)
But Fire and Brimstone too, if he so please;
Whereas, now, whilst his mercy does appease
His wrath a little hearty penitence,
Improved may keep some other Plague from hence,
And, for one sin that truly is repented,
Three may removed be, or else prevented.
Meditated and composed during the Authors close Confinement in the Tower,
July. 1663. Psalm 107.8. Oh! that men would praise the Lord for his goodness,
and for his wondrous works to the Children of men.

The whole Psalm is very pertinent to stir up to a due consideration and
practice of this duty.



June 15, 1665. A PRECAUTION Relating to the time present.
Two years are past, since what precedes was writ
When here, Excessive Rains occasioned it.
The present Drougth, now makes us as much fear,
A Dearth may probably conclude this year:
For want of timely moisture, in the spring,
Has in the Bud, ni^t many a growing thing;
And that Defect continuing to this day,
Starves herbs, and turns the standing grass to hay.
The Winter corn, as yet, prick up their ears;
But, to decay, the Summer Crop appears;
And both (if GOD prevent not) may consume
Before our usual harvest time is come.
As, when to cure, or give their Patients ease,
(Who long have suffered by a strong Disease)
A good Physician first applies for cures
His best known helps in such distempratures,
That f^iling, tries another; and that done,
Does then, through every course of Physic run,
Repeats it often too; and as Events
Occasion it, makes new Experiments:
Even so, has GOD proceeded with this Nation,
To bring us to a timely Reformation;
Yet, our habitual wickedness is such,
That, nothing works upon us very much,
Except it be the quite contrary way:
For, when we should Repent, and Fast and Pray,
We Feast and Triumph: when we should release
The Prisoner, we the Freeman do oppress.
When we the poor and needy should relieve,
The Rich we beggar, and the poor we grieve.
When Princes should put mourning Garments on,
Each Vassal is arrayed like a Don.
The meanest Pinnaces wear Silken Sails,
And like the Peacock spread their gaudy Tails.
Yea, in the steed of due humiliations,
In public, here are public provocations,
Still multiplied quite throughout the land,
Even whilst we lie beneath GOD's heavy hand,
And manifestly see, both every blessing
Withdrawing, and Plagues every day increasing.
He therefore justly may, if so he pleases,
Do, like Physicians, when they find Diseases
To, be incurable. They then permit,
Such Patients to take what course they think fit;
Leave them to any Emperick, who will
Pretend to that wherein he has no skill;
Send them to Epsom, or the Tunbridge water,
Or, that at Lewsham (to which it is no matter)
Or to that Country Air, where first they drew
Their breaths, to try what thereon will ensue.
Thither, if GOD sends after them a Blessing,
It Is more then they deserve, and worth confessing:
For, it is of his mere Grace; And, this, sometimes
He does vouchsafe ere men repent their Crimes.
Such mercies none can sound, much less express;
For they are infinitely fathomless.
And if they work not, in a timely day,
GOD's will be done, is all, that I dare pray.
The Authors Epitaph.
Composed by himself, upon a Common fame Of his being dead and buried. It has
a short Preface prefixed, and an Epilogue added after it, for a Copartment to
set it off.

The Preface.
RUmors of things that shall be, are begun
Sometimes, before they actually are done,
That, we thereby forewarned, may prepare
To entertain them, when in Act they are;
And, four times, at the least, (though yet I am
Surviving it) my death has been by Fame
Divulged so, that some, no credit give
To those men who affirm that I yet live.
At this time also, a Report does go
That, I was lately dead and buried too:
Perhaps, not without being fore-design'd
That I, in prison might be hunger-pin'd:
For, having nothing left, that was mine own,
Or ought allowed, save what should be bestown,
By their compassion, who have me preserved
From being in my close Confinement starved,
I might have died indeed through want of bread,
Had all my Friends believed me to be dead.
It may have likewise, an Ill Consequent,
If, I shall be releast; which, to prevent
I have composed this following Epitaph,
Thus Prefaced, with this short Paragraph,
And, sent it to my Friends, that, they may know
I live, and live in hope, that what I owe
To them, repaid (in life or death) shall be,
By GOD, although, not probably by me.
That, also, what this Epitaph expresses
May mind me of my duty, till life cease;
And, be by others, with some profit read,
Both whilst, that I am living, and when dead.
The Epitaph.
By way of Epitaph, thus sed
George Whither, when Fame voic'd him dead.
IF, I did escape the dooms of those,
Whose heads and limbs, fed Rats and Crows,
(And, was not thrown into the fire
Or water, when breath did exspire)
Then, here, (or somewhere else) my Bones,
Lie raked up, with Earth and Stones.
Their burial place, you shall do well
To learn from those men who can tell,
And in what mode interred they were;
For, I do neither know nor care,
Or, what was either sung, or said,
By others, when I there was laid;
Nor any whit, suspicious am
That, they shall be exposed to shame
Nor fear I troubling of their rest,
By those who living men molest,
Because, how e're the world shall please
To use them, they shall be at ease,
When that, which her despite intends
To me, shall ceaze on her own friends
As it befell to some, of late,
If that be true, which fame does prate.
My Life was nor too long, nor short,
Nor, without Good and Ill Report;
And, profited, as many ways
I was by Scandals, as by praise.
Great foes I had, and very many,
Friends too, a few, as kind as any
And, seldom felt their earthly hell,
Who love, and are not loved as well:
For, that, whereof they had sharp sense,
I knew, but, by intelligence.
A Wife I had, as fit for me
As any one a live could be;
Yea, as if, GOD, out of each other
Had made us, to be joined together.
And, whilst she lives, what ere is sed
Of my Death, I am but half dead.
Beside the Issue of my Brain,
I had six children, whereof twain
Did live, when we divided were,
And, I, alive was buried here.
When, Portious, I had none to give
God gave them (as I, did believe
He would) a means, whereby to live:
Which is here mentioned, to this end,
That others, may on him depend.
I prized no Honors, bought or sold,
Nor wished for youth, when I was old,
But, what each Age, Place, and Degree,
Might best become, best pleased me.
I coveted nor Ease, nor Wealth
(No, not enjoyment of my health)
Ought further, then it had relation
To GODs praise; and my Souls Salvation.
When I seemed rich, I wanted more
Then e're I did when deemed poor;
And, when in Body, most confind,
Enjoyed most freedom in my mind.
I was not Factious or Seditious,
Though thereof, many were Suspicious,
Because, I humor'd not the times,
In Follies, and destructive crimes.
In things, that Good or Evil were,
I had abundantly my share;
And, never wished to change my Lot
For what another man had got,
Or, that, in any time or place,
My Birth had been, save where it was
So wise I was not to be mad
Though much oppressed; or, to be sad
When my Relations did conceive
I had exceeding Cause to grieve:
For, GOD, in season, still supplide
Those needful things the world denide,
Disposing every thing, so well
To my content, what ere befell,
That, thankful praise to him was due;
And, will be, for what shall ensue.
I sold not Honesty, to buy
A formal Garb of Sanctity;
Nor to hate any was inclined,
Because, they were not of my mind;
Nor feared to publish truths in season,
Though termed Heresy or Treason,
But, spoke, what I conceived might tend
To benefit both foe and friend;
And, if in Love, they seemed sincere,
With their Infirmities, could bear.
I practiced what I did believe,
And pinned upon no man's sleeve,
My Faith or Conscience; for, there is none
Judgd, by what other men have done.
My sins were great, and numerous grown;
My Righteousness, was not mine own,
Yet, more prevailed by Grace divine,
Then if it had been wholly mine.
I loved all men, feared none
Except my self, and GOD alone;
And, when I knew him, did not make
Esteem of ought, but for his sake.
On him, in life time I depended,
By Death are all my troubles ended,
And, I shall live again, even here,
When my Redeemer, does appear,
Which (by what I have seen and heard)
I know, will not be long deferred;
Nor that Reign, here on Earth, among
His Saints, which they have looked for long.
But, that, which we shall then behold,
May better be believed then told;
Because, we may presume as well
To put the Sea into a shell,
As to demonstrate, unto men*
Of flesh and blood, what will be then.
Nor often, nor much desire had I,
Long time to live, or soon to die;
But, did the work I had to do,
As I enabled was thereto;
Then, whether it seemed Good or Ill,
Left that, and all things, to Gods will;
And, when this mind is not in me,
That, I am dead, assured be.
Do Reader, what I have well done;
What I have erred in, learn to shun;
And, when I must no more appear,
Let this, be thy Remembrancer.
The Epilogue.
THis, I perceive will take up too much Room,
Within a Church, or, on a Chapel Tomb;
And, peradventure, need a larger Stone
Then my estate will buy to write it on:
I Will therefore, let it wander on betwixt
The two Poles, till it finds where to be fixed:
For, though it seems brought forth before the time,
It may, whilst it continues in this Clime,
Some way advantage me, by bringing that
Into my mind, which I might else forget,
That, Whilst I live, I might conform thereto
So far forth, as I am obliged to do.
Moreover, I shall know, (when this is read)
What will be said of me when I am dead;
Which, that man cannot hear, who shall not have
An Epitaph, till he is in his Grave.
Some part thereof, may likewise useful seem
To others, who my words, now disesteem:
For, through the spacious earth, I know not ought,
That is, or may be said* or done, or thought,
But, has a tendance, if we heed it will,
Either to what is good or what is ill:
A Single hair, or fluttring of a Bird,
May providentially, sometimes afford
Hints, or precautions, to incline us, to
What we ought to Observe, believe, or do.
This, also will be, as it were, to some
A Messenger, who from the dead is come,
To Preach what is agreeable to Reason,
(Although it be a Preachment out of season)
But, now, both dead and living Preachers too,
Are slighted, whatsoever they say or do.
And, if such Predicants found no regard,
Where Moses and the Prophets were not heard,
What, probably, from those can be expected
Who Christ and his Apostles, have neglected?
Yet, from dead Letters, and from men deceast
There comes (from what in lifetime they expressed)
A voice sometimes, to which men will incline,
A willing ear; and so, there will from mine.
A Petitionary Meditation on the behalf of F. S. The Authors much Honored and
Charitable, Friend then visited by a Languishing Sickness.
In my contemplatings, VERSE, is to me
What DAVID's Harp, to him, was wont to be;
And, (on occasions offered) unto GOD)
I, often, make Addresses, in this mode.
LORD, thou did raise me friends, when few or none
I had, whom I could much depend upon;
And, none of those, had they not first been thine,
Could possibly have been a Friend of mine,
In such a manner, or at such a time
As when thy kindness did appear in them:
For, such Respectiveness, to men that are
In my case is at this time, very rare.
Thereby, they worthily therefore, are grown
More precious for thy sake, then for their own;
And, me to them it binds, in Bonds more strong,
Then if their frindship, from themselves had sprung.
My GOD, to thee, for one of those by whom
Thou have refreshed me I now am come
To offer what my poverty affords;
Which (though it be no more then hearty words)
Be pleased to accept, for those proceeds,
That were extended unto me in deeds;
And, thereunto, vouchsafe thou to impute
That vigor, which I cannot contribute;
Since, there is nothing in my best oblation*
Which of it self, can merit acceptance.
On his behalf, whom thou to me have given,
I, here on earth, Petition thee in heaven,
Not for our own deserts, but for his sake,
Who did for all mankind atonement make)
That (if it shall be pleasing unto thee)
His crazed health may now renewed be,
And, he continue by thy preservation,
A faithful servant to this generation,
Till he those works has finished altogether,
For which thou principally sentst him hither;
And, till they who yet want him, less may miss
His passage from them, to eternal Bliss:
For, Life, and all that therewith is bestown,
He had, as well for their sakes, as his own.
Thy people thought themselves obliged to plead
To Christ for him, who for them, had but made
A Synagogue: Elias thou did hear
For, her, by whom, refreshed his bowels were:
And, thou have promised an easy bed,
To them, by whom the hungry soul is fed;
Whereby I am encouraged, and inclined,
To pray for him; who has to me been kind,
With hope, it shall some good product beget
Both to thy glory, and his benefit.
For, thou have to the prayers of the poor,
An ear as open, now, as heretofore,
And grantst the humble suits of faithful men,
As Well, as of thy greatest Prophets, then.
To thee, I dare not absolutely pray
For ought, belonging to the present day,
Save what that pattern warrants, which has taught
To whom, for what, and how to pray we ought.
When therefore LORD, my frailty shall incline
My will, to what repugnant is to thine,
(Though I should ask it) let it be denied,
And, wants, according to thy will supplied.
The objects, and the subjects, of my prayers
Are positively, nor hopes fears, or dispaires,
Or pains, or pleasures; neither joy nor grief;
No nor a temporary Death or Life,
(Though they concern my self) except they fall
Within the verge of that Conditional
With which thou bound'st them: For enough there is
Besides that, grantable, unless amiss
We ask it. And soon'st, thou will that dispense,
When Faith assaults thee with most violence.
Such things as thou have promised, we may crave;
Such things in their best season, we shall have,
Though they are often deferred, till we know better
How, by their use, to make the blessings greater:
Such things, I dare to ask, and persevere
In asking them, until vouchsafd they are;
And, such things, i will now beg of thee, for him
Whose cause I plead: LORD, therefore grant thou them
Confirm him in that Love, whence all things had
Their Beings, when created things were made;
And, which at last, will knit up all in one
That was created, when the world begun.
Contentment give him, with what change soere
Thou shall be pleased to exercise him here.
Preserve him in the saving faith of CHRIST,
Which will secure the blessed interest
That, he to all men offers; and to none
Denies, who, to lay fast hold thereon
Not wilfully, and finally neglects,
Thou having cured his natural defects.
Grant him true self-denial: him befriend,
With constant perseverance to the end
Of all his trials: Every sin forgive
Committed in the flesh, whilst he shall live.
Enable him, whilst he has time and place,
To make such an improvement of thy grace
On him conferred, that, as day by day,
Sin sprouts up, it may rooted be away.
In all, whereby the world, the flesh, or Devil
May him assault, deliver him from evil,
And all distemperatures, that may begin
Either from things without him, or within.
Let these Petitions, for his Consolation
Be sanctified by CHRIST's Mediation,
And lie still spread before thee, whilst in life,
My Friend is sensible of pains and grief.
So far forth also, as that, which by me
Is prayed for now, shall with thy will agree,
Let him with faith, in our Redeemers name
Both for himself and me, desire the same.
And (to conclude this prayer) let all those
By whom, thou have been pleased to dispose*
Thy manyfold Love Tokens unto me,
In all, here prayed for, partakers be
At every need; till thou translatst us thither
Where, all thine, shall with thee, live still together.
Amen.
ERRATA.
PAge 3 l. 29. read persecute. p. 8. l 31. r. persever. p. 13. l. 15. r. war
for fear p. 17. l. 1. r. our own p. 23. l. 1. r. so to p. 24. l. 4. r. their
Fallacies p. 25. l. 13. r. harvest time, and p. 40. l. 18. God, praise p. 46.
l. 5. r. through, and for Reb. r. Rebels p. 50 l. 10. r. the, for there. p. 56.
l. 13. thee for the p. 58. l. 30. r. on for in.

FINIS.

