A DESCRIPION OF THE GRAND SIGNOUR'S SERAGLIO, OR TVRKISH EMPERORS COURT.

By JOHN GREAVES, late Professor of Astronomy in the University of Oxford.

LONDON, Printed for Jo. Ridley, at the Castle in Fleet street by Ram-Alley,
1653.

To his Honored, and truly Noble Friend, George Took, Esquire, of Popes in the
County of Hartford.
SIR,
J D^t not have presumed to a Friend of so much honor, and worth, to present
this description of the Turkish Emperors Court; but that finding it to be a
piece of that exactness, as the like is not extant in any other language, and
the argument to be so noble (treating of the greatest Monarchy upon earth;
whose Magnificence has much resemblance with that of the Persians, in the
Scriptures) I thought it would not be unacceptable, if under your name it were
communicated to the world. In which I assume nothing to my self, as Author of
the discourse, nor much as Polisher of it; but only an humble desire of
publicly expressing my obligations to You. It was freely presented to me at
Constantinople, and with the same freeness I recommend it to the Reader, having
not altered anything in the substance, and but a little in the dress, and
elocution. The name of the Author being then unknown, upon inquiry I find it
since to be the work of Mr. Robert Withers; who, by the assistance of the
English Ambassador, procuring admittance into the Seraglio (a favor unusual)
and by continuance many years in those parts, had time, and opportunity, to
persect his observations. To him therefore are solely due the thanks of the
labor, and from his virtuous example all generous, and noble spirits will
propose, in their travels abroad, a solid inquisition of truth, and knowledge;
not vain garbes, and modes, and disguised fashions, the only objects, and
idols, of fantastic Travelers. To me it is sufficient that I have faithfully
discharged my trust, in publishing since the Authors death, the fruits of his
observations; and in communicating to the Reader the pleasure, and
satisfaction, of perusing a relation full of truth, and exactness: which, in
many particulars, upon experience he is able to attest, who is, Sir,

Your most obliged friend, and humble servant,

The Contents of the Chapters.
Chap. 1. The description of the Place, partitions, and manifold conveniences
of the Seraglio. page 1. Chap. 2. Of the Divan days, judges, sessions,
judicature, diet, and giving an account to the King of whatsoever has passed.
page 17. Chap. 3. Of the audience, and entertainment given to Ambassadors. page
28. Chap. 4. Of the persons that live in the Seraglio, and chiefly of the women
and virgins. p. 34. Chap. 5. Of the Ajamoglans, how taken, distributed, and
employed. p. 56. Chap. 6. Of the Kings Itchoglans, their severe diseipline, and
education in the four subordinate schools, and of their after advancements. p.
67. Chap. 7. Of inferior persons, and Buffons, Mutes, Musicians, etc. of White
Eunuchs, and of the Grand Officers of the Seraglio. p. 87. Chap. 8. Of the
Black Eunuchs, and Black-moor girls, and women, of the Physicians, andof the
Kings children. p. 100. Chap. 9. Of the Cooks, kitchins, diet of the King, and
Queen, and of their other manner of service, of the scullery, and provision of
the Seraglio. p. 108. Chap. 10. Of Apparel, bedding, sickness, hospitals,
inheritance, Kings expenses, recreations, receiving of petitions, of the Kings
Stables, and Byram solemnities. p. 128. Chap. 11. Of the old Seraglio, and
women's lives therein, of their marriages and children, slaveselling, and
witnesses. p. 147. Chap. 12. Of their religion, opinions, Clergymen, times,
places, and rites sacred, and of the women's small devotion. p. 158.
THE GRAND SIGNORS SERAGLIO.
CHAP. I.
A Description of the place, partitions, and manifold conveniences of the
Seraglio.

THe The Turkish word is Sarai, borrowed from the Persian word Seraw, which
signifies a house.
Seraglio, wherein the Grand Signor resideth with his Court, is in that place
where Byzantium stood, upon a point of the Continent, which looks toward the
That is into the Posphorus which comes from the Mouth of the Black sea to the
point of the Seraglio.
mouth of the Black Sea: and is in form triangular, two sides whereof are
compassed with the Thracian Bosphorus, and the third joyneth to the rest of the
City Constantinople. It is enclosed with a very high, and strong wall, upon
which there are diverse watch-towers, and is by computation about three Italian
miles in The compass
compass.

It has many gates, some of which open toward the seaside, and the rest into
The Gates.
the City; but the chiefest gate (which indeed is a very stately one) is one of
those toward the City; and by it they go in and out daily; the others being
kept shut, till such times as the king, or some of the principal officers of
the Seraglio cause any of them to be opened, either for their pleasure to sit
by the sea side (where they have a fair prospect, and may behold the ships
sailing to and fro) or for any other occasion. If any of the other land-gates
be opened, it is either when the king sends privately to put some great man
to death, or for the execution of some such secret action; but they are all
locked fast in the night again.

The aforesaid chief, and common Gate, is in the day time guarded by a Chief
Gate.
Company of Porters.
Capoochees, which change their watch by turns, and in the night likewise by
others of the same rank; all which Capoochees are under the Command of a Head
of the Porters: an office of good credit.
Capoochee Bashaw, which Capoochee Bashaws (being six in number) are bound
every week one of them to lie within the Seraglio, for the security, and
safeguard of the same. And without the Gate, about ten or twelve paces off,
there stands a little house made of boards upon wheels, in which every night a
Watch house upon wheels.
Company of Janissaries do watch, who upon any occasion are ready to awake those
within, and to give them notice of whatsoever sudden accident may happen
without.

In the night also, it is well guarded by the sea side; for in the watch-towers
which are upon the wall, there be diverse Of them you shall read more at large
hereafter.
Agiam-oglan's, which are to watch, and see that none come near: and lest any
shipping should dare to attempt some mischief, they have Ordinance ready
charged, and the Gunners lying close by them.

In this Seraglio there are many stately rooms suited to the seasons of the
year; the greatest part whereof are built upon plain ground; some upon the
hills which are there: and some also upon the sea side, which are called
Kiosks, that is rooms of fair prospect, or (as we term Kiosks.
them) banqueting houses, into which the king sometimes goes alone, but most
commonly with his Concubines for his recreation.

Amongst the aforesaid rooms, is the Chamber into which the Grand Signor
Chamber of Audience.
repaireth, when he is to give Audience to Ambassadors, or to the Bashawes, on
the days of Public Divan: or to those who being to depart upon any weighty
service, or employment, are to take their leaves of him; as also to such who
(after the limited time of their government abroad is expired) do return to
Constantinople, to give account to his Majesty of their carriage in their
several places. This room stands in a little Court curiously adorned with many
very delicate fountains; and has within it a A place raised from the floor
about a foot to sit upon.
Sofa spread with very sumptuous Carpets of gold, and of Crimson velvet
embriodered with costly pearls; upon which the Grand Signor sits: and about
the Chamber instead of Hangings, the walls are covered with very fine white
stones, which having diverse sorts of leaves and flowers artificially wrought,
and baked upon them, do make a glorious show. There is also a little room
adjoining unto it, the whole inside whereof is covered with silver plate
hatched with gold, and the floor is spread with very rich Persian carpets of
silk and gold.

There are belonging to the said rooms and lodgings of the King, very fair
gardens of all sorts of flowers, and fruits that Gardens.
are to be found in those parts; with many very pleasant walks, enclosed with
high Cypresse-trees on each side; and Cypress walks.
marble fountains in such abundance, that almost every walk has two or three
of them; such great delight does the Grand-Signor, and all Turks in general
take in them. Nor indeed does a Turk at any The pleasure that a Turk takes in a
garden.
time show himself to be so truly pleased, and satisfied in his senses, as he
does in the summer time, when he is in a pleasant garden. For, he is no sooner
come into it (if it be his own, or where he thinks he may be bold) but he puts
off his uppermost Coat, and lays it aside, and upon that his Turbant, then
turns up his sleeves, and unbuttoneth himself, turning his breast to the wind
if there be any; if not, he fans himself, or his servant does it for him.
Again, sometimes standing upon an high bank, to take the fresh air, holding his
arms abroad (as a Cormorant sitting upon a rock does his wings in sunshine
after a storm) courting the weather, and sweet air, calling it his soul, his
life, and his delight; ever and anon showing some notable signs of
contentment: nor shall the garden (during his pleasant distraction) be termed
other then Paradise: with whose flowers he stuffs his bosom, and decks his
Turbant, shaking his head at their sweet savors; and sometimes singing a song
to some pretty flower, by whose name peradventure his Mistress is called; and
uttering words of as great joy, as if at that instant she her self were there
present. And one bit of meat in a garden shall do him more good (in his
opinion) then the best fare that may be else where.

Besides the aforesaid rooms (which are very many, and serve only for the kings
Women's lodging.
own person) there is the women's lodging, (which is in a manner like a Nunnery)
wherein the Queen, the other Sultana, a Lady, the feminine gender to ^ultan.
Sultana's, and all the kings women and slaves do dwell. And it has within it
all the commodity that may be, of beds, chambers, Dining rooms, Bathes or
hot-houses; it must be pronounced Banios.
Bagno's, and all other kinds of building necessary for the use, and service
of the women, which dwell therein.

There are likewise diverse rooms, and lodgings built apart from all those
aforesaid, Rooms for Officers.
which serve both for the principal officers, and those of mean degree, and
also for the basest sort; and are so well furnished, that not any want can be
discerned of ought that may be thought requisite, and convenient for them.

Amongst which there are two large The privy Treasury or Wardrope.
buildings, the one the Hazineh, or private Treasury, and the other the kings
Wardrope. These are two very handsome buildings, and secure by reason of the
thickness of their walls, and strength of their iron windows: they have each
of them an iron door, kept shut continually, and that of the Hazineh sealed
with the Door seal
kings seal.

In the said Seraglio there are rooms for Prayer, Baths, Schools, Butteries
Rooms for many oath uses.
Kitchins, Distilling rooms, places to swim in, places to run horses in, places
for wrestling, butts to shoot at: and to conclude, all the commodity that may
be had in a princes Palace, for things of that nature.

At the first entrance into the Seraglio, First Gate.
there is a very large and stately Gate, in the Porch whereof, there is always
a Porch and guard.
guard of about fifty men with their weapons by them, as pieces, bows, and
swords. Having passed this gate (through which the Bashawes, and other great
men may pass on horseback) there is a very spacious Court almost a quarter of
an Italian Great Court.
mile in length, and very nigh as much in breadth; and on the left hand in the
Court near unto the Gate, there is a place to shelter the people and horses in
rainie weather: on the right hand there is an Hospital for such as fall sick
Hospital with officers.
in the Seraglio, in which there are all things necessary. It is kept by an
Eunuch, who has many servants under him to attend upon the diseased. Again, on
the left hand there is a very large place in which they keep their Timber,
^tore-house.
and Carts, and such like things, to have them near at hand for the use, and
service of the Seraglio; over the which there is a great Hall, where are hanged
up many weapons of Antiquity, as Cimitars, Javelins, Bows, Head-pieces,
Gauntlets, etc. which they keep to lend the Soldiers, and others, for to
accompany the Grand Signor, or the The Grand Signors Deputy.
Chief Vizir, when they make any solemn entry into the City of Constantinople.

Having passed through the aforesaid Court, there is a second Gate (at which
Second gate.
the Bashawes alight) somewhat less then the former, but more neat, and
costly; under which there is also a stately Porch, where there is likewise a
Porch and Guard.
Guard of Capoochees provided with weapons, as they at the first Gate are;
thence there is another Court lesser Second court.
then the former, but far more beautiful and pleasant, by reason of the
delicate fountains, and rows of Cypress trees, and the green grasse-plots in
which the Roe Deer.
Gazels do feed, and bring forth young: but in this Court (the Grand Signor
only excepted) every one must go on foot. On both sides of the said Gate there
is an open Gallery underset with pillars, without which the Messengers,
Pursivants, or Sumners.
Chiaushes, the The Turkish word is Yeng-itheree, of Yengee new in, for that
they are the latest order of soldiers.
Janissaries, and the The word is Espawhee, which in the Persian signifies a
horseman.
Spahees, do use to stand in their several ranks, very well apparelled, at
such times as there is a great Court of Justice. Nine Kitchins with their
Larders.
Divan held, for the coming of any Ambassador to kiss the Grand Signors hand.

In the said Court on the right hand are all the Kitchins, being in number
nine; all which have their several offices, and Larders belonging unto them.

The first and greatest is the Kings.
The second the Queens.
The third the Sultana's.
The fourth the Chief Chamberlen.
Capee Agha's.
The fifth for the Divan.
The sixth for the Aga signifies Master.
Agha's, the Kings Gentlemen.

The seventh for the meaner sort of Servants.

The eighth for the Women.

The ninth for the under Officers of the Divan, and such as attend there to do
what belongs unto them, in their several places.

On the left side of the Court is the Kings stable, of about thirty, or thirty
Kings stable.
five very gallant horses, which his Majesty keeps for his exercise, when he
pleases to run, or sport with his Gentlemen the Agha's in the Seraglio. Over
which stable there is a row of rooms, wherein is kept all the furniture of the
horses, the which (I having seen both there, and abroad, at such times as they
have been used) I can affirm to be of extraordinary value. For the Bridles,
Horses furniture.
Pectorals, Cruppers, Saddle-clothes, the pommels of the Saddles, and Stirrups,
are set so thick with jewels of diverse sorts, that the beholders are amazed,
they do so far exceed all imagination.

Near adjoining to the said stable, are certain buildings for the service of
the Officers of the Divan, and having passed two thirds of this Court on the
same side, there is the room wherein the Divan Divan room.
is kept: unto this joyneth upon one side the Hazineh, called the outward
Outward Hazineh, or treasury.
Hazineh, which (the Divan being ended) is sealed with the Chief Vizirs Seal.
Even with the room where the Divan is kept (but somewhat behind it, toward
the left hand) is the Gate Gallery. Queens gate and guard of black Eunuchs.
which leads into the women's lodgings, called the Queens Gate, kept and
guarded by a Company of Black Eunuchs.

The aforesaid second Court ends at a third Gate, termed the Kings Gate,
which leads into the rooms or lodgings Third (or kings) gate.
kept apart for himself, and such Gentlemen, as are to attend upon him
continually: neither may any one enter therein, but by absolute leave from the
king (speaking of men of great quality): Who may enter.
but such as are belonging to the Buttry, or Kitchen, and Physicians, Caters,
and Sewers, may go in and out with leave only from the Capee Aga chief
Chamberlain.
Capee Agha: who is the chief Chamberlain of the Seraglio, and to him is
committed the keeping of this Gate, and he is always at hand (by reason his
lodging is near) with a Company of white Eunuchs about him White Eunuchs.
like himself; so that, what is reported of things within this Gate, is for the
most part by relation. For either one may not see them, or if he do see them,
it must be when the king is absent; and he must be brought in by some man of
quality, and Command, by one of the gates at the Sea side; the which also
cannot be obtained but with great difficulty, and some charge too, for a
gratification to the guide; they having not only great regard and respect to
their kings person, but also to his rooms in his absence.

Having passed the third Gate (the Audience Chamber.
which has also a very fair porch) immediately is seen the aforesaid room
appointed for public Audience. And there Another fair Court.
within that Gate also is another fair Court, paved with very fine marble,
wrought with Mosaical work: wherein are many delicate Fountains, and sumptuous
buildings on all sides, in which commonly the king uses to eat, and pass the
time in some recreation.

There is also a row of Summer rooms Summer rooms.
built upon the top of a little hill, which looks toward the Sea side, so well
contrived with Halls and Chambers, and so pleasantly seated, and richly
furnished, that it may well be the habitation of so great a Prince. Amongst
which there is A Hall.
a Hall opening toward the East, underset with very fair pillars; which Hall
looks into an artificial apiece Lake A Lake.
(which they call Hawoz) proceeding from about thirty Fountains which are built
upon a kind of Tarrase, of very fine Marble, incompassing the said Lake, the
water running from the Fountains above, down into the Lake: and from the Lake
through diverse gutters into Gardens. Two men may walk a breast upon the
Tarrase; where they hear the continual, and sweet harmony which the fountains
make with leaden pipes, in so much that it is a most delightful place. And in
the Lake there is a little boat, the which (as I was informed) the Grand Signor
does oftentimes go A little boat in the lake.
into with his Dumb men and jesters.
Mutes, and Buffones, to make them row up and down, and to sport with them,
making them leap into the water; and many times, as he walks along with them
above upon the sides of the Lake, he throws them down into it, and plunges
them over head and ears.

Near unto the said Hall, is his Majesty's Bedchamber, the walls whereof Grand
Signors bedchamber desc^bed.
are covered with stones of the finest China metal, spotted with flowers of
diverse colors, which make an excellent show. The Hangings before the doors.
Anteporta's are Cloth of gold of Bursia, and their Borders of Crimson Velvet
embroydered with gold and pearls. The posts of the Bedstead are of silver,
hollow, and in stead of knobs on the tops of them, there are set Lions made of
Crystal: The Canopie Lions of Chystal.
over it is of Cloth of Gold, and so are the bolsters, and the mattresses. The
floor of this Chamber (as of the other rooms) and the Sofaes, are spread with
very costly Persian Carpets of silk and gold: and the Pallets to sit on, with
the cushens to lean upon, are of very rich cloth of gold.

There is hanging in the midst of the aforesaid Hall a very great Lantern, the
A Lantern.
form whereof is round, and the bars of silver guilt, and set very thick with
Rubies, Emraulds, and Turkesses: the panes are of fine Crystal. There is
likewise a Basen and Ewer of massive gold, set Basin and Ewer of gold.
with Rubies and Turkesses, which beautify the room.

Behind the Hall there is a place to Shooting place.
shoot in, where there are laid up many Bows and arrows; and there are to be
seen such strange passages made with arrows, by the Kings predecessors, and by
the king himself, through Brass and Iron, that it seems almost impossible to
be done by the arm of man.

The Room which is called the Public Public Divan described.
Divan has been built of late years. It is apiece, and about eight or
nine paces every way from side to side. It has behind it another room for the
service thereof, and one also at the coming in to the Divan at the right hand,
divided only by a wooden rail: with many other rooms somewhat distant from
it, which serve for the expedition of sundry businesses. This Divan I call
public, because any kind of person whatsoever (as well stranger, as native)
publicly, and indifferently may have free access unto it, to require Justice,
to procure Grants, and to end their Causes, and Controversies: of what nature,
condition, or import soever they be, without let, or contradiction.

Thus have I made a brief description of some of the rooms, and buildings, of
this Seraglio, according to the notice I took of them. But hitherto I have
omitted to show, how that a great part of the best of them, have been built
from time to time at the cost and charges of the Subjects. For there have been
diverse Bashawes, who, being in favor with the Bashawes build rooms in the
Kings Seraglio.
Grand Signor, obtained leave at severa^ times to add unto the Seraglio a room
or two, for a memorial of some notable good service, which they had done their
Prince. In the building of which, they have spared no cost, although for the
most part the rooms are very little: but this their often patching of new rooms
with old, has caused a great confusednesse in the whole fabric, they having
not observed any uniformity at all in their manner of building.

CHAP. II.
Of the Divan days, Judges, Session, Judicature, Diet, and giving an account
to the King of what has passed.

THe Divan days are four every Four Divan days.
week: viz. Saturday, Sunday, Monday, and Tuesday: Upon which days the Chief
Vizir.
Vizir azem, with all the rest of the Vizirs, the two The true word is
Kazeelasker, which signifies the judge of an Army.
Cadileschers, of Graecia and Natolia (which are the chief over all the Cadees
of those two Provinces); the three Defterdars, the Treasurers. So called of the
word Def^er, which signifies a bill or scroll. Reiskitawb.
Defterdars (whose charge is to gather in the Kings revenues, and likewise to
pay all his Soldiers, and others which have any pension due unto them); the
Reiskitawb (which is the Chancellor); the The word signifies a keeper of the
Mark. Secretaries and Clerks.
Nishawngee (that is he which signeth commandments, and letters, with the Grand
Signors mark); the Secretaries of all the Bashawes, and of other great men; a
great number of Clerks, which are always attending at the door of the Divan;
the Chiaush Bashaw (who all that Chief over all the Chiaushes.
while that he is in the Seraglio carries a silver staff in his hand;) and
many Chiaushes, who at the Vizirs command are Chiaushes.
ready to be dispatched, with such orders as shall be given them, by him, to
what place, or to whomsoever he pleases (For, they are those which are
employed in Ambassies, or in ordinary messages; to summon men to appear before
the Bench; to keep close Prisoners; and in fine, to perform all businesses of
that nature:) Upon those days, I say, all the aforesaid Magistrates and
Officers, from the highest to the lowest, are to be at the Diva^ by break of
day.

The Vizirs being come into the Divan, The manner of Sestion.
they sit down within at the further end thereof, with their faces toward the
door, upon a low bench which joyneth to the wall, every one in his place as he
is in degree; sitting all at the right hand of the Chief Vizir, (for with the
Laity the left is counted the upper hand, but with Lest, the upper hand with
the laity: but with the Clergy the right. Cadeleschers places.
the Clergy the right:) and on his left hand upon the same bench do sit the
two Cadiles^hers. First, he of Graecia, as being of the more noble and famous
Province; and then he of Natolia. And on the right side, at the coming in at
the door, do sit the three Defterdars, who have behind Defterdars places.
them (in the aforesaid room, which is divided with a wooden rail) all the said
Clerks, who sit upon the ground on mats, with paper and pens in their hand,
being Clerksplaces
ready to write whatsoever is commanded them. And on the other side, over
against the Defterdars, sits the Nishawngee with a pen in his hand, having his
assistants round about him. The Reiskitawb for the most part stands close by
the Vizir, Neeshawngees place. Reisketawbs place.
for he takes his advise in many occurrents. In the midst of the room do stand
all such as require Audience of the Bench.

Now they being all come together, and every man set in his own place; the
Petitioners forthwith begin their suits, one after another, (who have no need
of Attourneyes, though oftentimes they procure No need of Attorneyes.
the help of a Chiaush: for every one may speak for himself) referring
themselves to the judgment, and sentence of the Vizir Azem, who (if he The
power of the Vizir azem.
please) may end all. For the other Bashawes do not speak, but only hearken,
and attend till such time as he shall refer any thing to their abitrement, as
commonly he does. For he having once understood the substance only of a
business (to free himself from too much trouble) remits the deciding of it to
others: as for example, if it be appertaining to the civil Law, he then remits
it to Manner of deciding.
the Cadileschers: if it be of accounts, to the Defterdars; if of falsehood, (as
counterfeiting the kings mark, or such like) to the Nishawngee; if concerning
Merchants or merchandise (wherein there may be any great difficulty) to some one
of the other Bashawes which sit by him. So that after this manner he does
exceedingly ease himself of so great a toil and burden, which otherwise he
alone should be enforced to undergo; reserving only to himself what he thinks
to be of greatest import, and consequence; and the like course does the He
which governs in the chief Vizirs absence. Caim signifies firm, or resident,
and Mekam a place.
Caimekam take in his absence.

Thus do they spend the time until it be almost noon; at which hour (one of the
Sewers being appointed to be there present) the chief Vizir commands that
dinner be brought in; and immediately all the Common people depart. So, the
room being free, the tables are made Dinner rites.
ready after this manner; there is set upon a stool before the Vizir Azem, a
thin, Copper plate
round, copper plate, tinned over, about the bigness of the bottom of a
beer-barrel; at which himself, with one (or two at the most) of the other
Bashawes do eat; the like is prepared for the rest of the Vizirs, which do eat
together: and another for the Cadileschers: one for the Defterdars; and one
likewise for the Nishawngee. Having every one a Which they call Pestimaw
Napkin spread upon his knees to keep his garments clean, and a great quantity
of bread being laid ready round about the said copper plates, immediately the
meat is brought in, and set before them upon the plates in great dishes made
after a strange fashion; and still as they have eaten of one dish the Sewer
takes off that, and sets on another. Their diet is ordinarily, Mutton, Hens,
Pigeons, Diet.
Geese, Lamb, Chickens, Broth of Rise and pulse, dressed after diverse fashions;
and some Tarts, or such like at the last; for in a very short space they make
an end of their diner; that which remains of the said tables, the Officers of
the Divan do eat, but they have an addition allowed, Officers diet.
and brought them from their Kitchen. The Bashaws, and other great men^ have
drink brought unto them, (which is Drink.
Sherbet) in great Porcelain dishes: but the others do either not drink at all,
or if they do drink, it is fair water brought them from the next fountains. At
the same time when the Vizirs of the Bench, and others of the Divan are at
dinner; the under Officers, Waiters, and keepers, Under-osficers, underdiet.
do dine also; (for they must loose no time,) the which are not less
ordinarily then four or five hundred persons (including also such poor sharking
fellows, as slip into the company for a dinner) but their food is nothing but
bread, and pottage, which they call Churva, serving to fill their bellies,
though it be but of small nourishment.

Dinner being ended, the Chief Vizir spends some small time about general
Affairs; and taking Counsel together (if he pleases, and thinks it fit) with
the other Bashawes; at last he determines and resolves of all within himself,
and prepares to go in unto the King (it being the ordinary custom so to do, in
two of the four Divan days, viz. upon Sunday, and upon Tuesday;) to render an
account briefly unto his Majesty of all such businesses as he has dispatched.
And to this end Giving account to the king.
the Grand Signor (after he has dined also) repaireth unto his Chamber of
Audience, and being set down upon a Sofa, sends the Capee Agha (who has in
his hand a silver staff) to call first the Cadileschers, who immediately rise up
out By the Cadeeleschers.
of their places, and having bowed themselves to the Vizir Azem, they depart,
being accompanied with the said Capee Agha, and Chiush Bashaw, who go before
them with their silver staves in their hands; and so they go in unto the King
to give account, and make him acquainted, with what has passed concerning
their charge; which being done they are dismissed (for that day) and go
directly home to their own houses. Next after them are called the Defterdars:
who in By the Defterdars.
the same manner are brought unto the king, but the Chief Defterdar only is
permitted to speak; and having dispatched, they take leave and give place to
the Vizirs; who are called last of all, and go together in rank one after
another, And by the Vizirs.
the Chief Vizir being foremost, ushered along by the two aforesaid silver
staves: and being come before the presence of the Grand Signor, they stand all
on one side of the room with their hands before Reverence to the King.
them a cross, holding down their heads in token of reverence and humility;
and here none but the Chief Vizir speaks, and gives an account of what he
thinks fit: delivering his Memorials, or Petitions, one by one, the which the
king having read, the Vizir takes them, and having put them into a little
crimson Satin bag, he most humbly lays them down again before his Majesty
(who afterward causes his A commandment from the King, the word signifies a
kingly or royal Paper.
Hattee-humawyoon to be drawn for the performance of what the Arses, that is
petitions, did require;) if the Grand Signor demand no further of him (the
other Bashawes not having spoken one word all this while) they all depart, and
take horse at the second Their departure.
Gate; and being accompanied by diverse men of quality (who to insinuate into
their favors do wait upon them) besides a great company of their own people,
every one goes to his own house. The Chief Vizir for his greater grace and
honor, has commonly about an hundred Chiaushes on hors-back, who bring him to
his home. And so the Divan is ended for that day, it being about three hours
afternoon; but upon such days as they have no Audience of the King, they
dispatch sooner. And what has been said of the Vizir Azem, the same also is to
be understood of the Caimekam in his absence.

It is to be noted that sometimes also the Chief Captain or master of the
Janissaries.
Agha of the Janissaries, and the Admiral. Captain Bashawe.
Captain Bashawe, come to the Divan, when they are at home in Constantinople,
and have business to do there. But the Captain Bashawe only, does go in unto
the King (which also may not be but in Company of the other Bashawes) and his
business is to acquaint his Majesty with the estate, and affairs of the
Arsenal, and Armada. His place in the Divan His place.
is upon the same Bench, but yet he sits last, and lowest of all the
Bashawes; unless he be a Vizir (as it is often seen) and then he takes his
place either second, or third, or fourth, as he is in degree by election. But
the Agha of the Janissaries does not sit in Divan, Aga of the Janissaries place.
but sits under the open Gallery on the right hand within the second Gate.
And if at any time it shall so fall out, upon some extraordinary business, (as
it has sometimes been seen) that he be to go in unto the king; then he is
called first of all, and goes before either Defterdars, or Cadeeleschers: and
being come out from his Majesty, he sits down again in his place until the
Divan be ended: he is the last that departs of all the great men, and is
attended on by a great many Captains of the Janissaries.
Churbegees, and Janissaries unto his Seraglio, where he, and many of them do
live together

The Grand Signors Predecessors were always wont to come, and this man
sometimes comes privately by an upper way to a certain little window, which
looks into the Divan, right over the head of the Chief Vizir: and there
sits (with a Lattise before him, that he The Kings private and awful window.
may not be seen) to hear and see what is done in the Divan: and especially at
such times, when he is to give Audience to any Ambassador from a great Prince,
to see him eat, and hear him discourse with the Bashawes: and by this his
coming to that window, the Chief Vizir (who always stands in jeopardy of
losing his head upon the Grand Signors displeasure) is enforced to carry
himself very uprightly, and circumspectly, in the mannaging of affairs, whilst
he sits in Divan: though at other times his hands are open to bribery, and
carry businesses as he pleases.

CHAP. III.
Of the Audience, and entertainment given to Ambassadors.

WHen it falls out that an Ambassador from any great Prince is to kiss the
Grand Signors hand: it must be either upon a Sunday, or upon a Tuesday: (for
those are the days appointed Ambassadors Audience.
for his Highness to give Audience) to the end he may not be troubled at other
times. And then the Vizir commands that there be a great Divan, which is done
by calling together all the Grandees of the Port; all the Chiaushes, all the
These are horsemen, but of a higher rank then Spahees: the word signifies set
a part, or different.
Mutaferrakas, and a great number of Spahees and Janissaries; who are every one
of them commanded by their Captains to apparel themselves in the best manner
that they are able, and to go every one to his place in the second Court, and
there to stand in orderly ranks: making indeed a very goodly show, for they are
very well clothed, and are most of them of comely personage.

Thus the Divan being all in order, (and few, or no common businesses handled
for that day) the Vizir, sends the Chiaush Bashaw with many of his Chiaushes
on horseback to accompany the Ambassador: who being come to the Divan is set
face to face close before the chief Vizir, upon a stool covered Ambassador
entertained at the Divan
with Cloth of Gold. Having for a while complemented, and used some friendly
discourse together, the Bashaw commands that dinner be brought: the which is
done after the same manner as upon other Divan days (only the round plate on
which the meat is set is of silver; and the victuals are more delicate, and in
greater abundance.) And so the Ambassador, and the Vizir Azem, with one or two
of the other Bashawes do eat together. And for every such banquet at such times
the Grand Signor allows (besides the ordinary Divan diet) a thousand A
thousand crowns allowed for the entertainment.
Crowns to be spent: howbeit I dare say the Steward makes the one half to serve
the turn, and reserves the rest to himself.

They having dined, the Vizir entertaineth the Ambassador with some discourse,
until such time as the Ambassadors followers have dined also, (who I can upon
experience affirm are served after a very mean fashion) and then the
Ambassador, together with his own attendants retire themselves into a certain
place near the kings gate: where he must stay till such time as all the orders
of the Divan have had audience of the king, who being dismissed do all depart,
(the Bashawes excepted, who for the Grand Signors honor are to stay, and
attend in the room upon his Majesty.) But by the way I must not omit to
relate, how that the present, which the Ambassador brings along with him, is
carried (whilst he sits in the said retiring place) once about the second
Court in open sight of the people, (be it what it will be) and so in unto the
King.

Then the Ambassador is called by the Master of the ceremonies.
master of the ceremonies, by whom he is brought to the gate where the Cape^
Agha stands with a company of Eunuchs: thence the Capee Agha leads him to
the door of the room, where there do stand two Capoochee Bashawes, who take the
Ambassador, the one by His admission to the presence. His kissing the kings
band.
one arm, and the other by the other arm, and so lead him to kiss his
highness hand (which in truth is but his hanging sleeve; which he having done,
they lead him back after the same manner to the lower end of the room, where he
stands till such time as the said two Capoochee Bashawes have lead such of
the Ambassadors gentlemen, as are appointed to kiss the Kings hand also. This
done the The true word is Terjuman, which signifies an interpreter.
Druggaman declares the Ambassadors commission, to which the Grand Signor
makes no answer at all (disdaining to speak to a Christian) but only speaks a
word or two to the chief Vizir to license him; referring all proceedings to his
discretion. And so the Ambassador departs, doing obeisance to the His
departure.
King, with bowing down his head, but pulls not off his hat, or cap at all.

There is one particular, belonging to this ceremony, worth the observation,
which is this; that there is not any time, any person whatsoever, as well
Ambassador, as other, which is to kiss the Grand Signors hand, but he is
vested with a vest given him by the Grand Signor: and Vesting.
to this end, before the Ambassador goes in unto the king, the Uizir Azem
sends him so many vests, as are appointed by Canon, for himself and his
gentlemen; who put them on in the place where the Ambassador stays till the
King send for him to give him Audience. These vests are of diverse sorts; of
which there is one or two for the Ambassadors own person of cloth of gold of
Bursia; the other being of a low price, worth little or nothing.

But on the contrary, in lieu of those vests, there is not any Ambassador
(which is to go to the King for his first audience) or Bashawe (who at his
return from some employment abroad, is to kiss his hand) but they present to
him the full value of what the Canon requires: in Recompense
so much that the Grand Signor receives more then he gives, twenty fold.
Moreover the Bashawes (over and above the ordinary duty) do give him exceeding
rich presents: and oftentimes great sums of money too; that by all means they
may continue in his grace and favor.

Other Ambassadors, which come from petty Princes, or States, howbeit they are
vested also with vests given them by the Grand Signor: yet they come not to the
Divan in that pomp, neither are they feasted as the others are; but go
privately, carrying their present with them: howsoever they are also led in
unto the King after the aforesaid manner. It is to be noted, that all
Ambassadors from absolute Princes; as well ordinary, as extraordinary,
(excepting All Ambassadors but the Venetian at the Kings charge.
those from the State of Venice, to whom, from their first introduction it was
denied:) all, I say, lie at the charges of the Grand Signor. For from his own
store, they have allowed them, wheat, barley, pulse, wood, coals, hay, the
custom of their wine; and many other necessaries for their household expense,
and from the Defterdar so many Ten aspers make six pence.
aspars per diem as the Vizir shall think fit. Which provision, though now of
late it be very hard to be gotten; yet by great importunity and gifts, (without
which there is no good to be done) in the end they receive a great part of it;
but the officers will share with them do they what they can: such is their
baseness and slender account, of either honor, or honesty.

CHAP. IV.
Of the persons which live in the Seraglio; and chiefly of the Women, and
Uirgins.

HAving thus far made a description of the Seraglio it self, and the buildings
which are therein; with some particulars belonging unto it, according to that
which I have both seen, and heard from others, which are daily conversant
there: it follows that I now speak somewhat touching those which dwell in it,
and of their several qualities, and employments.

First then I say, that all they which are in the Seraglio, both men and women,
are the Grand Signors slaves (for so they style themselves) and so are all they
which One Lord, the rest slaves.
are subject to his Empire. For, besides that he is their Sovereign, they do
all acknowledge that whatsoever they do possess, or enjoy, proceeds merely
from his good will, and favor: and not only their estates, but their lives
also are at his dispose, not having respect either to the cause, or manner. So
that in my opinion, the attributes they give unto him are proper, and fitly
suting with the condition of such a Prince. For he is styled sometimes This
word signifies an expeller of princes: but some will have it to come of Pawd
and shooh, which is an expeller of injury, or injustice: but amongst the Turks
it is used for an Emperor; and they give the same title to the Emperor of
Germany, calling him Nem^s Pawdishawh.
Paudishawh, and sometimes This is a Persian word, and signifies a man of
blood, or one which causes blood; but used for King.
Hoonkeawr. In regard of sovereignty and justice, they may truly call him
Paudishawh; but in regard of his tyranny, Hoonkeawr: both which words they use
in the same sense as we do the word, king.

This Seraglio may rightly be termed the seminary or nursery of the best
subjects. For in it all they have their education, who afterward become the
principal officers, and subordinate rulers of the state, and affairs of the
whole Empire: as hereafter I shall show at large.

They which are within the third gate, Two thousand within the kings gate.
called the Kings gate, are about two thousand persons, men and women; whereof
the women (old and young one with another; what with the Kings concubines, old
women, and women-servants) may be about eleven or twelve 11 or 1200 (...).
hundred. Now, those which are shut up for their beauties, are all young
virgins Virgins.
taken and stolen from foreign Nations: who after they have been instructed
in good behavior, and can play upon instruments, sing, dance, and few
curiously; they are given to the Grand Signor as presents of great value: and
the number of these increases daily, as they are sent, and presented by the
Tartars, by the Bashawes, and other great men, to the King, and Queen. They do
likewise sometimes decrease, according as the Grand Signor shall think fit. For
upon diverse occasions, and accidents, he causes many of them to be turned out
of this Seraglio, and to be sent into the old Seraglio: which is also a very
goodly, and spacious place, of which hereafter I shall take occasion to make
mention. These Virgins immediately after their Virgins made Turks, and how.
coming into the Seraglio are made Turks; which is done by using this ceremony
only; to hold up their forefinger, and say these words; law illawheh illaw
Allaw, Muhammed resoul Allawh; that is, there is no God but God alone, and
Mahomet is the messenger of God. And according as they are in age and
disposition (being proved, and examined by an old woman called Kahiyah Cadun,
that is, as we say, the mother of the maids) Kahiyah Cadun, the mother of the
maids.
so they are placed in a room with the others of the same age, spirit, and
inclination, to live together.

Now in the Women's lodgings, they Their manner of life.
live as Nuns do in great Nunneries: for these virgins, have very large rooms
to live in, and their bed-chambers will Chambers.
hold almost a hundred of them a piece. They sleep upon Sofaes, which are built
long-wise on both sides of the room, and a large space left in the midst to go
to and fro about their business.

Their beds are very course, and hard Beds.
(for the Turks neither use featherbeds, nor corded bedsteads) made of flocks
of wool: and by every ten virgins there lies an old woman: and all the night
long there are many lamps burning, so that one may see plainly throughout the
whole room: which does both keep the young women from wantonness, and serve
upon any occasion which may happen in the night. Near unto the said bedchambers
they have baths for their use Baths.
at all times, with many fountains, out of which they are served with water:
and above their chambers there are diverse rooms, where they sit and sew: and
there ^ewing, and chests.
they keep their boxes, and chests, in which they lay up their apparel.

They feed by whole Camarada's, and are served, and waited upon by other women:
nor do they want any thing whatsoever that is necessary for them.

There are other places likewise for them, where they go to school, to learn
Schooling, and mistresses.
to speak, and read (if they will) the Turkish tongue, to sew also, and to play
on diverse instruments: and thus they spend the day with their mistresses, who
are all ancient women: some hours notwithstanding being allowed them for their
recreation, to walk in their gardens, Recreations.
and use such sports as they familiarly exercise themselves withal.

The king does not at all frequent, or see these Virgins, unless it be at that
instant, when they are first presented unto him; or else in case that he desire
one of them for his bedfellow, or to make him some pastime with music, and
other sports: wherefore, when he is prepared for a fresh mate, he gives notice
to the said Kahiya Cadun of his purpose; who immediately bestirs her self, like
a crafty baud, and chooses out such as she judges to be the most amiable, and
fairest of all; and having placed them in good order in a room, in two ranks,
like so many pictures, half on the one side, and half on the other; she
forthwith brings in the King, who walking four or The Kings coming to them.
five times in the midst of them, and having viewed them well, takes good
notice within himself of her that he best likes, but says nothing; only as he
goes out again, he throws a handkerchief into that virgins hand; by which
His choice.
token she knows that she is to lie with him that night: so she being
(questionless) exceeding joyful to become the object of so great a fortune, in
being chosen out from among so many to enjoy the society of an Emperor, has
all the art, that possibly may be, shown upon her by the Cadun, in attiring,
^ainting, and perfuming her; and at night she is brought Preparatives
to sleep with the Grand Signor in the women's lodgings, where there are
chambers set apart for that business only. And being in Bed together, they
have Bedchamber rites.
two great wax lights burning by them all night; one at the beds feet, and the
other by the door: besides there are appointed (by the Cadun) diverse old Black
moor women, to watch by turns that night in the chamber, by two at a time; one
of them to sit by the light at the beds feet, and the other by the door; and
when they will they change, and other two supply their rooms, without making
the least noise imaginable, so that the King is not any whit disturbed. Now in
the morning when his Highness rises (for he rises first) he changes all
Reward.
his apparel from top to toe, leaving those which he wore to her that he lay
withal, and all the money that was in his pockets, were it never so much; and
so departs to his own lodgings; from whence also he sends her immediately a
present of jewels, money, and vests, of great value, agreeable to the
satisfaction, and content, which he received from her that night. In the same
manner he deals with all such as he makes use of in that kind; but with some
he continues longer then with other some, and enlarges his bounty far more
toward some then others; according as his humor, and affection to them
increases, by their fulfilling his lustful desires.

And if it so fall out, that any one of them does conceive by him, and bring
forth his first begotten child; then she is called by the name of Sultana
Queen: and Sultana Queen.
if it be a son, she is confirmed, and established Queen by great feasts, and
solemnities; and forthwith has a dwelling assigned unto her apart, of many
stately rooms well furnished; and many servants to attend upon her.

The King likewise allows her a large Her allowance.
revenue, that she may give away, and spend at her pleasure, in whatsoever she
may have occasion; and all they of the Seraglio must, and do acknowledge her
for Queen, showing all the duty, and respect that may be, both to her self, and
to them that belong unto her.

The other women (howsoever they bring forth issue) are not called Queens; yet
they are called Sultana's, because Other Sultanas.
they have had carnal commerce with the King: and she only is called Queen,
which is the mother of the first begotten son, heir to the Empire; the which
Sultana's, being frequented by the King at his pleasure, have also this
prerogative; to be immediately removed from the common sort, and to live in
rooms apart, exceeding well served, and attended; and have no want, either of
money, or apparel, in conformity to their degree.

All these Sultana's do resort together very familiarly, when they please; but
not without great dissimulation, and inward malice; fearing lest the one should
be better beloved of the Grand Signor then the other; yet notwithstanding this
their jealousy, they (in outward show) use all kind of courtesy one toward
another.

Now if it happen that the first begotten Son of the Queen, heir to the Empire,
should die, and another of the Sultana's should have a second son, then, her
son being to succeed the deceased heir, she is immediately made Queen: and the
former shall remain a Sultana only, and be deprived of the aforesaid The Queen
^hanged.
revenue, and royalty: thus the title of Queen runs from one Sultana to
another by virtue of the sons succession.

In times past the Queen was wont to be wedded to the King; but now she passes
without the Kebin, that is, without an assignment of any jointure, or
celebrating the nuptial rites: which is nothing else, but in the presence of
the Nuptial rite^
Muftee, to give each of them their assent to matrimony, of which there is
Hogett made (that is, an authentical writing or testification) not only of the
consent of the two parties to be contracted; but also of the jointure which the
King is to make over unto her.

The reason why the Queens are not now (nor have been of late years) espoused,
is, not to dismember the Kings patrimony of five hundred thousand chicquins a
year. For Sultan Selim having allowed so much to the Empress, The Queen^
jointure.
his wife (to the end she might spend freely, and build Churches, and
Hospitals, so that by all means she might be honored, and esteemed) made a
decree, that all his Successors should do the like, if so be they purposed to
be married to their Queens. But now the said revenue being otherwise employed,
the Bashawes do endeavor, as much as in them lies, to keep the Grand Signor
from marrying. And so much the rather, because they would have none to rule but
the King alone; howsoever (married, or not married) the mother of the heir is
by every one called, and acknowledged for Queen; and presented with many rich
presents from all great personages: and has continually at her gate, a guard
of thirty, or forty Black Eunuchs, together with Guard of black Eunuchs.
the Kuzlar Agha signifies, master of the Virgins.
Kuzlar Agha their master; whom she commands and employeth in all her
occasions: and so do all the other Sultana's, which never stir out of the
Seraglio but in company of the King himself; who oftentimes carries either
all, or most of them abroad by water, to his other Seraglios of pleasure: and
in those ways, through which they pass to go to and fro from their Barges.
Canvas-way.
Kaiks, there is Canvas pitched up on both sides, and none may come near them
but black Eunuchs, till they be settled, and covered close in the room at the
stern of the Barge; and then go in the Barge-men; so that in fine, they are
never seen by any men, but by the Grand Signor only, and the Eunuchs.

The Kings daughters, sisters, and aunts, The Kings daughters, and sisters etc.
have their lodgings also in the same Seraglio; being royally served, and very
sumptuously apparelled, and live together by themselves, in continual
pleasures; until such time as, at their request, the King shall be pleased to
give them in marriage: and then they come forth of that Seraglio, and carry
each along with Portion chest.
them a chest, which the Grand Signor gives them, full of rich apparel,
jewels, and money; to the value of (at the least) thirty thousand pounds
sterling a chest; and that is (as we call it their portion. They carry likewise
along with them all that they have hid from time to time, unknown to any but to
themselves; amounting sometimes to a great matter, and stands them in good
stead all their whole life time. And if so be that they be in the Grand Signors
favor, and that he be disposed to deal royally with them; then they are
suffered to carry with them out of the Seraglio, such women slaves as they
please, (provided they do not exceed the number of twenty a piece) Slaves and
Eunuchs.
and such Eunuchs as they like best for their service.

These also being called Sultana's, reserve still, so long as they live, their
allowance of money, which they had whilst they lived in the Kings Seraglio,
some a thousand, and some a thousand five hundred afpars a day: the slaves also
and the Eunuchs do likewise enjoy their former pensions.

Their houses are furnished, both with household stuff, and other necessary
provision, from the Kings Treasury.
Hazineh, and Store.
Begleek, that they may live in state like Sultana's; so that indeed they live
far better in every respect without the Seraglio, then they did within it.

And if so be that a Bashawe, having married one of them, be not provided of a
house fit for her, then the King gives her one of his, (for he has many which
fall to him by the death of great persons) that her house may be suitable with
her greatness and quality.

Now, for the husbands part, he is on the contrary to make her a bill of
dowry, Bill of dowry.
ordinarily of at least a hundred thousand chicquins in money, besides vests,
jewels, brooches, and other ornaments, amounting to a great sum. For although
the fashion of the Sultana's habit be common, and nothing different from that
of the other women; yet the substance is far more rich, and costly; the which
redounds to the great charge, and loss of their husbands.

They being thus married, do not at all Privatenesse.
converse with men, more then they did when they lived in the Kings Seraglio
(except with their own husbands) but with women only; and that is commonly
Visitings^
when they go upon visits to see their old acquaintance in the Seraglio: but
because they themselves came forth from thence (as I said before) they may not
at their pleasure come in again, without leave from the Grand Signor.

These Sultana's the Bashaws wifes, are They are their husbands masters.
for the most part their husbands masters, insulting over them, and commanding
them as they please: they always wear at their girdle a A Dagger.
Hanjar, set with rich stones, in token of privilege and domination: and
esteem of their husbands, as of slaves, doing good or evil for them, as they
receive content, and satisfaction from them, or as they find them to be in
favor, and powerful with the King. And sometimes they put their husbands
away, and take others, but not without Divorce.
the Grand Signors leave; which divorce proves commonly to be the death, and
ruin of the poor rejected husbands, the King being apt to give way to the will,
and persuasion of the Sultana's: so it behooves them in any case to be very
obsequious to their wives.

Now, the other women which are not so fortunate as to be beloved of the king,
What becomes of the other women
must still live together, and diet with the rest of the young virgins; wasting
their youthful days amongst themselves in evil thoughts (for they are too
strictly looked unto, to offend in act) and when they are grown old, they serve
for mistresses, and overseers of the young ones, which are daily brought into the
Seraglio: but they hold it their best fortune (their former hopes of being
bed-fellows to an Emperor being now wholly frustrated) through some accident
to be sent forth from thence into the old Seraglio. For from the old Seraglio
they may be married (if the mistress of that place give her consent thereto)
and may take with them such money, as they through their frugality have saved,
and spared, of their former allowance in the Kings Seraglio, and such things as
have been given them from time to time, which may amount to a reasonable value.
For whilst they are in the Seraglio they get many things from the Sultana's,
who having formerly been companions with them, cannot but in some measure let
them be partakers of their good fortune; besides their current pay out of the
Kings Treasury of That is 9. d. or 12. d. a day. Manner of their pay.
fifteen or twenty aspars a day for the middle sort, and four or five for the
bafer sort; the which is paid at every three months end, without any deferring
or contradiction: in this manner also are the Sultana's paid, viz. quarterly;
having for their shares from That is between 3. and 4. li. ster. a day.
Clothes, and jewels:
a thousand to a thousand five hundred aspers a piece daily, besides as much
clothing as they will; and jewels in great abundance, given to them with the
Kings own hands.

The soldiers likewise, and all such (of what quality soever they be) as are
to receive pay from the Grand Signor are paid quarterly: and they call the
first quarters pay, Masar; the second Rejedg, the third, Reshen; and the fourth
and last, Lezez.

The women servants have, besides their The women servants allowance.
pay, two gowns of cloth a piece yearly, and a piece of fine linen for smocks
of twenty A Pike is (...) of a yard.
Pikes long, and a piece more fine for handkerchiefs of ten Pikes: and at the
Their great feast. Byram-gifts.
Byram one silk gown a piece, and somewhat else, according to the liberality of
the Grand Signor, who at that time above the rest has commonly a bountiful
hand toward the women; giving to the Sultana's, gowns with very rich furs,
earrings, brooches, bodkins, bracelets for their arms and legs, and such like,
set with stones of great worth; of all which the King has continually great
store, by reason of the unspeakable number of presents, which are given unto
him.

The Sultana's are likewise presented at such times by the Bashawes, and by
Sultanas presents.
the Bashaws wives (that by their means they may continue in grace and favor
with the Grand Signor) with most stately, and rich gifts, and with money also:
which indeed is more acceptable to them, then any other kind of present
whatsoever. For they being very covetous do hoord up, and spend but sparingly,
Frugality.
abandoning all manner of prodigality (in what may concern their own private
purses) but warily, and wittily provide against disasterous times, which may
come upon them unawares; and especially against the Kings death: for then
(excepting the Sultana Queen, who remains still in the Seraglio, as being
mother to the succeeding King) all the other poor desolate Ladies loose the
title of Sultana's, and are immediately sent to the old Seraglio: leaving
behind them their sons and daughters (if they have any living) in the Kings
Seraglio, there to be kept, and brought up, under the government, and care of
other women, appointed for that service. And in this case, finding themselves
to be wealthy, they may marry with men of reasonable good quality, according to
the measure of their portion, or estate, which they possess: and the good
will, and good report of the mistress of the old Seraglio on their behalf, is
none of the least furtherances, and helps in that business; but the Grand
Signors consent must be had thereto, notwithstanding: who will (for the most
part) not only be made fully acquainted with the condition of their husbands,
but also will know what jointure they will be content to make them, if in case
they should put them away, without their own consents, or otherwise leave them
widows. Thus by reason of their being turned out of the Kings Seraglio, it is
often seen, that though the daughter of the King be married to a Bashawe; yet
the mother of The daughter preferred before the mother.
that daughter (after the Kings decease) must be content with a second husband
of small account, far unequal, and much inferior, both in title, wealth, and
reputation to her Son in Law.

The Sultan's have leave of the Grand Signor, that certain Jew-women may at any
time come into the Seraglio unto Jewesse women.
them; who being extraordinary subtle, and coming in under color of teaching
them some fine, and curious needleworks, or to show them the art of making
Their arts.
waters, oils, and painting for their faces, (having once made way with the
better sort of the Eunuchs, which keep the gate, by often feeing them for their
egresse, and regresse) do make themselves by their crafty insinuations so
familiar, and so welcome to the Kings women, that (in a manner) they prevail
with them, in whatsoever they shall attempt for their own ends. For these are
they whom the Sultana's do employ in their private occasions; carrying out
whatsoever they would have sold, and bringing in unto them any thing that they
have a desire to buy. And hence it is that all such Jew-women, as frequent the
Seraglio do become very rich. For what they bring in, Their falsedealing.
they buy it cheap, and sell it dear to them: but on the contrary, when they
have jewels, or the like commodities to sell for the Sultana's, (which are to
be conveyed out by stealth) they receive a reasonable price for them of
strangers, and then tell the simple Ladies, who know not their worth (and are
afraid to be discovered) that they sold them peradventure for the half of that
which they had for them. And by this means there come things of great worth out
of the Seraglio, to be sold abroad at easy rates: yet in the end the husbands
of those Jew-women have but a bad market of it. For being discovered to be
rich, and their wealth to be gotten by deceit, they oftentimes loose both goods
and life too; the Bashawes and Defterdars altogether ^ll success.
aiming at such as they are, thinking by that means to restore to the Grand
Signor that which has from time to time been stolen from him; and the rather
for that they themselves under pretense of so good a work) may easily get
shares in the estates of such delinquents.

But (notwithstanding they are generally known, and accounted for fraudulent,
Jews, coun^ellors to great men.
and false-hearted people) yet there is scarly a man of authority, or esteem
among the Turks (and especially the Defterdars) but has a Jew for his
councellor, and assistant in the managing of his affairs; such a good opinion
they have of their sufficiency; and so ready are the Jews to entertain any
manner of employment; so that their wives are not so great, and powerful with
the Sultana's, but they themselves are as intimate with the Bashawes, and other
great ones of that rank.

The women of the Seraglio are punished Punishment^ of the women by blows.
for their faults very severely, and extremely beaten by their overseers; and
if they prove disobedient, incorrigible, and insolent, they are by the Kings
order, and express command, turned out and sent into the old Seraglio, as
being utterly rejected, and cast off, and the best By expulsion
part of what they have is taken from them: but if they shall be found culpable
of witchcraft, or any such like abomination, then they are bound hand and foot,
and put into a sack, and in the night cast By death.
into the sea. So that by all means it behooves them to be very careful, and
obedient, and to contain themselves within the bounds of honesty, chastity, and
good behavior, if they mean to prosper, and come to a good end.

Now it is not lawful for any one to bring ought in unto them, with which they
may commit the deeds of beastly Prevention of lust.
and unnatural uncleanness; so that if they have a will to eat radishes,
cucumbers, gourds, or such like meats, they are sent in unto them sliced, to
deprive them of the means of playing the wantons. For they being all young,
lusty, and lascivious, and wanting the society of men (which would better
instruct them, and questionless far better employ them) are doubtless of
themselves inclined to that which is naught, and will often be possessed with
unchaste thoughts.

CHAP. V.
Of the Agiam oglans, how taken, distributed, and employed.

HAving already spoken of the women, I must in the next place say somewhat of
the The word signifies unexpert, or untutored youths.
Agiam oglans which are in the Seraglio, and of their employments.

There are ordinarily about six or seven 6. or 700. Agiam oglans.
hundred of them, from twelve, to twenty five, or thirty years of age, at the
most, being all of them Christians children (as almost all Agiam oglans are)
gathered every three years in Morea, and thorowout all the parts of Albania:
the Agiam oglans, are Renegados, or children renouncing the Christian ^aith.
which Renegado children are disposed of, as hereafter you shall hear.

The number of them which are to be taken is uncertain. For there are gathered
sometimes more, and sometimes less, according as the Capoochees, and officers
How they are taken.
appointed for that service, in their own discretion shall think fit; but the
greatest collection seldom or never comes to above two thousand.

They are taken from such families, as are supposed to be of the best spirit,
and most warlike disposition; nor may they, when they are gathered, exceed
twelve, or fourteen years of age at the most, lest they should be unfit for a
new course of life, and too well settled in Christianity to become good Turks.
The Gapoochees, having finished their circuit, and gathered their whole
complement, bring them forthwith to Constantinople, to be distributed as
follows. So soon as they are arrived at the port, they are all clothed in
course Salonichi cloth, it makes no matter of what color; and How used and
apparelled.
their caps are of felt, of the form of a sugar loaf, of the color of Camels
hair; and so they are all brought to the Vizir Azem, who at that time is
accompanied with the other Bashawes, and officers of the Seragl^o, that he may
make choice of Election of the best.
the most well favored, and such as he judges likely to prove the best
spirits: this choice being made, the said youths chosen by the Uizir, are
carried by the Bustangee Bashawe into the Kings own Seraglio, and there
distributed to such companies, as want some to make up their complete numbers.
Then are they circumcised, and made Turks, and set to learn Their circumc^sion.
the Turkish tongue; and according as their several inclinations are
discovered, and discerned by their overseers, so are they encouraged in the
same, and suffered to proceed: and such as have a desire to learn, are taught
to read, and write; Schooling.
but generally all of them are taught to wrestle, to leap, to run, to throw the
iron weight, to shoot the bow, to discharge a piece, and (to conclude) all
such exercises as are befitting a Turkish Soldier.

Now, part of the residue of them, are distributed by the chief Uizir into all
The rest how disposed.
the Grand Signors gardens, and houses of pleasure: and into such ships as sail
for the Kings account, and which go to lade wood, and such like provision for
the Seraglio: confining them to the masters of the said vessels, with condition
to restore them again, when he shall require them: and so he does with the
chief arts-men of the city, of all sorts of occupations, to the end that the
youths may learn some trade, to keep them from idleness, when they are become
Janissaries, and are at home: or if they will they may practice the said arts
abroad, when they are at the wars, and reap great benefit for their pains, He
lends likewise to all the Bashawes, and Grandees of the Court, many of them
to serve them; but they are all delivered by name, and written down in a book,
that he may have them returned again, when there shall be occasion to make them
Janissaries. But these which are given to the Bashawes, are the scum, and
refuse, of all the rest, and are employed only in the service of stables,
kitchins, and such base offices of drudgery: and the better sort of the residue
are put into diverse nurseries, committed to the custody, and discipline of
certain white Eunuchs, who are appointed to be their overseers, and to take
care that they be brought up, and trained in military exercises, until such
time as they shall become fit to be entertained in the number of the Janissaries
in the rooms of the dead, or of old ones which are no longer fit for the wars,
but are made Milites emeriti, the word is derived from Otooracks, which
signifies to sit down.
Otooracks and have leave to stay at home; so that these of the latter sort
kept in Seminaries, are continually in labor: the King, Queen, and Uizir Azem,
employing them also many times in their buildings, and other very laborious
offices without exception.

These Agiam oglans being thus distributed; the chief Uizir presents a book,
wherein all their names are set down, to Book and pension.
the King, who having seen it, appoints every one his pension, according to
the Canon which is of two, or three, or at the most of five aspars a day; and
underwrites it with his own hand: the which book is forthwith consigned into
the custody of the chief Defterdar: that so, he seeing by the said book what
their several names, and pensions are, they may duly receive their pay from
him. Now this Defterdar is bound so often as their pay is due (that is once in
three months) to visit them all if he can; enquiring who is dead, and taking
good notice how the others live, and spend their time; whether they profit, or
not, by their tutors, and overseers; that if so be things be not as they should
be, he may acquaint the Grand Signor therewith, and have them amended.

I will now return to speak of the Agiam oglans of the Seraglio; having not
thought it superfluous to have digressed a little, and to have spoken somewhat
of the other Agiam oglans also. For it may peradventure prove delightful to
those, who have not as yet heard of these passages so distinctly.

The Agiam oglans of the Seraglio, albeit Agiam oglans of the Seraglio how used.
they are chosen for the best uses, out of the rest, by the chief Uizir; yet
are their first employments but very base, and slavish. For they serve in the
stables, kitchens, gardens, for digging, for cleaving of wood; and are made to
row in Barges.
Kaiks, and to lead the greyhounds a coursing, and whatsoever else they are
commanded to do, by their Heads of the companies of Agiam oglans.
Oda Bashawes: the which Oda Bashawes are also Agiam oglans as they are, but of
the highest rank, and longest standing, and have about fifteen aspars a day,
two vests Oda Bashaws wages.
of cloth yearly, two pieces of linen cloth for shirts and handkerchiefs, and
so much satin, or fine cloth, as will make each of them a pair of Chackshirs,
or breeches, after their fashion down to the heels, and ruffled in the small of
the leg, as our boots are: nevertheless these Oda Bashawes are all under
command of the Kahiyah, Government
who is the Bustangee Bashawes steward; now the Bustangee Bashawe himself has
daily about three hundred aspars pay; for he is their patron, judge, and
protector. And as any Turk whatsoever may be known of what degree he is, by the
bigness, and making up of the Turbant, which he wears, or by some other tokens
which they observe in their habit; so to the end that the Oda Bashawes, and
These and the Oda Bashawes are of equal authority.
Bulook Bashawes may be known from the common sort of Agiam oglans, they wear
broad silken girdles, of diverse colors, about their middles, and are allowed a
larger stipend: who (by authority given them from the Bustangee Bashawes
steward.
Kahiyah) do bring the underlings to such an extraordinary subjection, and
sufferance, by their often beating them upon the least misdemeanour: that they
do not only not refuse all manner of pains taking, but patiently undergo
whatsoever is done unto them.

They have their terms, and prerogatives amongst themselves, preceding or
succeeding one another according to the length of time which they have spent in
the Seraglio; so that in process of time (if they still continue there, and
are not sent out upon other occasions) they may aspire to the degree of chief
steward to the Bustangee Bashawe, or of Bustangee Bashawe himself, which is a
very eminent Possibility of preferment.
place; for he has the keeping of all the Grand Signors garden houses, and
steers the Kings Barge.
Kaik, and wears a Turbant upon his head in the Seraglio, although he were
but lately an Agiam oglan as the rest are, and did wear one of the aforesaid
felt caps: who also (if he be in grace with the King, as commonly every
Bustangee Bashawe is) may rise to greater dignities, as to be captain Bashawe,
Bashawe of Cairo, Damascus, Aleppo, etc. Nay sometimes to be Vizir Azem.

These Agiam-oglans are not altogether debarred from liberty, and going abroad,
but may upon good occasion be licensed to go whither they please, although at
the first they are strictly looked unto: and the Bustangee Bashawe always takes
with him good store of them, when by his Majesty's order he is sent to put some
great man to death: the which is commonly done by the hands of four or five of
the chiefest, and strongest of the said Agiam oglans.

There are sometimes natural born Turks brought in amongst them (but indeed
Some Turks among them.
very seldom) by means made to the Bustangee Bashawe, who therein does greatly
pleasure such poor folks as are willing to be rid of their children: but it
must be first made known to the Grand Signor, and done with his consent. For
the natural born Turks are not held to be of so brave spirits, and fit for
service as the other: and for diverse other respects best known to themselves,
(as the increasing the number of True believers.
Mussulmen, and the like) they do not willingly admit of any but Christians
children.

Their rooms, bagnoes, and kitchins, are joined to the walls of the Seraglio
without; Their rooms
divided severally, and equally for each company of them, and built for the
more commodity of such offices, and services, as the said Agiam oglans are
appointed for.

And as for their diet, they order it as Their Diet;
they please, having flesh, and pulse for their pottage; their bread also, and
every thing for their food, is delivered unto them daily from the Buttry,
Keeler, and the dressing of it left to themselves. Now for that many of them
lie near the sea side, they take good store of fish, part of which they sell,
and reserve the rest for their own eating.

They sleep always in their clothes (putting off only their uppermost coa^,
Their sleeping.
and their shoes) according to the ordinary custom of the poorer sort of Turks;
between a couple of rugs in the winter, and thin blankets in the summer.

They never see the King, unless it be when he passes through the gardens, or
when he takes boat, or else when he goes a hunting (for he makes them serve
instead of hounds to find out his game:) but when his Majesty will be in the
gardens to take his pleasure, and make pastime with his concubines, then all
the Agiam oglans being warned by an Eunuch, who cries aloud A word commmanding
absence, and retiring: never u^ed but for the King.
Helvet, do presently get out with all speed at the gates by the sea side,
where they may w^lk upon the banks and causeys, but must not dare to go in
again, until the King, and his women be departed. For None may see the kings
women.
there may none come near, nor be in sight of them, but himself and his black
Eunuchs: nay, if any other should but attempt (by some trick in creeping into
some private corner to see the women, and should be discoveted, he should be
put to death immediately. Every one therefore so soon as they hear Helvet
cried) runs out of sight as far as they can, to be free from all fear, and
suspicion.

Now of this rank of Agiam oglans, which are in the Kings Seraglio; they The
Janissaries are made of Agiam oglans in other Seminaries.
never make Janissaries, as they do of those which are brought up in the other
Seraglios, and Seminaries; and of such as are lent to diverse of the Kings
subjects, as tradesmen, masters of ships, and the like, and to the Bashawes:
but his Majesty's turn being served of these, he bestows them upon his
gentlemen Other uses of them.
Aghas, when he employes them abroad in some principal government, that they
may be faithful assistants unto them in their businesses, and that in time they
themselves may become men of worth; as often they do, if by their diligence,
and fidelity, they prove to be men of good desert.

The Grand Signor likewise makes great use of them, when he intends a
journey to any place; as when he goes to the wars, or any whither else, far
from Constantinople; for the pitching of his tents, for removing and carrying
of chests and baskets, and many other such like services, as must be done at
those times: for which employments the King never takes with him less then
three or four hundred of them.

CHAP. VI.
Of the Kings This word signi^ieth, youths within: and they are so called,
because they are reserved for the service of the Kings person. Itchoglans:
Itchoglans, their severe discipline, and education in four subordinate
Schools, and of their after advancements.

IT now remains that I say somewhat of the Grand Signors Itchoglans: which
are youths kept also in the Seraglio, but in far better fashion then the Agiam
oglans: and are (for the King, and countries service brought up in learning, in
the knowledge of the laws, and in military exercises: that they may in time be
made able to perform those things, which belong to the government of the whole
Empire. And albeit for the most part these are Christian captives, and
Renegado's, yet there are some natural born Turks amongst them (which must be
youths of very comely aspect, and their outsides must promise a great Turks
hardly admitted.
deal of worth, and goodness) brought in by the Capee Aghas means (who is
chief Chamberlain) with the Kings consent: but this happens but very seldom,
and is effected with great difficulty. For the ancient institution was, that
the Itchoglans should always be made of Christian Renegado's, and captives
only, of the most civil, and noblest that could be found.

Wherefore, when in the wars, either by sea or land, it happens, that any youth
Noble captives.
is taken, who is discovered to be of noble parents, and comely personage; or
if any such voluntarily come, and offer himself to become Turk (as diverse have
done in hope of advancement) he is presently marked, and set apart for the Grand
Signor; and is (so soon as he is thought capable and apprehensive) instructed
in matters of government (being as it were ordained for great employments.) Now
such are of very great esteem: for the Turks themselves affirm, that nobleness
of birth cannot but produce the most virtuous, and generous spirits; especially
when it is seconded, and accompanied with good education, which is professed in
the Seraglio: where there is great severity used in all the orders of
discipline, the government of them being in the hands of masters, who are white
Eunuchs for the most part, and very severe, and Eun^chs cruel.
cruel in all their actions; insomuch that their proverb is; that when one
comes out of that Seraglio and has run through all the orders of it, he is
without all question, the most mortified, and patient man in the world. For the
blows which they suffer, and the fastings which are commanded them for every
small fault are to be admired: nay, some of Punishments.
them are so cruelly handled, that although their time of being in the Seraglio
be almost expired: and that they should in few years come forth to be made
great men, yet not being able to endure such cruelty any longer, they procure
to be turned out, contenting themselves with the title, and small pay of a
Spahee, or a Mutaferraka, rather then be so often punished, and made weary of
their lives, in evpectation of great preferments.

The number of these Itchoglans is uncertain. For there are sometimes more,
Their number.
and sometimes less of them; but as I have heard they are commonly about a
hundred, the Grand Signor being very willing to entertain all such as are given
him of the aforesaid quality, be they never so many; provided they be young,
when they are first brought unto him.

The course that is taken with them, so soon as they come into the Seraglio, is
admirable, and nothing resembling the barbarism of Turks, but beseeming men of
singular virtue, and discipline. For they are exceeding well tutored, and daily
taught, as well good fashion and comely behavior, as they are instructed in the
Discipline in religion and civility.
rites and ceremonies of the M^ometan law, or whatsoever else may tend to the
enriching of their minds.

And for this purpose they have rooms^ which the Turks call Oda signifies a
chamber, or room.
Odas, but we may more properly (in regard of the use they are put unto) call
them Schools: of which there are four, the one taking degrees from the other.
Now into the first, they First school.
all come when they are but children, where the primary precept they learn is
silence; then their personal post^res, First lesson is silence.
(against such time as they shall be about the king) which is that they hold
down Second reverence.
their heads, and look downwards with their hands before them joined a cross;
all which betokens singular reverence.

Then (by a w^e Eunuch, who is chief over all the other masters, and ushers)
they are set to learn to write, and read: Third, to w^e and re^d, and speak
Turkish; and say the (...) prayers by heart.
to practice the Turkish tongue; and are taught their prayers in the Arabian
tongue by heart. And in this Od^, they are both morning and evening so
diligently followed, and carefully looked ^to, that by report it is a thing of
admiration: now in this first school they us^ally stay about five, or six
years; and such as are dull and hard of apprehension stay longer.

But by the way, before I come to the next Oda, I may not omit to tell you,
that so soon as they are given to the King, before they are of the first Oda,
they are registered by their Turkish names in a book, and the names of their
native Book, or check-roll.
countries set down with them; the Grand Signor allowing them a small pension
of four, or five aspars a day; the copy of which book is also sent to the great
Defterdar, that every one of them may in due time (that is quarterly) have the
aforesaid pension sent unto them.

From the first Oda they are removed to the second, where (by more learned,
Second ^hool. ^ourth, lesson Rh^rick, Pe^sian, Arabian, and Tartarian^ tongues.
and sufficient Tutors then the former) they are taught the Persian, Arabian,
and Tartarian tongues; and take great pains in reading diverse Authors, that
they may be the better able to speak the Turkish elegantly; which cannot be
done without some knowledge, and good insight in those three tongues, upon
which the Turkish chiefly does depend; and indeed their is found a great
difference between their speech, and that of the vulgar sort.

Here also they begin to learn to wrestle, to shoot in the bow, to throw the
Fifth bodily exercises.
iron mace, to toss the pike, to run, and to handle their weapons, etc. And in
these exercises, in their several orders, and several places, they spend their
hours; being severely punished if they shall in any wise grow negligent.

They spend likewise other five, or six years in this Oda; whence (being become
men, strong, and fit for any thing) they are removed to the third Oda; where,
Third school
(forgetting nothing of what they learned before, but greatly increasing their
Sixth, horsmanship and activity.
knowledge) they also learn to ride, and how to behave themselves in the wars.

Moreover, every one of them (according as he is thought fit for it) here
learns a trade, necessary for the service of the Kings person, viz. to shave,
to make up a Turbant, to fold up apparel handsomely, Seventh, Trades.
to pair nails, to attend at the Bagno, to keep hawks, and land-spaniels, to be
Sewers, Quiries of the stable, targetbearers, to wait at table, and the like:
as hereafter I shall show; so that having been in these offices a few years
they become men able to teach others.

But whilst they are in these three Meanly clothed whilst they are in the three
first schools.
schools, they are but meanly apparelled, having yearly their two vests of
Cloth somewhat fine, but their linen is such as the Agiam oglans wear.

The punishments also which they suffer in this Oda are extreme, for their
masters often give them an hundred blows Punishments
with a cudgel upon the soles of their feet, and butto^ks, insomuch that they
leave them of^entimes for dead.

Neicher are they permitted (so long as they continue in these three Odas) to
be familiar with any but themselves, and that with great modesty too: so that
it is a matter of great difficulty for any str^nger to speak with them, or see
them; Closeness.
which if it be obtained, it must be by express leave from the Capee Aga, who
causes an Eunuch to be present, so long as any stranger shall be in the
company of the said youths. Nay when they have occasion to go to the Bagno, or
the like businesses, the Eunuchs are always at hand, that so by all means they
may be kept from lewdness. And in their Bedchambers, which are long rooms, and
Bed-chambers.
hold about thirty or forty in each of them, (for they sleep near one another
upon Sofas) there are every night lamps burning, and Eunuchs lying by them to
keep them in awe, and from lewd, and wanton behavior.

In the third Oda, some of them do also learn ordinary mechanic arts, as
sewing in lether (which is in great use and esteem amongst the Turks) to mend
guns, to Sewing in leather, etc.
make bows and arrows, and quivers, and the like; from which trades they often
have both their surname, and their reputation too. For they are much made of,
who will be diligent, and fly idleness: holding it rather an honor, then an
ignominy, to have a trade. For therein they imitate the Grand Signors
themselves, who (for good example sake) in their youth are taught some trade, or
other; which although they never practice when they are Kings, yet they are
willing their subjects should know, that they are able to do it, if they
please. And diverse great men, nay Bashawes themselves, They take their
cognomina from Trades.
both have been, and are to this day called by the names of such arts, as they
practiced, when they were in this Oda.

Here also the Eunuchs (their tutors) make trial of their constancy in
Religion, searching (as far as in them lies) their hearts to see how they stand
affected to Trial of Religion.
Turcism. For the time growing near, wherein they are to pass to the fourth
Oda (which is the chiefest, and last, and from which they are called to
business of great importance) they would not then have them at all remember,
that they were formerly Christians, or to have the least desire imaginable to
turn to their first belief; lest that they should in time, by some stratagems,
and politic courses, peradventure prove disadvantageous to the Turkish Empire.
So then all possible proof, and trial being made, and they found to be
persuaded of the truth of that religion; they then are preferred to the fourth
Fourth School.
Oda, where they are once more registered* yet all they which are of the third
Oda, are not translated to the fourth at one, and the same time; but only such
as have gone through all the degrees of discipline in the three former, and are
become fit for service. And there is a note kept apart of them which come into
this fourth Oda. For they are immediately ordained for the Grand Signors own
service, Preferments.
and have their pay increased, some more, and some less, unto eight aspars a
day, and their habit changed from cloth to silk, and cloth of gold of great
price.

Now here their punishments cease: but Punishments cease.
they continue still with their heads, and beards shaven; only they suffer
some locks to grow on each side, from their Temples, which hang down below
their ears, for a sign that they are the next, which are capable of the
preferment of coming into the Kings chamber.

They must be very cleanly and neat in their apparel before they come about the
Neatness.
Grand Signors person; many of them ever accompanying his Majesty, when he goes
abroad upon pleasure (provided, none of his women be with him.) And they may
now freely converse with all the great men of the Seraglio, and with the
Bashaws also: and are often presented with gifts by men of the best quality, to
insinuate into their favor; hoping that they one day may become men of great
command, and so be able to stand them instead in their occasions.

Now out of these young men of the fourth Oda (after they have finished the
appointed term of years, and have been made perfect in all things, as
aforesaid) the King chooses his Aghas, which are his Gentlemen, that attend
only upon him: whose names and places, are as follows.

1. The Silihter Aga; the Kings swordbearer. 2. The Chiohadar Aga; he which
carries his Yagmoorlick. 3. The Raechiubtar Aga; yeoman of the stirrup. 4. The
Mataragee Aga; he which brings him water to wash his hands, and face. 5. The
Telbentar Aga; he which brings him his Turbant, 6. The Kemhasir Aga; he which
looks to his apparel, and the washing of his linen. 7. The Cheshneghir
Bashawe; the chief sewer. 8. The Dogangee Bashawe; the chief falconer. 9. The
Zagargee Bashawe; the chief huntsman. 10. The Turnackgee Bashawe; he which
paireth the Kings nails. 11. The Berber Bashawe; the chief barber. 12. The
Hamawmgee Bashawe; he which washes the King in the Bath. 13. The Muhasabegee
Bashawe, the chief accountant. 14. The Teskeregee Bashawe; his Majesty's
secretary.
All which are made of the eldest sort of the Itchoglans of the fourth Oda; and
these are always in his Majesty's presence, holding down their heads; (for
they may not be so bold as to look him in Gesture.
the face) and standing with their hands a cross before him in token of
reverence, and humility. Nor may they presume at all to speak to the Grand
Signor, nor in his presence to one another: but if the King shall command, or
call for ought, they are wonderful speedy, and ready to obey. They all do
execute their offices distinctly, as aforesaid, and attend in places appointed
for them, that they may be the Wanting.
better able to perform their several duties, and the more ready to obey at
every beek. At the hours of dinner and supper, they wait in the room, taking
the meat from the hands of the under Sewer at the door, and so his Majesty's
table being made ready (which is of a Bulgar hide) upon Great Turks Table.
a Sofa, they bring in meat, which is set thereon orderly, dish by dish, by the
chief Sewer, before the King; and is taken off again as his Majesty shall
appoint.

The Grand Signor is very well pleased with these Agas, and takes great delight
in their service, and company, (for that they are as I may say of his own
planting) making them ride on horseback, and playing with them at several
sports (especially Exercises.
at the A kind of running at base on horsback, darting lances one at another.
Gifts.
Ieeret) at such times as he is well disposed: ever gracing them with bestowing
gifts on them, of vests, swords, bows, and the like, and oftentimes ready
money: all which came before to the Kings hands by way of gift. Now besides
those favors, his Majesty at convenient times uses to bestow upon them the
dispatching of Embasses for foreign Embassages ^onferred.
parts; which is a merchandise held by them to be of a great price, and
brings no small prosit into their purses. For one of them having his
commission from the Grand Signor, for such, or such a prince (howbeit it is not
intended that he should go) presently informs himself what that Prince usually
does present the Ambassador withal; and so accordingly agrees with a Chiaush,
or with one of such like quality, to undertake the Embassage; who must give for
the same, as they two can agree between themselves; either in ready money
before his departure, or otherwise at his return; as the Aga shall think best
for his profit, and so forthwith he dispatches the party chosen.

This kind of employment proves wonderfully beneficial. For in the
establishing of the Princes of Walachia, Moldavia.
Bugdania, Vassal Princes.
Transylvania, and of the King of Tartarie (to all which Princes the Grand
Signor sends Ambassadors for confirming their possession of the said
Dominions) they which are sent receive great benefit; it being specified in
their Canon, how much every one is to disburse for being honored with that
solemnity; though peradventure they be Displaced; or turned out of osfice.
Maazold again before they be scarce warm in their places.

And this the King does of Policy, to the end his gentlemen may become rich;
laying up money to serve for their necessary expenses, and furnishing them by
that means with diverse things, against such time as they shall go forth of the
Seraglio; which is as often as his Majesty Their going forth of the Seraglio to
the chief offices.
thinks fit, and that most commonly on a sudden; either to be general at Sea,
Bashaw of Cairo.
Messur, Aleppo.
Halep, Damascus.
Shawm, Babylon, or of some other such great cities, which have whole Provinces
under them. The Grand Signor gives also to each of them, when he sends them
forth upon any the aforesaid employments; a The word signifies a familiar
talker, or discourser.
Musahib, that is in effect, a helping companion; such an one as shall have
liberty freely to talk with him, and go out and in unto him when he pleases:
the which title, and favor of being made Musahib to any of the Agas, proves
Musahib.
to be of so great reputation, that it is esteemed above any other sort of
employment. For as it is hard to be obtained, so it is only bestowed upon such
subjects as have deserved well at the Kings hands.

And this has been a course used of A politic course.
old, by the Grand Signors Progenitors, that they may have some trusty subjects
abroad to give notice to the Court of the carriage of the Bashawes in their
several regiments, or of any other; if so be they should attempt any thing,
that might be prejudicial to the crown; that so the King by cutting off their
provision, and the like, may easily anticipate their plots and designs.

But if his Majesty be not pleased, or the occasion do not require so highly
to exalt some one of the aforesaid Agas, as to be of the degrees already named;
he then makes him Lord of Graecia, or of Natolia.
Beglerbeg of Graecia, Other office
or of Natolia; Aga of the Janissaries; Spaheelor Agajee, which is head over all
the Spahees; Imrohor Bashawe, which is master of the horse: or at the least a
Capoochee Bashawe, which is head over the Capoogees.

The Grand Signor having bestowed any of the said places upon them, they
forthwith leave the Seraglio, and carry with them all their estates both money
and goods: and oftentimes take with them other young men of the other Odas, who
are permitted to go through their own hastiness and great importunity, not
being willing to stay out their time: but losing the Kings favor, are content
with small pay, and lesser reputation, to go along with the said Agas.

Such as are to go out upon the greatest employments, are accompanied forth of
the Kings Seraglio by the VizirAzem; who also presents them, and gives them
entertainment for three, or four days in his house: until such time as they
can be provided of houses of their own, whither afterward they repair, and set
their families in order; taking also unto them such as are come out of the
Seraglio with them for assistants, and ministers, in the charge assigned unto
them. They also accept of the service of strangers, who come in by gifts; which
likewise redounds to the benefit, and advantage of the great ones.

They which succeed in preferment ^rder in ^ccession.
those that are gone out of the Seraglio upon the aforesaid employments, are
(as the custom commands) such as are next in years unto them, and of the
longest residence. Nor can this course be altered, unless by some sinister
accident, or evil behavior they fail thereof: so that it is always known
amongst themselves, who is next capable of public employment; nay the
business is so orderly carried, and their course so regular, that even they of
the third Oda do know what their future fortunes will be, if they live to enjoy
them. And indeed all of them live in continual hope, and desire, that the Grand
Signor would often be pleased to send them abroad; that so they may the sooner
be out of their hard service in the Seraglio, and enter into the state of ample
government. It is no marvail then the Turkish officers are so often changed,
seeing that every Grand Signor has so many servants of his own that seek for
advancement.

They are most commonly of five and thirty, or forty years of age, before they
are sent abroad: and because they come out of the Seraglio with their beards
shaven, they are fain to stay within doors, for some days to let them grow,
that they may be fit to come amongst other great men: with which staying at
home, they are very well contented. For in that time they receive the presents,
Presents from great persons whilst they stay.
which are sent them from all the Sultana's, of vests, shirts, linen breeches,
and handkerchiefs, of all sorts, richly wrought, and of great worth; and from
the Bashawes, and other great men, horses, carpets, vests, slaves, and other
things, fit for the erecting, and furnishing of an house, and family: the which
presents are made the greater, and richer, by so much the more as the party, to
whom they are given, is known to be favored, and beloved of the King.

Now so soon as their beards are grown, they go abroad, and begin their visits;
Coming abroad and visitings.
first, to the chief Vizir, and then in order to the other great ones, till
they have been with them all; and last of all they offer their service to the
Capee Aga in all humble manner, acknowledging that Capee Aga visited.
their best fortunes, and honors, have been conferred upon them by his means,
and promising for ever all dutiful respect unto him for the same.

But this complement with the Capee Aga, is performed without the gate on the
Kings side, which is kept by the white Eunuchs: for they may not come any more
within that gate, unless they be called for by the King, for to treat of
things belonging to their employments, before their departure.

They all strive to gain the love, and good will of the Capee Aga, that he may
be as a protector, and patron unto them, and that, when they are absent, he may
possess the Grand Signor with a good opinion The power of the Capee Aga.
of them: for they know he is very powerful with him, being the chiefest in the
Seraglio, and always nearest to the King.

CHAP. VII.
Of inferior persons, as Buffons, Mutes, Musicians: of the White Eunuchs, and
of the Grand officers of the Seraglio.

BEsides the women, and the Agiam oglans of this Seraglio, and the a^oresaid
youths, the Itchoglans last spoken of: there are many other ministers for all
manner of necessary services. There are also Jesters.
Buffons, and such as show tricks, Musicians, wrestlers, and many Dumb men.
Mutes both old and young, who have liberty to go in and out at the Kings gate,
with leave only of the Capee Aga. It is worthy the observation, that in the
Seraglio both the Grand Signor, and diverse that are about him, can reason, and
discourse with the Mutes of any thing: as well Discourse by signs.
and as distinctly, alla Mutescha, by nods and signs, as they can with words;
a thing well befitting and suting with the gravity of the better sort of Turks,
who cannot endure much babbling. Nay, the Sultana's also, and many other of the
Kings women do practice it, who have many dumb women and girls about them for
that purpose.

This has been an ancient custom in the Seraglio, to get as many Mutes, as
they can possibly find; but chiefly for this one reason, which is, that they
hold it a thing unbefitting the Grand Signor, and not to suit with his
greatness, to speak to any about him familiarly; wherefore he takes this
course, that he may the more tractably, and domestically jest, and talk with
the Mutes, and with others that are about him, to make him pleasant with
diversity of pastime.

The King, besides this, makes another use of them; and that is, when his
Majesty A further use of them.
resolves with himself to put a Vizir to death, or some one of that rank, and
that he be willing to see it done with his own eyes in the Seraglio; he then
having called him into one of his rooms, and holding him in discourse, whilst
his Mutes are in readiness, (the poor man peradventure Mutes strangle men in
the Seraglio.
suspecting nothing) he makes but a sign unto them, and they presently fall
upon him, and strangle him, and so draw him by the heels out of the gates.

But that which in my opinion is admirable in these Mutes (who being born Mutes
can write.
deaf, and so of necessity must remain dumb) is, that many of them can write,
and that very sensibly and well: now how they should learn without the sense of
hearing, I leave to others judgments: but I am sure I have seen it, and have
my self made answer unto them in writing.

It follows now that I speak of the white Eunuchs, who as the black ones
White Eunuchs.
are for the service and attendance of the Sultana's, and for keeping of their
gate: so are the white Eunuchs appointed for the King, and his gate. Amongst
these Four principal Eunuchs in the Seraglio.
there are four ancient, and principal men, which attend only the most trusty,
and important employments, both about the Kings person and his household. Of The
first and chiefest; the Capee Aga, or chamber-2. Treasurer of the house. 3.
Master of the wardrobe. 4. The keeper of the house.
which, the first is the Capee Aga, for he is the principal of all the white
Eunuchs, and is chamberlain: the second is the Hazinehdar Bashawe, the
treasurer of the house: the third is the Keelerg^e Bashawe, the chief butler,
and master of the wardrope: the fourth is the Serai Agasee, the keeper of the
Seraglio.

Of these four old Eunuchs, the Capee Capee Aghas privileges.
Aga (as I said) is chief in authority, and in greatest esteem with the Grand
Signor. For none but he can of himself speak with his Majesty, neither can any
messages, writings, or petitions be sent in (ordinarily) but by his hand, and
means; he likewise does always accompany the Kings person, whithersoever he
goes, both without, and within the Seraglio. And when he goes to his women
also, he waits upon him to the very door, which leads in unto them: but
there he stops, and so returns to his own lodgings again; ever leaving some
body to wait at the said door, that when the King is ready to come away from
them, they may call him. The Capee Agas Ordinary His pension.
pension, is About 3. li. sterling.
eight They are called Sultanas, beca^se they are coined at Constantinople,
where the Sultan lives: they are worth about 7. s. 10. d. apieie Presents.
Sultana's a day, besides vests, and other necessaries, as many, as he will. He
also gets great store of money, (and indeed more then befits a man, that has
so small occasion of expense, as he has) by virtue of his place. For that,
both they of the Seraglio, and those abroad, of what condition or degree soever
they be to obtain his favor and furtherance in any business, present him with
all that they can imagine may give him content, whatsoever it cost.

The second is, the Hazinehdar Bashawe, and he has the charge and keeping The
Treasurer.
of the treasury, which is within the Seraglio; he having one key of it, and
the Grand Signor another; the door being likewise sealed with the Kings seal,
which is never taken off, but when the King himself gives order for the opening
of the same. In this Hazin^h are all the treasures which have been laid up by
the Treasure.
deceased Emperors: and into this comes no other revenue of the crown, then
that from Egypt, and the adjacent * 240. thousand pounds ster.
provinces, of six hundred thousand chicquins yearly, all the other revenues
going into the outward Hazineh, out of which all expenses are borne, both
ordinary, Outward treasury.
and extraordinary: but there is not ought taken out of the aforesaid inward
Hazineh, unless it be upon extreme necessity, when the Grand Signor is not
otherwise provided to appease the outcries, and threatenings of the Soldiers
for their pay, or for some other the like occasion; and this ought to be done
with this proviso, that the Grand Defterdar be bound to make it good again to
the uttermost aspar; but I suppose they have not of late been able to perform
it.

This Aga must keep an exact account of all the treasure that is brought in, or
Household treasurers office.
taken out of the same; nor may any go into the said Hazineh, but only he
himself, and such as he shall take in with him, when occasion shall require.
And when there is any gold, or silver taken out, it is all put into lether
bags, and so brought unto the King, who disposes thereof as he thinks fit.

He has also the custody of all the Kings jewels, of which he keeps a book
by himself, that he may know what jewels the King gives away, what jewels are
given to the King, and what are likewise for his Majesty's own wearing, and the
Capee Aga dying he succeeds him in his place.

The third, which is the Keelergee Bashawe, Master of the wardrobe
keeps the Kings wardrobe; into which are brought all the presents which are
given to the Grand Signor, as cloth of gold, plate, silks, woollen clothes,
furs of all sorts, swords, brooches, raw silk, carpets, and whatsoever else may
serve for his Majesty's use, either to keep, or give away. Of all which things
he keeps particular notes, and inventories, to the end he may also at any time,
see what is given to the King, and what the King gives away to others: the
which is a very painful employment, inasmuch as his Majesty does every day,
as well take, as give, Busy employment.
a great number of vests and other such like things: but the business is so
well ordered, and carefully looked unto, that there does not follow any
confusion at all. This Eunuch has many servants under him, and stays (for the
most part) within the Seraglio: his pension is a His pension.
50. s. sterling. at 20 aspars the shilling.
thousand aspars a day, besides vests, and other such gifts, which are given
him in abundance from time to time: he also is much favored, and graced by the
King, for that he is to succeed the Hazine^dar Bashawe, in case the said
Hazinehdar should die, or change his place: and is well esteemed of, and
reverenced by all, as well without, as within the Seraglio.

The fourth and last, which is the Sarai Keeper of the Seraglio.
Agasee, has charge to look unto the Seraglio: nor does he ever go out of it,
especially in the Grand Signors absence; but is very vigilant, not only in
seeing all things prepared for the daily service of the same, but also to look
over all the rooms, and see that they be well kept; and to eye the officers,
and servants of the house, marking whether they exercise themselves or no, in
t^ir several functions. Now because he is ancient, and his businesses great, he
has liberty to ride within the Seraglio, about the courts and gardens, and by
the seaside; His liberty.
as the three former Agas are also permitted to do: for which purpose they have
a stable of horses in a garden, for their use alone.

His pension is 40. s. sterling.
eight hundred aspars Pension.
a day, besides an allowance of vests, and furs, as many as he can well have
occasion to wear, and his succeeding the Keelergee Bashawe; and so by course
the Capee Aga, if he outlive the rest.

And although all these four Eunuchs may wear Turbants in the Seraglio, and
ride (being the chief next the King himself in authority within the Seraglio)
and Differing privileges.
are reverenced, and respected of all men; yet the three last, viz. Hazinehdar
Bashawe, Keelergee Bashawe, and Sarai Agasee, may not of themselves when they
list speak to the Grand Signor, but only answer when any thing is asked of
them: howbeit they always attend (with the Capee Aga) the person, and service
of the King, with all the Eunuchs under them: and the aforesaid Agas, and
Itchoglans, already spoken of: but these four only govern and manage the
Kings household affairs, giving order for all things needful and necessary,
as well for the days, as for the nights provision.

All the Eunuchs in the Seraglio may be in number about two hundred, what 200
Eunuch in the Seraglio.
with old ones, middle aged, and young ones; they are all of them not only
gelt, but have their yards also clean cut their gelding.
off: and are chosen of those Renegado youths, which are presented from time to
time to the Grand Signor, as aforesaid. Few or none of them are gelt, and cut
against their will. For then (as the master workmen in that business affirm)
they would be in great danger of death. Wherefore, to get their consent, they
promise them fair, and show unto them the assurance they may have (in time) to
become great men. All which must be done when they are very young, at their
first coming into the Seraglio. For it is a work not to be wrought upon men of
years.

They are brought up with the Itchoglans, and are instructed in many things
Their education in the four Odas,
as well as they; being removed also from one Oda to another; and are last of all
taken out by turns from the fourth Oda, for to serve the Grand Signor, as well
as those which are not Eunuchs.

His Majesty likewise employes some of these his white Eunuchs, in the
government Employment.
of all the other Seraglios, and Seminaries of of youth, as well in
Constantinople, as in Adrianople, Bursia, and in diverse other places: (in each
of which there are commonly two or three hundred youths) that so by their
diligence, and care over them (together with the help of other Ministers) they
may be brought to an excellent discipline; by which they may afterward prove
to be men of good manners, and learning.

And it so falls out many times that the Grand Signor, to give way to the
other inferior, and younger Eunuchs (who expect that they succeed in order the
aforesaid offices, sends forth some of the ancientest, richest, and of the
highest rank in great employments; as to be Bashawes of Cairo, Aleppo, or of
some other cities, and provinces in Asia, and Their advancement.
sometimes Uizirs of the bench. For the Eunuchs generally prove subjects,
though not of great courage, yet of the greatest judgment, and fidelity: their
minds being set on business, rather then on Fidelity.
pleasure.

And for that the Eunuchs are more trusty, then any other servants of the
Seraglio: the Capee Agha their patron does commonly commit such things, as the
Grand Signor would have kept for curiosity, unto their custody: who for that
end have closets made of purpose to lay up such rarities, as are presented to
the King; as great pieces of Amber Greese sent from the Bashawes of the Morea,
Musk, Treacle, Mithridate of Cairo, Terra sigillata, Balsame, and other such
things of great value; cups also of Agat, Crystal, and Jasper, Turkesses, and
other precious stones: all which are so curiously kept, that it seems to be
admirable. They likewise lay up his Indian presents of Zeva and Civett; of all
which things his Majesty, and his Sultana's make daily use.

Hard by the Eunuchs lodgings in the Seraglio, there is a very large place, in
which are kept all such goods as fall to the King, as well by them which are put
Goods of the de^eased.
to death, as by those which die of natural diseases; of which the King is
Master. Now the goods being brought into the said place by the chief Defterdar
(who receives them from the An officer which (...) the es^ates of the dead for
the King.
Be it il mawlgee, and is to bring them thither) the Grand S^gnor in presence
of his chief servants, having seen, and well viewed all, makes choice of what
he thinks fit to reserve, and to give away: the rest is cried in the Seraglio,
to the end, that if any one there, have a will to buy, he may have a good penny
worth, and the remainder of that is at last carried into the public *
Bezisten, where each parcel is cried up and down, the crier still The Bezisten
a large foursquare building, where the best and richest ware^ are bought and
sold.
naming the most that has been already offered, and is at length sold to him
that bids most; nor may any that offers a price go from his word, at least if
he be able to perform and stand to it. The money made of the said things is
delivered to the Hazinehdar Bashawe, and is put into the outward Hazineh or
treasury.

And although the goods did come out of the houses of such, as died but the day
before of the Pestilence, the Turks nevertheless do willingly buy them, and
use them, as if the disease were not infectious at all: affirming that their
end No fear of pestilence.
is written in their forehead, and that it is a vain thing to seek to prevent
it by any humane rule, or policy; as either avoiding the company of infected
persons, or the not wearing of the clothes of them that died.

CHAP. VIII.
Of the Black Eunuchs, and Black-moor girls, and women; of the Physicians, and
of the Kings children.

NOw as concerning the Black Eunuchs, and Black-moor wenches, which serve the
Sultana's, and the rest of the Kings women: it is to be noted, that the black
Eunuchs, whilst they are boys, are for the most part kept, and Black Eunuchs.
taught among the other youths of the Seraglio, as the white ones are, until
Their education.
they come to age, and are made fit for service. Being taken from thence, they
are appointed for the women, and set to serve, and wait with others at the
Sultana's gate (and are all under command of the Kuzlar Aga, who is their
Patron, as the Capee Aga is Master of the white ones) being allowed a pension
of fifty, Kuzlar Aga.
or sixty aspars a day, and two vests of Their pension.
silk yearly, with linen and other necessaries, sufficient for their use,
besides diverse gifts, and gratuities, which they receive from women strangers,
at such times as they let them in to the Kings women, and especially from the
Jews women, who are daily conversant with them. The reason why their pension is
so great (in comparison of others) is, that they can never be sent abroad in
any employment, thereby to enrich themselves as the other can; but must for
ever stay, and serve in the Seraglio.

They are named by the names of flowers, as Hiacynth, Narcissus, Rose,
Gilly-flower, Their names.
and the like. For that, serving the women, and being always near about them,
their names may be answerable to their virginity, sweet and undefiled.

The Black-moor girls, are no sooner brought into the Seraglio, after their
arrival at Constantinople (for they come by Negro girls
ship from Cairo, and thereabouts) but Fromwhence they como. Education.
they are carried to the women's lodgings; where they are brought up, and made
fit for all services: and by how much the Esteemed most for ugliness.
more ugly, and deformed they are, by so much the more they are valued, and
esteemed of by the Sultana's. Wherefore the Bashawe of Cairo (who for the most
part sends them all) is diligent to get the most ill favored, coal-black, The
Turks have no other word for a blabber lip then Areb dodack, which ^gnifieth a
Moors lip.
blabberlipped, and flat nosed girls that may be had through all Egypt, or the
countries bordering on it, to send them for presents to the Grand Signor, who
bestows them upon his women.

Now after their coming, if they shall be disliked by reason of some infirmity,
then are they sent into the old Seraglio, as the white women are, when they are
unfit for service, or mis-behave themselves; all which is done by the Kings
order, and consent.

The aforesaid black Eunuchs, by occasion of being sent with messages to the
Black Eunuchs privileges.
Grand Signor from the Sultana's, may pass through the men's lodgings to carry
little notes to the Capee Aga, that he may deliver them unto the King: or for
to fetch any thing from any of the officers Liberty limited.
of the Seraglio, or to speak with any of their friends at the gate: but
otherwise they may not dare to go forth of the Seraglio from the Kuzlar Aga,
without express license from the Sultana Queen.

They likewise are to go to and fro, Employment
and to do all other businesses for the Sultana's in the women's lodgings, which
the white Eunuchs cannot perform. For they are not permitted to come there; nor
any man that is white (but the King No white man may come amongst the women.
The Physicians visiting the sick women.
only) may see, and come amongst the women. Insomuch as when some one of them
being fallen sick, it is required that the Hakim Bashawe (who is the Kings
Physician) should come thither; they must necessarily first have leave of the
King for his entrance, and being admitted to enter by the Sultana's door, he
sees none but the black Eunuchs (all the other women being retired into some
withdrawing rooms) who bring him into the sick woman's chamber; and she being
closely covered from head to foot with quilts, and blankets, holds out her
arm only, so as the Doctor may touch her pulse; who when he has given order
what shall be done, both for her diet, and medicines, goes away immediately, by
the same way that he came.

But if she, which is sick, be the Queen, or one of the Sultana's, (with whom
the Grand Signor has layen) then her arm and hand, which she holds out of
the bed for the Physician to feel her pulse, is covered with a fine piece of
white silk, or Taffata sarcenet. For her Strange niceness.
flesh may not be seen, nor touched bare; neither may the Doctor say any thing
in her hearing, but being gone out of her chamber, prescribes what medicine he
thinks fit: which for the most part (according to the knowledge, and common
custom of the Turks) is but only some kind of loosning, and refreshing
P^tion, or drink, or sirrup. Physic mean.
Sherbett. For they seldom use any other physic; nor do I hold their skill
sufficient to prepare medicines for every malady.

But in case the party diseased should have need of a Surgeon, she then must
do as she may, and suffer without any scruple. For, there is no remedy to
conceal her skin and flesh from him. And as for the other women, which are not
Sultana's, or at least which are not well beloved of the Grand Signor, either
for their person, or for some p^culiar, and extraordinary virtues: they needing
a Surgeon, are sent into the old Seraglio to be cured, where they shall not
want Curing in the old Seraglio.
whatsoever may be thought convenient, and useful, for restoring them to their
former estate.

The Kings sons which are born unto him by his Queen, are nursed, and The Kings
sons by the Queen.
brought up together by themselves by choice nurses, which are found abroad
without the Seraglio. But if his Majesty have sons also by other Sultana's, (as
commonly every Grand Signor has) then those are brought up apart, and not with
the Queens; so that every mother cares for her own children, and that Mothers
(...)
with great envy, and jealousy: yet they may play together, till they come to
be of six or seven years of age; being much made of, sumptuously maintained,
and apparelled all alike at the Kings charge.

They live among the women till they come to be of nine, or ten years of age,
and about fourteen, they are circumcised with great pomp, and solemnities
thorowout Circumcision solemnity
the whole city, especially the eldest son. For the circumcisions of the Turks
children are like to the Christian weddings; there being used at them great
feasting, banqueting, music, and bringing of presents.

From five years of age until ten (during which time they live amongst the
women) they have their Hojah (that is, Hojah, or schoolmaster.
their Schoolmaster) appointed them by the King to teach them to write, and
read, and to instruct them in good manners, that they may behave themselves
decently before the King their father; which Hojah comes once a day into the
women's Seraglio, and is brought into a chamber by the black Eunuchs (without
ever seeing the Kings women at all) whither the children come accompanied with
two or three old Black-moor women slaves; and there they are taught for so many
hours together, as their tutor is permitted to stay, and then he departs.

As for the daughters, they are but slightly looked after; nor is the King so
tender, and careful over them. For as The Kings daughters.
they are not suspected at all, for any thing that may concern the state in
future times; so likewise are they not much respected: yet they are well
provided for by the Grand Signor their father, in case they live to be fit for
husbands.

After the The word signifies a Kings son in the Persian tongue.
Shawhzawdeh (the next heir to the crown) is circumcised; if his father think
it unfit to keep him any longer with him at home in the Seraglio, he provides
all things fitting for to send him abroad: that he may see the world, and learn
experience, the better to enable him for to govern the Empire after his Fathers
decease: sending along with him one of his principal, and trusty Eunuchs, for
to be his guide, and overseer in all his actions; An Eunuch his overseer.
besides many servants to attend upon him; all which he chooses out of his own
Seraglio. He allows him likewise sufficient means to maintain him like a
Prince (as he does also the rest of his sons, if he have a purpose to send any
of them abroad.) And so all things being well ordered, and prepared for him;
having taken leave of his father, and mother (who present him with many gifts,
as also the Sultana's, and all the Bashaws, and great men of the Court do) he
departs for Magnesia, a city in Asia, there to reside in the government of that
province; Magnesia his residence.
in which he has not the supreme authority, but governs only as his fathers
deputy. And should he pass the limits His commission.
of his commission, he would quickly fall into disgrace, and suspicion of
rebellion; as heretofore it has happened unto diverse of his predecessors, sent
out in the same manner. Wherefore the Eunuch who is appointed to be his helper
and overseer, is bound to give continual advise to the Grand Signor of his
deportment, and to the Vizirs of all occurrences whatsoever, according to the
charge given him: and likewise to receive from Constantinople such orders, and
commandments, as are to be obeyed in those parts where the Prince resideth. So
that all things (in a manner) are swayed by the discretion of the Eunuch.

CHAP. IX.
Of the cooks, kitchins; diet of the King, Queen, and others; of the manner of
service; of the skullery, and provision of the Seraglio.

THe victuals in the Seraglio (for the Victual^ and cooks.
most part are dressed by Agiamoglans brought up to cookery, (which are called
Cooks.
Aschees, and are known from other Agiamoglans by their white caps; yet in the
form of a sugar loaf as well as the others are) howbeit there are belonging to
the kitchins that are therein, more then two hundred under cooks, and
skullions; besides their principal officers, as sewers, caterers, and such
like: all which are carefully to look to their several kitchins, and not any
one to trust another with his business.

The Kings kitchen begins to work ordinarily The Kings kitchen and meals.
before break of day. For his highness rising betimes, there must be always
somewhat ready for him; because commonly he eats three or four times a day.
He dines usually at ten of the clock in the forenoon, and sups about six at
night, as well in the summer, as in the winter.

When he has a will to eat, he tells the Capee Aga of it, who forthwith sends
an Eunuch to give notice of the same to the chief Sewer, and he having caused
the meat to be dished up, brings it in dish by dish to the Kings table: and so
his Majesty sits down, after the common Turkish fashion, with his legs a
cross, having His sitting at meat.
a very rich towel cast before him upon his knees to save his clothes: and
another hanging upon his left arm, which he uses for his napkin to wipe his
mouth, and fingers. He is not carved unto as other Princes are, but helps
himself; having before Not carved.
him upon a piece of Bulgar leather (which is in stead of a table cloth) fine
white bread, of three or four sorts, well relished, and always very new: as
indeed His bread.
all Turks love their bread best when it is warm, newly come forth of the oven.
He neither uses knife, nor fork, but only No knife, nor fork. Two spoons.
a wooden spoon, of which there are two always laid before him: the one
serving him to eat his pottage, and the other to sup up certain delicate
sirrups, made of Sirrups.
diverse fruits compounded with the juice of lemmons, and sugar, to quench his
thirst. He tastes of his dishes one by one, and as he has done with them they
are taken off. His meat is so tender, and so delicately dressed, that (as I
said before) he needs no knife, but pulls the flesh from the bones very easily
with his fingers. He uses no salt at his Table, neither No salt, nor antepast.
has he any Antepast; but immediately falls aboard the flesh, and having well
fed, closes up his stomach with a A Tart.
Bocklava, or some such like thing. And so his dinner or supper being ended, he
Basin and Ewer.
washes his hands in a basin of gold, with the Ewer all set with precious
stones.

His Majesty's ordinary diet (as I have His diet.
been told by some of the Aschees) is, half a score roasted pigeons in a dish,
two or three geese in a dish, lamb, hens, chickins, mutton, and sometimes wild
fowl, but very seldom: and look what he has roasted for him, so he has the
same quantity boiled, almost of every thing, there being very good sauce for
every dish, and other ingredients very pleasing to the palate. He has likewise
brothes of all sorts, and diverse purcelain dishes full of preserves, and
sirrups; and some Tarts, and Little pies.
B^recks after their fashion made of flesh covered with paste. Having made an
end of eating, he drinks one draught of It is an Arabian word, and signifies
drink; of these Sherbets there are very many sorts. Drinking once.
Sherbet (seldom or never drinking above once at a meal) which is brought unto
him by one of his Agas in a deep Purcelain dish covered, standing upon a flat
under-dish of the same metal.

All the while that he is at Table, he No words at meals according to this
saying, Evel tazawm anden kelawm: first victuals and then words. Mutes and
jesters.
very seldom, or never, speaks to any man; albeit there stand before him many
Mutes, and Buffons to make him merry, playing tricks, and sporting one with
another, alla Mutescha, which the King understands very well. For by their
signs their meaning is easily conceived, and if peradventure he should
vouchsafe to speak a word or two, it is to grace some one of his Agas standing
by him, whom he highly favors; throwing unto him a loaf of bread from his
own ^is favor.
Table: and this is held for a singular grace, and especial favor; and he
distributing part of it amongst his companions, they likewise accept of it at
the second hand, and account it as a great honor done unto them, in regard it
came from their Lord, and King.

The dishes for his highness Table, are all of gold, and so likewise are their
covers. Dishes, and covers of gold.
They are in the custody of the Keelergee Bashawe, who attends at the kitchen,
at dinner and supper time: and so are all the yellow purcelane dishes (which
are very costly, and scarcely to be had for money) in which the Grand Signor
eats in the Ramazan time, which Yellow Purcelane for the Ramazan or Lent.
is their lent, and lasts a whole moon, and the month it self is so called.
Now at that time, the Turks never eat in the day, but only in the night; not
making any difference at all, in meats (excepting swines flesh, and things
strangled) of which they are forbidden by their law to eat at any time.

The King seldom eats fish, unless it be when he is abroad, at some garden
house by the sea side, with his women; where he may sit, and see it taken
himself.

The meat which remains of that which The remainders of his meat.
was at the Grand Ssgnors table, is immediately carried to the Gentlemen
wa^ters.
Aghas table, who wait upon him: so that they (what with that, and their own
diet together) are exceeding well provided. Whilst the Aghas are eating, the
King passes away His sporting with his Buffons.
the time with his Mutes, and Buffons, not speaking (as I said) at all with his
tongue, but only by signs. And now and then he kicks, and buffeteth them in
sport: but forthwith makes them amends, by giving them money. For which
purpose, his pockets are always furnished, so that they are well contented
with that pastime.

In the mean time also, the Capee Agha eats in a room apart such meat as is
prepared The Capee Agas d^et.
for him in his kitchen, being far inferior to the Kings diet. And with him do
eat, the Hazi^ehdar Bashawe, the Saraj Agasee, and sometimes, some of the Kings
Physicians, whom he calls in for to bear him company; and such other Eunuchs
which are keepers of the Seraglio's abroad, as do come to visit him. And the
remainder of his diet with a fresh supply from the kitchins, serves From one to
another, or from hand to hand. Diet for the Oda youths.
diman in mano, all the other white Eunuchs.

In this interim likewise, is meat sent to all the other Odas for the youths
there; which is two loaves apiece, a day, and a little boiled mutton, with
pottage of rice, mingled with butter, and honey; which indeed consists more of
broth then substance; it being but thin of rice, and so little flesh in it,
that it is well, if it give but a taste thereof, when they sop their bread in
the dish.

On the other side, is meat carried in by black Eunuchs to the Queen, to the
Sultana's, and to all the other women; Queen and Sultanas diet
wherein is observed the same order, as is aforesaid with the King: insomuch as
in the space of an hour and half, or two hours at the most, all is dispatched.

The Queens service is in copper dishes, tinned over: but kept very bright, and
Queens service in copper.
clean, and some also of white Purselain: however it is to be understood, that
she her self may be served as she pleases; and so questionless may all the
Sultana's, (although their ordinary allowance be no other then Copper.) For
oftentimes the King is amongst them a whole day The King with his women.
together, eating, sporting, and sleeping, of which there is no notice taken,
nor may any look into his actions: where, amongst themselves, they make him
delicate, and sumptuous banquets, (over, and above the ordinary meals of
dinner, and supper) of sweet meats, and fruits of all sorts, having daily an
abundance presented unto them.

They drink their sherbet in the summer time, mingled with snow, of which Snow
mixed with sherbet.
there is a great quantity preserved yearly, for to serve the Seraglio; but at
a very dear rate. For the snow does stand the Port in more then twenty thousand
chicquins a year, in gifts, and ceremonies, Eight thousand pound sterling.
and other expenses at the fetching it in from the hills, and in putting it
under ground in houses made of purpose for that use.

They do not ordinarily use Comfets, Comsets and Cheese not used.
nor Cheese. For the Turks do hardly know how to make them, especially cheese,
which if they make, yet it never proves good. So that the Sultana's, all the
Bashawes, and other great personages, eat none but Parmezan, of which the
Leiger Ambassador.
Bailo of Venice, does always furnish them, and that very plentifully: for
they love it well, and eat heartily of it, when they go abroad upon pleasure,
to take the air.

For the sundry provisions of the said Seraglio, all things are prepared in
great Order.
abundance: and every particular provision is assigned to particular persons,
to take care thereof; so that there is never any want at all of things
necessary. For the Officers are sure upon the least complaint made against them
to lose their places. Wherefore (as it behooves them) they are very careful to
see, not only that there be a sufficiency, but also that it be very good.

The first, and best sort of bread (which indeed is very white, and savoury) is
Bread of 3 sorts.
for the Grand Signor, the Sultana's, the Bashawes, and other great ones; The
second sort for them of middle rank. And the third and last sort (which is very
black and course) is for the Agiamoglans, and others of base quality.

The meal whereof the best sort of bread is made, for the Grand Signor, and the
Sultana's, is brought from Bursia, Meal from Bursia.
made of the wheat of that Province of Bithynia, and growing in the Kings own
ground. The yearly provision thereof is, about seven or eight thousand Keloes,
which makes almost so many bushels of Quanty.
our measure in London: the which wheat makes the best flour that comes to
Constantinople; for that it is also ground at Bursia, and those mills are far
better then any, that are near Constantinople.
Stanboll.

Now for the other wheat which they spend, it comes (for the most part) from
Volo in Graecia by shipping, where there Volo-wheat.
is a great portion of land belonging to the crown. And a great part of the
corn there growing is spent yearly in the kings Armada, made into biscuit at
Negroponte: some also is sold to the Raguseans, and others, who come with their
shipping to lade it thence: but they must bring their authority with them from
Constantinople, underwritten with the chief Uizirs own hand. And there is
likewise brought yearly to Stanboll, of the aforesaid wheat of Volo, thirty
five, or forty thousand Kelo's: the which is laid up in Storehouses
Magazines, and is afterward ground, and most ^uantity.
of it spent in the Seraglio: that which remains, they sell away into the city.

Nor is it any wonder, that the Seraglio, consumes so much bread corn. For,
besides the ordinary servants, as aforesaid, all the Sultana's, and great
personages, with diverse others, have their daily, and due allowance of bread,
from the Keeler, that is, the Pantry, or from his Majesty's Bakehouse; viz.
every Sultana twenty loaves; every Bashawe ten; to Pantry allowance.
the Muftee eight; and so to diverse others a several proportion, even to one
loaf a man: all which is ordered, and done by the commandment, and discretion
of the chief Uizir; their several allowances being set down in the chief
Pantlers Books, or else in his, who is the Overseer of the Bake-houses: every
loaf being as big as three of our penny loaves in London, but very light, and
spungie, and easy of digestion.

The rice, and lentiles, and all other sorts of pulse (of which there is a
great Rice, and pulse from Alexandria.
quantity spent, is brought yearly from Alexandria in the Galeons, which make
yearly two voiages, and bring out of Egypt, not only the said pulse, but also
all sorts of spice, and sugar, and a great quantity of preserves, and pickled
meats, Spice, sugar, and sweet meats.
which the Turks much delight in. And as for sugar, there is spent an
unspeakable deal of it, in the making of Sherbets, and Tarts.
Boclavas, which not only the Seraglio uses: but are also ordinary presents
from one Bashawe to another, and from one friend to another: insomuch that it
is a thing to be admired, that so great a quantity should so suddenly be
consumed.

True it is, that there is but little spice Little Spice consumed.
spent in the Seraglio, nor indeed any great store among the Turks (pepper only
excepted.) For seeing wine is not an ordinary drink amongst them, they
therefore avoid the eating of such things, as do provoke a desire thereunto.
Howsoever, in the storehouses of the Port, there is provision of all sorts of
spices, and drugs, whatsoever occasion should happen, that might require the
use of them.

There likewise comes from Egypt great store of dates, prunes, and other dried
Egyptian fruits.
plums of diverse sorts, which the Cooks use in their dressing of meat; as well
for roast as boiled in broths: and indeed they make very delicate dishes of them.

The honey (of which the Port spends a great quantity, both in their broths,
Honey whence.
boiled meats, They call them yo^f ka signifying flat.
Pancakes, The Turks call them lo^kma, which signifies, a bit, or mouthful.
Frittars, and course Sherbets for the common sort of people) is brought in
great earthen jars, from Walachia, from Transylvania, and Moldavia, as well
that which is presented by the Princes of those Provinces, to the Grand Signor,
as that which comes for particular men's accounts. Yet that honey which is used
in the Kings own kitchen, comes from The Turks call it, sak^z Ada; that is the
mastick island, because the mastick grows there.
Cio, and is far better, and purer then the other.

The oil (of which there is an unspeakable Oil whence.
quantity spent, by reason of the many uses they put it unto; as well in their
meats, as for their lamps, and the like) is brought from Modon, and Coron in
Graecia: the Governor, next in degree to a Beglerbegh.
Sanjack Beg of that Province being bound to see the Port sufficiently
furnished therewith from time to time; howbeit that which is spent in the Kings
own kitchen is brought from Candie, and Zant: it being sweeter, cleerer, and in
every respect better, then that of the Morea.

The butter (of which also there is spent a very great quantity, in that it is
used Butter from Bogdania, etc
almost in all their meats, especially in that ordinary dish which they call
Boild rice.
Pillaw) comes by shipping out of the Black sea from Bogdania, and from Caffa,
being put into great Ox hides, and Buffalo hides, with the hairy sides inward;
and so is laid up in Storehouses
Magazines, for the yearly provision of the Kings court: but commonly they have
so much of it, that they are fain to sell part into the city; Quantity.
as they likewise do by the oil, honey, etc. which are Begleek, (that is, for
the Grand Signors own account) when they have more then they think they shall
have occasion to spend, and make a wonderful great benefit of it: oftentimes
enforcing the shopkeepers to take it at what price they please to rate it at,
although it be ill conditioned, and ready to stink.

The Turks are no whit acquainted No fresh butter.
with fresh butter, there being little, or none at all, made about
Constantinople: neither do the eat much milk, Little milk eaten.
except it be made ^re, which they call Yoghurd. For ^eing so turned Yoghurd.,
sower milk.
sour, it does quen^ the thirst: and of that both they, and the Christians do
eat a great quantity in the summer time. They eat also some store of Kaymack
(that is, clouted, or clodded cream) Kaymack.
but that is a dish for the better sort only, it being a meat of too high a
price for the vulgar.

Now as for the flesh: every year in the Autumn, winter drawing nigh, the
Provision of fle^h.
Bashawe causes the provision of So called because the flesh is pressed and
made flat. How they use it.
Basturma to be made for the Kings kitchins; which must be of cowes great with
calf. For then (say they) the flesh is most tender and savoury. They use it in
the same manner, as Christians use swines flesh. For they make puddings, and
sausages of it, and the rest they boil, and dress after other fashions.

This sort of dried flesh, (after that it is sufficiently dried, and hardened,
with Hanged up, and dried.
hanging a month, or better, in some upper room, and little, or no salt used
about it, but pressed very flat) will last the whole year following, and eat
very savourly. And it is in such great use amongst the Turks, and so well liked
of, that there is scarce any Master of a family, if he be of ability, but does
yearly against winter make his provision of it; and it is held a very thrifty
and sparing course. For that then fresh meat would be very dear. But they do
not all make their Basturma of cowes great with calf, (that is for the
Seraglio) for there are many which love the other better, which i made of Oxen
and Bullocks; and they can buy it far cheaper.

The Bashawe (as I said) has the care, 400 Cowes great with calf spent every
year to make Basturma.
and oversight of what is prepared for the Kings kitchens, and there are
commonly spent four hundred cowes every year for the said provision of
Basturma; there is also fresh beef spent in the Seraglio: but the quantity is
uncertain.

The other flesh, which is daily provided, and spent in the kitchens of the
Seraglio Other flesh.
(as I was told by one of the Cooks.
Aschees) is as follows; sheep two hundred, lambs, or kids, when they are in
season, one hundred, calves ten, geese fifty, hens two hundred, chickens one
hundred, pigeons an hundred pair.

There is very little store of fish spent in the Seraglio, either shellfish,
or other: Fish.
yet sometimes the Agas for dainties will eat some. The seas thereabout do
exceedingly abound with diverse kinds, and they may easily take as many as they
please: by reason of which the Christians are plentifully served with fish in
the markets, and at reasonable prices, and the common and poorer sort of Turks
do bear them company in that diet.

The Grand Signor (nor any of his women, or servants in the Seraglio) cannot
Fruits.
want for fruit: there being at time of year so many presents, of all sorts of
fruits, brought thither, besides what comes from the Kings own gardens (which
are many, and near the city) every morning in great abundance, and excellent
good; especially, figs, grapes, peaches, and Melous.
Caoons; the Gardiners selling the remainder at a place in Constantinople,
Which is called yemish bazar, that is, the fruit market.
where only the Kings fruit is sold, and bring the money weekly to the
Bustangee Bashawe, who afterward gives it to his Majesty; and it is called
jebbe ackchesee, that is, the Kings pocket-money. The Kings pocket-money.
For he gives it away by handfulls, as he sees occasion, to his Mutes and
Buffones, at such times as they make him sport. Now this fruit being sold, the
buyers of it do commonly send it to some great personages: for it is
extraordinary good, and so artificially piled up in baskets, by the Agiam
oglans gardiners.
Bustangees, that for the beauty of it, it oftentimes proves more acceptable
then a gift of greater price.

The furniture of the kitchens in the The skullery
Seraglio, as kettles, caldrons, pots, and skillets, etc. are almost all of
brass and they are so neatly kept, and of such a largeness, that there cannot
be a braver sight of that nature; insomuch that one would rather think, that
they stood there to be sold, then that they should be so often used as they
are. And as for the dishes, they are all of copper tinned over: but so often
new furbished, scowred, and trimmed, that (they being daily used) it is
wonderful to behold their continual Neatness.
brightness. And of these dishes they have a great number: but the Grand
Signor sustains great loss by Loss by pi^tering.
them. For their being such a multitude of people served daily from the
kitchens, both within, and without (especially upon the four Divan days) there
are so many of them stolen, that the Defterdars (weighing the loss, and
charge of the said dishes) have oftentimes been almost resolved, to make them
all of silver, and so consign them to the custody of the Sewers, and Butlers,
who should from time to time give account of them, and look the better to them,
and not to suffer every ordinary fellow to carry away his meat in them, as they
do in the other copper ones: but finding it a thing so costly, not any
Defterdar (as yet has) performed it, nor adventured to begin, only have
discoursed of it, and approved of that course, as a remedy to prevent their
usual pilfering.

The wood which is spent in the aforesaid kitchens, and in all the Seraglio, is
Wood and fuel.
an infinite number of weights (for at Constantino^e the wood is all bought,
and sold by weight, and so is almost every thing else) there being for the
account of the Seraglio (which they call Begleek) about thirty great Ships.
Caramusals, which do nothing else at one season of the year, but sail into the
Black sea, there to lade at the Kings woods. It is a business which costeth
the Grand Signor but little, or nothing (in respect of the worth of it.) For
they have it for the cutting down, and as for the bringing, and unloading of
it, it requires little or no charge at all. For the said Caramusals are bound
to make so many returns in a year for the king, and to receive no fraught; and
the Masters are to see it unladen at the appointed wharfe, at their own costs,
and charges; receiving only a discharge in the end from the An officer of good
account, which takes care for the cities provision: The word signifies the
master of Stanboll.
Stanbol Aga for that years service, but no recompense at all. Afterward they
may work for themselves, and go whither they please, till their turns come
again for the year following.

CHAP. X.
Of apparel, bedding, sickness, hospitals, inheritance, Kings expenses,
recreatious, his going abroad, receiving of petitions, of the Kings stables,
and Byram solemnities.

THe Grand Signors apparel, is nothing different in fashion from other The
fashion of the Kings apparel.
men's, saving in the length of his vests, and the richness thereof, nor are
his shoes plated with iron at the heels, as other Turks wear them: but are
raced, and painted like childrens shoes, with knots and flowers, or else they
are all white. The fashion of his Turbant is all one with that of the Bashawes:
but he wears plumes, and brooches in his, and so does not any Bashawe in the
Port, except the Uizir Azem, and that is upon the day when he makes a solemn
show at his departure for the wars.

As for his lodging; he sleeps upon matteresses of velvet, and cloth of His
bedding.
gold: in the summer in sheets of *Shash embrodered with silk, sown to A shash
is the whole piece (be it long or short) of fine linen, of which the Turbant
is made; but the name of the stuff (as we call ours lawn, cambrick, holland,
etc. is Telbent: when^e we (falsely) call that which ^urk wears a Turbant, using
the ^ame of the stuff for the thing made up: whereas the true word is Saruck,
and the Turks themselves so call it: it comes from Sarmack which signifies to
wind about, or to swathe.
the quilts, and in the winter betwixt coverlets of Lusernes, or of Sables,
wearing all night a Night-attire, for the Head.
Gheje-lick, or little shash on his head.

And when he lies alone in his own lodgings, he is always watched by the Pages
of his chamber, by two and two at a time, changing their watch every three
hours; one of them standing at the chamber door; and the other by the bed side
to cover him, in case the clothes should slide off, and to be near hand if his
Majesty should want any thing, or be ill at ease. In the same chamber also
where he lies, there are always two old Two torchwomen.
women, that wait with burning torches in their hands, which they may not put
out, till such time as the king is risen out of his bed: now the use of these
lights is, for his Majesty to say over his Beads, and for to pray by, in case
his devotion be stirred up thereto, at midnight, or at Temcheet namaz, which is
the time of prayer, about two hours before day.

The habit of his women, is much like to that of the men. For they wear
Breeches, from the waste down to the heel.
Women's habit.
Chackshirs, and Buskins too, and the meaner sort of them, have their shoes
shod with iron at the heels.

They likewise sleep as the men do, in their linen breeches, and quilted
waste-coats; having thin, and light ones for the summer, and more thick, and
warm ones for the winter.

The Turks never have any close-stools, No closestools, among the men; but the
women ever when they go to the Haman or Bath, carry them along with them. No
paper used at the privy.
or such like utensils in their chambers; but having necessity they rise, and
go to the privies, made in places apart, where there do always stand pots full
of water ready, that they may wash when they have done. For they use no paper
in that service, as others do; holding it not only undecent, but an
extraordinary absurdity for a Mussulman to put paper to so base a use: seeing
that both the name of God, and the Mohammedan Law, are written upon it. They all
put off their Turbants when they go about that business; and a Janizarie may
by no means piss with his They also call it Ke^heh, that is, a Janissaries cap,
but Uskuf properly signisieth a hood.
Uskuf upon his head, but having done, he must kiss it, and so put it on
again. For they hold the covering of their heads to be as honorable, in a
manner, as the head it self.

The several stipends, which the Grand Stipends how paid.
Signor allows to those of the Seraglio (of what degree or condition soever
the persons be) are paid out of the outmost Hazineh; and the chief Defterdar
(who has a book as well of the names of the stipendiaries, as of their stipends)
is bound to send once in three months, to Every thr^ months,
all the Odas, in several bags so much money as their pay comes to, and there
they share it amongst them: the like he does also by the women, and the
Agiam^glans, paying them in good money. And against the Byram, which is their
Carneval, he must send them their vests, their linen, and such like
necessaries; of all which he never fails them. For if he should disappoint them
(especially at that time) they would so complain against the said Defterdar,
that it would be his utter overthrow, or at the least he should be sure to lose
his place: such is the Grand Signors care for his servants, that they may not
want whatsoever is befitting each particular person, in his several degree.

When any one dies in the Seraglio, whether it be Itchoglan, or Agiamoglan,
Seraglio heirs.
his chamber fellows are made his heirs, and that which he leaves behind him
is equally divided amongst them; and so is it with the young women which never
lay with the King: but if any great Eunuch die, all comes to the Grand Signor.
Exception.
For they are always very rich, by reason of the manifold gifts, and
gratuities, which daily come to their hands: and if any Eunuch of the
Seraglio's abroad, or in other places of government, should die, then two
thirds only of his estate falls to the King by Canon, the other third part
being to be disposed of, according to the Testators will: this also is only by
permission, when the King gives way unto it, and will not out of his supreme
authority, and power, take all to himself, as he uses to do by all great rich
ones: the Kings person being held the principal, and most lawful heir of all,
they esteeming themselves as slaves, which have received their livelihood,
goods, estates, and all that they have enjoyed, merely from his greatness, and
bounty; so that they may not grudge to render back again at their deaths (or
whenever he shall require it) all that they do possess. And to this end
there is an officer called the Beyt el Mawlgee; who so soon Beyt el mawlgee.
as any one dies, or is put to death, makes inquisition after their estates,
and so certifies the Defterdar thereof, leaving the performance to him, if it
be of great import: but the Beyt el Mawlgee for his own private gain, does
oftentimes conceal (after search made) a great part of the estate of the
deceased; dividing the His subtil^y.
same, privately betwixt the kindred, and himself.

When any ordinary person falls sick in the Seraglio, he is immediately carried
from his chamber in a Cart, covered with cloth, and drawn with hands, and is
put into the aforesaid Hospital, or Lazaretta, Hospital.
belonging to the house only; where he is looked unto after the Turkish
fashion, and kept so closely, that none may come to the speech of him (except
the Physician, or Apothecary) but with great difficulty; and growing well
again, he must be carried back, in the same manner, to his own chamber where he
was at the first.

The expenses of the Seraglio are very great, as one may gather by what has
been already said: but there are moreover diverse other charges of great
consideration which the King is at, by reason The Kings expenses.
of the Sultana Queen, and then of the Chief Vizirs, the Captains, or Generals.
Serdars of his several forces both by sea, and land, and the great Defterdars,
and others: to all which he gives gratuities, accarding as he sees fit upon
sundry occosions, as well at the times of their going forth, as at their returns
from their employments abroad, and upon good services done at home: the which
gifts, are vests, some unlined, and some lined with very costly furs, swords,
bows, Daggers.
Hanjars, plumes, and brooches, girdles, all set with rich stones, and many
other things of great value: and again some but of low price, according to the
quality, and desert of the parties, to whom his majesty is pleased to show his
liberality. Nay the Hazinehdar Bashawe, who has the keeping of the cloth of
gold, and silver of Bursia, does affirm that, in that one commodity to make
vests of, there is spent yearly two hundred thousand Sultanas: 200000.
Sultanas, about 80000 pounds sterling.
besides what he disburseth for the buying of Venetian silks, and woollen
clothes, of which the Seraglio consumes a great quantity, they not wearing (for
the most part) any other.

Neither does this alone serve the turn. For besides all this the Grand Signor
gives away all that which is given him by strangers; and a great part also of
that which comes to him of the spoil of the dead, of which he is Master, as
has been showed before.

And surely, should his Majesty want these helps, he could not long continue
his liberality, giving (...) he does to his women, to his Bashawes, and to all
such as are at any time to kiss his hand. Nevertheless, true it is, that the
greatest part of things of value, (...) he gives away, in time comes again
(...) his hands. For his Sultana's, Bashawes, Eunuchs, or other rich men,
dying, he immediately becomes Master of all again, or (at least) of the
greatest part of their estate: and so of such things there is a continual
ebbing, and flowing in the Seraglio.

The Queen likewise gives much away. For as she is presented by many; so is it
The Queens expenses.
fit that she should in part make some compensation: and to that end, she has
an allowance of vests, and other things in great abundance: besides she has
liberty to dispose of many of those which have been worn by the King.

The Uizir Azem is also a giver at the The Vizirs gifts.
Kings charge; as well whilst he is in Constantinople, as when he is upon
departure, as General of the Grand Signors army, to the wars: and to that end
before he departs, he has brought unto him from the Hazinehdar Bashawe a
great number of vests, and other things that he may be provided, when he is in
the field, with presents according to the Turkish custom: which (in all
businesses, and upon every occasion) is, to give, and take.

The King (if he please) may at any time go abroad out of the Seraglio, either
by water, or by land: when he goes by water he has his Kaik, or barge of
sixteen, or eighteen banks, with a very sumptuous, and stately Poop, covered
over with crimson velvet richly embroydered, under which he himself sits, and
none but he upon cushons of velvet, and cloth of gold; his Agas standing all on
their feet, holding with one hand by the side of the Kaik, and only the
Bustangee Bashawe, who steers the barge, may now and then sit down, that he may
handle the helm the better. Now the Bustangee Bashawe, by reason the King talks
much with him in the Kaik (at which Mutes howling.
time, lest any one should hear what they say, the Mutes fall a howling like
little dogs) may benefit, or prejudice whom he pleases: the Grand Signor being
altogether ignorant of diverse passages, and apt to believe any information,
either with, or against any subject whatsoever. His barge is rowed by
Agiamoglans, which are brought up in that exercise, and indeed they manage the
business very well and nimbly; not sitting at all when they row, but as they
fetch their stroke, they step up upon the next bank before them, and so with
the stroke fall Their manner of rowing.
backward flat on their backs upon the next bank behind them: much resembling
the manner of rowing in the galleys.

When he goes forth by land, he always His going out by land.
rides on hors-back, and goes out (commonly) at the greatest gate, especially
at such times as he is to go to the Moschea, or Church, which is upon the
Friday (it being their Sabbath) and is accompanied into the city by all the
Bashawes, and other Grandes of the Port, besides many of his own household
servants which go by his stirrup, and his Agas riding after him; having diverse
Solacks also with their bows, and arrows, Solacks, or bowe-men.
which go before him for his guard. And as he rides along the streets, he
salutes the people with nodding his head toward them, who again salute him
with loud shouts, and prayers of prosperity, and happiness; and for
recompense, Gratulations and gratifications.
the King oftentimes puts his hand into his pocket, and throws whole handfuls
of money amongst them. Now they of the Seraglio, which go along by his stirrup,
have charge to take all such Petitions, as are preferred to his Majesty as he
rides along either to, or from the Petitions - preferred.
Moschea: and many poor men, who dare not presume, by reason of their ragged
apparel, to approach near unto so majestic a prefence, stand afar off with
fire upon their heads, holding up their petitions in their hands, the which the
Grand Signor seeing (who never despises, but rather encourages the poor)
sends immediately to take the Arzes, or petitions, and being returned home into
his Seraglio, reads them all, and then gives order for redress as he thinks
fit. By reason of which complaints, the King oftentimes takes occasion to
execute the fury of his wrath, and displeasure, even upon the most eminent in
place, before they are aware, without taking any course in law against them
(only acquainting the Muftee with his design, who seldom or never does oppose
him) but causing a sudden execution of what punishments he pleases upon them;
either putting them to death, or at the least, turning them out of their
places. For as he styles himself The worlds refuge.
Awlem penawh, so he would have the world to take notice, that such as lament
unto him, shall be sure to have redress, and succor from him; although his
ministers fail them, or abuse them through their injustice. Which makes the
Bashawes, and other great officers, that they care not how seldom the Grand
Signor stirs abroad in public, for fear lest in that manner their unjust
proceedings, and bad justice should come to his ear. And indeed they always
live in great fear, through the multiplicity of business that passes through
their hands, and in danger of loosing their lives at a short warning (as it
has been ever observed, that few Uizirs die in their beds) which makes them
use this Proverb: that he that is even the greatest in office, is but a statue
of glass: but notwithstanding their brittle estate, bribery Proverb.
has so bewitched them, that hap, what will hap, he that will give most shall
be sure to speed at their hands.

The Grand Signor, for the use of his household, has in Constantinople at a
place called That is the stable wharf, or gate. The Kings great stable.
Ahur Capsee, near unto the Seraglio; an exceeding large stable of a thousand
horses and upward: and the Chief master of the horse, the true word is
Emeer-Ahor which signifies Lord of the stable.
Imrohor Bashawe, which is Master of the horse, has the charge of them, as of
all his other horses, mules, camels, and all his cattle whatsoever, and of all
the kings hay, and provender: having an under Imrohor for his assistant,
besides many ordinary grooms which are to look to them, and see that the
Horse-keepers.
Seises keep them in good case. Now the said Imrohor Bashawe, and his Deputy,
are to see the Grand Signors servants provided of horses, at such times as they
accompany his Majesty abroad, either solemnly at shows in the city, or abroad
at hunting, or otherwise as the King pleases.

Besides this stable, he has diverse others in other places, both for his own
Other stables
service, and for the use of his Gentlemen, at such times as he, or they shall
come thither: namely, at his Gardens, and houses of pleasure abroad in the
country, to which his Majesty uses to go very often; but these stables have
not above eight, or ten horses a piece in them. For to those houses he carries
but few followers with him, and those few are the chiefest Agas of all.

He has also stables of stallions for race in Bursia, Adrianople, and in
diverse Stallion horses.
other places; from which are brought to Constantinople very stately colts;
besides such as are continually sent him for presents from Cairo, Damascus,
Bagdat, and other places by the Bashawes, he has also many which fall to his
share by the death of great persons: all which are horses of great price, and
kept for his own use.

But because there must be a great number of horses, for ordinary services of
the baser sort of servants, the King is therefore furnished with low prized
nags His nags from Walachia.
out of Walachia.

Besides the aforesaid stables of horses; the Grand Signor is provided of five
thousand mules, kept near to Constantinople, Mules.
which serve to carry Pavillions, chests, water, and all other necessaries for
travel: but because the Vizir Azem (at his going out General) makes use of a
great part of them, there is seldom that number complete at home. And should
the King himself go out to the wars in person, his very household would use a
thousand of them, besides their riding horses. For the Ottoman Emperors are
almost as well accommodated in their voyages abroad, as they are at home in the
city; and indeed the generality of the Turks are so well fitted, against such
times as they are to go forth, especially for long journeyes, as I think no
people in the world can go beyond them.

The Grand Signor is bound by Canon of the Empire, upon the first day of the
Byram, which is their Carneval, the Ramazan being ended, which is their
day-lent, to show himself publicly, and Public appearing a^ the Byram.
to let all the great men, and the better sort of his own servants kiss his
vest; wherefore upon that day early in the morning, being richly clad, and
decked with his best jewels; he comes forth of his lodgings, at that gate
which is kept by white Eunuchs in the second court, and sets himself down in a
certain place called the A Throne.
Taht, upon a Persian carpet of silk and gold, close by the aforesaid gate; and
does not stir thence until such time as all that are appointed have kissed his
vest, in token of their reverence, and duty toward him: the chief Uizir
standing close by him, and telling him the names of such as he thinks fit, and
their places, to the end the Grand Signor may take the better notice of them.
Now to some of the Doctors of the Law, His honor to some.
which are of high degree, the King raises himself up a little to honor, and
receive them; and to some he shows more grace, and affection, then to other
some, and indeed to all more then ordinary: especially to the Muftee, and the
two Cadeleeschers.

Now this ceremony being ended, he goes to the Moschea of Sancta Sophia, His
going to Sancta Sophia.
accompanied by them all; where having finished the Divine service.
Namaz for that day, he hears a sermon; and at his return, taking his leave of
them, he retires himself to his own lodgings, where he dines alone, as he does
upon other days: notwithstanding upon that day he maketk a very sumptuous
banquet in the Divan for the Bashawes, and other Grandes, and a very great
dinner in the Court yard for all such as did accompany him, and are there
present. Then after dinner his Majesty observing the ordinary custom, sends
the Uizir Azem, for his Byramlick, A present of the nature of a new years gift.
a very rich vest furred with a costly fur; and doing the like by the other
great ones of the Port, (though with Gifts to the Grandees.
vests of far lower price) he also extends his bounty to all his Agas,
bestowing upon them swords, Daggers.
Hanjars, and such like things; and upon the Sultana's costly jewels, Such caps
as the women wear.
Filjan take as, and Girdles.
Coshacks all set with stones: besides many gifts to others of the Seraglio,
giving Byramlicks, (or as we say) new years gifts to all.

Every night during the three days of three days solemnity.
the Byram (for it is but for three days, and so it ends) he causes shows to
be Fireworks, and shows.
made of fireworks, and such like, by the water side, which continue until
morning, and a great drum is beaten all the while; and that the Sultana's may
see them, the King comes of purpose into their company to be merry with them,
and is more free, and familiar then at other times; he also gives free liberty
for mirth, and sports, both by day and night, thorowout the whole city, during
those three days.

There are also invited ^o these great Presents to the King.
festivals all the Sultana's which live out of the Seraglio, who both give
presents to the King, and take Byramlicks of him: moreover in this Byram the
Grand Signor From the Bashawes.
is presented by the Bashawes, and great personages, with gifts of very great
price. For every one strives to exceed another, thinking thereby to win favor.
The Sultanas also are not behind hand; for they present him with shirts,
handkerchiefs, From the Sultanas.
linen breeches, towels, and such like things of good value, being all very
curiously wrought, the which the Grand Signor afterward makes use of, for his
own wearing.

The same Feast,
Byram of three days, is kept in all his dominions, and throughout the city of
Constantinople, even in every Turks house; the streets being (almost at every
corner) set out, and decked with pretty devises, and Swings.
Salunjacks of diverse sorts, very artificially made, where old and young are
solaced; and giving two or three aspars to the keepers of the swings, have
sufficient recreation. But during this feast, it is somewhat troublesome, and
dangerous for the poor Christians, and Jews, to walk along the streets. For the
Turks being then somewhat ^hristians and Jews seared.
insolent, and full of wine, putting off the sobriety In which time they drink
no strong drink at all.
of the Ramazan, do scare them exceedingly; often threatening to mischief them,
if they deny them money, when they in that fury demand it of them. And so they
do likewise at another Byram, which is called the Coochook That i^ the (...)
Byram.
Byram, and comes about three months after the other; in which likewise the
Turks are wonderful merry both day, and night.

CHAP. XI.
Of the Old Seraglio, and women's lives therein: of the Turks marriages, and
children: slave-selling, and witnesses.

HAving oftentimes (by the way) made mention of the * Fs^ee S raj, or old Old
Seraglio, which is (as it were a Old Seraglio
dependent of the Kings Seraglio, in regard of the use of it) it will not be
amiss, briefly to speak somewhat touching the same.

This is a very large place, immured with a very high wall, surpassing that of
the Kings Seraglio; the buildings are fair, it has many inhabitants, all
women, and Eunuchs, and is about three quarters Compass.
of a mile in compass, being feated in the noblest part of the city. And this
was the first Seraglio, which Mahomet the Built by Mahomet the second.
second built for to dwell in, with all his court, when he took Constantinople:
^t has but one gate belonging unto it, and that is of iron; the which gate is
kept, and guarded by a company of white Eunuchs, and no man may come in
thereat, unless it be to b^ing in such necessaries as they want in the house,
at which times they may not see any of the women.

Now the women which are therein, are those which are put out of the Kings Who
are therein.
Seraglio, viz. such Sultana's as have belonged to the deceased Grand Signors;
those women likewise, which through their evil behavior, and conditions, are
fallen into disgrace with the King; and such as are infirm, or defective in
what should belong to women fit for the company, and bed of a King, and none
else are there, but for some of these causes. All which are governed, and looked
unto by an old woman (called also Kahiya Cadun) which is made their Over-seer,
Woman-overseer.
and takes care to see them used according to the custom of the house, every
one in their degree: and that they have their diet, and clothing, with their
several stipends in due time: all which is far short of what they had, when
they were in the Kings ^eraglio; howbeit, such as have been Sultana's, live out
of the common rank, in their lodgings apart; and although they are out of the
Kings sight, and (as it were) out of favor, yet they are reasonably well
served.

The greatest part of the said Sultan^'s, if they be any thing rich, may (with
the Grand Signors leave, by the old woman's They may marry with the Kings leave.
solicitation) go forth from thence, and marry, and carry with them all that
which they have kept, and stolen. For if they do not carry the business
cuningly, at their coming forth of the Kings Seraglio, if they have ought of
any great worth, or value that is known, the The Mistres of the maids.
Cadun takes it from them, and rest^res it again to the Grand Signor: so that I
say, if they have any thing, to bestow themselves withal, they warily make it
known abroad, to the end, that some men of quality may become Suitors to them,
and make them a good joynter.

In the said Seraglio, they have all the Conveniences thereof.
commodity of necessaries, that may be, as gardens, fountains, and fair Baths.
And the King himself has some rooms also therein ready furnished. For
sometimes he goes thither to visit his female kindred, as his Grandmother,
Sisters, Aunts, etc. who for some of the aforesaid occasions, have been put out
of his Seraglio.

The other women of this Old Seraglio have but mean allowance; and had they not
somewhat of their own to help sometimes, they would pass but coursly; so that
they are fain to betake themselves Hard state.
to their needles, by which they in part sustain themselves, and reap a
reasonable benefit. And as in the Kings Seraglio, the Sultana's are permitted
to employ diverse Jewes-women about their ordinary occasions: Jews-women.
so these women likewise of this Seraglio, have other Jews-women, who daily
frequent their companies, and sell their labors for them.

Any Turk, be he of the Clergy, or of the Laity, may, if he please, take seven
Seven wives.
wives at Kebi^, (but few, or none will have more then one, or two at the most,
to save charges) besides he may keep as many Women-slaves.
Haylayks, as he will, and the children begotten of them, are held as
legitimate, as those of the wives, and have as much right to the inheritance of
what the father leaves behind him. But between the children of the great ones
there is great difference. For a Bashawe having married a sister, or daughter
of the King, and having sons by them, those sons may not rise above the degree
of a Sanjack Beg, or a Capoogee Bashawe, to the end they may be kept under,
being allied to the crown; that so being but in mean places, they may not be
apt to rebel. But their brothers which their father begat of slaves, may come
to be Bashawes; for Bashawes sons kept under, if of royal blood.
they are free from suspicion, in regard they are not of the blood Royal. And
hence it is, that those children, which had a Sultana to their mother, are so
often seen to be in lower degree then the others. For, for the aforesaid
reason, he which is born of the slave, is above him that is born of the
Sultana. Yet with the children of the other subjects it is otherwise; for they
are all equals.

The parties married, may upon diverse occasions specified in their law, leave
one Divorces.
another: especially when they cannot agree, and live peaceably together. And
if the man puts away the woman, then he is bound to allow her the joynter,
which he promised her, when they were contracted before the Cadee, and
witnesses: but if the woman forsake the man, then she can recover nothing; but
departs only with a small portion, such as she brought with her into her
husbands house. And if they have any children, then he must keep the males, and
she must take the females along with her. What becomes of the (...) of the
divorced.
^he same order is also observed, and held with married Christians. For, if the
husband turns Turk, he may take his sons with him, and make them of that
profession; but his wife will retain the daughters: and if she turn Turk, she
does the like by her daughters, and leaves the sons to him.

Now in case a Turk takes slaves for his To lie wi^hall.
use, he may not sell them again; but they become members of his family, in
which they are to remain till they die. But if they prove barren, then they may
be sold from hand to hand, as often as it Slaves sold if ba^ren.
is their fortune.

The Turks may buy of all sorts of slaves, of every religion, and nation; and
may use them as they please (killing only excepted) which the Christians, and
Jews there may not do; for they have liberty only to buy Christians and Jews.

There is for this purpose a place in Constantinople, near the Bezisten, where
every Wednesday (in the open street) Slaves bou^ht and sold in the market.
there are bought, and sold slaves of all sorts, and every one may freely come
to buy for their several uses; some for nurses, some for servants, and some for
their lustful appetites. For they which make use of slaves for their
sensuality, cannot be punished by the Justice, as they should be, if they were
taken with free women, and with Turkish women especially.

These slaves are bought, and sold, as beasts, and cattle are, they being
viewed, Manner of selling slaves
and reviewed, and felt all about their limbs, and bodies, and their mouths
looked into, as if they were so many horses in Smithfield; then they are
examined of what country they are, and what they are good for; either for
sewing, spinning, weaving, or the like; buying sometimes the mother with the
children, and sometimes the children without the mother, sometimes two or three
brothers together, and again, sometimes taking the one, and leaving the rest,
using no terms of humanity, love, or honesty, but even as the buyer, or the
seller shall think will best turn them to profit.

Now when there is a virgin that is beautiful, and fair, she is held at a high
rate, and is sold for far more then any other; and for security of her
virginity, the seller is not only bound to the restitution Restitution if not a
virgin.
of the money (if she prove otherwise) to him that bought her; but is for his
fraud fined at a great sum of money. And in this B^zisten there sits an
Emeen, that is, a Customer, who receives custom of the buyers, and sellers
Emeen.
of slaves, which amounts to a reasonable sum in a year, for the toll is very
great.

The Bashaws, and other great subjects, though by marriage they become uncles,
No benefit by affinity to the king.
sons in law, or cozens to the Grand Signor, may not by virtue of their
affinity, challenge any more familiarity, or freedom with his Majesty, then if
there were no such matter of kindred between them: but only presume so far, as
may well befit their place and dignity; they remaining still slaves, as the
others do: Nay their servitude is thereby increased, and they lose a great part
of their former liberty. For they must be very obsequious Loss by it.
to the Sultana's, whom they have married, and turn away the greatest part of
their other women, and slaves if they have any) and must with patience support
all their wives imperfections. So that for this reason, few Bashawes of worth
and judgment, seek after such marriages; for they are both chargeable, and
bring discontent. But when the King commands, they (as his slaves) must submit,
and obey, though their vexation, and charge increase never so much thereby: and
must confess themselves to be highly honored, and obliged unto his Majesty for
so great a favor.

The ceremonies of Turkish marrying are nothing else, but in the presence of
the Cadee (who is the Justice) to make Rites of marriage.
Hoget, that is, a writing expressing the vow, and good liking of the parties
to be married; with a specification of the joynter, which the husband is to
make to the wife. All which is done in the presence also of witnesses, which
are true, and honest, without exception. For among the Turks it is not
permitted that every oue that will, should bear witness: but only such men as
are free, of a good Who may be witnesses.
age, that can say the Common prayer.
Namaz, and have some knowledge in the law, known to be men of civil life, and
conversation; and (above all) which drink no wine. For the witness of a ^urk,
which drinks wine, is nothing worth (yet they may drink New wine boiled.
Moosellesse, Aquavitae.
R^kee, A drink made of seed, much like new mustard; and is very heady.
and Boza, which are stronger then wine) and thus their law commands. But for
all this, corruption is so crept in amongst them, that now in Turkey,
(especially in Constantinople) there are (to the outward appearance grave and
honest men) more false witnesses, then in any other part of the world besides:
and who are they? (at least the chief of them) but a certain company of
beggarly Emeers, that is, such as pretend to come of the race and stock of
^meers, false witnesses.
Mahomet, always wearing green Turbants, by which they are known, and
reverenced: but they are generally the most ill favored men that ever I saw:
and with them I may fitly join a great number of poor Cadees, and Naits out of
office who as well as the Emeers, for money do use that detestable trade, which
our knights of the Post do practice here with us. And hence it is, that Avanias
are so False accusations or pretenses.
commonly framed; for they can stoutly (and that with ease) outface the poor
Christians, and Jews. Nay for a bribe they will not spare their own sect, in
bearing false witness, or raising an Or Avania. Turks covetous, and dangerous.
Eftera, that is, a false accusation against them. For these Turks being
naturally given to covetousness (though they pretend to be lovers of honesty)
and altogether inclined to rapine (yet without question, there are some very
honest men amongst them) when they meet with a fit opportunity, they will play
fast, and loose with any man, be he of what condition soever, for their own
benefit. Wherefore it proves dangerous to have any dealing with them; for that
they with that trick will easily free themselves from any obligation, or
agreement before made. Judgment there consisting chiesly in the proof by
witnesses; so that a man had Force of evidence.
need to be wondrous circumspect, and wary in his proceedings with Turks,
especially in matters of contract.

CHAP. XII.
Of their religion, opinions, Clergymen, times, places, and rites sacred; and
of the women's small devotion.

THe Turks believe in Almighty God, and give him familiarly these Attributes.
Their Religion.
He.
Hoo. Arab. God.
Alloh. Turk. God.
Tangree. Truth.
Hack. High Truth
Hackteawlaw. High God.
Alloh teawlaw. Creator of the world.
Jehawnee awfeereen. Pers. God.
Hodoy, etc. And that he is the Creator of the whole Universe, and will be a
gracious pardoner of all good men in the day of Judgment. That he is in the
highest Heaven, served with especial angels, having from the beginning cast out
the disobedient ones, for whom, as also for wicked men, he made Hell. And as
they affirm everlasting life to be in these two places, viz. Heaven, and Hell;
so they confess, and wait for the resurrection of the body to be reunited
Resurrection
with the soul, at such time as the fearful trumpet (which they call Soor) The
Trumpet Soor.
shall be sounded by Mahomet at the commandment of the great God of the
judgment.

They believe also, the life everlasting in Paradise to be such a happiness,
as Se^sual Paradise.
consists only in delighting, and pleasing of the senses, and that they shall
have there the use of natural things in all perfection, without making any
difference; enjoying perfect health, and free from all manner of trouble, and
vexation. And on the contrary, that in Hell the Hell.
use of the foresaid things shall be in unquenchable fire, and shall have a
most bitter and loathsome taste, and they which come there shall continually be
tormented with inumerable vexations, and fearful sights: and this is all that
they conceive of Heaven or Hell; either for the reward of the righteous, or the
punishment of the reprobate.

They say moreover, that the power of God is such, that having at the creation
of man prefixed, and appointed a set time for his end, it is impossible that
the wit or device of mortal man, should Fate.
be able to divert, or prevent it; wherefore in the wars, and in all other
occasions, they are so much the more bold, resolute, and courageous; being
persuaded that their end is written in their foreheads, and that it is not for
them to go about to avoid it, so that if they die, Emmer Allohung, it was Gods
will it The commandment of God.
should be so. Now this their opinion makes them to laugh at, and scorn the
Greeks, who burn waxen candles at holy Charms used by the Greeks.
wells hang rags upon trees, which they rend from the clothing of the sick, and
use diverse other charms for to drive away diseases.

They also affirm Gods power to be such, that after men's bodies are risen
again, he will give them such an agility, Agility in the next life.
that they shall be able in a moment to pass from one Heaven to another, even
to the farthest part of them, to visit, and embrace their wives, mothers,
brothers, and others of their kindred; the heavens being all transparent, of
Diamonds, Rubies, Transparent Heavens.
and Crystal.

As concerning Gods throne, or seat of Majesty, they affirm, that every one
cannot Gods throne.
behold it, by reason of the brightness of the beams, which come from his
eyes; and by reason of the unspeakable splendour proceeding from his glorious
face; so that the Angels, and Prophets only have the grace to enjoy that sight.
And of the Angels they report thus, that they are continually serving, and
praising The Angels.
God, and ready to obey his will: but I have read in a book which they call
Ahvawlee keeyawmet, that is, the state of the day of judgment; written by a
famous Sheyk amongst them, a most ridiculous discourse of the Angel Gabriel.
Angel Gabriel.
For he writes, that Gabriel has a thousand six hundred wings, and that he is
hairy from head to foot, of a saffron color, having in his forehead a sun, and
upon every hair a star; and that he dives three hundred and sixty times a day
into Sea in Paradise.
Noor dengiz, and ever as he rises out of the water he shakes himself, and of
every drop that falls from him there is an angel made, after the likeness of
Gabriel himself; who until the end of the world do pray unto God, and praise
him, upon their beads; and these young angels are called Roohawneyoon. Many
such dicourses there are in that book: but because they are vain I leave them
to the Turks that believe them, especially the common sort, who think that
whatsoever is written in their tongue must of necessity be true, and that they
are bound to believe it.

They hold that in Paradise there is a tree which they call Toobaw, upon whose
A Tree in Paradise.
leaves are written the names of every living man; so when Gods will is that
such, or such a one should die, God shakes off his leaf into This Israel they
say is an angel.
Isreal's lap, who looks upon it, and reads it, and having seen what Gods
pleasure is, he (after the party has been dead forty days) sends an angel to
carry his soul, according as the leaf shall direct him, either into heaven or
hell, for upon his leaf, not only his hour of death is written, but also what
shall become of him after he is dead.

They say, that Almighty God sent four Pegambers, that is Prophets, into the
world, to instruct, govern, and save Four Prophets, and four Books.
mankind, each of them being holy, pure, and undefiled, viz. Moses.
Moosaw: David.
Dawood: Jesus.
Isaw: Mahomet.
Muhammed: and that God sent to every one of them by his angel Gabriel, a book
that they themselves being first perfected, might the better know how to
instruct the people: to Moses he sent the Tevrat, that is, the Old Law; to
David the Zebur, that is, Old Law.
the Psalms; to Jesus the Injeel, that is, The psalms.
the Gospel; and to Mahomet the Kuraw^, The Gospel.
that is, the Alcoran. And that the three first Prophets with their people did
The Alcoran
fail somewhat in the Laws given them by God: but Mahomet coming last, brought
a Law, more true, plain, clear, and sincere, in which all such as believe
should obtain the love of God: but they say that all other nations continue
still in their errors, and having sucked of their mothers milk, do not embrace
the truth. For which obstinacy, and blindness, being (by right) deprived of
all hope of coming to heaven; they have no other means to recover the same, and
to come thither at the day of judgment, but by Mahomets protection, who is the
only intercessor, and mediator unto Almighty God: and standing in the dreadful
day of Judgment at the gate of Paradise, he shall be sought unto, and
entreated by the other three Prophets to save their people also, and his
goodness, and clemency shall be such, as to make intercession for them; so
that the good Christians, and the good Jews, shall by his means obtain
everlasting life, with perpetual fruition of sensual delights as aforesaid; but
in a place apart, and inferior to the Turks, they being beloved of God, and
more dear unto him then others; the women also shall come into heaven, but
shall be Women's heaven.
in a place far inferior to men, and be less glorified.

All the Prophets are held in great honor amongst them, and they never name any
Prophet, but they say, Aleyhoo selawm, that is health, or salvation be upon him.

They call Moses, Musahib Alloh, that is, a Talker with God; and David
Hazrettee Dawood, that is, venerable David, and Jesus Meseeh, Roohullah, and
Hazrettee Isaw, that is, Messiah, the spirit of God, and Venerable Jesus; and
Mahomet, Resul Alloh, that is, the Messenger of God.

When they talk of Christ Jesus, they speak very reverently of him, and
confess Their opinion of Christ.
that the Jews through envy apprehended him, and falsely, and maliciously
condemned him, and led him along to put him to death: but the angels being sent
from God, took him away from them in a cloud, and carried him up into Heaven;
at which the Jews being astonished, and extremely vexed, took one that was
there present, and crucified him in his stead; being unwilling to have it known
that Jesus was the Messiah, he being in heaven in company of his brethren the
Prophets, beloved of God, and serving him, as the other Prophets do.

These are the main, and principal foundations of their Religion, upon which
they build, and frame the course of this their present temporal life; and by
which they hope to obtain a life everlasting, and happy; affirmed by their
Prophet to be full of the delights, and pleasures of this world, but enjoyed in
all perfection, and excellency, in a supernatural, and incorruptible manner.

The ministry of their Religion (or rather their confused Sect) is as follows.

First they have a Muftee. This word comes from Fetha which signifies to open
in the Arab. tongue.
Muftee, that is to say, an expounder, or declarer of Law cases; who is also
amongst them as an Archbishop with us: for he is the Primat over the Church,
and must be a man very expert in the Law, and accustomed to do justice, chosen
by the Grand Signor himself: the which Muftees charge is, to oversee, and hear
all such matters The Muftees charge.
of weight, as are belonging to the Law, or to the Church, in case his
inferiors, as Cadees of the highest rank, the word signifies Lords.
Moola's, Cadees, etc. should fail in the due performance of what belongs to
their ^everal places. And to this end, every Tuesday he must assemble all the
chiefest of them which are in town, or ^is disputation on the Tue^day.
at least the greatest part of them, to his own house; where he disputes with
them for the space of three, or four hours, putting diverse cases to them, and
taking their answers from them in writing: but by this means he oftentimes
entraps many of the Cadees which are in The use.
office, especially such as are given to bribery. For when any Plaintiff, or
Defendant is assured that the Cadee (which had the cause before him) has
wronged any of them; then the party offended makes his grievance known to the
Muftee, who against the next Tuesday frames a case as like unto it as possibly
he can, but of another subject, and in other men's names; so when they are come
together he wittily puts forth that amongst the rest, and that being resolved
with the rest, he looks upon it; then he calls that Cadee, which committed the
fault, and privately rebukes him for it.

The like course is taken by many, which come to the Muftee himself to be
resolved of some point in Law; lest that the Muftee should know either party by
naming them, and so lean to what side he pleases: but after this manner he
cannot easily deceive them.

The Muftees chief employment is, to answer all such propositions as are made
unto him, upon cases of conscience, and the rites of the Turkish Law. The which
answers are in few words, very brief, and they are called Fetfa's; that is,
declarations, or judgments of the Muftee; with which he may compel, not only
the Cadees, and Bashawes to the performance of the contents thereof; His power.
but the Kings own person is also bound to see them executed, and to stand to
his decree. For they seek altogether to amplify this sect of lawyers, in
honor of their prophet the Lawmaker; and the Muftees Authority is so much the
more regarded, for that he is upheld very stoutly by the whole order of the
Cadees.

The Muftee has his revenue a part in land of about six thousand Sultana's His
revenue.
the year; but being put out of his place, leaving the revenue to his
successor, he has then but a thousand aspars a day, as the Cadeeleschers have
when they are in office; howbeit their uncertainties amount always to a far
greater matter.

And although this Muftee has not an absolute rule, and command over the
Muftees of other parts of the Kings dominions; yet by his policy he ever
prevails with the Grand Signor, and effects whatsoever he undertakes,
especially when he has the Uizir Azem to his friend, who in degree, dignity,
and authority is his superior.

Next to the Muftee, there are two Cadeeleschers, that is to say, Judges of the
Armies, one of Graecia, and the other of Cadeeleschers.
Natolia; who also being men of the law, and they which always succeed the
Muftee, have the oversight of all the other Cadees, and the placing, or the
displacing of them is in their power; which Cadees are justices, and there is
one in every city, and town, to do justice, and end controversies between man,
and man; and to punish offenders; but they are changed every three years, and
others put into their places, by the Cadeeleschers, with order from the Grand
Signor: which selling of Cadees places.
Cadeelicks is an unspeakable benefit to the said two Cadeeleschers.

Amongst these Cadees, they have also their orders; viz. those of the first
rank, Cadees, and their orders.
and they are called Lords.
Moola's, which are always employed in the chiefest cities; the other are but
Cadees, and they get employments as they can, by their good, and upright
carriage in their places; a third sort there is also of this kind, which are
called Naibs, and they serve in Naibs.
small towns, and villages, as Deputies to the former, but in time come to be
as high as they. Now the Cadeeleschers keep each of them a Book, wherein are
exactly set down the revenues of Books.
every particular Cadees place.
Cadeelick both in Graecia, and in Natolia; so that by their books they know
the better how to furnish any place that is void, and at what rates to sell
them: none of them being worth, or yielding above five hundred aspars the day;
gratuities, and bribes excepted.

This order of Turks only, amongst the rest, has this large privilege, which
is, that they may not be put to death as other Privilege.
Turks are: so that, if any of them by committing some notorious villainy, or
offense against the Law, should deserve death, it must then be done, by an
express and absolute command from the Grand Signor, and that very warily, and
secretly; but this happens very seldom, or never.

The Muftee, and Cadeeleschers are Their continuan^e. No office during life.
changed at the Kings pleasure, (for there is no office among the Turks during
life) howbeit their ordinary continuance is three years; their chief fortune
depending wholly in obtaining the grace, and favor of the chief Vizir.

All the aforesaid men of the law, viz. the Muftee, the Cadeeleschers, Moola's,
and Cadees, wear their Turbants far bigger Great Turbants.
then any other Turks, and are made up after another fashion, in token that
they ought to be reverenced above others: and although their habit be in
fashion very like other men's, yet in this there is great difference, which is,
that their wearing is commonly Chamblet, and the Their habits.
finest cloth, but no silk, or cloth of gold at all.

Then nex to these orders, they have a governor of the Moscheas, or Churches,
called the This word is derived from evel, which signifies first. She^chs.
Priests and Clerks.
Mootevelee; whose chief employment Motevelee.
is to look after the revenues of the Church, and after the repairing of the
great Moscheas: then Sheichs which are high Priests, and Eemawms, which are
Parish Priests, and next to them Muyezins, which are as our Churchclerks, all
which are employed in the service of the Church, both in praying, preaching,
calling the people to prayer, burying the dead, reading upon the Their
employment.
graves of the dead; and to conclude, all such offices as are any way belonging
to the Church, for the edifying of the people.

And in every Jawm, or Cathedral Church, there are This word is derived from
Ders, which signifies a lesson.
Mudereefes which are Readers, that teach Scholars the Readers.
Common prayers, and instruct them in the service, and duties belonging to the
Church, being paid for their pains out of the revenues of the Moscheas.

They pray five times a day ordinarily Prayers five times a day.
(as well in the Moscheas, as in their private houses, or wheresoever they are)
viz. about four of the clock in the morning, which they call Sabaw Namaz, or
Temcheet Namaz: at Noon, and that they call Oileh Namaz: between three and four
a clock afternoon, which they call Ekinde Namaz: between seven and eight at
night, and that they call Acksham Namaz: and at midnight, which they call
Ghejeh Namaz: and upon the Friday (which is their Sabbath) six times. For they
pray then at nine of the clock Upon friday six times.
in the forenoon also, and that is called Selaw: now upon that day there are
more Clerks.
Muyezins which cry in the Meenares, or steeples, then upon other days; Manner
of calling to prayer.
(for at all those hours instead of bells, the people are called to prayer by
the voice of one or two of them standing in the steeples, or turrets, which are
of a reasonable height, and join to the Moscheas) by whose voices, and
repetition of the The words which the Muyezin uses to say in the steeple.
Aazawn, they are stirred up to the praise of God, and Mahomet, and so they
prepare themselves for prayer.

The condition of them which are to pray, is only to be corporally clean; it
Cleanness and purifying.
being altogether unlawful for any Turk to enter into the Moscheas, with an
intent to pray, if he find that he has any natural pollution, or carnal
uncleanness about him, be it of what condition soever, or of never so small
moment; wherefore, for their cleansing, every one is bound either to wash
himself in the Bagno or bath, if it be for carnal commerce, (until which time
he remains Unclean.
Jenoob) or for other sorts of uncleanness, or small offenses, with cold water:
every place, and city abounding with Baths, both public, and private; and
every Churchyard with very fair fountains, for the use of the common sort of
people; so that every one must do his Their washing before they pray is so
called. Awb in Persian signifies water, and Dest the hand.
Awb dest before he pray.

Now, immediately after every one is Priest. The manner of their prayers.
cleansed, and come into the Church, the Eemawm begins with a loud voice to
pray, sitting before all the company with his face toward the Because Mecca is
south east of Constantinople, in other places it may be different. Their rule
in praying wheresoever they are is to direct their faces to the city Mecca; and
this is called by them Kibla.
south east: and the people being placed in orderly ranks with their faces the
same way, do altogether imitate him in gesture. For of themselves a great part
of them would not else know how to perform that business, scarcely one in
twenty understanding what the Eemawm says. For they pray in an unknown tongue
as well as the Papists do: and their prayers consist Prayers in an unknown
tongue. Their gestures.
chiefly in rising up, falling down, kissing the ground, and sometime sitting
still; one while touching their eyes, sometimes their faces, then stroaking
their beards, and anon their heads; again sometimes looking over the left
shoulder, and sometimes over the right; saying some few words in the praise of
God, and Mahomet: the Churches being all the while matted under foot, and in
some places there are carpets spread for the better sort of people.

The said prayers, according to the hours of prayer are diverse, some longer,
and some shorter; none of them being above an hour long, only the Prayer in
Their length
the evening of the Ramazan, is longer then the other prayers.

They pray, as I said, after the Eemawm, who is is their guide, and is much
esteemed of, if he have a good voice, as we esteem of our singing men.

They also use preaching upon every Friday, it signifies a day of assembling.
Jumaa ghun in the Ramazan: and Preaching.
when they will pray for any good success in their wars, or curse any Rebel.
Jelawlee, they then have a custom to go a Procession along the streets by two,
and two, but without any lights, or any such Procession and cursing.
things in their hands: and as they go along, they praise the name of God, and
read very long prayers which they have for those purposes, the people still
crying Amen at the end of every prayer: and then they hold that rebel, or
enemy, whosoever he be, to be without all doubt accursed, and themselves
prosperous in their enterprises.

In the times of trouble, and affliction, they publish in the most eminent
places Other convocations and prayers.
a convocation of all the chief men, and Ecclesiastical persons in the city
(and of the common people also such as will come, may) to pray in the fields
which are for that use; (therein imitating the Jews) and being all come
together; diverse of their Holy men, Sermons.
Santons, (esteemed for their show of holiness) make sermons of exhortation to
fortitude, patience, and to the love and fear of God: but if those troubles
continue still, they then use the prayers of forty hours, and of forty days
(for they are so called) in the chiefest Moscheas built by the Emperors: which
prayers are said by a company of Churchmen, who are belonging to the said
Moscheas, and if all fail, then they fall to sacrificing; for that is held to
be of Sacrificing.
greatest force to put away evil, and the best thanksgiving for benefits
received.

All the ceremonies, which they use in the Ramazan, or month of fasting, are
no other, but to abstain from eating and Ramazan ceremonies.
drinking in the day time. For they have leave to eat all the night long, if
they will (that is, from the Acksham Namaz, which is about seven or eight a
clock at night, until the Sabaw Namaz, which is about four a clock in the
morning) and what they please, without any difference of meats. And at twilight
they light lamps round about the steeples, which Lamps.
burn till morning; the Eemawm of every parish taking special notice who is
often Priest.
wanting from Church, (especially in the evening) and who drinks wine, or eats
in the day time. For besides that they should be held despisers of the law,
they should be most severely punished, if they were found in any such fault.

I remember, that Nasooh Bashawe being Vizir Azem, and riding through the
Example of severity.
streets in the month Ramazan, espied a Turk that was drunk with wine;
forthwith he caused him to be brought unto him, and without giving him any
respite, for the recovery of his lost wits, caused a ladlefull of boiling lead
to be poured down his throat, wherewith the wretch perished immediately.

The Grand Signor uses in the Ramazan, as well as in the times of troubles, and
afflictions; (and so do the Bashawes, and other great men) to sacrifice diverse
sorts of beasts, both at the sepulchers of such as have been held for holy and
valiant men, and at the Moscheas too, now some do it privately, but the Kings
have still command, that their sacrifices be done publicly, and in the open
streets, and at the gates of the city; dividing the flesh of the beasts among
the people, yet some part of it is sent to the Bashawes themselves, and to the
other grandees of the Port. These sacrifices are used very often. For by that
means they think to appease Gods wrath, and regain his love and favor.

Those Turks which seem to be professors of Religion, and devotion, and would
be accounted * Sofees, do commonly Puritans.
read, as they walk along the streets, and have their beads longer then Beads.
other men, carrying them in their hands into the Moscheas, and are ever busy
with them as they walk up and down the streets, that the world may take notice
of their fained zeal: but they pass (or rather post (them over very quickly;
for whereas the Papists say the Pater noster, or an Ave Marie; they say only
two words; as for example, God is pure.
Subhawn Allah, or God defend.
Istigfir allah, and sometimes. God is great.
3. Alloho okber,

Many of them go to Mecca, and to Pilgrimage. Mecca T^mple.
Jerusalem on pilgrimage. To Mecca, to visit the temple which they say was
built by Abraham, in which Mahomet in the time of idolatry did hide himself; of
whom they affirm, that when he was almost forty years of age, he received the
Alcoran from God, by the hand of the angel Gabriel, and that from that time the
Mussulmanlick began, that is, the true belief, and shortly after he died, and
his sepulcher is visited by all such, as go the said pilgrimage. And when they
go to Jerusalem they go not to visit Christ's Je^salem.
sepulcher. For they say, he did not die: but they go to see the places, which
he most frequented, as being a miraculous prophet, who raised the dead to life,
healed the sick, gave sight to the blind, and wrought many such wonders, which
never any prophet could do but he. They go likewise to the valley of
Jehoshaphat; for they say, that in that place shall be Valley of Jehosha^hat.
the resurrection at the day of Judgment. Now all such as have gone the said
pilgrimage, and return home again to their Pilgrims.
houses, are ever after called Hagees, that is, pilgrims, and are very much
reverenced, and esteemed of all men. There are also diverse Turks, who forsaking
the world, leave all that they have and go to live, near to the foresaid valley,
for devotion; and to be nearer to the place of resurrection, supposing thereby
to get a great advantage to themselves, above the rest at that day.

Many there be likewise, which profess a kind of living out of the common
course, and custom of the world, being clothed wonderful poorly, and
raggedly, with white felt caps on their heads, that beg for their living, and
lie in the courts of the Moscheas, and in such like places; and these are
accounted very holy men. For they pray much in the view of the world, and live
always (in outward appearance) in the love of honesty: preaching this doctrine
to the standers by, that it is impossible perfectly to arrive unto, and gain
the love of God, but by the ladder of humane love, and innocence; and for this
cause they betake themselves to that course of life, that they may be in
charity with all the world, and be accepted of God, and rewarded for it in
Heaven; under which color of holiness they live at ease, and deceive the
world, every one being bountiful unto them. For the poor, simple, and
ignorant people do daily throng about them, receiving their benedictions, for
which they give them money. They go many times up and down the city, from
house to house, singing certain prayers for the prosperity of the family; and
seldom, or never go away empty.

Besides them, there are also some, who (like Hermits) live in rocks, and on
the sides of mountains, and in other solitary places, neglecting the world,
conceiving that course of life to excel all other for innocence, and holiness;
to whom also many men, and women do resort, and give money for their prayers,
and benedictions.

The greatest ceremony (for pomp, and solemnity) which is used amongst the
Circumcision.
T^rks, is that of circumcising their children; wherein they greatly differ from
the Jews in this one particular. For the Turks never circumcise them, till they
be past ten years of age, following the example of Ishmael, whom they imitate;
alleging that Abraham loved him, and not Isaac, and that it was Ishmael whom
Abraham would have sacrificed.

Until the very day of circumcision, The lock of Hair.
they let a lock of hair grow on the crown of the head, as long as may be, but
afterward they cut it shorter: and the reason why they must let it grow is,
only to show that they are not as yet circumcised: until which time they are
not accounted perfect True Believers.
Mussulmen, nor may till then pray in the congregation; they wear the lock
broided, and plaited, and hanging down the middle of their back, over their
uppermost coat, that every one may see it. This circumcision is done without
the Church, because of the shedding of blood; all the kindred, and friends
being invited unto it, in token of joy, and gladness. They use the like
ceremony with those, which turn from any other religion, and become Turks;
who, in token that they embrace the religion of Mahomet, do (before they are
circumcised) hold up their forefinger and say these words, Law illawho illaw
Allhah ve Muhammed resul Alla, that is, There is no God, but God alone, and
Mahomet is the messenger of God.

There are in the cities, and by the high ways also, in most places of the
Grand Signors dominions, for the benefit both of the inhabitants, and
travailers, diverse * Hawns (commonly called Canes.
Canes) in which wayfaring men do lodge, and refresh themselves, and their
horses: there are also Hospitals in Cities, Hospitals and Colleges.
and Colleges for the bringing up of youth, where they may learn to read, and
write; every Moschea built by the Emperors, and all other great Moscheas having
large revenues, out of which (by the will of the founders) the said Colleges,
and Hospitals are maintained. For the Emperors by Canon, should not build any
Churches, but in memory of some notable conquest, or memorable Limited.
enterprise, by which the Church may be provided for: nor Sultana's neither may
build, unless it be the Queen mother to that Emperor who reigns at that time
when she goes about it. For the building of which, they are at infinite charge,
dedicating them with great solemnities for the said victory, be it what it will
be. When an Emperor builds a Moschea, and that it is almost finished, A
ceremony at the finishing a Moschea.
and the main Cupola, or round roof is to be laid on, to cap, or crown as it
were the whole fabric; then are invited all the Bashawes, and other great men
to come to the solemnity, but every one of them does send the day before, his
present of vests of cloth of gold, velvet, satin, etc. all which being that
day hanged upon cords, on the outside of the top of the Church, the Grand
Signor himself comes thither, and being set under his pavillion in the
Churchyard, all the chiefest of them (to whom he also gives vests) kiss his
hand one after another: this being ended the Mustee makes a Prayer, and then
the Cupola is put on, and this is their consecration; the said vests, which
were hanged up, being afterward shared amongst the master workmen.

The same ceremony is also used among the Turks in building of their houses, at
the closing up the roof. For they invite their friends, who either send them
vests, or handkerchiefs, and hang them up after the said manner, which also
fall to the workmens share; the guests are feasted for their pains, and that is
the warming of the house, as we call it in England.

In these Moscheas there are some very costly pieces of work, and exceeding
Moscheas.
well set forth, and proportioned; as well for the largeness, and neatness of
those places where the people pray; as also for the beautiful porches,
galleries, and Magnificence.
large paved Courts which compass the said Moscheas, being adorned with very
stately pillars, and fountains built all of curious Marble, besides their
colleges, and hospitals near unto them, to which (as I said) belong very large
revenues: insomuch that some of those Moscheas may be compared with the richest
Churches in the world. They are built all of wonderful fair stone, with
Cupola's covered all over with lead; the pillars within the churches being
either of Porphiry, or some such costly stones, and the basis thereof all
whited. Now the pillars in time of prayer shine Lamps.
most gloriously, by reason of the abundance of lamps that are burning: the
which lamps are curiously fastened into round iron hoops, in compass as big as
the hoop of a butt; upon which there are diverse rounds of lamps one above
another, and are let down by copper chains from the roof of the church: in
every Moschea there are three, or four such circles of lamps, or more,
according No seats.
to the bigness of the Church.

There are no benches in the Moscheas, nor any thing to sit upon; only a little
place raised from the ground for the priests, and another right over against it
(but somewhat lower) for the Grand Signor, at such times as he comes to prayer;
all the rest sitting upon the ground, as ordinarily they use to sit in other
places: wherefore the pavements (although they are of very bright, and clean
stone) are covered with very fine mats of Cairo, which are kept wondrous Mattes.
neatly. For besides the Grand Signor no man may come into the Church with his
shoes on; but must leave them at the door, or else give them to their servants
to keep. Sickness.


When any one is dangerously sick, and in their judgments past hope of
recovery; then they send for the Priest.
Imawm, who comes, and uses comfortable speeches unto him, and prays by him,
and the party dying, they wash him all over with water, then having wound him
up in his Manner of burying.
Kefin, or winding sheet, and laid him in a coffin with his face downward,
they carry him to his grave with his head foremost. Now if the party that is
dead be a man, or a manchild, then they set a Tubant upon the coffin; and if it
be a woman, or a girl, then they set a Filian Takya upon the coffin, for
distinctions sake; that is such a cap as the women wear, with a brooch, and
feather in it. Again, if the party be a virgin, they oftentimes (provided they
be people of Garlands, and boughs of oranges.
quality) set garlands, and boughs of Oranges upon the coffin. They are
accompanied to the grave by the Churchmen, and their own kindred, and many
strangers also, which pass by, willingly go along with them (for they hold it a
very meritorious work to see the dead well buried) but no women at all; (yet
women may afterward both weep, and Women go not to burialls. No Lights.
pray upon their graves) nor do they carry any lights in their hands, or
censers, or howl, and cry after them as the Greeks do; but the Clerks.
Muyezins sing all along as they go, calling upon the name of God, and their
Prophet Mahomet; and praying for the health of the soul departed: and at their
return there is some kind of course banquet made to the company for their
pains.

The Tombs of the Emperors most commonly are built upon the ground, Tombs of
the Emperors.
close by their graves, and on each grave there stands an empty coffin, covered
either with extraordinary fine cloth, or else with velvet; having Turbants set
upon them of the fashion of those which the Emperors themselves did wear, with
brooches, and sprigs of feathers in them: and there stand great candlesticks
both at the head, and at the feet of the said graves, and two lamps burning
continually day and, night. Now these tombs are for the most part built in
little chapels close by (but not adloyning) to the Moscheas of the said
Emperors, there is no great store of workmanship about any of their tombs. For
they are of the fashion of a chest, about seven foot long, and about two foot
and half broad: either side is cut out with flowers, gilded over, and at each
end an Epitaph. Now in these chapels there are Muyezins, and Derveeshes, who
by turns continually read in the Alcoran, and pray with their beads, for the
glory of the Emperors deceased. The Uizirs, Bashawes, and other great men also
(imitating the Emperors) do the like, but with less pomp, and charge: and they
which have no burying places near the Moscheas, may make them near their
dwelling houses, and be buried there, or if they please in any other part of
the city, provided that the ground whereon they build their tombs be their
own. The common sort are carried out of the city, Common tombs.
and buried in the fields, which serve only for that purpose; having one stone
set upright at the one end of their grave, and another at the other end, for a
token that one has been buried there (for by the law, howsoever it is not
strictly observed, they ought not to bury where one has been buried before)
upon which is graven the name, degree, and country, or any thing else that
they please of the parties deceased. Besides, if it be the Tomb of a man of
quality, they usually set a Turbant cut out in marble upon the head of it: or
if a women then a cap of marble, such as the woman, wear.

Amongst the Turks there are no Religious houses, or monasteries, unless the
Colleges
Teckebs of the Meulevees, which are an order of holy men professing innocence.
Derveeshes, that turn round with music in their Divine Service. The Turks
generally are bred up to Arms, and very few can write, or read; Nay it has
been sometimes seen that a Bashawe, Vizir of the port (which had not his
education in the kings Seraglio) has sat to do Justice in the Divan, and has
not known either to write, or read; but has been enforced of necessity to
learn to write a few words of course, for the signing of commandments, bills,
warrants, and the like. And among the Turks, he that can but read, and write,
is held a very learned man, and esteemed of far above others, by the common
ignorant people: insomuch that when a crafty fellow has got a book, which he
knows will please their humors (they altogether delighting in books like
P^lmerind' Oliva, the Knight of the sun, Amadis de Gaul, and the like) he
forthwith gets him with his book to some Houses Where drink Cahve.
Cahve house, or other, where there is always great resort, and there being
set down in the middle of them, he falls to reading (the people evermore giving
credit to whatsoever he says) and so having spent an hour, or two, he takes
their benevolences, which is usually more then the price of the book comes to;
such is their delight in hearing a man read fables.

As for the women, there is no heed taken, or reckoning made of their religion
at all; therefore I speak of it last, but Women's Religion.
for modesty sake, I must conceal what the Turks are not ashamed sometimes to
Judge of them. For they never go to Church, so that if they happily have a
Women go not to church
will to pray at the hours of prayer, they do it in their own houses, using the
same preparations as the men do. Nevertheless their honesty, and good carriage
is much looked after; the Priests.
Imawms of every parish being bound to harken diligently after their
deportment: who if they discover anything that is amiss, must reveal it to
their husbands, that they may put them away if they will; or else to their
fathers, or kindred (if they be unmarried) that they may take some course for
to reform them.

And although the women may not be conversant with any other men, then with
their husbands, fathers, or brothers, and although they live in lodgings apart,
by themselves, out of the sight of men, and go always abroad with their faces
covered; yet many of them being extraordinarily wanton, are very dishonest, and
lascivious, who taking the opportunity of their husbands absence, at the wars,
or in some long Journey, under color of going to the Baths, and being covered
withal, go whither, and to whom they lust, knowing that the worst of it is to
be put away, if so be it should at any time be discovered.

FINIS.

