The tired Petitioner, TO His noble Friends, who are Members of the honorable
House of Commons.
SIRS, if this Paper find you (who, to me
Are not so fully known, as you should be)
It comes to move, that, my Petitions may
Obtain your Answer without more delay;
Lest by Attendance (as my Neighbors do)
With my Estate, I lose my Patience too.
For, I have waited, and endured so long,
That, no Result can do me greater wrong
Then lingering hopes; And, were I quite undone,
I, possibly, another course might run
To be repaired again, ere I obtain
That Benefit, which I, had hope to gain:
Or, else, might find some other likely way
To fit me for the part I have to play.
Some say my Friends are more then I do know:
And, I am hopeful that it may be so;
For, if kind language, and much complement
Are signs thereof; nor Christendom, nor Kent
Knows any man who may himself apply
Unto your House, with better hopes then I:
But, if by reall-deeds, it must be known
What Friends I have, their number small is grown:
Or, else, their Power attaineth not unto
Those Friendly Offices they wish to do;
And, peradventure, they obstructed be
In their endeavors, by defects in me.
It may be it is observed, I want Relations,
Guifts-qualifying, or those Commendations
That should advance my Suites; and, which do make
Those active, who, men's Causes undertake;
And I half think it so: For, e're this day,
Some one or other had, else, gotten way
For my Petitions; or appeared able
To make my suites and me considerable;
Since, others, who have neither lost, nor spent,
Nor for the Public, hazzarded or lent
Life, Limb, or money; (yea, though they, before,
Had profitable places) meet with more
Success then I; and, daily can be heard
With expedition, and with good regard.
But, (whatsoever the other causes are
Why thus it comes to pass) this, does appear,
That, they who now are my Competitors,
Have so o'rematched my Solicitors,
That, if I speed, your House, will prove, to me,
A better Friend then Individuals be.
I find, that, many who, a while ago,
Appeared for me, do now ( Gradatim) grow
Elsewhere engaged. I find, that, they begin
To reckon, how the place has valued been;
And, to expostulate, and to admire
How, I, to an Employment dared aspire
Of Trust or Worth; who, am dispoil'd of that,
Which (in their judgment) should secure the State:
As if, a known unblamed-Conversation
Were no Security; or, out of fashion:
As if, my portion, in the public hand,
Might not, as well, for good-assurance stand,
As if it were in mine: Or, as if he
Who, for his Country, prodigal could be
Of all he had, deserved not to be thought
As trusty, as they are, who, never, ought
Adventured; nor had ought, but what they got
By gaining Trust, where they deserved it not.
If all were weighed, admire they rather may
That, I my pains dare venture in a way
Wherein, I have so often sought in vain,
Those things, which unto me, of right, pertain.
They might admire, that I, who have not bin
A Servant, nor, am known to be, of kin
To Peer or Commoner; nor have the skill
To make a Party; nor, thereto, a Will:
That, I who follow Suites, as if I thought,
That Justice, should be neither sold nor bought,
Or got by importunities; save, where
The Judge does neither GOD, nor Mortal fear:
That, I, should ever hope to compass that,
Which any other thinks worth aiming at;
Since, cause, perhaps enough, is found, why none
Thus minded, should presume to think upon
A Place of profit; and, conceive to get
His hopes, by merit, honesty, or wit:
For, I do find that, in this undertaking
Great rubs are made (and many other making)
So troublesome to pass, that, I am tired:
And, had I but that competence acquired,
Which I have lost; this life, I would not live,
For all, the King and Parliament could give.
One, of your Order, told me, at your door
Since my last-suite was tendered (and, before
He had perused it) that, I deserved
No Favor: (Oh! how strangely have I swerved!)
But, as, I to his face, made answer, then,
So, now, I say, (and I will say it again)
Let me receive but Justice, and I Will wave
All humane-Mercie; and, yet hope to have
A happier condition by the same
Then that, whereto, I now exposed am.
Another of them tells me, that, in vain,
I seek, what I make suit for, in the maine,
Whilst I am in Confinement: As if, you
Could but one Blessing, at one time, allow.
Or else, as if, because I now have had
(Like one, of whom the slight'st account is made)
Nine Months Restraint (and, thereby am become
A Bondman, without either formall-doome
Or, Breach of Law,) I, therefore, must expect,
My chief desire, will find the less effect:
Which seems to me, as if a man should say,
The more he owes, the less he means to pay.
A third man intimates; because, he sees
I wear not, yet Sheeps-leather, or Welch-freeze;
(But, by GOD'S blessing, hitherto have borne
My usual Port, to put aside the scorn
Of Knaves and Fools) that I am not undone
Sufficiently, to be so thought upon
As I desire: But, such as these prolong
The public Judgments, and our private wrong,
Through want of real feeling what we bear
Whose plaints they pocket, and whose cries they hear
Without regard: For, when we most are grieved,
So little of our sufferings is believed,
As if men had nor heart nor power to think,
That ought we ayl'e, till we be dead and stink.
A fifth, does much persuade me to forbear
My present Suite; because he seems to fear
My late bold-numbers have incenst so many,
That, I shall hardly find regard from any,
When I expect it: which, to be believed,
(Where I have hope with grace to be received)
Is so abominable; that, I trust
To find their Generall-Conclusions just,
(Though I in person, goods, and reputation,
Have lately suffered by misinformation:)
For (thought I otherwise) I would disdain
To them, for Grace or Justice to complain;
Though I were plunged, into a worse condition,
Then seems approaching, by my last Petition.
I cannot fear that they who true-men be,
Will for true-speaking be displeased with me,
But, rather, by vouchsafing what I crave
Be glad the Kingdom may occasion have
To see their Justice, by repairing him,
Who gave himself, to be undone for them:
For them, who buy less honor, at the price,
Then may be purchased by this device.
But, hitherto, my hopes, do not succeed
According to my sufferings, and my need.
Two Months, upon one Suite, I have bestowne;
Upon a former, thrice three Months, and one;
Upon another, four times three, and nine;
Yet, still, some other Cause out-justles mine:
And, even by favors hitherto obtained,
More Mischiefs, then Advantages, are gained;
Because, in the execution, they have wanted
That influence, whereby they first were granted.
This, with uncrazed patience I can bear,
So long as my desires delayed appear,
By those affairs, which profitable be
Unto the Public, though they hinder me;
Since, whilst that thrives, I cannot be bereft
Of all my hopes, nor comfortless be left,
But, if I still perceive my Suites delayed,
Or crossed, for Private-ends; I am afraid
My Greevances, will make my Plaints outroare
The Cries, of all the Women at your door.
Preserve I would, according to my might,
My Private-Freedomes, with our Publike-Right;
And, Wisemen will consider, that, unless
They heed, sometime, a single-mans distress,
(At least in his extremes) that, one by one,
The Generality may be undone;
And, that, a bruise upon the smallest-toe
May cause the bodies total overthrow.
In me (although my sufferings are despised)
The Common-Greevance, is epitomis'd;
And, as, this day, the Kingdoms Cause does lie
Distressed between two Factions, so do I;
For, what some would have granted for my sake,
Is crossed, for their sakes, who the motion make;
And, that man, by no party grows strong,
Who sides not with it, both in Right, and Wrong.
In all things which, undoubtedly appear,
Unto my Conscience, I, to both adhere;
And, do from neither, purposely dissent,
To make a Schism, or nourish discontent.
I have in both, professed Foes and Friends;
In both, I have some hopes, on both, some ends;
But, without all designments upon either,
Save, how I may unite them, both together,
In such a Posture, as may free this Land
From those distructions, that seem near at hand;
And, woo them to be just, in every Action,
Without respect to Friend, to Foe or Faction.
Who e're, among you, shall thus minded be,
Whether he seem to love or malice me,
Whether he be of the one to'ther side,
Whether my Suites be granted or denide,
By his endeavourings; it shall not wrest
My thoughts, for any private interest,
To murmur at him; so, he will befriend
My Suite so much, to bring it to an end:
That, from your Labyrinths, I may retire;
And, be again at leisure to enquire
What will become of Me; and, what of Them,
Who take the Courses, which I most contemn.
For, to retreat, and gotten ground to yield,
Is, otherwhile, the means to win a field;
And, he that would turn Floods another way,
Must dig his Draine, before he builds his Bay.
Heu; Temporum, praevaricati Mores!
Quis, delegabit Misero favores?
Quis, auscultabit Populi Clamores?
Vel, quis pensabit Pauperum Dolores?
Nemo, fert Opem, viro perituro;
Sic ERAT, EST, ac ERIT in futuro;
Vt olim, tamen, in haec Verba juro,
Nec Habeo, nec Careo, nec Curo.
Nec Habeo, quod visus sum habere;
Nec Careo, quod multi caruere,
Nec Curo, quamvis devoratus fere;
Nam, Deo Vero, spem repono, vere.
Which is in English to this effect.

Oh! how corrupt this Age in manners grows!
Who, to the Miserable, mercy shows?
Who, on the Peoples cries, an ear bestows?
Or, who compassionates the Poore-mans woes?
To succor the Distressed, none appear;
Thus 'twas, thus it is; and thus I Am like to fare:
Yet, as of old, this Motto, still, I bear;
I neither have, nor want, nor do I care.
I have not, what I had a while ago;
I want not, that, which many others do;
Nor care I, though I quite neglected grow;
For, I in GOD confide, and will do so.
A Postscript.
He, that has Money to procure his ends,
Needs neither strain his wits, nor tire his Friends.
He, that has Friends, his matters to contrive,
May (though he has nor Wit, nor Money) live.
He, that has Wit, and wants the former two,
May live more richly, then he seems to do.
He, that has two of these, und wants but one,
Can neither happy be, nor quite undone*
He, that has all of these, might be a King,
If he could wish, to be so poor a thing:
And, he that is deprived of all the three,
May be an Englishman, for ought I see.
FINIS

