A SERMON PREACHED At East Dearham in Norf. Jan. 30. 1661. BEING The day of the
most horrid MURDER of that most PIOUS and INCOMPARABLE PRINCE King CHARLES the
First of England, etc. By John Winter Curate Ibid.

Oh that my head were waters, and mine eyes a fountain of tears.

Jerem. 9.1. Illa tantum demonstrare, est destruere.

Tertul. Expletur lachrymis egeriturque dolor.

Ovid. Tris. LONDON. Printed in the Year, 1662.

2 Chronicles. 35.24. And all Judah and Jerusalem mourned for Josiah.


AND who can blame their mourning? or who can forbear to mourn in such a case?
Judah was Gods people; Jerusalem his holy City; Josiah the best of the Kings of
Judah, and taken away by an untimely death. Hinc illae lachrimae, hence these
salt waves and sable weeds. And all Judah, etc.

Kings be the best of the best people; under God the glory and safety of
Churches and Nations; whose felicity holds in capite. Genesis 3.15.
Even the Kingdom of Christ had long since been overthrown, could the old
Serpent have wounded the head, as well as he can bruise the heel. Howbeit, his
implacable spite declares whereat he does aim; who seeing his sting too short
to reach Christ in Person, persecutes him in effigy. He cannot simite the
anointed Lord of life, and therefore strikes at the life of the Lords
anointed. He most labors to deface the glory of them, who most eminently bear
Gods Image; and because the Lord has done Princes the honor, to call them
Gods; he envyes them the happiness to dye like men. Psalm. 82.
He knows right-well, that the fall alone of the Royal Oak and Princely Cedar,
will break down the undergrowing Plants, and expose the poor Shrubs to all
disasters. And this was the cause of Gods Lebanon, Judah and Jerusalem; of
which, when it was too late, the people became sensible. Whilst Josiah lived,
perhaps (like other Nations since,) they thought his Office and Dignity
unnecessary, troublesome, and burdensome: But by the waters of Babylon they
best understood the worth of their late King, under whose gracious Reign they
saw peace and truth in Sion. And then all Judah and Jerusalem, etc.

In which words are the Person mourned for, and the Persons mourning.


Or, here is Josiahs death, and His peoples grief.


The person here lamented is Josiah, who is considerable in three respects: 1.
As a good man. 2. As a good King. And, 3. As being both an excellent man, and
an admirable King, cut off in the midst of his years by a bloody death. And by
that time it will be no wonder, that all Judah and Jerusalem mourned for Josiah.

And first, Josiah was a good man. His name promised no less; and he performed
no less than his name promimised, that is, to be a burning and shining Lord.
God frequently gives significant names to his most eminent servants. Jacob for
wrestling with God is named Israel, Genesis 32.28. The famous Prophet, who was
true to his God in sacred things, and yet faithful to his idolatrous Prince in
civil matters, Mark 3.17.
had to his name Daniel, that is, the judgment of God. The two brethren
Apostles, who were to be a terror to sinners, and a light to the Church, are
named by Christ, Boanerges, the Sons of thunder. And this Josiah, designed by
God for an eternal monument of piety, had his name given long before his being,
1 Kings. 13.2. being in this respect like unto the King of Kings, whose name
was given, before he was conceived in the womb, Luke 2.21. Of this Josiah may
we say, what Christ said of John the Baptist, John 5.35. He was a burning and a
shining light; burning in faith, shining in charity; burning in zeal toward
God, shining in goodness among men. And pity it were, (might God think so) that
such a man should dye; the world having so small a number, and so great a need
of them. When Saul's blind zeal for his rash oath brought Jonathans life in
hazard, the whole Army interposed for his rescue. Shall Jonathan dye, (said
they) who has wrought this great salvation? God forbid, 1 Samuel 14.45. pity
that Jonathan, one that does good in Israel, should dye at all; more pity it
is, that he should dye by the Sword of the wicked. One good man's death, is
every good man's wound; So that for a goad man (as the Apostle says) somke
would even dare to dye, Romans 5.7. And therefore, when the righteous perish, and
no man lays it to heart, it is a most certain sign of greater evil to come,
Isal. 57.1. So soon as righteous Lot was secured in Zoar, fire and brimstone
from Heaven fell upon Sodom, Genesis 19.24. Joash and his people had no sooner
murdered holy Zechariah, but God delivered them into the hands of the host of
Syria. Good men are as tutelary Angels in their several stations; the wicked
world, which cannot endure them, cannot endure without them. Such was Josiah
unto Judah and Jerusalem. A good man; so the story of his life records. To
him Jobs character aptly squareth, Job 1.
Persect and upright, one that feared God and eschewed evil. So that had he
been a private person, his virtues must have made him public; his goodness
made him beloved, and therefore his loss the more to be lamented. And all
Judah, etc.

But secondly, Look upon Josiah King of Judah, and King in Jerusalem; and then
common reason will teach nature to pay more than an ordinary tribute of sighs
and tears at his last obsequies. Public persons Herses may justly challenge
the distilliation of private persons eyes. All rivulets and little torrents
empty themselves into the main Ocean. Can any man forbid, or fault this holy
water? Dethroned and enthralled Princes, have had this paid them by their
enslaved Subjects, Cum nil nisi flere relictum, when they were able to do no
more, and could do no less. The Church of God in all ages has bewailed the
loss of eminent Persons, though dropped away with age, and gathered to their
fathers with the Long Rake of silent time. The death of old father Jacob, was
bewailed by his sons seven days, with a great and very sore lamentation, Genesis
last. 10. And the Canaanites called it a grievous mourning, verse. 11. It made
an impression even in the Aliens and Insidels.

Thus when Moses the faithful Prince and Ruler was dead, all Israel mourned
for him thirty days in the plains of Moab, Deuteronomy. last. verse. 8. So great a
loss has a whole Nation in one Moses, that they may prosecute his assumptions,
as Elisha did Elijah, saying, My father, my father, the chariots of Israel, and
the horsemen thereof! 2 King. 2.12. Chariots are both for War and Peace; and in
both, good Princes are Isreal's chariots. Without them Nations may have
Jehu-drivers for a time; who Phaeton-like may set the world on fire, and with
the Egyptians, drown all in a red Sea of blood, violence, and destruction; so
by woeful experience, teaching all Judah and Jerusalem to mourn for one Josiah.

All Nations are taught of God, by the light of nature, to reverence their
Kings whilst they live; and to lament them being dead.

The Romans had their vast Funeral piles, and massy columns for their Caesar's.
Jus Gentium est obedire Regibus, S. Aug. It is the Law of Nations to obey
Kings. Cons.
The Law of Nations, is the Law of God written in the heart. The Law of
Christians is the will of God written both in the heart, and in the holy
Scriptures. The Heathens Law is more dark; the Christians more clear: And
therefore the Christian Prince is bettet instructed how to rule his Subjects;
the Christian Subjects better informed, how to obey their Sovereigns. They
should better understand the value of a King than Heathens; and therefore more
lament his loss. Whatsoever the Babylonians did for their Nebuchadnezzar, or
the Persians for their Cyrus; this the people of God did: All Judah and
Jerusalem mourned for Josiah.

So much is peace and prosperity tied unto Sovereignty, and entailed to the
Crown, that it fares amongst men, as with Virgils Bees; Rege incolumi men's
omnibus una est, Amisso rupere fidem. When the King is lost, then instead of
honey making, there is gall and heartbreaking; the waxing fabrics are
demolisht; and Drones devour the labors of the industrious. Then appear
factions and fractions, sects and schisms; then armed swarms encounter, and
tumble down dead together like Abners and Joabs men (2 Samuel 2.16.) as though
they could agree in nothing, but to disagree among themselves. So ominous is
the death of a King to a whole Nation, that well may all Judah and Jerusalem
mourn for one Josiah.

And the better the King, the greater the grief; and we have a Proverb, which
says, Seldom come the better; which speaks that old woman Himera, who prayed
for the Tyrant Dionysius, a great deal wiser than them, whose hearts and heads
are ever given to change: with whom to have nothing to do, is the Counsel of
the wise Solomon, Prove. 24.21.

All changes are of dubious consequence. A Kings translation, often signifies
no less than a Nations dissolution; that the world may see a genuine sympathy
between King and people, as well as between the head and body natural. Such was
the case between Judah and their Josiah.

He must be more than blind, that reads not Gods anger in the loss of a good
King; seeing he tells us plainly, that his wrath is shown in the fate of a bad
one, Hosea 13.11. I gave thee a King in mine anger, and took him away in my
wrath. Holy David discerned Gods judgment against the Land in Saul's overthrow,
and thus he laments it, 2 Samuel 1.19. The beauty of Israel is slain upon the
high places. Tell it not in Gath, publish it not in the streets of Askelon. At
the 21. verse, he curses the very field, wherein that fatal battle was
fought; Ye mountain; of Gilboah, let there be no dew, nor rain upon you, nor
fields of offerings; for there the shield of the neighty was vilely cast away,
the shield of Saul, as though he not been anointed with oil. At the 24.
verse, he calls upon the Land to mourn; Ye daughters of Israel weep for Saul,
who clothed you with scarlet, etc. So much are a Nation concerned to bewail
the fall of a Prince, though a Saul, and rejected of God.

But then, put Good to King, and the Good is multiplied; put Best to King, and
then no other mortal person can come near it. Behold the Josiah, the best of
Judahs Kings. Never had they such a King; and therefore never such a loss;
never such a cause of mourning. And all Judah, etc.

Josiah came to the Crown a child, 2 Chronicles. 34.1.
at eight years of age; whose tender youth excelled in piety, many Ancients his
Predecessors. He was senex in juventute, spending those youthful days in
religious exercises, which the generallity drive away in vain and idel
excursions. In the eighth year of his Raigh, he sought after the God of David
his Father; in the twelfth year he sets upon reformation, purging the Land from
heathenish prophamation. Then brake he down the Altars of the Idols, and burnt
the bones of their Priests. And as he beat down superstition, so he built up
true Religion; which two parts by Authority duly executed make a true
reformation. Many are zealous pretenders to pull down superstition; but few
attend or intend to advance Religion. Many cry down Diana, merely to get the
silver shrines into their close cupboards. The greedy grasping and
misemploying, of the ancient devoted endowments of this Nation, give just
occasion to sober-minded persons to say, whatsoever the crimes of the Papists
might be; the zeal of the demolishers was too much byaz'd to the left hand: and
whether or no the first founders meant well, the confounders did ill. So did
not Josiah. He purged the Temple, and restored the sacrifices of God; he rent
his clothes at the reading of the Book of God, because of his peoples
transgression; for which he received an answer of approbation from God, and a
comfortable promise, that he should go to his grave in peace, Ver. 27, 28
and not see the evil that God should bring upon that place.

After which answer from God, Josiah's zeal was not qnenched, but enflamed. He
caused all his people to serve the Lord; and all his days they departed not
from following the Lord God of their Fathers. Ver. last.
And well it had been for them, that Josiah had lived as long as Meihuselah:
for Judah's Religion fell to the ground, together with Josiah.

This Chapter speaks his zeal for Gods glory; that he kept so magnificent a
passover, as none ever before, or after him. He did not take to himself any
thing from Gods offerings; Ver. 7.
but gave freely of his own to the offerings of God: thirty thousand Lambs and
Kigs, and three thousand Bullocks. Well did Josiah deserve that acclamation
from his people, which Daniel gave to King Darius, Dan. 6.21. Oh King live for
ever. Here was zeal worth the beholding. When Jehu boasted of his zeal, he
could show nothing for it, but channels running with Royal blood, and heaps
made of Princes heads, 2 King. 10. Josiah held a better sacrifice. And much
need not be said in praise of him, of whom God himself has said this, 2 King.
23.25.
Like unto him was there no King before him, that turned to the Lord with all
his heart, and with all his soul; neither after him arose there any like him.
Solomon had his Idolatry; (to say no more) and David was found in the matter of
Uriah: but we read of no capital crime in the life of just Josiah. As he was a
good man, so a better King. When goodness and greatness go hand in hand
together, how great is that goodness! how good that greatness! There are many
in the world, who had been good men, had they not aimed to be great men; but
having aspired to high places, became neither good Rulers, nor good persons:
Trebell. Apoll.
like Saturninus, who told his own soldiers that advanced him (and they soon
found his words true) that they had spoiled a good Captain, and made an evil
Prince. Little hope can be of that Kings Reign, to whom popular confusion gives
right and title. No King is like to him, that comes to the Scepter in the Name
of God, and holds it according to his Commission. Such a one was good Josiah,
descended from David, of the Royal Tribe of Judah. Such a Kings death may well
force tears to flow from all Judah and Jerusalem.

But then thirdly look upon this best of Kings taken away by an untimely death,
cut off in the midst of his days, the thirty ninth of his age; and by the hand
of an uncircumcised Egyptian. And who but such a black Infidel would have aimed
to kill so fair a King?

But oh! what makes Josiah expose his sacred Person to their black darts and
venomous malice? In this alone (setting humane frailty aside) was Josiah to be
blamed, of all that we read of him. Pharaoh Necho King of Egypt came up to the
River Euphrates, to fight with the King of Assyria; and Josiah not interessed
in the quarrel, engaged against the King of Egypt, prompted (perhaps) by
State Policy to remove so bad a neighbor: but God had a further purpose in it,
that Josiah being taken away, Judah and Jerusalem might smart for their
transgressions, committed in the days of King Manasseh. So mcuh the Word of
God informs us, 2 King. 23.26, 27. Thus deep are Gods judgments. Manasseh
the Grandfather, and his people fill Jerusalem with blood and abominations; and
Josiah the Grandchild a pious and tenderhearted Prince, must be slain in
battle, by the hand of a cursed Infidel, and made the Prologue to the Nations
tragedy.

This may seem to call in question Gods providence, or at least his promise;
for how does Josiah go to his grave in peace, when he is slain in battle?

The answer is this; here in one act does God show mercy and severity: mercy to
Josiah: severity against Judah. It was a mercy to him, that he lived not to see
the evil, which they lived to feel. They that understand not how he died in
peace, let them know, he died in peace with God, and that peace passes all
understanding. Whosoever has that peace, need not fear Egyptian arrows: but he
that has it not, dies untimely though he live long; and dies unhappily, though
a natural death. What an arrow did to Josiah, a fever or any other disease
might have done; and of necessity something must do. The arrow that slew him,
wounded all Judah and Jerusalem. It was to him the arrow of Gods deliverance;
to them the arrow of Gods vengeance: it was to him but a single death; but to
them, a manifold judgment. Not the Sun, but the sublunary creatures suffer by
the Suns eclipse. Josiah was delivered from a rebellious people, to keep a
perpetual holy day with Saints and Angels; whilst they have leave to sigh and
groan under a long Babylonish servitude. And then all Judah and Jerusalem
mourned for Josiah. And so come we to the persons mourning.

And all Judah, etc. Judah was Jacobs fourth son by Leah, and predicted to be
the head of that stock, whence Christ lineally was to be derived according to
the flesh, Genesis 49.8. The whole Tribe is here put in the name of their great
Progenitour. So, all Judah, all the Princes and Nobles were perfect Royallists.
None of them attempted, none conspired, none rejoiced, but all lamented at the
death of good King Josiah. It would have been an eternal blot to the Tribe,
had not the branches cast their leaves, when the stock was so cut down. They
must have been bastard imps, and degenerate plants, that had been otherwise
affected for Josiah. And all Judah and Jerusalem mourned, etc.

Jerusalem was the Royal City, and residence of Kings; the Metropolis, Psalm.
122.
the joy of the whole earth. There were the liverly Oracles, the Courts Civil
and Ecclesiastical, the Priests and Levites, the Judges and Elders. There was
Mount Sion, whose gates God loved more than all the dwellings of Jacob, Psalm.
87.1. This Jerusalem, this great and glorious City, All Judah and Jerusalem
mourned for Josiah.

As then Judas the traitor was not born; nor had the Priests learned to betray,
or to buy and sell their King in the Temple. Though bad they were, yet so bad
they were not. They did not then rejoice, but mourn for the untimely death of
Princes. To this all Judah and Jerusalem by their noble extraction, and by
their civil and sacred education held themselves obliged; being far unlike to
some great Cities, which prodigiously have rebelled against those good Kings,
under the shadow of whose wings, they have grown warm in wealth, and cold in
obedience. But Jerusalem held firm to Josiah in his life; and they most
heartily bewail his death. And all Judah, etc.

And a poor All they were, God knows; but his one only Tribe of Judah was now
free from bondage. En quo discordia cives perduxit miseros! See whither civil
discord brings the wretched people! They first disunited in the days of
Jeroboam; from which time, corruption upon corruption followed, until all
Israel for their sins were carried captive by the King of Assyria, and none
left, but this Tribe of Judah only. And now even the glass of Judah was fast
running out, and to hasten it, was much shaken by the sad fall of their Josiah.
This judgment was their passing Bell. Now he was gone that stood in the gap,
and there was no sense for Heavens thunderclaps. And now all Judah, etc.

Grande doloris ingenium, sorrow makes men truly ingenious: want puts the best
esteem upon Gods mercies. When Israel had enjoyed Samuel from his infancy to
his old age; though they could not find a fault in him, yet they grew weary of
him: but when he was dead, they all lamented him, 1 Samuel 25.1. It is one of the
vulgar errors, and may be put in our English Calendar, Praesentem odimus,
amissum querimur, whom we hate present, we bewail when gone. Perhaps Josiah,
when with them, pleased not all parties. Qui multitudini praeest, multis
displiceat, He that rules over the multitude must displease many. Probably, to
the favorers of Idolatry Josiah seemed sacrilegious; to the sacrilegious, to
be superstitious; and to the lazy Israelite, to be too severe and zealous. Been
facere, and male pati Regium, To do well, and hear illis Kingly. Howbeit,
whatsoever they thought of him in his life, they all bemoan his death. All
Judah and Jerusalem mourned, etc.

Now began their sorrow; never more were they to see such another King in that
Nation, that they might know the difference between a Native Prince and a
Babylonish Tyrant. No sect nor sex escaped the Caldeans rod. So general the
misery; so general the mourning. From the Prince on the Throne, to him that
sits on the dunghill; all are concerned to mourn for one Josiah.

The Prophet Jeremy having a deeper insight into this wound of the Nation, than
the generallity; lamented not only himself, but taught all the people to lament
also, as the following Verse shows. All the singing men and singing women
spoke of Josiah in their lamentations, and made them an Ordinance in Israel:
and behold they are written in the Lamentations. Jeremiah an eminent Prophet
was most sensible of the loss of Josiah an excellent King. De art nemo nisi
artifex, An Artist best judges of art; and good men of good men. The Book of
Lamentations was composed by the Prophet, In perpetuam rei memoriam. Jeremy and
his holy contemporaries, made Josiah's death a matter of mourning, unto all
generations, by a Law and Ordinance; to teach even us, that we ought to be
humbled for, and retain the memory of the untimely death of godly Kings. It was
an ominous presage, that Judah was commanded to mourn by an Ordinance; and mark
the sequel: About two and twenty years and six months after Josiah's death,
the Caldeans came, and ruined Prince, Nobles, Priests and people, carring the
poor remnant into captivity, where they continued threescore and ten years.
After more than fourscore years, had they greater cause to mourn that pious
Prince's fall, than the first day. The child, whose father was unborn when
Josiah was slain, had cause to curse those swarth Egyptians. So long lived are
those sorrows, which have their birth at the Prince's death. A nation is soon
wounded; but the wound is not so soon healed. And now having seen Judah's and
Jerusalem's case, we come to make it our own; and to act the second part of
Jeremy's lamentation.

But how or where well to begin, or end our lamentation; alas, I know not. None
but Apelles his Pencill, was thought sit to draw Great Alexander's picture; and
it would require another Jeremiah, to speak to purpose of our Josiah.

To declare our Late King of ever blessed memory, his life and virtues, his
miseries, and death; and in all these our own sin and shame; who is sufficient
for these things?

Yet nevertheless, as the Jeremiah's of the times may compose Books: so the
poor Levites may come in, to bear a part in the sorrowful song.

The mean person may have as true a sense of this misery, though not so full a
one, as the great ones.

And since it has pleased God to bring me to the task of this sad day; I
desire you to assist me herein, that what is wanting in elocution, may be made
up in godly sorrow and contrition, concerning the sad story of our Josiah.

As Hezekiah said, (2 King. 19.3.) so may I, This day is a day of trouble, and
of rebuke, and of blasphemy.

A day of trouble; for it caused the Nation many days and years of trouble;
and how many more it may, God knows: who in his just judgment, has smitten
man and beast with manifold plagues and punishments. And for all this, his
wrath is not turned away, but his hand is stretched out still.

A day of rebuke it is, from all them that are round about us. The Papists
retort upon us all those crimes, wherewith we charged the Jesuits, as
equivocation, perjury, sedition, rebellion, treason, and murdering of Kings.

And a day of blasphemy it is; for Jews, Turks, Pagans and Infidels scoff at
Christian Religion, and say; Lo these are Christ's Disciples, who have cast
aside their Masters precepts, neither give God nor Caesar his due, neither fear
God, nor regard man. Yea, it is to be feared, that by this bloody days work
the Devil has gotten many an Atheist. Many persons seeing so righteous a
Prince fall by so wicked hands, in so horrid a manner, were apt to conclude, it
was in vain to serve God any longer. For this every faithful person may cry
out with the Prophet Jeremy, chap 9.1. Oh that my head were waters, and mine
eyes a fountain of tears, etc.

A true Josiah our Late Sovereign was indeed, a bright and shining Lord,
conspicuous in his high affection for Gods glory, and the welfare of his
people. To this end was he born, to bear witness to the truth; and ( horresco
referens) for this was he murdered. Full well might he say, Psalm. 69.9.
with David in his meditations, to the Lord; The zeal of thy house has even
consumed me.

His name Charles signifies magnanimous, valiant; a name famous long since,
for Charles Martell, and Charles the Great, Kings of France: but now more
famous for Charles Martyr, Charles the good King of, Charles the too good King
for England. He was (even his enemies being Judges) worthy of the Kingdom, had
he not been owner of it; but because owner of it, held unworthy of life. Such
paradoxes are held in Satan's Schools. A King he was, whom all Nations admired,
but his own; in this also like his Savior, Mat 13.57
who had no honor in his own Country.

A Prince he was, who was the glory of Europe, and the shame of his own
degenerate people born in Scotland; and but that he was born there, I should
have said of it, Joh. 1.46.
as Nathanael of Nazareth, Can there any good thing come out thence? I would be
loath to say that he robbed the National stock; but (saving to each truly worthy
person his respective dignity) this I may safely say, as was said of Josiah:
Before him arose no such King (God knows what may be after him) in our Judah
and Jerusalem. The greater cause have we all to mourn for our Josiah.

He was a King, who had made an absolute conquest over himself; having his
passions in better obedience, than any Prince has his Subjects. He was pious
and discreet; heroic, yet withal patient; in his prosperity sober and
moderate; in his adversity magnanimous and constant; in his judgment profound,
yet not despising counsel; in his determinations deliberate; and in defense of
the truth invincible.

The coal which the Seraphim laid upon Esay's lips, Isa. 6.7.
was bestowed upon his Pen; whereby he drew out his own Picture in those
excellent Pieces, which he left behind him, for the world to look upon with
wonder and reverence.

There may weread his zeal truly balanced with profound knowledge, piety, and
modesty; his grief for the ruins of Gods Church, and his people; his care for
his friends; his charity for this enemies; his commiseration of others, and
courage in his own afflictions: and in all so even a temper; that never any
came nearer him, who at his Cross did say, Luke 23.34.
Father forgive them, for they know not what they do.

Thus God takes the most spotless Lambs for sacrifice. For his piety and acute
inspection into sacred mysteries, he was as much a Priest as a King: and for
his divine foreknowledge, as much a Prophet; a Trismegistus, thrice great; in
this age unparaleld. A real Defender of the Faith, whose Quill wounded to the
death with invincible Arguments, both Heretics and Schismatics. A true
Beauclerk, and best deserving that Title; as much a Scholar as a Prince; as
much a Christian as either; and as much all in one, as ever was any mortal
one. In brief, he was, and he is, not only to this Nation, but to all
Christendom, a mirror to think how he lived; a grief to think how he died.
Then let all our Judah and Jerusalem mourn for our Josiah.

And if all Judah and Jersalem mourned; much more cause have we. They were not
immediately guilty of the death of their King, nor any otherwise, than by the
provocation of their sins. They contrived not Josiah's murder; they did not
confederate with the cursed Egyptians; they fell not from obedience; they took
not up Arms against him; they did not buy and sell him; they did not pretend a
Law; erect a Scaffold to butcher him, nor make his Royal Palace his
slaughterhouse; they did not triumph over the dead Kings Corpse, and justify
the fact; oh no: but what an Egyptian did, they bewail and lament, bathing the
bloody Corpse with tears, and embalming his precious memory with a set form of
lamentation. And all Judah and Jerusalem mourned for Josiah.

Thus was the case of our Josiah far beyond theirs; and most near to that of
our blessed Savior. Inter malitiam and avaritiam, Between the malice of some,
and the avarice and ambition of others (as Christ between the thieves) was he
crucified. Some corrupt and stinking Elders, some bloody hypocritical Priests,
and some pharisaicall Zelots, pretend to do God service, by violating his holy
Commandments.

Here a Judas comes with his, Quantum dabitis? What will ye give me, and I will
betray him? There a temporizing Courtier, who eat bread at his Table, lift up
his heel against him. Such practices Heathens have abhorred. Am I a Jew? (said
Pilate to Christ) thine own Nation and the chief Priests have delivered thee
unto me. His own Nation, even those, who by all Laws of God and man were
obliged to defend him. This was a heavy aggravation of Christ's sufferings; and
so it was of our gracious Sovereigns. The base Scots sold him; as base English
bought him; the receiver and the thief are both in one predicament: and the
Nation may say to either party, as Simon Peter said to Simon Magus, Pecunia tua
tibi sit in perditionem, Act. 8.20.
They money perish with thee.

How has this wounded and stained our Church and Nation! And we, whither have
we caused our shampe to go? If the guilt of a brothers blood cried to Heaven
for vengeance, as God told Cain, Genesis 4.10. then how much more the blood of a
father, the common father of three Christian Kingdoms? If Readiness death were
deplorable, yet he a wicked person, and the Philistines none of his Subjects;
then how much more this case, 2 Samuel 4.11.
where wicked Subjects, like Baanah and Rhecab have murdered a righteous man,
and their most gracious King, at his own house, in his Royal Jerusalem? How
ought this to afflict us? Know ye not that there is a Prince, and a great man
fallen this day in our Israel? He is fallen, and with him fell Judah and
Jerusalem; Judah, the Nobility and Gentry, Laws and Justice; Jerusalem, Church
and Religion, doctrine and discipline, piety and morality. The Civil State was
forthwith corupted in practice, the Ecclesiastical in judgment and worship.
Thus all Judah and Jerusalem have cause to mourn for our Josiah.

And all, all indeed have cause to mourn. The Princes Nobility and Gentry have
cause to mourn; to think what a breach the Lord has made upon them, by the
profanation of the Scepter, and dishonor of the Diadem. For whose honor of
life can be safe, where Kings shields are thus vilely cast away?

The Bishops and Pastors of the Church have cause to mourn; for since the death
of that Defender of the Faith, profaneness, heresies, and schisms have
revived and flourished; saving truths and orthodox Ministers have languished;
they that sold the truth, have with the wages of iniquity bought preferment; Et
probit as laudatur and alget, and honesty is only praised and starved.

The common people have cause to mourn; the cheat of the public Faith has
weakened their private credits; taxes have exhausted their purses; others have
eaten up their labors; and the evil spirits (I mean the miseries) which were
quickly raised, are not like soon to be conjured down. Well may the whole Land
mourn for the misemployed wealth, wherewith they purchased the death of their
most gracious King; and (without Gods wonderful mercy upon their hearty
repentance) misery and vengeance on themselves and their posterities.

The greatest of the Kings enemies have greatest cause to mourn, both upon a
sacred, and a civil account. Upon a facred; because their souls lie at stake
for that bloody sacrifice: and upon a civil, because they now see the axe laid
to them in justice which they brought upon others unjustly. For having Agag's
cruelty, 1 Samuel 15.33.
they suffer Agag's doom; which was this; As thy sword has made women
childless; so shall thy mother be childless among women. And it comes upon
them, as upon him, when they said, Surely the bitterness of death is past. And
God grant that they all may be true mourners, that their scarlet sins may be
made white by the blood of Christ Jesus. It is not our part to rejoice at any
man's misery; and far is it (I thank God) from my thoughts to do so. But I
should be cruel, if in this business I should not be strict in laying open the
atrocity of the crime.

My hearts desire for all those that hear me this day, and for all those that
do not, is, that they may be saved. And I hope no man will count me an enemy,
because I tell him the truth. It is sorrow unto repentance that brings
salvation, 2 Cor. 7.10. The work of this day calls for mourning, for more than
an ordinary mourning. And the blessing of Christ is pronounced to mourners,
Mat. 5.4. My prayer is, that God would first give every man true sorrow of
heart, for all his sins, and more especially for this great sin; and then that
he would give him the comfort of his holy Spirit, as he did to David in the
time of his great need, that he may not be swallowed up of overmuch grief. I
shall say no more to set forth the ugliness of this monster, this black deed;
for I am charitably persuaded, that every one here present does more abhor it
in his heart, than I am able to conceive or express. And therefore let no man
misunderstand me, and think, because I have (as I ought) throughout this
Discourse, and upon all other occasions, eternally condemned the fact, that
therefore I have everlastingly damned all persons concerned in it. God forbid.
There was hope, and place of repentance, yea, and infallible means of
salvation, for them that had their hands stained with the blood of Christ
Jesus. When St Peter had laid the crime home most severly to them, and they
were pricked in their hearts, and said, Men and brethren what shall we do? Act.
2.37. he did not bid them lie down and perish; but repent and save themselves
from that untoward generation. And upon this there were converted that day,
three thousand souls. And God grant that this days preaching, may be
proportionably, as effectual throughout this Nation.

Brethren, we are all guilty of this days crime, though after sundry manners;
well then, let us not be angry one with another any longer: but let every man
be angry with himself for his sinful ways. Let us condemn our selves, and God
will not condemn us. If we confess our sins, God is faithful and just to
forgive us our sins, and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness.

Let there be no more discord; let us henceforth fear God and the King, and
love one another, as he has commanded us. Give me leave to use that phrase of
speech, which has been long abused; let us associate against the common enemy.
The common enemy is the Devil; his dominion is sin; and his Kingdom is
enlarged by our divisions. Let us strive to beat down sin in our selves, and to
advance the Kingdom of Christ, which consists in righteousness, peace, and joy
in the holy Ghost, Romans 14.17.

This Text I have chosen for the day, calls to us unanimously for mourning; the
occasion I have showed you to be a very sad one. As for our Josiah, our Late
gracious King; our sorrow reaches not to him. Injuriam facit Martyri, qui orat
pro Martyr, He injures the Martyr that prays for him. Let our mourning then be
for our selves, and for our sins, which helped forward his death and our own
misery. Methinks I hear his glorious soul saying to us, as our Savior did to
the Daughters of Jerusalem, Luke 23.28. Weep not for me, but for your selves
and for your children. Ye know what follows in the next words; and we know
not how nearly they may concern us. Judah and Jerusalem rued Josiah's death
full many a year after; indeed they never did outgrow it. And we the people of
this Land (for ought we know) may every year more and more have cause to mourn
for our Josiah.

The Lord give us all a true insight into our selves, and our own dangers. The
Lord be merciful unto us, and restore the voice of joy and health into our
dwellings. Deliver us from blood-guiltiness Oh God, thou that art the God of
our strength, and our tongues shall sing of thy righteousness. Grant this O
Lord for Jesus Christ's sake our Savior and Redeemer. Amen.

Laus Do.
FINIS.

