THE Modern Statesman.

By G. W. Esquire

(...).

Plutarch. In hac ruina rerum stetit una integra atque immobilis virtus populi
Romani. Haec omnia strata humi erexit, ac sustulit.

Livie. LONDON, Printed, by Henry Hills, and are to be sold at his House at the
sign of Sir John Old Castle in Py-Corner, MDCLIII.

To the Reader.
READER,
I Here present thee with a few conceptions and observations hudled together
during my confinement to my Chamber by an arrest from Heaven; my nobler part
being then unwilling to ly idle, when the other was denied the liberty of
action: If I have not observed so exact a method as thou might expect, let
the distraction of my mind by bodily pains and weakness plead my excuse. Thou
may wonder perhaps to meet me walking abroad without a support, which was
not from any overweening confidence in my own ability, but because I was
ignorant where to find such an one as might lend me an hand; and this, not that
I could not have picked out one sufficient in my own apprehension, but in
thine: For when I considered our divisions, what animosities, what parties,
what factions are amongst us, I knew not where to elect the man might please
all, and so rather would have none, than one that might creat a prejudice, or
hinder any from looking into this little Treatise of so public concernment. We
are all passengers in the public Vessel, therefore as wise Mariners diligently
observe the Heavens, that they may not be taken unprovided by Tempests: so
ought we to enquire what may betide the Public, whereon our private Quiet, and
Happiness depends. Foresight is an half-prevention, and though it may not
totally defend, yet will it take off the edge so far, that the evil shall not
be able to pierce to the heart: let this then suffice to move thee to read on,
whereby thou shall be enabled to make a perfect judgment, whether happiness,
or calamity attends the nation whereof thou art a member. Sol et homo generant
Hominem, say the Naturalists, and Providence, and Virtue concur in the
begetting of a perfect and durable Commonwealth, for divine influence, and
humane activity are equally necessary to the generation of the politic, as
well as natural Body, and Heaven and earth must join to make up an absolute
Compositum. Observe then both God, and Man, the actings of Providence toward,
and of Virtue in a Nation, and thou may foretell whether it will be well or
ill with them, without going to a Conjuror, or any Star-gazing Mountebank.

FAREWELL.
The Contents.
CHap 1. That there is by nature in all men an inquisitive desire after the
knowledge of futurity* the reason of this; the means by which they have
attempted it. Chap. 2. That there is a way leads to this knowledge, and what it
is. Chap. 3. This may confirmed by reason and examples. Chap. 4. An admonition
to some amongst us. Chap. 5. How England became a Commonwealth, and what may be
expected from such a beginning. Chap. 6. The beginning of the Commonwealth of
Rome, and the causes of its growth. Chap. 7. A Parallel. Chap. 8. Of
Providence, and Virtue, and the concurrence of second causes. Chap. 9. Of the
Roman Piety, the evil and danger of mock thansgivings. Chap. 10. Piety and
Valor not inconsistent; Piety rewarded in Heathens, Impiety punished. Chap.
11. Religion ingrafted in man's heart by nature. Chap. 12. The outward means to
be used; Ministers encouraged and maintained; the Christian Magistrates duty.
Chap. 13. Religion not to be made a stalking horse to Ambition or Avarice.
Chap. 14. The benefit of humane learning, and some objections answered. Chap.
15. An answer to some objections in a Book entitled, The Saints Guide. Chap.
16. The abuse of learning no argument against the use of it. Chap. 17. The
mischief of Ignorance. Chap. 18. Of moral Virtue in general. Chap. 19. Of
Probity, and the practice of it among the Romans. Chap. 20. Of Prudence. Chap.
21. Of Natural parts, Experience, Learning, and Travel. Chap. 22. Of the
Prudence of the Romans. Chap. 23. Of Justice, and the Roman practice of it.
Chap. 24. Of Laws, and the English Laws. Chap. 25. Of Fortitude. Chap. 26. Of
Temperance.
THE Modern Statesman.
CHAP. I.
That there is by nature in all men an inquisitive desire after the knowledge
of futurity; the reason of this; the means by which they have attempted to
attain this in all Ages.

THere is, and has always been, in the generality of mankind, an itching
desire, and ^ankering after the knowledge of future events, the Sons of Adam
reaching out their hands to the forbidden tree, and catching at the fruit of
it; yea, this offspring of Eve longing for the greenest apples, the precocious
knowledge of Events, before they come to their just ripeness and maturity.

And to say truth, the Tree of knowledge is fair to the eye, and pleasant to
the taste; for as all notional dainties are delightful, so especially these
prenotions and anticipations of things are the more sweet and delicious to the
palates of men, because most of their being is treasured up in their future
condition. They can find no satisfaction, no Sabbath, no quiet in their present
state, and therefore they would fain know what the next day, what the next
year, what the next age will bring forth; in the highest prosperity they fear a
mutation, in the lowest adversity they are impatient for a change; and hence it
comes to pass, that futurity is the mark at which all level the arrows of
their Counsels, their endeavors, their hopes, their desires, and their prayers.

This has caused them in all ages to have a sacred esteem of those who
pretended skill in divination, as the honor conferred upon Joseph by Pharaoh,
and the advancement of Daniel by the Chaldean and Persian Monarchs recorded in
sacred writ undoubtedly makesout, to let pass the honors which the Magi
enjoyed among them, which are set down by those that wrote their histories.

Thus the Jews who had the Vrim and Thummim, and Prophets from God to enquire
of, yet ran a madding after wizzards, and such as had familiar spirits, had
their false prophets by hundreds, yea, and sent to Baalzebub the God of Ekron,
an oracle of the Devils, to enquire, as in the life of Ahaziah will appear.

With how frequent, and costly sacrifices did the Graecians adore their
Oracle-giving Deities, purchasing an answer with a Hecatomb, and with the blood
of a hundred dumb beasts conjuring their dumb devils, before the sullen fiends
would vouchsafe to answer them? and of what esteem were the Sybills books among
the Romans, who with all other heathens were so inquisitive after the future,
that they left no stone unrol'd to attain the knowledge of their fates?

There could not a Bird chatter, but there was an Augur to comment on, and
expound its language.

There could not a Bird fly, but there was an Auspex to watch it; nor light,
but he was ready to observe, and by its motions in the air interpret the
revolutions of States and Persons.

There could not a sacrifice fall, but there was an Aruspex to behold the
posture of it, and by the quietness or struggling of the sensitive creature, to
foretell the facilities or reluctancies in the affairs of rational beings; and
an Exspex to consult the entrails, and by the color of the inwards tell the
complexion of outward affairs.

There could not a line seem to be scribled on the hand, but there was a
Chiromancer to read them, and with his interlineary glosses expound them,
giving a short Synopsis of the future passages of this present life out of that
Enchiridion (as they would have it) of natures penning.

The Interpreter of Dreams was set to judge in the horny and ivory gates of
fancy, and as if the day were to receive light from the night, to regulate its
walking motions, by th others slumbring intimations.

To pass by those several kinds of the same madness expressed in Geomancy,
by circles in the earth; Pyromancy, by fire; Hydromancy, by water; Necromancy,
by the Ghosts of the dead, etc. of which the nations were enamoured, the heaven
it self could not escape them, but the Astrologer with his key was to unlock
the starry charracters, and out of them spell the fate of sublunary things.

And here let me not be mistaken, for I am not of opinion that those glorious
bodies were created only to twinckle in a clear night, I do believe them to
have an influence on sublunary bodies, and see the Moon empire it over the
waters, and the humors increase, and decrease, as it fills, or is in the wane,
yet are they not, I conceiv, so easy to be read as some pretend, if certainly
to be known by any; for I find the Prince of the power of the air himself at
loss in his conjectures, which made him so cautelous in his oraculous
responsals, as Plutarch in many places observes.

And Aquinas will have the crows, cranes, and swallows, those flying Almanacks,
more happy and successeful in their predictions, than our anni specula, which
become often cracked and broken in their guessings at the weather and truly the
giving such unequal representations of things most obvious, is a very bad into
create a belief of their ability to foretell things far more imperceptible, and
immaterial, that depend upon the will and decrees of God, and upon the motions
of most free and indifferent agents; yea, such as are confessed on all hands so
able to oppose, that they cannot be compelled, for Sapiens dominabitur astris,
and it is related of Socrates, that of a crabbed and dissolute disposition by
nature, he became the most accomplished in his time by Philosophy.

But I shall not set bounds to other men's knowledge, nor circumscribe them
within the circle of my own ignorance, they may have dawnings where I perceive
no starlight; yet take this along with you, that God often in text-hand
declares his mind, in a Comet, a blazing-star, and other fiery apparitions, as
he did before the last destruction of Jerusalem.

And as the Jews and Heathens, so many Christians have been tampering about
futurities, how lawfully I cannot say, for I am persuaded we ought to acquiesc
in Gods revealed will; God will have his children in some sense in diem vivere
entertain fortune by the day, and he does choose gradually and leasurely (...),
to discover the thoughts he has concerning them, that he might keep them in a
waiting and obedient posture, in a posture of dependence, and expectation; not
that I would have them with Anacreon cry out, (...), give me to day, let who
will take care for to morrow; or with the Stoics lazily expect the
blind-stroak of a conceited unavoidable Fate; but using all lawful and probable
means, endeavor their countries, and in it their own future good.

I confess with that kingly Prophet, that Gods ways are unsearchable, and his
paths past finding out, that is in the hidden and secret bringing of things
about, yet in his outgoings he will be observed, that his glory, his power,
his justice, and his mercy may be made manifest unto the children of men; thus
we find his mighty works of creation, and redemption, of preservation, and
castigation, all along recorded in the sacred registers of the old and new
Testaments; and that for the comfort as well as instruction of his people; in
the writings of those glorious stars, the sacred Penmen, may the Saints read
their fortunes, and with comfort apply unto themselves the divine dispensations
of God to his people.

Has God brought England through a red sea of war out of Egyptian bondage, and
will he not perfect his work? is the mighty hand of omnipotency shortened that
it cannot save? or the loving kindness of the immutable Deity changed that he
will not save? though the murmurers (those repiners at Gods hand, who would
upon beds of down, with all ease and plenty be carried through the wilderness)
may be cut off, and those low souls whom the height of the sons of Anak has
caused to rebel against the most high be consumed; and who knows whether for
their sakes he has not deferred to settle us in the promised land? yet shall
the Caleb's and Joshua's who have followed God fully be brought into it, and
their seed shall possess it; though God may defer his mercies because of some
men's infidelity, yet in his good time he will accomplish them, if his people
walk worthy of them. Let us not then despair, nor be impatient, but endeavor
to fit our selves to receive them; for the wise God, and our merciful Father
knows better what is good for us than our selves, his time is best, but let us
from the bottom of our hearts echo to that petition in the Gospel, Thy will be
done on earth as it is in beaven.

But I shall not insist further in applying Scripture, and I could wish some (I
am persuaded Godly persons) had not been (I fear) to adventurous in misapplying
it; for surely if we warily look into those Prophecies in Daniel, we shall
hardly find them calculated for the Meridian of great Britain, and Ireland;
were not some peremptorily concerning the return of the Jews out of the
Babylonish captivity, as in 9. chap. 24. verse! the coming of Christ, and the
destruction of Jerusalem, as in 25, 26, 27. etc. verses others concerning the
four Monarchies in 2. chap. the division of Alexanders Kingdom, in 8. chap.
and the Empire of Rome, in the 11. chap.

So if we behold the book of the Apocalypse, it rather seems to hold forth the
actions of a world than an Island, and the great concernments of the rational
species than of a few English Individuums.

I hope I shall be allowed liberty of conscience in so intricate a case,
especialy being no fundamental point of salvation, and if God shall be pleased
to use England as the primary instrument in my days for the destruction of
that Romish Kingdom of Antichrist, and the exaltation of the Lord Jesus
blessed for ever on the throne, I shall endeavor to praise him both in word and
deed, and humbly to prostrate my life and fortunes at his feet, as ready to
wait upon him in what part of that work he shall be pleased to make me though
never so meanly instrumental.

CHAP. II.
That there is a way which leads to to this knowledge, and what it is.

ANd now setting aside the before rehearsed follies of the besotted world, I
shall attempt by a new way of conjecture to guess at the fortune of the
Commonwealth; reason shall be the Jacobs-staff by which I shall take its
height, and in that true glass show you its futureface, that I may have few,
and those inconsiderable opponents. I know that discourse which is most filled
with reason must needs be most victorious and triumphant, the weapons of it are
general, and there is none of the sons of men able to oppose its force, the
unjust Infidel must believe it, or deny his essence, and the Atheist must
subscribe upon peril of his being, for the Creator, or as they, nature it self
gave it an imprimatur and (...) the eternal Being graved it on immortal souls,
as Philo very excellently declares, (...). It is essential, and so must be
universal to the species of mankind; and as Aristotle says, (...), what soever
is natural, is immovable, and perpetually in the same manner energetical; It
constantly and continually commands obedience, and none but a monster, an
Heteroclite in nature, as the Philosopher speaks (...), will dare to resist it;
but to our purpose.

There is not, I confess, enough light in any c^eated reason to give a bright
displaying of fate, nor is there vigor enough in any created eye to pierce
into the marrow and pith, into the depth and secrecy of the eternal decree;
yet can it discover such objects as are within its own sphere with a sufficient
certainty. The actings of Providence are so fairly printed, and the letters of
it so visible, and capital, that we may read them, though some perverse beings,
unworthy the name of men, slight all its workings, upon this account, that they
are rolling, and fluctuating; who with the old Scepticks by a kind of strange
hypocrisy, and in an unusual way of affectation, pretend to more ignorance
than they have, nay than they are capable of, or with Socrates cry, Hoc tantum
scire, se nihil scire; He only knows this, that he knows nothing; and with
the Academicks (...). I cannot comprehend.

But let me tell such dubious, if not lazy, Gentlemen, that it is an error very
derogatory to the plenitude and exuberancy of the divine actings, which stream
out in a clear cognoscibility, and no less injurious to their own natural
capacities, which were not made so straight and narrow-mouthed, as not to
receive those lessons that continually drop from Providence upon the world.

It is an unquestionable rule, Omne quod est, quando est, necesse est esse, a
contingency, when it is extra suas causas, when it is actually produced, having
a determinatum esse, it may then also have a determinate cognoscibility; for
entity is the root and bottom of intelligibility; a Commonwealth in its
growth is uncertain, and the means whereby it shall acquire strength lie hid in
the eternal decree, until by the working of Providence they are presented to
public view, and then we know how it attained to maturity,

CHAP, III.
This Way confirmed by Reason, and Examples.

NOw this ordinary working of Providence has so often shown it self in the
adadvancement of States, that with a little industry we may track it, and by
its leadings may conjecture how good a progress such or such a State shall
have; for matters in fact are as certain in being and reality, as
demonstrations.

And this may be enlightened by a simile fetched from Vegetables, which we see
thrive by the alternat help of heat and moisture, moderately and in their
seasons shining, and showring down upon them; yet either of these in excess,
much enfeebles, or totally destroys them: hence without a witch will your
country man foretell plenty or scarcity, and indeed all such effects as lurk in
probable causes, that seem to promise very fairly, may be known also in an
answerable, and proportionable manner, by strong, and shrewd conjectures: thus
the Physician knows the disease, the Mariner forsees a storm, and the Shepherd
provides for the security of his flock.

Thus by an intermingled influence of Peace and War, Nations have grown
renowned, whereas, either alone depresses or extinguishes them; and for this we
can give good reason.

For War files off that rust that is apt to canker and eat into the bowels of
States; it opens the veins, purifies the blood, and makes it lively, and
generous; it raises and quickneth the spirits, and makes the members active
and prompt for the highest and noblest atchievments.

And Peace it fills the barns, is the Nurse of Trade, from whence grow the
golden sinnews that strengthen the arms, and makes them able to wield their
weapons in the time of war; is the Patroness of learning, the Mistress of
Art, the Parent of good and wholesome Laws; needs then must that nation
vigorously increase, on which both these have a joint and happy influence.

But if any should ask how it is possible to enjoy both? let them go and see
how one spring is made happy by both showers and Sunshine; nay they may be
both at once, there may be a foreign War, yet Peace at home, it may rain and
shine, and that together.

Yet let the drums bellow too long, and people will echo to them, and become
brutish, savage and barbarous; let war break in on all sides, and like a deluge
it sweeps all before it, and if any thing be left, it is but mud and dirt.

Or let a long calm come what sloth, what luxury, what effeminatness and
cowardice does it create? how does it enervate the members, clog the spirits,
cause the blood to putrify, and corrupt, and beget that lazy and scurvy
disease which makes the whole body to draw a faint, sickly, inglorious, yea, a
noisome breath?

Thus we see the standing waters to corrupt, and natural bodies crazed, and
resolved to their first earth, as much by plurisies as consumptions, by
surfeits as famine; and souls as often forced by a disease to take their flight,
as a sword, and by an inward malady not seldomer than an outward enemy
compelled to quit their beloved mansions.

And as reason, so examples, and those in all ages, may be brought to back our
assertions.

The Assyrian, Caldaean, and Persian Monarchies by arms got footing, and became
powerful, by a mixed peace, they grew into a form of government, and whilst
these walked hand in hand, they continued both formidable, and lovely, and to
use the Scripture expression, they were fair as the Moon, bright as the Sun,
and terrible as an Army with Banners. This temperature of beauty and terror,
order and strength, is the happy Crasis of a State; these in their true
proportions make up the perfect Symetry, and from these discords springs the
sweetest harmony in State music.

And now, when all their sayls were filled with the prosperous gales of
fortune, and there was none but veiled and stoopt unto them, on a sudden being
becalmed, an effeminate Sardanapalus, a drunken Belshazzar, and a luxurious
Darius, put a period to their greatnesss; so easy it is to tumble down hill.

Thus the Roman Monarchy fell to pieces, and became a prey to barbarous
nations, yet out of its ashes arose a Phoenix, a maiden Commonwealth, which
has preserved her beauty as well as virginity for twelve hundred years without
wrinckle or blemish, and has so often foild the Ottoman forces, to whom the
Grecian Empire became a prey with little difficulty; so potent is virtue even
in the least bodies, and of such advantage is situation, and bad neighbors too
sometimes which will not suffer her ancient virtue to be cankered, or eaten
with rust.

Thus a few Fisher-Towns among the Batavers became a Commonwealth in despite
of Spain, and Flanders to boot, and from poor distressed States are grown
Hogen-Mogens with the help of England, for which they have since well rewarded
us. But let them take heed lest their High and Mightinesses be not brought as
low as their situation, being grown resty with their former little successes,
Peace, and Plenty, and by their treacherous ingratitude made their best friend
their enemy, to whom they are as much inferior in true valor, as they surpass
in Pride, Arrogance, Treachery, and Cruelty.

Yea, to come home, how illustrious, and famous did this nation grow in the
days of Queen Elizabeth? What noble Acts? What generous spirits did it bring
forth? What supplies did it afford the Netherlands? What an help was it to
France, and what a Scourge and terror to the usurping Spaniards? whose Armado
styled Invincible it not only sent home well beaten, but with fire and sword
took revenge in their Havens and on their Coasts; and yet into how contemptible
a condition it did relapse by a long sloth, and how it has been undervalued,
our own eyes can witness unto us, if we look a little back, even to the
sadning of our friends, and rejoicing of our enemies.

Thus the best made Clocks by long being unwound up gather rust, and become
unfit for the least motion.

And this that Politic Lawgiver perceiving, gave it in command to the
Spartans, not to wage war often with one and the same enemy; which when
Agesilaus one of their Kings had neglected to their loss, and his own smart,
He was flouted, returning wounded, by Antalcidas, with, The Thebans have well
rewarded thee, O King, whom, unwilling and ignorant, thou have compeld and
taught to conquer.

CHAP. IIII.
An Admonition to many amongst us.

WHat then may we think of some lately appearing amongst us, who neither
minding their own good, not their masters business, have been bold in the
sight of the sun to upbraid those in power with these latter wars, as fomented
and raised for their lusts, and our pressure, which by the good hand of
Providence hitherto have turned to our honor, and advantage, and it may be
have been a means to prevent our ruin; the common Enemy keeping us from
quarrelling among our selves, and as it were binding up our hands from
intestine slaughter: for so many and so great divisions there were amongst us,
such animosities and heart-burnings in one party against the other, as in that
unsettled estate we were in at first, In sua victrices vertentes viscera
dextras, might have turned our weapons into our own bowels, had not heaven in
mercy cut out work for us elsewhere, until we were a little* better come to our
selves What means then the bleatings, and lowings of these Cattle, which are
driven like beasts to the slaughter? for alas fond youths, though your noddles
are not full enough to render you suspected of design, yet undoubtedly have you
been set a going by some well practiced in the art of sedition, and whose
concernments and inclinations prodigiously meet in that fatal point, to whom it
may seem as natural to live in the fire of contention, as profitable to fish in
troubled waters; consider but the bottom, and you will abhor the broachers of
this design, who under the pretense of crying down foreign, would stir up a
civil war; and of advancing Peace, and Freedom, raise Rebellion and Confusion,
which would inevitably ruin your Selves, Trades, and Country. Let not any of
these fly Sinons make you break down your own walls, to bring in so fatal an
Engine, a second Trojan-horse, which will powrforth armed Tyrants in the dead
of night upon you, whose understandings they have charmd asleep with their
false and counterfeit pretenses. Timete Danaos et dona ferentes: You cannot be
too mistrustfull of your old Enemy, of whom this design smells rank; take heed,
I say, you lose not your liberty in the noise you make for freedom, and whilst
you crowd out Authority, you bring not Tyranny in on pick-back; which your
enemies of themselves despair ever to accomplish.

Thus have I seen full-grown fruit which has withstood the assaults of outward
storms, rot with superfluity of innate moisture, and the double-armed nut
resolved to dust by a worm bred in its own kernel.

Or what shall we say to a second sort, those sons of sloth, those dregs of a
lazy and luxurious peace, who as if their souls lay in their bellies, find no
content but in ease and riot? whose whole note is, Where are those golden days
we once had? Where are our Court-revellings and Masks? Where our Lord-Maiors
Feasts and Shows, and all those joviall sports gone, in which England was wont
to pride herself and triumph? not a Wake, not a morrice-Dance now to be feen,
are these the effects of a Parliament? and is this that we have got by
fighting? Alas poor souls! you dreamed (I Will warrant) a Parliament would have
made the Thames flow Custard, and turned the pebbles on the shore into
Garoway-Comfits; have caused Bag-pudding to grow on every Bush, and each pond
abound with beef and brewis; have commanded the conduits to run Sack and
Clarret, and the Rivers and Brooks Ale and strong Beer; and welladay, your
houses are not walled with Hasty Pudding, neither do Pigs ready roasted come
and cry Come eat me; Lubberland is as far off now as ever, and you deceived of
all your goodly expectations; but peace, put fingers out of neyes, and I will
tell you what; yea, what your Country, your Mammee (if she be not ashamed to
own you) has got; she has gained her freedom, and regained her reputation; of
a baffel'd, scorned, and despised Kingdom, she is become a victorious,
dreadful, and renowned Commonwealth; she that was contemned by Gales.
Spain, cudgel'd by Ree.
France, braved by the Downs.
Holland, affronted by Rebellion.
Ireland, and baffe'ld by The first Invasion.
Scotla. has made those with whom she has grappell'd feel the force of her
arms, and taught the rest to observe their due distance; yea she has done more
in four years, than your Monarchs could do in four hundred; having quelled
Ireland, subdued Scotland, cudgel'd Holland, and with a Navy of near two
hundred sail scoured her narrow seas, and swept her Enemies Coasts,
notwithstanding her strugglings at home with such undutifull sons as your
selves, who have laid all the stumbling blocks in her way they either could or
durst.

But your Purses pay for this you cry, I warrant you, and so they did for the
Puppets and Pageants, the hobby-horses and bells, and all the rest of the
Trumperies your souls so much delighted in; as I conceive too you were wont to
pay subsidies for your Charters, and your Petition of Right, which you hung by
and gazed on with as much benefit to your selves then, as now on your Scotch
Covenant; as also Ship-mony, Knighthood-mony, Coat and Conduct-mony, and now
and then you received a Privy Seal; your Carts now and then did attend the
Court, and your Oxen, Sheep, Horses, Hay, Straw, Oats, etc. were taken up at
the Kings price, and that paid too, when you could get it; there were slavish
tenures, and a Court of Wards, a Star Chamber, and an High Commission Court
with its appurtenances in each Diocese; Justices in Eire, and Forest laws,
etc. which cost you something; but you will be wiser upon second thoughts, put
on your considering caps than, for you know not what you may come too; what
though you are out of hopes of being Courtiers you may be Patriots, and instead
of being slaves to flattery, become Patrones of liberty; what though you cannot
buy Knighthoods, and Lordships, yet may you purchase never-dying honor to your
names by faithfully serving your God, and Country. Act then virtuously, and
let posterity find your names in the Van of good Commonwealths-men, among the
first Ranks of the Assertors of Liberty. Which of you, were you to choose,
would not rather be read in history a Brutus, than a Tarquin; an Aristogiton,
than a Pisistratus; a Pelopidas, than an Archas; a Timoleon, than a Dionysius?
whether does the name of Lancaster, or Gaveston, Hereford, or Spencer, make the
pleasinger found in English ears? and which were accounted Martyrs, which
Traitor, in the thoughts of your generous Ancestors? and if all this will not
prevail with you, if duty and honor appear small in your eyes, yet profit sure
will do much; it is the way to thrive; for it is more than probable that the
Commonwealth will survive its enemies, and there are certain symptoms of its
welfare.

That Providence which has hitherto brooded upon it, and hatched it into this
perfection, that hand of Omnipotency which has given assured tokens of
assistance from heaven, has in text-letters written its fortune on its
forehead, so that the least read in Physiognomy may spell it out. The Schoolmen
observe, Divina voluntas, licet simpliciter libera sit ad extra, ex
suppositione tamen unius actus liberi, potest necessitari ad alium. We shall
not go so high, but this we shall say, that where God has so visibly owned a
nation, he will never draw back his hand unless upon some notorious
provocation. Lift up your eyes then, Os homini sublime dedit, coelumque videre
Jussit, and erectos ad sidera tollere vultus, which were given you to this end,
and contemplate the works of your gracious Creator, it is your duty so to do,
and he expects it at your hands; be not rebels to nature, nor make frustrate
the admirable frame of your creation, which will argue you not only ingrate, but
worse than brutish, yea put you in the lower form, to the beasts that perish,
for as the Heathen Satyrist, Sensum e coelesti demissum traximus arce,
Cujus egent prona, and terram spectantia; mundi
Principio indulsit communis Conditor illis
Tantum animas, nobis animum quoque.


But lest there should be some so ignorant that they cannot, others so lazy
that they will not take the pains to read this handwriting from heaven, I will
endeavor so plainly to set it before them, that Fronaque si spectent animalia,
if they look but downwards, will they, nill they, they shall perceive it, unles
they blindfold themselves, and wink out of design; and for such Moles, let them
enjoy their dark Caverns, and there delve and dig until they have laid
themselves as low as they desire, or deserve; let their affected shades
envelope them, and not the smallest star disturb their Cimmaerian enjoyments;
let the nights black Quiristers, Ravens and Scrich-Owls, sing Anthems and
Requiems to their souls, and no sun arise to disturb the music, and dissolve
the lucky consort.

CHAP. V.
How England became a Commonwealth, and what may be expected from such a
Beginning.

THe English Nation by a long and bloody civil War being awak't out of that
sleep which had almost brought a Lethargy upon her, (like an angry Lion roused
and enraged with the smart of his wounds) resolutely, and with a courage not
unworthy the nobility of her Stock, sets upon the foe that had so galled her,
and soon brought him under her feet; then disdaining to wear the fetters of a
conquered enemy, assumes the power God then, and Nature at first had invested
her with, and assumes her pristine freedom.

Thus Bellona was the Midwife which brought England to bed of the
Commonwealth, which was no sooner born, but she swadled her in Ensigns torn
from her proudest foes, and adorned her cradle with Trophies of victory! O
sacred and happy birth! what Triumphs attend thy youth, and what Lawrells shall
encircle thy manly front? Thou that have strangled serpents in thy cradle,
give us hopes, that the seaven-headed Hydra shall fall by thee when thou have
attained thy full strength; and who have made it as it were thy sport to pull
down petty Tyrants, wilt make it thy business to destroy the grand Impostor;
that as with thy fist thou have given him a box on the ear, so with thy sword
thou will divide his head from his shoulders; For what less than a Triple
Crown can attend thy Chariot, whose go-cart is lackied on by Crowns in couples?
for great, even for so great things sure has Providence reserved thee, whom
she has so carefully tended in thy infancy; for though she has suffered thine
enemies to rise against thee, yet so tender a regard has she had of thy youth,
that she put hooks as it were in their nostrils, and restrained them from
uniting, whom single she knew thee able to grapple with; so that their malice
has augmented thy glory, and by their endeavoring to ruin thee, they have
increased thy power, making themselves but Touchstones to convince the world of
the purity of thy metal, and on their own shoulders advancing thee above an
ordinary height, that the World might take notice of thy growth, and stature;
and as with thee, so has she done with others, even with all all those whom
she intended to advance; examples of which, both divine, and humane histories
abundantly offer to our veiw. Thus was it with Israel in their conquering the
promised land, Sihon king of the Amorites first sets upon them, then Og king of
Baashan came out against them, etc. thus we find it with diverse others in other
Authors, which to avoid prolixity I shall pass by, instancing in one and that
so well known, that few, if any therebe, but have heard thereof, and that the
Commonwealth of Rome, which from a small beginning grew up into so vast a
body, that her Eagles-wings spread over the greatest part of the then known
world.

CHAP. VI.
The beginning of the Commonwealth of Rome, and the causes of its growth.

THis City, or rather Town of Rome, being founded by Romulus, and inhabitants
gathered together from diverse places, was no sooner built, but it was threatened
with ruin in its very infancy, and the best it could expect was but an ages
duration; for the greatest part of the inhabitants being single, all hope of
issue was cut off, which only could afford it a longer life: Wives thus
wanting, and none to be obtained by consent, so contemptible were they in the
eyes of their neighbors, they attempt what craft and force would do; and their
Plot succeeded to their minds; for having proclaimed public plays, and invited
their neighbors, they suddenly provided themselves wives of the Sabine
Virgins, which came with their Parents to be spectators.

Yet this remedy seemed as dangerous as the disease; for the Sabines were a
great and warlike nation, and a Colony of the Spartans, after whose manner
they lived in Towns without walls, reputing themselves safe in their own
valor, and the Romans could not but expect they would resent the affront. But
see how fortune (which we Christians truly term Providence) gave them
assistance, by giving let to the conjunction of their enemies, though of one
nation, and alike interessed in the quarrel.

First, the Caeninenses come against them, whose King being slain by Romulus in
fight hand to hand, and their Army defeated, were compelled to leave their old
habitations, and go and dwell at Rome by the Conqueror, who by this means
increased his strength as well as reputation, and became the better able to
deal with the rest.

This war done, the Fidenates, Crustimini and Antenates begin another, and run
the same fortune, and likewise being incorporated with the Victors still
increase the Roman Stock.

The rest grown wise by these examples unite, and put the Romans to such a
plunge, that it was easy to conjecture what have would have been the issue,
had they taken this course at first; but by the intercession of the women
running in between the armies, a peace was made, and both Nations joined in
one, the City keeping its old name of Rome from Romulus, the people being
called Quirites from the chief Tribe of the Sabines, the Roman and Sabine Kings
jointly reigning.

Now could the wisest among the sons of me^ have judged that a rape should have
begot an union? but there is an hand above disposes of things above our
suppositions, which continued its favor till Rome grew of perfect strength.
This was he that withdrew Porsenna, and changed his enmity into love, and
admiration; that restrained any warlike Marcian or Lucan, any Mulius, Silo, or
Telesinus with the joint forces of Italy from falling upon her, until she was
able to bear the storm; that out supplies off from Hannibal when he had almost
born down all before him, and made the envy of his own Citizens instrumental to
their own ruin; that made Antiochus sit still until Philip was brought under,
and Tigranes look on until Mithridates was beaten out of his kingdom, yea that
provided work by the Sarmatians for Mithridates till the Marsian war was over;
that divided the Cimbri and Teutones so, that Marius when he had overthrown one
party, had time to join with the other Consul to help destroy the other, and
suffered not three hundred thousand fighting men in one body to attempt Italy;
and in like manner the slaves, and fencers, giving Crassus opportunity to
defeat them, who had ranged Italy, and often put the Roman Armies to rout; that
by a few Geese saved the Capitol, and caused the unjust banishment of Camillus
to be a means to preserve Rome.

CHAP. VII.
A Parallel.

ANd has not Providence in the same manner dealt with this Commonwealth?
which was no sooner established in England, but it was threatened from Ireland,
where Dublin, Derry, and a few forces under General Monk were only left us,
two being besieged, and the third in an incapacity to afford them relief; when
things were thus desperate, God divided the Rebels, and made O Neal
instrumental in the relief of Derry, neither could they be pieced until Ormond
was totally broke, and the other party under the Popish Bishop of Clogher,
fought and routed.

The Irish cloud almost dissolved, a Scotch storm threatens us, which yet came
not on so suddenly, but that we had time to provide shelter, (Providence
causing them to trifle away much time in their treaties, and other mockeries)
insomuch that the greatest part of it fell in their own Nation, the tail only
besprinkling some parts of this, where it totally vanished.

And here we can never sufficiently admire Gods goodness to this
Commonwealth, who when the enemy had given our Army the slip, and left them so
far behind them, suffered them not to march up to London, but to empound
themselves at Worcester, and so overruled the hearts of this Nation, that
notwithstanding the malice and hatred of many to the present Government, yet
not any considerable person, or number, joined with the enemy, even marching
through the most discontented and disaffected Counties.

The North being cleared, the Dutch jealous of our increase, who have found the
sweetness of a State Government, endeavor to clip our wings, and to usurp our
long held sovereignty of the seas, having undermined our Trading a long while
before; but they may put what they have got by it in their eyes without any
danger, unless of making themselves weep, notwithstanding their treacherous
and base attempt upon a small squadron with one of our Generals in the time of
Ttreaty, and before denouncing a war, and that even upon our own coast; whilst
we besides the honor, and repute gained abroad, are grown more potent at sea
in one year, than we had like to have been in many ages, had they let us been
at quiet; and even thus the Car haginians compelled the Romans to become
Masters at sea, by their injuries provoking that stout nation to adventure a
sea fight, though so ignorant, that the Consul taught them to row by sitting,
and beating poles on the sand; and truly little better seamen were our
Redcoats at first.

CHAP. VIII.
Of Providence, and Virtue, and the concurrence of second causes.

ANd sure now no Christian but will acknowledge a divine hand overruling in
these actings for Englands preservation, which even the Heathen observed by
their dim light, in Romes advancement.

Thus we find that ingenuous moralist Plutarch affirming, that though there
has been a great and continual war, and feud between Fortune and Virtue, yet
it is probable, they made a truce, and united their forces for Romes assistance.

Again, as they report Venus passing over the River Eurotas laid aside her
looking-glass, attire, and girdle, and took a spear and a shield to accompany
Lyeurgus; so Fortune having deserted the Assyrians, and Persians, hovered over
Macedon, suddenly shook off Alexander, viewed Egypt and Syria, seemingly
advanced Carthage, at last past Tiber, laid aside her wings, and set up her
residence in the Capitol.

And as He, so the Romans themselves were sensible of this divine aid, as the
multitude of Temples dedicated to Fortune may demonstrate; there was the Temple
of Fortunae virilis: Fortunae muliebris: Fortunae primogeniae and obsequentis:
Fortunae privatae and Viscatricis: Fortunae virginis: Fortunae bonae spei:
Fortunae masculae: Fortis Fortunae, etc.

Yet did they not attribute all to Fortune, and neglect Virtue, of which they
were as great admirers, and honourers, as they were adorers of the other; and
Plutarch gives it a due place: Rome was (says he) conducted and encompassed
with whole troops of Citizens, brandishing bloody weapons, enobled with scars
received before, bedewed with blood and sweat, and leaning on half-broken
Trophies, such as her Fabricii, Cimilli, Cincinnati, Fabii, Aemillii, Marcelli,
Scipiones, etc.

And let us but consider, and we shall see that Providence works by
instruments, and God expects the use of means; we cannot suppose a victory
without a fight; lying still, and wishing will do nothing, D^i munerasua
laboribus vendunt, it was not hid from the Heathen, that the active only were
to expect a blessing; the hand of the diligent makes rich, and virtuous actions
advance States and Persons to honor and dignity. For though scientia Dei, the
knowledge of God be the Cause of things, yet being but the Remote cause it takes
not away Contingency: God himself perceives that some things will evenire
contingenter, for he does not only cognoscere res, sed ordinem et modum rerum,
know things, but the order and manner how they shall come to pass; He knows
there are causae intermediae, which are impedibiles et defectibiles (as the
Schoolmen say) and from the wavering of these Second causes the whole rise of
Contingency flows; thus in a Syllogism, let the Major be Necessary, if the
Minor be Contingent, the Conclusion will be so too; though the First cause be
certain, yet if there be obstructions in the Second, no man can assure himself
what will be the effect; though the spring of motion cannot fail, yet if the
wheels break, the progress will be very uncertain to all but God, who knows
whether they will break or no; He knows whether such a Nation will use the
means or no; whether it will improve his blessings, or abuse them; whether it
will employ the Peace, Plenty, Wealth, Power, and Strength it has received for
his glory, and the common good, or for Pride, Luxury, and riot: so that we only
are in the dark; yet not altogether are we blind, but where we see Virtue on
the throne in a Nation, there we may foretell a blessing to that people, and
where Vice predominant, that its attendant Ruin is not far off; and for this
the beforementioned Commonwealth of Rome affords us an example in both kinds;
which as it grew up by Virtue to an unparalled height, so by Vice was its
strength broken, and its renown turned into shame, that Dalilah betraying this
mighty Sampson into the hands of his enemies, who have fettered him, and pulled
out his eyes: It will not therefore I suppose be a work unworthy our labor to
take a veiw of those virtues, by which, that, as other Nations have become
renowned, and set them for our example; for though Heathens, they attained to a
great height of morality, yea such an one as may put most that wear the style
of Christians to the blush.

CHAP. IX.
Of the Piety of the Romans, the Evil and Danger of Mock-thanksgivings.

ANd first let us behold their Piety, which is not only the chief, but the
file-leader, and indeed the ground of all the rest; this is that which bridles
the most unruly, and strikes an aw where reason cannot persuade; let this be
taken away, and with it all fidelity, justice, purity vanish, yea humane
society cannot subsist without it, as Cicero observes in his first Book de Not.
Deor.

Never did they begin any business without frequent supplications. Civitas
religiosa in principiis maxim novornm bellorum, supplicationibus habitis, and
obsecratione circa omnia pulvinaria facta, Ludos Jovi, donumqui vovere Consulem
jussit. Livie dec. 4. l. 1. Supplicatio* a Consulibus in triduum ex
Senatus-consulto indicta est, obsecratique circa omnia pulvinaria Dii, quod
bellum populus jussisset, id been, ac foeliciter eviniret. Idem in eodem.

Never did they obtain a victory, or receive a deliverance, but public
thanksgivings were decreed, and those for one, three, or more days, according
to the greatness of the benefit; Magna victoria loetitiaque Romae fuit literis
allatis, supplicatio in triduum decreta est, and 40. majores hostiae immiolari
juss^. Livy. Thus when Hannibal was forced to leave Italy after sixteen years
war, they no sooner heard of it, but they ordered solemn and public thanks.
Decretum ut quinque dies circa omnia pulvinaria supplicaretur, victimaeque
majores immolarentur centum and viginti.

Never shall we find them mocking heaven, giving thanks for a victory, when
they had received a loss. A practice so superlatively impious, that any less
than an Atheist must tremble but to think on; for what is this but to abuse
God, that man may be deceived, making the divine power (may it be spoken with
reverence) as it were a stalking-horse to drive the befooled people into their
nets? What is this other than a professed Declaration that their sole confidence
is in the arm of flesh, not caring how they undervalew Gods glory, so they may
maintain their own reputation, how they provoke him, so they may but keep up
the spirits of theit own party? Flectere si nequeunt superos Acheronta
monebunt, Since God has forsaken them, they will try what the Devil will do;
since Heaven refuses, they will try what help Hell will afford them; poor
wretches, not at all considering, that whilst they endeavor to rally, and
patch together a poor, routed and broken party of frail men, they make
omnipotency their foe, defying the Almighty himself in so public a manner,
that he is engaged by that which is most dear to him, his own glory, to revenge
the affront; It is evident then how good a match they are like to have of it.
Neither does their wickedness stop here; it is not against God only they sin,
but men also; they are not only Traitors against the Majesty of Heaven, but
their trust on earth, betraying their own poor people which repose their
confidence in them, by rendering them obstinate and proud upon hopes of false
success, which knew they but the truth, and their own weakness, might make
their peace to the preservation of many of their lives, and much of their
fortunes; and drawing the blood and miseries of their neighbour-nations upon
their own heads, falsely seduced to embarque with them in their ill-thriving
quarrel, wherein unawares they often are oppressed when they foolishly supposed
all cock-sure.

Yet has this impious and treacherous piece of policy been acted again and
again in our eyes, with horror and amazement may we speak it, even by those
who would be thought Christians: yea may not this clothe many of the
Oxford-thanksgiving days in red, and put our Dutch foes, if they have any
ingenuity, to the blush, who not coutent by their emissaries abroad to abuse
all Europe with brags and lies, have of late ordered a day of Public
Thanksgiving at home to gull their own people into conceit of victory, not
without a Piaculum, which may cost them dear before it be expiated. For he that
is High and Mighty indeed, neither can be deceived, nor will be out-faced by
any impudency whatsoever, and they had best consider whether they are able to
engage with him too, whom they dare affront in the sight of Angels and Men.

Courage then brave Englishmen, you see what shifts your enemies are put to,
you have beaten them out of their confidence in the rock of ages, and forced
them to make lies their refuge, a wretched defense, and such as cannot long
protect the^; behold what low-spirited foes you have to deal with, even such as
dare not take notice of a loss; alas how far short come these of the Roman
Fortitude as well as Piety, whom you shall see according to that of their own
Virgil, Tu ne cede malis, sed contra audentior ito, so far from being basely
dejected by losses, though coming one on the back of another, that their
courage rather increased, being pricked on with shame and a desire to regain
their lost honor, which still buoied them up when in greatest danger of
sinking? this is that true sober valor grounded on a right sense of honor,
and due love to the public, which needed neither gunpowder nor brand-wine to
make them fight lustick; this is that which rendered them victorious and
triumphant, and which will enable, you if you embrace it. But we shall have
occasion to speak of this more hereafter; let us return therefore to our
generous Romans, whom we find (I say) so far from this impious mocking of
Heaven,

That on the contrary, upon the least sense or apprehension of their Gods
displeasure, They sought by all humble and Public addresses to pacify and
appease their incensed Dieties: for this we may see their frequent lustrations
and deprecations, the first to purge and cleanse themselves, the second to
avert and turn away their Gods anger. Horum Prodigiorum causa decemviri libris
adire jussi, et nove^diale sacrum factum, and supplicatio indicta est, atque
urbs lustrata. Live. Dec. 4. l. 6.

Lastly, besieging an enemies City, they would invoke the Gods of that place,
imploring their aid, and deprecating their anger, by inviting them to go with
them to Rome with the promise of more magnificent Temples, and a more splendid
adoration: so great a care had they not to provoke Heaven, and so fearful were
they to engage against it.

CHAP. X.
Piety and Valor not inconsistent' Piety rewarded in Heathens, and Impiety
punished.

ANd here by the way may be observed, that Piety and Valor are not
inconsistent, and that Religion makes not men Cowards. What Nation ever was
more valiant, and what more religious than the Roman? who were so strict in
their divine worship, that they would choose rather to lay themselves open to
their enemies arms, than by omitting the least part of it, to their Gods
displeasure: an eminent example of which we have in that war of the Gauls which
succeeded the first Punick, in which when Flaminius and Furius the Consuls were
gone against the Enemy with great Forces, the Augurs having found that some
things were omitted in their election, They were commanded by letters from the
Senate to return presently and abjure their offices, which Letters Flaminius
not opening until he had fought and routed the Enemy, and made a memorable
invasion of their Country, though he returned crowned with victory, and laden
with spoil, not one went out to meet him, nay he had much ado to obtain a
Triumph, (which was no sooner past, but both He and his Colleague were
constrained to lay aside their Consulships) because he seemed to have contemned
and made slight of their holy Rites; they esteeming it more conducing to the
common safety that their Gods should be observed, than their Enemies overcome,
and rather choosing to leave their Armies without Commanders, though in a war
reputed so dangerous as that of the Gauls, in which their Priests were not
exempted from bearing Arms, than omit the least Punctilio in their worship, so
zealous and tender were they in matters concerning their Religion. Thus when
they were besieged by the Gauls in the Capitol, and the day approached wherein
their solemn Sacrifice was to be performed in Colle Quirinali, the Hill so
called, rather than to omit their duty to Heaven, they ventured through the
very midst of their Enemies Camp, and having performed their Rites, returned
with safety, their Enemies either being amazed at the boldness of the Attempt,
or moved with respect to Religion, which present death could not deter them
from performing.

And though their Religion were idolatrous, yet according to their light being
zealous they reaped the reward of a temporal prosperity: which some among them
despising, smarted for to the purpose, in their own ruin reaping the reward of
their Impiety and contempt of Religion: Thus we shall see Crassus who slighting
the Curses and Execrations of the Tribune Ateius, would make war upon the
Parthians, where he lost his own and his sons life, with most of his Army, the
poor remainder escaping by a dishonorable flight: and thus Pompey the great,
who would, notwithstanding the entreaties and diswafions of the High Priest,
enter the Holy of Holies in the Temple of Jerusalem, in his coming out fell
down, and never after prospered, but being overthrown by Caesar, and flying
into Egypt, lost his head, his body being left unburied on the sands: and
though he were no Jew, yet being a Roman by Religion he was bound to reverence
all Deities, as the (...) the Temple of all the Gods at Rome may demonstrate.

Neither need we wonder to see even a superstitious and idolatrous worship in
the Heathens who knew no better, rewarded with outward blessings: Since
whatsoever is lovely in Nature is acceptable even to God himself, for it is a
print of Himself, and He does proportion some temporal rewards unto it; the
courage of Romulus, the devotion of Numa, the integrity of Fabritius, the
temperance, and justice, and public spiritednesse of the rest, had all some
rewards scattered amongst them, and can we think their Piety had no share?
which is so agreeable to nature, and so deeply imprinted by it on man's heart,
that man, even the stubbornest, and most unwilling otherwise to submit, yet
will fall down and worship a Stock or Stone rather than be without a Deity,
will devise a Religion rather than be without one; but more of this in the next.

CHAP. XI.
Religion ingrafted in man's haart by Nature.

WE hear the Philosopher thus reasoning, Do not the imperfect serve the more
perfect, as the Elements mixed bodies, mixed bodies plants, plants living
creatures, living creatures and all the rest man, nay has not the soul a
master like rule over the body, and the understanding an empire over the
appetite, (...), and now when by nature it is thought convenient for the
inferior to serve the superior, ought not man to judge it best for him to
serve the most wise and good God?

Cicero says we cannot be just, unless we be religious, Fietas justitia
quaedam est adversus deos, lib. 1. de not. Deor.

Epictetus, if I were a Nightingale, I would do as a Nightingale, but being a
man what shall I do? I will praise God; and that without ceasing.

Nay Epicurus himself though he taught that God (...); neither did any thing
himself, nor commanded others to do, yet affirmed that his nature was so
excellent and glorious, that it alone was sufficient to allure a wiseman to
adore him.

Could the Heathen grope thus far, and shall we that have the name to be
Christians lagge behind them, could they perceive thus much by the glimmering
light of nature, and shall we be blind in the glorious sunshine of the Gospel?
for shame let us open our eyes, lest they rise in judgment, and condemn us,
and it be more tolerable for them than us in that great day, when the Lord
shall appear with thousands and ten thousands of Saints and Angels. Behold O
England to be religious is the way to thrive, Godliness will be thy gain both
here and hereafter.

CHAP. XII.
The Outward means to be used; Ministers to be encouraged, and maintained; the
Christian Magistrates duty.

NOw that we may be so, we are to use all means God has appointed for the
obtaining the true knowledge of him, and his will, which is the ground of
Religion; for as our knowledge is true or false, so will our Religion be too;
and the ordinary means are the reading and hearing of the sacred Scriptures,
for faith comes by hearing, and how shall we hear unless we are taught, and
how shall we be taught without a Teacher? In the first place therefore as we
ought to have a holy esteem of his word, so ought we to have a reverent esteem
of the faithful and able dispencers of it, giving them all due encouragement
and maintenance, that they may be the better enabled cheerfully to follow that
work whereunto they are called, of winning souls unto Christ.

And this is a duty incumbent on the Christian Magistrate, who is to use all
lawful means to promote Religion, and to restrain profaneness, for he bears
not the sword in vain, but for terror of evil doers, and encouragement of
those that do well. And here let me not be mistaken, for though I believe it is
their duty to punish those grand Traitors against the majesty of Heaven,
blasphemers I mean, and all other public disturbers of the civil peace and
quiet of the nation; yet on the otherside to force all men to submit to one
form, or to be of such or such a general received opinion in every tittle,
under penalty of Censures civil and ecclesiastical, I conceive a Tyranny as
little to be suffered by the Magistrate, as it had been for Saul to have
suffered Nahash the Ammonite to put out the right eyes of the Gilcadites, for
indeed this were to put out both our eyes.

For it is God and none but God that can assure us of his own mind, though he
do reveal his mind by a creature, there will be some tremblings, and waverings
in the soul, unless he does withal satisfy the soul that such a creature
does communicate his mind truly and really as it is, so that ultimately the
certainty is resolved into the voice of God, who is only to rule his Church
(...), by a determining and legislative power; Men that are fitted by God are
to guide and direct (...), in way of subserviency to him, and by an explication
of his mind, yet so that every one may judge of this (...), by acts of their
own understanding illuminated by the Spirit of God, for there are no
Representatives in spirituals, men may represent the bodies of others in civil
and temporal affairs, and thus a bodily obedience is due to a just authority,
but there is none can always represent the mind and judgment of another in
the vitals and inwards of religion; for as a late Bishop of our own, ad nudam
praescriptionem, aut determinationem alterius sine lumine privati judicii nemo
est qui credere potest etiamsi cupiat maxim; No man let him desire it never so
much can believe the bare determination of another unless his own judgment
concur; a truth that condemns the antichristian practices of the rest that were
of that order, and Mirandula gives the reason of it, for says he, Nemo credit
aliquid verum praecise quia vult credere illud esse verum, non est enim in
potentia hominis facere aliquid apparere intellectui suo verum, quando ipse
voluerit: No man believes a thing because he will believe it, for it is not in
the power of man to make a thing appear what he will to his understanding; and
indeed, before there can be faith there must not only be a knowledge of the
thing to be believed; but an inclination also of the understanding to assent to
it when known; should we not judge that man a Tyrant that should command us to
renounce our sense, to believe that to be white that we see to be black, to
believe that to be sweeter than honey, that we taste to be bitterer than gaul?
what are those then that would force us to disclaim our understandings, and
make us believe that to be true, which we conceive or know to be false? and yet
what cruelty in this kind has been practiced by the Papists? What by the
Prelates? What by some that succeeded them, and yet de-cryed it in them? yea
what by some of those who will cry out for Liberty of conscience too?

CHAP. XIII.
Religion not to be made a stalking-Horse to Ambition, or Avarice.

IF any shall but question in the least, these men's jus divinum, presently they
are Heretics, Schismatics, Sectaries, etc.

If any man shall not have the same whirligiggs in their pates as the other, or
will not assent in an instant to what ever Chymaera their rambling fancies
produce, let them be what they will, Parliament or City, Magistrates or private
persons, Teachers or Hearers, presently pray them down, purge them, they are
self-seekers, Tyrants, Enemies to the Saints, Antichristian, and Baals Priests,
and what not, yea such as are to be destroyed.

Yet by yout leave furious Saint, you must excuse our diffidence of your
tenants, yea and of your Saint-ship too, until we perceive more ground for
the^, and find a better temper in you; our Lord and Master I am sure has given
us ground to doubt you, and I hope the servant is not above the Lord, it will
be best for us then to observe him, When his disciples would have had fire
commanded from heaven, He tells them, ye know not what manner of Spirit you are
of, for the Son of Man is not come to destroy souls but to save them; we know
who is Abaddon, (...), the Destroyer, and it is his badg to be spitting of
fire; why is it not as lawful for us to question an opinion though it have
your stamp and superscription upon it, as it was for the Bereans to bring even
Apostolical words to the touchstone? Yet were they rewarded by Saint Paul with
the title of (...), more noble, an Epithet we cannot find in your Catalogue.
But you will say, they believed, they did indeed, but not hand over head, and
so may we when we find the same Spirit bearing witness to your doctrine which
did to the Apostles.

But through all your cantinglanguage we do discover your aims, indeed out of
the abundance of the heart your tongues tell us, you would be popular, great
and powerful, and enjoy the fat things of the earth, these only belong to you
and your tribe, you are to rule the Nations, to bind their kings in chains, and
their nobles with fetters of iron; the old itch of temporal Lordship is
wretchedly broke out upon you, your hands are the hands of Esau, though your
voice be the voice of Jacob, your practices are unchristian, though yout
profession be sanctity; Christ he promises to make his disciples fishers of
men, but you fish for honor, worldly power, and riches for your followers, a
bewitching bait to catch poor mortals: we read of the devil tempting our head
with the kingdoms of the world, and the glory of them, but from whom have you
Commission thus to tempt his members? Who gave you authority to dispose of
worldly powers? Is your Masters kingdom of this world? If it be, we must rank
you with those antichristian usurpers, who arrogate to themselves a power above
all that is called God: What more does that man of Rome? whom we find bestowing
the kingdoms of the world on those that will bow down and worship him, but
cursing, deposing, and turning out of office all that refuse to subscribe to
his fopperies. Thus we see Mahomet not with this loadstone drawing men, but
with his Sword conquering them, he draws his Sword, bids them deliver up their
Souls, and upon this condition he will spare their lives: Signailla quae
Tyrannis et latronibus non desunt, what more do Tyrants and Thieves? But sure
the Christian Religion stands not in need of such helps, whose principles in
themselves are attractive and magnetical, enamouring souls, and leading them
captive in the silken bonds of love with the cords of a man.

CHAP. XIV.
The benefit of Humane Learning, with an answer to some objections made against
it.
ANother sort there is wriggled in amongst us, who even in print and pulpits
publicly bray against learning, endeavoring to seduce people into a belief
that humane learning as they call it, is in no measure to be tolerated in a
Gospel-Teacher, most wretchedly wresting Scripture to apply those texts against
preaching themselves to overthrow it; a fallacy so base that they had need to
cry up ignorance lest the cheat should be descried: as if learning and
preaching themselves were termini convertibiles, the one necessarily implying
the other; whereas it is commonly quite contrary; it is your Sciolist, your
fellow that has scarce wet his lips in that sacred fountain, who will be
dabling and patching that he may be thought a Scholar, when as the most learned
men, who are conscious of their own sufficiency, seldom or never, unless upon
just, and necessary occasions make the least show of it in their public
teaching. The truth of this is verified daily in our eyes by the continual
practice of many learned men amongst us. Where shall we find more powerful
plainness, than in the works of the learned Bolton, to omit the names of the
rest, which are so well known to all? thus shall we see your coward, the common
Braggadochio, and those the greatest boasters who have the least in them; for
such being conscious off their own baseness, endeavor to make others believe
them to be brave Fellows, which they know themselves not to be, and to make up
in show what they want in reality; whereas your valiant man is still silent,
and lets his acts speak for him, knowing according to the proverb, that Good
Wine needs no Bush, and that worth will be taken notice of without proclaiming
it at the Market Cross.

2. But the Apostles were poor Fishrmen, and the like, altogether unlearned,
and therefore the Gospel Ministers ought to be so too. O Horrid, Jesuitical,
nay Diabolical Sophistry! We acknowledge that the only wise God in the carrying
on of his great and glorious works usually makes use of such instruments, as
seem despicable, and contemptible in the eyes of men, yea such as are
altogether unable and unfit to hatch and carry on defigns of their own, the
more to manifest that it is his work, and to show his strength in their
weakness, which, unless supported by Omnipotency, would sink under it, as also
to leave the obstinate without excuse: but though these may seem weak, yet are
they made mighty through the power of God that strengthens them, and are
abundantly supplied from above with what gifts and graces soever are necessary
for them: Thus the Apostles being poor unlearned Fishermen, and the like, once
called, and invested with the Apostleship, were endued from above, had the gift
of Tongues, immediately were taught by the Holy Ghost: and who dares affirm
them unlearned then? or deny skill in the tongues necessary for the office of a
Teacher, which God, who does nothing in vain, by Miracle bestowed upon them?
And what now though they wanted acquired Learning, so they had it infused? and
God was pleased in that extraordinary time, in an extraordinary manner to endow
them, must we therefore now neglect the ordinary means, and tempt God to work a
Miracle to be able to answer a Gainsayer? but let us but consider how faithful
an handmaid learning has been to religion; how the Armor-bearer has helped
Jonathan to destroy the Philistimes; how necessary it has been to maintain
Religion, and oppose Idolatry; by the help of Learning have the Ministry of
England been enabled to defend the truth, and oppose error, to ward off, and
put by the blows and thrusts of their Antichristian adversaries, and to strike
with the edge, and give them the true point, to the wounding and destroying of
their superstitious tenants. Thus we see the learned Whitacre disarm their
Goliath, confute their Bellarmine, foyl their chosen Champion, unwind the subtle
Jesuit, trace him through all his Maeanders, meet him at every turn, beat him
from outwork to outwork, from sconce to sconce, till he has driven him out of
all his strengths, and left him not a lurking hole to hide his head in; when
the most that we could expect from a Dean of Dunstable could be Bellarmine thou
lie, neither showing sense or reason, but his say so. But it may be said,
thank a good cause: yet may the best cause be spoiled by an evil mannaging, and
the most bright and shining truths be obscured in a dark Lanthorn, yea let them
be whiter than Snow, they may be sullied by dirty fingers, and more transparent
than glass, yet may be cracked when clumsie fists shall come to handle them.
This the Jesuits know, which has been the cause of this strange attempt, for
it is most plain by the poison now vomited, that some of those Serpents are
wriggled in amongst us; they have tried our weapons, and to their smart know
the sharpness of them, no marvel then they endeavor to disarm us; Learning
has kept them out, no wonder then they attempt to introduce ignorance the
Mother, which could they effect, they are assured Popish Devotion the Daughter
would not be long kept out.

Neither can this seem strange unto us, if we but consider their practice in
the Lutheran Church, where it has been usual with the Jesuits to seem to
become Proselites, to heighten and continue the division between them and the
Calvinists; or what a late Author of our own, who seems not to be unacquainted
of their practices, writes of them, The Jesuit reckons it in the number of his
merits, if he may by any sinister ways ruffle and disorder Heretical Kingdoms
(so he calls them) encourage weak and unstable minds to slight Magistracy,
irritate divisions, tumults, rebellions, absolve from oaths, and all sacred
ties; so that its hard to find any tragical scene, or bloody theater, into
which the Jesuit has not intruded, and been as busy as Davus in the Comedy,
contributing in a very high measure to every fanatic insolence, justifying the
old lemma of Loyola's picture, Cavete vobis principes: these are the firebrands
of Europe, the forge, and bellows of Sedition, infernal Emissaries, the pests
of the age, men that live as if huge sins would merit heaven by an
antiperistasis. Concutiunt populos, vexant regna, solicitant bella, diruunt
Ecclesias.

And it is for certain written from beyond the Seas, that the English Colleges
are emptyed, and all those Emissaries sent abroad, whither, unless amongst ^s?

CHAP. XV.
An answer to some objections against learning, in a book entitled, The Saints
Guide.

ANd the same Author goes on, Nor is any nation without some turbulent spirits
of its own, the dishonor of the gown, and pulpit, the shame, and sometimes
ruin of their Country; one of which has late started this question, Whether
or not all that much magnifyed natural reason (which we think dignifieth us
above, and distinguishes us from Brutes) and all that humane learning (which
we conceive exalts and rectifyeth reason) be the fruit of the forbidden tree,
and is a spurious and adventious faculty, which man wanted in his innocence,
and was instilled into him by Satan in the fall?

A quaery Satan himself might blush to put, and yet the Book stuffed with this
and the like doctrine, is clothed with the specious title of the Saints Guide;
the Wolf adorns himself with the Lambs skin, the Fiend transforms himself
into an Angel of light: it is not amiss to mark the phrase he reproaches
learning in, then how he coucheth his doctrine, lastly his Divinity in these
words, which man wanted in his innocence. Indeed the old Serpent told Eve that
the fruit of the forbidden tree would increase their Knowledge, but except him,
and this Disciple of his, I never found any affirming that man wanted any thing
in his Innocence: but suppose this diabolical doctrine true, if man wanted
Learning before, he much more wa^ts it since the fall; the Author of such stuff
may well cry out against reason and Learning.

But to the question, That Reason was depraved and darkened by the fall, we
allow, and that by the help of learning it is in some measure restored, we
affirm, and so consequently that there had been no need of acquired learning
had man stood, no more would there of repentance: but does it follow therefore,
that now we are fallen, we should not labor for repentance? Let this fellow
go and try whether he can persuade a man that is fallen into a pit not to
endeavor to get out, because getting out is a fruit, and effect of his falling
in. Truly such arguing is instilled by Satan, and such Sophistry is a bastardly
faculty which ingenuity, much more innocence, is so far from wanting, that it
abhors and detests it. The Fellow seems to be a Scholar, I shall ask him
therefore one question. Is not reason the specifical difference of a man from a
Beast? and was man distinguished from a Beast by the fall, or the Creation? Did
the Devil or God make him a rational creature? Behold then the horrid blasphemy
couched in this query, which would insinuate the rational soul to be the
product of the Devil; if this be not a doctrine of Devils I know not what is.

Then for his Parenthesis, ( which we think dignifieth us above, and
distinguishes us from Brutes) if Reason does not, what does? shape cannot, for
so one Beast differs from another: neither is it Grace, for then all but Beasts
must have Grace: And for his other ( which we conceive exalts, and rectifies
reason) has not learning exalted and rectified his reason so far as to enable
him from such and such Premises to draw such a and such a Conclusion, to frame
his Syllogisms, to write and utter these words, positions, consectaries,
quaeries, responsions, cognition, which his illiterate auditors and readers
understand no more, than they do him and his drifts? what but learning has set
his understanding above theirs, and enabled him to talk at a rate his ignorant
followers only can admire? Behold then you misled wretches what a Guide you
have got, who when all his Sophistry, and abuse of his own reason and learning,
all his Logic and Syllogisms are unable to overthrow reason and learning, goes
about by his queries to undermine them; who, when all his impudency dares not
affirm, and all his ability cannot prove, endeavors by way off doubt to instill
his poison, upon hopes that you will swallow and take sor granted whatever
drops from him: what is it you admire in this Fellow, is it his railing against
learning in others? does he not make use of it himself? he disputes
Syllogistically, he is frequent in division, abounds in subtle and sophistical
distinctions, talks hard words, rattles out Latin, nay there is not one Arrow
in his quiver but is feathered with feathers plucked from learnings wing, nor
is he able to speak or write, or you to read or understand one syllable, word
or sentence against Learning, but by its assistance. Could you have read, could
you have wrote, could you have understood one word had you not been taught? why
these are degrees of learning; awake and behold the cheat, which would make you
enemies even to that image of God which is imprinted on you, level you with
Brutes nay make you such: you see it is reason that distinguishes a man from a
Beast, it is learning that improves reason, be not afraid of being rational;
this Caytiff would deprive you of your humanity, that he might the easier
destroy your Christianity; rob you of your reason, to bob you of your religion:
For if he be not a very Jesuit, yet is he the likest one that ever I met with;
if the tree may be judged by the fruits, his acts will a loud proclaim him a
notorious juggler: and first behold how he cheats you in stating the question,
for it is not whether by the help of humane learning a man may attain a saving
knowledge to himself, whether he can save his own soul; but whether he may not
attain to such a knowledge as may enable him to hold out the way of Salvation
unto others: and that a man may do this, not only too too frequent examples do
make out, but the Apostle himself tells us in the 1 Cor. 9. 27. But I keep
under my body, and keep it in subjection; lest that by any means, when I have
preached unto others, I my self should be a cast away; a man may preach to
others, and yet be himself a cast away: for this wretch dares not affirm that
the Apostle inspired by the Spirit of God would suppose an impossibility: and
the example of Judas clearly shows that a man may have an outward call to
teach, and yet be a reprobate; was not he one of the twelve that was sent to
preach the Kingdom of God, and to heal the sick? Luke 9. 1, 2. also the
Apostle in the 2 Timothy 3. 5. speaks of some, having a form of Godliness,
creeping into houses, leading captive silly women laden with infirmities: These
Hypocrites by the help of learning and parts could pray as devoutly, talk as
holily, wrest the Scriptures as dexterously, cogging the die, making the word
speak what they list, craftily applying it, having all the arts and methodes of
consenage, even as he himself; yet were they not taught of God; it is clear
therefore that learning and parts perse ex propria natura can understand and so
apprehend the mystery of the Gospel, as to hold it out so to others, that the
hearers cannot discern by the teaching an Hypocrite from a true Believer,
notwithstanding all his Positions. You may behold also how finely the holy text
is wrested by him to no purpose in his following Arguments, for unless he prove
that a man by the help of learning cannot attain to such a Knowledge as to be
able to make an outward profession, he proves nothing.

And that this Sophistry is malicious, not ignorant, his answering two
objections will fully clear.

Object. 1. That though humane learning be an enemy to the law of God while it
is in an unsanctified heart, yet when the heart is truly turned to God, then it
becomes a sanctified instrument, and a good hundmaid to Theology.

Solution. To this he answers, That though the heart be truly sanctified, in
which humane learning does inhere as in its subject, yet does it not follow
that learning it self is, no more than sin can be said to be sanctified, though
the heart of a sinful man may be truly said to be sanctified: for acquired
learning of it self, and of its own nature, is nothing else but sin, and
therefore remains so still, and cannot be truly nor properly said to be
sanctified, no more than sin. But if by being sanctified, they mean that the
providential wisdom of God does order it, or make use of it for the good of
his people, I oppose it not, so that it be understood, that that good flows
not srom the nature of acquired knowledge it self, but from the wisdom and
goodness of the Spirit of God, who makes all things work together for the
benefit of those that love him, who are called according to his purpose, and so
no more can properly in this respect be predicated of it than of sin it self,
which in that case (though not as an entity, for non entia ad modum entium
concipiuntur) is said also to work for the good of Gods Saints.

First to this we say, that the habit of sin is destroyed, there is a
mortification of sin, as well as a vivification of grace, as Romans 6. 2. How
shall we that are dead to sin, live any longer therein? and Ephesians. 2. 1. You
has he quickened who were dead in trespasses and sins. Now the habit of
learning is not in the least diminished, much less destroyed.

Secondly, That the whole man with all his endowments is sanctified, as 1 These.
5. 23, 24. And the very God of peace sanctify you wholly, and I pray God your
whole spirit, and soul, and body, be preserved blameless unto the coming of
our Lord Jesus Christ. Faithful is he that calls you, who also will do it.
Now then, either learning must be sanctified, or something remains unsanctified.

Thirdly, That acquired learning, of it self, and of its own nature is not sin,
for sin is a transgression of the Law, 1 John 3. 4. verse, For sin is the
transgression of the Law, (...). Now what Law forbids learning? where is it
written Thou shall not be learned? and sure were learning either in it self
sin, or left unsanctified in a sanctified heart, we should not find the ^^^stle
Paul giving thanks for it in 1 Cor. 14. 18. I thank my God I speak with tongues
more than you all: and the holy Ghost describing Apollos leaves him upon record
to be an eloquent man (...), the word usually is taken for a learned man; and
see what follows, He helped them much which believed, for he mightily
convinced the Jews, (...), which the learned Beza in his Annotations renders,
Magna cum contentione, and he gives the reason of it, Vti volui hac perphrasi
ut Graeci vocabuli emphasin servarem, quo significatur eloquentem hunc hominem
omnes (quod aiunt) nervos revincendis Iudaeis contendisse, I have used this
periphrasis, that I might preserve the emphasis of the Greek word, by ^^ich is
signified that this eloquent man employed the utmost of his abilities to
convince the Jews. Behold then what Divinity your Doctor teaches, who is not
only content to belly learning, but sanctification, making the holy Spirit work
by halves; and as he plays the Knave here, so in the latter part he plays the
Fool, fighting with his own shadow, and keeping a coil about nothing, for the
very objection, as he himself has put it, asserts the good to flow from the
sanctification of learning, not from its own nature, it makes it a handmaid,
and so does he; until he comes to his Conclusion, which how true it is, as it
sufficiently appears by what is said, yet will be more manifest if we consider
learning in it self to be indifferent either good or evil, according as it is
used or abused, now is sin so? Suppose a man shall make the glory of God his
only end in his attaining learning, that thereby he may be better enabled to
read, converse, dispute, and speak concerning the mysteries of Salvation (for
could he have written or spoken as he does without it, unless by help of a
miracle?) will he affirm this learning to be sin? is the Physical act sinful,
or does the moral circumstance cloth it with good or evil? Something more then
may be predicated of learning than of sin, which cannot be conceived in any
other notion than of sin.

Object. 2. Again, if it be objected, that though learning be not effectual to
the understanding of the mystery of the Gospel, yet it is prealent to the
completing of the literal and historical knowledge thereof: Take this here,
that these objections are of his own clothing, the terms are his own.

Solution. To this he answers. Though it may conduce to the gaining of literal,
and historical knowledge, yet this is not ad idem, because it profits
nothing; For truth it self bears record, It is the Spirit that quickneth, the
flesh profitteth nothing; and men are made able Ministers of the New Testament,
not of the Letter, but of the Spirit; For the letter kills, but the Spirit
gives life. So that all literal and historical knowledge gained by man's power,
is but like the principle from whence it slowed, fleshly, earthly, deadly, and
destructive.

To this we say, that what he says here against learning, may as well be said
against reading, teaching, and hearing, there must be fit and outward Organs,
there must be eyes, a tongue, and ears, and these must have a body to subsist;
is all reading, hearing, and teaching therefore like the principle from whence
they flow, fleshly, earthly, deadly, and destructive? Behold then whether these
Scriptures are wrested or no? do you think they are to be understood to condemn
all outward means, or only to show that outward means without the inward
assistance and operation of the Spirit cooperating with them were unable to
beget saving grace in a soul? do you conceive the Spirit of God in them
disallowes all reading, teaching, hearing, or only forbid to put such a
confidence in them as to esteem them able in themselves to confer eternal life
upon us? Besides, i that place in the Corinths, the letter signifies the Law,
of which Moses was a Minister, the Spirit the Gospel, which Christ brought and
delivered to his Apostles and Ministers; for look but into the chapter and you
shall see the scope of the Apostle is to advance the Ministry of the Gospel
above the Ministry of the Law: was not this rightly applied then against
learning? can you imagine he himself can th^^k them to mean what he puts upon
them? but I leave him, and so I hope will you; yet I could wish some able pen
would take him task, and (...) the Impostor.

CHAP. XVI.
The abuse of Learning no argument against the use of it.

But as this fellow cries down, so are there others which too much cry up
learning, who will entail the ^ift of teaching upon it, and allow none to teach
but an University Graduate; which is no other than put bounds to God, to limit
the holy Spirit, hither and no farther shall thou go; but because these men
idolize it, must we execrate and abhor it? because the Persians adored the Sun,
must we Christians refuse the comfort of its light and heat? in thus doing we
run as far out of the way on the one hand, as they do on the other.

Let them consider how many under the light of the Gospel furnished with the
helps of humane learning are strangely unacquainted with the knowledge of Christ
crucified; a plain experienced Christian (notwithstanding their Auxiliary
forces) only by the help of a Bible, will put a whole Army to flight; Surgunt
indocti et rapiunt coelum, when they in the mean time do but, as he speaks,
ornare Diabolum; they become learned spoils, Sapienter descendunt in infernum,
they go cunningly to Hell. And then on the other side let not us be so silly
and malicious as to put the fault in learning, whereas there is no greater
vicinity than between truth and goodness; heaven is full of knowledge, as it is
of holiness; and it is brimfull of both: if some will not make a right use, or
will abuse their learning, must learning suffer? can there be a more gross
abuse than, as, Isocrates speaks, (...), to lay the blame on the thing, not the
man? some men with weapons commit murders and outrages, shall not others
therefore have any for their own necessary and just defense? some make
themselves drunk, may not others therefore drink to maintain life, and to
comfort and cheer the heart? Noah was drunk with wine, shall not Timothy
therefore drink a little for his stomachs sake, and his often infirmities? 1 Timothy 5. 23. a subtle Jesuiticall Knave wrests Scripture, may not a Minister of
the Gospel therefore quote it? The first abuses his learning to pervert, and
destroy, shall not the second make use of his to instruct, and edify? Upon
this account all things might be condemned, even profession it self, and all
religious duties, which have been by some abused, and profaned.

CHAP. XVII.
The Mischief of Ignorance.

THese things thus weighed, will not the improvement of nature beautified and
adorned with supernatural grace make men more serviceable, and instrumental for
Gods glory? when the strength of learning, and the power of Godliness unite and
concentricate their forces, will they not make up the finest and purest
complexion, the soundest and bravest constitution, like a sparkling and
vigorous soul, quickening and informing a beautiful body? can Religion desire to
shine with greater gloss and luster, can it desire to ride among men in greater
pomp and solemnity, in a more tryumphant Chariot than in a soul of vast
intellectualls? let us but consider our poor ignorant and unlearned Ancestors,
with yellings, and howlings, with the horrid noise of brazen and copper pans
and bazons hammered on and beaten, endeavoring to help the Moon in the
eclipse, whom they thought they did great service to; and whence proceeded
this but from ignorance of the natural cause? what prayers, what sacrifices did
an eclipse of the Sun produce? all presently supposing he hid his face for
anger, as the Poets report he did at Atreus his banquet, -- Verterit cursus
licet sibi ipse Titan, obvium ducens iter, tenebrisque facinus obruit tetrum
novis, nox missa ab ort u tempore alieno gravis. Seneca, Thyestes, and they in
danger of an eternal night, and not only be, as one speaks notably of the Suns
adorers, (...), without their God by night, but for ever: and indeed what
advantage did the Devil make of ignorance in the time of Popery? What a
quarter did he keep with his Hobgoblins, and Fairies? O, darkness is his
delight in the understanding as well as in the air, and does it not lay men
more open to his temptations? what a triumph would the Prince of darkness lead
could he get us all into his livery? This Plutarch an heathen could perceive,
Knowledge, says he, frees men from that superstition, which frights, disturbs,
and entangles with sinister conceits of the Deity, others, who are ignorant of
the natural causes of things, and in its place induces a secure piety, and holy
confidence in the Divine power; and he instances in the head of a Ram with one
horn growing in the midst of the front brought to Pericles, which when the
Southsayers converted to an Omen, Anaxagoras the Philosopher dissecting the
scull showed it empty on the sides, and the brains lying in the midst in an
oval form just where the horn took root, clearly convincing them of the natural
cause.

Let us consider how a poor Bishop was degraded by a whole Council, and the
Popes infallible Worship too boot, for writing and maintaining that there were
Antipodes, people inhabiting the other side of the Worldly Globe, a thing known
to every ship-boy in Wapping: and what will nothign serve our turns but a herd
of such Teachers? a drove of such Doctors that may bring us in one age to a
degree above bleating to be as far from understanding, as they from being able
to speak sense? when a Dutch Sophister with this doughty fallacy, The Scripture
commands us to reverence and obey our Elders, but the Dutch State is the elder
State, therefore the Scripture commands the English State to reverence and obey
the Dutch; Or, Asses have ears, Englishmen have ears, therefore Englishmen
are Asses, shall puzzle our whole nation, and none be able to answer him,
unless by downright telling him he lies, and so instead of confuting, confirm
him in his wild assertions.

Lastly, Let us consider with what impatience we would hear a man that went
about to persuade us to burn our ships, break our Guns, destroy all our Arms
and Weapons, and lay our selves naked to the invasion and rapine of any foreign
enemy; and shall we not with the same disdain and abhorrency behold these
pedling Truckers under Satan, who would disarm our souls, prostitute our
understandings to the lust of every subtle Sophister, make us like to the
Horse and Mule which want understanding, ready to take the Bit into our mouths
to be rid by each deceiver, and to crowch down under the burdens which every
sly and cunning Knave shall please to load us with? do we so much detest the
slavery of our bodies, and shall we not abhor to see our souls led captive, our
understandings drawn in shackles after the triumphant Chariot of every
Impostor? our Lord and Savior teaches us, that though a man both strong and
armed keep the house, yet if a stronger than he come, he will enter and take
possession; these Imps of the Destroyer suggest, that the Lame and Blind are
only fit Garrison Soldiers for the strong holds of the New Jerusalem, as if
Religion were the Capitol that only Geese must defend; alas, had there not
been a Manlius and other valiant and armed Romans, the Gauls could not have
been kept out by their cackling. Thus much for learning, as it is useful in
religion, what advantage it is of to the Civil State shall be discoursed of
hereafter in its proper place.

CHAP. XVIII.
Of Moral virtue in general.

BEfore we proceed further, it will not be amiss to consider Moral virtue in
the general, as of good conducement to our better understanding of the
particular virtues which follow in order to be treated of in our subsequent
discourse, and to our easier attaining and embracing them in our future
practice.

And first of the Name; the Greeks according to some denominated it (...), from
Mars their God of War, because in War the efficacy of virtue seemed most
perspicuous. Others fetch its derivation (...), from choosing, because virtue
is above all things to be chosen. The Latins called it virtus a vir which
anciently was solie applied to a valiant man; thus Cicero in offic. Nomen
virtutis, inquit, antiquitus solius fuit fortitudinis, Virtue, says he, was
the badge heretofore only of Fortitude. But since experience teaching that man
was not only to strive with man, to combat the Common enemy, but also with his
own disorderly affections easily misled by the allurements of riches, delights,
and preferment, it became the tryumphant Ornament of those that were victorious
over themselves and these temptations, which indeed is the more noble conquest,
and most manly, as performed by the force of reason, the weapon only man can
use. Lastly there are some, who not unpleasantly alluding will have it termed
virtus, quasi viri artus, as it were the joints and lineaments of the mind.

Now, as the name has been diversely derived, so has the Thing been variously
applied.

As first, to signify in general the power and perfection of any thing, hence
we often meet with these and the like phrases in English, By virtue of Gods
power, wisdom, omniscience; by virtue of the Soul, of the Heavens, of the
Elements, of such or such a plant, mineral, or living creature.

Secondly, to denote promiscuously all habits as well infused as acquired, thus
we say by virtue of Grace, faith, etc.

Thirdly, it is taken for a natural inclination or disposition: thus Aristotle
in 6 Ethic. cap. ult. we possess virtue by nature, and by nature we are
temperate and valiant. Lastly, it is most properly taken for an habit of the
mind, acquired by use and frequent exercise, and thus we are to accept it as an
habit ruling the will and appetite of man, and conforming and composing his
manners for the help and ornament of humane society.

And now having viewed it in the gross, let us a little descend to take it in
pieces, whereby the true nature of it will be more plainly understood. The nus
is an habit, and we prove its lineage by its Coat Armor. Plutarch de virtut.
moral. (...). There are, says he, three things in the mind, the faculty, the
affection, and the habit; the faculty is the principle and matter of the
affection; the affection is a certain motion of the faculty: but the habit is
the strength and conformity of the faculty gotten by custom. Now virtue being
to be reduced under one of these heads, we must examine to which it does conform
it self. By virtue men are accounted good, as by vice bad; but by the faculties
which are natural and bear themselves in an indifferent posture to this or
that; and by the affections by which we are only moved, and become not, neither
are accounted such or such, we can neither be termed good or bad; it remains
then that the habit gives the denomination, and that virtue is an habit, and so
Aristotle l. 2. ethic. cap. 6. defines it to be (...).

The difference must be fetched from the matter and form; now the matter is the
subject and object, for no other* matter can be attributed to Accidents; the
subject is the will and appetite, the internal object, are the affections, and
actions springing from those affections; the external objects are the persons
toward which, and the things in which virtue is exercised. The form is a
Mediocrity or mean to be observed in all our affections and actions which exces
renders violent, defect lame and imperfect.

Now virtue consists in indivisibili medio, in an individual mediocrity; (...).
for there is but one path leads to virtue, but to vice many. (...) For Good is
single, evil of many shapes; yet is this indivisibility not to be taken in a
Mathematical, but a Moral construction, which admits of some Latitude, for its
the prudent admonition of some eminent Moralists, Parum deflectere a medio in
excedendo, vel deficiendo, non est vitium semper existimandum; cum medii
quaedam sit latitudo, intra quamse continentes been agunt, a small declining
from the mean either on the right or left is not always to be accounted vice,
since there is a certain latitude in mediocritie, within the limits of which,
men containing themselves act well. Thus a valiant man by the smart and sight
of his wounds may be transported with anger and thirst of revenge, yet it being
in the lawful and just defense of himself and Country, a resolute and eager
charge will be no excess from true fortitude, and for the other extreme we have
a noble example in the Roman Consul Catulus, who when he could not persuade the
greatest part of his Army to abide in their Camp, being terrified with the
approach of the Cimbrians, commanded the Eagle, the Roman Standart, to be
advanced, and marched away himself in the head of them, that they might appear
rather to follow than desert their General. Here he forsook his Camp, and those
resolute Soldiers that staid to defend it, for fear lest the body of his Army
who would go should be utterly disheartened, and being publicly branded with
deserting the Consul, might set light by their fame already blasted, and so the
Commonwealth then threatened might be greatly endangered by the loss of such an
Army, which would either have disbanded, or fought untowardly.

And to come closer, virtue is not (...), an absolute calm without the least
perturbation, but (...), a Symmetry of the affections regulated by measure,
squared by the golden rule of Mediocrity.

And as there is a latiude to be considered, so is the proportion which is
Geometrical, not Arithmetical; it is medium rationis, non rei: for virtue does
not equally differ from its extremes, as six does from two and ten, as for
example, Liberality comes nearer to prodigality than covetousness.

Yet the attaining this mediocrity being a thing of the greatest difficulty,
for as it is easy to be angry, so is it hard to be angry with these necessary
circumstances, with whom, how far, when, wherefore, and in what manner we
ought, it will much avail us to take these helps, laid down by all or the most
experienced Moralists.

First, let us endeavor to shun that extreme which seems most contrary to
virtue; yet here must be care taken lest by endeavoring to avoid one we run
into the other extremity according to that,

Dum vitant stulti vitia in contraria currunt.

And, Incidit in Scyllam cupiens vitare Charybdim.

Thus as the Nymph Calypso instructs Ulysses being to sail between Scylla and
Charybdis, two dangerous rocks in the Sicilian Sea, rather to avoid Charybdis
as the more dangerous, but yet still to have an eye to Scylla: Homer 12. Odyss.
So we must avoid that extreme which is most opposite to virtue as more
destructive, yet with care of the other too: Superstition is liker Piety than
Atheism, we had better therefore be a little too tender, than to make no
scruple, a little too formal, than openly profane, here the excess is less
contrary; but here again the defect, for abstemionsness altogether to forbear
wine is more like Temperance then drunkenness, and this our Reason will instruct
us to judge of. Yet the Prudent persuade for the most part to avoid the excess,
as of more difficulty to be shaken off: and indeed it would be more facile to
bring an abstemious person to a moderate use of Wine for his health sake, than
to dissuade a drunkard from his tipple though his health, nay life lay at
stake; and of this opinion is Cicero in I* de Orat Suus cuique modus est,
inquit, tamen magis offendit nimium, quam parum. There is a measure to be had
in every thing, says he, yet excess is the greater offender of the two: and
where we find one voluntarily starving himself, we shall meet with thousands
destroyed by surfeiting.

Secondly, Let us strive to avoid that extreme which we are most inclined to by
our natural Temper; as if we are covetously enclind, let us endeavor rather to
be a little too profuse, and so by degrees we may become liberal. (...). This
Aristotle illustrates by an apt simile of streightning a stick: for he that
will make a stick straight must do it by bending it to the contrary side.

Thirdly, we must in every action be very suspicious of that which seems to
entice with the alluring bait of pleasure, and this Aristotle confirms by an
argument drawn from the pernicious effect of pleasure. And thus Cicero in
Catone. Impedit consilium volupt as rationi inimica et mentis oculos
perstringit. Pleasure, says he, that foe to reason, lays a bar in judgments
way, and dazzles the eye of the understanding: And again in 2. lib. offic.
Voluptates blandissimae dominae saepe majores parts animae a virtute
detorquent; Those flattering Mistresses, Pleasures, do often enveagle and draw
the nobler parts of the soul from the practice of virtue, and Seneca in Epist.
28. Quis Hostis in quenquam ita contumeliosus fuit, quam in quosdam voluptates
suae? No professed enemy has been so injurious and spiteful, has wrought a
man so much disgrace, as their own pleasures, their bosom delights have done
too many, one Dalilah has been more powerful to captivate a Sampson, than all
the Lords, than all the thousands among the Philistimes.

And as a help we shall add this, That proposing the most sublime, and
heroical Patterns of virtue for our imitation, we shall the less square our
actions by the crooked and deceitful rule of Pleasure.

He that shall make Cicero his example shall never become a Cataline: nor shall
the admirer of a studious and contemplative Athenian, of a courageous and
active Lacaedemonian, incur the infamy and effeminacie of a delicate Sybarite,
or a dissolved Persian: thus when the glory of Miltiades once disturbed the
sleep of Themistocles, when his victory at Marathon had made a conquest also
over the others debauchery at Athens; you see how soon he broke those silken
cords of pleasure, wherein he was noos'd, and the sense of honor having set an
edge upon his affections, he soon cut that Gordion knot, whereby he became
first victorious over himself, and after over Asia; I mean the numerous Persian
with the strength of Asia then invading Greece, and of a dissolute young man,
became the most famous Captain in his time Greece could boast of; of such
efficacy is a noble example. Whereas on the contrary, as Cicero in Laelio,
Nihilaltum, nihil magnificum, nihil divinum suscipere possunt, qui suas
cogitationes abjecerunt in rem humilem et abjectam. The latter phrase is very
emphatical; he that trifles away his thoughts in a low, and abject
contemplation, shall never come to be fit for any high, any noble, any heroic
undertaking. Thus the muck worm that pores upon the ground continually will
never arrive to the liberal science of Astronomy; and we cannot but suppose
that he shall shoot nearer Heaven who takes his aim at a star, than he that
levels at a Gloworm.

The efficient cause of virtue is custom; which is the genuine Parent of an
habit; thus when we see a man wallow in vice, we say he is habituated to it,
yet have there been some who have endeavored to alter this Pedigree, and to
engraft this excellent Cien on another stock.

Gallen a Physician, would bring it under his cure, and place it within the
verge of his art, and could he do it, it would be no small addition to his
calling, both in respect of honor, and profit; which would abound in admirers,
and never want patients: how necessary would the Physician be to the Body
Politic as well as natural, could he rectify and purge the manners, as well as
the humors, and not only help men to live, but to live well? O the sacred
power of that Physic, which could purge out vice, and be a cordial to virtue!
thou have a fragrancy beyond the ointment of the Apothecary; whose shop alas
cannot be the cradle of virtue, neither can all his compounds compose the
affections, all his distillations instill virtue, all his essences and spirits
quicken that noble heat in the soul, it is beyond the power of Chemistry to
extract this habit, or to resolve corrupted nature into its first principle of
purity. Show me that Doctor that can by his Physiek make the cholerike man
meek, the Coward, valiant, or the corrupt, Just; and let him enjoy the deity of
Aesculapius, and his ruined Shrines be repaired for his service. I confess they
can make the Miser open his fist, and scatter his Angels, when he is terrifyed
with the dreadful apparition of death. This wretch, contrary to all others, who
hold fastest when in danger of drowning, unclutching his gripe when he is
sinking into the grave, and parting with his Mammon, his beloved Deity so long
adored by him, when the Devil appears ready to ceize him. But this is but like
the Cowards winking and laying about him when there is no remedy but fight or
die, like Damaetas in the noble and ingenuous Sydney, who when the Sea would let
him run no further, turned, and had the hap to have his adversary cry quarter
first; and the one is as far from being liberal, as the other valiant.

Thus it seems, making for his profession, Gallen attempts to cry up his own
Diana, and on Nature beget a Sire for virtue, for he will have it spring from a
Temperament of the Body; but though this may incline, yet does it not
necessarily draw men to virtue.

1. For we often see manners changed, the temperament remaining the same, as in
the example of Themistocles; and the temper changed, the manners continuing,
for in the life of Marius we read, that though he was both old, gross, and
corpulent, yet did he daily in public exercise himself in arms among the young
men, endeavoring to make his body active and nimble whether nature would or no:
yea so fiery and young was his ambition that the chill froast of age which had
made his head hoary could not nip it, and such a thirst after honor burned
within him, that six Consulships adorned with the most-splendid tryumphs could
not quench it, but his aspiring soul would have drawn his unweldie body crazed
with age, and laden with honor, after it into Pontus, whether he eagerly
sought to be sent Commander in chief against Mithridates; yea upon his death
bed when he was light headed, fancying he was warring against Mithridates, he
would often use such postures, and motions of the body, as became a General,
backed with a loud, and military clamor: Alas poor man! as if one sprig of
Laurel could have given thee content, which in a whole Grove thou could not
find, though springing from thine own conquests.

2. Again the temper is not in our power, manners are, for if they were not, to
what purpose would deliberation, counsel, exhortation, praise, reproof, laws,
rewards, punishments be? it is evident then that the Temperament is not the
proximate and chief cause of virtue.

Secondly, And as Gallen, so the Stoics make Nature the cause of virtue, which
they hold born with man, but vice contrary to Nature and acquired by evil
custom. So that they themselves will have custom the cause of the acquired
habit of vice, which grants our Tenent, for having proved virtue to be a habit
acquired, not an innate faculty, it must be the product of custom. Besides,
whatever is natural is immovable, but manners are mutable, as in the before
recited example of Themistocles, and how often have our eyes seen young men of
very promising beginnings debauched by evil company, to fall from that bright
Orb of virtue, in which had they been placed by nature they would have been
fixed stars?

Thirdly, Some there are that ascribe virtues original to education, and
breeding, and indeed this is very much conducing to beget the first acts of
virtue, and to put youth in the right road to come to it, but it is not of
force to creat the habit: for how many do we behold excellently initiated in
this sacred mystery by a good Tutorage, which when they come to have the reigns
laid in their necks, gallop down hill, and break the neck of all those goodly
expectations? for the best instilled precepts though they may sometimes check,
yet are they not of force to stop the carreer of the headstrong affections, and
many are there, who can give good counsel to others, which they cannot or will
not follow themselves. But let me not be misunderstood, for though we do not
allow education to be the proximate and adaequate, yet shall we not deny it to
be a remote cause, which by entering men in virtues path, which gone on in will
bring to the habit, may be said to lay the foundation to this glorious Fabric.
And thus though we cannot in justice confer the Crown as to have reached the
Goal, yet let it carry the prize for the first start; though we must deny it
the triumph due to an absolute victory, yet shall we put the murall Crown on
its head, for having first mounted the Wall, and first erected virtues Ensign
upon the Battlements. Let it then not be neglected, but of all receive its due
esteem, as the most excellent Trayner up of youth, the most noble File-leader,
who well followed conducts to victory, that happy victory which will render us
invincible, place us above the reach of any enemy, carry us out of Fortunes
gunshot.

Now the rest enjoying what is their own, let us give Custom its due, which is
to be the efficient cause of virtue, enabling men by an often repetition of
such or such a virtuous action, to a ready and unperturbed performing it upon
occasion; for to descend a little in a simile, how come your Artificers to
become excellent, unless by often practice, or your Soldier to be expert, but
by exercise? and it is a maxim amongst military men, that a man never so well
versed in speculation, who has all the arts and stratagems of the most
renowned Captains at his fingers ends, yet at the first skirmish will be to
seek; and can we think the repugnancies within are less disturbing than enemies
without, and require not a mind as well experienced to resist and quell them?
To sum up all the Etymon of the word (...) Moral, (...), derived from the word
which signifies custom, may confirm us that it has its original from the
thing from whose name it derives its denomination. For it would be no more a
Soloecism in speech to call the Son of Van Trump an English man, than that
moral or customary virtue, which is sprung from the loins of Temperament,
Nature or Education.

But now to prescribe a set number, to tell how many acts go to the making up
an habit, is impossible; for 1. fewer or more are requisite, accordingly as the
mind is less or more inclined to virtue. 2. Some acts are more powerful, others
less valid. 3. Attention makes large amends for number, whose worth, by way of
exchange, may viewith hundreds, and, when put in the scale, far outweigh them.
Neither let any of us fear to overdo, to act virtuously too often.

The external causes of virtue are the examples of others, as in the
before-named example of Miltiades and Themistocles; and rewards and
punishments, as we shall show more fully in their proper-place.

The end of virtue, is bonum civil, the common good, the general interest of
mankind, and this must needs be lovely in all our eyes, (...), says the
Philosopher, it is honorable to do good to one, to a nation heroical; it is
near of kin to divinity for a man to be able to contribute toward the welfare
of his whole species: and Magistrates, men in public place, of whom it is
spoken, I have said ye are Gods, are placed by God for the common good; those
that are set to rule, like the Sun should be full of light, and heat, visible
in example, and powerful influence.

CHAP. XIX.
Of Probity, and the practice of it among the Romans.

THe external object, as it relates to the Persons toward whom virtue bends
its eye, delivers it Janus-like, looking forward by Piety upon God, backward by
Probity upon man, providing a well-being both for Soul and body, and directing
us for the benefit of our selves and others.

Of the first, Piety, we have aready spoken, the other, Probity, is therefore
that which remains for the subject of our persent discourse, and this meets us
well accompanied, nobly followed, as having all those virtues in her train,
which are necessary to enable us in performing our duties as we stand in all
relations. For its denomination, we find it termed by the Greeks (...), and by
the Latins Honestas, from honos honor; so ingenuously provident were the
Ancients that it might not be so much as mentioned without its due, honor. And
indeed it is the very abstract of the other virtues; it is the ci^cle from
whence those noble lines are drawn, and the center in which they meet; it is
the salt that seasons them, and the soul that informs them, that bestows their
glorious being. Without this, Prudence would be but cunning. Justice, in
execution, but a more specious and reserved kind of revenge; in distribution,
but a keeping of credit to maintain our trade; in rewarding, but a bribery to
gain affection, and increase our dependancies. Fortitude, but a brutish
audacity, and daring rashness to render our selves terrible, and gain
Domination. Temperance, but a kind of senslesnes and stupidity, a Stoical piece
of tyranny over our bodies.

Hence grew its esteem among the Moralists, which generally make the other
virtues spring from the pregnant womb of Probitie; and hence came it to be
honored among the Romans, which they beheld blessed with so glorious and
numerous a progeny, attended by so beautiful a company of Daughters.

This was it set Numa on the Throne, and made them with one consent call him
from a private Country life to govern Rome, passing by the most noble among
both Romans and Sabines. It was this fetched Serranus from the Plough, and
adorned him with the absolute and uncontrollable power of Dictator. This
encouraged them to elect Cato to be Censor, and pass by the noblest
Competitors, when instead of courting the people, he seemed to threaten them,
proclaming, that by choosing him and Valerius Flaccus, whom they also made his
Colleague, the City might be purged of its new corruptions, and ancient probity
of manners restored. This made Fabritius, when the Physician sent him word,
that if he pleased he would poison Pyrrhus, return the Letter to Pyrrhus with
this exprobration, That he was most unfortunate in his choice of friends, as
well as enemies; which when Pyrrhus had received, and hanging his Physician,
returned the Roman Captives without ransom, Fabritius sent as many captives of
his with this admonition, that he discovered the Treason not for any favor or
respect he bore to him, but to let him know that the Romans abhorred by
treachery to destroy their enemies. Pyrrhus had then invaded Italy, had
overthrown the Consul Laevinus, and was grown numerous by the revolt of many of
the people of Italy who lackied to his Fortune; his Physician unsought to, even
of his own accord, offers to rid them of this danger, yet so great was their
love to honesty, they chose to undergo any hazard, rather than to connive at a
dishonest act, or in the least to bear with it though in a Stranger.

Behold O Matchivilian, this is that which truly establishes a State, when thy
unworthy policies, though they may be prosperous for a while, are never
long-lived, and thy rotten props will in the close fail thee, and bury thee in
the ruins of that thou buildest upon them. Produce me an example, where
although Prosperity might lead the Van, reproach and ruin did not bring up the
Rear? where thy villainies flourishing for a day, were not frost-nipt at night?
where though they might bud in the morning, and blow at noon, they were not
blasted in the evening, and their purple changed into sables, their
rosie-tinctured mantles into nights black livery, double died in Infamy and
Horror? whereas virtuous Honesty renders States and Persons stable like it
self, whose glorious edifices in the roughest and most boisterous storms stand
unshaken like their foundation: yea and always clothes them with the
tryumphant roabs of success, who in its armor of proof have combated their
Foes. This was it set Rome aloft in spite of all opposition, and raised her on
her feet, when ready to be trampled on by her fiercest foes. This was it upheld
her courage in the midst of the greatest losses, and made her enemies tremble
in the height of their victories, as accounting her invincible in her virtue,
which would make all force stoop and veil bonnet in the end. Thus may we see
Pyrrhus even reeking with a bloody victory, dispatch away his Ambassador, and
stretch out his victorious arms to implore a peace, whilst the beaten Roman
disdains to treat, and can hardly be brought to give any terms to the
Conqueror* rejecting his proffered Friendship, as much as his Gold and bribes.
For his Ambassador could not fasten the least gift on any private person, nor
obtain any other answer from the Senate, than a command to leave Italy, and
that the Consul was coming, and in the head of the Roman Legions should
deliver their Terms. This made Fabritius contemn his proffered Gold, deride his
stratagem of the Elephant, which was suddenly brought upon him to try if they
could terrify him; refuse his profer of being next the King* if he would
continue with him; and return this brief answer, I am no more moved at your
Beast, than I was with your Gold, and for me to live with thee would be
perilous, O King, for should thy Subjects once come to know me, they would
choose rather to serve me than thee; account Fabritius more worthy of the
Throne, than Pyrrhus. This was it carried Cato the elder through the greatest
oppositions of the Roman Nobility, and set him above the reach of their envy
and malice: this gave him the Suffrages from all his Competitors, the ancient
and noblest Roman blood backed with all its factions and dependancies being
unable to stand in competition with a Plebeian Probitie, or the whole Patrician
Order to put stop to his being chosen Censor, yea and whom he pleased to be
joined with him. This was it, not affection or money, yea that in despite of
Favor and Bribery brought him off in all his accusations; so that he never was
once condemned though fifty times impeached, but in every action had the day;
yea this gave him the confidence to demand his greatest adversary to be Judge
at his last trial, who also gave sentence for him. So potent is Honesty, that
Malice it self cannot but yield, and either openly acknowledge, or tacitly
confess, that her roughest and best-edg'd files cannot touch it. Who would not
then embrace this so potent, and excellen virtue? which even wrests Encomiums
out of the mouths of enemies: which could make Pyrrhus with admiration cry out,
That it was easier to turn the Sun from its course, than Fabritius from his
integrity. And his Ambassador Cyneas return this answer, when asked what he
though of Rome. That it was a City of Kings, and a Senate of Gods; Every
private person virtuously commanding his affections, and the Magistrates
divinely influential for the public honor and safety.

And now coming to handle the particular virtues, we shall follow Cicero l. 1.
offic. in his division of them into Prudence, Justice, Portitude, and
Temperance, under which all necessary honest actions may be reduced; and these
are commonly called the Cardinal virtues. Prudence that directs our reason, the
other govern our appetites, as Fortitude and Temperance in adverse and
prosperous affairs concerning our selves, Justice in that which pertains to
others.

CHAP. XX.
Of Prudence.

THis virtue is called by the Greeks (...), from the mind, whose chief ornament
it is: By the Latins Prudentia, quasi providentia a providendo, it foreseeing
what is to be avoided, what to be chosen, as most apposit for the welbeing of
our selves and others, it being also its special employment to provide for the
future, and we are only to look upon it in its politic capacity, as it is
reduced under Moral Philosophy: for though it may be accounted an intellectual
virtue in regard of its subject and efficient cause, as having its dependancy
on the understanding and judgment: yet in respect of its object and end it
becomes also moral, as which leads not only to contemplative but practical
felicity, and beholds civil good as its most lovely object.

And indeed prudence is (...) the Master Workman, the principal Agent in the
raising and composing of the noble frame of virtue, (...): For as this directs,
so do the virtues, and virtuous men act: This draws the lines of Election, in
whose rectitude the main force of virtue lies; this squares and contrives by
deliberation, making the timbers fit, and the whole structure decent and
useful: yea so necessary an ingredient is it in morality, that Aristotle and
with him all the Moralists have concluded,

First, That a man cannot be virtuous, unless he be prudent; (...): For virtue
is not only an habit consonant to, but joined with right reason.

Secondly, That a man cannot be prudent, unless he be virtuous: for he must
have a right end in all his actions, which is inconsistent with crooked
manners. Qualis vita, finis ita, may be well enough applied here; besides, vice
perverts the judgment, (...), and like a cheating Tradesman shows colors by a
false light. It is therefore affirmed on all hands, (...), That by prudence and
virtue, every work is made absolute, Virtue setting up a right end, and
prudence making choice of apt means to bring us to that end.

Prudence thus coming within our verge, let us inquire what it is: And first
we find Cicero in l. ^. de invent. thus telling us, That Prudence is an exact
knowledge of what is both good and evil, Prudentia est rerum bonarum, malarum,
utrarumque peritia. And Lipsius makes it, notitia rerum eventuumque, et
judicium in iis rectum, An ability in knowing, and judging a right of things
and events. Aristotle defines it, l. 6. eth. c. 5. (...), An habit conjoined
with right reason, conversant and operative in those things which bring good or
evil unto man.

And now having viewed its essence, let us a little consider its operation, and
we find its employment to consist in a solid deliberation of those things which
are good and profitable, not particularly only to health and strength, but
which generally conduce to a virtuous and happy life, lib. 6. ethic. e. 5. and
this not by deliberating of the general precepts, and laws of living, which
are certainly defined, but by consulting how to square each single act by the
straight rule of virtue; for in the variety of circumstances upon which the
rectitude or pravity of action depends consists the obscurity, and in this
consultation is solely requisite: And now counsel being taken, prudence decrees
that good is to be chosen before evil, the greater good before the lesser, and
the lesser evil before the greater; yet this only in malo tristi, non turpi;
for the prudent man always shuns the least baseness; therefore the Philosopher
tells us that there are some things which are to be abhorred above torments, or
death it self; thus Pericles being entreated by a friend to give a false
testimony, returned this answer, (...), I Am only to help my friends in such
things as offend not the Gods; and the French History affords a memorable
example of this in the Prince of Conde, who being trecherously surprised by
Charles the 9th. and word sent him that he must choose either to go to Mass, to
die, or to be perpetually imprisoned, nobly answered, For the first, by Gods
assistance, I will never do it, for the other two let the King do as he please,
yet I doubt not but God by his Fatherly providence will turn all to the best:
He refuses the crime, neither would be choose the punishment, lest he might
seem to disavow his own innocence: Whereas David, convinced of his guilt in
numbering the people, by choosing the Pestilence, before Sword or Famine, as a
more mild and fatherly punishment, acted the part of a prudent man, 2 Samuel 24.

CHAP. XXI.
Of the Causes of Prudence, Natural parts, Experience, Learning, Travel, etc.

THe chief causes of Prudence may be reduced under three heads, Nature, Use,
Learning.

First, there must be some foundation in nature, some ground whereon to build,
ex quovis ligno non fit Mercurius, every block will not make a Mercury, it is
in vain to wash an Ethiopian, and though a fool be brayed in a Mortar he will
never become wise: therefore the Moralists generally hold these three things
requisite to the acquiring of Prudence, (...), a clear judgment, a quick
Apprehension, and a strong Memory; The two first being necessary to a right
judging, and readily applying apt means for gaining our end. Thus Thucydides in
lib. 1. gives us an eminent example in the person of Themistocles, who without
long warning or tedious consultation, by the very acuteness of his
understanding gave the best counsel: in future things he could exactly
conjecture what would happen; in present affairs he was quick of dispatch; he
was most dexterous at discovery in unknown, and in obscure things above all men
could foresee what might be for the better, and what for the worse: to sum up
all, what by the strength of nature, and help of deliberation, he became so
exact, as he seldom or never missed his mark. And Livie in 4. dec. lib. 9.
shows another in Cato Major, In hoc viro tanta vis animi, ingeniique fuit, ut
quocunque loco natus esset, fortunam sibi ipse facturus fuisse videretur: nulla
ars neque privatae, neque publicae rei gerendae ei defuit, urbanas, rusticasque
res pariter callebat: ad summos honores alios Scientia juris, alios eloquentia,
alios gloria militaris provexit; huic versatile ingenium sic pariter ad omnia
fuit, ut natum ad id unum diceres, quodcunque ageret. The last which is Memory
furnishes us with examples and presidents by which we are taught both by other
men's losses or advantages, what course, and how we should steer in all our
affairs. Thus the Philosopher in his little book of the Virtues styles Memory
the cause, and that known verse, usus me genuit, matter peperit memoria, makes
Use the Father, and Memory the Mother of Prudence. Demosthenes says it is
required in a prudent man to remember what is past, to dispatch and mind what is
present, and to provide for what may happen. And Isocrates gives this rule,
That when we deliberate, we ought to consider of past examples, for by calling
to mind things that are gone, we shall be better enabled to make provision for
things that are to come. We shall sum up this with that of Strada in his
prolus. academ. Qui memoria prae aliis valet, glorietur tanquam excellenti
vitae bono, tanquam thesauro, et penu disciplinarum, germana literaturae,
musarum Parente, altrice sapientiae, insigni demum argumento divinitatis; as
was observably eminent in those prudent men Homer, Aristotle, Seneca, and
especially Julius Caesar, who is reported never to have forgotten any thing,
but an injury.

The second help is use or experience, which furnish us with an insight in
single actions, which are most necessary the prudent man's knowledge; natural
abilities, and learning do often make men opiniative, and to presume themselves
knowing and wise: but it is experience that brings solidity. The greatest
Clerks are not always the wisest men; Therefore Theognis concludes (...),
Opinion to be of evil consequence, but use of the best concernment; to which
Lipsius assents, especially in those that are are to sit at the helm in a
State: indeed this is it which in every art makes a man his Crafts-Master; and
there is both a civil and Military art requisite to the well-governing of a
State: therefore your experienced Soldier is chosen to command, and men most
versed in State affairs held fittest for counsel, and government. Suppose we
were to perform a far voyage, or to enter an unknown and dangerous harbor,
would we not choose him for a Pilot who had oftenest steered it, who was best
acquainted with the passage? truly let us consider and we shall find a
Commonwealth may properly enough be likened to a Ship, and the mannagement of
affairs to steerage; thus Horace Ode 14. O navis, referent in mare te novi
fluctus: And the ingenuous and learned Johnson in his Catiline brings Cato thus
speaking to the then chosen Consul Cicero.

-- Each petty hand
Can steer a Ship becalmed: but he that will
Govern, and carry her to her ends, must know
His tides, his currents, how to shift his sails;
What she will bear in foul, what in fair weather;
Where her springs are, her leaks and how to stop them;
What sands, what shelves, what rocks do threaten her,
The forces, and the natures of all winds,
Gusts, storms, and tempests. When her Keel ploughs Hell,
And Deck knocks Heaven, then to manage her
Becomes the name, and office of a Pilot.
Thus the prudent man must not only be well acquainted with his own strengths,
the ability of the means he has chosen as fit to bring him to his proposed
end, but with the vigor and force of whatsoever is likely to oppose him: He
must provide for open assaults, and countermine against underhand practices,
for should he depend only upon his own power, he will be at loss upon every
opposition; he will bowl short of his Mark, unless he allow for rubs, which may
be in the way. And hence it is that the Moralists generally exclude young men
as incapable of Prudence, who by the natural heat and vigor of youth are too
fiery, apt to presume and run headlong into action without any deliberation;
whereas grave men, through use, and experience are made wary and provident;
They will look before they leap, consider whether they shall be able to carry
on such or such a design, maugre all opposition, before they imbark themselves
in it: therefore Homer being to present a prudent Counselor under the person
of Nestor, makes him 300 years of age; a man of the greatest experience, who
had waded through the employments of three ages.

The third help is Learning; for there being so great a variety, such nooks,
and corners in action, that light is necessary on all sides to further us in
our search, it will be need full for us that would be prudent to fly to
Learning for aid, which can afford us noble and copious assistance.

As first History, which is as it were another use, but of a more vigorous
capacity. Man clogged with matter can move but slowly, and by his birth and
outward concernments is commonly circumscribed within some narrow nook or angle
of the World, where he is constrained to spend that shorttime of life which
nature allows: so that let him employ his utmost diligence in observation, and
most strictly take notes, his knowledge can arrive but to the half of one ages
experience, and that too but of a few Nations actions; whereas History lays
before us all mankind in all ages acting in whatever as yet has happened, and
providing for* and against whatever could fall under humane consideration, so
that we shall not meet with any affair which may not be paralleld, and which we
may not find managed by others, even to our hands, in the large Volume of
History. This is that which can make a young man prudent, and exalt his
experience above the oldest he that shall stand on tip to upon his own
observation: this is that upon whose Shoulders a Dwarf in years setting his
feet, shall see further than a Nestor, than the tallest Giant standing on the
ground of his own experience. This is that, which not only enriches the memory
with variety and plenty of actions and examples, but also enobles the mind with
excellent and choice precepts, with good and wholesome admonitions; for wise and
prudent men generally being the Penmen to History, have flourished her about,
and embroidered the edges of her Garments with rich and precious maxims, costly
and curious observations of their own. We will conclude Histories character
with Heinsius, Est certissima divinae erga Homines benignitatis obses,
veritatis matter, vitae norma, actionum propagatrix vera, Prudentiae (ut quidam
apud Graecos loquitur) metropolis. Haec aetatem nostram cum aetate aequat
universi; haec imaginem, non corporis, sed vitae, sed consiliorum, sed animi ad
posteros transfundit, et expressam non in aere, aut ferro, non picturae
beneficio aut plasticae, immortali rerum ac verborum copia delineatam omnibus
spectandam exhibet.

And it is reported of Lucius Lucullus, who conquered two great Kings,
Mithridates and Tigranes, that by History he was trained up to that skill in
Martial affairs, which rendered him both an able and victorious General, one who
with 12000 foot, and 3000 horse, besieged the great City Tigranocerta, and beat
Tigranes coming to relieve it with 20000 darts and slings, 150000 foot, and
55000 horse, 17000 of which were armed cappa^pe.

Secondly, As History, so Philosophy, as first Moral, confers much help in
attaining of Prudence.

As 1. in teaching those peculiar rules of life, and Canons, according to which
the prudent man governs his counsels* and actions; besides, it is generally
held that a man cannot be prudent unless he be virtuous, now the readiest way
to become so is to know what virtue is, and wherein it consists, which Moral
Philosophy teaches, together with the means to attain it. To sum up all,
prudence it self, with all its precepts, and rules, is here handled; whether
then should we go for water but to the Fountain, where it is most pleasant,
Dulcius ex ipso font bibuntur aquae, most abundant, and most easy to come by?

Secondly, Speculative Philosophy is a great help; this confers Sapience, a
dear friend, and support to Prudence, upon whose precepts Prudence builds, and
lays the foundation of its rules; as for example, upon the doctrine of the
rational soul, the doctrine of the will, and of the affections: neither can any
man be prudent, unless he be able to discern those various circumstances of
persons, places, and times, all which are distinctly handled in Speculative
Philosophy. Thus Aristotle affirms Sapience to be marvellously profitable for
the solid understanding of humane felicity, (which is the end prudence
proposes) both because the operations of the will have their dependency upon
the operations of the understanding, for we will after the same rate as we
understand; as also because many arguments may be drawn from Speculative
Philosophy which may much conduce to the exercise of virtue; as an insight into
the temper of our bodies may persuade us to Temperance. And Lipsius commends
both Moral and Speculative Philosophy; Duae istae parts formant hominis
animum, vel ad virtutis amorem, and pretium, vel ad notitiam Caelestium, and
Terrestrium, e quibus magnitudo animi oritur, and simul modestia, collatione
utrorumque, because both of them create in the mind of man as well a love and
esteem of virtue, as a knowledge of the nature of Caelestial and earthly
things, from which springs magnanimity, and modesty too by comparing each with
other. To sum up all with that known saying of Divine Plato, Then Commonwealths
shall become happy, when Philosophers are made Magistrates, or Magistrates
addict themselves to the study of Philosophy.

Thirdly, Philology, a skill in Languages is of much importance to a prudent
man, by which he is made able not only to converse with, but to dive into the
actions of Foreiners; indeed all commerce, all correspondences, all leagues are
beholding to this, without which nation could not discourse with nation but by
signs, by mopping and mowing as Monkies do: and it would be as possible for us
to understand the Cats wawling in our gutters, as an Ambassador, or Merchant
which could not speak English.

Lastly, Both Geometry, and Geography are of no small use to advance Prudence;
and Aristotle is bold to affirm it impossible for a young man to be prudent
without skill in the Mathematikes, 6. Eth. 8. c.

But to these three, to wit, Natural parts, Use, Learning, we may add as
instrumental causes both a careful observation of examples, and also Travail;
thus we shall find Demosthenes affirming (...): and Terence, Hoc vero est
sapere, in aliorum vitam tanquam in speculum intueri, et ex illis exemplum
capere tibi quod ex usu siet. The wise man dresses himself in the glass of
other men's actions, in which he may discover what is comely and fit for him:
and Homer gives travail for a chief cause of prudence in his Ulysses, (...).
And now I shall sum up all with a few examples, which are held by many more
prevalent in persuasion than advice or instruction. And first, Solon the
Athenian Lawmakers was not only endowed with parts, exercised in affairs,
improved by travail, but excellently learned, as many of his writings testify;
yea so desirous was he of knowledge, that upon his deathbed being visited by
some friends, he lifted up his head, and listened to their discourse, and when
asked for what end he was so attentive, returned this answer, that knowing
this, I may die more learned. Thus Epimanondas, the glory of Thebes, is reported
by Thucydides to have studied much, but (...), without effeminacy. Thus Philip,
thus Alexander, thus Philopomen, Cato the younger, Julius and Augustus Caesar
were learned, the latter of which discharged a Consular Legate, as rude,
unlearned, and unfit for employment, because he had written ixi for ipsi. Thus
Marcus Antonius the good Emperor was called the Philosopher, and that famous
Lady Isabella of Spain, and the incomparable Elizabeth of England were studious
and learned.

CHAP. XXII.
Of the Prudence of the Romans.

THis victorious and fortunate Commonwealth was so sensible of the necessity
of this virtue to the wel-being of a State, that they took the greatest care to
provide that able and prudent persons should only be admitted to the
mannagement of affairs: as for example, they had their Lex annalis, the Law
that provided, that none should bear office before such and such an age,
because they would not have unexperienced, rash and imprudent young men trusted
at the helm of State. Thus Latinus Pacatus in Laudat. Theodosii. Annorum,
inquit, ita cura fuit majoribus, ut non solum in amplissimis Magistratibus
adipiscendis, sed in Praeturis quoque aut Aedilitatibus capessendis aetas sit
spectanda petitorum; neque quisquam tantum valuerit nobilitate, vel gratia, qui
annos comitiali lege praescriptos, festinatis honoribus occuparit. Thus Cicero
Philip. 5. Legibus annalibus cum grandiorem aetatem ad Consulatam
constituebant, temeritatem adolescentiae verebantur.

Thus Ovid 5. Fast.

-- Finitaque certis Legibus est aetas, unde petatur honos.

And we find that those that set the fewest will have 25 years of age the time
wherein the first office to wit of Quaestor could be born; for that of Aedilis,
and Tribune 27 or 28. for Praetor 35. for Consul 42, or 43. as Cicero plainly
tells us in Phil. 5. Quid Alexander Macedo, qui cum ab ineunte aetate res
maximas gerere caepisset, trigesimo tertio anno mortem obiit? quae aetas
nostris legibus december annis minor quam Consularis. And though this Law might
now and then be dispensed with in some extraordinary danger, and for some more
than ordinary worth and virtue in some single person, as Scipio Africanus,
Scipio Aemilianus, and Pompeius Magnus: as there can be no general rule but may
admit of some exception, especially where the reason of the Law pleads against
the Letter, which taken strictly would deprive the State of the service of such
eminent Citizens when her dangers would admit of no delay: yet for the general
it was inviolably observed until the unruly and tyrannous Monarchs turned this
topsie turvy, together with all other their most sacred Laws and Liberties.
Thus also we shall find Lycurgus that wise Lawgiver among the Spartans, (who so
long as they observed his rules were the most eminent State among the Greeks)
would admit none into the Senate, unless he were sixty years of age.

But we shall conclude this with some few examples which may convince us
thoroughly of the benefit of Prudence. Cato the elder being Consul, had Spain
allotted for his Province, which was then near to a total revolt; coming thither
the Celtiberians, a warlike and populous nation, offered to aid him for 2000
talents; this proposition was generally disliked by the Romans, as a thing
unworthy the Roman magnaminity, by money to buy aid or friendship, until the
Consul convinced them how small a thing the Celtiberians demanded, without
whose aid there was no hopes of victory; For should we overcome by their
assistance, we will pay them out of the enemies spoils, said he, but should we
and they be beaten, neither will they be alive to demand, nor shall we be left
to pay. Scipio Africanus, being about to invade Afrike, and carry the war to
the gates of Carthage, prudently seeing that a State which warred by
Mercinaries, would be weakest at home, selected 300 able and resolute young men
out of the Roman Legions, whom he kept about him, none knowing to what end, and
being arrived in Sicily, he commanded 300 of the noblest and wealthiest
Sicilian young Gentlemen to appear such a day with their horse and arms. The
time being come, he demanded whether they were willing to go with him, or no?
for he had rather they should now tell the truth, than afterward be
unprofitable, and unactive, as such would be. Whereupon one of them answered,
that if he were put to his choice he should rather stay at home; Scipio
commending him for his ingenuity, and calling one of the 300 hundred Roman
young men, this youth, says he, shall serve in your stead upon condition you
will furnish him with horse and arms, and take him home, and exercise and teach
him; which he joyfully consenting to, all the rest presently desired a
dismission upon the same terms: Thus raised he a gallant Troop, which did him
great service, without charge to the Commonwealth, whose treasury was emptyed
by a long and chargeable war: and obliged the Sicilians and their friends, by
dismissing their persons from a dangerous war upon so small and inconsiderable
a condition as that seemed to them, who would have given far more had they been
put to their own choice. And indeed it is not so much the tax, as the manner of
laying and levying it, that begets distastes, tumults, insurrections, and
revolts. Had Scipio laid this charge of providing horse and arms, etc. upon
these Sicilian Gentlemen, without any other circumstance, what mutterings would
there have been? why should we above all others be thus used? and what hatred
would it have procured him? whereas doing as he did, first he seemed to have a
great confidence in their worth and valor, to choose them out of the thousands
of Sicily; then a great regard of and civility to their persons, by enquiring
whether they were willing to serve or no; Lastly a greater respect to their
contentment than his own, by so gentle and easy a dismission of them whom he
had honored above others, and who by refusing to engage with him, disappointed
his hopes, and made void the great expectations he had of them: and so by this
means imposed an obligation upon them, who in another way would have looked on
it as a great discourtesie. And as we find the benefit of Prudence in these, so
may we see the mischiefs which improvident rashness wrought in other examples.
As in Coriolanus, who by his stubborn and harsh carriage brought banishment on
himself, a miserable war and disgrace upon his Country, which at last caused
his death. Thus Terentius Varro by rashness and imprudency had almost ruined
his Country in that fatal and bloody battle at Cannae. And multitudes of other
examples we shall meet with in all Histories, yea and in our own daily
experience and observation.

CHAP. XXIII.
Of Justice, and the Roman practice of it.

IT would be a thing of the smallest concernment both to know and choose what
is good and to accomodate our actions to the exact circumstances of place,
time, and persons, unless we should acknowledge our selves obliged to virtuous
actions, and to a total obedience of all her laws, which is Justices part to
teach, whose praise were more proper for a prolix Oration than the narrow
limits of our discourse. Aristotle in brief calls it, (...), the best of the
virtues, And Plato (...), that neither the morning nor evening Star are so
admirable. Cicero in l. 3. offic. Justitia est virtus excellentissima, and
splendidissima, omnium virtutum regina, ac domina. And Scalig. Exercit. 307.
Sect. 3. Justitia est conservatrix conjunctionis humanae, quae conjunctio ad
beatitudinem magna v^a est. Indeed it is the use of other virtues toward
others; (...). For as the Philosopher, there are many that can be virtuous for
their own concernment, who in other men's will faulter. Therefore as Cicero,
Justitia for as spectat, totamque se ad alienas utilitates porrigit* atque
explicat. Justice will teach them to act virtuously toward others. It is
(...), a good to others, and indeed the most beautiful, perfect, and best
virtue. For he is the most virtuous (...), who is good to others; here lies the
point; hic labor hoc opus est, To make profit, pleasure, revenge, etc. give the
way to virtue, to right and equity.

It is called by the Greeks (...), by the Latins Justitia, and it is either
general which consists in a virtuous obedienee of all laws tending to the
preservation of humane society, and this is (...) an universal virtue,
according to that of the Proverb, -- (...) Or particular, which is a keeping a
mean and aequality in all those things in which adversity or prosperity has to
do, or wherein fortune rules; to give the definition of both according to
Aristotle, (...), it is an habit apting men to just actions, whereby they are
enabled to do, and will just things.

Nowfor to handle this at large, I suppose would be to little purpose, there
being none that perceive not that it is the chief duty, as being of general
concernment, of the Magistrate to look well to the exercise of this virtue: I
shall only therefore hint in some cases which are essential to the welbeing
of a State.

As first in cases of public danger, the particular members of a State are
bound in justice to help the public with their private stocks, thus we shall
find in the Roman State* Live. dec. 3. l. 6. They brought in all their Gold,
Silver, and coined Brass, reserving only enough for an Ornament of distinction,
and for the public service of their Gods, into the Common treasury, and you
shall have a motive, Respublicaincolumis and privatas res facile salvas
praestet: publica prodendo tua nequicquam serves.

Secondly, the Magistrate, after the danger is past, is in Justice bound to see
these public debts sati^fyed, there being nothing more to be preserved
inviolable than the public faith: Besides Prudence teaches this, for if the
people perceive them negligent in their public trust, it will make them
refractory, and careless in their private duties. We shall instance no further
than in trading, a man once breaking his word, will never be trusted upon his
bond, and it would be a sad plunge to put a State to get another State to be
bound for them, and an impossibilty to find any private security for such large
sums.

The third thing required by Justice is, That the Magistrate ought not in the
least to incroach upon the right of particular persons, further than the common
necessity or good requires: thus in the beforementioned place we shall find,
that first the Consuls, then the Senate, then the Roman Knights brought in
their Gold, etc. They were examples to the people, not exactors upon them. And
to say the truth, the Magistrate is entrusted for the public good, and it is
not in his power to do a private injury, they are Gods Substitutes, whose
glorious attribute it is, That he cannot do injustice and the Peoples Trustees,
to rule for their good: now grant that they may extrajudicially take away one
man's right, and it will follow that they may take away any man's, and all men's.

The fourth thing is, Inviolably to observe all Leagues, Treaties, and Public
promises with Foreiners: This will make them be believed, loved, and honored
abroad. Thus we shall see that the Romans in defense of, and revenge for their
Allies of Saguntum, undertook that long, bloody, and almost fatal second Punick
war; nay and when Hannibal was in the heart of Italy, yet sent they Armies into
Spain, and upon the first opportunity restored that City, gathered the
scattered Inhabitants, bought those that were slaves, and took a sharp revenge
upon their borderers, even to the final ruin of the Nation which had been
instrumental in their miseries. Thus shall we see them restore the Kingdom of
Egypt to Ptolomy their Ally, when driven out by a popular insurrection, nay and
preserve it in his sons, whom he by Will left to their protection, in spite of
the force and ambition of the great Antiochus. Thus made them honorable, and
procured them fast Friends, and so it will any State that practices after their
Copy.

The fifth thing is, To have a sacred respect to the Persons of Ambassadors,
and Agents; who are indeed the Ministers of peace; and indeed there can be
nothing more brutish, and less manly, than to affront and violate these Doves
which bring Olive branches in their mouths, whom the Law of Nations gives
protection to: thus shall we find the Romans taking no where so sharp a revenge
as upon Corinth, which had abused their Ambassadors: and when they for respect
to Ambustius (who being an Ambassador to the Gauls, had contrary to the Law of
Nations taken arms and fought against them) denied to deliver him up as the
Faeciales their Heralds a arms had counseled, in the sack of their City they
paid the reward of slighting this sacred Law, and had near lost all by the
unjust endeavoring to preserve one offender from Justice.

The sixth thing is, To endeavor first by fair means for satisfaction, and if
these will not prevail, then to send them a public Defiance: This the Romans
constantly practiced, as to instance once for all, Live. d. 4. l. 6. Consul
deinde M. Acilius ex S. c. ad collegium Faecialium retulit, ipsine utique regi
Antiocho indiceretur bellum? an satis esset ad praesidium aliquod ejus
nunciare? et number Aetolis quoque separatim indici juberunt bellum? et number prius
societas eis et amicitia renuncianda esset, quam bellum indicendum? Faeciales
responderunt, jam ante sese, cum de Philippo Consulerentur, decrevisse nihil
refer ipsi coram an ad praesidium nunciaretur, amicitiam renunciatam videri,
cum legatis toties repetentibus res, nec reddi, nec satisfieri aequum
censuissent; Aetolos ultro sibi bellum indixisse, cum Demetriadem sociorum
urbem per vim occupassent, etc.

The seventh is, Honorably to reward their own Citizens who deserve well. And
there can be ^o greater spur to virtue, nor a better way to propagate and
increase it. Thus we shall see what Tryumphs, what Ovations, what Crowns were
conferred on victorious Generals, and valiant Soldiers; as he that preserved
the life of a Citizen had an Oaken Crown, and he that first gained the top of
the wall, a Mural one, by the Roman State.

The eight is, Duly and justly to pay those that serve them. And this will
render them well-beloved, and well followed; and though they make use only of
their own Citizens, yet ought these to be well paid who gallantly venture their
lives; shall they be liberal of their blood, and shall others be niggardly of
their purses? besides, they leave their callings, and all other means of
providing maintenance. Thus was their a constant provision of lands among the
Romans for those that had fulfilled their time of warfare, neither shall we
ever find a mutiny for want of pay; and our Savior tells us, No man goes to a
warfare on his own charge.

The ninth is, To have a tender regard of their Widows and Orphans, who have
nobly lost their lives in their Countrey's defense. Shall we enjoy rest, and
abundance, and see theirs perishing for want by whose valor we have been
preserved? besides, it is a great discouragement to others to venture their
lives for us, when they shall see such a calamity in their deaths ready to
cease the dearest pledges of their souls. Thus the Romans provided them
portions out of the public Stock.

The tenth is, To have the like regard of such men and their families, who have
liberally laid out their own estates in the public service, or have been so
publicly minded, as that they have not regarded their private benefit. Thus
did the Romans often bury great and noble Captains, who di'd poor, on the
public charge, and bestow their Daughters according to their qualities.

The eleventh is, To Crown the Memories of those who had done public service,
with Statues, and tryumphant Arches, which was every where to be seen in that
noble and grateful City of Rome. And as these are just, necessary, of good
concernment for the nourishing of noble spirits, and producing brave actions,
so on the other side it will be the same.

Twelfly, Severely to punish all incendaries, seditious, traiterous, and
cowardly persons, and that first to amend such, secondly to keep the public
authority from contempt, thirdly to terrify others by their examples. Thus
Seneca, Ni mia enim licentia adversus malos, crudelitas est adversus bonos. And
Cicero, Quare ita probanda est mansuetudo, ut adhibeatur Reipublicae causa
severitas, sine qua administrari civitas non potest. And indeed obsta
principiis, to nip such practices in the bud, is the safest way, which by
connivency may grow to such an height as it will be hard to resist: a small
spark unregarded may kindle a flame that shall burn a City: and the Romans were
so careful in this, that the greatest services, and noblest extraction could
not turn the Scale of Justice, as in Manlius Capitolinus, Saturninus, Tiberius
and Caius Gracchus, Catiline, Lentulus, Cethegus, etc.

Lastly, To take an exact account of those that shall embeazle or purloin the
Public treasure; tyrannize and oppress the people under their charge. For
connivency in such cases will be of very bad consequence, both in keeping the
public poor and behind-hand, in making Officers Knaves, and wicked, and in
undoing, disheartning and enraging the people: therefore we shall find the
Romans very strict in this point, often calling to account and condemning, even
some very eminent for other deserts, as in Scipio Asiaticus, Marcellus, and
those noble Orations of Tully against Verres. And indeed this is the only
means to preserve peace and plenty; for a poor people will be always busling,
and an oppressed careless to gather, or play the good husbands, not knowing how
long they shall enjoy their own. Therefore Boaetius excellently says, Annuum
bonum, non tam de magnis fructibus, quam de just regnantibus existimandum, the
one will quickly be devoured without the other.

CHAP. XXIV.
Of Laws, and the English Laws.

IT follows now therefore, offenders being to be restrained, to show what that
is which must do it, and that is Law, which is the proper medicine for a
Commonwealth in time of peace, in war there must be a sharper and quicker
course taken: and indeed this is so necessary, that as Livy says, Multitudo
coalescere in vuius populi corpus, nulla re, quam legibus, potest, There can be
no communion, no society without Laws; these preserve property, and encourage
industry, whereas should men be left at uncertainties, they would like wild and
ravenous Beasts, wander, ceasing upon their prey where they met with any weaker
than themselves: but this general assertion is taken for granted on all hands,
we shall only therefore endeavor to give our thoughts in some paticulars, which
seem to concern the Laws of England.

As first that our Generous and knowing Ancestors plainly perceiving that there
could be no Liberty where there was no Law, were very careful to bring all
things to a certainty, so that the very Judges are obliged to take notice of it
as well as the people, and are bound up to observe the Law as much as Plantiff
or Defendant: and this, because to set up Arbitrary Courts or Judges were to
leave the people to their will, and in a mist to grope after surmizes what such
or such persons would determine; and indeed until men were omniscient, or could
prophetically foretell the imaginations of the Rulers or Judges hearts, it were
the highest piece of injustice to call men to account for a thing committed
against no law, and a thing not to be named to condemn them. What could a man
call his own, unless there were tenures warranted and confirmed by Law? and to
bring a criminal process for a thing no where declared a crime, would be a
Tyranny our Monarchs in the worst ages would have blushed at.

But it may be said, What need there so many? these engender but strife and
vexation; truly for strife its the effect of peoples perverseness, not the law:
and should those actions of Battery, actions upon the case for words, and
actions of trespass be taken away, we should quickly see the people make
themselves Judges, and by revenging themselves fall together by the ears: our
wise Ancestors being aware of such a mischief thought it better to let them
vent their petty animosities in a suit where some small matter of money might
be thrown away, and spend their spleen in opening each others purse, than to
fall into deadly fewds, wherein kindred on both fides would engage, and so print
their revenges in murder and ruin, as we have heard practiced in the Northern
parts of this Island, and our forefathers saw, and provided against. For let us
assure our selves, to provide no remedy by law against these injuries, which
are the main beginnings of all quarrels, would not only make mem more ready to
provoke, but others as apt to revenge themselves being provoked, and of what
consequence this will be to the endangering the civil peace, good, and quiet of
a Nation, I leave to the world to judge.

To conclude, as the Law of England gives rules, and teaches men their duties,
so is it the most careful and provident for their trials; it so abhors
arbitrariness (as the enemy of liberty, and father of injustice) that it will
not trust the matter of Fact, and of Law in one hand, but sets twelve men of
the neighborhood to give their verdict for fact; against whom it allows an
attaint, and being found guilty inflicts on them a dreadful punishment; so
careful is it of the lives and liberties of particular persons, and so
provident that Justice should be impartially administered; And now if any by his
living in Turkey is become enamoured of slavery, let him choose arbitrary
Courts, for my part I desire a rule to teach me what may be an offense, and
Judges who are bound by oath to observe that rule to give sentence, and twelve
of the neighborhood to enquire of the fact, and against whom their lies an
attaint, and upon eviction a dreadful punishment, before an arbitrary Court,
though never so carefully picked, and so I am sure do all understanding English
men, who any whit prize and value their liberties.

Another objection there is against the Judges, That they are for life; and
that such a continuance may make them remiss and sloathful, and that by a
continual use they become less reverent of Justice, as a work which daily use
makes tedious and clogging: not omitting that it may create faction and
combination, as Livy notes of the Carthaginians, qui unum ejus ordinis, idem
adversos omnes habebat; as lastly that it may beget corruption by taking away
fear of calling to account: and therefore the Romans Decurias Iudicum
scribebant, ex honestissimis, and ex censu (ne paupertas ad culpam impelleret):
sed non eas omnes assidue judicare vole bant, duntaxat quotannis certum and
necessarium numerum sort legebant, reliquis tunc feriatis. All this we allow
in arbitrary Judges, who cannot be too short a time limited; but where there
are laws according to which they are to judge, there they ought to have
experience and knowledge, which must of necessity increase by practice and
continuance. Thus the Romans whilst they were poor and in continual war, there
was no great cause of strife, wealth being wanting, and the war employing them
and keeping them busy, so that they had little leisure for private brawls: but
when they began to enjoy peace and plenty, they had their Decemviri, which were
of continuance, and still provided by new Laws to bridle new enormities. So
that take away law and continuance will be as dangerous, as the loss of liberty
and right will be inevitable; for we must hold all at will, and have no rule to
call Judges to account by, whose will must be our final determination, and as
they think so must the Bell tink.

CHAP. XXV.
Of Fortitude, and the Roman practice of it.

THis virtue by the Greeks is styled (...), from a man, because it is peculiar
to that sex, and is seldom found in women, and that in regard of the
temperament, which must be hot and dry, and in a heart which is well compact,
solid, and full of spirit: Therefore Cicero 2. Tuscul. Viri propria maxim est
fortitudo, cujus munera duo sunt, nempe mortis and doloris contemptio.

We find it defined by the Philosopher, (...), to be a virtue keeping a mean in
fear and confidence. And it is divided into public and private.

Private is a noble and patient undergoing of adversity, as Cicero 4. Tuscul.
Fortitudo est scientia perferendarum rerum, vel affectio animi in patiendo, et
ferendo, summae legi parens sine timore: Et in l. 1. offic. Fortis and
constantis animi est, non perturbari in rebus asperis, nec tumultuantem dejici
de gradu, ut dicitur, sed praesenti animo uti, et nec a consilio, nec a ratione
discedere; And Horace l. 2. od. 10.

Rebus angustis animosus, atque
Fortis apparet --
Public is a fearless under taking, and constant wading through such perils,
wherein our deeds and examples may bring benefit to our Country, and honor
and renown to our selves; and this where, when, and how we ought, as l. 3 eth.
c. 7.

By this then we may behold, First* that Self murder is no Fortitude, for as
Curtius says, Non fortium virorum est odisse vitam, sed contemnere mortem, but
rather a cowardice that makes them fling themselves into the arms of death to
avoid some more threatening evil. Besides, they are injurious to the Common
wealth, which they deprive of a member; yet here for a Sea Captain to blow up
his Ship rather than let her be taken by the enemy, is no point of self-murder;
for the aiming at his Countries good, and her enemies loss and ruin, acts the
part of a valiant and faithful Citizen. Secondly, that Duels are no effect of
true valor, they being injurious to the Common wealth. Thirdly, Sturdy Thieves
or Robbers, which are not only injurious, and mischievous, but such as fight
directly against the laws of humane society* and they are so far from being
truly valiant, that they are wicked and impudent: and therefore we shall find
some of the Ancients define fortitude (...); fear of reproof* and dread of
infamy; and it is commonly seen that those that most dread the laws, least
fear the enemy, and who are most quiet in peace, are most valiant in war, as
Plutarch in the life of Agis, (...). They are least fearful of suffering, who
stand most in aw of doing evil. Much more might be said of this manly virtue,
which for brevity we omit, and shall refer those that desire further
information, to that masculine discourse of Aristotle in l. 3. eth. cap. 6.

For the Roman practice of this virtue, it is so obvious in their histories, as
we shall hardly find the least foot-step of cowardice in that gallant and
victorious Commonwealth, whose noble Citizens in all occasions were most ready
to devote their lives for their Country, and sacrifise their rags of
mortality, to immortal fame and renown.

And indeed the love of our Country, and noble thirst after honor, are the
great agents in this glorious production: for what man that is fully persuaded
of his duty to the first, and the reward he shall receive from the last, can be
faint-hearted or cowardly?

-- Fax mentis honestae Gloria, says the Poet, and as Velleius, Nec potest
quidquam abjectum, and humile cogitare, qui scit de se semper loquendum, A man
will hardly be brought to act basely, who shall consider he shall stand on
record, either infamous or renowned; Yea such a record, as time every day more
and more publishes, as Lipsius, Vt sol in aurora tenuior, assurgit, and
inclarescit; sic ex virtute, and meritis fama cum aevo ipso augetur, and
crescit. What man in flight coming to a bridge, and remembering Horatius
Cocles, would not make a noble stand, and either live with him, or dying live
his equal in History? I shall sum up all with that of Polybius, (...), Riches
are common, but bravery of mind, and the glory and renown that springs from it,
is peculiar to the Gods, or such men as come near them.

CHAP. XXVI.
Of Temperance, and he Roman practice of it.

THis virtue by the Greeks is called (...), quasi (...), as it were the
preserver of Prudence: for pleasure and grief corrupt (...), those faculties
which are to consider of action: and a mind taken up with either of these
cannot well intend the end for which (...), all things ought to be chosen or
door. Now Temperance moderating these passions keeps the mind undisturbed, and
deservedly is styled, The Conservatrix of Prudence.

We shall define it, A virtue preserving a just decorum in the desiring and
enjoying sensual delights: for grief, which comes within its verge, that only
arises from want of fruition. It is therefore the duty of a temperat man to
abhor dishonest, moderately to desire, and enjoy lawful pleasures, and not
immoderately to grieve when deprived of them. Now lawful-pleasures are such as
first (...), conduce to bodily health, or as (...), exceed not our estates, and
misbecom the rank and quality we live in.

And of what avail this virtue is to the preservation and growth of a State,
History and observation every where, and every day, may clearly make out unto
us. This was it set Rome upon her legs; This is it that made her Citizens able
of body, both to fight, and endure the field; This made her Captains contemn
bribes; and her Generals in the height of, military heat, and success, slight
pleasure, and constantly keep the public good, and their own honor in their
eye. Thus shall we see the noble Curious, when the conquered Samnites proffered
him Gold, show them his Dinner (for he was at their coming cooking it himself)
which was a few rape roots in a pipkin, telling them there was no great need of
gold to furnish his table, and that he had rather command over such as had
Gold, than possess it himself. And when some complained that he had assigned
too little of the conquered Lands to private men, and too much to the Public,
He told them, He hoped that there was never a Roman Citizen which would count
that land too little which was sufficient to maintain him. Thus shall we see
Scipio Africanus, when the Soldiers brought him a most beautiful Damosel,
taken in the sack of New Carthage in Spain, and hearing she was betroathed to
Allucius a young Prince of the Celtiberians, he sent for him, and not only
bestowed on him his beautiful Bride, but a great sum of Gold as her portion,
which her parents brought for her ransom. Let us behold the event, this young
Prince goes home rapt with joy, filling every place with the praise and merit
of Scipio, telling his Countrymen, Venisse Diis simillimum juvenem, vincentem
omnia cum armis, tum benignitate, ac beneficiis, There was a Godlike young man
arrived, conquering all both by force and bounty: and within a few days
returned with 1400 horse to Scipio's Camp. Thus by his temperance he advanced
the Roman cause, which he preferred above all private pleasure, and gave
Carthage a greater blow in this victory over himself, than in that other of
taking their City, though the most considerable they had in Spain* I shall
conclude all with that speech of Asdruball surnamed the Kid, the Carthaginian
Legate to the Roman Senate, Raro simul hominibus bonam fortunam, bonamque mentem
dari: populum Romanum eo invictum esse quod in secundis rebus sapere, and
consulere meminerit: and hercle mirandum fuisse, si aliter facerent: ex
insolentia, quibus nova bona fortuna sit, impotentes laetitiae insauire: populo
Romano usitate, ac prope jam obsoleta ex victoria gaudia esse, ac plus pene
parcendo victis, quam vincendo imperium auxisse. God has given England her
share of success, we have not of late known what it is to be conquered, but as
if we had been the adopted sons of victory, she has perched upon our
conquering ensigns, and pitched her pavilion among our tents. O let us then
endeavor not to be transported with any unbecoming passions, which may force
this glorious Virgin to blush, to hide her head, and be ashamed to keep us
company any further; but as we increase in power, let us grow in virtue; thus
shall we be established, and to our wreaths of Palm and Laurel shall the Olive
chaplet be added, and we enjoy the pleasant fruits of Peace at home as well as
honorable esteem of valor abroad.

-- Sic, sic juvat ire -- Per altos virtutum gradus patet ascensus ad
aeternitatem.

FINIS.

