Sigh for the Pitchers: Breathed out in a Personal Contribution TO THE NATIONAL
HUMILIATION the last of May, 1666.

In the Cities of London and Westminster, UPON The near approaching ENGAGEMENT
Then expected, Between the English and Dutch Navies.

Wherewith are complicated such Musings as were occasioned by a Report of their
Actual Engagement; and by observing the Public Rejoicing whilst this was
preparing by the Author GEORGE WITHER.

Hold, If ye knock, ye are broke. Hold. Unless God prevent.



Imprinted in the sad year expressed in this seasonable CHRONOGRAM LorD haVe
Mercy Upon Us. MDCLXVI.

To the English Nation, and to every Individual Person within these British
Isles, Geo. Wither, wishes that Grace, Peace, and Love in CHRIST JESUS, which
by an unfeigned Humiliation, may reconcile us all to GOD; Unite us by an
indissolvable Band of Charity, to each other; and in a Christian Amity, withal
Nations through the world.
MY Sighs concern you all, throughout this Nation
Who are this day, in true Humiliation
To seek the face of GOD; For, we make One
Of those two Pitchers whom I do bemone:
And, unto whom (then fearing much their breaking,
When first I saw War preparations making)
I sent a Trumpet, both with an Intent
And hope, that which was feared, to prevent;
Which, failing my good purpose to produce,
I send this now, to mediate a Truce;
For, who can tell, but that my words may have
Such ^ssue now, as heretofore GOD gave
Unto a private-womans when she spoke
For Abel, what effect in season took?
So may it prosper as I am sincere
In that, Which I have Superscribed here;
And, let my Foes on earth, be still as many
As there are men, if I wish ill to any;
Or, am not pleased that all should live and die
As happy, both in Life and Death as I
Who shall not, by a final Wilfulness,
Deprive themselves of what they might possess;
And slander GOD, as cause Original
Of that, which does amiss to them befall.
For, though, not few, my Adversaries be
Or such, as, yet, bear no good will to me,
I, even for that cause, am in love, their debtor;
For, him, who loves his Foes, GOD, loves the better:
Yea, having partly been, in my distress
Relievd by some few who, do naytheless
Seem still my Enemies; it, makes me more,
Love GOD, and all Mankind, then heretofore.
A time is come, in which, it is our turn
Both altogether, and apart to mourn:
Those General Calamities befall
Which, for a general Repentance call,
And, for particular Humiliation,
In order to a public Reformation,
From which, at present, are excepted none;
No, not the King, who sits on the Throne:
For, that which is in Cottages begun
Will seize the Palace, ere the Round is run,
If GOD in mercy, answer not our hope,
And, to our sins and fears, vouchsafe a Stop.
To that end, though this be not what I would
Or, should contribute, it is what I could
And, may now, be as usefully expressed,
As what more artificially is dressed:
Yea, (though it be, that only) in effect,
Which I have ost preferred without respect,
This, seems a very seasonable time,
To greet you, with a Reasonable Rhyme.
Accept it therefore, and be not offended
With what is conscientiously intended.
GOD, who from us does Trifles often receive,
Requires of none, more then he has to give;
And, if you shall accept what is in my power
He, will of that accept, which is in your;
For, all that is contributed, by this,
Worth your acceptance, is not mine, but his.
Sighs for the Pitchers.
Breathd out, in a Personal Contribution to the National Humiliation, formally
begun in the Cities or London and Westminster, the last of May, 1666.
'Such is GODS gratiousness, that, wheresoever
'He finds a Willingness joynd with endeavor
To please or to appease him, though bat small,
(And in it self worth no respect at all)
He does accept it: But, it is not so
With men, what er'e we mean, or say, or do.
For, most so pettish are; that even with that
Which to their own well-being does relate,
They quarrel; and as much offended are
With what, unto their own particular
Has no relation, as to any thing
Which may to them a disadvantage bring.
Yea, so inclind are, to be discontent
With Actions, and with words indifferent,
That how to fit all humors no man knows
What ere he writes, be it in Verse or Prose.
Some, are best pleased with this, and some with that,
With nothing some; or, with we know not what,
Except with that, (and in their own mode dressed)
Whereby their Single Fancies are expressed.
If, I may freely, Truth declare in either,
To me, it is indifferent in whether:
Verse cannot be so justly termd unholy
As they, who think so, may be chargd with folly.
The Liberty, I therefore, at this time,
Resume, to vent my mind in Verse and Rhyme
As heretofore without an affectation
Of what, is this day, with most men in fashion;
And, what I purpose to contribute now,
Shall be such private Sighings as I owe
To Public sorrowings; not such, as may,
Without true sense thereof, be puffed away.
I offer not, now Cures are to be done,
That, which will prove no better then Herb-John
Or Chipps in broth; nor, when provide I should
Apparel to preserve my Friend from cold,
Bring them such thin slight Garments, as are neither
Good Silk or Cloth, but Bawbles patcht together,
Lace, Points and Ribbands: Nor, to feed them, set
A platter full of Sawces without meat,
Or, with so little, and so trimd about
With Kickshawes, that they cannot pick it out:
Nor give the Sick, when they for health endeavor,
Such Trash, as may beget a mortal Fever;
Nor Healing Plasters, when I do perceive
The Patient rather needs a Corrosive:
Nor, if there ought improper to that end,
For which, Humiliations we pretend
In that, which I in words have added here:
Either peruse it therefore, or, give ear.
BEfore a Storm is actually begun,
Or, Symptoms of it, in the Skies appear;
Both Birds and Beasts, for shelter fly and run,
To escape the Dangers, then approaching near.
To what these are by Sense inclind, in season,
Men are assisted (for their preservations)
By Strong Impulses, both of Grace and Reason,
Till they neglect, or slight those Inclinations.
And to the Public safety, every one
Owes what may possibly by him be done:
For, there is a Portion due from him that is poor,
Though from the Rich, there is expected more.
2. I had some education in the, Schools,
But my best Teachings, came another way,
And, neither to the wisest, or mere Fools,
Is that intended which I have to say.
My Muse is to a midling-temper fitted,
What suits with their capacities to write
Who, (not much under or much over witted)
More in the Matter, then the Words delight.
By that means, when with Trifles I begin,
Things useful, are often, thereby Skrewed in,
Which peradventure, had not else been sought,
Where, they appeard more likely to be taught:
What I but to one end, at first intended,
Occasions many Cautions, ere it is ended.
So, sometimes, twenty businesses are done,
By him, who went from home, to do but one.
3. Sometimes too, by what in this mode is hinted,
(On slight occasions in a Vulgar Strain)
Such Notions have been in the heart imprinted
As were more plausibly expressed in vain:
Yea, otherwhile, a few plain words, in season,
Experimentally in private spoke,
More operate with Sanctified Reason,
(And of what they import, more heed is took)
Then is (although more gloriously arayd)
Of what is but formally, in public said.
Now therefore, I contribue thus, alone,
To what was this day, publicly begun.
But, stay! what Pannick fear has seizd this Nation
That, they who Triumphd but one day ago,
Assume the Postures of Humiliation,
And Fast and Pray, at least, pretend thereto?
Their Jollitie is at a sudden pause,
And to the Temples, they begin to flock;
God make the effect, as real as the cause,
That, him with formal shows we do not mock,
Lest Plagues increase, and when of what is better,
We are in hope, our fears grow daily greater:
For, till our sins are heartily repented,
By Fasts and Prayers, Plagues are not prevented.
5. Most, dedicated this months first Aurora
To their own fleshly Lusts; and spent the day
In sacrificing to the Strumpet Flora,
Which was by some employed another way,
Perhaps though not Profane, more superstitious
Then holy: for, all is not sanctifide
That is not vulgarly reputed vicious;
Nor all unholy, which will not abide
A Sanctuary-Test: But, somewhat has
Doubtless, been acted which provokes Gods wrath
Against our Nation, since this Month begun,
That brings us on our knees, before it is done.
6. Our Safety, Peace and Glory lie at stake;
And, we are forced such a Game to play,
As makes us tremble, and our hearts to ache
Twixt hope and fear of that which follow may:
Even they, who lately foolishly did boast,
And with proud Vaunts and scorns contemn their Foes,
Do find, that Recknings made without their host,
Arise to more then they did presuppose.
Of Foes without them, their regard was small;
Of those within them, less, or none at all:
But, now, to be assaulted, they begin
With outward perils, and with fears within.
7. Beyond reteating we engaged are
With foreign enemies; and not quite free
From Factions, threatening an intestine War,
If our Presumings unsuccessfull be.
As foes do multiply, so, friends grow fewer;
And, in those few, there is but little trust:
For, none can in another be secure
Who, to himself is neither kind nor just.
War is begun; the Pestilence does spread;
And, though of Dearth we feel but little dread,
They, by whose Labors, plenty was increast,
Are by a wasting Poverty oppressed.
8. The Rich are discontent, the Poor much grievd:
The first have small hope to be better pleased;
The last as little hope to be relievd,
And most men are grown stupidly diseasd.
Men with Ill tidings in all places meet,
Bewailing loss of Goods, or want of Trade:
All day they hear complainings in the street;
All night, they and their Families are sad.
Hereof, they upon others lay the blame
Who have been chief deservers of the same:
Most, apprehend a general Distress,
But, no man knows which way to make it less.
2. They, who should act, or mediate at least,
Some course to stop the fury of the Current,
Find, it will most advance their Interest,
To be at this time Fishing in the Torrent.
They, who have now most cause, least frighted be:
Those few alone, who with a filial fear
And Christian hope, Gods purposes foresee,
Submissive to his Dispensations are:
The rest are active still, in their own mode,
As if in their own power their safety stood;
Or, that it might be wrought, by their own hand,
If (as it was once said) GOD would Neuter stand.
16. For our defense, a Naval preparation
Is made, as strong, as ever heretofore
In any Age, was modeld by this Nation;
Yea, stronger much, though not in number more.
And, if they who thereof have management,
Shall not thereon (as if it could not fail)
Or, in themselves, be over-confident,
It may against our ablest Foes prevail:
But, not unless, we timely lay aside
Our malice, our profaness, and our pride,
Which by the Lord of hosts, are so abhord,
That, they destroy more, then both fire and sword.
11. In mournings, we so little do delight,
That, whatsoever sad event befalls,
Which to humiliation does invite,
It seldom supersedes our Festivals.
A Fast therefore, so near a Feast begins,
To moderate our Mirth, and make us mind
A true and speedy mourning for those sins
Whereto we have been, and are still inclinde.
A change of Feasts to fastings threatened was,
Which is within a little come to pass;
And, that, may peradventure be effected
Which we most fear, when it is least expected.
12. Hereof the Civil powers having sense,
And, fearing what might probably befall,
Unless, we strengthened are by Providence
Much more, then by their moving wooden-wall;
They lately summond us by Proclamations
To meet, and on the last of May begin
In our head-Cities, such Humiliations
As may declare a true Remorse for sin.
Early that morning, likewise, lest we might
Their summons, either then forget, or slight,
GOD, seconded their Act, and from our beds
With Peals of Thunders, raisd our drowzie heads.
13 If I was not deceivd, five hours together
That Summons lasted, (with few Intervals)
Made signal by Rain, Lightning, Stormy weather,
And Thunderbolts, which pierced through stone-wals.
It brake and melted Bells; consumd a Steeple;
Scard Fowls and Beasts, yea, and afraid did make
Even them, among those unrelenting People,
Who, heed of naught but smart and noise will take;
And in security again sleep on
As Soon as ere the pain or noise is gone.
Alas! what horrors will such men confound,
When they shall hear the seventh Trumpet sound?
14. I did obey this Call; and knowing too,
That in the common peace, mine does consist,
In meekness, I prepared my heart, to do
What might secure the common Interest.
The best have failings, and the worst have more;
Though therefore they often err, who are in power,
With their defects, we must our own deplore:
For oftentimes their faults take root from our.
King David's crime sprung from the Peoples sin;
For his offense, a Plague on them broke in:
Thus, to each other, men of each degree,
A mutual cause, of sins and sufferings be.
15. This makes me the more cautious, to take heed
Wherein, I personally give offense;
And, ere I censure that which others did,
Bewail mine own misdeeds with penitence.
All of us have offended, (if not more)
As much as our forefathers have transgrest:
Some, with more Impudence, then heretofore;
And, my sins, have the common guilt increast:
My self, to humble therefore, I went thither
Where good and bad men congregate together;
And, where, the worst are, or (before they die)
May be, for ought I know, more just then I.
16. He seems to me, unlikely to appease
The wrath of GOD, or mortifide to be,
Who, offers Prayers like that Pharisees,
Who judged the Publican less just then he.
There is no sign of true Humiliations,
But, of a proud self-overweening rather
In those, who judge unclean whole Congregations
Who with them, serve one Spirit, Son and Father;
And (although members of another College)
Adore one GOD according to their knowledge.
According unto mine, therefore, with them
I joynd in Love, and left their doom to him.
17. I dare not such a separation make
Twixt persons, things or places, as may bar
A freedom in those Duties to partake
Which necessary or expedient are.
When sins and Plagues grow Epidemical,
It such Humiliations then requires,
As may in that respect, be general:
For, private tears quench not the public Fires.
In all Fraternities and Constitutions,
Among men, are both errors and pollutions;
Yet safe converse, for pious men has bin
With such, (even then) in all things, but their sin.
18. With others, I preferred those petitions
Which with Christ's prayr assentially agree;
With them, I joined in all those confessions
That seemed proper both to them and me.
Their persons I did much commiserate,
Who were in hazard by the War now waged:
With GOD, I meekly did expostulate
Concerning that wherein we are engaged.
For others sakes, those fears my fears I made,
Whereof, no sense, for self-respects I had;
And wished all their hopes might be enjoyd
Whereby, their true bliss might not be destroyed.
19. Although particulars inclusive are
In Vniversals; yet, they who neglect
Their single Duties, justly loose their share
In what the general Devoirs effect.
I have contributed my best endeavor,
To what I think is publicly intended,
And in that duty purpose to persever
Which is to my performance recommended.
For all things, and all men (so far as they
Are objects of our Prayers) I do pray;
And, when I doubt, what to insist upon,
Conclude my prayer thus: GODS will be done.
20. Their welfare seeking, who would me enslave,
The person I distinguish from his Crime;
And rather would a wicked people save,
Then let the Righteous be destroyed with them.
To their proceeds in wickedness, I say
GOOD speed to none; and whensoere, therefore
I pray against their sins, for them I pray:
Yea, when they seem worst, pray for them the more.
When LOT was prisner among Sodomites,
Against their Foes, to free him, Abram fights.
When universal Plagues on us befall,
Not knowing good from bad, I pray for all.
21. I have a long time taken so much heed
Both of GODS righteous, and our crooked ways,
That, whatsoere does outwardly succeed,
I find just cause to give him hearty praise.
So often, experience I have likewise had,
My losses, wants, and those things which I feared,
To have been unto me more gainful made,
Then such, as more desirable appeard;
That, whensoere GOD grants or denies,
My soul is pleased, and on his love relies.
For, when they seemed most severe to be,
His Judgments have been Mercies unto me.
22. Such they were, such they are, such will be still,
Not unto me, and to some few alone;
But, if they be submissive to his will,
Such likewise, at all times, to every one:
And, though he grants not always that Request,
Which is preferred, he does condescend
To what is better; yea, to what may best
Conduce to what we chiefly should intend.
If, what we pray for, he denies to grant,
Humility, or Faith, or Love we want;
Or else, there are some other great defects,
In those Petitioners, whom GOD rejects.
23. Sins National, so far forth as they were
Confessed in Public, I with those confessed
To whom I joynd; and in particular,
If possible, they ought to be expressed.
I know we are obliged at this time
(Considering why together we did come)
To mention such, (or part at least of them)
As brought what we would be deliverd from.
I hope such were acknowledged by many;
But, since I heard it not performd by any,
I will enumerate some few of those
Provoking sins, from whence most danger flows.
For, GOD, at this time over all the Land
Has in displeasure stretched forth his hand;
And for our sins, does strike us, here and there
With every Judgment, yea, and every where.
24. We are a Nation to whom God has given
As many privileges, as bestown
On any people that is under Heaven:
But, therewithal more proud, then thankful grown.
We overween, as if we thought none were
Our equals; and with so much impudence
Our selves before our Neighbors do prefer,
That, more Disgrace then Honor springs from thence.
Some vaunt as if none ought to be compared
With them, in what is by their valor dared;
And, some, as if none went or knew the way
Whereby, men shall ascend to heaven, but they.
25. If what GOD has conferd, or for us done
Were mentioned, to stir up thankfulness
In us; or to advance his praise alone,
Thence would spring many great advantages.
But that which most men rather do pursue,
Is but before men's eyes a Blind to raise,
And, hide their shameful nakedness from view;
Or, blow the Bubbles of an empty praise.
And, (as if we were not befoold enough,
With such ridiculous and frothy stuff)
In Ballads, which are for such objects meet,
We sing out our own shame, in every street.
26 Perhaps in suchlike things the neighbring Nations
Opposing us, as guilty are as we:
But, our own sins, in our Humiliations
Is that, which to confess, obliged we be.
Our sins, our sins, are horrid, great and many,
Those Plagues too, which they bring on us, are great;
Whereof, there is not so much fense in any,
As ought to be, nor such confessions, yet.
So loath we are that other men should see
(Or, we ourselves) in what sad case we be,
That, we our scabs and sores had rather hide
With any Clouts, then let them be espide.
27. So loath we are, in that course to proceed,
Which GOD and Reason offers to our heed;
So apt, to take the clean contrary way;
To heed, what every Mountebanck does say;
So ventrous, any hazard to endure,
Which our enjoyments present may secure;
So prone with Bugbears to be frighted from
What may secure a happiness to come;
And, are so wilful in pursuing things
Which every day, more mischiefs on us brings,
That, very seldom we approve of that
Which may be for our good, till it is too late.
28. And then, surprised with a sudden, dread,
To any God, to any Idol run;
Move every way, like Dors without a Head;
Do every thing save that which should be done:
Catch hold on sticks, and reeds, and chips and straws,
To save our selves; descend, to sawn on those
Whom we contemned; and to support our cause,
Against old Friends, confederate with Foes;
Yea, with the greatest enemy of Christ;
And, rather hazard all our Interest
In him, then here to be deprivd of that
Which we enjoyed, and have aimed at.
29. We are so much inclined to rely
Upon the trustless and bewitching Charms
Of State-designs and humane policy,
On Armies, Fleets, and strength of our own Arms,
That we are deafer then th'inchanted Adder,
To those who show to us the way of peace;
Good counsel makes us to be the madder,
And, does but raging violence increase.
Yet, they who know they shall not be excusd
From doing their endeavor, though abusd,
Must speak what on their Consciences does lie,
Whatere thereby befalls; and so will I.
30. Such times have be^n, and such are come again,
Wherein, the Sluggard to the Ant was sent;
The Wise instructed were by simple men
How to reform their ways when they miswent.
GOD, by them, Kings reprovd, even for their sake
Whom they had then enslaved; and they were heard.
Yea, unto Balaam, by his Ass he spoke,
And, at that present he escapd the Sword:
But they who to their words gave no regard,
Receivd their obstinacies due Reward.
They, who were penitent escapd the blow
Which then was threatened; so shall all such now.
31. Ore them a very dreadful Plague impends
Whom to the will of men, GOD, does expose,
Though such they be whom they suppose their friends
And, have thereof made fair external shows.
A greater Plague it is, when known foes are
Empowered upon them to exercise
All cruelties, and outrages of War
Which rage will act, and malice can devise.
But, when so terrible a doom as this,
And mercy too, much and often slighted is,
It will be then more horrible then all
That can be thought, into Gods hands to fall.
32. Alas! how shall this horror be prevented,
If none in such a time should silence break?
When should what is misacted be repented,
Unless, to that intent the stones could speak?
And, what may they speak likely to prevail
Upon a Generation grown so giddy?
The Stars to do their duty did not fail;
The Elements have often spoke already,
And acted in their place, as well as spoken
What might our duties, and Gods mind betoken;
Yea, so much, and so often, that what they heard
Or saw, few men did credit or regard.
33. Hereby are blessings turned into a curse;
Those hardened, whom it should have softened more;
They who were bad before, grow to be worse;
Some wicked, who seemd good men, heretofore.
Our sins are as immovable as Rocks;
Our Guides and Leaders, either lame or blind;
The Shepherds as great straglers as the Flocks,
And both alike, to wickedness inclinde.
That, which we thought should make us, does undo us,
All things do seem to cry VVo woe unto us:
And, that which should have movd men to repent
Does but their Rage and Blasphemies augment.
34. Most, against those by whom they were offended
Are so imbitterd, that although in them
They see performances to be commended,
Such, naytheless, they totally condemn:
Yea, those who have ingenuously confessed
What seems to be in these worth approbation,
They judge to be Time-pleasers, not the best;
Which is a bar to Reconciliation.
Our Proverb bids us give the devil his due;
And, they the ways to peace, do not pursue
Who are unwilling, in their Foes, to see
Good things, as well as those that evil be.
35. The Knowledge men have gotten has destroyed
That Love, which ought thereby to be increast.
The Public peace, that might have been enjoyd,
Is vitiated by Self-interest.
The Gospel is abusd, Law made a snare,
Or, of Unrighteousness a confirmation:
The Consciences of men inslaved are,
To nothing left so free as Profanation.
The Rich do quarrel, and the Poor must fight,
To serve their Lusts, who do them little right;
And they whose Lives to pawn for them are laid,
With Deaths or VVounds, or with neglect are paid.
36. Religion is to Policy become
A servile Handmaid; and few persons are
Conceivd to be so dangerous as some,
Who are in Christian Piety sincere.
Now, not to be like others Superstitious,
Or to be strict in moral Righteousness,
Gives cause of more suspect then to be vicious;
Or else, at least, it them ingratiates less.
Foundations are so overthrown, that few
Are safe in whatsoever they pursue:
For, liberty, life, credit, and estate,
In hazard are by all that aim thereat.
37. Picked Juries, and suborned VVitnesses
May, if assisted then with partial udges,
Bring quickly to destruction, whom they pleases;
Frustrate all Laws, and all our privileges:
And (what was never heretofore in Reason
Thought probable) charge falsely upon some
The plotting and pursuing Plots of Treason
At open meetings whither all may come.
In likelihood, they have nor wit, nor fear,
Nor need be feared, who so foolish are:
And, I might of my fear be much ashamed
If I should fear such Plots, as then were framed.
38 Who err in malice, or to get reward,
Shall forge an Accusation, though it be
Improbable, with favor shall be heard,
When none seems guilty of the Plot but he.
They, who of all men do least conscience make
Of Perjury, at pleasure may destroy
An Innocent. They who false Oaths dare take
May rob rich men of all they do enjoy.
The Liar is not out of danger ever;
But, he that speaks truth boldly, is safe never
Until his death, unless by God protected
From what may be by wicked men projected.
39. This also, does increasing Plagues pretoken,
(Unless we to repair it speedy are)
The Bond of Christian Charity is broken,
And brotherly affection lost well-near.
Both Persons and Societies seek more
Their several new Structures to uphold,
Then Disciplines and Doctrines to restore
Unto that purity which was of old.
From hence does spring impair of peace and health
In mind and body, Church and Commonwealth,
For, though few heed it, thence our private Jars
At first proceeded, and then, open Wars.
40. All Constitutions both in Church and State
Are, for the most part, made but properties
To add a grandeur, and repute to that
Which pride and avarice did first devise.
Not those alone, which may essential seem
Unto the Civil power; but also, some
Which have among Divine Rites most esteem,
Are serviceable to the flesh become.
Prophand is every holy Ordinance,
Self-profit or self-honour to advance:
Yea, even the Lords day and the Sacraments
Are made expedients for the same intents.
41. Judgments and Mercies have not in their course
Wrought that on us, which they were sent to do:
For, what should make us better, makes us worse,
And others by our ill examples, too.
Good counsels timely given we have slighted,
Scoft and derided seasnable forewarnings,
Neglecting that, whereto we were invited
Both by our own and other men's discernings:
And, if these failings be not heeded more
Now, and in time to come, then heretofore,
The Consequents, will not much better be
Whether the Dutch are Conquerours, or we.
42. Those Animosities we must repent
Which are pretended to be laid aside;
Else pride and malice will so much augment
Those Practices which more and more divide,
That, as the ruin of Jerusalem
Had been completed when the time was come
By those three, Factions, which then wasted them,
Although it had not been destroyed by Rome:
So, though we should subdue French, Dutch and Dane,
Our own distempers would become our bane;
And, that which others are inclind unto,
Our follies and our wilfulness will do.
43. The breach of Covenants, of Faith and Oaths
We must lament, and from that falsehood turn:
For, GOD that capital transgression loathes;
Oaths, (now, if ever) make the land to mourn,
We must confess our sin of bloodshed too,
The Blood of Innocents much more bewail,
And our oppressing them, then yet we do;
Else, of our expectations we shall fail.
For, to no more a bare confession tends,
Then to increase our guilt, without amends.
He that neglects performing what he knows
To be his duty, merits naught out blows.
44. We have moreover, failings by omissions
Which it concerns us to be humbled for
No less then for those actual transgressions
Which we are now engaged to abhor:
Not one day, no not one year will suffice
To recollect them. And yet if we would
Our selves but so much humble as it lies
In us, GOD, would accept of what we could.
Hereof apparent evidences are
In Nineveh and Nebuchadnezzar:
For by these Paterns, King and People too
Instructed are, what in our case to do.
45. When that King, for his sins had been bereaven
Of understanding, and for sevn years space,
To live with Beasts, was from his Kingdom driven,
And re-inthroned, when unlikely it was;
Himself he did abase, Gods power confess
Acknowledge him, to be in chief adored;
Declare that power extol his righteousness
And that Free grace, by which he was restored:
Yea, praised him for their de^iverance
Whom he himself oppressed; them did advance
Who suffered; and reverst that Law whereby
He had compeld them to Idolatry.
46. This signal Pattern of Humiliation
Was Royal; but, by one both popular
And Regal, unto what beseems a Nation
In our condition, we directed are.
At Nineveh, there was not in a day,
Like this, some in the Temples GOD adoring,
Some there, inclined more to sleep then pray,
Some, in an Alehouse, or a Tavern roaring;
Some, who did of their duties Conscience make,
Some who performed it, but for fashion sake:
But I believe, that with more Veneration
They testified their Humiliation.
47. Both King and People joined there as One
In penitence, net being less fincere
Then formal in pursuing what was done.
Strict their commands and executions were.
The King, his rich Apparel from him cast
(By good Examples, precepts are made strong)
He, and his Nobles did proclaim a Fast,
With all the Rites, that to a Fast belong.
The Prophet was believd, in what he said;
The Royal Proclamation was obeyed.
God, thereto had so gracious a regard
That, King and People thereupon he spard.
48. Alas! how comes it that now Christian men,
Are deaf to what GODS Messengers do say?
Not so meek-hearted as those Heathens then?
More dead in Sins and Trespasses then they.
Imperfect was their Penitence, no doubt,
Yet God accepted what they did endever,
And (though perhaps, their zeal did soon burn out,)
He, in vouchsafing mercy did presever.
So might it be with us, if we would heed
His judgments, and perform what Ethnicks did:
For, GOD, upon a Formal penitence,
Did with a part of Ahabs doom dispense.
49. But, though we have as much cause to bewail
Our sad condition, we have much less fear.
And little or no sense of what we all
Until with mischief overwhelmd well-near.
Then, likewise, we endeavor all we can
To hide what cannot cured be till known,
Dissembling grossly, both with GOD and Man,
And will not see what is evidently shown.
Yea, so presumptuous are, that, now GOD sends
His Judgments, and his Arm in wrath extends,
We labor to obscure it, lest the heeding
Of his Proceeds, may hinder our proceeding.
50. And as among the Jews in former ages
There were false Prophets and corrupted Priests,
Who prophecid and preachd for Balaams wages,
And to promote their carnal Interests,
Then Flatterd them into Security:
So we have some among us, who as much
Do magnify this Nations Piety
As if it never had till now been such.
They boast of our prosperities increase,
And promise us both Victories and Peace,
As if vain words believd should rather be
Then what we feel, as well, as hear and see.
15. Though sensible enough of sin we are not
To humble us; or though Plagues yet deferd
(How near at hand soever) we much fear not,
Nor thereby for this duty are prepared:
Methinks the loss of so much blood and Treasure
As has been spent; At home, decay of Trade
And Manufactures in so large a measure;
Abroad in Colonies, the havoc made
Should humble us, or that at least, which has
More cause of dread then War, or sudden Death,
To wit, a PRESS, whereby some grieved are,
More then by all the worst events of War.
2. For, War is pleasing to those Voluntaries,
Who, Wealth or Honor, hope thereby to gain;
Through every difficulty them it carries
With very little sense of dread or pain.
By Sudden Death likewi^e all Plagues are ended
Which Sin, or Folly on our bodies bring;
Yea, thereby finished ere apprehended,
In which respect, no very dreadful thing.
But, to be snatched at unawares away,
From all Relations by a Sudden PRESS,
And, from all our Affairs, as at this day,
Is more injurious, then words can express.
Whole Families, thereby destroyed become;
In soul and body, it tormenteth some;
And, thereby greater Griefs occasiond are
Then do befall, by life or death, in War.
54. I know well that, the Civil powrs intend
The prosecution of those Services
Which to their Substitutes they recommend,
Should be pursued without just Grievances:
And, to inform us in this very case,
(Of taking men to serve them in the Wars)
A Law among the Jews established was
To be our Guide in some particulars:
Let it observed be, lest that Oppression
Which is occasioned by indiscretion,
Those persons to our damage may inrage,
Whom we think, for our safety to engage.
55. With others I did publicly be moan
Those things which we ought jointly to deplore;
And, in my Spirit, I lament alone
That for mine own Sins, I can sigh no more.
I sigh for those two Pitchers, which are knocking
Against each other, when they mind not me;
Yea, when some are, perhaps, my sighings mocking,
Or, not well pleased with my good meanings be.
I sigh to see their Charity decrease
Who are pretenders to Religiousness;
Not for my self, though I perceive it is grown
Less then it was, five shillings in a Crown.
56. I have now, somewhat more then fifty years,
Been often mine own and your Remembrancer;
And whilst I live, as often (as cause appears)
Resolved am such Cautions to prefer.
For since GOD has so long preservd me from
A total Ruin in such Services,
I will continue during life to come
Whilst I see need, in services like these,
Not doubting but his Mercy shall outlast
The Time to come as well as what is past;
And, still, as comfortably be enjoyd,
Though life in their pursuit should be destroyed.
57. This, I have therefore, now contributed
In private to what publicly was done.
With hopefulness, that when it shall be read
It will to good effect be thought upon:
For in the common Lot, I shall have part,
To whatsoever the success may tend,
And dare to arrogate no self-desart,
More then they justly may, who most offend.
From Public sins my self I count not free;
What is in others bad, is worse in me,
Since, he whom GOD so many years has taught,
If bad, is worse then others who are naught.
58. Yet, as there is no Righteousness in me,
That, may with safety be confided in;
So, whatsoere the Common Plagues may be,
In me there is no slavish fear of sin:
For, in Gods Promise, and his Mediation
Who has Redeemed me, I, so confide,
That, I despair not of a Soul-salvation,
Whatever to my Body shall betide,
And, know, that, whilst to live, more then to die,
Shall tend to what GODS name may glorify,
My life shall comfortably be enjoyd
When thousands round about me are destroyed;
And that all, who are firm in this belief,
Shall see a glad end of their present Grief.
Lord in that patience keep me always strong,
Which, to the Saints probation does belong.
50. There was a Promise made long time ago,
To some, who then in our condition were,
(And, in what they were to believe, and do,
As much as they, we now concerned are.)
To them, it by GODS Prophet was declard
That, from their wickedness if they returned,
One with a Writers Inkhorn was prepared
To set a Mark on all who truly mourned,
Assuring all who had his Mark upon them
That when the common Judgments seized on them
It should not harm them, as to that, at least,
In which a real safety, does consist.
60. That Mark is set on thousands at this day,
And many Writers hither have been sent
To show it, and inform us how we may
The Mischiefs threatened, seasonably prevent.
Prophets rise early, and do sit up late,
To mind us of our duties, yea, there are
Some thousands even this day, declaring that
Which they are bound to speak, and we to hear.
To that end also, GOO, has now and then,
Employed me, and my Despised Pen,
As at this time: and, at his feet I lay
Wha^ I have writ, and what I have to say.
I might --
BUt, hark! methinks, some Whisperings I hear,
As it both Navies now engaged were:
And, Lo, the sudden Rumor of that Storm
Startles my Muse into another form
Before I am aware, and makes me stop,
To heed, what it contributes to my hope.
Fame speaks it louder, and the increasing sound
On every side, my person does surround.
If what we fear succeeds, let them speed worst
At last, who of this War gave just cause first;
And, by both Parties, let all be amended
Wherein they jointly, or apart offended.
More blood! more fury still! are brutish passions
No whit abated by Humiliations?
No marvel then, no good effects yet spring
To peace conducting, by my Trumpeting,
When I first saw a likelihood of breaking
Our Pitchers, by the Preparations making;
For, that, wherein divine expedients fail
Humane endeavors little can prevail.
My heart is pinched betwixt hope and fear,
By musing upon what I see and hear,
With that whereto our Actings may amount
When we of all events have had account.
Fame tells us that the English and the Dutch
Have fought five days together. This is much,
And I think so implacable a Rage,
Was rarely paralleld in any Age,
If (as it is reported) neither side
Gave Quarter, whatsoever did betide.
How that with Christian charity may be
Consistent, it appears not to me;
Or, how it quadrats with the tender nature
That Is pro^er to a reasonable Creature:
Nor do I know infallibly how far
It is permissive in an actual War;
Nor is it known to any, till ^e tries
The justness of it in extremities.
To censure that, I therefore, will forbear
Which lies without the compass of my Sphere.
King David in some cases, such things did
As Natural compassion does forbid.
This I dare say, no man can see that end
Whereto, a brutish fury, will extend,
When both provoked, and let loose, to do
Whatever it shall then be prone unto.
I clearly gather from our contestations,
What may be truly judged of both Nations
As to their daring, and Couragiousness;
Which, I in few words, fully will express,
Even thus: (for nothing parallels it fitter)
Two English Mastive Dogs never fought better;
Nor has ought often been acted heretofore,
Which evidenced humane courage more,
If all be truly said which we have heard
This day, of these Antagonists averd:
For, though some Cowards upon either side,
Were so amazd they knew not what they did,
And some (when blinded by the fires and smoke
Slaughtred those Friends, whom they for Foes
In that long combat, neither of the two (mistook;
The other, did in any thing outdo.
And (which deserves heed) no wind yet wags
That brings us tidings of such Fears, or Brags
As usually are published abroad,
When Rivals are engaged in this mode;
And, that, to me presageth a success
Which may to both contribute happiness,
If meekly, they and we, submit unto
What GOD vouchsafes to permit, or do,
Who, did a Mercy unto both begin
When he withheld the French from coming in;
Which Mercy, though yet hidden, will be seen
When time removes that artificial Skreen,
Which, an abusive Policy invents
To interpose twixt actions and intents.
Heed, therefore, let both take when this fight ends,
How it concerns both, quickly to be Friends;
What may be quite lost; what may yet be saved:
How both may by their Discord, be inslaved:
What great Plagues they now feel; what may betide
More grievous, if they further should divide;
What great advantages it might bring thither
Where, they their Strength and Courage join together,
Not thereupon as heretofore presuming,
Neither that glory to themselves assuming,
Which appertains unto God alone;
Nor vaunting of what their own hands have done;
Nor la'bring, Breaches to repair with Lies,
Nor putting upon Truths a false disguise,
(A fault now so habitual become
That, it is not easily refrained from)
Nor sacrificing what GOD does abhor,
Or that, which at the best, he cares not for;
But, giving what he still takes in good part,
(Though meritless) an Humble contrite heart.
Then, that the Mercies daignd may be prolongd,
Let not his Saints in any wise be wronged;
(Among whom many will be found at last,
On whom the world reproachful terms has cast)
For, when, or wheresoever, Peace he makes,
It is at their Requests, and for their Sakes;
Whereas, no Peace is true, or long possessed,
Where Innocents are causlesly oppressed;
Especially, where they oppressed are
Who serve GOD, with a conscientious fear
According to their knowledge: of this Crime,
Neither the Dutch, nor they who now with them
Associate, so guilty are as we
Do at this present day appear to be.
And, I believe 'twas therefore that GODS hand
Enabled them our Forces to withstand;
And still preserves both, that both might more heed,
What they have done, and how they should proceed.
Among those things by them and us misdone
Provoking GODS displeasure, this alone
Next mentiond, is enough without one more,
Us, in all our Plantations to undo:
For, to advance our carnal Interest
We parallel the Practice of the BEAST
In merchandising Souls; Yea, more then so,
Have set to sale, both Souls and Bodies too,
In many Colonies: our Avarice
(Which is one root of evry other Vice)
Gave partly an occasion of that Jar,
From whence first sprung, this present bloody War,
And, which at last, will totally destroy,
Both that which we in Foreign Lands enjoy
And here at Home, unless we shall with speed,
Repent that course wherein we do proceed.
We do not only there, both sell and wast
Men's Bodies whilst their lives and strength do last,
(In bondage and in labor like a Beast,
From which they have no hope to be releast,)
But, miserably, keep them, too, inslavd
Without the means, whereby the Soul is savd:
Whereas, a blessing both to them and us
Might be procured by endeav'ring thus:
Even by providing Conscientious Preachers,
To be one day in every week their Teachers.
This would in part at least, excuse the Crime,
Whereby Guilt lies on many at this time.
I, seriously have heeded with compassion
What them concerns, who have to God relation,
And, in particular what I beheld
Or, heard concerning those of late Exild
For Consciencesake. How much ado there was;
How much time spent, to send them to the place
Of their Confinement; what, within short time,
Befell thereby to others; what to them
Worth observation; and how they were cast
Into the power of our Dutch Foes at last,
To whom their Ship and Goods are made a prey,
Who undertook to carry them away.
Whence I collect, that, we shall nothing win,
Whilst we are guilty of so great a Sin;
And, that by long continuance in this guilt,
Much blood that might besaved will be spilt.
Of this sin, therefore let an Expiation
Be constantly endeavored through the Nation,
And henceforth, twixt the English and the Dutch,
Let nothing be contended for so much
As, whether shall the other most excel
In Love, in Piety, and doing well
Let both petition for, Grace, Truth and Peace,
And, for their mutual Amities increase,
Let them not Fast to be protected in
Their quarrellings, but, fast from Strife and sin,
And when Humiliations they pretend
Begin them with beginning to amend;
Withhold their hands from Lawless Violences,
Not cloak Hypocrisy with fair pretenses,
Nor think, when God vouchsafes Deliverance,
It is, their Pride and Selfness to advance,
Or, that, when they a Victory have won,
It Was got, that they might do as they have done,
This, (though Humiliation, we pretend)
I fear, by very many is designd.
For, Providence has brought me to behold
What I should not have credited if told.
The dreadful hazzards which we now are in,
So little moves to penitence for Sin,
That I have heard of one this day, who from
The last Engagement came sore wounded home
Who, ere those wounds were cured, did by another
Endeavor, how he might corrupt the Mother
To be her daughters Baud, and to contrive
The means, how they might in uncleanness live.
This I have heard, and (whether yea or no)
See probability it may be so.
Alas! what will ensue thereon in fine
If this should be the general design?
Oh! let each individual Soul beware
Of such presumptions, lest they spread so far
That, GOD, in his provoked indignation
Wholly destroy this wicked Generation.
In chief, let those Grand Parties whose escapes
Yet, give them time, beware of a Relapse
And hear him; For, assured then I am,
That, he, (according to the Chronogram
Upon my Title page,) us will so bear,
That, this will prove to be a happy year.
Let us for bear to vaunt, as we have done,
Of Conquests, whilst our Arms are putting on:
For, an example of that folly have I
In their invincible (so called) Navy
Which was in Eighty eight, upon our Coasts
Destroyed after many shameless Boasts.
God grant that Sixty six, be not to us
For such like Vauntings as unprosperous.
I hope the best, and I as much do fear
The worst, according as our Actings are.
If possible it be, let an Accord
Be made by Christian Prudence, not the Sword.
For that Cure, usually does leave a Skar
From whence at last, breaks forth another War.
If to no end, our Quarrels can be brought
Till we have to the utmost fought it out;
Let them, whom GOD shall pleased be to crown
With Signal Victory, themselves bow down,
In true Humility, as low as they
Who, then, have lost the glory of the day;
Such Mercy showing, as they would have shown
U^^^ themselves, if that case were their own;
And, mind what Plagues, GOD threatens to inflict
On them, who add grief, where he does correct:
Else to avenge their Cruelty and Pride,
A greater Foe, shall rise up in his stead
Who was destroyed, and they shall then have
That Measure to them given, which they gave.
When all this, and much more then this is done,
We may, as far be, as when we begun
From being truly humbled. For, with leaving
Gross sins, there enters often a deceiving
Whereby, the Soul may be polluted more
And, in more danger then it was before;
Unless we shall together with a loathing
Of all sins, Value our ownselves at nothing.
For, we have naught good, but by imputation,
Which to confess, is true Humiliation
If done sincerely. It will then abide
The Test, when thus it shall be qualifide;
And, we soon after, shall behold, or hear
What will complete our Hope and banish Fear,
For, GOD in Mercy always does return
To all, who for offending him, so mourn.
WHilst this was writing, Tidings we receivd
(Which very willingly we then believd)
That we were Victors. God vouchsafe thereto
A blessed consequ^nce, if it prove so:
Make us, whatever otherwise befell,
Sincerely thankful that we speed so well,
Still mindful of the hazzards we were in,
Before that Doubtful Trial did begin;
And be henceforth, obedient to his calls
Lest else a worse thing suddenly befalls:
For, most to fear him, we have then most cause
When an impending Judgment he withdraws,
Since, in our Duties, if we then grow slack;
Vengeance, with double Rigor it brings back;
But, much more, when instead of Penitence
Those Faults renewd are, which first gave offense.
That News, came whilst the People were in prayr,
Some, hopeful, some afraid, some in despair,
Such Medlies making of Words, Thoughts and Passions
As often befall in sudden Alterations;
And peradventure, causd some to forget
To what end, they that day together met:
For, many had expressed signs of Gladness
Before, they gave one sign of Sober sadness,
Days of Thanks giving and Humiliation
Being by them, observd still in one fashion;
And, by their various Postures, those Digressions
Occasiond were, which vary my Expressions.
We were nor like Jews-harps on Willows hung,
But, like those, which are always tuned and strung
For Jiggs; and we, a Triumph-song begun
Before our Lamentation-song was done.
From laying, by, our vain Desires and Boasts,
From Sanctifying of the Lord of Hosts
With filial awe! and Praise to him returning
(For joyful Tidings on our Day of mourning)
We were so far, that, evn before we knew,
Or could hear certainly, the News was true,
We skipt abruptly, from Humiliation
Into our Antic mode of Exultation,
Joining our selves to throngs of Fools and Boys,
In Triumphs, which consist of Squibs and Noise,
Of Healths, and Bells, and Fires, and Tunes, and Smoke
(Thanksgiving Tools, in which delight we took)
Objects of Scorn, to wisemen rendering us;
To grave Spectators, more ridiculous
Then pleasing: And, instead of some Relief
To sufferers an increasing of their Grief,
Chiefly to those poor Orphans and sad Wives,
Whose Husbands, and whose Fathers limbs and lives
Were lost in that Engagement, whereof they
Had little Sense, or drank the same away,
(Whilst they who hardly scaping it, lay grieving,
Their safety, rather doubting then believing)
And, these too, when grown sober, found they had
Not so much cause of Mirth, as to be sad.
An outward Joy, expressed with moderation,
And Triumphs, are not without Approbation,
When they shall be exhibited in season,
And for ends justified by sound Reason;
Yet, for all Victories, they are not so;
Nor the same things, fit at all times to do.
King David knew it did not him become
To triumph when he conquered Absalom,
And I have seen, for Victories, of late,
(Much less to be rejoiced in than that)
Great Joy expressed: yea, for a Conquest won
( Thanksgivings also rendered) where was none.
At all times, by all men, are Praises due,
And thanks to God, for all things that ensue
On our Endeavors: for, in all he does
Inclusively, are comprehended both
Justice, and Mercy: yet, our thanks to GOD
Is not on all occasions, in one mode
To be expressed; nor ought we to pretend
His Glory, when it is for another end;
Lest, he in our Destruction or our shame,
Provoked be to glorify his Name.
In both our late Engagements GOD has done
That, which both Nations ought to think upon
With much more heed, and much more thankfulness,
Then either we or they do yet express.
This month last year when we did glorify
Our selves, for a supposed Victory,
I did contribute then, as I do now
My single Mite,(as well as I knew how)
To praise GOD for his Mercy, making none
With him, a sharer in what he had done;
Then offering also to consideration
Such things as tended to Humiliation,
Much to the same effect, with that which here,
I tender in another mode this year.
But, GOD who times, and Orders all we do,
My purpose knowing, put a Stop thereto;
Perhaps lest if it had been publishd then,
It had exasperated more, some men,
Both to their own, and to my detriment,
Then was consistent with my good intent.
For, (by my Printers death) what, I then did
In some unknown hand, till this day lies hid;
And possibly may come again to light,
By that time, this is brought to open sight.
Meanwhile, I will proceed, with what, this day
A New Occasion prompteth me to say.
The said Engagements, now already past
(Which if GOD please, I wish might be the last)
By Providential means, have made their swords
Speak more, then else with so much power in words,
Could have been spoken, to persuade us to
What, it, will most concern us both, to do.
For, whatsoever, Policy and Pride
Have published abroad on either side,
It Is evident; (or, may be so to either)
Our Earthen Pitchers, are so knocked together
That one or two more such like knocks will break them
So small, that useless Po^sherds it will make them;
Except to patch up the Designs of those
Who seem their Friends, to whom they will be Foes.
This would be better heeded, if it were
Propounded by a Private Counselor,
A Bishop or a Judge: Thus I suppose,
Till I remember, that the best of those
Have writ, and spoke in vain: yet, then, were they
Obligd to speak their conscience, so am I.
But, many, who to be my Friends would seem,
(And, not me, or my words to disesteem)
Persuade me, in these: matters to be mute:
Tell me, that my Attempts produce no fruit
Save mischiefs to my self: and, other some
Affirm this Meddling does no^ me become.
I thank their wisdoms; but, am not so wise
As to believe they prudently advise.
A Fool may to good purpose speak sometimes,
And, they have found sound Reason in my Rimes,
Who were not so adverse to words in season,
That, they lovd neither Truth, nor Rhyme, nor Reason.
The effects to other men will be the same,
Whether, to them I speak, or silent am;
Yet, since with profit, I have heretofore
Spoke somewhat, I will speak a little more,
Because, I know the damage will not be
So great, then, in relation unto me,
As unto those men, who shall be offended
With what is conscientiously intended.
Successes, good and bad, are shard so even
Between them (by his Justice, who from heaven
Beholds both what they did in every place
With whatsoere by them intended was)
That, if on both sides, Truth might be expressed
It would by them and others, be confessed,
The Sword has spoke a loud, and plainly too,
That, which both Nations speedily should do:
That, it speaks also, what they do intend
On whose Assistances they much depend:
And hints, that both, in their proceeds, (at length)
May be devourd by their own Wealth and Strength.
For, whereunto amounts all we have heard
Three days together, to and fro, averd,
But certainty of Ruin, on both sides,
To which soever best success betides?
What have we heard, by that which pro and con
Has been reported of what is lost and won,
But contradictions, intermixed with sounds
Of Lamentations, Losses, Deaths and Wounds,
And with relation of a Victory,
Which with infeebled and lame wings does fly:
None certainly informed of what is done,
Or of that which may follow thereupon.
We hear sad News one day, as bad next morrow,
Or worse perhaps: and shall have daily sorrow,
Till of their sorrows, we more sense have got,
Whose Suff^ings, we do know and pity not:
And till our Nation shall discharge that better,
Where^n to GOD and Man it is a Debtor.
I have with heedfulness, perused that,
Sea-Gibbersh, which is publishd to relate
What passed in the Naval fight between
Both Fleets; with what, to some a ground has been
To think, the Victory is on our side
And, that we st^ll victorious do abide.
If so it were (because, it might prevent
The Foes proud brags, our Friends discouragement;
Or, superfede their Fears) I should be glad,
And thankful, for the good success we had:
But, nothing therein mentioned found I out,
Whence, I could pick forth, what to find, I sought.
All I could thence collect, was but thus much,
That, We were heaten, and did beat the Dutch,
Till they were glad, at last, to sail away,
And, we as glad, they did no longer stay.
He, that was otherwise informd thereby
Does understand much more, or less, then I,
And, for ourselves, I know no reason why
We should, if, we for GOD, ought not to Lie;
For, though it is imprudence to reveal
All Truths at all times (and not to conceal,
What may occasion mischiefs) never should
The Truth be falsesaid, or Untruths be told:
And, more advantage would to us, ensue
If our Intelligence were always true:
Indeed, I found, in that Express, much wit
In such terms, as that Subject, did befit;
As also, very much, related there
To magnify those who then active were
For our defense. And, I well pleased am
With what may add to their deserved Fame.
To them I grudge no meed, or honor due,
Who prudently, and valiantly pursue
Their undertakings: But, Gods praise alone,
Is my chief Aim. To praise what men have done,
Is, to my proper work impertinent,
And, also, at this time, to my intent.
If, by omitting that, I shall offend
In prosecutions to a better end;
Or, if that any shall malign me more,
For this, who di^ not love me heretofore,
I shall not think it strange: For, I of late
Merely, for Speaking, and for Writing that,
Which both to Gods prdise, and Man's welfare are tends,
Loose daily, very many seeming Friends;
Whereby, if they no whit indamagd are,
I shall not, for what haps to me, much care;
Especially, whilst that, which I design
Tends to Gods praise (without selfends of mine.)
To which intention, that which now is read
(In these few pages,) is contributed.
And though, like Jeremiahs Lamentation,
Or David's humblings, this Humiliation
Is not besprinkled with corporeal tears,
Or, worded with Hyberbolies like theirs;
Nor strowd with Ashes, nor in Haircloth dressed;
Or, with such formal-complements expressed,
(As may be, and ofttimes assumed are
As well by Hypocrites, as Men sincere
Or, though it may want what affects the Sense,
I hope, that, which affects the Intelligence
It shall not want, nor ought, which to that end
Is needful, whereto, I, the same intend;
And, it is exhibited in such a mode,
I hope too, as will pleasing be to GOD.
What, he has done, at this time, seems to me
Not so much heeded as it ought to be,
To make us thankful; nor do we express
What we pretend, in way of thinkfulness
As it becomes us; neither do we show it
As does beseem him, unto whom we ow it:
But, act it with such vain appurtenances
(And break out into such Extravagances)
As, to our Sins, are rather an addition
Then signs of Thankfulness, or true Contrition.
For, though, at full, informd I have not bin
What streights, and what great hazzards they were in;
Or, of what might have happened, unless then
Assisted more by Providence, then Men;
Thus much is likely, we were so intrapt,
That, by our own power, we had not escapt
A total Rout, if Providentially
There came not in, a seasonable supply.
For, had not GOD, sent Rupert timely back,
The Fleet with Albemarl, had gone to wrack;
Or, both perhaps, then, been destroyed together,
Had not GOD sent the French, we know not whither:
Yea, somewhat, in that Providence I see,
Which our Foes ought to heed, as much as We.
GOD, grace vouchsafe both unto us, and them,
To heed, whereto it tends, whilst there is time;
And, unto me, and every person living,
Timely Repentance, and sincere Thanksgiving.
Ere these few Cautionary exhortations,
(Which I think proper to Humiliations)
I do conclude; Lle add this Corollary
In hope, that some, the same in mind will carry.
Though very great our Streighrs and Hazzards are,
(And, those may be much greater which we fear)
Seek Remedies, by no dishonest course;
Lest, thereby, we still make the mischief worse.
That, were to do like them, who, when an Evil
Befalls, run to a Witch, or to the Devil,
Who, such Cures, only, for his Pati^nts has
As their, who kill themselves, through fear of Death.
It has been thought, ye^, ^ have often been told,
That, I, in my Attempts, have been too bold;
Yet I think no man stands in more dread
Of doing ought which is not warranten
By common Justice; For, I dare not act
To save my life, in any such like f^ct.
Nor would my Conscience let me step in peace
Should I but wink at an Unrigh eousness,
Which might by me be hundred, (though to gain
That, which I do most covet to obtain)
Till I repented it: nay, I should dread
A Vengeance were impending ore my head,
If I in secret, wishd advance unto
My hopes, by what another might misdo
Without my knowledge; or, by ought not right
Both in GODS eye, and evry good man's sight.
Which, I profess, that others might beware
Of such Ill consequents, as I now fear.
If we believe there is a GOD, that heeds
The Patience of the Sain^s, and our Procreeds,
Let us not still persist, as we have done,
Within man's corscience, to usurp GODS Throne
As many do, in most presumptaous wise,
Even whilst his heavy hand upon us lies:
For, he will shortly make it to appear,
None ought, but he, to sit in Judgment there;
As also, what they merir, who offend
So highly, when an humbling they pretend.
At Ho^re, from persecuting of them cease
Who do not interrupt the civil peace;
Let for bear in an inhumane mode,
More to divide us, and our foes abroad;
Let us leave off those Railings at each other,
Which hinder the uniting us together.
T^ll GOD shall judge the cause that is depending
Between the Nations which are now contending,
Let none of us who in ou private Stations,
Are called to sincere Humiliations,
Presume to judge them further then he knows
Their Actings, and what Judgments GOD allows
In doubtful Tria s; But with Humbleness,
At end on (...) ose of the success;
(...) as tears and prayers,
What ^l^e^h Immergencies of our Affairs
(...) require; lest, we betray
(...) ves, and them we should obey.
(...) private share, is part of that
Which ^s the Joint Stock of the Public State,
And, ought propo^ition^ ably ^o b^ shard,
As (...) shall b^, to make a Public Guard.
(...) others, are thereby invited to
Is (...), which conscientions^ I do:
For, (...) this end, (though I am so bereft
Of (...) I hd, that, ^o h^ing now is left
But Alms to live on) I, have ever since
^ and T^xes, out of that B nevol^nce;
And, will not grudg^ to do ir, whilst GOD shall
That way, (...) any way, give wherewithal:
(...) that he Public strength, may not decline
Will take h^ed that it be no Fault of mine,
By not contributing, what I think may
Be thereto needful, in an evil day.
If well it be employed, GOD, will bless
Their prudent Management, and Faithfulness,
Who therewith are entrusted: ^f, unjust
Therein they prove, and shall deceive our trust,
Twill be dest^ uctive only to the Abusers,
And, faithful men, will be at last no Loosers:
For, when the Kingdom which we look for, comes,
All men, shall have their just deserved Dooms.
Hereof, to me, GOD has often Earnest given
By aids vouchs^fed, as it were, from Heaven,
At every need. By him, I have been fed
With Manna, Quail s, and with my daily bread,
(I know not else, either by whom or how)
For some years lately pnst; and so am now,
Without suspect, of ought which may be fall
Whether, my gathering shall be much or small.
Yea, now, while I behold d^spairing fear
In most men's faces, almost evry where;
Although the day, now very gloomy be;
Though falling off, our Chariot-wheels I see;
Their Drivers with much difficulty driving;
Against Waves, Rocks and Sands, our Leaders striving,
And, GOD, in this day of our great distress,
Within a Black Cloud, hiding yet his Face;
A Glummering, I naytheless perceive
Of Mercy, shining on all who believe;
With Symp^oms, of the like aspect to them
Who, yet believe not, if they turn to him.
Turn therefore, oh return unto him, now;
Hear him, and he will give an ear to you.
But I fear most men so corrupt are grown,
That, my words, are on them in vain bestown:
Lest, therefore what I write, they heed the less,
I, at this present, will no more express;
And, since, in our case, there is no help in Man,
His aid, I will implore, who help us can.
LEt GOD arise! Arise LORD, I implore thee;
And, let all those who hate thee, fly before thee;
Rebuke them who thy Adversaries are,
The Bulls and Calves who take delight in War;
As Well the Common People, as their Kings,
Till all the world, to thee, due tribute brings.
Lee those destroying Angels, which are sent
To chastise us, make a distinguishment
Between them, who through Hum^ne frailty sin,
Without persisting wilfully therein,
And, such, as have been unto thee and Thine,
Malicious Foes, a long time, by Design;
Or, who, not only, against us, now be
Confederates, but likewise against Thee.
In Mercy, look again, on us, and those,
Who are, at this day, our professed Foes;
Lest, the pursuit of what is yet intended
Consumes both Nations, ere the war be ended.
Now, so unclose the Eyes of evry Nation,
Which has pretended to a Reformation,
That, they may see how much, they have been blinded;
How they depraved are, and howself-minded:
So prudent make all Governors and Kings,
So qualify the Peoples murmurings;
So, let thy holy Spirit sanctify
Each Congregational Society;
So show, to evry Individual one,
What ought to be believd, and to be done
Together and Apart, which may improve
That, Principle of Universal Love,
In which, the Being of the world begun;
Whereby, preserved while Time wheeleth on,
And, by which, that perfection shall be gaind
Which was by thy Eternal Love ordaind;
That we regenerated may become,
And not continue, till the day of Doom,
So stupefied in our sins, as they
Who were, at last, with Water, washd away;
Or, Sodom-like, in sinning persevere
Until with Fire consumed as they were:
But, let what thou haft done, sufficient be
To turn thee unto us, and us to Thee.
I do confess, should thou be so severe,
As, but to heed how bad, the best men are;
Among us all, there could be found out none
Who might be called Righteous; no, not one
Of whatsoever Calling, or Degree,
Whether, Priest, Prophet, a King it be,
Or of the common Rank; Lord, naytheless
In Mercy, and in thy Sons Rigteousness
Vouchlafe to look upon us; and, to cure
Our single, and our joint distemp'rature.
At this time, to those Lustings put an end,
Which makes us more then brutishly contend
For trifles; and to brawl, curse, lie and swear;
Like Dogs, for bones, to scramble, scratch and tear;
Fight, wound and kill each other, without heed
Of what we do, or of what may succeed.
Yea, so inhumanely, as if, now, here
The Devils, clothd with Humane bodies were;
Hell, as it were, broke loose, and, they come hither
With purpose, to bring Hell and Earth together.
That, which this may portend, secure us from:
Hallow thy Name, and let thy kingdom come.
Thy will be done on Earth, as it is in Heaven:
Give us the bread of Life; and, that forgiven
Our sins may be, let us forgive each other,
And, henceforth, live in Amity together,
On us, let not temptations, then prevail,
When then permittest any to. ^ssail
Our persons; that, we may in our Probations
Be constant, and enjoy our expectations.
Let neither presnt, past, or future evil,
(The temptings of the World, the First or Devil)
Hive power to harm, or fright us any more,
With Plagues and Wars, as now, and heretofore;
Especially, let them not us, ensnare
With those sins, whereof these the wages are.
Wholly, to thee, our selves let us resign;
Consels the Kingdom, Power and Glory thine
Without a partner; and henceforth, forbear
To seek our Kingdom, Power and Glory here.
Whilst that time lasts, wherein in things yet remain
Undone, which to thy Glory appertain
And, wherein we must further be imployd,
Before the Man of Sin shall be destroyed,
(Who very often, usurps a lodging, where
Thy Kingdom is, although he Reigns not there)
Him to resist, vouchsafe Assisting Grace
To every one of us, in his own place:
Preserve us blameless, in that Dispensation
Whereto, a Conscentious inclination
(Without self ends) has joynd us; so to use
Our Liberty, that, we do not abuse
The Christian Freerdom by including on
Thy Right; or, by imposing that upon
Another conscience, by usurped power,
Which, we would not should be imposd on our.
And, so incline those also, to do thus
To whom thou give power over us,
That none, may to obey them forced be,
By being disobedient unto thee;
But, let our Duties be performd in Peace
To thee, and, to all men, in Righteousness.
And, that both We, and our Superiors too,
May be the more kept heedful what to do;
Make them to know; that if in what relates
To Thee, the humane Laws, or Magistrates
Must be obeyed in all they shall command,
However they, or we shall understnd
Thy (...) reveald; then, if the Kingdom be
The Turks or- Popes, we mast believe, as he;
And, thy will and thy Deity, thenceforth,
Stand for a Cyther, or, for what is less worth:
For tha^, will be the consequence thereof,
Though Politians, at his Truth will skoff:
Me therefore, unto what thou callst me to,
Keep firm, in spite of all the world shall do.
The single, and the joint Humiliation
of King and People, bless with acceptance,
Although, what has been done, prayed, or consest,
Will not abide thy Sanctuery Test;
For, hope of an acceptance, none there is,
If thou should mark all things that are am'ss:
And, saved from what is deserved, here, would neither
Be Good or Bad men, but, sink altogether.
Let, in one Duty, none be so ^mployd,
That, all the rest be slighted, or made void.
So let us Hear, that, we as as well may Do
As Hea ken, what thy word persuades unto.
So let us strive to Do, that having done
The best we can, we trust not thereupon;
And, so Believe too, that we may improve
Our Faith still more, both by Good works and Love;
Remembering, it is Love, that does fulfill
The Law, the Gaspel, and thy total will.
Let thin own Spirit help urs so to pray,
That, we may mind Thee, more then what we say.
Since to Speak words, less needful is to thee,
Then telling our own hearts, what our thoughts be;
And, chiefly used, that we might discern
Or, h^^d, the better those things which concern
Our selves, and Brethren; because, none can show
That unto thee, which thou did not foreknow
Words, often are sooke to others, with intent
To counterfeit that which was never meant.
To such ends, as we ought to make Addressings
To thee, are all my Prayers and Confessings;
To such ends, I now offer here in words,
Those Musings, which my narrow heart affords;
And, which drawn, and pressed out of it, have been
By those great streights, we still continue in.
To such ends, 1 implore thee in this mode;
Accept of this Oblation, my dear GOD:
Give us his Righteousness, who took our Guilt;
Love us, and then, do with us, what thou will.
These MusingS, me, did waking keep
When other men were fast asleep:
And, may, when I a nap am taking,
Keep others, peradventure, waking.
GOD, grant we may so help each other
To watch, by turns, or, altogether,
That, when the Bridegroom, does appear
( Although at midnight) we may hear.
And, keep our Lamps, in such a Trim
That, we may entrance have within.
Written June 17. this sad year, MDCLX VI.
That which is mentioned in the thirty fifth page aforegoing, being imprinted
in or about June 1665, and ever since concealed by reason of the Printers
death, is now come to light, and hereto added in the three next following
sheets. There are many faults escaped in the Printing by reason of the Authors
absences, which the Reader must correct where he finds them.

FINIS.

