A TIMELY CAVTION Comprehended in thirty seven Double Trimeters, occasioned by
a late Rumor of an Intention, suddenly to Adjourn this Parliament: And
Superscribed, to those whom it most concerns; September 10. 1652.
Amicj Legite; Veridicum Credit, Veritatem Diligite.
By G. W. A faithful servant to this Republik.
IT made a Dumb Child speak, to see,
His Fathers life, in Ieopardy:
And, such a Passion swells in me.
To vent it, therefore, leave I crave;
For, dread of sadder things I have,
Then single Murders, or a Grave.
I find most men regardless grown,
Of Public dangers, and their own,
Yet, my Conjecture shall be shown,
That, when my words are proved trve,
It may appear, I some things knew,
Which might have been of use, to you.
Birth's, then unborn, are eight years old,
Since in Aenigmas, one foretold,
What, many, do fulfilled behold;
And at that time, some Hints had we,
Of things, that would attempted be,
In Fifty two, and Fifty three.
Now harken, therefore, and give Creed,
To him, who bids you take heed,
How, other men, and You, proceed;
That, You, together may abide,
Till we expedients can provide,
For what is likely to betide.
Else, they who seem to be your Friends,
May prosecute, for private ends,
What, your apparent Foe intends;
And, when dispersed abroad you are,
Accomplish that, which many fear,
And prove as false as they appear.
For, we, who search the depths to find:
Of what is secretly designed,
Perceive Old mischiefs, new refined;
Which, if no power the same prevent,
Will from each other, shortly rent,
Each Member of this Parliament.
It Is thought, that some are gone away,
To that intent; and, that some stay,
To win the rest, their Game to play:
So, when you are seduced become,
To leave your Charge, and stragle home,
None shall to them be troublesome.
It is confessed to be trve,
That, of your Ship, there are but few,
To whom her Pilotage is due;
And, so long time upon the Seas,
It has been tossed, that, now, to these
There should allowance be of, Ease.
Yet, since the Vessel (bruiz'd and torn)
A Tempest, of twelve years has borne,
And promises a rich Return;
Bear up; and stoutly persevere:
For, your wished Harbor, now is near;
And, you, may speedily be there.
As Paul, said once, to those who saild,
With him (when each man's courage faild,
And their endeavors naught availd)
So, say I now; Continve, still,
Within the Shipp and, wait his will:
Who can your honest hopes fulfill.
For, if your selves you shall betake,
To that Retreat, which some would make;
You hazard all, unto a Wrack:
And, where you Safety think to find,
They will ^o you prove more unkind,
Then Rocks, or Wherlpools, Waves, or Wind.
Although yourselves you must renew,
Before those wishes will ensue,
Which, your endeavors do pursue;
Yet, in your Weakness does remain,
That Strength, whereby, God will sustain,
And build up, what he does Ordain.
We, therefore, justly may suspect,
That, they who zealously project,
A Change; will find no good effect;
Till God has ripend you, and them,
To join more seriously with him,
In building New Jerusalem.
Or, till a dotage on those things,
Which brought destruction on our Kings,
On us, the same Correction brings.
For, then, of this event be su^^;
Disoraer, shall Disorder cure,
Till none remains, that is impure.
Be therefore warned, and be wise;
And, what these Trimeters advise,
Do not, disdainfully, despise:
Nor think, I, from good manners err,
Though, I thus venture, to prefer,
These Lines, for your Remembrancer.
On your well-being, mine depends;
And, though you are not all my Frinds,
My love, to all of you extends:
And, whilst I have abiding here,
You, now and then, are like to hear,
What I believe, think, hope, and fear.
You better know, then I can tell,
Amid'st what Enemies you dwell;
And, what they fear, who wish you well.
Your Prudence also, may surmize,
What mischieves, might this Land surprise,
If, at this Juncture, you should rise.
Not without Cause, we have, of late,
Provoked a Foe, which to this State,
Expresses an unequaled hate:
And (truth to say) there could not be,
Accord twixt us, till They and We,
Had mean, each others Power to see.
For, self esteem, on the other side,
Had puffed them up, with so much pride,
That, till by some Events we tried,
What mischievs, from our Emnities,
Unto each, other, might arise;
We could have had no long-lived Peace:
But, They and We, shall now perchance,
Know shortly, what will most advance,
Our Weals; and foot a better Dance:
Meane-while, it will concern us near,
That, you should keep together, here,
And, in a well-fill'd House appear.
For, such a Breach, with such a Foe,
And, other things, requiring so
Invite a speedy calling in
Of those, that long have absent bin,
And, make you, daily, fit so thin.
Then, hence depart, not, yet, a way;
Nor loose an hour, whilst here you stay;
But, do your duties, whilst you may.
For, your short time, does swiftly runn,
And many, things are to be done,
E're you, with safety, can be gone.
Who can be sure (if you Adjorne,
He shall not drop in to his Vrn,
Before this Parliament return?
Nay, who can tell us, that it shall,
Return? Or, what sad-thing, to all
This Nation, may meanewhile befall?
Establish therefore, e're you go,
Some Settlement; that, we may know,
What, in Immergencies, to do.
Remember, too, what heretofore,
Was Promised; And, when you give over,
Leave no man crying, at your door.
I mean, leave none, who, justly there
May make Complaint; or, whom to hear,
O^ to relieve, obliged you are.
At least wise, leave them so, that, they
Acknowledge your Compassion may,
And, bless you, when they go away.
Your Mercy, to your Foes, extends.
Do Justice, also, to your Friends,
On whose well-being, yours depends:
For, you can neither Sit, nor Rise
In safe or honorable wise,
Whilst their Complaint, neglected lies.
But, who both Friends, and Foes can please?
Or, hope, to bring to pass, with ease,
Such difficult-effects, as these?
YOU may; for, my good Angle sings,
The probable Accomplishings,
Of these, and of much harder things.
There is a day, now rear at hand,
Enjoined by your own Command,
To crave GOD'S blessing, on this Land:
And, he, yet, gives both Time, and Place,
To seek the favor of his Face:
Yea, seems to offer, his embrace.
Then, in your hearts, your selves prepare,
(As soon as you this Warning hear)
Within his presence, to appear.
And, as one Person, let us all,
That day, before his Foostoole fall,
Upon his holy name, to call.
So, he, shall help, and teach us, too,
What to believe, what things to do;
How long to stay; what time to go;
And, guard our Coast, much better, than*
Our fleets, and our three Armies, can,
O^, all the strength, and wit, of man.
But, it is a hundred, tho, to one,
If my Advise be thought upon,
Till Opportunities are gone:
For though this Age does much approve,
Of Revla tons from above,
And, what the Spirit seems to move,
Yet, most are so in love with Lies,
And, Pride, selfe-ends, and vanities
So deafs their Ear, so dimms their Eyes;
That, such are credited by few,
who always tell them what is true:
And, what this may protend; Judge you.
And, judge aright of his Intent,
Who, Public damage to prevent,
Thus ventures, private detriment:
For, They, whom you most ought to fear,
As soon as they, this CAVTION hear,
Will either Frown, or Carpe, or Jeer.
And, hope, to pick occasion hence,
So to prevaricat the sense,
That, some in Power, may take offense;
To, bring upon him, back again,
(Like Clouds returning after Rain)
The Troubles, he did late sustain.
But, he, now Forty years, and more,
Dispights, without Despair, has bore;
And, if he live another Score,
Shall see his Foes, as he has done.
Drop, yearly, hence, by One and One,
Till, all, who malice him, are gone.
And, as their Number grows less,
So, shall they, every day increase,
Who truly seek, the Public Peace:
And, He, or his; And you, or your,
shall see Oppressions fatal hour,
And, JUSTICE, gain the Sovereign powr^*
LORD! be it thus; and give thy Grace,
To all that are in Public place,
To join in bringing this to pass:
Uouchsafe them Patience, too, to bear,
Their Trials; who, must suffer, here,
Until thy Kingdom shall appear.
A POSTCRIPT*
It Was said (since forth these Lines were sent)
The lately Rumored Intent,
Of an ADIOVRNE, was not approov'd
By many; nor, in Publik, moov'd:
And, he, from whom this Caution came,
Is glad, it was a Lying-Fame:
And, these Expressions had forbore,
Might he have heard so much before.
Yet, since, Just cause, that Rumovr gave,
Of what, in these few Leaves, you have;
Since, also, there be Various Uses,
Of all, that Providence produces;
Some use of these, there may be, too
Among you, therefore, let them go.
For, when leaves fall from every Tree,
Ev^n, WITHERED Leaves, in season be;
And, (at the worst) will serve the turn,
To make dull-Fires, more apt to burn.
Some things, do Seem; And, are not, so:
Some, Are; and, thereof, make no show.
London, Printed by John Clowes, and are to be sold by the Book sellers in
Westminister-Hall, and Elsewhere

FINIS.

