Poor Robin's TRUE CHARACTER OF A SCOLD: OR, THE SHREWS Looking-glass.
DEDICATED To all DOMINEERING DAMES, WIVES RAMPANT, CUCKOLDS COUCHANT, and
HEN-PECKT SNEAKS,
In City or Country. With Allowance.

LONDON: Printed for L. C. 1678.

Poor Robin's True Character of a SCOLD.
A Rank SCOLD is a Devil of the Feminine gender; a Serpent, perpetually
hissing, and spitting of Venom; a Composition of Ill Nature and Clamor. You
may call her animated Gunpowder, a walking Mount Aetna that is always belching
forth flames of Sulphur, or a Real Purgatory, more to be dreaded in this world,
than the Popes Imaginary Hot-house in the next. A Burr about the Moon, is not
half so certain a Presage of a Tempest at Sea, as her Brow is of a Storm on
Land. And though Laurel, Haw-thorn, and Seal-skin are held Preservatives
against Thunder, Magic has not yet been able to find any Amulet so Sovereign
as to still her Ravings: for, like Oil poured on Flames, Good words do but make
her Rage the faster; and when once her Flag of Defiance, the Tippet, is
unfurled, she cares not a straw for Constable nor Cucking-stool.

Her Tongue is the Clapper of the Devil's Saints-bell, that rings all-in to
Confusion: It runs round-like a Wheel, one spoak after another, and makes more
Noise and Jangling, than Country-Steeples on the Fifth of November. She is
never less at ease, than when she is quiet; never quiet, but when she is
sleeping; nor then neither: for either she talks in her Dream, or awakes the
whole house with a terrible fit of Snoring. She makes such a Pattering with her
Lips when she walks the streets, as if she were possessed; so indeed she is, with
the spirit of Contention. The Dog Days, with her, continue all the year round;
nor can she possibly take Cold: for she is ever in an Heat, and holds neither
Pox nor Plague so grievous a Disease, as being Tongue-ty'd.

She makes an Ass of Aristotle, and demonstrates, That though every man be, yet
many a woman is not, A sociable Creature: for there is no Good humor can charm
her to be Civil or Agreeable; no Company, how affable or compaisant soever,
that can long content her. She seeks occasions for Railing, as eagerly as a
Common Barretor does to go to Law. If you will not anger her, she will be angry
with you for thus neglecting her: and you cannot vex her worse, than to be
silent, unless you sing or whistle at her Folly. She interprets all she hears
in the worst sense, and supplies the defect of real Affronts with jealous
suspicions. She is more captious, than capable of Offense; and all her
Neighbors bless themselves from her, wishing this Quotidian Fever of her
Tongue cured with a Razor. Yet is not that her only weapon; for she has Hands
to Clap with, and Nails to Scratch with, and Teeth to Bite with, and much more
Furniture for War; so that being looked upon as Invincible, her bad humor gets
her a Privilege: for wherever she comes, she may be sure to have the Room to
her self; nor needs long Contest for priority of Walk, or precedence at Table,
or opinion in Argument: for the proudest Gossip will quit Pretensions, rather
than stand the shock of her well-known Rhetoric.

If she be of the preciser Cast, she abuses Sacred Language in her Railing, as
Conjurers do in their Charms; calls her Neighbors Heathen Edomites, her
Husband, Reprobate, or Son of Belial, and will not cudgel her Maid without a
Text for it. But now I speak of Husband, methinks I see the creeping snail
shivering in an Ague fit when he comes in her presence. She is worse than
Cow-itch in his Bed, and as good as a Chafing Dish at Board: but has either
quite forgot his Name, or else she likes it not; which makes her Rebaptize him
with more noble Titles, as White-liver'd Raskal, Drunken Sot, Sneaking
Ninkompoop, or pitiful lowsy Tom Farthing, Thus she worries him out of his
senses at home, and then ferrets his Haunts abroad worse than a needy Bawd does
a decayed Bully's. Taverns and Alehouses dread her single Alarm, more than the
joint Attaques of the Constable and Watch; and his Companions are content to
pay his Club and dismiss him, on news of her approach, rather than be at the
charge of so many Glasses and Bottles as she will quickly salute his Coxcomb
with. A full Glass seasonably offered, may sometimes pacify her for a moment;
but immediately the Ill spirit returns, and she can be quiet only just so long
as she is drinking. Thus she clamours at him so long without occasion, that at
last he gives her enough; and rails at him for keeping Ill Company, till she
forces him to it; being ashamed to go into any Good Society, or they ashamed of
him; which makes him seek blind Bubbing-schools to hide himself in from her
fury, and resolve to stay out all Night, rather than endure a double Rally.

In a word, (for I perceive our Character begins to be infected with the
contagious Talkativeness of its subject) a virulent Scold is her Neighbors
perpetual Disquiet, her Families Evil Genius, her Husbands Ruin, and her own
daily Tormentor: And that you may the better know her Pedigree, I Will give you a
serious Account of the Receipt or Method made use of for her Production into
the world, lately found in a long-concealed Manuscript of Theophrastus
Bombastus Paracelsus, as follows: viz.

That Nature long since finding many of her Sons oft-times bewitched to their
own Ruin by the Charms of Women, for their punishment contrived this Monster
called A Scold: To form which,

She first took of the Tongues and Galls of Bulls, Bears, Wolves, Magpies,
Parrets, Cuckows, and Nightingales, of each a like number: The Tongues and
Tails of Vipers, Adders, Snakes and Lizards, Seven apiece: Aurum Fulminans,
Aqua Fortis and Gunpowder, of each one pound: The Clappers of Nineteen Bells,
and the Pestles of a dozen Apothecaries Mortars. Which being all mixed, she
calcined in Mount Strombelo, and dissolved the Ashes in a water distilled just
under London Bridge at three quarters Flood, and filtrated it through the
leaves of Calepines Dictionary, to render the Operation more verbal. After
which, she distilled it again through a Speaking-Trumpet, and closed up the
remaining Spirits in the mouth of a Cannon. Then she opened the Graves of all
new-deceased Pettifoggers, Mountebanks, Barbers, Coffee-news-mongers, and
Fish-wives; and with the skin of their Tongues, made a Bladder covered over
with Drum-heads, and filled with Storms, Tempests, Whirlwinds, Thunders,
Lightnings, etc. These, for better Incorporation, she set seven years in a
rough Sea to ferment, and then mixing them with the rest, rectified the whole
three times a day for a Twelve month in a Balneo of Quicksilver. Lastly, to
irrabiate the whole Elixir, and make it more Churlish, she cut a vein under the
Tongue of the Dog Star, drawing thence a pound of the most Choleric blood;
from which sublimating the Spirits, she mixed them with the Foam of a mad Dog:
and then putting all together in the forementioned Bladder, stitcht it up with
the Nerves of Socrates's Wife.

Out of this noble Preparation, and a Crooked Rib (Emblem of future Crosness)
Dame Nature first composed a SHREW, whose Posterity (as is frequent with
noxious Animals) has since so overspread the world, that scarce an Alley or
Village is free from some of her Lineage.

But that you may see her End as well as Beginning, be pleased to peruse this

EPITAPH.
After some Threescore years of Catterwauling,
Here lies A SCOLD, stopped from above-ground Bawling.
Though Ill she lived, I dare not read her Doom;
But fure, go where she will, she is Troublesome.
I wish her, in Revenge, amongst he Blessed:
For she would as lief be Damned, as be at Rest.
FINIS.

