A PROPHECY WRITTEN LONG SINCE FOR THIS YEAR, 1641.

Wherein Prelate-policie is proved to be folly.

AS ALSO, Many notable Passages Concerning the fall of some great Churchmen.

Written by a modern Poet.

LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1641.

A PROPHECY WRITTEN LONG SINCE FOR THIS YEAR, 1641.
I Do not wonder, as I erst have done,
That when the Prophet Jonas should have gone
To Niniveh, Gods word he disobeyed*
And would himself to Tharsus have conveyed:
For, I have now a sense how flesh and blood
The motions of the Holy Ghost withstood,
And feel (me thinks) how many a likely doubt
The Devil, and his frailty, found him out.
He was a man, (though he a Prophet were)
In whom no little weakness did appear:
And, thus he thought, perchance, What shall J do?
A strange attempt my heart is urged to:
And, there is somewhat, earnestly incites
That I should hasten to the Ninivites,
And, preach, that if they alter not their ways,
Their time of standing, (...) but forty days.
My soul persuades God injoynes me to it;
And, sleep in peace, I cannot, till I do it:
But common Reason striveth to restrain
This motion, and persuades me it is vain.
It says, I am a sinner, and so frail,
That many times, my best endeavors fail
To rectify my self. How shall I then
Be hopeful of reclaiming other men?
To Israel J have threatened many years
Gods judgments: yet, no fruit thereof appears
Although they have some knowledge of the Lord,
And are within his League, they slight his word:
What hope then is there, that a heathen Nation
Will prove regardfull of my exhortation?
The style of Prophet, in this land I carry;
And such a Calling, here, is ordinary
But, in a foreign State, what warranty
Have I, to publish such a Prophecy?
How may the King and people take the same,
If I shall in the open streets defame
So great ae City? and, condemn for sin,
A place wherein I never yet have bin*
If I shall say, the Lord commanded me*
Then, they phehaps, will answer: What is he?
For, they profess him no^* Nay, some suspicion
They may conceive, that I to move sedition
Am sent among them. Or, if otherwise
They shall suppose; how can they but despise
My person, and my counsel, who shall from
So far a place, so mere a stranger come,
That no man knows, or what, or who I am,
Or, from what Country, or from whom I came?
Such thought (belike) delayed and feared him so;
And, so the Spirit urged him still to go
For Niniveh; that nor to go, nor stay,
Could he resolve; but, fled another way.
From which rebellious course, God fetceth him back
With such a vengeance, that he did not lack
Sufficient proofs, how Reason did betray him,
And, in his Calling, causlesly affray him,
Yea (mark heavens providence) though Jonas went
Another way, it crossed not God's intent,
But furthered it. For, doubtless, e*re he came
To Ninveh, the miracle and fame
Of his Deliverance, was sent before;
And, made his preaching work on them the more.
Now, though I do not arrogate, nor dare
My self (except in frailties) to compare
With blessed Jonas: yet I may behold
To say, our Causes a resemblance hold.
My heart (and when that moves, as one averres,
It more prevails then many Counselors,
My heart (I say) persuaded me e're while,
To read a warning Lecture to this I Will.
And in such manner moved; that, to say
It came from God, me thinks, behold I may.
Yet, my own natural frailty, and the world,
Among my thoughts so many doubtings hurld,
That every step had rubs. I levelled some
In my last Canto. Yet, I could not come
To even ground, till I had overtopt
Some other Mountains which my passage stopped,
Beware said Reason, how thou undertake
This hazardous adventure, which to make
Thou have resolved For, this wise age denies
That God vouchsated any Prophesies
Concerning them* or, that the application
Of ought foretold, pertains to this Nation.
She says, my Constancy is no true sign
That God first moved this intent of mine;
Since Heretics, and Traitors, often are seen
As bold in all their causes to have been
As Martyrs be. And, that for what they do,
They can pretend the holy Spirit too.
And she persuades, it is likely I shall pass
(At best) for one that much deluded was.
She says, moreover, that if these times be
Indeed, so wicked, as they seem to me,
I shall in stead of moving to repent,
Naught else but stir their fury, and be rent
Perhaps in pieces, by their hasty rage,
For, what is more likely in a wicked age?
When people in their sins grow hardened once,
She says I may as well go talk to stones,
As tell them ought. For, they are in the dark;
And, what they see and hear, they do not mark.
She urged that the Prophets in old times
Did speak in vain against the peoples crimes;
And if in them their words begat no faith,
Much less will such as mine, my Reaeson says.
She tells me also, that this I Will has store
Of Prophets, and of Preachers never more:
She says, that though their calling none neglect,
Their pains appear to take but small effect:
And, if such men authorized as they,
Do cast their words, without success, away;
In vain my Muse (whose warrant most contemn)
Does seek to work more piety in them.
A thousand things unto the like effect;
Yea, all and more then any can object,
(Who shall peruse this Book) my Reason brought
Before me, and objected to my thought,
And, as a Pilgrim (who occasions has
To take some extraordinary path)
Arrival making at a double way,
Is doubtful whether to proceed or stay:
So fared I; I was nigh tired quite,
Before I could be certain of the right.
Yea, twixt my doubtings, and all those replies
Which in my meditations did arise;
I so amazed grew, I could not know
Which way it best befitted me to go*
But* at the last, God brought me through all
My doubts and fears; as though the Storm and Whale,
Once Jonas came: That so* all they, who are
Ordained for their good, these lines to hear,
The more may profit, when they think upon
What straights I passed, e're this work was done.
To that intent my frailties I have so
Insisted on, as in this book I do.
Yea, I am hopeful also, they that read
These lines of mine (and mark with how much heed
And Christian awfulnesse, my heart was won
To censure and reprove as I have done)
Will plainly see, these Numbers flow not from
Fantastic rashness; nor from envy come*
Nor spring from faction; neither were begot
By their distracted zeal, who (knowing not
What Spirit guides them) often are beguiled
With shows of truth; and madly have reviled
Both good and ill: and whose unsavory Rimes
Defames men's persons more then check their crimes.
Dishonor Kings; their sacred names blaspheme;
And having gained some notions in a dream,
Or by report (of what they know not well)
Desire their giddy thoughts abroad to tell
In hope to merit; as in deed they do,
Sometime the pillory, and gallows too.
I trust, I say, these lines will seem no such;
Or, if they do, truth is, I care not much,
Because I certain am what power infused
Those matters whereupon I now have muzed*
And know, that none will these or me condemn,
But they whose rage and follies I contemn.
Yet, that they may be sure I never care
Who censures me, nor what their censures are,
(When honest things I do) here, somewhat more
I Will add to what is mentioned before*
And give thee, Britain, a more perfect sight
Of thy distempers, and thy sickly plight.
Yea, thou shall know, I have not seen alone
A bodily Consumption stealing on,
And wasting of thy Temporalties; but, that
I also have discovered of late,
A Lethargy upon thy soul to steal
And that as well the Church as Commonweal
Does need a cure. Oh! do not quite neglect,
The good of both; but, one (at least) respect*
Though Iudahs sicknesses unheeded be,
(Although thy temporal wounds afflict not thee*)
Yet look on Syon: yea, behold and see
Thy Spiritualties how much impaired they be*
The Churches Patrimony ^s decayed*
And many a one is in her spoils draid ^o
Those Patrons (as we term them in this age)
Who of her Dowries have the patronage,
Do rob and cheat her, many times of all;
And, their Donations basely set to sale.
Those Cananites, whom thou preservest here,
(And by thy laws to be expelled were)
Are in thy borders now so multiplied,
That they are thorns and thistles in thy side.
They are become a Serpens in thy path,
Which bites unseene; and nigh unhorsed has.
Some able Riders. On thy Places-high
Thy people do commin idolatry,
And rear strange Altars. In thy Fields are found
Those cunning harmefull Foxes to abound,
That spoil thy Vines. And, some I have espied,
Twixt whose opposed tales, are firebrands tied,
Which wastes thy fruits. Thy Harvest seems fair;
But secret blastings do so much impair
And blite the Corn: that when it comes to bread,
Thy Children often unholsomly are fed.
Men use Religion as a stalking-horse
To catch preferment; yea, sometimes to worse
And baser uses they employ the same;
Like that bold Harlot, who quite void of shame,
Did of her Vows, and of her Peace Offerings make
A Ginn, lascivious customers to take.
Yea, some (resembling him, from whom was cast
One Devil) when one sin thy have displac't,
Of which the world took notice, sweep and cleanse
Themselves (in show) from all their other sins;
Yet secretly, let Satan repossesse,
And foul them with a sevenfold wickedness.
An universal dullness will benum
Thy senses, if thou do not soon become
More heedefull of thy state, then thou art yet:
For, every part has felt an ague*fit.
Thy Academs, which are the famous places
In which all pious knowledges and graces
Should nourisht be, and whence thy chief supply
Of Teachers, come, (as from a Nursery)
Even those fair Fountains are much tainted grown,
With doctrine hardly sound, which thence are blown
Through every quarter. In their Schools are heard
Vain jiggs and janglings, worthless of regard.
Their very Pulpits, and their Oratories,
Are Stages, whereupon their own vain glories
Men often act. Yea, many a vain conceit,
Is brought in stead of arguments of weight
And (which is worse) disorder is so rise
Among them; and the weeds of evil life
Have so o'regrowne those Gardens, that (unless
Good government shall speedily redress
That spreading mischief) it will overtop
The plants of Syon, and destroy her crop.
To be thy Shepherds, wolves are stolen in;
And thou have chose who even by day begin
To sow their Tares among thy purest Seed;
And, with mixed Craines thy Lands pollutions breed.
For hire, and money, prophesies the Prophet:
The Priest does preach to make a living of it,
Even merely for a living; and* but few
Their holy charge, for conscience sake pursue
Which I by many signs could make apparent,
But that it is not yet within my Warrant.
Loquntur Curae leves; little Cures
Do make men preach, whilst poverty endures.
Ingentes stupent; but, large livings make
Our Doctors dumb: condemn not my mistake
For, though I do the Latin sentence wrong,
That Is true I tell you in the English tongue.
Our Nation, which of late profaneness hated*
Is in that sin almost Italionated.
The Scriptures without reverence are used:
The holy phrase, in jesting, is abused:
To flout, or praise, or curses we can apply
Gods holy word, most irreligiously:
In stead of Emblemes, moving thoughts divine,
The filthy pictures of lewd Ar^^^ne,
Are found in many Closets. Foolish lies,
Profane and most lascivious Elegies.
Are public made. Yea, those whom heretofore
A heathen Emperor did so abhor,
That he, for them, their wanton Author sent
To undergo perpetual banishment:
Even these, we read; and worse then those, by far*
Allowed pass, and unreproved are.
Nay, their vain Authors often cherisht be:
At least, they have the favor to go free.
But, if a graver Muse reprove their sin,
Lord, with what a hasty zeal they call it in!
How libellous they make it! and how vile,
Thou know; and at that folly thou do smile.
Full warily, the politic Divine,
(Who should allow it) scanneth every Line
Before it pass* each phrase he does suspect;
Although he finds nothing to be chekt,
He fears to License it. And if by chance
It pass abroad, forthwith does ignorance
Mistake or misapply; and false and bade
Constructions are, of good expressions made*
Yea, they who on the fears of Judgment sit,
Are often, most ready, to miscensure it.
I would they were as forward to disgrace
Those Authors, who have filled ev'ey place
With fruitless volumes. For dispersed are
Even quite throughout this Land every year,
Even many thousand Reames of scurrill toys,
Songs, Rimes and Ballads, whose vain use destroys
Or hinders Uertuous knowledge and Devotion,
And this they do to further the promotion
Of our Diana* Yet, behold, if we
To publish some few sheets required be,
Containing pious Hymns, or Christian Songs.
Or ought which to the praise of God belongs:
We do so fear the hindrance of our gain,
That like the Ephesian Silver-smiths, we feign
A great complaint. As if to have enlarged
A little Book, had grievously o'recharged
The Common wealth. Whereas if it were weighed,
How much of late this Land is ove^ aid
With trivial Volumes or how much they do
Corrupt our Manners, and Religion too,
By that abusive matter they contain?
I should not seem unjustly to complain.
These times do swat me with Pamphlets, which be far
More dangerous, then mortal poisons are.
Even in those books, whereby the simple thought
To find true* knowledge, they their bane have ought
For, thence, strong Heresies (there being hid
Amid some doubtless Truths, a while unspid)
Steal out among the people, by degees;
More mischief working then each Reader sees:
And, so, to ruin knowledge, that is made
An instrument* whereby it rising had.
For (by their lucre, who the Churches peace
Disturb, their private profit to increase)
Those Doctrines which are unauthorised,
Are so promiscuously divulged* and spread,
Among approved Verities, that some
Are in those Labarinths amazed become:
And, such a contradiction is in that
Which their confused Pamphlets do relate;
That, common Readers, known not which to leave,
Nor, which the Church of England does receive.
And, from this mischief many others flow,
Which will, in future times, more harmfull grow
This, spins vain Controversies to their length;
By this, most Heresies receive their strength.
And what distraction it already makes,
Our grieved Mother woeful notice takes.
In stead of active knowledge, and her fruit;
This fills men with itching of dispute,
And empty words; whereby are set abroach
A thousand quarrels, to the Truths reproach.
The Sectaries, the Munkeyes, and the Apes,
The Cubs and Foxes, which do mar our Grapes;
The Wolves in sheepskins* and our frantic rabble
Of VVorship-mongers, are innumerable*
And, as the Churches quiet they molest.
So they each other spightfully infest.
We have some Papists* some that half way go:
Some Semi-puritans; some wholly so;
Some Anabaptists; some who do refuse
Black puddings; and good porke, like arrant Jews:
Some also termed Arminians are among
Our Priests and People, very lately sprung.
What most, so called, profess, I stand not for:
And what some say they teach, I do abhor.
But, what some other, so misnam'd, believe*
Is that whereto best Christians credit give,
For, as we see the most reformed man,
By Libertines, is termed a Puritan:
So (by our purblinde Formalist) all those
Who new fantastic crotchets do oppose,
Begin to be mis-term'd Arminians now,
And, hence e're long will greater mischieves grow
Then most imagine. For, the foolish fear,
Lest they to be Arminians may appear,
Or else be termed Puritans, will make
Great multitudes Religion quite forsake.
And, I am half persuaded, this will one
Of those great Schisms (or earthquakes) cause which John
Foretold in his Apocalypse; and they
Are blessed, who shall not thereby fall away.
Some Brownists, and some Famalists hove we;
And some, that no man can tell what they be;
Nor they themselves. Some, seem so wondrous pure
They no man's conversations can endure,
Unless they use their plaistrings; and appear
In every formal garb which they shall were.
There be of those, who in their words deny,
And hate the practice of Idolary,
Yet make an Idol of their formal zeal,
And underneath strict holiness, conceal
A mystery of evil, which deceives them,
And, when they think all safe, in danger leaves them.
Their whole Religion, some do place in heating*
Some, in the outward action of forbearing
Ill deeds; or in well doing, though the heart
In that performance bear no real part.
Some others, of their mor^all actions make*
Small conscience: and, affirm that God does take
No notize how in body they transgress,
If him in their inward man confess:
As if a soul beloved could reside
Within a body quite unsanctifide.
Some not contented in the act of sin.
Aare grown so impudent, that they begin
To joustifie themselves in wickedness;
Or, by quait arguments, to make it less:
And, by such Monsters, to such ends as this,
The Christians liberty de^amed is.
Newfanglednesse, Religion has o'rethrowne;
And, many as fantastical are grown
In that, as in apparel. Some, delight
In nothing more then to be opposite
To other men: Their zeal they wholly spend
The present government to reprehend;
The Churches discipline to villifie;
And rail, at all, which pleades antiquity.
They love not peace: and therefore have suspicion
Of Truth it self, if out of persecution:
And are so thankelesse, or so heedlesse be
Of Gods great love, in giving such a free
And plenteous means of pulishing his word*
That, what his Prophets of the Jews record,
Some verefie in us. Much praise is given
To that blind age, wherein the Queen of Heaven
Was worship hear. And falsely we extol
Those days, as being much more plentiful.
Some, at the frequency of Preaching grutch,
And, tired with it, thick we have too much:
Nay, impudently practice to suppress
That Exercise, and make our plenty less.
And, that their doing may not want some fair
Or goodly coulor, they do call for Prayer,
In stead thereof; as if we could not pray,
Until our Preaching we had sent away.
As these are foolishly, or lewdly, wise;
We have some others wantonly precise.
So waywardly disps'd, amidst our plenty,
And through their curiosity, so dainty,
That, very many cannot well digest
The Bread of life, but in their manner dressed.
Nor will Gods Manna, or that measure serve,
Which he provides; But, they cry out they starve,
Unless they feed upon their own opinions,
(Which are like Egypts Garlike and her Onions)
Some like not Prayer that is extempory;
Some not any that set form noth carry:
Some think there is no devotion, but in those
That howl, or whine, or snuffle in the nose;
As if that God vouchsafed all his Graces
For fained gestures, or for sour faces.
Some think not that the man, who gravely teaches;
Or has a sober gesture when he preaches,
Or gentle voice: has any zeal in him,
And therefore, such like Preachers they contemn.
Yea, they suppose that no man's doctrine saves
The soul of any one, unless he raves,
And rores aloud, and flings, and hurleth so
As if his arms he quite away would throw;
Or over-leap the Pulpit; or else break it:
And this (if their opinion true may make it)
Is to advance their voices Trumpet-like,
As God commands: yea this (they say) does strike
Sin dead. Whereas indeed, God seldom goes
In whirlewinds: but is in the voice of those
Who speak in meekness. And it is not in
The power of noise to shake the walls of sin:
For clamors, antique actions, writhed looks
And such like mimmick Rhetoric none brooks
That has discretion: neither does it move
The heart of any, when we so reprove;
Excpt it be in some contrary motion,
Which interupts the hearts good devotion.
The well affected Christian pitties it;
It makes prophanest men at naught to set
Gods Ordinance. Mere moral men despise
Such affatection: much it terrifies
The ignorant: but very few from thence
Receive sound knowledge, or true penitence.
Some relish nothing, but those points that are
In controversy: some would nothing hear
But songs of Mercy, some delight in none
But Songs of Thunder; and scarce any one*
Is pleased in what he hears. Nay of their Preachers,
Mechanics, arrogate to be the teachers.
Yea, most of us, what e're our Pastor shyes,
Keep still our own opinions and our ways.
To hear and know Gods word, to some among
Our Nation, seems only to belong
To Clergymen; and, their implicit Faith
Is built on what the common rumor says.
Some others filled with curiosity
Affirm that every several mystery
Within Gods Book included, does concrne
Even each particular Christian man to learn:
Whereas they might as well affirm, each guest
That is invited to each Feast,
Is bound the several dishes there to heed,
And upon every meat before him feed*
Nay, some have almost this imagination,
That there is hardly hope of their salvation
Who speak not Hebrew. And, this now adays,
Makes foolish women, and young Prentises
To learn that holy Tongue; in which they grow
As cunning as do those who nothing know,
Save to be arrogant, and to contemn
Those Pastors, who have taken charge of them.
The appetite of some grows dull, and fails,
Unless it may be pampered with Quails;
High flying crotchets, which we see do fill
Not half so many souls as they do kill.
We cannot be content to make our flights,
For that which God exposes to our sights,
And search for that which he is pleased to show,
But, we must also pry, what God does know.
Which was indeed an ancient fallacy
Of Satan's; and the very same whereby
He cheated Eave* From seeking to disclose
Beyond our warrant, what God only knows,
Proceeds many errors. Thence does come
Most questions that have troubled Christendom.
Yea, searching things concealed, has overthrown
The comfortable use of what is known.
Hence flows their fruitless fond asseveration,
Who blundred on Eternall-Reprobation,
And many groundless whimsies have invented,
Whereby much better musings are prevented.
Of Reprobation I no doubt have made;
Yet, those vain quarrellings which we have had,
Concerning her, and her antiquity,
(But that the world has wiser fools then I)
Appears to me to bring so little fruits,
That I suppose it fitter for disputes
In hell, (among the reprobrated crew)
Then for for a Church of Christians to pursue:
At least to brawle about with such hot rage,
As has possessed some Spirits of this age.
For, some have urged this point of Reprobation,
As if the chiefest groun-worke of salvation
Depended on believing, just, as they
(Deluded by their fancies) please to say.
And, though they never found Gods holy word
Did any mention of the same offord,
But, as of that which did begin since Time;
And with respect to some comshitted crime:
They, nevertheless, their strengths together guther,
To prove the Child is older then the Father.
And, since that fatal thread, there, finds her spinning,
But from Of; at farthest from Beginning:
They Reprobation, otherwhile confound
With our Predestination: which is found
No where in all the Scripture, to respect
The Reprobates, but only Gods Elect.
And then they are compeld to prove the sense
Of their dark Tenet, by an inference;
And to affirm (from reason) that Election
Eternal, does infer the like rejection.
(As if an action of Eternity,
Were fit to square out shallow reasons, by)
Which Argument because it has not taken
True Faith, to ground on, may with ease be shaken.
Their tottering structure, therefore, up to keep,
They into Gods foreknowledge boldly peep,
Beyond his warrant; searching for Decrees
And secrets, farther then an Angel sees:
Presuming then, as if all things they knew,
And had Eternity within their view.
But, that has such an infinite extension,
Beyond their narrow-bounded comprehension,
That, there, they wander on, till they are madd:
And loose that little knowledge, which they had:
For what are they but madmen who maintain
The giddie fancies of their own weak brain,
For Theses of Religion, which we must
Believe as they affirm them, or be thrust
Among the Reprobates? What less, I pray,
Are they then madd, who fool their wits away
In wheeling Arguments which have no end?
In Strains which man shall never apprehend?
In seeking what their knowledge does exceed?
In vain disputings, which contentions breed.
In strange Chymera's, and fantastic notions,
That neither stir us up to good devotions,
Nor mend our manners? But our ways pervert,
Distract the Judgment, or puff up the heart.
If this I may not madness call, or folly,
It Is (at the best) religious-melancholly.
What shall we judge of those who strive to make
Gods Word (whose Terms and Scope they much mistake
Their proofs for that whereof no proofs they are,
And slight those Truths, for which the Text is clear:
What shall we deem of those, who quite mistaking
Good Authors, (and their Volumes guilty making
Of what they never meant) do preach and write
Against those Books, with rancorous despite,
Which being well examined, say the same
Which they affirm, and check what they do blame.
Such men there be, and they great noise have made
By fighting furiously with their own shade.
What may be thought of them, who likely, ever,
In their perverse opinions to persever,
Take knowledge up on trust. and follow those
Who lead them on, as wild-geese fly in rows*
And when their multitude is waxen great,
Do then so wilfully prejudicate,
Become so confident of that they hold,
And in their blind assurance, so are bold,
That they can brook no trial, neither see
Their oversights, how plain so ere they be?
But fondly think (though we believe it not)
That they infallibitie have got?
Some pious men; yea, some great Doctors tread,
Such Laborinths; and often are misled
By holding that which they at first were taught,
Without due proving all things as they ought;
And vulgar men are often led awry,
By their examples, and for company.
For, as a Traveller, that is to come
From some far Country, through large deserts, home;
(Not knowing well the way) is glad to take
His course with such who shows of cunning make,
And walks along, depending still on them,
Through many a wood, and over many a stream,
Till he and they are lost: there to remain
He finds no safety, nor means back again,
Nor list to leave his company; because
He hopes that nearer homeward still he draws,
And that his guides full sure of passage are,
Although they cannot well describe it, there.
So, when plain men do first attempt the way
Of knowledge, by their guides, they walk astray,
Without distrust: and when arrived they be
Where many troublesome windings they do see,
And where no certainty they can behold,
Yet, on their leaders knowledge they are bold,
Or on their multitude: yea, though they know,
And, see them err, and turn, and stagger so,
(In darksome paths) that well suppose they may*
They rove and wander in an uncouth way;
Yet, still they are unwilling to suspect
The wisdom of the Fathers of their Sect.
Yea, though no satisfaction they can find,
Though fears and doubtings do afflict their mind,
They still impute it rather to their own
Infirmities, or to the depths unknown
Of those mysterious points, to mention brought;
But never call in question what is taught:
Lest being by those Teachers tertifide,
They might forsaken in despair abide.
Their Doctors, also, failing to devise
Strong Arguments, their hearers to suffice;
This course, to salve their credits, late have got;
They say (forsooth) Faiths doctrine settles not
With natural capacities; and that
The Spirit must those men illuminate
Who shall receive them. And, indeed in this,
They do both say the truth, and say amiss:
This is a Jesuitish juggling trick,
And, if allowed it be, each lunatic,
And every brain sick Dreamer, by that way,
May foist upon us all that he can say.
For, though Gods holy Spirit must create
New hearts within us, and regenerate
Depraved nature, e're it can be able
To make our outward hearings profitable;
We must not think that all which fancy says
(In terms, obscure) are mysteries of Faith.
Nor make the hearers want of power to reach
Their meanings, to be proofs of what they teach.
There is twixt men, and that which they are taught*
Some natural proportion, or it is naught.
The deepest mystery of our profession,
Is capable of literal expression,
As well to Reprobates, as men elected;
Or else it may of error be suspected.
Yea wicked men a power granted have
To understand, although they misconceive.
And can of darkest points make plain relations,
Though to themselves they fail in applications.
God never yet did bid us take in hand
To publish that which none can understand:
Much less affects he a man should mutter
Rude sounds of that, whose depth he cannot utter;
Or in uncertain terms, as many do,
Who preach Nonsense, and often non entia too.
For those which man to man is bound to show,
Are such plain Truths, as we by word may know;
Which when the hearer can express again,
The fruit has equalled the Teachers pain.
Then, though the soul does many times conceive
(By Faith, and by that Word which we receive)
Deep mysteries, and that which far transcends
A carnal knowledge: though she apprehends
Some glimmerings of those Objects, that are higher
Then humane Reason ever shall aspire;
Though she has tastings of that blessedness,
Which mortal tongue could never yet express;
And though the soul may have some earnest given
On earth, of what it shall enjoy in heaven;
Though God may when he list (and now and then
For cause not ordinary) to some men
Vouchsafes (for their secret satisfactions)
A few reflections from eternal actions:
Though this be so, let no man arrogate
That he such secrets can by word relate:
For, they are things, of which no voice can preach;
High flights, to which no mortal wing can reach;
It Is Gods own work, such raptures to convay,
To compass them there is no other way,
But by his blessed Spirit. And, of those
Most can we not; some must we not disclose.
For, if they only touch our private state,
They were not sent, that we should them relate;
But daigned that the soul they strengthen might
Amid the perils of some secret fight;
When men to honor God, or for their sin,
The terrors of this life are plunged in.
And, as it is reputed of those things,
Which foolish people think some Fairy brings,
So, of Enthusiasmes speak I may;
Discover them, and straight they fly away.
For, thus they fare who boast of Revelations.
Or of the certainty of their Salvations,
Or any ghostly gift, at times or places,
Which warrant not the mention of such graces:
Yea, by revealing things which they should hide,
They entrance make for overweening pride:
And that quite marres the blessing they possessed,
Or, for a while, obscureth it, at best:
And yet, if any man shall climb so high,
That they attain unto a Mystery,
Conceived by few; they may, if they be able,
Disclose it where it may be profitable.
But, they must know, that (if it be, indeed,
Of such transcendency, as does exceed
Mere natural reaches) it should be declard
To none, save unto those who are prepared
For such conceptions; and more apt to know them
By their own thoughts, then are our words to show them.
Else, all they utter will in clouds appear,
And errors, men, for truths, away will bear.
Would this had been observed a little more,
By some who in our Congregations roar
Of Gods unknown Decrees, Eternall-Callings,
Of Perseverance, and of Final Fallings,
And such like Mysteries. Of else, I would
That they t^eir meanings better utter could,
(If well they meant.) For, though those points afford
Much comfort and instruction (as Gods word
Has mentioned them) and may applied be,
And opened, when we just occasion see;
Yet, as most handle them, who now adays
Do pass for Preachers, with a vulgar praise,
They profit not: for, this ripe age has young
And forward wits, who by their fluent tongue,
And able memories, a way have found
To build a house, e're they have laid the ground.
With common places, and with notes purloin'd,
(Not well applied, and as ill conjoined)
A garb of preaching these have soon attained,
Which has, with many, approbation gained
Beyond their merit. For, they take in hand
Those mysteries, they neither understand,
Nor studied on. And, they have much distracted
Some hearers, by their doctrines ill compacted:
Yea, by enquiring out what God fore-sees,
And meddling much with his unknown Decrees,
The Churches peace so much disturbed have they;
So foul and crooked made Faiths plainest way;
Such scandals raised; and interrupted so,
By doubts impertinent, what men should do;
And, their endeavors nullifide, so far,
That many of them at a nonplus are.
I am not of their minds, who take from this
And other things, that are performed amiss,
Occasion to disparage frequent preaching;
Or, to abate our plentiousnesse of teaching:
For, of our Harvest, Lord, I humbly pray,
The store of Laborers continue may.
And, I could also wish, that none were chose
To be a seed-man, till he truly knows
The Wheat from Tares; and is indu'd with reason,
And grace, to sow in order, and in season.
And that those artlesse workmen may be staid,
Who build before foundations they have laid:
Lest, when our Church well built, suppose we shall,
It sink, and overwhelme us in the fall.
It pities me to mark what rents appear
Within our Sion; and what daubings are
To hide the ruins; and I fear the frame
Will totter, if we long neglect the same.
Our Watchmen, for the greater part, are grown
Less mindful of Gods honor, than their own:
For either almost wholly we omit
That work, or undiscreetly follow it.
Some, speak the truth, without sincere intention,
As they who preach the Gospel for contention.
Some, by their wicked lives do give offense,
And harden men in their impenitence.
As if nor hell nor heaven they did believe,
They riot, game, drink drunk, and whore, and theeve,
For avarice, and envy, none are worse;
They are malicious, and blaspheme, and curse,
As much as any others. None are more
Regardlesse of the soul that is mean and poor;
Among their neighbors, none more quarrelsome,
Or, that more hardly reconciled become,
Then many Clergie-^en. And as we see
They are the best of men, when good they be;
So, there are none that wander more astray,
When they have left a sanctified way.
Some Pastors are too hot; and some too cold;
And, very few the golden temper hold.
Some, at the Papist with such madness fling,
As if they could not utter any thing
Of them too vile; though never so false it were:
And, we so used by their Jesuits are.
Some others at the Puritan do strike,
So furiously, that they are often like
To wrong the Protestants: for, men impose
That name, sometime, upon the best of those;
Yea, they who are profane, that name mis-lay
On all who make a conscience of their way.
Some Shepherds, on their Flocks are gorged at full,
And sumptuously arrayed in their wool.
But, those that are diseased, they make not strong;
Their sickliest sheep they seldom come among;
They take no care, the broken up to bind,
The Sheep that is lost, they do not seek to find;
They let such wander as will run astray;
And, many times their fury so does fray
The tender conscience; that their indiscretion
Does fright their hearers headlong to perdition.
Gods bounty has large pastorage provided;
But, they have not his flocks with wisdom guided:
For, in the midst of plenty, some be ready
To starve in ignorance. Some sheep are headdy;
Some get the staggers; some the scab; and they
Infect their fellows. Some, the wantons play
Among the thorns and briars, which have torn
The marks and fleeces, which they should have worn.
Some straggle from the flock; and they are straight
Surpised by Wolves, which lie for them in wait.
Some, sought large feeding, and rank pastures got,
Which proved not wholesome; and they caught the Rot*
For, many preach themselves, and fancies broach,
That scandal preaching, to the Truths reproach.
Yea, some term that (forsooth) Gods word divine,
Which would half shame me, should they term it mine.
And they we see, that longest pray and speak
Are prized of most (though head nor foot they make)
Because the common hearers of this Land,
Think best of that, which least they understand.
Some, also, by their feet disturb the Springs;
Or trample and defile Gods pasturings;
And they are either such who make obscure
Faiths principles; or, such whose lives impure,
Profane their Doctrines. Other some have we,
Who (like the beasts that over-gamesome be)
Do push their weaker brethren with their homes;
And hunt them from the flock, by wrongs, or scorns*
Gods houses, also, much neglected are;
And of his Sanctuaries, few have care.
A barn, or any common house, or room,
Is thought as well Gods worship to become,
As in the Churches infancy; or there,
Where wants, and wars, and persecutions are.
Amidst our peace and plenties, we do grutch
Our Oratories should be trimmed as much
As are our vulgar dwellings; and repine
That exercises which are most divine,
Should with more Rites, or Ornaments, be done,
Then when the troublous times afforded none.
As if a Garden, when the flowers are blown,
Were still to look as when it first was sown.
To worship so in spirit, we pretend
That, in our bodies, we do scarcely bend
A leg, or move a cap, when there we be,
Where Gods most holy Mysteries we see.
Yea, many seem so careful to have bin,
To let no Superstition enter in,
That they have, almost, wholly banished hence,
All Decency, and pious Reverence.
The Church, by Lukewarm Christians, is neglected,
By brutish Atho'sts, it is disrespected;
By greedy Worldlings, robbed of her fleeces;
By selfe-will'd Schismatics, nigh torn in pieces;
By Tyrants, and by Infidels opposed;
By her blind Guides, to hazard often exposed;
By Hypocrites, injuriously defamed;
And, by the frailties of the best, often shamed.
A power ecclesiastical is granted
To them, full often, who those minds have wanted
Becoming such Authority: and they
Play fast and loose, even with the Churches Key*
They censure and absolve, as best shall make
For their advantage; not for conscience sake.
As they shall please, they punish or connive;
And, by the peoples follies they do thrive.
Of evil customs, many are we see
Insinuated, and so strict are we
To keep them, that we sottishly deny
To leave them, for what more would edify:
And we so much do Innovations fear,
That needful Reformations none appear.
We have profaned every holy thing;
Even our most Christian Feasts, which are to bring
Gods Mercies to our thought; and memorize
Of Saving-Grace, the sacred Mysteries:
Some have even those gain-sayed; and, in that
Have evil spoken, of they know not what.
Some others keep them; but, as heathenishly,
As Feasts of Bacchus; and impiety
Is then so rife, that God is rarely named
Or thought upon, except to be blasphemed.
By these, and other ways, the Church does lose
Much honor, to the glory of her foes,
And our great shame, and loss: for, her decays
Shall be this Realms disprofit, and dispraise.
God has a Controversy with our Land;
And, in an evil plight affairs do stand.
Already we do smart for doing ill;
Yet, us the hand of God afflicts still,
And many see it not; as many be
So wilful, that his hand they will not see.
Some, plainly view the same, but nothing care:
Some, at the sight thereof amazed are
Like Balthazar; and have a trembling heart;
Yet, will not from their vanities depart.
About such matters, other some are loath
Their thoughts to busy (merely out of sloth)
Like him, who rather would in hazard put
His life, than rise from bed the door to shut.
Some, dream that all things do by chance succeed,
And that I prate more of them than I need.
But, Heaven and Earth, to witness I invoke,
That, causlesly, I nothing here have spoke.
If this, oh sickly Island, thou believe,
And for thy great infirmity shall grieve,
And, grieving of thy follies make confessions;
And so confess thine infinite transgressions:
That thou amend those errors: God shall then
Thy manifold distempers cure again;
Make all thy scarlet sins as white as snow,
And cast his threatened judgment on thy foe.
But, if thou (fondly thinking thou art well)
Shall slight this Message, which my Muse does tell,
And scorn her counsel; If thou shall not rue
Thy former ways; but, frowardly pursue
Thy wilful course: then, hark what I am bold,
(In spite of all thy madness) to unfold.
For, I will tell thy Fortune; which, when they
That are unborne, shall read, another day;
They will believe Gods mercy did infuse
Thy Poets breast with a prophetic Muse.
And know, that he this Author did prefer,
To be from him, this Isles Remembrancer.
If thou, I say, oh Britain! shall retain
Thy crying sins, thou do presume in vain,
Of Gods protection. If thou stop thine ear,
Or burn this Roll, in which recorded are
Thy just Inditements; it shall written be
With new additions, deeply stamped on thee
With such Characters, that no time shall race
Their fatal image, from thy scarred face.
Though haughtily thou do thy self dispose;
Because the Sea thy borders does enclose.
Although upon the Rocks thy neast is placed;
Though thou among the Stars thy dwelling have;
Though thou increase thy ships; and unto that
Which is thine own, with King Iehosaphat,
Join Ahabs forces. Though thou watch and ward,
And all thy Ports and Havens strongly guard;
Although thou multiply thy inland forces,
And muster up large troops of men and horses;
Though like an Eagle, thou thy wings display'st,
And (high thy self advancing) proudly say;
I sit aloft, and am so high, that none
Can fetch me from the place I rest upon.
Yea, though thou no advantages did want,
Of which the glorioust Emperies did vaunt;
Yet, sure, thou shall be humbled and brought low;
Even then, perhaps, when least thou fear it so.
Till thou repent, provisions which are made
For thy defense, or others to invade,
Shall be in vain; and still, the greater cost
Thou shall bestow, the honor that is lost
Shall be the greater; and thy wasted strength,
Be sick of a Consumption, at the length.
Thy Treaties, which for peace or profit be,
Shall nether peace, nor profit, bring to thee.
Or, if thy Counsels prosper for a while,
God will permit it, only to beguile
Thy foolishness; and tempt thee on, to run
Some courses, that will bring his Judgments on.
Yea, all thy winnings shall but fuel be,
To feed those follies that now spring in thee;
And make (with vengeance) those the more enraged
Who shall for thy correction be engaged.
What ever threatened in Gods Book has bin,
Against a wicked people for their sin,
Shall come on thee: His hand shall be for ill,
On every Mountain, and high-raised Hill.
Thy lofty Cedars, and thy sturdy Oaks,
Shall feel the fury of his thunder-stroakes.
Upon thy ships, thy Havens, and thy Ports,
Upon thy Arms, thy Armies, and thy Forts,
Upon thy pleasures and commodities,
Thy Crafts mechanic, and thy Merchandise;
On all the fruits, and cattle in thy fields,
On what the Air, or what the Water yields,
On Prince and People; on both weak, and strong,
On Priest, and Prophet; on both old, and young;
Yea, on each person, place, and every thing,
The plague it has deserved God shall bring.
What ever thou do hope, he frustrate shall;
And, make what e're thou fear, on thee fall.
This pleasant soil, wherein such plenty grows,
And where both milk and honey overflowes,
Shall for thy peoples wickedness be made
A Land as barren, as what never had
Such plenties in it. God shall drive away
Thy pleasant Fowls, and all those Fish that play
Within thy waters; and for whose great store
Some other Nations would have praised him more.
Those Rivers, that have made thy Valleys rich,
Shall be like streams of ever-burning Pitch.
Thy dust, as Brimstone; fields as hard and dry
As iron is; the Firmament, on high,
(Like Brass) shall yield thee neither rain nor due.
The hope of wasted blessings to renew.
A leanness, shall thy fatness quite devour;
Thy Wheat shall in the place of wholesome flower,
Yield naught but bran. In stead of grass and corn,
Thou shall in times of harvest, reap the thorn,
The thistle, and the bryar. Of their shadows
Thy Groves shall robbed be. Thy flowery Meadows
Shall sterile wax. There shall be seldom seen
Sheep on thy Downs; or Shepherds on the green*
Thy walks, thy gardens, and each pleasant plot,
Shall be as those where men inhabit not.
Thy Villages, where goodly dwellings are,
Shall stand as if they unfrequented were.
Thy Cities, and thy Palaces, wherein
Most neatness and magnificence has bin,
Shall heaps of rubbish be, and (as in those
Demolisht Abbeys, wherein Dawes, and Crows,
Now make their nests) the bramble, and the nettle,
Shall in their halls, and parlours, root, and settle.
Thy Princes houses, and thy wealthy Ports,
Now filled with men of all degrees and sorts,
Shall no inhabitants in them retain,
But some poor Fisherman, or Country Swain,
Who of thy glories, when the marks they see,
Shall wonder what those mighty ruins be*
As now they do, who old foundations find,
Of Towns and Cities, perished out of mind.
The places where much people meetings had,
Shall vermin holes, and dens for beasts be made.
Or walks for Sprights, who from those uncouth rooms
Shall fright the passenger, which that way comes.
In stead of mirth and laughter, lamentation
Shall there abide: and* loathsome desolation*
In stead of company. Where once was heard
Sweet melody, men shall be made afeard
With hideous cries, and howlings of despair.
Thy very Climate, and thy temperate air,
Shall lose their wholsomnesse* for thy offenses;
And breed hot Fevers, Murraines, Pestilences,
And all diseases. They that now are trained
In ease, and with soft pleasures entertained;
In stead of idle games, and wanton dances,
Shall practice how to handle guns, and lances:
And be compelled to leave their friends embraces,
To end their lives in diverse uncouth places;
Or else, thy face, with their own blood defile,
In hope to keep themselves, and thee, from spoil.
Thy beauteous Women (whose great pride is more
Than theirs, whom Esaias blamed heretofore)
In stead of paintings, and of costly sents,
Of glittering gems, and precious ornaments,
Shall wear deformity about their faces;
And, being robbed of all their tempting graces,
Feel wants, diseases, and all such like things,
Which to a wanton Lover lothing brings*
Thy God, shall for thy overflowing vices,
Scourge thee with Scorpions, Serpents, Cockatrices,
And other such; whose tails with stings are armed,
That neither can be plucked forth, nor charmed.
Thou shall not be suffiz'd when thou art fed;
Nor shall thou suffer scarcity of bread
And temp'rall food alone; but, of that meat,
Whereof the faithful soul desires to eat.
That curse of Ravenous beasts, which God has said,
Upon a wicked kingdom shall be laid,
He will inflict on the. For though there be
No Tigers, Lions, Wolves, or bears in th^e,
By beastly minded men (that shall be far
More cruel then those bloody spoylers are)
Thou shall be torn: for, each man shall assay
His fellow to devour as lawful prey.
In stead of Lions, Tyrants thou shall breed,
Who nor of conscience, nor of Law take heed;
But, on the weak man's portion lay their paw,
And, make their Pleasures, to become their L^w.
In stead of Tigers, men of no compassion,
A furious, and a wilful generation,
Shall fill thy borders. Thieves, and outlawes vile,
Shall hunt the ways, and haunt the woods for spoil,
As Bears, and Wolves. A subtle cheating crew
(That will with tricks and cousenages pursue
The simpler sort) shall here increase their breed;
And, in their subtleties the Fox exceed.
That hoggish herd, which always rooting are
Within the ground, and never upward rear
Their grunting snouts; nor fix their eyes on heaven,
To look from whence their daily food is given:
Those filthy swinish livers, who desire
To feed on dra^fe, and wallow in the mire;
Those, who affect rank pudles, more then springs;
To trample and despise most precious thing;
The holy to profane; Gods herbs of grace
To nouzle up, his Vineyard to deface;
And such like harms to do: these shall thy fields,
Mar worse, then those wild Boares the d^sart yields.
If thou remain impenitent, thou ar^
Like Egypt; and so stony is thy heart.
For which obdurateness, those plagues will all
Descend on thee, which did on Egypt fall.
Blood, Frogs, and Lice, great swarms of uncoth Flies*
The infectious Murraine, whereof Cattle dies;
Boyles, Scabs, and Blaines; fierce Hail, and Thunder-stormes,
The Locust, and all fruit devouring Worms.
Cross Darkness, and the Death of those that be
Thy Darlings; all those Plagues shall fall on thee,
According as the Letter does imply,
Or, as in mystic sense they signify.
Thy purest Rivers God shall turn to blood*
With every Lake, that has been sweet and good.
Even in thy nostrils he shall make it stink,
For* nothing shall thy people eat or drink,
Until their own, or others blood it cost;
Or, put their lives in hazard to be lost.
Most loathsome Frogs; that is, a race impure,
Of base condition, and of birth obscure,
(Even in unwholesome fens, and ditches, bred)
Shall with a clownish rudeness overspread
Thy pleasant'st fields; thy fairest rooms possess;
And make unwholesome (by their sluttishnesse)
Thy kneading troughs, thy ovens, and that meat,
Whereof thy people, and thy Princes eat.
This hateful brood, shall climb to croake and sing,
Within in lodging chambers of the King.
Yea, there make practice of those natural notes,
Which issue from their evill-sounding throats:
To wit, vain brags, revilings, ribaldries,
Vile slanders, and unchristian blasphemies.
The Land shall breed a nasty Generation,
Unworthy either of the reputation
Or name of men. For, they as Lice shall feed
Even on the body whence they did proceed;
Till poverty, and sloventy, and sloth,
Have quite disgraced them, and consumed them both,
There shall moreover, swarms of diverse Flies,
Engendered be in thy prosperities,
To be a plague: the Flesh-flye shall corrupt
Thy savory meats; Musketoes interrupt
The weary traveller; thou shall have Drones,
Doors, Hornets, Waspes, and s;uch like angry-ones,
Who represent that swarm whose buzzing tongues
(Like stings) are used in their neighbors wrongs:
And, still are flying, and still humming so,
As if they meant some weighty work to do,
When as, upon the common stock they spend;
And naught perform of that which they pretend.
Thy Butter-flies shall plague thee too; even those,
Who waste their Lands and Rents, in gaudy clothes,
Or idle flutterings; and then spawne their seed,
Upon thy goodli'st flowers, and herbs to feed.
As Beasts destroyed by the Murraine be,
So, they they that are of beastly life in thee,
By lewd example shall infect each other;
And in their foul diseases rot together.
On all thy people, or what sort soever,
Shall Scabs, and bile, and running sores appear,
The fruits of their corruption. Yea, with pains
(Within their conscience, and with scars and blaines
Of outward infamy) they shall be grieved.
And, in their tortures perish, unrelieved.
Tempestuos storms, upon this I Will shall fall,
Hot Thunderbolts, and Haile-stones therewithal;
Men either too too hot, or too too cold;
Or else luke warm. But, few or none shall hold
A rightful temper: and, these meteors will
Thy borders with a thousand mischieves fill.
The Locust also and the Palmer worms,
Shall prey on what escapes from the Storms:
Not they alone, which on the grass do breed;
But, also, they who from the pit proceed
Which has no bottom: and, when any thing
Does by the dew of heaven begin to spring,
They shall devour the same, till they have left thee,
Nor leaf nor blossom; but, of all bereft thee,
Then shall a darkness follow, far more black,
Then when the light coporeall thou do lack.
For, grossest Jgnorance, o'reshadowing all,
Shall in so thick a darkness thee inthrall,
That thou a blockish people shall be made,
Still wandering on in a deceiving shade;
Mistrusting those that safest paths are showing,
Most trusting them, who counsel thy undoing;
And aye tormented be with doubts and fears,
As one that outeries, in dark places hears.
Nor shall the hand of God from thee return,
Till he has also smote thine eldest-borne.
That is, till he has taken from the quite,
Even that whereon thou setst thy whole delight;
And filled every house throughout this Nation,
With deaths unlooked for, and lamentation.
So great shall be thy ruin, and thy shame,
That when the neighbor kingdoms hear the same
Their ears shall tingle. And when that day comes,
In which thy follies must receive their doomes;
A day of clouds, a day of gloominesse,
A day of black despair, and heaviness,
It will appear. And, then thy vanities,
Thy gold, thy silver, thy confederacies,
And all those reeds on which thou have depended;
Will fail thy trust, and leave thee unbefriended.
Thy King, thy Priests and Prophets, then shall mourn;
And, peradventure, fainedly return
To beg of God to succor them: but, they
Who will not harken to his voice today,
Shall cry unheeded: and he will despise
Their vows, their prayers, and their sacrifice:
A sea of troubles, all thy hopes shall swallow:
As waves on waves, so plague on plague shall follow:
And, every thing that was a blessing to thee,
Shall turn to be a curse, and help undo thee.
Thy Sov'raignes have to thee thy Fathers bin;
By means of them has peace been kept within
Thy sea-girt limits: they, thy weal befriended,
The blessed Faith they stoutly have defended:
And, thou have cause of goodly hopes in him,
Who has, of late, put on thy Diadem.
But know, that (till thou shall repent) no part
Belongs to thee of what is his desert
His princely virtues, to his own avail,
Shall profit much: but they to thee shall fail.
To thee his clemency shall seem severe,
His favors all, shall injuries appear;
And when thy sin is fully ripe in thee,
Thy Prince and people, then* alike shall be.
Thou shall have Babes to be thy Kings; or worse,
Those Tyrants who by cruelty and force
Shall take away thy ancient freedoms quite,
From all their Subjects; yea themselves delight,
In their vexations: and, all those that are
Made slaves thereby, shall murder, yet not dare
To stir against them. By degeers they shall
Deprive thee of thy patrimonies all;
Compel thee (as in other Lands, this day)
For thine own meat, and thine own drink* to pay.
And, at the last begin to exercise
Upon thy sons, all heathnish tyrannies,
As just Prerogatives To these intents,
Thy Nobles shall become their instruments.
For they who had their birth from noble races,
Shall (some and some) be brought into disgraces
From offices they shall excluded stand:
And all their virtuous offspring from the Land,
Shall quite be worn in stead of whom shall rise
A brood advanced by impieties,
By flattery by purchase, and by that
Which every truely-noble one does hate.
From stems obscure, and out of mean professions,
They shall ascend and mount by their ambtions,
To seats of Justice; and those Nam^s to bear*
Which honored most within these Kingdoms are.
And being thither got, shall make more strong
Their new-built Greatness, by increasing wrong*
To those* will some of these themselves unite,
Who by their births to Lordly Stil^s have right;
But, viciously consuming their estate,
Did from their fathers worths degenerate.
By this Confederacy* their nobler bloods*
Shall countenance the others ill-got goods;
The others wealth again shall keep from scorn
Their beggary, who have been nobly borne:
And, both together, being else unable,
(In this ill course to make their standing stable)
Shall seek how they more great, and strong, may grow
By compassing the public overthrow.
They shall abuse thy Kings, with tales, and lies;
With seeming love, and servile flatteries.
They shall persuade them they have power to make
Their Wills, their Law; and as they please to take
There peoples goods, their children and their lives,
Even by their just and due Prerogatives.
When thus much they have made them to believe,
Then they shall teach them practices to grieve
Their subjects by; and, instruments become
To help the screwing up, by some and some,
Of Monarchies to Tyrannies. They shall
Abuse Religion, Honesty, and all.
To compass their designs. They shall devise
Strange projects; and with impudence, and lies,
Proceed in settling them. They shall forget
Those reverent usages, which do befit
The majesty of State; and rail, and storm,
When they pretend disorders to reform.
In their high Counsels, and where men should have
Kind admonitions, and reprovings grave,
When they offend, they shall be threatened there,
Or scoft, or taunted, though no cause appear.
It is unseemly for a Judge to sit
And exercise a jibing Schoole-boyes wit
Upon their trades, or names, who stand before
Their judgment seats: bu^ who does not abhor
To hear it, when a Magistrate objects,
Birth, poverty, or personal defects
In an upbraiding wise? Or, who with me
Derides it not, when in our Courts we see
Those men, whose bodies are both old and weak,
(Forgetting grave and useful things to speak)
Uent Giants words, and bristle up, as tho
Their very breath could armies overthrow:
Whereas (poor weaklings) were there in their places
No more authority, then in their faces,
Their persons, or their language, all their chasing,
And threatening, nothing would effect but laughing.
For unto me big looks, and crying ho^^,
As dreadful seems, as when a child cries boh
To fright his Nurse, yea such a bugbeare fashion
Eff^cteth naught but scornful indignation.
But in those times (which nearer are then some
Suppose perhaps) such Rhetoric will come
To be in use; and arguments of Reason,
And just proceeding, will be out of season.
Their Wisdom shall be folly; and, go nigh
To bring con^empt on their Authority.
Their Council Fable shall a snare be made,
And those against whom they no just matter had,
At first appearance shall be urged to say
Some word or other, e're they part away,
Which will betray their innocence to blame,
And bring upon them detriment and shame:
Yea, many times (as David has of old,
Concerning such oppressors well foretold)
To humble crouchings, and to fained shows,
Descend they shall, to work men's overthrowes:
And what their subtilty does fail to gain,
They shall by rigor, and by force obtain.
What ever from thy people they can tear,
Or borrow, they shall keep, as if it were
A prize which had been taken from the Foe:
And they shall make no conscience what they do
To prejudice Posterity. For, they
To gain their lust, but for the present day,
Shall with such love unto themselves endeavor,
That (though they knew it would undo for ever
Their own posterity) it shall not make
Those Monsters any better course to take.
Nay, God shall give them up for their offenses,
To such uncomely reprobated senses:
And blind them so, that (when the axe they see
Even hewing at the root of their own tree,
By their own handy strokes) they shall not grieve
For their approaching fall: no, nor believe
Their fall approaches; nor assume that heed
Which might prevent it, till they fall indeed.
Thy Princes, Britain, in those days, will be
Like roaring Lions, making prey of thee.
God shall deliver thee into their hand.
And they shall act their pleasure in the Land;
As one his Prophet threatened to that Nation,
Which does exemplify thy Desolation.
Thy Kings (as thou have wallowed in excess)
Shall take delight in drink, and wantonness.
And, those who thou do call thy Noble-ones
Shall to the very marrow, gnaw thy bones.
Thy Lawyers fulfully shall wrest thy Laws,
And (to the ruin of the common Cause)
Shall mis-interpret them, in hope of grace
From those, who may dispoyle them of their place.
Yea, that whereto they are obliged both
By Conscience, by their Calling, and their Oath
To put in execution, they shall fear,
And, leave them helpelesse, who oppessed are.
Thy Prelates in the spoil of thee shall share;
Thy Priests, as light shall be, as those that are
The meanest persons. All their Prophecies,
Or preachings, shall be herisies and lies.
The word of truth in them shall not remain,
Their lips no wholesome knowledge shall retain,
And all his outward means of saving Grace,
Thy God shall carry to another place.
Mark well oh Britain! what I now shall say,
And do not sleihhtly pass these words away;
But, be assured that when God begins,
To bring that vengeance on thee, for thy sins,
Which hazard will with total overthrow,
Thy Prophets, and thy Priests shall sliely sow
The seeds of that dissension and sedition,
Which time will ripen for thy sad perdition.
Even they, who formerly, were of thy peace
The happy instruments, shall then increase
Thy troubles most. And, even as when the Jews
Gods truth-presaging Prophets did abuse,
He suffered those who preached in his Name,
Such falsehoods as the chiefest cause became
Of their destruction: so if thou go on
To make a scorn (as thou have often done)
Of them who seek thy welfare, he will send
False Prophets, that shall bring thee to thine end*
By saying all things thou would have them say:
And lulling thee asleep in thine own way.
If any brainsick Fellow, whom the Devil
Seduceth to inflict, on thee some evil,
Shall coin false Doctrines, or persuade thee to
Some foolish course that will, at length, undo
The Commonweal: ^his counsel thou shall follow*
Thou, covered with his bait, a hook shall swallow
To rend thine entrails: and thine ignorance
Shall also for that mischief, him advance.
But if that any love^ of thy weal,
Inspired with truth, and with an honest zeal,
Shall tell thee ought pert^ining to thy good,
His Messages shall stiffly be withstood:
That Seer shall be charged not to see;
His word shall slighted as a potsherd be
His l^fe shall be traduced, to disgrace
His Counsels; or, his errant to debase:
In stead of recompense he shall be sure,
Imprisonments, or threatenings to procure:
And peradventure (as those Prophets were,
Who did among the Jewish Peers declare
Their States enormities) his good intention,
May be so rong'd, that he, by some invention,
May loose his life, with public shame and hate,
As one that is a troubler of the State.
But not unless the Priest thereto consent*
For in those days shall few men innocent
Be grieved (through any quarter of the Land)
In which thy Clergy shall not have some hand.
If ever in the Fields (as God forbid)
The blood of thine own children shall be shed
By civil discord, they shall blow the flame,
That will become thy ruin, and thy shame.
And thus it shall be kindled. When the times,
Are nigh at worst; and thy increasing crimes
Almost complete; the Devil shall begin
To bring strange crotchets, and opinons in
Among thy Teachers, which will breed disunion,
And interrupt the visible communion
Of thy established Church. And, in the steed
Of zealous Pastors, (who Gods flock did feed)
There shall arise within thee, by degrees*
A Clergy, that shall more desire to fleece,
Then feed the flock. A Clergy it shall be,
Divided in it self: and they shall thee
Divide among them, into several factions:
which rend thee will, and fill thee with destructions:
They all in ourward seeming shall pretend
Gods glory, and to have one pious end:
But, under color of sincere devotion,
Their study shall be temporal promotion;
Which will among themselves strange quarrels make
Wherein thy other children shall pe^^take.
As to the Persons, or the Cause, they stand
Affected, even quite throughout the Land.
One part of these will for preferment strive,
By li^ting up the King's prerogative
Above it self. They shall persuade him to
Much more then Law or Conscience bids him do;
And say, God warrants it. His holy Law^s
They shall pervert, to justify their cause;
And, impudently wrest, to prove their ends,
What God, to better purposes, intends.
They shall not blush to say, that every King,
May do like Solomon, in every thing,
As if they had his warrant: and shall dare
Ascribe to Monarchs, rights that proper are
To none but Christ; and mixed their flatteries,
With no less gross and wicked blasphemies*
Then Heathens did: yea, make their Kings believe,
That whosoever they oppress or greive,
It is no wrong; nor fit for men oppressed,
To seek by their own Laws to be redressed,
Such council shall thy Princes then provoke,
To cast upon thee Rehoboams yoke.
And, they not caring, or not taking heed
How ill that ill-advised King did speed,
Shall multiply thy causes of distraction.
For, then, will of thy Priests, the other faction
Bestir themselves. They will in outward shows,
Those whom I last have mentioned, oppose.
But, in thy ruin, they will both agree,
As in one Center, though far off they be
In their Diameter. With lowly zeal,
An envious pride they sl^ly shall conceal:
And, as the former to thy Kings will teach
Mere Tyranny: so shall these other preach
Rebellion to the people; and shall strain
The word of God, Sedition to maintain.
They shall not fear to say, that if thy King
Become a Tyrant, thou may also fling
Obedience off; or from his Crown divorce him;
Or, by the terror of drawn swords enforce him.
Which false Divinity, shall to the Devil
Send many souls, and bring on thee much evil.
Oh! be thou therefore watchful; and when e're
These Lambs with Dragons voices do appear,
Repent thy sin, or take it for a token,
That some great Bulwark of thy peace is broken,
Which must be soon repaired; or else, all
The greatness of thy glory, down will fall.
Take heed of those false prophets, who will strive
Betwixt thy Prince and people to contrive
A disagreement. And, what ever come,
Thy due Allegiance never start thou from.
For (their oppressions though we may withstand
By pleading Laws, or Customs) not a hand
Must move against them, save the hand of God,
Who makes a King, a Bulwark, or a Rod,
As pleases him. Oh! take ye therefore heed
Ye People, and ye Kings (that shall succeed)
Of these Impostors. Of the last beware
Ye Subjects: for, their Doctrines hellish are.
And though they promise Liberty and Peace,
Your Thraldom, and your Troubles they will increase.
Shun oh! ye Kings the first; sor, they advise
What will your Crowns and honors prejudice.
When you do think their Prophecies befriend you,
They do but unto R^moth-Gilead send you,
Where you shall perish; and poor Micahs word,
Though less esteemed more safety will afford.
They will abuse your piety, and all
Your virtues. For their wicked ends they shall
Apply the Sacred Story; or what ever
May seem to further their unjust endevor.
Even what the son of Hannah told the Jews,
Should be their scourge (because they did refuse
The sov'raignty of God, and were so vain
To ask a King which over them might reign
As heathen Princes did) that curse they shall
Affirm to be a Law Monarchical
Which God himself established to stand
Throughout all ages, and in every land.
Which is as good Divinity, as they
Have also taught, who do not blush to say
That Kings may have both Wives and Concubines;
And, by that Rule whereby these great Divines
Shall prove their Tenet, I dare undertake
(If found it hold) that I like proof will make
Of any I^wish Custom, and devise
Authority for all absurdities.
But, false it is. For might all Kings at pleasure
(As by the right of royalty) make seasure
Of any man's possessions: why i pray
Did Ahab grieve, that Naboth said him nay?
Why made he not this answer thereunto,
(If what the Prophet said some Kings would do,
Were justly to be done) Thy vineyards mine;
And at my pleasure, Naboth, all that is thine
Assume I may, like a Turky-chick,
Did he so foolishly grow sullen-sick,
And get possession by a wicked fact
Of what might have been his by royal act?
If such Divinity, as this were true,
The Queen should not have needed to pursue
Poor Naboth, as she did; or, so contrive
His death; since by the Kings Prerogative,
She might have got his Vinyard. Nor would God
Have scourged that murder with so keen a rod*
On Ahab, had he asked but his due.
For, he did neither plot, nor yet pursue
The murder; nor (for ought that we can tell)
Had knowledge of the deed of Iezabel,
Till God revealed it by the Prophet to him,
Nor is it said, that Naboth wrong did do him,
Or disrespect; in that he did not yield,
To sell, or give, or to exchange his Field.
The Jewish Commonwealth did so instate,
That, theit possessions none could alienate,
But for a time; who ever, for his money,
Or in exchange, desired their patrimony.
And, doubtless, we offend, who at this day
Those fredomes give, or lose, or sell away,
Which were in common right possessed of old,
By our Forefathers; and, continue should
To all their after comers. For, although
We may dispose of what pertaines unto
Our persons: yet, those dues which former ages have left unto us for our
heritages,
(And whereunto, the child that borne must be,
Has every whit as good a right as we)
Those dues we should preserve with all our might,
By pleading of our just and ancient rgiht,
In humble wise, if so the Sov'raigne state
Our freedom shall attempt to violate.
But, when by peaceful means we cannot save it,
We to the pleasure of the King must leave it,
And unto God our Judge: for all the power
In us, consists in saying, This is our.
A King is for a blessing, or a curse;
And therefore (though a Fool he were, or worse,
A Tyrant, or an Ethnic) no man may
So much as in their private closets, pray
Against his person; though they moy petition
Against the wickedness of his condition.
Nor, is this suffrance due to those alone,
Who subject are unto a Monarchs throne,
But, from all those who either subjects are
To mixed Government, or popular.
For, though irregularities appear
In every State; because but men they are
Whom Gods exalts to rule: yet, it is he
By whom all Governments ordained be.
And every Government (although the Name
Be different) is in effect the same.
In Monarchies, the Counsel (as it were
An Aristocracy) one while does bear
The sway of all; and though they name the King,
Yet, him they overruled in every thing.
Sometime again, the pop'lar voice we see,
Does awe the Counsel, when in them there be
Some pop'lar Spirits* Aristocracies
Are otherwhile the same with Monarchies,
For, one great man among them gets the power,
From all the rest, and like an Emperor,
Does act his pleasure. And we know it is common
To have some foolish Favorite* or Woman,
To govern him. So in a pop'lar State,
Affairs are managed by the self same fate;
And either one or more, away do steal
The peoples hearts, and sway the Commonweal.
Thus God is pleased, to humble and to raise*
Thus, he by several names, and several ways,
The world does govern. Yea, thus, even in one nation,
And in one State, he makes much alteration
In forms of Government; of changing that
Which is but accidental to a State.
And, such his Justice, and his Wisdom is,
That he preserves by the means of this,
Those things which do essentially pertain
To that great Power, which over all does reign*
Nor is he pleased thus it should be done
In States that merely civil are alone;
But, also, in the Churches governments,
Allows the change of outward accidents.
Yea, they to whom he gives the oversights
Of some particular Church, may change old Rites,
The Customs, Forms, or Titles, as occasions
Are offered them; or, as the Times, or Nations,
Require a change: provided so, that they
Take nothing which essential is, away;
Nor add what shall repugne or prejudice
Gods Laws, his Kingdom, or the Liberties
Of them that are his people. For, in what
Has any Church a power, if not in that
Which is indifferent? Or, in what I pray
Will men the Church authority obey,
If not in such like things? Or, who should be
The Judge what is indifferent, if not she?
A private Spirit knows what best agrees
With his own fancy; but, the Church best sees,
What fits the Congr^gation. From what gives
Offense to one, another man receives
Much comfort: and, his conscience edifies,
By disciplines, which many do despise.
A Parish is a little Diocese;
And, as of Cities, Towns, and Villages,
A Bishopric consists: so, that does rise
By Tythings, Hamlets, and by Families.
And little difference would be in the same,
(Excepting in the largeness and the name)
If their opinions were allowed of all,
Who favor not the style Episcopal:
For, every Priest would then usurp the same
Authority, whereof some hate the name.
Yea, many a one would then his Parish make
A little Popedom, and upon him take
(Considering his mean power) as much as he
That Universal Bishop claims to be:
And prove more proud, and troublesome, then they
Against whose Lordlinesse they now inveigh.
This therefore is my Rule; that Govern^ment
(What e're it be) in which to me God lent
My birth and breeding; that, until my end,
I will obey, and to my power defend.
Yea, though it tyrannize, I will denay
No more obedience, then by law I may:
Even by those Laws and Customs whirh do stand
In force, and unrepealed in that land.
What right another had, e're I was borne
Or how, or for what sin, Gods hand has torn
His Kingdom from him, I will never care;
Let them go answer that who Subjects were,
(When lost it was) and had that means, and calling,
And years, which might prevented have his falling.
Or should another Country take me home
As one of hers; when thither I did come
I would not seek, nor wish to innovate
The Titles, or the Customs of that State,
To what some other Countries better thought:
But, leave such things to those to whom I ought.
And, there, if any Faction shall constrain
That I one part must take, I will maintain
What bore the Sov'raignty when I came thither;
And, I and that will stand and fall together.
The same obedience, also, keep I shall,
To governments Ecclesiastical
Where e're I come; if nothing they command
Which does Gods word, essentially, withstand:
Or, indirectly, or directly, thwart
His glory, or the purity pervert
Of Christian Principles, nor further strife,
Nor cause, nor countenance an evil life.
The Hyerarchy, here, I will obey,
And reverence, while I in England stay.
In Scotland if I lived, I would deny
No due respect to their Presbytery.
Geneva should I visit, I would there
Submit my self to what their customs were.
Yea, wheresoever I am, I will suppose
The Spirit in that Church much better knows
What best that place befitteth, then I do:
And, I will live conformed thereunto,
In every thing that is merely politic,
And injuries not the Doctrines Catholic.
To every temp'rall power I Will be the same,
By whatsoever cognizance, or name,
Men please to call it. If I should be sent
To Poland, where a mixed government
Established is; I would not tell them, there,
That any other Custom better were
Were I in Switzerland, I would maintain
Democrity; and, think to make it plain,
That for these Times, those Cantons, and that Nation,
There could not be a better Domination.
In Venice, far before a Monarchy
I would prefer an Aristocratie.
In Spain, and France, and in great Britain here
I hold no Goverments more perfect are
Then Monarchies. And, if Gods will should be,
Beneath a Tyrant to envassaile me,
I would persuade my self, that heavy yoke
Were best, for some respects; and, to the stroke
Even of an iron Mace would subject be,
In Body; with a mind that should be free
From his inforcement, (if he did withstand,
Or bid me what Gods Law does countermand.)
There is, I know, a middle-way that lies
Even just betwixt the two extremities,
Which to sedition, and to saction tend.
To find which tract, my whole desire I bend;
And wish it followed more. For, if we tread
That harmless path, we cannot be misled;
Nor shamed, though blamed we be. To every man
I feign would give his due; and all I can
I do endeavor it. I would not wrong
My Country; neither take what does belong
To Caesar: nor infringe, or prejudice,
The vnivesall Churches liberties;
Nor for her outward Discipline prefer
Or censure, any Church particular;
Or any State, but as befit it may,
His Muse, which naught but needful truths does say.
Nor have I any purpose to withdraw
Obedience, or respect from any Law
That Is positive; or, to dishearten from
Those Customs, which a Christian state become.
Nor have I any thought to scandalize,
Or speak a miss of Principalities;
Or, to traduce men's persons* but, I fall
On errors of men's lives in general,
And, on those great abuses, which I see
To blemish every Calling and Degree
Of Dignities and Persons, I observe,
All means I can, their honors to preserve,
When I reprove their faults. And, even as he
That hunteth Foxes, where Lambs feeding be,
May fright that harmless flock, and suffer blame
Of some Bystanders, (knowing not his Game)
When from his Dogs, those innocents are free,
And none but their devourers bitten be.
So, though my reprehensions, often are
Mistook by foolish Readers; they are far
From reprehending those, or taxing that
Which is unfitting for my shooting at.
I speak those things which will advantage rather
Then harm: and hence this blinded age may gather
Much light. Thich little volume does relate
Naught else but what is like to be our fate,
If sin increase; and what in former times
Did fall on other Nations for their crimes.
I utter what our welfare may increase,
And help confirm us in a happy peace;
Which they will never compass, who pursue
To speak what is pleasing, rather then what is true,
How ever, here my thoughts deliv'red be:
Let God, as he shall please, deliver me.
And if what here is mentioned, thou do heed
(Oh Britain!) in those times that shall succeed,
It may prevent much loss, and make thee shun
Those mischiefs, whereby Kingdoms are undone.
But, to thy other sins, if thou shall add
Rebellions (as false Prophets will persuade)
Which likely are to follow, when thou shall
In thy profession of Religion halt:
Then, will thy Kings and People scourge each other,
For their offenses, till both fall together:
By weakening of your powers, to make them way,
Who seek and look for that unhappy day.
Then, shall disorder every where abound
And neither just nor pious man be found
The best shall be a Br^er or a Thorn,
By whom their neighbors shall be scratcht and torn.
Thy Princes shall to nothing condescend
For any merit, just, or pious end;
But either for increasing of their treasure,
Or for accomplishing their wilful pleasure:
And unto what they sell or daine for meede,
There shall be given little trust or heed.
For, that which by their words confirm they shall,
(The royal Seals uniting therewithal)
A toy shall frustate; and a gift shall make
Their strictest Orders no effect to take.
The Judge, without a bribe, no cause shall end:
No man shall trust his brother, or his friend:
The parents and the children shall despise
And hate, and spoil each other: she that lies
Within her husbands bosom, shall betray him:
They who thy people should protect, shall slay them:
The aged shall regarded be of none:
The poor shall by the rich be trodden on:
Such grievous insolences, every where
Shall acted be, that good and bad shall fear
In thee to dwell; and, men discreet shall hate
To be a Ruler, or a Magistrate;
When they behold (without impenitence)
So much injustice, and such violence.
And, when thy wickedness this height shall gain,
To which (no doubt) it will e're long attain,
If thou proceed: Then, from the bow that is bent
(And half way drawn already) shall be sent
A mortal arrow: and it pierce thee shall
Quite through the head, the liver, and the gall.
The Lord shall call, and whistle from afar,
For those thy enemies that fiercest are:
For those thou fear most; and they shall from
Their Countries, like a whirlewind hither come,
They shall not sleep, nor stumble, nor untie
Their garments, till within thy field they lie,
Sharp shall their arrows be, and strong their bow,
Their faces shall as full of horror show
As does a Lions. Like a bolt of thunder
Their troops of horse shall come, and tread thee under
Their iron feet. Thy foes shall eat thy bread,
And with thy flocks both clothed be and fed.
Thy Dwellers, they shall carry from their own,
To Countries which their fathers have not known.
And, thither shall such mischiefs them pursue,
That they who seek the pit-fall to eschew,
Shall in a snare be taken. If they shall
Escape the sword, a serpent in the wall
To death shall sting them: yea (although they hap;
To shun a hundred plagues) they shall not escape;
But, with new dangers, still be chased about,
Until that they are wholly rooted out.
The Plowman, then, shall be afraid to sow;
Artificers their labor shall forgo;
The Merchant man shall cross the Seas no more,
(Except to fly and seek some other shore)
Thy ablest-men shall faint: thy wise-ones, then
Shall know themselves to be but foolish men.
And they who built and planted by oppression,
Shall leave their gettings to the foes possession.
Yea, God will scourge thee, England, seven times more
With seven times greater Plagues then heretofore,
Then* thy Allies their friendship shall withdraw;
And, they that of thy greatness stood in awe,
Shall say (in scorn) Is this the valiant Nation,
That had throughout the world such reputation,
By victories upon the shore? are these
That people, which were master of the seas,
And grew so mighty? yea that petty Nation,
That were not worthy of thy indignation,
Shall mock thee too; and all thy former fame,
Forgot shall be, or mentioned to thy shame.
Mark how Gods Plagues were doubled on the Jews
When they his mild corrections did abuse*
Mark what, at last upon their Land he sent;
And, look thou for the self same punishment,
If them thou imitatest. I or their sin,
At first, but eight years Bondage they were in.
Their wickedness grew more; and God did then,
To Eglon, make them slaves, eight years and ten
They disobeying, still, the God of heaven;
Their year of Servitude were twenty seven,
To Jabin and to Midian. Then, prevailed
Philistia forty years; and, when that failed,
To make them of their evil ways repent;
There was* among themselves* a fatal rent;
And, they often scourged each other. Still, they trod
The selfsame path; and, then the hand of God
Brought Ashur on them; and, did make them bear
His heavy yoke, until the seventeenth year.
And last of all the Roman Empire came,
Which from their Country rooted out their Name
That foolish project which they did embrace,
To keep them in possession of their place,
Did loose it. And, like Cain, that vagrant Nation,
Has now remained in fearful Desolation
Nigh sixteen hundred years: and, whatsoever
Some lately dream) in vain, they look for here
A temp'rall Kingdom. For, as long ago
Their Psalmist said; No Prophet does foreshow
This thraldoms end. Nor shall it end until
The Gentiles their just number do fulfill:
Which is unlike to be until that hour,
In which there shall be no more temporal power,
Of temporal Kingdom. Therefore gather them
(Oh Lord!) unto thy new Jerusalem,
In thy due time. For, yet unto that place
They have a promised right, by thy mere grace.
To those who shall repent, thy firm Election
Continues in this temporal rejection.
Oh! show thy mercy in their desolation,
That thou may honored be in their salvation
Yea, teach us also, by their fearful fall,
To harken to thy voice, when thou do call;
(Lest thou in anger, unto us protest,
That we shall never come into thy rest)
For, we have followed them in all their sin:
Such, and so many, have our warnings bin:
And if thou still prolong not thy compassion,
To us belongs the selfsame Desolation.
And it will shortly come, with all those terrors
That we on them inflicted, for their errors.
Then, woe shall be to them that heretofore
By joining house, to house expelled the poor;
And field have into field incoporated,
Until their Township were depopulated.
For, desolate their dwelling shall be made:
Even in their blood the Lord shall bathe his blade:
And they that have by avarice, and wiles,
Erected Palaces and costly Piles;
Shall think, the stones and timbers in the wall,
Aloud, to God, for vengeance on them call.
Then, woe shall be to them who early rise
To eat and drink, and play, and wantonnize;
Still adding sin to sin: for, they the pain
Of cold, and thirst, and hunger, shall sustain;
And be the servile slaves of them that are
Their foes, as to their lusts they captives were.
Then woe to them who darkness more have loved
Then light; and good advice have disapproved:
For, they shall wander in a crooked path,
Which neither light, nor end, nor comfort has.
And, when for Guides, and Counsel they do cry*
Not one shall pity them, who passes by.
Then, woe to them that have corrupted bin*
To justify the wicked in his sin;
Or, for a bribe, the righteous to condemn:
For, flames (as on the chafe) shall seize on them:
Their bodies to the dunghill shall be cast:
Their flower shall turn to dust; their stock shall wast,
And all the glorious titles they have worn,
Shall but increase their infamy and scorn,
Then woe to them that have been raised aloft
By good men's ruins; and by laying soft
And easy pillowes, under great men's arms,
To make them pleased in their alluring charms.
Then, woe to them who being grown afraid
Of some nigh peril, sought unlawful aid;
And, setting Gods protection quite aside,
Upon their own inventions have relied.
For, God their foolish hopes will bring to naught;
On them, their feared mischief shall be brought;
And, all their wit and strength, shall not suffice,
To have their sorrow off, which on them lies.
Yea, then, oh Britain! woe to every one,
That has without repentance evil done:
For, those who do not heed, nor bear in mind
His visitings, Gods reaching hand will find;
And they with howling cries and lamentation,
Shall sue and seek, in vain, for his compassion.
Because they careless of his Mercies were,
Till in consumming wrath he did appear*
But, still, we set far off that evil day;
In dull security we pass away
Our precious time; and with vain hopes and toys,
Build up a trust which every puff destroys.
And therefore, still when healing is expected,
New and unlookt for troubles are effected.
We gather Armies, and we Fleets prepare;
And, then* both strong and safe we think we are.
But, when we look for victories, and glory,
What follows, but events that make us sorry?
And it is Gods mercy that we turn our faces
With so few losses, and no more disgraces.
For, what are most of those whom we commend
Such actions to; and whom we forth do send
To fight those Battles, which the Lords we call,
But, such as never fight for him at all?
Whom do thou make thy Captains, and dispose
Such Offices unto, but unto those
(Some few excepted) who procure by friends,
Command and pay, to serve their private ends?
Their language, and their practices declare,
That entertained by Gods Foe they were.
Their whoring, swearing, and their drunkenness,
Do far more plainly to the world express
What General they do belong unto,
Then all their Feathers and their Ensigns do.
These by their unrepented sins, betray
Thy Cause. By these, the honor, and the day
Is lost: and when thou hopest that thy trouble
*Shall have and end, thy danger waxes double.
We wished for Parliaments; and them we made
Our Cod: for, all the hope that many had
To remedy the public discontent,
Was by the wisdom of a Parliament.
Well; Parliaments we had; and what in being,
Suceedeth yet, but greater disagreeing,
With greater grievances then heretofore?
And reason good: for, we depended more
On outward means, then on Gods will that sends
All punishments; and all afflictions ends.
Believe it, should our Parliaments agree
In every motion: should our Sov'raigne be
So gracious, as to condescend to all
Which for his weal and ours, propose we shall;
Even that Agreement, till our sins we leave,
Shall make us but secure; and help to weave
A snare, by whose fine threads we shall be caught,
Before we see the mischief that is wrought.
Whilst we by Parliament do chiefly seek
Mere temp'rall ends, the King shall do the like:
Yea, till in them we mutually agree
To help each other; and unfeigned be
In laboring for a Christian Reformation;
Each Meeting shall beget a new vexation.
This Island has has some sense of what she ayle
And very much, these evil times bewailes:
But, not so much our sins do we lament,
Or mourn, that God for them is discontent,
As that the Plagues they being disturb our pleasures,
Increase our dangers, and exhaust our treasures.
And, for these causes, now and then we fast,
And pray, as long as half a day does last.
For, if the Sun do hut a little clear
That cloud, from which a tempest we do fear,
What kind of grief we took, we plainly show
By those rejoycings which thereon ensue:
For, in the stead of such due thankfulness,
As Christian zeal obliges to express;
To pleasure (not to God) we sacrifice;
Renew our sin; revive our vanities;
And, all our vowed gratitude expires,
In Games, in Guns, in Bells, in Healths, or Fires.
We feign would be at peace; but few men go
That way, as yet, whereby it may be so.
We have not that humility which must
Effect it: we are false, and cannot trust
Each other; no nor God with true confessions:
Which shows that we abhor not our transgressions.
It proves, that of our errors, we in heart
Repent not, neither purpose to depart
From any folly. For all they that are
Sincerely penitent, do nothing fear
So much as their own guilt; nor seek to gain
Ought more, then to be reconciled again:
And they that are thus minded* never can
Be long unreconcil'd to God, or man.
When we should stoop, we most our selves exalt
And (though we be) would not be thought in fault.
Nay, though we faulty be, and though and known,
And proved so, and see that we are thro^^e
By our apparent errors, into straits,
From which we cannot get by all our sleights
Yet, still our selves we vaunt and justify,
And struggle, till the snare we faster tie.
We sin, and we to boast it have no ^^^ame,
Yet storm when others do our follies name:
And rather then we will so much as say
We did amiss (though that might wipe away
The stain of all) I think that some of us
So wilful are, so proud, and mischievous,
That we our selves, would ruin, and our Nation,
To keep our shadow of a Reputation.
Oh! if we are thus headstrong it is unlike
We any part of our proud sails will strike
Till they have suncke our vessel in the Sea,
Or by the furious winds, are torn away.
Twere better, tho, we did confess our wound,
Then hide it till our state grew more unsound.
Twere better we some wealth, or office lost,
Then keep them, till our lives, and all, it cost*
And therefore, let us wisely be advised,
Before we by a tempest be surprised.
Down first with our Top-gallants, and our Flags;
In storms the skilfull'st Pilots make no brags.
Let us (if that be not enough) let fall
Our Misn^-yeard, and strike our top-sailes all.
If this we find be not enough to do,
Strike Fote-saile, Sprit-saile yea and Main-saile too.
And, rather then our Ship should sink or rend;
Let Us overboard, goods, mast and tackling send.
Save but the Hull, the Master, and the Men;
And we may live to scour the seas again.
Believe it England, howsoever some
(Who should foresee thy plagues before they come)
Endeavor to persuade thee that thou have
A hopeful time, and that the worst is past.
Yet I dare boldly tell thee, thou have nigh
Worn out Gods patience by impiety.
And, that unless the same we do renew
By penitence, our folly we shall rue.
But, what am I, that me thou should believe?
Or, unto what I tell thee, credit give?
It may be this adultrous Generation
Expects tokens of her desolation;
And therefore I will give them signs of that
Which they are now almost arrived at.
Not signs, so mystical as most of those
Which did the ruin of the Jews disclose;
But, signs as evident as are the day.
For, know ye Britains, that what God did say
Ierusalems destruction should foreshew,
He spoke to every State that should ensue.
And, that he naught of her, or to her spoke.
For hers alone, but also for our sake.
One sign that Gods long-suffering we have tired,
And that his patience is almost expired.
Is this; that many judgments he has sent.
And still removed them e're we did repent.
For, God (even by his Holiness) did swear,
(Says Amos) such a Nation he will tear
With briars, and with Fish hooks rend away
The whole posterity of such as they.
Clean teeth (says God) I gave them; and with bread
In many places, them I scantly fed;
And yet they sought me not: Then I restrained
The dewes of heaven; upon this Field I rained,
And not on that; yea, to one City came
Some two or three, to quench their thirsty flame;
Yet, to return to me, no care they took;
With Blastings then, and Mildewes, I them struck;
And mixed among their Fruits the Palmer-worme;
Yet, they their lives did not a jot reform:
Then did I send the Pestilence (said he)
Devoured by the Sword, their young men be;
Their Horse are slain, and up to heaven ascends
Their stink; yet I discover no amends
The self same things thy God in thee has done*
Oh England! yet, here follows thereupon
So small amendment, that they are a sign
To thee; and their sharp Judgment, will be thine.
The second Token which does fore-declare
When Cities States, and Realms, declining are*
Even Christ himself has left us: for, (says he)
When Desolation shall approaching be,
Of wars, and warlike rumors ye shall hear;
Rare signs and tokens will in heaven appear;
Down from the Firmament the stars shall fall;
The hearts of many men, then, fail them shall;
There will be many scandals and offenses;
Great earthquakes, Schisms, Dearths, and Pestilences,
Realm, Realm; and Nation, Nation shall oppose;
The nearest friends, shall be the greatest foes.
Against the Church shall many tyrannize;
Deceivers, and false Prophets, shall arise;
In every place shall wickedness abound;
And, Charity shall very cold be befound.
This Christ himself did Prophecy: and we
Are doubtless blind, unless confessed it be,
That at this hour, upon this Kingdom here,
These marks of Desolation viewed are.
How often have we seen prodigious lights,
O'respread the face of heaven in moonlesse nights?
How many dreadful Meteors, have there been
In this our Climate, lately heard and seen?
Who knows not that but a while ago
A Blazing-Star did threat, if not foreshow
Gods Judgments* In what age, tofore did hear
So many, who did Saints and Stars appear,
Fall (as it were) from heaven? Or who has heard
Of greater Earthquakes* then has lately scared
These quarters of the world? How often, the touch
Of Famine have we had? But, when so much
Devoured by the Pestilence were we,
As in this present year our people be?
Of Wars, and martial rumors, never more
Were heard within these confines heretofore;
When were all Kingdoms, and all Nations through
The world, so opposite as they are now*
We know no Country, whether nigh or far,
But is engaged, or threatened with some War.
All places, either present woes bewail;
Or else things feared make men's hearts to fail.
False Prophets, and Deceivers we have many;
We scarcely find integrity in any:
The Name of Christ, begins in every place
To suffer persecution and disgrace;
And, we the greatest jeopardies are in,
Among our neighbors, and our nearest kin.
Strange Heresies do every where increase,
Disturbing Sion, and exiling peace.
Impiety does multiply. True love
Grows cold. And, if these tokens do not prove
Our fall draws on, unless we do amend:
I know not when our folly shall have end.
A third apparent sign which does declare
When some devouring Plague approaches near,
Is when a Nation does anew begin
To let Idolatry to enter in;
And openly, or secretly give place
To Heresy, where Truth established was:
Or when like Jeroboam, to possess
An outward profit, or a temporal peace,
They either change Religions, or devise
A worship which does mix Idolatries
With truth. For this, even for this very crime,
The King of Ashur, in Hosea's time
Led Israel captive And, both from the sight
Of God; and from the house of David quite,
They were cut off for ever, and did neither
Serve God nor Idols; but even both together;
In such a mixed Religion as is-that
Which some among us, now, have aimed at.
Mark England; and I prithee mark it well,
If this offense which ruined Israel,
On thee appear not: and, if so it be,
Amend; or look for what it threatens thee.
The fourth true token which does fore-expresse
The ruin of a Land for wickedness,
Is when the Priests* and Magistrates begin,
To grow extremely impudent in sin.
This Sign, the Prophet Micah gives us;
And he (not I) to you cries loudly thus:
Heaere, O ye house of Jacob, and all ye
That Princes of the house of Israel be:
Ye Justice hate; and ye pervert what is good;
Ye build the walls of Sion up with blood;
Jerusalem with sin, ye up have reared,
Your Judges pass their censures for reward;
Your Priests do preach for hire, your Prophets do
Like them; and prophecy for money too.
And, for this cause shall Sion mount (says he)
Even like a plowed field become to be;
And like a Forest hill where bushes grow.
The City of Jerusalem shall show.
Change but the names, oh Britain, and that token
Of desolation, unto thee is spoken.
For, what this day thy Priests and Princes are,
Their actions, and the peoples cries declare.
A fifth sure evidence that God among
Thy ruins will entomb thy same e're long,
(If thou repent not) is even this, that thou
Do every day the more ungodly grow,
By how much more the blessed means of grace
Does multiply it self in every place.
God sends unto thee many learned Preachers,
Apostles, Pastors, and all kind of teachers;
His Visions, and his Prophecies upon thee
He multiplies. And (that he might have won thee
To more sincerity) on all occasions,
By counsel, by entreatie, and persuasions,
He has advised, allured, and befought thee:
With precept upon precept, he has taught thee;
By line on line; by miracle; by reason;
In every place; in season, out of season;
By little and by little; and by much
(Sometime) at once: yet is thy nature such,
That still thou waxest worse; and in the room
Of pleasant Grapes, more Thistles daily come:
And, thou that art so haughty, and so proud,
For this, shall vanish like an empty cloud;
And, as a Lion, Leopard, or a Bear,
Thy God, for this, shall thee in pieces tear.
If thou suppose my Muse did this devise,
Go take it from Hosea's Prophesies
The sixth undoubted signal when the last
Good days of sinful Realms are almost past,
Is when the people near to God shall draw
In word, to make profession of his Law:
And by their tongues his praises forth declare;
Yet, in their hearts from him continue far.
To such a Land, their destiny displayes
Isaiah: for even thus the Prophet says:
God will produce ae marvel in that state
And do a Work that men shall wonder at;
The wisdom of their wisest Counselor,
Shall perish, and their prudent men shall err.
On their deep Counsels, sorrow shall attend;
Their secret plots shall have a dismal end;
Their giddy projects which they have devised,
Shall as the Potters clay be quite despised.
Like Carmel, Lebanon shall seem; and he
Like Lebanon, shall make mount Carmel be.
Their pleasant Fields like Deserts shall appear;
And, there shall Gardens be, where Deserts are.
God keep (thou British I Will) this plague from thee;
For, signs thereof upon thy Body be.
Thou of the purest worship make profession;
Yet, waxest more impure in thy condition.
Thou boastest of the knowledge of Gods word,
Yet, thereunto in manners to accord
Thou do refuse. Thou make protestation
Of piety; yet hate reformation.
Yea, when thy tongue does sing of praise divine,
Thy heart does plot some temporal design.
And, some of those, who in this wise are holy,
Begin to show their wisdom will be folly.
For, when from sight their snares they deepest hide.
By God Almighties eyes they are espide.
The seventh Symptom of a dreadful blow,
(If not a perpetual overthrow)
Is when a slumbring Spirit does surprise
A nation; and has closed up their eyes:
Or when the Prophets and the Seers are
So clouded, that plain truths do not appear:
Or when the Visions evidently seen
Are passed by, as if they had not been:
Or when to Nations who can read, God gives
His Book; and thereof does unseale the leaves,
And bids them read the same, which they to do
Deny* or plead unablenesse thereto.
Black signs are these. For if that Book to them,
Still dark; or as a Book unsealed seem;
Or, if they heed no more what here is said,
Then they that have the Books* and cannot read;
The Judgments, last repeated, are the doom,
That shall on such a stupid Nation come.
This sign is come on us, for, lo, unsealed
Gods Book is now amongst us, and revealed
Are all the Mysteries which do concern
The children of this present age to learn.
So well has he instructed this our land,
That we not only read, but understand
The secrets of his Word. The prophecies
Of his chief Seers, are before our eyes,
Vnveiled* true interpretations
Are made, and many proper applications
Even to ourselves, yet is our heart so blind,
That what we know and see we do not mind.
We hear, and speak, and much ado we keep*
But we as senseless are as men asleep.
What then we do. Yea, while that we are talking,
What snares are in the way where we are walking,
We heed not what we say, but pass along;
And, many times, are fast ensnared among
Those mischiefs, and those faults we did condemn,
Before our tongues have left to mention them.
For our neglect of God in former times,
(Or for some present unrepented crimes)
A slumbring Spirit so possesses us,
That our estate is wondrous dangerous.
We see and hear, and tell to one another
Our perils, yet we headlong haste together
To wilful ruin: and are grown so mad,
That when our friends a better course persuade,
Or seek to stop us (when they see we run
That way in which we cannot ruin shun)
We persecute those men with all our soul,
That we may damn our selves without control.
The eight plain Sign, by which I understand
That some devouring mischief is at hand,
Is that maliciousness which I do see
Among Professors of one Faith to be.
We that have but one Father, and one Mother,
Do persecute, and torture one another.
So hotly, we oppose not Antichrist,
As we our fellow-brethren do resist.
The Protestant, the Protestant defies;
And, we our selves, our selves do scandalize.
Our Church we have exposed to more scorn;
And her fair seamlesse Vest^ent rent, and come,
By our own fury, more then by their spite
Who are to us directly opposite.
To save an Apple, we the Tree destroy;
And, quarrels make for every needless toy:
From us, if any brother differ shall
But in a crochet, we upon him fall
As eagerly, and with as bitter hate,
As if we knew him for a Reprobate.
And, what ever all this does signify,
Saint Paul (by way of caveat) does imply.
Take heed (says he) lest while ye bite each other,
You, of your selves, consumed be together.
Another Sign which causes me to fear
That our confusion is approaching near,
Are those Disunions which I have espide,
In Church, and Commonwealth, this present tide.
We cannot hide these rents; for they do gape,
So wide, that some their Jaws can hardly escape.
Would God, the way to close them up we knew,
Else, what they threaten, time will shortly show;
For, all men know, a City or a Land,
Within it self divided, cannot stand.
The last black Sign that here I will repeat,
(Which does to Kingdoms desolation threat)
Is when the hand of God Almighty brings
The people, into bondage, to their Kings.
I say, when their own King shall take delight,
Those whom he should protect, to rob, and smite.
When they who fed the Sheep, the Sheep shall kill,
And eat them; and suppose they do no ill.
When God gives up a Nation unto those
That are their neighbors, that they may, as foes,
Devour them. When (oh England!) thou shall see
This come to pass, a sign it is to thee
That God is angry; and a certain token
That into pieces thou shall quite be broken:
If not by foreign strength, by force at home;
And, that thy greater torment will become.
This Vengeance, and this fearful preparation,
Of bringing ruin on a sinful Nation,
(If they remain impenitent) the Lord
Does menace; and, by Zachary record,
To make us wise. Oh! let us therefore learn,
What now is coming on us, to discern.
For, (well considered if all things were)
From this Captivity we seem not far.
It now already seems to be projected;
Nay, little wants of being quite effected.
For, they that are our Shepherds, now, are they
That fleece us, and endevor to betray
Our lives and freedoms. Those great men that be
Our neighbors (and can claim no more then we)
Would sell us: and, attempt to gain a power,
Whereby they may, at pleasure, us devour:
And had not we a King, as loath to make
His people slaves, as from himself to take
His lawful right; (or, were there not some let
Vnheeded, which is unremoved yet)
E're this (and justly too) the hand of heaven
Into perpetual bondage us had given.
And, if we do not more Gods will regard,
That mischief is but for a time deferred.
Our King is just and merciful; and tho
Some may (with loyal, and a gilded show
Of pious equity) a while assay
To lead his judgment in his youth astray;
Yet, God (I hope) will keep him so, that he
Shall still be just, (though we ungodly be)
And make him in the fittest hour express
His royal Judgment, and his Righteousness.
But, if God should from us (as God forbid)
Take him, as once he good Josiah did,
He also will (unless we mend) perchance,
In times to come, a Shepherd here advance,
Who shall not plead for what his Young men say
Is just; but, take the same, perforce, away.
An Idol Shepherd, who shall neither care
To find or seek, for those that strayed are;
Nor guard the Lambs; nor cure what has a wound;
Nor cherish those that firm to him are found;
But, take the fat, and rob them of their fleeces;
And eat their flesh; and break their bones in pieces.
More Signs I might, as yet, commemorate,
To show Gods patience is nigh out of date.
But, these are signs enough, and so apparent,
That twenty more will give no better warrant
To what I speak. Yet, if these false appear,
That Is one sign more, our fall approaches near.
Be mindful, therefore, while it is to Day;
And, let no good occasion slip away.
Now rend your hearts, ye Britains, wash and rinse them
From all corruption: from all evil cleanse them.
Go offer up the pleasing sacrifice
Of Righteousness: from folly turn your eyes.
Seek peace, and follow it, with strict pursuit:
Relieve the needy; Judgment execute:
Refresh the weary; right the fatherless:
The strangers, and the widows wants redress:
Give praise to God; depend with lowly faith,
On him; and what his holy Spirit says:
Remember what a price thy ransom cost;
And, now redeem the time that thou have lost.
Return, return thou (oh back sliding Nation)
And, let thy tears prevent thy desolation.
As yet, thou may return; for, Gods embrace
Is open for thee, if thou have the grace,
To give it meeting. Yet, repentance may
Prevent the mischiefs of that evil day,
Which here is menaced: yet, thou may have peace,
And by discreet endeavoring, increase
Each outward grace, and every inward thing,
Which will additions to thy comfort bring.
If this thou do; these fearful threatenings all,
(Repeated here) to mercies change he shall.
We cannot say, it will excuse thee from.
All chastisement; or that no blow shall come.
For, peradventure, thou so long have bin
Unpenitent, that some loud crying sin
Has waked that Vengeance, which upon thy crimes
Must fall (as once in Jeremiahs times)
Without prevention; to exemplify
Gods hate of sin to all posterity,
But, sure we are, that if he does not stay
His threatened hand, the stroke that he does lay
Will fall the lighter; and become a blessing,
Thy future joys, and virtues more increasing,
Than all that large prosperity and rest
Which thou, so long together, have possessed.
God (with a Writers ink horn) one has sent,
To set a mark on them that shall repent;
And bids him promise in his Name, that they
Who shall (recanting) leave their evil way,
And in their hearts, bewail the grievous crimes,
And miseries of Sion, in their times;
That they shall be secure, and saved from
The hand of these Destroyers, which must come:
Or else by their destruction find a way
To that repairing which will never decay.
Yea, thou, oh Britain! if thou could reform
Thy manners, might expel the dreadful storm
Now threatened; and thy foes (who triumph would*
The ruin of thy glory to behold.
And jeere thee when thou fallest) soon shall see
Thy God returning, and avenging thee
On their insultings: yea, with angry blows
He would effect their shameful overthrowes*
Or turn their hearts. For when from sin men cease,
God makes their enemies, and them, at peace.
Moreover, thou shall have in thy possessing,
Each inward grace, and every outward blessing;
Thy fruitful Herds shall in rich pastures feed;
Thy soil shall plenteously increase thy seed;
Thy Flock, shall neither Shepherds want, nor meat;
Clean provander, thy stabled beast shall eat;
There shall be Rivers in thy Dales; and Fountains
Upon the tops of all thy noblest Mountains:
The Moon shall cast upon thee beams as bright
As now the Sun, and with a sevenfold light
The Sun shall bless thee. He that reigns in thee,
To all his people reconciled shall be;
And they shall find themselves no whit deceived,
In those good hopes which are of him conceived:
But he, (and they, who shall his throne possess
When he is gone) shall reign in righteousness;
And be more careful of thy weal (by far)
Then parents of their childrens profits are.
Thy Magistrates, with wisdom shall proceed
In all that shall be counseled or decreed.
As Harbors, when it blows tempestuously;
As Rivers, unto places over-dry;
As Shadows are to men oppressed with heat;
As to a hungry stomach, wholesome meat;
To thee, so welcome, and as much contenting,
Thy Nobles will become, on thy repenting.
Thy Priests shall preach true doctrine in thy Temples;
And make it fruitful by their good examples.
Thy God, with righteousness shall them array,
And hear and answer them, when they do pray.
Thy eyes, that much are blinded, shall be clear;
Thy ears, that yet are deafned, then shall hear;
Thy tongue, that stammers now, shall then speak plain;
Thy heart shall perfect understanding gain;
The preaching of the Gospel shall increase;
Thy God shall make thy comforts and thy peace,
To flow as does a River; they who plant,
The blessing of their labor shall not want;
Thy poorest people shall at full be fed;
The meek, shall of no tyrant stand in dread;
Thou shall have grace and knowledge, to avoid
Those things, whereby the rest, may be annoid;
Thou shall possess thy wished blessings all;
And, God shall hear thee still before thou call.
But, as a Chime, whose frets disordered grow,
Can never cause it self in tune to go,
Nor chime at all, until some cunning hand
Does make the same again in order stand:
Or, as the Clock, whose plummets are not weight,
Strikes sometimes one for three, and fix for eight;
So fares it with men and kingdoms all,
When once from their integrity they fall.
They may their motion hurry out of frame,
But have no power to rectify the same.
That curious hand which first those pieces wrought*
Must mend them still; or they will still be naught.
To thee I therefore now my speech convert,
Thou famous Artist, who Creator art
Of heaven and earth, and of those goodly Sphe^res,
That now have whirled many thousand years,
(And shall until thy pleasure gives it ending)
In their perpetual motion, without mending.
Oh! be thou pleased, by thy powerful hand,
To set in order this depraved Land.
Our whole foundation, Lord, is out of course;
And every thing still grows worse and worse;
The way that leads quite from thee, we have took;
Thy Covenant, and all thy Laws are broke*
In mischiefs, and in folly, is our pleasure;
Our crying sins have almost filled their measure;
Yet, every day we add a new transgression,
And still abuse thy favor and compassion.
Our Governor, our Prelates, and our Nobles*
Have by their sins increase, encreast our troubles.
Our Priests, and all the People, have misgone;
All kind of evil deeds, we all have done.
We have not lived as those means of grace
Require, which thou have granted to this place*
But rather worse than many who have had
Less helps than we, of being better made.
No Nation under heaven so lewd has bin,
That had so many warnings for their sin,
And such perpetual callings on, as we,
To leave our wickedness, and turn to thee.
Yet, we in stead of turning, further went;
And when thy Mercies and thy Plagues were sent
To pull us back; they seldom wrought our stay,
Or moved to repentance one whole day.
No blessing, no affliction, has a power
To move compunction in us, for one hour*
Unless thou work it. All that I can speak
(And all that I have spoken) till thou break
And mollify the heart, will fruitless be,
Not only in my hearers, but in me.
If thou prepare not way for more esteem,
All these Remembrances will foolish seem.
Nay these, in stead of moving to repent,
Will indignation move and discontent;
Which will men's hardened hearts obdurate more,
And make their fault much greater than before.
Unless thou give a blessing, I may strive
As well to make a marble stone alive,
As to effect my purpose: yea, all this
Like wholesome counsel to a mad man is,
And, I for my good meaning shall be torn
In pieces, or exposed be to scorn.
For, they against thy word do stop their ear;
And wild in disobedience, will not hear.
In this, we all confess our selves to blame,
And that we therefore have deserved shame.
Yea, Lord, we do acknowledge, that for this
There nothing else to us pertaining is,
(Respecting our own worth) but desolation*
And final rooting out, without compassion.
But gracious God, though such our merit be,
Yet, mercy still pertains unto thee.
To thee the act of pard'ning and forgiving,
As much belongs (oh Father everliving)
As plagues to us: and it were better far
Our sins had less than their deservings are,
Then that thy Clemency should be outgone,
By all the wickedness that can be done.
As well as theirs whose lives now left them have,
Thou can command those bodies from the grave,
Who stink, and putrify, and buried be
In their corruption. Such, oh Lord! are we.
Oh! call us from this grave; and show thy power
Upon this much polluted Land of our,
Which is not only sick of works unholy,
But almost dead and buried in her folly.
Forgive us all our slips, our negligences,
Our sins of knowledge, and our ignorances;
Our daring wickedness; our bloody crimes;
And all the faults of past and present times.
Permit not thy just wrath to burn forever;
In thy displeasure do not still persever;
But, call us from that pit of Death, and Sin,
And from that path of Hell which we are in.
Remember, that this Vineyard has a Vine,
Which had her planting by that hand of thine.
Remember, when from Egypt thou remov'dst it,
With what entire affection, then, thou lov'dst it.
How thou did weed and dress it heretofore;
How thou did fence it from the Forest Bore;
And think how sweet a vintage then it brought,
When thy first work upon her thou had wrought:
Remember, that without thy daily care,
The choicest plants, sone wild and fruitless are;
And, that as long as thou do prune and dress,
The sowrest Vine shall bring a sweet increase.
Remember, also Lord, how still that Foe,
Who first pursued us, does seek to sow
His tares among thy wheat; and to his power,
Break down thy fence, and trample, and devour
The seeds of grace, as soon as they do sprout;
And is too strong, for us to keep him out.
Oh! let not him prevail, such harm to do us,
As he desires, but, Lord, return unto us.
Return in mercy. Though thou find us slack
To come our selves, fetch, draw, and pull us back
From our own courses, by thy grace divine,
And set, and keep us, in each way of thine.
We from our foes have saved been by thee;
And in thy love, oh Lord! triumphed we.
But now behold, disgraced thou throw'st us by,
And we before our adversaries fly.
At us our neighboring Nations laugh and jeere,
And, us they soome, whom late we made to fear.
Oh God arise, reject us not for aye;
No longer hide from us thy face away:
But, come, oh come with speed to give us aid,
And let us not be lost though we have straid.
Vouchsafe that every one in his degree,
The secret errors of his life may see;
And, in his lawful calling all his days,
Perform his Christian duty, to thy praise.
Give peace this troublous age; for, perilous
The times are grown, and no man fights for us
But thou oh God! nor do we seek or crave,
That any other Champion we may have.
Nay, give us troubles, if thy will be so,
That we may have thy strength to bear them too;
And in affliction thee more glorify;
Then heretofore in our prosperity.
For when thy countenance on us did shine,
Those Lands that boasted of their corn and wine,
Had not that joy which thou did then inspire,
When we were boyld and fryde, in blood and fire.
Oh! give again that joy* although it cost us
Our lives. Restore thou what our sin has lost us*
Thy Church, in these Dominions, Lord preserve
In purity: and teach us thee to serve
In holiness and righteousness, until
We shall the number of our days fulfill.
Defend these Kingdoms from all overthrowes,
By foreign enemies, or homebred foes,
Our King with every grace and virtue bless,
Which may thine honor and his own increase.
Inflame our Nobles with more love and zeal,
To thy true Spouse, and to this Commonweal.
Inspire our Clergy in their several places,
With knowledge, and all sanctifying graces;
That by their lives and doctrines they may rear
Those parts of Sion, which decayed are*
Awake this People, give them souls that may
Believe thy Word, and thy commands obey.
The Plagues deserved already, save them from.
More watchful make them, in all times to come.
For blessings past, let hearty thanks be given.
For present ones, let sacrifice to heaven
Be daily offered up. For what is needing
(Or may be useful in the time succeeding)
Let faithful prayers to thy throne be sent,
With hearts and hands upright and innocent:
And let all this the better furthred be,
Through these Remembrances, now brought by me.
For which high favor, and emboldning thus
My spirit, in a time so dangerous;
For choosing me, that am so despicable,
To be employed in this honorable
And great employment (which I more esteem,
Than to be crowned with a Diadem)
For thy enabling me in this Embassage;
For bringing to conclusion this my Message;
For sparing of my life, when thousands died,
Before, behind me, and on every side;
For saving of me many a time since then,
When I had forfeited my soul again;
For all those griefs and poverties, by which
I am in better things made great, and rich,
Then all that wealth and honor brings man to,
Wherewith the world does keep so much ado:
For all which thou to me on earth have given;
For all, which does concern my hopes of heaven;
For these, and those innumerable graces,
Vouchsafed me, at sundry times, and places,
(Unthought upon) unfeigned praise I render:
And, for a living sacrifice, I tender
To thee (oh God) my body, soul, and all,
Which mine I may, by thy donation, call.
Accept it blessed Maker, for his sake
Who did this offering acceptable make,
By giving up himself. Oh! look thou not
Upon those blemishes which I have got
By natural corruption; or by those
Polluted acts which from that ulcer flows.
According to my skill, I have enrolled
Thy Mercies; and thy Justice I have told.
I have not hid thy workings in my breast;
But as I could, their power I have expressed
Among our great assemblies, to declare
Thy will and pleasure, lo, I do not fear:
And though by Princes I am checked and blamed;
To speak the truth, I am no whit ashamed.
Oh! show thou, Lord, thy mercy so to me,
And let thy Love and Truth, my guardians be.
Forgive me all the follies of my youth;
My faulty deeds; the errors of my mouth;
The wanderings of my heart, and every one
Of those good works that I have left undone.
Forgive me all wherein I did amiss,
Since thou employd'st me in performing this:
My doubtings of thy calling me unto it;
My fears, which often disheartened me to do it;
My sloth, my negligences, my evasions,
And my deferring it, on vain occasions,
When I had vowed that no work of mine,
Should take me up, till I had finished thine.
Lord, pardon this; and let no future sin,
Nor what already has committed bin,
Profane this Work; or cause the same to be
The less effectual to this Land, or me.
But to my self (oh Lord) and others, let it
So moving be, that we may never forget it.
Let not the evil, nor the good effect
It takes, or puff me up, or me deject:
Or make me think that I the better am,
Because I tell how others are to blame:
But, let it keep me in a Christian fear,
Still humbly heedfull what my actions are.
Let all those observations I have had,
Of others errors, be occasions made
To mind me of mine own. And, lest I err,
Let every man be my Remembrancer;
With so much charity, as I have sought
To bring their duties more into our thought.
And, if in any sin I linger long,
Without repentance; Lord, let every tongue
That names me, check me for it: and, to me
Become, what I to others feign would be.
Oh! let me not be like those busy broomes,
Which having cleansed many nasty rooms,
Do make themselves the fouler: but sweet Father,
Let me be like the precious Diamond rather,
Which does by polishing another stone,
The better shape and luster, set upon
His own rough body. Let my life be such,
As that man's ought to be, who knows much
Of thy good pleasure. And, most awful God,
Let none of those who spread of me abroad
Unjust reports, the Devils purpose gain,
By making these my warnings prove in vain
To those that hear them: but let such disgraces,
Reflect with shame, upon their Authors faces,
Till they repent. And let their scandal serve
Within my heart true meekness to preserve;
And that humility, which else, perchance,
Vainglory, or some natural arrogance
Might overthrow, if I should think upon
(With carnal thoughts) some good my lines have done.
Restrain, moreover, them who out of pride,
Or ignorance, this Labor shall deride.
Make them perceive, who shall prefer a story
Composed for some temporal friends glory,
Before those Poems which thy works declare,
That vain and witless their opinions are:
And, if by thee I was appointed, Lord,
Thy Judgments and thy Mercies to record,
(As here I do) set thou thy mark on those,
Who shall despightfully the same oppose:
And let it publicly be seen of all,
Till of their malice they repent them shall.
As I my conscience have discharged here,
Without concealing ought for love, or fear;
From furious men let me preserved be,
And from the scorn of fools deliver me.
Vouchsafe at length some comforting reflection,
According to the years of my affliction.
On me, for good, some token please to show,
That they who see it, may thy bounty know;
Rejoice, with fellow-feeling of the same,
And join with me, in praising of thy Name.
And lest (oh Lord!) some weak ones may despise
My words, because of such necessities,
As they have brought upon me, by their spite,
Who to my Studies have been opposite:
Oh! give me that which may sufficient be;
To make them know that I have served thee.
And that my labors are by thee regarded,
Although they seem not outwardly rewarded.
Those Honors, or that Wealth, I do not crave,
Which they affect, who most endeavored have
To please the World. I only ask to gain,
But food and raiment, Lord, for all my pain;
And that the slanders, and the poverties,
Wherewith my patience thou shall exercise,
Make not these Lines, or me, become a scorn,
Nor leave me to the world-ward, quite forlorn.
Yet, in preferring of this humble Suit,
I make not my request so absolute,
As that I will capitulate, or tie
To such conditions, thy dread Majesty.
For, if to honor but an earthly Prince
My Muse had sung; it had been impudence
To prompt his bounty; or, to doubt he might
Forget to do my honest Labors right.
Do therefore as thou please: only give
Thy Servant grace contentedly to live,
And, to be thankful, whatsoever shall
In this my weary Pilgrimage befall.
Such things thou do command me to require,
With earnest, and an absolute desire:
With which I come: beseeching I may find
Thy love continue, though none else be kind;
That blessedness eternal I may get,
Though all I lose on earth, to compass it;
And that, at last, when my account is eaven,
My payment may be summoned up in heaven.
Lord, this will please me: call me quickly thither,
And pay me there my wages all together:
Not that which mine by merit seems to be;
But, what by thy mere grace is due to me.
FINIS.

