VERSES Intended to the King's Majesty, BY Major GEORGE WITHER, Whilst he was
Prisoner in NEVVGATE: Which being found Written with his own Hand, among his
loose Papers, since his Commitment close Prisoner to the TOVVER, Are now
Published, as pertinent both to his MAJESTY, and to Him.

LONDON, Printed in the year, 1662.

VERSES intended to the KINGS MAJESTY, by Maj. Geo. Wither, when he was
Prisoner in Newgate; and found among other loose Papers, written with his own
hand.
SIR, though I neither of your Grace despair,
Nor lack sufficient Faith, to make a Prayr
In Court: yet, wanting means to prosecute,
I Will trouble you at this time, with no Suit;
But, treat of somewhat, that no more will cost,
Save Labor, which I many times have lost,
And, thereby, not been made a jot the worse,
Either in mind, in body, or in purse.
When Rebels did King David's flight constrain,
And, GOD was pleased to bring him home again,
They, who to drive him out, had forwardst been,
Made have to join with those who brought him in.
And, he, with GOD, in Mercy so complied,
That, not one man for that Rebellion died,
In following Absalom, who had contrived
The Treason, and well-meaning men deceived.
A traitrous Child's life, that Rebellion cost;
But, by our War, a Fathers life was lost:
And therefore, though some bloodshed that produced,
In humane Reason you may be excused,
Whom natural Affection moved to shed
The blood of some, by whom your Father bled;
Since you more Mercy freely have bestown
Than David's, or your Foll'wers would have shown.
Which much augments your Honor: For, no Jem
So beautifies a Royal Diadem,
As Mercy, when it is enameled
With Justice, and with Prudence riveted.
I had presumed a personal Address
Long since; but, difficult is an (Non cuivis homini conting it adire
Corinthum.)
Access
For such as I appear, who hazard blame,
And disrespect enough, where I now am;
Because, what Conscience charge me withal,
Is by some judged to be criminal.
In that regard, this Paper must make way
For gaining an admittance, as it may;
And will, I hope, presented be, by some
Who shall have entrance, where I cannot come.
I am despoiled so of every thing,
That nothing for a Present I can bring
Except (of Grace) your Majesty shall please
To daign acceptance to such Gifts as these;
Which (though but mean, and in an homly dress)
Will then illustrate your true Worthiness,
As amply, as the can did Acceptance,
Of what may seem of greater valuation.
I cannot write strong Lines, with swelling words,
Whose Elegancy scarcely room affords
For sober sense; nor muster up their Names,
Whom History, and whom Tradition fames
For brav'st Achievements, since time first begun,
And then say, you have all of them outgone;
As if my foolish words, might add unto
Your Honor, more than your own Deeds can do.
Or, as if any Wiseman would give creed
To what they in a flatring Poem read.
It is not in the power of any other
By Pen or Tongue to clear up, or to smother
Your true Deserts; For, in your self that lies,
Which either them beclouds, or dignifies.
No other Thoughts I entertain of You,
But such as I may think, and you allow:
Yet, to extol your Worth I shall not dare,
Till I know truly what your Virtues are.
For, though to Flatrers all Kings seem to be
Of like desert, they seem not so to me.
I Will serve you faithfully in what I may,
And, as my King, love, honor and obey.
I would conceal, not publish your defects,
If I know any; and give due respects
To all your Merits; but, I will not own
One Line that praises them, till they are known:
For, till I know, I give but what is due,
I am a Liar, though my words be true;
Since equally, both good and evil things,
Are famed of the best of men, and Kings.
A Stranger likewise, you have been long time
To most of your own Subjects in this Clime,
And, I was never where I did behold
Your face, since you were two or three years old:
What Good soever therefore I aver
Of you, I shall but seem a Flatterer;
Yea, you your self would think so, should I add
Those Virtues, which you know you never had;
And, Praise, which is ascribed to any one
In that mode, is a little less than none.
But, little Credit also has a Poet,
To celebrate your Worth, when he shall know it,
Or counterpoize, or silence Contradictions,
Since most esteem his Writings to be Fictions;
And you will be more honored, than in them,
By these blunt Lines, if they have your esteem.
I therefore, so shall study to increase
Your Honor, that I may not make it less;
And whatsoever I can say or do,
(Although you give a Countermand thereto)
I Will say, and do it; when I shall be sure
Your Life, or Peace, or Honor 'twill secure:
And, if this be a fault, I do intend
To be thus faulty, till my life shall end.
I know, most Royal Sir, who it is that says,
Princibus placuisse Viris, non ultima laus est.
Hor. Epistol. 17.
To please great men, deserves not meanest praise:
I see how it is approved, and what they gain
Who can that thriving Faculty attain.
Yet, I shall wave their Art, and will assay
To do you honor in another way,
By giving you occasion to express
Your Justice, Mercy, and your Prudentness;
So that your self may make the world to see
Your Virtues more, than words can say they be.
To that end, much might in my case be shown;
But, rather for your sake, than for mine own
Is this Address; Yea, rather to prevent
What may be your harm, than my detriment. Coram Rege suo, de paupertate
placentes,
Plus, poscente ferent.
Hor: ibidem.

To tell our Wants, or Grievances, to Kings,
Sometime, less remedy, than Silence brings.
I Will therefore wave that too; that no self-end
May frustrate what I chiefly do intend.
Some, questionless, before your Restoration
Contributed for your Accommodation
In true sincerity; and some, no doubt,
Thereby to work their own Salvation out;
And many a one, perhaps, like Ziba sped,
Who merited no better than he did.
Some other would have done as much as they,
But, neither had the means, nor knew the way;
And many, who against You then combined,
Are now, so truly of another mind,
That, you in them are safe: for, Love in such
Will much abound, who were forgiven much.
I, who obeyed late preceding Powers
Compulsively; now, willingly to yours
Profess Allegiance; and, as true as those
Will be, who of their Truth make fairest shows.
For, when I saw GOD on your side appear,
I was reclaimed by Conscience, not by Fear;
Yea, I foresaw, and likewise did foretell
(To them who were in power) what since befell;
Attending passively, what I expected,
By Providence divine would be effected:
And my professed Loyalty to you
Is not alone unquestionably true,
But also, may appear to be more free
From self ends, than their Loyalty can be
In whom you most confide: For, they from Bands
Exempted are; have Honors, Goods and Lands,
Pensions or Offices, wherein you do
Protect them; and, they have your Favor too.
But, all these wholly are to me destroyed,
And I by your Protection have enjoyed
Naught, save a dying-life, a living-grave,
Or that, whereof so small esteem I have,
That, if my Work were done, and GOD would say
Amen, I would resign my Life this day.
Yet, so far am I from repining at
My Portion, or my seeming sad estate,
That, in this Posture I will serve as long,
As to endure it GOD shall make me strong;
Not doubting, but when all things come to proof,
My Sufferings will be much to my behoof:
Mean time, lest otherwise, my good intent
To you, some causualty may prevent,
I will, so far forth as my Chain will stretch,
(And mine now shortened arm and hand will reach)
Exhibit such Expedients, as from Time,
And other Herbs, I Have sucked within your Clime;
And, wanting better Gifts, will offer you
This little Cluster of those Grapes, which grew
Upon my withered Vine: For, though they are
But sour, your Kingdom yields none wholsomer,
If you shall seasonably press out the Juice,
And then assume it without prejudice.
This Time is critical; The ways be ruff,
And many of those Chariot-wheels fly off,
By which your Marches expedited seemed,
And lost Advantages must be redeemed,
Lest when you think that they are come to hand,
Your main Expectances be at a stand,
Or, put so far back, that you may survive
Your hopes, and your own happiness outlive.
I wish it otherwise; and know it may
Be as I wish, if you the means assay,
Not giving ear to those, who will withstand
Your Good, and that which GOD has now in hand.
I have discharged my Conscience; and so shall,
Whatever for so doing does befall,
In hope that will not wholly be dispis'd,
Which now shall be in faithfulness advised.
To those men do not overmuch adhere,
Who think all Wisdom lies within their sphere;
For, Honors, Riches, and self-Interest
Have made wisemen as brutish as a Beast.
Heed otherwhile, what Common Fame does say,
As Well as what your Courtiers whisper may;
Lest you be ignorant of many things,
Whose cognizance is pertinent to Kings.
Make no man your chief Confident, but he
That Is both discreet, and honest known to be;
Lest he deceives your trust, and in the close
Destroys your old Friends, or begets new Foes.
Let Justice be your Scepter, let your Crown
Be Mercy; and, if you would keep your own,
Give that to others, which to them belongs,
And free the Poor and Fatherless from wrongs:
Especially, your main Endeavors bend
To make and keep your Sovereign Lord your friend.
And if you would be settled on your Throne,
Take care that His usurped be by none.
Enjoy your Conscience, whatsoere it be;
So other men may have their Conscience free;
And, hang me for a Traitor, if thereby
You then enjoy not more Security,
Than what your Strength by Sea and Land now gives,
And all that humane Policy contrives.
Let Truth and Error fight it out together,
Whilst Civil Peace disturbed is by neither;
Which may be so provided for, that none
Shall justly be displeased with what is done;
Nor you hereafter be (for evermore)
Disturbed, as you have been heretofore.
If You neglect this, and I disobey,
Twill be with much grief, and no other way,
But only passively, and whatsoever
I suffer, will your Welfare still endeavor.
To be of this mind, thousands are believed,
Who are not into favor yet received:
And whilst they are excluded (though in peace
They live) suspicions daily will increase;
And from their Malice, who nor GOD, nor King,
Much care for, some ill consequence may spring,
By which You may have trouble, and they blame,
Who shall be no way guilty of the same.
Your taking timely Opportunities
Now offered (and, of what before You lies)
May render You a blessed Instrument,
In making passage to that Government
Which Tyrants fear; more glorious make Your Throne
Than ever any King yet sat upon:
And make Your Name a terror to all those
Who to that Kingdom shall continue Foes.
Herein I Have spoke according to my creed,
Wishing my just hopes may thereon succeed;
And that upon Your heart it may work more,
Than what I Have spoke to others heretofore.
But GOD's time is at hand; within his power
Are all men's ways; yea, both your hearts and our;
And I will patiently submit unto
What either He or You shall please to do,
Not asking (whatsoere I seem to want)
Ought more, than you spontaneously shall grant:
For, what I may expect, if you deny,
So far as need shall be, GOD will supply.
These words, when I was young, my Motto were, [Nec habeo, nec careo, nec curo.]


(Thus Englished) I nor have, nor want, nor care:
So are they now I Am old; yea, somewhat more
Essentially than ever heretofore;
And thereof I will not abate one Letter,
Till GOD and You dirrect me to a better.
The Liberty I covet to enjoy,
Is that which no man living can destroy.
The Wealth I aim at, is nor less, nor more,
But to be well contented, Rich or poor:
And, if I had a mind my Wits to strain,
That I to earthly Honors might attain,
I should to no such common heights aspire,
As now are objects of most men's desire;
Or, to a style of so mean consequence,
As is an Earl, a Marquess, Duke or Prince;
Or, to be called your Cousin: For, no less
Would satisfy my large Ambitiousness,
But so much worth, at least, as did commend
His Loyalty, whom David called his Friend,
And wit enough to make a parallel
Of every Traitor, with Achithophel:
Or, show to you, the diffrence 'twixt the Faiths
Of all your Ziba's, and Mephibosheths.
For, then you should in very short time see,
That no man more deserves esteemed to be
Your Majesty's loyal Subject Than, Geo. Wither.
Newgate, Mar. 22. 1662.
FINIS.

