THE Virtuous Woman FOUND, Her LOSS bewayl'd, AND CHARACTER Exemplified IN A
SERMON Preached at Felsted in Essex, At the Funeral of the most Excellent and
Religious Lady, the Right Honorable MARY Countess Dowager of Warwick.

By Anthony Walker D.D. Rector of Fyfield in the said County.

To which are annexed some of her Ladyships pious and useful Meditations.

The second Edition Corrected.

LONDON, Printed for Nathanael Ranew at the King's-Arms in St. Paul's
Churchyard. 1680.

TO THE Right Honorable KATHARINE, Vicountess Ranalaugh.
And the Honorable ROBERT BOIL, Esquire Executors of the Last Will of the Right
Honorable Mary, Countess Dowager of Warwick.
Right Honorable Madam, and Truly Honorable Sir.
MY Obedience to the repeated Commands I have received, (for so I shall always
esteem your Requests) from both your Honors to publish the Sermon, I was by
the same Authority engaged to Preach at the Funeral of that excellent Lady, the
Genuine Sister of your virtue, as well as the Germane Sister of your blood; had
not been guilty of these few weeks delays, had not the indisposition which
began to seize me at so near and perplexing a stroke, and under which I
labored all the time of my preparations, and in the hour of its delivery,
continued upon me many days after: An effect so natural to so pressing a cause,
that I know not whether the health of my body could have consisted with the
soundness of my mind, under such an inexpressible loss to the Church of God,
and my poor self in particular. Ut bonum quo diu fruiti sumus, etiam caeteris
noscendum, imitandumque before describerem. S. Hier. Ep. 10 Epitaphium
mircellae viduae.


But what I was constrained to defer a while, I now multo cum faenore present
to you both, with all humble observance; and under your favorable protection
to the eye of the world. The Sermon is such, almost verbatim, as my hasty and
sickly preparations would then allow: Her Ladyships Character, I confess is
much enlarged, that I might somewhat more fully, than those streights of time
would suffer me, propound to the knowledge and imitation of others, Grandes
materias ingenia parva non sustinent. Et in ipso conatu ultra vires ausa
succumbunt, quantoque magis fuerit quod dicendum est tanto magis obruitur qui
magnitudinem rerum verbis non potest explicare.
that good we had the happiness to enjoy so long, and yet too short a time.

I am conscious to my self of the great disproportion betwixt my performance
and her merit, for which my Apology is that of St. Jerome, weak parts cannot
sustain great matters, etc. Yea this is a Fate must have inevitably attended,
whoever had been her Orator in some degree. When I may say as truly of her as
Greg. Naz, of his Gorgonia, her Prudence and Piety no man living was able to
set forth, with proportionable language. And again, It is exceeding difficult
to reach the excellencies of her Virtues, either by deed or word, by imitation
or encomium. And though very many might have praised her more floridly, none
could have represented her more truly, no man living having known her so long
and so intimately as my self.

And my weakness and plainness may attain this double advantage.

First, Quaedam aostraxero ne incredibilia videantur, etc. Hier. ad Demer.
Render the Narration more credible, which if it had been dressed up with all
the ornaments of which 'twas capable, would have looked in this Age, more like
a Romance than an History. Age ad ipsius lauds accedamus neglecta sermonis
elegantia and concinnitate; nam ne haec quidem quam laudandam suscepimus
lascivo unquam ornatu delectata est. Naz.


Secondly, It will better fuit with the Original it copies; for as is said of
Suetonius, he wrote the lives of the Roman Caesar's, with the same liberty they
led them. So I have writ this excellent Ladies life, with the * same
undisguised simplicity with which she lived it. And though never any man had a
more condescending, constant, sincere Friend, than she vouchsafed to be to me,
yet is not the testimony less true, because of a Friend; but the more
scrupulously exact for fear of desecrating so sacred a name, and offending the
Genius of her, who above all things hated falsehood.

I am not the first, nor shall be the last, whom those (whose charity and good
opinion is not only so wise as to begin at home; but also so kind as to dwell
and end there too) will despise or pity, and bless themselves in the conceit,
of what mighty matters they could have done, if this Province had fallen to
their share. It may be little thinking, how such sorrows as mine justly are,
would have blunted the edge of their keener Eloquence; and how unmeet a Theme
so calamitous a loss is, on which to show our wit. Non oportet ex calamitate
ipsa ostendendi ingenii ansam arripere.


But let such, for me, enjoy their humors, I Will say no more, lest I awake
them, and so deprive them of their pleasant dream.

For my self, I have endeavored to approve my Conscience to God: Hic murus
aheneus esto. And I hope I may appeal to your Honorable Attestation, (whose
Testimony will be without and beyond exception) in most things I have written
of Your, Marcellam tuam imo meam, and ut verius loquar nostram. S. Hier. ep. 16.
My, Our incomparable Friend.

And I doubt not but all who knew her Ladyship thoroughly, will be able to say as
the poor people are reported to have said after the Funeral Sermon of another
The Lady Veer.
eminent Ornament of this Country.

They could have said a great deal more of Her, than the Minister did: At the
hearing of which our good Lady was much pleased, and said; She should value
such a Testimony above all others. The Poor, like the Widows, which stood about
the dead body of Dorcas; showing the Coats and Garments she made for them, Acts
9.39.
whilst she was with them, being the most unexceptionable witnesses.

I. Confess it seems both decent and necessary to suggest some Arguments of
Comfort to them whom I know to be oppressed with so bitter and distressing a
loss. And the undertaking would not (in one respect at least) be altogether
unsuitable to my self. Because, Magnum Pharmacum illud est, quod ab illi^ qui
eodem dolor affecti sunt porrigitur; and qui in endem calamitate versantur,
little in consolandis calamitosis major est Authorita^.
Great is that Cordial which is administered by those who are partakers of the
same sorrows. And their Authority is greatest in comforting the calamitous, who
bear a deep share in the same calamity, as one of the Ancients has well said.

Give me leave therefore, much honored Madam, Sir, besides what you will meet
with in the following discourse, to remind you of that great Panpharmacon. It
is the Lord who has done it, that Wisdom and Goodness which commits no errors,
but does all things well and wisely. And our daily prayers for the fulfilling
of whose Will, obliges, at least, to a submiss acquiescence when it is done.

And as to her, She has finished her course triumphantly, and she has
obtained the Crown.: She rests from her labors, and her works do follow her.
She is landed in safe harbor, got off the rough Seas of sins and sorrows. She
is taken from the evil to come, and shall neither feel nor see what our sins
may justly make us fear. Non maeremus quod talem amisimus sed gratias agimus
quod talem habuimus imo habemus: Dee enim vivunt omnia and quicquid revertitur
ad Dominum, in familiae numero computatur. Epita. Paul.
She would not be again with us as well as she loved us, let us long and hasten
to be with Her: We have used to account her happiness our own, therefore her
blessedness cannot make us miserable.

She is not lost, but gone before; and She could not be where She is, nor enjoy
what She does; without being parted from us, till we can overtake Her.

Be pleased also to remember that of Saint Jerome, We mourn not because we have
lost such an one, but give thanks that we had such an one, yea have such an
one: for all such live to God, and whatever returns to the Lord, is to be
accounted in the number of the Family.

But I must repress my self, reflecting how needless it is to cast in my Mite
into such full Treasuries.

I am conscious to my self but of one offense, which may make me apprehend your
Frown: Which is, my adventuring to insert, without your leave or knowledge some
short touches of that Noble Stock of which her Ladyship was so conspicuous and
eminent a branch.

But as I have the Example of many Ancients, Praecepta sunt Rhetorum ut majores
ejus, qui laudandus est, and eorum gesta altius repetantur: sicque ad ipsum per
gradus sermo perveniar? quo viz. avitis paternisque virtutibus illustrior fiat,
and non degenerasse a bonis ipsi videatnr. Hier. de Nepotia.
and almost all Moderns, who write on such occasions; so would it have been a
great Hiatus and indecent deficiency to her Story, to have been wholly silent
in it. And I have been so concise and cautious, not to offend the humble
modesty of those who yet survive.

That when the Laws of Order and Method have obtained the allowance Justice may
demand; your Honors kindness will I hope, (at least for her sake) supply what
shall be farther needful of Forgiveness.

Those few of her Ladyships pious and excellent Papers, which are inserted in
the Discourse, or subjoyned to it; (as they justly may, so I hope they) will
give Ornament and Luster to it, in the Judgment of all serious Christians: As
richer Trimmings of Gold and Silk use to do to Garments made of couns^r
Materials.

I shall not enlarge your trouble by being importune in begging your Patronage;
It Is Natural to all to defend their own; and surely besides the many Titles you
had to me before,

Now by your Executorship, you have an Indefeasable Right to me: For nothing to
which her Ladyships Will entitles you, was more entirely Hers, and consequently
your Honors, than

Much and Truly Honored Madam, Sir, Your Honors Most Humbly Devoted and
Faithful Obedient. Servant, Anthony Walker.
May 27. 1678.
THE Virtuous Woman.
PROVE. 31.29, 30, 31. Many daughters have done virtuously, but thou excellest
them all.

Favor is deceitful, and beauty is vain, but a woman that fears the Lord,
she shall be praised.

Give her of the fruit of her hands, let her own works praise her in the gates.


THat hard question which Solomon propounds in the tenth Verse of this Chapter,
Who can find a virtuous woman? I could have answered with an (...), more
rapturous, quick and brisk, than that of Archimedes when he had solved the
posing Problem; had not her sudden loss surprised and over balanced the joy of
finding her, and sunk it into a gulf of inexpressible grief, which might justly
strike me dumb with astonishing amazement, into the deepest silenc^^ as S.
Jerome tells his Paula and Eustochium, Proaem. in Eccl.
it happened to himself, upon the unexpected death of the holy Blaesilla.

And this might excuse our measuring, and wearing out, this solemn saddest
hour, not by sliding Sands, but as they used of old, by distilling drops of
Water, (...) a (...) and (...).
our bitterest and saltest Tears, or rather, if our Blood can circulate and
flow in such a consternation, and be not chilled and stagnant, with Streams of
that, both from our Veins and Hearts. But though the Laws of Nature might
indulge such gratifying of our Passions, as we are Men, the Law of Grace will
not allow it, Lev. 10.3. Aaron held his peace.
as we are Christians: to whom a sullen silence is as much forbidden as a
submissive holding of our peace is charged on us.

For we must not sorrow, 1 These. 4.14.
as Men without hope, for them who sleep ^n Jesus, as without any hesitance, ^e
may conclude she does, who li^ed so entirely to him; and it would ^e too rank a
selfishness, and unkind Sacrilege, to rob her, but in our (...), of the
enjoyment of God, (...) the inheritance of Saints in ^ight, that we might again
enjoy ^er kind, obliging, Col. 1.12
holy conversa^on, in this vale of Banishment and ^arkness.

If therefore, she being dead, yet ^eaketh, as doubtless she does, and ^ill do
to all that had the honor and happiness to know her, Heb. 13.4
either to ^ur comfort or conviction; let me ^rce a passage through my obstiate
and stupifying sorrows, and ^artly be her Echo, partly repre^nt her in
effigy, that by this inno^nt and useful way, she who is gone ^ live with God
in Heaven, may ^ll live with us on Earth, in our ^ateful remembrance of her
virtu^s perfections, in our serious ^actice of her wise and holy coun^s, and in
a ready imitation of her ^emplary Piety.

But because the most usual and useful method of instructing, is, by giving
rules first, and then illustrating those rules with apposit^ and fit examples,
which prove the^ practicable, and possible at least, i^ not easy also, to be
observed, ^ shall pursue that order, and giv^ you the rule and the measure,
from the wisest of Men in his Generation and the example from the best o^ Women
in her own; the first from the Pen of the Royal Preacher, the second from the
Hearse of a nobl^ Lady, both Epithetes which carr^ grandeur in their sound, and
may a^ waken, yea, command attent^ on.

The whole Chapter contains ^ Dialogue betwixt Bathsheba and he^ Son Solomon,
under the the well di^ guised name of Lemuel, wherein she after her scandalous
fall (to she^ the mighty power of Divine Gra^ and sincere Repentance) now cons^
crated to be a Prophetess, The Prophecy which his Mother taught him.
by a d^ vine afflatus, instructs and catech^ ses him in things of greatest
impo^ tance, and nearest concernment which she performs with a strong P^ those,
and most winning insinuation, and has the honor to have her prudent, holy
counsels recorded in the Sacred Canon. And this fills up the nine first Verses,
and from thence he reciprocates, and in a lofty strain approves and applauds
his Mother.

This latter part presents us with the Ihon and Character of an excellent and
Heroic Woman, which is laid down in two and twenty Verses, according to the
number, and in the order of the Letters of the Hebrew Alphabet; every Letter in
due sequence, beginning a several Verse, to intimate there is somewhat signal in
it, Psalm 25.34.111.119. Lament. and diverse other.
which is composed with so much art, as we find many other eminent portions of
the Holy Scriptures are.

Some Interpreters allegorize these words and make the Virtuous Woman the
Figure of the true Church. Others refer them to the Holy and ever Blessed
Virgin Mother. Others suppose them to describe an holy and devout Soul, that
consecrates it self entirely to God in the practice of all divine and truly
ennobling Virtues. Others will have them to be, by a Prosopopaeia, the Idea of
Spiritual Wisdom, and Heroical Virtue in the Abstract. But the most, and I
think the best Expositors, esteem them the Icon, Idea, Character and Picture of
a truly Wise, Religious, Godly, Gracious Woman, drawn by the Holy Ghosts own
Pencil, in the hand of the most exquisite Master and Artist, Solomon.

He begins with an inquest after her, Who can find a virtuous Woman? implying,
she is a rare creature, and hardly found, but to encourage your search, he
assures you, she is worth looking for, her value being inestimable, for her
price is far above Pearls and Rubies, and all precious Stones. And then
descends to draw her Pourtraicture and Beauty, with comely and due proportions,
with bright and orient colors, and sets her in the most advantageous Light, in
eighteen Verses. And finally crowns her with this Wreath of Laurels, with this
golden Coronet, with this Diadem of costly Jewels, which make my present Text.

Many daughters have done virtuously, but thou excellest them all.

Favor is deceitful, and beauty is vain, but the woman which fears the Lord,
she shall be praised.

Give her of the fruit of her hands: let her own works praise her in the gates.

The words are a Royal Garland, set on the Temples of the Virtuous Woman, by
the hands of Solomon and God. I may not give the scent of every single Flower,
the sense of every several word. Such solemn trifling would look like fulsom
Pedantry, and ill become the mournful gravity of this occasion.

The mixed and compound fragrancy resulting from the whole, wreathed and bound
up together, is this, That solid (...) true praise is only and superlatively
due to the sincerely, godly, and gracious woman, who may claim it by the fruits
her virtue has been pregnant with: or goodness in good earnest, substantial
Religion which has fruitful hands, deserves, and shall obtain, an honorable
testimony both of God and Men.

But as too minute a niceness is unmanly, and upbraids the Auditory, so too
general a procedure is confused and cloudy, acts the Dictator, and arbitrarily
imposes both on Text and Hearers, father than deduceth fairly, and convinces
clearly^ I shall therefore use that method which is free from both extremes,
taking for granted what is obvious, and rendering so, by additional Light, the
rest which needs it.

I may call this Text the Porch to the Temple of Honor, and it has two Doors,
one to shut out the bold Intruders, and salse Pretenders: the other to admit
the true and rightful claimers. Plainly it shows;

1. Negatively, who does not deserve.

2. Positively, who does deserve true praise,

1. Negutively, no Woman deserves true praise,

1. For Favor.

2. For Beauty.

2. Positively, every Woman deserves true praise,

1. Who fears the Lord.

2. Who is fruitful in good works.

First, per remotionem, negatively because the Gates of this Templ^ are
thronged with Worshippers and Praise has many Candidates and ^otaries, and
many run for this ^rize, but only one obtains it. I ^all briefly show how
Solomon thrusts ^ack, and shuts the Door against, onsuits the Plea of most
Pretend^ers, under two instances, of Favor and Beaaty, and by parity of reasoh
^ocks the bold confidence of all^ ^hers, who can show no better Char^er for
their claim: as if he had ^id, whatsoever is false and vain ^an produce nothing
that is true and ^sting: but Favor is false, deceitful, ^lye. And Beauty is a
vanishing, a ^ding fleeting thing; therefore all ^he praise you affect, or can
obtain ^y these, is like the seed from ^hence it springs: false and deceiv^g,
perishing and vain, and she who ^ws such wind, may expect nothing ^ut a crop of
Whirlwind, Hos. 8.7. Vide Cora. a Lapide in locum.
a blasting and a cold return.

By Favor is meant a comely pre^nce, a graceful deportment, a ^inning
carriage, decent gesture, and some motions, a ready wit, and ^ood expression,
and a decorous con^ersation, made up of all these and ^uch like Ingredients,
which is most taking, and renders Women desir^ ble and acceptable, and procur^
Favor in the Eyes and Hearts (...) Men.

By Beauty he understands a goo^ ly proportion of members, a j^ Symmetry, and
due situation of pa^ with the fit mixture of the Rose a^ Lilly, Pulchritudo est
Gypsum sepulchro inductum, iphlegma sanguine commixtum pulchre per pellem
pellucens S. Chrysostom-
the best Varnish of a clear w^ colored skin, and whatever e^ composes an
harmonious Air. O^ if you please, Beauty, whether ^ tural or artificial,
whether the mi^ ture of Blood and Phlegm shini^ through a good skin, as S. Chry^
stom defines it, or Ceruss and V^ milion daubed on, to hide a bad o^ whether a
Gift wherewith God ha^ blessed them, or a Theft for whi^ God will blast them;
whether t^ Benefit of the Author of Nature or the Artifice of him who delig^ to
disguise and destroy his Wo^ manship.

Both these are vain and inconst^ false and deceitful, adventitious, (...)
external, the best no effect of o^ choice, as every thing must be wh^ is
praiseworthy.

The worst proceeding from a c^rupt and sinful will, therefore blameworthy, and
reproachable, not excusable, much less commendable. Not Ague-proof, Temporis
and morbi ludibrium. G. Naz. Can. 1.6.
nor tenable against the first assaults of age or sickness, nor dare be looked
upon by Wind or Sun.

And not only empty, vain, and destitute of good, but fallacious and deceiving,
and full of evils, snares and bands, and nets, and great temptations. First,
Fastus inest pulchris, sequiturque superbia formam.
to the Women themselves, who have them, or who make them; too often rendering
them proud, disdainful, wanton, lascivious, despisers of others, wasters of
their time, Idolizers of their own reflections in a Glass, and careless, or
afraid to behold the image of their impurer Souls in the Crystal of God's Law,
and more afraid of being sick, or dying, than of a thousand Sins or Hells.

Secondly, deceiving and destroy^ng silly Men, through whose Livers, Prove. 7.23.
the seats of Lust, those mortal Darts strike, which an invisible Bow shoots
from their wanton Glances, and bewitching Smiles and Arts.

And by parity of reason, the like may be said of all the other perishing,
empty, lying vanities: honors, riches, strength, the wisdom of the flesh, and
learning merely humane, which are but adventitious Goods at best, and seldom
make Men better, often worse. What shall I say, shall I praise you for these? I
praise you not: nor will God ever praise you, or reward you for them.

Nay, I must rather drive such false Hucsters for true praise, ou^ of the
Temple of lasting Honor with such a Scourge as the Prophet Jeremiah long since
prepared for that purpose; Jer. 9.23.
Let not the wise man glory in his wisdom: nor the witt^ in her wit. Let not
the strong man glory in his strength: nor the fa^ woman glory in her Beauty. L^
not the rich man glory in his riches nor the fine woman glory in he^ dress. Let
not the honourabl^ Man glory in his Honor, nor the courted Mistress in her
favou^ Let not the learned Man glory i^ his being Natures Secretary; no^ the
wanton woman in being skille^ in the depths of Satan. But l^ him and her that
would glory, and not be ashamed, or glory in their shame, glory in this that
they know the Lord, and love and fear him in sincerity and truth. Which brings
me to the positive part, and is the foundation which Solomon lays, whereon to
build a Pyramid of lasting Fame.

Not the graceful, Pulchritudinem existima animi ornatum; non in corporis
forma, sed in moribus pulchritudo sita est. Corn. a Lapide ex Chrysostom.
but the gracious woman, not she who glories in her face, but she who like the
King's Daughter is all glorious within, even the woman that fears the Lord
she shall be praised.

In which positive part we have the good woman's Character, and Crown.

1. Her Character, which has two parts, for the new creature also consists of
Soul and Body, an inside, and an outside.

1. She fears the Lord, there is the Soul of her Virtue, the root of the matter
within ground, Grace in the Heart.

2. She has fruitful hands, there is the Body of her Virtue, the good Tree
above ground works in her life.

2. Her Crown, Praise and Renown. Which is.

1. Promised to her: She shall be praised.

2. Commanded for her: Give her of the fruit of her hands, let her own works
praise her in the gates.

3. Performed concerning her: Thou excellest them all.

As briefly as may be concerning these Particulars: and first let us view both
Pages on which her Character is written.

1. A woman that fears the Lord, that is, who is sincerely religious, good in
good earnest. Nothing is more frequent or obvious in Scripture than such
Synechdoches, as put one eminent Grace for all the Chain of Graces. So
sometimes the Love of God, sometimes Trust in God, and most commonly the Fear
of God is put for being truly religious, or is made the Periphrasis of a godly
Man. As in that signal promise of the New Covenant, Jer. 32.38, 39, 40. They
shall be my people, and I will be their God, and I will give them one heart,
and one way, that they may fear me for ever, for the good of them, and their
Children after them. And I will make an everlasting covenant with them, that I
will not turn away from them to do them good, and I will put my fear in their
hearts, that they shall not depart from me. Job. 1.1. There was a man in the
land of Vz., whose name was Job, and that man was perfect and upright, one that
feared God, and eschewed evil: so verse. 8. Have thou considered my servant Job,
that there is none like him in the earth, a perfect and upright man, one that
fears God, and escheweth evil, verse. 9. Does Job fear God, for naught? Eccl.
12, 13. Fear God, and keep his Commandments, that is the whole of Man: Psalm.
15.4. He honors them that fear the Lord; where the godly Man is under this
Denomination of one that fears the Lord, opposed to the wicked, called there
a vile person. It Is also an infallible sign of the presence of all other
Graces, in the exercise of which true Godliness consists; for as the Law is
copulative, so are the Graces by which we obey it, and as where the Soul is,
discovering it self by one vital act, all its faculties and powers are; so
where the Spirit of God is working one Grace in truth, the Spirit of all Grace
is, for the Spirit can no more be without its Graces, than the Soul without its
Faculties: yea, the Fear of God contains all Graces in it, therefore when
Abraham offered up his Son Isaac, which was a mighty act of Faith and Love: God
says, Now I know thou fear me, Genesis 22.12. And as it is so frequent, it
would be endless to cite all, so it is so obvious, it is needless to cite more.

2. The other Page has this Inscription, Fruitful hands: the good Woman is
like Dorcas full of good works.

1. Hands, two Hands to hold the two Tables of the Law, as Moses came down from
the Mount with the two Tables in his two hands, Deuteronomy. 9.15.
in each hand one, neither empty nor idle.

The first in the Right Hand, there is Religion toward God. The second Table in
the Left Hand, there is Righteousness and Charity toward Men.

2. These Hands bear Fruit, good works spring, and grow naturally, freely,
seasonably, easily, maturely as fruits from a prolifique Tree, planted in a
good soil, and by the Waters side, as the godly Man is described in the first
Psalm: called Fruits of righteousness, Fruits of the Spirit, Gal. 5. where S.
Paul has a signal Antithesis betwixt Graces and Vices, calling the first
Fruits, the other Works; the Works of the Flesh: verse. 19. There Is servile
drudgery in them: Fruits of the Spirit: verse. 22. There Is a spiritual easiness
in the production of them by the new Nature.

3. They are Fruits, in the plural, for variety of kinds, for number in every
kind. First, various acts of Devotion, Prayers, Praises, Reading, Hearing,
Meditation, Conference, Preparing, Communicating, and all these reiterated, the
Morning and the Evening Sacrifice, the weekly Sabbath, solemn Fasts and
Festivals, secret, private, public Devotions, Morning, Evening, and at Noon
day: yea, at Midnight, Psalm. 119.
seven times a day; yea, in a sober sense, all the day long, nay, all day, and
all night too, as it is testified of Anna, Luke 2.37. That she departed not
from the Temple, but served God with fasting and prayers night and day. 1 These.
5. Romans 12.12.
Pray without ceasing, continuing instant in prayer, giving thanks continually,
and in all things.

And the Left Hand, though it grow on another Arm, draws Sap and Virtue from
the same Tree and Root, to make it fruitful in variety and multitude of acts of
Justice and Charity.

1. Of Justice, thinking, speaking no evil of any Man, but dealing honestly
with all Men, Superiors, Equals, Inferiors, in all natural, moral, civil
Actions, in all concernments of Body, Goods and Name, wronging no Man,
defrauding no Man, but doing to others as they would others should do to them;
and observing this rule constantly, and in all occasions and occurrences, and
so doing Righteous at all times.

2. Matthew. 25.
In Charity, relieving the distressed, feeding the hungry, clothing the naked,
visiting the afflicted by sickness, prison, or any other pressures, instructing
the ignorant, comforting the feeble mindded, and supporting them who are cast
down under any temptation, and this not once or twice, or to one or two, Eccl.
18.6.2.
but sowing this seed in the Morning, and not withholding in the Evening,
giving this portion to seven, and also to eight, casting Bread upon the waters,
yea, scattering by all waters. This briefly of the good Woman's Character.

2, Her Crown, Praise: Praise is the shadow which attends the Body of Virtue.
The Echo which resounds an honorary Testimony.

1. From the Consciences of all Men, even those who will not practice it
themselves, cannot but approve it and applaud it in them that do; if there be
any virtue, if there be any praise, the Apostle of the Gentiles, nay, the
Consciences of the very Gentiles, Se Judice nemo nocens absolvitur.
has annexed them so close together, they cannot be parted: for as no vicious
and guilty person can be absolved, though he were to be his own judge: so no
virtuous person can be condemned, Romans 2.
though to be judged by his Enemies. That Law written in the heart cannot but
approve the Transcript, and Counter-part, and Copy of it self where ere it
meets it.

2. From the Mouths of all good Men, and those especially who have found and
felt its beneficial influence.

Beloved, thou do faithfully whatever thou do to the Brethren, and to
Strangers, 3 John 5.6.
which have born witness of thy Charity before the Church S. Paul even boasted
of the forward zeal of them of Achaia, 2 Cor. 9.12, 13. 2 Cor. 8.3.
and God was glorified for their liberal distribution to all Men. And of the
Churches of Macedonia he bears record That to their power, yea, and beyon^
their power they were willing o^ themselves. Job 31.20.
The Loins of the poo^ blessed Job who were warmed by the fleece of his Sheep:
Her children ris^ up and call her blessed, for the can of their tender and
pious education, and her husband for her chaste conversation and faithful
industry of which he is not only a witness but reaps the benefit of it, and for
those he praises her.

3. From the whole Chorus o^ the Heavenly Hierarchy, the Angels Joy in Heaven,
is the most laudative acclamation to her Virtues.

4. From God and Christ, whose Euge, Well done, good and faithful servants,
whose Come ye blessed of my Father, whose testimony, Matthew. 29^
I was hungry and ye fed me; naked, and ye clothed me; is the highest praise
imaginable, or possible.

Now this praise is first promised, She shall be praised: God leaves us not
without encouragements to make us good. Promises, and Threats, Rewards and
punishments, are the great instruments of Government, both with God and Men;
and all Rewards include Praise, and are the silent, yet the loudest
commendations.

A Crown of Righteousness, 2 Timothy 4.7, 8.
and Life, is provided, and fore-promised, to them that fight the good Fight,
that keep the Faith, that are faithful unto death. Great and precious promises,
2 Cor. 6.7
that God will receive us, be our Father and our God, to provoke us to cleanse
our selves from all filthiness of flesh and spirit, and perfect holiness in the
fear of God. An Inheritance incorruptible, 1 Pet.
undefiled, and that fades not away, reserved in Heaven: Rivers of pleasure
fullness of joy, an eternal Kingdom and everlasting life. And in the Letter,
Romans 2.28.
the highest praise, for he that is circumcised in heart and spirit that is a
Christian within, his praise shall be of God, and he is approved indeed whom
God commends, and we have God's word for it, that the righteous shall be in
everlasting remembrance.

2. It Is commanded and given in charge concerning her to others Give her of the
fruit of her hands; let her works praise her in the Gates Let them be spoken of
and mentioned to her honor in the Assemblies of the great men, and in the
concourse of the people, which use to be most frequent in the Gates God gives
not only leave, but charge and it is not only an allowable courtesy, but a just
debt and tribute du^ to virtuous persons, to declare and celebrate their famous
Acts. 'Ti^ an Apostolical precept to the Phillippians concerning Epaphroditus
who for the work of Christ was near unto death; hold him, and not him only, but
such as he, Phil. 2.29.
in reputation. Yea, our Lord himself concerning Mary, who anointed him, and
wrought a good work upon him: Praedicendo praecepit. Verily, Mat. 26.13.
I say unto you, wheresoever this Gospel shall be preached in the whole world,
there shall also this that this woman has done be told, for a memorial of her.
And God will have the Virtues and Victories of his Saints recorded, to provoke
our imitation of them, and encourage our weakness to war against vice, says S.
Gregory.

3. It Is performed concerning her, thou excellest them all; we should labor to
excel in Duty, 1 Cor. 14.12.
Seek that thou may excel. What do you more than others? See that ye abound
more and more, so run, out run others, that ye may obtain; and praise shall be
proportionable: Thou excellest them all. We find such Encomiums frequent in
Scripture. Thus of Hezekiah, 2 Kings. 18.5. He trusted in the Lord God of
Israel, so that after him was none like him of all the Kings of Israel, nor any
that was before him, that is, for strength of Faith So of Josiah, 2 King.
23.25. And like unto him there was no King before him, that turned to the Lord
with all his heart, and with all his soul and with all his might, according to
the Law of Moses, neither after him aerose any like him. So God's testimony of
Job, Job 1.8. is, That there was not a Man like him in all the earth. So S.
Paul testifies of Timothy, Phil. 2.20. I have no man like minded, who will
naturally care for your estate.

Thus I have lightly shaken the principal Branches of this goodly Tree: and the
ripe and pleasant Fruit which is fallen from them all, I shall pick up and
serve in one dish. To be sincerely religioue, to be a virtuous, gracious, godly
woman is the highest accomplishment, and deserves the greatest praise: nay,
it is the most honorable testimony can be given to any, to say of her in truth,
she was godly, and feared the Lord.

There seems to be a great agreement and likeness betwixt the hundred and
forty fourth Psalm, in point of happiness, and this Chapter in matter of Duty;
and Praise resulting from it. And therefore the transcribing those words, may
give much light and illustration to what lies before us. David therefore to
show, populum quae faciunt beautiorem, What will make a people happy, proceeds
thus, v. 12. That our sons may be as plants grown up in their youth, that our
daughters may be as corner stones, polished after the similitude of a palace.
Verse. 13. That our garners may be full, affording all manner of store, that our
Sheep may bring forth thousands and ten thousands in our Streets. Verse. 14.
That our oxen may be strong to labor, that there be no breaking in, nor going
out, that there be no complaining in our Streets. Verse. 15. Happy is that
people that is in such a case. Every one will be ready to acknowledge and
admire the happiness of such a people. But says David, I Will tell you who are
infinitely and more truly happy, yea, who are only so indeed; yea, happy is
that people whose God is the Lord. So Solomon in this Chapter, to deseribe the
Woman who deserves praise, she that is so good a wife, that the heart of her
Husband does safely trust in her, that will do him good, and not evil all the
days of his life, that is a Crown to him, and renders him honorable in the
gates. She that is so good a Houswife, that she works willingly with her
hands, stays at home, rises early, is industrious, planteth, purchases,
increases her estate, she that is so good a Mother, as to educate her children
well, and so good a Mistress as to provide most carefully for all her servants,
(...) that they are so far from wanting clothes, that their Liveries are
Scarlet. She that is so good a Neighbor that she treats the rich, and relives
the poor and needy, Super omnia vultus accessere boni.
and obliges all by the law of kindness in her tongue, sweetning all by kindest
words, and kinder looks. This Woman certainly deserves to be admired, yea, is
almost adored as a terrestrial Goddess. But after all this, says Solomon, yet
show I you a more excellent way to obtain true and lasting praise; the godly
Woman, the Woman that fears the Lord, she, she deserves to be praised above
all others.

Most Men and Women affect to be praised, but it is for the most part for vain
and deceitful things, which deserve no praise at all; and ^f they attain any,
it is a poor and empty praise which may sound and make a noise in the world,
amongst ^he foolish Herd, but signifies little with wise men, and nothing at
^ll with God, who designs Glory and Honor for none but those who ^eek it by
patient continuance in well ^oing, and working good, Romans 2.7, ^o. But to fear
the Lord, that is, ^o be godly, this deserves praise in^eed. A truth so
evident, and ^lear by its own light, it is hard to ^dd any thing to it for proof
or ^lustration, to make it clearer, nature has printed it in our hearts, and
the new nature in a second and ^airer edition, as a common prin^iple. And first
notions are inde^nonstrable.

To praise is to bear witness, or ^ive an honorable testimony, of ^ Man or
Woman's having such a ^irtue, Grace, Perfection, Excel^ency in them, and the
very acknowledging and testifying that they have them, is a praising o^ them
highly, as Acts 11 24. Bar^ nabas is abundantly praised, in tha^ testimony that
he was a good man full of the holy Ghost, and of faith without adding other
encomiastic^ Words. So when God himse^ vouchsafes to write Job's Panegy rick,
Job 1.1. he calls him h^ servant, a perfect and an upright man^ one that feared
God, Acts 13.22.
and eschewe^ evil. And S. Paul expressly sait^ that God gave testimony to Davi^
when he said of him, I have sou^ David a man after mine own hear^ who shall
fulfill all my will. For a we say for reproach, call a man u^ grateful, and you
can say no wor^ you have stigmatized him with the foulest brand. So for Praise,
ca^ a Woman Godly, you need say (...) more, there is praise enough in tha^ So
that if you confine me strictl^ I must stick in the Center, and dra^ no lines
from it, but all will retu^ upon it self, and be the Epha nev^ so full, it will
settle upon its ow^ Base: I may say aliud, but not an^ plius, none can be
commended hig^ liar, than to have this Character in^ pressed, they fear the Lord.

Again, if I should compare the ^ear of the Lord with other things ^o give it
its due preference, or let any self loose into an enumeration ^f its causes,
properties, effects, ^gns, consequents, advantages, and ^^seasonably
commonplace upon ^, I should lanch into an Ocean, in which I should lose my
self and your ^atience, and despair to kenn a shore a more than an hours
sailing: I ^all therefore confine my self, or ^ather willingly submit to be
con^ned by the straits of time, to very ^arrow measures, which shall be ^hese
two:

1. To point in general at the ^bjects of Praise, and show what in^erest
Religion or the Fear of God ^ath in them.

2. To show what usually acquires ^raise to men, in reference to God, their
Neighbors and Themselves, and ^eclare how being sincerely religi^us, will
entitle us to it on those Accounts,

1. As to the Objects of true ^raise.

The first and grand object of Praise is God, and the divine perfections, which
is so evident throug all the Scriptures, and to the lig^ of Reason, that I Will
not waste tin^ to prove it; and consequently what is next to them, and likest
them is the next and first in the ord^ of the secondary objects of Prai^ Now
that is the Image of God r^ flected and imprinted on the Soul^ Man; and this,
Religion and the Fe^ of God produces: Ephesians. 4.24. T^ new man is created after
God's Image^ righteousness and true holiness: A^ Coloss. 3.10. The new man is
renew^ in knowledge after the image of him the created him.

And they that sincerely embra^ the great and precious promises (...) the
Gospel, are thereby made pa^ takers of the divine nature: A Go^ like temper and
disposition. For Go^ liness is Godlikeness. Therefore 't^ enjoined in such
language, Be ^ holy, for I am holy: or, as I am ho^ says the Lord: 1 Pet.
1.16. an^ Luke 6.36. Be ye merciful as yo^ heavenly father is merciful; and
(...) ye perfect as your heavenly father ^ perfect, Matthew. 5.48. They there^
fore that approach so near the mo^ praiseworthy object, deserve great ^raise.

2. The object of Praise is some ^cellent good, it must be good, or it ^eserves
reproach; but it must be ^so excellent, or no notice is taken ^f it. Now the
fear of God is ex^llent, Psalm. 19. The Saints are ^he excellent of the earth;
Psalm. 16. ^ The righteous is more excellent than ^s Neighbor, Prove. 12.26.
Wis^m excels folly, as light excels ^arkness, Eccles. 2.13. And the ^ings
of God's Law, wherein good ^en exercise themselves, are said to be ^ore
excellent, Romans 2.18. The god^ therefore are to be praised, for ^ey are
excellent.

3. It must be a chosen good, for (...) would be no praise for any Man ^f that
were possible) to be good without, or against his will. If I ^ this thing
willingly I have a reward: (...) Cor. 9.17. Now this good wo^an chooses. Mary
has chosen the ^od part: Luke 10.42. (And so ^d our honorable Mary, if ever
any) and it is employed in the re^oach cast upon Sinners: Prove. 1.9. That they
did not choose the fear of the Lord: that the Saints do ch^ it: Psalm. 119.30. I
have chosen the w^ of truth, thy judgments have I laid (...) fore me: and verse.
137. I have c^^ sen thy precepts. Isa. 56.4. The (...) nuchs which choose the
things wh^ please me. And it is the high co^ mendation of Moses, Heb. 11.25, 2^
That he chose to suffer affliction w^ the people of God, rather than to ^ joy
the pleasure of sin for a season, a^ esteemed the reproach of Christ, great
riches than the treasures of Egypt.

4. It must be some permane^ and abiding good, not fading, n^ like the morning
cloud and early de^ now the fear of the Lord endures ^ ever: Psalm. 19.9.
and where it is in truth it w^ both continue and grow. The rig^ teous is an
everlasting foundation Prove. 10.25. The good part they ch^ shall not be taken
away.

They repent not of their repe^ tance, and Christ has prayed the their faith
fail not.

They go from strength to strength ^ they appear before God perfect in Zi^ and
bring forth more fruit in their a^

The path way of the just is as t^ shining light: Prove. 4.18.
which shines more un^ the perfect day.

2. I shall consider the object of ^raise more specially, and what men ^re
esteemed to merit praise for, ^ith respect to God, their Neighbors and
themselves.

1. Men are praised for their wel^ ^erforming of their duty to God, ^s good
servants.

2. For their Beneficence to men in ^l relations, as useful, just, kind,
cha^itable amongst and toward all ^nen.

3. For their wisdom to themselves, as being prudent, discreet, and wise in
their own concerns.

Now Religion, the Fear of the Lord, ^ productive of all these in an emi^ent
degree; and therefore are ^hey greatly to be praised in whom ^ is.

1. This fear will make good ser^ants to God. This is a principal ^art of a
servants duty: Mal. 1.6. ^f I be a Master where is my fear? Now this fear is
the root of Uni^ersal obedience: he that fears God will not, dare not offend
him: Fear God and keep his Commandments, that is ^he whole duty of man: Eccles.
12.^3. Only fear the Lord, and serve him; if you fear him, you will no^ fail to
serve him. Deuteronomy. 10.12.
What does the Lord require of thee, but to fear hi^^ and to serve the Lord thy
God with ^ thy heart and soul: serve the Lord with fear, Psalm. 2. Let us have
gra^ whereby we may serve God acceptab^^ with reverence and godly fear: He^
12.28. Yea, the fear of God wi^ help to cleanse from all filthine^ both of
flesh and spirit, and to pe^ fect holiness: 2 Cor. 7.1. So that it be
praiseworthy to be a dutif^ child and obedient servant to God, ^ certainly
nothing deserves it be^ ter; the woman that fears t^ Lord has a just claim
to Prais^ because she is such.

2. The fear of the Lord will ma^^ fruitful in all good offices to o^
Neighbor, humble and obedie^ to Superiors, careful of, and ten^ er to
Inferiors, just and kind to a^ and munificent and liberal to tho^ that are in
want. This good w^^ man in the Text, who fears t^ Lord in her heart, had
fruitful hand^ and works of her own to praise her ^ the gates.

It Is the excellency of Religion to make good in all relations. Good
Magistrates, it is the first qualification of Jethro's Justice: Able men that
fear God: Exodus 18.21.

So Nehemiah of himself, Neh. 5.15. The former Governors which were before me,
had been chargeable to the people, and had taken of them bread, and wine, and
forty sheckles of silver, yea, even their servants had rule over the people,
but so did not I because of the fear of God, and good Subjects: Fear thou the
Lord, and the King; Prove. 24.21. Fear God, and honor the King: 1 Pet. 2.17.
One will enforce the other, and will make subject for conscience sake: Romans
13.5.

It will make loving and good Husbands, and it will make good and obedient
Wives, like Sarah; for holy women who trust in God are in subjection to their
own husbands: 1 Pet. 3, And this made this Virtuous Woman so excellent a Wife.
It will make good Family-Governours, who will walk in their house with a
perfect heart, and will neither provoke their Children, nor deny what is equal
to their servants, whilst they remember themselves have a Father, and a Master
in heaven: Col. 4.1. It will make dutiful children, and faithful servants.
Servants obey in all things your Masters according to the flesh, not with
eye-service, as men pleasers, but in singleness of heart, fearing God: Col.
3.22. In a word, it will make honest and righteous in our whole conversation:
S. Peter puts together Acts 10.35. Fearing God and working righteousness.

It renders also charitable and bountiful to them in need; this good Woman,
verse. 20. Stretches out her hands to the poor; yea, she reaches on her hands
to the needy. The good man is ever merciful, and lends; yea, liberal and
gives.

Cornelius is described, Acts 10.^ A devout man that feared God, an^ gave much
alms to the people; and S^ James tells us, that true Religion an^ undefiled is
to visit the fatherless, an^ widows in their affliction, that is to relieve
them.

So that if to be good in all relations, and to be a Benefactor an^ common good
to mankind, deserv^ praise, the fear of God deserves i^ which makes men such.

Thirdly and lastly, the fear of the Lord will make a man wise for himself, to
do himself good: And men will praise thee when thou do well to thy self;
Psalm. 49.18. And nothing is more praiseworthy in man's account, than to be
wise, nor in the account of God, than to be wise to salvation. Now the fear of
the Lord not only makes wise, but is wisdom it self.

The fear of the Lord, that is wisdom, and to depart from evil is
understanding: Job 28.28.

Wisdom and Godliness are synonymous words in the Holy Ghost's Language, the
wise man is the good man, (wise virgins, Matthew. 25.) and the wicked man the
fool. The fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom; the head, the chief of
wisdom; a good understanding have all they that keep his commandments. The
praise of every one of them who do so endures for ever: Psalm. 111. ult.

I am loath, notwithstanding the straits of time, to dismiss this great truth
without some short improvement, let me therefore take advantage from the desire
of fame and praise, which nature has planted in us all.

1. To reprove the blindness and folly of Men who will not see, or seeing, not
pursue the only true and safe, and sure method of attaining it, by laboring to
be soundly and sincerely godly, but build upon the sand, that hollow, sinking
ground, which will not bear this triumphal Arch, this Royal Pillar; their
natural, fortuitous, acquired accomplishments, their strength, beauty, riches,
honor, fleshly wisdom, all which are perishing and vain, false and deceiving,
and will crown them at last but with fading flowers, and withering garlands,
with the praise of foolish men, like themselves; never with that praise which
comes from God: Psalm. 147.10.
for the Lord takes no pleasure in the legs of a man, nor in the face of a
woman: in the strength of the one, nor in the beauty of the other; but the Lord
takes pleasure in them that fear him, and hope in his mercy. I beseech you
therefore, and adjure you by all the obligations of duty to God, and wisdom for
your selves, devote your selves to the fear of God entirely. Resolve to be good
in very good earnest; to be Christians indeed, and Christians within, Romans
8.2.2.
circumcised in heart and spirit, that your praise may be of God, and not of
men: 1 Pet. 1.7.
and found in the faith, that it may be found to praise, and honor, and glory,
at the appearance of Jesus Christ.

And to encourage you, lift up your eyes, bestow one steady, wishful glance
upon the goodly fruit, with which this tree of life is laden, of which,
whoever eats shall never die, but live for ever.

1. All your sins shall be pardoned, you shall have peace with God, with
conscience, and with all the creatures; acceptance of your persons, and of all
your services.

2. You shall be freed from the power, the filth, and the deceitfulness of sin,
the vassalage of Satan, the sting of death, and from the pit, and fear of Hell.

3. Your Souls shall be repaired to their original perfections and excellencies
in the Image of God, and participation of the Divine Life.

4. You shall be ingrafted into Christ, adopted into the Family of God, made
temples of the holy Ghost, with all the Blessings which are consequent on these.

5. You shall be heirs of all the promises; yea, inherit all things: have all
your wants supplied, all just desires satisfied, all conditions sanctified, all
providence blessed, to promote your everlasting good.

Lastly, you shall be crowned with the unwithering Laurels of true, and of
eternal praises, by Men, by Angels, and by Christ, and God; and when you die in
nature, begin to live in glory; go to God and see his face, and be for ever
with him, in whose presence is fullness of joy, and at whose right hand are
pleasures for ever more.

And for further quickening and strengthening you against the difficulties which
may seem to meet you, and to obstruct you in this excellent way. Let me set
before you the examples of the Saints of God, who, though men of like passions
with your selves, inwardly clogged with the same corrupt and sinful nature,
outwardly beset with the like or same temptations, cast off the weight which
hung upon them, broke through the difficulties which did encompass them, and
ran the race which was set before them, and through faith and patience
obtained, and now inherit the promises, and that sure reward, that Diadem of
Joy, and Praise, which God has provided, and Christ has purchased for, and
promised to them that love and fear him, and wait for his appearance. Reflect
on all the Worthies of the Old Testament, and New, the holy Patriarchs,
Prophets and Apostles, the noble Army of Martyrs, all the primitive Christians,
whose names are recorded in the Church's Story, all the devout men and women of
succeeding ages; and follow that Cloud of Witnesses, as Israel followed that
Pillar of Cloud and Fire, through the wilderness till they arrived at Canaan.

And that you may not doubt, or fear that God's Arm is shortened, or his hand
is grown weak his Bowels straightened, or the aid of his Grace less powerful,
sufficient, yea, exuberant than they were of old.

Let me set before you an illustrious, an Heroic, a recent instance, fresh in
your memories, known to you all, a President, as much beyond exception, as
example, which may silence all your cavils of difficulty, and much more of
impossibility.

I mean the thrice honorable; and truly noble, the most excellent and
incomparable Lady, the sacred Shrine of whose venerable Hearse we are now
drenching with the just tribute of our floods of tears, and strewing with the
sweetest Flowers, of Applause and Admiration, though they as much too few, as
these too pale and faint, for such an offering.

She was a Woman; -- of the feebler Sex, a sinful daughter of first sinning
Eve, a rich woman, and how hardly can such be saved? That had as much business
to divert her, and as much plenty to entertain her, as much beauty to tempt
her, and as much Favor to entangle her, as any of you, and lived in the same
atheistical, degenerate age with your selves, wherein sincere and serious
Religion is made the greatest Ridicule, esteemed the most unmodish and
unfashionable thing.

And yet in the midst of all these disadvantages, I may without Hyperbole
invite you, as the Cryar used to call Spectators to the secular Plays: Come see
those Shows, Quos nemo mortalium vidit, vel visurus est, Come see, come hear
such an example of Heroic Virtue, of Generous Piety, of sincere, humble,
unaffected, serious, fruitful Religion, as in all respects this age has not
produced, as has had rare, if any Presidents to follow, and I fear will be
followed by few, or none, but with long distant intervals.

An hundred Mouths and a thousand Tongues, Si mihi sint centum linguae, sint
oraque centum.
though they all flowed with Nectar, would be too few to praise her. O for a
Chrysostom's Mouth, for an Angel's Tongue to describe this terrestrial
Seraphim; or a ray of light condensed into a pencil, and made tactile to give
you this glorious child of light in vive Effigy.

But what great Masters can present in minature? what skilful hand epitomize so
great a soul, and draw her in little (on so few remaining Sands) who had
nothing little, nothing mean, but a little esteem of her own perfections, and
being mean in her own eyes.

For she was truly excellent, and great in all respects: great in the honor of
her Birth, being born a Lady, and a Virtuosa both, Seventh Daughter of that
eminently Honorable Richard, the first Earl of Cork, who being born a private
Gentleman, and younger Brother of a younger Brother, to no other Heritage than
is expressed in the Device and Motto, which his humble Gratitude inscribed on
all the Palaces he built.

God's Providence, mine Inheritance.

By that Providence, and his diligent and wise Industry, raised such an Honor
and Estate, and left such a Family as never any Subject of these three Kingdoms
did, and that with so unspotted a Reputation of integrity, that the most
invidious scrutiny could find no blot, though it winnowed all the methods of
his Rising most severely, which our good Lady has often told me with great
content and satisfaction.

This Noble Lord by his prudent and pious Consort, no less an Ornament and
Honor to their Descendants than himself, was blessed with five Sons, of which
he lived to see four Lords, and Peers of the Kingdom of Ireland.

And a fifth, more than these Titles speak, a Sovereign and Peerless, in a
larger Province, that of universal nature, subdued, and made obsequious to his
inquisitive mind.

And eight Daughters.

And that you may remark how all things were extraordinary in this great
Personage: it will, I hope, be neither unpleasant, nor impertinent, to add a
short Story, I had from our Lady's own mouth.

Master Boil after Earl of Cork (who was then a Widdower) came one morning to
wait upon Sir Jeoffry Fenton, at that time a great Officer of State in the
Kingdom of Ireland; who being engaged in business, and not knowing who it was
who desired to speak with him, a while delayed him access, which time he spent
pleasantly with his young Daughter in her Nurses Arms. But when Sir Jeoffry
came, and saw whom he had made stay somewhat long, he civilly excused it. But
Master Boil replied, he had been very well entertained, and spent his time much
to his satisfaction, in courting his Daughter, if he might obtain the Honor to
be accepted for his Son-in-law. At which Sir Jeoffry smiling, (to hear one who
had been formerly married, move for a Wife carried in Arms, and under two years
old) asked him, if he would stay for her: to which he frankly answered him he
would, and Sir Jeoffry as generously, promised him, he should then have his
full consent. And they both kept their words honorably. And by this virtuous
Lady he had thirteen Children, ten of which he lived to see honorably married,
and died a Grandfather by the youngest of them.

Nor did she derive less honor from ^e collateral, than the descending ^ine,
being Sister by Soul and Ge^us, as well as Blood to these great ^ersonages,
whose illustrious, unspot^d and resplendent Honor, and ^irtue, and whose
useful Learning, and accurate Pens, may atone and ^xpiate, as well as shame,
the scan^alous Blemishes of a debauched, and ^e many impertinences of a
scrib^ng Age.

1. Richard the truly Right Hoourable, Loyal, Wise, and Virtu^us Earl of
Burlington and Cork, whose ^fe is his fairest, and most lauda^le Character.

2. The Right Honorable Ro^er, Earl of Orery, that great Poet, ^reat
Statesman, great Soldier, and ^reat Everything, which merits the ^ame of
Great or Good.

3. Francis Lord Shannon: whose Pocket-Pistol, as he styles his Book, may make
as wide Breaches in the Walls of the Capitol, as many Ca^ons.

4. And that Honorable, and well known name R. Boil, Esquire, that profound
Philosopher, accomplished Humanist, and excellent Divine I had almost said
Lay-Bishop, as o^ has styled Sir H. Savil, who^ Works alone may make a Libr^ry.

The Female Branches also (if be lawful so to call them, who^ Virtues were so
masculine, Sou^ knowing no difference of Sex) b^ their Honors and Graces (by
m^ tual reflections) gave, and receive^ luster, to, and from her.

The Eldest of which, the Lad^ Alice, was married to the Lord B^ ramore.

The Second, the Lady Sarah, t^ the Lord Digby of Ireland.

The Third, the Lady Laetitia, to the eldest Son of the Lord Goring who died
Earl of Norwich.

The Fourth, the Lady Joan, to the Earl of Kildare, not only Primier Earl of
Ireland, but the ancientest House in Christendom of tha^ degree, the present
Earl being the six and twentieth, or the seven and twentieth of Lineal Descent.
And, as I have heard, it was that great Antiquary, King Charles the First his
observation, that the three ancientest Families of Europe for ^obility, were
the Veres in England, ^arls of Oxford, and the Fitz Ge^alds in Ireland, Earls
of Kildare: and Momorancy in France. It Is ^bservable, that the present young
Earl of Kildare, is a mixture of ^he Blood of Fitz-Geralds and Ve^res.

The Fifth, the Lady Katherine, who was married to the Lord Vicount Ranelaugh,
and Mother to the present generous Earl of Ranelaugh, of which Family I could
have added an eminent Remark, I meet with in Fuller's Worthies.

This Lady's Character is so signalized by her known Merit, among all Persons
of Honor; that as I need not, so I dare not attempt beyond this one word, She
was our Lady's Friend-Sister.

The Sixth, the Lady Dorothy Loftus.

The Seventh (the number of Perfection) which shut up and crowned this noble
Train, (for the Eighth, the Lady Margaret died unmarried) was our excellent
Lady Mary, married to Charles Earl of Warwick: of whom, if I should use the
Language of my Text, I should neither despair their pardon, nor fear the
reproach of rudeness: Many Daughters, all his Daughters did virtuously; but
thou --

She was Great by her Marriage into the Noble Neighboring Family, which yet
received accession to its Grandeur, by the luster of her Name and Virtues. But
she needed neither borrowed Shades, nor reflexive Lights, to set her off, being
personally great in all natural Endowments and Accomplishments of Soul, and
Body, Wisdom, Beauty, Favor, Virtue.

Great by her Tongue; for never Woman used one better, speaking so gracefully,
promptly, discreetly, pertinently, holily, that I have ^st admired the edifying
words that proceeded from her Mouth.

Great by her Pen, as you may (Expede Herculem) discover by that little taste
of it, the world has been happy in, the hasty fruit of one or two interrupted
hours after Supper, which she professed to me with a little regret, when she
was surprised with it is sliding into the ^orld without her knowledge, or
^lowance, and wholly beside her ^xpectation.

Great by being the greatest Mi^ress, and Promotress, not to say ^he Foundress,
and Inventress of a ^ew Science -- The Art of obliging; ^n which she attained
that Sovereign Perfection, that she reigned over all their hearts with whom she
did con^erse.

Great in her nobleness of Living, and in her free and splendid Hospitality.

Great in the unparalled sincerity of constant, faithful, condescending
Friendship; and for that Law of kindness which dwelt in her Lips and Heart.

Great in her dexterity of Ma^agement.

Great in her quickness to appre^end the difficulties of her Affairs, and where
the stress and pinch lay, ^o untie the Knot, and loose and ease them.

Great in the conquest of her self, and mastery of her passions, as I could
give severel pregnant instances, but especially in that of the death of her
dear and only So^ wherein her behavior was so fulmiss, serene, and calm, I
confes^ cannot but judge it scarce imitable or attainable by any other.

Great in a thousand things b^ sides, which the world admires a^ such; but I
can be, and here profess my self her faithful witness she despised them all,
and counte^ them but loss and dung in comparison ^ the fear of God, and the
excellency (...) the knowledge of Christ, Jesus our Lord

The Substance of great Volume uses to be summarily contracted in to Contents
and Titles. All I have said is but an imperfect Index, ^ this great Folio of
Voluminous Virtu^ You that knew her must have the Book before you, turn over
the leave of your own memories, and rea^ with pleasure what those hints refe^
you to.

But I promised you to present her as an example of Solomon's Rule, l^ us
therefore bring her, and the To^ together, and never two were be^ ter met. If
even this Scripture we^ fulfilled, it is this day fulfilled in you ears.

O thou Great, Heroic, Noble, Bles^d Soul, (and blessed be that God, ^d Grace
that made thee such) Man daughters have done virtuously, but ^ou excellest them
all. Though thou ^antedst not Beauty, and did ex^ed in Favor; thou did
neither rize them, nor catch at praises by ^em, but did fear the Lord with ^l
thy heart, and esteemedst that thy ^ly praise and honor. Thy hands ^ere
fruitful, and thy lips too, and thy ^ruits were many, pleasant, useful,
^asonable, ripe, sweet, and fragrant: ^oth to God and Man.

Thou art now praising God, and ^ve are praising thee: with the Sprigs ^f those
Laurels will we crown thee which thy own hands did plant, and ^es did water;
that God may be ^raised in thee, and for thee, and others drawn by holy
emulation to ^anscribe thy Copy.

I shall begin with that which always had the first place in her care, and
heart, her Religion, and Piety, which in the language of my Text, ^s the fear
of the Lord. And I may, ^s is said of Hannaniah, Neh. 7.2. truly attest, that
she feared the Lord above many; above most, not to ^ above all: that she feared
the L^ greatly, as is testified of Obad^ 1 Kings 18.3. Or as David calls h^
self God's servant devoted to his fe^ Psalm 119.38. So might she m^ truly.

I shall give you an account of,

1. Her Entrance, or Beginning.

2. Progress, or Growth.

3. Practice, and Exercise of R^ ligion as to her self.

4. Of her Zeal, and holy Indust to promote it, and encourage it others.

First, as to her beginning to be ^^riously Religious, and to make it h^^
business in good earnest, though (...) had good education, and had be^
principled in the Grounds of Cat^chism in her youth: yet she wou^^ confess she
understood nothing (...) the life and power of Religion upon her heart, had no
spiritual sense (...) it, till some years after she was ma^ried. She has told
me also wit^ what prejudice and strange appr^hensions, as to matters of
Religion she came into the Family in which she lived and died with so much
Honor, for she was almost frighted ^th the disadvantageous account ^s given of
it: but when she came (...) see the regular performance of ^^vine Worship, and
hear the use^^^, edifying, preaching of the most ^^cessary, practical, and
substantial ^^ths, and observe the order and ^od Government, and received
^^couragement from her Right Ho^^urable Father-in-law, who had al^ays an
extraordinary value for ^r, and affection to her* her preju^e wore off, and
approbation follow^^^. Which minds me of a compa^on, used by the Learned P.
Mar^^^, which occasioned the Conversi^^ of the Pious Galeacious Caracci^s.

If a Man standing at a great di^^ance see a Company dancing, he ^^onders at
their antic Gestures, ^d seemingly ridiculous motions, ^d thinks them a
company of mad ^en: but if he approaches nearer, ^^d comes within the hearing
of ^e sweet and harmonious Music, which guides and measures out ^ose motions,
and observes how ^egularly one answers to the other, he then admires them,
appro^^^ their decency and order, and des^^^ to dance with them. So if a (...)
take up the reports the world gi^^ of serious Christians, or sees the at a
distance busily attending (...) the duties of their holy Calling a^^
Profession, he thinks of them (...) Festus did of Paul: that they (...) besides
themselves, or mad: but if acquaint himself more through^ with them, and hears
and understan^ the Word of God, which is as it we the Music to which they
danc^ and takes notice how they measu^^ all their motions by its melody, (...)
sees such an agreeing and beauti^^ conformity betwixt them; he ca^ not but
approve it, and join wi^^ them.

God made use of two more rem^ means of her Conversion, Affliction and
Retirement, the kind of the fir^ and the occasion of the second ne^ not here be
named. Only the d^ vine Wisdom and Grace is very dorable, for adapting suitable
mea^ to bring his purposes to pass: (...) these were in her circumstances, f^^
she would since acknowledge the ^r great difficulty and remora, was ^^r love of
the pleasures and vani^es of the world, which she nei^^er knew how to reconcile
with ^e strictness of Religion, nor yet ^ould be content to part with for ^^at,
whose sweets and better plea^^res, she was not then acquainted ^ith: God
therefore gradually ^eaned her, by rendering more insi^id what had too much
pleased her, and by giving her vacancy and free^om from distraction, to
acquaint ^er self more thoroughly with the things of God. By which she was
^nabled to set to her feal to that ^e^imony which God gives to that ^piritual
Wisdom, That all her ways ^re pleasantness, and all her paths are ^eace: and to
her Friends would frequently and freely do it, assuring them That she had no
cause to re^ent the change she had found, of the solid and satisfying pleasures
she obtained in Religion, for those unquiet, empty ones, she left in ways of
vanity: thereby encouraging them to try, not doubting, but upon experience they
would become of the same mind.

Two more immediate helps which God blessed to her, were the preaching of the
Word ( which God has ordained for the salvation of them that believe: 1 Cor.
1.21.) and Christian Conference, and (because such an^ hint may do others good)
the pressing the necessity of speedy and true repentance, and showing the
danger of procrastination, and puttings off, and stifling present convictions
by delay: This seemed to turn the wavering, tremling balance, and to fix the
scale of her resolution.

This is about nine and twenty years since, from which time (though before her
coversation was viceless, sweet, and inoffensive, yet she would confess her
mind was vain) she walked with God most closely, circumspectly, accurately. And
I verily believe few (if any) ever chose the better part, more resolutely than
this our noble Mary, or devoted themselves more unreservedly to God's love, and
fear, and service, learning to be good in very good earnest, and to increase,
and grow in grace, and in the knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.

2. To promote this, like the wise man in the Gospel, Mat. 7.24. She dug deep
to lay her foundations on a rock. She made a strict scrutiny into the State of
her Soul, and weighed the reasons of her choice, in the balance of the
Sanctuary. And with the other Builder of the Gospel, sat down and considered
with her self what it might cost to finish her spiritual edifice, and whether
she were furnished to defray that charge. And also whether the grounds of her
hope were firm, and such as would not abuse, and shame her; and her evidences
for Heaven, such as would bear the Test, and Scripture would approve.

And this she drew up at large, with her own hand judiciously, soberly,
modestly, humbly, and about twenty years since did me the honor with greatest
secrecy to read it to me, and obliged me with all freedom and faithfulness to
give her my judgment of it; which I could not but do with much approbation. And
this, I doubt not, remains amongst her many excellent Papers.

Having thus put her hand to the plough, she looked not back, but minded
Religion as her business indeed; and never gave suspicion of trifling in so
serious a work.

3. Therefore for her practice of it, it was her great design to walk worthy of
God in all well-pleasing, to adorn her professed subjection to the Gospel, by a
conversation becoming it, and to show forth his virtues and praises, who had
called her to his mavelous Light.

First then she was circumspectly careful to abstain from all appearance of
evil; and in all doubtful cases 'twas her rule to take the surest side; for she
would say, I am sure, 'twill do me no hurt, to let them alone. Though therefore
(...) were further from censuring others, or usurping judgment over their
liberties; yet for her self she would never allow her self the addition of
artificial handsomness, (used neither paint nor patch) and was pleased with a
saying of one of her spiritual Friends, upon the reading the Book which
apologizes for it: O lord, I thank thee, that thou gave me not wit enough to
write such a Book, unless withal thou had given me Grace enough not to write
it. Neither would she play at any Games, because beside many other
inconveniences, she judged them great wasters of precious time: of which she
was always very thristy. And though she was known to be a woman of good
understanding, yet were there three things which were too hard for her, and she
would confess she could not comprehend them.

First, How those who professed to believe an Eternal Estate, and it is
dependence upon the short inch of time, could complain of times lying as a dead
commodity on their hand, which they were troubled how to drive away.

Secondly, how Christians, who would seem devout at Church, could laugh at
others for being serious out on it, and burlesque the very Bible, and turn
Religion into Ridicule.

Thirdly, How knowing men could take care of souls, and seldom come amongst
them, and never look after them.

And though in the forenamed particulars, she was content only to give example
of forbearance: yet from the Playhouse, since the Stage has taken so great
liberty, she would openly dehort her Friends with greatest earnestness.

She very many years since, began to keep a Diary; and consulted two, whom she
used to call her Soul-Friends, and ever esteemed such her best Friends,
concerning the best manner of performing it. This, at first, she used to
perform every Evening; but finding that inconvenient, by reason of her Lords
long ilness, which gave her many inevitable divertions and interruptions at
that season, she changed it into the quiet, silent morning, always rising
early. And therein amongst other things recorded the daily frame of her own
heart toward God, his signal providence to her self, and sometimes toward
others, his gracious manifestations to her Soul, returns of prayer, temptations
resisted, or prevailing, or what ever might be useful for caution, or
encouragement, afford her matter of thankfulness or humiliation. And by this
means she had arrived at such experience, that she could conclude, at least
make strong conjectures of the events of things she spread before the Lord in
prayer, by the frame of her own heart, in the performance of it, as I could
instance in particulars, if it were convenient.

She used to call Prayer Heartsease, as she often found it; and though her
modesty was such, and she was so far from a vain, affected ostentation of her
gifts, I cannot name one person with whom she prayed, yet can I say she was as
well mighty, and fervent in prayer, as constant and abundant in it; for she
sometimes using her voice, has been overheard, and her own Lord (knowing her
hours of prayer) once conveyed a grave Minister into a secret place, within
hearing, whom, if I should name, I suppose would not be denied to be a
competent Judge, who much admired her humble fervency; for she praying prayed,
and when she used not an audible voice, her sighs and groans would echo from
her Closet at good distance. And the very day before she died, she was shut up
above an hour, which she spent in fervent, private, prayer, notwithstanding her
indisposition; and indeed prayer was her very element in which she lived, and
actually died; and 'twas as the vital breath of her Soul, and the wing that
wasted it immediately to Heaven.

But if she exceeded her self in any thing as much as she excelled others in
most things, 'twas in meditation: this was her Masterpiece; for she usually
walked two hours daily in the morning, to meditate alone, in which divine art
she was an accomplished Mistress, both in set and occasional, in the first
choosing some select subject, which she would press upon her heart with
intensest thoughts, till she had drawn out all its Juice and nourishment: and
for the second, like a spiritual Be, she would suck Honey from all
occurrences, whole Volumes of which she has left behind her.

After this consecrating of the day with reading Scriptures, prayer, and
meditation: Lectione assidua and meditatione diuturna pectus suum Bibliothecam
fecerat Christi; unde hic fervor, nisiex amore Dei? unde legis Christi
indefessa meditatio nisi ex desiderio ejus qui legein dedit?
a short dressing time, and ordering her domestic Affairs, or reading some
good Book, spent the remainder of the morning till Chappel-prayers, from which
she was never absent, and at which she was ever reverend, and a devout example
to her whole Family.

She was a strict observer of the Lords day, which is truly called the Hedge
and Fence of Religion, and though some please themselves to call this
Judaizing, to excuse the liberties they indulge themselves: I am sure our
Church has enjoined us all to cry to God for mercy, for the breach of, and for
grace to incline our hearts to keep, the fourth Commandment, as well as any of
the other nine: and it is not hard to observe that the streams of Religion are
deep, or shallow, according as these Banks are kept up, or neglected.

She was a very devout Communicant; seldom omitting to prepare her Soul with
solemn fasting, to renew her Covenant with God.

And in the act of receiving, I cannot think of her without reflecting on S.
Stephen, when he saw the Heavens opened, and Jesus standing at God's right
hand, and his face was as the face of an Angel.

And to encourage others to such serious preparation to that Sacred Ordinance,
as she used before it: I shall show what sweet advantages she reaped in it, and
by it. And this I shall do by transcribing word for word out of her Diary, what
I find written with her own hand, concerning one of the last Sacrament days,
she ever enjoyed. For the Sacrament which was appointed to have been
administered in her Ladyships Chapel upon Easter Day, was put off by reason of
her falling ill in Passion week.

November, 25. Sacrament Day.
AS soon as I awaked, I blessed God. When I had read in the Word, the Chapters
of the Sufferings of my Blessed Savior, I spent much time in meditating of his
dying love. By which thoughts I found my heart much drawn out to love him, and
melted by his love, then with great and awful apprehensions of God upon my
heart, I went to pray. In which duty my heart was lifted up in the high praises
of God, for both spiritual and temporal mercies: and my affections were much
drawn out in the duty, in which my heart did follow exceeding hard after God
for a nearer communion with him in the Sacrament than ever yet I had. I then
renewed my covenant with God: and made promises, that by his Grace enabling me,
I would walk more closely with him for the time to come. That which in especial
manner I begged of God at this Sacrament was more love to him, more holiness,
more contempt of the World, and the Glories of it, that I might be more useful
to the Souls and Bodies of my Fellow- Christians than formerly I had been.

Those mercies which in especial manner, I was grateful for, were, the Creation
and Redemption of the World, and for the Gospel and the Covenant of Grace, and
for converting Grace, and for Justification, and for some measure of
Sanctification: and for so much Patience exercised toward me, before my
conversion: and in order to it, imbittering Creature Comforts, that I might
seek for comforts above: and for a sanctified affliction, and for some degree
of patience to bear it, and for supports under it by the warm and lively
comforts of the Holy Ghost: and for returns of prayer: and for so many
opportunities to seek unto God: and for the sweet reviving hours I had enjoyed
with God in solitude by Heavenly Meditations: and for the Word and Sacraments,
and the sanctifying motions of God's Spirit. I was in a more than usual manner
melted in the duty, and shed a very great plenty of tears in it: which when I
came from, I found a longing desire to partake of the Lord's Supper, and a
great joy that I was going to partake of it. Then I went to hear -- the Text
was I am the way, the truth and the life, no man comes to the Father, but by
me.

I was attentive at that good Sermon. And by what I heard of the excellency of
Christ, had my heart much warmed with love to him.

Afterward, at the confession before the Sacrament, I found my heart in a more
than usual manner broken for my sins, which I bewailed with great plenty of
tears, and from my heart judged, and loathed my self for them. After I had
received, I found my heart in an extraordinary manner warmed with love to God.
And my Soul did follow very hard after him, to be made more holy, and for Grace
to serve him better than ever yet I had done. I had very lively affections in
the duty; in which I received much joy, and had sweet communion with God in it.

After I had at the Table of the Lord given to the Poor, I came from the
Sacrament with my heart in a sweet grateful, and Heavenly Frame, and then in
private blessed God, for that blessed Feast, and begged strength to keep my
promises I had made to God, of new obedience.

In the Afternoon I heard again the same person, upon the same Text; I was in
an attentive, serious frame at that good Sermon. The Subject of which was to
show, that Christ was the only way for penitent sinners to come unto the Father.

I meditated upon the Sermons, and prayed them over. And had also meditations
of the Joys of Heaven, with the thoughts of being for ever freed from sin, and
of being ever with the Lord, where I should enjoy him in his fullest love.

I found my heart much revived and my Soul did then make strong Sallies and
Egresses after that blessed Rest.

After Family Duties were over, at which I prayed with fervency; I did before
going to Bed commit my self to God.

O Lord, I do from my Soul bless thee for this sweet day, in which thou were
pleased to vouchsafe unto me, thy most unworthy Servant, more Soul-joy, than
thou did give me for a long time before.

She was a very serious and attentive hearer of the Word, and constantly after
Sermon recollected what she heard, sometimes by writing, always by thinking and
calling it to mind, that she might make it her own, and turn it into practice,
not content to be a forgetful fruitless hearer only, but a doer, that she might
be blessed in her deed.

And such she was for the external performances of Religion.

And though this was beautiful and lovely, yet her chief glory was within, in
the hidden man of the heart, in that which is not corruptible, in that dress of
Graces which adorned her Soul; this string was all of Orient Pearls, and evenly
matched, not one ill watered, or of unequal size. There was not one dried or
withered Limb, one member wanting or defective in the new creature, she was
complete in Christ, all of a piece.

The Head of her Knowledge was comprehensive and clear, The Eye of her Faith
was piercing and steady. The Ear of her obedience was open and light of
hearing, and boared at the door posts of wisdom's house. Her Palate was
savoury, and relishing, to which God's Law was sweeter than the honey, and the
honeycomb, and more esteemed than her necessary food. The Cheeks of her
Modesty were fair and ruddy. The Arms of her desires were stretched out after
God, and flexile, to embrace him. The Hands of her Justice and Charity were
strong and open. The Breasts of her Bounty were well-fashioned; and full of
milk, and the Bowels of her compassion were tender and fruitful. Her hunger and
thirst after righteousness was even greedy and insatiable. The heart of her
sincerity was sound and lively, and the pulse of her conscience smooth and
equal. The feet of her affections were swifter than the Roes on the Mountains
of Bether, more truly winged than the Poets feign their Mercuries. The natural
heat of her Zeal more fervent than the coals of Juniper, and the radical
moisture of her repentance more fluid than the springs of Pisgah. Being seen
with dry eyes, under tear-moving circumstances, which very nearly concerned her
self, and being asked, how she could refrain? She replied, I desire to weep for
nothing but my sin:. Her name was as ointment pouned forth, which made her the
delight and admiration of all good men and women; yea, you may call her a She
Jedidiah, a Female Lemuel, the Lord's delights, she with whom God was.

Now the Soul of this excellent Body, which animated all its goodly parts
within, was the love of God, and the gorgeous Robe which clothed it without,
was her deep humility. These were the Sun and Moon in this great Firmament, all
whose Stars were of the first magnitude, and the least of which would have made
the great Luminary in another Orb. Such was this beauteous Spouse of Christ, so
like her Heavenly Bridegroom, that for that resemblance sake, we may say of her
she was exceeding lovely.

Nor was she less solicitous to make others good, than to be so her self. She
well remembered our Saviors charge to S. Peter, When thou art converted,
strengthen thy Brethren: She set her heart to build God's spiritual Temple, and
therefore she applied her self to it with all her might. She had holy
Transports for the Glory of God, and she was a great Lover of Souls, and those
two engaged her to promote Religion with utmost industry and zeal, which that
she might accomplish more advantageously,

1. She avowedly designed to represent Religion as amiable, and taking, and
free from vulgar prejudice, as possibly she might; not so as might affright and
scare men from it: but that it might allure them, and insinuate it is self into
their love and liking: to this end she was affable, familiar, pleasant, of a
free, and agreeable conversation, unaffected, not sour, reserved, morose, sad,
dejected, melancholy, which presents Religion most disadvantageously. She was
naturally of the sweetest temper in the World: and Grace inoculated into such a
stock, thrives even luxuriantly. Whereas some crabbed, peevish, sullen natures
starve the best Cien they are grafted with. As I remember one of whom 'twas
usually said, he had Grace enough for seven other men, yet scarce enough for
himself. And she made grace and nature both subservient to the good of others.

As we say of some neat, well-fashion'd persons, what e're they wear becomes
them, and sits well: I must do her this right, to testify, I never saw
Religion become any person better. And 'twas hard not to approve and love a
dress so decent and adorning.

2. She kept her self free and disinteressed from all Parties and Factions,
that none might suspect a design of making Proselytes to any, but to God.

She was neither of Paul, nor Apollos, nor Cephas, but only Christ. Her name
was Christian, and her Surname Catholic, she had a large and unconfined Soul,
not hemmed in, or pounded up within the Circle of any man's name or drawing, a
Lati^^dinarian in the true commendable sense: and whoever feared God, and
wrought righteousness was accepted of her.

She very inoffensively, regularly, devoutly, observed all the Orders of the
Church of England, in its Liturgy and public Service, which she failed not to
attend twice a day with exemplary Reverence, yet was she very far from placing
Religion in Ritual Observances. And I may not deny, that she would sometimes
warm her heart (though never with strange fire) at private Altars in her own
Chamber or Closet.

3. She would perfume the company with good discourse, to prevent idle, or
worse communication, not abruptly, upbraidingly, or importunely, which is very
nauseous and fulsome and spoils a good game by bad playing: But she was like a
spiritual Stove, you should feel the heat, and not see the fire, and find your
self in other company amongst the same persons, and rather wonder than perceive
how you came there; for she would drop a wise sentence, or moral holy Apothegm
(with which she was admirably furnished, of her own making or collection) that
suited with at least not far remote from wha^ was talked of, and commending, o^
improving that, she would wind about the whole discourse without offense, yea, with
pleasure.

She kept a Book of such wise, pithy Sayings, much valuing words, which
contained great use and worth in little compass.

I shall transcribe a few of many.

THe almost Christian is the unhappiest Man, having Religi^n enough to make the
World hate ^im; and not enough to make God love him.

God's Servants should be as bold ^or him as the Devils are for him.

What will make thee happy at ^^y time, may make thee happy at (...) times.

O Lord, what I give thee, does ^^t please thee, unless I give thee ^y self. So
what thou give me all not satisfy me, unless thou give ^e thy self.

O Lord, who give Grace to the ^^mble, give me grace to be hum^^e.

He loves God too little, who ^^es any thing with him, which he ^^es not for
him.

The true measure of loving God, is to love him without measure.

So speak to God, as though men heard thee, so speak to men, as knowing God
hears thee.

Seneca said, he was better born than to be a slave to his Body.

Luther said, Christ's Cross is no Letter, yet it taught him more than all the
Alphabet.

We should meditate of Christ's Cross, till we be fastened as close to him, as
he was to his Cross.

By how much the more Christ made himself vile for us; by so much the more
precious he should be to us.

We need every day blood for our hearts: as water for our hands.

Through Christ's wounds we may see his Bowels.

He only can satisfy us, who satisfied for us.

He that takes up Christ's Cross handsomely, shall find it such a burden as
Wings to a Bird, or Sails to a Ship.

It Is a great honor to be Almoner to the King of Heaven.

The Bowels of the poor are the best soil, which brings forth an hundred fold.

Who would not starve a Lust to feed a Saint?

To give is the greatest sensuality: How indulgent then is God to annex future
rewards, to what is so much its own recompense?

To be libelled for Christ is the best Panegyric.

Where affliction is heavy, sin is light.

God chastises whom he loves, but he loves not to chastise.

Sin brought death into the world, and nothing but death will carry sin out of
the world.

If all men's troubles were brought into a common store, every one would carry
back what he brought, rather than stand to a share of an equal division.

Though time be not lasting, what depends on it, is everlasting.

The best Shield against Slanderers, is to live so, that none may believe them.

He that revenges an injury, acts the part of an Executioner. He that pardons
it, acts the part of a Prince.

Sanctified afflictions are spiritual promotions.

Man is a pile of Dust, and puff of Wind.

Why are we so fond of that life which begins with a Cry, and ends with a groan!

But I will not cloy you, knowing it is safest to rise with an appetite; even
when we are entertained at a Banquet.

4. Where she had particular kindness, or personal interest, she would improve
the authority of her friendship to gentle, but free correption, and argue, and
persuade so strenuously, that her Bow, like Jonathan's, seldom returned empty;
and plead the cause of God, and their own souls, to whom she spoke with so
winning and insinuating sweetness, that 'twas hard to resist the Suada, shall I
say, or rather the spirit, by which she spoke. Let me resound and eccho^ from
her lips (though alas too faintly) how she would with melting charms, and
powerful strains, attempt upon the Friends, for whom she had a kindness, and
whom she longed to rescue.

COme, come, my Friend, you must be good, you shall be good; I cannot be so
unkind, nay, so unfaithful to the laws of Friendship, as to let you persist,
and perish in a way, you know as well as I, leads down to Hell. It grives my
very soul to see so good a nature ensnared against the dictates of its own
light, by bad example, custom or somewhat else -- And if they replied with
excuses, she would stop them thus: I pray, my Friend, have patience, hear me
out, I know, or guess at least, what you would say, and I would not have you
say it. It Is bad to commit sin, but it is worse to plead for it, and defend it.
None sin so dangerously as those who sin with excuses. The Devil then ties a
new snare, when he gets into our tongues to fasten us to our failings, and
raises an out-work in our own mouths, to secure the Fort he possesses in our
hearts: I take it for granted, all other Holds were slighted easily, could you
conquer such or such a vice, too much by custom prevailing with you. Unhappy
custom that dares prescribe against God's Law -- But, Friend, use no arguments
that will not hold water at the day of judgment: though hand join in hand, you
know what follows. And no example, custom, number should allure us, which
cannot excuse us and secure us. But this is the mischief of sin lived in it, it
bewitches the heart to love it, that it cannot leave it. Cannot, so men love to
speak; but it is because they will not, that is, will use no endeavors to be
rid on it. But you must leave it, there is no remedy though it cost you trouble,
smart, and self-denial. There Is as much as all this comes to, in cutting off
(...) right hand, and digging out a right eye. I speak to you, as to one in
whom I have a party to help me plead. I mean your conscience and the belief of
the Scriptures for if you were one of those o^ whom you know I use to set m^
mark, I should not give you this trouble, nor esteem myself under more than the
Laws of general charity to wish you better, should hardly venture my little
skill to make you so.

But as for you, who still own God's authority, and believe his Word, and
attend his Worship. Why should I despair of making one piece of your self,
agree with the other, your practice with your convictions, your conversation
with your conscience.

And not to fright you with the Thunderclaps of wrath and vengeance, and God's
judging you know whom -- listen to the still voice, it is your peculiar eminency
to be kind and grateful (and because there is a kind of magnetic virtue in
those arguments which touch our temper, and a string will move it self when
another instrument is touched that is set to the same Key, and pitch) I shall
attack you on that side, hoping the strongest excellency of your nature, will
prove the weakest defensative for sin, and to keep our God.

You therefore who are so good natured, so kind, so grateful that you never
think you have acquit your self sufficiently to those who have been civil, or
as you please to called obliging. Oh how can -- be so unkind, and so ungrateful
unto God Almighty, the kindest Friend, who is so much before hand with you, who
has given you so much, and is so ready to forgive you all. Oh that you, who I
dare say would take my word for any hing else, would do me the honor to take
my word for him, who I assure you upon your sincere repentance will be fully
reconciled to you in Christ, and never so much as upraid your past neglects,
but heal your backslidings, and love you freely. And do not fear you shall
have cause to repent of your repentance. No man ever yet was a loser by God;
and you shall not be the first: you shall not lose your pleasures, but exchange
them, defiling ones for pure and clean and ravishing. And let i^ not seem
strange, or incredible to you, that there should be such things, because
perhaps you never felt them. Alas you have deprived your self unhappily, by
being incapable of them. New wine must be put into new bottles.

To say nothing of what the Scriptures speak of a day in God's courts being
better than a thousand, and of joys, unspeakable, and full of glory, of the
great peace they have who keep God's Law, and that nothing shall offend them,
that wisdoms ways are pleasantness. Let my weakness reason out the case with
you. Do you think that God's Angels which excel in all perfections, have no
delights, because they have no flesh, no sense, no bodies, as men and beasts?
or have our Souls (the Angels in these houses of clay) which are God's Images,
and the price of his Blood no objects, no employments which may yield them
delight and satisfaction?

Think not so unworthily of God, or meanly of your self; have not the strokes
of your own fancy, or the intellectual pleasures of your mind, sometimes
transported you beyond all the charms of your senses, when they have chimed all
in tune together.

And cannot God, think you, who is a spirit, and so fit an object for our
souls, give them as great pleasures, as any object of our taste and sight.

Come, come, my Friend, take my word for it, there is more pleasure in the peace
of a good conscience, and in well grounded hopes our sins are pardoned, and in
serving God, and expectation of eternal life, than in all the pleasures in the
world. Alas, I was once of your mind, but I assure you upon my word, I have
really found more satisfaction in serving God, than ever I found in all the
good things of the world, of which you know I have had my share.

Try therefore, dare to be good, resolve to be so thoroughly; and if you do not
find it much better than I have told you, never take my word, or trust me more.

Thus and much more powerfully would her zeal for their good, cause her to
argue with her Friends, that she might by holy violence attract them, and
allure them to be good, and happy.

5. She was of an extensive charity; and would make people good by believing
them to be so, and by this engagement make them ashamed to deceive her hopes,
and disappoint her expectation.

6. She had a tender, conscientious care to provide good Ministers, and to
encourage them, would augment their maintenance where 'twas small; Leez,
Braintree, and Foulness, etc. may be her witnesses in this, and indeed she was
the heartiest and truest Friend I ever knew to such, and do despair ever to
know her like, in this respect.

7. She had a great care of the Souls of her Servants, and if she had any
ambition in her, 'twas in this, to be the Mistress of a religious Family. This
appeared amongst others, in these particulars.

1. In exacting their attendance on God's public Worship, and reverent
behavior there.

Her Eye surveyed her Chapel, and none could be absent, but she would miss
them.

2. In personal instruction, and familiar persuading of them, I appeal to the
consciences of all that served her, what one of them has she not; on some
occasion, dealt with to do them good.

3. In preparing them for, and persuading them to the frequent perticipation of
the Lord's most holy Supper.

4. In scattering good Books in all the common Rooms and places of attendance,
that those that waited might not lose their time, but well employ it, and have
a bait laid of some practical, useful Book, and sitted to their capacity, which
might catch and take them.

5. In making it the Foot-step to preferment, for she used to make the
hundredth and first Psalm the Rule of her Oeconomicks; and though she treated
all her servants as Friends, yet they were her Favorites, which most signally
feared God.

And she was not a first Table Christian only, we need not draw her Picture
with a side-face, to hide the disfigurements of either side, both her hands
wrought in the work of God: she did not claudicare, but walked in his ways with
both her Feet. She had learned S. John's Lesson: That he who loves God, must
love his Brother also.

1. She was exactly righteous. 2. She was prodigiously charitable.
1. She was exactly just in word and deed. She never forfeited her Title, to
the privilege of Peerage, to be believed upon the honor of her word; which
was, as sacred as any oath, and as good security as many bonds. No
inconvenience to her self would make her recoil, or flinch from the obligations
she had brought her self under, by her own mouth: yea, she had such an
abhorrence of a dishonorable recess, from express, or but intimated promises,
that it would render her esteem of such persons exceeding cheap and mean, who
by little arts and shifts would loose and free themselves from their
engagements, and disappoint the expectations they had raised in others, to save
their charges, accounting their money spared, a very poor and base redemption
of their reputation.

She abhorred a lie; and used modestly to give this testimony of her self, You
know I dare not, I will not lie. And her Lord knew this so well, that though he
were positive enough, yet would never persist, if there happened any contest,
against what ever she affirmed peremptorily.

And a lie was the foulest blemish any could stain themselves with, in
conversing with her, and the most unpardonable fault, a servant could contract,
to whom she used to say, Tell me the truth, and I can forgive you any thing.

I shall take liberty on this occasion to add a passage, which may be useful on
a double account.

1. To let her honorable Friends know she forgot them not, though her purposes
were prevented.

2. How she feared the shadow of a lie.

About a Month before she died, she was, (though then in as perfect health, as
I have known her) determined to alter her will. And whereas she had before
given many honorable Legacies in money to persons of great Quality: she said,
she would alter them all, for this reason, because they were rich, and money
they needed not: but she would give it in something they might keep, as kind
memorials of her: and when she had set down all their names in a Paper, she
also bethought her self what would be most acceptable to every of them: For,
said she, that renders a gift most agreeable, when it suits the fancy of the
party to whom it is designed. And then surveying her own store, she fixed on
what to give to most of them, but not finding her self actually provided, of
what she might bequeath to all, she resolved to leave all to a Codicil, to be
annexed to her Will, and expressly said, I am now, God willing, going to London,
when I have finished my Will, and then I will by discourse find out,
undiscerned, what will be most pleasing to every one of them, and will provide
accordingly. Yet when the draught of her Will was made, she would put into the
Will its self for the Right Honorable the Countess of Scarsdale her beloved
Sister-in-law, (who was one of that number to which in her former Will she had
given a Legacy in money) a set of silver Sconces, which adorned her own
Chamber. And when I asked her Ladyship why she would not leave her to the
Codicil among the rest, she was pleased to give this reason: Because, said she,
she is the only person living to whom I ever intimated being in my will, and I
would not die, and have it found otherwise, and so be under the suspicion of
having told a lie, or dying with a lie in my mouth.

She had learned S. Paul's Lesson to perfection, To speak evil of no man: and
where she could not speak well, the worst injury she would do was to be silent,
and say nothing, unless it were to some single Eriend, of whose Taciturnity she
was secure by experience.

Nor would she invidiously diminish the just praises of any who deserved them.
Nay, would rather study to extenuate their other failings, by presenting the
light side to hide the dark one. And would commend them for one good quality or
action, to cover many bad ones: and would say, yet I must do them this right,
they are so, or so -- for all this.

And she was no less accurately just in deed than word: she had learned to do,
as well as to say: she not only gave goodly words, but good performances.

And because the due discharge of the duties of our Relations is one of the
most signal evidences of Righteousness, and the greatest ornament of our
Profession of Religion. I shall touch briefly how she used to acquit her self
in that respect: as a Wife to her Husband living, as an Executrix to his Will,
and a Trustee to the Estate; as a Mother, as a Daughter, as a Sister, as a
Friend, as a Mistress, as a Landlady, as a Neighbor. In all which she was as a
singular Blessing to her Relatives, so an eminent example to others.

First, as a Wife. The heart of her Husband did safely trust in her, and she
did him good, and not evil all the days of his life. Never was woman more truly
a crown or ornament to man. She always lived with a sense of the covenant of
God, which was betwixt them upon her heart. She was an equal mixture of
affectionate obedience, and obediential affection.

She would conceal and hide his infirmities; deeply sympathised in his long
indispositions, attended, and relieved him under them with the greatest
tenderness, loved his Soul, and would both counsel him with prudent zeal, and
pray for him with greatest ardours, and fervency. And he was not wanting in
praising her. He has with vehement protestations said to me: He had rather
have her with five thousand pounds (though she brought him much more) than any
woman living with twenty. Yea, when the very Torrents of his Sorrow were
highest for the death of his only Son (and Family) he made that the
circumflexing Accent of his grief: 'twould kill his Wife, which was he said
more to him than an hundred Sons: Sed quid verba audiam, cum facta videam: He
gave her his whole estate, as an honorary testimony of his grateful esteem of
her merits toward him, and left her sole Executrix, a high testimony of his
confidence in her integrity. Which trust, though it cost her almost unspeakable
labor and difficulties, she discharged with such indefatigable pains, such
scrupulous exactness, and admirable prudence, that as she failed not of one
Title of the Will, till all was fulfilled; so she never gave, or left occasion
of the least noise of any complaining, (...) any interested person, but rendered
all more than silent, satisfied, more than satisfied, applauding, and admiring
her prudent, and honorable conduct of that great Affair. Which she owned to
God with much thankfulness, as no small Mercy and Blessing to her. And for that
Noble Estate which was to descend to others after her, she would not have
wronged it in the least, to have gained the disposal of the whole; and
therefore was at vast expenses in repairs, both on the Mansion, and Farms,
though her self but a Termer. Yea, though none were more ready to recede from
their own right, which determinated in her own personal interests; yet would
she be stiff, and tenacious, in what may concern her Successors: Usually
saying, whatever she lost her self, she would never give occasion to them that
came after her, to say, she had damnified the Estate, or wronged her trust, or
them. I must add one particular, because I believe she was the first, and will
be the last instance of it.

Her (...), splendid way of living (which in most is sacrificing to their
vanity and ostentation) for she lived very great, as you all are witnesses) was
not an act of pride and ambition, but purely, at least principally, of
conscience: she would not contract; or abate, because she would not deceive her
Lord's trust, who gave her the Estate to keep up the honor of his Name and
Family in a place where it had flourished, and in that kind been famous so many
years.

She was a most incomparable Mother, which appeared in the education of one Son
of her Body, and three Daughters of her Soul; for so I may truly speak. She
never bare more than two Children; one Daughter, who died young, and a Son, the
gallant, hopeful, young Lord Rich, of whom the world has had an account, by
the same hand which has had the unhappy honor to be employed the third time
in this mournful Service: Planctus unigeniti at the Lord Rich's Funeral: Leez
lacrymans at the Earl of Warwick's: and this.

The pious methods of whose education might be suggested, with advantage, but I
should never have done, should I allow my self liberty to enlarge on all was
commendable, or exemplary; yet one thing I will not conceal; those three
excellent Ladies to whom she was an own Mother, though but an Aunt-in-law, and
who are by their Cousins death become so vast fortunes to their Husbands, being
left with less plentiful portions, she would even during her Son's life, never
leave pressing her Lord to make noble provisions for, and settle their portions
suitable to their Birth and Qualities, which as they well knew, so I doubt not
but they will most readily attest with becoming acknowledgments, as also all
the other never to be forgotten obligations, which she so nobly ceased not, to
please her kind humor, in conferring on them.

I never personally saw her Right Honorable Father, nor could remember her
dutiful observances of him; but this I know, that engagements of her own
affections would not supersede her respects to him in her marriage, till his
full consent and approbation was obtained.

And no Child could make more honorable mention of Parents than I have heard
her do of hers, and for the transmitting i^ to posterity, I cannot say she had
resolved to write and publish her Father's Life; but I can, and do affirm, she
had it in deliberation, and had considerable Materials and Collections, many of
which she has discoursed, and read to me, or given me the favor to read my
self.

She was so endearing a Sister, no language can express it; and therefore it
would be inexcusable boldness for me to attempt it.

A Friend so faithful, so kind, so constant, so condescending, so open, so
free, unreserved, unsuspicious, as I believe is not to be found on earth. I
could give instance of a Friendship, which as she vouchsafed to contract with
much condescension on her part, continued thirty years, not only without
interruption, or Eclipse, but without the least cloud or shadow of
misunderstanding on either side for that long space.

The best Mistress in the world, to almost a Proverb, in a double care, both of
the spiritual and bodily welfare of her servants, whom she as much loved to
please, as other persons servants can do to please their Masters, it being her
peculiar delight to render the lives of all easy and pleasant, and free from
discontent, that they might serve God with cheerfulness. And when she was to
leave them, she left not off ^er kindness to them, or care for them, but
provided to the uttermost of her power, for their comfortable subsistence,
according to their degree and time of service, giving. Legacies liberal and
noble, four hundred pounds, three hundred pounds, two hundred pounds a piece,
to some, one hundred pound a piece to many, to others eighty, to many seventy,
to buy them Annuities for their lives; to others fifty, forty, twenty, and a
full years wages to every one not specified by name, and three Months
Entertainment, with Lodging, Diet, and all accommodations, as in her life; that
they might have time to seek out, and provide places for themselves, and not be
exposed to inconveniences, by a sudden remove.

She was a most noble, I may say, indulgent Landlady, and would usuall^ say of
her Tenants; Alas, po^ creatures, they take a great deal^ pains, and I love to
see them thri^ and live comfortably, and I cannot e^dure to see them brought
in^ straits, and therefore would wit^ out grudging or difficulty have (...)
things made convenient for the^ and if they had sustained any co^derable
losses, effectually consider it. And for her Copyhold Tenants, would urge with
warmth the timely finishing the Rolls of her Courts, and delivery of their
Copies, professing she could not in conscience suffer it to be neglected,
because it (...) as all they had to show for their Estates, a piece of eminent
justice, not more honorable than necessary in Lords of Manors.

And lastly, as a Neighbor, she was so kind and courteous, it advanced ^he
Rent of adjacent Houses to be so near situated to her, nor only her House, and
Table, but her Countenance and very heart were open to all persons of Quality
in a considerable ^^rcuit, and for the inferior sort, if ^hey were sick, or
tempted, or in any ^istress of Body or Mind, whither ^ould they go but to the
good ^ountess whose Closet and Still-house was their Shop for Chirurge^^, and
Physic, and her self, (for ^e would visit the meanest of them ^ersonally) and
Ministers whom she ^ould send to them, their spiritual ^ysicians.

But as her love to God was the soul of her Religion, so the exuberancy of her
charity toward those who needed her abundant liberality, was the conspicuous
Crown which beautified all her sweetness, and goodness toward Men: for in the
she was forward, I bear her record, (...) her power, yea, and beyond her power
for she would even anticipate he Revenue and Incomes, rather tha^ want
wherewith to be liberal. S. J^rom placed in the highest rank of the praises of
his admired Paula, the she not only made her self poor (...) relieve, S. Hier.
Epitaphium Paulae.
but died in magno Aere alie^. And I am sure it used to be said ^ our excellent
Lady; That was (...) Lady that would borrow money to gi^ away. She would not
live poor ((...) good works) to dye rich; yea, thoug^ she had chosen Executors,
in who^ her heart could trust as safely as e^ her Husbands did in her, yet
(...) would make her own hands her Ex^cutors, and they were very faithf^ to her
enlarged heart.

But to be more particular; wh^ she had in her Lord and Husban^ life time, a
separate maintenance allowance, settled by Marriage ^^ticles, she was pleased
to ask me my opinion concerning the quota pars: What proportion one is obliged
to consecrate to God of our Estates, and when I told her it was hard, if not
impossible, to fix a Rule which might hold universally; but the ^ircumstances
must be considered in which persons stood, their Qualities, their Incomes,
their Dependances, necessary and emergent Occasions, inevitably occurring. --
But she persisting to urge a more particular answer as to her self, what would
be fit and becoming her to ^o, I not being ignorant of her cir^umstances, (I
must bear my own name in acknowledging the straitness of my own heart, told
her) I supposed a seventh part: But before I could suggest the reasons, she
^reventingly replied, she would never give less than the third part, and she
kept her resolution to the all and with advantage; laying a^de constantly the
third part for ^aritable uses, and would some^^me borrow of that which remain^d
to add to it, but never defaulk ^om that to serve her own occasions, though
sometimes pressing enough.

When she came to the possession of so large an Estate as her Lord bequeathed
her for her life, she in good measure made it true, what a great Person was
reported to say, that the Earl of Warwick had gave all his Estate to pious
uses: Meaning thereby, that he had given it to this Noble Lady, who would so
convert it.

And it is a great truth, which I have had from her own mouth, the all the
satisfaction she took in it was the opportunity it afforded he^ of doing good.
And I have hea^ her earnestly averr, that she would not accept of, or be
encumbered wit^ the greatest Estate in England, if i^ should be offered her,
clogged with this condition, not to do good t^ others with it.

But some may say, were her Ey^ as open as her Hands; did she n^ scatter it as
carelessly as profusely Nothing less, her liberal Soul devis^ liberal things: I
will point at some few of many.

1. There are some Objects of (...) Charity, which are not so to vulgar-Eyes or
Purses; on whom she would confer, and whom she would surprise, with noble and
suitable assistances, this struck deep, drew an whole bag at once, but made no
noise.

Some scarcely known to any but my self, and it may be had not been to me, but
to ask my judgment, whether it might be reduced to the account of charity, to
give to such and such, being in such circumstances: For she was never less
tender of their modesty than compassionate of their necessity, and was more
sollicitous for their pardon, than their thanks, for helping them.

4. Foreiners who fled either to preserve their Religion, or to embrace what
they were convinced of to be the truth.

3. A great many young Scholars of hopeful promising Parts, whom she wholly or
in good measure educated at the University, allowing some thirty, some twenty,
some ten, some eight, many five pounds per Annum, and some others who had more
assistance, less.

4. Abundance of young Children which she put to School in the neighboring
Towns, I cannot say how many, but rather sans number, all that were poor and
willing to learn: Nay; that could be persuaded to it, whose Schooling she did
not only pay for, but gave them both Books and often Clothing; and not only
near home but as far as Wales, contributing nobly to that pious design, of that
good old man and indefatigable promoter of it Mr. Gouge, so amply attested by a
Cloud of Witnesses, beyond exception, to rescue Wales from its remaining
ignorance and demi-Barbarism.

5. Many Ministers of both denominations, as well Conformists whose livings
were so small as not to yield them a subsistence, as those who had none at all.

6. Many occasional Objects of Charity, which you may surely conclude, failed
not to ply at those Stairs where 'twas seldom low water: And though she was
sometimes imposed upon, and deceived by those that neither needed nor deserved
what she gave, yet this did not discourage her from giving again; For she said,
she had rather relieve ten that only appeared meet objects and were not, than
let one go unrelieved that was so indeed: For though they deceived her in her
giving, God would not deceive her in accepting, what was sincerely done for his
Name sake.

7. Lastly, the Poor which she fed in great number, not only with fragments and
broken meat, but with liberal provision purposely made for them. She was a
greatpitier, yea a great lover of the poor, and she built a convenient house on
purpose for them at her London-Seat, (as they had one at Leez) to shelter them
from rain and heat while they received their dole, and when she was at London
with her Family, had in her absence, whilst no house kept for their sakes
alone: That is, twice a week, good Beef and Bread provided for the poor of four
adjacent Parishes, and has taken order in her Will to have the same continued
three months after her decease, and by the same Will has given an hundred
pounds to be distributed to the Poor of Braintree, Felsted, Little-Leez, and
Much-Waltham, at or shortly after her Funeral.

And though it cannot reasonably be expected from one who had no Lands of
Inheritance, to leave charitable foundations. Yet I may, without Hyperbole,
say, that every year she lived, after she came to be Mistress of the Estate,
she gave as much in charity as would have purchased Lands sufficient to have
endowed an Almshouse or Freeschool. And that pious and liberal foundation of
Rochford Almshouse, which though founded legally by a Patent granted under the
Broad Seal for its confirmation, by the Ancestors of that Family, of which she
bore the Title; was by the death of the Founder not endowed, yet as all her
predecessors had done.

She always paid the Alms-people their full designed Allowance, and ordered by
her last Will it should be so done for a year after her decease. And I must
here take leave to add, to their great honor, and the satisfaction of all that
relate to that Family, that those Right honorable and worthy persons, to whom
the estate descends, have agreed to continue the same plentiful allowance: And
if I were worthy to advise them, I would earnestly persuade them to make Legal
Settlement, and endow it with Lands to the value of what they resolve to allow,
before they make the division of the Estate.

But methinks I hear it asked, what! had she no Spots, no Scars, no real nor
imputed Blemishes? how could she live in such an Age and not be corrupted or at
least traduced? neither scorched by the fire of infection, nor blackned by the
smoke of revengeful detraction, for upbraiding the guilty by her innocence?
This overdoing is undoing, if you would make us believe she had no faults, we
shall sooner believe you have no truth: And that all you have said has more of
Romance, and what you fancy, than Narrative of what she was or did.

I confess it is next to a miracle to consider, both how divine Grace enlarged
her heart, and established her goings, and restrained the tongues of others
from reproaching, or showing dislike of that in her, for which they deride and
hate, not to say persecute others.

But I must implore that candor while I embalm her memory, with the sweet
Ointment of her own good name, you granted to her virtues which acquired it,
and made it so fragrant.

I therefore solemnly protest, I have spoke the truth ( though the truth in
love; as I am allowed and required Ephesians. 4.15.) and have not knowingly disguised
or falsified, nor dipped my pen in flattering colors.

But since you are so inquisitive, and seem to deny me the just and civil
freedom, to draw a veil of silence over her imperfections, and your curiosity
will be peeping under that sacred Pall, which should secure and shroud the
worst of men from being pryed into; and the Vault, and Grave, that place of
darkness and forgetfulness, which should bury all defects and render them
invisible, must be ransacked: Draw back the Curtains, let in the light, survey
its secretest recesses; nor She, nor I in her behalf, fear the most piercing
Eagle-eye or Scent: Not that I deny her to have been a Sinner, while I adore
that Grace that made her a Saint, or that she was a Woman, while I proclaim her
a Terrestrial Angel.

But these three things I say, and will adhere to.

First, That she was not notoriously defective in any Grace or Virtue, but as
eminent in all as most have been for a^y single one: She was not only aliquid
in omnibus; but omnis in singulis, she did abound in every Grace. Which St.
Gregory Naz. admires in Gorgonia, and St. Jerome in Nepotian: Itain singulis
virtutibus eminebat, quasi caeter as non haberet.

Secondly, She was never stained with any scandalous deformity, another rare
mercy: For though she did humanum pati, slip now and then, or stumble if you
will, she fell not, much less lay or wallowed to defile her Garments, which I
testify not only from mine own observation, but her own Pen.

After God had thus savingly (I hope) wrought upon me, I went on constantly,
comfortably in my Christian course, though I had many doubts and fears to
contend with: And did truly obey that Precept of working out my Salvation with
fear and trembling, yet God was pleased to carry me still onward: And though I
too often broke my good resolutions, I never renounced them, and though I too
often tript in my Journey to Heaven, yet I never forsook my purpose of going
thither. Thirdly, Her very defects and failings were such as others might be
proud of, her Weeds would have been Flowers, and her Thistles appeared Roses in
another Garden.

For I never heard her blamed for more than two faults, by the most curious
observers and inspectors of her disposition or behavior.

1. Excess of Charity.

2. Defect of Anger, or what was reduceable to those two, Two goodly faults!
But even these admit Apology more easily than they need it.

1. What was reputed the culpable excess of her Charity, was her credulous
easiness, to believe most people good, or at least better than they were. I
confess she did bend a little to this right hand error, but if it were a bad
effect, it proceeded from a good cause. For as it is observed, that as they who
are conscious to themselves of some great evils, scarce can esteem any less
nocent than themselves; so they that have clear and innocent hearts, are ready
to judge the like of others. Charity thinks no evil, and she used this good
opinion of others, as an instrument to make them what she was so willing to
signify she thought them: And though she would never despair of any man, while
she found them under the Awe of God's Authority and Word, for even those may
receive some nourishment, who eat against Stomach, and the Sieve under the Pump
may be cleansed though it hold no water; yet if she observed a person to scorn
or deride the Scriptures, despise Gods Ordinances, and turn all that was sacred
into ridicule -- She used, as her Phrase was, to set her mark upon that man:
And I must further add, She was neither so often nor so much mistaken in her
judgment of persons, as some supposed she was; they more mis interpreting her
civility, than she did the others sanctity.

2. For her Defect of Anger, which implies, if it be faulty, want of zeal
against sin, and sinners, and so it is an unjust charge; for though I confess
she could not rage and storm, and discover her anger, as some persons do, who
verify the saying, Ira furor brevis, Anger is a kind of madness; for her
sedate, composed, serene mind, and sweet, and amicable disposition was scarce
forcible to what was so contrary to her nature; yet would she make deeper
impressions of her displeasure for great faults, than those who appeared most
furious, like a still soaking shower, which will wet more than a driving storm.
And therefore 'twas observed, that if any servant had been faulty, they had
rather have passed the Gantlet thrice of their Lord's most furious expressions,
than have once been sent for to their Lady's Closet, whose treatment was soft
words, but hard arguments against their faults, and like that silent lightning,
which without the noise of Thunder melts the Blade, and sindgeth not the
Scabbard; Her reproofs were neither the frightful hissing, nor the venomed
sting, but the penetrating oil of Scorpions.

This little is enough to extenuate her, almost commendable faults; and it is a
great evidence of her goodness, that these things were imputed as Blemishes,
for they who would not spare her in these little errors, showed plainly that
she was not chargeable with more or greater.

I am now arrived at the last Stage of this Mournful Journey, to give an
account of her surprising, and never enough lamented death.

What presages she might have of its near approach she never discovered, but
her preparations for it had been long habitual, it was one of the most constant
subjects of her Thinking, and she used to call her walking to meditate of it,
her going to take a turn with death, and it could never surprise, or take her
unprepared, who was always preparing for it.

Yet there are some passages, worthy of our remarks of the watchful kindness of
Divine Providence over his own, allarming them to trim their Lamps (as the wise
Virgins did) against the coming of the Bridegroom, and allowing them fit
opportunities to do it, as he signally did to her.

I shall on this consideration very seasonably add another Transcript out of
her Ladyships Diary, which contains an account of the last Sunday of her
health, being written but the very day before she was taken ill, and in which
God did, it seems, in a most remarkable manner, impress the thoughts of her
approaching dissolution on her Soul, though there were no visible symptoms of
it then upon her Body.

March 24. Sunday.
AS soon as I awaked, I blessed God; then I meditated and endeavored by
thinking of some of the great mercies of my life, to stir up my heart to return
Glory to God. And those thoughts had this effect upon me, to melt my heart much
by God's love, and to warm it with love to him.

Then I prayed, and I was enabled in that duty to pour out my Soul to God, and
my heart was in it, carried out to praise God, and I was large in recounting of
many of God's special mercies to me. And whilst I was doing so, I found God
mighty upon my spirit: and my heart in a much more than ordinary manner,
carried out to admire God for his goodness, and to love him. And I found his
love make great impressions in my Breast. And melting me into an unusual plenty
of tears.

Those mercies which in an especial manner I was grateful for, were the
Creation and Redemption of the World, and for the Gospel and the Sacraments,
and for free Grace, and the Covenant of Grace, and for the excellent means of
it I had enjoyed: and for the great patience God has exercised toward me
before and since my Conversion. And for checks of Conscience when I had sinned,
and for repentance when I had done so. And for a sanctified affliction and
supports under it. And for so large a portion of worldly Blessings.

After I had begged a Blessing upon the public Ordinances, I went to hear Mr.
Woodroof: his Text was, Pass the time of your sojourning here in fear -- Then
after a summary account of the Sermon, follows: In the Afternoon I heard again
the same Person upon the same Text. And then follows a concise and methodical
recapitulation of that Sermon also. "And after that -- I was in a serious and
affected frame at both the Sermons, and was by them convinced of the excellency
of fearing God, and of spending of the remainder of the term of my life in his
service. And did resolve to endeavor to spend the remaining part of my time
better.

At both his Prayers I prayed with fervency: afterward I retired, and
meditated upon the Sermons, and prayed them over.

And I had also this Evening large Meditations of death, and of Eternity; which
thoughts had this effect upon me, to make me in an extraordinary awakened
frame, in which the things of another life were much realized to me, and did
make very deep impressions upon me. And my Soul did follow hard after God, for
Grace to serve him better than ever yet I had done.

O Lord be pleased to hear my Prayers, which did not come out of fained Lips:
and to hear the voice of my weeping, for more holiness, and for being more
weaned from the world, and all things in it.

After Supper, I committed my self to God.

This was written the very last day of her health, Monday Morning: in which we
see how God realized to her, and gave her extraordinary impressions of Death,
Eternity, and the Life to come, when he was about to bring her to it; for the
very next day she began to be ill of that Sickness of which she died.

Our excellent Lady was far from their humor whose Consciences are so bad and
unquiet company, that they hate solitude, and dare not be alone: For she loved,
and even hugged her retirements as her greatest satisfactions. And though, when
she was called to it, she would deny her self and particular inclination (as in
the Universe Individuals do, to obey the Laws of universal Nature) to comply
with a duty of a larger spread; as is related of the devout Marquess of Renti
in the two years time he spent in repairing the seat of his Ancestors, which
diversion he cheerfully suffered as a willing mortification, being a duty he
owed to the Station in which God had placed him.

So she cheerfully sustained the hurry of business which was inevitable to the
acquitting her self of the trust reposed in her, by her Lord's last Will.

But never did Bird take Wing, when dis-intangled from a Net, with greater
cheerfulness, nor chirp out the pleasures of its unconfined freedom, more
merrily than she did solace her self, when she had escaped the noise and crowd
of affairs, which ruffled and turmoyled her quiet, and suspended the enjoyment
of her self. And when her dearest Sister was in the beginning of the last
winter, about to leave her; her last farewell she took was in these words: Now
I have done my drudgery (meaning her business) I will set to the renewing of my
preparations for Eternity, and she made it the repeated business of the last
winter.

In the beginning of the last March, she set to the making of her Will anew,
and signed and fealed it on the twelfth day of the same Month, and on the
Tuesday in Passion week, March 26. was taken with some indisposition, loss of
Appetite, and aguish distemper, and had four or five Fits, which yet in that
season were judged both by Physicians and her Friends, more advantageous to her
health than dangerous to her life. And in this state she continued freed from
her fits in her own apprehension, and in our hopes, till Friday the twelfth of
April, on which day she rose with good strength, and after sitting up some
time, being laid upon her Bed, discoursing cheerfully, and piously, one of the
last sentences she spoke was this, turning back the Curtain with her hand.

Well, Ladies, if I were one hour in Heaven, I would not be again with you as
well as I love you. Having then received a kind visit from a Neighboring Lady,
at her departure she rose from her Bed to her Chair, in which being set, she
said she would go into her Bed, but first would desire one of the Ministers
then in the house to go to prayer with her, and asking the company which they
would have, presently resolved her self to have him who was going away, because
the other would stay and pray with her daily; and immediately he being called,
and come, her Ladyship sitting in her Chair, by reason of her weakness, for
otherwise she always kneeled, holding an Orange in her hand, to which she
smelt, almost in the beginning of the Prayer she was heard to fetch a sigh, or
groan, which was esteemed devotional, as she used to do at other times. But a
Lady looking up, who kneeled by her, saw her look pale, and her hand hang down,
at which she started up, affrighted, and all applied themselves to help, and
the most afflictively distressed of them all, if I may so speak, when all our
sorrows were superlative, caught her right hand, which then had lost its
pulse, and never recovered it again.

Thus lived, thus died this Right Honorable Lady, this Heroic Woman, this
blessed Saint, this incomparable pattern of flaming zeal for the glory of God,
and burning charity for the good of ( men; in the actual exercise of prayer,
according to her own desire, for there are many witnesses have testified, that
they have often heard her say, that if she might choose the manner and
circumstances of her death, she would dye praying;) by which she so often
anticipated Heaven by pregustation, and which now wafted her longing Soul into
the Holy of Holies, within the vail: at the kiss of God's mouth as Moses did,
though not full of years, yet full of mature fruits, and Graces, when all men
judged her worthy of a longer, but God, the only unerring Judge, found her full
ripened for a better life. And in a sweeter Euthanasia than Augustus could wish
himself, might claim^ a more triumphant Plaudite than he. Yea, might have sung
her Nunc demittis with good old Simeon, nay, with the holy Apostle, that joyful
Epinichion, I have fought a good fight, I have finished my course, I have kep^^
the faith, henceforth there is laid up for me a crown of righteousness, which
the Lord the righteous Judge shall give me (...) that day, and not to me only
but unto them also that love his appearing.

You have heard, though too to dryly, how the served and honor God, I should
now show to encourage you to do the like, how he honored her, according to his
word by Samuel: Him that honors me, I will honor. And that of our Savior, He
that serves me, him will my Father honor.

But I have much prevented my self by what is interwoven through all the
preceding discourse: The greatest honor God can put upon his creatures, is to
vouchsafe to use them, and to make them Vessels of Honor, fitted for their
Master's service. And this he conferred upon her in eminent and redoubled
measures. He imprinted on her the fairest impress of his most amiable Image,
and rendered her habile, and ready to every good word and work.

He gave her riches and honor in abundance, as is said of Jehosaphat, 2 Cron.
17.5, 6.
and yet her heart was not puf^ed up by them, but lifted up under them in the
ways of the Lord, as it ^here follows.

He gave her the Heaven upon earth, (after some shivering scruples, and
rembling fears) the blessed calm of (...) purified, pacified, serene, and
well^ssured conscience.

He gave her the fragrant persum^ of an odoriferous name, and more than
unspotted, a bright, and resplendent reputation.

He gave her many endeare Cordial Friends, faithful to her a her own Soul, to
assist, counsel comfort, help her, and carry he through her greatest
difficultie^ and entangling affairs, concerni^ one of whom she used often wi^^
much thankfulness to say, He w^ a Friend of God Almighty's giving even beyond
her own expect^tion.

He gave her many merciful d^ liverances, one very like to the Gregory
Nazianzen, insists so largly on in his Funeral Oration for h^ Sister Gorgonia,
the Mules in who^ Chariot running away, not on^^ bruised, but brake her Bones,
a^^ yet God miraculously restored he So when the Horses in our Lady Coach
excussed the Coachman ran furiously away, God almost n^ raculously hung the
Coach again a Post in the way, stopped their f^ry, rescued her life from most
em^nent hazard, and healed the bruises (...) received with safety. This
happen^d July 23. 1661.

He gave her the affectionate esteem of all her Neighbors, to such (...)
degree, that she was like Titus, ^eliciae humani generis, the delight and
^arling of her Country, and with so ^oving a willingness did they delight ^o
serve her, that you might see ^ifty fresh, brave and gallant Teams, ^ay after
day bringing in her pro^isions, without other invitation ^han the bare
knowledge of the time, which themselves would enquire out; and nothing would
grieve them more, than to be prevented in ^aying this Tribute of Honorary
Respect.

He gave her such an esteem for ^er prudent integrity, and discreet, and
impartial Righteousness, that he began to be (an employ and honor not usual to
her Sex) the Arbitress and Vmpress of all the ^ontroversies amongst adjacent
Neighbors, many of which she ^econciled happily, and all which ^he decided
wisely and justly.

He gave her the universal approbation, love, admiration of all that knew her,
that the Proverb was confuted, which says, Who has no Enemies, has no
Friends, For either she had none, or her ways so pleased the Lord, he made her
Enemies to to be at peace with her. For honorable, and mean, rich, and poor,
of all degrees, and which is more, of all persuasions, paid her most kind
respect, honored, and loved her.

Finally, he prevented her with the blessing of goodness, and crowned her with
loving kindness, and tender mercy. He made her glad with the light of his
countenance, and satisfied her as with marrow and fatness; he granted the
requests of her lips, and shut not one her prayer: He gave her ability, and
time to discharge her trust, and settle her worldly affairs with honor and
satisfaction, and he gave her oppotunity, space, and an heart to recollect her
self, and redeem what a hurry of business had deprived her of, and renew her
evidences for Heaven.

He took out the sting of death before she died, and the pains of death when
she died, and with a kiss of his mouth drew up her Soul to Heaven, Intelligeres
illam non emori, sed emigrare, and mutare amicos non relinquere. Hierom.
to be immersed in that fullness of joy, and bathed in those rivers of pleasure,
which are at his right hand for ever more.

May we live like her, may we die like her, that we may live with her, and with
our common Lord, for ever.

And for your noble Lordship, who are now investing your self with her large
and noble Mantle -- May Elijah's spirit rest upon you, as mell as his Mantle:
that you may rise up an Elisha in her place and stead.

That Leez may be Leez still: the seat of Nobleness, and Honor, the Hospital
of Bounty, and Charity, the Sanctuary of Religion, and the fear of God.

That so you may live, and may live longer, and as much desired, and when you
die (as die you must, for Leez, though a Paradise, has no Tree of Life) you
may die later, and as much lamented as your Noble Predecessors.


