PREDICTIONS OF THE Overthrow of Popery, And the Landing of the Prince of
Orange IN THE WEST:
Written by George Wither Esquire, in the year 1660. And some Proposals for*
PERPETUAL PARLIAMEN^ Written by the same Author in 1652.
TO Act the last Scene which proceeds their Doom,
They now new vampt upon the Stage are come;
And, though that with the King, as if his Friends
They seem to side, they come for other ends,
Which he not yet discerning, in his Grace
Vouchsafes them a considerable Place,
And of prevailing they already boast,
As if they saw the LAMB and all his Host
Quite overthrown, which me as confident
Has made that God their proud hopes will prevent,
And overthrow that Tyranny outright,
By what they Dream shall raise it to its height.
But many Trials must the Saints abide,
And very much their patience will be tried
Here and elsewhere before that Act is done,
Which with an Anti-mask is now begun.
Our Friends inhabiting beyond the Waters,
And who were of our Tragedy Spectators,
Now Twenty years (though they perceive it not,
Or seem not to perceive it) in that Lot
Which these have cast for us, designed are
(Or in what follows next) to have a share,
For Hamans PURS on foot; not only here,
But likewise almost every other where.
And these think that to take them by his Gin,
With most speed, is, with us first to begin.
But there is a Counter-Mine, which will be sprung,
To blowup them, and all their Mines e're long, etc.
-- wherein they see
The Beasts late deadly wound nigh cured to be,
They on a sudden, are become as Jolly,
As if they thought it to be cured wholly;
And, to impose their Mark, will now begin
To be more strict than ever they have been;
So that e're long, few men shall live in peace,
Bear Office, or a free Estate possess
Where they have power, unless they marked are
In Hand, or Forehead, with their Character.
But, if that, whereof some imperfect views
Far off appear, accordingly ensues,
There will to thwart their hopes, a new Star blaze
Within the West, that shall the World amaze;
And influences through the Universe
So quickly, and prodigiously disperse,
That, aided by concurring Constellations,
It shall have some effects upon most Nations,
And cause such changes, as will make a stand
In those Attempts which they have now in hand.
Yet know, it will but a diversion be,
Not that which must from Bondage set us free.
We, on this side the Water are not yet, Printed Anno 1652.

Confused enough, that order to beget
Which must establish us, and shall therefore
Pursue Self-interest a little more.
With new Wine our old Bottles must be filled,
(Endangering Wine and Bottles to be spilled)
Till such as are in power be pleased to hear
The Counsel of a slighted Engineer.
With new Cloth our old Garments patcht must be,
(Whereby the Rents made wider ye shall see)
Till every old Rag be worn out, and then
The Robe so rent shall be renewed again.
And they that own it, be secured more,
And much more dignified, than heretofore.
If they who must complete it, make their choice
By Lot divine, as well as humane voice.
Whereto Self-seekers never will agree,
Until enforced by some streights they be.
Before the Sons of Jacob entrance found
Into their Promised Land, they had a round,
Or progress to fulfill, and many years
They in the Deserts were Probationers,
By several hardships, thereby to improve
The Seeds of Faith, new sown at their remove
From Egypt, and by Signs and Wonders shown
To make unto themselves their frailties known.
But they at each restraining of their Lust,
Brake forth into repinings and distrust;
Yea, into flat Rebellion, into rearing
Of Idols (when his Law God was preparing)
Into a wicked causless Murmuring
Against the Means of their delivering
From Egypt's. Trial, and into Wishes vain,
That they might thither back return again*
For which of many hundred thousands none
Enjoyed the Promised Rest, but two alone.
And we are just like them, yea, we have done,
Since God, to bring us from our Thrall begun,
The very same things in the Wilderness
Of our Probation; and our Carcases
Shall there be left, unless we do betimes
Make an Atonement for our passed Crimes;
And with unfeignedness that course pursue
Which leads unto the Rest, that is in view, etc.
There is a course whereby, without disgrace,
Or danger, you may bring that work to pass,
And free your selves from that great cost and pain,
Which without thanks or profit you sustain;
Afflicting others too, by those Confusions
Which are increast by your irresolutions.
Until a better therefore shall appear,
Be pleased that Expedient to hear,
And by those preventions, or that good
It promises, you find a likelihood,
Take heed, that no self-interest, divert
That approbation, whereunto your heart
Inclines you; for God will find you out,
And cross the Counter-work you go about.
In England and in Wales, there is a Shire,
For every Week that is numbered in the year.
By Twelve, according to the Months divide
The Counties, with their Persons qualified
For Knights and Burgesses, proportioning
As near as may be, to an equalling
The number of the whole, so, or so many
Unto each Month, without omitting any.
Ascertain then, the Month and Day, wherein
Each twelfth part an Election shall begin;
(The middle of the Week, appearing best,
As being furthest from the day of Rest.)
On each first Wednesday, of each Month, let those
By whom our Deputies are to be chose,
Respectively convene in every Shire,
Upon that Month, and Wednesday every year,
Which is to them assigned; and having chosen,
(At Months end) let each twelfth part, of the dozen,
Send up their Chosen men, to represent
Their Shires and Boroughs in the Parliament;
And on that very Day, in which they come,
Let all their Predecessors give them Room.
Thus one Month some, and Month by Month for ever
Let each twelfth part, still orderly persever
To take a turn, till every Shire has had
A Month in every year; and having made
Their choice, let them still enter and withdraw
Successively by a perpetual Law,
No man a place of Trust, supplying there,
At one Election, longer than one year.
The Book Entitled, The Perpetual Parliament, is designed to be Reprinted, and
presented to all the Members.

FINIS.

