A Triple Paradox: Affixed to a COUNTER-MURE Raised against the Furious
Batteries of Restraint, Slander and Poverty, The three Grand Engines OF The
World, the Flesh and the Devil.

By Major GEORGE WITHER, Who, now beleagured by their Forces, throws out unto
them this DEFIANCE.

The said PARADOX maintains these Particulars. That Confinement is more safe
than Liberty, Slander more advantageous than Praise, Poverty more profitable
than Riches.


Nusquam, non potest esse virtuti locus.

Seneca. LONDON, Printed for the Author. 1661.

The Author, to all those who have relieved him in his Beleagurement.
IT is a more Blessed thing to Give, than to Receive; Therefore, having
hitherto been a Receiver only, I am now desirous to be a Giver also, though it
be but of a Mite, or of a Cup of cold water; For, we are not to expect
Benedictions or Acceprations, strictly answerable to the quantity or quality of
our Gifts considered in themselves, but according to our Purposes and
Abilities; which incourages me to send you a handful of such Fruit as grows
upon my WITHERD-Tree, now almost past bearing, that if you find it as pleasant
and as wholesome, as I conceived it to be, you having therewith refreshed your
selves, may if you please, pick out some of the Kernels, and by sowing and
replanting them in your Orchards, preserve the kind for future use, when my
Tree is rotten.

I make not tender of this Diminutive Present, by way of R^tribution; For, GOD
is your reward: but to be a testimonial of my Gratitude, and of my willingness,
to have done more, if I had been able; or rather, that it may be a memorial of
GODS Mercy to me vouchsafed by your hands when I was deserted of the World;
which ought never to be by me forgotten: For, I confess, I have thereby lived
to produce this, and whatsoever I shall do hereafter in discharge of my duty,
and had else, ere this day perished from the Earth, for ought I know to the
contrary, though in my greatest wants and uncertainty of Supplies I was always
as far from a despairing Distrust, as if I had then possessed a Vault filled
with hidden Treasures, which no man could take from me: And (though I am yet in
no more certainty in respect of External Supplies) GOD preserves in me the same
confidence, and I believe he will always preserve it in me.

This, is so great, and so extraordinary a Mercy, considering the many terrors,
distrusts and necessities, wherewith many thousands of better men are daily
exercised and proved, that I conceive my self obliged in conscience, openly to
acknowledge it both to glorify him who vouchsafes it, and to confirm in my
self and other men, our Christian hopes, by delaring what GOD has done for my
soul, who have nothing in my self to deserve it, but what is of his gift, and
who have much more of my own, which rather deserves the contrary. I am, and I
hope shall ever be so far from being ashamed of my preservation by mere
Charity, that I do esteem it a greater honor and happiness, than to have the
most plentiful subsistence which the world can confer upon me by a constant
Revenue, with an eminent dignitary annexed: For I have seen the best Provisions
of that kind, not only to fall but to bring their Possessors also to be worse
than nothing.

I had superscribed your Names (or hereto added a Catalogue of them:) but many
of you are personally unknown, and, the rest having discovered themselves unto
me, for our mutual comfort and conversation only (without any desire that
notice might be taken by other men of what has been communicated, and passed
between them and me) I do forbear making your Names public, for that and other
considerable respects. You are my friends by the surest side: For you were not
made mine by my industry, merit, solicitation, or in respect of any carnal
Relations, but merely by GODS Mediation who inclined your hearts to that
voluntary compassion, whereof I had fruit in due season, sufficient to preserve
me, without sordid want or dejection, in that condition wherein I am likely to
be continued to fit me for that service, which I have yet to do; and I am
confident that he who made you my Friends, will so keep you; and make me
thankful to him and you, whilst we live in this world. Your Acceptance I doubt
not of, nor of assistance by your prayers to the end of my Pilgrim^ge: For,
though some of us may circumstantially differ in our Judgments, we are one in
him and with him, in his Essential Truth, and in that love which knits all the
Saints into one blessed and everlasting Communion. I am

Your humble Beadsman, GEORGE WITHER.

A Triple Paradox; Wherein are asserted, these particulars, that (TY;
IMPRISONMENT, is more safe than LIBERSLANDER, more advantageous than PRAISE;
POVERTY, more profitable than RICHES.
For an INTRODUCTION, the AUTHOR flings this Express to the WORLD.
A Parlie, unto thee disdainful WORLD,
I sound; and have to thee this Paper hurled.
Yet, neither for a Treaty or Compliance,
But, rather, still, to bid to thee Defiance;
For, what thou were, thou art; and I yet am
And will be, whilst I live, to thee the same.
Thou art become the Mistress of the Field;
Have me beleaguered, summond me to yield
My Fortress, and thou so proceedest on,
As if thou were assured, it should be wonn:
But, thereon thou perhaps, may yet attend
As long as did the Infanta for Ostend;
And as she nothing had at last but Stones,
Get nothing but dead flesh, and rotten bones.
I see thine insolence, and every day
Hear what thy favorites are pleased to say,
How they extol thy Power, how they debase
My succors, and my helpers would disgrace.
I well observe, thou round begirt me have;
That, having all my Outworks quite laid waste,
Thou, to complete a Conquest, do begin
A fierce assault to ruin all within.
That, to prevent the sending of supplies,
Thou fright'st my friends with slanders and with lies.
My Accusatrix too, become thou art;
And, justly (I acknowledge) in some part,
But, not in all: for, chiefly, thy temptations
Inducements were to those prevarications
Whereby, my Talents were sometime abused:
Though therefore, I seem worthily reduced
To what I am; thou undeservedly
Have me pursued with malignity;
Because the love which I once bore to thee
Was more, than thou deservedest it should be;
Thou most injuriously requited have
That love, which in my youth on thee I placed;
For, though I never totally was thine,
Thou had (when least) more of me then was mine:
And, him, of his right, to whom all was due
I robbed then, thy service to pursue.
But, he, now gives me grace, thy wiles to hate,
And to observe them ere it is too late,
That what thou by thy falsehoods do intend,
Shall cross thine own Designments in the end.
Thou, having into many errors run me,
Thought by undoing me, to have undone me,
But art deceived: for, that which thou have done
Has brought me to the knowledge of that Stone,
Which turns dross to gold; and from offenses
Instructs me to extract those Quintessences,
Which will preserve my Freedom in all places,
Supply all Wants; Convert all my Disgraces
To honors; and in every estate,
With all things needful, me accommodate.
The Devil by thine aid, has long time sought
How, he his ends upon me might have wrought;
But, neither Thou nor He, nor both conjoined,
Had power to bring to pass what was designed,
Until the FLESH, my Dalilah, you got
To be a third Associate in the Plot;
And then, both to her damage, and to mine
You, such progression made in your design,
That by deluding her, you soon prevailed,
In that, whereof you otherwise had failed;
So, by her Frailty, more than by your Power,
(I, being in your clutches at this hour)
Am openly exposed (in some sort)
Like Sampson for a while, to make you sport;
But, stretched your malignity so far
That your own Actings, your own works will mar:
For, though my Dalilah your Vassal be,
And you by her means have surprised me,
Your Cords and Chains will off again be flung,
So that, we shall redeemed be ere long
From our Captivities, and in conclusion
Your own contrivements will be your confusion.
When thou pretendedst kindnesses to me
(And by them, did intend to ruin me)
Thou gav'st me then, one of Pandora's Boxes,
Which, I return thee full of Paradoxes
That shall uncharm thy Witchcrafts, and destroy
Those Gins which thou against me do employ:
For, if thou open it, (as it is sed
Prometheus opened what she is fabuled
To have bestowed on him) from thence will flow
Those Truths, which will thy falsehoods overthrow,
And make some who admire them, to contemn
Those Iuglings wherewithal thou foolest them:
As likewise all those Bugbear-Tyrannies,
Which thy oppressing-Instruments devise
To fright us from our duties, and adhere
To thy allurements, out of love or fear.
To batter down my petty single Sconce,
Thy three great'st Engines thou have raised at once,
And so surrounded me within my Fort,
That, I have scarce one little Sally-port
Whereby I may have egress to offend
My Foes, or to give ingress to a friend.
Thy Ragged Regiment of POVERTY,
(And they which by RESTRAINT of LIBERTY,)
Commanded are) enclose me so about
With double Trenches, that, here can to naught
For my Relief, admittance now be given,
Except it comes immediately from Heaven:
Moreover, at the four Winds, raised high,
Are four Mounts, whereupon thy Batteries lie
So diligently manned by Major SLANDER
(An old and well experienced Commander
In such like services) that, several ways
His great Artillery upon me plays.
At me perpetually his tongue-shot flies,
And his whole Culverings charged full with Lies,
Send poisoned Bullets, which I often hear,
Making loud cracks, or whizzing by mine ear.
But, I, at last, shall rout all this Brigade,
Quite frustrate those attempts which thou have made
And raise again thy seige, or do as well
By dying nobly in my Citadel,
And, that it will to thee (when battered down)
Prove like the House by Sampson overthrown.
Then, those things, plainly will to thee appear,
Which thou at present, wilt not see nor hear;
And I shall be the same to thee and thine,
Which thou have lately been to me and mine;
For, then, my Ghost, arrayed in white sheets
Shall haunt thy houses, walk about thy streets,
And fright thee day and night with repetition
Of what is hasting on, for thy perdition,
And will descend upon thee at those times
Wherein thou fill'st the measure of thy Crimes.
Mean while, to comfort others, and prevent
The tediousness of my Beleagurement,
I Will draw a Map, wherein I Will so express
The vanity of thy maliciousness,
That, they who list shall know how much I slight
Thy Triple-Forces, and contemn thy spite;
And I to thee, their weaknesses apart
Will so declare, that, unless blind thou art
Thou shall perceive, I cannot be destroyed,
By those whom thou against me have employed
Although in one united: for, these three
SLANDER, IMPRISONMENT and POVERTY,
To fall upon me, all at once began
Before, thou did repute me for a Man;
And though they charge me all at once again,
Grown weaker by old age, than I was then,
My Helper is the same; and suffering long
Has by his Grace, now made my power more strong.
I know thy pride this Confidence contemns:
For, faith and hope, are now thought but the dreams
Of those men, whom thou do Phanaticks call:
But, whatsoev'r thou think, proceed I shall.
And, if thou heedst what follows, thou shall hear
How little, either thee, or thine I fear.
With that part of thy Forces I Will begin
Which, with the first Trench has now shut me in.
Thou know, what outwardly, thou have bereft;
Now, thou shall know, what is within me left
But, never shall attain to apprehend
How far my hidden storehouse does extend.
Confinement is more advantageous than Liberty.
RESTRAINT, which is an Engine, right or wrong,
Made use of, (first, or last, short time or long)
By most Oppressors, has been often my lot;
And, at this present, I escape it not:
For, (though not in the ordinary way
It seems now inflicted) I might say,
I am imprisoned, and so confined
That, I am no way free, except in mind.
Of most enjoyments I am quite deprived
Which from external things may be derived,
Yet thereby not undone; for I possess
My whole essential Freedom neretheless.
My toys are lost, but by their deprivations
I furnished am with real consolations,
Which, though they to the world-ward make no shows
Yield sweeter comforts than the things I lose,
And make my hidden Freedoms to be more
Than those the world vouchsafed heretofore:
For, to her Freedoms, when respect I gave
I was then only free to be a slave,
Whereas, this, does from nothing me restrain,
Which, to true Liberty, does appertain.
That, which gives most content to flesh and blood
I find to be the basest servitude;
And that we nothing have whereof to boast
Till what the world calls Liberty is lost.
What Freedom want I, save what being had
makes many Freemen slaves, and wise men mad?
None, have upon themselves, and others, brought
More plagues than they have done, who would be thought
The freest men: for Freedoms mis-imploy'd
Have lately all our Liberties destroyed;
And, most, whom we much reverence as our betters
Are but our fellow-slaves in golden fetters.
What Liberty had I, whereof to vaunt
By those Infranchisements I seem to want?
I was at Liberty to roll in dust,
To prosecute my fancies and my lust;
And therein joy'd, when I could walk abroad;
But, now, I find the Services of GOD
Are Perfectst Freedom. That, I am debarred
Of nothing, which deserves my regard;
And, that the Liberty I did possess,
Was not true Freedom, but Licentiousness;
At which experiment I am arrived,
By losing that whereof I am deprived.
This (though foreseen it was) to me befell
Before I for it was prepared well,
And, I confess, at first it made a change
Within me, and without, that seemed strange:
But, not long after, at the second sight,
That, which appeared the wrong-side, proved the right;
And I am well contented therewithal:
For, I could see GODS Mercies through the wall;
Discerned, when inwardly, I turned mine eyes,
Much more of Heaven, than when I saw the skies.
And, that, from very little I was barred,
Which I have reason greatly to regard.
What can I see abroad, which has not been
By me before, almost to loathing seen,
Or, heard not so described, that being shown
It will not seem a thing already known?
Both Changes and Rechanges I have viewed;
Seen new things old become, old things renewed;
Princes petitioning disdainful Grooms
Great Kings dethroned, and Peasants in their rooms;
Laws out-lawed, Outlaws raised to be Judges
Of Laws, Lives, Goods, and of our Privileges,
By Law and Conscience; Loyalty made Treason,
And Treason Loyalty; Nonsense for Reason
Allowed, and Reason thought irrational:
Yea, Meteors I have seen rise, and Stars fall;
Foundations that immovable appeared
Thrown down, and Castles in the Air uprear'd.
I have seen Heads and Feet exchange their places,
Wealth make men poor, and honor bring disgraces;
Beauties, which ravished beholders eyes
Wax more deformed than Anatomies,
Or, no more lovely to be looked upon,
Than Rawridge, Mumble-crust, or Bloody-bone,
But, truth to say, they who most lovely be,
Now, no more pleasureful appear to me
Than Pictures, nor so much as ugly faces
Whose hearts are beautified with inward graces,
Although to Beauty very few were more
A Servant, than I have been heretofore,
And if that please not, which I once liked best,
What pleasure is there to behold the rest?
That, at this present, and all other sights
Afford so little which my heart delights,
That, all the earth, and one poor little room
Are so equivalent to me become,
That I know nothing any other where
More to be prized than my enjoyments here;
And, that which makes me so indifferent
Nor melancholy is, nor discontent.
Confinement, in a house of strength does dwell,
A homely, and sometimes a nasty Cell,
In furnitures, and in attendance poor,
A Cerberus lies always at the door
Fawning a little, when we entering are
But ever snarls while we continue there:
Yet, I so quickly had found out his diet,
That, I knew either how to keep him quiet,
Or order so my self, that when I please,
I can lie down and sleep in LITTLE-EASE;
Enlarge within, that which without has bound,
Contrive conveniences, where none I found;
And, every whit as much content receive
In what I have not, as in what I have.
I view not here the pleasures of the fields
Or what a Garden, Grove, or Meddow yields
Which were of late my daily recreation,
But, I have Visions by my contemplation,
Which hither, during my Confinement brings
Not only sights of more essential things
But an assurance of enjoyments too,
Whereof I doubted more a while ago.
I could not be at that Solemnization
Which honored my Sovereigns Coronation,
Nor saw his Royal Train in their late Marches
Through LONDON, under their Triumphant Arches;
Yet in my solitariness, alone,
What they were doing, I did think upon,
With what should else be done, that is not done yet
And, which I wish we may not quite forget,
Nor so long, that there, may at length be lost
Much real honor, and no little cost;
And which, perhaps, to bring now into mind
By this expression, I am thus confined;
For Providence, did neither me restrain
At this time, nor infuse these thoughts in vain.
Ionick, Dorick, and Corinthians works,
In which, an Architectors cunning lurks
Apart, or inter-wove (with that applied
Whereby it may be richly beautified)
I can conceive, as if I saw it made,
And all which paintings thereunto can add.
I know, as well as they who did behold
That costly Show, what Silver, Silk and Gold,
Pearls, Diamonds, and precious Rubies, can
Contribute to adorn a horse or man.
I have seen all materials which were thither,
To make up that great triumph, brought together.
Princes and Dukes, and Marquesses and Earls,
Plebeians, Men and Women, Boys and Girls,
As many thousands as then present were
I did as well imagine to be there
As if I them had seen; and can suppose
Not only what is acted at such Shows,
But also, more than was at any one
Since first the Roman Triumphs were begun,
And fancy by my self such glorious things
As would quite beggar Emperors and Kings
To represent them. So, by being there
I had but seen a meaner Show than here
My fancy could have made; and what had I
Been then, I pray, advantaged thereby?
What had I gained then, by sitting long
And paying, to be crowded in a throng?
What great contentment could I have derived
From what Mechanic Artists had contrived,
Compared to that which my imagination
Contrived in honor of that Coronation?
At which the Trophies cost, at most, no more
Than would have made some needy persons poor?
I seldom took, at any time much pleasure
In Shows, which every vulgar eye can measure;
And time and cost require to make them gay,
Yet in a moment vanish quite away,
Behind them leaving nothing that conduces
To Pious, Moral, or to Civil uses.
What though I did not see the King that day?
I did in my Confinement, for him pray
As heartily as any person there,
And, GOD, perhaps, as soon the same will hear,
Although my Tongue was not then heard among
Those Acclamations of the vulgar throng,
Which did salute his ear; my silent Voice
Winged with Devotion (though it made no noise)
Ascended Heaven, and may bring blessings down,
Which will conduce to settling of his Crown,
If he unfix it not by mis-endeavour,
Or, valuing of the Gift more than the Giver.
I do presume his duties on that day
He did discharge; and (wishing others may
Perform their dues to him) do not envy
The glory of that day's Solemnity
To him, for whom 'twas purposed, nor the sight,
Thereof, to those who took therein delight;
But wished, both might be perfectly contented
In what was at that present represented;
And hope, naught was to him ascribed then,
Which rather appertains to GOD than Men:
For, when to Hereds eloquent Orations
The people gave blasphemous Acclamations,
And he that honor to himself applied,
Whereby, GOD ought to have been glorified,
The Doom, which that offense did on him bring,
Made him a lifeless, and a louzie King.
Of these things my confinement did produce
Some thoughts, which are perhaps of some good use.
I, likewise exercised my Meditation,
That day, on other things which have relation
To what was then in act; and mused upon
That, which occasion gave of things then done,
On some now past, and upon other some
Which probably will be in time to come.
I mused upon the Changes, and the Chances,
The Public Troubles, and Deliverances
Which I have seen. I seriously did ponder
GODS, and Men's actions jointly and asunder;
Our foolish Projects, his wise Providence,
Both in their Progress, and their Consequences.
I thought both on the People and the King,
What good or evil possibly might spring
From their deportments toward one another
Now by GODS mercy they are brought together.
On those too, in particular, I thought
Whom, GOD into his power has lately brought:
How great, erewhile, his wants and sufferings were,
What, his enjoyments at this present are;
And, on some other matters, not a few,
Which these, to my consideration drew,
And which perhaps, that day had been by none
Mused on, so much, had I not been alone.
Moreover it occasioned thoughts of that
Which to a Nobler Object does relate;
Even to that Kingdom, King, and Coronation,
That should be thought on with more veneration
Than all the Monarchs in their greatest glory,
Who now live, or are memoriz'd in story.
My Contemplation, with as much content,
As others had, to me did represent
That DAY wherein CHRIST through Jerusalem
Rode meekly on an Ass, whilst after him
The people thronged or laqued by his side,
And voluntarily HOSANNA cried,
Yet afterward pursuing him with scorns
Cried Crucify, and crowned him with Thorns;
And this, me thought, was so considerable,
That it made all our Pomp seem despicable.
For, then my Muses drew me by degrees,
To meditate on what my soul fore-sees
Concerning them, who, whilst they do pretend
CHRIST's Kingdom, do pursue another end;
And that, which for his glory was bestown,
Make use of, for advancement of their own.
Not seldom, likewise, I then thought upon
Those many thousand families undone,
Who sit and weep through want of what that day
Was wastfully and vainly, thrown away,
At such a time, wherein both Man and GOD,
Proceedings looked for in another mode,
And when, our public hazards and distress,
Required another way of thankfulness.
Upon that solemn day, (not without wonder)
I saw and heard, the Lightning, rain, and thunder
Wherewith GOD seemed to answer and out-vy
Our Guns and Fireworks, (though I was not nigh)
And such-resemblance had the works of Art,
To Nature's, that they could not be apart
Distinguished; but that, to prevent our error,
The last was loudest, and infused more terror.
This, I observed well; and furthermore
Took special heed, that nigh two Months before,
And likewise ever since, from Rainy weather
We were not often free, one whole day together,
Until that Royal Triumph was begun,
Nor till that moment wherein it was done:
Yet, durst I not be so profane, to say
(As one has writ) it dared not rain that day.
Nor at that time, Flaminian like, durst I
Conjecture by a Heathenish Augurie
What GOD thereby intended: but, with awe
Considered upon what I heard and saw:
And I confess, the Lightning, Rain, and Thunder
At this our Seed-time, caused me to ponder
On that, which Sumuel prayed GOD to send
In Harvest-time, and what that did portend;
Which I conceive to be a Meditation
Not then improper, for my Contemplation.
And, though some peradventure may suspect
That these expressions, may some way reflect
On what concerns them, it concerns him more
Whose cause and honor I prefer before
All earthly things; and can be not afraid,
Who ere shall be displeased with what I Have said;
For, I was barred from seeing what is done
By men; that, GODS works might be mused on.
Such things, although we then much mind them not,
Should not amidst our Triumphs be forgot;
And, that, (which then by me was thought upon)
Much more effectually, perhaps, was done
In this condition which I now am in,
Than could in that state, wherein I have been:
Forgot therefore, by others, if it be
It will seem no great wonderment to me;
For, who remember Joseph's in their sports,
Or in the jollities at Princes Courts?
Confinement (which I once a damage thought)
To me, has other privileges brought.
It manifests apparently to me
Who are my Kinsmen, who my Neighbors be;
And whether he who passes by me than,
Be Levite, Priest, or a Samaritan:
For, Neighborhood and Kindred, he best tryes
That Is robbed, wounded, or imprisoned lies.
In Liberty, I sometimes doubted whether
They, who then came to visit me, were either
My Friends or Foes, for, I found other while
They whom I trusted most, did most beguile.
But, few or none my Visitants now are
Save they, whose Visitations are sincere;
The Friends I got, when I did walk abroad
I gained my self: These, are made mine by GOD.
These were acquired without pains or cost;
Not won by merit, nor by small faults lost.
The first, were for prosperity decreed,
The latter, for my help, in time of need,
And sought my Body out, unknown before
Because, they heard it was distressed, and poor;
Which has to me, Confinement sweeter made,
Than all the Freedoms which I lately had;
And, me, with that Communion of the Saints,
Experimentally, it now acquaints,
Which, in this life enjoyed is, by all,
Who, in the life to come, enjoy it shall,
A Prison, cannot dreadful seem to me,
For, there I first was taught my A, B, C,
In Sufferings: There, when I had scarcely past
Mine Nonage, to be schooled I was place't.
And, so long as the Providence of GOD,
Was pleased, that, to instruct me with that Rod,
I should continue my abiding there,
Princes, my Tutors, and Correctors were.
A Prison, is that House of Discipline,
Wherein the MARTYRS usually begin
To be Probationers; it is the College
Of SAINTS, wherein experimental knowledge
Is first acquired by a carnal sense
Of that, which tries their Christian patience.
Prisons, to them, are sanctified Temples,
Wherein, they by their meekness and examples
Preach to the world by Deeds (a powerful way)
What, many other do but merely say.
And, as our Prelates, in each Cathedral
Have several places, which they please to call
More or less holy: so, there likewise be
Imprisonments of differing degree:
The Outer-ward, an entertainment gives
Most commonly to Murderers and Thieves,
Or, such like malefactors, who displease
The world sometimes, and interrupt her ease,
For which they are confined, till their just guerdon
They shall receive, or bribe her for a pardon;
And whereto she gives all advantages
That may in Prisons granted be to these.
But, all her Prisoners are not confined
To Wards, and Receptacles of one kind.
The Inner-wards, which do to me appear
The same that Chancels unto Churches are,
Are not made use of (except now and then)
But for most holy and Religious men.
The deepest Dungeons be reserved for those
Who dare our Vices, or her Lusts oppose;
Or, things repugnant to our ends profess,
(When moved thereto by conscientiousness)
And, whosoere presumes to plead their cases,
As Innocents, does hazard in like places
His own Restraint; or else unto suspects,
Which peradventure may have worse effects.
Yet, Freedom yields to none so much content,
As these enjoy, by such Imprisonment.
For, they with inward comforts are delighted,
Whilst they with outward darkness are benighted:
And sweet Refreshments, in amongst them come
When they are thronged up in a nasty Room.
When, they of their familiars are deprived,
They are by those, who knew them not, relieved;
When they from earthly men, fast locked have been,
Celestial Angels have sometime broke in;
Knocked off their chains; the gates and doors unbar'd
The Prison shook; the sturdy Iaylor scarr'd
And made him (falling down before them too)
Cry, Men and Brethren, say, what shall we do?
A Prison is the best retiring Room
That can be got; the best Museolum
For him, wherein to contemplate, that would
Those Objects without fallacy behold,
Which most concern him; or would notions have
Of what he ought to do, hope or believe;
For, most of those things, which abroad he spies,
Either delude his ears, or blind his eyes,
Pervert his Judgment, or withdraw his mind
From that, wherein his welfare he might find.
A Prison is a place; which he that can
Make use of, as becomes a prudent man,
Finds there, more lasting, and more perfect solace
Than in the greatest earthly Princes Palace,
And, when he knows what Privileges are
In this condition, will scorn all that is there.
In Prison, quickly, understand he shall
The worst that can to him, at last, befall.
There, he may notice take, how most men pother
Themselves; what plagues they are unto each other.
How, causelessly men terrified are
By those, to whom they dreadful would appear;
And, peradventure, if they patient be
That, they pursued by their Foes will see,
By which their self-destruction shall be wrought,
And those freed, whom, they into bondage brought.
There, they may learn, that to make black or white,
One hair, or add one straws-breadth to their height
Care naught avails; and in that poor estate
To laugh at all the worlds despite and hate:
For, over them, no power then left she has,
Except of prosecuting them to death,
Which them ten thousand fold will happier make
Than all, that she can either give or take.
These are such benefits as I enjoy,
By what, now seems my Freedom to destroy.
In Prison, too, this Privilege I have,
That, living, I descend into my Grave,
And by my Contemplation can foresee
What my condition in that place will be.
I search it to the bottom, by that spark
Of Light, which shines brightest in the dark.
The terrors of that Dungeon I fore-stall,
I, (as it were) pre-act my Funeral,
And in a manner also, see and hear
What will be said and done, when I am there;
Which are advantages not to be known,
Whilst in the world I flutter up and down.
In Prison also, when least room I have,
And close am kept, I, far beyond the Grave
Do Prospects view; and can see pretty well
What may concern men, both in Heaven and Hell;
Whereof, if here I should my knowledge speak
Them, for Phanatick dreams, the world would take;
And not believe the things I could declare,
Because, she knows that I was never there;
And, therefore, I Will proceed again to show
What, my Experiments are here below.
Restraint, from me, has totally shut out
That frivelous, and that offensive Rout,
Which interrupts my Musings with discourse
That Is either wholly vain, or somewhat worse:
For, to naught else, it for the most part tends
But fruitless complements, or graceless ends;
And, what among us, is at meetings blown,
Wrongs other men's affairs, or else our own,
Whereas, our words whilst here we are together,
Tend to the edifying of each other,
In Faith or Manners; or else, to improve
That Hope, that Meekness, Constancy and Love
Which may enable, patiently to bear
Those Burdens, wherewith we oppressed are:
And, when our Bodies are asunder gone,
We never leave each other quite alone;
For, we (even when corporeally apart)
Are present, both in Spirit and in Heart.
Though this Fraternity did often mind me,
Till my Imprisonment they could not find me,
Nor did I know their persons. Thou, therefore
Oh foolish world, to my content add'st more
By my Restraint, than if to me were given
All carnal Freedoms on this side of Heaven;
And, if this be the great'st harms thou can do,
Prithee, let every spite thou do be two.
But, all the comforts which best friends afford,
(As they are men) may prove like Ionah's Gourd,
For, as next morning, that, did wither quite
Which GOD did cause to spring up in one night,
So, when the Sun burns, or a sharp wind blows,
This may as quickly fade, as it arose:
For, Death or Injuries, do every day
Take those men's lives, or, their estates away
Who are most charitable, and, of bread
They may have need, by whom I have been fed,
For, unto all men underneath the Sun
That may betide which does befall to one.
Not therefore, upon those things which GOD sends,
But, on himself alone, my soul depends:
Here, all my confidence, vain world, is place't,
Or else I might be ruined at last;
And all my present hopes, as vain would be,
As if I had reposed my trust in thee.
By this Restriction, not a few temptations
Will be repelled; many deviations
Of mine prevented; duties better done;
Things which have been forgot, more thought upon;
It peradventure may prepare me too,
For what I Am yet to suffer and to do,
Much better than that Freedom did, or could,
Which, by the Common Tenure I did hold:
And who knows, but some corporal mis-hap
I may or did by this Restraint escape,
Which might have else befell me when together
The people thronged and trod upon each other.
Which, though no more but shunning so much harm,
As breaking of a neck, a leg, or arm,
Were considerable, and ten to one
Such mis-adventures daily fall upon
Some persons unconfined, when they least dread them,
Because, where dangers are, they little heed them.
Escaped I no more here, than that slavish load
Of Complementings, wherewithal abroad
Men tire themselves, and others; that, alone
Sufficient were, if well considered on,
To make amends for all the sufferings
Which my confinement now upon me brings.
For, as to pay this life, I am a debtor
To Nature, and then hope to have a better,
My Wants, Restraints, and Poverty do less
Afflict my Body, by all that distress
Now laid upon it, than my soul has been
To hear and see, what I have heard and seen,
Whilst I had liberty abroad to go,
And hear and see, what many say and do:
With what dissembling Complements, Caresses,
Affected Speeches, flattering Addresses,
And false Pretendings, men of every sort
Do cheat, fool, claw, and one another court,
As if they did Realities intend
When, in mere Nullities, at last they end.
How, Letters, Promises, Vows, Declarations,
Orders, Oaths, Covenants, and Protestations
Annihilated are, and turn to smoke
Or stinks, which rather poison us, and choke
Than truly nourish; and how they go on
In acting still, such things as they have done
Who are destroyed; and yet, nere the less,
Dream they pursue the ways of Happiness.
I am, as well pleased, with my sad condition,
As others, with what they have in fruition,
And, if desire a longer life I could,
For nothing else the same desire I should,
Except it were that I might live to see
What GOD will do, and what their end will be.
Frequent I cannot, with convenience
(As lately, when I had my Liberty,
I might have done) the Public Congregation;
But, I, upon GOD's Word, by meditation,
(To exercise my self) may set apart
The time they dedicate; and both my heart
And my best Faculties, employ that day,
In preaching somewhat to the world my way
Which will advance GOD's glory, and improve
My Brethren in good life, hope, faith, and love:
Or, that prepare, which thereunto may tend,
When Days and Times, with me will have an end:
And, GOD (I know) confines not Saving Graces
To ordinary Means, Forms, Times, or Places,
Nor is displeased when his services
Endeavored are, without contentiousness,
As we are able, and with upright heart,
Though of our duties we may fail in part.
Some other Notions, which in this estate
Are apprehended, I might now relate,
Which further may illustrate those mis-haps
That man by an Imprisonment escapes
But, they are Trifles to what I possess,
In my constrained Solitariness.
For, though it be not what I might have chose
(Had I been left unto mine own dispose)
It proves much better: and for that respect
What I most naturally do affect
I dare not absolutely to request,
(Much less make choice of) but to him that best
Knows what is best for me, wholly have resigned
Both mine own self, and things of every kind.
It Is he, who has assigned this lot, and all
What ere it be, which thereby does befall;
And, this Restraint, not only makes him dearer
To me, but also, to him, draws me nearer,
So that the more my troubles do increase,
The nearer unto him is my access.
He, fortifies my confidence in him,
And heartens me, the World thus to contemn,
As boldly as if doubtless cause there were
For her to fear me, more than I fear her.
I have my fears, but they are nothing else
Save what Perdues and Scouts, and Sentinels
Are to an Army: they do not dis-heart
A valiant Soldier; though they make him start
At first Alarm; but cause him to prepare
For those assaults, which nigh approaching are.
When I am judged, in an undone-case,
Because, confined, in wants, and in distress;
When all my outward Comforters are gone,
And, I lie musing on my bed alone
Of what I knew before, or heard that day;
Of what my Friends fear, and my Foes do say;
What men they are, who seem with me offended,
What is already done, and what intended;
Sometimes a little shuddring does begin,
As if a panick-fear were breaking in,
Which he marks, ere to me it does appear
Forthwith, steps down betwixt me and that fear
Supplies defects, expels doubts and sadness,
Replenisheth my heart with sober gladness,
About me sets his Angels, watch to keep,
And (as to his beloved) gives me sleep.
These things considered, Prisons and Restraints
(Which have been long, the portion of the Saints)
Are not alone things little to be feared,
But also many times to be preferred
Before those Liberties, and all those things
That can be found in Palaces of Kings;
What ere their flatterers are pleased to say,
By fruitless hopes, to drive their fears away.
For, more are there endangered, more destroyed:
There, many times, is less content enjoyed,
Less outward safety, and a great deal less
Of what conduces to true happiness,
Than in a Prison: And who ere well heeds
What, there is done, and what thereon succeeds
Will find cause, their condition to bewail
Sometimes, much more, than his that is in a Gaol.
For, errors flowing from Prosperity
Endanger more, because unseen they lie.
Men may by their Afflictions be prepared
For whatsoere can follow afterward,
And are often fitted by a lingering grief,
For future happiness in death or life:
But, while corrupted by excessive Treasures,
Befooled with honors, and bewitched with pleasures,
The cause of self-destruction still they nourish;
They grow as brutish as the beasts that perish;
And, daily so besotted, by degrees
That, sense of their humanity they leese;
So long dream, they are GOD's (or somewhat greater,
Till they are Devils, or but little better;
And suddenly, when they think all goes well,
Sink from supposed Happiness to HELL.
Most men, (yea very many of the best)
Their Talents, till they Palm-like down are pressed,
Improve not; nor their Duties truly do,
Till by Afflictions they are whipped thereto.
A Prison, was long time the School, wherein
Chaste Joseph those progressions did begin,
Which, him forth from obscurity did bring
To be the second person to a King.
Jonas was not obedient to GOD'S Call
Till he, both by a Storm, and by a Whale,
Was disciplined: And, if I had a thought
My duties were performed as they ought
In any thing, affirmed it should be
That, thereto my Afflictions fitted me:
For, such like Simples, as I am, require
To make them yield forth Oil, the Press, or Fire,
My Flinty-nature gives not out one spark
To light my self, or others in the dark,
Till knocked with Steel. This knowledge I have gained
Of mine own temper, and it is unfain'd.
To be imprisoned, slandered, or made poor,
Shall therefore, henceforth, frighten me no more,
Nor make me, whilst I live ashamed of either
Of those three Lots, nor of them altogether.
Priests, Prophets, Kings and Saints, yea (whilst abode
He made on earth) the glorious Son of GOD
Was pleased to submit to all of them
(But to the latter two in an extreme)
And, with such Company, I Will undergo
My share, and think, I Am thereby honored too.
To this effect, much more might here be said,
But, this will be sufficient, if well weighed,
Which, I suspect; for, very few men heed,
Or mind, long, what they hear, or what they read.
SLANDER is more Beneficial than PRAISE.
WHo, can express the pain of being stung
With such a fiery Serpent as the TONGUE?
Or, what can cure it, but his being eyed,
Whom, once, the Brazen Serpent typifi'd?
It Is far more sharp than Arrows, Darts or Spears;
Down to the heart, it pierces through the ears;
Not only wounds, but frighteth also more
Than murthring Canons, when they loudest roar;
Afflicts us, whilst here we draw our breath,
And, Gangreeve-like, so spreads after death
(Even to posterity upon our Names)
That it destroys the life of honest Fames.
This sury SLANDER, has been quartered long,
In Rotten-Row, and Hart-street, at the Tongue;
Her Magazeens and Forges are all there,
The Shop at which she vents them, is the Ear,
In every Town and City; and no places
Or persons, her aspersions and disgraces
Can long avoid: For, every where she scatters
That shot wherewith the Forts of Fame she batters.
So venomous it is, that every touch
Proves mortal, or indangers very much,
And nothing shoots more impoysoned pellets,
Except it be the flatteries of Prelates.
I must confess, that many years ago
I therewith have been often wounded so
That, very well, content I could have been
To lie down, where I might no more be seen;
And, my stupidity is not, yet, such
As not to feel indignities as much
As any man: But, I have learned how
To change my Sicknesses to Physic, now:
And when the world intends me a shame
By retroversion to convert the same
To that, which from be spattrings purifies,
And makes me both her Blame and Praise despise,
No more displeased, or pleased therewithal
Than if a whibling Cur, should fawn or bawl.
For, unto those Oppressions, heretofore
And now laid on me, whatsoever more
The world shall add; though they a while oppress,
Will, shortly, make them, not alone much less
But, also none at all; and wheel about
Upon her self, as soon as my Turn's out.
Praise, is a pleasing thing, to flesh and blood,
Yet, often does it much more harm than good;
Puffs up with Pride, ore-weening and vain glory,
Or, with affection to things transitory
Beyond a safe Mean; and makes men suppose
Themselves to be, what every neighbor knows
They are not; yea, what they themselves do see
They neither are, nor possibly can be.
Whereas, to be without a cause despised,
Disprais'd, reproached, scoft, jeered and scandalized,
An undue self-opinion does remove
True Meekness and Humility improve;
Brings Constancy and Patience to their trial,
And, at the last, to such a Self-denial,
As in the close will more contentment give us
Than all, whereof a Slander can deprive us.
The flatteries of his Lords, made Joash stumble,
Reviling speeches, made King David humble,
Good men, by praises, often, are evil made,
But, by Reproaches harm they never had.
The World, which best is pleased with her own baubles
For that false titulary honor scrabbles,
Which is composed of aerie Attributes,
Or, which opinion only constitutes:
And, all her happiness, dependant seems
On vulgar approbations and esteems,
Which are, indeed, her Portion: but, to those,
Who can look both beyond, and through the Shows,
That such Toies make, naught therein does appear
To merit their desire, love, hate or fear:
And, therefore, they respect them, (come, or go)
As Reason them obliges thereunto,
Or, as things, which (if grace divine be granted) them,
Indifferently, may be possessed or wanted;
Make such use as they serve to, whilst they have
And yield them, when resumed, to those who gave them.
For, had external honors in this place,
Been truly more essential than disgrace,
To happiness eternal; CHRIST had waved
The scandals of the Cross; we had been saved
And sanctified should be without those troubles,
Scorns and reproaches, which the world now doubles
And may redouble: yea, in vain had he
A promise made, that they should blessed be
Who in his sufferings do with him partake,
And are reproached and slandered for his sake.
These things considered, I am at full rest;
Slanders infringe not my chief interest.
Good or Ill Words will me no more concern
When I am dead, than when I was unborn.
And, whilst I live, (as is inferred before)
They harm a little, and they profit more.
If Scandals neither mend nor mar my health,
Increase not troubles, nor decrease my wealth,
Save in opinion only; all those lostes
Are cured, if my vote, that opinion crosses.
And (prare who list) I will as merry be
As is a Pie upon a Cherry-tree.
Praise, or dispraises, if so be my heart
Assures, that neither of them by desert
To me belongs, my own Phanatick brain
Is cause of all, where of I do complain,
Or take delight in: praise, blame, bless, or curse,
I am no whit the better, or the worse;
And, all men are as much concerned as I
In what is then spoken be it Truth, or Lie.
If of a hundred Crimes I guilty were,
All which, as evidently did appear,
As in a cloudless day, the Sun at noon;
The world, but as the spots within the Moon,
Would look upon them, if, for my defense
I have a face well braz'd with impudence;
An Oily Tongue, a Crocodiles moist eye,
Can find great Friends, bribe, flatter, fawn and lie,
Ore-awe my neighbors, or, my self express
A friend to them, in their licentiousness.
But, were I, both in words and deeds, as free
From just reproof, as mortal man may be,
Had I, but one great neighbor, who envies
All men supposed more honest, or more wise,
Than he is thought; therewith a neighborhood,
Which takes delight in nothing that is good;
Abhorring all, as their injurious foes,
Who, them, in their unrighteous ways oppose;
Or, if I be constrained to have dealing,
With such, by some relation, or nigh dwelling,
Who think, there is nothing rational or just,
But, what tends to their profit, or their lust;
It is impossible to escape the wrongs
Of wicked hands, or of malicious tongues:
And, therefore, he, with whom it thus does fare
Must study patience, how his lot to bear;
And in this case, can look for no defense
But from GODS Justice, and his Innocence,
Which is sufficient unto them that know
What consolations from those fountains flow.
What, is there to be feared in Slandrous Tales,
Whether, they shall be either true or false?
A false Report more mischieves those who spread it,
Than harmeth me. If it impairs my credit,
I may recover it again ere long,
And also peradventure, by that wrong
Improve some Virtue, or abate some Pride,
Within my self till that time, unespy'd.
Although hard words, give harder knocks than stones,
And crack our Credits, yet, they break no Bones;
And, if unjustly thrown, by spightful fingers,
They prove most mischievous unto their flingers.
One fault which Conscience finds, afflicts me more
Than twenty slanders, yea than twenty score:
So long as that lies quietly in me,
I shall not care who my Accusers be;
And, when that shall accuse me (as sometime
It does) I sue out an Appeal to him
Who straight acquits me; else I must confess
I should as much fear mine own Righteousness
As all my Sins; for, I esteem them both
Alike impure, and as a menstruous cloth.
If I am justly blamed for things misdone,
Or, for faults wherein I am going on,
It does by bringing on me shame of face,
Repentance bring, and to that, state of Grace
From which I falling was; and stay the course
Which might have drawn me on from bad to worse,
Until, that by habituated sin,
Endless Impenitency had broke in:
Much more, therefore, to these I am a debtor
Who speak ill, than to those men who speak better
Than I deserve: And, though that in their ends
They differ, they may be as useful friends
Who speak of me opprobriously, sometimes,
As they, who praise me, or excuse my crimes.
For, I have long observed that all Relations,
Nigh or far off (what ever Obligations
Have nearly joined them, or whatsoere
Their Quarrels, Bonds, or Disobligements are)
Be (for the most part) either friends or foes,
But, as a prosperous, or a cross wind blows;
Or, as their inter'st or Expectancy
May be secured, or does at hazard lie.
The Love or Hatred, which I find in them,
Differs but in the Measure, or the Time,
Or, in the Occasions, which have them inclined,
To friendliness, or else to be unkind.
They frown or smile they praise, or they disgrace,
Destroy and save, and stab, or else embrace,
Even as the fit which comes upon them, takes them,
And either pleased, or displeased makes them.
Such will their words and deeds be then to thee,
What ere thou art to them, or they to thee.
As bitter Language, I have heard 'twixt those
That were dear Lovers, as 'twixt greatest Foes,
Yea, and more bitter too, in some respects
Considering their Causes and Effects.
A Foes Revilings very sharp appear,
But, when our Friends exasperated are
With, or without Cause given of offense,
There is between them greater difference
(Or at the least, but very little less)
Than tasted is between the bitterness
Of unpeel'd Wallnut-kernels, and strong Gall,
When with our tongues distinguish them we shall.
Moreover, I have sometimes also seen
That, they, who have unto each other been
Most mischievous, so reconciled together
(Though little virtue has appeared in either)
So kind in words and deeds, for outward ends,
And, so engaged mutually as friends
In their Concernments, as if they had never
At variance been; but, hearty friends for ever.
Which, when I mind, I neither pleasure have
In Praises, nor do slanders me bereave
Of much content, from whom soever they come,
So long as I find Innocence at home;
Nor, in my own respect at any time,
So grieved am I, as otherwhile for them
Who have mis-censur'd me; because I know
From what distempers usually they flow;
And that the sob'rest and the wisest men
Have some Deliriums on them now and then.
Exception is not always to be took
By what shall by a Friend or Foe be spoke:
For, men in passion, whether they appear.
Pleased or displeased, speak few things as they are,
Nor always as they think, but, rather say
That, which the passion bearing then chief sway
Transports them to; although a wound it give
To their own souls, which pains them whilst they live.
But, Friends and Foes, both good and ill report,
And, all terrestrial things of every sort,
Will shortly have an end (with me at least.)
The worst, as well as that whereof the best
Esteem I had, will into nothing fly:
My Slanders, and my Slanderers will dye.
At present, therefore them no more I dread
Than if I saw they were already dead;
And, that which dead or living, shall to me
Befall, will equally forgotten be.
By living, I, their scandals may outlive,
And good proofs of my innocence give.
When I am dead, what ever men shall please
To speak or do, it cannot me disease:
And, they who after death do men defame,
Or shall expose their bodies unto shame,
Bring that dishonor which they did intend
To others, on themselves, at latter end:
Yea, make some question, and suspect their merits;
Repute them persons of ignoble spirits;
And, what they hoped should confirm their peace,
Their terrors and their dangers will increase.
Slanders (though poison in themselves) have been
To me a precious Antidote for sin,
Preventing, not a few times more than one,
That, wherein else perhaps I had mis-done,
(And I, thereby, effects like his have found
Who had a Sickness cured by a wound)
Whereas, contrariwise, a vain Applause
Of sins or follies, are a frequent cause.
I well remember, that, when I was young
(And in both kinds an Object of the Tongue,
As now I am) I reaped, many ways,
By Slanders, much more profit than by Praise.
For, Praises made me sometimes over-ween,
And (as if no defects in me had been)
Neglect the means, that, supplements might add
To what, I more in Show, than Substance had.
It, likewise, me to envy did expose,
From which great disadvantages arose,
And scandals, without cause: But Grace divine
Crossed thereby, what the Devil did design:
For, Defamation, so soon was begun,
That, what it charged me with, was never done.
That, sin prevented was, and many more
By sending of the Scandal forth before
The Crime was acted; So, into a Blessing
A Curse was turned, which merits this confessing;
And also, me obliges, all my days,
On all occasions, to give GOD the praise;
For, if, perhaps it had over-flowed then,
The stream had never kept his bounds again.
The scoffs and jeers, cast on me by the Rimes
Of some reputed Poets in these times
Have been my great advantage: for, the esteem
Which in my youthful days I had of them
Had else perhaps, from my simplicity
Drawn me, by their familiarity
To those affected Vanities with which
They have infected fools, and clawed their itch.
Were I but as ambitious of that name
A POET, as they are, and think I am,
It might a little vex me, when I hear
How often, in their Pamphlets me they jear,
Because, Truth seasonably I convey
To such as need it, in a homely way,
Best pleasing unto those who do not care
To crack hard shells in which no kernels are;
Or for strong Lines, in which is little found,
Save an affected phrase, and empty sound.
But, I do read them with a smiling pity
To find them to be wicked, who are witty.
At their Detractions, I do not repine;
Their Poems I esteem as they do mine:
Their Censures, I with sleighting overpass,
Who, like words without sense, wit without grace;
And, better am contented, without cause
To hear their mis-reports, than their Applause.
As also, that, they should by Pantaloons
Admired be, and honored by Buffoons.
Yea, as Job said, should they a Book compile
Against me (as they may, and did erewhile)
I would receive it, on my shoulders bear it,
And as a Crown, upon my head would wear it.
My fearleness of SLANDERS does not flow
From Ignorance, which hinders me to know
How, I am scandalized: for it appears
In Print and I have heard it through both ears.
I daily hear what ignominious lies
Detraction, to defame me does devise.
I know, whence they proceed; whereto they tend,
In what likewise they possibly may end:
And it would stagger and affright me too,
Unless I knew the worst, all this could do
For, they, who Idolize the Prelacy
Impute to me no less than Blasphemy,
And Sacrilege: And, I may well expect
That, when their hopes have taken full effect,
Though they with me at present, do but dandle,
They then will curse me with Bell, Book and Candle.
How ever, for their persons I will pray:
For, malice has not moved me to gainsay
Their Prelacy; nor hope to get again
What they usurp, and does to me pertain:
But, merely conscientiousness of that
Which in my place I vowed to vindicate.
Some, call me Traitor too; but well I wot,
They do not so believe, or know me not.
I never did betray my trust to any,
Though I my self have been betrayed by many.
With Traitors I have numbered beenf or one,
And served their ends, yet I my self was none:
For, if like Absolone they did pretend
To Sacrifice, and had another end,
I went on in simplicity of heart,
And did not from my Principles depart.
If they intended, or committed Treason,
I wronged not my Conscience, or my Reason.
By ought mis-done, except it were, perchance,
Through oversight, or else through Ignorance;
For which, the Plagues now Epidemical,
To me, as unto other men befall.
I never was in any factious Plot,
Nor likely seems it, by what I have got,
That, with them in their Actings, I was one
Who, thrived by those designs they carried on,
Though being subject to the present Law,
I now do suffer, like Jack Fletchers Daw.
But, howsoere, I seem to merit blame
None, to the King, are truer than I am.
Yet, if in Fame, we credit may repose,
I am designed to be one of those,
Who shall not be vouchsafed that Common grace,
Which at his Coronation granted was.
GOD's will be done: Perhaps, the King well knows
I need not, what on others he bestows;
Or, to me, singly, will his favor show,
That I his Magnanimity may know;
And, that he will more gracious be to those
Who, him did not maliciously oppose,
Than they, whom I did serve, were to their friends,
Because they did not serve them, to their ends.
But, if Report has not divulged a Lie,
What, can I lose, or others get thereby?
My whole estate, already is bereft,
And, what will there be found, where is nothing left?
My life, you will say; Alas! that is little worth,
It has been wasting, ever since my birth;
And (when it was at best) too poor a thing,
To satisfy the Vengeance of a King.
It will to most men seem ridiculous,
To hear a Lion Rampant, killed a Mouse,
Or, see an Eagle stoop down from on high,
To trusse a Titmouse, or a Butterfly.
The dread of such a loss will not come near me,
For, Age will shortly kill me, though he spare me;
And, when there is no convenience of living,
Life, neither is worth asking or the giving.
But GOD's intentions, and the hearts of Kings,
Are such inscrutable and hidden things,
That, none can search their bottomes; then much less
Can they be fathomed by maliciousness.
Their ways of working their own pleasures out,
Are, many times, by wheeling round about,
By cross and counter-actings, and by those
Which seemed their own Designments to oppose.
The faithfull'st men, they do expose oft-times
To hazzards; or wirh such as are for crimes
Condemned, they number them; or, prove them by
Desertions, dis-respects, and Poverty;
And, frequently, do fit them for those places
Wherein they best may serve them, by disgraces;
But principally, at those times, wherein,
Hypocrisy, becomes the Reigning-sin.
More things I might insert, which have relations
In this kind, to my own prevarications,
And, to the Improvements, which have often ensued
By Scandals, which I then would have eschew'd.
But, my Experiments will work on none,
Who cannot by their own, be wrought upon.
Consider therefore all ye unto whom
This Writing, by GOD's providence does come,
What, in your selves and others, you have heeded,
Which has from Slanders, and from Praise proceeded;
And, you shall find more by the last undone
Than by the former, at least, ten to one.
According to our Proverb, the Bell clinketh
Just so, as in his fancy, the fool thinks
And, they who flattring praises love to hear,
Immediately, such to themselves appear,
As represented by their Parasite,
Though no more like than Black-swans are to white.
Such Panegyricks I have sometime seen
That, hard to be resolved, it had been,
By him, whose judgment you therein should crave,
Whether, the Panegyrist were more knave
Than he was Fool, for whom, the same was made:
But, of their equal Impudence I had
No doubt at all, when wistly I had heeded
What one gave, the other took, and what succeeded.
For, I have oftentimes observed, thereby,
Good Men depraved; Great Men, to Tyranny
Encouraged; That, which is due to men
By Natures Law, at first, they seize and then
Those Attributes, at last, intrude upon
That ought to be ascribed to GOD alone.
Which evidences, that, Immodest Praise
Is worse than Slander, and a groundwork lays,
Whereon a superstructure may be built,
To sink the Builders, down to shame and guilt.
SLANDERS, and Persecutions of the Tongue
A portion likewise is, which does belong
Unto the Saints; and sanctified they are
By him, with whom, an individual share
Each must expect; we, do but only sup
At brim, he drunk the bottom of the Cup:
We altogether merited the blame,
He underwent the sorrow and the shame.
False witnesses against him were suborned;
His Glory was to his dishonor turned;
His nearest friends forsook him, and forswore him,
His foes preferred a Murderer before him;
His Innocence not alone reproaching,
But, likewise most injuriously incroaching:
Upon his righteous person, him pursued
Till by a shameful death, he death subdued,
And breaking from the grave, to Heaven ascended,
By Angels to Immortal Life attended;
Where, now enthroned, he Thrones prepared has
For all, who follow him in that rough path;
And every slander, scorn, reproach and shame,
He suffr'd here, adds glory to his Name.
This is the way, and has been ever since,
Through which all men must pass, who go from hence
To that Eternity, where shall be worn
The Robes of honor, when the Rags of scorn
Shall off be thrown. On him I fix mine eyes,
And, that, will me enable to despise
Terrestrial shame and honor: That, makes all
My troubles, when at greatest, seem but small.
That, makes me, whilst my Body is confined,
Take pleasure, in the freedoms of the Mind;
Not dreading present, or ensuing wrongs,
Of wicked hands, or of malicious tongues.
This Paradox, it helps me to maintain,
That, where the Grace of GOD is not in vain,
More profit, bitterest reproach affords,
Than all the worlds Applauses, and fair words.
Poverty is more profitable than Riches.
ANother Black-Guard has beleagur'd me,
That, seems to be the worst of all the three
For, therewith, whosoever has to do,
Still is in danger of these other two,
Imprisonment and Slander, who attend
On Poverty unto her latter end.
Yet, whatsoever in her self she seem,
She merits not a total dis-esteem:
For, it is an instrument of good and evil,
Oft-times employed against us by the Devil,
And, often by GOD himself, to such effects
As may prevent the mischief he projects,
By tempting to those manifold abuses
Which Riches being mis-employ'd produces.
There are two sorts of Poverty, that spring
From diffring Roots; effects they likewise bring
Both diffring and alike: for, providence
Maugre all humane wit and diligence,
Makes many poor, and all their industries
Renders successeless by Contingencies,
Which no man can foresee, or wholly shun
Who shall be thereby outwardly undone.
This Poverty, afflicts, at first, as much
As any, but, disparages not such
As bear it well; and though it grieveth many,
(Except by their own fault) destroys not any.
The other sort, is sordid, vile, and base,
Yet, draws her Pedigree, from such a Race,
As does in Country, City, and in Court
Still bear an extraordinary port:
For, by the Fathers, or the Mothers side,
It sprung from Prodigality or Pride,
Or, from Improvidence or Idleness,
And, is indeed, near kin to all Excess,
Though her Alliance, these, now scorn and wave,
Because, that she is ragged, and they brave.
She, at this present time, both against me
And others is employed: But, though she be
Made use of by the world; yet, I well know
The World it self abhors her as a foe,
And, with a slavish dreadfulness does fear her,
On whatsoere occasion, she comes near her.
Yea, till this Bugbear, was more known to me,
I, dreaded her almost as much as she,
And, did the best I could, to keep her from
That nearness whereunto she now is come.
For, he that would disgrace, and bring us to
That State, which questionless might us undo,
Let him but justly say that we are poor,
And, to destroy us, he need say no more.
Whereas disgraced thereby we shall be much
If, we continue to be very rich,
Of whatsoever crime or crimes, we stand
Convicted by the known Laws, of this Land.
For, Wealth cannot alone our Pardons buy
And blot out every former Infamy;
But, in a short time also, make us capable
Of Trusts or places that be honorable;
Yea though they be those places which dispense
To all the people, Law and Conscience;
And marry Ladies (neither nor poor, nor painted)
As if our bloods had with no crimes been tainted.
But, to be poor, implies every whit,
As if we had nor honesty, nor wit,
And, every thing, which since our lives begun,
We honestly, nor prudently have done,
Shall so traduced be as if that naught
Had e're by us, been well done, spoke, or thought.
There, where we have been kindly entertained,
A civil usage, hardly shall be daign'd.
There, where we have been honored in times past,
Neighbors and Kinsmen will their doors make fast;
Our old familiars will our persons shun,
Like Rats, our Servants from the house will run,
Which, then, will be a place of desolation,
And few thenceforth approach our habitation,
But, Sergeants, Shreeves, or Bailiffs (beasts of prey)
That little, which is left, to fetch a way:
And, when there does remain nor sticks nor stones,
Dead or alive, they will take our Flesh and Bones.
If all I should express, that might be said
In this kind, you would think me still afraid
Of Poverty; and, that which I should speak,
In some, perhaps, would such impressions make
That, they with difficulty would believe
What benefits I now thereby receive:
Forbearing therefore, that which I might add
I Will tell what profits may thereby be had;
That, others (who can think I do not lie)
May be no more afraid thereof than I:
That, also, they who thereby grieved are,
May in my Consolations have a share,
To bear those burchens without discontent,
Which are now on them, or seem imminent:
For, little I will mention which was brought
By reading, or by hearsay to my thought;
But, that Philosophy, which Reason teaches,
(Experience has confirmed, and GOD's Grace
Unto my heart; that, it may sympathize
With their hearts, who the same shall not despise: preaches
Which, though expressed in language rude and plain,
Will, peradventure, to good use remain,
When they, who of their Elegancies boast,
Are, with their Kickshaws, in oblivion lost.
When most are also, quite forgot, whom they
Now dream, shall by their Poems, live for aye;
And, when, that, which they despicable deem,
With wise and honest men, shall find esteem.
In my Restraint, I therefore, do not whine;
At my Reproaches, I do not repine,
Nor murmr at my losses; nor want sense
Of that is in them, which may give offense.
My seeming-friends, I must confess, are fewer,
But, they whom now God gives me are much truer;
For, these that now I have, I find more willing
To give a pound, than those to pay a shilling.
Yet, some of these are so poor, that, I Am fain
Them, from their free Donations to restrain,
Because, that of my Sufferings they are grown
More sensible, than they are of their own.
And this, an evidence of that does give,
Which pleases better than what I receive;
Since it demonstrates, GOD, has in this Nation
A people, capable of his compassion.
I am not ignorant how much disgrace
Is thrown on Poverty, nor in what base
Account they are, who, thereby are constrained
Merely, by Charity, to be maintained:
Yet naught ashamed am of that estate
Which most so scorn, and so abominate.
For without loss of honor, men of merit,
This Portion very many times inherit.
Great Consuls, and renowned Generals
(In such an exigent as often befalls
To very many thousands in this Nation)
Have had relief without dis-reputation
By Common Charity: and, Ancient Story
Has kept memorials of it to their glory.
But, I refer that which I might express
(To take this Blur off) to another place.
To have subsistence by mere Charity
Is, to subsist by GOD, immediately,
And, they are wicked, or, vain fools, at least,
By whom those Exhibitions are disgraced.
For, very many of GOD's favorites
Have been often, thereby, from the worlds despights
Preserved: yea, to the World, it would appear
If she would heed it, that, her Minions are
Exposed to such a Lot, and (without shame)
Have been by Alms preserved as I am:
And, not in those necessities alone,
Which by mis-accidents are undergone,
Are they relieved; but, very many be
Thereby likewise upheld, in that degree,
Which much is honored; yea, even to Excess,
In outward splendour, and vain pompousnesse.
For, this way, not alone are Monks and Friars
Maintained, with their Abbots and their Priors,
But, even the great Prelates, all their lives,
By Charities abused Donatives;
And, yet as loftily advance their crest
As if they had been Barons born, at least,
Precedence usurping above those,
By whom, they from obscurity arose.
By most men, Poverty is thought so base,
That, they repute it for the great'st disgrace
Which can betide them, by what way soever
It comes; or howsoere they shall endeavor
To keep it off; and think it not their least
Dishonor, when enforced to subsist
By Charity, although it shall be used
With thankfulness, and in no wise abused.
And, many seek to turn it to my shame
That I now brought to this condition am.
Yet, what is to me befallen worse or more
Than to good, wise, and great men heretofore?
Renowned Princes in preceding ages,
Have sought, and had Supplies and Patronages.
From Foreign Kings and States, in their distresses
Without reproach: yea, he that now possesses
These three great Kingdoms was by indigence
Constrained (not a very long time since)
By Charity, to be both clothed and fed;
To slake his hunger with a poor man's bread,
And, to accept it, not alone from those
Who were his friends, but also from his soes,
(Whose gifts were baits, whose Table was a snare,
And, of whom, if he do not well beware,
More mischief, and, dishonor will be done him
Than by the Poverty then brought upon him.)
Some other persons also, of great birth,
From place to place have wandr'd through the earth
Maintained by the Charity alone,
Sometime by many, and sometimes by one;
And other while, have seemed so left by all,
That they into great poverty did fall.
Yet n'eretheless, whilst they have Preservation
Retain still in the world some Reputation.
They are mere fools, or worse, who do believe
That, more disgrace, than these I can receive
From such an In-come: for (by what I gather
From thence) it is a real honor rather,
That, GOD supplieth (as it were) from Heaven,
When earthly wealth and honors are bereaven.
When Israel had been Captived sev'nty year,
He made, even those, by whom enslaved they were
Them, from their tedious thraldom to redeem,
When there was none to help or pity them.
It was their honor, that their preservation
Should be vouchsafed, so to admiration,
That Nations all, might in all times to come,
By heeding it, consider well, from whom
They must in such like cases aid expect;
And, that, though by a long delayed effect
They seem forgot, and outward hopes quite past,
There will be a Deliverer at last,
By whom, those wants for which they have been scorned
Shall, to their honor, certainly be turned.
What is it more to my Dis-reputation
That GOD provideth for my preservation
By Charity, than it is disgrace to those
Who their Estates by Fire or Water lose
And, thereupon the State vouchsafes a Breef,
Whereby to ask, and to receive releef?
Nay, what supply can be so honorable
As that, which from hearts, by hands charitable
Is raised and conferred, (unaskt, unsought)
By them, of whom I never heard, or thought?
This way (which without shame I do confess)
GOD has vouchsafed releef in my distress,
To me, as he to men in like estate,
Has done in former times, and now of late.
E're while at Piedmont in their persecutions
Our Brethren he relieved by contributions;
And, should I think it my disgrace can be
That, he does for my family and me
Provide, as for a Nation? I believe
It blame deserved, if so I should conceive.
Though I had asked; what without asking came,
None could impute it justly to my blame
All things considered: for, a Public Score,
Demonstrates, that this Nation owes me more
Than Food and Raiment; and that, in the fine
My Want, will more be their disgrace than mine.
My beggarly condition, is a Portion
More noble, than Wealth gotten by Extortion,
Bribes, projects, and those cheats whereby some be
Advanced to great wealth, and high degree,
Thought honorable: yea Benevolences,
And forced Loans, which otherwhile by Princes
Exacted be, much more disgraceful are
Than what my Benefactors do confer;
For, at my need, it gives me releef,
And, to the Givers, is no wrong or grief.
I hear that is disgracefully objected
Which by my Poverty is now effected:
My house, they say, is desolate become,
And, I confined am to a single room;
My wife is of her Dowry quite despoiled;
I cannot give the portion of a child
To Son or Daughter, which a while ago
I offered, and was able to bestow:
And, that, where lately we had good respect
Scoffs, flouts and jeers, are added to neglect;
And, though these hardships possibly I may
With patience bear, yet, certainly, say they,
These his Relations cannot: yes, they can
And have done, ever since the storm began:
For, we foresaw it, and we did prepare
A stock of Patience, those events to bear.
My Spouse is CHRIST's Spouse, by a Law Divine,
More his, than she by Humane Law is mine.
Our Children (though the world usurps a power
Over them) are likewise, much more his than our;
And, of her scorn, though she an Object makes them
He neither helpless leaves them, or forsakes them.
He made this Globe, with all that therein is;
All things that are in Heaven and Earth are his;
We know it, and therefore do not despair
That here on Earth; our loss he will repair,
Or, give us better Portions, where, they never
Shall be impaired, but enjoyed for ever.
Yea, I am confident, that, if it may
But add unto GOD's glory any way,
Or, make for their Advancement in that path
Which, to Eternity, a tendance has,
He Will either keep them Virgins to attend
The LAMB, when he brings Babel to an end,
Or, marry them ere long, without my cost,
And, give them better Portions than they lost,
Or, at the worst, they shall content be made
With (be it more or less) what may be had.
This, without wavering, believe I do,
And, others will perhaps, believe it too,
When they consider Marriages in Heaven
By GOD himself are made, and Portions given,
In Love and Virtue, without prepossessing
Of any other Medium, but his blessing.
Wealth, in itself, is neither good nor bad,
Nor Poverty, nor takes from, nor does add
To Happiness Essential, but, as they
Are sanctified, and as our games we play:
And, of the two, in that, least danger lies,
Which we most seek to shun, and most despise.
Wealth, makes men wasteful, dissolute and lazy,
In manners rude, in Mind and Body crazy;
Makes bold-men cowards, Freemen does inslave;
Many, to lose themselves, their wealth to save.
It so befools them, that Asse-like, some bear
Their golden-load, till, meat for worms they are,
Enjoying no more profit by their Treasure,
Save merely, an imaginary pleasure
Whilst here they live; and, as if hope it gave
It would be useful to them in the grave
They hugg it, hoard it, and do lock it fast,
(As long as living breath in them does last)
Not sensible of any detriment
Which they do thereby cause, or might prevent.
And, I believe, three Families, for one,
That thereby thrive, by Riches are undone,
Through those debauchments whereto they allure,
Till, soul or bodies ruin, they procure.
Contrariwise, despised Poverty,
Incites to courage, and to industry,
Breaks thraldoms Yoaks; cures often, those diseases
Which Luxury ingenders, or increases;
For, it is an Antidote against the Gout,
And helps to purge all those ill humors out,
That, send men to their graves, by an excess
Either in gluttony, or drunkenness.
Exorbitant desires it does restrain,
An empty belly makes a witful brain:
A crosseless purse, to him small danger brings
Who bears it; for, before the Thief he sings.
And, when he dies, that which makes those men sad,
Who, whilst they lived, things in abundance had,
Afflicts not him that is poor; for he is deprived
Of naught, but what oppressed him whilst he lived.
A very poor man also, scapes their fates,
Who are beloved, or hanged for their Estates,
And, some at this time, (I believe) will judge
The last of these, to be a privilege.
Though many, not a little do rejoice
In that rude, loud, and everlasting noise
Which, in most rich men's houses you shall hear,
Where every Room is made a thorow-fare;
Or, where, so many servants help to do
Their works, as make one Business, more than two;
Where, for each man who faithfully obeyes him,
The Master feeds another, who betrays him
And, thrice as many, who, by night or day
Do steal, perhaps, or spoil, or waste away
More (oftentimes) than would the charges bear
Of paying twice their wages, for that year:
Though many like this; it is to me an ease
That Poverty has freed me quite from these.
I, now, find much more joy, than in much pelf,
That, I have learned how to serve my self;
To brush my Cloak, my garments to unloose,
Put on and off, my stockings and my shoes,
And, that, without my Servants, I can be
As well content, as they are without me;
I know both how to want, and to abound;
And much more pleasure, I, in this have found,
Than in choice meats, that in a time of need,
On bread alone, I savourly can seed,
Or; on as scanty, and as homely fare
(In my old age) as men that poorest are:
Yet, be both more in health, and no less able,
Than when GOD gave a fully furnished table,
With meat so well cook't, that it did invite
At every meal, a double-Appetite.
And, I, whose worst apparel used to be
As good as any man's of my degree,
Can in those garments, without shame, appear
Which, I, but lately was ashamed to wear;
Unto which confidence, till want had brought me,
Philosophy, that lesson never taught me.
I, must likewise, ingenuously confess
That, my distractions have been ten times less
Since I had nothing left, than whilst I had
What, in opinion, me a rich man made:
And, this is gained by losing what is gone,
That, now, 'twixt having wealth, and having none,
I know the difference to be so small,
That, upon neither of them, dote I shall:
For, as much certainty, I do perceive
In that uncertainty, at which I live
As is in any temporal estate
Of Goods or Lands (especially of late)
Now, therefore, I desire not to be Rich,
Or to be Poor, because (not knowing which
Will best advantage me) I to his pleasure
Have left it, who, knows what Estate, and Measure
Of Wealth and Poverty, best fit me shall
To do that, whereto he vouchsafes a Call.
I neither Wealth nor Poverty will choose;
Nor, which soere he gives will I refuse.
But, most men would have somewhat of their own,
As if supplies by Charity bestown,
Would sooner fail them; yea, although their Father
Well clothes and feeds them, they desire much rather
To finger their whole Portion, that they might
Pursue their own desires, out of his sight.
Some other, altogether do rely
On their own prudence, and self-industry,
And, of Contingencies, are so afraid
That, thus within themselves their hearts have said;
We possibly, into such wants may fall,
And, so deserted likewise be of all
By whom we have been harbored, clothed and sed,
(Some of them being ruined, and some dead)
That, unless we can some Reserve provide,
Whereby, what e're haps, we may be supplied,
We may become exceeding miserable;
Especially, if us to dis-enable,
Old Age, Restraint, and Sickness should increase,
And, to Necessities, add Helplesness.
Should this befall (as possibly it may)
Our Poverty would be too great, they will say,
With patience to be born: Alas! poor men,
I Will grant all this may happen: but, what then?
Did ever you yet know, or see, or hear,
That Lands or goods freed any from this fear?
If not, how can you hope to bring to pass
That, which by no man, yet effected was?
Have you not still a GOD? and, is not he,
A Refuge, though all other failing be?
Your Trust was never placed on him alone,
If him, you cannot trust, when all is gone.
While somewhat's left, whereby subsist we may,
As David said, we boast of him all day,
But, be assured, that e're from hence ye go,
He Will make proof, whether it be thus or no.
Him, and our own Cause, we do much mistake,
When it is at best, the same at worst, we make,
And, so much on his Gifts our hearts are set,
That, him, who did bestow them, we forget.
To GOD, be therefore, praise, who, by this trial
Gives me both proof and means of Self-denial.
I, am as worthless as the worst of you,
I, nothing know by mine own merits due,
But, that which now I suffer, and much worse,
(The wages of an everlasting curse)
My frailties are as great, my sins as many
As yours; worse than my self I know not any,
Though some so seem: and, yet, GOD's promises
Make way through all these disadvantages,
So well to know him, that I do believe
My trust in him, he never will deceive;
And, that it would for my advantage be
If all that may be feared, should fall on me.
Were that condition (as it may be) mine,
I, then, should have no more cause to repine
Than any other man, who to the doom
Of Death submits, when his time is come:
For, he who feels this day nor want nor sorrow,
May be in worse estate than I to morrow.
So long, as I, have any work to do,
I shall have what is needful thereunto.
And when it is at an end, no matter whether
The stroke of Death shall be received, either
By Axe or Halter, (so I merit not,
What is by Law the Malefactors Lot.)
Or, starving, or, by one of those diseases
Which, ordinarily, the body ceizes.
For, that shame, which men fear, whilst they have breath
By suffering, what they count a shameful death
Is shared among mankind, and every one
Bears part thereof with me, when I am gone.
And, whilst I live, what e're can suffered be,
May fall as well to any, as to me.
Upon my deathbed, or, upon a Rack,
When flesh and bones, and all my sinews crack,
I may be therewithal, as blithe and frolic,
As, when a burning Fever, or, the Colic
Age, or Consumptions, or the Pestilence
Shall be the means to carry me from hence.
The pains of these, are oftentimes as strong,
They do continue every whit, as long;
And, at a Rich man's door, a Lazar dies
Sometimes as easily, as he that lies
Upon a bed of Down, and who till death
All necessaries in abundance has.
This, being well observed, it may appear
That, we are fooled with false hope, or fear,
When we shall dream to be secured more
From all events, by being rich, than poor,
Or, that, there any state on earth can be,
Which may not have the same Catastrophe.
When GOD vouchsafes to make men's Poverties
To glorify him, he does send supplies,
Even by unlikely means; and makes that nourish
Whereby, they, who are fed with dainties perish.
Them, on whom Tyrants no compassion have,
He, in the fiery furnaces can save;
When they are cast into a Lions den,
He makes beasts more merciful than men.
He, (when to manifest his Power Divine
It pleases him) turns Water into Wine
Which, at a poor man's wedding once was done
More to his honor, than when Conduits run
With Sack and Claret; which magnificence
Adds honor to the marriage of a Prince.
He, when men hungring after Righteousness
Wait on him in a hungry Wilderness,
Feeds thousands with a few loaves, and two fishes,
As full, as if they had ten thousand dishes.
The bottom of a Barrel, and a Cruse
Shall Meal and Oil sufficiently produce,
To keep a family in time of Dearth,
Until he sends a Plenty upon earth.
He, when the Creditor, for payment asks
(With rigor) does fill many empty Casks,
Out of one pot of Oil, until there be
A competence, to set the Debtor free,
And, for his livelihood, in time to come.
Yea, by devourers, he does nourish some:
For, daily, that Elias might be fed
The Ravens brought unto him flesh and bread.
This has been; and some things I can aver
Of this kind, in mine own particular.
Once, twice, nay, oftener I have been distressed
As, I now am; and three times at the least,
Have had repair vouchsafed me by GOD,
In such an extraordinary mode,
That, many did admire, at my supply;
As very well they might; for, so did I.
And, when it seasonably may be shown,
The manner of it will perhaps be known.
At, this time, that, which many did suppose
Would me, ere now, have ruined; on my foes
Has cast a bridle, and will keep me from
What they intend, until my hour is come;
And, peradventure, then, restrain them too,
From acting all, that they intend to do.
That, which both my Estate and Reputation
Should have destroyed, is my preservation
Another away; and an advantage brings,
In better and more profitable things.
For, Slanders, gain me credit; that, does glad me
Which was intended to deject and sad me;
That, which pursued, is, to make me poor
Makes my wants less, and my contentments more.
And, as if GOD had purposed to bestow
A sign upon me, plainly to fore-show
That, those Afflictions, and abhorred places,
Which add to others, torments and disgraces,
Should comfort me, when common comforts fail,
NEW GATE, supposed an ignomineous Jaile
To me, has (as it were a Patroness)
Contributed releef in my distress,
Perhaps, from some of them, whose pressures were
Either as great, or greater, than, mine are:
Which (as I am obliged) to GOD's praise
I do, and shall acknowledge all my days
To be an action, which does signify
A greater Mercy, than that bare supply;
For, it informs, and well assures me
A Prison, shall no damage bring to me,
And, that those places, which, make many poor,
Will make me richer than I was before.
These things, I thus express, that others may
Persuaded be, I do not write or say
What I have read or heard, or whereof I
Have no more in me, save the Theory;
And, knowing, this, which into words I spin
Flows forth from what is really, within,
And, by experience learned, it might effect
That operation which I do expect.
Most men, suppose them signs they are beloved
Of GOD, and all their ways by him approved,
(How negligent soever of his commands)
When outward things do prosper in their hands.
They count them marks of his especial Grace
If their Cows casts not Calf; if he does bless
Their Oxen; if their flocks of Sheep increase;
If none does in their persons them oppress;
If their new-purchas'd Titles be made good;
If, by their Trades and Rents, they to their Brood
May leave great Portions; if, they may at Court
Find favor; and, if blessings of this sort
Be multiplied upon them, they suppose
God is their Friend, and foe unto their foes.
Indeed, these, blessings are; But signs to me
Of GOD's especial Grace, these, rather be;
That, when of Land and Goods I am bereft,
And, no external comfort seems left,
I can depend on him, and be more glad,
In his love, than in all that e're I had:
That, I am freely justified by him
In that, for which the world does me condemn:
That, I perceive, he deigneth me releef,
By that, which usually augmenteth grief;
And, that, when most enraged oppressors are,
Of their displeasure, I am least in fear:
That, things which threaten troubles to prolong
(Till they are helpless) make my faith more strong,
My fear as little, whilst the Fight does last,
As at the Triumph, when all danger's past;
And, that, their ways, who do most malice me,
Neither the ways of GOD, or good men be.
These things, are of GOD's love a truer sign
Than an increase of Corn, of Oil and Wine,
And, I do smile to think, how like poor slaves
They will e're long, sneak down into their graves,
Who, make false boast of GOD, when they with shame
Shall know, that, by their spite I bettered am.
And, when my Country hears the next Age tell
How, me they used, who always loved it well;
What, better men have suffered; what, in vain
Was said; what done, undone, and done again;
How, Truth's belied; how Lies upheld for Truth;
How much the heart dissented from the mouth;
Their Deeds from what they seem to think and say;
And, how, at fast and loose, we now do play;
It will be thought, perhaps, this Generation
Had lost Faith, Reason, Justice, and Compassion,
And, they, who shall by strict examination,
Search out the cause of this prevarication
Will find an hypocritical Devotion
Sprung from the love of Riches and Promotion,
(Dis-robing Piety of her plain Dress,
To be dis-figur'd with that pompousness
Which is affected by the Man of Sin)
Of all that is amiss, chief cause has been.
I must not scribble all that might be pend
Upon this Subject, lest I more offend
Than profit, or, lest, for want of speed,
Be hindered, in my purpose to proceed.
But, one more Argument, I Will therefore add
Whereby, it out of question may be made,
That, to be very Rich, indangers more
A real Happiness, than to be poor;
And, proved it shall be by a Demonstration,
That, will admit no future confutation.
Because, it shows that Wealth has not alone
More hurt to many single persons done
Than Poverty, but, also to the Race
Of all mankind; and unto GOD's Free Grace
Injurious been; dishonor brought to CHRIST,
And, set up his opposers Interest.
Observe it, for, I, nothing will allege
But, that, whereof, the meanest wit may judge.
I need not tell you, we more easily
May drive a Camel through a needles eye,
Or, thread it with a Cable, than, to heaven
Rich men ascend, or thither may be driven.
For, most have heard, he spoke to that effect
Whose judgment none have reason to suspect;
Yet, I will show to you what way he went,
And how, by his example to prevent
That difficulty; For, he did not say,
One thing to us, and walk another way
As many do, and did, who would be thought
To follow him, and teach us what he taught.
In plain expression I will let you see
Who, those Impostors and Apostates be
Who speak sometimes his words, and do profess
His Truth, yet are in practice nothing less.
CHRIST, knowing well, that, Avarice, Ambition,
Wealth and Preferments ripen to perdition,
And, that, they so insensibly deprave
The best and wisest men, if way they give
To their Allurements; that, although he were
The Son of GOD, and needed not to fear
The frailties of his flesh, he, to the Law
Conformed, and preserved it in awe
By true obedience; mortified that nature
Which he assumed from the Humane-creature.
Both by an unconstrained Humility,
And, by a voluntary Poverty:
And, did for our example, and our sake
Forbear, of things indifferent to partake,
Lest, we, who know not how aright to use
Our Liberty, things lawful might abuse
By taking that for food, which was provided
For Physic rather, when a Cure we needed.
When, first, from Heaven he came (though Lord of all
In Heaven and Earth he was) within a stall
He took up his first Lodging; passed on
Throughout his Childe-hood, as he had begun;
And, to the world, no better did appear
Than Son to Joseph, a poor Carpenter.
When to man's age he came (for ought we know)
He lived by labor, as such poor men do.
And, when he did begin to manifest
Himself to be the Savior JESUS CHRIST,
His Royalty was furnished out no more
With Earthly Riches, than it was before;
He had nor Lands, nor Goods, to find him bread,
Nor any House, wherein to rest his head.
He had, for what was needful, no supplies
But, pious men and women's Charities.
Poor despicable Fishermen (or such)
And, those, who neither Noble were, nor Rich
He those for his Disciples; and when these
(...) (...) abroad on his Ambassages,
They were forbidden either to take care
Where with they might be fed, or what to wear,
Or, m^^y to provide for their expense,
But, le^ve those things unto GOD's providence.
To them his Gospel-principles he gave,
And, taught them how themselves they should behave
In their Discipleship, both where neglect
They found, and also where they had respect.
(...) them enjoined, to be meek and humble,
(...) likeli'st block to make them stumble
(...), to Precedence, not to aspire,
(...) Lordly Attributes desire:
(...) Disciples in their low'st condition
Began to be infected with Ambition.
The Sons of Zebede, when they were poor,
Were tainted therewithal; And, how much more
It does deprave men when they wealthy grow
CHRIST did foresee, and we have lived to know
By that, wherein the Prelacy has varied
From his Example; and, by him who carried
The Bag in his time, we have learned too,
What Avarice may make a Bishop do.
Moreover, when by public Acclamation
CHRIST had a visible inauguration
Into that Kingdom, whereto he was born,
No rich or Royal Robes by him were worn;
Nor sought he to be honored with such things
As are affected by terrestrial Kings,
But, meekly, through Jerusalem did pass
Not on a barbed Steed, but, on an Ass,
(Which none had backed before) and which nor Pad,
Nor saddle, trappings, or a foot-cloth had,
Save what the people on his back had thrown,
And, to that purpose taken from their own.
When he was crowned, no golden Crown he wore
Lined with soft Fur, but, one much worse than poor:
A Wreath of Thorns, he wore upon his head;
He, had no better Scepter than a Reed;
A Purple Robe, was cast on him in scorn,
To be at that sad Coronation worn.
For him, there was prepared no other Throne,
Except a Cross, to be advanced upon.
Nor Funeral Rites, nor Monument, nor Grave,
Had he when dead, but, what some lent or gave.
Thus, poorly was his Kingdom here begun;
Thus, his Affairs of State were carried on.
So long, as he a life on earth retaind,
Like no terrestrial Monarch, here he reigned;
But, glorified his Kingdom in this mode:
And, when that he ascended up to GOD,
He, by his Holy Spirit, so did mind,
(And so inspire those whom he left behind)
To propagate the same, that they pursued
The Discipline and Pattern, which he showed.
From SATAN'S Kingdoms, to distinguish it,
He added whatsoever did befit
A Righteous Government, in every thing
Which might advance the Throne of such a King,
Without those Baubles which do more oppress
Their Subjects, than promote the Common Peace.
To this end, and preserve with purity
The Church and Saints in their integrity,
They left behind them precepts, counsels, cautions,
And, many (not ambiguous) declarations,
Both to inform us of the mind of CHRIST,
And, of the wiles of that great Antichrist
Which was to come, and should foundationslay
To set a Kingdom up, another way;
That, might (if possible) be thought to be
CHRIST's Kingdom, as now thousands live to see
The world reputes what they erected have,
And, with her Ornaments, made rich and brave.
Moreover, that CHRIST's Vineyard and Cornfield,
Might fruits both nourishing and pleasant yield,
No needful diligence, at first was wanting,
In digging, dressing, sowing, or in planting;
Or, so to beautify it, that none might
Despise it, or not therein take delight.
And, that, none should by Pride, or Avarice
Intrude upon their Brethrens Legacies,
They, truly, his Last Tstament recorded;
The same into a Gospel-Law they worded,
Which has sufficiency, without additions
By humane policies, or new Traditions,
To constitute his Kingdom, and prevent
Prevarications, by mis-government.
To bar out Innovations, they by Deed
Confirmed, what they had in words decreed.
From no true principles of Faith they swerved,
Devotions reverence they well preserved,
With ut new-sangles, and those trincketings,
That Superstition to adorn it brings.
The Sacrament (by which the death of Christ
Should be remembered) they made not the Test
Of things, no way relating to that end,
For which, that Mystery he did intend,
Or, rendering, what should be by his intention,
The Band of Love, a means to breed dissension:
Nor was the Bread or Wine, then Idolized;
But, that Love-feast, was duly solemnized,
In decency, without vain pomp of State;
Altars, Court-cubbord like, beset with Plate;
Waxe-lights at noon, in Silver-Candlesticks,
Or, any other of those needless tricks,
Which were first introduced, in those days
When Wooden-Priests, got silver Chalices.
They used no superstitious Adorations,
Cringings, ridiculous gesticulations,
Or mimick Actions: nor these, or those, postures
Of Body; neither places, times, or vestures,
Were so essential made, or necessary
To holy Duties, that, none ought to vary
From those Formalities: nor, painted walls,
Nor Pictures had they, Supplices, nor Palls,
Chimers, hoods, Rochets, nor rich Copes, nor Tippets,
Nor was their Service cut out into sippets,
For, such toys (then unknown) did not begin
Till Ancichrist arose and brought them in;
And, till with Wealth and Dignities inricht
The Presbyters, and Bishops were bewitched.
To have prevented this (as I have said)
A good Foundation CHRIST himself had laid,
And, at the first, that Structure was begun,
Which, he intended should be built thereon.
Such as were then, by sacred Ordination,
Called Bishops, watchful were, and took occasion
From every slip, to travel, preach, and write,
That, errors and mis-deeds prevent they might.
As soon as Demas and Diotrephes,
With such like, were observed in their days
To innovate, and labor to begin
That Prelacy which, afterward crept in,
They so opposed it, that, till from his chain,
The Devil (then confined) was loosed again,
None could setup what a faction begun,
Though many were then working thereupon;
For, CHRIST's Apostles, and their true successors
(In spite of Innovators, of Oppressors
And Heretics) by that simplicity
Of Truth, which was professed in Poverty,
Did so distinguish it, from what by those
Advanced would be, when Antichrist arose,
That, they inviolate maintaind thereby
Her honor, and her native purity,
Without that carnal Pomp, and costly Pride
With which, the STRUMPET, now seems glorified.
And wherewith, she has half the world enchanted,
Since Heathenish Deities, were first supplanted.
That Miracle, was wrought by GOD, through them
Whose Poverty the world did then contemn:
Even when their Worshippers were in full power,
And, when enraged at height, sought to devour
Their scorned Opposers, they withal that odds
Were not then able to support their Gods.
But, when the Saints were as distressed and poor,
As they, who seek their bread from door to door,
When, they broke through a tenfold persecution,
To put their Masters will in execution;
When in despised habits through each Nation
They preached the blessed means of our salvation;
Were counted Fools, and as much dis-esteem'd
As any, who are now Phanaticks deemed;
When, they had neither Academick Halls,
Schools, Colleges, or sumptuous Cathedrals,
Nor Universities, nor Deans, nor Doctors,
Prebends, Archdeacons, Chancellours or Proctors,
Nor Rents, nor Tithes, nor Pensions, nor Oblations,
Excepting only good men's free-donations;
When they, nor Bishops had, nor Presbyters,
Save, such as holy Scripture characters,
(Who claimed no Precedence, or Submission,
From those, authorized by the same Commission;
When, they were meek and lowly, in their places,
Poor in their Temporalties, and rich in Graces;
When, they (as necessary to salvation)
On no man, did impose an Observation
Of days, times, forms, or Ceremonious Rite,
But, as to edifying, tend it might;
And, left them to be practiced, or omitted,
As, either they might, or might not be fitted
To holy Duties, without just offenses,
To other men's, or their own consciences:
(In which case, none that has Sobriety,
Will bar another of his Liberty.)
When Pastors meddled not at all, or little,
With Sovereigns, whether they themselves, or Title
Were good or bad; excepting in those cases
Which did concern the duties of their places;
But, in the fear of GOD, obedient were
To that Power, which did visibly appear
Empowered to protect them (whilst it stood
With that obedience, which they owe to GOD;
And, did by suffering, render satisfaction,
For what they dared not perform in action.)
When, Emperors nor Kings did them esteem,
Nor flattered were, or fawned upon, by them;
Even then by these, men's Doctrines and Examples,
Were all the Gentiles great and glorious Temples
Throughout the world destroyed: their Superstitions
(From which New Rome retrived her Traditions)
Were then by those expelled: Their Oracles,
Then silenced were; Their juggling Miracles
Were proved Impostures: Then, the Sophistries
Of those whom former ages thought most wise,
Were found but fallacies; their wisdom folly;
Unsound their Manners, their belief unholy;
Their books of Curious Arts, whereby great fame
They had acquired, were cast into the flame;
And, then, their Flamins, and Archflamins too,
(Who domineered as the Prelates do)
Were (as these, in the time appointed shall)
Brought to those dooms, which on Impostors fall.
The Worship also, wherewithal the Jews,
The worlds credulity sought to abuse,
As well as her Philosophy, was foiled
At their own weapons; of that glory spoiled
Whereof they boasted; and all this was done,
Without the Outward Pomp, now doted on.
And, if the Prelates, can with all the glory,
Which they have gotten by things Transitory,
And, by the help of all the Kings on earth,
To such another Miracle give birth,
I Will think, that they as great Impostors are,
As Jannes, and as Jambres long since, were;
Yet, still believe, that, maugre all their power,
The Rods of these, will their charmed Rods devour.
That, which the Prelates take to be a sign
Of Sanctity, the most becoming shrine
Of sacred Piety, and true Devotion,
I mean, that Pomp, whereby (for self promotion)
They seek to trim and paint it, forth has brought
(Compared to this) not any thing worth ought
But mere contempt: for, by the zeal of those,
Who, made such poor, and despicable shows,
More honor to the Church of Christ is done,
Than all their wealth and honors, have thereon
Conferred, in more than fifteen hundred years,
By all their great and potent Favorers.
They, whom the Churches Poverty brought forth,
Though poor externally, had inward worth;
Good life was practiced, sacred Truth professed
Religion, with sincerity embraced,
In her poor Driss, by many an humble Saint,
Without the fucus of a Whorish paint;
And, till men leaving their plain sober way,
Sought by external wealth, to make her gay,
The Church, in Piety, did still increase
Though outward persecutions did not cease.
But, what has followed since her Poverties,
Are changed for temporal wealth and dignities?
Since Princely Prelates sought for carnal things,
Had learned to flatter Emperors and Kings,
And, cheat them with a seeming Loyalty,
Made credible by fained Piety?
Since they, an Ambodexters part could play,
Had got two Masters, and a double pay,
Topt wreathes Imperial with a Triple crown,
Made Rebels Martyrs, trod Allegiance down
And, had on so much wealth and honor ceased,
That they could turn the scale which way they pleased,
What, has er'e since that time, proceeded thence
But, products of Destructive consequence?
And those Confusions, for which (without shame)
Some, to the Saints of GOD, impute the blame,
As heretofore, the Heathen Tyrants did
To them, whose blood they innocently shed?
And, though that in their public declamations,
(As also, in their private exultation.)
The Prelates, to a joy transported seem,
Like (as they say themselves) men in a dream,
To see that Wealth, and Pomp restored again,
Whereof, small hope they did erewhile retain;
Though, of a golden Hierarchy dreaming,
They (still the Poverty of CHRIST blaspheming)
Do think, the Angels are as glad as they
Of that, wherein they triumph at this day;
And, say (which I conceive to be a lie)
That, they, could well content have been to dye,
The next day after they restored had been
To that condition, which they now are in;
Yet, I believe, it will not, in the cloze,
Make them so happy, as they now suppose;
Or, give much cause unto this Generation,
To be well pleased in their restoration.
For, to these Nations, or unto our King,
What, can I think, these golden Calves will bring
Save, at the last, what followed upon that,
Which Ieroboams policy of State
Produced in Israel, when he (as it were
Inspight of GOD) set golden Calves up there?
And, his Successors walked on in that way,
What er'e those Prophets, from thenceforth, could say
Whom GOD, in Justice, or in Mercy, sent
Their threatened desolation to prevent?
What, is more likely, if the abominations
Of, almost every Good Man, in these Nations
Shall be indulged? (and, though it ever since
It first begun, produced naught but offense?)
For, Observation daily finds it plain,
That, fear of losses, or the hope of gain,
Or, of Promotion, will root out apace
The seeds and plants, of Piety and Grace.
And, since, already, it so multiplies
Apostates, and augments Hypocrisies,
What can be thought, but, that, those days, we see
Wherein, the Elect shall hardly saved be,
Unless GOD shorten them for, whatsoere
Men say, or do, they fall into a snare;
And, those Deceivers, whereof last I spoke,
To blind men's eyes, have raised such a smoke,
That, few, know which way safely turn they may;
Or, what to think, believe, hope, do, or say.
Such Histories, as are approved by those,
Who never did the Prelacy oppose,
Affirm, that when the Churches Augmentation
Of wealth and honor, by the free donation
Of Constantine, was first on them conferred,
A voice, was in the Air distinctly heard,
Which did these words, articulately say,
Into the Church is poison poured this day:
And, thereupon, that, quickly did ensue,
Which, manifests the Saying to he true:
For, they, who read Historical Relations,
Of what has been in former Generations,
(As also, in their times) discreetly heeding
What, their Experience adds to their reading,
Will find, that, here, and, almost every where,
The Prelates cause of many mischieves were.
Yea, that the greatest troubles on the earth,
Sprung indirectly, or directly, forth
From their Ambition, Avarice and Pride.
When Gold and Silver they had multiplied.
How many troubles, have been here of late,
Occasioned by what they did innovate?
How many thousand Families undone
In these three Kingdoms are, since they begun,
Those Whimzies, which the prime occasion were
Of all the Civil Wars and discords here?
And, what more will ensue, GOD only knows,
For, we, already see ill boding shows.
Their Avarice, and matchless greediness,
Of hoarding Treasure up, to an excess
At such a time as this, wherein the State
Is straightened; (and when much it does abate
That, Trading, whereby, our necessities
Public, and Private, should have their supplies)
Produces ill effects; and how by these
Both in their Civil Peace, and Consciences,
Men may disturbed be, there is cause of fear,
By what in their deportments does appear.
And, I observed this (which I Will now record)
That, when they first begun to be restored,
With them, returned, (God grant there come no
May-poles, Maid-marian, and the hobbyhorse, (worse)
Beside, some other heathenish Prophanations,
Maugre the Kings late pious Proclamations.
It would fill many volumes to collect
What Prelacy did heretofore effect;
How troublesome in other Common-weals,
And Kingdoms, it has to GOD's Isreal's,
And, other people been: how often have they
Endeavored their Sovereigns to betray,
Unto the Sea of Rome? how often, to bring
The People into bondage to their King,
That, when their purpose they had wrought on him
Both King and people, might be slaves to them?
How insolent and impudent a power,
Was then usurped when an Emperor
Did hold the Stirrup? when an English king
They to so great a slavery did bring,
(And foolery to boot) as to decline
His Royal Person, at Tom Beckets shrine?
Do penance there, and be so much befoold,
That, school-boy-like, he was with Rods there schooled,
By Canterbury Monks? when, he, that trod
Upon his Liege Lords neck (blaspheming GOD)
That piece of scripture, to himself applide
Which could in none, but CHRIST, be verifide?
Intolerable was his arrogance,
But, such are often effects of their advance;
And, thus, have Kings and Emperors been rewarded,
Who, their lean Gammons, had with fat inlarded.
These, are the blessed and the holy fruits,
Of their great wealth, and Lordly Attributes;
Yet, these are not the worst; for Kings and Princes,
Were not alone by Prelates insolences,
Abused like other men, in what relates
Unto their lives, their honors and estates;
But, GOD, is also, thrust out of his Throne:
Even his Peculiars are usurped upon;
And, such Intrusions are now made, by these
Upon men's Faiths, and on their Consciences,
That, they make many Prostites for the Devil,
Expose them to an everlasting evil,
And, causes are of mischiefs and offense,
Which all the world can never recompense:
For, Bonds they lay, where GOD does none impose;
Unbinde, from what he never will unlose;
And, whatsoere he speaks, his words, by these,
Are made to mean, what ever they shall please.
But, let the Saints in patience persevere;
For, though these arrogantly domineer,
And in their hopes grow every day more strong,
Their time of standing, will not now be long:
The Kings, who with the Cup of Fornications
Have been made Drunk, for many Generations,
Will at the last grow sober, or else mad,
To see what power on them, these Juglers had,
And, help to bring that fatal Judgment on,
Which must reward them for what they have done:
Great Babylon it self, will shortly fall,
And, they shall have their Portion therewithal.
To do us harm, they had not been so able,
If in those Principles, men had been stable
Which constitute CHRIST's Church; nor to assist
As they have done, the Throne of Antichrist.
Had these been still content to seek no more
(As Bishops were in ages heretofore)
Than might supply things needful in their place,
For Nature to promote the works of Grace,
(Nor stretched their Precedence ought further,
Than did conduce to Decency, and Order)
It had not such ill consequents produced:
And, could they but, yet, timely be reduced,
To that Bound; Discords, would ere long be ended,
And, much, that is amiss would be amended.
(GOD Bless the King, and open so his eyes,
That, he may see in what his safety lies;
And prosper me, as I desire he may
Walk and continue, in that blessed way,
Which truly to his glory does redound;
Whom he so kind, and merciful has found.
My prayers are, that GOD would make him strong
Against the Charms of every glosing Tongue;
In Grace and Virtues, daily so improve him,
That, GOD and Men, for ever more may love him:
And, that, I may find favor in his sight,
According as I am in heart, upright:
For, whatsoever, he shall be to me;
To him, I Am true, and so will ever be.
GOD, pardon all that I have done amiss,
And, so, I finish this Parenthesis.)
Here, I have shown you, by plain demonstration,
Which (as I said) admits no confutation,
That, Poverty (though much despised) is better
Than Riches; and, that, I thereto am debtor
Much more, for what concerns my happiness,
Than, by what can be got by an excess
In Wealth and Honor: And, what is here rehearst,
Will be approved, when Synods have reverst
Their Votes; and be by Wisest men upheld
When Acts of Parliament shall be repealed,
That, were confirmed, by Commons, Lords and King,
When, GOD, shall to effect, his purpose bring,
And, those men to their wits, who, little heeded,
What, would ensue that, wherein they proceeded.
Now I have done. If this you can believe,
And, GOD, his blessing thereunto shall give,
I have what, I desired for my pain;
And, what is here writ, shall not be writ in vain:
for, all that is in my words, is in my heart,
In every circumstance, and every part.
Perhaps, this despicable Barly-cake,
May tumble, till a fatal breach it make
Into the Tents of Midian: but, thereon
What ere else follows, let GOD's will be done.
Though no man living, should the same regard,
A good work, to it self gives full reward;
And, there is nothing, that can make it less,
Than what it is, or, bar it from increase:
For, though such Accidents, may often befall,
As, that, it will not so appear to all,
Nor Poverty, Imprisonment, Disgrace,
Life, death, good, bad condition, time nor place,
Praises, Privations, nor ought that has name,
Makes real Virtue, not to be the same.
Glory be to GOD.
A Word on the behalf of Mr. Zachary Crofton Prisoner in the Tower.
Whatsoever ye would that men should do unto you, do ye the same unto them; for
this is the Law and the Prophets, Matthew. 7. 12.
SInce all men err, and one way, or another,
Occasion what mis-happens to each other,
I cannot but be sensible of that,
Which may be mine, and every man's estate.
CROFTON's a Prisoner, and, some say, must dye;
Yet, I, from none, can learn the reason why.
If his declaring for the COVENANT,
Be all his Crime, a reason I shall want,
To satisfy me, by what Law we shall
Conclude that his Offense is Capital;
Or, how, that can imputed be for sin,
Which, by no Law, has yet forbidden been.
GOD, bless the King and State; and so men's reason
Preserve, that, we may once know Truth from Treason,
Lest we at last be brought into a snare,
And, be uncertain, when we Traitors are:
For, though it safely might be justified
That, rather than GOD, Men should be obeyed;
Such, may not be their own Friends, who condemn
That man, who pleaded both for GOD, and them,
And, to the hazard of his life persists,
In vindicating their Joynt-Interests,
To no man's disadvantage, except those,
Who, are to GOD and Men, apparent foes.
Me thinks, it is great pity, that, a man
Who, to GOD, King and Church, both may, and can
Be serviceable; and, who does profess
His Judgment, in mere conscientiousness
Without designed contempt, unto the State,
Or, purposing a mutinous debate,
And, never gave just cause to be suspected,
He was to either of them disaffected,
(But, unto both of them, good service did,
When they of Faithful Servants had most need;
And, has but done his duty, to oppose
Those Harpies, which to all Good men are foes)
Should by mistake, or, by misinformation,
As one, who had deserved no compassion,
A Sufferer with Malefactors be
Because, he sees not, what he cannot see;
Or, else, because he cannot credit give
To what, he finds no reason to believe;
For, who will care for life, where Prelacy
Attains to such a height of Tyranny,
That, it inslaves both Soul and Body too?
And, where, of what we should believe and do,
No certainty, can by their LIGHT be known,
Nor leave obtained, to make use of our own,
Though voluntarily the King engaged
To let the Conscience be so priviledg'd;
And, Mercy, in some other things, did show
Whereof, the Prelacy will not allow,
Whether the COVENANT, by right, or wrong,
Were made, or burnt, it does not now belong
To private men to question: For, when dooms
Are past in Parliament, the Case then comes
Before GOD's Judgment Seat; and, woe to them,
Who, that, which he approves of, shall condemn.
Till, therefore, he, thence answers their appeal
Wise men, their private thinkings will conceal,
And, him implore, to whom referred it is,
To right what is wrong, and pardon what is amiss.
What, Fame reports by Crofton to be done
I, singly and sincerely musing on,
Do find, by that; whereof informed I am,
That, he more merited reward than blame,
Unless, that, wherein other men have erred
(Without his fault) may be to him transferred.
The Covenant he took, but did not make it;
Nor forced any one to take, or break it;
But, in his place alone, the same maintained
(To his own hazard) as it appertained
Unto the honor, peace, and preservation
Both of the Royal persons, and the Nation,
As he thought it obliged; and as it stood
In force, relating to the Will of GOD
And, no jot further; unless, we suppose
He erred, in pressing it, to bar out those
Who, have been, still are, and will be again,
Foes unto GOD, to Kings, and Common men,
As soon as they themselves enabled find,
To do the work, for which they were designed.
For, that, which CROFTON most insisted on,
(As purposed by the Covenant to be done)
Is an exploding of the Hierarchy
Brought in, by Antichristian-Prelacy,
(To whose support, his Oath cannot extend
Who, CHRIST's Faith, is obliged to defend.)
And, if that, be a fault, GOD, me forgive,
For, therein, I resolve, to dye, and live.
The stress of his Case, as appears to me,
Lies there; if, he of ought else guilty be,
I, leave him to excuse himself; for, never
Saw I his face, nor shall perhaps for ever.
But, he is in durance, and I fain would do
As, in his Case, I would be done unto;
And, peradventure, it will needful be
That, some, ere long, should do as much for me.
There are, besides those actings, which do fall
Within the duties of our Common-call,
Some, having so peculiar Relation,
To GOD's Designments in our Generation,
That, they not only do the force abate
Of what is called, The Reason of the State,
But, of those Precepts also, at sometimes,
Whose violations are most heinous Crimes,
In any other case; as may appear,
By many proofs, which I will now forbear.
GOD, does a Generation-work design;
For, every man: These, are a part of mine,
And, I had rather dye ten deaths for one
Than take ten lives, to let it be undone.
Till that is done, me, Lord vouchsafe to keep;
And, David -like, then, let me fall asleep. Act. 13. 36.


