PARALELLOGRAMMATON.

An EPISTLE to the three Nations of England, Scotland, and Ireland; whereby
their Sins being Paralleled with those of Judah and Israel, they are
forewarned, and exhorted to a timely Repentance, lest they incur the like
Condemnation. To render it the more effectual, some Considerable Notions are
therein expressed touching Ceremonies, and things indifferent: The LORD's
Supper: The Civil Government: The taking of Oaths: The Mark of the Beast: The
Liberty of Conscience: The great Sabbath; and the Two Witnesses, with other
Particulars of Concernment interwoven.

Written by GEO. WITHER.

If this be not of GOD, it is evil,
And was inspired by the Devil;
But whence it was, it will be known:
For, that which is of GOD, he will own.
Ezekiel. 3. 17. Son of man, I have made thee a watchman to these Nations;
Therefore according to my Word, give them Warning from me. If thou warn them,
and they turn not from their wickedness, they shall surely die in their
iniquity, but thou have delivered thy Soul.

Be not afraid of them, nor of their words, nor of their looks, though they be
a rebellious People, and as Briars and Thorns unto thee,

Ezekiel. 2. 6. Imprinted MDCLXII years after the Birth of Christ, to prepare for
the year MDCLXVI after his Passion.

The Printer to the Reader.
THe Author hereof intending whilst he was Prisoner in Newgate, that this
Epistle should be committed to any one, who would honestly and conscientiously
undertake the Publication thereof; it came a while after the date, to my hands.
But, finding it not authorized to be imprinted, I was for a time, fearful to
make an Impression thereof: yet, having seriously perused it, I thought the
same so pertinent to GOD's Glory and the present condition of these Nations,
not to permit such necessary Precautions, Forewarnings and Exhortations to be
smothered, that I have adventured upon what such a seeming Transgression may
make me liable unto; hoping (there being no prohibition to the contrary) the
public benefit will more than recompense the Offense, if it shall be offensive
to any, in regard I have done it conscientiously, and not in contempt of
Orders, which are otherwhile (by ingogitancy or casualty) obstructive to their
own good intentions by whom they are made. Let therefore the Approvableness of
the matter, and my well-meaning, excuse me; and let us make such good use
thereof, that we may be all the more excusable to GOD and men. This is all I
have to say, but, that it was not my fault it could not be finished at the
Press until this third day of May, 1662, being long time after the date of the
Epistle. So Farewell.

This for a Postscript hereunto I Will add,
Which from the Author, by report, I Have had.
He that this Book, by parcels does peruse,
May both the Author and himself abuse.
In the way of this Address to his own Countrymen, the Author humbly tenders
this following Epigram, To the Pastors, Elders, and other Members, of the
French and Dutch Congregations, inhabiting within the Islands of Great Britain.
I Have but seen your Countries, (not yet known
Their Constitution, as I do mine own)
And, therefore justly cannot to your Nations,
As I might unto these, make Applications.
But, they and we have been professed One
In Faith and Christian Love, some years now gone;
And, I shall do the best of my endeavor,
That so again it may be, and for ever.
The Jewish Prophets very often hinted,
What, being heeded well, might have prevented
The Judgments, afterward, inflicted on
Egypt, Damascus, Tire, and Babylon,
With other Neighboring Nations: So might I,
Had I the self-same gift of Prophecy,
Presage to you, what darkly I foresee
Their Lot, in probability, will be,
When we have drawn forth our, unless with heed
They seek how to avert what may succeed,
And prosecute, what Prudence does require,
When men behold their Neighbors house on fire.
Your Countries may perhaps, discern by this,
Some things that are among themselves amiss;
And by the Constellations in our sphere,
What Exhalations are engendring there.
If you so think, and shall it not contemn,
Let it communicated be to them;
For, whatsoere I either seem, or am,
From whom, to you, these Premonitions came,
They may be of concernment, and are sent
In hearty Love, and with a good intent.
If you with Love vouchsafe them good regard,
I have my whole aim, and a full reward.
The several Churches and the several States
Of Protestants, will have the self-same Fates
Throughout all Europe, with small difference,
Unless, they in another mode commence,
Than yet they do; and sensible become
Of that, which they are lately fallen from:
For, self-love, and neglecting of each other,
Will singly ruin all, or, altogether.
I somewhat have to utter, (if GOD shall
Enable me) to those without our Pale:
But, they so wholly seem to have forgot
Piedmonts late Case, and Germany's sad Lot,
That they must see a Storm again appear,
Before ought can be spoke, that they will hear.
Our Corosives (if ever we shall be so)
Have made us sit, that Plasters may unto
Our Ulcers be applied. They smart and prick;
I therefore am become an Emperick,
And, this Catholicon (as it befalls)
Was pressed from between the Prison walls,
Which is not only at this time a Den
Of Thieves, but also, crammed with honest men.
Newgate, March 8, 1662. Your Servant in the Love of Christ Jesus, George
Wither.

PARALELLOGRAMMATON. An Epistle Exhortatory and Premonitory to all the Nations
in the three Kingdoms of England, Scotland, and Ireland, with the Dominions and
Territories to them belonging.
The Muses language suits with few of those
Who most need this; I therefore now in Prose
Express my mind. My Pen, LORD, so direct,
That what I write may have some good effect.
GEORGE WITHER, an unworthy Servant of Jesus Christ and of all his Servants,
(called through that Anointing of the holy Spirit, whereby every true
Professor of Christianity is qualified for the work of his Generation) wishes
Grace and Peace in the same Christ Jesus, to all the Inhabitants of England,
Scotland and Ireland, with the Colonies and Territories to them belonging.
Providence, dearly beloved Brethren, has so disposed of me, that I have
neither Civil nor Martial employment, as heretofore; nor Parochial,
Congregational, or Oeconomical charge incumbent upon me, or so much as any
certain place of Residence upon Earth, (except a Prison) confining me to a
local or particular duty relating to others; nor Estate or Affairs in the world
to entangle me: Therefore, being a Freeman in the Spirit, though in corporeal
Bands for discharging my Conscience, and obeying GOD rather than Men; (and left
at large in respect of other obligations) I conceive my self bound to bestow
the little remainder of my life in some National Services, whereby GOD may be
glorified, my Brethren edified, and my Country preserved from Destruction. I am
not altogether unknown unto you: For, I undertook long since, to be a
Remembrancer to these Islands of Great Britain, with a Resolution to execute
that Office, whilst I lived, as just occasions and opportunities should from
time to time be offered, so far forth as GOD shall give me Grace; And I do now
by this Premonitory and Exhortatory Epistle, exhibit to your serious
considerations, that which Providence has lately offered unto mine; preaching
in my Laymode, the Doctrine of Repentance, which is to us as necessary to
prepare the way of our LORD Christ at this near approach of his second Coming,
as it was in that Generation whereto it was preached by John the Baptist at his
first Coming in the flesh. That Premonitor was single in his work, being
thereto extraordinarily designed and qualified: I am but one among many,
thereto fitted in some degree by GOD's ordinary dispensations: Nevertheless, by
a Medium, having an Allusion to his imitation, though much differing from it:
For, as he was prepared for his work in that Generation, by returning from
conversing among men, into a desolate place or Wilderness; so, I have been
prepared for that which I have to do, by conversing among men in the world;
And, as he finished his Life and Testimony against the corruption of his
Generation in a Prison, so peradventure must I; yea, without peradventure, if
GOD himself prevents it not, with whose good pleasure I shall be well pleased.
Suffer me therefore with your patience to prosecute my work, and let it not be
supposed that I have herein acted without Commission; nor let this Allusion to
John Baptist, be misconstrued, as if I thereby arrogated or sought to insinuate
an opinion that I am somewhat more than I am; for, I conceive my self to be one
of the least in the Kingdom of Heaven, and to be by the Grace of GOD only that
which I am, having neither Mission nor Commission, but that of GOD's Word and
Spirit, whereby every true Servant of his is qualified, called, and authorized,
to prosecute the particular Services, whereto he is appointed in his Time and
Place.

During five or six eminent Public Changes for about sixty years together, I
have had place, means and opportunity (otherwhile as a private, and sometimes
as a public person) to be an occular or an earwitness of many of the most
signal transactions in these three Nations, relating to their general well or
ill being; and was also a diligent Observer (somewhat sooner than most other
men of my years) of the Peoples Manners in private, as well concerning GOD as
Men, even in persons of all Degrees and Professions from the highest to the
lowest inclusively; as may partly appear, by those Observations, Oriations, and
Reproofs, which I have heretofore published from time to time; and for which I
began to suffer, as I now do, nigh fifty years past. But, my Endeavors having
had little good effect hitherto, notwithstanding the various and manifold
inter-changes of Judgments and Mercies, wherewithal GOD has provoked us, (nor
by the frequent Applications which his Ministers have made of them, as
occasions were offered) I not thinking my self discharged from what I
undertook, am willing to adventure the loss of more labor to prevent (if it be
possible) that which I fear may ensue: And to that end am induced to add this
Expedient, hoping and believing, that some of this Generation will be hereby
awakened out of their security, when they have herewithal considered in how
many evident Particulars, GOD has verified my Presages to these Nations,
lately and long ago published, when there was little fear of such Events. The
Generality, in my apprehension, is more infatuated and much more wicked than
when I first took notice of the world, and so insnarled with all manner of
Confusions in things both Divine and Civil, that, unless we speedily and more
strenuously return to GOD by Repentance, Faith and Prayer, that we may be
disentangled, all the great hopes of the Temporal Prosperity, which is by some
lately conceived, will quite fail them, and all the severe Judgments heretofore
inflicted upon our true Types, Judah and Israel, will be shortly executed upon
us. I heartily pray we may escape them, and to that intent, forewarn you by
these Presents, before it is too late; Not being thereto moved by such
Phanatick Impulses, as those are by some judged to be, whereby GOD has
inclined many of his Servants (on whom you impose contemptible names) in
various Modes, to awaken you out of your dreams and security: But, I have
attempted it, upon those Motives, whereby they and I have been warrantably
provoked to be Remembrancers for your weal and safety, though maligned and
persecuted for our good will: and that which inclined me to write unto you in
this manner, was thus occasioned.

I lately making use of my ordinary Contemplative Object, the written Word of
God, the better to preserve my Faith and Dependence in and upon him in these my
Bands; and having in particular refreshed my memory with what the Prophets left
recorded touching the Prevarications of the Children of Israel, and the
Inhabitants of Judah and Jerusalem, on whom the Judgments fore-declared were
afterward inflicted for their obstinate impenitence; I perceived them to be so
like us, and we so like them, both in our transgressions and wilfulness, that
the Contemplation thereof moved me to make this Premonitory Address; and to
preface it with such Preoccupations as I thought needful; and a brief
Recapitulation of those Omitions and Commitions, wherewith I found the Jews to
have been charged by their own Prophets: hoping, the Exemplification of such
Premonitions, so authorized, and having such notorious Events, shall so
prevail, that when you have observed, what they did, what you have done, (and
find it testified by your own Consciences, how you parallel them in the same
and the like sins) you will not be so stupid, as to think, if you continue in
them, that you can possibly escape the like Judgments; in regard, as the
Crimes are the same, or equivolent, so, you have the same Accusers, and the
same Judge, with not a few Witnesses and Aggravations of your Guiltiness.
Read, hear and heed then what Impeachments the Prophets of GOD have in several
times drawn up against his own chosen People, with what was threatened and befell
them afterward, for their perverseness and impenitency.

The Prophet Isaiah personates the LORD, accusing them to be, Rebellious
Children, an ignorant inconsiderate People, laden with iniquity; A seed of evil
doers corrupting each other, perverse in their ways to the provoking of his
Anger and still more and more apostatizing, notwithstanding their frequent
corrections and fatherly admonitions. That, they were head-sick heart-sick, and
unsound in every part from head to foot. That, nothing would work upon them to
amendment; insomuch, that but for a Remnant, which he had preserved among them,
they had been like Sodom and Gomorrah. The said Prophet testifies, that they
had made their Worship of GOD, their Sacrifices, and all their outward services
of him (even those which he himself had commanded) to be as abominable, or as
little regarded, as those which he required not at their hands. That, their
Princes and Judges were rebellious, the companions of Robbers; lovers of
Bribes, and Oppressors of the Poor, the Fatherless and Widows. That, they
polluted themselves with bloody defilements; were guilty of a whorish
unfaithfulness to GOD; were covetous and cruel to Men; Trusters to Vanities and
Lies; wicked in their Imaginations and Practices; and that by their manifold
Transgressions they had made a separation between GOD and them. Isa. Chapter 1. he
upbraids them, with following the vain customs and fashions of other Nations;
with multiplying (their Militia) their Garrisons, and with their gross
Idolatries. Chap. 2. he reproves them for their hauty looks, for the iniquity
of their words and actions; for their impudence in sinning; for the insolency
of their Children, and for the imperiousness of their Women, upon whose
petulancies he much insisting, reckons up at least twenty of their feminine
Gewgaws and Baubles, such as with us are multiplied into almost twenty times as
many; not omitting, their discovered necks, their wandering eyes, their affected
gestures or paces, nor the tingling of their shoes or slippers; as if such
vanities in their Women were to be a sign to other Nations in after Ages, that
some destructive Change, was approaching unto them, whose Women were become
extraordinarily immodest, and addicted to new fangles. Chap. 3. he brands them,
with bringing forth Oppression, when Righteousness was expected; with the sin
of depopulation, by laying House to House, and Land to Land, until there was no
place left for the poor; with their early rising to be drunk, and continuing at
the Wine till night; with excess in Feastings and Music in times of general
Calamity, without considering the necessities and afflictions of GOD's People,
or what he had done for them; he reproves them, for their scoffings, for their
slighting the Works and Counsels of the Holy One of Israel; for calling good,
evil, and evil, good; for putting darkness for light, and light for darkness;
for being wise in their own conceits only, and for justifying the Wicked, and
condemning the Innocent. Chap. 5. He blames them, for not returning to GOD when
he chastised them, and impeaches their Princes and Prophets, for leading the
People to destruction, chap. 9. He impeaches their Pastors and Watchmen of
Blood-guiltiness and Ignorance, terming them greedy, sleepy, and dumb dogs,
hunting after game, and filling themselves with strong drink. Chap. 46. He
reproves their neglect of Justice and Mercy, their hypocritical Fasts, and mere
formal Humiliations. Chap. 58. He charges them also, with musing vanities, with
plotting mischiefs, with speaking lies, with swiftness to shed innocent blood,
with neglecting GOD's ways, and prosecuting their own crooked paths, Chap. 59.
This is part of Isaiah's Charge; and wherefore was it recorded but for our
warning and instruction?

The Prophet Jeremy adding his Testimony, witnesses their Ingratitude,
Apostacies and Oppressions. Chap. 2. Mentions their sottish unaptness to every
good act, and their proneness to that which is evil. Chap. 4. Accuses them
particularly, of Perjury, of swearing by false Gods, of Fornications,
Adulteries, and assembling by troops in Brothel-houses; and expresses the
bruitishness of their lusts, by neighing after their Neighbors Wives, like
full-fed horses. He brands them, as Isa did, for being a rebellious people,
fearless of GOD, betrayers and insnarers of Men; for having uncircumcised ears;
for being covetous, disaffected to the ways of GOD, and for out-acting even
the wicked in their wickedness. Chapters 5, and 6. he charges them with
confiding in Lies, with depending upon a mere formal Profession of Holiness,
and with a vain conceit, that their having the Temple of the LORD among them,
should sanctify them and make them acceptable, notwistanding all their
Hypocrisy, Idolatry and Profaneness. Chap. 7. he upbraids them with perpetuated
backslidings, obstinate impenitence, with surpassing brute creatures in their
brutishness, with self-conceit and self-will, to the rejecting the Wisdom of
GOD; and with being, from the highest to the lowest, even Priests and Prophets,
false and deceitful in their hearts, tongues and practices; in regard whereof,
he advises every man to beware of his neighbor. Chapters 8 and 9. And in his
10th Chap. complains, that both People and Pastors were brutish. He complains
also, that they encouraged each other to smite him with the tongue, that is, to
slander him, (probably like those in our days, who consederate in defaming the
Servants and Messengers of GOD, that their premonitious Reproofs and wholesome
Cautions might be the less regarded. Chap. 18. he records the cancelling and
burning his Roll of Prophecies, by the hand of their King (which was as well
done, as by the hand of the Hangman) with an intent to suppress his Testimony
against their Wickedness, published by him upon a day of humiliation, wherein
they hypocritically pretended to seek GOD by Prayer and Fasting. Chap. 36. he
testifies against their hypocritical asking counsel of him concerning their
departing out of their own Country into Egypt, and then doing the contrary to
what he advised them in the Name of GOD; and declares the malepartness of their
Women, in justifying their Superstition (and Idolatrous huswifery) in making
spice Cakes for the Queen of Heaven (blasphemously so called) and their wicked
ascribing to that Idol, the blessing of Plenty, which they enjoyed (by GOD's
merciful long-suffering and bounty) in the times of their predominant I
dolatry and Prosperity, Chap. 44.

The Prophet Ezekiel brought in a large Impeachment also, against them, and by
a Commission from GOD, arraigned them for Rebellion and Stubbornness, chap. 2.
Accused their Prophets of Folly, Deceit, lying Divinations, and of pretending
to speak as from GOD, when he had not spoken by them: Charges them with
neglecting to make up the Breaches of Israel; daubing with untempored mortar,
and deluding the People with promises of Peace, when Destruction was imminent.
Chap. 13. he indicted them of Ingratefully giving those good things, which GOD
had graciously bestowed on them, to his Enemies, and to ingratiate themselves
with their Adultrous Lovers; laying also to their charge the horrible sin of
sacrificing their Children to Molech, Chap. 16. and, with imputing Injustice to
GOD, as if he punished men for sins not committed by them; and children, for
those transgressions of their fathers whereof they were not guilty. Chap. 18.
He accuses the Princes of Bloodshed, the People of Disobedience to Parents, of
oppressing Strangers, the Fatherless and the Widow; of dispising and profaning
Holy things; of making Debate by Tale bearing; of Incests, Fornications and
Adulteries; of unsatiable Lustings; of Extortions, Usury, and of wholly
forgetting GOD. Chap 23. He complains, that they pretended to Godliness, and to
a desire of being directed and taught by GOD's Prophets, whereas they intended
it not, neither gave much more regard unto them, than to Balladsingers and
Fiddlers, (or in words to that effect) chap. 33. He testifies, that their
Shepherds fed themselves with the fat of their Flocks, and clothed themselves
with their wool; but neither fed those that were hungry, nor strengthened those
that were weak, nor cured those that were sick, nor bound up that which was
broken, nor sought out that which was lost, nor brought home that which went
astray; but, ruling over them by force and cruelty, caused the Flocks to be
scattered, and wander throughout the Earth, Chapt. 34. Consider to whom this
may be applied; and who, as they did, have set their thresholds by God's
thresholds, and their posts by his posts, as it is said the Jews did, Ezekiel. 43.

The Prophet Daniel confesses in his Prayer, that their Kings, their Princes,
their Fathers, and the whole house of Israel, had been transgressors against
GOD's Laws, and despisers of his Prophets and Servants.

The Prophet Hosea calls them, the Children of Whoredom, and Covenant-breakers.
Hos. chap. 2. He charges them, with being inconsiderate of their own ways,
corrupters of their Kings, by making them sport, and rejoicing their hearts
with wickedness, and delighting their Princes with lies. That, upon their
Festivals they made their Kings (or themselves, or both) sick with Bottles of
Wine; meaning as I conceive, that they were drunk: For, it is usually said that
Great men are sick, when they are distempered with drink; and poor men drunk;
and peradventure they then drank healths, as in these times, until they had by
drinking healths to others, drunk away their own health. The same Prophet says
also, that they caused their Kings to stretch out their hands to Scorners:
which may peradventure signify the giving of their hands to be kissed by
unworthy persons, as a testimony that they are in their favor. He further
charges them, to be Adulterers, heated with Lust like Ovens; and that their
Kings and Judges were apostatized through neglect of GOD. Chap. 7. That they
had likewise set up Kings which he intended not to set over them, and such
Princes as he approved not of, (which sin Samuel laid also to their charge,
when they desired a King like other Nations.) Moreover, he impeaches them for
Covenant Breaking; for transgressing against the Laws of their Maker, and being
forgetful of him, and become strangers unto him; for building such Temples, and
making such Fortifications as he approved not of, Chap. 8. And adds, that
they were a Vine bearing fruit to themselves only; That, they had sworn falsely
in their Covenants, plowed for wickedness, reaped Iniquity, fed upon the fruit
of Lies, and confided in their own strength and Policy, chap. 10.

Joel particularizeth such Judgments as were approaching for their sins; and
exhorts them to speedy Repentance.

Amos complains, that neither Judgments nor Mercies prevailed to reform them;
That, their sins had made their Fasts, Oblations, and other pious duties,
abominable to the LORD; That, they deferred the evil day, and caused the
Thrones of Oppression to be exalted: That, they stretched themselves upon their
couches and beds of Ivory, chearing their hearts with variety of Music, whilst
the People of GOD were oppressed, and their sufferings by them unregarded.

Micaiah, charge those who were in Authority with meditating mischiefs upon
their beds, at night, and executing it in the morning; as also with coveting
and violently taking away other men's Houses and Inheritances, Chap. 2. He
charges their Princes and Rulers with ignorance in Judgment, with hating that
which is good, with loving that which is evil, with plucking the skins of the
People from their flesh, tearing the flesh from the bones, and quite devouring
them. He accuses their Prophets of leading the People into errors, of being
contentious and quarrelsome with such as fed them not according to their
unsatiable longings; of building up Sion with Blood, and Jerusalem with
Iniquity. He affirmed, that the Heads of the People judged for reward; that the
Priests taught for hire; and that their Prophets prophesied for money, Chap. 3.
He impeached the Nation of fraud and lying, of deceitfulness in their Trading,
and of using falsehood in their weights and measures, Chap. 6. He complained,
that good and righteous men were perished out of the Land; that, they lay in
wait for Blood, hunting their Brethren as with Nets, and played upon both hands
in their prosecutions of evil: That, their Princes were greedy of Gifts and
Bribes, plotters of mischief, and the best of them but a Bryar or a Thorn.
That, Children dishonored their Parents; That, Kinsmen were treacherous to
each other; That, the most dangerous Enemies were men of the same household;
and, that neither Friends, Guides, Guardians, or they who lay in each others
bosoms, were to be trusted, Chap. 7.

The Prophet Zephaniah attested, that their Princes were like roaring Lions and
ravenous Wolves gnawing the very Bones of the People: That, their Prophets were
light treacherous persons, their Priests violaters of the Laws, and polluters
of the Sanctuary, Chap. 3.

Haggai upbraids them, with neglect of GOD's House, and suffering that to be
waste, whilst they were curiously trimming up their own habitations.

Zechary declares, the hypocrisy of their Fasts, affirming that they were deaf
to all good Counsel, and that, because they would not listen unto GOD, he would
not hearken unto them, Chap. 7.

Malachi charges their Priests both with offering polluted Bread, and with
making the Table of the LORD contemptible; which last mentioned crime is now
almost epidemical.

These Presentiments were made and recorded by twelve good and lawful men, and
are a Breviate but of some of those Transgressions which are enumerated in the
books of the Prophets, and charged upon the Jews by their Mouths and Pens,
before and after the Babylonish Captivity, even whilst interchanges of
Judgments and Mercies were frequently dispensed to reclaim them, to the
manifesting of GOD's wonderful patience and long-suffering during their
Prevarications. Of his Patience we have had the like experience, as also how
unjustly some of his Messengers whom he has sent to reconcile us unto him by
Repentance, are traduced and persecuted as seditious persons, troublers of the
common Peace, and disaffected to Civil Governments. To the sins aforementioned,
I might add the manifold Provocations of the Kings, Princes, Priests and People
of that Nation, in those days wherein they seemed to serve GOD with most
uprightness. The Patriarchs when they were but one Family, during the life of
Jacob, failed grossly; and Moses gave a true character of their Posterity in his
time, as also what they would afterward prove: So did the Prophet David in his
Generation, who, though he was a wise King (and probably endeavored their
Reformation as much as in him lay) complained, that there was no good man left;
that, there was no trust to be reposed in Princes; and charged them, who were
in Authority, with establishing wickedness by Law; particularly enveighing (in
Psalm. 82.) against the corruptions of those Congregations of the Mighty, which
I conceive were equivolent with our Parliaments, Councils, and supreme
Judicatories, as being extremely depraved; yea, he personates GOD himself,
standing where he beholds their proceedings, and sharply reproving them, for
their unjust accepting of the persons of the wicked; for negligence in
executing Justice on the behalf of the Needy, the Fatherless, and the Widow:
For being wilfully ignorant of their duties; for obstinatly walking on in
darkness; and for destroying even the foundations of Righteous Government. Many
other great sins was that Nation guilty of, from the day of their deliverance
out of Egypt, until their settlement in the Promised Land; and likewise from
that time, still growing worse (except otherwhile when they were under the Rod)
till they committed the great sin of crucifying the Messiah, for which they
were scattered throughout the world, to be preserved for a universal Memorial
both of GOD's Justice and Mercy to his People in all places and Generations
(until their Restoration and the fullness of the Gentiles) according to David's
prophetical Imprecation, Scatter them, but destroy them not, lest my People
forget it. Signal were their Murmurings, frequent Idolatries and Rebellions in
the days of Moses Joshua and the Judges. Likewise, notwithstanding GOD's daily
miraculous Presence among them in a Cloud and a fiery Pillar, feeding,
protecting and providing for them forty years together, in an extraordinary
manner amidst their Enemies and in desolate places, they were sottishly
distrustful of him, and desired to return back again to that Bondage from which
he had delivered them by a strong Arm. And, (as if they had a natural
propensity to slavery, and were necessitated to be slaves one way or another)
when GOD had performed his Promise, by settling them a free People in a good
Land; They (being weary of the Government by Him established, which was to have
been a Preparatory unto his Government, to whom alone all the Kingdoms of the
world belong) craved to be ruled after the mode of such Heathen Kings as he had
destroyed for their sakes.

Great were their failings and transgressions also, when they had Kings
according to their own desire; And such Kings as they were desirous of,
occasioned their extirpation out of that good Country which GOD had bestowed on
them. In the days of David, Solomon, Asa, Hezekiah, Josiah, Jehosaphat, (the
best of their Princes) they were guilty of great Provocations, and of much
greater during the Reigns of their worst Kings; especially, of wilful and
foolish Jeroboam, who made Israel to sin by his State Policy and obstinateness
therein; when, notwithstanding GOD's extraordinary advancement of him from the
rank of common men, to a Kingdom (yea, to be a King over his own People, of
whom he had rent ten parts in twelve from the Posterity of his beloved David)
with a conditional Promise to establish his seed for ever on the same Throne,
did neglect the performance of that Condition: And we are thereby taught
seriously to consider how difficultly they will be reclaimed, who seek to
accomplish their ends by Statepolicy, rather than by conforming to divine
Counsels and Commands. For, GOD proved him (as he has tried others in the like
manner in these days) by no less than three Miracles in one day; manifesting
two of them upon his own person, yet they took no effect. If with the
fore-expressed Prevarications, I should consider all the sins of these Nations
comparatively, illustrating the Parallel as I could, to set forth what
resemblance our sins, in this Generation only wherein I live, have unto their
transgressions, and how liable we are made unto the same Judgments which were
inflicted on them (even to be cast out of our Country, and be made Vagabonds
throughout the world, as they long since were, and some of us have lately
already been) it would either provoke us to a speedy amendment, or stupifie us
with amazement. For, since I first knew the world, men of all degrees,
professions and relations, Princes and Subjects; Peers and Commons; Husbands
and Wives; Priests and Laymen; Parents and Children; Tutors and Scholars;
Masters and Servants; high and low; rich and poor, are in my Judgment much more
depraved than formerly they were; And many among us, have so little regarded
what GGD has done for us, or against us; so often resisted the Holy Ghost, and
so hardened our hearts, that all Premonitions being rendered fruitless, it may be
feared that some of us will be found, as guilty of the Blood of Jesus Christ
and of his Prophets, as the Jews were: And as by long continuing in their sins,
and by proceeding from one sin to another, they at length, by the just Judgment
of GOD (who deservedly makes them quite blind who will not see when they may)
hardened into such an impenitency and blindness, that when their promised King
and Messiah came to make them a glorious and a happy Nation, they despightfully
rejected, slandered, persecuted and crucified him: So, I fear some of us may so
parallel them, that at Christ's second coming (which now draws near) they will
be liable to severer Judgments, than have befallen to the Jews; which I
heartily beseech GOD to prevent.

But, it is your Application, not mine alone, which must make this proposed
Parallel effectual; and therefore I entreat you, to take it into serious
consideration whilst ye may, before the day of your Probation has an end;
because you have had them for an example, as also the same fore-warnings which
they had, with an Addition of many other timely Precautions. Do it speedily,
lest that evil spirit which GOD sent between the Shechemites and their King
Abimelech (and which has already possessed many) do by those Animosities,
which are still fomented between the late differing Parties, render these
Nations incapable of being reconciled to GOD, and to each other for ever.
Particularly, I beseech you who are in Authority, to consider, what an illegal
depriving peaceable men of their Liberties, may at last occasion. To consider
also, whether it be according to the Privileges due to the Humane Nature (and
by the Ancient Claims and Charters of these Nations, so often confirmed) that
upon every slight suggestion, perhaps of an enemy or an envious neighbor, (For
the Case will be altered, if there be a probable jealousy, that the Common
Peace is hazarded; whereof GOD will judge and avenge, if it be feigned, or
satisfaction not made to innocent Sufferers) whether, I say, sober men should
be debarred of their Freedom, by close Imprisonment many months and years,
without lawful Trials, or knowing their Crimes or Accusers; yea, shut up
without means of subsistence, save what they have by charity; not only their
Access denied, who of mere compassion are conscientiously inclined to relieve,
but their Wives, Children, Servants, and all others to them relating,
restrained from speaking with them, concerning those Affairs on whose
prosecution and management, their, and other men's Estates, Credits, necessary
Livelihoods, and all their outward Comforts may depend: Not so much favored as
with permission to write a Petition for their Relief, or left Necessaries to
sustain the healths and lives of their own persons or families: much less to
pay those large Fees which are then exacted, and the Charges which the
prosecution of Petitions to a hearing will require, where the success also is
uncertain. Consider, if such Grievances be among us, whether it would not be
more agreeable to Justice, and a less provoking sin, to inflict death
immediately upon every suspicion of a crime, than to expose men to sufferings
which are worse than death, contrary to Law, and without permitting them to
know either the pretended Causes, or their Accusers. Consider, whether GOD or
Men can be well pleased, that their concealed Foes (and perhaps Foes to the
State as much as to innocent men's persons) should be empowered to impose
Injuries as Laws, and be lawless in their own persons, to the ruining or
impoverishing of many thousands depending upon those who suffer in their own
persons and estates. This is to turn Honey into Gall, and Physic into Poison,
Laws into Snares, and Privileges into the worst Bondage. These Oppressions I
never heard of among the Jews or Gentiles, or among Christians, until of late:
and, if they be found here, and long practiced, it will be impossible these
Nations should be reformed, or their peace be renewed with GOD, or established
between each other: For the Relations which men of all sorts and degrees
(howsoever differing or agreeing in their Designs, Judgments, Interests or
Affections) have to and with each other, such Relations in their Estates,
Alliances, Credits or Engagements; and they are so linked together by one or
more of these respects, throughout these three Kingdoms, that the Discontents
and Mischiefs occasioned by such Oppressions, will extend to all at the last,
from the highest to the lowest. The disturbing of stingless Bees and their
Breed, will destroy the whole Hive; yea, and all the stalls of Bees in these
Islands, and those likewise who are gathering Wax and Honey in the remote Woods
and Wildernesses of the Earth, for our enriching and their own subsistence,
will be so affrighted and discouraged by finding themselves and others liable
to such Oppressions, and their quiet uncertain, that they will fly to another
Climate, lest Hornets, Wasps and Drones be encouraged to dispoyl them of their
Hives, Lives, and Honey.

To help prevent it, take this Breviate which I have composed, and thereby
compare that which your own consciences will bring to remembrance, wherein our
sins have paralleled or exceeded the wickedness of the Jews; and that this
Preparative may make it the more practical, recommend it at your Meetings
(whilst you enjoy them, if you think it useful) to be considered both jointly
and apart, by every single person and Congregation, how much it concerns us
universally and particularly, from the least to the greatest among us: And let
not the seeming novelty of such expressions as I may casually insert (or the
despicableness of my present condition) make you contemn them; seeing this is a
time of Probation, wherein GOD is pleased to exercise your humility by his most
despised Servants, and by such dispensations and means as are denied by the
wisdom of the world.

The Theme which I have undertaken is so copious, and will probably draw me
into so many pertinent collateral Musings, seeming to some impertinent, that I
must apollogize now and then for it, lest you think me too immethodical; in
regard when the Pen is in my hand, to such or such purposes as I first intend,
I usually take in by the way all Meditations which then occur, seeming
necessary either to prevent Prejudicacy, or to illustrate my prime Intention:
sometimes also, that which comes so in, may be as useful as the main
Proposition. The Apprehensions I now have of the sad condition and hazards
which these Nations are in (at this present) so distract my Muse also, in some
cases, that otherwhile, hardly knowing what may be fittest to be inserted or
omitted, I may fall into seeming Extravagancies. And, it is not to be wondered
at, if I do: For the most excellent of GOD's Prophets have often (to our
understanding) been transported into such Raptures; and in such cases as this,
so confusedly expressed themselves, by reiterating the same words and matter;
by flying, as it were, on and off, to and fro, and on and on again, in what
they intended to declare; that they intimate more by their dark confused and
dis-joynted expressions (to them who look as well after a spiritual as a
literal sense) than they could have done, by those methodical connexions and
prosecutions, which would appear most elegant, and more plausible to carnal
wisdom, in the Rhetorical modes of our times. For, the Prophets taking into
consideration at one and the same time, the Peoples extreme perverseness, and
GOD's abominating of their sins, together with his unspeakable fatherly
affection to the persons of his Elect among them (for David's and for his
Promise sake) they in one verse or chapter of their Prophecies, personate him
exceedingly inclined to Wrath or Jealousy, and in the same chapter, or in the
next, personate him as prone to Compassion: In one verse threating their
perpetual rejection; immediately after, comforting and promising to receive them
again to his everlasting favor; yea, and bitterly menacing those by whom he
had chastised them, for adding their Malice to his Corrections; which may seem,
being understood according to the nature and common language of men, to imply
contradictory passions or irresolution in GOD, with whom there is no shadow of
changing; but it the better insinuates into our hearts an apprehension of that
fatherly tender-heartedness which GOD has toward his People; and signifies to
my understanding (with reverence to his unchangeableness be it understood by
others) that his People did as it were force GOD by their sinful frowardness
to employ the utmost of his Wisdom and Omnipotency, to reconcile his Justice
and Mercy on their behalf; and that it is not in the nature of humane words or
language to extend unto a full and plain demonstration of those particular
Notions which his Prophets divinely apprehended in relation to GOD and his
People: And if it fared so with them, much less will it be in my power, to put
spiritual and supernatural Contemplations into a mere natural or literal
expression. Discourses of this kind may challenge allowance of more than
ordinary liberty, by circumlocutions or digressions; for, like a Physician who
is to cure a Patient who has many complicated diseases, I am to apply this to
a Body which has many contrary distempers, and must therefore make it such a
Catholicon, as may not more increase the rest, by curing one malady: and
therefore I will endeavor that which my conscience inclines me to, with as
much discretion as I can; and the more distractions you find in this Epistle,
the more it will oblige you to a serious consideration of what is in my mode
expressed.

Consider, whether ever you saw a Picture made by the most cunning Painter, so
like the man for whom it was limbed, or that any one thing can more truly
resemble another, than the Inhabitants of these Isles, do resemble the People
of Judah and Jerusalem in their prevarications; and consider it so that your
sins may lead you to lay the faster hold on GOD's infinite Mercy, by abominating
the one, and a right esteem of the other: for, GOD has made as many gracious
offers and promises to us, as to them. They, who had so many gross failings,
were nevertheless, his chosen People and Saints by calling, separated from
other Nations; and I do believe, by the fatherly compassion extended unto them
from time to time, and by the manifold conditional promises and deliverances
vouchsafed unto them whilst they prevaricated (in their miraculous preservation
now they are scattered) that, he has still mercy for them according to his
Election, giving them an Interest in the sure Mercies of David; and that in
their open temporal chastisements, they shall be secretly purged through the
hidden seed of Grace remaining in them; and received to his favor in the
evening of the world. In like manner I believe that many among us at this day,
who have in the outward man, failed very much, to the dishonor of GOD, and of
their Christian Profession, having externally suffered, to the glorifying of
GOD's Justice, are and shall be by the same free grace in this life, or at
their translation out of this life, be received into favor to the like
glorifying of his Mercy in Christ Jesus; yea, much more than it could have been
done by their own Righteousness, GOD having always respect through Christ's
merits to what they did conscientiously, though it were over-ballanced by much
humane corruption and frailty, yet remember still, that notwithstanding the
infinite Mercy of GOD, he is to be feared, and the more to be feared and sought
unto with a filial fear, for the sake of that infinite Mercy: And, let heed be
taken, lest presuming upon his patience beyond our limits, we outgo the
Presumption of the Jews, or draw very near to such a dangerous Extravagancy.

To that end, consider how GOD has from time to time, sought to reclaim us by
the like interchanges of Judgments and Mercies; and how he has tried and
provoked us, as he said he would provoke the Jews, by foolish People in our
esteem; and by making his Premonitions signal unto us, by acting to that
purpose, many things appearing to be ridiculous in our Judgments; as for
example, by making use of such a Dispensation as this, and of such Persons as I
am, to be your Remembrancers, by an impulse of Conscience, which we think
cannot safely be resisted, though we are otherwhile tempted, as Jeremy was, to
complain to GOD of that hardship whereto he has exposed us: For, as the
Prophets of the Jewish Nation, being the Watchmen appointed in their
Generations, to forewarn them what the success would be, if they neglected
their duties, or the People to repent, being by them forewarned: Even so (as I
believe) GOD has now in some degree qualified me and others (as he did
heretofore a Plowman, a Herdsman, and a Fruit-gatherer) to be Premonitors in
these our times, of what we have observed to be misdone or neglected, by men;
and of what GOD has done, threatened, and promised in his Word concerning such
Delinquencies as we are guilty of, and such a Repentance as is expected. In
consideration whereof, I dared not for my part, but signify what I have
declared; lest, though others perish in their sins, their blood may be required
at my hands, for neglecting that, which I think my self bound in conscience to
forewarn them of in my mode; which is one kind of Preaching, though not in
ordinary. And though I have not the Reputation of a Prophet; yet GOD has made
me instrumental in fore-declaring many things pertinent to the welfare of
these Nations, long before they came to pass: And I am one of those despised
ones, of whom he is pleased to make use at such times as these, after the
Counsels and Forewarnings of Royal Premonitors, honorable Prophets, Ministers
and Remembrancers have been long neglected; And that which I have written will
evidence me at last, to be neither seditious Libeller, Madman, Phanatick, or
one discontented with all Governments and Governors, as I am by some reputed,
who will be of another Judgment when they come to their Wits: For, though I
have not been wholly free from Errors, those things which I write, are not such
as I have learned, like Parots taught by men; or which were attained by reading
or hearing only; but, such as were infused by GOD's Word and Spirit; and such,
as he has witnessed to my heart more certainly, than that which is made known
by sense only.

If it were not so, it had been impossible for me to have sustained so many
years without discouragement, those Raylings, Revilings, Slanders, Persecutions
and Oppressions, wherewithal I have been exercised by them, who (as it befell to
the Prophets, Apostles, and their true Successors) deemed my Cautions and
Remembrances to be seditious and scandalous to Authority, and falsely imputed
unto me (as is aforesaid) coffeehouse under all Governments; whereas I have
been actively or passively obedient to every Government whereunto GOD has
subjected me, and reproved in general terms only (in a sober peaceable way)
that Oppression and Unrighteousness, which has been and will be distructive to
all Governments and Governors who continue them. I neither was, nor am, nor
shall be disobedient to the just commands of any Governors or Government which
these Nations desire, and GOD permits, (though in his wrath) but
conscientiously, as I now do, submitted at all times to the Power in Being, and
visibly enabled to protect me, as I ever thought it my duty, whether they
favored or dis-favoured me; neither endeavoring to set up or pull down any,
howsoever they acquired or exercised their Authority: But remembered them
sometimes of their duties, as aforesaid, whom I evidently saw to be forgetful
thereof; doing it also, without factiousness, and with such Cautions as
befitted me in my station. I am neither melancholy, nor sullen, nor delighted
with contradictions: For, though I have been a man of strife (as Jeremy said
GOD had made him to be) I am not naturally constituted for such a work. My
Conversation has been delightful to many; my Body is as sensible of sufferings
as any man's; my natural Affections are strong in me; my Infirmities being great
and many, render me as unable by my own strength, to sustain the Desertions,
close Imprisonments and Deprivations whereto I am and have been exposed, almost
from the cradle; and whereby the world seeks to fright me from prosecuting
that, whereto my Conscience enclines me. I likewise confess my self to be
naturally as willing as any of you, to take my case and pleasure in those
desirable things of this life, which other men affect; and might probably have
enjoyed them, if I had neglected what I have done, and that way employed the
little wit I have, or would desist from such prosecutions for the future.

But, it must not be so: I have lost those Advantages, that I might not lose my
self, or you want a Remembrancer; and am better contented in their loss, than
ever I was in their fruition. I would not fight against the Philistims in
Readiness Armor; nor would my Corruption have permitted me to do my work, if I
had not been so long disciplined by sufferings, and at last been stripped out of
all that I had (or might hope for in this world) as now I am; Neither could I
have had so much experience of GOD's Mercy as now I have, in being
extraordinarily (I might say miraculously) provided for, supported, and
supplied, with necessaries for Soul and Body: Nor could I have apprehended
experimentally such Comforts in this life, as are discovered unto me in and by
my restraint and Poverty: Nor should I have believed, that GOD had so great a
Number of People in this crooked generation, as I do now know he has: which
Discovery alone, is more joyous unto me, than all my losses and sufferings are
grievous. Therefore, if you believe me not herein, let not that which I seem to
suffer in your opinion, be altogether useless unto you, for whose advantage,
and for whose sakes I have partly suffered them: Nor let these Preoccupations,
or those which I shall further add, be thought impertinent, considering what
trivial Blocks many men stumble at, if they be not removed; especially when
men, besotted with sin, and blinded with self-conceit, are drawn into a
causless Prejudice; such as these Digressions from my Text may somewhat perhaps
prevent, and hint somewhat also, by the way, useful to other ends. But, when I
have done, and said and written all that I can, it will not wholly prevent
misconstructions; for GOD 's Word has not escaped them. Howsoever I cram in so
many Preoccupations, because they may be (as I inferred before) advantageous to
some others in the like cases, and hint somewhat, collaterally pertinent to my
chief Design, though in other respects, they may be of no avail to me.

There be Weeds, which will permit no good Seed to thrive in that ground where
they grow, until they be destroyed by often plowing; or, until the earth be
prepared by a Crop of somewhat destructive to them. Malice and Envy are of the
nature of such Weeds; and such Herbs of Grace, as Rhue or Repentance, which
implies Rue thy Sin, will never take root, until they be extirpated and the
heart prepared by Love. Therefore, let us lay aside that Malice and Vengeance,
which lies yet at the heart-root of many of the late Dissenting Parties in
these Nations, notwithstanding the late Act of Oblivion; and consider in what
times we are, and to what Period we draw near, by being guilty of the same sins
(or of such as are equivolent to those) which in all Ages have been Symptoms
and Harbengers of Destructive Changes: and which do, as it were, compel GOD to
withdraw temporary Mercies from his own Chosen People, and to inflict severe
Chastisements in their stead. Heed well whether we justify not them by our
evil deeds, whose actions we have condemned in words, by our perpetrating the
very same wickedness, which we exclaimed against in them, whom GOD dispoiled of
their abused Power; and whether the same Paths lead not to the same
Destructions? Observe, whether our neglect of common Justice, of GOD's
Judgments and Mercies, our Ingratitude, our Murmurings, our Rebellions against
him, our Hypocrisies, Apostacies, Idolatries, Superstitions, Profaneness,
Oppressions, Spiritual and Corporeal Fornications and Whoredoms, have not been
as great, as many, and as impudent as among the Jews? Whether our
Thanksgivings, Praisings, Fastings, Feastings, Humiliations, and our other
Formalities in Religious and Moral Duties, have not been as worthy to be
rejected? Whether our Boastings of our Civil Justice, of our Just Laws, of the
Glory and Purity of our National Church, be not much like their vain brags of
their Laws, of the Temple of the LORD, and somewhat like the vauntings of
lukewarm Laodicea? Whether it be not an Abomination resembling (if not
equivolent) to the Jews impious and cruel sacrificing their Children to Molech,
when we dedicate our Children, under color of a pretended zeal of offering
them to GOD in professing Chastity (after the manner of Heathen Vestal Nuns)
when we cause them to pass compulsively through the Fires of their Natural
Affections, to the hazard of their Souls and Bodies, in a suffering which GOD
requires not at their hands: For, though Chastity is a Moral Virtue, enforced
Virginity is none, but a sinful Inforcement in Parents, especially, when, under
a pretended Piety, it is intended only to save a Child's Portion (or the best
part thereof) to be consumed upon their own Lusts, or else to advance another
Child in their dedication thereof to the world? Consider also, whether we have
not paralleled the Jews as well in Civil as in Religious misactings, and in
some things outgone them? Whether our Alliances and Confederacies with
professed Enemies of GOD and his Truth, have not been contracted more for other
sinister respects, than to preserve Peace and humane society? and whether our
trust unto, and in them, and in our own strength and policy, be not as evident
in us, as it was in them, and as repugnant to what GOD approves? Whether we
establish not Wickedness and Oppression by Laws, as they did, or more
barbarously than they; as by making some pay for that, whereof not they, but
others have the benefit; or, by making the formality of Legal Proceedings and
Trials, so chargeable, that the Remedies of Grievances do often prove worse
than the Diseases; especially to poor men who have most need of Relief; the
prosecutions of whose Petitions and Suits for Justice or Equity, being so
tedious, difficult and expensive, that the little remainder of their Estates
which the Oppressors had left, is quite consumed by those Courts and Officers,
which were constituted for a Remedy; as if they had been purposly ordained to
enrich and maintain Oppressors in idleness, who do little or nothing for their
large Fees. Thus, to the loss of men's Estates, the loss of labor and precious
time is added (with vexation of spirit) to the undoing of many Families: Thus
the Caterpillars and Locusts devour that which the Storms had left: The
oppressed man perishes without compassion, and would grow desperate, if access
to GOD in such straits were not cheap and easy. For what can they possibly do,
who deprived of all outward means of livelihood, are also shut up in Prisons,
contrary to Law and Equity, both from the comfort of Relations, and from
endeavoring either for their liberty or subsistence?

Consider, whether even they also upon whom such afflictions are come, and have
no refuge but in GOD, do not still neglect him, and seek rather to be delivered
by the World which oppressed them, than by being reconciled unto GOD, from whom
comes Salvation; and whether there be not many among us, (even of those in
every differing Judgment, relating to Piety, Policy and Humanity) who wickedly
devise false Rumors, Visions, Apparitions, Signs, Wonders and Revelations, to
delude and amase the People, or to discredit those Reports which are true? and
whether there be not some seduced rather by a feminine, than guided by a true
masculine spirit, who, like the Women Prophetesses among the Jews, put pillows
under men's arms, to uphold them in their Errors by their Gipsie-like
Predictions? Some also, who, not only as the Jews did, hunt after vain
Astrological Predictions, which they call Prophecies, and such Sorcerous
Presages as mother Shiptons, but who have dependence also upon them, and seek
for ease in their troubles, and for cure of their fears and distempers, as Saul
did from the Witch of Endor; and who, as others did heretofore, send to enquire
of false Gods, neglecting and contemning such Remedies and Presages of good or
evil, as are grounded upon the infallible Word of GOD; as if they conceived
that would be to them, what Micah was to Ahab; and that they could expect no
good Presages to them from GOD's true Prophets, or by ought grounded upon his
Word. I perceive too evidently that it is so; and that this wicked Vanity is
fomented by the frequent publication of lying Pamphlets, purposly invented to
disparage Truths. Therefore, beware of them, and try all spirits before you
trust them (even mine as well as the rest) that ye may know what to adhere unto
safely; and, neither be deluded by Impostors, nor deprived of the benefits
which you may receive by wholesome Cautions: For, as we are in that time in
which the Elect will be in hazard of being deceived; and though it is true,
that, they who are not against us, are with us; So, it is also true, that, many
who seem to be with us, are against us, and by that means get opportunities, to
draw us into wicked, or at least into uncomely and unsafe practices.

Consider these things, you who forget both Piety and Humanity, and whether our
Kings, our Princes, our Nobles, our Commons, our Gentry, our Judges, our
Priests, our Magistrates, our Councils, our Courts or Trustees, our Fathers,
our Children, our Women, our Servants, yea, all of us in general and in
particular, have not prevaricated as the Israelites did heretofore when they
were most corrupt? whether we have not set our Thresholds by GOD's Thresholds,
and our Posts by his Posts? whether our Bloodguiltiness, our Thieving, our
Drunkenness, our Cursings, our Swearings and Forswearings, Suborning of
Witnesses, and the Perjury of Jurors, have not made our Land to mourn because
of Oaths, as much as their Land did? Whether we have not been as guilty by
immoderate coveting to lay House to House, and Land to Land, to the occasioning
of depopulation? by lying and falsehood in our trading with each other; by
unequal weights and measures; and some by vainly scatring and squandring away
the Estates and Inheritances left them by their Predecessors? Whether we are
not as culpable by Covenant Breaking, Briberies, Extortions, grinding the faces
of the Poor; by selling them for trifles; by prosecuting our cruel Intentions,
until Blood touches Blood; by seeking to cover one sin with another; by
justifying the Wicked, and condemning the Innocent, until our Injustice cries
as loud against us for Vengeance as it did against them? Whether some of our
Nobles (as we call them) have not been Companions of Murderers and Thieves,
with Indemnity? Whether we are not as guilty of persecuting, oppressing, and
murdering the Prophets and Servants of GOD, by shutting them up in Dungeons and
Prisons, till famished through want of Relief, under false pretenses of
Sedition, Scandals, or of being troublers of the Common Peace; as Jeremy had
been, if one Conscientious Blackamoore had not been more pitiful than all the
rest of the People in Jerusalem? Whether we have not set up such Governors and
Princes, as GOD never intended to set over us, until we our selves would so
have it, in imitation of our Pattern the Jews? Whether our Women be not grown as
malepert in justifying their Superstitions, as the Jewish Women were in the
days of Jeremy? and whether their feminine extravagancies in newfangled
baubles, fantastic habits, dressings, gestures and postures, may not be a
symptom of our approaching Desolation, as it was a Preludium to their Captivity
and Rejection? Whether also, our superstitions Devotion has not fed and
countenanced as many false Prophets as Jezabel did, suppressing, oppressing and
silencing the true Prophets and Ministers of GOD and his Truth; making them
also to be objects of scorn and ridiculous laughter in the public Theaters?
And, whether we have not often pretended both a Reformation of our Manners, for
our personal advantages only, and a voluntary desire to be counseled and
directed as the Jews did, when they intended to depart from their Country into
Egypt, yet, prosecuted our secret purposes, as if done in despite of GOD? yea,
and whether, as the Judges of the Jews, judged for reward, their Priests taught
for money, and their Prophets prophesied for hire, we have not those Judges,
Lawyers, and Divines, who will make both Law and Divinity to speak any thing
for their advantage, who may either prefer them or deprive them of their
Preferments?

Consider all these Particulars, and such other as your own Consciences will
bring to mind as considerable; especially what Covenants we have broken, and in
what manner; and therewith take notice and remember, that I do but offer it to
your consideration, whether you are guilty of these sins in particular or not,
leaving the Verity thereof to your own search; and the Conclusion and
Application to your own Consciences; in regard if they be silent, it would be
to no purpose for me to charge them upon you, though I could evidently prove
them.

I confess, I am very jealous we may be found guilty of all the aforementioned
Crimes; of some of them, I know we are culpable, and of many also, unknown to
the Jews, which these latter times have produced. Even in constraining men to
act and profess in relation to Religion, against their Consciences, (if it be
according to the Cries I hear) more cruel in that respect than the worst of
their Idolatrous Kings. For, though they allured men to their Idolatries and
Superstitions, I do not remember that any one of them compelled the worshipping
of Idols; no not Jeroboam (who notwithstanding GOD's giving him a Kingdom, with
many gracious promises to establish it, was more wickedly politic than any
other, to continue the same to his posterity in his own mode) For, I do not
hear that he forcibly restrained any from going up to worship GOD at Jerusalem,
or persecuted any for not worshipping his Golden Calves; but permitted every
man that would, to build high Places, to plant Groves, and to worship either
the LORD GOD, or Idols, at home, as he pleased: Neither do I read that any of
their best Kings or Governors made or executed any penal Laws touching the
Conscience, except only after the return from Babylon, in an extraordinary
Case, and in relation to the observing of those ancient Laws of their Nation,
by the breach whereof their Civil Peace could not well be without hazard; at
which time there was a penalty threatened by Proclamation, and afterward a
Covenant voluntarily and conscientiously made, or was at least pretended by
Prince, Priests and People, for the breach whereof, Confiscation of Goods and
Exclusion from the Congregation was menaced; but how far forth it was put in
execution it appears not; no had any wrong been done thereby, because that is
no wrong which is done to a man by his own consent; no, nor that which is done
against his will, if it be purposed for his wel-being, and cannot have any
effect to his hurt, nor fail of that good which is pretended; which enforcing
the Conscience can never produce, but the contrary rather: for GOD is never
wel-pleased with any service unwillingly done, though the performance be good
in it self; and is always highly displeased with every one, who for fear,
favor, or for any other end whatsoever, acts or speaks against his
Conscience; and no doubt as highly offended with all those who offer violence
to the Consciences of other men, in regard it is not only injurious to men, but
a presumptuous offense also against a Prerogative due and proper to Him alone.

If these Prevarications be found among us, be it known that they are surer
tokens of GOD's Indignation, than those which we call Plague-tokens are of
their near approaching deaths who are visited with the Pestilence: yet we have
lately had other signs and tokens, which are both Presignificators of the
General Judgment, and of the National Calamities which will come upon
particular Nations and Persons, when their sins grow ripe; according to what
our Savior Christ foretold, Luke 21. 25. where it is said, There shall be
signs in the Sun, the Moon and the Stars, and upon the Earth distress of
Nations, with perplexity, the Sea and the Waves voaring; men's hearts failing in
looking after those things which are coming upon the Earth: for the Powers of
Heaven shall be shaken, etc. We have seen these or such like signs, whether
taken in a metaphorical or a literal sense, and the sign also of the Prophet
Jonas mystically revived; in some of the Saints of GOD, whose Judgments are
begun upon those of his own Household: and his Justice and Mercy have been
manifested upon many of them in our sight. Moreover, though we who believe his
Word have therein sufficient manifestations, and look for no other signs of
what is approaching; yet, GOD has vouchasafed to Unbelievers in these days,
what he denied to the like unbelieving and adulterous Generation heretofore, if
what has been credibly reported may be credited: For, we have heard of more
strange Prodigies, dreadful Apparitions, and unusual Visions in the Air, upon
the Waters, and on the Earth, within a few years, than I have read recorded in
all humane Stories since the coming of Christ in the flesh; and, they are the
more to be considered, in regard GOD has been pleased to give us Signs of what
he intends, though (as I said before) he denied Signs to those who desired
them: and forasmuch as they made us no whit the better, it implies an
experimental verifying of this saying; They who will not believe Moses and the
Prophets, will not believe one sent from the dead. If the Signs and Wonders
lately averred be true, or but in part true (as I am persuaded they are, though
I never saw any such) then they are very considerable: And no less considerable
or significant are they, if feigned or delusions; seeing they declare this
Generation to be presumptuously wicked beyond all before them, as daring to
make, aver, and publish Lies of that nature. If they are true, they are the
Finger of GOD, pointing to somewhat whereof they are Signs, and which ought to
be heeded: yea, though they are but delusions of the Fancy, they are terrible
Signs of affrighted and self-condemning Consciences. Those Apparitions which we
see, or fear to see upon the Earth, show us from whence all our troubles come,
even from our Earthly-mindedness: and the Signs which men see, or think they
see in the Heavens, invite us to look up unto those Hills, from whence comes
our Salvation.

We have yet other Signs of what is approaching, and of what will certainly
ensue, if not prevented by Repentance; and they are very significant and
observable, though very few heed them, or think themselves therein concerned.
GOD foretold the obstinate Jews, that he would provoke them by such as they
reputed a foolish People; and so have we been provoked by some among us, whose
persons, words and actions appear unto the greatest number of us, not only
foolish and contemptible, but impudent and wicked also. Such were they and
their Actings, who came naked into our Public Assemblies; and by what spirit
soever they were thereto moved, were Signs, which I believe GOD permitted, to
signify, that he will openly discover our Shame, and strip us naked from all
those Fig Leaves which we have patched together to hide it; and take from us
all those things which we have made our chief delight, pride, and ornament. And
I am persuaded those signal Actings of that nature, which were personated by
some of the Prophets, were in their times reputed as ridiculous and scandalous,
as the extravagancies which have been seen in our days. They likewise, whom ye
term Quakers, and who with much resolution and patience, do sustain the
Persecutions whereby they are prosecuted in all places; Even they, as I
believe, are instrumental by a Divine Dispensation, signally to foreshew that
Contempt which GOD will bring upon our false Worship, false Honor, vain
Complements, Hypocrisies, Superstitions, Formalities in Piety, counterfeit
Morality, and Dissimulations with GOD and Men. Many take great offense at them;
and I do believe (because it has been averred unto me by conscientious men)
that some, so called, have professed and taught erroneous and scandalous
Doctrines; for, there is no Dispensation whereinto the Devil has not screwed
many of his Instruments, to disparage and hinder what was thereby intended; but
I do profess, that none among all them, of whose Principles and Conversation I
have had opportunity to take notice, has appeared otherwise to me than a truly
honest and pious man; and though their language and manners are offensive to
many, they are not so to me; because, if they be not taken up with an
affectation to singularity, whereof I cannot judge, unless I could see their
hearts, they seem to me such as are essential to their Dispensation; and had
GOD fitted me for the same work, I should have done as some of them do, though
I will not justify all that some of them do. Habakkuk in his mode, and at such
a time as this, was a Quaker: So likewise was Ezekiel the Prophet, and a sign
to the Jews, by GOD's Dispensation in his time; as appears, Ezekiel. 12. 17. The
Word of the LORD came unto me, saying, Son of man, eat thy bread with quaking,
and drink thy water with trembling and carefulness, and say unto the People of
the Land, thus says the LORD GOD, of the Inhabitants of Jerusalem, and of the
Land of Israel, They shall eat their bread with carefulness, and drink their
water with astonishment, that their Land may be desolate of all that is
therein, because of the violence of them who dwell in it. Let this be well
considered, and whether our Quakers may not be a sign of the like Judgment
upon our chief City, and all these three Nations; yea, and to all those Nations
whither they have been dispersed, if they speedily repent not; for, their
Actings and Sufferings are not in vain.

I have observed one occasion of hardening the hearts of many in this
Generation, which was not ripened until these latter Ages of the world; and
though little notice be taken thereof, it makes many defer their Repentance,
and hardens the greatest number into a resolute perseverance in their wicked
courses, by a mis-apprehending of GOD's Ways, a mis-belief of his Word,
ignorant of his Justice, and a false Conclusion drawn from an ancient and true
Prophecy; by reason of the long continuance and prevalency of Sin, Oppression
and Tyranny in those courses and Postures wherein they have been acted. Men
have walked so far after the Counsels of the Ungodly, and stood so long in the
way of Sinners, that they are now seated in the Chair of the Scornful, and make
a mock at Reproofs and Instructions, according to this Prophecy of the Apostle
Peter: In the latter days there shall be (said he) Scoffers, walking after
their own Lusts, and saying, Where is the Promise of his coming? for, since the
Fathers fell asleep, all things continue as they were from the beginning of the
Creation; 2 Pet. 3. 4. Into these latter days we are fallen, and by not
heeding, not believing, or by not rightly understanding the ground of this
Prophecy touching the revealed things of GOD, the Scorners of good Counsel have
now fulfilled that Prophecy, to their own disadvantage: For, to put the fear of
GOD's Judgments out of their own and other men's hearts, they scoffingly and
profanely conclude, from the long continuance and prevalency, as aforesaid,
that Sin and Oppression have had in the world, from the Creation until this
day, that so it will be until the end of time; and deride those who expect the
coming of Christ the King of Righteousness. Tush (say they) thus it ever was,
and thus it will be for ever. GOD either heeds it not, or regards it not; and
the Caveats, Counsels, Threatenings, Promises, and Premonitions of those who
pretend to be Ministers and Messengers from GOD, are but politic Devices of
their own brain, forged out of Envy and Malice, to disturb us in our Pleasures,
diminish our Profit, and weaken our Power; for after above sixteen hundred
years preaching of their Imaginary Kingdom to come, we see as little, or less
likelihood thereof, than was at the birth of that King whom they expect. To
this effect are their Scoffs, and thereby they encourage each other in their
Wickedness and Oppressions. But they, and all whom they shall delude, will find
themselves to have been much deceived. Therefore, in hope it may awaken some
out of their dreams before it be too late, I will declare unto you a Mystery,
by few yet heeded, which GOD has revealed unto me in this my Confinement, to
strengthen my Faith, when it was exercised and tried by that and such like
Atheistical Arguments and Objections of carnal men, who presume on the
perpetuity of their Kingdom: and I will illustrate as plainly as I can, that
which I have apprehended, by looking back as far as the Creation.

All things that GOD created, were exceeding good, even Mankind, which is now
depraved, was made good and innocent, though of a constitution possibly
mutable: That possible mutability GOD proved by an easy Law given in Paradise,
without compulsatively necessitating, or byassing our first Parents, to the
right hand or to the left, but evenly ballancing them with a Free Will; yea,
and without debarring them, until their Delinquency, from the Tree of Life in
the midst of the Garden, or from any other means whereby they might have been
preserved and confirmed in their Integrity (so far forth as was pertinent to a
Creature left free and under no restraint.) In this happy estate they
continued, until the Devil (who had corrupted himself without a Tempter) being
moved thereto through envy, seduced our said first Parents through subtilty:
For, he perceiving them to rest satisfied with the knowledge of Good only,
without desiring cognizance of Evil; first, by lying, prepossessed them with an
injurious misbelief of GOD, and then, with a false and vain opinion, that they
should become like GOD, by knowing both Good and Evil, if they did eat of the
Tree by Him forbidden. That Suggestion being entertained, begat in them a
desire of an unprofitable knowledge; and that Desire being conceived, corrupted
into an actual disobedience of GOD's Command; whereupon they quickly found
themselves to be guilty, naked and miserable. Their former free liberty of
access to the Tree of Life was obstructed, as also the influence of many Graces
formerly vouchsafed, and they were turned out of Eden into the World, to get
their living by the sweat of their brows, in painful tilling the accursed
Earth, liable both to a corporeal and spiritual death: And, since it was their
own choice and desire to know both Good and Evil, GOD determined they should
experimentally know them, and that Privilege be derived to all the Posterity
of Adam, to satisfy their curiosity, and make them really and thoroughly
sensible thereby of their neglecting his Goodness, of the Devil's malice, whom
they believed, and of their own unfaithfulness, ingratitude and folly, until
the time were accomplished, wherein the Seed of the Woman should break the
Serpent's head. Divine Justice did so decree also, that after their exclusion
out of Eden for disobedience, there should be Enmity between the Seed of the
Woman and of the Serpent for ever; and a certain space of time allowed, wherein
both righteous and wicked men, should have an actual as well as a contemplative
experience of Good and Evil, by permitting Men, Good and evil Angels, to make
trial what their own power, wisdom, folly, righteousness or wickedness could
produce, whilst GOD stood as it were indifferently looking on as a
Superintendent, to prevent (as occasions would be offered) what might else by
their misactings, be destructive to the whole humane Nature, to the residue of
his Creatures, or to his Eternal Decrees. Ignorance of this Mystery, and not
being acquainted with the concurrant Justice and Mercy of GOD, revealed in his
Word, inclines depraved Men to think and say, all things continue as they were
since the Creation; and that, so they shall continue for ever: which evidently
appears to my understanding to be otherwise determined; and how that long
toleration of Wickedness from which they extract their false Conclusion, shall
ripen it unto the destruction of it self. But, because this Mystery has been
long veiled, and is yet beclouded, I will express the same as it has appeared
to me in this my Loneliness, that it may help strengthen the Faith and Hope of
those who can receive it, as it has fortified mine, to the making a large
amends for all my Sufferings. The better to explain it, I must walk a little
about by the way of Circumlocution, that I may fetch in some collateral
Notions, which will be pertinent to my main Design. Slight them not, my dear
Brethren, though in some Circumstances I may differ from you in Judgment: for,
if we continue in the Love of Christ Jesus, and of each other, that Love will
at last bring us into all Truth, make all, who are of one house, to be of one
mind, and cover a multitude of other sins, as well as our Ignorances, which are
not wilfully contracted.

I proceed with my promised Illustration. GOD Almighty (all whose Actions are
eternal) when he was pleased to give a being unto Time, and make a visible
World, seemed in some respects, to work according to the manner of men, the
better to suit his workings, to the natures and capacities of his Creatures; as
by making his Actings to be temporary, and that which he could have perfected
in one moment, to be the work of six Ordinary Days. In which time, he having
completed all Created things, and put them into an orderly way of procreating
and continuing themselves by his assisting Providence, and Superintendency, it
is said he rested the Seventh day, and Sanctified it. Not, that he needed Rest,
or the setting apart of any portion of Time for himself, who is LORD of
Eternity, but in respect only to mankind, and to what should come to pass about
the later end of Time. The Consideration of that Rest, and Sanctification,
dictated unto me that which I have discovered of the foresaid Mystery; in the
Illustration whereof, I shall hint upon some particular Notions, repugnant to
what has been commonly believed by many good men concerning the Sabbath;
wherein I hope to be as charitably censured, as I consure those, who sincerely
declare their Judgments, though they are not the same with mine. I am not of
their Opinion, who suppose the fore mentioned Sanctification of a part of Time,
did imply that Seventh day, which was afterward Commanded to be observed by the
Jews when they were brought out of Egypt: For, it is said by Moses, Deuteronomy. 5.
15. that the Sabbath at that time enjoined to be observed, was Instituted for a
Remembrance of that Deliverance, as likewise to preserve them always mindful
to be merciful to Servants, Cattle and Strangers, as GOD was to them, in
vouchsafing Rest and Deliverance from their hard labor, and cruel Taxmasters,
in the Land wherein they had been Strangers and Servants: And (the Sabbath
being made for man, and not man for the Sabbath) it was chiefly for that end
Commanded. Nor do I think the Sanctifying of the Seventh day at the Creation
(or that which was enjoined to the Jews) employed the Sanctification of that
which is called the LORD's Day, which is observed by most Christians, according
to an ancient custom for a day of Assembling together in regard upon that day
of the week, our Savior Jesus Christ (with whom the Jewish Sabbath was buried)
arose from Death to Life upon that day of the week. Yet I my self do observe
that day, and acknowledge the observation thereof (if not Judaically or
Superstitiously kept and imposed) to be a pious Custom and Institution, as well
tending to our edification in Faith and good life, by our meeting to hear GOD's
Word, and communicate in other Pious Duties, as toward a fulfilling that part
of the Moral Law, which is contained in the Ten Commandments, and injoyneth an
allowance of competent Rest, and corporeal refreshment to Servants, Cattle and
Strangers, who would else be oppressed by unmerciful Masters and Owners, who
either know not how to use their Christian Liberty, or are ignorant what is due
to the Creatures by the Law of Nature; and for that reason, provision has been
prudently made by the practice of the Church, and by Christian Princes upon
penalties, for allowing of certain portion of time, and they are not wilfully
to be neglected, nor superstitiously to be observed; but, for convenience,
comeliness, and order sake, that we may associate in the Service of GOD, and
communicate in holy Duties, at such times, to the edifying of each other: yet
over and above those times, GOD provided a Supplement for Moral Rest, and
spiritual Contemplations, by allowing to every Day, a Night wherein to rest the
body by sleep, and to refresh the mind by Prayer and Meditations. But, I do not
find that the LORD's Day was enjoined by any Evangelical Precept to be observed
instead of the Jewish Sabbath, and in such manner as that was: Or that the said
Jewish Sabbath was given at the Creation, or at any time since by divine
Institution, to be an Universal Law to all Mankind, or to any of another
Nation, save only to those who became Jewish Proselytes whilst the Ceremonial
Law was in force. For, had it been otherwise, then that seventh day should
questionless, have been universally made known, and kept without scruple by
other Nations, without changing it into another day, until it had been divinely
done by the same Lawgiver, and that change declared at the promulgation of his
new Covenant in the Gospel, it being not in the power of any other to change
his Ordinances, or to warrant a variation from them in the least Punctilio,
whether they concern Faith or Manners. The Observation of Days and Meats, with
suchlike Ceremonies, had their end in Christ; and every man is left at
liberty, as concerning a Religious Observation of such things, to do as the
present necessity requires, and as he thinks himself in his own Conscience
obliged: And therefore the Apostle implicitly reproving them who presumed to
judge between another man's Conscience and GOD (to whom only he stands or falls
as his Servant) expects every one to do as he is persuaded in his Conscience;
and says, Rom, 14. He that observes a day, observes it unto the LORD, and he
who observes it not, forbears the observation thereof in conscientious
obedience to the LORD also: which liberty he would not have given, had a set
day been essential to the morality of the fourth Commandment. Therefore I am
not offended with any one, what day soever he observes or observes not, who
does it Conscientiously, not Contentiously; neither condemning himself in that
which he allows or disalloweth, nor judging uncharitably of others who claim
the like liberty of Conscience. And I hope the conscientious sanctification of
Days piously set apart for Religious Duties, will be rather better, then less
observed, by what I have hitherto, or shall hereafter express; for there be
many, to my knowledge, who are more zealous in professing the observation of
this or that day, then in truly observing any day as they ought to do; as also
of many other Christian Duties; and such Persons will take most offense at what
I have expressed.

It is also to be Considered, that the Ceremonial observation of a seventh part
of time for the competent rest of men's bodies, and providing due nourishments
and refreshments for the Soul (as also for performance of Holy Duties) neither
is, nor was, or can be essential to the morality of Rest, or of Religious
Duties, but Circumstantial and Ceremonial only; in regard a due portion of
time, or any set time for these purposes, cannot be just the same portion, or a
like expedient for all, but must be more or less, oftener or seldomer,
according to the differing strengths, weaknesses, ignorances, or other defects,
necessities, or occasions of Individual persons, who shall need the same; and
who must take and be allowed such times, and so much time, as shall be
necessary, and is required by that morality, which was written in the hearts of
all men, among the residue of universal Morals at the beginning of time. And
the Rest of that Mystical Sabbath, which GOD is said to have sanctified as
aforesaid, is neither pertinent nor communicable to Beasts, or mere natural
Men; or to any, save to those Saints who are made one with GOD in Christ Jesus;
and, who have wrought, and are to work with GOD and him, in the six days of a
thousand years a piece, upon the work of Regeneration; and in maintaining Good
against Evil, until it shall obtain the Conquest. These things considered, the
sanctifying of a more excellent Sabbath, than that which was observed by the
Jews, or, than that which is called the LORD's day, seems to have been
intended by that which GOD is said to have sanctified at the Creation; and the
Mystery which I would show forth, relating to a confutation of the Error
occasioned by the long continuance of Wickedness and Tyranny in the World (and
which was in part discovered unto me, by meditating the foregoing
Circumstances) is this;

GOD, having finished his Work of Creation the sixth day, (wherein Man was also
made, for whose sake the World was made) His Wisdom foreseeing what the
Devil's malice, and humane curiosity would produce, by desiring the knowledge
of Good and Evil; it was his good pleasure (all his Operations as to things
Temporary, being in Number, Weight, and Measure, and a thousand years with him
but as one day, and one day as a thousand years) that, as he had wrought six
common days upon the work of Creation, so his Intellectual and Reasonable
Creatures, having made themselves work by their Prevarications, should have six
mystical days of a thousand years a piece, according to the vulgar Account,
wherein to do those works which they ought to do, or had a desire to do, that
so they might have a sufficient time wherein to complete their knowledge of
Good and Evil, according to their longing, as aforesaid: And the seventh day
which GOD sanctified after the work of Creation, is, as I believe, that
mystical day of a thousand years; or that seventh part of time, (be it sooner
or later) wherein Christ, according to their expectation in the main, whom you
call Fift-Monarchy-men, shall visibly Reign upon the Earth with his Saints, as
John has Prophesied, Revel. 20. 5. At which time will begin that great and
Everlasting Sabbath, wherein they shall rest from their labors, and wherein
they, who have seen Christ upon the Earth in his Humiliation, shall there also
behold him in his Glorification, to the rejoicing of his chosen People, and to
the confusion of his Adversaries; not in such a gross, carnal manner, as is
fancied by some, but as becomes glorified Bodies; and as was partly typified,
by our Saviors Transfiguration upon the Mount, when his Disciples then
present, well knew not what they either saw or said; or, as it was at the hour
of his Ascension, which is neither expressible or intelligible, in the state
wherein we now are.

During the first six thousand years of time, Good and Evil are permitted to
execute their distinct and mixed Powers and Faculties, in working out their
ends, and in struggling for the mastery, and manifestation of their Natures, as
they best can, in and by all those who are to them respectively inclinable:
And, when that six thousand years are completed (abating so much thereof only,
as the violent fury of the Devil, Antichrist, and their Confederates, shall
diminish of their own time, within the last six thousand years) then the
Wickedness of the wicked, the Righteous endeavors of good men (so far forth as
it is merely their own) and all that seems good or evil in their own strength,
weakness, wisdom, folly, ungodliness, or piety, shall come to an end, and be of
no force or esteem: Whereof, the Devil began to be afraid, when he said to
Christ, Art thou come to torment us before the time? That, seems to me, the
seventh day which GOD is said to have sanctified, and to rest on after his six
days work aforesaid; and, in my apprehension, the preceding thousand years
before that great Sabbath, are the six mystical days wherein men should have
permission, as I said before, to do those works which they had a desire to be
doing, for perfecting their knowledge in Good and Evil in this life, after they
had, by disobeying GOD in our first Parents, entered into a Confederacy with
the Devil. This sense of that Mystery I received not from men, but, by
meditating an Interpretation of the first Chapters of the Old Testament, by
comparing them with the last Chapters of the New Testament, and by what I
collected out of that Prayer which Christ himself left unto us to be a Pattern
of what we might absolutely pray for; in regard whatsoever I am taught by him
to pray for, I am warranted undoubtingly to believe. Now, according to the
Contents of that Prayer, I do believe, that the Name of our Heavenly Father
shall be Hallowed upon Earth, and his Kingdom come down visibly among us, and
his Will be here done as it is in Heaven; which can never be until that great
Sabbath. I believe also, That all who seek after his Kingdom which is to come,
with sincerity in the first place, shall be daily fed with the bread of eternal
life, and supplied with all things necessary for prosecuting their Work in the
mean time; That our sins shall be forgiven us, as we, by his example, forgive
those who have trespassed against us: That in all our Trials and Temptations,
whereby GOD exercises our Faith, we shall be delivered from whatsoever is evil
in them, and be at last partakers of his Kingdom, Power and Glory, even here
upon Earth where we have suffered with him, when that great Sabbath,
aforementioned, begins; and in Heaven for ever.

But, you may think, perhaps to your discouragement the mean while, that time
is very far off, because by our ordinary Computation of Times and Years, there
will seem to be about 300 years unexpired of the last thousand of those 6000
years in which Antichrist with his Mystery of Iniquity was permitted to Reign,
666 years, after he had attained to his full power. Nevertheless, let not that
infringe the patience of any; For, though GOD is absolute in fulfilling the
times promised for the benefit of his Elect, he does not so oblige himself to
those times which concern the lengthning out the Kingdoms of his Enemies, but
that they may be shortened by their own actions, according to this saying; The
wicked live not out half their time. It is probable, that our Chronology is
defective, some Chronologers differing in their Account hundreds of years, and
they about 80 or 40 years who differ least. Or, if it were not so, the time of
our suffering may be shortened for the sake of GOD's Elect; yea, Christ has
promised that it shall be shortened for their sake, Matthew. 24. 22. And probably,
the shortning the last days of Tribulation, will be occasioned by GOD's
permitting his and their Adversaries, to be so violent and infatuated in their
furious prosecutions of malicious Designs to uphold their Tyranny, when they
feel it tottering, that they themselves will thereby shorten their own time;
And that the Kingdoms of the Devil, Antichrist, and the World will be so
divided and confounded in their Designment and Prosecutions, that they shall
help destroy themselves and their Kingdoms, by their own Actings, and by
provoking GOD, (according to his Conditional Decrees) to come in, when Evil is
at the highest pitch of Malignity; to make it evident, that by his Power and
Goodness alone, Good becomes prevalent against Evil. And, probably some
Dispensations of Mercy in that kind, will be vouchsafed as to the weakening of
Antichrist's kingdom, betwixt this time, and the year 1666, according to our
Computation after the birth of Christ; But, that Number of the Name, or Power
of the Beasts, whose time of tyrannizing is thereby limited from the last of
the times of the distinct highest Exaltations of the two Beasts, until the full
end of their Powers, will not be until so many years after the Passion of our
Savior, if I have not mis-grounded my Judgment, as I believe I have not. For,
at the time of Christ's Passion, the last of those Earthly Monarchies which
have oppressed the Saints, was at the highest; and ever since it has declined:
Their longest time of continuance (as I conceive) being mystically numbered out
unto them, in their own Numerals, which put altogether in order, according to
their distinct Valuations singly, can make no more, as these their Characters
demonstrate, than M. D. C. L. X. V. I, which is a M. years for the continuance
of Heathen Romes tyranny, after it was at highest, until it was swallowed up by
that Beast which arose out of it, (for, old Romes Tyranny continued in the
Civil Government of that Empire after Christian Emperors had the Title) The
remainder of the aforesaid sum, being DCLXVI, is the time of the Reign of
Antichrist (or the Man of Sin) after he attained to an absolute Supremacy,
which will have an end in or about the Seventeenth hundred year after Christ's
Nativity, by our Account, if Chronologers have not misreckoned the times. This
is my Judgment of the Number of Beast. When that day comes, I believe the Souls
under the Altar will no more cry, How long LORD! We shall not then think the
days or years of our suffering, for Righteousness sake, were over many; nor
will the Scoffers then ask any more in derision, Where is the Promise of his
Coming?

Then, how long or short a time soever it be, during which, the present, or the
last Trial of the Saints must continue; Let us consider how little a few years,
more or less, are in respect of Eternity, and of how small consequence all that
is which we can suffer, in comparison of that reward which is prepared for
those who overcome by patience. What can we lose? Or, what have they lost, who
have been translated out of this life, by the cruelty of their Persecutors, but
that which would have been a greater disadvantage had it not been lost? Perhaps
that experience which I have had, in my particular, of GOD's extraordinary
strengthening me in my Sufferings, by the increase of Hope and Consolations
vouchsafed, may be believed by some, to the augmentation of their constancy and
comfort; I do therefore unfeignedly profess (though I profess it in much
frailty of the Flesh) That if GOD continue his Mercy begun (which I doubt not
of) and shall give me a full draught of those Cordials, whereof he has
vouchsafed me a Taste, I think I should not repine to undergo for his Glory,
the heat of those terrible days, which are begun, or near approaching: For, I
conceive it will not be much hotter than the Fiery Furnace, which was heated
sevenfold more than usually, for Shadrach, Mesech, and Abednego; and I believe,
that to strengthen and preserve me, I should have the same Companion they had
in that Fiery Trial, if it might be so much to GOD's glory. Let not then the
length or sharpness of any Persecution discourage from a Constant waiting upon
GOD, whose Grace will be a sufficient Assistance in all Probations. Nor let
your imperfect apprehensions of those mysterious expressions, whereby the
estate of that Sabbath or Kingdom, aforementioned, is described, mislead you
either into a distrust of the reality thereof, or into any carnal mis-belief,
misteachings, or mis-actings, by a vain curiosity of seeking to know further
than is plainly revealed, before the time. For, Fancy is apt to make many
erroneous representations; and that which shall be, is darkly expressed, for
the exercise of our Faith; and we can no more apprehend it, as it is (being in
the state wherein we yet are) than Children of a month old, can declare what
manner of life they shall here live, when they come to ripe years. It may
suffice, that so much is declared and unfolded, by what is fulfilled, and so
demonstrated by Allusions to things of which we highly esteem, that it may
assure us, there is an unspeakable glory and happiness, prepared for all those
who believe, and suffer for Righteousness sake. Our sight, is yet too weak to
behold it; Our hearts are too narrow to apprehend it; and that hour of the day,
is not yet come, which will manifest to any, so much as will hereafter be made
evident to all.

But, that we may not make our Afflictions and Troubles greater than else they
would be, and our Consolations less than they might be by our own defaults; and
so imbitter our Spirits against the Truth, and each other, that Repentance and
Reformation be obstructed thereby; and lest also, through defect of true Piety
toward GOD, or of true Charity to Men, we be found rather sufferers altogether
for our sins, than for Righteousness sake, to the making of our sorrows endless
in this life (as it happens to many) or to the rendering of us more wicked and
cruel, when our Sufferings be removed, than we were before; to the perpetuating
of an unhappy condition hereafter: Be pleased, for prevention thereof, to take
notice of a Triple Memorandum, which coming suddenly into my thoughts, I shall
here inssert as necessary for us all to take heed of at this time, though I
know it will disadvantage me in the opinion of many. The First branch of it, is
pertinent to GOD's Glory: The Second, to the Civil Government and Governors
whereto he has subjected us: And the Third, pertains to all those whom he has
put under their subjection. Observe it well, O ye British Nations, and repent
of your sins in General and Particular, both against GOD and Men; especially of
your intrenchments against GOD's Prerogative, and your temporal and spiritual
oppressing the members of his Son Jesus Christ, by the dishonoring of him in
his chief Attributes; and by the breach of your Public Faith, plighted to Him
and his People, against whom very many of us have, in my Judgment, much
exceeded the Parallel aforementioned, and all that I find recorded against any
other Nation. If we expect a Reconciliation to GOD, by a pardon for that, and
our other manifold Transgressions, let us acknowledge our sinfulness against
the infinite extent of GOD's Mercy intended to all Mankind in general (which is
the first branch of my Memorandums) and not limiting it, as many do, suppose
they glorify him in so doing, whereas, it is apparently to his dishonor, and
will be to the inflaming of his Wrath, when there will be most need of his
Fatherly Compassion.

For I will be bold to aver (though some probably will be offended at it, by
whose Charity I have been here in part relieved) that the brotherly Love and
true Repentance whereto I would persuade, will never be effectually attained
unto by them, who knowingly, premeditately, and wilfully persevere in denying
the Universal Redemption of Mankind by Jesus Christ; seeing thereon depends
GOD's most glorious Attribute; and in regard it is that, for which we are much
more obliged unto him, than all the rest of his Creatures, he cannot but be
highly displeased with all those who confine the extent of that Mercy. I know
many in these times (some of them in other respects very good and learned men)
who think Universal Redemption to be a new Doctrine, terming it Arminianism and
Popery; but, it is neither new, nor repugnant (as is pretended) to the Orthodox
Doctrine of Election, Predestination and the Free Grace of GOD; nor ascribes
ought more to Nature by the Consequences thereof, than tends to our justifying
of GOD, and to our self-condemnation, if that which he has given us be not
husbanded, according as he has and does enable. The holy Scriptures evidence
it to all who rightly understand them. So far is it also from being a Novelty
(as ignorant hearers are made believe) that it was received and professed for a
necessary Truth by the Churches of GOD in all Ages since Christ's birth, and
contradicted by very few in the first times of Christianity. Yea, it was
believed many hundreds of years before Arminius was born, or Popery had a being
in the world; and will be professed when the Opposers and Traducers of that
Verity shall be quite rooted out of the Evangelical Kingdom. It is, I confess,
a Doctrine embraced by many in the Church of Rome; but that makes it not
erroneous. If we renounce all things approved of by Heretics, and which
Antichrist and his Confederates embrace and profess, we shall more disadvantage
the Kingdom of Christ thereby, than they have done by all their Heresies,
Idolatries and Superstitions; For they acknowledge the holy Scriptures, and all
the Articles of our Creed; and hold (though in unrighteousness) a great part
both of Moral and Evangelical Truths, by a verbal profession, and with a
mixture of humane Traditions; because, if they did not so juggle, they could
never have been hopeful to effect what is intended by their Mystery of
Iniquity. It is the well counterfeiting of Truth and Holiness, which must
complete the Designs of Antichrist; and there is not any one single Heresy or
Wickedness which does so secretly and so mischievously supplant Christ; it
undermines the Foundation of that Structure which open Blasphemies above ground
cannot endanger, and has already sprung such a Mine, to the dividing of
Lutherans and Calvinists, (as they are now termed) that they will hardly be
reconciled until all Controversies are at an end.

Let us therefore consider well what depends upon it; how much it concerns the
Glory of GOD; how much he is dishonored by a contrary belief, and how much it
detracts from our own Privileges and Consolations. GOD's Mercy is above all
his Works. It is the Crown and Dignity of the KING of Kings, and the Highest of
all High-Treasons to clip it. A professed denial of the Universality of humane
Redemption, seems to me a cursed Counter-callol, made and sung by Devils, in
opposition to that blessed Nativity-Song, which was sung by Angels at the Birth
of CHRIST; Glory be to GOD on high, on Earth Peace, and Good will to Men. For,
how was GOD likely to be glorified, Peace to be upon the Earth, or his
Good Will manifested to Men by the incarnation of his Son, if Man's Redemption
had not been Universal, but so narrowed, that it extended to a very few, and
those few also left without assurance they were of that small number,
whatsoever they should endeavor, if there should be an Exception from that Act
of Grace, as many fancy? Doubtless, if it had been so, it would have given
occasion rather of howling than of singing; and been rather sad than glad
tidings, in regard of that great terror which might have seized upon all
Mankind, and caused an Universal Lamentation, when they considered how many
millions of millions, were certainly exposed to Everlasting Damnation; how
small a number in possibility to be saved, and how few of their dearly beloved
Parents, Children and Friends might be of those few, for whom Christ took upon
him the humane Nature. Oh! horrible and unparalled Blasphemy! But blessed be
GOD's Name, it is not so. When the Children of Israel were redeemed from their
Egyptian Bondage, which was a type of our Universal Redemption, there was not
one soul, no not a hoof left behind them: Nor was one soul absolutely excluded
from the benefit of Christ's Incarnation and Passion; but they only, who by
their own default and unrepented sin, should fall away as they did who perished
in the Wilderness. For, GOD has many times, upon several occasions, passed his
Word, to ascertain the Universality of his Love to Man without personal
respects, where personal sins, without repentance, have not first made the
person unacceptable, nay, our incredulity has put him to his Oath, to assure
every sinner; and if nevertheless we still distrust him, continue in our
misbelief of his Word and Oath, and labor to draw others into the same crime;
It cannot be an ordinary Judgment which GOD will at last inflict for so
extraordinary and so high an affront, it being a sin more heinous than Murder,
Adultery, and all other mere carnal sins put together; yea, more heinous than
those the Jews committed by their Idolatries, killing the Prophets, and
crucifying Christ in the flesh; for the last was but a sin against his
Humanity, and their Idolatries but the ascribing some part of that honor to
Creatures which was due to GOD only; whereas the limiting of GOD's Universal
Grace in Christ, with the concommitant Doctrines, and the Consequences thence
raised, and the imputing to GOD, an eternal Reprobation of the greatest part of
Mankind, before they had done good or evil, and for those sins also, which they
blasphemously say, he necessitated them to commit, to show his Justice, and
manifest his hatred to sin, is a dispoiling GOD of his Divine Nature, of his
Goodness, and an ascribing unto him that which belongs only to the Devil. Oh
the Patience of GOD! What can be so abominable? They do not only make
Reprobation older than the father of it the Devil, but make GOD also the Author
of his wickedness, in necessitating him to be a Devil, and consequently Author
of all the wickedness committed by all the Devils in Hell, and all the wicked
men upon Earth; which appears to me so horrible an Impiety, that I wonder not
to see the World so full of Plagues and Sins; and Sins and Sinners become such
Plagues to each other as they are; nor can I believe there will ever be less
Plagues where that Blasphemy is professed and indulged as Orthodox Doctrine,
until it be repented of; nor shall I marvel if my words be misunderstood, and
my good meanings mis-interpreted, if GOD's Word be so mistaken, and his Love so
ill rewarded. I know the bitterness and uncharitableness of their spirit, who
shall be obstinate in this Judgment, yet am neither afraid nor ashamed for any
respects to declare my Conscience herein; or in whatsoever else I think may
concern GOD's Glory and the Peace of my Country. If I think any to be in an
Error, I will peaceably do the best I can to reclaim them, but attempt nothing
to destroy them; for that is an Antichristian Principle, and I abhor it. Oh let
us be more heedful to avoid it, and more conscientious in acknowledging our
Destruction to be only and originally of the Devil and of our selves; I confess
that GOD (who would have all men to be saved) has provided means of salvation
for all, without excluding any, who first excludes not himself by his personal
sins and impenitency: and (that our manifold sins may be forgotten) I desire we
may henceforward believe both his preventing and assisting Grace, shall be
vouchsafed to all those who shall ask for it in Faith, or have not wilfully
rejected it being offered.

In like manner (for, I now come to the second branch of my Memorandum) if we
desire an external Peace may be settled and continued so among us, that we may
serve the LORD in Holiness and Righteousness, let us be conscientiously careful
that we entrench not injuriously upon the Civil Government whereto GOD has
subjected us, how oppressive soever it shall be, or seems to be unto any of
us in particular, during the time wherein GOD gives it a Sovereignty over us.
For, all Power, was and is of him by his Grace, or Permission; not only that
which was Patriarchal in Adam and Noah; with that which was established for a
time in Moses, Joshua, and the Judges of Israel; and that which is called
Ecclesiastical in the visible Church of Christ; but all those tyrannizing
Powers, Governments and Governors also, which have been in the world ever since
the Creation until now, were gracious, or permissive effects of that longing
after the knowledge of Good and Evil, which corrupted our first Parents, whose
Posterity, were permitted to elect such Governments and Governors as they best
liked, till some of them lost that Privilege by their own folly, as the Jews,
and others have done. Thus it was in all times and Nations, after the natural
and Paternal Government ceased by the death of Adam and Noah, except that which
was Supernaturally Constituted over the Jews in the days of Moses; That, and
the Paternal Government being conferred, the one by Grace, and the other by
Nature, were Branches of the Fifth Monarchy (as many now call the Kingdom of
Christ) which indeed is the Alpha and Omega, the first and the last, ever one
and the same; in regard, that Providential Government, which is and was in GOD
the Father by right of Creation; and exercised imperfectly by Adam, Noah, Moses
and his Successors, was translated to GOD the Son, who is the only and true
Catholic King (though Antichrist has given that Title to one of his Vassals)
yea, though this Government has seemed a long time suspended, and been
intruded upon by the Usurpation of Tyrants, in most parts of the world, ever
since the days of Nimrod, he will at last assume his Kingdom, and the
Government thereof, in his own Person, when the time appointed is come. In the
mean space, his Father and He himself, have permitted others to make Kings, and
to be Kings and Governors, according as they could effect it by their own
Policy and Power. This was one product of eating the forbidden Tree; and of
man's desired knowledge of Good and Evil (especially his experience in what is
evil) has been much advanced in all Nations and Generations, by the
Exorbitances of such Governors, and by the Popular Idolizing, and base
flattering their Kings and Governors into a foolish conceit they were more than
Men, and by deifying them, as the Romans and others did, until they became
worse than Beasts, and little better than Devils to the rest of Mankind: in
which sordid Flattery, the Priests in all times were most instrumental.
Therefore, GOD permitted for a punishment of their wickedness and folly (and to
perfect their desired knowledge of Good and Evil, as aforesaid, the Kingdoms of
the Earth (as it is said, Dan. 4. 17.) to be governed by the basest of men;
which will never be otherwise, until the People shall reform themselves by a
true Self-denial, and until that is fulfilled, which has been prefaged in
these Verses: "A King shall willingly un-self un-King,
"And, thereby grow far greater than before;
"The Clergy, to contempt themselves will bring,
"And, thereby, Piety shall thrive the more.


When a King (or the Civil Governor or Governors, by whatsoever Title they
Reign) shall quite lay aside all those tyrannous Prerogatives, which were
usurped by the Emperors and Kings of the Nations, who knew not GOD; and when
they shall Govern according to the divine Law, which he has declared in his
Evangelical Word, and had once written in the hearts of men, then shall a
Righteous Government be established; and when the Clergies Prevarications shall
bring upon them a general Contempt, such an endeavor will be in season. When
this comes to pass, (which is contingent, and may be or not be) Righteousness
will begin to flourish, or else never, until Christ assumes his Universal
Kingdom. But, that King or Supreme Power, who shall conform to the foregoing
Prediction, shall be tho Protarrhon, and have the honor of the first true
Vice-regency under Jesus Christ, within his own Dominions. There shall the
Throne of Evangelical Righteousness first begin to be established; or, at
least, there shall be the first evident preparation for that Monarchy.

It must then be acknowledged (Kings and their Subjects being Relatives) that
all the mischieves which have befallen to Mankind in all Nations, have
proceeded equally from themselves; yet, as I said before, by GOD's permissive
Providence, for a just punishment of their sins, by each other; and the People
must submit patiently to the yoke, until he vouchsafes to take it off: For, as
it has given Wickedness, Wicked-men, and Devils opportunities to manifest
their Natures toward the perfecting of an experimental knowledge in Evil, to
their shame; So, it has occasioned also the manifestation of the Justice,
Mercy, and Goodness of GOD, to his Glory, in making good what he had promised
to his Elect, by his Providential changing of Governments and Governors,
setting up, pulling down, enlarging or restraining, as may best conduce to the
punishment of Sin, to the encouragement of Virtue, to the exercising of the
Patience, Faith, Humility, Constancy, Love, and other Graces of the Saints; as
also to the improving in them an experimental knowledge of that which is Good,
together with a detestation of all that is Evil; that, they might at last
overcome Evil with Goodness: which gives an answer to all those Queries, which
have often been proposed by the Children of GOD, when they have observed the
Prosperity of the wicked, whilst they are afflicted.

These things considered, it will be a Transgression against the Providence of
GOD, if any private Persons or Parties, howsoever oppressed thereby, shall
endeavor by Preaching, Writing, or Speaking seditiously (much more by
attempting it in an Hostile manner) the innovating, changing, or disturbing the
Government or Governors whereunto they are subjected; and they are Rebels
against GOD's Ordinance, there being no other ordinary means left to the
People, who are by them oppressed, but humbly Petitioning, declaring their
Grievances, and pleading for their due Privileges by legal Proceedings, and by
Appealing to GOD for redress of their Sufferings; who does heed all
Oppressions, and will provide Deliverers, as he did for the Israelites in
Egypt, when there was no likelihood of a Deliverance. For, when Princes
infatuated by their own pride and corruption, or by the giddiness of their
young Counselors, over-voting wiser men, as appears in Rehoboam, shall so add
to the provocations of their Forefathers, by their personal impieties against
GOD, or by so oppressing the People, as Rehoboam did, he will either rend from
them the hearts of the greatest part of them, as he did from that foolish King,
or by some other way; and a Remedy will soon after follow, without any
irregular endeavors, by the private Heads or Hands of any one of his Saints;
which would but exasperate their oppressors, give them those advantages which
they watch for, to color the utter destroying of those whom they oppress, with
an appearance of executing Justice upon them; and it would defer also that
Deliverance which is Providentially designed.

Therefore, not presuming as their Counselor, but, as their Humble
Remembrancer, I do hereby desire, that the King and his Counselors, as also
the People, might be hereby put seasonably in mind, to consult with the Laws of
GOD, of Nature, of their own Nation, and with their own Consciences, what they
will dictate unto them, concerning their Duties to GOD, and to each other in
such Cases: And, that they may use their rational Faculties to that purpose, I
offer to their serious disquisition, these following Queries:

1. Whether, that which was not ordained for its own sake, but for the sake of
that which was precedent, and more worthy, ought to be preferred before that,
for whose sake only it was ordained?

2. Whether, there can be Treason committed by one of any two Parties against
the other between whom there is not a Mutual Trust, and Reciprocal Obligation?

3. Whether, if that Allegiance and Mutual Trust, which is between two Parties,
be by one of them evidently infringed, the other be not thereby, absolutely
freed from that Allegiance?

4. Whether, it be in the just Power, of any humane Authority to make that
Treason, which is not Treason by the Law of Nature and Trust; or any thing, to
be that which really it is not?

5. Whether a whole Nation, or the greatest part thereof, can be guilty of
Treason against their Supreme Magistrate, failing of his Trust, in that for
which he was ordained, in the judgment of the greatest number of those who
entrusted him; and whether they who are Confederates with him, in the breach of
that Trust, and in oppressing the People, ought to be reckoned as a part of
that People?

6. Whether a considerable part of those People, who are peaceable in their
lives and conversations, and seek nothing but an enjoyment of those Freedoms
and Rights which belong unto them by the Laws of GOD, Nature, and the Nation,
may not without just blame, Petition to be freed from those Oppressions, which
are imposed by humane Laws; and when they who are violently invaded in their
Possessions, or in the exercise of their Consciences toward GOD, according to
his Fundamental Laws, may not warrantably stand upon their guard (though they
may not take up Offensive Arms) as well as a private person, may Se defendendo,
endeavor to preserve his life, and his Hereditory Possessions, from an
injurious Assailant, in which case (as I conceive) he is Indempnified by the
Law of our Nation?

7. Whether, all Oaths, Engagements, and Covenants whatsoever, taken, entered
into and made, by compulsion, contrary to the Laws of GOD and Nature, be not
void ipso facto, and to be repented of rather than kept, when the Conscience is
rightly informed?

These Queries, being rightly resolved, both Kings and their Subjects may be
truly informed how they ought to regulate their Judgments and Actings in
relation to each other, for the preservation of their honor, peace, and
safety; but, private Persons who shall undertake to Resolve them, will perhaps
be thought more bold than wise; and they will rarely be Resolved impartially,
either by any Supreme Magistrate, who is not a true Lover of Justice; or by any
of the Commonalty, who prefers Licentiousness before a true Christian, or manly
Freedom; muchless by any of them, whose irregular Courses are destructive to
their Kings, their Country, and to their own well-being. Therefore, instead of
giving my private sense upon the said Queries, I leave that to those whom it
more concerns, and advise all those who think themselves oppressed (by those
who act under, and for the Supreme Power) and are doubtful how to behave
themselves in such wise, that they may neither transgress the Ordinances of
GOD, nor give occasion of offense to their Governors) to put on the pure white
Ephod or Surplice of a sincere unbyassed Conscience, and repair to that Urim
and Thummin, whereby the Secrets of the LORD are in all straits and
difficulties made known to such as fear him: And, in the mean time, I being
neither for or against the Power of Kings, or the Privileges of the People,
further than they are agreeable to the Laws of GOD and Nature, will declare
what my own practice has been in these late staggering times, hoping it may be
of good use to some, and no way hurtful to any.

Though I have been often Imprisoned, and my honest and peaceable Intentions
questioned upon misapprehensions and mis-informations, I never endeavored
ought by Factious Confederacy with others, or in my single Capacity, by Word or
Writing against the Supreme Person, or Power in being. It is otherwise affirmed
by some, who (I think) neither know what I have done, written, or said, but by
hearsay; and a Person of some quality (who seldom read ought save scurrilous
and obscene Pamphlets) charged me before many, in my absence, to have been a
Troubler and Scandalizer of all Governments now fifty years. Ahab in suchlike
words charged Elias to be the Troubler of Israel, because he had reproved his
wickedness, who was the greatest troubler thereof in his time: and the same
troublesomness is imputed to every one in his time, who conscientiously
reproves Vice, when Wickedness and Folly are predominant, how modestly soever
he does it. But, if all my Actings, Writings, and Speakings were known and
considered, it would manifestly appear, that neither my Principles or
Endeavors ever tended to ought, destructive or dishonorable to the Supreme
Magistrate possessing the Throne, but to that which was for the preservation of
his honor and safety, if rightly understood; and that, I have unfeignedly
exhorted others to the like obedience. To our present Governor, I have no way
failed in obedience since his Restoration; and think these Nations more than
ordinary obliged to that duty, in regard GOD has given them those Governments,
and that King, which the greatest number of them desired, when they called him
Home unto them from a long Exile: As also, because, I am confident that
miraculous Restoration was vouchsafed to be a Test both of His and our
Obedience to GOD's Commands; and of our conformity to that which he justly
expects should be performed by King and People to Him, and by them reciprocally
to each other. According to proof thereof upon the Test, such will be the
sequels respectively to all Parties; for I am not deceived in the Say-Master;
nor is this unwarantably declared by me, though I my self am but one in the
Furnace of Purgation and Probation among the rest. GOD brought in the King
without bloodshed, and without being engaged to any (except only in a few
Promises upon the word of a King) that he might depend on GOD only, and
dispense Justice and Mercy impartially to all: which my hope is he will do,
when he is dis-intangled from such inconveniences thereto obstructive, as his
late troubles occasioned; and when he is better acquainted with the temper and
constitution of these Nations, to which he was long a stranger, even from his
Infancy. I pray GOD, that neither our sins, nor his own, nor their Actings who
are to him what the Sons of Zerviah were to David, prove hindrances thereunto,
by being too hard for him; of which I am somewhat fearful.

This brings to mind the third Branch of my Memorandum aforementioned, which I
had almost forgotten, and which concerns those, as aforesaid, whom GOD has now
put visibly under subjection to him, and whose distempers were much allayed by
many fair Promises (or pretendings at least) that they should enjoy their
Consciences, and those estates which were granted (and as they thought secured)
unto them by the Public Faith of the Nations. The neglect of Performance to
those purposes according to expectation (though outward clamors were upon vain
hopes awhile calmed) may have evil effects when least feared: For,
Unfaithfulness and Unmercifulness GOD will avenge, though men wink at it;
especially a National unfaithfulness (if not repented and satisfied for,
seasonably in some measure) whatsoever colorable excuses may be alleged, will
be avenged, as is manifest in the Case of the Gibeonites. All the Three Nations
are engaged by their Common Faith, given in pledge directly or indirectly, both
for the Liberty of Conscience in relation to GOD, and for making good in some
proportion those Debts and Contracts, whereunto many were drawn, under Pious
and Civil pretenses, authorized by that visible Power which was then in being,
and countenanced and submitted unto, by the most eminent Persons of all
Degrees, Judgments, and Professions, as well as by the greatest number of the
People, without any open contradiction; Thereupon, they contributed their
Estates for support of that, which they thought a lawful Power, even to the
ruining of many of their Families (as it has since happened) who submitted
thereunto conscientiously in the simplicity of their hearts (as many others did
by compulsion, and some for sinister respects) in obedience only to them, who
acted in the Name of a Lawful Supreme Authority, which in reason excuses them,
who are not to judge the Actings of their visible Superiors, submitted unto by
the whole Nation, or the greatest part thereof as aforesaid. The Power now in
being also, together with many eminent Members of the former Power (seemingly
at least to be concurrent) did, if I and many other mistake not, voluntarily
pretend, both before and after the Restoration of this Power, to indulge tender
Consciences, and to make some competent satisfaction to them who had
conscientiously hazarded their Persons, and trusted out their Estates, as
aforesaid; and who justly expect that their Loyal submission without bloodshed
should be rewarded according to explicit or implicit Promises and
Declarations, wherein they confided; and for which (hoping it will be at last
performed) they do patiently suffer in the mean time, beseeching GOD to remove
the Confusions and Burdens, wherewithal they, and many other in these Nations,
are at this present oppressed and involved. Now then, that their and our
Prayers may be effectual to incline GOD to have Mercy upon us all in general,
let the neglect of that expected Indulgence be taken into consideration, and
somewhat be performed according to what is hoped for, to testify our thankful
acknowledging the large extent of GOD's Mercy both to King and People, for
bringing us so peaceably into a way of Reconciliation, which may possibly be
perfected and continued, if we prudently and gratefully pursue it, and not make
our selves liable again to those great debts and trespasses which were
forgotten, by taking our Brethren by the throats, for failings less
considerable, and by unmerciful destroying them and their Families; especially,
by being severe unto them for seeming deficiences relating to GOD and the
Conscience, with which none have ought to do, but GOD only, who is the proper
Judge between Himself and men's Consciences. But, for ought I perceive, every
Dissenting Party, is, and will be Judge in his own Cause, whomsoever else it
concerns. And we are all I confess, even the best of us, somewhat over-byassed
as to Self-Interest. Princes and their Councils will be sole Judges of that
which they think concerns the Peace of their Kingdoms and Self-Interest;
Prelates and their appurtenat Officers, will be Judges of that which they
conceive pertains to the Discipline of their own Church, and their temporary
Dignities; and Conscientious men, suppose themselves as competent Judges, next
under GOD, of what belongs to the peace of their Consciences, as either of the
former, and resolve to act according to their own judgments, or to suffer what
shall be imposed upon them: For, as their Persecutors may peradventure say as
the Jews did when they Crucified Christ, that, they have a Law, by which these
ought to suffer; So they may say, that GOD and Nature have Laws, by which it
ought to be otherwise; and to those Laws they may, and I do for my part,
appeal. Let therefore, if it be so, these three Nations seek unto GOD, as one
man, and humbly Petition the King, in his own Person, that, to establish his
Throne in Righteousness, all Public and Private Grievances may be impartially
and effectually considered hereafter, and not slighted as heretofore. That, in
things relating to GOD and the Conscience, men may be governed according to his
divine Law only; and in all Civil Matters, by such humane Laws as the People
have chosen, and shall choose, agreeable to the Word of GOD and the Law of
Nature. Which Exhortation I propose not to ingratiate my self either with the
People, or the present Government to any self end: For, the Restraints and
Sufferings which have been imposed on me, have been more advantageous than all
the Liberties or Preferments they can confer; and were I put to choose, whether
I would enjoy the greatest earthly Glory, or be exposed to the greatest earthly
Torments for a good Conscience; I would as soon choose the later as the first,
if GOD might be more glorified thereby: Indeed, I would choose neither of them,
because I know not in which of those estates I should most honor God; but
leave it absolutely unto him, to dispose of me as he pleases; and will not
desire (muchless attempt) any thing for my personal security, or for enjoyment
of my Conscience, by any unjustifiable act.

It has been said, That the Kingdom of Heaven must be taken by violence; yet,
let us now be cautious that we seek not to make passage into it, by a Carnal
violence, and by the Temporal Sword (which Sword belongs principally to the
Kingdoms of this World) lest we perish by that Sword as many have done. Our
Savior said to Peter, when he smote off the ear of Malchus in his defense, Put
up the Sword: for in truth it was not then in season, nor is so now. Had either
a natural or a supernatural Resistance been then seasonable, our blessed
Savior (as he at that time said) could have prayed to his Father, and have had
more than twelve Legions of Angels immediately sent unto him for his Rescue.
Those Angels, when the time appointed comes, will appear under the Conduct of
Michael their Archangel, to do that execution upon the Usurpers of Christ's
Kingdom, which has been long since foretold, and which we daily pray for. The
Weapons of our Warfare are not Carnal; nor shall the Conquest which we expect,
be obtained by any other Sword in the hands of the Saints, but that Two-edged
Sword, proceeding out of his Mouth, whom John saw standing between the seven
golden Candlesticks, sharpened by the Faith, Hope, Love, Patience, Prayers, and
Constancy of the LAMB's followers; which Conquest at or about the end of the
last of those six days, aforesaid, of a 1000 years a piece; or at the
shortning of that day, and at the beginning of the great Sabbath, which GOD
sanctified at the Creation, will be accomplished. Till that time, the Saints
are patiently to wait upon GOD, and permit his Enemies to enjoy their time,
without grudging or fretting at their prosperity, as David counsels in his 37
Psalm. In order to their final Destruction, some proceedings will every year be
made, whilst the sixth Vial is pouring out (and which is already in a great
measure diffused) and probably a signal progression, in some evident
particular, will be vouchsafed betwixt this and the end of 1666 years after the
birth of Christ; and be completed at or about the end (as I have before
declared) of the thousand six hundred sixty and sixth year after his Passion,
if the Foundation of my Calculations fail not. The Planets in their Courses are
moving toward those Constellations and Influences, which will shortly
demonstrate they are fighting for the People of GOD against their Enemies, as
they fought against Sisera and his Army; and when GOD destroyed the Host of
five Kings, with hailstones, who Warred against the Gibeonites, whilst they
went under the Protection of Joshua. But, we have a surer Word to trust unto
than the Book of the Creatures (whose Characters our Folly has now made
obscure) even GOD's written Word and Spirit; and the Prophesies in that Word
contained, will shortly be fulfilled; and then the knowledge of Good and Evil,
as to all sublunary things, being experimentally known in full, such an end
will be put to all their strugglings for the Victory, that our Scoffers will
from thenceforth no more say, or think, that all things are to continue as they
are; but they who now insolently persecute the Saints, will, miserably
affrighted, sneak into Dens and Caverns of the Earth, wishing the falling
Mountains might cover them from his Presence whom they have persecuted and
despised. GOD's White Banner has been displayed among us a long time
heretofore, to invite us by fair means to come in, and make our peace: His Red
Colors are now hung forth, and though it has already cost us much blood and
treasure, we return not unto him; and if we delay it until his Black Flagg be
set up, it will be then too late to Retreat without a mischief: for, they who
are to come upon the black and pale Horses, will immediately follow to do
execution.

It is high time to look about us, and take heed what this Spirit says unto
the Churches, typified by the seven Churches in Asia, wherein the state of the
most eminent Congregations, which are Members of the Catholic Church in all
Ages, are concerned; as is also that Universal Church in all the Contents of
St. John's Apocalypse, throughout her several Ages, until the end of the Mystery
of Iniquity. The sixth Trumpet (as I believe) has sounded, and is yet
sounding. The third great Woe will come forth. A Mystical Earthquake has
already shaken down a Tenth part of the malignant City: The Nations, being both
affrighted and angry, are laboring to repair the Breaches, and have partly
skinned over some of their putrefying Wounds, with Patches and Plasters; and
like the old Egyptians, (their true types) increase the works of Bondage and
Slavery, to the suppressing of GOD's People, within their Jurisdictions,
because they perceive them endeavoring to separate from them: But, the time is
near, wherein the true Israelites, and their Oppressors, will receive the
Rewards respectively prepared, and due unto them by GOD's Judgments promenced
against the one, and his gracious Promises to the other; though his Enemies
struggle yet against him like Pharaoh and his Armies in the Red Sea, when their
Chariotwheels were taken off, and while the waves on either side stood heaped
up ready to swallow them. The Grand City, being divided into three parts, will
ere long fall, with every subordinate Power, Kingdom, City and Society thereto
belonging; and woe to all them who have not separated from her by repentance.
Her abominations are come into remembrance before GOD; Her sins are almost full
ripe, and she is become an habitation of Devils, and a receptacle for every
unclean bird: all Nations have drunk the Cup of her Fornications, and are
besotted and bewitched with her Sorceries and Enchantments: The Merchants of
the Earth are enriched by the abundance of her carnal Delicacies, and by her
Traffic in spiritual and temporal Merchandises, for they have traded together,
not only, for Gold, Silver, Precious Stones, Pearls, fine Linen, Silks,
Purple, Scarlet, Vessels of Brass, Iron, Wood, and Marble, Spices, Odours,
Ointments, Oil, Wine, Wheat, Beasts and Chariots, but also for the Bodies and
Souls of men; according to what was prophesied; pretending to settle upon their
Chapmen, Possessions in Heaven, that they might cheat them and their Heirs of
their Inheritances upon Earth. Their Formal Devotions being of the same nature
and value, with such as were in use among the old Heathen Idolaters (and for
the most part borrowed from their Idol Temples) will not avail them in the day
of their Visitation; but be cast out as unholy things, fit for nothing but to
be trampled under foot and destroyed, with all those Trumperies which the
Founders of the Mystery of Iniquity have raked together out of Judaism and
Gentilism, to trim up a Will Worship. They, who dote on them, shall perish with
them, and GOD's People whom they now oppress and reproach, shall be delivered
from their scorns and oppressions.

If they, with whom GOD has entrusted the Civil Power, shall join with her in
oppressing his People, he himself will deliver them from all their oppressive
Actings and Constitutions, who by a corrupt exercise of their Authority, are
more or less at enmity with his Kingdom; and persecutors of his Saints, as
turbulent and seditious Persons, for professing their Consciences, and not
complying with them in their Abominations, and vain Inventions, repugnant to
the dictates of his Word and Spirit, who is their Sovereign Paramount: Yea, so
many of the Civil Governors and Magistrates, as in their public or personal
actings, adhere finally to Antichristianism in the essentials thereof, shall be
therewith destroyed: But, they who Conform to the Kingdom and Government of
Christ, shall be thereunto admitted, and therewith honored. Be wise therefore,
O ye Kings, and learn what ye are to do, you that are Judges of the People; Let
not the Kings and Rulers of the Earth, bind themselves together in their
Counsels against the LORD and his Anointed, nor the murmuring People imagine
vain things; For, GOD who sits in Heaven derides their attempts, and maugre all
their opposition, will set his King upon the holy Hill of Sion, Psalm. 2. Amen.

These things considered, our future Repentance and Reformation will not alone
consist in forsaking our Transgressions against the moral Law, and the impudent
profaneness whereof we are guilty, by mere carnal sins, but in timely disserting
also every spiritual wickedness, by coming out of Babylon, and desisting from
complying with her, and especially by razing out the Mark of the Beast, if we
have in any mode received it; which is not to be performed by a local departure
or separation; but, by a relinquishment of their Superstitions and Idolatries,
and by avoiding the mark of the Beast, both in the hand and forehead, which I
conceive not to be any thing forcibly imposed upon men against their wills, as
Oaths, Stigmatizings, or Conformity with them in things indifferent. But, I
judge that Mark to be a voluntary approving the Power of the Beast, and an
adhering to him or his Image, by justifying their tyrannies, professing their
Idolatries, and by openly or secretly persecuting the followers of the LAMB;
For, these Qualifications knit together with an etc, will make such a perfect
Character, whereby to distinguish them from the Disciples of Christ, that they
shall be privileged to buy and sell, or to enjoy any place of Power, Honor,
or Profit within his usurped Jurisdiction, which he exercises, at several
times, and under various Notions: For, I conceive, that the first and second
Beast, mentioned in the Revelation, as also, the Image of the Beast; The
Skarlet Whore, with her Cup of Fornications; The Red Dragon, The False Prophet,
the seven Heads, the ten Horns, the smoke which ascended out of the Bottomless
Pit, and the Locusts proceeding out of that smoke, do all together make up but
one Mystical Body of Iniquity, as it was by degrees produced, active and
manifested in several times, according to the true nature thereof in every
particular part. The first Beast, being the fourth and last humane tyranny,
described by Daniel in the last of the four Beasts, whereof he had a Vision in
the Reign of Belshazer, is that Monster out of which all the Appurtenances of
the said Mystery successively branched. The second Beast is that mixture of
temporal and spiritual Oppressions and Wickednesses which sprouted up from the
first, by Sa^anical Delusions and fleshly Impostures: It is called the Image of
the Beast, because of the manifold resemblances which it retains of heathenish
-Romes Cruelties, Pride, and Superstitions; and their forming of it into that
Image, was partly (as I judge) to color and countenance their Novelties and
wicked Impostures with an appearance of venerable Antiquity, and with a
successive Authority, which is one of their chief boasts; and it was partly to
share also among themselves the Dignities and Profits, which were formerly
enjoyed by the Flamines, Arch-Flamines, and other Priests among the Gentiles,
who had large Privileges and Possessions: It is expressed by a Red Dragon, in
respect of the bloody Persecutions thereby raised in the Primitive Church; It
is called a Whore arrayed in Scarlet, with a golden cup of Fornications in her
hand, to signify the carnal Pomp and Pleasures whereby it should infatuate
and bewitch the great men of the World. It is likened to a False Prophet, to
intimate the counterfeit Sanctity and Gravity, whereby it should delude foolish
Kings and Nations: The Smoke ascending out of the bottomless Pit, implies the
Jugglings and Sophistications, whereby they should becloud the Truth, and
darken men's understandings with fictitious Glosses and false Interpretations.
The Locusts, presignified that innumerable company of Locust-like unprofitable
Cardinals, Abbots, Prelates, Monks, Friars, Jesuits, and suchlike devouring
Animals, as were afterward bred and brought forth in that smoke, and now swarm
into every part of the World, to the devouring, not only of the Fruits of the
Earth, but to the destroying of the Fruits of Grace likewise, in the bud and
blossom. The seven Heads, signified their usurping old Romes claim of
Supremacy, over all Kings and Nations in the Earth, when her seven Hills wore
the Imperial Crown. The ten Horns may betoken, that addition of temporal Power,
which it would acquire by subjecting and enslaving Kings, Kingdoms, and
Republics, to the throne of Antichrist; and by joining the temporal Sword, to
the imaginary Keys of St. Peter, until the gross Impostures of that man of
Sin, or mystical Whore, should be by them discovered, as they will be ere long,
provoking the Kings of the Earth rather out of self respects, then in any
regard of Christ's Kingdom, to begin to hate the Strumpet, and prey upon her
flesh.

I am suspicious, that I may be suddenly deprived of the Means and Liberty
which I yet have to express my mind in public; Therefore, being unwilling, to
leave unmentioned any Notion coming at this time to my Remembrance, whereby
Repentance may be hastened, Concord increased, and things prevented which may
be destructive to common Peace; And, in regard, teeming Transgressions, are or
may be at this time occasioned, by the Imposing and Refusing of Oaths, to the
multiplying of troubles and Imprisonments, not only upon persons, who are
thought unpeaceably affected, but, to the oppressing and total ruining also of
many innocent Families, whose Masters are conscientiously afraid of all Oaths;
I am resolved (notwithstanding it may be to my personal disadvantage) to
declare my Judgment concerning that, and some other Particlars, which I
conceive may conduce to the dis-insnaring of many, whose misunderstandings have
exposed themselves and others to great hazards. My personal refusing or taking
of such Oaths, as I hear are tendered, cannot bring either outward detriment or
profit unto me, because, I have neither Estate or Liberty, which will be
thereby lost or saved, nor so much as hope of any future Preferment in the
World; therefore (without self ends) I do voluntarily declare, for the sake of
others only (not judging the Consciences of any who are of another opinion)
that I think, if the Supreme Power, or Person, be doubtful upon probable
grounds, of any Subjects Loyalty, they, or he, may for their own, or the
Public security and safety, require it by an Oath, so far forth as the Laws of
GOD, Nature, and the Nation, do oblige or permit. For, Allegiance and Fealty
are due from all Subjects, to the Power, and Persons whom GOD has set over
them, so long as he continues a visible possessionary Power, able to Protect
them out of an Usurpers hands; yea, so long as he is present with them to
encourage them in their Loyalty by his Righteous actings or Sufferings:
therefore, I know no reason, why an Engagement by Oath should be denied to him
or them who have bound themselves by the like Obligation to be their Liege
Lords, and to Govern them according to the Laws of GOD and their Country. Upon
this consideration, I never refused the Oath of Allegiance, to any
possessionary Power or Person, claiming or exercising a Sovereign Authority
without opposition; and I conceive I deserved as little blame in so doing, as
is usually imputed to the Inhabitants of a besieged City, submitting to their
Conquerors, when they are over-powred by an Enemy, and disserted by their
Officer in Chief; for who is bound to resist, when the LORD of Hosts appears
against them? Of the Oath of Supremacy, I made as little scruple: For, as I
understand it, (and as King James expounded the same) it intends no more than
the other, except only an exclusion of all Foreign Powers; if (as I think it
is) it be the same Oath which was heretofore tendered to me when I was a
Commissioner of the Peace. That Oath, as I remember, enjoined an
acknowledgement of the King's Power over all Persons within his own Dominions,
as head Governor, subordinate to Christ only, in all Causes whatsoever, whether
Ecclesiastical or Civil; and not, as many fancy, that he has a Power over the
Causes, or a Co-headship with Christ; for, these were ridiculous Claims and
Acknowledgements, in regard no Natural or Politick-head can suit with the
Spiritual and Mystical Body of Christ Jesus, nor the Power of any Earthly King
make a Righteous Cause to be unjust, or an unjust Cause to be righteous; though
it be too often, made so to appear by an abused Authority; of which abuse,
there is at this present great likelihood and jealousy touching a Cause now
depending and relating to Persons in this Jayl, wherein I am a Prisoner; and I
am suspicious that somewhat is endeavoring, which may redound to the dishonor
of GOD and the King. All Oaths given or taken contrary to Law, being void ipso
facto, as soon as they are taken, ought to be repented of, by those who took
them either ignorantly or through fear, and make them to be the greater
offenders who Impose them, though that does not totally excuse the Takers of
such Oaths, upon compulsion. Indeed, so little regard is made of Oaths in these
days in many Cases, especially by Witnesses and Jurors in Courts of
Judicature, that it was never more truly averred of any Land, than now of this,
that it mourns because of Oaths: For every man's Estate, Life and Credit, is
in hazard, by Suborners and false Witnesses; insomuch, that it were well with
us if the severity of Tennes, and Tenedia Bipermis, were here revived, to
terrify Forswearers and false-Witnesses; lest impudent perjured Persons swear
honest men out of all they have. An Oath, though it be abused, is the usual and
lawful medium, both by divine and humane Authority, to evidence Truths in
Controversy between man and man, and relating to the Common Peace; and in my
Judgment, not unlawful in private Differences, when in Charity and Reason it is
needful to ascertain matters of Consequence, the doubting whereof may be
hurtful to him, who is incredulous of what is affirmed, or else of what may be
injurious to another person: For, though our Savior said, that whatsoever in
our Communication (to which his words are to be restrained) is more than YEA,
and NAY, comes of evil; yet a further Asseveration may not be absolutely evil,
being necessitated either by an evil Custom in him who Swears when there is no
need of an Oath; or else by an evil causless distrust in the Hearers; and
therefore in serious Matters (as it appears by Christ's own practice in such
cases) more is sometimes requisite than a bare Asseveration. The word Verily,
double (which is equivalent with Infaith, and In Troth in our language) was
often added by him in his Affirmations to confirm them; and the former may,
without just blame, be otherwhile added by us, though many (who do therein, as
it were Tithe Mint and Annis) are offended at such additions, ignorantly
supposing them to be Oaths.

Nevertheless, I am so tender of offending their Consciences, who scruple at
such Niceties, that I deny my self liberty, even in many such indifferent
things, except I causually slip into them through inadvertency; and I judge not
uncharitably of those who dare not Swear at all, because, they have a written
Word inducing them to be of that Judgment, James 5. 12. where it is said, Above
all things, Swear not, neither by Heaven, nor by Earth, nor by any other Oath;
but, let your Yea be Yea, and your Nay, Nay; which seems to be a Caution
against all Oaths whatsoever, in the understanding of some, but not in mine:
nor do I think this Scripture is to be limited (as some have thought) to
Promissary Oaths, in regard there is no word in the Text, or Context, to
warrant such an Interpretation. Perhaps, that which is offensive in Oaths,
consists more in the Circumstances or Formalities, than in what is by them
essentially intended: I think therefore it would be a Provision worthy a
Christian Government, and would be more satisfactory to those whom it concerns,
than the Testimony of a Peer upon his Honor, (Conscientious men deserving at
least as much Credit and Privilege, upon their bare word, as the other by an
empty Title) if for an Expedient in this case, a Law were enacted, whereby the
Testimony of those Persons, who are Conscientiously afraid of Swearing, may be
taken for a legal witnessing of the Truth, by an attestation upon their word
only, evidenced by some such action as the lifting up of the Hand, without the
usual Formalities of an Oath; upon the same Penalties which our Laws inflict on
persur'd Persons; who deserve at least, the same Pains or Mulcts, which may
befall to other men by their Falsehood. This, I suppose, will displease no
reasonable or conscientious man, in regard none ought to think that they are
not in conscience obliged to Assert the Truth in Controversies between man and
man, or in matters relating to public Justice, or common Safety, when it tends
not to an Accusing of themselves: And, I have this charitable belief of the
greatest number of them, who make Conscience of Swearing, as aforesaid, out of
mere Conscientiousness, that they will be more trusty in their Assertions, and
more Loyal to the Supreme Power (though it favored them not) upon their bare
verbal Engagements, than the greatest part of them will be, who voluntarily
take, or impose Oaths by Compulsion on other men. I am assured also, that GOD
will not hold them guiltless, who by Threatenings, or by Oaths, or by
Imprisonments, or Tortures enforce men to act against their Consciences, or to
accuse themselves or other Innocents, in their distempers and torments. St.
Agustine in his City of God, inveighs against it, as an abominable oppressive
Cruelty, practiced till then by none but Heathenish Tyrants (and afterward by
the Beast who sprung from them) to enforce Innocents, against the Laws of GOD
and Nature, unjustly to accuse themselves, and those whom they intended to
destroy; whereas both Divine and Humane Justice directs to other means of
discovering Truths, and vindicating of suspected Persons. The Holy Ghost wills,
that every man before he suffers, should be tried and Convicted by the mouth of
two or three Witnesses; upon which Precept, the Law of our Nation, called the
Great Charter, is founded: And (as it is exemplified in the Case of Achan,
wherein the safety of a whole Nation was concerned and endangered by his
private sin) no man is to be interrogated as touching things which may tend to
the accusing of himself, until there be either an Accuser produced, or a
previous probability, in some degree, evidencing that he is guilty, as Achan
appeared to be upon a providential discovery first made out, by five Lots,
before it came to a personal Examination; and even then, Joshua proceeded not
rigorously, or by menacings, but meekly, and by a Fatherly compellatur, said
unto him, My Son, give, I pray thee, glory to the GOD of Israel, and tell me,
what have thou done? Whereupon, he Conscientiously confessed his Crime. In this
temper of Spirit, it becomes all Christians to search out doubtful matters,
and not by a tyrannous violence, in what hazard soever the Public may appear,
by the concealment thereof. This is my Judgment, whereto I will add what shall
deserve to be well heeded at this time (to wit) That not only those Confessions
or Accusations which are extorted by threatenings or tortures, are no proofs at
all of what is Confessed against themselves or others; but that all these
Informations and Accusations likewise, which Condemned or Guilty men are
allured, tempted, or bribed unto, by hopes or fears, promises of pardon,
favor, or reward, and not conscientiously declared, ought not to be regarded
as a valid Evidence further than they concur with other Circumstances, and
unquestionable proofs. For, they who are corrupted or distempered, by
covetousness, hopes, fears, enforced necessities, or long and hard durance,
will for the most part, say any thing to escape a present misery, as by sad
experiments it has been often seen. Even at this day (as I am credibly
informed) there is a man living, who being thought murdered, a poor innocent
man was hanged lately in chains as principal in the fact, and his Mother and
Brother executed as Accessaries, upon the said man's Confession, when he was
distempered to a degree of distraction, by hard durance, by the threatenings of
the Prosecutors, and by his own fears and frailties; which were perhaps thought
to be effects and evidences of his guiltiness. But, who can help this? or how
or when will it be better, whilst Oaths are forcibly imposed? and whilst they
who have no conscience are more indulged than the most conscientious men. I
would to GOD that our Public and Private Peace and Safety were no more
endangered by false Witnesses, Suborners of Perjury, Trapanners, Ignorant or
corrupt Jurors, (and by some of them, who impose Oaths against men's
Consciences) than by them who make Conscience of Swearing.

I may seem perhaps to make tedious Digressions, impertinent to my first
Design; but they are not such, if well considered: for, I being like a Beggar
who is never out of his way, might add much more (collatrally at least) tending
to my first purpose, which I omit, partly, because it cannot now be born, and
partly, for that I am not in such a capacity to express it, as assures me it is
part of my work at this present; Therefore I will proceed with what I am
certain so to be, lest I be prevented (as aforesaid) by what I expect may
shortly happen to the depriving me of those Tools and Opportunities, which I
have at this time and place in my fruition. And, I conceive, that what I
purpose next to treat of, will be so necessary toward the performance of those
duties, for promoting whereof I have tendered the preceding Parallel to your
consideration, that, neither all your experimental knowledge of Good and Evil,
nor your Historical Faith, nor your Formal Devotions, nor the rest of your
supposed Virtues or Merits will effect so much as may make them acceptable if
that be wanting; in regard it is that, without which they will be unsavory and
fruitless. My Brethren, it is LOVE and UNITY in and with Him, who is the
Fountain of that Love which must reconcile us to GOD and to each other; that,
which must preserve us in safety, and destroy our Adversaries, who will else
destroy us by our Divisions, whose Unity will so divide the malignant City and
Kingdom of Antichrist, that they shall be instrumental for your deliverance by
their own destruction; whereas they have hitherto prolonged our miseries and
hazarded our destruction, by sowing and cherishing the seeds of division among
us underhand; and under color of reconciling you to your true Mother, sought
to bring you by degrees back again to an acknowledging the Whore of Babylon to
be the Spouse of Christ, and your spiritual Mother: Many also, who have not
that wicked Design, are ignorantly contriving and prosecuting that, which may
be a furtherance thereto, unless prevented. If any National or Provincial
Churches, may warrantably arrogate that Infallibility, which has been denied
to Popes or General Councils, and which evidently appears they never had; then
possibly, that whereto some drive, might seem feazible: But, it is not our or
their politic endeavourings to establish that which is called Conformity and
Uniformity in externals, that will settle a general Agreement in all Religious
Concernments in the mode intended; much less accomplish GOD's Work. Unity in
Essentials is necessary, and ought to be prosecuted to the utmost of our
ability. Uniformity and Conformity also in Circumstantials, might be expedients
helpful toward an enjoyment of much outward peace, if they could be attained
unto: But, if it be an Unity in Errors, or such a Conformity in things
accidental or indifferent, as is not every way homogent to and with the whole
Mystical Body of Christ, or not adequate to the true Original Paterns, but
intrenching upon the Christian Liberty in things indifferent, temporary and
mutable, as occasion may require; it would make that which is harmless in it
self, to be hurtful by consequences; that which is bad, to be worse; and, as it
may be established, prove a Confederacy and Conspiracy both against Christ and
his Members, and destructive to the Privileges of Grace and Nature, rather
than a wholesome and lawful Constitution; especially, if they who take upon them
the contriving an Uniformity in Religious Doctrines and Disciplines, may be
questionable, as to their dependency to their Interest, or to their calling to
such a work, by having crept in at a backdoor, or at a window, for ambitious
or covetous ends. If such Edicts should be made and ratified, as men so
qualified are likely to contrive, I know not what we had then to do, save only
to act and suffer as GOD and our Consciences will direct; patiently and
peaceably waiting on him until he provides a Remedy.

Unity is a virtue beautifying and securing; comely, and yet as terrible to the
Adversaries thereof as an Army with Banners: But Uniformity, is neither
absolutely a Virtue, nor so beautiful, nor so securing at all times, as Variety
and differing Forms, if they be orderly united upon a Foundation capable of
them; and not unseasonably or contentiously affected. He is an unskilful
General who marches or fights always with his Army in one figure; but he who
puts it into several shapes, according as place and occasion requires, acts
like an able Commander; A Phalonx will best endure the shock when opposed by
numerous and furious Enemies, but Batalias formed into Bodies much differing
from each other, will be most serviceable at sometimes. Variety of Forms in
Structures render them more beautiful, more conveniently useful, and more
honorable to the Founders, than those which are all of one shape, as we see in
those Palaces which consist of unequal Piles and Turrets of differing forms,
less and greater, higher and lower, round and square, and of the several models
of Architecture, distinct and joined, mixed and interwoven. The sweetest Music
is not an Unisone, but a Harmony made up of differing Instruments, Strings and
Voices. The World had not been properly called Kosmos, but Akosmos; not
beautiful, but deformed; Nor man's body, been termed a little World, or Beauty,
if the various Creatures of the one, or the Members of the other had not
consisted of Dissimilitudes, diverse shapes and differing faculties, knit
together into one frame, by a decent Simetry; and made so to sympathize, that
they might be the more serviceable to their Maker and to each other; which
could not have been, without variety of Forms and Qualifications. If (as St.
Paul says) 1 Cor. 12. 18, 19. All the Members were one Member (or all alike in
form) where were then the Body? But, GOD has made them all, as it pleased him,
and many differing Members make one Body: Even so also in the Catholic Church
of Christ, which is his Mystical Body, there are many particular Churches true
Members thereof, which in some external and circumstantial things differ from
each other; There are diversities of Gifts, Judgments, Administrations and
Dispensations; but all of them are of the same LORD, by the same Spirit, and
GOD is the more glorified by that variety: To the consideration whereof, I
beseech that GOD, so to direct and incline those with whom he has entrusted
the administration of Civil Powers, and the dispensation of his holy Mysteries,
that they so entrench not upon the Privileges of Christ's Evangelical Kingdom,
to establish an outward Peace in their Temporal Governments and Jurisdictions
by humane Contrivements, that, at last there be neither external nor internal
Peace among them.

If all our Judgments and Affections were the same, and all men so alike
tempered, that they were universally inclined to the same temporal objects, in
this estate wherein we now are, it would occasion more quarrels and mischiefs,
than their disparity has produced; GOOD and EVIL could not have been so well
known as they are; Nor had we been reasonable Creatures, but had then lived and
acted by instinct only, as Birds, Beasts, and other irrational Animals do, and
there had been little or no use of Love, or of the other Virtues or Passions of
the mind, to the Glory of GOD; at least, not so much as has been occasioned by
the diversity of Judgments and Affections managed according to his Word and
Natural Reason thereby sanctified; nor indeed had we been more sinful or more
righteous than brute Creatures, as it will be manifested when Love, the
foundation of our Being and Wellbeing, has repaired those defects and flaws,
which our Lusts ill governed, and Satan's delusions have made in our will and
understanding, by separating us from GOD, and from each other. Schism is that
which has so multiplied our sins and sorrows. I mean not that Schism, which
the profane and superstitious Enemies of Truth (confederating with Antichrist
in his Mystery of Iniquity) charge us withal, because we separate from them;
for, that Schism or Separation, denominates us to be Saints; the word SAINT, in
the first acceptance, is one separated from the world, from the Enemies of
GOD's Truth, from communicating with them in their Errors, Impieties, and
Superstitions, and sanctified for his Service. That therefore, which I reprove,
is that Schism which many of us have made in the seamless Robe of Christ, by a
malicious separating from each other; by such contentions and wickednesses as
proceed out of self-conceit, selfwill, pride and lusts, with a seeming respect
to indifferent things, as essential to GOD's Worship, or to our own Eternal
Happiness; whereas they being but temporary advantages or disadvantages, do
incline the heart to an uncharitable censuring, hating and persecuting those
who dissent, though it proceeds from weakness or ignorance only, or else from
their belief, that until they be unquestionably convinced in their
understandings to the contrary, they are obliged to profess and act according
to their own faith and knowledge, rather than to the faith and knowledge of
other men, of whose wisdom and integrity they are not certain, whatsoever good
opinion the world has of them, or they of themselves; especially when they
perceive it warranted in the Word of GOD, by such clauses as this; Romans 14. 23.
He that doubts (and acts otherwise than he believes he ought to do) is
condemned: For, whatsoever is not of Faith is sin. Happy is he who condemns
not himself in that which he allows, or disalloweth. On the contrary; Unhappy
are they, who are seduced by their Authority and Power, who denying evident
Truths in some cases (and being unrighteous also in their conversations) have
made it justly dubious, that the things which they would enforce on them, are
not according to GOD's Will. What conscientious person can suppose himself
obliged to renounce his own Judgment of things which he believerh have their
foundation in the Divine Word, to be guided by them, who practice not in their
deeds what they profess in words? Who can confide in them, who neither entered
into their Function, or the Sheepfold, by the door; nor are of such a
conversation, being entered, as becomes the place they execute; but are
apparently vicious, ambitious, proud, covetous and cruel imposers of heavy
burdens upon their Brethren? not only in things indifferent, as being
absolutely necessary (though GOD has left them at liberty to be used, or not
to be used, as occasion should require) but enforcing some such also, as are
evidently contrary to GOD's Commands, and other things which are so far from
having been practiced, or approved of by the Churches of Christ (as is
pretended) that they are manifest appurtenances to the Mystery of Iniquity, or
to the Kingdoms of this World rather than to his Kingdom, as they are also for
the most part who impose them by constraint.

If the heart be so deceitful, that it deserves not to be trusted with what it
is conscientiously persuaded belongs to the furtherance of its own happiness;
how can it justly? or, why should it be compelled to trust upon what other men's
consciences persuade it to believe? seeing he himself, and not another, must
suffer what may thereby succeed. If we must depend upon the faith and knowledge
of other men, and be obliged to such a Canonical obedience, as is imposed upon
many; what need we trouble our selves to search further than to our Parish
Priest, be he never so ignorant or profane, since he is thought sufficiently
qualified for the information of all those who are committed to his charge. If
there be not a degree of Reason, and a proportion of sanctifying Light set up
in every man, whereby he may see what he ought to do, and in what condition he
is. What is then meant by the hidden Manna which Christ promised? or, to what
use is the white Stone with a New Name thereon written, which no man knows but
he to whom it is given? Verily, men's hearts are more deceitful to other men
than to themselves; and therefore GOD has not left us to depend wholly upon
other men, nor would we should so hear them, as to adhere to their Judgments
and neglect our own; But expects that we, as the noble Bereans did, should
examine all Doctrines and Disciplines by the holy Scriptures, and trust other
men no further than they teach agreeably thereto: And GOD having according to
what was in them prophesied, engraven so his Laws in the heart, that we may
read them there, we are not to despise the dictates of our own hearts, which
Solomon tells us are better than many Counselors, as doubtless they are, when
grounded upon divine Precepts and Promises.

A time is near at hand, wherein Orthodox Teachers will not so abound as
Impostors; and therefore I skrew into this Epistle as much as conveniently I
can, to prepare for such a day, by encouraging men to preserve their
Consciences from being vitiated by those Mountebanks which will arise. Be wary
of such, and take heed also, lest that which you think to be a conscientious
persuasion, be but an impression of Opinions begotten by delusions, or settled
by mere custom and breeding only, or by an over-high esteem of their Knowledge
and Sanctity, by whom you have been taught, which has prepossessed many with a
superstitious credulity to their great disadvantage; as it has fared with
some, who having in their Childehood, heard foolish Tales of Cats being
Witches, or of Witches assuming the shape of Cats, thereupon admitted and
cherished by degrees such an Antipathy in themselves against those necessary
Creatures, that they are distempered to swooning, when a Cat comes
accidentally into their presence, and could never be freed from that infirmity
whilst they lived. That which may truly be called Conscience, has no such
causual or phanatick beginnings, nor terminates in ought which is dishonorable
to GOD, injurious to our Neighbors, or harmful to the Soul of him who
cherishes it, though it may bring troubles upon the Flesh: which if it do,
those troubles being patiently and meekly sustained, will evidence it to be a
good Conscience rightly grounded, and improve the Sufferings, which it
occasioneth, into Consolations; whereas it is impossible, that an ignorant or
pretended Conscience should endure much hardship or long-sufferings. Let us
therefore, well examine and try our Consciences, and then not be afraid for any
outward respect whatsoever, to profess unto others (when just occasions are
offered) that, whereof we truly make Conscience; seeing, by that means, if we
be rightly informed, we may help rectify the Consciences of our erring
Brethren, or be an occasion of our own better information, if we have erred; in
the mean time it will be a trial and exercise likewise of each others Meekness,
Love, and Humility; And, he whose Conscience thus inclines him, can never be
thereby damnified, or want Consolation, whatsoever he suffers, though it may
have some error in it through humane frailty. For, he that is unfeignedly
conscientious of what he professes, because he believes it is agreeable to the
Will of GOD, (and will not therefore infringe it, through fear of any outward
disadvantages, or for the enjoying of any temporary benefit) has so much of
GOD and of his Love in him (as also of Brotherly Affection) that if his
Judgment be faulty, Love will rectify it at last; whereas, whatsoever his
Judgment be, who wants Love and Sincerity, or conformeth to the Judgments of
other men, merely for external ends, it will be corrupted to his detriment,
yea, though it were an approveable Judgment. The Truth which is professed,
whereunto the heart is not inclined for its own sake, but, for some carnal
respects, will rarely be sanctified unto any man, without much trouble in the
Flesh, and affliction in the Spirit.

Therefore, to force or allure the Conscience by temporary baits from what it
sincerely professes in a peaceable deportment to the Civil Power, is a great
Cruelty and Oppression; and whosoever is guilty of that violence or
insinuation, is like one of them, who was said, to compass Sea and Land to make
Proselytes, (or obedient Subjects) and did but thereby make Hypocrites, and
secret Traitors; beget Children for the Devil instead of true Believers; or
Vassals for Antichrist, rather than loyal Leige-men to their Governors.
Whatsoever they pretend unto, they thereby seek somewhat for their own
advantage, much more than for GOD's glory, the public peace of the Nation, or
the Salvation of private persons. This is my Judgment, and will be until I
shall be convinced to the contrary, and then I shall heartily recant it, (as I
will all my other private Opinions upon those terms, in whatsoever I have
Dogmatically declared, and offered to Consideration.) But, I yet doubt not of
what I have averred, and am confirmed in my belief by what the LORD has said
by his Prophet Isaiah, to all those who tremble at his Word, and serve him
according to their Conscience: Your Brethren (says he) hated you, and cast you
out (pretending it to be for GOD's glory) for his Names sake; but he shall
appear to your joy, and they shall be ashamed, Isa. 66. 5.

Be not offended, if in some Particulars I seem not to be at present, wholly of
that Judgment which you best approve of; for I shall be so at last, if it be
truly approveable. In the mean time, by such necessary offenses, the persons
and things which are best to be approved, will be the better known; and though
I dissent from some good-men in things indifferent (or in such as they think
not indifferent) or though I may withdraw out of a conscientious respect, to
others, from partaking with some Professors of Christianity, in that which I or
other men conceive to be erroneous or scandalous; yet, an Heretic or
Schismatic, properly so called, I hope never to be, because GOD's grace
preserves me from wilful averrations, and from infringing of Brotherly Love.
Whether it be in Spiritual or Temporal things, I judge in the abstract, as I
think the Word of GOD judges of them, leaving men's persons to him, and to
those, unto whom a personal Judgment of them belongs; declaring my Conscience
and Belief, as I think I am obliged to do without personal respects or
disrespects, that I might preserve concord, and incline other men to be
like-minded toward me, and to each other; and I conceive I therein give no just
occasion of scandal to my Superiors, or to the Catholic Church. When a City
is first Incorporated, every man who had a Possession therein, or is afterward
admitted to be a free Citizen, may therein exercise the Trade and Faculties
which he had, as a Freeman, before there were distinct Societies, in the same,
and cannot justly be dis-infranchized, or reputed a Transgressor, though he be
none of those new Companions. I was admitted into the City of GOD before there
were (to my knowledge) any gathered Churches therein, and I conform according
to my power and understanding to all the positive Laws of that City, living
peaceably in concord with every Fraternity; and if all the distinct
Corporations therein will receive me into their Societies, I will be obliged to
be conformable to every one of them, so far forth as their Bylaws and Orders
be in my Conscience agreeable to the Universal Laws of the City of GOD, and not
repugnant to each other. For, I am not only a Professor of Universal Humanity
and Philanthrophy, but also a Jesuit and a Catholic Christian. A Jesuit of
the Society and Order instituted by our Patron Jesus Christ; not of that
upstart Sect, lately and falsely so called and invented by Ignatius Loyola, for
the service of Antichrist, under color of that name. A Catholic also I am,
but not a Roman Catholic (which is an absurd term, contradictory to it self)
nor am I of any other particular profession, which may imply a repugnancy to
Universal Truths or Duties; therefore cannot separate in Love from any;
especially, not from those of any Church, who are in a possibility of being in
Christ Jesus, though they are for the present entangled in some Errors; and I
have as well a Charity for mine Enemies, as an affectionate Love for my
Friends; not only desiring the Salvation of all those who profess Christ, by
whatsoever Sect or Name distinguished (and of the profane among them, reputed
as Publicans and Sinners) but that Infidels also, Mahumetans, Jews, yea and
Antichristian Christians (who are the worst of all men) might (if GOD pleased)
come out of the Malignant City by Repentance into his New Jerusalem. And
forasmuch as it is said, He would that all men should be saved; I would have
them compelied to come in, by all manner of loving compellations, and by
preaching unto them the Universal Love and Mercy of GOD in Christ Jesus, by our
exemplary good lives, as well in deeds as in words. To this end, I have much
upon my spirit to be expressed; but, I reserve it to be inserted, in what I
have begun to meditate upon the more Excellent Way, mentioned by St. Paul, and
for illustration of that Universal Gospel, which St. John in his Revelation
informs us, an Angel flying through the midst of Heaven, was commissioned to
preach: For, I have hitherto so long observed, and insisted upon expressing the
ingratitude of Mankind, and the prevarications of the world, that I am as weary
thereof as it is of me; and leaving her henceforth to her own ways, without
reproof, will spend the rest of my time (if my Pen be not taken from me) to
magnify that Eternal Love, by which all things were created, and which shall
be in GOD's time manifested in the perfecting of what his Wisdom intended
before there was a visible World. Meanwhile I will proceed with what I have
now in hand.

The General Love by me professed, as is aforementioned, so prevails with me,
that I can communicate with the Members of any Christian Congregation (if they
will admit it) to break Bread in remembrance of Christ's Passion, and in any
other pious Duties, provided the Communicants be not scandalously profane in
their lives, or obstinate Professors of Antichristian Principles destructive to
the essence of Faith or humane Society; yea, though there be a surplusage or
defect in some circumstances; provided also, my Conscience checks me not
therein, for being a stumbling block to other of my weak Brethren: And I do
ingenuously confess, that in some particulars wherein I practically comply not
with others, I could do it without offending mine own Conscience, in respect of
the things themselves; if I be not enjoined to acknowledge that is necessary
which I think not so to be; to profess I believe that which I cannot believe;
or, if I were not conscientiously fearful, I should thereby give encouragement
to Superstition, and be a more dangerous offense to the weak ones of a contrary
Judgment, than would consist with Christian Charity, the Glory of GOD, and mine
own internal quiet. And, whether I shall at any time hereafter conform, or not
conform to other men's Judgments in things controverted, in public or private,
I shall do it, or not do it, conscientiously in the fear of God, as my heart
then inclines me (though it shall be to my external disadvantage) without
contempt to Authority, or disrespect to any Profession. Nor will it much offend
me, as in relation to my self, to be compelled to submit to things indifferent;
because, if that be a transgression, the fault is not mine, but their crime who
compel that to be done as necessary, which is left indifferently to be done, or
not to be done, as just occasion makes it expedient or inexpedient; and when
the doing or not doing of it, may advance the Common Peace, I prefer that,
before my own private conveniences or inconveniences; yea, before all things,
except the Honor of GOD only. But, take notice, that notwithstanding this
latitude of my Conscience, I am sometimes in as great straits in respect of the
particulars aforementioned, as they who have the narrowest latitude, and shall
in some cases more willingly suffer, than do that which I have a liberty to do:
But I will do as GOD directs me in every emergency; and desire all my Readers
to take heed, that they make neither mine, nor any other man's Conscience, an
absolute Pattern or President whereby to regulate their actings, till they be
convinced by better Arguments than Presidents or Examples. Follow other men (as
St. Paul said) as they follow Christ, and no further: for that latitude which
is vouchsafed to some, is not given to all, nor at all times to the same
persons in the same cases, but variously dispensed, and at no time justifiable
in any, but when it is grounded upon the Law of GOD by Faith, and warranted by
his holy Spirit, working in our hearts according to those Principles.

I again beseech you all in the Love of Jesus Christ (of whatsoever Judgment
you are) to read without prejudicacy, what I have further to declare, tending
(as I think) to Universal Concord, to the preventing what may disturb the peace
of your private Consciences, and conduce to that Repentance and Reformation,
whereunto I would persuade. It proceeds from no Phanatick Resolution taken up
for mine own advantage; nor from a partial respect or disrespect to any
dissenting Parties, but is that which ever since I was of understanding I have
judged reasonable, and been so conformable unto in my practice, that I neither
gave just cause of offense to any, nor persuaded any to be of my Judgment
further than their own Consciences inclined them. I much reverencing the
National Church of England, without despising, or factiously adhering to any
Congregational Assemblies; and heretofore conceived that Set-Forms of Prayer,
as well in public as in private, were for many respects expedient at sometimes,
for some persons, though not always necessary for all men. I believed (as I
still do) that such Prayers as were at any time dictated by the Spirit of GOD,
were at all times accompanied and sanctified by the same Spirit, when any
Congregation, or person, having the same occasions, did with a sincere
intention of the heart, speak them unto GOD in the same words; and that they
who assented unto those words with sincerity, offered up a Sacrifice pleasing
unto GOD, though they were but formally only read by him who officiated as the
mouth of the Congregation. I thought also, that such Forms as are enjoined,
might be helpful to some, either to bring things needful at present to
remembrance, which might else have been forgotten, or to assist those who had
not the gift of vocal Prayer in public; or to help instruct the Ignorant in
giving decent Attributes to GOD in their Devotions; or to stir up their own or
other men's hearrs in that Duty, by preventing such Tautologies, impertinent and
undecent Interjections, or such deficiencies in words as may be offensive to
their hearers, and otherwhile obstructive to themselves in the performance of
that Duty. I judged likewise, that the Forms of Prayer publicly used in the
Church of England were pious, and in few particulars justly to be excepted
against as offensive, if not magisterially imposed as necessary for all, or
formally only repeated, without a hearty intention; yea, I confess, that I
conceived the Let any (whereat much offense is taken) to be the best Pattern of
Prayer, as in respect of the Form, for a Congregation or Family, next to that
which was prescribed by our Savior; because, consisting of many short
Petitions, Confessions, and Deprecations, (to be used as occasions are offered)
the hearers give assent to every one of them vocally at the end thereof; and
are then, thereby kept the more attentive, and their minds more from wandering,
than usually they are in a long continued Prayer; and for that it joins
together both the Minister and the People in their Devotions. Upon these and
the like considerations, I had a reverend esteem of that Form, and of some
other Prayers, notwithstanding their Objection, who say, the Common Prayer Book
was taken out of the Roman Missal: For, though the Papists had part of it in
their Lyturgie, to set a flourish upon their superstitious Novelties (which
Trash had buried under it that little whereof good use might have been made) so
much as the Saints and Martyrs retained at the time of Reformation, and which
in effect was a Collection, for the most part, of what was in the Greek and
Roman Churches before the Papal tyranny began, was not originally Papal, but by
degrees mixed with such humane Inventions, as would not else perhaps, have been
so soon and easily admitted; and I knew not wherefore (the Rubbish being again
separated) but that the wholesome words might be as well hallowed to a pious
use, as the Censers, wherein Incense had been offered up with strange fire, by
Nadab and Abihu, and be re-sanctified by a sincere devotion, when it is
needful. Therefore, I was, at first exploding thereof, sorry it was not rather
purged of what seemed offensive, than quite taken away; and that it was not
left to be used, or not to be used, as occasion might require, or as men's
Consciences thereunto inclined them, without compulsion: For, I thought the
sudden Innovasion, then intended, would be unseasonable, and probably, as it
was carried on, produce those or such like ill effects, as followed soon after;
which presupposal of mine, I publicly declared also, at that time, with as
little thanks for my labor, as peradventure I may have for what I now express.

Yet, when I perceived many had made it an Idol, as others did of things no
less necessary in their season than the Brazen Serpent, (which was at first set
up by GOD's Command) I submitted to what his Providence produced at that time,
who disposes of all things, and permitted that Formality among other, to be
taken away: Yet I knew by my own experience, and by what has been confessed by
some, endowed with more excellent gifts than I am, that GOD, who distributes
his Graces as it pleases him (partly, perhaps, to prevent spiritual pride, and
partly, to increase Love, by making each Member of Christ to need each other;
or, for some other cause known to himself only, (as when he withheld that
fluent vocal expression from Moses, which he conferred on Aaron) does not give
to every Servant of his that confidence in their own abilities which many have,
nor such satisfaction in their own verbosity, that they can speak to him
extempory in the presence of an Auditory, though they are full of devout
thoughts, and want not that gift of internal Prayer, which makes their silent
mental Devotions, or broken expressions, acceptable unto him, and as effectual
as Hannahs Whisperings were, of which Eli misjudged. And indeed, where there is
the nearest communion in the closets of their hearts between GOD and the souls
of his dearly beloved ones, they are more privileged than the greatest
Favorites of Earthly Princes (who make not their Petitions after the manner of
other Courtiers) and being so ingratiated, that they are many times prevented
in their desires by his free Grace, cannot set themselves at such a distance as
they must do who petition in the ordinary mode; neither can they when there is
need, so effectually pour out their hearts unto him in the formality of words,
as by a spiritual communication, though they use words otherwhile, for the sake
and example of others, who have not that way of address, and who may else
peradventure think they pray not at all. In my own particular, it often so
fares with me, that when my heart is fullest both of matter and of strong
desires, to pour out all in words; I am so fearful to forget what is most
necessary to be spoken for, that I can say little or nothing in words; yet have
such prayers of mine been heard and graciously answered. If it were not so,
many poor afflicted souls would be in a sad condition; and it may be that the
declaring of my experience in this case, will be a means of consolation to some.

My private Prayers are for the most part, such; and when I am necessitated to
be the mouth of others, Then (as many do who think it not observed) I heartily,
not formally only, make use otherwhile of some formal words, both to help light
my Candle, and to draw out of my heart by degrees, that which is in season for
present occasions; And as the sweet savor of Ambergreece (which it naturally
puts not forth of it self) is drawn out by things added thereto which have no
sweetness of that kind; so otherwhile by those Forms, which are in themselves
but dead Letters, that which lies unactive within us is quickened; yea,
sometimes the operations of the Spirit may be stirred up by a contemptible
means, even in the most excellent Prophets of GOD, as it appears by Elias, who
to rouse up his Prophetical Spirit, called for a Fiddler, and it is said, 2
King. 3. 15. That when the Minstrel (or Fiddler) played, the hand of the LORD
came upon him. Nevertheless, I desire not that any Forms of Prayer should be
compulsarily imposed on those who need them not; especially, not on them who
are called to be Teachers and Speakers on the behalf of other men: For, though
I my self have not that excellent Gift of extemporary Praying and Speaking,
which becomes him who undertakes to speak to, or for a Public Assembly; I
would not have such Places conferred on those who are not able, on all
immergent occasions, to speak unto the People from GOD, and unto GOD for them
on whom they take charge, either in fit words of their own, or in such of GOD's
words as are stored up in memory: Nor do I think it reasonable, that men so
qualified, should have their spirits confined to other men's words; and perhaps
otherwhile to such words as they cannot make use of with a safe conscience,
though they seem pious and plausible unto many; as for instance, when in our
Thanksgivings or Prayers to GOD, we mention Persons or Actions with such
Attributes, Epethites, or Affirmations, as we either doubt of, or believe to be
untrue, or are not assured that they are approved of by GOD. There may be no
defect in the Form or in the Matter, to common appearance; yet there may be
some Complements in it, which every man's Conscience cannot brook; and to
enforce the use of Set-Forms, not prescribed by GOD in his divine Worship, as
necessary, whether it be on Minister or People, look (in my understanding) when
it is pretended to be for their good, like bidding Guests to a Feast, and when
they come, to constrain them to eat of all that is set before them, even more
than they need, and that also which their stomach loathes (one man's meat, as our
Proverb says, being another man's poison) and if it be refused, cram it down
their throats, whether they will or not; or else keep them prisoners, and strip
them of that which they have about them. I also allow to every man his due
freedom in things of that nature, that when I come to join with any in public
or private Prayers, I bring not with me to their discouragement, a censorious
mind to judge uncharitably of defects in words or circumstances, but
endeavoring diligently to observe what is spoken (be it extempory or a
set-form) and whether it be spoken heartily, or cursorily only (which concerns
not me, but the Speaker) I do consent to the wholesome words of him that
speaks, in so much as I believe tends to the Glory of GOD and to our public
or private necessities, passing by that which I think impertinent, as if it had
not been spoken; adding also secretly in my heart, an amendment or supply,
where I conceive a defect striving against my own corruptions, if any
uncharitable censure begins to rise up, by exercising my Faith and Humility, by
which means that which had else been equivalent to a set-form of Prayer as to
me, is made my own extemporary devotion, though partly personated by another
man: And by thus exercising the Principle of Love, I neither give just cause of
offense for the present, nor disable my self to take opportunities to rectify
at another time, that which I thought not then approvable in him that prayed.
When they in whose pious duties I was partaker, kneeled, I kneeled; when they
stood up or sat, I did the same; the like in all other indifferent things,
that I might not disturb their Devotions. Moreover, when heretofore in the
Public Assemblies, they rose up at the repetition of the Creed, I was not
offended at it, but pitied their ignorance who did it superstitiously; For, in
the Primitive Times, that posture was often used in true zeal, to signify to
those Infidels, and others among whom they lived, their voluntary assenting to
that Belief: and (as I remember) it is recorded, that the Christian Souldery in
those days, drew out their Swords, thereby implying that they would defend
that Profession to the death, with hazard of their lives, if need were. Also,
when the Congregation communicated in receiving Bread and Wine, I sat or
kneeled as the rest did, without irreverence in sitting, or superstition in
kneeling: For I kneeled not to adore the outward Elements, or the Table (which
is now termed an Altar) but, to put my self into an humble posture of
addressing my heart to Jesus Christ in Thanksgiving and Prayer: By which
conformity, in such indifferent things, (which many superstitiously observe,
and many as superstitiously omit) I preserved peaceablness in those who would
have been disquieted, and otherwhile gained thereby an opportunity to rectify
the Judgments of some, who make the observation or not observation of such
indifferent things, to be essential to their Religion; and I am afraid that too
many are only religious in the observing or not observing such punctilio's;
separating for trifles, and being ignorantly affected, or uncharitably
disaffected, to the vexation of themselves and others.

Upon these and the like considerations I heretofore conformed to the
Discipline of the Church of England (knowing in my own conscience, as Paul said
of an Idol, that to me who made not conscience of worshipping thereof, it was
not only no Idol, but as a mere nothing) so for such as my conscience would
permit without offense to my weak Brethren; supposing such Forms of Prayer or
Discipline, as were continued or instituted by the first Reformers, when they
separated from Babylon, were not contrivements of humane Policy only, the
better to withdraw the Peoples hearts from Romish Superstitions, but sincerely
established for the time being, in that mode, because they thought them
edifying, or because it was not in their power to perfect their intention, or
else (which is my Judgment) it was permitted so to be, because the Providence
of GOD would ripen that work by degrees, as it might best advantage his Kingdom
in the time to come, according to his permissions at the wearing out of Jewish
Ceremonies. And, I thinking it my duty, to make the best use I could in my
place, of that Faculty which he gave me, to render such humane Constitutions,
as I had not power to take away, more edifying and less superstitious, composed
about forty years past, a Hymn for every observable day in the year, to prevent
that superstitious observation, whereby GOD was dishonored in those days; and
to the like intent, conformed, as aforesaid, in some other indifferent things
then practiced, until that Discipline was interdicted; and perhaps had so done
now it is restored, but that I evidently perceived the Adversaries of sincere
Reformation, (some of whom seemed to be Friends thereto) have labored to
enslave us to their Judgment; and others, by the old way, to bring us back
again to Rome, by drawing us a little nearer thereunto, by pressing that upon
us, wherein we seemed at first to be separated from her; pulling down, setting
up, and adding what may advance their Designs under color of repairing the old
model of Reformation: And ever since that Discovery, I have desisted from that
conformity, which I formerly thought a thing indifferent; and as I lately
submitted to the Providence which abolished that for a time, whereof I thought
good use might have been made, so I shall gladly now do, if it be abolished for
ever, with all the remainder of humane Inventions, which have been added to
Divine Worship: For, though I have heretofore endeavored to improve them, and
(as you may perceive by what is declared) am not ignorant of the best use that
can be made of them; I now see men have made such Idols of their Disciplines
and Formalities, that they are as mere dead things for the most part among all
Professors. In words they are very zealous for observing the Sabbath, or Lord's
day, Holy Days and other such Ordinances, but keep them not as they pretend
they are bound in conscience. In hearing they hear not; in praying they pray
not as they ought to do; for their businesses on those days, are principally
to see and be seen in their best clothes, to confer of their temporal affairs;
to hear news out of the Pulpit, or from other places, with suchlike; and their
formal devotions are but fruits of a trust reposed in the work done, heedlesly
hudled up, as the Papists do their Pater Nosters and Ave Mary's, as if so, or
so many Prayers repeated, or so many Sermons or Masses heard, were meritorious.
Therefore, notwithstanding I yet see not in this my fleshly being, how the Soul
of Religion can be preserved without some Form wherein it may be visible and
active, I am nevertheless confidently persuaded (and perhaps may therein be a
Prophet to this Generation) that GOD who is a Spirit, and to be Worshipped in
Spirit and Truth, will ere long destroy all external Formalities, but such as
he himself has ordained; in regard his jealousy is as much provoked by our
Phanatick Idea's, as by Graven Images. In the Primitive Church, I do not find
either those Forms of Prayer, nor those Disciplines, nor that artificial mode
of Preaching which is now in use, they came into fashion by degrees; And I do
believe, that though GOD has permitted other Dispensations to be and continue
a long time, and was also pleased to make them somewhat effectual for
preservation of his Truth; yet that Simplicity of Worship, Preaching, and
Praying, whereby the Gospel was first planted, will be again received
hereafter. Howsoever it pleases GOD to proceed, every man is obliged while
such Dispensations continue, to be so far forth conformable unto them, as he
conscientiously believes them to be necessary or expedient for Edification; and
I for my part will husband them as well as I can with preservation of my
obedience to GOD, and charity to men.

I resolve neither to separate from, or comply with any, but as their Doctrines
and Disciplines are contradictory or agreeable to the Word of GOD in my
understanding, in obedience to him, without wilful or factious disobedience to
the Civil Power, or giving just occasion of offense to the Elders or Members of
the Church of England, or of any particular Congregation within these Islands;
but what I cannot believe warranted, I cannot practice or profess, whatsoever
penalty I incur. I conceive not the Church of England, or any other Church, to
be so properly called the Mother, as the Nurse of those who are in them
begotten and regenerated: Nor was I by Covenant at my Baptism, or at any time
since to my knowledge, made a Son or Member of any Prelatical, National, or
Congregational Society, but of the Catholic Church only. If I thought
otherwise (and were not conscientiously persuaded, that it would be uncomely
(or somewhat worse) to go back again to the door for an Initiation after I have
been openly admitted to communicate at the LORD's Table) I would be rebaptized;
therefore, I will conform to no Personal, National, or Congregation Judgment
or Practice, further than I know it to be Catholic, and warranted to quadrate
with necessary decency and good order, by GOD's Word and the Light which is in
me, sanctifying through his Grace the talents of Nature. How other men ought to
demean themselves, the same Light in them, assisted as aforesaid, will also
direct; and of their actings in things controverted, there can be no other
competent Judge but GOD. For, there is a Latitude by him vouchsafed to the
Consciences of some persons, in some cases, to vary otherwhile from General
Rules; as to the Children of Israel, in forbearing Circumcision, whilst they
were in the Wilderness; to Paul, in Circumcising Timothy; as also touching some
outward Conformities, in respect of the Civil Power, even in things injurious
to their own personal Right, according to Christ's example, who paid tribute to
Caesar the usurper of his Kingdom. In great straits and necessities, that which
is not lawful may be expedient, and therefore tolerated. It was unlawful for
any to eat of the Shewbread but the Priests; yet, Mercy being better than
Sacrifice, David and his followers did eat thereof rather than perish by
hunger; and Reason of State excuses not Saul from being a Murderer in slaying
those who gave it unto them, in that necessity, though by the Arbitrary Laws of
earthly Monarchs, it was adjudged Treason. Moreover, that Toleration which was
desired by Naaman, appears to me approvable (though I was once of another
Judgment) That Assyrian Lord, being cured of his Leprosy, humbly desired, in
respect of his nigh Relation to the King of Assyria his Master, who had sent
him to be cured, that God would pardon him, when only to do his service to the
King, he went with him to the house of Rimmon, if whilst his Master there
leaned upon him, he bowed down, without intending any Adoration to the Idol
(which I conceive was employed.) In answer to this request, the Prophet said, Go
in Peace; which if it had not amounted unto a toleration according to his
Petition, the Prophet in my Judgment, had neither dealt faithfully nor
charitably, to send away one so likely to be a true Proselyte, without plenary
satisfaction and instruction concerning his duty. I can neither excuse those
who Magisterially burden the People of GOD, with indifferent things as being
necessary to his divine service, whilst they on whom they are imposed conceive
them to be superstitious, and an infringment of their Christian Liberty; nor
blame those who shall humbly, peaceably, and orderly plead to be delivered from
their bondage, and obey in suffering: For though they may Authoritativly say,
as the Jews did when they crucified Christ, We have a Law by which he ought to
suffer, they may answer and be bold to say, GOD and Nature have Laws by which
it ought to be otherwise. The benefit of those Laws I do modestly (not
factiously) endeavor to vindicate, and will be as wary as I can, not to hazard
Substances for Circumstances or Accidents, nor be afraid to glorify GOD and
confess Christ, in the same good words, which are formally used by wicked or
profane men, though I will not join with them in their intentions; but knowing
that Truths and pious Words are sometimes used to deceive, will so far only
conform to other men's Words and Actions as they are good in themselves, and as
they may be turned to the Truths advantage in my understanding: Much less then
will I make scruple to join with Christian men, in pious Expressions, and in
indifferent Actings, though there may be a sinister intention in them, unknown
to me, who am in charity to judge the best, where evil is not apparent. And,
because I may possibly thereby take occasion sometimes to make that which was
impertinently or superstitiously intended, both a means to frustrate that ill
intention, and to improve a righteous purpose, as GOD does, to glorify his
Justice and Mercy by our prevarications.

Therefore, as to advance the Glory of GOD, and preserve their own internal
quiet, I exhort all men to be watchful that they neither act or omit the doing
of any thing, but as they are conscientiously persuaded, until they shall be
convinced to the contrary; So, I desire them for preservation of their outward
peace, to be as wary, neither wilfully or factiously, or for sinister ends to
refuse Conformity to the Ordinances of men, in such particulars as come within
the extent of things decent, orderly, and well-spoken of by good men, and may
conduce to Edification in Piety, or of Civil Concernments which clash not with
Divine Constitutions. Be not afraid or ashamed to conform, if you have no
better ground of dissent than your temporary advantage or disadvantage, or
because you have heretofore acted and professed to the contrary, especially in
such cases as may make it more obstructive to the Gospel of Christ, and to the
improvement of Christian Amity, than by giving offense to some Brethren; when
as many of another Judgment will be offended also, of whom you ought to be as
conscientiously tender, in which case there will be need of much sanctified
discretion. I likewise humbly beseech all those, to whom GOD has committed the
managing of Civil Powers, to be careful (if they would have men conscientiously
obedient to their Civil Constitutions and Commands) that they entrench not upon
GOD's Prerogatives and positive Ordinances, to the provoking of his wrath, by
imposing on his People unjust or unnecessary burdens in Concernments Divine or
Civil: or by giving those power to domineer over the LORD's Heritage, who
pretend to be Pastors of Christ's Flocks under them, and may multiply, by their
assistance, impertinent and superstitious Traditions and Ceremonies, till at
last they, leaving nothing indifferent, bring the most part of Civil Causes
into their Ecclesiastical Jurisdictions, and be destructive as well to the
Supreme Civil Magistrates, as to the Estates, Persons, and Consciences of their
faithful Subjects, by depriving them of their natural and spiritual Rights and
Freedoms, one by one. That unnecessary cost which many thousands are, or may be
enforced unto, by their Visitations, Inquisitions, Articles, vexatious
Prosecutions in several Courts, their numerous exacting Officers, and by Bribes
to supercede or take off the Process, Censures, and Mulcts, cannot be sum'd up;
besides the charge of all these, and those other burdensome Impositions laid
upon the People since Antichrist got power; Among the rest, that one of
Imposing the observation of Holy Days (as they call them) above the seventh
part of time set apart by ancient Christians in place of the Jewish Sabbath,
amounts yearly to an incredible sum, and by my calculation, to a greater burden
than the Excise, and all other Taxes: For, it deprives the People of above the
12th part of those days, wherein GOD by the old Law allowed them to do what
they had to do in their temporal Affairs: And if we could cast up into one sum,
what the labor of every man, woman, beast, teem of horses and oxen probably
arises unto in those many days, which are superstitiously dedicated to Saints
and Angels, together with the sinful or vain expenses which they occasion by
drunkenness, gaming, and other vanities and mischiefs, during those days, it
would appear such an annual charge (beside hindrances in Trading, and losses at
Harvest and Seed-times) that being added to all the other Impositions, Services
and Payments, lawfully and unlawfully laid upon the Nation, it would, in my
judgment, seem greater than ever was charged upon any People, who were not
absolute Slaves; nevertheless, that superstitious observation was not to be
murmured at, if it tended ought to the Glory of GOD, or but to the benefit of
any part of Mankind, except those who are enemies to the Kingdom of Christ.
That, such Oppressions might be prevented, and redressed when begun, GOD left
not them, who should be Kings and Governors over his People at large, as the
Kings of the Nations were, but gave them, beside many other exemplary Paterns
of Righteousness, the Law of a Just Monarchy, in Deuteronomy. 17. 15. before the
coming of Christ, and many Evangelical Precepts since, whereby they, and their
Substitutes under them, ought to be regulated. And in all times, divine
Providence has raised up some, as well in the Camp, like Eldad, and Medad, as
in the Tabernacle, to be Remembrancers of what ought to be done. They have also
those Ministers of the Gospel, who, instead of those Priests, whose lips were
heretofore to preserve knowledge, by whom they may, and ought to be assistant
with their Counsel, which would not be in vain, if consulted.

But, hereupon arises a Question, lately put to my Conscience, which may,
perhaps, be of concernment at this time, if I could give a satisfactory answer
thereunto; for which cause I will endeavor it so far forth as my Judgment
extends. The Question is, Whether they who being called to a Spiritual
Function, to minister in things relating to the Kingdom of Christ, and the
divine Service of GOD, may intermedle in the administrations touching the
Kingdoms of Men, or in civil and common matters; seeing it seems to be an
undertaking to serve two Masters, which may occasion the neglect of the one or
of the other? I Answer; it may, or it may not be so, according to the mind and
sincerity of the Undertaker.

The State of Venice, rarely admit any of the Clergy to be of Counsel in their
Civil Affairs, because they are jealous of the Popes Interest among them; yet,
I remember they had one, by whose wisdom and faithfulness, they were more
advantaged, than by any one Counselor that ever they had. But, this was a
rare Bird; Rara Avis terris, nigroque similima Cigno. Many such are not bred at
a time in one Nest. The Woods yield few white Ravens, and as few white Dawes
are bred in Churches; yet I have seen both. If he that is called to the
Ministry of the Gospel, shall ambitiously desire wordly honors or profits,
which he formerly enjoyed not; or shall not willingly for-go what he formerly
possessed, when he is called to follow Christ, and finds it is, or may be his
hindrance therein, he cannot, as I believe, with a good Conscience, either keep
that which he had, or accept of other temporary Dignities or Profits. But, if
he be born to any temporal honor or estate, or shall have them bestowed on him
by his Prince, who may have need of his Service, in the administration of
Justice, or of other Civil Affairs, without his own desire or seeking; and
conscientiously believes he may thereby the better serve his Master, Christ
Jesus, he ought (in my understanding) to keep what he had, and accept of what
is tendered, rather than reject it; provided he be watchful that honors corrupt
not his manners, nor his Riches choke the seeds of Grace; and that when he
serves his Prince or Country in a temporal capacity, he leans not to them and
forsakes his best Master, making use of his additional power, to the
disadvantage of Christ's Kingdom; provided also, that when he serves his Prince
or Country in a temporal capacity, he so remembers his spiritual Engagement,
that he humble himself into a parity with his fellow Commissioners, ordained by
Christ, as meekly as if he had no temporary additions or privileges more than
they; so totally laying them aside in the execution of his spiritual Function,
that he may not overawe them in their Votes, or so much as seem to think them
any appurtenances thereto. Where this Moderation is with sincerity preserved,
both GOD and the King, may be the better served; then Peoples Christian and
Civil Liberties be the more secured; and both Parties be as mutually helpful,
as one hand in washing the other. This, I conceive, is as lawful, and as
agreeable to the will of GOD and a good Conscience (with the provisoes
aforementioned) for preservance of the Civil politic Body, and of peace in
the Church, as it was for Jehojeda, the High Priest, to intermedle, together
with his Priestly Office, in the administration of the Civil Government, for
preservation of the King and Kingdom of Judah; or, as it was for Paul, and
other Disciples, who officiated in preaching the Gospel, to exercise their
Mechanic Trades for the subsistence of their bodies, which was less
considerable than the well-being of the Saints in their bodily concernments. As
there be no worse Counselors than Priests, if they be corrupt and wicked; so,
there be none better, if they be prudent and sincere; and therefore I grudge
them not a double honor, who are approved such. But, when the most ambitious,
and the most covetous selfseekers of a Formal Ministry, shall be only, or
chiefly consulted withal, who endeavor the establishing of their own
Ecclesiastical Constitutions, or Popish Canons, shall be joined to a Civil
Government by their own procurement, or by other indirect means, with persons
who for the most part, wholly intend also the settlement of their Politic
ends; there can be nothing expected but an utter overthrow of all the
Foundations of Righteous Government both in Church and Commonwealth. This is my
Judgment; which, if it may tend to produce as good effects as are by me
intended in declaring it, would rejoice my heart, though I were sure to die for
it when it is published.

This Paragraph slipped in by way of Parenthesis, whilst I was prosecuting what I
had to declare touching what is intended to be forcibly imposed upon
conscientious men; upon which Theme I could allege many things, both for and
against what is affected and disliked, more than either of the dissenting
Parties have (that I yet know of) said for themselves; yet had not said so
much, but that it thereby appearing I am neither partial nor ignorant what may
be on both sides objected, I may be heard with the less prejudice on both
sides, in that which I rationally and conscientiously declare; who conceive the
Controversies between them both at this time, to be more mysterious and
ridiculous, than heretofore the Contest was between the Greek and Roman
Churches concerning the Festival of Easter. These are only my Caveats and
Hints; wherein the manifold Confusions, both in matters Divine and Civil by me
observed, and the multiplicity of my Musings thereupon, make my Expressions
also to be confused; yet peradventure they may startle some into a more serious
consideration of them hereafter, if they do no more. In the mean time, GOD's
Word, Christian Prudence, and your own Consciences, must be your Guides; to
which I refer every man, hoping it will be better weighed than it has been;
and that they will take heed on all sides, that their Consciences be not
deluded, feigned, infringed, palliated or biased to the right hand or to the
left, but as they shall be reasonably convinced: For, we are likely to be in a
great strait ere long, which will try who has Faith and Constancy, who are
truly conscientious or hypocrites; where injustice and oppressions abound,
there can be no true Love; where Love is not, there can be no Repentance or
Peace; and where these are not found, Confusion, Despair and Destruction will
take place. Nor the dissembling of our Condition, nor our pretending things
which are not; nor our discountenancing of Truth, and countenancing of Lies and
false Rumors, and fictitious Prophecies, whether it be on the behalf of our
private Interests, or of the Civil Government, or of GOD, will avail us for
good, but be of evil consequence? To such wicked Vanities, I find very many
overprone at this time, and well-pleased with publication of that, which they
believe to be false and erroneous, so it may advantage that whereunto they are
inclined. And for prevention of what these and such like prevarications may
effect, my Conscience compels me to insist so much on the foregoing
particulars, and on those Interjections which are occasionally and suddenly
cast into my heart, that probably I shall be blamed for transgressing in
Tautologies, Pleomasmes and defect of Method, and may also bring upon my self
an increase of troubles in the flesh, by so plainly expressing what I am, and
what comes into my mind, rather than omit what I think necessary, or not
clearly expressed that which I suppose fit to be offered to consideration at
this Critical time: Yea, and some tell me, to whom I have communicated these
Papers, that it will make many of those to fall from me, by whose Charity I
have been hitherto relieved in my present necessities. But, Non nobis nati
sumus, we are not born for our selves only; and if I suffer hereby, I shall be
well contented with GOD's Pleasure therein; who, though his Promises do often
seem to clash, and run cross to his Providence a long time, (for the probation
of our Faith and Constancy) will make them to meet at last in the completing
of that which will be most for his Glory, and the true happiness of all who
depend upon his Word.

Such a wicked spirit of Division, Vengeance and Persecution is active, to
their intolerable oppression who serve GOD according to their Consciences; and
such a defect both of Christian Love and Humanity, even among those who profess
the same Jesus, and of some who are Pastors of his Flocks, that they make it a
Principle of their Association, and as it were essential to their Function, to
endeavor by any means whatsoever (whereby they incur not the penalty of humane
Laws) to suppress all those by violence, who are not conformable to them in
Doctrine and Discipline, even to the maintaining in practice (though they
openly profess it not in words) of this Maxim of the Papists, That Faith is
not to be kept with Heretics; and do their utmost to provoke the Civil
Magistrate to draw the Temporal Sword against them, and thrust them into the
Fire; whereas the Apostle Paul advises, that such as are obstinatly
incorrigible in things justly reprovable, should only be cut off from the
Congregation of Saints by the Spiritual Sword, and as it were pulled out of the
Fire by the holy violence of a loving Zeal, that if possible they may repent
and be saved both in Soul and Body: yet many, against whom their hot-spirited
Brethren are so violent, as being setters up of New Lights, do set up no other
Lights than such as were set up in the seven Golden Candlesticks in the seven
Churches of Asia, when they were at purest; and not such Candles without Light,
or lighted at noonday, as are set up in many places. Some have much wondered
what inclined them to that useless practice; and to inform them, I will
declare, what I conceive to be the reason thereof; They have some Juggling part
to play, which they would not have the common people discover: For, you seldom
see Puppet-Playes, and such Mymical Contrivements presented but by
Candlelight, the better to obscure their secret Conveyances. Their common plea
of Antiquity for their old Lights, is fallacious: Error may plead it in many
cases as well as Truth, though Truth derives a pedigree far more ancient than
our modern or most antique Superstitions, which are not so ancient as
Heathenish Idolatries from whence they sprung. Nay, many of them are mere
Novelties; and therefore all rightprincipled men, who are persecuted for their
Nonconformity, adhere in their belief and practice to the written Word only,
according to their understanding thereof (when they have discharged their
Consciences) in professing their Faith to GOD and their Consciences, in which
he has his Tribunal: For, hoping, that they who dissent from them in Judgment,
profess that which they seem to believe, to no self-end, but only, because in
their understanding it accords with the revealed Will of GOD, they dare not
intermeddle to judge between GOD and them, nor be the less affectionate unto
their persons, though they are in some points deluded for the present. This
temper of spirit I have endeavored to cherish in my self toward all those who
dissent from me in Judgment; and that we may be one in Love, preserve a
Christian Fellowship with the Members of every Congregation professing Faith in
Christ, who are not scandalous in their lives, or maliciously wilful in those
dividing Principles which are destructive to Piety or Humanity. In requital
whereof I have had large testimonies of the like affection to me from some of
every Christian Society, by their late seasonable Charity: yea, such a
considerable number of persons at this time in this Nation, differing from me
and from each other in Judgment, have seemed so to center in the Principle of
Love, by their affectionate, as well as charitable respect to my Person, ever
since I was deprived of my Estate and Liberty; that, considering my
unworthiness (that the tenth part of them were not formerly of my Acquaintance;
and the multitude of other necessitated persons, who are more nearly to them
related) I do much mind it, with much thankfulness to GOD and them, and more
rejoice in it for their sakes than for mine own; because, I hope it is a
Symptom that this Virtue will more increase, to the Glory of GOD and their
Consolation, by our Afflictions and Persecutions, than it did by our temporal
Prosperity and carnal Peace. Not long since (as I publicly declared in a Poem
tending to the prosecution of this work) I thought I should have been as lonely
as Elias thought himself, but GOD has made it appear, that he has many
Servants in this Nation: And my desire to render this precious Ointment of Love
more diffusive among men, has made me so copious in words, and seeming
Digressions upon this subject; wherein, as Paul said of himself, 2 Cor. 15. 13.
Whether I am beside my self, it is of GOD; or whether I am therein sober, it is
for your cause. And as the same Apostle says, 1 Cor. 9. 19. Though I be free
from all men, I have made my self a servant unto all, that I might gain some of
all Judgments; denying or allowing to my self those things that are lawful, so
far forth as they are expedient for the edification of others, and no further.
Let us all endeavor the same thing; and, if we desire Peace with GOD and among
our selves, make Love a medium to that Repentance and Reformation, which is
expected, by considering that the wisest among men, know but in part, (by
laboring to imitate Christ, in his Life, Meekness, Love, Patience,
Forbearance, Long-suffering and Humility, as well as by making a verbal
profession of his Doctrines) and by seeking with mildness to reclaim those who
err in Judgment or Manners; not persecuting, tearing and destroying them, for
failings which they see not in themselves, which they would hate if they saw
them, and for which we ought rather to commiserate, than afflict and oppress
them. They were Disciples, who were so zealous, that they would have Fire
called down from Heaven; but, their Master Christ, reproving them, said, that
they knew not of what spirit they were. Judge your selves, not others; but, as
Paul advises, forbear to judge them in respect of Meats or Drinks, or of an
Holy Day, or of the New Mood, or of the Sabbath; which were a shadow of things
to come, whose Body is Christ. Nor let any (as he counsels in another place)
beguile you of your reward, by a voluntary humility, and worshipping of Angels,
etc. Philip. 2. Nor by any of those Ordinances of men, which, as I said before,
come within the extent and meaning, of Touch not, taste not, bandle not, or the
like; but put on, as the holy elected of GOD, bowels of Compassion, Meekness,
Humbleness of mind, Long-suffering; and above all other, Charity, which is the
bond of Perfection: and let your Conversation be such as becomes the Gospel of
Christ. And, as that Apostle advised, Phil. 4. 8. Whatsoever things are true,
whatsoever is honest, just, pure, lovely; whatsoever is well spoken of (that is
by good men) and whatsoever is necessary to preserve the Common Peace, and
Brotherly Concord, in the fear of GOD, and in obedience to his Truth, think on
these things, to do them: For, you are thereto obliged; and whilst you do so,
ye shall neither fear, nor need to be afraid of your Adversaries, or of what is
feared these later times will produce; because, that fearlesness will be an
evident token of Perdition to them, and of Salvation to you in GOD, on whom you
have confidence, that, he who has begun a good work in you will perfect it,
until the day of Jesus Christ.

Mercy and Love to others will incline GOD to be merciful to our sins, whereas
by defect of Love and Mercy in us toward others, we shall be liable to Judgment
without Mercy, by a self-condemnation. They, who think to do GOD acceptable
service, or to have a happy accomplishment of their own ends, by persecuting
those who serve GOD according to their Conscience and understanding, do but
kick against the pricks, as Paul did when he was Saul, a persecuter; and
stumble upon a Stone of offense, upon which they will be broken into pieces, if
their hearts be not changed, as Paul's was. Also, when they expect GOD should
forgive them their Trespasses against him, they will fail of their hope: For,
how can they perform the condition of their Pardon, by forgiving those who
Trespass against them, when they prosecute a Brother for those offenses which
he commits not against them, but, in their opinion, against another, who, for
ought they know, is rather well pleased, than offended at what they judge an
offense. This kind of trespassing against our Brethren, will bring us within
the compass of those horrible Maledictions, which are prophetically pronounced
against such persecutors in the 109 Psalm; and therefore let us take heed of
it. Tyrannizing over the Conscience is a sin, which I do not find the Jews to
have been charged withal until the coming of Christ, and when their general
Desolation approached; nor that the Gentiles were often guilty thereof, until
the Worlds Grand Monarchs usurped an Arbitrary Sovereignty over the rest of
Mankind, and would be reputed Gods; nor then, until Nebuchadnazzer's time; nor
among Christians, until Prelacy (which sprung from Heathenism) brought it into
practice, to settle their Novelties, with their Usurpations of those pompeous
Pontifical Dignities which they found in old Rome, and have continued by
Oppression and Persecution, ever since the power of the first Beast, mentioned
in the Revelation, was transferred to the second: And they are such sweet
Morsels to flesh and blood, that the Best Reformed Churches (as they call
themselves) are loath to let go the Rags and Relics which some of them at
first had, and do yet retain of those Carnal Dignities and Perquisites; but
preserve as much of them as they can in specie, or, in disguized Forms,
persecuting, more or less, to uphold their Diana; which is a sin so destructive
to that Peace, Repentance, and Reformation whereto I would persuade, that
(judging uncharitably of no particular Person, Congregation, or National
Church, though I conceive of their defects and sins, as I believe the Word of
GOD judges of them) I will proceed one step further, to signify what I
apprehend thereof, and of what Classts I think them to be, which is plainly
this.

Whatsoever Person, Persons, Congregation, or Society of men, or National
Church, or Civil Government, shall be so espoused to his, or their own
Judgment, Will, Formalities in Discipline, or Profession of Doctrines relating
to the Worship of GOD, as to arrogate Infallibility to themselves, and shall
thereupon endeavor by humane Policy, by the temporal Sword, or by any other
way than by the Word Preached, and by such Disciplines as are thereby
warranted, to enforce other men to conform to those Doctrines or Disciplines
which they please to establish and profess, though it be the Truth, until they
are convinced in Conscience, that it is so: Or, whosoever shall Constitute a
Ministry of the Gospel, otherwise than is ordained in holy Scripture, either by
setting up such Officers as are not thereby Divinely Authorized, or by casting
out, or silencing such as Officiate according to the Primitive practice of
Christians: Or, whosoever shall act or combine with others, to set up, or
destroy, or uphold any Civil Authority, to the Disturbance of the Common Peace,
under Pious and Religious Pretenses, otherwise than the Laws of Nature, and of
the Nation, do allow: Or, having gotten Power of Compulsion, shall enforce any,
contrary to their Consciences, to comply with them therein, or to submit to
their Commands farther than by a Passive Obedience: Or, whosoever shall make
their Congregational or National Sanctions, which relate to GOD's Worship only,
to be unduly Instrumental for advance of their personal Power, Estates, or
Preferments, Temporal or Spiritual, by over-awing their Brethren, or otherwise
than is agreeable to divine and humane Justice; or, to a purposed excluding of
those from the like advantages, merely because they are of differing opinions
from them in Religious Controversies, though in Fundamentals of Divinity and
Humanity, in their Prudence, Manners, and in all other respects they are as
capable of that Trust, as other men. All such, whatsoever show they make of
Christian Piety, or true Morality, are (in my Judgment, though they carry not
the Mark of the Beast in their Foreheads) in a degree, more or less, for the
time being, Confederates with Antichrist, and Members of that Divided Kingdom,
and Malignant City, which must be destroyed, and help destroy it self, so far
forth as the Temporal Sword, mere humane Powers and Policies, will be useful to
that purpose. The Work of the Saints consisting only in their Constancy,
Patience, Love, and in the exercise of suchlike Spiritual Weapons; especially
in the sincere Love of GOD, and of each other, grounded on his Eternal Love to
Mankind in his Son, King Jesus; which Love --

When thus much was Printed, a part of the Copy was lost at the Printing House,
which could not be supplied without sending privately that which was left to
the Author, in whose hands both this Supplement, and the rest of the Copy, was
seized in his Chamber. The Providence of GOD must be submitted unto, and we
doubt not but the Remainder will shortly come to our hands, either from a Copy
which is said to be sent into Holland, or by another which is in a Friends hand
that will keep it safe. And perhaps, when they in Authority have perused what
is seized, and see how innocent a Piece it is, and how much it tends to the
Glory of GOD, the Honor of the King, and the Settlement of the Common Peace,
it will be returned back to the Author, that it may be made public; this is
the hope of good men who have seen it, unless for our many sins GOD shall
justly deprive us of that means, which he graciously intended to bring to the
knowledge of the King and People, those things which are pertinent to their
joint Consideration at this time, for prevention of his further Wrath, and the
Judgments deserved. That which is wanting, amounts to about seven or eight
Pages; and contains Particulars of much concernment, not mentioned in the
Title; Among which, that considerable Mystery of the Reign and Kingdom of
Christ upon Earth; and what is to be believed thereof, is stated, so far forth
as Man is capable of it in this fleshly being; so that none who are principled
aright therein, will or can, with a good Conscience, think that the Weapons or
Militia of that Kingdom are carnal, or that the Kingdoms of the Earth and
Antichrist, are to be destroyed by any such Instruments in the hands of the
Saints; which being well Considered, would have been advantageous to preserve
the Common Peace. So Farewell.

FINIS.

