THE DOCTRINE AND PRACTICE OF MORTIFICATION.

Wherein is discovered the matter, manner, and means thereof, together with the
blessed event that comes by it.

Necessary for every Christian to know and practice, that will live
comfortably, and die peaceably.

By Thomas Wolfall, Master of Arts, and Preacher of the word of God.

LONDON, Printed by T.C. for John Sweeting, and are to be sold at his shop in
Popeshead alley, at the sign of the Angel, the entering out of Cornehill, 1641.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE JOHN Earl of Bridgewater, Viscount Brackly, Baron
Elesmere, Lord President of Wales, and one of his Majesty's most honorable
Privy Council, his noble Patron.
Right honorable,
HAving upon slow deliberation resolved to publish these Meditations, being,
animated thereunto by some of my good friends, wh^ are both able and judicious:
my next resolution came more readily to present them unto your honor, not for
the worth of the matter, but as willing to discharge my duty and service; Quod
solum nostra opis ^st gratias ager uti apud Douns s^eri amat, copiosius
sentiende. quam loquen de Auson.ad Imperator em 1 Cor. 2.4. Col. 2.4.
for as my first call to a Pastoral charg was by your honors liberal and
unspotted bounty: so I here present these the first fruits of my labors (of
this kind) to your honor, as the testimony of my thankful mind; humbly
desiring to shroud them under your honors shadow; which albeit they come in a
plain and homely dress (m^o more) not in wisdom of words to please the
curious care, but by plain demonstration f^o^ the holy Scripture, to work
upon the honest heart, neither was it my intention in penning and publishing of
this discourse, Non tonantia and poetica verba proferimus, non aliqua
Grammaticorum ante composita; nec eloquentia seculari, diserto sermon fucata;
Sed Christum crucisixum praedicamus. Aug. de accedent. ad gratiam. Ser. 1.2
Cor. 10.4 Heb, 4.12.
to satisfy men, vain phantafies but the consciences: yet notwithstanding, I
trust they will be the more acceptable unto your honor. A soldier that
intends to kill his enemy, does not do it with a flourish, or flat blows;
but by striking home, even to the fetching of blood. I hope I may be then
excused if I take the same course; it is not paper pellets, that will beat
down strong holds, nor wooden swords, that will wound to the heart. Wherefore
I have endeavored to lay the Axe to the root of the Tree, and to discover
that kind of war and weapons will be needful for the work.

To which end I shall humbly crave leave that I may give your honor, in a few
wo^ds, the sum of the whole.

1. Here is a discovery of the enemy which is latent in us, sicut Anguis in
herba, as a Snake in the grass, potent against us, building (...) strong holds
against us: lastly, subtle and politic, and so does beset us round, and
hinders the entrance of the good motions of the holy Ghost, Heb. 12.1.
Sordes peccati and spiritus sanctus in uno domic^lio non mor abuntur: the
filth of sin and the holy Ghost will not dwell together in the same
habitation.

2. The combat is set down in those words, mortify, etc. Ber. Ser. in
Pentecost. Hic jac^t Similis, cujus atas multorum annorum fuit septem autem
duntaxat annis vixit Dion. in Hadriano.
For the place of this combat, it is the Church; when as once we become the
sons of God, then also do we become soldiers of Christ; and for the time of
it, it is in and after regeneration, and not before, though our lives may be
long, yet our spiritual life in grace may be but short, as it was said of
Similis, whose years were many, yet lived but seven of them.

3. For our assistance we have the spirit of Christ to arm us with that whole
armor of God that we may be able to stand in the evil day; and withal to put
courage and animosity into us, (...) Ps. 7.8.9. Psalm. 84.7. (...).
that we faint not like those Ephramits, that went our and carried bows, yet
turned again in the day of battle; sine animis nil arma.

4. The reward is propounded and promised, ye shall live: our fight is here,
our crown hereafter; quis sanctorum sine certamine coronatur, Hier. Ep. 22.

To conclude, therefore that we may not be deceived, behold the enemy
discovered, the flesh with the deeds of it; that we may not pleasantly dream
of ease, and security, behold a sad combat, gravis lucta non contra hosts sed
hospites. Ber. Not against enemies, but home born seeming friends; that we may
not fear, nor faint in our minds; behold the spirit of grace helping our
infirmities.

And lastly, that no man may think it in vain to serve God; behold, the
reward: we shall pass from a battle to a banquet, from a combat to a crown;
we have the life of grace here, and the life of glory hereafter. Wherefore,
seeing that this kind of death is the end of so much misery, and beginning of
so great happiness, which is the maine drift of this discourse; I hope at your
honors best leisure, it may do you some service, though not to inform you of
what you know not, yet to mind you of what you know, so that the good work
begun in you may come to perfection in Gods best time.

Thus prays your honors devoted in all service, Tho. Wolfall.

To the Christian Reader, grace and peace.
THIS discourse being delivered in certain Sermons to a private Congregation
in the City of London; the notes whereof falling into the hands of diverse of my
loving friends; by whose motion I was encouraged to commend them to a more
public view, as a discourse not unsuitable for these times, and a good means
(through Gods blessing) to appease and aswage those inward boylings of envy,
hatred and other exorbitant lusts in the hearts of men: Those scandalous and
scurrilous speeches, that issue of their months, and also those fell and fierce
dissensions that break out in men's lives; not only to unnecessary suits in
Law, but also to unjust quarrels, and duels; even to the indangerment of the
loss of soul and body, Vitium quod parvulum habitum concupiscere facit ad
ultimum etiam concupiscentem reddit. Pet. Lum 2. lib. 2. did. 30.
all which are nothing else but the fruit of unmortified lusts. Jam. 4.1. These
as they are born and brought up with us, so often like the sons of Zerviah,
they become too strong for us. Is it dangerous living among Lions, and is it
not dangerous living among lusts; every one of them seeking fiercely to war
against the soul?

There be three things that men do greatly desire, equity, liberty, and peace:
now so long as sin lives, and lust does lord it over the soul; there is no
justice to be expected: such as the tree is, such will be the fruit; and if the
Bramble rule, it will burn up the Cedars of Lebanon; Jud. 9.9.
nor can we expect liberty, for the Law that is in our members will lead us
away captive; the liberty that is given to the flesh, does but bring the spirit
into bondage; and what peace can we expect, where there is no peace with God?
If then (Christian) thou would have justice, then do justice, and kill
sin before it kill thee; if thou would have liberty, then let not sin
reign, for therein does the great strength of it lie; Sampson was easily taken
when his locks were shorn: so thou may easily subdue sin when the
regiment of it is taken down; if thou would enjoy that peace of God which
passes all understanding, then make no provision for the flesh, but mortify
it by the help of the spirit, Romans 13.13.
and thou shall have peace internal here and eternal hereafter.

Now for as much as this discourse is to help thee therein, I do therefore
heartily commend it unto thee. I have avoyled prolixity, lest I should tire the
Reader, and too much brevity lest I should wrong the matter, I have the rather
fallen on this subject, because I find few that have done it; and because I
have found some such spirits as have labored to cry it down, as altogether
unnecessary after conversion. If there be any such into whose hands this
Treatise shall fall, let me so far prevail with them as not prejudge what
they do not mean to read lest they be numbered among those fools that
speak evil of what they know not.

To conclude (Christian) thou have my labors, thou have my prayers, when thou
do approach the throne of grace let me have thine.

Thomas Wolfall.

THE DOCTRINE AND PRACTICE OF MORTIFICATION,
ROMANS 8.13. But if ye through the spirit mortify the deeds of the body ye
shall live.


Chap. 1. An Introduction to the Text with the coherence of the foregoing part
of the Chapter.
THe common tidings that has sounded in our ears from the Churches abroad,
for diverse years together, has been upon the point nothing but wars, and
rumors of wars, of leading into captivity, of garments roled in blood;
insomuch as that country in which was plenty of corn and wine, as the garden
of Eden, is now as a land forsaken, or as a desolate wilderness; nay a very
Aceldama, or field of blood: And howsoever we of this Nation have but heard of
this, amongst us, no leading into captivity, no complaining in our streets;
Yet the sword of the Lord has been drown against us, and has slain
thousands, and ten thousands in our streets. James 4.1.
Now the general cause both of those lamentable desolations abroad, and the
hand of God at home, is chiefly this; that we go not to war with our selves,
we do not slay those lusts of ours that fight in our members: for if ye walk
after the flesh, ye shall die, not only a death of the body, but the second
death, the soul shall suffer eternal torment; But if ye mortify the deeds
of the flesh by the spirit, then ye shall live eternally.

To make way unto the matter in hand, our Apostle lays down certain
differences between such as walk after the flesh, and others that walk after
the spirit.

1 In respect of the object that they aim at, the one minds the things of the
flesh, the other the things that are above; such as a man is, such is his
mind; a carnal man, and a carnal mind: the wisdom that is not from above,
is earthly, sensual, and devilish; James 3.15.
but that which is from above, is first pure, then peaceable, gentle, easy to
be entreated, Verse. 17.
full of mercy and of good fruits, without partiality, and without hypocrisy.

2 They differ in their ends; for the end of the one is life, the end of the
other is death; Every man must eat of the fruit of his own way, Prove. 1.31.
and be filled with his own devises.

3 They differ in their affections, so as they that are at enmity with the Law
of God, Verse. 7.8.
their fleshly minds are not subject unto it, neither can they be, and being
they are not, they cannot please God. Whereas on the other side, they that are
of the spirit, Christ dwells with them, and takes up his habitation in their
hearts, suppes with them, and they with him: Happy and thrice happy that house
which has him for an inhabitant, for this possession of Christ does imply the
dispossession of sin, Verse. 10.
For if Christ be in you the body is dead, but of sin, as Dagon could not
stand with the Arc, so no more can sin and Christ inhabit together. We cannot
serve these two Masters. Again, as it puts sin to death, so he quickens us,
Verse. 11.
that same spirit that raised Christ shall quicken us; wherein he shows that
the work of our regeneration is great, even as great as that of the
resurrection, the one being the internal renovation of the soul, the other
the external restoration of the body to its reunion with the soul; Hence our
Apostle draws an effectual inference to persuade men to withstand the
inticements of the flesh, from this, that there is no service of due that does
belong to it, we are not debtors to it, that we should follow it. Nay if you
walk after the flesh ye shall die, but if ye mortify the deeds of the flesh
by the spirit, then ye shall live. Behold as Moses said: Deuteronomy. 30.19.
I call Heaven and Earth to record against you this day, that I set before you
life and death, blessing and cursing, therefore choose life that you and your
seed may live. So I here set before you both these, and yet my desire is the
same that Moses his was, that you would choose life, that your souls might
live, which undoubtedly you may do if ye follow Saint Paul's direction here, If
ye mortify the deeds of the flesh by the spirit. Here you may observe,

1 A description of our natural corruption, it is called the deeds or
practices of the body.

2 Here is our duty what we should do against it, namely, to contend against
it, and to mortify and slay it.

3 The means whereby it must be done, by the spirit.

4 The reward is that promised, Ye shall live: which is a large promise,
seeing it contains in it all the happiness that we are capable of, called a
crown of life for the greatness, and everlasting life for the continuance.

Chap. 2. Of the means how to find out our natural condition by a threefold
inquiry.
TO begin with the first, the description of our natural corruption, viz. It
is called the deeds of the body, as it is with men that go to war, the first
thing that they do, is to endeavor to find out the enemy: so it must be in
this spiritual warfare, we must first endeavor to find out this our
spiritual and mortal enemy, who he is: and secondly, where he lurkes; and
thirdly, how he seeks to fortify himself.

1 Who this enemy is.
1 Who this enemy is; it must be he that contends against the spirit, and
labors to withstand all the good motions of it, which is called all along in
the former part of the chapter the flesh, and here in this place the body: now
the body is sometimes taken Physically for the substance of the body consisting
of flesh and blood; or else morally and in a metaphor for sin and vice
compared to a body; and so I conceive it must be taken here; for conceive of
the body as it is merely natural, and so it is good, and those effects that do
issue from it must needs be good: again the body in the production of her
actions is but the handmaid to the soul; and the soul is as the great wheel
of the clock, Corpus mortis est cuncta peccata: multa enim unum corpus su^t,
singula quasi membra uno authore inventa Ambros. vid. locum. Infelix est homo
hospitem secum habens peccatum perquod ad illum aditum habet Satanas. Gloss.
that moves all the inferior wheels by her motion: now the denomination in
propriety of speech comes from the better part; therefore it must be taken here
for that natural corruption, that does abide in the body and soul. So S.
Ambrose on Romans 7.24. he calls it there, that mass of corruption that is
inherent in us, is all our sin, as it were making up that body of sin, that
as a body consisting of many members, do but make up one entire body; so sin,
though it spread it self into every part of our bodies to make them members of
sin, and into every faculty of the soul to make them weapons of
unrighteousness, yet still it is but one.

Take notice, carries another body that has in it the symptoms of death, nay
and that will draw the other to the same condition with it self; nay if one
should tell you of a monster that had something in it like a beast, something
like a serpent, nay and something like a devil. This monstrous birth of sin
does contain all that in it, if not more: are not men like the cruellest beast
the Lion; like the most poisonous creature the serpent, nay children of Satan.
John 4.44. O that we could see our selves as we are; we would be ready to fly
from our selves, as Moses did from his rod, when it became a serpent, Exodus
3.4. and to abhor our selves in dust and ashes.

2 Where he lodges.
2 If you enquire where this enemy is, you will hardly believe that he is so
near you, nor near so favored of you as indeed he is, that such a desperate
enemy as this is should lodge in your houses, feed at your tables, and lie in
your bosoms, is not so strange as true, nor more true than lamentable. Men in
this case are like David, who did not stick to condemn the injustice and
cruelty of the man in Nathans parable, 2 Samuel 12.
that took the Lamb from his poor neighbor when he had no need, having
sufficient, or rather superfluity of his own; but alas the good man little
thought that all this had been done by himself; even so it is with us, when
we hear from the Word, that there is such a thing as a body of death, a heart
that is desperately wicked, Romans 7.24 Jer. 19 9.
and a law of the members that leads men captive to sin: it is easily granted
by them that so it is, but yet will they be loath to yield, Dolus latet in
universalibus.
or to have such a thought in themselves, that they are the men: and hence it
is that we are like unto sick men that complain of their bed, when the cause
is in their bones, and of the sharpness of their physic, when the fault is
in themselves; so it is with men in case of sin, when it lies on the
consciences of men, and makes them restless, they complain of the condition
as too hard and heavy, and of the Word, which is the physic for the soul,
as too sharp and bitter, when as they look not into the cause which is this
body of death that lies in our own bosoms: and as we see not our sins, so
neither do we see the danger that we are in; but as it was with Balaam, Numb.
though the Angel was before him with his drawn sword, yet he saw him not,
but falls out with the poor Ass, as if all the fault had been in the
harmless beast; whereas had not the Ass stood still Balaam had been slain,
and all this came from his covetous heart, which he would take no notice of;
So men are ready in case that sin be charged on them, and even the danger
ready to approach, yet do not see it, but are ready to quarrel with such as
labor to keep them from it, but howsoever men labor to put their sins one
to another, as we toss a Ball, and bandy it from one to another, and every man
from him, yet let him know, that they go but herein about a vain shadow, and
disquiet themselves in vain; It would be much better to take David's counsel,
Psalm. 4.4.
stand in awe and sin not, commune with your own bearts in your bed and be
still: or as some will have it, and bleed, and that in deed should be our
care, that when we have found this enemy which is the disturber of our peace,
we should enter in our chambers and bewail our misery, if it were possible,
even with tears of blood.

3. The means how lust does fortify it self.
Lastly, how he seeks to fortify himself, and to this end observe, that the
flesh and this corruption is such an enemy as is never out of action; thence
it is that God complains, My people have chosen two evils, they have forsaken
me the fountain of living waters, and hewed them out Cisternes, broken
Cisternes that will hold no water; So that in this sin of man there is a
turning from God the chiefest good, as the fountain of all their happiness,
which is as a living spring that never fails; God all-sufficient who gives
grace and glory and every good thing; Psalm. 84.11. Ier. 9.27.
Now we first turn our backs on God and not our faces to him, and then fall
to these empty and broken vessels, Cisternes they are, but Cisternes that hold
no great matter; Dulc^ores a font bibuntur aquae.
nay, broken Cisternes that will not hold any thing at all; so as there is
neither solidity nor certainty in the comfort that they give, not solid and
sweet, because they are from the Cisterne, and smell of the caske: Surely man
disquieteth himself about a vain shadow, Psalm. 39.6.
were it not a folly, or rather a madness in a man that should come into an
orchard, upon the trees whereof did hang much fruit, sweet and pleasant, yet
should leave them, and seek to disquiet himself to gather up the shadow: The
Philosopher calls a man Arbor transversa, Luke 10.
a tree turned upside down; but by sin it is, that a man is homo
transversus, a man that is quite altered, and goes downward like the young man
from Jerusalem to Ierico, spoliatur, vulneratur, redivivus relinquitur, spoiled
of his good, wounded, and left half dead; So it is here, we in our departure
from God to meet this enemy that spoils us of all those ornaments we had, and
we are wounded with the guilt, and the stains of sin, and left in such a
lamentable condition, as did not that good Samaritan come, our Lord Jesus
Christ, and power in the oil of his own grace, and the wine of his dearest
blood, we should perish everlastingly.

CAP. III. Of activity of lust proved by two particulars.
THat sin is thus practical and full of action will appear if you confider
two things.

1. By the fruitfulnes of sin which does appear.
1. The fruitfulness, and the plentiful increase that it does bring forth.

2. And then the power and vivacity that there is in sin, both which will set
out, that the enemy against whom we do contend, is an active and stirring
enemy.

1. For the first, sin, Jam. 1.15. By its expedition in the production of
sin.
it brings forth with much speed and celerity, Lust when it has conceived it
brings forth sin; and sin when it is perfected brings forth death. Even
as when you cast a stone into a pond, that begets a circle, and that begets a
greater, and so they multiply until they be many, and that on a sudden. So is
it in case of sin, one sin begets another speedily, and the reason is,
because it is the nature of the worst kind of fruit to spring the fastest; you
need not plow for weeds, nor sow cockle nor hemlock in the furrows of your
field, they will grow of themselves: So is it with the ill weeds of sin, they
come up of their own accord; nay, though we labor to weed out these
corruptions, yet will they sprout and grow again; If you ask me why that
grace comes on so slowly, and sin with such speed, I answer as the Egyptian
Midwives did unto Pharaoh when he asked them why they slew not the male
children, they answered, because they are not as the Egyptian women, Exodus 1.19.
but lively, and are speedily delivered. So it is in this case, grace at the
first is weak, compared to a grain of Mustard Seed, and falls into a barren
soil, our corrupt hearts, and there it is that it comes up so slowly; but
sin, that is strong, and is in a soil that it likes, and therefore comes up
with more celerity.

2. In the increase of sin.
2. Sin is fruitful in that it increases, sin, though it be little at the
first, yet grows apace; a man that begins with smaller sins, those make
way for greater, as it is said of the sin of Sodom, Genesis 18 20.
it was very great, and the cry was multiplied; that is, as the sin
increased, so the cry came; grievous sins do make a great cry: Hazael was
afraid to hear of that wickedness, which after he was not ashamed to commit;
sin is like that cloud which Eliah saw, which was at first no broader then a
man's hand, yet it spread, and spread till it covered the whole heavens; So it
is when men first begin to fall to some little, do they know how they shall
be carried before that they will return again: Amos 5.1
Israel is called the Virgin Israel but behold afterward her great
transgression and her mighty sins made the prudent to keep silence, 13.16.
and brought such a storm and inundation of wrath upon them, that a wailing
should be in all streets and Vine-yards, the day of the Lord should be a day
of darkness, etc. When we speak of the works of the flesh, Gal. 5.19.
we may say as Leah said when Gad was born; behold, a troop comes, as
Adultery, Fornication, Uncleannes, etc. seve^teen in number, and the reason of
this multiplication of sin is in respect of the multiplicity of objects each
of them being a bait to entice us unto sinue, and withal, the multiplicity of
occasions, that are as bridges to lead unto evil; that we had need every day
to pray, Lord lead us not into temptation: and the greatest temptation that can
befall a man, is the temptation of his own heart, for every man is tempted
when he is drawn away with his own concupiscence and is enticed.

3. In the constance of it.
3. Lastly, sin is fruitful in respect of the continuance and lastingnesse
thereof. God complains of the thoughts and imaginations of man's heart, they
are evil, and only evil, and that continually, contray to all other
breeders, who though they have been fruitful, yet nature decaies, and time
makes them barren; but now sin, as it is said, vires acquirit eundo, it
gathers strength by its motion; So it is here in sin, it holds on and goes on;
and that as Saint Paul speaks of ill men and seducers, 2. Tim. 3.13.
that they grow worse and worse, and as the Prophet complains, How long shall
evil thoughts lodge in you, Jer. 4.14.
he does not say that evil thoughts may not be in you, but they should not
lodge, the word is pernoctare to lodge all night, that is as if he should say,
though you sin, beware you continue not in it, though you be angry, let not
the Sun go down upon your wrath* to fall into sin, is as if a man should
fall into a deep pit; and to continue in it, is as if a man should role a
great stone upon it, for by falling into sin he falls into the snare of the
Devil, and by continuance it entangles himself more and more, as a wild Bull
in a net, who the more he rages the faster he is entangled: Esa. 51.20.
And thence it is that custom in sin is as hard to be left, as to wash an
Ethiopian white, or for a Leopard to change his skin.

CAP. IV. Of the power and authority that unmortified lusts does put forth in
us.
THe second demonstration whereby it may appear that this enemy against whom
we do contend is thus active will appear from the power and authority that sin
has, as they answered Iehu when he bad them fight for their Masters sons; 2.
King. 10.4.
Two Kings (say they) stood not before him: So may I say of sin (and I would
it were not too true) that two of the worthiest Kings that ever reigned in the
world, both for piety and wisdom, were foiled by this enemy, namely David and
Solomon; And if they did not stand before it, how careful should we be that
we be not entangled with it. The power of a King. Romans 5.21
It has the power of a King, sin is said to reign unto death, as it was
when the Israelites desired a King, Samuel told him what an one he would be,
and what he would do; He will take says he (meaning that wicked King Saul)
your sons for his service, 1. Sam. 8.10.
and your daughters to be his handmaids, nay the best of your Vine-yards, and
Olive-yards for his servants, etc. So it is with sin when as it reigns, it
will bring all to his service: This Tyrant sin will take the choysest wits,
and make them plot for him, and will make them wiser in their generation then
the children of light; Inimicus noster mo do rex modo Tyran nus Sen. Ep. 96.
he will take the choysest of your strength, even your young and flourishing
days, and set you into his work to dress his Vineyard, and to reap his
harvest, as he did with Absalom, Manasses, and the prodigal son, nay he will
take every faculty of your souls, and engage them in the common quarrel
against Christ, Romans 6.13
and every member of the body, and make them weapons of unrighteousness to
serve sin, and indeed the very reason why sin is such a fearful and dreadful
enemy, is because it makes it self a King; for suppose we sin to be
dethroned, and put from his dignity, and behold you shall find him like
Sampson, Judge. 16.19.
without his locks, as another man; but as long as sin reigns, though it be,
but as the bramble, Judge. 9.15 Eadem libido dominatur, nec Regum purpuras
times, nec mendicatium centonem spernit. Herr. Ep. 9. 2. Of the Law. Romans 7.23
yet will it be strong enough to set fire on the goodliest Cedars of the
Forest, as you may see in Iothams parable, nay it fears no more to enter in
the Palaces of Princes then it does to assault the beggars Cottage.

2. As sin is a King, so he rules by his laws, I find a Law in my members
leading me captive unto sin; this Law, it stands in opposition to the law of
God; (...).
that is, that it fights against it: now a Law is properly nothing but a rule
whereby we are to work; so it is with sin, it has a rule whereby it goes,
and that whereby they frame and direct all their actions; Now because they that
have a mind to live in sin, and withal find that conscience does condemn
that course wherein they walk; hereupon they frame unto themselves another
Law, which may be as the City of refuge against conscience, who like a
revenger of blood, hunts after the malefactor.

1. Lust would abolish Gods law.
1. They lay down this as a principle, that the Law of God is too heavy a
burden, it is too hard a task-master, and therefore as Jeroboam pretended unto
the people of Israel, that it was too far for them to go up to Jerusalem,
therefore made them calves at Dan and Bethel; so carnal reason says, that the
Law of God, it is too far a journey, full of difficulty and danger: it is
like Rheoboams yoke that was intolerable; Thus the wicked heart of man labors
to bring an ill report upon the pure Law of God, and hence it is; that our
Antinomists, and Libertines labor to overthrow the Law of God; that which
Christ came to establish, these men endeavor to abolish; Romans 3.31 2 Timothy 3.6
such a generation of men there has been, as creep into houses and lead away
silly women laden with lusts, that is, by putting them into a form of
Godliness, telling them that Christ having taken away the guilt and punishment
of sin, there is nothing to do for them, no need to make the Law as a Rule,
or to mortify their corruptions: flat contrary to the Apostle, that such as
are in Christ do mortify the flesh, Gal. 5.24.
with the affections and lusts: But let such take heed as do endeavor to bring
an ill report on this good Law of God, that the Lord say not as he did against
those that brought an ill report of the good land, Psalm. 95.11
unto whom he swear in his wrath that they should never enter into his rest.

2. Lust frames a new rule.
2. Seeing that this Law will not serve their turns they frame another of their
own, that will be subservient for the accomplishment of their ends, they are
compared to such as kindle a fire and compass about the sparks, walk (says
God) in the light of your fires, Esa. 50.11
and in the sparks that you have kindled, this shall you have of mine hand,
you shall lie down in sorrow; to kindle this fire is to hatch and forge some
new rule as a light to walk by; and to compass it with sparks, is as it were
to blow it up with carnal and fleshly arguments, and then to walk in the
light of it, is to labor, to carry, and enforce all their actions according
unto that rule, and hence it is that there are so many sects, and so many ways
that men walk in; It is because they are not contented with that fire that
burns on Gods Altar; the pure light of the word, but like Nadab and Abibu,
they kindle strange fire of their own, but this shall they have at Gods hand,
their light shall be turned into darkness, and their sparks into ashes, and
lastly their joy shall turn into sorrow. For as the Arc and Dagon could not
stand together: so no more will these stand long, because they are like
building laid on a sandy foundation, or as grass on the house top.

3. It colors all with fair pretenses
3. That the mind may be the better persuaded to go along according to this
rule, the flesh labors to color all over, and to set a fair gloss on a
foul cause; and if you mark it, there is no sin so vile but men will find
out some color and some excuse, either to make it no sin, or else to make it
venial, and so little, that it may lodge in his heart with as much safery as
Lot did in Zoar, we want not examples of both these. For the former you see,
Saul is charged by Samuel to have transgressed the Commandment of the Lord; No
says Saul I have obeyed the Commandment of the Lord; but then says Samuel,
what means then the bleating of the Sheep, and lowing of the Oxen in mine
care. So may we say, when men would excuse themselves from sin, and say, we
have good hearts to God, we may ask them what means their swearing and their
drinking, and their profane and unchaste speeches? Out of the abundance of the
heart the mouth speaks. Some again will confess the fact, but excuse it,
either they were ignorant, and knew it not; whereas our ignorance is a sin,
and when we add sin to it, we make the sin double; Or they did sin, but
it was with no ill intent, and therefore it was but an infirmity; I confess
the more evil there is in the intention, the more wicked is the action; but I
do not see how there can be an evil action without an ill intention, for if
the tree were good, then the fruit would be good, and therefore let me tell
you, that to excuse your sin is all one as to cover your sin, Prove. 28.13.
and you know that he that hides his sin shall not prosper.

CAP. V. Arguments to prove sin active.
NOw it remains that we give some arguments whence it comes to pass that this
enemy is so active.

1. Stoutnesse.
1. The first is taken from that stoutnesse and stubbornness that is in it, Romans
8.7.
such a height of pride is in it, that it is not nor cannot be subject unto the
Law of God, nay it is not afraid to contest against the holy Ghost, Acts. 7.51.
and to say unto the Almighty, depart from us we desire not the knowledge of
thy Law, what is the Almighty, that we should serve him, Job. 21.14.15.
etc. And hence it is that Saint Gregory in his moral makes it regina
peccatorum and vitiorum, for whereas all other sins fly away and labor to
bide themselves from God as Adam did amongst the trees of the garden; and as
Saul among the stuff, but only this stoutnesse of spirit is that which
labors to rebel against God, nay and to exalt it self above God, and all
that is called God; the Lord would have his will to be done, 2. These. 2.4.
Vult Deus fierl voluntatem suam superbus vult sieri suam. Ber. Ser. 4. vig.
not. Psalm. 2.3. 1 King. 12.25. Vt melius posset resistere regno Juda, and ipsum
infestare aedificavit sortalicia.
but the proud heart will do his own, as they said. Let us break their bonds
in sunder, and cast their cords from us. Now all this resistance cannot be done
without much action and motion. We read that when Jeroboam revolted with the
ten Tribes from the house of David, he built Sichem and Penuel two strong holds
to defend himself and his Kingdom from the inroads which might be made by his
enemies; So it is in this case, that when a man begins to revolt from God, th^e
he cosiders how he may fortify himself against him; and this is done by our
high thoughts that labor to build to themselves strong holds; 2 Cor. 10.4.
So as Gods word (if it may be) shall not come near, Judge. 1.19.
but they will repel the force of it; As it was said, the Lord was with the
Tribe of Judah, and he drove out the inhabitants of the mountain, but could not
drive out the inhabitants of the valley, for they had chariots of Iron: So a
Minister of God, and with whom the Lord is pleased to do great things; yet
some men have so fortified themselves with such stiff necks, and such brazen
foreheads, that you may as soon fill the skin of Leviathan with barbed
irons, Job. 41.7.
and his head with fish spears (which Ioh made a thing wondrous difficult, if
not impossible) as to make any entrance upon him, or to convert him unto God.

2 Experiments of it.
2 That sin is so active may appear in respect of the many battles it has
fought, and the many victories it has obtained; some it has foiled; as it
began with David on the top of his Tower, and there it drew him to lust: and
lust drew him to adultery; and his adultery drew him to murder; and it left
him not there, but made him to cover it with a fair pretense, that the sword
does devour one as well as another; and in this case men are like Rachel, that
first stole away her fathers Idols, and after wards, when they were sought for,
sat on them. So is it here, first to sin, and then to hide it; and thus it
foiled Peter, it found him first in the High Priests hall, there he sinned
against knowledge, in denying he knew Christ, and against equity, in that he
denied that he was any of his Disciples, yea and against that promise that he
had made, that though all men would forsake him, yet will not I. Whereas he
was the first: And as it has soiled many of Gods dear servants, Judge. 4.21.
so has it conquered and quite overthrown others, Judge. 4.21.
and fastened them to the ground as Iael did Sisera, that they never rose
again: thus it did with Judas, the hope of gain made him that he betrayed his
Master, and then went and hanged himself; thus it was with the Angels that
fell: that they fell so wittingly, and so desperately, as there was no place
found for repentance, as there was for man after his fall. Now as it is with a
man that has fought many battles, and that has obtained many victories, sure
no man will deny him to be active, so it is in this case, sin having given so
many foiles, and having gained so many victories, who can say but sin is full
of action, and restless till it have accomplished its ends.

3 The force and help it has,
3 We cannot marvel, though sin be active, seeing that Satan helps it
forward, in some he plays the Rex, and rules in the hearts of the children of
disobedience; Ephesians. 2.2.
and note this, where men are sons of disobedience, there are they also
servants unto the Prince of darkness, 1 Pet. 5.8.
they come at his call, and go at his command: nay he makes them as like
himself as may be; the devil is fierce and cruel, thence he is called a
roaring lion, and are not his servants so? No Bear more salvage, no Tiger more
fierce, no Lion more cruel than they are: It is better says one, to be a
beast, than compared to a beast, for a beast is good in his nature, but a man
that is like a beast, he degenerates from that nature that should be in him.
How does Pharaoh cause the male children to float on the river? How does
Manasses cause Jerusalem to swim in blood? And what a monster was Herod that
slew all those innocent babes from two years old and under? Inv. Sat. 8
Nay how like was Nero to him that caused Christians to be put into coats laid
over with pitch and brimstone, Hino ausi quod liceat. tunica punire molesta
Juv. Sat. 8. Host is callidus ta^da ad mortem supplicia conquirens animas
cuprebat jugulare non corpora.
and to burn all night, to the end they might show light to those that passed
by, The devil hates our natural life: so does he make his servants, to seek
to take away the precious life of men, as you have beard, nay he labors to
take away our spiritual life, that is to destroy our souls; as when Christ
had sown the good seed, Matt. 13 19.
the enemy he comes and sowes tares: he was a lying spirit in the mouths of
all Ahabs Prophets, 1 King 2.23.
so he seeks to fan us as chafe, and to hinder our faith: so do all his
servants. How did Jannes and Jambres resist Moses to his face? 2 Timothy 3.8.
Acts 13.8.9.10.
And did not Elimas seek to turn the Deputy from the faith, whom Paul not
unfitly calls the Child of the Devil, and enemy of all righteousness; And for
their activenesse in all this, they are very industrious; As it was said of old
of Pharisees (of Jesuits now) that they did compass sea and land to make one
Proselyte, Mat. 23.15.
and when they had done made him twofold more the child of the devil than
themselves: and no wonder though they move so fast, for they must needs go
apace whom the devil drives.

Chap. 6. Instructions arising from the former doctrine.
1 IF then sin be so active, this sets out whence it is, Whence m^e are
restless in sin.
that wicked men are so restless in sin, so as they are never at quiet,
unless they be doing something or other that makes against God, and the good
of his people: Ps. 37.12.
David shows that the wicked plots against the righteous, and gnasheth upon
him with his teeth, and draws his sword, and bends his bow, and all to slay
such as are upright in heart, Ps. 78.12.
yea he lays snares, and seeks their hurt, and speaks mischievous things,
and imagines deceit all the day long; Esa. 57. ul.
hence it is that they are compared to the troubled sea, when it cannot rest;
whose waters cast up mire and dirt; and indeed as long as this body of sin is
unmortified in us, it will be as troublesome to us, as Jonah was unto the
ship which was tossed up and down on the waves till he was cast out; for
howsoever that sin may sometime seem to lie quiet, and all in the man may
seem to be at rest, yet alas it is neither a true, nor long peace, but as it
is with him that has an ague upon him, albeit when the sit is over he comes to
his temper again, and you would think that all were well, and that his enemy
had left him; but alas the next day the poor man is disquieted with it again,
and possibly more than before: so it is in case of sin, that though it may
be, that such a man that lives in sin, is now quiet, and neither does
discover his malice against God and goodness without, nor at present any
appearance of a storm arising in his own conscience within; yet that
unmortified body of death, that lodges within him will not rest till it bring
both fear at home, and trouble abroad, for this is the policy of Satan to
make the way fair unto us, until he have drawn us into sin, and then
labors to pierce us through with many sorrower; and so it was with Saul; 1 Timothy 6.10.
sometimes he was as calm and as well as another man, but when the evil
spirit came upon him, then was he like a ^ad man: so it is with men that live
in this case, while they are in their cold blood, and have no occasion offered
they are quiet, but if once there come a fit occasion; and that be followed
with a temptation, then are they as tinder to the spark, that presently
kindles, and which begets a great flame, James 3.5.
behold how great a matter this little fire (of sin) kindles.

2 Whence suddenly wicked.
3 This shows whence it is that men are so suddenly wicked: surely it must be
from hence, because that sin is so active as it is* the activenesse of sin
makes a man impatient of delays; one being demanded why the earth was every
where so fruitful of weeds, and yet so much ado to make fragrant, and
pleasant flowers to grow, albeit it were with much cost and pains; answered,
that the earth was the natural mother to the one, and stepmother to the other;
it is so in this case, the earth of our hearts does bring forth sin of it
self, and has the seed in it self; but for grace, alas it is a stepmother
unto it, all that we can do is little enough to bring it to perfection;
whereas this body of sin is marching on like Iehu the son of Nimshi with much
rage and malice, neither fearing God, nor reverencing man: when the old world
began to corrupt their way, Genesis 6.4.
they are said to have had to their children mighty men, and men of renown, or
of name; and the reason, because they were mighty in wickedness, (...)
and had got themselves a name of infamy; the way of sin is down hill, and
can hardly stay it self till it come to the bottom; little do men know how
deep he may fall that is a falling into sin, if he fall not as Eutychus,
that fell from such a height, that he was taken up dead, yet may he fall at
Mephi^osheth did, and receive such hurt by it, that he may never claw it off
all the dales of his life.

3 The rise of hypocrisy. Intus Nero, foris Cato totus amb guus, pars prima
Leo: postrema Draco media ipsa chymera: Hier. ep: 5.
3 That a man may be a notorious sinner, and yet have a show and color of
piety: so those that were proud, heady, high minded, etc. yet they had a form
of godliness, a rule that they went by in show; within as base as Nero:
without as austere as Cato; Such were the Pharisees that sought out wardly to
justify themselves, but God knows your hearts says our Savior; Luke 16.15.
that is howsoever men could not, yet God both can and will: Hypocrisy is one
of the fairest garments, that this body of sin can be covered withal,
because that by this means the hypocrite is hidden both from others, and from
himself; from others by this, it has been that so many have showed unto men
to have had the voice of Jacob, and the hands were the hands of Esau, and have
pretended great piety; when their intentions have been barbarous and most
prodigiously impious; As Jezabel pretends a fast, 1 King: 21.9.
and intends murder; and Absolon pretends the performance of a vow, 2 Samuel
15.8.
yet intends treason, nay the worst of treasons against his own father: and
those preachers of Philippi pretend to preach Christ, Phil: 5.15.
but their intentions were malicious: but howsoever they think by this means
to deceive others, 2 Timothy: 3.13.
yet in the issue they deceive themselves; for while they are a deceiving
others they do indeed deceive themselves; and it were better openly to sin,
Meli^s est aperte peccare quam santitatem simulare: Aug:
than to dissemble sanctity, and be you sure, whosoever you are, that carry a
heart, and a heart; a balance and a balance, that God will find you out, and
shall smite every such whited wall; and as old Ahiah said to the wife of
Jeroboam, 1 Kings 146.
when she came disguised, Come in (says he) thou wife of Jeroboam, why
fainest thou the self to be another? I have heavy tidings to tell thee, so
may I say unto such, that I have heavy tidings to tell them, that is this,
Act. 8.23.
that they are in the gall of bitterness, and in the bond of iniquity: and if
there be any fire in that bottomless tophet hotter than another, it is prepared
for the hypocrites, and therefore when God tells men of great punishments that
the wicked shall have, he tells them that their punishment shall be with
hypocrites; that is, making them a pattern of greas punishment to others. Mat:
24.41.


Again, this body of sin it does so work and cover it self, that it makes
a man to mistake his own condition, as the young man did, when he said, Mat.
19.29.
All these have I done from my youth, and yet poor soul, he knew not the
deceitfulnes of his own heart, that he was mistaken, and had a deceitful
heart that would not submit to the will of Christ: and we read of Herod, that
he did many things until it came to the leaving of his Herodias, he was
content, but there he stuck. So it is with men, they are so well conceited of
their conditions, as he that goes a jot beyond them, goes too far, and he
that comes not to their pitch is too profane, and that rule which they have
taken up is the only rule; but to such I will say no more than our Apostle
does, Let him that thinks he stands take heed lest he fall, and that his
foundation be not built on the sand.

4 Seeing that this body of sin is thus active, 4 How suspicious we should be
of our selves.
it should make us suspicious of our selves, and be very jealous over our
selves in all the actions that we do, seeing that there is one within us that
has a hand in them, that is our mortal enemy, Prove. 26.25.
who albeit he may speak us fair; and make his voice gracious; yet as
Solomon says in another cas^, there are seven abominations in his heart; if a
man have a servant in his house, that he neither can turn out, nor may trust;
will he not then be suspicious of him, and often call him to account, Jer.
17.9.
yet behold such is our own hearts, deceitful above all things, and who can
know it, it has such turnings and windings, that unless we watch it narrowly,
it will deceive us. Ask we our hearts this question, whither they went then at
such a sermon, when the word was powerfully opened, it will answer as Gehezi
did, Thy servant went no whither. Ask it again, whether it does believe in
the Lord Jesus Christ for life and eternal salvation, it will answer yea, he
has believed ever since he can remember, and never doubted in all his life.
Ask him again, whether he be in such a condition as he may go to the Lords
Table, he will answer again, go in peace: Thus like another treacherous
Judas, he will for his own ends betray his own Master; now I appeal unto
your own hearts, whether this be so or no, whether you have not offered such
strange fire unto God, and thought that such blind and lame services would
serve your turn. Have you not cause here to be suspicious of your secret
enemy, that lurkes in your bosoms, that is so ready to deceive it self and
you. When that King of Syria saw that his plots were still discovered, that his
war did not prosper against the Kings of Israel, 2 King. 6.11.
Will you not tell me (says he) which of us is for the King of Isra^l? So it
should be with you, that when your designs and good purposes are interrupted,
you should enter into your chambers and commune with your own hearts, and call
up all your thoughts together, say to them, will none of you show me, which of
you are for Sa^han. I find many good motions that are all stifled in the birth,
and a law of the members that does rebel against the law of the mind, and then
complain of this enemy unto him that is able to help you, and say, O wretched
man that I am, good Lord deliver me from this body of death.

CAP. VII. Of the second principal thing, viz: the doctrine of Mortification,
with certainc distinctions to clear it.
NOw the second thing laid down in the text, is the duty that is commended
unto us by our Apostle, namely that the deeds of the body are to be mortified,
Joel. 2.13.
this is no other than that of the Prophet, Rent your hearts, and not your
garments, etc. now the renting of their garments, was but (in the best use of
them) to put them in mind of the disposition of their hearts, and what serious
thoughts God would have them be affected withal: They did use to rent garments
either in case of some great evil of sin, or evil of punishment, in case of
some great sin. 2 King. 18
So Hezekiah rent his clothes at the blasphemy of Rabsheke, Hest. 4.1.
the foul mouthed enemy of God; and so in case of some eminent danger, so
Mordecay rent his garment, out of trouble of heart for that great Massacre that
was likely to befall the Jews: and may not the like misery sway with us, to
make us rent our hearts, and mortify the deeds of the body, especially when we
consider the greatness of our sins, both in respect of their number that
they are many, and of their nature that they are foul, and make us loathsome
in the sight of God, for their quantity they are as heavy as mountains of
lead, Deuteronomy. 19.18.
and for the quality they are roots that bear gall and wormwood.

The like exhortation the Apostle gives, Non dicit Apostolus non sit, non
habitet, hoc enim impossible, sed non regnet peccatum, etc Greg.
Let not sin reign in your mortal bodies, that you should obey it in the
lusts thereof. It is true that sin will remain in us, but it must not reign
over us, for if grace reign in your hearts, then sin must not reign, grace
will have no competitor. We read of Alexander the great, that he was never
content till he had conquered all the world; so is it with grace, it is never
at rest till it have conquered this little world, this body of sin, and put
down every high thought that does exalt it self against God. This exhortation
is urged more plainly. Mortify therefore your members that are on the earth,
fornication, uncleanness, inordinate affections, etc. as before, sin is
compared to a body, so here, particular sins are compared to so many members of
that body, that as all the members do work together for the preservation of
the whole, so does every least conduct, and concur, to the preservation and
continuation of this body of sin.

For the more distinct handling of the point, consider, that mortification may
be distinguished as something that is external and without us, Mortification
is external.
or else as something that is internal and is done within us: as it is
external, so it is said to be a legal mortification, when as a man is dead in
law, as a melefact or is said then to be a dead man when he is condemned; so
sin is then said to be dead when it is forgiven, Romans 8.3.
and God is said to send his son, in the likeness of sinful flesh, and for
sin condemned sin in the flesh, that is, that sin should be as certainly
put to death, as it was certain that Christ had taken our nature on him, a
great comfort it is to a distressed soul that does cast it self upon the Lord
Jesus Christ: though at first it do not apprehend the power of sin
mortified, yet apprehending our plentious redemption purchased by Christ he
concludes, that sin shall certainly die, because Christ has already
condemned it and as David said, 1 Samuel 20.3.
when Jonathan did persuade him to the contrary, As the Lord lives, and as thy
soul lives, there is but a step between me and death, so whatsoever conceit
the soolish heart of man may have, that his lusts are so strong, as there is
not possibility of subduing them, yet for as much as the matter is now in the
hand of Christ, who has past sentence on them, it is certain that there is
but a step between them and death.

Internal. Initiall.
2. Internal mortification is either initiall or renewed, initiall
mortification it is that first work of sanctification, whereby the force and
vigor of sin is broken, and the body of sin has received such a deadly
wound as makes it incurable, though a man in this case may go as the woman
did from one Physician to another to have the issue of blood stayed, yet will
it bleed still, there is no Balm from no Physician there: Jer. 3.22.
now this initiall mortification is either general or special.

Initiall. General. Luke 15.8
1. General, when there is a general blow given to every sin when we do
as the woman when she had lost her money, did sweep the house, not only
some, but every room of it, the whole house, thus shall we be sure not to
leave any sin without the mark of death upon it, wash your hands ye
sinners, James 4.8.
and purify your hearts ye double minded; that is, that man that is truly
mortified, is such as is all over mortified; that is, there is no actual sin,
that sticks to his hands, nor any inward corruption that he does allow of in
his heart: The Pharisees were strict in the tradition of the washing their
hands, but negligent of purging out the hypocrisy of their hearts; So likewise
the curse that is annexed unto sin, and does follow it as sure as the day does
the night, so sure will wrath follow sin. Had we not need then to be very
much grieved for them, Matthew 15.2.
and to mourn in secret until they be slain in us? Though Jobs afflictions
were many and great, Job. 1.14.
yet there is this remarkable, that there was one in every of these trials that
escaped to come and tell him, so is it in this case with many that though there
may seem to be a great mortification of sin, yet behold one or other does
make an escape, and comes and tells us that all is not mortified, such a man is
wise and liberal, but yet he is proud, such a one is humble and courteous,
but yet he is covetous, a third is devout and religious, and yet full of
disordered passions, so that though men seek to color over their sins with
never so many fair pretenses, yet if it be not so indeed, something will
escape: as she said to Peter, Matthew. 26.73.
you are sure one of his Disciples, for thy speech bewrays thee, so something
will discover them at one time or another, either pride, or their
covetousness, or their passions; like a dead Fly spoils the whole box of
precious ointment.

2. There is a special mortification of special sins, 2. Special
that although for sins of ignorance, a general mortification will serve the
turn and is acceptable to God, yet because that there is much deceit lies in
generals, we must descend to particulars, as David says. I know mine
iniquity, Psalm. 51.3.
and my sin in ever before me, is it not I that have sinned? 1. Cron. 21.17.
Again, all sin is not of equal proportion, but some are weaker and some
stronger, like the sons of Zerviah, and they are not unlike to that kind of
evil spirit that is not cast out but by prayer and fasting; much ado there is
to subdue them, there is some bosom sin that is so sweet and pleasant, as it
is compared to our right hand, in respect of the profit of it, and to our right
eye, in respect of the tenderness of it: now against this we must contend, for
as long as such a special corruption lives in us, (like as Pharoahs thin
blasted ears of corn) it devoureth the fat ones, so will that sin eat up
all your spiritual comforts, or as Saul said concerning David, as long as the
son of Jesse lives, the Kingdom shall not be established to you (meaning
Jonathan) so I say, as long as you do not contend against your special sins,
the Kingdom of heaven will never be established unto you, therefore labor to
find them out one by one, and having found them, pursue after them as the
revenger of blood till you have slain them, that you have may come to carry
tidings of the fall of the rest. 2. Renewed in case.


2. The next is renewed mortification, Daily incursions and fruits of sin.
that is in case that we renew our sins, we must renew this work also, and
this is either in regard of those daily infirmities that are the fruits of this
body of sin that is in us: or else in case of a relapse or falling fowly into
some great sin which does waste the conscience, and therefore when we have
given unto sin some deadly blow, we must not then think that the work is
done, for it is with us, as it is when a Ship springs a leake, though they
pumpe up the water, yet will it fill again; so is it with us, there is such a
corrupt fountain as will still be troubling of us, the same reason that may
move us to say, give us this day our daily bread; may also prevail with us, to
say, forgive us this day our daily sins; it should be our care every day to
consider our ways, and to examine our hearts, and not suffer our temples to
take their rest, nor the eyes in our heads until such time as we have caused
our daily sins to sleep the long sleep of death: believe it, if we would
do this we should sleep more quietly, live more peaceably, and dye more
comfortably, this is that same wherein we may rejoice, for by our rejoicing
that we have in Christ, 1 Cor. 15.31.
we dye daily; Now to mortify sin every day is more easy, because it does
not get that strength that it does if it be let alone, the fire is quenched
best when it is but a spark; and a bank of the Sea is easily repaired at the
first: so is it in case of sin before this spark of sin ever set on fire
the whole frame of nature, and before this Ocean of lusts have made such a
large breach in our conscience, as that, which would have been but the work
of a few hours, becomes the work of many months.

2 In case of a relapse.
2. In case of a relapse, or of some great sin thath ath been the case of
diverse good men, they have fallen out of one sin into another, to the
wounding of their own conscience, to the stilling of the good motions of the
holy Ghost; and to the opening of the mouths of the wicked, to blaspheme the
holy name of God and that holy profession they had taken in hand; now as we see
by experience a relapse into a disease is dangerous, so a revolt into sin is
very dangerous, because a man sins in that case against light, and against
conscience, and against the good motion of the Spirit, and makes way for the
great enemy to return with a greater strength: now by how much the disease is
more dangerous, by so much is the cure more difficult, how beit, the matter be
hard, yet it is not impossible, therefore in such a case, and to that end, you
must not deceive your selves; you must search out the cause wherefore this
evil has befallen you, as it was when Israel turned their backs on their
enemies; Joshu. 7.8.
Joshuah sought out the cause, and sound that there was one Achan, that had
troubled the whole camp. So should we never cease before we have found out
the cause; And when you have found it, say of it as ( Soul did in another case)
when as God answered him not; 1. Sam. 14 38.39.
know and see, says he, wherein this sin has been this day, for if it be
Jonathan my son, he shall surely die; so say I to you, show no pity on it,
for sin can show no mercy, and therefore good reason, that it should have
judgment without mercy; alas brethren lust is so dear unto some men that
they will undo themselves and their souls to enjoy that, as it was said of
Jacob, Genesis 44.30.
that his life was bound up in the life of Benjamin: so may I say that men's
hearts are so folded up in their lust, that you may as well pull out the one as
purge out the other.

CAP. VIII. Containing the second distinction
Inartifitial Imperfect. Perfect.
MOrtification is either perfect or imperfect, perfect mortification is that
when there is a total abolishing of all sin, so as there is nothing that
does remain. As God is said to wipe Jerusalem as a man wipeth a dish, and
turns it up-side down. So when as sin shall be so wiped out, as there is
none of the venom of sin tthat does remain or stick to us, 2 King 21 13.
but all is wiped off and utterly extinguished; but this cannot be expected in
this life, not that God cannot, but that in his wisdom he sees it not fit:
1 Cor. 13.9
we know in part, and we prophecy in part, but we must not look either for
an absolute perfection of holiness, nor for a perfect freedom from sin,
until we put off these Tabernacles, which when they shall be restored again
at the resurrection, then shall we be as the Angels of God without either
stain or remainder of sin, this shall be done hereafter, but not now, for
these reasons.

1 Reasons why none perfect.
1. For the manifestation of the power of God, that though we have corruption
within, and fighting without, the great enemy, that casts his fiery darts at
us, yet the Grace of God is sufficient for us, and his strength is made perfect
in weakness, 2 Cor 12.9 Haec praesentis vitoe tuoe perfectio ut te imperfectum
agnoseas.
this is our greatest perfection to see our imperfections, that so we might
glorify God the more. It was as great a power of God, to keep Lot in his
integrity in that sink of sin, that City of Sodom, as it was to free him
from that shower of Brimstone that fell upon it; so is it as great a power to
keep his grace in the midst of such corruption as to have free us from it, by
his absolute power at the first, or to keep a spark in the midst of the Sea.

2. To put a difference between viatores and comprehensores, between such as
are in their journey to the new Jerusalem that is above, and those that are
Citizens there already: No man has the Garland before the victory, nor the
reward before the race be run; we must not look for a Heaven here and another
hereafter, Hic conten demus ut alibicoronemur
we contend here, that we may receive a crown hereafter; we are not to expect
that which is not promised: Nay he has told us that his Kingdom is not of
this world.

Hebrews) to hang up our Harps, and to weep by those banks of Babell, when
we remember mount Sion which is above, it was Christ's usual journey from
Bethany to Jerusalem, from the house of mourning, to the vision of peace: so
must we mourn here, that we may rejoice hereafter.

Adams sin, for if that we should have sin removed as soon as we are
borrne, we should never be sensible of the greatness of that offense; nor of
the weight, and burden of original corruption, for if you would reason but
thus with your selves; if the weight of sin be so intolerable, and the burden
so heavy to a man regenerate; that he cries out, woe is me, for I am a man of
polluted lips, Es. 6.5.
and dwell amongst men of polluted lips; if he complain, O wretched man that
I am, Romans 7.24.
who shall deliver me from this body of death: if we our selves groan under
the burden of sin that is upon us, what would the weight of it be if God
should lay it on in the full measure, then would we cry out as Kain, that our
punishment would be greater then we can bear; as they, by finding out the
length of the Gians foot, found out the length of his whole body; so may we
by the weight of the sin we feel, be able to conceive of that we feel
not; and to say as Paul did, Verse. 25.
God be thanked through Jesus Christ our Lord, that though in my flesh I serve
the Law of sin, yet in my mind I serve the Law of God.

Imperfect mortification is when the work is begun but not finished, it is
with us in case of mortification, as it was when the Israelites came to
possess the land of Canaan, God would have them cast out the inhabitants by
little and little, Dent. 7.22
and not to be consumed at once; So in this case it is not to be expected
that sin should be consumed at once, but by little and little.

The degrees of mortification are some more temote, some more near.
For the better clearing hereof, observe two particulars, whereby you may
conceive by what steps and degrees sin is mortified. First, some of them are
more remote. Secondly, some of them are naere.

Philosophy that natura non facil saltum, that nature works successively, and
makes no leapes; for it is as true in grace, 2 Pet. 3.18.
that it does admit degrees.

Simeon and Levi, brethren in evil: sin is then pleasant unto them, and
whosoever speaks against it are none of their friends; but now when we see
that sin has deceived our soul, and played the Judas with us, that it has
betrayed us into the hands of Satan, and has procured the wrath of God upon
us; then we break our friendship with it, and are sorry that we had ever any
thing to do with it, Ephesians. 5.11
have no fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness, but rather
reprove them; that is, we must not have any more to do with them. God charges
the people of Israel to take heed that they marry not with the heathen, Deuteronomy.
7.
for they would turn away their sons and daughters from serving God: So will
sin do if you make league with it, or do not break from it, and so procure
the heavy wrath of God upon you; it is the charge which our Savior gives unto
those that went into Babylon. Rev. 18.4 2 Cron. 19 2.
Come out of Babell my people, be not partaker with her of her sins, that ye
receive not of her plagues. It was a good speech of the son of the Prophet to
Iehosaphat, should thou help the ungodly, and love them that hate the Lord,
therefore in wrath upon you from the Lord: So there is nothing a greater enemy
unto God, nor unto your salvation, then sin is, therefore break your league
with it lest you procure the fierce wrath of the Lord of heaven and earth
against you.

Paul's hand, without any hurt or taking any strong impression upon them; where
there is the greatest unity and friendship, when such fall out, there is the
greatest enmity and discords; thence it is that Solomon says, Prove. 18.19.
that a Brother offended is as hard to win as a strong City, and their
contentions are like the bars of a Castle; so is it with this contention,
because as their freindship has been great, so also is the contention
stronger: therefore some of the Martyrs when they have been pressed by their
friends, to renounce their religion, with what indignation have they spoken,
that if every hair of their head were a man, William Sparrow pascalis.
they would burn them all rather then go from the truth. And some have
blessed God even that ever they came in prison, or that they were counted
worthy to suffer for Christ all this, out of a desire of the enjoyment of
Christ, and the hatred of sin.

flesh can make, that so we may starve the flesh out of the holds that it has
made for it self; Romans 13.14.
So the Apostle put on the Lord Jesus Christ, and made no provision, for the
flesh; sure it is when men are careful for the body, and careless for the
soul, when they expend the greatest part of their lives and means in the
minding of the things that pertain to the satisfaction of the flesh, and in
the prosecution of their lusts and pleasures, and say unto their souls, Luke
12.19.
eat, drink, and be merry; what do they all this while but foster and
nourish that body of death, even unto the day of slaughter; but on the other
side, a man does then make no provision for the flesh, when he lives as a
Pilgrim, and as a stranger, and does abstain from fleshly lusts, that fight
against the soul. When a man makes a covenant with his eyes, 1 Pet. 2.11
that he will not look on a woman to lust after her, when he shuts his
ears, Job. 31.1
and will not hear the voice of the Charmer, charm he never so wisely, when
that he looks to all his ways and takes heed, Psalm. 39.1.
that he offend not in his tongue; in one word, that keeps his heart with all
diligence, Pet. 4.23.
that howsoever voluptuous and sinful thoughts may knock at the door, yet
they may find neither entrance nor enterrainment, when he hardens his heart
against sin as much as Dives did, that he would not permit Lazarus the
crummes that were under his table, but suffered the Beggar to dye at his door:
So when we deny our lusts their least requests, and will not permit them the
least or lowest room in our hearts, 2 King. 6.32.
when we deal with sin, as Elisha caused his servants that kept the door,
says he, hold him fast, and handle him roughly, or press him at the door; so
should we do with sin, if he offer to make intrusion, repel him back with a
holy violence. 1 Cor. 9.27.
I beat down my body, and bring my flesh in subjection, that when I have
preached to others, I my self may not be a castaway.

CAP. IX. Showing those more near degrees of mortification.
2 NOw I come to those that are more near degrees of mortification, as you see
in war, there is many lesser assaults made before they win the maine
battle; so is it in this spirirituall contestation and contention between the
law of the members, and the law of the mind; 1 Degree. Heb. 12 4. Gal 5.17.
Venit avaritia and vendicat in me sibi sedem: jactantiacupit dominari mihi.
Superbia vult mihi esse Rex, luxuria dicit ego regnabo, ambitto, de. tractio,
invidia and iracundia certant in me ipso and de me ipso, cujus ego potissimum
effe videor. Ego quantum valeo resist, renitor quantum suvor dominum meum
Iesum reclamo (and paul post) dico non habeo regem, nisidominum Iesum, veni
demine, disperge illos vertute tua and regnabis in me, quia tu es ipse Rex
meus. Ber. him. 4.
between true grace and corrupt nature.

1. First is in that strong rel^ctancie that the spirit makes against the
flesh, so as there is very hard struggling who shall win the victory, gravis
lucta, (says Saint Bevnard) non contra hosts, sed contra hospites, a grievous
war it is, and the greater that it is not against enemies but guests (howbeit
they are in deed secret enemies.) The flesh musters up all her forces and sets
them in battle array, which as they are many in number, so are they strong and
resolute, every one ambitious of a crown: but now the soul it flies unto
Christ as a prisoner of hope, oppressed by the enemy unto his strong hold,
Zach. 9.12. That as the Jews would have no King but Caesar; so a Christian
will have none to reign over him but Christ, this reluctancie is the greater,
in me, quia tu es ipse Rex mous. Bet. him 4.
because that the object of their contention is exceeding weighty, it is as
much as a man's soul is worth, it is the losing or winning of a Kingdom; it is
not pro finibus not for the bounds, but pro haereditate for the inheritance,
and therefore it is, that neither side will yield to the other: Satan will not
yield up his right because they once belongd to him; nor Christ will not lose
his right, because he bought them with a price; hence it is that the Kingdom
of Heaven is said to suffer violence, Matthew. 11.12.
and the violent take it by force, there is nothing to be gotten without
contention. That you may not be mistaken in this business of so great
consequence, give me leave to lay down some rules to know whether your war
be a right war, yea or no; for when our. Luke 13.24.
Savior does exhort us to strive to enter in at the strait gate, he tells us
that many shall secke to enter and shall not be able, showing that all striving
will not serve your turns: not every one that says, Matthew. 7.21.
Lord Lord shall inherit the Kingdom of Heaven; thence it, is that Saint James
tells us that we may ask and not receive because we ask amiss, and this was
the reason why such as shall at the end of the world come and say, Lord, Math.
7.22.
Lord, we have prophesied in thy name, and in thy name we have cast out
Devils, and in thy name we have done many wonderful works: why such I say
should be rejected because all this was not done in sincerity, and in a right
manner; therefore for the clearing of it, take this rule.

1. They differ in ground, and so the quarrel: for howsoever that the I
quarrel may be occasioned from the same general ground in respect of the use
of it, How the natural and spiritual combat differs.
namely sin, 1 In the ground.
yet in special the one looks at sin as it is sin, the other at sin as
it brings punishment after it, the one could he escape the punishment would be
glad to enjoy his finne, the other is far more willing to suffer than to
sin: an example of the former you have in Cain, who made no great matter of
his sin, but indeed his punishment was greater than he could bear, and for
the latter you have another example of Joseph, who notwithstanding the wanton
solicitations he had from his Mistress, and withal his own unmarried
condition, and being in the strength of his youthful years, which is most
licentious, and voluptuous, yet behold he repells them all with a most chaste,
resolution, Genesis 39.
How shall I do this great wickedness and sin against God? He thought not on
the punishment that would follow, but on the sin as the maine thing. It was a
good speech of him that said it, Anselme.
that he had rather be in hell without sins, than in heaven with them on his
conscience; and indeed what comfort could a man have in heaven, so long as he
had a hell in his conscience, and on the other side, hell would be no hell to
him, were his conscience fair, therefore men should not think that all is
well, because they sind sometimes a troubled, or a trembling spirit, for the
devils believe and tremble, and yet are their spirits stout enough, and
stubborn enough against God, so, Jam 2.19.
it may be in men by that conviction that they may have, although it may not be
accompanied with any sound conversion, have you not seen many that when they
have been in some great strait (as Balaam between the vineyards, not knowing
which way to turn himself) either under some sad and heavy cross, or else
under some present peril of death: poor souls! how have they quarrelled with
their sins, and with themselves, as though they would never have had any
friendship with them more: well, deliverance comes, and health comes, behold
now the battle is over, they shake hands again with their lusts, and are the
same men they were; but now if there be a principle of grace in you, that makes
your hearts rise against sin, then, to say no more, go on and prosper ye
valient men, for God is with you.

2 They differ in respect of the seat of the combat, 2 In the seat.
the natural combat is,

1 Sometimes nothing but the distemper of the body, that is the seat of the
conflict; a sick body does occasion a distempered and sick mind; is it not
strange to see, what strange effects, that distemper of melancholy does
produce, what fears and terrors have they felt at sometimes, as though they
had been scorched in the flames of hell, what joys, and exultations they have
made at another time, as though they had been rapt up into the third heaven,
what conflicts they have supposed they have passed through, yet all is nothing,
but the production of a distempered body deeply affected with melancholy? Now
this differs from the true combat.

1 First, they differ as much as the shadow and the substance one from another:
that combat between the flesh and the spirit is really true, but that is but
imaginary, like as you see upon the stage, one is a King, another is a Judge,
another a soldier, which when the action is over, they are no such men; so is
it in this case, all this combat is but a mere show.

2 In a true combat there are some scarres, some thing that sticks to him
after the battle, and some booty is carried away as a testimony of his valor,
so a Christian that has got some ground against his enemy, he has got some
strength against his lusts, as it was said of the house of David and Saul, that
David's house did increase, and Saul's decrease; so is it here, grace it gains
something at every combat, now after the combat is over, the melancholy
person is as he was, there is no alteration, if he was profane before, so he
is still, or if he was civil before, he is civil still.

3 They differ in their cure, a distempered body is cured with physic, good
air and temperate diet, but who is he that can cure a sick, and distempered
soul, not all the Physicians in the world. Nay, let me speak a bold word;
not all the Angels in heaven, are able by all their wisdom to help a wounded
spirit; it must be no less than the blood of the Lamb of God, that takes away
sin, and heales a sick distressed and destempered soul.

2 Again the seat of this war is sometimes among the passions, Number. 13.32.
so as one stands in opposition to another, Nay as the spies that went to
view the land of Canaan; said unto Moses, that the land they went to search was
a land that did eat up the inhabitants of it, so it is with our lusts, one
lust is so predominant, that it eats up another as you have an example in
Herod, who being ambitious, did favor John, Mark. 6. Eusebius. lib. 8. cap. 17.
because he looked at the applause of the people (for all held John as a
Prophet) yet such was his lust to Herodias, Libido potias quam iracundia
tenebat imperium, and paulo post dicit author, quod Christiana continentia
neque morte, neque pecunia expugnari potest.
that for her sake, he cast him into prison, and afterward cut off his head.
So it is said of Maxontius, that as he was cruel, so was he incontinent, and
sometime his lust of incontinencie prevailed against that of cruelty, as
instance is given in a Christian Virgin whom he had attempted to have defiled,
in which case, says my Author, that his incontinencie got the victory of his
fury; but now this war is not a war amongst them, but against them all; as
they that are Christ's do crucify the flesh with the affections and lusts:
Gal. 5.24.
and the truth is, that, when as a man does suffer his lust to rule, is as if a
man should suffer his feet to guide his head, or the handmaid to rule over the
mistress; so is it in this case, for our passion should be guided by reason,
and reason rectified by the spirit, and then things would go in a right order,
therefore our Apostle does show that the flesh lusts against the spirit, not
that the flesh lusts against the flesh, for though the lusts of the flesh may
be at discord one with another, it is but like that which was between Pilate
and Herod, which albeit there was some contention between them, Luke 23.12.
yet they both joined together against Christ; so that howsoever it be, that
one lust may in some cases overthrow another, yet they will all conspire
against Christ.

CAP. XI. Showing certain other differences that are between them in this
relactancie of the flesh against the spirit.
3 In the time.
3 THirdly, they differ in the time of their combat, the natural combat
ofttimes comes as soon as reason can make a difference between good and bad;
and it is that which may be in a very heathen, To. 2.15.
for the Gentiles that had no law to go by, besides that which was written in
their hearts, yet by that, were a law to themselves, their consciences either
excusing, on accusing of them, now conscience according to that light that it
has, is always at hand to contend against the works of sin, and that fleshly
appetite that is in us, howbeit, conscience may trouble us, yet it is commonly
for greater sins, and not for lesser, as Pharaoh for his great cruelty
confesses, I have sinned: and so we read did Nero, and others; but now for
lesser, them they easily pass over. Saint Paul cries out of the body of sin,
that was within him: and David of the cutting off Saul's garment, his heart
smote him for that, but in this case the natural conscience has little to
say, because it knows little, therefore Saint Paul says, Romans 7.7.
I had not known lust, except the Law had said, thou shall not lust; that is,
his natural conscience did not discover it unto him, but it was given him by a
higher, and a clearer light. Our Savior Christ shows that while the strong
man keeps the house, all that a man possesses is in peace, but when a
stronger than he comes then he begins the combat; so long as a man is in
the state of nature the prince of the air rules in his heart, and has quiet
possession: for although there may be a contention (as has been showed) among
the passions and lusts, yet so as there is no hinderance to Satan by that at
all, for the lesser footing he has in one lust, the stronger he is in
another, as it is among a company of gamesters, look what one loses another
winnes, and suppose that they should be all losers, yet the house where they
game would be a gainer; so is it here, that as long as there is no other
strife, but amongst themselves, men are still as bad or worse than they were,
and Satan that keeps, the house gaine^ by them.

Again; suppose we some strange man should come into this gaming house, and
should take away their money, and burn the dice, and cause the house to be
pulled down, and bind the strong man, and lay him in prison; would not this
breed hot blood, and occasion strife? So it is in this case, for when the
spirit comes then it comes with such might as bears down all before it, and
overthrows the strong holds of Satan, and every high thought that does exalt
it self against God: by what as has been said, you may easily see how this
natural combat differs from the spiritual, in regard of the time.

4 In the end.
4 They differ in their ends that they have in their combat, there are three
ends for which a man does undertake war: namely, peace, honor, and terror:
first, this war is undertaken for peace sake, both peace of conscience, and
peace with God, now howsoever a wicked man may seem to humble himself for his
sin, and to make up his peace with God, yet it is but like those truces that
are made in the wars for some short time, for some private reasons known to
themselves, so is it in this case, 1 King. 21.29.
Ahab when he heard what God had threatened, he rent his clothes, and put
sackcloth on his flesh, and lay in sackcloth, and went softly, now here was a
truce made between God and Ahab, but no reconciliation, See thou not (says
God) how Ahab humbles himself before me. I will not bring the evil in his
days, but in his sons days will I bring this evil upon his house, so that
the judgment is not taken away but deferred: but now this spiritual warfare
does aim at peace and ends in it, there is no affliction that is pleasant for
the present, but grievous; Heb. 12.11.
nevertheless it brings forth the peaceable fruit of righteousness, though
this burden be heavy, yet is it the way to ease, and as after a toilsome
labor comes the quietest rest, so after this war, the most settled peace, 1
King. 19.11. etc.
as it was in that vision that Eliah saw. First came a strong wind that rent
the mountains and brake the rocks in pieces, after this an earthquake, and
after this a fire, and after all, a still voice; so it is with a Christian,
that after many tumults, and garboiles in the soul, between these two enemies
(the flesh and the spirit) comes the still voice with joy and peace.

2 Another end is honor, a man that is a good soldier under Christ's banner
does endeavor to fight manfully, that he may honor his cause, and his
captain, and good reason, the cause is just: for it is for the defense of
Christ's right in our souls, and we never had a better Captain than Christ is,
Rev. 6.1.
who rides on conquering, and to conquer, who has led captivity captive, and a
prince, against whom there is no rising: but on the other side in that seeming
war that there is to be found in wicked men, Mat. 6.16.
they chiefly aim at their own praise, as they, in their private fasting and
works of mortification, disfigured their faces, and were of sad countenances,
and all this is to be seen of men; but God knew their hearts to be far
otherwise, or at the best, the chief and that a wicked man has in any trouble
or contention against any sin it is himself; either for the preservation of
himself, or for his own advantage: and the reason is, because as the man is,
so are his ends, if a man be flesh, then his ends cannot but smell of the flesh.

3 The last end of this holy war is terror and fear; a man wars to that
end that thee may put the enemy into such a fear, that he will be afraid to
offend any more: so a man in this spiritual warfare, when the heart is once
smitten, has true remorse for sin, he will be afraid to sin again, as you
have examples of David and Peter, a hundred Bathsheba's would not have allured
David to have fallen into that sin again; the voice of a silly damsel made
Saint Peter to deny his master, but after he felt the smart of it, and had
repented of it, he was not ashamed of his master, no not before Princes and
Judges of the world: on the other side, a man that is not sound at the heart,
though his mind may be at present troubled and tremble in respect of some foul
and great sin, that stares him in the face, and lies heavy upon his
conscience, yet does it work no change in him, but after the tempest is over,
2 Pet. 2.22.
he turns with the dog to his vomit, and with the sow to his wallowing in
the mire, with as fresh, Prove 23.34, 35.
and as free an appetite, as ever he did unto his sin. Solomon compares such
a man to one that lies on the top of a mast in the midst of the sea, and says
they have smitten me, but I felt it not, thy have beaten me, but I was not
sick, and therefore when I awake, I will seek it again.

5 They differ in their event: 5 In the event.
this war that is between the flesh and the spirit, always ends in a
victoriour conquest, over all the enemies of it, as they say of truth, Magna
est veritas, 2 Cor. 12.9.
and praevalebit, so may I say of grace, great is the power of it, and it will
prevail. Paul was not without this buffeting of Satan, and behold the grace of
God was sufficient for him to enable him to bear out the quarrel against his
enemy. And further he says, When I am weak then am I strong; it is with a
Christian in this case, as it was wi^h Rebeccah, when she had two twins
strove in her womb, she comes to the Lord and says, Lord why am J thus? the
Lord makes this answer, two nations are in thy womb, and two manner of people
shall be separated from thy bowels, and the one people, shall be stronger than
the other; Genesis 25.22.23.
and the elder shall serve the younger, so it is in this case, here are two
nations that strive within us, the old and the new man, and they are contrary
one to another, yet this is your comfort, the elder shall serve the younger, the
new commer shall cast out the old inhabitant; Now who would not take that side
on which he is sure to conquer? Then must you join with the spirit against the
flesh; and though you may be foiled, yet you shall never be conquered, for if
God be with us who shall or can stand against us? He that is with us is
greater than he that is against us, it is reported of Caesar, and Antony, that
they were wont often to wrestle together, and though Antony was the stronger
man, yet Caesar always gave him the fall; the reason being demanded why it
should be so, the answer was made; because Caesar was guided by a better Genius:
so if you demand whence it is that such strong and potent lusts, do all fall
down before us, and none of them able to stand; I answer, 1 John 4.4.
it is because we have a better Genius, greater is he that is with us, than
he that is in the world; on the other side, all the war of a wicked man, it
never brings any thing to pass: they are like the children of Ephraim that
went out harnished, and carried bows, yet turned again in the day of battle:
Psalm. 78.9.
what show soever there may be of goodness in us, yet if it be not in truth,
it will not hold in the fiery trial.

CAP. XII. Showing further the difference of this combat by the weapons of it,
which is cleared by two propositions.
6 THe next thing wherein they differ in this conflict is in their weapons, 2
Cor. 10 4.
the weapons of our warfare are not carnal but spiritual, so that look what
difference, there is between a carnal and a spiritual man, so much
difference is there between a carnal and spiritual weapon: if ye should see
men go to wars, and instead of warlike munition one should carry a shovell,
and another a mattocke, and others should carry instruments for the ploughing,
and tillage of the ground, you would either suppose that the enemy were weak,
and contemptible, or else account them but as fools or mad men, that would
undertake such a business, being so ill furnished for it. In like manner, may
we account them as foolish and unwise, that undertake a spiritual warfare with
carnal weapons, more especially against so potent an enemy, but that you may
the better understand the meaning of the Apostle; observe, first that carnal
weapons will not serve your turn. Secondly, that spiritual weapons will
prevail, before the former.

Baal of old, 1 King. 18.28.
that out of their blind devotion did lance themselves till the blood gushed
out, Damones delectantur in sacrificiis de sanguine hominum, qui est
nobilissima creatura ad imagine^ Dei facta, and ideo in talibus solent dare
responsa.
not unlike to these were the Pharisees that did disguise their faces. Matthew.
6.16. and those Fratres flagellantes, among the Papists, that have far more
blind devotion than true discretion, who think by this means, Lyra in locum.
not only to mortify their flesh, Res ista fidem facit a Romany superis
institutum esse acceptum quod illi super talia ludicra celebrantes nudi per
urbem incedebant, a^ lavati flagellis obvios cadebant. Pol. Vir. 7. lib. cap. 6.
but also to merit salvation; notwithstanding it was but an old custom taken
from the ancient Heathens; neither by going on pilgrimage, and wearing
sacke-cloth on our loins, or a profession of wilful poverty: all these are
but like so many outward medicines, which will be unable to cure an inward
disease, this is but, as it were, to apply a plaster to the head, when your
grief lies at the heart, Bodily exercise profits little, but godliness is
profitable unto all things; and suppose that there were some virtue in some of
these things to take down and tame the flesh, yet can we not suppose that they
should have any efficacy on the soul being they are no spiritual weapons,
neither does the Lord require them at our hands.

2 It is not a restraint from sin that will serve our turns, such a
restraint may arise from good education, and living in good families, or out of
the goodness of natural temper, which is not so prone to rush into vice, as
others are; or for the better accomplishment of a man's own ends of profit or
credit: now all this keeps but a man from the outward acts of sin, yet he
may be as bad or worse within every day than others; as we see some men that
are forbidden to work at their trades outwardly, yet will they work hard at
them within still, so it is in this case, that though it be so, that he may
not without some disadvantage suffer sin to break out, yet does he work
within, and follow the trade of sin there. If that a Poole do engender snakes
and venomous creatures, when it runs and the water issues from it, much more
will it produce the like effects, when it is dammed up, and stands: In like
manner, if sin be but restrained, and no more, lust breeds as fruitfully,
and works as hard within, as ever it did.

2 Again, when sin breaks out, it is the more violent after a restraint, as
you see it was with Absalon, and Achitophel, for all their fair pretenses,
that they made before of equity and piety, yet when they brake out, how foul
was their sin: as it is with such, as are cast into prison for the stealing
of some small trifles, after they have continued there sometime among the rest,
they grow so skillfull, that they come out, ten times worse than they went
in. In like manner, a man that has nothing but this restraint, when he does
break out, is far worse than he was before: but true grace now does not
only restrain from sin, Ioh. 7.17.
but does purge it out, so sin is not bridled, but broken to pieces, and not
a restraint, but a real chang from sin to God. Act. 5.4.


3 It is not enough to have good desires, and good purposes of mortification
unless they be put in practice, you know that muskets and swords and pikes,
and other warlike instruments, will not serve our turns, if we let them hang
up in a room, unless we make use of them: in the day of battle so no, nor
will our good desires, unless they be improved: Some they have good purposes
and desires, but they are but slothful desires. Balaam desires to die the
death of the righteous, but he does not put his endeavor to it, many have good
wishes, and fair pretenses, and make large promises of better obedience, and
that is all; they may well be said to bear the sluggards motto, which is this,
he sits in his chair with his feet by the fire, and his hands in his pockets,
saying, Vtinam hoc esset laborare, O that this were to labor, so it is with
many, that if good words, and good wishes would do it, they would be as good
Christians as the best; but now when it comes to any difficulty here they stay.

2 They are but childish desires; such as are very earnest after God, and very
strongly bent against lust, but it is for a little while, till some bait be
laid in the way, and then they fall to sin again, as a child does, sometimes
you shall hear it complain, and cry for the breast, but give it but a key or a
ball, and it is quiet again: so when men seem to have some more than ordinary
desire to this work, if that a key of some profit, or a ball of some pleasure
be cast in their way, they are straight taken off from this work, and all
afresh to their lusts, and to their sins again: far are these from right
purposes, and sound resolutions, which are begun upon good deliberation. Luke
14.31.
Like that King going to war, thinks whether he can be able with ten
thousand to meet him that comes against him with twenty thousand; and it is
continued with undaunted resolutions, Heb. 12.4.
struggling, and striving against sin, and ends with unspeakeable comfort unto
the soul, that we contend for an incorruptible crown that abides for us in
the heavens. 1 Cor. 25.


4 It is not enough to have a form of godliness, to have some appearance of
this conflict, suppose we a man that is gotten into a way of piety, and uses
those ways and means that are appointed for that end, that sin may be
mortified; suppose it be hearing the word, prayer, and fasting, abstinence from
gross sins, and the society of those that are righteous and good men, so the
means are good, but he spoils them in the managing of them, as it was said of
Amazia, 2 Cro. 25.2
that he did that which was right in the sight of the Lord, but not with a
perfect heart: so in this case, the things that they do are good for the
matter; but for the manner, Mal. 2.3.
it is done with such cold and superficial devotion, that God says he will
spread dung on their face, even the dung of their solemn feasts; yea, Prove.
15.8, Es. 66.3. Jer. 6.20. Amos 5.21
best things being abused become the worst, and God does much abhor them,
when they are not one in sincerity, therefore it is that the prayer of the
wicked is abominable, and all the splendid and fairest actions he does, are but
gilded and painted vices; That is the right circumcision, Romans 2. ult.
which is the circumcision of the heart.

2. Propos. Ephesians. 6.13.
2. The next proposition is that spiritual weapons will prevail unto this
work of mortification; it is a good exhortation you on the whole armor of
God: furnish the head, with the helmet of hope, have your breast guarded with the
breast plate of righteousness, and your loins girt about with truth, in your
right hand the sword of the spirit, and in your left the shield of faith, and
your feet shod with the preparation of the Gospel of peace: and as so many
Sentinels, you must add hereunto prayer in your spirit, watchfulness over
your own hearts, and perseverance in so doing all your days. I should be
tedious if I should handle these at large, and show you the vigor and virtue of
every one of these pieces of spiritual armor; I shall therefore speak so
much of them, as may concern our present purpose, to put a difference between
these and all carnal weapons. How spiritual and carnal weapons differ
They differ in respect of their Author, viz. it is called the armor of God;
these are wea^ons that were fashioned in Heaven so as they are heavenly, both
for the matter and form, 1 Samuel 21.9
that as David said of the sword of Goliath, that there was none to it; so may I
say of these, that there is none equal to them for the depressing of high
thoughts, and the pulling down and demolishing the strong holds of sin other
weapons are such as are made by the flesh and Satan together, and cannot be
able to cut any sin; for if that the flesh and Satan should be divided
against themselves, how should their Kingdom stand: if that Satan do depart
from a man, for some small time, it is but as a man that leasses his house,
when he takes a journey, but yet retains his right and property in it still,
Mat. 12.48
that so at his pleasure he ^^y return, and then makes (...) later end of that
man worse then the beginning was.

(...) Malum ^ritur ex defectualicuius causa, sed benum non nist ex causis
int^gris.
2. They differ in respect of their compleatnesse; for this armor of God is
called the whole armor, or complete armor of God. They say in the Schools:
that evil may arise from the defect of any one cause, but to make an action
truly good, it must have all the causes entire; so it is in this case, 2 King.
22.34.
to have your hearts truly mortified, and this spiritual warfare to prosper
in your hands, you must have this complete armor; Ahab was smitten with an
arrow between the joints of his harness. Now if Ahab was smitten with his
complete harness on, much more may this cunning enemy smite and wound our
souls, Judge. 20.16.
when we are not armed with every piece of this spiritual armor. He is as
cunning as those left handed Benjamites, that could sling stones at an hairs
breadth, and not miss; how did this fiery dart of Satan stick in Paul's flesh;
how did his envenomed arrows waste the spirits of holy Job, that had they not
been fortified with this armor of proof, they had not been able to have stood
on the other side; though an unregenerate man may pretend he has a good hope
in God, Heb. 11.1.
yet wants he faith as the ground; and if he say he has a good faith, yet
wants he the sword of the spirit, the word of God; and so is an ignorant man, 1
Cor. 2.12.
and knows not the things of God; or if he have the word of God, yet wants he
the breast plate of righteousness, and the girdle of truth and sincerity; there
is ever something that is wanting; and hence it is, that they are not able to
stand in the time of trial, but are made such vassals, and led captive by him,
to the dishonor of God and their own just condemnation; therefore the
exhortation that the Apostle uses shall be that of mine. Finally Brethren,
Ephesians. 6.12.
put on the whole armor of God, that you may be able to stand in the evil
day.

3. It is armor for the fore-parts, to show that so long as we stand to it,
and fight out our good fight we are safe enough, all shall prosper in our
hands; but if we turn our backs on our enemy, then is it that we are
wounded and everthrowne. Josh. 7.8.
It was the complaint of Ioshuah, O Lord what shall I say when Israel turns
their back before their enemies; But alas! what shall were say, when a man that
has this spiritual furniture on him, the fear and dread whereof, were able
to put an ordinary enemy to slight, the shield of faith being able to quench
his fiery darts, and the sword of the spirit able to give him such a strong
repulse, as that he is not able to stand before it: submit your selves
therefore to God, James 4.7.
and resist the Devil and he will fly from you. It is reported of the
Crocodile, that if so be that you flee from him, he will follow after you, and
tear you in pieces; but if you stand to him and fear him not, but contend
with him, he will flee from you. Believe it brethren there is noe way to this,
to withstand and resist Satan and the flesh; for if you turn your backs on
him, seeing you have no armor for behind, you will never be able to hold out
long, but will become a prey unto him; and therefore if you be in a room at
prayer, or about any holy duty, as reading the Scripture, or any devout
meditation, if there Satan shall present himself when we are best employed,
fear him not, neither quit your place for fear of him, let him not gain that
advantage of you, neither give place to the Devil, for greater is he that is
with you then he that is against you: Exodus 17.
As it was with the Israelites, so long as Moses held up his hands, Israel did
prevail, An quia fugisti ex acie putas to manus hostium evasisse libentius te
cons^quitur fugientem quam sustineat repugnantem. Ber. Ep.
but when he held them down the Amaleckes did prevail: so while you seek
the Lord, and resist Satan, you shall prevail, but if you hang down your
hands and turn your backs against him, the Lord will leave you and deliver you
up into his hands. Therefore be you ever ready to resist Satan as he is
tempting.

CAP. XIII. The second degree of mortification which is more near, is a broken
and contrite heart.
THe second and more near degree of mortification is a bleeding and contrite
heart. It is called the sacrifice of God, or a broken spirit, Psalm. 51.17
a broken and a contrite heart O Lord thou will not despise; all sacrifices are
included in this broken heart, Psalm. 57.16
the highest; heavens and the lowest heart, are the two houses where the Lord
will take up his special habitation; the Lord says of the contrite heart, ^s.
66.2.
this is my house, here will I dwell to revive the spirit of the humble. Here I
shall observe two maine things,

The nature and necessity of contrition.
1. The nature of this contrition and brokennesse of heart. 2. The necessity of
it.
First, consider the nature of contrition, and a broken heart for sin. This
consists in four things.

The nature of it, and first godly sorrow.
1. A godly sorrow and true remorse for sin, a melting and tender heart, 2
Cro. 34.27.
which of all hearts is the best, that when as we shall hear the word, it will
affect our hearts as the heart of Josiah was; or when we commit any sin, our
hearts, 1 Samuel 24.5.
like that of David, will smite us speedily; or when we see men dishonor God,
or break his law, Psalm. 119.136.
our eyes do break out with rivers of tears; Jer. 9.1.
or at least desire that our heads were Wels of water, and our eyes were
fountains of tears. Or when we want any good thing at the hands of our God,
that we find the good spirit of God helping our infirmities with sighs and
groans, such a^ cannot be expressed, Romans 8.26.
crying Abba Father! and when we see our own deformities and the plague of
our own hearts. 1 King. 8.38.
We do bemoane our selves as Ephraim did, and smite our hands on our hearts
and say, Lord! Jer. 31.18.
what have I done, woe is me, I am a man of polluted lips, and dwell amongst
men of polluted lips: Es. 6.5^
and indeed, as one has well observed; he that does not bewail his sins,
does not perceive the wounds that sum has made in his soul.

Qui non planges p^^oa^a, non souti^ vulnera, n^e anims lect^^nem. Ber.
1. For the quantity of godly sorrow, how great it must be; for the softer the
heart is made by sorrow, the more fit it is to be cast into what fashion God
would have it; 2 Cor. 7.10 11, 12, 13.
as the Fur^^^ takes away the dross from the silver, so does godly sorrow
work strange effects in the soul. Now although we cannot se^ unto you ^ow
deep (...) should b^e, (...)
^eith^r^ea^ we say, as ^^od does to the Sea, ^ither to shall you go and no
f^^ther; (...)
yet may we set down some things in general, which will be very necessary
for (...) to know. ^a^. 10.12.
A^ first it must be as gr^ut as worldly sorrow; 2 Cor. 35, 24
yea, as the greatest worldly sorrow, therefore it is compared to the bitter
lamentation that is for an only child, and for a ma^s first horn, and like
that healty mourning that there was for Josiah in the valley of Megido^. Now
look how you have se^ne at any time a disconsolate Father bewail the loss of
his son, (...) David did for Absalon in that (...) complaint of his; O
Absolon my son, my son, or a distressed Mother mourning like R^^hel for her
children, because they were not. Even such should be our sorrow for our sins,
that our sins have so deeply offended God. Therefore it is prophesied, Ezekiel.
7,16
that they shall be on the mountains, like Doves of the valleys, every one
mourning for his iniquity. Now whereas some poor soul may be troubled at
this, and say; Alas! I never found any such affection in the for sin, as I
have found for such a loss; therefore we must distinguish between dolor
sensitiv^^ and dolor apr^^iativus; in respect of sense, the body and passions
may be more troubled at an outward los^s; because the object is more sensible;
and yet sorrow for sin may be greater in respect of the price and worth of
it: shallow waters often make the greatest noise, whereas the deep waters
run the more still: Acts 2.37.
so it is here, this sensitive sorrow makes more noise, and yet this sorrow for
sin goes nearer to the heart, Jer. 4.3.
and takes deeper impression: there sometimes an aching tooth, or some outward
grief does vex and trouble a man more, then a burning Fever on the
Consumption of the lungs, and yet the later is far more dangerous then the
former; because, the disease seaseth on the more noble parts: so it is in this
case, godly sorrow keeping within the bounds of reason, though it may be more
secret, yet it is more sound, and every way as great or greater then the other.

2. Consider of sorrow, either intensive or extensive, either in respect of the
present force and intention of it, and so worldly sorrow may be greater; or
else in respect of the constant duration, and extent of it, and so godly sorrow
is greater; water that is dammed up in a pond, if you set open the watergate,
it will run more for a short time, then the spring that feeds and fills it;
so may worldly sorrow run faster for a present gush, and yet not comparable
to the other in respect of continuance: a pregnant example hereof we have in
David, how did he bewail the immature and untimely death of his son
Absalon. O Absalon my son, my son, this was heavy for the present, and yet
his sin that he had committed was heavier unto him in respect of continuance,
and therefore he says, that his sin was ever before him, Psalm. 51.
he does not say so of the loss of Absalon; when Moses had smitten the Rock,
the people drank of the Rock, it followed them. It is thought by Divines that
this water followed them through the wilderness till they came where there was
plenty of water: so if our hearts be truly smitten with the rod of Gods word,
this sorrow will continue till we attain to the vision of peace.

2. Our sorrow must be according to our apprehension, and the greater that we
apprehend our sins to be, the greater should be the proportion of our
sorrow for them; David had greatly sinned, Psalm. 3 2.4.
and therefore when he came to the sight of it, he did wash his bed, and water
his couch with tears, and his moisture was turned into the drought of Summer,
and when Peter had greatly offended; be went out and wept bitterly. A great
wound must have a large plaster, and a strong disease must have a strong
potion; so forasmuch as sorrow is the means to cure sin, and acceptable to God
above all sacrifices; where sin has been great, the sorrow should be great
also, neither are ^^sser sins to be neglected, Peccatum quod non pae^itentia
dilus, tipsop^ndere in aliud peccatum trahit. Greg.
^or there is no sin so little, but if it be known, it must be repented
of; for if it be not grieved for; then it will grow, yea, and bring Gods
judgment on us too: did not Eve bring all that misery on her self and us, by
eating of an Apple, and was not Lots wise turned into a Pillar of Salt, for a
look back unto her City: did not Vzzah lose his life by only touching the
Ark of God: nimis offici^sa seduli^as, for too much diligence, 2 Samuel 6.6.
as it were, therefore make not any sin small, but bewail and leave them. If
it shall be said that there are many sins a man cannot know, or if they be
known, yet peradventure we do not conceive of them as we ought: for answer
hereunto; first, if that ignorance be not affected ignorance, but after a sort
invincible, because using all good means to know it and yet it is not clear
to him, in this case bewailing his known and unknown sins will suffice; and
secondly, for the other I answer, that we must know that how great soever we
can conceive our sins to be so great they are and greater; according to thy
fear, Ps. 90.11.
so is thy wrath, that is, what fear you can conceive of Gods displeasure for
sin, so it is; that if your apprehension would swell higher, you would still
apprehend sin to be fouler and more ugly and odious in the sight of God: and
therefore measure out your sorrow according to t^ he hither proportion rather
then otherwise; If it be said how may this proportion be found out: to this I
answer that then there is some proportion when as we are as deeply affected
with sorrow for sin as we were raised and taken with the pleasure we had in
sin, as it was said of the seven years of plenty that was in the land of
Egypt, Genesis 41.31
that it should be forgotten by reason of the famine that was at the heels of
it; so all the pleasure that a man has taken in sin is forgotten in regard
of the grief and sorrow of heart that we feel, nay when he takes as much
pleasure now in mortification of sin, and his mourning for sin; as he took
pleasure in sin it self; nay he counts it all joy when he falls into troubles
as these are, because that he knew after his sowing in tears, he shall reap
in joy, semper dolet, and de dolere gandet, Ber.
whereas his former pleasures would have been the occasion of his future woe
and misery, Audacior qui cum uno peccato dermit, quam qui cum septem hostibus
Aug.
therefore that speech was very good of him that said it, that he was a more
bold man that durst sleep with one sin (unrepented of) then with seven
enemies.

2. The nature of true sorrow may be discerned in the qualities and properties
of it: as,

1. Is that that makes men look about them, it makes them to seek for help,
as those that were pricked in their hearts, they said, men and brethren what
shall we do to be saved; Acts 2.37.
as it was with those Lepers that lay at the gate of Samaria, 2. King. 7.3 How
was S. Aug. weakened after his heart was broken for sin, how does he seek out
for help, he goes to Alipius his friend, he goes up and down and cannot be
freed withal his great words against himself, quibus sententiarums verberibus
me flagitavi. Yet never was at rest, but dried out, quam diu, quam diu, cras,
cras quare non modo quare non hac hora sini sturpitudinis mea? etc. Aug. Lib. 8.
when there was famine within, and food without, but in the Camp of the
enemies, these men are now in a sad condition, if they stay there or tu^^e into
the City they die of the famine; if they betake themselves into the Camp of
the enemy, it may be they may live, it may be not; yet in a case of this
nature, there is more wisdom to cast themselves upon a way wherein there is
most hopes, and so they saved their lives by it, and are the messengers of good
news to all the City: It is just thus with a broken heart and a sorrowful
spirit sometimes. If I turn back to my former condition, then I shall but
add sin unto sin; if I stay here, and remain in this condition, then shall
I certainly perish, and therefore though as yet I know not whether God will
have mercy on me, and hold out his golden Septer unto such a vile sinner as I
am, yet will I go venture my self, and if I perish I perish; believe it, if
you seek thus you shall find; if you knock thus it shall be opened unto
you; for if there be any hope in a merciless enemy, Matthew. 7.
there is more hope in a merciful God: on the other side security is a certain
sign of impenitencie and of an unmortified nature; 1 These. 5.3.
men are never nearer danger, then when they are most secure; while they cry
peace, Jer. 48.11 Luke 17.27.28.
and are settled on their lees, dreading of no danger, then comes it upon them:
but now that which makes a man mourn for sin puts him upon use of all good
means to destroy this enemy and to favor no sin, though it be never so
dear unto us, that we may follow the counsel of our Savior; that if our
right hand do offend us we must cut it off and cast it from us; yea, and we
must spare nothing that we may spare our souls.

Nulli parcas ut soli parcas animae crudelitas illa pietas. Heir.
2. This sorrow turns all other sorrow into its own nature, as all the fresh
rivers, though they run with forcible, and strong currents into the Sea, yet
when they come there they are immediately turned into Salt; so is it in this
case, all other sorrows when they fall on a sanctified and a broken heart for
sin, he can turn them all into this channel, and here they all change their
qualities: suppose he find losses in his estate by some bad servant or bad
debtor or any casualty by Sea or Land; the broken heart is not so much troubled
at the loss it self, nor at the persons that might occasion it as at his
sin which might be the ground of it, and so it was with David when Shimei
cursed ^im, 2 Sem. 16.10.
behold he looked at himself, and a^^ his sin, and humbled himself before
God, because he knew that the Lord had sent him; so we see it was with Job,
that when Satan's malice was made manifest to the full, yet so as Job looks
hither, and in conclusion says, God gives and God takes; whereas if he had
looked lower, he might have said, God has given, and the Devil has taken,
but the humble spirit desires not to be troubled with what the Devil or man
can do unto him, because he knows that they are but instruments and rods in
Gods hand to correct his children withal; therefore he falls down before
God, and kisseth his rod, and calls upon his name; and then the Lord harkens,
and hears, and puts his tears into his bottle, and in his good time will
heal his soul. In one word, as it is said of the Philosophers stone, that
what metal soever it touches, it turns it into gold, so is it with this
sorrow that what cross or disaster soever it does meet withal it makes it an
occasion to work in him godly sorrow to repentance, never to be repented of.

3. It mends all, it make up all breaches, Esa. 1.16.18.
wash you, make you clean, take away the evil of your doing, (which is done
by this work of mortification and mourning for sin; and then says God, let
us reason together, and then though your sins were as red as crimson, I will
make them as white as wool (herein is the excellency of godly sorrow) if you
have losses in your estate or crosses by your children, or injuries by evil
men, you may fit down and sorrow till you can weep no more; but now half of
this, were it godly sorrow, though your sins be as black as hell, yet God
will make them as white as snow; if a man be old the skill of all the
Physicians cannot make him young again; but a man that is truly humbled for
sin, the Lord Christ redeemes his life from death, Verus penitens simper est
in labor and dolere delet de prateritis; laborat pro futuris cavendis. Ber.
and renewes his youth like the Eagles, that as they report of the Eagle, that
when she grows old and cannot eat for the length of her bill, with much ado
she gets it broken, and then falls to her meat as if she were young again; so
it is in this case when we have cast away all our abominations and our doings
that were not good, though with much ado, then shall we renew our lives as the
Eagle, and be made fit to sit among Christ's guests, at the marriage feast when
he makes us a feast of fat things, Isa. 25.6.
and wine when the lees are well refined.

3. The third thing in this sorrow is how long it should continue, to this we
answer; that as we sin daily, so we must sorrow daily, and because all sin
is not of one magnitude or proportion, therefore it does admit of degrees, but
if we speak of initiall mortification, which is the thing chiefly in hand,
the first work that is begun in the soul: then I say,

1. We must mourn till the general frame of sin be dissolved, till the
regiments of sin be taken down: Judge. 14.17.
Sampsons wise did never cease weeping until she knew his riddle; so should
we never cease till we know-that our sins are dissolved and purged out:
Alas! what comfort can a man receive so long as he remains a slave to his
hust, 2 Samuel 12 20.
and is under the Prince of darkness, but now sin is slain in us, and dead
in us; then we do as David did when his child was dead, he then at often from
the earth, and wa^nt and ano^hed him^^lfe, and changed his apparel, and came
into, the house of the Lord, and worshipped, and then came into his own house
and are bread, when we find that this child that we have begotten by our
sin, is dead, we should do the like, then cheer up your hearts and worship
God that has given you victory against it. It was comfortable neves that was
brought by the Angel unto Joseph. Mat. 2.20.
Return into the land Israel, for they are dead that sought the young child's
life, so say (...) it will be a great stay to our souls, to hear that the
body of death is dead within us, that sought how to destroy our souls.

2. We must mourn till he that has wounded us shall come and heal us, Hos.
6.1.
come say they, let us return to the Lord, for he has borne us, and he will
heal us, he has smitten us, and (...).

It (...) an easy matter to wound, but not so easy to cure and heal again;
it is the prerogative in this case, that belongs chiefly to God, the flesh
can vex us, and Satan can tear, and trouble us, and wound us, but none of
these can cure us again; but now God can as well heal as wound; here is one
thing further to be observed, that the Prophet does not say that sin or
Satan has wounded us, and God will heal us; but he has wounded us, and he
will heal us, and bind us up; for a man may have these wounds by sin and
Satan, and yet no true our^, the cure that these Physicians can give us are of
no value; is either to cast a man into a deep, or rather a dead sleep of
security and harness of heart, or to suffer him, to fall into despair, and
ha^^^ his owns and by an untimely death, as Judas and Iuli^^ did: but where God
once by his spirit smites the heart with true remorse for sin, then he is
moved by the same shirit to seek unto God for the cure of that wound as it was
with Elisha, 1 King. 19 19.
that after the Prophet Elia had put his mantle upon him, he presently comes
after him; so, whereas the Lord shall be pleased to works in us a true sight of
our misery, he never does it without some hope of mercy, that when we seele our
burden we might likewise come unto him for case and comfort; Psalm. 103.13.
these are those comfortable speeches, that as a father pittieth his own
children, Mat. 12.20
so the Lord pittith them that fear him, and that promise he will not break
the bruised Reed, nor quench the smoking Flax, etc. and that exhortation,
Mat. 11.28
come unto me all ye that are weary and heavy laden and I will ease you.

CAP. XIV. Shows thee other properties of Contrition, viz. shame, indignation,
and revenge.
THe next thing in contrition, 2 Of shame
is to be ashamed of our sins, and to loath them; for the more the heart is
broken for sin, the more it is ashamed for it; Job. 42.6.
as when Job saw himself in his colors, then he did abhor himself in dust
and ashes, Ezeck. 36.31.
and the Prophet shows, that there should come a time when the Lord would
smite the hearts of men, that they should remember their own evil way and
their doings that were not good, and should loath themselves in their own
sight for their iniquities, and for all their abominations: and hence is that
of the Apostle, Romans 6.21.
what profit have you in those things whereof ye are now ashamed^ It is not
the having of sin that brings shame, but the sense of it; for when as we
shall have it clear to our understanding, how bad a companion it is, and how
much harm it has done us, and how great danger it has drawn us into it
makes us ashamed.

1 What will make a man ashamed sooner than the apprehension, and sight of his
own nakedness? Genesis 2.25.
So soon as Adam saw his nakedness he even out of shame went and hid
himself in the garden among the bushes, this was not so much because of the
nakedness of his body, for so he was before, but his sin, not for the want
of apparel, as for the want of righteousness, that made him ashamed.

Again, when a man considers that he is not only naked, but that sin has
defiled him, and made him a most defiled and monstrous creature: this makes him
the more astonished at Gods great patience, that suffers him to live, and to
abhor himself as one of the most wretched and miserable men under heaven.

3 When we consider the contempt that sin brings on us, that is not only a
burden to us, but it makes us oftentimes odious to the sight of men, and
always contemptible on the sight of God: thence it was, that the Prophet
setting out the vileness of our natural condition, sets it out by such an one
as no eye pitied, Ephesians. 16.
none looked with compassion on him, when he lay polluted in his blood, he
was then cast out into the open field, to the loathing of his person, so is it
with every man by nature, when he comes to see into what contempt and disgrace
he has brought himself, both with God and man, will he not be ashamed,
surely if there be any spark of grace, he will abhor himself in dust and
ashes, Job. 42.5.
and labor to buy of Christ white raiment, that the shame of his nakedness
may not appear. Rev. 3.
If any shall say, that men may be ashamed of their sin, and yet the heart
not broken; to which we answer, that there is a large difference between them.

1 They differ in their objects, a man whose heart is truly sensible of that
disgrace, that lies upon him from God, this is that makes him ashamed, as it
was said of Miriam, when she was smitten with leprosy, and Moses prayed unto
the Lord, Nu. 12.14.
that he would heal her, the Lord answered Moses, saying, if her father had
but spit in her face, should she not be ashamed? and so say I, that when God
powereth contempt on a man unto whom he has been gracious, and favorable, so
as he casts out his petitions, and will not hear, nor answer them; he casts
him into darkness, and sets his sins in order before him, and suffers him
to lie in the deep, Esa 6.5.
as Jonah among the weeds: this makes a gracious man greatly ashamed: but now
the shame that a wicked man has, it is most of all in respect of men; they
think they shall escape the reproach from God well enough, Job 22.13.
were it so they could but escape those disgraces, and disparagements that do
fall on them from men, they say, that heaven is so high that God cannot hear:
can he judge through the dark clouds? Thence it was Saul desired to be
honored among the people, 1 Samuel 13.30.
though otherwise he would have gloried in his shame: Ph. 3.19.
in one word; where the shame of men does more bridle us from sin, than the
fear of God, it is clear to me, that we prefer our credit above our
conscience; I read of Paphnutius, a learned; Theatr. Hist. p. 533
and pious Bishop, at the Council of Nice, that being allured by a harlot to
incontinencie, she brings him into a very dark room, he looking fadly about
him, said: I am afraid that some body sees, never doubt, says she, none but
only God sees us here, but (says he) if God does see us, how dare we do
that in the sight of God, that we dare not do in the sight of men?

2 They differ in their continuance, for the longer that a wicked man lives,
the harder his heart grows, and the less sin and shame has he of his
sins. Hazael could not think that ever he should prove so bad and so bold a
sinner as was prophesied of him, no man is the worst, 2 King. 8.13.
at first: but grows to it by degrees, Domitius Nero for the first five years
of his reign; he was so fair, and so favorable, as it was called Neronis
Quinquennium. But after he broke forth into such foul, and bloody sins, as
made him both hateful to God, and man. But now on the other side, the longer a
good man lives, the more is his sense, and sorrow for his sins, and the more
he is ashamed of them: there ever the burden of them is the more heavy, Job.
13.26.
and the memory is the more grievous unto him, yea the sins of his youth:
thou writest bitter things against me; and make me to possess the sins
of my youth.

Briefly, that I may end this point, if you can step over those sins, now
without remorse or shame that before time would have made you ashamed, you may
well suspect your selves to be let loose to hardness of your own hearts, and
given over to reprobate sense; but if on the contrary, you feel a stronger
distaste of sin, so as it is not committed without grief, nor thought upon
without blushing, if you be thus ashamed of your sins, God will not be
ashamed of you at the last day.

3 They differ in these operations, and manner of working, for though a wicked
man may, when he has sinned, and he is under the guilt, and punishment of some
heinous offense, sometime be humbled for it, and blush at the remembrance of
it; yet it works no change in him, it does not alter him to any purpose, it
may do, peradventure, as the Angel unto Balaam for the time, turn him aside,
or stop him a little while, Prove. 5.22. Nune pr^mam adverte sp^nsae
verecundiam, est expugnatrix mal^rum, pr^pugnatrix puritatis innat^, specialis
gl^ria, conscientia fama oustos, vitae decus, virtutis seeds, virtutum
primitia, naturae laus, and insignetotius honesti. Ber. in Sermon. 86. Cant.
but not long; he goes on still, till he perish by the wages of iniquity, and
be taken in the cords of his own sins. On the other side, he that is truly
bash full for his sins, he has taken such a distaste against them, as that
neither the flattering baits of the flesh, nor the golden showers of the mammon
of iniquity, can persuade with him, to take pleasure in sin, any more, yea
this holy bashfulnesse is like the flaming sword that kept the gate of Paradise
that fallen man could not make any entry, for when we are ashamed of our
sins, it wards the gates of our hearts, and keeps us in that we rush not into
sin again, for when God smites the conscience, and reproves it savingly for
its sins; it makes Job's reply, Behold I am vile, what shall I answer thee: I
will lay my hand upon my mouth, Job 40.4.5.
once have I spoken, but I will not answer, yea twice, but I will proceed no
further.

3 Now come we to the third property of a broken, 3 Indignation.
and bleeding heart: that is, where there is a hearty, 2 Cor. 7.11.
and holy indignation against sin. The Apostle speaking of godly sorrow: Lo,
says he, what indignation has it wrought: there is a twofold indignation,
the former is ira subita, a sudden anger, that is, when men are soon angry,
and soon pleased: as it was with David, what a pelting chafe was he in,
against Nabal, what big words does he break into, while he is going down the
hill, how does he upbraid his Churlish behavior; and tells what havocke he
will make amongst them before the next morning; yet by and by, when Abigail
meets him with a small gift, with a few soft words she turns away his wrath,
and all is well agains: so is it in this case do you not see many a man that
when sin gauls him, O how bitter, and boisterous he is against his lusts,
But now when as this corrupt heart of ours, shall but deck her self with some
fair and plausible excuse, and bring some present in her hand of gain or
pleasure, the matter is taken up, and the contention is at an end, and lust and
he are grown good friends.

2 But now there is another indignation, that is called ira permanens, that
does continue, and remains with a man, so as it is with some men, that when
they are once out and angry with a man they are never pleased again. This kind
is no way good but against sin, and then it is exceeding good; we are charged
not to let the suune go down upon our wrath, neither to give place to the
devil, Ephesians. 4.26.
but in this case we must suffer the sun to go down upon this indignation
against this body of sin, or else we give place to the devil. 2 King. 13.18.
When Elisha bid Joash King of Israel to smite the ground with his arrows; The
text says, he smote the ground thrice, and stayed, which if he had done five
or six times, he had utterly consumed his enemies. It is so in this case,
some men will be angry sometimes with their sins, it may be twice or thrice
in their lives, but if they would continue their indignation, and smite on,
they would at last utterly confound their sins, and subdue them. The way to
avoid the anger of God, is to be angry with our selves, for if we judge our
selves we shall not be judged of God at the last, and great day, this is our
comfort that are angry with our lust: we can never be angry too much, you
cannot hate them more than they do deserve: but as the Israelites were never
to make pleace with Amalecke, so no more must we with our sins. 4 Revenge.


4 The last property of a broken and a bleeding heart is a holy revenge; now a
revenge is a dealing in like manner with sin, as it has dealt with us; for
as much as lusts are those enemies that war against our souls, we must be
courageous to war against them, that thereby we may revenge our selves of our
sins, and then do we do this great work.

1 When we do abstain from the use of those things that are in themselves
lawful, 2 Cor. 7.11.
when we have unlawfully abused them; as suppose we, a man that has been an
immoderate drinker of wine, whereby he has not only abused the creature of
God, but made himself for the time, of a reasonable man, like unto an
unreasonable beast, or suppose we another, that has been given to immoderate
gaming, as hunting, hawking, bouling, and has made these which were for his
recreation to become, as it were, his vocation. In such a case as this, if it
might not tend to the too much loss of his health, or danger of his life, it
were good for a man to abstain altogether from them, at least for some time,
as a revenge of his former abuse of them. Again, if that these, or the like
immoderate recreations have kept us from the service of God, either in the
public assembly, or in our private closets, it should be our care and
endeavor to recompense, our slothfulness with double diligence.

A man that would avenge himself of his lusts, he must pursue them, as the
avenger of blood did the man slayer, or malefactor, that unless he was gotten
into the city of refuge, he was surely slain; so must we do, hunt them out,
let them not rest in any corner of our hearts, for if sin may but find any
little resting place in our souls, it will not out, and as long as sin rests
in us, Christ will not rest, therefore you must not cease till you have driven
it out of your bounds. It was a good speech of Sarah, Genesis 21.9.10.
Cast out (says she) the bond woman and her son; for he shall not be heir
with my son: so say I to you, Esa. 2.20.
cast away your transgressions, for these two, Christ and sin; grace and lust
will not inhabit together.

3 The last thing in revenge is, that we should show no pity or compassion on
our lusts: when a man shall neither spare great nor small sins. Deuteronomy. 33.9.
It was the blessing that Moses gave to the Tribe of Levy, that he should say
to his father and mother, I have not seen him, neither did he acknowledge his
brethren: nor knew his own children, so it should be here, that we should
regard no lust, though it might be so dear as a man's Parents, or children to
him, yet should he have no pity. Saint Hierome gives the reason why we should
be so void of pity, Hier. Ep. ad Heliodor. Licet parvulus ex collo pendeat
nepos, licet sparse crine, scisiis vestibus ubera, quibus te nutriit, matter
ostondat, licet in limine pater jaceat, percalcatum perge Patre^ siccis ocults
ad v^icillum crucis: evola solum p^etatis genus, in hac re est esse crudelem.
Hier. ibid.
Ecce adversarius in pectore tuo, qui Christum conatur occidere: behold there
is an enemy within you, that does endeavor to slay Christ, therefore says
he, neither father nor mother, nor kinsman should prevail with us to keep us
in our sins, but we should shake off all; and follow Christ, though it be to
the loss of all things else, for this kind of cruelty, is the height and top
of true piety.

The righteous shall rejoice, when he sees the vengeance; and wash his feet
in the blood of the wicked, Psalm. 58.10. And how great joy will that be when
as a Christian shall see the revenge upon his sins, that they that were his
enemies are fallen before him: it is hard unto flesh and blood to be thus
cruel, especially against himself, as to turn his mirth into mourning; his
hours of recreation into times of devotion: to beat down his body, by
fasting; and to afflict his soul with shame and sorrow. This I say is
difficult, but yet, 1 Samuel 6.10.
if you would overcome nature, you must become in this thing unnatural, as it
was said of those two Kine that had their calves taken from them, that were
appointed to draw the ark of God; they went along the high way lowing as they
went, until they came to the coasts of Israel, a strange thing it was, and it
may seem to be unnatural, that they should leave their calves, and do thus;
yet they did it because it was Gods work; so I may say, that though this may
seem unnatural, and a kind of cruelty, yet we must set upon it because it is
Gods work; Ps. 137.9.
happy is that man that takes these brats of Babylon and dashes their heads
against the stones, for in not pitying of them, he pittieth his soul.

CAP. XV. Showing the great necessity of contrition, which is fourefold.
1 A necessity of the precept.
2 THe second thing is, the necessity of a broken heart. In point of
mortification there is necessitas precepti, of Gods command, he has commanded
us to do this duty, he has commanded us to mourn, they should weep as a
Virgin girded with sackcloth, for the husband of her youth, and so turn to the
Lord: Joel 1.8.
where there is the greatest love there should be the greatest sorrow, now the
first love is the greatest love, and therefore the first loss does require the
greatest sorrow. 1 Which does show unto us, that nothing should be more
grievous to us, than our sins, seeing God has commanded it as a thing
necessary to this work, why should we not do it? Again, we are enjoined
shame, thence it was in the Law, that when they had transgressed the
Commandments of the Lord, Neh. 9.1.
they used to put sackcloth on their loins, Ier. 4^.^7.
and power ashes on their heads, being tokens of shame and sorrow. Again, Psalm
39.3.
we are commanded to before displeased with our sins. David's heart was hot
within him: and the heart of Ios^ah was melted at the abominations of those
times, and the great transgression against Gods Law: this is that the Lord does
require; Lastly, that there should be a holy revenge, I suppose that vow of of
the Nazarite; that he should abstain from wines, and from the husks of the
grapes, was chiefly ordained, as holy revenge upon occasion of the abuse of the
good creature of God. Now whatsoever God commands us, that is necessary, but
you see that God has commanded us to labor for a contrite and a bleeding
heart, therefore it is necessary, as the servant of Naaman the Syrian said unto
him, 2 King^ 5.^3.
If the Prophet had bid thee do some great thing, would thou not have done
it, how much more then, when he says to thee, wash and be clean: so say I, if
God should command you some great thing, for the mortification of your sins,
and the salvation of your souls; suppose it were to go barefoot to
Jerusalem, or to bestow all your goods on the poor, or give the first borne of
your body for the sin of your soul, would you not do it, how much rather
then, Psalm. 51.17
when he says only this, that a broken and a contrite heart shall stand
instead of all these.

2 There is necessitas medii, a necessity of the means, 2 Of the means.
it is a special means, that this body of sin may be subdued, for as it is
with water, when it overflowes the ground, it drives out moles, and worms, and
other such creatures, 2 Cor. 7.11.
as do infest, and annoy the ground, and eat up the roots of plants fit to
become food for man: so it is with true contrition, it does so overflow the
heart with godly sorrow, as that it drives out these troublesome Inhabitants
that do annoy our spirits, and would spoil those good beginnings of grace in
us, therefore put we our selves on the means, and stand not like the hand
that is set up to guide us the way, and yet moves not it self. But if we know
these things blessed are we if we do them; if you say, that to do thus is
troublesome to flesh and blood, I answer, it may be so, but as we say that,
sometimes the things that are not the most toothsome, are very wholesome and
good, so howsoever they may be some trouble, yet so long as this trouble does
free us from a greater trouble, all is well; it is better to mourn here where
we have comfort, than to mourn and burn in hell, where we can neither have
ease nor remedy. Again, our comfort will recompense our trouble; for every
hour of grief shall be recompensed with thousands of years of joy and
consolation; when a man has been ten thousand years in heaven, and then
shall look back and consider what a short time of sorrow it was that he
endured, and withal how many millions of years are behind, which can never
expire; I conceive, it will not repent him, that he has repented, nor grieve
him, that he has mourned. In one word, this necessity is confirmed by the
practice of such, as are gone to heaven already, as Saint Paul that did
struggle with his corruption, and beat down his body, Number. 7.27.
and Saint Peter, and David, and the rest. 1 Cor. 9.
And it is prophesied of the people of God, that they should go weeping to
seek the Lord, Ier. 51.4.5.
and should ask the way to Sion, with their faces thitherward, saying, come
let us join our selves to the Lord in a perpetual covenant that shall not be
forgotten Comfort your selves therefore in the use of good means for your
passage through the valley of Baca, Psalm. 84.6.7
or valley of mourning, is to meet the Lord in Sion.

3 Of our actions.
3 It Is necessary in respect of all our actions, that they may be right, it is
necessary that they should come from such a heart as hates sin. Psalm. 66.1^.
For if I regard wickedness in my beart the Lord will not hear my prayer: now
a man is said to regard wickedness, when the parting with it is grievous unto
him, as it was when Abraham was bidden by Sarah to cast out Ismael, Genesis 21.
the matter was very grievous unto him, because he did regard and love him: so
it is, when we respect and love our sins, we will be loath to part with
them, and then know that what action soever you do, Luke 16.15.
you cannot please God. The reason is, because God he judges of a man's
actions according to his heart, which if that be unsound, then will all the
actions be no better. Thence i^ the complaint made by the Prophet; Es. 33.31.
they come unto thee as the people comes, and they sit before thee as my
people, they hear my words but they will not do them, for with their mouth
they show much love, but their hearts go after their covetousness; while men
deal thus with God, and behave themselves no better in his service, they may
not unfitly be compared to the Water-man, that while he roweth one way, he
looks another; wash your hands therefore ye sinners, and cleanse your hearts,
Jam. 4.8.
ye double minded men; wash your hands by reformation, (and your hearts by
true contrition) otherwise you are but (...) double minded; Mat. 12.33
therefore make the tree good and the fruit will be good, therefore now if your
heart be good, so will your actions be; for out of the abundance of the heart
the mouth speaks, the hand works, the ear hearkneth, and the whole man
moves: Therefore there must be great need of contrition to the end.

4. Of the way that is made for Christ.
4. There is a necessity of it in this regard, in as much as it makes way for
Christ to dwell in our hearts: Esa. 5.7.15 Luke 14.15
when our blessed Savior tells his Disciples whither they should go, and where
he would eat the Pass over; you shall find (says he) an upper room
furnished and prepared, there make ready for us; so it is also in this case,
into what heart Christ intends to come, and to make it his Chamber of presence;
Ephesians. 3.17.
it must be prepared for him by true humility and contrition of spirit; wash
you, make you clean, etc. Esa. 1.16.18.
and then come, says God, and let us reason together, till then you are not
fit to draw near unto God. When the people of Isreal had committed the great
sin in the making of a Calse, the Lord tells them, Exodus 3 3.
that so long as they kept their ornaments on them, it was in vain to make
suite unto him; put off therefore (says he) your ornaments, Ephesians. 4.22.
that I may know what to do unto you: so must we, if we expect Christ to come
into our hearts, put off the old man which is corrupt by deceitful lusts, so
long as lust rules and reigns in the heart, so long Christ is kept out; but
now when by true contrition we cast away our transgressions, and banish out the
old inhabitants, then Christ he will enter in and dwell there; but first he
will cast out buyers and sellers, and money changers, they shall not neast and
rest themselves in his Temple, he will cast out and overcome the world, and our
strong corruption, and make us to abhor and avenge our selves of our sins;
then he will say, this is my house, here will I dwell, and I will establish it
on such a foundation, as the gates of hell cannot prevail against.

CAP. XVI. The third more near degree of Mortification in the killing of sin.
THe last degree of mortification is the slaying of sin, the execution of it,
whereby we are said to be crucified unto the world, Gal. 6.14.
that is, I am not so low and vile in the esteem of the world; Romans 6.6.
but the world is as base and contemptible unto me; the same Apostle shows
that the end why Christ was crucified, was that the body of sin might be
destroyed.

What kind of death the death to sin is.
1. This destruction and death of sin is a lingering death, a man dies by
degrees; as the death of the Cross was, they hung a long while before they
died; and the more strength the longer: so the stronger that sin is, the
longer it will be a dying; as it is with a man that does beleager a strong
forte, and where stout and valiant men are, they will suffer much penury and
hardship, and hardly be brought to yield until the last man: so is it in such
a case, here is such a strong hold of carnal reasons and corrupt lusts set up
within us, and be fortified by Satan, and strong and desperate resolutions;
that it will be a long time before we can get the upper hand, and the victory
over them; and when we have gotten the victory, yet still they will trouble,
and disquiet our peace; as the Lord would not drive out all those Nations from
among the people of Israel, Josh. 23.13.
but they were as thorns in their eyes, and scourges in their sides, and were
not utterly cast out: so may I say, that these lusts they will be so unto us;
all that we can do will be this, not to suffer them to reign, and to weaken
their strength by degrees.

2. It is a painful death, to mortify and to kill sin, it cannot be done
without much pain; hence it is called Circumcision, Jer. 4.4.
circumcise your selves unto the Lord, and take away the fore-skinnes of your
hearts, that this was a sore and painful thing, may appear in the soreness
of the men of Sheehem the third day; Gen, 34.25
and by that speech of Zipporah unto Moses, a bloody husband thou art; Exodus
4.26.
because of the Circumcision; and indeed, when we consider what prayers, what
tears, what revenge, and what wrestling it has or may cost you; you will say
that there is need of much faith to defend your selves, much skill in Gods word
to offend your enemy, and much patience, that in the midst of this conflict
that you may not break out against God into impatient speeches; Pro. 14, 10.
the heart (in this case) knows his own bitterness, no man else can tell it,
nor is able to express it; what sightings and fears within, and what troubles
without; as that the poor soul finds such waves and storms in his
conscience that he is like Noah's Dove, knows not where to rest his foot, not
where to rest his soul; as you may see in the case of Job, and Paul: and many
times strong Christians are not without strong assaults and conflicts, the
enemy when he is a dying, is often the most desperate; and sometime good men
apt to be surprised with spiritual pride, and to think that either he is so
good, he ought not, or so strong he fears not to be tempted, in such a a
case he has need of a temptation that he may the better know himself, and
seek out unto Christ, as they when they were tossed with the waves (say) help
Master, Mat. 8.26.
or else we perish.

3. Though sin cannot be utterly subdued, yet may it be greatly diminished;
and the power of it enervated and abated, though the Cananites were not utterly
subdued, yet were they very low brought; so sin may by this work of
mortification be brought very low, as it was with the widow of Zarephta, her
store was so wasted that she had no more but a handful of Meal in a Barrel,
and a little Oil in a Cruse, which she was about to dress for her self and
her son, and then to eat it, and after dye. Now it is a great comfort unto a
man when a man can attain to this.

1. That he can keep his heart that sin do not at any time break out into
any gross act. Luke 1.6. Genesis 5.24.
It is said of Zacharias and Eliz. that they walked in all the Commandments of
God without rebuke; that is, though they were not without their infirmities;
yet were they without rebuke, in respect of any crime or gross sin: yet here
is a large difference between such as do only restrain and keep in sin,
for some by end, and such as these to whom sin is in some measure mortified,
even as much as there is between the beating out of the teeth of a Lion, and
the changing of his nature; thence it is that this work makes us of Lions to
become as meek as Lambs; Is. 11.6.
so as the Lamb and the Leopard shall lie down, with the Kid and the Calse and
the young Lion and the fatling together, and a little child shall lead them:
again, though a wicked man may curb and keep in sin, yet can he not kill and
destroy sin; and the reason is this, because he wants special and spiritual
means; sin will not be driven out with great words, Is. 58, 6.
nor by spreading sackcloth and ashes under you; nor hanging down your heads
like a bull-rush for a day, but there must be in us the love of God, which will
make us to depart from iniquity.

2. It is a great comfort when sin is so over-powerd as it does not divert us
from duty, I do not say distract us in the performance of them, for there is
no man without them, for when we are the best employed about our devotions; as
reading, hearing, praying, or mediration, then is the adversary most busy to
disquiet our peace, and to hinder us in our work; Zach. 3.1.
when J^hoshuah the high Priest was standing before the Angel of the Lord, Neh.
4.18.
there Satan stood at his right hand; yet you may have good comfort in this,
when you go on in your work as they that builded up the wall of Jerusalem;
though they were much distracted, and disquieted by their enemies, yet did they
hold on their work, though it was with their swords by their sides: so a good
Christian, albeit he has many distractions, yet he goes on in duty, and will
not be diverted from it, as it was with David when Michal his wife spoke
against him for his dancing before the Ark of God, 2 Samuel 6.20 21, 22, 23.
he made his reply, that if that were vile, he would yet be more vile; so it
is with a mortified man, that though there were never so many impediments, and
stumbling blocks laid in his way, of the loss and discredit, he shall
sustain, yet he looks more at the praise of God then of men, and knows
that what is highly pleasing in the sight of men is displeasing in the sight of
God, Luk 16.15.
and therefore takes up Saint Paul's resolution when they besought him that he
would not go up to Jerusalem, Acts 21.12 13.
in regard of the present danger that they did foresee, howbeit Saint Paul
being bound in the Spirit for the work of the Lord, asks them what they
mean to break his heart, seeing he was ready not only to be bound at
Jerusalem, but to dye there for the name of the Lord Jesus; so is it with him
that is truly humbled, that nothing diverteth him from the duty.

3. It is a great comfort unto a Christian, Acts 8.39.
when he has so conquered and overpowered his corruptions, and that they
take not away his joy and consolation that he has in Christ, neither can
Satan take such advantage by them to dispoyle us of our crown; 2 Cor. (...) 5.
thence it is that Saint Paul says he will glory in his infirmities, that
though he might glory in those heavenly visions that he had, yet he would
rather glory in them, for though in a large sense, every sin is called an
infirmity, because it disableth a man from the performance of duty; but in a
strict sense no man can be said to have infirmities, unless that sin in some
measure be mortified; for in an unmortified man sin is alive and in his full
strength, and his soul is void of grace: but now in a man that is truly
mortified, there grace receives strength, and sin is wounded; and so such a
man is the proper subject of infirmities; now when the Apostle says, that he
does rejoice in his infirmities, he does not rejoice in his infirmities, as
they are sins, Matthew. 10.
but as they are infirmities; that is, as sin was deforced and diminished in
him, and therein he had cause of joy; and we also when we find it so in us, if
the Disciples rejoiced that the Devils were subdued by them; much more may we
that the body of sin is destroyed, and that which is worse then the Devil is
subdued by us, count it all joy when ye fall into diverse temptations, Jam. 1:
2.3.
knowing that the trial of our says works patience, and patience makes
perfect and entire: we are but in this case, as gold that is put into the
Furnace, that comes out more pure, and are made by that means vessels of
honor, fit for the use of our great Master, our Lord and Savior Christ.

CAP. XVII. Certain signs of a dying man.
2 I Come now to show unto you certain signs of a dying man, whereby you may
see whether that you be in such a case, yea or no; it would be in vain to show
you signs of a dead man, for as much as there is no perfection of death of
sin in our souls; as there is no perfection of grace, so neither is there
(as we have formerly showed) perfection of mortification; 1 Cor. 13.
only as has been showed we are daily a dying, but not fully dead.

1. A man is said to be a dying man when his stomach fails, when he has no
appetite to his food; when we have no stomach to sin, no apetite after it,
when we feel no such sweetness in it as we have done, when we esteem the
profits and pleasures of finne as an empty vessel; in one word, when all of
them are bitter unto us, and tastlesse in respect of what they have been to us
before time: 2 Samuel 19.35.
as old Barzillai said to David, can thy servant taste what Teate or what I
drink; can I hear any more the voice of singing men or singing women, verse.
37.
etc. Let me turn back that I may dye, etc. Just thus it is when a man
feele^ his affection off from his sin, that he can neither relish their
sweernes, nor be allured with their pleasant songs, to be drawn back unto
them: again, it is a good evidence that sin is a dying, and declining in
him, I deny not but time may wear out our appetite unto some sins as an old
man, that has been given in his youth to lust and voluptuousness, may leave
them, but yet he lives still in some other sin which is equivalent, and as
dangerous to his soul; yea, and when his natural apetite is taken away, ye^
his sinful appe^ite may remain, so that when a man wants strength to sin,
yet may he have a mind to sin, and wish that he were young again that he
might sin. Whereas, were sin mortified, these sinful affections would ^ye
sooner then our natural.

2. A man is then a dying man when he is a burden to himself, whereas he is
not able to bear his own weight; when you see a man hardly able to go on his
legs, you say that unless he do recover again he is not like to continue
long; so say I, inregard of sin, then when you see a man that feels and
finds sin to be such a burden, as he is not able to bear, but groans under
the burden of it; that assuredly then sin is a dying; Romans 8.23.
well may sin make us groan and buckle under it, when it makes the whole
creation groan; nay, that which is so heavy a burden, as the Lord that made
heaven and earth, and bears them up by his own power, and never complains of
the burden of them, Complains of this, behold I am pressed down under you,
Amos 2.13.
as a cart is pressed that is full of sheaves: you therefore that feel your
sins to be no burden, but can carry your sins away with you as easily as
Sampson carried the gates of Gaza upon his shoulders; Judge: 16.3.
it is an argument that you are Sampson-like in your sin^, sin does abide in
you in its full strength, if some man shall say, I hope I shall do well then,
for I find sin a heavy burden; but I would ask him this question then,
whether do you find sin a burden in regard of it self, or in regard of
some circumstance that does depend upon it; as namely, the wrath of God, or the
shame and disgrace that you may have among men by it: if that sin be the
burden, then your case is good, if not, then may you suspect your selves to be
unsound; as suppose a man that has a certain quantity of sponge on his back,
which he carries lightly away, but now this man travelleth all a sore rainy
day which does so fill the sponge with water, that his burden that was light
before, now becomes intolerable; so it is in this case, it is not the weight of
sin that troubles them, they carry it roundly away; but now that which
troubles them, is those showers of wrath from Heaven, and that shame and
contempt that they receive from men, that makes them to cry out as Kain did, my
punishment i^ greater then I can bear, where as the penalty that is annexed
unto sin, were the sin removed moved off to a mortified man it would seem
light and little,

3. A man may then be said to be a dying man when as his disease prevails upon
him, so as he has less power to resist it, every day then other: so likewise
when that sin decays and does languish away in us, and grace does so
prevail and get the upper hand, as that corruption and sin is not able to
stand against it, as it has done; the understanding is so far convinced by
the clear light that shines into it, that it is not able to stand nor shift
any longer, but it is beaten off from all those false reasonings, Prox. 3.5.
secret turnings, and cunning equivocations, so as a man dares not any longer
rest on it; the will is also fairly persuaded, and will resist the holy Ghost
no longer, but yields up the hold unto Christ, and says, Lord, not my will,
but thy will be done.

Hence comes a general mortification of the affections and lusts; Gal. 5.24.
by affections understand those inordinate affections which bear sway in the
hearts of men; as immoderate anger, grief, also pride, unnatural affections;
and by lusts, all insatiable desires after the things of this life, they are
now all crucified, so as they will yield no more blind obedience, either to
sin or Satan, so as grace has drawn the strength of the soul unto it, and
cutteth off that wherein the great strength of corruption lay.

It is reported Cyrus finding the City of Babylon impregnable, and almost
impossible to be taken by land, by reason of a great wall that did compass it
on the one side, and finding the river Ephrates to hemme it in on the other
side, caused his soldiers to cut the river into many channels, and to divert
it another way, and so surprised the City, and subdued it; just thus it is when
we shall divert those noble faculties of the soul another way; namely from
taking part with sin, to take part with God, it will not then be hard to
mortify and subdue our corruptions; if it shall be said, then how comes it
to pass then that men after that they be grown Christians that they fall into
such sins: I answer, it is not because sin is stronger but either by reason
of their slothfulness or spiritual pride, or else by violence of something
which may befall them while they resting, careless, and secure are supprized
and overtaken, which howsoever there be neither want of strength, nor weakness
of Grace; yet for want of watchfulness this may befall a good man, as it did
David and Peter; yet let me add this one thing, that is, that this in the
event turns to a greater good, and for the time to come, to make us more
careful to gird our armor about us, and more watchful that we sin no more;
the burnt child (as it is in the Proverb) dreads the fire: so will a
Christian that has been once scorched by such a temptation.

CAP. XVIII. Showing the third, articular that is the means whereby this work
is done, and that is by the spirit.
COme we now to the third particular, and that is the means whereby this
great work of mortification, is effected and brought to pass, for the better
understanding of this particular, observe these two propositions.

1. First, that the spirit must be had of us. 2. That we must by the help and
assistance of the spirit mortify our sinful nature.
1. For the former, that we must have the spirit; there is great necessity of
this, for then we are in the spirit, Romans 8.9.
when the spirit dwells in us, and if any man have not the spirit of Christ
the same is none of his, God says that in the time of the Gospel he would
power upon them, Zac. 13.10.
the spirit of grace, and supplication, that is, as they were anointed with
oil, that undertook any special office: so Christians, when they are made by
grace Kings and Priests unto God, they have this oil of the spirit powered into
their hearts, our blessed Savior confirms this, unto us in that speech to
Nichodemus, that which is borne of the spirit is spirit. Ioh. 3.6.
As Adam begot a man in his own likeness: so the spirit it begets us like
unto it self; holy as it is holy, heavenly as it is heavenly.

For the better understanding of the point in hand, know that the spirit is to
be considered 2. ways; either according to its essence, or according to his
gifts and graces, now according to its essence and being, it is every where,
it fills heaven and earth, as it is excluded out of no place; so neither is
it included in any, but in this sense, we can no more be said to have the
spirit than other men, and creatures can, in whom, and by whom we all live,
move, and have our being: Act. 17.28.
but in the second sense, in respect of its gifts and graces, so some men are
said in special, to have the spirit as the spirit quickens, 2 Cor. 3.6.
and conveyeth a principle of life into us, whereby we live the life of grace,
and that is called spiritus inhabitans, that takes up his seat in our heart,
and spiritus obsignans, Iam. 4.5.
that sealing spirit, whereby the spirit witnesses with our spirits that we
are the sons of God: now in this sense we may be said to have the spirit.
Romans 8.16.


2 That there must by the help and assistance of the spirit, Mortify the
deeds of the body: Ez. 36.27.
a new beart will I give you, and I will take away your stony heart, etc. that
is, that this mighty power of the spirit, is that which will help forward, to
the taking away of this stony heart, the Lord is said to wash away the filth of
the daughter of Zion: and to purge the blood of Jerusalem by the spirit of
Judgment, Esa 41.4.
and the spirit of burning, that is, this spirit shall be in us, and shall
enable us to judge our selves, and kindle such a fire in us, as shall melt away
the dross of our corruption.

That you may the better understand, what assistance it is that the spirit
gives unto us, in this work of mortification, give me leave to lay down
unto you these three things.

1 By what means the spirit works, or helps forward this work of
mortification: although I deny not but the spirit may and can work, where it
lists, and when it lists, Ioh. 3.8.
either by means, or above means, yet our task is at this time to show how
it works by means.

1 It awakeneth conscience, it does convince us of sin, and discovers unto
us the greatness of their number, and the foulness of their nature, thence
it is that Christ, when he comes, does convince the world of sin, of
righteousness, and of judgment; of sin, because they believe not on him,
that howsoever the guilt of the Law lie heavy, Ioh. 16.8, 9, 10.
and the weight there of as a penalty, greater than a man can tell how to
bear: yet then to have added hereunto another conviction, that is the
conder^ning sin of infidelity, Ioh. 3.18.
this does much aggravate, Mar. 16.16
and make sin out of measure sinful; therefore it is that our Savior Christ
says, that he that believes not is condemned already; as if he should have
said, if a man were a drunkard, or a swearer, or a profane person, and yet if
he can believe, there is hope of pardon, but so long as he does not believe,
there is no hope at all, for as much as he is without God, and without the
Covenant of Grace: Ephesians. 2.12.
now the spirit when it comes convinces our judgments of this: till such
time as the spirit has done this, we are like Jonah, fast asleep in the
bottime of the ship, the sea rages, the Mariners row, the waves beat, the
ship is tossed up and down, yet all this does but rock Jonah faster a sleep,
Iona 1.6.
till the ship-master comes to him, and says, What meanest thou, etc. thou
sleeper arise and call upon thy God, etc. So it is with us, while we are
asleep in our sins, the heavy wrath of God hangs over our heads, yea and
the judgments of God are abroad in the world, yet we lie fast asleep,
senseless, and secure, not dreading any anger: but now, when this blessed
spirit of Christ shall waken us, and show us the danger, and ask us what we
mean to continue in this condition; then we begin to bethink our selves,
and to shake off sluggishnesse, and to cast about for our own safety. Act.
9.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6.
Saul thought himself safe enough when he was a persecutor, and that
authority that he had from the High Priest, was sufficient to bear him out
that while he did breath out slaughter against Christ, Ioh. 16.2.
he thought he had done God good service, till Christ caused a light to shine
from heaven, and a voice saying, Saul, Saul; why persecutest thou me? this
indeed wakened him, and made him shake and tremble, and say, Who art thou Lord?
and what would thou have me to do: by this means it was that Paul of a
persecutor becomes a preacher, and had his corruptions, and cruel
dispositions changed in him, that of a fierce lion, he became as meek as a
lamb.

2 The spirit of Christ it sets home the means that God uses for our
mortification, 2 Cor. 10.4.
the weapons of our warfare are mighty through God; it is God that puts virtue,
and strength into them: now there are several sorts of weapons that the Holy
Ghost uses for this end, as

1 The preaching of the Word of God, it is called the ministration of the
spirit, 2 Cor. 3.8.
it is called the two edged sword, Heb. 4.12.
that which is sharper, that it cuts asunder the soul and the spirit, the
joints and the ma^row and discovers the secret intents of our hearts, 2 Cor.
4.7.
but what is that that makes this word so powerful? Sure it is the Holy Spirit
of God that does it, we have this Word in earthen vessels, that the
excellency of the power might be of God, and not of us, it is not the
Ministry that can make the word virtuall, and powerful, nor is it in the
letter of the Word, but in the spirit, therefore when you come to the Word and
hear it opened unto you, 1 Cor. 3.6.
do not look at the man, who he is, nor the instrument, but at the power
which is from the spirit: Saint Paul may plant, and Apollos water, but it is
God that must give the increase, when it pleases God to accompany his word,
Ier. 23.29.
with the influence of his spirit, then is it like fire to purge out our
dross, and like the hammer that breaks in sunder our hard hearts: that as
Moses when he smote with his rod the rock, Number. 2^.1^.
the water came abundantly: so when God smites our hearts, with the rod of his
Word, it is able to dissolve our hearts into tears, and godly sorrow unto
repentance not to be repented of.

2 The spirit sets home afflictions, and troubles to make them vertuall, and
efficacious to the subduing of our corruptions, Zach. 13.9.
I will bring a third part through the fire, I will refine them as silver is
refined; and will try them as gold is tried, and they shall call upon my name,
and I will hear them, etc. When God takes us in hand, then all the hurt that
we receive by our afflictions, Esa 27.7.9.
is the taking away of our sins, all the fruit of their afflictions was to
the end that thereby the iniquity of Jacob might be purged. God suffered the
bush to burn, but yet it was not consumed because the Lord was in the midst of
it. The Finer is most careful of his gold when it is in the furnace, and so is
God for our good, in the time of our afflictions, as he said periissem nisi
periissem; I had perished if I had not perished. Many good Christian may say,
that if he had not had crosses, and losses in the world, he had lost his
soul. We read of some of the Martyrs that have blessed God that ever they came
to prison for Christ's sake, that when they became man's bondmen, then were they
Christ's freemen, and could as comfortably feed on brown bread, and rouse in
the straw, as on a bed of down. What a mavelous change was wrought in
Manasse, 2 Chro. 33. from v. 1. to 14.
who in his prosperity was most wicked, he fell to the Idolatry of the Heathen
used enchantment, witchchraft, caused Jerusalem to swim with blood, yet in
his affliction, how did he humble himself? greatly. How mightily was he then
wrought upon! how did his heart smite him! Whence was this but from the spirit
of God, that persuaded his heart unto it, for if that Gods spirit go not at
long with those afflictions, that are on men, they are never the better, but
the worse for them: as you see it said of him; that said; because the evil was
from the Lord, 2 King. 6.33.
he saw no reason to wait any longer, and so it was of King Ahaz, 2 Cron. 28.
that in his extremity, he sinned yet more and more, therefore the Holy Ghost
does brand him with this infamous note, this is that King Ahaz, that is he
that afflictions could not mend, nor make better. And indeed when as it is so,
that affliction does men no good, it is to be feared, that they have rejected
the last remedy that God means to bestow upon them, and God may say to them,
Why should I smite them any more. Isa 1.5.


3 The spirit sets home examples of good men, and makes them means to
mortify our sins, when we see men weaned from the world, upright in their
ways, charitable to the poor, temperate in the use of the creatures; holy,
humble, and full of good fruits; such a man's life, when God pleases to set it
on, does make other men repent, and by seeing their good works, to glorify
God, Show thy self in all things a pattern of good works: Mat. 5.16.
now a pattern is a rule for others to follow: Tit. 2.7.
examples teach sooner than precepts, and are more easy to the undestanding to
learn, and also are more speedily taken into practice. Longum ^ter por
praecepta offica^, and breve per exemplu. Sen.
. A notionall goodness is little worth, unless some demonstration may be
given of it, in point of practice, this we read of Hezek^ah, 2 King. 18.3.
that he did walk in all the ways of his father David, 2 King. 22.2.
and of Josiah after him; much more are godly men's examples very efficacious,
in their sufferings, and in their deaths, when the spirit shall join with
them: Iam. 5.11.
as how has the patience of Job been a pattern unto succeeding posterities,
Job 1.21.
we want not many examples to prove, how the blood of the Martyrs have been
the seed of the Church; 2 King. 6.22, 23.
If Elisha did so calm the Syrians by that example of patience, and kindness,
so that they came no more to annoy, and infest, their land; how much more may
the patience of godly men persuade others to lay aside their cruelty, and
mortify their strong corruptions?

CAP. XIX. The manner how the spirit does mortify corruption.
COme we now to the manner how the spirit does mortify corruption.

1 The spirit shows the way how we should mortify the corruptions, Esa
30.21.
thou shall hear a voice behind thee, saying, this is the way walk in it.
When ye turn to the left hand, or to the right, it carries us through, were it
not for this assistance we should either stand still, go no further, or else
turn aside, either on the right hand to superstition; Esa 50.
to walk in the light of our own sparks, and in the fire that we have
kindled: or on the left hand, to profanesse, and to hardness of heart, and to
commit iniquity with unsatiable greediness, therefore that prayer of Moses
should be ours, Exo. 33.13.
O Lord, if I have found grace in thy sight show me thy way now a man is the^
in Gods way, when he goes about his work with carfulness, Prove. 45.10. and
15.
when a man devotes himself to his work, and takes pleasure in it, as it was
said of the Kings daughter, that she should forget her own people, and her
fathers house (which is a hard business) and this was to be done cheerfully
and freely, so when we do leave our dearest lusts, Ioh. 8.44.
and cast off the yoke, satan, Ephesians, 2.1.
who is a father to the children of Belial, and a Prince that reigns over
their consciences, we must do it cheerfully, as it is in the sweet song of
Deborah, Judge. 5.2.
who praised the Lord for the avenging of Israel, when the people willingly
offered themselves. It is certain that we have then cause to bless the Lord,
Deuteronomy. 20.5, 6.
when that God makes our heart willing to serve the Lord. It was a rule in the
Law, that if any man had builded a new house, or planted a Vineyard, or married
a wife, that he should not go to war that year: the reason was, because
that he could not do it willingly, out of that love and affection he had unto
his present expectation of gain, and comfort, lest that which he had left at
home might make him less willing to adventure his life, or at least to turn
back before the battle was ended: so any man that goes to war against his
corruptions, let him know this, that if there be any thing in the world, that
his heart stands affected unto, which makes him unwilling unto this service,
be sure of this, he is not fit to be a soldier against so potent an enemy: no
man that warreth entangleth himself with the affairs of this life, 2 Timothy 2.4.
then he may please him who has chosen him to be a soldier: as if he should
say, if you be cumbred, and entangled with the world, you cannot serve God
willingly, and by consequent not please him.

2 The spirit does assist us in this way, that we do the work strongly, when
the iron is hard, men put to the more strength: this work is hard, and
difficult, therefore you must be strong that you may go through. Therefore is
the prayer of the Apostle for the Collossians, Col. 1.19.
that they might be strengthened, with all might, unto all patience and long
sufferings. As it was said of Sampson, when he came to the vineyards of
Timnath, Judge. 14.5, 6.
that a young lion roared against him, and the spirit of the Lord came mightily
upon him, and he rent the lion as a man should rend a kid: so it is with us, we
have the old Lion the devil that seeks to devour us, and were it not that
the spirit of Christ should strengthen us with all might, and enable us to
overcome him, 1 Samuel 4.9.
we could not stand before him, as the Philistines encouraged one another,
saying, Quit your selves like men, that you may not be servants to the
Hebrews. So say I to you, be strong in the Lord, and quit your selves, like so
many soldiers of the Lords Hosts, that you may not serve sin, but fight out
your Gods fight, that you may be more than Conquerers, and against your
spiritual enemies.

3 The spirit of Christ takes away those impecliments that would hinder this
work, and disableth us from the performance of it.

1 One great impediment that hinders this work, it is ignorance: when men do
not know those things that concern their peace, Luke 19.41.
for there is no true peace, but where there is and has been this war, Many
a man is like to some simple Countryman, if some great and potent man lay
claim to some part of his land, though his cause be never so just, yet he will
rather lose his right, than go to Law for it: so is it with many, that they
will rather lose their soul, than contend against their corruptions, they out
of their ignorance think them too potent, and too strong for them; but now
when the spirit comes, it shows that he is greater, that is with us, than he
that is in the world, and that they are cursed that go not out, to help the
Lord against the mighty: Judge. 5.23.
he does comfort that as he did Joshua, Josh. 1.5.
that none of his enemies should stand before him; nor be able to prevail
against him: he will be with us while we are with him, nay the spirit
encourages our hearts against this enemy, 2 Cor. 15.2.
as Caleb and Ioshuah did the Israelites, Number, 14.9.
saying, fear none of your spiritual enemies, for their defense is departed
from them: and God is not with them, and doubt not, but though thou can not
finally consume them, yet thou shall make a happy conquest against them.

2 Another impediment is, hardness of heart, it is called an obstinate heart,
Deuteronomy. 2.30.
because it does refuse mercy: Esa 6.10.
a fat heart, because it makes men insensible of their condition: Zach. 7.12
a heart as hard as the adamant stone, because it makes men hate to be
reformed. Now when the spirit comes it softeneth this hardness, and takes
away this resistancie, Ez. 36.26,
and gives us hearts that are of a melting temper; and makes the songs of the
Temple to be sorrowful, Amos 8.3.
and men to be affected with grief as the sorrow of a traveling woman: Hos.
13.13.
the sorrow of a woman in travel, as it is most grievous, so it is most
comfortable in regard of the issue and event. The mother forgets her sorrow,
because that a manchild is borne, so this breach that is made into the rocks
of our hearts, though it be grievous unto us, yet is it profitable in the
issue, for as much as this seed time of tears is seconded, with an harvest of
joy, we want not examples to make good this point? What an obstinate heart had
Manasses, till the spirit of God brake it? What a hard heart had Paul, till he
was smitten by the spirit of Christ? how was this Lion then changed into a
Lamb! This is set forth by the Baptist, Every valley shall be filled, every
mountain and hill shall be brought low, Luke 3.5.
and the crocked shall be made straight, and the rough ways shall he made
smooth: what is this, but every man that is low in his own eyes, shall be
raised by the spirit, and every one that is high and lofty shall be humbled;
and such as walk in the crooked path of error, shall be reduced and walk in
the straight paths of truth in sincerity: and such as have been tough and
obstinate shall be made plain and passable by the spirit.

3 The next impediment that hinders a man from mortification, is self-love, I
do not mean that love which is natural, but that which is sinful, for no
man ever hated his own flesh: but this is the property of sinful self-love;
when a man shall love his body above his soul, and himself more than his God,
and shall be at more cost, and take more pains for the enjoyment of a base
lust, than to enjoy Christ: now when the spirit comes, it makes us to renounce
all, Heb. 10.34.
and to follow Christ. To suffer the loss of our goods, and of our hopes, as
it was said of Bradford that for that he would not make one scratch with a pen,
Heb. 11.24.25.26.
he lost all his hopes that he might have had in this world; and so did Moses
refuse to be called son of Pharaohs daughter, and to renounce the pleasures
of the Court, and the treasures of Egypt; that he might not lose the peace of
his conscience, nor dishonor his God; nay it does so make us our of love with
our selves, that neither father, nor mother, nor wife, nor children, nor our
own lives shall be dear unto us, provided we may but finish our course with
joy.

3. I come now to the third thing wherein I shall be briese; namely, the ends
why the spirit may be said to assist us in this work, and there are two
reasons of it.

1. For to show man's impotencie that we are not able to do it of our selves, a
natural agent cannot do a spiritual work; who can bring a clean thing out
of an unclean? Not one. Who knows not that we are polluted and defiled with
sin, and have disabled our selves of strength and ability to do it?

Thence is that of the Prophet, Jer. 10.23.
I know that the way of man is not in himself; it is not in man that walks,
to direct his steps: that is, we are too weak for any such work without Gods
grace assisting of us, and therefore we have good cause to bewail our misery,
to lay aside our pride, and confess our poverty, and to seek some other
means of help and redress at Gods hand.

2. To set out Gods power, this is his privilege that he only is able to do
this work; there are three ways whereby things came to have their being and
existencie; by Generation, Art, or Creation, the two former must have matter to
work upon, either in potentia, as generation, or in actu, as Art, and where
there is not a matter to work upon they can do nothing, now for as much as
this work of regeneration, Ephesians. 4.24.
and the new creature is called a creation, it is beyond the work of a
creature, and only a privilege that does belong to the holy Spirit to create
in us qualities of holiness, and thereby to abolish the whole body of sin,
thence it is that the Lord says, I create the fruit of the lips to be peace,
Isa. 57.19
and the Prophet complaining in another place to whom is the arm of the Lord
revealed, it is that mighty, and potent arm of the Lord that does this work;
it is by his power, and therefore he must have the honor of it. As Joab when
he was in hope to take Rabbah, he sent messengers to David that he should come
and take it, 2 Samuel 12.26.
because the honor that would have been given him was too great for him, how
much more should we, seeing out hope is in the Lord, and our success chiefly
by his power give all the honor to him?

CAP. XX. Certain instructions from the doctrine premised.
FRom this doctrine of mortification we may observe diverse necessary
instructions, both for the information of our judgment, and well ordering of
our lives, as

1. First, we may learn that such a doctrine as does give liberty to the
flesh, was never given by the spirit of God; for the spirit is given us, not
only as a bridle to curb, and keep in sin, neither a scourge to castigate
corrupt nature, but chiefly as a sword to kill and destroy the very body of
sin: it is the counsel of Saint Paul, Gal. 5.13.
that we being called to liberty, should not use our liberty as an occasion to
the flesh; that is, if we do not use our liberty with great caution and
watchfulness, we will make our liberty to be a snare to us; the word used by
Saint Paul is (...) that signifies occasion; it comes (as some think) of
(...) that signifies to make an assault; Acts 14.5.
because that if you give but your selves liberty, never so little more then is
fit; the flesh will make an assault upon you: as it is said of the Lion, that
if you come but within his reach when he is caged up he will not miss but
fasten upon you, so is it in this case, therefore we must beware that we do
labor for temperance, and moderation; otherwise the flesh will seize upon us,
and so while we give liberty to the flesh, we lose the peace of our conscience,
and that peace with God, unto whom we have had free access and audience in
our prayers: Therefore know this, that the more liberty we give unto the flesh,
the more we do deprive our selves of our Christian liberty, as the more
delight that we take in the sinful pleasures of this life; the lesser and
lower will be our delights, and contentments in God: Herod did like well of the
Baptist, and heard him gladly; but yet his lust, and the delight he took in
Herodias and her daughter, he did eclipse it at the best, and in the end took
it quite away: Psalm. 32. Psalm. 77.
Nay how was David straitened of that spiritual freedom after such time as he
had given liberty to the flesh, behold how many tears, how many prayers, how
many sighs and groans did it cost him; before he was restored to his former
comfort and consolation again; the more liberty a man takes for the flesh, the
more he does enthrall himself; as the bird once in the snare, the more she
does struggle, the more she does entangle her self; little do men know what
disadvantages they cast themselves into when they take liberty to sin; 2 Pet.
2.20.21.
there is a heavy doom propounded against them, if after they have escaped
the pollutions of the world through the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ,
they are again entangled therein, and overcome, the later end is worse with
them then their beginning: if any shall say, but what benefit have we then by
our Christian liberty? Gal. 3.11.
I answer, much every way; we are freed by Christ from the curse of the Law,
from the irritation of it, whereby it was an occasion to make us sin more,
and from the rigor of it, whereby we are bound to perform it and live; or
else in the not doing of it perfectly to die eternally; we have a comfortable
and free use of the creature, Heb. 4.16.
and free access to the throne of grace in time of need, for the receiving of
all good things; both the benefit of soul and body in all these things; we
see we have much liberty granted unto us, but no liberty to sin; you will say
how may a man do that that he may give no liberty to the flesh,

When a man will not take the full liberty that he may take; all things are
lawful, 2 Cor. 6.12.
but all things are not expedient; it may be lawful to go near the banck of
a deep river, but if his foot should slip, or that he should tread never so
little awry, he would fall into very great danger; so is it here, when men
hazard themselves to the utmost bounds of their liberty, ten to one, but they
drop into one sin or another, and so procure unto themselves one misery after
another. Genesis 34.1.2. Si tu otiose spectes otiose non specteris si tu curiose
spectas curiose specteris. Ber.
Dinah went but out to see the daughters of the land, peradventure the thing
might be lawful enough, yet because it was the utmost bounds of liberty, she
not being cautious lost all the fairest ornament about her, before her return;
thence is that of our Savior, if they say unto thee behold he is in the
desert, go not forth, behold he is in the secret chamber, believe it not; why
it might be lawful to go and see, suppose it might, yet because there is a
snare laid open in lawful things; we should take heed we prevent, if it may
be, the occasion.

2. If you would not give liberty to the flesh, shake off dullness in the
performance of good duties; Mat. 26.41
the spirit is willing, but the flesh is weak, the flesh is short-paced and
too too ready to hinder us, in the way of the spirit; the Ass in the Law was
to have his neck broken, and not be offered unto God; and the reason was,
because it was a dull creature: so it is in this case, that the flesh is dull,
and heavy, and if so be we be not stirring and zealous in our way; the
flesh will draw us back and keep us so far back in the way to salvation,
as that we had need to wish that the Sun and Moon might stand still in their
stations; as they did in the time of Ioshuah, or else it is to be feared, we
shall come short of our expected journey, to the Kingdom of Heaven: nay in
doing the work of the Lord negligently, instead of a blessing, we procure a
curse upon our selves; Jer. 48.10.
every sacrifice in the Law was to be salted with fire; Mark 9.49
that is, there was to be the salt of wisdom, that they did perform duties
with discretion; so there must be fire of zeal, that the services may be
living and vigorous. Romans 12.1


3. If you would not give liberty to the flesh, give God his full due, the more
you give to God, the less you have to give to the flesh; ^ccl. 12.1
give unto God the chief of your time, remember him in the days of your
youth, because that is the most seasonable time to give unto God our first
fruits, and the beginning of our strength; and it is the time of most
certainety, for it is as the spring and summer of our days; it is most likely
that we shall do God most service, then a man will put a man into his
Vineyard, when he may do him the most work; so if we wait on the Lord, in
the days of our youth; it is most likely then we shall be set into our
work, and such a work as shall not be without a happy reward. Secondly, give
the Lord the chief of your endeavors, the end to which you came into this
world, is not so much to plow up your lands, or to dig in the earth, or to
follow your trades, and to cumber your selves with Martha about many things;
Phil. 2.12. 2 Timothy 4.7. 1 Cor. 15.
but it is to work out your salvation with fear and trembling; and to fight
out your good fight, and never be weary of well doing; knowing that in due time
you shall reap, if you faint not; I do not say that men should neglect their
callings, for he that provideth not for his family, is worse then an infidel;
but this I say, that he that is so careful for the world; that he does
neglect his soul, and the service of his God, is little better then an
Atheist: yet let me tell you, that the plough that does plow your grounds, must
rather stand, then that which ploweth up the fallow grounds of your hearts, and
you must not spend so much time in your shops, as there by to neglect the trade
of your souls, nor be so busy about your counting-bookes as to forget that
great account that you are to make with God; for howsoever this may be good
husbandry amongst men, yet sure I am, it is none of Gods husbandry, as that
Prophet said unto Ahab; 1. Kieg. 2.38.39.
behold says he, there was in the battle, a man committed unto me, but on
these terms; that if I kept him not, my life should go for his, etc. but
while I was busy here and there, the man was gone; so it is in this case, that
while a man is busy about this and that thing, that a man's days are spent,
and he drops into hell before he is aware, and loses his soul for the
satisfaction of his lusts. First, labor in the last place to be always on
the growing hand, to add unto your faith virtue, to your virtue knowledge, to
knowledge temperance; to temperance, 2 Pet. 1.5.6
brotherly kindness, love, etc. then he concludes, that if these things be in
you, and abound; ye shall neither be barren nor unfruitful.

That as the spiritual part does increase, so the flesh and corruptions, they
do decrease, and go down: 2 Samuel 17.16.
Though Vriah was a valiant man, yet when he was set upon by strong men, then
he fell and was overcome; so it is in this case, that though corruption cannot
be denied, but to be a potent enemy; yet when it is set upon by these graces,
it will fall and be deprived of the power it has.

CAP. XXI. Mortification of sin makes Christians live with comfort and die in
peace*
2 THis shows unto us the way to lead a comfortable and a contented life, and
to die a peaceable and joyful death; it is chiefly when we find the power of
sin mortified and subdued by us, for what is it that will distract the mind,
and disquiet the conscience more then sin will; this is that one thing that
does separate God from us, and us from God; Es. 59.2.
and is the cause whereby we are plunged into so many fears, and why our minds
hang in suspense, and that our hearts are often pierced through with many
sorrows, we would have fewer cares in getting of worldly things; less fears
in heaping them up, and be very little disquieted at their loss; were it so,
that there were not in us a covetous heart, Gal. 6.14.
were we but crucified unto the world, James 4.4.
and the world unto us; then would we be friends of God, and this would follow,
that we would be at enmity with the world, there would be no heart burnings,
James 4.1. 1 Pet. 3.4.
nor malicious speeches and cruel deeds; were it not from those lusts that
war in our members, were there a meek and a quiet spirit which is much
esteemed of God; while Acan was in the camp, and his sin not discovered, nor
found out, there was no peace to the camp, nor power to prevail against the
enemies; but when he was discovered, and justly punished; then they went on and
prospered; so likewise while sin is not acknowledged, nor a holy revenge taken
against it; so long there is no peace in the conscience; but if that our hearts
be once wrought to a holy indignation for our offenses, then fear not but
there is way made for the entrance of that peace of God which passes all
understanding; therefore if we would have that peace that is fraternall among
brethren, or that which is internal in our own hearts, or that which is
eternal with God for ever, then mortify our lusts which are the causes at the
first to deprive us of our peace, and while they live will be fomenters of our
discords; but were they mortified, this enmity that they have wrought could not
live: As Jonah said, cast me out, and the storm will cease, so say I, cast
sin out, and there will be an allaying of all these garboiles that are in the
world, and making up of that breach between God and us, they have a rule in
Law moritur causa cum corpore; that if the man die the suite falls, so is it
here, that if we die to sin, then this suite will fall between us and God;
where there is no wood (says Solomon) the fire goes out; Proy. 26.20.
so where there is no talebearer, the strife cease: what is this wood but
sin, and what makes so great a cry in the ears of God as sin does?
therefore take away sin, and the contention will be at an end.

3. The third instruction that we may observe hence, is this; that it is an
hard thing to mortify our sin, it is as hard to find out a disease as it is
to cure it; the Philistines did quickly overcome Sampson, when they found where
his great strength lay; it is easy for a man in general, to say that he is a
sinner, and yet if you should run over the Commandments, and come to
particulars, he would clear himself as not guilty of any, and say as the
young man did, all these have I done; and like the Harlot, Mat. 19.20 Prove.
3.20.
wipe her mouth, and say I have done no wickedness; therefore your care must
be to search out wherein the great strength of sin does lie, and therefore we
must labor to take the light of the word to direct us, and desire God that he
will give us the light of his holy spirit to open our eyes, that we may be
able to see and know our own sinful hearts; and when we have found it, set
upon this work with courage and resolution.

1. Again, another thing that makes sin so hard to be mortified; as that
marriage that is made between sin and us: Romans 7.4.
after the people of Israel had mixed themselves among the Heathen, and made
marriages with them; they were wonderfully hard to be brought to leave them;
Ezr. 10.
so when as a man is married unto his lusts; so it is a hard thing for a man to
leave them, but now for a man to kill his wife, this is much more difficult. It
was a hard matter to flesh and blood, for Abraham to sacrifice his son, and
yet at the commandment of God he did it; so must we do, our obedience to God
must exceed our love of our sins; though the matter be difficult, yet it must
be done; as Iephtah when he had made a vow unto God, though it turned afterward
to his great grief, so to part with his only daughter; yet says he, I have
opened my mouth to the Lord, and I cannot go back, so may we, though that we
find the matter to be hard that we are about to do, to leave that we love so
dearly, yet resolve and vow against it: and when we have so done, then say as
he did, I have opened my mouth unto the Lord, and I cannot go back, nor can I
alter what is gone out of my mouth.

3. Another thing that makes this work of mortification; hard and difficult,
is the close adherencie that sin has unto us, it winds it self so about us,
as the Ivy does about the tree, till it eat out the heart and sap of it; so is
it in this case, corruption does cleave unto us so, as it is very hard to be
freed from it: 2 Samuel 2.21
Abner when he fled from Joah, was so followed by Hazael, that he had no way to
be freed from him, but by sheathing his spear in his bowels, so it is in this
case, there is no way to be freed from these corruptions, but by slaughter of
them, they will not be driven away with neither fair nor foul speeches; you
may scare away a dog with harsh speeches, but you cannot do so with a Lion;
sin is of the brood of the old Lion the Devil, that will not be easily
driven away, nor overcome; therefore seeing it is that does so beset us, and
does cleave so hard unto us; Heb. 12.1.2.
let us shake off every thing that presses down, and sin that does disquiet
us, but how; looking unto Jesus; the author and finisher of our faith, as they
that looked on the brazen Serpent, were cured of the sting that they had
received of the fiery Serpent; so it is in this case, when we look up to
Christ, he it is that can only stanch this bloody issue that sin has made,
in one word, frequent the means that God has appointed for curing of your
souls, John. 17.17.
the preaching of the word, when you come with faith, then there is hope of
purging, the word has a cleansing power in it, as the poole of Bethesda, when
it was troubled, John. 5.4.
it had a healing virtue in it: Chap. 22.4.
so our hearts when they are troubled by the word God heales by it.

CAP. XXII. Our weakness appears in this, that we need the help of the
spirit,
THis should teach us to take notice of our own weakness, and how without
the spirit of Christ we can do nothing. We bear about an ignorant mind, a
perverse will, violent pasions that have in them an aptitude to all sin, and
wickedness, that as Adams actual sin corrupted his nature; so our nature on
the other side, corrupts, and defiles our actions, so as the stream cannot
be good, because the fountain is corrupt: fall we may, but rise we cannot,
we may plunge our selves deep into the pit of finne, but to recover our
selves, hoc opus, hic labor est: this is a work beyond our strength; we
cannot contract uncleanness upon our selves, but when we have done we cannot
wash it off; and though we should use never so many outward means to that en^,
yet were it not that the spirit go along with us: though we wash our selves
with snowwater, Job 9.31.10.1.
our own garment would defile us, and make us unclean.

Therefore it will be necessary that we should examine whether we have the
spirit of God, yea or no, which will be able to help up, and bear us out in
this business.

1 It is the spirit of wisdom that does enable us, How you may know that you
have the spirit.
to lay a sure foundation, and to make such battle against the strong holds of
sin, as these our lusts and corruptions cannot be able to withstand; 2 Timothy
1.7.
we have not received the spirit of fear, but of power, of love, and of a
sound mind, where there is this sound mind, there must needs be power, and
love, such is the force of the spirit, that it is set out, by the rushing of a
mighty wind, and by the fire, a mighty element, so as nothing that is
combustible can stand before it.

Now when God shall say, awake O North, Can. 4.16.
and come thou South, and blow upon my garden, when he shall call the spirit of
bondage, which is as the North wind; to terrify, and ama^e us, for our sins;
and then shall send his spirit of adoption, as the South wind to make us
fruitful, in repentance, and in the works of mortification; then I say are we
furnished with this spirit of a sound mind, Eccles. 7.12
wisdom is a distention, and money is a defension, but the excellency of
knowledge is, that wisdom gives life to him that has it; much may be done
with money, but more with wisdom, because money can neither slay sin, nor
assure us of life, but wisdom can do both, wisdom will teach us to make
provision for our latter end.

2 It is a spirit of holiness, and sanctity, and that is the reason of an
opposition, that there is unto sin in the soul, the spirit lusts against the
flesh, Gal. 5.19.
and the flesh against the spirit, and they are contrary one to another: as it
is with a fountain of living water, that if any filth be cast into it, it will
work it out, by the constant running of it, so it is with the spirit, that
when any corrupt motion, is cast into the heart, it will not leave until it
have purged it out; and the reason is, because there can be no agreement
betwixt these, the one does always seek to dispossess, and destroy the
other, and therefore as it is when a woman that has decked her self; with
beautiful garments, she will not come into unclean places, and naftie
company: so in this case; the holy spirit will not endure the heart, where he
lodges should be defiled, or that it should be a receptacle for unclean
lusts. For if Christ could not endure that his carthly Temple should be a den
of thieves, much less will he endure that his spiritual Temple should be a
cage of every unclean and noisome lust.

3 It is a craving spirit, it goes out day by day, and does crave assistance
at Gods hands to help us against our corruption, Romans 8.26.
it is the spirit that helps our infirmities, and makes intercession for us;
that as Hezekiah said, 2 Cor. 20.
Lord we know not what to do, our eyes are toward thee; what was that made
him wait on God, but this spirit of grace and supplication: so say I, what
makes a Christian to lift up strong cries and prayers unto God, when he is
assaulted by the flesh, and to wait for strength from heaven; is it not the
spirit, that puts us upon it, and makes us never to give over till we find
success from God; it is not the making of a prayer, that will serve your
turns, but the having of the spirit of prayer, that is it that will help you,
Hos. 12.4.
to wrestle with God with your prayers, and tears, as Jacob did, and not to
give over like the importunate widow, Luke 18.34.5.
until you have your requests granted unto you.

4 It is a cheerful spirit that thought the work be hard, and sharp, yet it
makes us pass through it with much alacrity; and cheerfulness; it makes us,
while we are breaking up the fallow grounds of our hearts, and while we are
about to crucify the flesh, 1 Cor. 9.10
and circumcise the foreskinne of our hearts, to be cheerful and rejoice
because the end of that is joy and consolation, for they that plow in hope and
thresh in hope shall be partakers of their hopes. What makes the mariner to
pass through so many hard adventures, by sea and land, but hope of some great
advantage that may be for his advancement: or what makes the Soldier
adventure himself, into the heat of the battle, but hope of a joyful victory,
and what makes a Christian to take such pains with his heart, and to make
such hot skirmishes against his lusts, but in hope of good success, and a
glorious victory? On the other side, there is no greater sign of an
unmortified heart, then when he is forced unto the work, and drawn unto
duty, as a Bear to a stake, out of slavish fear, and apprehensions of wrath:
as Satan than says in Job; that skin for skin, Job. 2.4.
and all that a man has will he give for his life: a man will do much in
extremity, which is not a free, but a forced service, but now if so he that
there be a cheerful spirit we are carried by it, to this duty, as freely as
Abraham was to the sacrificing of his son, not reasoning with flesh and
blood, but out of the fear of God, 2 Cor. 7.1.2
the love of holineffe, and the hatred of sin: we are as cheerful at the
death of it, as we delighted sometime at the commission of it.

CAP. XXIII. An exhortation unto the duty of mortification.
FOr as much as we are naturally slow unto this work of mortification, both
in respect of that love we have unto our lusts, and also in respect that
Satan, and our deceitful hearts, do labor by all fair and possible
arguments to beat us off from this work: saying, as sometimes Peter did unto
our Savior: Master spare thy flesh, Mat. 16.22.
this shall not be to thee: such suggestions men have; when they are pressed
unto duty, that they should spare that labor, there i^ no necessity of.
Therefore it will not be amiss to quicken you up unto this duty, by such
considerations as these.

1 In regard of sin, that if it be not mortified, we do highly displease
Almighty God, therefore the Lord is said to have iniquity, as that which is
contrary to his Law, as that which is cursed of him, now that sin is thu^
displeasing to him, will appear.

1 In regard of those sad Complaints and those patheticall expressions that are
used in Scripture, against sin, and sinners: when the sins of the old world
grew to that height, that the whole earth was corrupt before God, and that the
wickedness of man was great in the earth, Genesis 6.6.
it repented the Lord that he had made man, and it grieved him at the heart, a
deep expression how much God is displeased with it, now when God is said to be
grieved, it is not in that he is subject to passion, but after the manner of
men, not secundum affectum, but effectum, as they speak in the Schools, that
as men are grieved when they are offended, so is God sore displeased with
sin. Psalm. 95.10, 11.
Forty years long was I grieved with this generation: then it was that he
swear in his wrath that they should not enter into his rest, that after they
had grieved him so long time together, his sore displeasure did arise, and so
they perished in the wilderness: Luke 19.41.
how was our blessed Savior grieved when he beheld the City, and wept over
it, saying, O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, how often would I have gathered thee, as a
hen gathers her chickins, etc. What can be a greater grief to a loving
father, or a tender mother, than to see their Children not to harken unto good
admonitions, and exhortations; so is it unto Christ: when as we turn aside,
to the bypath of sin, it grieves him much, how does God complain of his
people: O my people what have I done unto thee, Mich. 6.2.
testify against me: now when we hear God to show so much discontent, in his
be wayling of our sins; it should be a strong motive, to make us to be wail
our own sins, and offenses against God.

2 Consider that sin is it, that does separate God from us, and us from him;
thence it is that sometimes God has left his people: Ier. 12.7.
I have forsaken mine house, I have left mine heritage, and delivered the
dearly beloved of my soul into the hand of mine enemy. It must needs be a
great matter that makes a man to leave his house, and forsake his heritage,
either the house stands n^e^e untoward neighbors, or it is in a bad soil, the
water is naught, and the ground barren, or else it could not be a man would
leave it; so here, when a man spends his life among notorious and wicked men,
and shall be like the unfruitful ground; Heb. 6.7.8.
that brings forth nothing but thorns, and briars, then it is to be feared
that the Lord will leave him, and will pull down the hedge of his providence,
and cause all the beasts in the field to come and devour; Esa 5.4.
now when we see that Christ and sin will not comply together; O labor then
to mortify your corruptious, that separate God from us, and us from him, and
hinders good things from you.

3. Consider those grievous punishments, which have fallen on men by reason of
sins, both on whole Nations, and on particular persons; see how the
foundations of the great deep from below, and the windows of heaven from
above were set open by the sins of those times; how the clouds contrary to
their nature dissolved into a shower of Brimstone, and fell on that sinful
City: in one word, wherefore was Kain smitten with such fears? and Herod
smitten with worms, was it not for sin?

Lastly, if God would ever have spared any, he would have spared his own
son; but Christ undertaking to become sin for us, he must not be spared,
but must suffer a sorrowful, and a shameful death for that cause: sure then
if God have been ever so severe, that he would not spare sin, it should be
our care that we should not spare it.

2. Consider, that if you do not mortify your corruptions, then you are first
under the power and servitude of Satan; he that walks in sin, is a servant
of sin, and while he promises liberty to himself, Ioh. 8.34.
he becomes the servant of corruption; 2 Pet. 2.19.
for of whom a man is overcome, of the same he is brought in bondage; for as it
is with a servant, he does not his own will, but the will of his Master; so
is it with a man that is in bondage unto sin and Satan, is servant
thereunto: as it is with a ship when the Rudder, and the Anchors, and Masts are
broken, that it is carried whether the tempest will force it; so deplored is a
man that is unmortified; he is carried whither the flesh and Satan will have
him led captive, he is at his will; but were the power of sin mortified, we
should find that these temptations would fall from us as the Viper from Paul's
hand, and would not prevail against us. Suppose a man have a strong house, and
great fortifications about it, yet if there be but a servant within that can
unlocke and unbolt the doors, there is no safety there; so suppose there be
never so many good gifts in a man, yet if he have his corrupt nature
unmortified, be assured of this then, that there is one within you, that will
let in Satan, who will seduce you to sin.

2 If you do not mortify sin, Satan will make your souls his lodging. For
as a mortified, and a sanctified heart is the seat of the Holy Ghost: so also
an unmortified and an unclean heart is the seat of Satan. When the spirit of
God departed from Saul, 1. Sam. 16.14.
then an evil spirit from the Lord troubled him: so it is in this case, that
if Christ by his spirit dwell not in you, Satan will take place, as it was
said of Babylon, that she was the habitation of Devils, Rev. 18.2.
and the kennell of every foul spirit, and a cage of every unclean and
hateful bird, so a man that is not purged from his sin, the strong man keeps
the house and all kind of lusts swim in him: now then that these great
enemies, and these noisome and hurtful lusts may be destroyed, labor to
mortify your corruption, then will all these your enemies be driven away, by
the breath of the spirit of Christ, and the brightness of his coming.

3 In regard of our selves, if we do not mortify sin, we cannot be but
great losers by it: Heb. 6.7.
until then the word is unprofitable it falls upon us, till it mortify
corruption, as the rain that falls on the barren ground, it brings forth
nothing but briars and thorns, fit for cursing; so all the gain that you
have, by the hid treasure of the holy Word of God, and this pearl of the
Gospel, it is but the aggravation of your sin, and a savor of death unto
you, so that this word that kills sin in others, does but ripen them in
you, and this word that is wholesome nourishment unto others, is but a potion of
death unto you.

2 Until sin be mortified you can have no true peace in your consciences,
Esa 57. ult.
the wicked, says God, have no peace: as Iehu answered the King, when he said,
Is it peace Iehu, what peace, says he, so long as the whoredoms of thy mother
Iesabell, and her witchchrafts are so many: so say I, what peace, can there be,
as long as lust, and the body of sin does remain, what peace can there be in
the heart of a man. As it was said, that in the days of Shamgar the high ways
were unoccupied, and travelers walked through by-ways, Judge. 5.6.
till I Deborah arose, etc. sountill such time as sin is purged out, there is
no peace but war, no walking in those ways of grace and peace, till there be
a mortification of sin; as you see it is, when that the high ways are
pestered with robbers, there is no safety to pass, in, or out: so when the
highways of piety are pestered, with lust, so as the passages are stopped,
and there will be no security, until such time, as that these be cut off, but
if that you can come to slay and destroy these enemies, that do way lay, and
fight against the soul, I say then you may walk in safety; and the truth is,
were we not enemies unto our selves, we need to fear no enemy: our greatest
and most desperate enemies are those of our own house, even such lusts as have
their breath and breeding in our own hearts.

3 The last great loss that we do sustain by want of mortification is the
loss of our souls, which is the greatest loss that can be: for if every
grass pile in our fields were a precious pearl, and every stone in the
street were a diamond; and every ear of corn in our fields, were so many
shining chrysolites, yet were they not all worth the soul: but now if a man
should not endeavor to kill sin, sin will kill him. Suppose we the most
fearful and dastardly man that may be, yet if he had this proposition made, if
thou do not kill me I will kill thee, I should suppose that this would make
him fight. I tell you brethren, that if you do not slay sin, it will slay
you, and if you mortify the deeds of the flesh by the spirit you shall live,
but if you live after the flesh, you shall dye.

CAP. XXIV. Containing a brief explication of the last words of the (ye shall
live) by way of motive.
I Have only one motive to add to persuade you to mortify sin, and that is
the words of my text: if ye do this, you shall live; life, as you have heard,
is a large word, and does signify not only the life natural, but that of
grace and glory; now here I take it; for the life of glory, as standing in
opposition to the death, that is set over in the former part of the verse,
which is that eternal punishment in hell, which shall be certainly inflicted
on unmortified men, that live after the flesh, and this life that is set in
opposition thereunto, is that life, that certainly may be obtained, by such as
do mortify the flesh, and endeavor to destroy that body of sin, now this
happiness that is here spoken of, if I had the tongue of men and Angels, yet
could I not sufficiently set it out, yet to give you a taste of what is
revealed, that you may guess at what is not revealed, but believed, and waited
for, some thing the Scripture says of it.

1 There shall be a perfect victory over all your enemies, over sin that has
been so turbulent; over death, that has been so fearful, and over hell that
is so dreadful, so as now we may boast, 1 Cor. 15.55.
as he that puts off the harness, and triumphs, because that his warfare is
accomplished, and our sins are pardoned: Esa 40.2.
here the Church triumphant, does change their swords into Scepters, their
corslets into Crowns, and their garments rouled in blood, into long white
robes to follow the Lamb whithersoever he goes; now we may sing with the
Saints, the song of Moses Haleluiah unto him that dwells in the highest, and
to him that sits on the throne for evermore.

2 There shall be a resting from all our labors, from all our works, either
of body or of mind, so far as they did consist in our seeking, for the
preservation of our present being, or from the attainment of our future
well-being: here it is laid upon us, to eat bread in the sweat of our faces:
and to endure heat and cold, hunger, Genesis 3, 19,
and nakedness, but there shall be an end of all these, poor Lazarus shall
rest in the bosom of rich Abraham, and all the blessed Saints shall sit down
with Abraham, Mat. 8.12.
and Isaac, and Jacob, in the Kingdom of God: here there is our work of
faith, and labor of love, our hope waiting for the accomplishments of the
promises, and our tears of godly sorrow unto repentance, arising from a
bleeding, and broken heart: but there our faith shall be turned into vision,
Hebr. 4.9.
our love and hope, into fruition, and then all tears shall be wiped from our
eyes, doubtless such a rest there is for the people of God.

3 There shall be the vision of God, that is, we shall be brought into the
presence of God, and shall see God in Christ, the beams of the Deity shall be
so resplendent from Christ his humanity, as that we shall see him; as we are
seen; there fore our Savior prays that where he is, John 3.2. John 17.24.
there they may be also, that they may behold his glory: a glimps of this
there was in the transfiguration, when Peter said, it is Good for us to be
here, and in that of Saint Paul, when he saw things unutterable.

1. We shall see with greater inlargements of knowledge. No Eagles eye shall be
so strong that can look on the Sun, as ours then that can look upon him, at
whose presence the sight of many sins would vanish into darkness. If Adam in
the state of nature could understand so much of God, as to give names unto the
creatures; sure in the state of glory, there will be a great augmentation of
that fight; so that he that was an unlearned man, shall know that at once that
many agreat Doctor have been many year bearing their heads about.

2. Again, in respect of the sight, this sight must be glorious, the light of
the Sun is no more to be compered unto it, then the light of the Candle is in
the light of it: no, nor as one observes well, it is tanquam unus maximus Sol,
all the whole heaven, it is, as it were nothing but all glorious Sun.

4. Lastly, we shall enjoy the fruition of God, Rabeus.
quod originatur in visione perficitur in fruitione; that which is begun in the
vision of God, shall be perfected in the fruition of God: Dives saw Abraham a
far off, and Lazerus in his bosom; but what was this to Dives, it was no
ease to him, but as we shall see him, so we shall enjoy him; he will love us
with an everlasting love, and we shall live with him for ever; Psalm. 36.8.9.
nay we shall be abundantly satisfied with the fullness of his house, and he
shall make us drink of the rivers of pleasure, for at his right hand is
fullness of joy and pleasure for evermore. Psalm. 16. vit.
If a man had a certain measure of joy in heaven, were it not full, it would
not content the mind of a man, and if he had fullness, were it not perpetual;
it would not give content, but now seeing this joy is both perfect and
perpetual, there will be full content in it.

To conclude all, blessed and happy are all those that have mortified this body
of sin, out of an hatred and holy indignation against it, they are careful
to sin no more; for they shall live a life of grace here, and life of glory
hereafter.

FINIS.
Errata.
PAge 4 line 26 for but of sin, read because of sin page 13 l. 20 for from him,
r. from himself l. 21 for him r. them page 14 l. 7 for in r. into l. 11 for
lastly how r. lastly see how, for how he r. how this enemy l. 14 for and this
r. this page 16 l. 12 for to meet r. do meet p. 19. l. 6 for and there r.
and thence p. 20 r. 6 for some little r. to some little sin l. 7 blot out
(that) p. 21 l. last for it is said r. it is said of fame p. 22 l. 25: for
continuance it r. continuance in it p. 73 l. 16 for are near r. are more near
p. 74 l. 4 for it is r. so it is p. 83 l. 25 for this rule r. these rules and
l. 26 for ground and r. ground of, and l. last blot out (so) p. 110 l. 2 for no
r. neither p. 113 l. 14 put out (one) p. 128 l. 4 for it r. and p. 149 l. 21
for sin r. sense p. 154 l. 18 for he r. we p. 193. l. 1 for articular r.
particular p. 208 l. 3 for go r. and go p. 210 l. 16 for then r. that p. 223 l.
2. blot out he. p. 225. l. last blot out (all)


