THE WIZARD UNVIZOR'D: OR, A Clear display of the Madness of JUDICIAL
ASTROLOGY.

Printed in the Year, 1652.

Tudor rose Scottish thistle French fleur-de-lis depiction of Irish harp
THE Wizard Unvizor'd, OR, A clear display of the Madness of Judicial
ASTROLOGY.
HOw Monstrous Error does usurp the room
Of sacred truth, and to defiance come!
No study now like Magic in request,
Or what confines upon its Brink at least;
Termed at the best an Artifical cheat,
A formal villainy, refined deceit;
And in its speculations most sublime,
The school of vanity, and spoil of time.
The most young pregnant wits do now apply
Them to defense of mad Astrology,
That Is now professed past ages did abhor,
Nor ever any could have warrant for.
So rife is the Black Art in every place,
Ladies never blush to show it in the face:
Lillie's by these approved, and liked so well,
To know their husbands they will consult with hell.
And what dishonest thing the worst commit,
The Planets force may be excuse for it,
Since by the Stars the humor is inclined,
By that the body; and by this the mind.
Nowth' Argument of the divining Crew,
Is that events foretold by them prove true:
Where we may note this reasons want of weight,
Who should not knowledge gain by means unright;
The Devil does miss sometimes, or's instrument,
Mistakes his informations, and intent:
And yet suppose that these Predictions fall
Out true, we should not credit yet at all
The more such wizards as foretell the same,
Since God does this but as our Deuteronomy. 13.1.
trial name:
Though with the vulgar when they have foretold
Ought which so happens, it their cause uphold.
Besides the Stars nor second nature give,
Nor change the first by their prerogative:
One influence from Heavens each part does fall
With universal harmony, and works on all
According to the season, subject, place,
Now on this wise, then in a different case.
We hence may draw this Corrollary then,
Unlawful it is to seek unto these men
For their Advice, or for their help in ought,
Nor should we deem that good can come of naught.
The Gypsy, Canter, the Nativity-Caster,
And Figure-flingers, like the Devil their Master
With their foretelling let all hence avoid;
Nor send to Ekrons god when they are annoyed,
Nor unto Endors Witch, when they are in doubt
Touching contingences how they will fall out.
Nor let the people be Enchanted still
With firm opinion of their learned skill,
Much less may they have countenance from the State,
Who proud such doting liars but of late;
Their Star-divinity who now will own,
Which on Black-Monday was so fairly shown?
These impious wretches would be deemed divine,
But the Sun checked them with his brighter shine.
Familiar with their Feinds, they thought to be
Familiar with God, and's secrets see,
By their sage prudency they thought to pry.
Into his counsels, hid from mortal eye:
But God who jealous of his glory is,
Made it appear they did Divine amiss;
Turning a dismal to a cheerful day,
That so hereafter the most simple may
These Wizards-dizards, and wise fools abhor,
And laugh at the credulous inquisitor.
When Archimedes once King Hiero made
A Ship with his little finger drawn, he said,
From this day forward I convinced shall
Judge Archimedes sayings true in all:
But let us taught by one false guess alone,
Credit these base Astrologers in none.
Nor to such cunning ones put up a suit,
Which none can do but must themselves Let. 19.31.
pollute,
For by this means the heart from God withdrawn
In Spiritual whoredom is the Devils pawn.
Can we pretend unto a Christian name,
And not esteem it a most horrid shame
In the bright Sunshine of the Gospels day.
By such vile vanities to be lead away?
Have we learned Christ and to the Devil go?
Do we remember our Baptismal vow
Which in the Churches presence we did make
That we would Satan and his works forsake?
Jer. 10.2.
The Godly fearlesse upon God rely
When Heavens signs do the Heathen terrify.
Now then let all convinced of such false ways,
Assert the truth, and the Almighties praise.
And in abhorrence of them let each one
To beating down the Error throw a stone,
And let these fear the dismal end which came
To Faustus, may be theirs with Doctor Lamb.
FINIS.

