Aron-bimnucha: OR, AN ANTIDOTE TO CURE The CALAMITES of their Trembling For
fear of the Ark. To which is added Mr CROFTON's CREED Touching
Church Communion. WITH A brief Answer to the Position (pretended to be) taken
out of his Pocket, and added to the end of a Scandalous and Schismatical
Pamphlet, Entitled, JERVBBAAL JVSTIFIED.

Number. X. 35. Psalm. LXVIII. 1. Exurgat Deus, Dissipentur Inimici. LONDON,
Printed for Richard Royston, Bookseller to His Most Sacred Majesty. 1663.

TO The Strenuous IMPVGNERS of Schism and Rebellion,


The Ingenuous ASSERTORS of the Kings Supremacy Crown, and Dignity,


The Zealous PATRONS of the Churches Hierarchy and Liturgy


The Vigorous CHAMPIONS of Decency and Uniformity
In Gods Public Worship,

The Honorable REPRESENTATIVE OF All the COMMONS of ENGLAND Now in PARLIAMENT
Assembled, UNDER The Most Excellent and Auspicious Majesty OF CHARLES the
Second; Laurence Womock D. D. Archdeacon of Suffolk DEDICATETH These his
Occasional Meditations, IN JUSTIFICATION Of the present Settlement of God's
Solemn Service In the CHURCH of ENGLAND; AGAINST

The Schismatical Fears and Jealousies,
Seditious Hints and Insinuations



OF Mr Edmund Calamy.

THE CONTENTS.
THe Ark (p. 3.) A Type of 1. Christ Page 5 2. The Church Page 6 3. The
Ordinances and solemn worship of God under the Gospel Page 6
1. The transportation of the Ark 1. By whose Authority? David's Page 7 2. Under
whose Ministry? The Priests and Levites Page 8 Their Consecration Page 9 Their
Subordination Page 9 Their Conformity with Page 10
The means thereof Settled Maintenance Page 11 The means thereof Strict
Discipline Page 11
3. With what Train and Attendants Elders Page 12 Captains Page 13 Chosen men
Page 15
4. With what Pomp and Solemnity 1. Pious Page 17 2. Decent Page 17 3.
Delightful Page 18 4. Cordial Page 18

2. The situation of the Ark Page 19 1. In the City of DAVID; near the Court
Page 19 2. In a place separated for that use Page 20 3. In a Tabernacle, and
why? Page 21
3. The Gratulation for this Settlement Page 22 1. The expressions of it 1.
Burn Sacrifices Page 23 2. Peace Offerings Page 25
2. Inducements to it Page 27

APPLICATION.
The Preface to it Page 30 1. The captivity of Gods Ark Page 35 2. The
restoration of it Page 36 Our duty, to offer, 1. A BURNT SACRIFCE 1. In
acknowledgment of Gods goodness Page 37 2. To make Atonement for our
miscarriages Page 38
2. A Peace Offering (p. 40) consisting, of 1. A dutiful submission to it (p.
40) in regard of 1. The place where it is settled Page 40 2. The Authority by
which Page 41 3. The Ministry under which Page 42 4. The Solemnity with which
Page 44 Being 1. According to Order Page 44 2. Decent Page 44 3. For
Edification Page 45 4. For Gods glory Page 46

2. Our joyful Gratulation for it Page 47 In regard of 1. Our love to it Page
48 2. Our interest in it Page 48 3. Our need of it Page 49 4. Our advantage by
it Page 49




OBJECTIONS: (1) Who has required this at your hand? Ans. Page 51 (2)
Will Worship. Ans. Page 53 (3) All Jewish Ceremonies are not unlawful Page 59
(4) Our present Divisions Page 64 (5) A soul-searching Ministry Page 65 (6)
Popery Page 67 (7) Our great transgressions Page 70 The Church in no fault Page
72 Prognostics of our continuance Page 73

CAVEATS. (1) Not to deifie the Ark Page 76 (2) Not to scoff at it Page 77 The
Presbyterians guilty of this Page 78
(3) Not to invade the Ark Page 80 The Presbyterians guilty of it Page 81
(4) Not to belie the Ark Page 83 The Presbyterians guilty of it ibid. etc.
(5) Not to pry into the Ark Page 87 The Presbyterians guilty of it Page 88 The
pulling down of Antichrist, a seditious pretense ibid. etc.
(6) Not to plunder the Ark Page 91 The Presbyterians guilt of it Page 92


DIRECTIONS.
(1) To Superiors. 2. 1. To uphold the Hierarchy Page 93 2. To make it such
indeed Page 95
2. To all people Page 95 To approach the Ark with 1. Reverence Page 96 2.
Alacrity Page 98 3. Unanimity Page 100 4. Uniformity Page 102
Mr. CROFTON'S Position Page 106 His Creed touching Communion with the Church
Page 113
IMPRIMATUR,

Ex aedibus Lambithanis, Mart. 27. 1663.

Dan. Nicols, R. P. D. Arch. Cant. Capel. Domesticus.

ERRATA.
PAge 11. line 17. read, of filthy lucre. p. 15. l. 1. r. to hold us steady.

p. 23. l. 24. r. in his own stead.

p. 30. l. 19 r. upon it.

p. 36. l. 22. r. returned.

p. 81. l. 5. r. usurped.

p. 110. l. 3. r. they be not abused to the confusion.

In the Margent, p. 5. r. Tho. 12. ae.q. 102.4.6^. Col. 2.

A DISCOURSE Occasioned by MR Calamies LATE SERMON, ENTITLED Eli trembling for
fear of the Ark.
1 CHRONICLES. 16.1. So they brought the Ark of God, and set it in the midst of the
Tent that David had pitched for it; and they offered burnt Sacrifices and Peace
Offerings before God.


IT is the felicity of affliction, that when it will suffer us to find relief
in nothing else, it drives us unto God for refuge: And the distressed soul,
that she may lay the stronger engagement for her succor upon God, she does
usually lay a strict obligation of gratitude upon her self. In his troubles
David swear unto the Lord, and vowed a vow unto the Almighty God of Jacob.
Psalm. 132.2.
A Vow that could not but meet with a very gracious accep^a^ion; for thus he
resolves, I will not come within the Tabernacle of my house, nor climb up into
my bed. I will not give sleep to mine eyes, Ibid.
or slumber to mine eye lids, Until I find out a place for the Lord; an
Habitation for the mighty God of Jacob: He would not enjoy any settlement in
himself, till he had provided a settlement for the Ark of God.

In this Vow his general aim was Gods glory; but a collateral benefit would
redound to himself by it; (for it is impossible we should entertain a design
to please God, but to our own advantage) He had sometimes been driven into
banishment through the severity of a jealous Prince, upon the suggestions of
malicious Adversaries; but the gall and wormwood of his exile, was, his
sequestration from the Ark, the holy Ordinances and worship of his God. When I
remember these things, I pour out my soul in me, Psalm. 42.4.
for I had gone with the multitude, I went with them to the House of God; with
the voice of joy and praise, with the multitude that kept holy day: But being
now deprived of the comfort of this Communion, and of these Solemnities, he
cries out, As the Heart pants after the water Brooks, Verse 1, 2.
so pants my soul after thee O God. My soul thirsts for God, for the living
God, When shall I come and appear before God? This, this was the bitterness of
his exile, the saddest strain and burden of his lamentation. As soon therefore
as he comes to be possessed of peace, as the fruit of those many Victories
wherewith Almighty God had Crowned him, 2 Samuel 7.1.
He resolves to perform his former Vow, and tender it as a Peace Offering to
the God of his Salvation. Now the Sovereign power is in his hands, and the
Kingdom at his disposal, nothing shall excommunicate him from the visible
symbols of Gods gracious presence. C. 6.16.
The City of David shall be the Seat of Gods solemn worship; and a Tent shall
be prepared, wherein the sacred Ark shall keep its Residence; and all Israel
shall be invited to wait upon the Solemnity of its Inthronization; So they
brought the Ark of God, etc.

In which words we have three general Parts.

1. The Transportation or Conduct of the Ark: So they brought the Ark of God.
2. The Situation or placing of it: And (they) set it in the midst of the Tent
that David had pitched for it. 3. The Gratulation or Thanksgiving for it; And
they offered burnt Sacrifices and Peace offerings before God.
The Object of all this Care, this Indeerment and joy, is the Ark of God:
Touching which I should give you an account of three things; The Structure; The
Furniture; And the Signification of it; But of all these the great Apostle had
not leisure enough to speak particularly; no more have I: Heb. 9.5.
But I shall say what may be sufficient, by way of Introduction to a needful
Discourse, for the undeceiving a miserably-cheated and seduced people.

1. For the Structure of the Ark; It was to be of Shittim Wood, a most solid
Wood, that would not putrify: and that was to be over-laid with beaten Gold;
for as God delights in the incorruption and purity of things and persons
Dedicated to his Service; So he desires to make the Monuments of his own Love
and Mercy everlasting to us.

It was styled the Ark of the Covenant, because it contained the Law, 1 Kings
8.21.
which was the Condition upon which God did Espouse that people, and promise to
make them happy.

2. It was styled The Ark of the Testimony, because it was the Evidence of Gods
Will and Counsel; and was ready also to make out Evidence and give Testimony
against Transgr^ssours. Mendaz. in (...) Reg. 4.11. p. 202. 2 A.
Si quis alicujus sceler is conscius accedebat, impunitus non abibat: If any
guilty person did approach it, it would not let him depart unpunished. When
Moses had made a Conquest of the Madianites, he made an order, that amongst the
women that were taken Prisoners, number. 31.17, 18
the Virgins only should be reprieved from death: But how did they make the
discrimination? The Hebrews tell us, that, being all presented before the Ark,
the Virgins remained as inviolate as their chastity; the rest were struck with
an invisible violence, and fell before the Majestatick presence of it. And such
was the Lotery that discovered the Theft and Sacrilege committed at Jericho;
when all the Israelites marched by as innocent and unconcerned, the Ark did
deprehend and arrest the guilty Achan; Josh. 7.14.
he could not quit himself of the miraculous seizure, nor deny this tacit
accusation.

3. It is styled The Ark of God, because God was the Author and Founder of it;
He prescribed the parts and the matter, the form and the fashion, the use and
the service of it; He conferred the grace and benefits that did flow from it:
This was his Seat Psalm. 99.1.
, his Habitation Psalm. 74.7.
, his Court Psalm. 84.10.
, his Throne Jer. 17.12.
, his place of residence Psalm. 31.20.
, where he did vouchsafe his gracious presence, and is therefore dignified with
the title of Jehovah Number. 10.35. Psalm. 68.1.
.

And in re^erence to the people Israel, this Ark was their Glory, their
Strength, their Beauty: The Glory is departed from Israel, 1 Samuel 4.
says the wife of Phineas, when the Ark of God was taken: And the Psalmist
says, God delivered their strength into Captivity, and their beauty into the
Enemies hands Psalm. 78.61.
. If they wanted direction, here they had the Oracle Exodus 25.22.
, here they were admitted to conference with God himself; There I will meet
with thee, (says the Lord to Moses) and I will commune with thee, from above
the Mercy seat, from between the two Cherubins, which are upon the Ark of the
Testimony, of all things which I will give thee in Commandment unto the
Children of Israel. And because they were worthily admired among all Nations
for the Laws and Ordinances Deuteronomy. 4.6.
which they thus received, this might very well be called their Glory; (not to
mention the luster of the Ark it self, or the splendor of Divine Majesty that
appeared in it.) If they wanted protection, here they had an host of Angels,
the invincible Chariots of God, to pitch their Tents about them, represented by
the Cherubins over-shadowing the Mercy-seat with their outstretched wings; upon
which account the Ark is called their strength: And if they were defiled and
wanted pardon, here they had the Propitiatory, and the Mercy-seat; and because
that soul is blessed and amiable in Gods eye whose sin is covered and blotted
out, therefore the Ark was styled their beauty.

This Ark did adumbrate the Mystery of the Incarnation Nicetus apud Greg.
Nazian. Orat. 43. Tho. 1 2 ae. 102.4.6. in Col. 2. Heb. 1.
. It was a Type of Christ, in whom the course wood was overlaid with pure gold,
in that the fullness of the Godhead dwelt in him bodily. He is the Oracle of his
Church; for God spoke to us by his own Son, in whom were hid not the Tables of
the Law only, but all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge. He is the
Mercy-seat, and the Propitiatory; for God has set him forth to be a
propitiation through faith in his blood: Romans 3.25.
And he has prostrated Dagon, and cut off his hands and head, 1 Samuel 5.4.
in that he has defeated the designs and dissolved the works of the Devil. In
him we have the Cherubins adoring him Heb. 1.6.
; and their wings to shelter us John 1. ult.
; The Angels ascending and descending upon the Mystical body of the Son of man,
Heb. 1. ult.
to minister to such as shall be Heirs of Salvation. He is made unto us wisdom
and righteousness and sanctification and redemption, 1 Cor. 1. Luke 1.
and is the glory of his people Israel.

2. This Ark is a Type of the Church, Jo. Gerhard, Loc. Com. de leg. Cer. c. 2.
Sect. 2. mihi. p. 261.
which is the Repository of the holy Scriptures, and the Ordinances of divine
Worship; Where the Angels incamp; where the Counsel of God is revealed; where
Mercy and Pardon are dispensed.

3. This is a Type of the Gospel Jo. Botsac. prompt. Alleger. 1506.1.
, which is the word of wisdom, and the mind of Christ; a mystery which the
Angels desire to look into; and so it answers to the Oracle; It is the pledge
of our peace, * 1 Cor. 2.16. 1 Pet. 1.12.
the word of Reconciliation; and so answers to the mercy-Seat: It is the
Magazin and Armory, whence we are furnished with arms and strength for our
Christian warfare: It puts upon us the whole Armor of God, the Shield of
faith, the breast plate of righteousness, the Helmet of salvation: This was the
Israelites Palladium and Sanctuary; It divided the waters of Jordan, demolished
the Walls of Jericho, prostrated Dagon, and redeemed it self out of captivity,
when the wicked Israelites had exposed it to the scorn and triumphs of the
uncircumcised; representing hereby the Majesty of the Holy Gospel, which is the
power of God unto salvation, pulling down strong holds; drying up the
inundations of sin and misery, which stand in our way to Heaven; prompting, and
pressing, and inabling us to work out our own salvation: In a word, it did not
signify less, and it could not well signify more, then God did really exhibit
by it; It hallowed every place where it stood, and blessed every person that
was qualified to receive a blessing from it: This makes David so enamored of
it, and all his subjects so ready to conduct it; So they brought the Ark, etc.

In this Transportation or Conduct of the Ark, we have two things to be
inquired after: 1. Who they were that did conduct it? 2. How, or after what
manner, they did conduct it?

1. Who they were? The Text says, That David gathered all Israel together to
Jerusalem, to bring up the Ark of the Lord unto his place, which he had
prepared for it: 1 Chronicles 15.3, 4, 5.
And David assembled the children of Aaron and the Levites: So David and the
Elders of Israel, and the Captains over thousands, went to bring up the Ark of
the Covenant of the Lord. Where we are to consider, 1. By whose Authority and
example it was Transported; By David the King's: 2. Under whose Inspection and
Ministry; The Priests and Levites: 3. With what Train and Attendants; Here were
the Elders, and the Captains over thousands, and all their Companies; for there
were Thirty thousand chosen men of Israel, 2 Samuel 6 1. when the Ark was to be
Carted to the City of David; and sure there were as many now.

1. By whose Authority and Example the Ark was Conducted or Translated; I. The
King.
The people might not do it of their own head; no nor yet the Elders; they had
no Warrant for it; It was done by David's, by the Kings Authority and Example:
It was observed by the Philosopher, that the King ought to be (...), the
Supreme Governor of things that pertain to divine Worship: The Model of this
Ark was at first given by God to Moses; it was his Concern to see it made,
being the Supreme Governor; and David's to see it kept. The highest Honor the
Royal Office entitles Princes to, is, to be Defenders of the Faith; Indeed
Princes may do much to the advantage of Religion, as well by the encouragement
of their Example, as by their Authority; and it is their interest to do their
uttermost; for, 1. Sam. 2.
Those that honor me will I honor, says the Lord; And it is said of
Lycurgus, that he commanded nothing in his Laws that he did not confirm by his
example; and of Agesilaus, it is said, that he first of all performed that
himself which he did injoin to others; and David will not only make one, but
lead the Dance in this holy Solemnity; and invite others by the force of his
example; I will bless the Lord at all times; His praise shall continually be in
my mouth: Psalm. 34.1, 2, 3.
My soul shall make her boast of the Lord: The humble shall hear thereof and be
glad: O magnify the Lord with me, and let us exalt his name together: When
such eminent persons shall advance the Standard of Piety, Ecclus. 10.2:
a plentiful train will follow: As the Judge of the people is himself, so are
his Officers; and what manner of man the Ruler of the City is, such are all
they that dwell therein: But the ill president finds most followers; men learn
soonest to write after a foul Copy; Good examples, for the most part, gain more
reverence then imitation: It is not enough therefore for a Prince to commend
Piety by his Example; old Eli did so much; He must Imprint it by the Royal
Stamp of his Authority: And to go regularly to work, he must in the first
place, exercise his Authority in settling the Hierarchy of the Church, under
whose inspection and Ministry the Ark is to be conducted; and thus did David, 1 Chronicles. 15.11, 12. And David called for Zadok and Abiathar, the Priests, and for
the Levites; for Uriel, Asaiah and Joel, Shemaiah, and Eliel, and Aminadab, And
said unto them, Ye are the chief of the Fathers of the Levites; sanctify your
selves both, ye and your brethren, that ye may bring up the Ark of the Lord God
of Israel unto the place that I have prepared for it.

II. The Hierarchy of Priests and Levites.
This was the Hierarchy under whose Inspection and Ministry the service of the
Ark was to be accomplished; wherein three things are considerable. 1. Their
Consecration and Sanctity. 2. Their Subordination and Inequality. 3. Their
Regulation and Conformity.

1. Of their Consecration and Sanctity: It was not enough for them to be of the
Tribe of Levi, (though God had taken that Tribe instead of the firstborn Numb.
3.6. with 12.
of every Family, to minister unto him) there was a solemn separation of their
persons to the sacred Office: They were to be solemnly Anointed, Consecrated
and Hallowed, to minister in the Priests Office Exodus 19.1. Numb. 3.3.
: and the Levites were to be cleansed and solemnly dedicated before the Lord,
that they might execute the service of the Lord Numb. 8.3. and 11.
; and this was required indispensably, under pain of death Numb. 3.10.
: And besides this Consecration of their persons, there was a prefatory
sanctifying, by way of preparation unto the address, before they did officiate,
1 Chronicles. 15.14. So the Priests and Levites sanctified themselves to bring up
the Ark of the Lord God of Israel.

2. For their Subordination and Inequality; this commenced with the Ark it
self, by Gods own immediate Order: Aaron, as a Type of Christ, was head of all;
but Eleazar and Ithamar (no such Types (to be sure) in Aarons life time) though
under him, had very large jurisdictions; all the Levites were under their
inspection and command, Numb. 3.4.

Besides the family of Aaron, there were the Families of Cohath, Gershon, and
Merari: Of Cohath there were four Families, and each family had its Chief, or
Ruler; and over all these was Elizaphan Numb. 3.30.
: Of Gershon there were two families; and each of them had its head; and over
both these was Eliasaph Numb. 3.24.
: Of Merari were two families; and each of them had its hiad; and over these
was Zuriel Ib. verse. 35.
: Now all the Gershonites, with their Heads or Presidents, which were 2630. And
all the Merarites, with their Guides or Presidents, which were 3200. were under
Ithamars inspection, Numb 4.28. and 33. Eleazar had his own family, with the
Fathers and Heads thereof: And the Cohathites, with the Rulers thereof (in
number 2750.) as his peculiar Diocese: But besides this, he had a general
jurisdiction over all the rest; He was Primate (under Aaron) over 8580. Priests
and Levites; and therefore he is styled Princeps Principum, or Prelatus
Prelatorum; the Prelate of the Prelates, or, which is all one, Chief over the
Chief, Numb. 3.32. And all matters that belonged to the service of God were
generally under his care and inspection, Numb. 4.16.

This Subordination and Inequality did continue to the days of David, as
appears in the place before mentioned, 1 Chronicles. 15.11, 12. Zadok and Abiathar,
the Priests, were above all the Heads of Levites; and there was an inequality
between the two Priests too; Abiathar attended the Ark at Jerusalem, 2 Samuel
15.29. 2 Chro. 16.39.
the higher function; and Zadok, the Tabernacle at Gibeon. There was a first
and second even amongst the high Priests, 2 Kings 25.18. And how exactly David
settled this Hierarchy in its state of Subordination and Inequality, (when
38000. were put into 24. Courses, under so many Presidents; and all these under
the Jurisdiction and Government of Zadok and Ahimelech) you may find at large,
1 Chronicles. 23, 24, 25, and 26. Chapters; more particularly and concisely, 1 Chronicles. 24.3, 4, and 5. verses. The Governors of the Sanctuary, and of the
House of God, were of the Sons of Eleazar, and of the Sons of Ithamar; and the
Offices we^e distributed for the sacred service: But of the Sons of Eleazar
there were sixteen Chiefs under Zadok; and but eight of the Sons of Ithamar
under Ahimelech: This leads us to

3. Their Regulation and Conformity: The Priests in their Courses applied
themselves to their service; and the Levites to their Charges, to praise and
minister before the Priests, 2 Chronicles. 8.14.
as the duty of every day required: Not a Nonconformist amongst them: What
part of the holy Function was assigned them they carefully observed, and kept
their station and decorum exactly according to the tenor of the sacred Canon:
And that they might have no encouragement or pretense to do otherwise, this
Hierarchy of the Church was supported by a double provision: 1. Of Maintenance.
2. Of Discipline.

1. Their Maintenance did not depend upon the liberality of the people; they
had an honorable allowance settled by Law, by a divine, inviolable right; So
that they had no temptation to hurry the Ark after the humor of the people; to
gratify either their needs or their avarice; Having the Lord for their
portion, they disdained, with a generous contempt, to betray the honor and
interest of the Ark, or the confidence and good meaning of well disposed
people, to gain the little imposts and bribery, and filthy lucre: And

2. In case of Exorbitancy, there was a Coercive power in that Hierarchy, to
punish the disorderly person, according to the quality of his offense; not only
with spiritual penalties, as suspension from the holy Function Fzra 2.62.
, and Excommunication from the holy Offices of the Church Ezr. 10.8. John 12.42.
; but with corporal punishments also, as imprisonment Jer. 10.2. Cap. 29; 26.
; and in some cases, with pain of death Deuteronomy. 17.12:
: This Maintenance and Discipline kept up Order and Conformity amongst them: So
tha^ under the Authority and influence of David, the King, you have the Priests
and Levites marshalled, the Hierarchy of the Church ready to attend the
procession and solemn service of the Ark.

III. The Train and Attendants.
But a private Office, performed by the Priest and Levite, or the Priest and his
Clerk, will not serve David's turn; He must h^ve the Ark conducted in such an
Equipage as becomes the divine Majesty it represented; and to this end he
summoned h^^ Elders and Captains, and the chosen men of Israel, to make up a
Train of Attendants for this great Solemnity.

First, nicet. in Greg. Naz. Orat. 19.
The Elders; Christ's Government differs from that of other Princes; The
Government was upon his shoulders; but the Government is too great a burden for
the feeble shoulders of other Princes; Mose's shoulders did shrink under it:
They are glad therefore of Auxiliaries to assist them; and such are their
Elders and their Captains: But judgment is to be used in the choice of These;
For in the Machina or Engine of Polity, the lower Wheels, to which the people
are more immediately affixed, have the strongest impulse into their motion: The
great Wheel of Sovereign Authority, let it move never so orderly, if the motion
of subordinate Magistrates be irregular, the force of their ill example will
have a more powerful influence upon the people, and carry their inclinations
after it: Hereupon Jethro advises Moses to make choice of men fearing God, to
be subordinate Magistrates; and David exhorts not only Kings in their own
persons, but such as are put in Authority under them, Psalm. 2. Be wise now
therefore O ye Kings, be instructed ye that are Judges of the earth, serve the
Lord with fear; and kiss the Son lest he be angry: Princes are the more
concerned to have an eye to Piety and virtue in their Officers; because the
people think, for the most part, that they may read the Princes inclinations in
their practices Syrae. 10.1.
: Spots in the Sun and Moon are better discovered by observing them in their
Reflexes and Images in the water, then by looking upon their own bodies in
their Motions: In consideration whereof, as well for reason of sta^e as
conscience, David might resolve as he does, Psalm 101.6. Mine eyes shall be upon
the faithful of the land, that they may dwell with me: He that walks in a
perfect way, he shall serve me; It is to be presumed, that as it was in
Ezekiels Vision; Cap. 1.
these Wheels of Subordinate Governors do move according to the motion of the
Spirit that is in the living Creature, the original and vital Fountain of
Authority. God takes of the spirit of Moses, and puts it upon those Elders that
were to share with him in the burden of the Government under him; Some other
giddy spirit might have put the who^e frame of Government into disorder and
confusion; but being acted by the same spirit with Moses, they aim at the same
end, and carry on the same design, to Gods glory and the welfare of the
people; numb. 11.25. Lopid. 16.
When the spirit of Moses rested upon them, they Prophesied and did not cease;
that is, Ex Dei instinctu Deum, De^que lauds celebrabant; they were inspired
to celebrate the praises of the Almighty. The Elders that Rule well under a
pious Prince, they do correspond and comply with him in his Devotions; as those
Elders in the Revelation did with the four Beasts; (which are conceived to be
the four Evangelists) when those Beasts gave glory and honor to him that sat
upon the Throne, Then the twenty four Elders fell down before him that sat
upon the Throne, Revel. 4.9, 10.
and worshipped him that lives for ever and ever: Such were these Elders here,
they did comply with David to attend the Ark in this Solemn Procession.

And so did the Captains too; not for fashion sake, 3. The Captains?
I wist, or merely to pay a civil homage to their Prince, (like Naaman, when he
went into the house of Rimmon) but out of devotion; For Soldiers may be
Religious; we read of one Centurion that had a prodigious faith; I have not
found so great faith no not in Israel; of another commended for his worthy
piety; He loves our nation, and has built us a Synagogue; of another whose
devotions soared so high upon the wings of his alms and fasting, Acts 10.
that they procured him an extraordinary visitation of kindness from Almighty
God: Soldiers are the sinews of a Kingdom; if they be lax and dissolute
through intemperance and effeminacy, the state of that Kingdom is but feeble;
if they be cut asunder by Factions and Divisions, it has no strength at all,
but enough to enable it to tumble and wallow in its own gore. To strengthen
these sinews there is no such Anodyne as Religion; and indeed, if Soldiers be
not Religious, how will they serve their Prince, either for the Lords sake, or
for conscience sake? Atheism cancels the two strongest obligations of a
subjects duty and Allegiance: Gallantry will carry but few to the Gates of
death for the safety and honor of their Prince; and if interest be all the
engagement he has upon his Soldiers, that may be bought off; the best
Exchequer, the fullest Purse will carry it: If his Captains be not Religious,
the Prince cannot be so confident of their fidelity, to be sure not of their
valor and success; for through faith the servants of God waxed valiant in
fight, Heb. 11.33, 34.
put to flight the Armies of the aliens, and subdued Kingdoms; They got not the
victory through their own strength, neither was it their own arm that saved
them; but it was the aid and favor of the Daity whom they adored: Hereupon the
Psalmist says, I will not trust in my bow, it is not my Sword that shall help
me; but it is thou (O God) that savest me, and put them to confusion that
hate me: Non eripio Magistratui arma, Typotius de Salut. Reipub. p. 242.
non praecido Consilia. His enim Resp. stat, illis defenditur: I do not disarm
the Magistrate of his Militia, nor cut off his Counsel; for the Commonweal is
upheld by the one, and defended by the other. At quovis rerum Statu absque Dei
Numine nihil recte geritur; desperatis rebus, quid subsidii reliquum est, Si
non Deus praepotens atque immortalis? In the best state of things nothing is
well done without Gods assistance; but when things are grown desperate, what
Anchor to hold is steady? what Sanctuary to flee to but only the defense of the
Almighty? Some put their trust in Chariots, and some in Horses, but we will
remember the name of the Lord our God. They are brought down and fallen, but we
are risen and stand upright; Psalm. 20.7; 8,
David therefore will have no Soldiers to be of his Guard, but such a^ have a
devotion for the Ark of God: And where there is such a Prince after Gods own
heart, ^uch a conformable Priesthood, such Religious Elders, such devout and
zealous Soldiers, we may be confident of an orderly, well-affected people; for
it is the Irregular Priest, and the Seditious Elder, and the Factious Soldier,
that does distract and imbroil a Kingdom, and fill it with disorder and
confusion. In a word, to shut up this Scene of our Discourse; When a Prince
comes newly to his Throne and the possession of his Kingdom, all Degrees and
Orders of men, under his Dominion, address themselves, to make their
recognition of his Authority, and pay their homage to him. Why, now the Ark of
God was a going to be inthroned in Sion, and take possession, as it were, of
its Kingdom; and therefore David will have all his Subjects, of what rank or
quality soever, present themselves to acknowledge and perform their respective
Duty; the Priests to devote their zeal and diligence; the Elders their Counsel
and Authority; the Captains their strength and valor; and all the people their
fidelity and obedience, to the Royal Prerogative thereof. Thus we have given
you an account of the first Quaere, who they were that did Transport or Conduct
this Ark, in this pregnant Relative, They; So They brought.

2. How they did Transport and Conduct it? 1. With what Carriage or
Instruments? 2. With what Pomp and Solemnity? (in which (as in the other
general parts that are to follow) I must be more brief, that I may come timely
to the pitch of my design, the Application.)

1. With what Carriage and Instruments? To set the Ark of the Covenant upon a
Cart, and commit it to the blind conduct of a pair of Kine, was somewhat
tolerable in the Philistims, who had no Priests that were rightly dedicated to
the most high God: And they had so much reverence to it, as to set it upon a
Cart that had not been over-worn in the service of the world, in the drudgery
of their secular employments; a new Cart will less profane it then the
shoulders of an old uncircumcised Philistine: They had so much care and
reverence too, as to commit it to the conduct of such Kine, as being sent from
their Calves, would be sure not to hurry it on too fast, to run it into the
danger of an utter overthrow: It might have fallen into the hands of some men
much more rash, unreasonable, and headstrong: But yet, that this new Cart and
those Kine should carry it as they did, was not without a miracle, as the
Learned think. When the Ark is within the confines of Israel, where there are
Priests anointed and hallowed to attend upon it, to Cart it then, whether out
of sloth, or negligence, out of irreverence or carelessness, out of Faction or
Inconformity, is such an intolerable contempt and profanation, as God will not
let go unpunished. David does acknowledge that the breach which was made upon
them by the death of Uzzah, was for this disorder, (1 Chronicles. 15.13. for God
will have things performed in their due order in his service) and that
affl^ction was an instruction to him; and made him apprehend that none ought to
carry the Ark but the Priests and Levites 1 Chronicles. 15.2. and 2 Chronicles. 5, 4, 5.
and Josh. 3.6.
, whom the Lord had chosen for that Ministry; And well might they undertake it;
for the Ark of God was not like the Idols of Egypt, a burden to the weary Beast
Isa. 46.1.
: it did not oppress or wring the Priests shoulders; for, the Text says, The
Lord helped them to bear it, 1 Chronicles. 15.26. Such is Gods goodness, if we will
but seriously endeavor it, we cannot want a sufficient assistance to perform
our expe^ted duty. Thus you see with what Carriage or Instruments the Ark was
transported. But

2. With what pomp and solemnity; and of this, we may observe that it was very
great, but withal very pious, very decent, very delightful, and very cordial.
1. A pious solemnity; It began with an accustomed Form of Prayer; for so Moses
had taught them, when the Ark advanced, to say, Number. 10.3^.
Rise Lord, and let thine enemies be scattered. To their Prayers they added
Sacrifice, Psalm. 68.1, 2.
1 Chronicles. 15.26. A Sacrifice of thanksgiving, that God did vouchsafe not only
to spare the Levites, whereas he had smitten Uzzah; but also to assist them in
their Ministry; and that their devotions might be the more rational, they make
them intelligible by a Psalm of praise newly penned, on purpose to adorn the
pomp of this solemnity, 1 Chronicles. 16.7. etc.

2. It was a decent Solemnity; 1 Chronicles. 15.27
for David was clothed with a robe of fine linen, and all the Levites that bare
the Ark, and the Singers, and Chenaniah the Master of the Song, with the
Singers; David also had upon him an Ephod of linen. See Eng. Annor. on Judge.
8.27. 1 Samuel 2.18. and on 2 Samuel 6.14.
The Ephod was an habit appropriated to Gods Service: And there were two sorts
of them; one very rich and costly, peculiar to the High Priest, made of blew,
purple, scarlet, and twined linen, cunningly wrought and embroidered with gold,
of which, Exodus 28.4, 6. the other was a vestment of linen for Priests and
Levites, which others might freely use also (though we find it no where
prescribed to them;) and such a one David used at this time, (say the English
Annotators) not only as being more light and fit for motion, on 2 Samuel 6.14.
but also to show his devotion in his religious Service. Here was decency, and
a signification of devotion in the use of this garment; (I pray observe, and
carry that home with you) and hereupon the Votaries of the Lamb of God are
represented to St John, See. Dr. Ham. Notes upon Rev. 19.8.
as celebrating the solemn Service of God in the Christian Church in this
habit, Revel. 19.

3. It was a delightful Solemnity: For, There was shouting, and the sound of
the Cornet, and Trumpets and Cymbals, making a noise with Psalteries and Harps,
1 Chronicles. 15.28. God requires that his people should serve him with joy and
gladness Deuteronomy. 28.47.
; and as well to blow up and inflame that sacred fire, as to entertain and
discover it, he allows the use of these bellows, Musical Instruments, as well
as Voices. When our melody is spiritual, and does not degenerate into carnality
and looseness; when the Holy Ghost is the Master of the Music, it is so great
an advantage to our devotions, that we are exhorted, even under the New
Testament, John. 4.
(where all the Worship of God is to be performed in Spirit and in Truth) even
here, under the dispensation of the Gospel, we are exhorted to use it, to raise
up our devotions, to the edification of our selves and others: Ephesians. 5.18, 19.
Col. 3.16.
Be not drunk with wine wherein is excess, but be filled with the Spirit:
speaking to your selves, and admonishing others in Psalms and Hymns and
spiritual Songs, singing (with your voice) and making melody (with musical
instruments) with grace in your hearts unto the Lord. And accordingly,

4. This was a cordial Solemnity. There are a sort of men in the world, so
rash, so uncharitable, so censorious, that they condemn all the Service that is
performed to Almighty God with pomp and ceremony, or any show of solemnity, as
merely formal and hypocritical. Let the practice of David upon this occasion
confute their vain and false imaginations. It is a contradiction to say, the
more there is of delight, the less there is of the soul in any service. David
performed this duty not only with joy and gladness 1 Chronicles. 15.25. 2 Samuel 6.12.
, but with all his might; and the holy ecstasies of his soul caused a religious
transportation and rapture in his body in these exercises; for he danced before
the Lord with all his might 2 Samuel 6.14.
: When his heart danced so for joy, his body could not choose but sympathiz^ in
the passion, and dance in grave and comely measu^es with it: My heart and my
flesh cries out for the living God, Psalm. 84.2. When I went with the multitude
into the house of God, I poured out my soul in me, says he, Psalm. 42.4. i. e.
I emptied my self of all earthly and carnal delights, Bellar. ad haec verba
Psalmi.
that I might be filled with the pleasures of Gods house; I expatiated and
enlarged my desires and faculties, that I might be capable to receive the
influences of so great a blessing. His body was in the dance with the decency
of an Ephod; but his very heart and soul were in the joy of this holy
procession; so cordial and so delightful, so decent and so pious was this
Solemnity. And thus we have done with the first general part of the Text, the
Transportation or Conduct of the Ark; So they brought the Ark of God: We come
now to the second.

2. The situation of it: And they set it in the Tent that David had pitched
for it. This was in the City of David, a part of Jerusalem, 2 Samuel 6.12.
where the Court was kept: David knew there was need of a sovereign Amulet
against those temptations that do usually ^aunt and follow greatness: The
splendor of a Court might possibly dazzle his eyes and make him forget his
duty; it is good therefore to have the light thereof eclipsed by the greater
splendor of a divine Majesty. The bands of Religion may be drawn so close and
tied so fast about his soul upon the frequent sight of such a sacred Shrine as
the Ark was, that nothing could easily puff it up, or make his spirits fly out
into dissolution: The sight of this was apt to strike the heart with awe and
reverence.

2. But besides, David was certainly informed that the presence of the Ark had
brought signal blessings, evidences of Gods favor, upon the Family of
Obed-Edom; and why should not he endeavor to share in the benefit, who had at
least as good a Title as Obed-Edom to the Ark it self? 1 Cor. 12.31.
To covet the best gifts, and that earnestly is a very commendable part of our
duty: To hunger and thirst after righteousness, after spiritual blessings, is a
holy thirst and hunger: To be ambitious to be had in favor and in honor 1 Chronicles. 17.18.
with the Divine Majesty, is a good ambition.

3. If the Ark were seated here (in the City of David) whither the Tribes
ascended for civil Justice, they might very commodiously receive the mysteries
of Religion administered together with it; and the blessings that should be
derived from the salutary presence of the Ark upon the Royal Family, would be
of a more general concernment, like a fruitful inundation, which having its
source from the top of some high mountain, waters all the valleys round about.

2. David had here prepared for the Ark; and therefore it is said, 2 Samuel 6.17.
imposuerunt eam in loco suo, they set it in his own place: For when a man
passes a surrender of any Thing or Place to the use of Almighty God, and
appropriates it to his Worship by the act of a solemn dedication, God accepts
of it, ownes it, calls it his, and makes it holy; holy always, in relation, by
his gracious acceptance of it, and holy sometimes, by a gracious manifestation
of his presence in it; and then it is to be reverenced, not to be alienated, or
converted unto any profane or common use. To this purpose we have these
expressions in Holy Scripture; Go to my place which was in Shilo, where I put
my name at the first, Jer. 7.12. My house shall be called the house of prayer:
Mat. 21.13. Keep my Sabbathes and reverence my Sanctuary; Levit. 19.30. Put off
thy shoes from off thy feet, for the place where thou stand is holy ground,
Exodus 3.5. to which alludes, Keep thy foot when thou come into the house of
God, Eccles. 5.1.

Because the Ark had been placed in this City of David, and so had hallowed it,
Solomon thinks it not fit, thinks it would be a profanation, to convert it
into a Court for Pharaoh's Daughter, though his royal consort, 2 Chronicles, 8.11.
And our Saviors zeal was so strict in this point, he would not suffer any of
them to carry their common Vessels through any part of the Temple, Mark 11.16.
Have ye not houses to eat and to drink in, says the Apostle, to such as
profaned the place of Gods worship, with intemperance, or despise ye the
Church of God? 1 Cor. 11.22.

3. In the Tent, or Tabernacle, which David had pitched. 2 Samuel 6.17.
David did not make choice of a Tabernacle to save charges. He was ashamed to
see himself live in more State, in respect of habitation, then God did; to see
himself lodged in a Palace of Cedar, and the Ark between course Curtains: out
of zeal therefore, he designed a House for the Lord, a House that should be
exceeding magnifical, of fame and glory among all Countries, 1 Chro. 22.5. and
although this was but a piece of will worship in him, having as yet received no
command or order, 2 Samuel 7.7. 1 Chro. 17.6.
no direction or intimation for it; yet God accepts of this pious intendment, 1
Kings 8.18. and, since David had intertain'd the thoughts of a Temple, God
would have it such a Temple (to honor the zeal of his designs) as should be a
type of heaven, a type of the Church triumphant; Rev. 11.19.
but then, though he had piously contrived it, David must not be allowed to
build it; 1 Chronicles. 22.6, to 10.
for David was a man of war, and heaven is to be prepared for us by the Prince
of Peace; this work therefore must be reserved for Solomon. But for the Church
militant, represented by a Tabernacle, Rev. 21.2, 3.
always in a moveable posture, subject to storms and deportations, a warlike
Prince may protect and shelter, endow and adorn that, after this example of
King David, who pitched a tent for the Ark of God.

And now the Ark is brought under David's roof, I hope the Proverb is not
verified in him; The nearer to Church, the further from God; I hope it is not
for State and Pomp that he designs this neighborhood Beati qui merentur
proximi esse Dco. Sed memento quod Scriptum est, qui approximant mihi,
approximant igni. Origin. super Jes. Nav. Hom. 4. k.
with the Almighty: No, no, it is that he may gain an opportunity at hand, to
celebrate the solemn service of God; which he does therefore religiously
hansel, with the Sacrifice of a dutiful gratulation; for [they offered burnt
sacrifices and peace offerings before God,] which is the last part of my Text.

To be possessed of God, to sit under the shadow of his wings, to communicate
in the Ordinances of his worship, and imbibe the influences of his Ministry,
what an ineffable blessing! how much this Prince and People valued this
enjoyment; how much their hearts were ravished with their success in this happy
settlement, we may collect from their oblations; which were the best the
Levitical Law had recommended; God did require, he did expect no better from
them.

We may take a threefold view of them. 1. In their nature or kind: Burnt
sacrifices; what they were; peace offerings, what they were: 2. In their
conjuncture and association; burnt sacrifices and peace offerings, together: 3.
In their subordination and order; first, burnt sacrifices, and then,
peace offerings, before God.

1. For their kind and nature: the burnt sacrifice was to be of the best in its
kind; a male and without blemish; and (that I may, in brief, give you the
History, and the Mystery, and the Morality of it) it was styled a Holocaust;
because herein neither the Priest, nor the party that made the oblation, was to
have any share; but it was wholly to be consumed by the sacred fire, that it
might ascend up in flames, in reverence to the most high God.

It was a Testification of Gods Supreme Dominion over them; and so it was
designed to make an acknowledgement of his Sovereignty to honor him; and it
was a Recognition of their subjection, and dependency; and so it was designed,
to make an atonement, to render him placid and gracious.

The Offerer was to lay his hand upon the head of the Sacrifice to this effect,
Levit. 1.4. He shall put his hand upon the head of the burnt offering, and it
shall be accepted for him, to make atonement for him. By this Rite and Ceremony
(of laying the hand upon the head of the Sacrifice) 1. He did transfer all his
interest in it upon God, and dedicated it entirely to Gods honor. Manuum
impositio symbolum oblationis crat, and testimonium reatus in hostiam
translati. Eusebius. apud Lapid. in Lev. 1.4.
2. He did hereby transfer the guilt of his own sin upon the Sacrifice, and
devoted it, in his own head, to the wrath of God, for that guilt. 3. He did
transfer the propriety and interest that he had in himself, and resigned it up,
for the future, to Gods service. This was the signification of that Rite and
Ceremony.

But there is a Mystery besides in this sacrifice; it was a Type and
prefiguration of the spotless Lamb of God, who gave himself for us, an offering
and a sacrifice to God, Ephesians. 5.2.
for a sweet smelling Savor.

And a twofold end was aimed at in that oblation; 1. Gods Honor, 2. Our
Atonement; for he did glorify God; John 17.4.
and was the propitiation for our sins 1 John 2.2.
.

And if David offered such a sacrifice to God, to shut up this great solemnity,
it may teach us modesty and caution; not to be too confident, not to rely upon
the worth of our own performances: but to suspect their imperfection, and our
own failing in them. Job was afraid his sons might take a surfeit of pleasures
in the freedom of their hospitable entertainment of one another; and therefore
his care and piety did always apply a burnt offering to them for an Antidote,
Job 1.5. it is not good to be too confident; verebar omnia opera mea; I was
jealous of all my works, says Job, Job 9.28.
we may be surprised in our devotion; there may be iniquity in our holy things.
Our spiritual sacrifices do not always ascend in so pure a flame, but some
cloud may darken them. It is the Angels Additional incense offered up with the
prayers of the Saints, Rev. 8: 3, 4.
upon the golden Altar, that makes them ascend like an acceptable perfume
before the throne of God. David performed this service for the Ark of God with
a most exquisite devotion: but lest some dead fly should be blown accidentally
into this pot of precious ointment, lest some circumstantial miscarriage should
have sullied the beauty, and blemished the perfection, and abated the worth of
it, he adds the cautionary atonement of a burnt sacrifice.

But, 2. if you look upon this Sacrifice, as designed to the honor of the
Divine Majesty, abstracted from all consideration of making him propitious to
the offerer; then it courts our devotions with this insinuation, that we are
not our own; God has an absolute dominion over us; and therefore we are wholly
at his service, and ought to resign our selves up entirely to his disposal;
that no creature may share in that divine honor, which we so deservedly ow,
and should as worthily render to him; for his glory he will not give unto
another.

2. The Peace Offering was a Sacrifice, whereof the blood and the fat went to
the Altar God was to have the fat that grew about the inwards, the Kidneys,
with the Caul that covered the Liver, Lev. 3.3, 4.
; the breast and the right shoulder to the Priest; the rest was to be eaten by
the Offerer. In this, the Priest and the people did communica^e with God, and
with one another, like friends feasting together upon one and the same stock of
entertainment. This oblation was offered, either by way of gratulation and
thanks, for some benefit already received Lev. 7.12; and 16.
, (according to some former vow, voluntarily made to that purpose;) of which
the Psalmist speaks, Psalm. 116.12, 13, 14. What shall I render unto the Lord
for all his benefits toward me? I will take the cup of salvation, The first ex
grato animo. The second ex spe impetrandi. Ainsw. Not. ad Psalm. 116.13.
and call upon the name of the Lord. I will pay my vows unto the Lord: now in
the presence of all his people. This cup was an attendant upon this oblation;
for of the peace offering they did communicate, and rejoice before the Lord,
and took a cup of wine, which was called the cup of salvation and the cup of
blessing; because they gave solemn thanks, and blessed God for his saving
health and benefits.

Or, 2. Gerhard, Loc. Com de leg. Cer. c. 2. 2. Thom. 12. q. 102 ar. 3.8. Ex
debito beneficii, vel accipiendi, vel accepti.
This oblation was offered by way of Vote and Option for some ensuing favor.
The Israelites had a just cause, but very ill success, in their expedition
against the Benjamites. They received two defeats with the loss of 40000 men;
but that they might prevail with God to assist and prosper them in their nex^
engagement, They came unto the house of God and wept, and sat there before the
Lord, and fasted that day until Even, and offered burnt offerings and
peace offerings before the Lord, Judge. 20.26. and so 1 Chronicles. 21.26. her the
design in these oblations, was to make atonement, and prevail for future peace
and salvation.

And methinks, in the very nature of these offerings there is an insinuation of
the necessity of our perseverance, and of Gods continual grace and assistance
to that effect. The very same oblation was offered not only by way of
gratulation, in thankfulness, for a benefit already past, but also by way of
vow, for the impetration of one to come. When we arrive at heaven, our
sacrifices shall be nothing else but the adoration of acknowledgements in a way
of praise and thanksgiving: but while we are Militant here on earth, our
praises are to be attended with atonement, and our thanksgivings with Litanies
and supplications. We must not think that we have the goal presently, because
^^e have Gods blessing and assistance at our setting forth. We may begin well,
and yet fall short of the mark; we may run, for a fit, a heat or two, and yet
lose the prize: it is perseverance that wins the Crown; and Gods grace that
enables us to hold out to the attainment of it. The design of our
peace offerings therefore must be, not only to acknowledge the mercy of God,
that did prevent us; but also to engage Unde, Psalm. 116.13. I will take the cup
of salvation: and I will call upon the name of the Lord.
his favor, that it may follow us, all the days of our lives; and such were
these oblations in the Text; they offered burnt sacrifices; they offered
peace offerings, before the Lord. This for the nature and kind of their
oblations.

2. For the association and conjuncture of them: Burnt sacrifices, and
peace offerings; God is to be adored and worshipped, for his own sake, out of
reverence to his excellent Majesty; this is signified by the burnt sacrifice;
Hujusmodi enim sacrificium offe^ ^batur Deo specialiter ad reverentiam
majestatis ipsius, etc. Thom. ubi sup^a.
and he is to be adored and worshipped, out of Gratitude for his goodness
toward us; this is signified by the peace offering. The first is to give him
praise; The second, to give him thanks; and whose offers me praise and thanks
he honors me, Psalm. 50. they are put both together there in the Psalm, and
here upon the Altar. We must be mindful to acknowledge and honor God; and we
must be mindful to relieve and save our selves; but Gods glory is to be sought
in the first place; our own advantage in the second, and in a way of
subordination to it. The burnt sacrifice first, and then the peace offering to
second it; that is the third, the Order in these Oblations. Gods interest must
be preferred before our own; his glory before our salvation; and because God
hears not sinners, the atonement should be made first, to reconcile our
persons, that our services of gratitude may find a gracious acceptance. Hence
the Psalmist; Psalm. 51.7, 9, 14, 19.
Purge me with hyssop, and I shall be clean; hide thy face from my sins, and
blot out all mine iniquities: Deliver me from blood-guiltiness; and then, Cum
ego perfect ^eparatus and justificatus fuero. Bellar. in Psalm. 50.
when my atonement is thus made, then shall thou be pleased with the sacrifices
of right cousness.

And if they be offered up in the memory and virtue of Christ, that great
Holocaust, through him, God will accept both of us and of our offerings; which
are no otherwise acceptable unto eternal life, but only through Jesus Christ
our Lord.

And the Royal Prophet could not choose but remember him in this solemnity; for
as well the Ark as the sacrifice was a Type of him; and so they brought the Ark
of God into the City of David, and set it in his place, in the tent which David
had pitched for it; and they offered burnt sacrifices and peace offerings
before God. Would you know David's inducements to perform all this service for
the Ark? they were four; his need of it, his love to it, his interest in it,
and his advantage by it.

1. His need of it; and that we find him the more sensible of, in his exile
from it; (as men, for the most part do, Magis carendo quam fruendo, they
understand the usefulness of things better by the want of them, then by their
enjoyment;) here was his Abyssus Abyssum, Psalm. 42.7.
one deep calling upon another; for he was brought very low, many times,
brought into inextricable perplexities; why art thou cast down, Psalm. 43.7.
O my soul? and why art thou so disquieted within me? He was in the ^^^k, and
wanted comfort, and nothing but the Ark of God could relieve and afford him
Cordials; O send out thy light and thy truth: let them lead me, Ibid. Verse. 3.
(and lest my heaviness and stupidity should tempt me to make a halt) let them
bring me unto thy holy hill, and to thy Tabernacles. And in another place his
need makes him more impetuous in his acclamations; O God, thou art my God,
early will I seek thee: my soul thirsts for thee, my flesh longs for thee:
would you know how importunate, how violent these passionate appetites are? you
must first be sick, you must be with child; when you are sick of love, when
Christ is formed in you, then you w^ll understand the nature of that sacred
thirst, that spiritual longing; for it is only to be felt, not fully to be
interpreted. Psalm. 63.1.
But what is the reason? his extreme needs, the aridity, the dryness and
desolation of his soul, it was, in a dry and thirsty land where no water was.
But where the Ark is, there God is, and with thee is the well of life; this
therefore is the object of all my thirst and longing, to see thy power and
glory, so as I have seen thee in the Sanctuary. Ibid. Verse. 2.


2. A second motive was his love to the Ark, Psalm. 26.8. Lord I have loved the
habitation of thy house, and the place where thine honor dwells. But more
passionately, Psalm. 84.1, 2. Psalm. 84.1, 2.
How amiable are thy Tabernables, O Lord of Hosts! my soul longs, yea even
faints for the Courts of the Lord: my heart and my flesh cries out for the
living God. He has in his soul the passions of a woman with child; he longs,
and because be cannot have his longing presently, there follows a Deliquium, a
defailance in his spirits, his ^oul faints; and as longers use to do many
times, he falls in travel, and his pangs and throws are so great, that his
heart and flesh, both cry out for the living God; and nothing can keep him from
miscarrying, from losing the fruit of this travel of his soul, but a sight of
Gods Ark; such a favor as this would allay and becalm and satisfy all these
passions. Verse. 4.
Blessed are they that dwell in thy house; they will be still praising thee:
One day in thy Courts, Verse. 10.
and doorkeeper there, is high preferment in the estimation of a pious Prince,
that has a true devotion to the Ark of God.

3. A third inducement was his interest in the Ark: and this interest depending
upon his interest in God, Psalm. 43. Verse. 3, 4.
they run, as it were, parallel; hence, Psalm. 43. O send out thy light, etc,
(as before) Then will I go unto the Altar of God, unto God my exceeding joy
(and) the God of my strength Verse. 2.
: yea upon the Harp will I praise thee, O God, my God. He will bear a part in
the solemn service before Gods Ark; and the interest he has in it makes his
banishment the more intolerable; when I remember these things, I pour out my
soul in me (grief and sorrow h^ving dissolved it;) for I had gone with the
multitude, I went with them to the house of God, Psalm. 42.4.

4. The fourth and last inducement was the advantage he had by the Ark; and
that was double. I. Protection, Psalm. 27 4 5. One thing have I desired of the
Lord, that I may dwell in the house of the Lord; to behold the beauty of the
Lord, and to inquire into his Counsel for my safety; For in the time of trouble
he shall hide me in his pavillion, etc. see Psalm. 31.20.

2. Here he finds satisfaction: here is a Julip will slack his thirst;
inebriabuntur, they shall be inebriated, abundantly satisfied with the
pleasures of thy house, etc. upon this account, such as do approach Gods Ark
are blessed, Psalm. 65.4. And now having given you these inducements of his
devotion, I have done with my Text. But I cannot enter upon my Application
without a Preface; and what Preface so suitable as a reflection upon those
signal impresses of Gods favor stamped upon us immediately before the late
fatal revolution; whereby we may take a prospect of our own happiness, in the
prosperity and flourishing condition of our Church and Nation: we were like
that Vine of Israel, which God sometimes brought out of Egypt; we were planted
in a Land flowing with milk and honey, and were twined about the walls of Gods
house, for our support and shelter. Those Clouds and Umbrages that did eclipse
and darken the glory of the Gospel in other parts of the World, were dispel'd
and scattered amongst us. The face of the Sky over our heads was serene and
calm, and the countenance of Heaven did smile upon us. Our Candlestick was
scoured bright, and instead of nasty stinking snuffs, or filthy meteors exhaled
from the slime of the earth, we had stars of the first magnitude for their
Piety and Learning set upon them, So that this people which had sat in
darkness saw a great light. God had not dealt so with other Nations. Here was a
comely as well as a convenient Tabernacle for the Ark of God; and God was
worshipped in the beauty of holiness. And God was not at all behind hand with
us in the reciprocation of kindnesses; there was never so low an ebb in us, by
our making out sallies of devotion upon him, but there came as high a tide upon
us flowing back from him. What we paid the Ark of God in reverence and duty,
was infalliby returned in a compensation, nay with a surplusage of blessings.
As long as our English earth continued to pay a worthy homage unto heaven, the
Heavens were not only constant to involve and incircle us; but they never
failed to protect and shelter, to feed, and to cloth us with suitable
applications of the most enriching influences. Other Nations had Mines, which
they dug with much pain and peril in the earth; but we had Mines in heaven,
treasures that never failed to supply not only our needs, but our very pomp and
curiosity: It was our felicity that God had made out that experiment to us,
which he speaks of by the Prophet Malachi: Mal. 3.10.
Prove me now, if I will not open to you the windows of heaven, and pour you
out a blessing, that there shall not be room enough to receive it. We had
pregnant evidence of this goodness of the Lord toward us, which makes one (that
might have made a better use of it) observe, that God has dealt by way of
prerogative with this English Nation.

But we perverted Gods gracious dispensations, turning his blessings into
aggravations of our crimes, and making our felicity serve only for a reproach
to our ingratitude: For like Israel we waxed fat and kicked; our Manna, a
spiritual food that came down from heaven, prepared for us by the Ministry of
those Angels that presided in the Church at the Reformation, because it was
common, and our daily bread, it became loathsome to us: We grew wanton, and
having taken a surfeit of the bread of life, we longed for quails to be brought
us out of foreign Countries: We thought Abana and Parphar, Rivers of Damascus,
better then all the waters of Israel. Men grew precise and squeamish; they
would not wash and be clean, unless they might have Cisterns of their own
hewing out; nor drink of the water of life, though it ran never so freely,
unless it were conveyed to them in new Pipes of their own casting: Some there
were that did strictly hold themselves to the Form of godliness, the Solemn
Worship of God established in the Church, who notwithstanding in the looseness
of their lives did shamefully deny the power thereof: Others there were that
did pretend to be so overborn with the power of godliness, that they would
allow no Form at all for the regulation and exercise of it: All the innocent
Ceremonies that had constantly attended the solemn devotions of pious Antiquity
were looked upon as the very dress and trimmings of Hypocrisy; Reverence in
Gods Worship was accounted superstitious; and the holy Incense of Morning and
Evening Prayers no better then abomination. Even such of the people (which make
up the greatest number of its adversaries) as never had judgment or wit enough
to understand it, had yet malice enough infused into them to deride and scorn
the Holy Service of the Church: And as an evidence that this disease was grown
desperate, our greatest quarrel was at those Physicians whose practice and
prescriptions were the most probable means to reduce us to our Christian temper.

When I consider the carriage of the people Israel under Gods gracious
dispensations, 2 Chronicles. 36.15, 16. methinks I see the Character of our English
Nation in these late years. The Lord God of their Fathers sent to them by his
Messengers, rising up betimes and sending; because he had compassion on his
people and on his dwelling place: But they mocked the Messengers of God, and
despised his Word, and misused his Prophets, until the wrath of the Lord arose
against his people, till there was noremedy. For when the Patient grows so
raving, so out of temper, as to strike his Physician, and throw away his
Antidotes, there remain no ordinary methods that can cure him: And then the
Bedlam, and the chain, the whip and the skrews, all the violences of a severe
discipline are the best instances of our kindness. Such was the condition of
Israel, Hosea 4.1, 2, 4. The Lord has a Controversy with the Inhabitants of
the Land, because there is no truth nor mercy, nor knowledge of God in the
Land. By swearing, and lying, and killing, and stealing, and committing
Adultery, they break out, and blood touches blood. Therefore shall the Land
mourn: Yet let no man strive nor reprove another; for this people are as they
that strive with the Priest. When sin begins to spread amongst a people, what
remedy does Almighty God use to apply to heal and stop it? there is the
Authority of a Judge to oppose it, and the Reprehension of the Priest to give a
check to it. But when God does inhibite these his Officers from using their
Authority, and exercising their Jurisdiction, it is a sign that people is grown
obstinate, shameless, and incorrigible: When they grow so insolent as to
contradict the Priest in his own office, wherein doubtless he is Gods
Vicegerent, that people is past Grace, as it runs in the ordinary Channel; and
unless God uses some other methods of Discipline, there is no hopes of their
amendment: So it follows in the Prophet, Hosea 4.5.
Therefore shall thou fall in the day. When they had the clear light of heaven
shining round about them, the light of knowledge, and the light of comfort and
prosperity, in this noonday, Thou shall stumble and fall, says the Lord, and
the Prophet also shall fall with thee in the night; the false Prophet shall be
benighted and lose himself in the darkness of his own vain imaginations; and I
will destroy thy Mother, says the Lord; the Church and Nation, from whose womb
thou have had thy birth, in whose bosom thou have had thy breeding, and to
whose blessings thou owe the procurement of thy prosperity. We may make
England the Scene of that Prophecy as well as Jerusalem; for the whole Tragedy
has been acted over in all its parts amongst us, with a full solemnity.

God he took notice of our misdemeanors (under his most gracious
dispensations) toward our Superiors, his Vicegerents, both Civil and
Ecclesiastical, and he was wroth; and upon so great provocations as we were
guilty of, he did to us as he had done to Israel, He delivered our strength
into Captivity, and our beauty into the Enemies hands. That Ark, that Form of
Gods Worship, that had procured such miracles of mercy for us in 88. and at the
intended powder plot; That Ark whose virtue had been so often tried, to good
effect, in times of war, pestilence and famine; And our Beauty, that Form of
Solemn Worship, which rendered the Church of England amiable above all the
Reformed Churches, and a true Copy of that Holy City, that New Jerusalem, which
S. John saw coming down from God out of heaven, prepared as a Bride adorned for
her Husband, Rev. 21.2. For our many provocations, He delivered This our
strength into Captivity, and This our beauty into the Enemies hands: The glory
was upon departing from our Israel; and I had almost said, That the abomination
of desolation was set up in the holy place: When the most magnificent House of
God that we had in our Land was turned into a stable; and many men, yea many
Priests (such was their Apostasy) had no more reverence for it then the very
beasts that perished by a strange vengeance inflicted, without doubt, upon that
sort of Cattle for that Sacrilegious profanation.

That Faction which had tired out the patience of two great Princes Queen
Elizabeth and K. James.
with Petitions, soliciting to have those Walls of Church Government levelled,
that Garrison dismantled wherein the Ark of God was in safe custody amongst us:
They that so often attempted to fire it out with their Squibs of scoffing
Pamphlets, and to batter it down with their paper bullets, for want of better
Arguments; At last (as soon as opportunity and advantage favored them; for
their rage could stay no longer) they assaulted it (how unlike Christ's Lambs
and the Servants of the Prince of peace, I need not tell you) but with Swords
and Pistols, Pikes and Cannons they assaulted it. And because this Ark could
not otherwise fall into their hands, the chief Priest, yea and the Prince too,
must fall before it, as a Sacrifice to their fury. And (which is more) that
they might utterly extinguish our hopes, and cut off all possibility of its
Restitution, as much as in them lay, they did cut off the Royal line that
should protect it, and the succession of a regular Priesthood, that should
minister unto it.

And now might the devout soul, that was pregnant with the passions of grief
and love, fall in travel, and for want of other issue give birth to a
lamentation, and name that Ichabod; for the glory is departed from Israel; and
we the true Sons of the Church of England in the condition that Israel was in,
when they sat by the waters of Babylon and wept; they hung up their Harps,
which were now grown useless; because their sorrows for the desolations of
Zion, had silenced all their melody.

And yet we are called upon to believe that all these violences were designed,
but to shake the dust out of the Badgers skins, and to brush the Curtains, and
to Reform the Tabernacle, that the pure gold of the A^k might shine the
brighter in the simplicity of its own luster. That is, just as the Soldiers
came with Swords and Staves from the High Priests, to apprehend and secure the
Lamb of God, and brought him before Pilate, out of kindness, that he might have
the honor to clear and acquit himself.

But what became of the Ark of God in the midst of these disorders? Why, we
heard of the same at Ephrata, Psalm. 132.6.
we found it in the wood: some harmless Country people would tell us some
tidings of it; but it was in the wood; Solemnities. And yet as forlorn as it
was, its Captivity was a punishment not only to the Jews, but also to the
Philistims; to them that triumphed over it, as well as to them that had lost
the possession, and forfeited the blessings of it. The adversaries could not
destroy it; nor could they court it into their assistance. The Dagon, which
they set up for themselves to worship, fell before it, with the loss of hands
and head, deprived not of strength only, but of counsel too. They provided a
new Cart for it; such was the new Discipline, hewn out, and rudely put together
by Mr. Calvin and others, in this last Century; and the Classes were the Wheels
of it; and this the Faction drove on furiously for a while, and stopped not, no,
not at the Red Sea, they drove it into a Sea of blood: but the Cattle that were
yoked together, to hurry it away, were so unreasonable and headstrong, they
could not agree, where, or how to set it up; and that they might not hurry it
into utter ruin, God was pleased to look through a frightful Cloud upon them,
Exodus 14.24, 25.
and took off their Chariot wheels, to trouble and discomfit them.

At last David, the King, being preserved and return^n, by as great a miracle
of providence as the Ark it self; in order to his own settlement, he gives
order to prepare the Tabernacle for the settlement of the Ark; and summoneth
all the heads of the Priests and Levites, with the Nobles and Elders of the
people: So they brought the Ark of God, etc.

We are no less happy then they, in the decent situation of our Ark; I pray God
we may be no less dutiful, in our gratulation for it. To which purpose,
me^hinks every devout soul should be a breathing out that Quaere of the
Psalmist, Psalm. 116.
Quid Retribuam, what shall I render unto the Lord, for this great, this signal
benefit done unto us? you can do no better than resolve with him; I will come
into thy house with burnt offerings; I will pay thee my vows, Psalm. 66.13, 14.
which I promised with my lips, and spoke with my mouth, when I was in trouble,
for the Ark of God. And because God takes no pleasure in the flesh of beasts;
neither will he drink the blood of Bulls or Goats: but requires of us, a
spiritual, a living and a reasonable Sacrifice; I beseech you therefore,
brethren, by the mercies of God, Romans 12.1.
that ye present your bodies a living Sacrifice, holy, acceptable unto God,
which is your reasonable service. Having nothing else that can be acceptable to
him, who gave himself for us, we should have the same devotion, the same mind
that was in the holy Martyrs; we should have our hearts and wills prepared; (if
duly called to it) to be made a sacrifice by others; in the mean time, we
should make an Oblation of our selves, have our whole spirits, souls and
bodies, devoted to Gods service and the service of his Church. Such a devotion
was in the great Apostle, Phil. 2.17. (...). If I be offered up (as a libamen,
a liquid oblation) upon the Sacrifice and Liturgy of your faith, I joy and
rejoice with you all: But,

Here is a twofold oblation recommended to us, by the example before us, in the
Text. 1. A burnt sacrifice; And, 2. A peace offering, and such we must offer,
in a spiritual sense; and we must offer;

1. A burnt sacrifice; and that, upon a double account (as such sacrifices use
to be offered up upon.) 1. To acknowledge Gods Power and Dominion, and Revere
his signal Goodness herein demonstrated. David has furnished us with a Psalm
to this purpose, Psalm. 124. (wherein the Church blesses God for a miraculous
deliverance, of her self and the Ark of God, settled in her possession) If it
had not been the Lord who was on our side: now may Israel say: If it had not
been the Lord, who was on our side, when men rose up against us, Then they had
swallowed us up quick: when their wrath was kindled against us, Then the water
had overwhelmed us; the stream had gone over our soul. Then the proud waters
had gone over our soul. Blessed be the Lord: who has not given us as a prey to
their teeth. Our soul is escaped as a bird out of the snare of the fowler: the
snare is broken and we are escaped. Our help is in the name of the Lord, who
made heaven and earth. Non nobis Domine, non nobis; therefore not unto us,
Lord, not unto us: but unto thy name be the praise: Thou art worthy to receive
glory and honor and praise: but to us there belongs nothing but shame and
confusion of face; for we contributed only to the reproach and captivity of
Gods Ark, and solemn worship; its happy restitution and settlement we ow to thy
signal power and goodness; great and mavelous are thy works, Lord God,
Almighty: just and true are thy ways, thou King of Saints. Who shall not fear
thee, O Lord, and glorify thy name! Rev. 15.3, 4.

2. A second design of our spiritual burnt sacrifice must be to make an
atonement for those miscarriages which forfeited our interest in the Ark, and
betrayed it into captivity. It was good advice of the Priests and Diviners to
the Philistims, when they consulted them about returning the Ark of God; 1 Samuel
6.3.
Oh! send it not away empty, said they, but in any wise return God a
trepass offering with it; that you may be healed. The captivity of that Ark
wrought a strange conviction in the Philistims, as well as in the Jews. The
Philistims saw clearly they had no reason to triumph in this defeat they had
given Is^ael; for though they had won the field, they had got no Victory; they
had taken the Ark indeed; but they had made no conquest of it; for it fell upon
the Rear of them, and smote them in their hinder parts, it discovered so much
of their nakedness, and turned their inside so much outward; and put them to so
much shame and anguish that they were glad to send it back with a
trepass offering, and beg to be, reconciled to it; the Israelites they were
instructed likewise that it was not out of ill will to the Ark, nor for want of
strength in God, that the Philistims prevailed to take it captive: but only out
of a just indignation, to revenge the profanation of that sacred Instrument,
which was the visible obsignation of his grace and favor to them. And when God
was about to suffer his holy Temple to be defiled, upon a like account, he
sends his people to be schooled by that example, Jer. 7.11, 12. Is the house
that is called by my name become a den of robbers? behold I have seen it. But
go now to my place, which was in Shiloh, where I set my name at the first; and
see what I did to it, for the wickedness of my people Israel. And because of
your wicked works, I will therefore do to that house that is called by my name,
as I did to Shiloh. Is there any here amongst us, that can plead not guilty?
have not thou profaned the Ark of Gods Worship, that was amongst us? have not
thou been unthankful for it? have not thou been unfruitful under the Ministry
of it? there is no person in this Congregation, if he be of a competent age,
but his heart will tell him, that he did contribute something to the captivity
of this Ark. If we had as much ingenuity, I am sure we have as much cause, as
Mr. Bradford, in the Book of Martyrs, had; or as the Christians, that were
banished in Q. Mary's days, had, to accuse our selves, for our wilful betraying
the honor of our Religion and the interest of the holy Gospel. We may all say,
For my sins, and for thy sins, was the Ark, the solemn worship and service of
God taken captive; and upon this account, it becomes our duty to present a
burnt sacrifice for our atonement, now upon its restitution. But wherewith
shall I come before the Lord, and how my self before the most high God? Mic.
6.6. the Psalmist has resolved us, Psalm. 51.17. A broken and a contrite heart,
O God, thou will not despise. This is our burnt sacrifice.

2. But to this we must add a peace offering; and that must consist of a double
ingredient. 1. A dutiful submission to this settlement of the Ark. And, 2. A
joyful gratulation for it.

1. A dutiful submission to it. In the the 24. Psalm. we find the people invited
to a solemn reception of the Ark; Psalm. 24.7.
Lift up your heads, O ye gates, and be ye lift up ye everlasting doors, and
the King of glory shall come in. Fuit beneficium Dei non vulgar, says Mr.
Calvin, quod Deus visibili symbolo in medio ipsorum residebat, In Psalm. 24.7.
coelesteque suum domicilium volebat in terra conspici. See 1 Kings 8.6, with
11.
It was no ordinary favor of God, that he would reside amongst them in a
visible representation, and suffer his sacred habitation be seen on earth; it
should be their ambition therefore and zeal to entertain it. Therefore lift up
your heads, Oh ye gates, and the King of glory shall come in: but what are
those gates that should be so solemnly opened for the admission of the King of
glory? Sub ratione typi fuerunt portae Templi, Ames. in Psalm. 24.24.
1 Kings 8.6, 11. says Amesius, Reipsa vero sunt fidelium corda, Isa. 66.1, 2.
they were the gates of the Temple in type: but the hearts of holy men in
reality; they are the Tabernacle, that Gods Ark and worship should reside in.
We must therefore inwardly, in our very hearts and souls, submit to this
outward settlement of it, in the Tabernacle or Church of God; and this upon a
fourfold Consideration.

1. In regard of the place where the Ark is settled: not in Barnes or Stables,
not in a Foreign far distant place; it is within thy Neighborhood, and yet
appropriated to this service. Though God be not confined to any place; though
he has not chosen any peculiarly to put his Ark in, as among the Jews; yet,
for our sakes, he delights in such places as our devotions have made his
propriety; The Lord loves the gates of Zion more then all the dwellings of
Jacob; and in compliance with him herein, the devout soul cries out, Lord I
have loved the habitation of thy house, and the place where thy honor
dwells; and, the Zeal of thy house has even consumed me; and, make not my
Fathers house a house of Merchandise: it is observable, though our Savior, in
the first year of his Ministry, foretells that all enclosures should be thrown
open, and the worship of God no longer be confined (as it had been) to
Jerusalem, Joh. 4.21. yet, to signify, that he would still (for all that)
accept and own places dedicated to his solemn service, all the world over, in
the fourth year of his Ministry, he makes his claim, and vindicates the honor
of his own interest, Mark 11.17.

2. We must submit to this settlement, in regard of the Authority by which it
is settled; here are, David, and the Elders, and the Captains of thousands; the
King, the Nobles, and the Representatives of all the Commons of England; what
comes to us derived in so full a current of Authority, (not to speak of the
miraculous restitution of this Authority,) should prostrate every private
judgment and make the passions, interests and opinions of all men, stoop before
it. There is a necessity laid upon us, yea and a woe will betide us, if we
submit not. Let every soul be subject to the higher powers, Romans 13.1. Nay, ye
must needs be subject, and that not only for fear of wrath, but for conscience
sake, Ver. 5. and there is another sake no less considerable to engage you, the
Lords sake: 1 Pet. 2.13, 14. Submit you selves to every ordinance of man, for
the Lords sake; whether it be to the King as Supreme, or unto Governors, as
those that are sent by him, for the punishment of evil doers, and for the
praise of them that do well. Time was, when an Ordinance (not so venerable as
that St Peter speaks of) did signify something with you; when less then one
link of that threefold Cord of Authority would serve to engage and yoke you to
draw the Ark aside; if you will not now submit to the Settlement of it, upon
the obligation of those Laws which come to us, in the greatest solemnity that a
just and full Authority can recommend them by, I shall say no more but this,
that your Consciences are strangely blinded, and they are prodigiously perverse
and obstinate. And yet this is not all; For,

3. We must submit to this Settlement, in regard of that Ministry under which
it is sotled; these are not like those false Prophets, which come in sheeps
clothing: but inwardly they are ravening wolves. We know them well enough by
their fruits: these are contented to subsist upon that portion which the Laws
of God and man allow them; and would not be Pensioners to your Purses, lest
they should be tempted to fl^tter you and betray your souls; for they seek not
yours, but you. These are n^ne of Jeroboams Priests, the meanest Mechanics
amongst the people, set up by an Usurper, to entertain the devotions of the
people, in the worship of his Calves, left b^ ^aving recourse to Jerusalem, to
the Ark of God and the Priesthood that does attend upon it, they should be
invited to their duty, and return their Allegiance to their Sovereign. This
Hierarchy, that now attends the Ark and worship of God, did not arise up of it
self, as the heads of Factions many times do, or out of the bottomless pit
(which is no better a Pedigree;) but it derives its Mission and Authority (as
it should do) in a visible line of succession from Christ and his Apostles; and
is most Conson^nt to the pattern in the Old Testament; where, as we are told by
the Apostle, the Synagogue was a Type or Shadow of the Christian Church, Heb.
10.1. where likewise God did promise, that, for the service of this Church,
(being made up for the most part of Gentiles) He would take of the Gentiles,
and make them Priests and Levites to himself, Isa. 66.22. by which legal name^
(of Priests and Levites) what does he understand, but such as we call
Presbyters and Deacons? upon which grounds the Ancient Fathers presumed a
correspondence be^ween that Hierarchy of the old, and this of the New
Testament. And if we look into the Degrees of this Hierarchy, we shall find
they run parallel, See Clavi Trabales, p. 117.
in their agreement, wi h those designed, of old, to Minister unt^ the Ark of
God. There was Aaron answerable to Christ, Eleazar Numb. 3.32: Neh. 11.10, 11,
14.
to Archbishops; Princes Ezr. 8.24; 29.
of Priests b to Bishops; Pri^sts to Presbyters; Princes Neh. 11.16, 22.
of Levites c to Archdeacons; Levites to Deacons; Nethinims to Clerks and
Sextons.

Is it not probable t^en that God will bless and accept of a Ministry of his
own institution and allowance, 1 Chronicles. 15.12
rather then one of our fond contrivance? and ^eeing the saving efficacy of the
Ministry depends wholly upon Gods blessing and gracious acceptance; are we
not highly concern^d to submit to that Ministry which derives its Original
regularly from God, and upon that account has the fairest title to his
blessing and acceptance? if this be not inducement enough, we have an
obligation l^id upon us from his command, Heb. 13.7. Remember your Prelates,
your guides, which have the rule over you, who have spoken unto you the word of
God, whose faith follow, considering the end of their conversation: and Verse.
17. Obey them that have the rule over you, and submit your selves; for they
watch for your souls, as they that must give an account; that they may do it
with joy, and not with grief, for that is unprofitable for you.

4. There is one Consideration more that should induce you to submit to this
Settlement of the Ark, and that is the solemnity with which it is settled.
Besides the Type and Pattern for it, in the Old Testament, there a^e four
general Rules left upon Record by the Apostle, for the direction of Prelates
and other Superiors, in settling the Ark of Gods solemn worship.

1. That all be done to the glory of God 1 Cor. 10.31.
2. That all be done to the edification of the Church of Goa 1 Cor. 14.26.
3. That all be done decently and worthily 1 Cor. 11.27, 29.
; as becomes the service we perform, and the Majesty we adore 1 Cor. 14.40.
. 4. That all things be done,(...), according to order.
1 Cor. 14.40.
These Rules are observed in our Settlement. 1. And first of the last of these.
It belongs unquestionably to the Office of Ecclesiastical Governors to set
things in Order; so St Paul in the Church of Corinth, 1 Cor. 11. ult. The rest
will I set in order (...).
when I come; so Titus in Crete (an Island that had 100 Cities in it) for this
cause I left thee in Crete, that thou should set in order (...).
the things that are wanting, or left undone, Tit. 1.5. and it was not left to
every man's choice, whether he would submit; such as did not observe these
Orders were punished by the censures of the Church, 2 These. 3.6, 14, 15. Now we
command you brethren in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ, that ye withdraw
your selves from every brother that walks disorderly, (...).
and not after the tradition which he received of us. But when Order is kept,
it is matter of satisfaction to the Apostle, so he tells the Colossians; for
though I be absent in the flesh, yet am I with you in the Spirit, joying and
beholding your order. It cannot be denied, Col. 2.5. (...).
but this Rule is observed amongst us, in the Settlement of the Ark; the solemn
worship and service of God is settled by Order; And,

2. It is settled decently: is it decent to be uncovered in the presence of a
Magistrate, and is it not decent to be so in the presence of the eternal God?
is it decent to kneel when you tender a Petition to your Prince, and is it not
decent to do so when you Petition the King of Kings? is it decent to rise up
and bow the head, when you make an acknowledgment to your Superiors; and is it
not decent to use the like reverence, when you address your recognitions and
homage to him who is Lord over all, blessed for ever? is not external bodily
worship required in the second Commandment? Is it not your duty, are you not
called upon in holy Scripture, to worship the Lord in the beauty of holiness?
And what does the Church of England require of you but this, in her solemn
service? And,

3 Is not the Settlement of the Ark, according to the third Rule, for
edification? I hope there are none so impudent as to deny it of the Prayers
themselves, and those Portions of Scripture, and Hymns appointed in this
Service: these are not nonsense, they are intelligible and for edification;
and for the rest, the Gestures and Ceremonies, I shall make it clear to you. We
kneel at our prayers, to signify, that we are in want; and that we are humble
Petitioners to a Divinee Majesty. We stand up at the Gospel and the Cre^d out
of Reverence; not only to signify, that we will stand fast in the profession
of our Faith: but to intimate also, that we esteem that profession venerable
Jam. 2.7.
We bow at the Name of Jesus, to assert his Deity, and that he is to be adored,
^s Mediator, in his Humane Nature, wherein he does accomplish the work of our
Redemption, and so effectually becomes a Savior. We kneel at the Sacrament,
that the Ceremony may be a memento to us of Christ's real presence in those
dreadful Mysteries; and put us in mind to invoke his blessing and assistance in
the action. Wherein the Cross in Baptism does edify, I need not tell you; you
are told, as often as it is used, what it signifies; it is a token that we
should not be ashamed to confess the faith of Christ crucified See S. Mark
8.34, with 38:
. How the Surplice, the fine linen, serves unto edification, you may learn of
the Psalmist; whose Prayer as well as insinuation it is, Psalm. 132.9, 16.
that the Priests be clothed with righteousness and salvation, that the Saints
may shout for joy. And does not the Ring in Marriage edify? does it not give a
lesson to the married Couple? It does teach them, that the love and fidelity
plighted to one another should be inviolable and endless. That very order of
reading the second Service in the Chancel, at the Altar or Lords Table (where
it is used) does signify something to our edification; for you must know, that
part of the Solemn Service does belong to the Communion; which the piety of
ancient times frequented, at le^st, every Lords day; now this practice, if it
cannot sh^me us out of our neglect and carelessness, yet it will put us in
mind, that it is our duty to draw nigh unto God in that sacred Ordinance; and
it may heat us into some holy and passionate breathings after it: which is a
spiritual kind of communion. In short, let the Solemnity, wherein the Ark is
settled amongst us, be well and duly considered, and there is not a
circumstance, but h^th something of decency in it, and a tendency to the use of
edifying, according to the Rule of the Apostle.

4. And for the glory of God, which is the prime and fundamental Rule of all;
every thing has a tendency to that: and if I could conceive how any one
Ceremony in use amongst us does tend to Gods dishonor, with the leave of
Authority, my own hand should be the first upon it, to pluck it off the Ark.

But indeed there is not a Church in all the world that has those glorious
advantages that this Church of England has; where there is such a beauty of
holiness; where there are such decencies of external splendour to set off the
efficacy of her essential purity. And when I speak of external splendour in the
service of God, do not take offense at it; for the Ark under the Old Testament
did put off her Wilderness habit, her old Tabernacle, with the Curtains of
Goats-skins, when it came to be settled, in a state of peace and prosperity, in
Jerusalem: and so should the Church of God do under the Gospel. Rev. 12.6.
She is indeed resembled to a woman fled into the Wilderness, in the times of
persecution: but afterward, when Constantine the Emperor became a Christ^an,
and a nursing Father to the Church, then we find her decked and trimmed up as a
Bride adorned for her husband, Revel. 21.2. The Kings daughter is all glorious
within, and her clothing is of wrought gold; this is a Prophecy of Christ's
Spouse, his Church, under the New Testament; Psalm. 45.13. etc. She shall be
brought unto the King in raiment of needle work; and the Virgins that be her
companions shall bear her company; with joy and gladness shall they be brought,
and shall enter into the Kings palace; and this leads me from the first part,
or ingredient, of our Peace offering for the Arks happy settlement [our dutiful
submission to it;] to the Second.

2. Our joyful gratulation for it: And now I must call upon you, as the
Psalmist does, O go your way into his gates with thanksgiving, and into his
courts with praise: Take the Psalm, bring hither the Tabret, the merry Harp,
with the Lute; blow up the Trumpet, as in the new moon. When the Ark of God was
solemnly settled, the people of God had their joyful gratulations; for they
cried out, Psalm. 132.8; 9.
Arise, O Lord, into thy rest, thou and the Ark of thy strength: Let thy
Priests be In their Priestly habits,
clothed with righteousness: and let thy Saints shout for joy; and shall not
the Saints under the Gospel rejoice as much at the settling of the Christian
Ark? Rev. 19.6, 7, 8.
St John informs us of a Revelation he had to this purpose; I heard as it were
the voice of a great multitude, and as the voice of many waters, and as the
voice of mighty thundrings, saying, Allelujah; for the Lord God omnipotent
reigns: Let us be glad and rejoice, and give honor to him; for the marriage
of the Lamb is come, and his wife has made her self ready. And to her was
granted that she should be arrayed in fine linen clean and white; for the fine
linen is the righteousness of the Saints: so we render it, but very improperly
(as the learned have observed) it signifies rather the Ordinances of the
Sanctuary, the habits of the Priests under the Law; and by way of allusion, it
is an intimation of the privileges of the Church, See Dr. Ham. Annot. on Rev.
19.
and the decent solemnities of Gods public worship and service under the Reign
of Constantine. And if they did so thunder out their gratulations then for such
a happy settlement, why should not all good Christians do the like now? If you
have not motives enough without you, have you not enough within you?

1. Where is your love to the Ark of God? do not all the friends of the
Bridegroom and Bride put on their wedding garments, and rejoice to attend the
solemnity of their espousals! the Spouse of Christ is now put into her wedding
garments, and rejoice to attend the solemnity of their espousals! the Spouse of
Christ is now put into her wedding dress amongst us; if we have any love to
Bride or Bridegreom, we cannot choose but rejoice, and put on our festival
robes, the garments of praise; at least festival affections; I will lift up my
hands to thy testimonies (kept in the holy Ark) which I have loved: love will
make a man lift up his ^ands, to bless God and himself too; God for the
settlement; and himself for the enjoyment: But,

2. If thou have no love to the Ark, have thou no interest in it? interest will
beget love, and kindle joy; we see this in all relations; in the parts of the
body, in reference to their fellow members; if one member be honored, all the
members rejoice with it; we see it in the woman, in reference to her money;
rejoice with me, for I have found my groat, which was lost; in the Father, in
reference to his Son; it was meet we should make merry and be glad; for this my
son was dead, and he is alive again; he was lost, but is found: Have thou any
interest in the Ark? that interest will kindle joy at the prosperity of it. The
children of Zion will be joyful in their King, if he be their King, and in the
decent setttlement of his solemn worship: But,

3. If thou have no interest in the Ark, have thou no need of it? they that go
down to the sea in ships, and are tossed which storms and tempests, and are in
jeopardy, and within an inch of death every moment; their needs teach them to
value the securities of the haven, and to bless God for their arrival at it.
Have thou no need of the Oracle (upon this Ark)? have thou no doubts to be
resolved, no fears to be removed, no jealousies to be calmed? have thou no
darkness, neither upon thy mind, nor upon thy heart? have thou no need of
light to clear up thy knowledge or thy comfort? that light must shine forth for
thy satisfaction out of the Oracle: have thou no sin, no guiltiness about thee?
do thou not want expiation and pardon? that must come, if it comes regularly,
if it comes at all, it must come from the Mercy seat of the Ark: art thou not
weak and feeble? have thou no sense of thy infirmities? do thou not want
strength; strength for protection and assistance? this must be brought to thee
upon the wings of the Cherubims, that attend the Ark; God must send thee help
from his holy place, and strengthen thee out of Zion: And then,

4. The advantage thou receivest from the Ark will engage thee to congratulate
its solemn settlement. It is the Ministry of the Ark that does abolish sin, and
tread Satan under thy feet, and make thee wise unto salvation; oh that men
would therefore praise the Lord for his goodness, Psa. 108.21, 22.
and declare the wonders that he does for the children of men: let us not be
like the beasts in Noah's Ark, unsensible of the Sanctuary that did preserve
them: let such as love the Lords salvation, and the se^tlement of the Ark, that
brings it, say always, The Lord be praised.

These are the oblations that we should make; the burnt sacrifices and
peace offerings, which we should offer before the Lord.

But if this be our duty, what means then this bleating of the Sheep in mine
ears, 1 Samuel 15.14.
and the lowing of the Oxen which I hear? In Rama there is a voice heard,
lamentation and weeping, Mat. 2.18.
and great mourning. Some passionate people there are, whose zeal is too hot
for their knowledge, that weep for the Ark, and will not be comforted; as if it
were not well settled, and instead of joining with us in our gratulations in our
peace offering, they are ready to put the whole Kingdom into a new flame; and,
if they had opportunity, would make all the dutiful Sons of the Church a burnt
sacrifice to their Fury.

Why what is the matter? they love the train and throng well enough, but not
the dance; they would have the Ark, but not the Hierarchy; the Mercy seat, but
not the Rod, unless it be in their own hands; they would have the Oracle, but
not the Music and the Ephod; the Covenant they would have too, but with such
new Articles of their own addition, as would destroy that whole solemnity and
glory of Divine Service. If the Ark may not be allowed to be hurried along in
their new Cart, and set up in their Consistory, they had as liff it were still
in the Camp of the Philistims. The glory is departed (they will cry out) if it
shines not to give countenance to their designs, and luster to their
reputations: They had rather it should wear the rough badgers skins, the course
habit of the wilderness, than be enthroned in a Tabernacle of David's setting
up, though he has the allowance and approbation of Almighty God for it: but
will that Hierarchy overthrow the Ark now, that did then attend it by divine
appointment? will those decent Ceremonies and Solemnities disgrace it now, that
were thought then to adorn it? Or did the Ark do better service to men's souls,
or to this Kingdom, when it was lately hurried upon their new Cart, then
formerly it had done, when it moved regularly upon the old Priests shoulders?
if you will but, with an impartial eye, reflect upon the horror of fire and
sword, the desolations of spoil and rapine, the expense of blood and treasure,
that has been of late amongst us; and weigh well upon what account these
confusions raged, for so many years together; I shall refer the determination
of this Question wholly to your selves.

But it will be objected to me: Objection.
You tell us of pomp and ceremony, of splendor and solemnity in Gods Service;
and we look upon all such things as legal types and shadows that are vanished
at the rising of the Sun of Righteousness; and we conceive our selves to be
freed from them by the Charter of our Christian Liberty; for we are not under
the Law, but under Grace: Nay, for us to observe such things were to perform
what we suppose to be Will Worship and unwarrantable; and therefore our
Consciences do take check at it, being afraid the Lord should upbraid us, as he
did the Israelites, Isa. 1.12. Who has required these things at your hands?

But stay, do these men understand their own objection? Solution.
Of what things speaks the Prophet that? Does he not speak of their Sacrifices
and burnt offerings, of their New Moons and Solemn Feasts; yea of their very
Sabbaths and many Prayers? And did not God require the observation of these
things at their hands? Most certainly he did. The exception therefore that God
takes there is not made to the things themselves, no, nor yet to the requiry of
them: To what then? Why, to the gross Hypocrisy and the foul indignity of the
persons that did perform them. Zach. Ursin. Comment. in Isa. 1. page 30.
Requirebat Sacrificia, and alias Ceremonias, and approbabat tanquam Cultum
sibi placentem, quatenus fiebant eo modo and fine in quo ipse praeceperat;
nempe in vera fide and paenitentia, and tanquam horum adminicula and exercitia:
Ut per Ceremonias adduceretur ad Christum and ipsius beneficia quae per illas
significabantur. God did require Sacrifices and other Ceremonies, and approved
them as a Service acceptable to himself, as they were performed after that
manner and to that end that he prescribed them: When they were the offspring
and the exercises of a true faith, and led the devotions of the people unto
Christ and his benefits: But if you take the external rite without the internal
piety, the ceremony stripped of all faith and fear, repentance and humility,
obedience and thankfulness; so it was but as a perambulation in the Sanctuary;
it gave God no satisfaction; in that sense, it was not of his institution, it
was but a prosane wearing out of the Pavement; and who has required this, that
you should thus tread my Courts, v. 12. And, if this be required, yet, who has
required it at your hands, whose hearts are so full of hypocrisy, whose hands
are so full of blood? But wash you, make you clean, put away the evil of your
doing from before mine eyes, etc. Then come and welcome; through faith and
repentance your Sacrifices shall procure you atonement and acceptance; for
though your sins be as scarlet, they shall be as white as snow, though they be
red like crimson, they shall be as wool, Isai. 1.18. But,

2. In matters of Religion, in matters that do relate to divine Worship, some
things are allowed and approved, and rewarded by Almighty God, for which he
has given no particular Commandment: 1. There were voluntary oblations, and
free will offerings allowed of in the Law Levit. 7.16.
. And 2. David, in this his attendance upon the Ark, wore a linen Ephod, to
show his devotion in this Religious Service, as the English Annotations "" on 2 Samuel 6.14. See them on 1 Samuel 2.18. and on Judge. 8.27.
(recommended by the Assembly of Divines) do acknowledge; and yet that garment
was prescribed for none but the Tribe of Levi. 3. It was also a piece of
voluntary devotion that David built this Tabernacle, and that he designed to
build such a magnificent Temple for Gods public and solemn Worship; and yet,
though He had given no order for it, God was pleased with the design, and
approved of his pious resolution; For Solomon tells us 1 King. 8.18.
The Lord said unto David my Father, Whereas it was in thine heart to build an
House unto my Name, thou did well in that it was in thine heart. Here was no
Command 2 Samuel 7.7. 1 Chronicles. 17.
for this, yet it was so acceptable, that God rewarded him in his posterity 2 Samuel 7.11. See 1 Chronicles. 17.
: The Lord tells thee, that he will make thee an House. By which promise it
is evident (as the English Annotators on 1 King. 8.18.
do confess) that God approved this purpose of David; and they add, That this
instance shows that a man may without sin intend to do that (for the greater
solemnity of God's Worship and Service; for that was the design) which God has
not purposed and determined to be done. And as a farther Testimony of Gods
acceptance of his pious, though voluntary intendment, God vouchsafed him an
extraordinary assistance for the delineation of the model of this House, and
the regulation of all things and persons, Vessels and Instruments, Offices and
Officers employed about Gods Service therein; the Pattern of them was suggested
to him by the Spirit, 1 Chronicles. 28 12, 13, 19. 2 Chronicles. 29.25. 4. In the New
Testament St. Paul's advice for coelebacy, 1 Cor. 7.
or single life, had reference to Religion and the service of God; for he
recommends it, not out of a carnal respect, or for a temporal advantage only,
to avoid trouble in the flesh, Verse. 18.
but for a Religious, a Spiritual emolument, that they might attend the service
of God without distraction; Verse. 35.
but for this, he tells the Corinthians, he had no command of the Lord to
warrant him; Verse. 25.
Yet, says he, I give my judgment as one that has obtained mercy of the
Lord, to be faithful: he doubts not but God allows of his judgment, and
approves of his direction, for the advancement of devotion, in that particular.

Nay, 3. God does not only allow and approve, but also reward such a voluntary
piety; works undertaken to promote his service, when there is not the
engagement of any Precept, nor so much as the recommendation of any Council to
perform them. David is an instance for this, as has been acknowledged by the
English Annotators. To which I may add St Paul; he might have challenged some
Milk, and some Fleece from the Flock he fed, to clothe, refresh and support
himself; that he waved this liberty, and was not chargeable to the Corinthians,
but preached the Gospel freely; he modestly gloried in it, as a matter highly
rewardable, 1 Cor. 9.15, 18. See Dr. Ham. Annot. ad 1. Cor. 9.17. Gloriationem
autem appellat, gratis praedicare, and pofitos terminos tranfilire. Theodoret.
Gloriationem dicit, ut ipse ex propria liberalitate id praeftet: nam quod
Domini praceptum tanquam fidelis servus exequatur, non exissimat al suum
praeclarum facinus pertinere. Oecumen. Et Paulo post; in quo est praeclara
merces and gloriatio? in co quod quum Evangelium ut jussi^^ sum praedicaverim,
nibil tamen ex praeditatione acceperim, ne tantum quidem ut inde vivere possum:
sed fine sumptu and gratis meum exhibuerim ministerium. Ibid. vide plurs.
.

What command had Mary Magdalen Luke 7.38.
to wash Christ's feet with her tears, and wipe them with the hairs of her head?
what command had she to pour that precious cintment upon Christ's head, Mark
14.3.
which the Law did allow her to employ to other uses? and yet because these
were real emanations of her great Luk 7.47.
love and proceeded from a true devotion, Christ became her Advocate for this
will worship Mark 14.5, 6.
; and did not only comfort her with a personal Absolution, [ thy sins are
forgiven Luke 7.48.
;] but dismissed her with a blessing, [ thy faith has saved thee, go in peace
Luke 7.52.
;] and rewarded her too, with a Name no less precious than her very cinement
Eccles. 7.1. Joh. 1 2.3.
; for the sweet Savor thereof he has caused so to be diffused by a solemn
Ministry, that it might perfume the whole Church. What her piety had
voluntarily devoted to his burial, such was his graci^us acceptance, he turned
it into an everlasting Monument of her honor; for, verily I say unto you,
wheresoever this Gospel shall be preached throughout the whole world, this also
that she has done shall be spoken of for a memorial of her, Mark 14 9.

But I must tell you, that such voluntary devotions must be guarded with a
double caution. 1. They must not consist of a thing unlawful, nor have any
ingredient of forbidden fruit in them; Isa. 66.3.
for that were as great an abomination under the Gospel, as the cutting off a
dogs neck, or the offering of swines blood, under Moses Law, instead of
sacrifice.

2. They must not be imposed (however they be recommended, I say) they must not
be imposed as Gods commands, nor performed out of an opinion of their
necessity, upon that account; for that is perfect Dogmatizing, a Teaching for
[necesary] Doctrines, [or Ordinances of Christ's institutions] the Traditions of
men; which is absolutely unlawful Mat. 15.9. Mark. 7.7. Col. 2.20. See D^. Ham.
Tract. of Willworship, with the Defense of it against Mr. Cawdrey.
. Such a conceit as this would have marred Mary Magdalens box of onitment, and
have caused it to send forth a stinking savor Eccles. 10.1.
: but offering it out of a pure and free devotion, without any such opinion,
Christ did both value and reward it.

Suppose we then, that there be some things in the Solemnity of Gods Public
worship, that he has not required; is it not enough (as long as he has no
where forbidden them, nor entered any caution to their prejudice) is it not
enough, I say, that I have the approbation of my own Conscience? is it not
enough, that I am able to say, I have used my best judgment, and herein I have
found mercy of the Lord to be faithful? if this be not enough, is it not enough
that I have Gods acceptance? is it not enough that I can hear God saying to me
secretly, as he said sometimes to David upon a like occasion, by his Prophet,
it was well that it was in thy heart? is it not enough that God is ready to
reward this my freewill-offering, my voluntary devotion? But,

3. Besides, we have the quity of a Divine Law, upon a parity of Reason, for
our warranty, in this our practice; and this ought to be of great force with
us. For, 1. as far as I can perceive, this is the firmest ground that the
observation of the Lords day relies upon. There are some insinuations for it
indeed, in the practice of the Apostles, as their meeting together on that day,
to make Collections, and the like; but these will not amount to the authority
of a Precept. The Sabbath of the Jews without all pesadventure, was Typical,
Heb. 4.4. etc. therefore abolished; hereupon the Apostle exhorts the
Colossians. Let no man judge you in meat or in drink, or in respect of an
Holy Day, or of the new moon, or of the Sabbath Days, which are a shadow of
things to come: Col. 2.16, 17. But that God should be solemnly worshipped,
still, upon several accounts; and that some time should be set apart for that
worship to be performed in, there is a parity of Reason for it; and so, upon
that account, the equity of the fourth Commandment does still bind us.

And, 2. The strength of the Apostles Argument for the maintenance of the
Gospel Ministry (as far as I can discern) relies chiefly upon this bottom. Do
ye not know that they which minister about holy things, live of the things of
the Temple? and they that wait at the Altar, 1 Cor. 9.13, 14.
are partakers with the Altar: even so has the Lord ordained, that they which
preach the Gospel should live of the Gospel: We can find no such Ordinance, as
this is, of Christ's positive institution, under the Gospel; that which the
Apostle speaks of, therefore, must be an Ordinance emergent out of the equity
of the former Law of God, upon a parity of Reason. Under the Law God thought it
equitable, that such as waited at his Altar, and devoted their time as well as
their soul and strength to his service, should have some settled maintenance
allotted them; and their attendance upon the several parts of their holy Office
requiring nothing less, but rather much more diligence and attention, under the
New, than under the Old Testament, the equity of that Divine Right stands in
full force, and should prevail for an honorable support of the Ministry, at
least, as much now as it did then.

And, 3. Whether the Right and Title that the Infants of Believers have unto
Baptism does not ultimately rely upon this foundation, let the learned judge.
Gods Law entitled them to the Sacrament of Circumcision, upon the account of
that faith which had engaged their Parents unto God, in the holy Covenant; the
equity of that Institution, upon a parity of Reason, extends to the benefit of
such Infants as are now born of Christian Parents; and that speech of St Peter,
Acts 2. imports no less, Verse. 38 39.
Repent, and be baptized every one of you, in the name of Jesus Christ, for the
remission of sins, and ye shall receive the gift of the holy Ghost: for the
promise is unto you and to your children.

Now to apply these instances to our purpose; I demand, 1. Was there a solemn
external worship of God required under the Law, or no? 2. Was it acceptable and
pleasing to Almighty God, yea or no? if it were (which cannot be denied;) then
I demand, Further, 3. upon what account was that service required? was it upon
the account of Gods Supreme Dominion and Sovereignty only? or upon the account
also of his Benefits, his works of Creation, Preservation and Redemption? that
it was upon this double account is evident, Psalm. 29.1, 2. Give unto the Lord,
O ye mighty, give unto the Lord glory and strength: give unto Lord the GLORY
DUE UNTO HIS NAME: worship the Lord in the BEAUTY OF HOLINESS: and Psa. 150.
Praise ye the Lord, praise God in his Sanctuary: praise him in the firmament of
his POWER praise him for his MIGHTY ACTS: praise him according to his EXCELLENT
GREATNESS: praise him with the sound of the Trumpet, praise him with the
Psaltery and Harp: praise him with the Timbrel and Dance: praise him with
stringed Instruments and Organs.

Well, did God require to be woshipped so reverently and so solemnly, then,
upon this account? why, how comes God to lose his Title? how come these
accounts to be altered? has God, under the New Testament, given out a
dspensation unto dust and ashes to be insolent and saucy with him? and in his
own house, and in his solemn and public worship too? or is Gods Dominion less
Sovereign? is his Majesty less Glorious th^n it was? or did not he make us, but
we made our selves? if we be his creatures, if we be the sheep of his pasture,
then the invitation of the Psalmist lays hold upon us: Psalm. 95.6.
O come, let us worship and fall down, and kneel before the Lord our Maker: if
we do not, the Elders that are before the Throne of God will shame us out of
our irreverence; for they fall down before him that sits upon the Throne,
and worship him that lives for ever and ever, and cast their Crowns before the
Throne, saying, Thou art worthy, O Lord, to receive glory and honor and power;
for thou have created all things, and for thy pleasure they are, and were
created, Revel. 4.10, 11.

And has he not redeemed us too? and what is the sum of our redemption? was it
our bodies only, out of a temporal thraldom, to be put into the possession of a
land that flows with milk and honey? was this all? has he not redeemed our
souls too, from the powers of darkness, and the wrath to come; to inherit the
blessings of eternal joy and glory? has he not thus redeemed us? and how was
this redemption wrought? by a force of Arms, or of Love? by exchange of money,
or the price of his own blood? if it be so, and so it is, then certainly, here
is all the equity in the world, that we should pay him the homage of a most
reverend and solemn worship; equity for it, upon a parity of reason, shall I
say, nay upon a Superiority, nay upon the highest Supremacy of Reason; we know
he has done more for our, then he had then done, for the redemption of Israel;
for ye are bought with a (better) price; therefore glorify God in your body,
and in your spirit, which are Gods, 1 Cor. 6. ult.

If this be not sufficient; it is further considerable, that Christ, who came,
not only to be a light unto the Gentiles, but to be the glory of his people
Israel; as he was born of that Nation, and lived regularly under their Law, and
observed their pious customs; so his design being to Reform what was amiss, and
heighten what was imperfect, that he might not seem to set up an absolutely new
Church, he had an eye to the Rites and Usages of the Jews, in all his
Institutions; what he found had been taken up in common practice amongst them,
he accommodated to his own purposes, making as little change or variation both
in point of Government and Ceremony, See Dr. Ham. Quaeres, page 176. etc.
as the nature of the Gospel, with the State and establishment of his Kingdom,
would admit of. Thus, his Election of Disciples, to wait constantly upon him,
was answerable to the Disciples of the Prophets amongst the Jews, who were to
attend and minister unto them. 2. The Title of Apostles, for Deputies and
Proxies, sent with Commission, or Letters of Credence. Mat. 10.40. to supply
Christ's place, and act, here on earth, in his stead; this he borrowed from
them. 3. That of Bishops, answerable to the Ruler of the Synagogue, the Prince
and Head of the Sanhedrim or Consistory amongst them; who was also called
(...), a Bishop or Over Seer. 4. That of Imposition of hands in Confirmation,
and Absolution, and Ordination, borrowed from the like Ceremony used amongst
them, not only in conferring the Paternal blessing, but also in admitting
persons (that were qualified for that Office) to the Dignity of Elders in their
Sanhedrim. 5. Both the Sacraments of the New Testament were taken up in
imitation of certain Rites that were solemnly used amongst these Jews. 1. At
the close of a Festival (their post-coenium) they took a cup of Wine, which
they called the Cup of Salvation (as in the Psalmist) or the Cup of Blessing,
(as the Apostle has it;) and at that very time, and when he was observing this
custom with his Disciples, in imitation thereof and answerable thereunto, did
our Lord institute the Sacrament of his holy Supper. And the Rite of Baptism
(designed to be the Sacrament, for the solemn admission of persons into the New
Covenant, and communion of the Church of Christ) was taken up in imitation of
that same Rite of Baptizing, solemnly used amongst them, for the initiating of
Jews and Proselytes into the Covenant of the Lord, and so into their
Congregation. Who list to see more of these parallels between the Church of the
Jews and that of Christ's establishing, may consult that learned and pious
Author.

But here it may be objected, that the Rites of the Ceermonial Law were all
abolished, upon the Preaching of the Gospel, and did vanish as shadows before
the Sun; and although, as St Augustine observed, the use of them was not
Mortiferous, they were not deadly, till the utter subversion of the Temple at
Jerusalem, and the Jewish Polity; (as appears also by the Doctrine and
Practice of St Paul, who did for the time freely and indifferently use or omit
them, as he judged, in prudence, most conducible to the advantage of the
Church;) yet they were Mortua, they were but a dead letter, and as a Carcass
without a soul, from after Christ's death and resurrection; and being designed
to have their solemn burial in the ruins of the Temple, after that was
demolished, they became Mortifera, the use of them was deadly; and consequently
to dig them up again, is noisome and unsavory. But as a very Learned, Grave
and Pious Bishop, Dr. Sanders. de obligat. Conscientiae. praelect. 4.. 29. p.
145, 146.
(now with God) has well observed, there is more of wit, than solidity in that
assertion. For all the Ceremonials are not of a like nature, and importance.
Those of external Order and Decency are to be distinguished, by Christian
prudence, from those which did prefigure Christ to come. For those Figurative
Ceremonies which were instituted of Almighty God, to be Types of Christ the
Redeemer to come in the flesh, (as Circumcision, the Sacrifices, and the like)
it is most certain, from the time that Christ did really fulfill all that was
Typically prefigured by those Ceremonies, and sufficiently proclaim to the
world, by the Preachers of the Gospel, that they were duly fulfilled, from
thence forth they were of no more use; and therefore they were not only to be
laid aside as dead and unsavory, but also to be avoided as pestiferous and
destructive. And especially it is to be most studiously avoided, that they be
not obtruded or observed out of any opinion of necessity: according to that of
the Apostle, Gal. 5.2. Behold, I Paul say unto you, that if you be circumcised,
Christ shall profit you nothing: for that did imply that Christ was not yet
come in the flesh; and so overthrew the faith.

But for those other Ceremonies, which were not typical, but modes of decency,
instituted to adorn the solemnity of Gods public worship, being essential to
the external beauty of it; these are not to be condemned, as unlawful, upon the
mere account, that they were a part of Moses's Discipline.

Nay, seeing God requires still to be worshipped in the beauty of holiness; and
will have all things, in his Church, performed, decently and in order; and yet
has not (in the New Testament) determined the particulars, wherein that Order,
Decency and Beauty shall consist; but has left it to the Care and Prudence of
the Governors, (to whom he has committed the Keys of his Kingdom,) how can
they discharge their duty better, in the particular determination hereof, then
by a compliance with the wisdom of God, and the practice of Christ in his
Institutions, in holding an Analogy with such Laws, and Directions, as were
given (or at least allowed) by God himself, to his Church of the Old Testament,
so far forth as there is equity and a parity of Reason for it?

Upon these grounds we may safely conclude, that the Tabernacle of the
Christian Church, wherein the Ordinances of the holy Gospel are to be
preserved, ought to have her Solemnities and decent trimmings as well as that
of David's pitching. And what sort of these Solemnities are most suitable, we
have very fair insinuations in the Scripture of the New Testament; in those
frequent allusions to the solemn service of the Tabernacle; as Rev. 21.2, 3.
where St. John's vision of the new Jerusalem coming down from God out of
heaven, prepared as a Bride adorned for her husband, is expounded, in the next
Verse, by this remarkable acclamation, Behold, the Tabernacle of God is with
men, and he will dwell with them, and they shall be his people, and God himself
shall be with them, and be their God.

Upon the whole matter therefore it is evident, that it is not an Hierarchy,
that is, a sacred Government consisting of Bishops, Priests and Deacons, settled
in a state of inequality and subordination; nor an established Liturgy,
consisting of set Forms, for the administration of the several parts of the
holy Office; nor a linen Ephod or Surplice; nor a Quire with a pair of Organs,
nor reverend gestures in our attendance upon it; it is none of these that will
overthrow our present Church, or drive away the Ordinances of Gods worship from
us, no more then the like did drive that Ark and Tabernacle from the people
Israel. If these be the gray hairs, which some (that pretend to be more
quick-sighted) discern upon the Gospel, (upon the matter) Christ himself has
stuck them there; and if the Bridegroom himself be pleased to see his Spouse
wear these marks of Antiquity, it becomes us, who are her Children, to
reverence such for her gray hairs, rather then reproach her for them. Certainly
(whatever that means) this is not a setting up of Gods Ark in the House of
Dagon: but in that decent Tabernacle which David, out of a true devotion, and
by the direction of Gods Spirit, has prepared for it.

2. But have we not other Prognostications of our approaching ruin, and the
removal of Gods Ark, as a prolusion or preface to it? what think you of the
discontentments and divisions that are in the Nation? is not that an Omen that
does boad as much? for Christ himself has said, That a Nation divided against
it self cannot stand.

But let me awaken your attention, to consider how unjust, how unreasonable
some men are, in their complaints and accusations. First, they themselves raise
the discontentments, make and foment Divisions in the Kingdom; and then they
make those Divisions the Prognostications of the ruin of it. This is just like
the practice of Barabbas; make the insurrection first, and then commit Murder
in that insurrection Mar. 15.7.
; Here lies all the difference, there the Felony was committed but upon a
single person; here it is upon Christ's Church and three whole Kingdoms.

But if men were wise; Ibid. Verse. 11.
if they would not cry out to have Barabbas acquitted, and Jesus delivered up
to be crucified; if they were considerative, and would obey the voice of God,
and hearken to their lawful Guides and Governors, they might easily, with Gods
blessing, prevent this mischief. Take away the tale bearer, says Solomon, and
strife will cease; you have heard of Sanctuary-sins, of Church and Sermon-sins,
and such there are indeed; there are Pulpit-tale bearers too, that make it
their design and practice to raise and foment jealousies, to sow the seeds of
discontent and sedition; and if they may not be allowed to Act this part upon
the public Stage, then they creep into houses; and find it a matter of much
advantage, though of no great difficulty, to triumph over such silly souls as
are willing to be led captive. But God has provided for his Church a
sufficient remedy against this mischief, an Antidote against such infusions;
Now I beseech you, brethren, mark them which cause divisions and offenses,
contrary to the doctrine which ye have learned, and avoid them: for they that
are such serve not the Lord Jesus Christ, but their own belly, and by good
words and fair speeches deceive the hearts of the simple, Romans 16.17, 18. it is
your part and duty, as far as in you lies, to apply this remedy, and make use
of the Caution.

3. But is not the Ark in great danger of being lost amongst us upon another
account; is not that an unchurching of a people, when they want the power of
the Ministry, a soul-searching Ministry; when we want a faithful Minister to go
before us?

I must confess, we have extreme need of such a Ministry; such as will not draw
a fair skin over our old sores, but will take pains and be faithful to lance
our impestum'd Ulcers, and Probe them to the very bottom; for there lies very
much Pride and Hypocrisy, Schism and Sedition, Malice and Treason, in our
hearts; it lies so near unto our eyes, we cannot see it; it is so natural, so
customable to us, we have no sense or feeling of it. Away then with those false
Prophets that have dawbed so long with untempered mortar, that have strained at
a Gnat and swallowed Camels; that have preached Placentia, and sewed Pillows
under men's Elbows, and cried peace, or go up and prosper, when the design was
flat Rebellion; and yet they humored the inclinations of the people, calling
them blessed Isa. 9.16.
and a godly people, that by such flatteries they might seduce them to run on
in error with them; woe unto them, for they have gone in the way of Cain, and
ran greedily after the error of Balaam for reward, and perished in the
gainsaying of Corah, Jud. ep. v. 11. if they repent not, away with them. And
give us, and God of his mercy continue to us, such a disingaged ingenuous
Ministry as may resemble his own incarnate Word, Heb. 4.12. one that is quick
and powerful, sharper than any two edged sword, piercing even to the dividing
asunder of soul and spirit, and of the joints and marrow, and is a discerner of
the thoughts and intents of the heart: God grant us such a Ministry, that there
may follow the like conviction of sinners to that mentioned by the Apostle, 1
Cor. 14.25. If all prophecy, and there come in one that believes not, or one
unlearned, he is convinced of all, he is judged of all: and thus are the
secrets of his heart made manifest; and so falling down on his face, he will
worship God, and report that God is in you of a truth.

God knows, this Kingdom, in general, has need of such a faithful,
soul-searching Ministry as this is. But there are many unruly and vain talkers
and deceivers, as St. Paul tells Titus, whose mouths must be stopped, who
subvert whole houses, teaching things which they ought not, for filthy lucres
sake, Tit. 1.10, 11. the silencing or degrading such popular Priests and
seditious Levites will not endanger the Ark of God at all. And if Abiathar does
complot with Joab, to promote the intended Usurpation of Adonijah, as great a
Priest as he is, it is fit he should be sent to Anathoth, and confined to his
Country Village, lest he make the City, by his Conspiracy, too hot for Solomon;
and in his absence, as well the Ark of God as the person of the King will be so
much the more in safety, 1 Kings 1.5, 7. with Chap. 2.26.

4. But there is a fourth Prognostication of this sad Calamity, that is, the
abundance of Popish Priests and Jesuits that are in the midst of us, the
growing and increasing of Popery, and that proneness that is in people, to run
headlong back again to the Garlic and Onions of Egypt: this argument (sure)
is sufficient to make us all believe the Ark of God is in danger.

But the truth is, the Persons that make the Argument, are none of the most
likely men to prevent what they complain of. For who have done so much to
harden that Popish party, to give them encouragement and advantage, as they
have done? not to mention their Club-law, and Sequestrations, with the sale of
their estates, (no Cogent Arguments, sure, to resolve and settle Conscience)
what by charging them with such things as cannot be made good against them; and
by condemning what is not to be disallowed in them, and by opposing very weakly
(with more strength of passion, than reason) what is justly to be reproved,
they have made them more inflexible and obstinate in their opinions. And they
have given them advantage also by their factious Confederacies against that
Hierarchy of the Church, whose Learning and Authority, is, under God, the only
probable means to check and silence them. It was a most remarkable observation,
in the Sermon of the late most Reverend Archbishop, upon the Scaffold, alluding
to that Counsel of the Priests and Pharisees against our Savior, Joh. 11.48.
Men are afraid, says he, that if they let this man alone, the Romans will
come, and that Popery will prevail, (and) then they will take away our place
and our Nation: but it proved the contrary; for after they had put that man to
death, then the Romans came (indeed) and vanquished the City.

Popery could never have broken in upon us, to shake the Ark of God, in its
decent and happy settlement amongst us, as long as our lawful Governors were
undisturbed in their station. They were our new door-keepers, they that thrust
out the right Possessors, to make room for their own ambi^ion, they turned the
Key, and opened the Door; nay, they pulled down the walls of Gods House and let
in Popery.

It was their turning the Ark of God into a Noab's Ark, where so many sorts of
wild and unclean beasts were herded up together, without order or distinction,
their dangerous mistakes in Doctrine, their horrible confusions in Discipline,
their irreligious defalcations of some parts of Gods worship, and their
scandalous irreverence in the performance of all the rest; these disorders
caused so many to abhor the offering of the Lord; and they inclined others
(whether more out of devotion and reverence, that out of levity and a desire of
change, I shall not determine) but inclined they were upon this account, to
lend a weak ear to the insinuations of those cunning Charmers of the Church of
Rome. For, to use the words of that Wise and Learned Archbishop; A Relation of
the Conference with Fisher, in Epist.
Ceremonies are the Hedge that fence the substance of Religion from all the
Indignities, which Profaneness and Sacrilege too commonly put upon it. And this
I have observed, that no one thing has made conscientious men more wavering in
their own minds, or more apt and easy to be drawn aside from the sincerity of
Religion professed in the Church of England, then the want of Uniform and
Decent Order in too many Churches of the Kingdom. And the Romanists have been
apt to say, The Houses of God could not be suffered to lie so Nastily (as in
some places they have done) were the true worship of God observed in them: or
did the people think that such it were.

And I may add this, as a further matter of scandal and advantage to them; when
men do openly proclaim, and that so crudely and without any distinction, that
there is not a Nation under heaven Mr. Calamy's challenge ( page 13.) amounts
to a positive assertion.
, except this Nation of England, that ever enjoyed the Gospel a hundred years
together; which is so apparently false, that nothing can well be more false
than that is; when they tell us that gray hairs are upon the Gospel, which is
everlasting Heb. 12.27, 28. chapter 8. ult. Rev. 14.6.
and can never wax old; who can fence off the Scandal, and not be transported
with indignation, to hear the holy Text abused by such absurd allusions,
designed on purpose to raise up amuzements and jealousies in the people. And we
may now see the said Archbishops just Complaint to His Majesty of ever Blessed
Memory verified, In his Relation of the Conference, in Epist.
by too sad an instance. That the Church of England was in a hard condition.
She professes the ancient Catholic Faith; and yet the Romanist condemns her of
Novelty in her Doctrine. She practices Church Government, as it has been in
use in all Ages, and all Places where the Church of Christ has taken any
Rooting, both in, and ever since the Apostles times; and yet the Separatist
condemns her for Antichristianism in her Discipline. The plain truth is, she is
between these two Factions, as between two Millston^s; and unless your Majesty
look to it, to whose trust she is committed, she will be ground to Powder, to an
irreparable both dishonor, and loss to this Kingdom. And it is very remarkable,
that while both these press hard upon the Church of England, both of them cry
out upon persecution, like froward children which scratch, and kick and bite,
and yet cry out all the while as if themselves were killed. What success this
great Distemper, Ibid. paulo post.
caused by the Collision of two such Factions, may have, I know not, I cannot
Prophecy. We may change the Phrase into [ A great Distemper caused by their
Coalition and clubbing of Interests to gain a Toleration] what success this may
have I know not; but (as that renowned Prelate goes on) though I cannot
Prophecy, Ibid. paulo post.
yet I fear that Atheism and Irreligion gathers strength, while the Truth is
thus weakened by an unworthy way of contending for it. And while they thus
contend, neither part consider, that they are in a way to induce upon
themselves, and others, that contrary extreme, which they seem most both to
fear and oppose.

But let the Ark of God be settled with a decent splendour, and all the parts of
Gods worship and service be performed with a due and becoming Reverence: and in
order hereunto, let the Hierarchy of the Church enjoy its full Authority and
encouragement, and then we shall be in no such danger of Apostasy to either of
these Factions.

5. But however, they say, we have reason to persuade our selves, that
England's Ark is in danger to be lost, were it only for the sins and prodigious
iniquities that we are guilty of; our Commonwealth sins, drunkenness and
uncleanness, bribery and oppression; our Sanctuary-sins, our remissness and
unfruitfulness, our indifferency and lukewarmness, the profanation of
Sabbaths, and the strange unheard of unthankfulness that is amongst us: And
that Commination will extend to us, if we be guilty of the like unfruitfulness;
Therefore I say unto you, the Kingdom of God shall be taken from you, and given
to a Nation bringing forth the fruits thereof, Mat. 21.43.

-- Pudet haec opprobria nobis
Et dici potuisse and non potuisse refelli.
I must ingenuously confess, we have but too much cause to be ashamed that we
have requited the Lord no better, that we have no better means to wipe off the
stain of this most deserved reproach: And unless we do seasonably repent, God
will visit for these things, and be avenged of such an ungrateful Nation as
this is.

In old Eli's time, when the Priests were guilty of so much intemperance and
uncleanness, so much rapine and sacrilege; and yet the outcries of a
complaining people could not awaken the Supreme Governor to unsheath his sword
to redress these exorbitancies; but the Priests proceeded to multiply and
aggravate their crimes; and the Prince his Lenity made his reprehensions but
little better then a Toleration or Connivance, and so the people fell into
irreligion and profaneness, they abhorred the offering of the Lord: When there
was such a complication of sins, and the sins of the Rulers (as well
Ecclesiastical as Civil) did both procure and encourage sin in the people; Then
the Holy Oracle grew silent, God himself departed, the Cherubims made use of
their wings to fly away, and the Ark of God was taken. If we be in league with
Hell, 1 Samuel chap. 3. and 4.
the Ark of the Covenant will not own us. Now the energy and efficacy of
witchcrafts depends upon a League with Hell; and Rebellion is as the sin of
witchcraft; as long therefore as we cleave unto, and in our hearts follow an
Usurper, we can have no saving Communion with the Ark of God, no more then
Israel had while they marched after Jeroboam. They are nothing else but their
iniquities that do separate betwixt God and his people; Isa. 59.1. Jer. 7.7.
etc.
it is their sins that withold good things from them, even the blessings of
the Ark and God's Holy Temple. As for the beauty of his Ornament, he set it in
Majesty: but they made the image of their abominations, and of their detestable
things therein: Therefore have I set it far from them. And I will give it into
the hands of the strangers for a prey, and to the wicked of the earth for a
spoil, and they shall pollute it, Ezekiel. 7.20, 21. Under the Gospel we find one
Church that left her first Love; Another that was neither hot nor cold; Rev.
chap. 2, and 3.
A third that had a name that she lived, but really she was dead; A fourth that
had such in her bosom and communion as did teach the wicked policies of
Balaam, and the unclean doctrine of the Nicolaitans; A fifth that did grant a
Toleration to Jezabel, notwithstanding her execrable Artifice and practices in
seducing such as had been dedicated to God's Service to commit Fornication and
Idolatry: And was removed, and the Ark of God was taken from them. And though
the Ark of God were entailed upon England, yet there is a measure, there are
aggravations, there are combinations of sin, that when they are once made up
will provoke God to use his prerogative over us, not in a way of mercy but of
justice, to cut off that entail, and determine (as he did in another case)
against it, Though England were the signet upon my right hand, yet would I
pluck thee thence.

And yet this I must take leave to interpose in vindication of the present
Church of England; The fault is not in her; She may truly say, the Sons of
Zeruiah are too hard for us: She has it not in her power to redress things as
she would. And whose factious clamours and petitions, and other acts of open
hostility, were they that unhinged the Government, and pulled down those
venerable Courts of Justice, whose Authority and Splendor were able to dazzle
the eyes, and break the hearts of the most insolent offenders? Till such Courts
can be restored, we must have patience to preach and pray, being in the same
condition that we find the Church of Corinth in, 2 Cor. 10.6. Having in a
readiness to revenge all disobedience, when your obedience shall have been
fulfilled. The delinquents among them were too numerous and too potent for the
Censures of the Church to take place upon them: For it is not prudent to
exasperate a multitude with the severity of a Discipline which their numbers
can so easily over-master: But when the Reformation of the major part is so
conspicuous, and the Zeal of the conformable part so serious and earnest, that
it may be prudent to proceed against the refractory, then the Church will not
fail in her duty, but inflict such censures upon offenders as shall be suitable
to their demerits: Having in a readiness to revenge all disobedience, when your
obedience shall be fulfilled.

In the mean while we are not without our Prognostications too, that the Ark
shall still reside and prosper with us.

1. Our late Tribulations have wrought patience, and our patience experience,
and our experience Hope; A Hope, Romans 5.3, 4, 5.
we trust, that will never make ashamed. We argue our selves into this
persuasion by the Logic of Manoah's wise: If the Lord were pleased to destroy
us, Judge. 13.23.
He would not have received an offering at our hands, nor would he have showed
us all these things; He would not have heard our prayers, nor have wrought such
miracles of mercy for the Restitution of his Ark amongst us: A mercy that the
Church of England may very well celebrate (with a very little variation of the
expressions) in the 83. Psalm. For lo our enemies lift up their head and made
a tumult. They took crafty counsel against thy people. They said, Come let us
cut them off, that the name of the Church of England may be no more in
remembrance. They consulted together with one consent, and were confederate.
The tabernacles of Edom, and the Ishmaelites, of Moab and the Hagarens. Gebal
and Ammon, and Amalek; the Philistines, with the Inhabitants of Tire. Assure
also was joined with them: and have helped the Children of Lot. But God has
(upon the matter) done unto them as unto the Midianites, as to Sisera, as to
Jabin, which perished at Endor; they became as dung for the Earth. He made
their Princes like Oreb and Zeb; yea all their Princes as Zebah and Zalmunna.
Who said let us take to our selves the houses of God into our possession. Our
God made them like a wheel that could never fix upon any solid ground of
establishment, but rolled and turned about in a restless variety of changes. At
last they were as stubble before the wind, God did divide them in Jacob and
scatter them in Israel: He did confound their Languages, that the building of
their Babel could not go forward. And all these dispensations were out of a
design of mercy to the Adversaries of this Church; God has filled their faces
with shame, that they might be induced to join with the Church in a due and
decent conformity to seek his Name. And so let all the Combinations of thy
Churches enemies perish, O Lord, but let them that love thee and thy Church, be
as the Sun when he goes forth in his might, Judges 5.31.
that our Land may be filled with piety, devotion and glory, and so have rest,
to all generations.

God has done great things for us already, whereof we rejoice; and what he
has done, he is pleased to make his engagement to do more; if we do not render
our selves utterly unworthy, and forfeit our Tenure by our obstinate
perversities. This is one ground of our hope: And there is, A

2d. The Church of England has a praying people; a people whose devotions are
solid and fervent, regular and constant; a people that do frequent the Public
Prayers of the Church out of humility and obedience, out of judgment and
prudence; and yet do importune God in their Closets, day and night too; though
they love not so much to play the Hypocrite, as to sound their Trumpet, to tell
the world they do so. You know, the interest of ten righteous persons was so
considerable to Almighty God, that it should have prevailed with him for the
preservation of five most lewd and vicious Cities; and God be blessed, we have
that number, I trust many hundred times told over.

But because, if we continue in sin, the Epha Zach. 5.
will be full at last; and if we neglect so great salvation, and the things
that do belong unto our peace; those things will be hidden from our eyes, and
we shall bring upon our selves swift destruction 2 Pet. 7.2.
; and then the devotions of holy Prophets will be enjoined silence, by Gods own
Order (Jer. 7.16. Pray not thou for this people [for their good Jer. 14.11.
etc. 11.14.
] neither lift up cry, nor prayer for them, neither make intercession to me;
for I will not hear thee.) And though they should pray earnestly, and continue
their importunity (receiving no such express Order, as that Prophet Jeremy had,
to the contrary;) yet their prayers, in this case, in this juncture of affairs
(when the harvest of sin is ripe) how effectual soever for themselves, would
not prevail, they would be fruitless, as to the generality of persons, and the
calamity of the Nation; for when I bring my sore judgments upon the Land,
though these three men, Noah, Daniel and Job, were in it, as I live, Ezekiel.
14.14, 10.
says the Lord God, they should deliver neither son nor daughter, they should
but deliver their own souls by their righteousness. Therefore to prevent this
dreadful severity of Almighty God, give me leave to propound some few Caveats
and Directions to you, touching your behavior, in reference to the Ark of God
(by which I understand his sacred Ordinances) and so I shall conclude.

When God was about to descend upon Mount Sinai, at the promulgation of the Law
( Exodus 19.) he commanded Moses to set bounds, to keep off the people, that
they might not press upon so dreadful a Majesty, to their own ruin. The
presence of God with his holy Ark, in his holy worship, is no less sacred, no
less dreadful than it was on Mount Sinal; I must therefore draw a line, and set
up rails about it, as well to secure your interest in it, as to preserve that
respect and veneration that is due unto it. These shall be made up of a six
fold Caveat. You must,

1. Not over value, or deifie it. 2. Not undervalue, or blaspheme it. 3. Not
invade, or profane it. 4. Not slander, or belie it. 5. Not intrude, or pry into
it. 6. Not rifle, or plunder it.
1. You must not overvalue or deifie it. A very high esteem and reverence you
must have for tthe Ark of God; and you may rely upon Gods promise, and
confidently expect what God has engaged to do for you by the Ministry thereof.
But you must not turn the Ark into an Idol; exhibere cultum Dei creaturae, est
Idololatria, says Aquinas; if you devote that service to it, and place that
affiance in it which is due to God alone, you do then make an Idol of it: You
make the Type of Christ to become his Rival; you make him jealous of his own
Representative; and you eclipse his honor by that shadow that was designed to
illustrate and set it off.

And yet there are some that do more then this, worse then this amounts to;
they do Hyper-deifie it, advance it above God, yea against God; for God will
not patronize the guilty, Christ will not save the impenitent; it is a desperate
presumption to think they will: if you expect this from the Ark, you do not
only turn it into an Idol, set it up in Gods stead: but you do more then so,
you exalt it above God, you pretend to make it do what God will not do, what
Christ cannot do; you make it a real Antichrist.

For Christ came to destroy the works of the Devil, and to take away sin by the
sacrifice of himself. And if you make the Ark a Sanctuary for Malefactors, you
set it up in opposition to Christ, and provoke him to Arm himself (as it were)
against it, in vindication of his own glory.

Upon this very account it was, that he delivered the Ark (under the Law) into
the hands of the Philistines, 1 Samuel 4. and Jer. 7.3. Thus says the Lord of
Hosts, the God of Israel, amend your ways and your doings, and I will cause you
to dwell in this place: (but) trust ye not in lying words, saying, The Temple
of the Lord, the Temple of the Lord, the Temple of the Lord; as if that had
been a threefold fortification, to secure them against all possible calamity;
But ye trust in lying words that cannot profit: will ye steal, murder, and
commit adultery, and swear fa^sly, and burn incense unto Baal, and wa^k after
other gods whom ye know not, and come and stand before me, in this house which
is called by my name, and say we are delivered to do all these abominations? is
this house that is called by my name become a den of robbers in your eyes?
Behold, even I have seen it, says the Lord; But go ye now unto my place which
was in Shiloh, where I put my name at the first, and see what I did to it, for
the wickedness of my people Israel, etc.

That Ark which was the visible Symbol of his presence, and the especial
Instrument of his worship and service, they set it up in opposition to his
glory; they would have it patronize their sin, and protect them, in their
impenit^ncy, against Gods severe judgments; and this provokes God to give it
up to be defiled by reproach and profanation. Let this be a Caveat to you
therefore, not to overvalue, or deifie the Ark of God.

2. And yet you must take heed you do not undervalue and blaspheme it; not
vilify the solemn service of God performed about it. This was the sin of
Michal the Daughter of Saul, she looked through a window, and saw David clothed
in his linen Ephod, and dancing (after the Music) before the Ark of the Lord,
and she despised him in her heart, 2 Samuel 6.16. yea, her heart was swelled so
big with pride and indignation, that it could not contain if self within any
bounds of moderation; it burst out into obloquy, for she reproached him as a
vain and shameless fellow, (Ver. 20)

But David had enough to say for his own vindication; that he did thus humble
himself, it was only in the presence of the Lord, who had exalted him; and it
is very fit that the Majesty of earth should be laid in the dust, before the
Majesty of heaven; and to despise any person for doing God reverence, argues an
opinion, that God may have too much honor, that the Solemnity of his worship
may be too great for his excellency, and transcend the merits of his divine
Attributes; and that a less devotion will serve his turn.

But this casts so dark a reflection upon Gods glory, that his patience
cannot brook it; and therefore the profaneness of Michal's heart, and the
petulancy of her bitter tongue, is punished with a barren womb, a great
reproach in that Nation; or if she be with child (as some think she was) she
shall not give birth to it, but with the loss of her own life; for, because of
this her carriage toward David, upon this occasion, Therefore Michal the
daughter of Saul had no child unto the day of her death. 2 Samuel 6.23.


And yet it is no Paradox to say, we have many of Michal's breed at this day
amongst us; such as have made a mock at the linen Ephod, derided Church-musick
designed to celebrate Gods praises, scoffed at the very Hymns and Prayers, and
blasphemed the whole Solemnity of Gods most sacred worship. Have not the
servants of the most high God been publicly reviled by the title of Baal's
Priests, for their reverent attendance upon this service of Gods Ark? has not
the established Form of Liturgy been vilified by the name of pottage, not only
in the foul leaves of Scurrilous Pamphlets; but likewise in the mouths of
railing Rabshakehs, more foul and profane then they?

But we cannot be transported with amazement at these things, being premonished
by the Spirit of Prophecy, in the holy Apostles, that there should come (and
that more abundantly) in the last days scoffers, walking after their own lusts.
2 Pet. 3.3.


But does not this filthy dirt that is thrown upon the Ark of God, dash and
bespatter the Majesty of God himself? yes surely; for Christ says, He that
despises you, despises me; and he that despises me, despises him that sent
me; such as despise the Ministry that attends upon the Ark, they despise not
man, but God; 1 These. 4.8.
the reproaches of them that reproach the Ark of God, do fall upon God himself.

And because they were guilty of Michals sin, have they not met with Michals
curse too? Give them, O Lord, what will thou give them? give them a barren womb
and dry breasts, Hos. 9.14. Have they not all been barren, that scoffed at the
solemn service of Gods Ark? either their Conceptions have proved abortive; or,
if the children have come to the birth, yet there has been no strength to
bring forth; or, if they have been delivered, yet those breasts, that should
have suckled the offspring of this scoffing Mother, have proved dry, and so
the production, like the seed sown by the way side, has dwindled away for want
of nourishment.

This was acknowledged in a Sermon preached before that remnant of the House of
Commons ( Jan. 27.1646/7) six year ago (says the Preacher) after this
Parliament had sat awhile, Mr. Jo. Arrow-smith his great wonder in Heaven,
page 36.
it was generally believed that she (he alludes to that woman which was a Type
of the Church, Rev. 12.1.) was fallen into her travel; And in the midst of all
those sorrows which have befallen England since, her friends encouraged
themselves with this hope, that the quicker and sharper her pains grew, the
liker she was to be speedily delilivered of that man-child, which was by them
so greedily expected. But, behold, as if all these had been but forerunners of
her labor, not bearing-throws, she continues still in pain: insomuch as they
begin now to think she has not gone her full time, and earnestly to desire she
may; because they fear nothing more than an Abortive Reformation; (for so they
called, they knew not what, the thing they projected to build upon the ruins
of Gods Church amongst us.)

Remember Michal, Remember Saul's daughter; her sin, and her judgment too; and
scoff no more at the Solemn Worship and Service, performed before the Ark of
God; that is our Second Caveat.

3. You must not invade and profane the Ark; God would not allow that any
person should Minister about the Ark, but such as were of the Tribe of Levi,
and duly ordained and ballowed for that service.

Every man might expect a blessing from the Ark; but every man might not
officiate about it, at his own pleasure; the highest Gifts gave him no
Commission, procured him no Authority for this work, without a special
Consecration; for no man takes this honor unto himself, Heb. 5.4.
but he that is called of God, as was Aaron; without this warrant, the greatest
Zeal, though directed by an eminent degree of knowledge, in the management of
this sacred Function, had been no better then a Sacrilegious profanation.

When the Oxen stumbled and shook the Ark, UZzah put forth his hand, out of
devotion, without all peradventure, to uphold it, that it might not be
overthrown; but his good meaning would not excuse his rashness; for, whether
his hand and shoulder withered, or he were struck suddenly with a thunderbolt,
I shall not take upon me to determine; but this I am assured of, upon the
Credit and Authori^y of the holy Story, tha^ the anger of the Lord was kindled
against UZZah, and God smote him there for his error, and there he died by the
Ark of God, 2 Samuel 6.6, 7.

Eli trembled for fear of the Ark.
Shall I give you Mr. Calamy's Application of this accident? We have had great
disorder heretofore, says he, and God is now punishing us for that disorder:
there were abundance of well-meaning men that usurping the Ministerial Office;
and (forsooth) they were afraid the Ark was falling, and they laid to their
shoulders; but their touching the Ark undid the Ark and themselves too, and
brought a scandal on the Gospel. This is Mr. Calamy's Application.

But if we examine the matter thoroughly, we shall find him, with many others
(that inveighed fiercely against such as usurped the Ministerial Office)
involved in the same guilt with UZZah, and consequently, they fall under the
same condemnation.

For what was Uzzah's crime; Oz a percussus est, quod attigisset arcam Domini.
Id enim ne Levitis quidem fas erat. Arcam enim ab illis tantum gestari, non
contingi, aut spectari oportuit, says Peter Martyr: Uzzah was smitten, In 2 Samuel 6.6, 7, 8.
because he touched the Ark of God; for the Levite's Office was to carry the
Ark, but they were, under a severe prohibition, neither to touch it, not to
look into it; for so the Lord had ordained, Numb. 4.15. When Aaron and his Sons
have made an end of covering the Sanctuary, and all the vessels of the
Sanctuary, as the Camp is to set forward; after that, the Sons of Kohath shall
come to bear it; but they shall not touch any holy thing, lest they die; and
Ver. 20. They shall not go in to see, when the holy things are covered, lest
they die.

But it might have been alleged on the beh^lf of Uzzah, that what he did was
upon an extraordinary occasion, in a case of necessity, and out of zeal, to
save the Ark from falling; Ibid.
but as Peter Martyr has very well observed, his touching the Ark is assigned,
by many, as the cause, why he was so suddenly smitten; Sed erat alia causa and
prior and major, quod ille arcam imposuisset in currum, and dedisset causam
huic necessitati. But there was another, a former and a greater cause for it;
his putting the Ark upon a Cart, and so betraying it to that danger and
necessity. So the English Annotations, The anger of the Lord was kindled
against Uzzah; because he had caused his holy Ark to be carried in a Cart,
which they should have born on their shoulders, and for touching it with his
hand, being but a Levite and no Priest. On, 2 Samuel 6.7.

The Levites might not be their own Carvers, in the holy function, might not
invade what part of it they had a fancy to; no, Aaron and his sons shall go in,
and appoint them every one to his service, and to his burden Numb. 4.19.
If they had an ambition to usurp any other part of the sacred Office (that was
not so assigned them by their Superiors) though they did create a present
necessity for it; yet that necessity of their own making could not justify
them in such their Sacrilegious Usurpation.

And this is directly the Case of the Presbyterians. It was their duty (we
confess) to bear the Ark of God, to Minister unto it, in some parts of the
sacred Office, such as were assigned them by their Superiors; but they could
not keep their hands off the Ark; their ambition spurred them on to Usurp other
parts of that Office; to lay on hands, for the Ordination of others; (lest,
forsooth, the Ark of Gods worship should fall to the ground, for lack of a
Ministry to attend it) which they had no Commission for, no Warrant at all, but
a pretended necessity of their own making, by pulling down Aaron and his Sons,
the holy Order of Bishops, who alone were invested with that power.

So that these Presbyterians have followed Uzzah in the imitation of his error
and temerity; and has not a suitable judgment overtaken them, a punishment
Analogical to that of Uzzah? are not those hands that were stretched out,
without any Authority, to perform this Office, are they not withered? has not
the anger of the Lord (as Mr. Calamy in part confesses) smitten them, for this
Sacrilegious Usurpation? we see, they are dead, before the Ark, in this
capacity; and therefore, you must not invade and profane the Ark; that is the
third Caveat.

4. You must not slander and belie the Ark. There are, and have been in all
Ages, false Prophets who have suggested their own Dreams, Fancies and Designs,
for the Oracles of God. The Prophets Prophecy lies in my name, as the Lord
himself complains by the Prophet Jeremy, Chap. 14.14.
I sent them not, neither have I commanded them, neither spoke I unto them:
they prophecy unto you a false vision, and divination, and a thing of naught,
and the deceit of their heart, J^r. 14.14. and Chap. 23 16, 17. Thus says the
Lord of Hosts, hearken no^ unto the words of the Prophets that prophesi^ unto
you; they make you vain: they speak a vision of their own heart, and not ou^ of
the mouth of the Lord: they say still unto them that despise me, the Lord has
said ye shall have peace; and they say unto every one that walks after the
stubbornness of his own heart, No evil shall come upon you.

And has not the lying spirit given out his Oracles, by the mouths of a
multitude of such Prophets, amongst us, in these times of our distraction?

One of them g^ve out this for an Oracle Mr. John Goodwin's Anti-Caval. See Dr.
Ham. of Resisting the lawful Magistrate, etc. page 22. etc.
, about 18 or 19 years ago, that the King, though Head of all, and singulis
Major; yet he was universis Minor; though above all single persons; yet
inferior to the body of his people; that they have a power and right to resist
him.

And because this is contradicted expressly by the lively Oracles of the holy
Scripture, and the writings of all the primitive Fathers, therefore that lying
bloody Oracle said further (in effect) that God did hide this liberty from the
primitive Christians, lest the use of it should cause an abortion in the birth
of Antichrist. God caused a dead sleep (says he) to fall upon these truths,
the hiding of them being necessary to help Antichrist up to his throne; yea, he
says, that God by special dispensation suffered him the said Antichrist to
make such truths his footstool, till he had advanced himself to his highest
pitch in the world.

But now that this Antichrist is to be destroyed and cast out, and the
Commonalty of Christians (as he pretended) being the men that must have the
principal hand in executing Gods judgments upon the whore; for bringing this to
pass now, says he, in these our times God has given out this Revelation to
us, he has manifested the Doctrine of Resistance; and Christians may act
contrary to the will of their Superiors. And for this, you have Mr. John
Goodwins asseveration.

To a like effect you have another, that blows the Trumpet of Sedition; and to
raise up the people in Arms against their lawful Sovereign. He does shamefully
pervert and blaspheme the sacred Text, Judge. 5.23. Curseye Meroz (said the
Angel of the Lord) curse ye bitterly the inhabitants thereof; because they came
not to the help of the Lord, to the help of the Lord against the mighty. And
this was Mr. Marshal See Mr. Ed. Symons Confutation of that Sermon.
.

A third tells some of the House of Commons, in a Sermon at Westminster, (1641)
that now is the time, that God is beating down the walls of proud Babylon, Mr.
William Bridge, Babylons downfall, page 10. Page 33.
that are raised up in every Kingdom; and, says he, ye shall see these great
works come to pass shortly. And, in his Epistle to the Reader, he tells him, I
shall not prophecy, if I say, The sword is now drawn, whose anger shall not be
pacified, till Babylon be down. And this is Mr. William Bridge. And another of
These Prophets is as positive as if the work had then been already done; the
greatest blow that ever was given, says he, to Antichristian Government, is
that which NOW IT HAS HAD, Babylon is fallen, is fallen, so fallen as it shall
NEVER rise again; and this is Mr. Jeremy Buroughs On Isa. 66.10. in a
Thanksgiving.
.

And others, to inflame and engage the people unto Rebellion, have forced the
holy Scripture seemingly to belie it self; for so they did when they preached
upon those Texts, Cursed is he that withholdeth his hand from blood; See
Evangelium Armatum, per totum.
and cursed is he that does the work of the Lord negligently; when they were
fighting against the King and his loyal Subjects.

And lest the peoples Consciences should be affrighted, and their insolence
daunted, at the Apostles dreadful Commination against such Resisters, Romans 13.
They that resist shall receive to themselves damnation; They found out an
allay, by a gentle interpretation of the Phrase; See Dr. Ham. ib. p. 33.
it does not signify the damnation of hell (they tell their confidents, whom
they had abused and seduced to follow their pernicious ways) but some temporal
mulct only (if the King should prove able to inflict it.)

But when so much Christian blood has been shed, and a most flourishing
Kingdom, with a Church of the best Constitution in the whole world, destroyed,
under a pretense of pulling down Antichrist, what new Model have they got, what
Plat form have they received from heaven, to set up in the room of it? why, no
other than what their blind imaginations should stumble upon by chance, and God
knows when; And the holy Text is sacrificed too, to gratify this conceit.

Go with me, says Mr. Case, In his Sermon before the Peers, March 25. 1646.
page 41.
to Heb. 11.13. And ye shall find Abraham with his staff in his hand, and his
sandalt on his feet, and his loins girt: please to let me ask him two or three
Questions by the way: see what he will answer. Reverend Patriarch, whether are
you going? Answer, I know not: When shall you return? Answer, I know not: How
will you subsist? Answ. I know not: He is in haste as well as we; and therefore
I Will ask him but one Question more. Abraham, why then do you go at such
UNCERTAINTIES? to this he will answer, I go not upon uncertainties; I have a
call; I have a command, and that will secure my person, and bear my charges. By
faith Abraham when he was called to go into a place, which he should after
receive for an inheritance, obeyed, and went out, Heb. 11.8.
NOT KNOWING WHITHER HE WENT.

Christians (says he) observe, a Call is as good as a Promise: (and a little
after) we have not only a call, but a promise; not in general only, but in
special. The whole Book of the Revelation is nothing else but one great Promise
of the downfall of Antichrist, and Gospel-Reformation; and that is the work
Parliament and Kingdom have now in hand in these three Nations: Thus Mr. Case.

But what they meant by that Gospel-reformation, they could never agree to tell
us; witness Mr. Daniel Evance, in his Sermon Entitled The Noble Order, page 41.
before the Lords, Jan. 28. 1645. (on 1 Samuel 2.30.) where he tells them thus: I
profess, my Lords, I am neither for Paul, nor Apollos, nor Cephas, nor Christ,
till I know what Paul and Apollos and Cephas are for, and what those, that say
they are for Christ, can say for him.

But I could wish (my Lords) that we had the PATTERN, that every man might
Consult with the mount, WHICH OF THE TWO IS CHRIST'S GOVERNMENT. The CHILD is
CHRISTENED (for ought I see) before it is BORN, and we have the NAMES before the
THINGS.

It seems, by their own Confession, they were not so good Marks-men as St Paul
was, When will these be so ingenuous as those mentioned, Zac. 13.4, 5.
[I therefore so run, not as uncertainly: so fight I, not as one that beats
the air:] they were like the Samaritanes, to whom our Savior says, Joh. 4.22.
Ye worship ye know not what. In this they were like those the Apostles speaks
of, who professing themselves to be wise, they became fools, Romans 1.22. take
head therefore that you do not slander, or belie the Ark of God; that is the
fourth Caveat.

5. You must not intrude or pry into the Ark of God. We must look no further
than as the holy Ghost has set it open, and the hand of the Prophets and
Apostles drawn the Curtain for us. God will not allow the common people to gaze
upon the holy Mount ( Exodus 19.21.) secret things belong to the Lord our God:
Revealed things are for us, and for our children. Deuteronomy. 29.29.
If we must needs afford a prospect to our curiosity, there are Mysteries
displaied to us, in the holy Gospel, 1 Pet. 1.12.
such as the Angels desire to look into; can we not satisfy our selves in the
contemplation of these things?

If we must needs let our thoughts run out upon the judgment to come, can we
not confine them within the modest limits of sobriety, and meditate upon the
certainty, and the severity, with those terrible accidents that shall attend
it? is all our longing after the forbidden fruit, that grows upon this tree?
See Gerh. de extrem. Jud. mihi, p. 190.
how many impostures have the Christian World been deluded with, upon this
account, for filthy lucres sake?

And of what ill consequence this is, you may learn from Mr. Calamy In his late
Sermon.
; he tells you it is the way to make men Atheists, to believe nothing; and
thereupon he concludes, that certainly those Ministers do no good to the
Church, that prescribe Times and Seasons; for when those Seasons are come, and
we find our selves disappointed, after that we will believe the Minister no
more.

This was the sin of the Bethshemites (prying into the Ark of God) which cost
them no less then 50070 lives. Mr. Calamy was very sensible of this judgment
upon those men; 1 Samuel 6.19.
and yet at the very same time, he must needs be peeping into the Ark himself;
for what else means his hints, touching those strong impressions upon the
hearts of many learned men, as to the year 1666. and the Book printed to prove,
that Antichrist shall then be destroyed? what means he else, by his hint, that
some pitch upon a nearer time, which he is loath to name?

But he tells us, he is sure, that God is now pouring out his Vials upon
Antichrist, and the Throne of the Beast; and although some few drops of these
Vials may fall upon the Reformed Churches to chastise them; yet the Vials are
intended for the Whore of Babylon, and shall at last be all poured out upon
Her, to the ruin of Antichrist and all his Adherents.

Why, truly these men are much beholden to the Beast, and do make much use of
his Throne to uphold their seditious doctrines and practices: For Antichrist is
their stalking horse, when the present Government is their quarry. For by
Antichrist they understand not only the Pope of Rome, or the Great Turk, but
the very Hierarchy of the Church, with the Solemn Service of God, which is
performed and upheld by it. And by amuzing the people with the sudden and
certain expectation of this Antichrists ruin, they keep them in a posture for
sedition, that when they see their advantage to give the word, they may be
ready to arm, and give fire upon their Governors.

But for this pretense of pulling down Antichrist, it is a saddle that will fit
any back. Has not the Presbyterian party been called Antichrist? yes, and that
in Print too; and perhaps they had had a war made upon them, upon that account,
had they insisted stiffly upon their pretentions to that Government.

But for my part, I think it more then probable, that the great Antichrist the
Apostle speaks of 2 These. 2.7. 8, 9, 10. See Dr. Hammonds Annotations.
is destroyed already: If not, yet the question is not sufficiently determined
(by them who are in expectation of his ruin) who he is; much less when his
Kingdom is to have an end. And when men have been engaged to the expense of so
much blood and treasure, to the ruin of so many Persons and Families, in
pursuance of such a design, and there comes nothing on it; but their supposed
Antichrist, or his supposed Adherents continue still, and appear to be so much
less Antichrist then themselves, in that they desire to live in peace, and to
render unto God the glory due unto his Name (which the real Antichrist
certainly does not;) who shall answer for all the horrible outrages that have
been committed to no purpose, but to the dishonor of God, and the scandal of
mankind, to the reproach of our Christian Profession, and the just indignation
of our Superiors? Who, I say, shall answer this at Gods Tribunal? Will that
excuse serve the turn, (which is all that can be pretended to) That the
promoters of these confusions were mistaken, and do now begin to think that the
Church (the woman they fancied to be all this while in travel with the designs
of their own begetting) has not yet gone her full time, (as one of them is
pleased to word it?) I say, Mr. Arrowsmith, ubi supra.
will this excuse serve the turn before the dreadful Judge?

But suppose there were an infallible discovery of Antichrist, yet where is the
Commission? where do we find any warrant to levy war against him? It is said
of that Beast and his Accomplices, Revel. 17.14. That they shall make war with
the Lamb, and the Lamb shall overcome them. But where do we find that the Lamb
makes war upon them? It is with the Spirit of his mouth that he consumes them,
and with the brightness of his coming, not by the mouth of the glittering
sword, 2 Thessalonians. 2.8. It is said also, ( Revel. 17.16) that the ten horns (which
are interpreted to be ten Kings, v. 12.) shall hate the whore, and shall make
her desolate and naked, and shall eat her flesh, and burn her with fire. But in
all this I can see no warrant, nothing that looks like it, for Subjects to take
up Arms without, much less, against the Kings Authority.

There is a Prophecy, indeed, that Antichrist shall fall and be destroyed; but
that will not justify what is done against Gods Command: For there is a
Prophecy likewise, that the Devil should cast some of the Servants of God into
prison, Revel. 2.10. and yet he is a Devil still. A Prophecy that Jeroboam 1
Kin. 11.31.
should have ten parts of Rehoboam's Kingdom, and yet he was a Rebel 1 Kin.
12.19.
and an Usurper 1 Kin. 11.17.
, and he made Israel to sin 1 Kin. 15.26, 34.
.

We must frame our lives and actions, not by dark Prophesies, but by clear
Precepts: And we are no where informed who is Antichrist; no where enjoined to
fight against him; but earnestly exhorted To be quiet, and to do our own
business 1 These. 4.11.
; To follow peace with all men, and holiness, without which (pair of virtues)
no man shall see the Lord Heb. 12.14.
.

Certainly therefore our wisest course is, not to trouble our heads about
Antichrist, but leave Christ himself do deal with him, and to betake our selves
to Prayer and Fasting, with other pious exercises, to prepare for the Advent of
Death and Judgment. This is the fifth Caveat, not to intrude or pry into the
Ark.

6. The sixth and last Caveat is, you must not rifle and plunder the Ark. The
Apostle tells us, Heb. 9.4. That with the Ark there were not only the Tables of
the Covenant, but also the golden pot that had Manna, and Aarons rod that
budded. The Tables of the Law are of indispensable necessity to salvation; for
the mercy of the Lord is from everlasting to everlasting upon them that fear
him; to such as keep his Covenant, and think upon his Commandments to do them,
Psalm. 103.17, 18. And Aarons Rod is requisite to excite and quicken; the Pot of
Manna to strengthen and encourage unto the duty: There is a mixture of severity
and sweetness, Lib. 2. pastoral. Cressol. Anthol. Dec. 2.161.
as Gregory has observed; Rigor disciplinae and, dulcedo humanitatis, quae
sacrosanctas legum Tabulas custodiunt. There must be Discipline, and there must
be Sacraments, else the Law cannot be observed: The one to awe, the other to
enable us to that observation.

All the Service performed before the Ark under the Law was not Typical; though
the Sacrifices of fowls and beasts be out of date and abolish^d, yet the
Sacrifice of hearts and souls is in force still. There was incense to be
offered, and God was to be solemnly thanked and praised Morning and Evening 1 Chronicles. 23.30.
; and this continues still, though the other be extinguished.

Nay, as they had their Sacrifice prefigurative, to protest their h^mage and
devotion, to awaken their repentance, upon a suggestion of their guilt and
their demerits, and to excite their faith to lay hold upon the passion and
death of Christ to come, for their expiation and atonement; so we have our
Sacrifice representative, to protest our devotion, to awaken our repentance,
and to excite our Faith to lay hold upon the Passion and Death of Christ
already past: Mal. 1.11. See Mr. Meade upon this Text, and the Ancient Fathers
by him cited.
For from the rising of the Sun even unto the going down of the same, my name
shall be great among the Gentiles; and in every place Incense shall be offered
unto my name, and a pure offering: For my name shall be great among the
Heathen, says the Lord of Hosts. This is that solemn Commemorative Oblation of
the Sacrifice of the Cross, with our Adorations, Lauds and Prayers, in that
Sacramental Eucharist of Christ's own Institution.

Christ is given us in pretium (says that Learned Bishop Bishop Andrews, Ser.
2. of the Nativity.
) for a price; a price either of ransom, to bring out de loco caliginoso; or a
price of purchase, of (that, where without it we have no interest) the Kingdom
of Heaven. For both he is given, non habentes oblationem majorem neque puriorem
quae Deo posset offerri quam Eucharistiam, eam in omni offerunt loco. Dignam
plane Deo oblationem, cujus respectu jam holocaustae and bostiae omnes antiquae
Deo non placent, tantopere illa placet (sc. Eucharistia.) Paul. de Palacio, in
Mal. 1.11.
offer we him for both. He was given us, to that end we might give him back. We
wanted, we had nothing valuable; that we might have, this he gave us, (as a
thing of greatest price) to offer for that which needs a great price, our
sins, so many in number, and so foul in quality. We had nothing worthy God;
This He gave us that is worthy him, which cannot be but accepted, offer we it
never so often. Let us then offer him, and in the act of offering, ask of him
what is meet. And a little after, This [his flesh] he gave for us in sacrifice;
and this he gives us, in the Sacrament; that the Sacrifice may, by the
Sacrament, be truly applied to us.

What an irreligious, what a scandalous neglect of the Ark of God, in respect
of this part of our Solemn worship, has been throughout this Kingdom, I need
not tell you; you cannot but remember it. But I wish there were; and I pray God
there may be such a sense of our miscarriages in these particulars, as may
produce a Salutary shame, a Cordial and through humiliation.

There is nothing else can fit us for so lovely a prospect, as is the external
Beauty of Gods house and solemn worship. To this purpose it is very remarkable
what the Lord says to the Prophet Ezekiel (Chap. 43.10, 11.) Thou Son of man,
show the house to the house of Israel, that they may be ashamed of their
iniquities, and let them measure the pattern. And if they be ashamed of all
that they have done, show them the Form of the House, and the fashion thereof,
and the goings out thereof, and the comings in thereof, and all the Forms
thereof, and all the Ordinances thereof, and all the Forms thereof, and all the
Laws thereof: and write it in their sight, that they may keep the whole Form
thereof, and all the Ordinances thereof, and do them.

And this will lead me to the last Stage of my Discourse, which is the end of
my Design; viz. to give you some directions how you are to demean your selves,
in reference to the Ark of Gods solemn worship.

But these Directions should be ushered in with a word or two of admonition to
such as are in highest Authority over us.

1. The First is, To support and countenance the Hierarchy, that Order of men
who are set apart by a special act of Consecration, to attend the service of
the Ark; the Ark of God cannot appear glorious, under the Ministry of a
contemptible Priesthood. It is the Learning and Piety, the Prudence and
Gravity, the Splendour and Authority, of the Episcopal Order, that must keep up
the Ark in a steady posture amongst us.

Aspiring Novices will run it into bogs and precipices, and leave it without a
guard, to be overlaid with Superstition, or exposed to the rude hands of
Sacrilege and Profaneness.

Where there is such a Hierarchy as keeps every one to his Station and Office,
there the people are instructed, by the example of their regular subordination,
to keep their Order and Decorum; and this is the Apostles Bulwark, opposed to
seduction ( Col. 2.5.) and such as keep to it are impregnable.

For as that Reverend and Learned Bishop observes, Bishop Daven. ad Colos. 2.5.
Raro in errores praecipitantur, qui ordinem obedientiae Praepositis debitum
observant; e contra, ubi ordo praecipiendi and parendi negligitur, ibi tanquam
per disjectam aciem facile perrumpitur. They seldom fall into Errors that
observe the order of obedience due unto their Prelates Not one Ranter, or
Quaker, or Anabaptist, of all that adhere to the Bishop; nor an
Antitrinitarian, etc.
; but on the contrary, where the order of commanding and obeying is neglected,
there the enemy easily breaks in, as into a routed Army.

To this purpose we may observe that Holy Martyr St. Ignatius very full and
pressing. (...). Be ye subject unto the Bishop as unto the Lord: For he
watches for your souls as he that must give account. Epist. ad Trallian.
And a little after; (...) It is necessary that you do nothing, that you
attempt nothing without the Bishop. And a while after: (...). Reverence your
Bishop even as Christ, according to the precept of the blessed Apostles. For he
that is within the Altar, within the communion of the Church, is an entire pure
Christian: and for this cause obey your Bishop and the Priests. But he that is
not within this communion, he that acts of his own head, without the Bishop,
not in conformity with him, and the Priests and Deacons, is polluted in his
Conscience, and is worse then an Infidel 1 Timothy 5.8.
, thus Ignatius. The Hierarchy therefore of the Church is by all means to be
kept up, and all due veneration and obedience is to be paid to it.

But this belongs chiefly to the Higher Powers; and yet something you may all
do toward it. It is Recorded, that when Chrysostom was to be banished from
Constantinople, the people were so affected with him, that they all went to the
Emperor, and Petitioned for Chrysostom, professing they could no more miss
Chrysostom, then they could miss the Sun out of the Firmament; and yet (which
I desire you to observe and carry home with you) Chrysostom was not the
peoples mercenary Curate, or flattering Heb. 13.17.
Lecturer, but the Bishop of the Diocese, and his See was Constantinople. And I
suppose this might be one reason, why Mr. Calamy (as he says) was so loath
(fully) to tell that story: But,

2. There is a second Admonition directed to all that are concerned herein, to
take care that this Hierarchy be really such as the name imports, A Holy
Order or Governance. Holy in their persons and conversation, and holy in their
ministration and address. Lev. 10.3.
God will be sanctified of all those that draw nigh unto him. Be ye holy, ye
that bear the vessels of the Lord: upon the bells of the horses, Zach. 14.10.
says the Prophet, shall be holiness to the Lord.

But there must be holiness, not upon Aarons Bells only (in the purity of his
Doctrine) but the inscription upon his forehead must be so too, Holiness to the
Lord; Psalm. 132.9.
let the Priests be clothed with righteousness: he must be white and pure in
his conversation as well as in his vesture.

And, 2. Because Sancta sancte, holy things must be performed after a holy
manner; therefore a special sanctification is requisite unto the address; (if a
beast should rush in to the holy Mount, Heb. 12.10.
he should be transfixed with some dart or other for it) hereupon the Psalmist,
I will wash my hands in innocence, Psalm. 26.6.
and so will I compass thy Altar, O Lord.

And now, for Directions to the people. All the mysteries of the Ark are
comprehended and unfolded in the Festivals of the Church; and such as do
constantly frequent them can be ignorant of nothing that is necessary to their
Salvation.

But your address must be duly qualified, that it may find a gracious
acceptance. You must approach with Humility, with Alacrity, with Unanimity,
with Uniformity. These four will make your approach welcome to the Ark or
Ordinances of God.

1. It must be with Humility and Reverence. There are some that bear no more
reverence to the Ark of Gods worship, then if it were but an Ark of
Bull-rushes. But holiness becomes thy house for ever, says the Prophet: Ye
shall observe my Sabbaths, and reverence my Sanctuary, I am the Lord, Lev.
19.31. God is greatly to be feared in the assembly of the Saints: and to be had
in reverence of all them that are about him, Psalm. 89.7.
Psalm. 89.7. and Psalm. 68. O God, thou art terrible out of thy holy places,
Psalm. 68. ult.
etc. therefore serve the Lord with fear, and rejoice before him with
trembling, Psalm. 2. We will go into his Tabernacles, we will worship at his
footstool, Psalm. 132.7. and Psalm. 99.5. Exalt ye the Lord our God, and worship
at his footstool. Psalm. 132.7.
And as that expression had reference to the Ark then, See Josh. 7.6.
so has it to the holy Sacrament now, as we are taught by St Ambrose De Spir.
Sancto. l. 3. c. 12.
and St Austin, Per scabellum terra intelligitur: per terram autem caro
Christi: quam hodie quoque in mysteriis adoramus: By footstool we are to
understand the earth, and by the earth the flesh of Christ; which at this very
day, we adore in the sacred mysteries. And St Austin In Psalm. 98.
to the same purpose; Quaero quid sit scabellum pedumejus, and dicit mihi
Scriptura, terra scabellum pedum meorum. not to do it at his name: nay at the
holy Mysteries, etc. Bishop Andr. Sermon. 9. of the Resur.
Fluctuans converto me ad Christum, quiaipsum quaero hic, and invenio quomodo
sine impietate a loretur terra, sine impietate adoretur scabellum pedum ejus.
Suscepit enim de terra terram, quia caro de terra est, and de carne Mariae
carnem accepit. Et quia in ipsa carne hic ambulavit, and ipsam carnem nobis
manducandam ad salutem dedis: NEMO AUTEM ILLAM CARNEM MANDUC AT NISI PRIUS
ADORAVERIT: inventum est quemadmodum adoretur tale scabellum pedum Domini, and
non solum NON PECCEMUS ADORANDO, sed PECCEMUS NON ADORANDO. I demand what is
his footstool; and God in the holy Scripture tells me, the earth is my
footstool. But being in some fluctuation and doubtfulness, I turn me unto
Christ, for him I am to seek here, and in him I find how the earth may be
adored without any impiety, how without any impiety I may adore his footstool.
For he took earth from the earth; for flesh is of the earth, and of the flesh
of the blessed Virgin Mary, he took flesh. And because in that flesh he
conversed here amongst us, and gave that flesh to us to eat for our salvation:
AND NO MAN EATS THAT FLESH UNLESS HE HAS FIRST ADORED: We have (here) found
how such a footstool of the Lord may be adored, and we should not only NOT SIN
IN A DORING, but WE SHOULD SIN (certainly) IN NOT ADORING: Thus St Augustine.

And above all others the Apostle expects that this service should be
worthily perfomed, 1 Cor. 11. otherwise sad effects did many times follow; for
whosoever shall eat this bread, and drink this cup of the Lord unworthily,
shall be guilty of the body and blood of the Lord, (Ver. 27.) He eats and
drinks damnation to himself, not discerning the Lords body (Ver. 29.) and for
this cause, says the Apostle, many are weak and sickly among you, and many
sleep, that is, they are struck dead, Ver. 30.

It is considerable in the Bethshemites, they took notice that the Ark of God
had been in Captivity amongst the uncircumcised Philistines, that they had set
it up in the house of Dagon, and had committed it to the conduct of Oxen, upon
a new Cart; and this homely usage of it gave them encouragement (never
considering the judgments that had been inflicted upon those Philistines) to be
Familiar with it, and to gaze upon it, without any reverence at all, 1 Samuel 6.
as if it had been alienated from Gods care and service, and was become an
ordinary common thing. But God does dreadfully vindicate this their
profanation; he strikes more then 50000 of them dead upon the place; that the
sharpness of his severity might recover that respect and veneration to the
Ark, which he saw was not like to be paid to it otherwise.

Men have made themselves very familiar with Almighty God, in these late times;
and his dreadful Ordinances, having been held in a kind of Captivity, and
sullied by the reproaches of ignorant and profane persons, they have been
looked upon as slight and common things: but be not deceived, God is not
mocked, neither will he always suffer himself to be affronted in his sacred
Assemblies and holy Institutions; if you have not ingenuity enough to render
all due reverence to Gods Ark; if the arguments of Reason and Religion cannot
prevail with you to this effect; if severity must be used, to procure this from
you (which concerns your own eternal good, no less then Gods glory) believe me,
in the end, when all must stoop, you will find that severity very sharp and
costly too: Romans 14.10, 11.
therefore approach the Ark of God with Humility and Reverence.

2. You must appreach it with Alacrity and Cheerfulness. It is admirable in
devout souls to consider how passionately affected they are with Gods solemn
worship, and the place where it is performed. When they are sequestrated from
it, they breathe out their devotions in fits of longing; If I forget thee, O
Jerusalem, if I do not remember thee, let my tongue cleave to the roof of my
mouth; if I prefer not Jerusalem above my chief joy: Psalm. 137.5, 6, 7.
How amiable are thy dwellings, O Lord of Hosts! My soul longs, yea, even
faints for the Courts of the Lord; for one day in thy Courts is better then a
thousand; Psalm. 84.1, 2, 4, 10.
I had rather be a doorkeeper in the house of my God; blessed are they that
dwell in thy house.

And there is nothing more welcome to a holy soul then an invitation to such a
Celestial entertainment; I was glad when they said unto me, Psalm. 122.1, 2:
we will go into the house of the Lord; and there he desires to fix his
station; Our feet shall stand within thy gates O Jerusalem: Yea, they shall joy
as the joy in harvest, as the joy of those that divide the spoil Isa. 9.3.
: I will go unto the Altar of God, unto God my exceeding joy Psalm. 43.4.
. Such a joy of heart as over flows the banks thereof, and causes exultation
in the body too; My heart danceth for joy; and not so only, but, my heart, and
my flesh also rejoices in the living God.

And much more, the glory of the flesh, the best member of it, the tongue, They
shall sing in the ways of the Lord, that great is the glory of the Lord. The
service of God should be like the celebration of a solemn Jubilee; Jubilate
Deo, O be joyful in the Lord all ye lands, Psalm. 100.1.
serve the Lord with gladness, and come before his presence with a song: and
again, O come, let us sing unto the Lord; Psalm. 95.1.
let us make a joyful noise to the Rock of our Salvation.

If we had that zeal of Gods glory, or that sense of our own duty, or if we had
but that regard to our own interest and advantage, that we should have, it were
impossible we should be either so slack in our approach, or (when present) so
cold and dull in our attention to Gods solemn service.

Are we not in some danger of Gods displeasure for this awkward carri^ge
toward him? does he not threaten his people for it? Deuteronomy. 28.47, 45. Because
thou servedst not the Lord thy God with joyfulnesse and gladness of heart, for
the abundance of all things: therefore shall thou serve thine enemies, which
the Lord shall send against thee, in hunger, and in thirst, and in want of all
things: he that cannot delight himself in the Solemnities of Gods house, in
that his gracious presence, where there is, in some sense, a fullness of joy,
Psalm. 16. ult.
it is pity he should ever come to his right hand, where are pleasures for
evermore: you must approach with Alacrity.

3. You must approach the Ark with unanimity: As Jerusalem was builded, Psalm.
122.3.
so it was governed, as a City at unity in it self. Psalm. 95.6.
The kingly Prophet invites, O come, let us worship and fall down and kneel
before the Lord; O magnify the Lord with me, Psalm. 34.3.
and let us exalt his name together. And at that great solemnity of Solomon's,
when he dedicated the house of the Lord, we find all Israel in consort with
him, 2 Chronicles. 7.4.
The King and all the people offered sacrifices before the Lord.

God has an expectation it should be so amongst us too; for he says by his
Evangelical Prophet, And it shall come to pass in the last days, Isa. 2.2, 3.
that the mountain of the Lords house shall be established in the top of the
mountains, and shall be exalted above the hills; and all nations shall flow
unto it. And many people shall go and say, Come ye, and let us go up to the
mountain of the Lord, to the house of the God of Jacob, and he will teach us of
his ways, and we will walk in his paths. For then (as the Lord says by
another Prophet) will I turn to the people a pure language, Zeph. 3.9.
that they may all call upon the name of the Lord, to serve him with one
consent, crouding in to the holy Assemblies with one shoulder, as the original
imports.

And that it might be so amongst us, how earnestly does the Apostle conjure us
in the persons of the Church of Philippi; if there be therefore any consolation
in Christ, Phil. 2.1, 2.
if any comfort of love, if any fellowship of the Spirit, if any bowels of
mercies; fulfill ye my joy; and what is that? that ye be like-minded, having the
same love, being of one accord, of one mind. For Christ has but one Church; My
love, my undefiled is one; there is one body, and one spirit, and ye are called
in one hope of your calling, one Lord, one Faith, Ephesians. 4.4, 5, 5.
one Baptism, one God and Father of all, who is above all, and through all, and
in you all. What a multiplicity of Arguments has the blessed Apostle twisted
together, to make the unity that should be amongst Christians indissoluble.

And if the advantages hereof were duly weighed, these alone were enough to
make it so. Origin weighing that verse of the Psalmist, See Magal. in Josh. c.
6. 1. Aunnot. 3.
Blessed are the people that know the joyful sound (Psalm. 89.15.) He quaeres
what it is that renders a people blessed. He says not, blessed are the people
that do righteousness; or blessed are the people that understand mysteries, or
are able to give an account of the heaven, of the earth, and of the stars: but,
he says, blessed are the people that know the sound (the jubilation). In other
(places) the fear of the Lord makes blessed, but it makes but one man
blessed; for so it is said, Blessed is the man that fears the Lord. Else
where we find also that more are blessed, as blessed are the poor in spirit;
blessed are the meek; blessed are the peacemakers; blessed are the pure in
heart. But here (in the Psalmist) the blessedness is profuse, and I know not
what so great cause of blessedness is intimated, that it should make the whole
people blessed, that hears the Jubilation. Unde mihi jubilatio videtur indicare
quendam concordiae, and unanimitatis affectum, whereupon it seems to me, that
this Jubilation does import an affection of concord and unanimity; which if it
clasps the hearts and hands of two or three Disciples together in Prayer, it
makes them so prevalent, (offering up their devotions in the name of Christ)
that the heavenly Father grants all they pray for.

And if it be so great a blessedness that a whole people are unanimous, that
they all speak the same thing, being joined together in the same mind and in
the same judgment, the united devotions of such a people may be as prevalent as
theirs were, in the Acts of the Apostles; They were of one heart and of one
soul, Acts 2.1. Chap. 4.31, 32.
they were with one accord in one place, and there was a great earthquake,
where they prayed (in unanimity) and the place being shaken the holy Ghost
descended. The joint devotions of an unanimous faithful people might be thus
effectual, terrae-motu facto destruentur and cadent omnia, quae terrena sunt,
ac mundus ipse subvertetur, says Origin; such an Earthquake might ensue, as
should remove those Mountains of earth, that oppose in our way to heaven, and
level the world under our feet, and bring down the Comforter to inlighten and
assist us.

Let us therefore approach the Ark of God with unanimity, and this will make us
inclinable to the last part of our duty, in our demeanor toward the Ark.

4. To approach it with uniformity; for our unanimity is to terminate and
center there, in uniformity. Hence the Apostle is so pathetical, 1 Cor. 1.10.
Now I beseech you, brethren, by the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that ye all
speak the same thing, and that there be no divisions (or Schisms) among you;
but that ye be perfectly joined together in the same mind and in the same
judgment. And why so? why, that ye may with one mind and one mouth glorify
God, even the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, Romans 15.6.

That promise of God, [ I will give them one heart and one way, Jer. 32.39.
Ezekiel. 11.19.
that they may fear me for ever] has reference certainly to the Christian
Church. But this is such a promise as implies our cooperation for the
accomplishment of it.

I demand then, whether God ^ath performed his Engagement to the Christian
Church? whether he has done his part, in giving his people one way? if not,
then we are to expect some new Revelations for the discovery of that way; for
how shall it be set open to us otherwise?

But this is not only contradicted by the Apostle, but sentenced too with the
dreadful commination of an Anathema; for thus he says, though we or an Angel
from heaven, Gal. 1.8, 9.
preach any other Gospel unto you, th^n that which we have preached unto you,
let him be accursed. And for the greater verification of this truth, he doubles
his asseveration; as we said before, so say I now again, if any man preach any
other Gospel unto you, th^n that ye have received, let him be accursed.

I am the way, says our Savior, and the truth too, and that can be but one;
we have the mind of Christ, 1 Cor. 2.16.
says the Apostle; and no man can, no man dare deny, that to be the one way,
that God has promised; and this is set open to the world, Acts 16.17.
by the Ministry of the Apostles and Evangelists; These men are the servants of
the most high God, which show unto us the way of salvation.

And if you ask me why some men refuse to walk in this way, I must refer you to
some of their stubborn fellow travelers, for answer; Thus says the Lord,
Stand ye in the ways and see and ask for the old paths, where is the good way,
and walk therein, and ye shall find rest for your souls: but they said, we will
not walk therein, Jer. 6.16.

And why not? why, here lies the quarrel, God has appointed certain Guides to
direct us and point out the way to us, and we are offended at this; we make our
Guides our stumbling blocks; God has also given a general Order to these
Guides, to set up some shades for our better accommodation, and to hang up some
lights for our more safe and regular walking, in this way, leaving it to their
care and prudence, what these shades shall be made of, and where these lights
shall be set up; and here, having an overweening conceit of our own worth, and
wanting that due reverence for our Guides and Governors, which we ought to
have, we fall out in and about the way too; pride and prejudice, Envy and
Animosity strike in, and make us NON-CONFORMISTS.

The Apostle foresaw this, or rather had a present intuition of it, in some
Churches of his own planting; and therefore when he injoyns this accord and
uniformity, for securing this duty he prescribes also these Caveats, Let
nothing be done through strif, Phil. 2.2, 3.
or vainglory, but in lowliness of mind let each esteem other better th^n
themselves. And the same charge he gives to the Ephesians; Ephesians. 4.1, 2, 3.
I therefore, the prisoner of the Lord, beseech you, that ye walk worthy of the
vocation wherewith ye are called, with all lowliness and meekness, with long
suffering, forbearing one another in love; (and by keeping this temper
especially toward our Guides) endeavoring to keep the unity of the Spirit in
the bond of peace.

Uniformity is this bond of the Churches peace; and it is that that makes her
terrible as an Army with Banners; which attribute no society of men can boast
of, Cant. 6.10.
but where they all keep the same posture, and observe the same motions, and
obey the same word of command, under their respective Officers.

In obedience therefore to the Apostles command, as well as for the honor and
advantage of Gods Church, Let us, as many as be perfect, be thus minded, Phil.
3.15. that is, as it follows, in the next verse, Let us walk by the same rule,
let us mind the same thing. And I must add (to take away an objection that may
arise from the words intervening) it may be very justly expected that we should
be so perfect, as is there required; for though some novices in the Faith, who
were then but newly crept out of the darkness of Heathenism, or the shades of
the Jewish observances; though these, I say, might then expect, some further
Revelation, to inlighten them more clearly, in that which by reason of their
ignorance, or prejudice, they were not, for the present, satisfied in; yet we
are to expe^^ no such matter, we have already attained to the utmost we can
expect of immediate Revelation Gal. 2.8, 9. Jud. ep. 3.
; and it is our duty, (Divine Revelation and Command has made it so) in all
doubtful matters to res;ign our judgments up to the conduct of such Guides Heb.
13, 7, and 17.
as God has set over us; and for the truth of this Position, I appeal to the
declared doctrine of Mr. Baxter, for thus he says, [ In his Unsavory Volumn
against Mr. Crandon, or his No^egay presented to Mr. Joseph Caryll, (page 83.)
ante finem.
Let me be bold to tell my opinion to my Brethren of the Ministry, that though
I deny them to have either credit or Authority against the known Word of God,
yet so great is their credit and Authority, even as Teachers and Guides of the
Church, in Causes agreeable to the Word, and in Causes to the people doubtful
and unknown, and in Causes left by the Word to their determination, (the Word
determining them but generally) that I think the ignorance of this truth has
been the main cause of our sad Confusions and Schisms in England, and that the
Ministers have been guilty of it, partly by an ^ver-modest concealing their
Authority, and partly by an indiscreet opposition to the Papists error of the
Authority of the Church: and I think that till we have better taught, even our
godly people, what credit and obedience is due to their Teachers and Spiritual
Guides, the Churches of England shall never have peace, or any good or
established Order. I say again, we are broken for want of the knowledge of this
truth; and till this be known, we shall never be well bound ^p and healed.]
Thus far Mr. Baxter.

And as many as walk according to this rule, Gal. 6.16.
peace be on the^ and mercy, and upon the Israel of God, Amen.

Mr Crofton's Position Examined, AND An Imposed Liturgy Justified.
THat it is pride and an over-weaning Conceit of their own worth which makes men
Non-Conformists, I shall now give you a pregnant evidence out of the Pamphlet
mentioned in the Title Page.

In a Postscript to that Pamphlet the Author tells us of a Paper taken out of
Mr. Crofton's pocket, containing his high way thoughts, which he committed to
paper to communicate to a Nonconformist. Having procured a Copy thereof (as he
pretends) with some difficulty, he sends it to a friend, with his leave, to
make it public, and thereby (as he says) to capacitate our Conforming Clergy
to resolve (if they can) one of the great scruples which (he says) barreth Mr
Crofton's Conformity, and Ministration by a Liturgy.

The Position he lays down is this, That [A Minister of the Gospel cannot
without sin receive a Liturgy generally and exclusively imposed.]

But wha^ is it the man contends for? That an Order and regular Method of
praying, page 1.
reading the Scriptures, and administration of other parts of Worship, in
convenient time and order, successively each after other, in their proper
place, this he confesses to have been used in all Churches of Jews and
Christians; and This (he says) is dictated by all Rules of Order and Prudence
necessary to humane Society, so specified as to constitute an holy Convocation.
A Rubric or Direction he acknowledges too, as the genuine product of
Ecclesiastical Polity, and the Forma informans of that Uniformity in public
Order, which is maintained without Unity of Words and Forms, Terms and
Expressions, as the ornament and honor of any particular and circumscribed
Church. Such a Liturgy as this he allows of, that is, The Directory.

But stated Forms for the celebration of Solemn Public Worship, and the
several parts thereof, composed, page 2.
digested, and ( for the very words, terms, and expressions thereof) determined
and prescribed by some others th^n the Parson, or Minister who stands to
minister Gods Ordinances between God and his Church; such an imposed Liturgy he
cannot submit unto.

So that here we have a mere (...), 1 Timothy 6.4. 2 Timothy 2.14.
a strife about words, terms and expressions, say the Apostle what he will to
the contrary. And of what extraction is this quarrel then? From whence come
wars and strivings amongst you? come they not from hence, even from the lusts
that war in your members? The Apostle takes it for granted, and the Wise man is
positive in it, Only by pride comes contention. And it is so certain in this
individuation of it, That our Pick-pocket, or pretended Mr. Crofton, page 3.
has not artifice enough to dissemble it: For he says, It cannot be denied to
be a most base and slavish servility, to prostitute the Office to which we are
apted [but not without humility] and ordained by the Lord Jesus Christ, unto
the pleasure and prescriptions of men, though the best for quality and
authority.

But not so passionate, good Mr. Crofton; you may please to be so humble as to
condescend to such an imposition for peace and order sake; and that I prove by
this Argument.

What I may lawfully be determined to by my own private judgment, that I may
lawfully be determined to by the judgment of my Superiors.

But to stated Forms for the celebration of Gods solemn public worship
composed, and (for the very words, terms and expressions) digested into method,
I may lawfully be determined by my own private judgment: Therefore,

To stated Forms for the celebration of Gods solemn public worship, composed,
and (for the very words, terms and expressions) digested into method, I may
lawfully be determined, by the judgment of my Superiors.

In this Argument, the Minor or Assumption cannot be denied; it is that Mr.
Crofton contends for; for I hope he does not exclude his judgment, when he
pleads for the liberty of his own Invention to Compose and Modifie his Forms of
public worship.

The Major is proved thus;

That which I may lawfully be determined to by a weaker judgment, to that I may
lawfully be determined by a judgment that is stronger.

But to stated Forms, etc. I may lawfully be determined by a weaker judgment (
viz. my own); therefore, to stated Forms, etc. I may lawfully be determined by
a judgment that is stronger, viz. that of my Superiors.

To deny the Major in this Argument, were to make himself ridiculous; and in
effect, to affirm, that a man may see more clearly by a dim light then by a
brighter. And to deny the Minor were to arrogate to himself a better judgment,
then that of his Superiors; which cannot be done without intolerable pride and
presumption, contrary to the express order of the Apostle, Phil. 2.3. Let
nothing be done through strif or vainglory, but in lowliness of mind let each
esteem other better then themselves: That ye (may) walk worthy of the vocation,
wherewith ye are called, with all lowliness and meekness: endeavoring to keep
the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace, Ephesians. 4.1, 2, 3.

But (to lay the Axe to the very root of his Ratiocination) he says the
Ministerial Modification (of public worship) by personal abilities, Page 4,
and 5.
is the formal act of the Ministerial Office; but to resign this formal act up
to a Ministry-destroying-imposition is sinful.

But I deny the Modification of worship by personal abilities to be the Formal
act of the Ministerial Office. The Formal act of the Ministerial Office is to
Minister; the Modification as well by personal Abilities, as by public
Authority, is extrinsecal and circumstantial to it. To make the Modification of
the Act to be the Formal act it self, is to make the Apparel the Man; which is
very absurd, except it be in a man of clouts; and truly Mr. Crofton's Argument
is no better.

Object. But the Imposition and Prescription in Prayer and Sacraments is
applicable to preaching.

Sol. To which I answer, 1. That certainly a Sermon is never the worse for
being well digested; And, 2. if it be seen and allowed by Authority, I know no
harm in it; And, 3. if it were not an endless work, this course would secure
the peace and solid edification of the Church the better; And, 4. when the
Presbyterians Preach other men's printed Sermons, (as some of them are
frequently observed to do) this is supposed to be no prejudice to the interest
of those souls that hear them.

But the truth is, there is a vast difference betwixt Prayer and Preaching, for
our Savior has taught us, that the first may be regularly and fully comprised
in a short Office; whereas the later has as many Fields to expatiate in, as
there are several Texts in the holy Bible; and here lies the most proper Scene,
for the variety of Gifts to perform their public exercise upon.

Besides, Gifts being designed for the edification of the Church, Governors
are concerned to take care they be not abused to the confusion of it, 1 Cor.
14.32, 33. Uzzah did but employ his Gifts; and Corah might pretend to do no
more.

What M. Crofton objects, Page 6. in fi^e.
by way of instance, touching the Parish Clerk and people is no more to our
prejudice, then it is to his own purpose; for without all peradventure they are
a general part of the holy Priesthood St Peter speaks of; 1 Pet. ^.5.
and it is their duty to bear a part in Gods solemn worship.

But I cannot think (says Mr. Crofton,) that any Bishop or his examinant will
judge a Schoolboy, Page 6.
twelve years old, sufficiently qualified to execute the formal act of the
Ministerial Office; and indeed, no more can I. But we must not so look to
personal abilities as to forget Divine Ordination. An ordinary Butcher, under
the Law, could dress a Lamb or a yoke of Oxen, as well as the best of the Sons
of Levi; and yet his personal abilities did not qualify him to offer
sacrifice. The efficacy of the Ministry does flow, as little, I am sure, ex
opere operantis, as ex opere operato; it depends not upon the cant and tone, or
the wording of the Minister that does officiate, but upon the Institution and
Promise of Christ himself. And Mr. Crofton cannot be our adversary in this;
Page 7. line, 2, 3.
for, he says [ I hope Protestants make not the intention, or intrinsecal
power of the Administrator, the formality, and so the efficacy of the
administration,] which is enough to cut the throat of his Argument; for it
follows from hence by an undeniable consequence, that the efficacy of the
Ministry does not depend upon personal Abilities. And, if another concession of
his, at the end of the same Page, be well considered, viz: that [ the Minister
must not vary any thing in the matter and substance of appointed worship.] it
will make much for the credit of stated Forms in the several parts of our
Ministration, as being; out of all question, far less subject to the danger of
varying from the matter and substance of appointed worship, th^n the
modification of it, especially by the extemporary exerting of personal
abilities.

So that upon the matter Mr. Crofton is still condemned of himself; and till
some better evidence be brought to the contrary, I must remain (as formerly) in
this opinion, that Pulpit Conceptions are (but) Popular Deceptions; And to the
Treatise that bears that Title I refer the Reader for a fuller proof thereof.

In the mean while I shall offer Mr. Crofton and his party a proof, that they
are bound to submit to the use of a prescribed Liturgy, that they may be at
peace with their Governors and their own Consciences, by keeping the unity of
the Spirit in the bond of peace with the Church of God.

To do whatsoever is morally possible, for Uniformity and peace sake, is your
duty.

But to submit to the use of a prescribed Liturgy is morally possible.

Therefore, to submit to the use of a prescribed Liturgy is your duty.

The Major is proved by Apostolical injunction; if it be possible (and) as much
as in you lies, live peaceably with all men, Romans 12.18.

The Minor is proved thus;

That which is not sinful, and is within our natural power is morally possible.
But to submit to a prescribed Liturgy is not sinful, and is within our natural
power;

Therefore, to submit to a prescribed Liturgy is morally possible.

The Major of this Argument [what is not sinful and is within our natural
power, is morally possible] cannot reasonably be denied.

The Min^r, as to the last branch of it, [to submit to a prescribed Liturgy is
within our natural power] this is evident of it self.

The first branch [to submit to a prescribed Liturgy is not sinful,] is proved
thus.

What is forbidden by no Law is not sinful. But to submit to a prescribed
Liturgy is forbidden by no Law. Therefore, to submit to a prescribed Liturgy is
not sinful.

The Major is proved by the definition of sin; sin is the transgression of the
Law, 1 John 3.4.

The Minor is justified upon this account. 1. As to the Form of Words, that is
not forbidden by any Law of God; for the Apostle says, Hold fast the Form of
sound words, 2 Timothy 1.13. and, I beseech you, brethren, by the name of our Lord
Jesus Christ, that ye all speak THE SAME THING, 1 Cor. 1.10. That ye may with
ONE MIND and ONE MOUTH glorify God, Romans 15.6.

2. As to our submission to the use of such prescribed Forms, that is no where
forbidden neither: but on the contrary, it is commanded, Heb. 13.17. Obey them
that have the rule over you, and submit your selves; and we should remember,
that to obey is better th^n Sacrifice, 1 Samuel 15.

Upon these grounds I conclude against Mr. Croftons Position, that a Minister
of the Gospel may, without sin, receive a Liturgy generally and exclusively
imposed, for the Celebration of Gods Solemn Public Worship.

And the receiving such a Liturgy, (...). Croft. page 2.
upon the Authority of our Superiors, with all submission and obedience does
not resolve the Administrator into the Dilemma of obeying God or man (as Mr.
Crofton pretends;) for God and man stand not here in opposition, but
subordination; and he that does not obey both, does obey neither.

Mr Crofton's CREED, Concerning Communion with Gods Church, Jerubbaal
justified, p. 12. etc.
commended to the observation of Gods people, and consideration of Gods
Ministers, as those which few sober men will deny to be true, and being well
understood would readily direct a godly man's course in the hour of temptation.
1. THe Church Catholic visible distributed (through necessity, and good
order) to particular Assemblies must sanctify the Lords day by an holy
Convocation.

2. The Congregation of particular Christians convened in full and open
joynt-Assemblies, to celebrate Gods solemn worship, is the formality of an holy
Convocation.

3. The worship celebrated in the holy Convocation for the matter and essential
form by which it substantially existeth, must be determined by the Lord, and by
him alone.

4. All worship of men's invention superadded to Gods appointment must be
avoided, abandoned by every of Gods people; but Gods worship substantially
existing with the same must not be disowned or declined.

5. Gods worship celebrated by and among men must be ministered, and exist in
and by an humane mode and dress suitable to, and so fit to edify such a
Creature and society.

6. The humane mode and dress, words and phrases, by which Gods worship must
exist, and be minstred in and to the Church, is not determined by the Lord, but
wholly left to the wisdom and faithfulness of them who minister the same.

7. The humane Ministerial modification of Gods Ordinances in and to the Church
is the formal act of the Ministerial Office to be fulfilled, and performed by
the Ministerial gifts, the personal abilities of every individual Minister, who
is gifted of God, and ordained by the Church for that purpose. [This Article is
confuted in the Answer to the Position above mentioned.]

8. The ministerial mode and order of Gods worship being wholly humane,
determined by men's wisdom and faithfulness, it is and cannot but be subject to
much and great corruption in defect and disorder, rudeness and irreverence in
expressions. Here it cannot be denied but the sudden and extemporary mode is
much more subject to these Corruptions, [in defect and disorder, rudeness and
irreverence] than the solemn and maturely-stated Forms.

9. The guilt of all defect and disorder in the humane ministerial mode of Gods
worship is immediately, properly, and directly personal, charged on the
Minister, and on him alone: not on the Church, or any the members thereof.

10. All defects, disorders, rude and impertinent expressions, in the humane,
ministerial mode of Gods worship: are corruptions, circumstantial, and
extrinsecal, in and by which Gods worship may substantially exist in matter,
and essential form, capable of operation to its appointed end.

11. Defects, disorders, and corruptions in the ministerial mode of Gods
Ordinances fixed, continued and reiterated, are more sinful and offensive to
God, and his people, th^n those which are present and transient; but both these
are sins of one and the same nature and quality, and of equal influence on Gods
worship ministered by the same. [But the extemporary and transient modes of
single persons are more subject to these corruptions and disorders, as was said
above.]

12. No defects, or disorders in the humane ministerial mode, (whether fixed,
and reiterated in and by imposed and prescribed forms, or expressed in and by
present transient conceived forms, in and by which Gods worship does
substantially exist, for matter and form, in and to his Church) will warrant
any Christians secession, voluntary withdrawing from the holy Convocation, or
non-communion in Gods worship so ministered.

For 1. these notwithstanding, Gods worship does truly, fully, formally exist,
capable of operation to its appointed end: 2. This sin is purely personal,
chargeable on the Minister, who stands charged with the office of ministerial
modification of Gods worship, in, and to the Church: the people or particular
members of the Church, may and must pass on this (as other personal acts) a
judgment of charity, which does direct them to grieve for the sin existent; to
complain of it, and as they have opportunity to admonish the sinner (though the
Sons of Eli) of i^, and seek the correction and removal of the same; but they
have not of it any judicium publicum, judgment of Office, charged on them, by
the specialty of duty: and armed with a just moral power of correction, so as
that the same should be the neglect of this public duty, become their sin, and
leave its guilt on their souls. That Gods worship (does) formally exist in
every mode of ministration, every Christian and member of the Church must judge
and see: for by this corruption, the holy Convocation cease, and they worship
not God: [I suppose the Authors meaning is this, as to this corruption the holy
Convocation cease, and they worship not God by it:] but the mode it self is
personally charged on the Minister: the defect and disorder is an accident
resulting from the sloth, negligence, ignorance, weakness and unfa^thfulness of
the Minister, and an adjunct separable from Gods worship existent by the same.

Sir, I pray you take good notice of this, that the private Christian, and
particular members of the Church have no public judgment of office, concerning
the Ministerial mode of Gods worship: for Sir, it is a notion of much weight
and use in this Case; and it appears plainly true, if the modifying of Gods
worship be, as it cannot be d^nyed to be the personal act of an Officer
appointed to that end: [ We say this belongs peculiarly to the Governors of
the Church to order.]

Moreover, Sir, if the people have a public judgment of the ministerial mode
of Gods worship, we are under a necessity of having what we so much complain
against, and cast off, (viz) a fixed Liturgy for the mode of Prayer, Preaching,
Ministration of Sacraments: [which] must then be known to the people, and
judged by them free from all defect and disorder, before the people can attend
Gods worship in that Ministration.

It must be confessed impossible, for a single Minister constantly to
communicate to every particular member of his Congregation the mode into which
he has (by his personal abilities and ministerial Gifts) cast the word Prayer
and Sacraments.

No serious, sober Christian, can think the people to be guilty of those rude
methods, indigested, raw expressions, tautologies, soloecismes, and disorders,
which a Minister may utter in his preaching, and praying; yet this is
inevitable if the people have a public judgment by special office, of the
ministerial mode of Gods worship: It is indeed true, the defective, disordered
mode of worship which is fixed, stated, and so from time (to time) reiterated
is more obvious and offensive, then what is transient, and so by the judgment
of charity more burdensome to the people, the grief of it being continued and
renewed: but it is the judgment of office, armed with power to correct, (that)
deriveth the guilt of the one, or of the other.

This is the sum of what Mr. Crofton believes concerning Church Communion. And
whether the Church of God be not more secure in her Freedom from corruptions
and disorders, by fixed, stated Forms, then by such as are indigested,
transient and extemporary, I appeal to the Reason and Common Sense of all the
World. And there is

AN END.

