depiction of a male figure in a torn coat at the bottom of a hill 2: Sam: 15:
verse the 32 Behold Hushai the Archite came to meet the King with his coat rent
and earth upon his head

Loyalty amongst REBELS. The True ROYALIST, Or HUSHAY the Archite. A happy
Counselor in King's DAVID'S Greatest Danger.

Say unto Absalon I will be thy servant O King.

2 Samuel 15.34. I Counsel thee to keep the Kings Commandment, and that in
Regard of the Oath of God.

Eccles. 8.2. Written by EDWARD WOLLEY D.D. and Chaplain in Ordinary to his
Sacred Majesty King CHARLES the II.

LONDON, Printed for John Williams, at the sign of the Crown in S. Paul's
Churchyard. 1662.

To the Right Honorable JOHN Baron Grenvil of Kilkhampton and Biddiford,
Viscount Grenvil of Lands-Down and Earl of Bathe, Groom of the Stool, and
first Gentleman of the Bedchamber, Lord Warden of the Stanneryes, Lord
Lieutenant of the County of Cornwall; and High Steward of the Duchy and
Governor of his Majesty's Town; Island, Fort and Castle of the Garrison of
Plymouth.
MY LORD,
I Have had the honor and happiness to know you from your tender years, and
have discerned your cordial affections and endeavors, to serve the Church, as
an obedient Son; your Prince, as a most Loyal Subject; and your Country, as
a most faithful Patriot. And as Pompey (when but a youth) to experience your
Fortitude, and fidelity to the Crown, and (without injury or flattery) it may,
in some degree, be said of you, as Plutarch writes of that Noble Roman, Is
etiamnum adolescens, totum se factioni Syllanae addixit; cumque nec
Magistratus, nec Senator esset, magnum ex Italia contraxit exercitum. That you
were a very early Commander in your youth, and those four terrible wounds,
which you received in the fight at Newberry; three in your head, and one in
your arm: Continue those marks and cicatrices, which, as honorable badges of
loyalty, will bear you company to your Grave. It was a question once started
about Ascanius by Andromache: whether he was like his Father Aeneas or his
Uncle Hector,

Ecquid in antiquam virtutem animosque viriles
Et Pater Aeneas, and a vunculus excitat Hector?
Andromache in Virgil:
Aeneid de Ascanio.
But there is not any need of such a question concerning your Lordship, in whom
the variety of your Noble Ancestors seem to concenter: So that the piety of
Richardus de Grana Villa, who founded the Abbey of Neath in Glamorgan-shire, in
the fourth year of the reign of King William Rufus, lives in you. The courage
of Sir Richard Grenvil, your great Grandfather who commanded the Rear-Admiral,
a Ship called the Revenge; wherein he so gallantly behaved himself, that in a
desperate fight at Sea with the Spaniards, he sunk and destroyed infinite
numbers of Qu. Elizabeth's enemies, when others made all the sail they could to
avoid the danger.) And the loyalty and great worth of Sir Bevill Grenvill seem
as thriving seeds to grow up, and flourish in you. And it will be an honor and
happiness to your Lordship, to be not only a Son and Heir of his Name and
loins, but of his virtues; who so loved the Church of England, that in person
he guarded the late Lord Archbishop of Canterbury against the fury of the
tumultuous Rabbles in all commotions and Rebellions; either of England and
Scotland, (in the late blessed Kings Reign,) he manifested the duty of a Loyal
Subject, and of a noble Commander, at the fight at Stratton; he was successful
against the enemy, with a handful of men; And at the fight at Lands-downe;
like another Epaminondas, though he lost his life, he got the Victory: Et cum
sentiret vulnus esse lethale, non prius ferrum eduxit, quam audisset Thebanos
vicisse, tum satis inquit, vixi, invictus enim morior. To encourage his
Soldiers; he fought with bleeding wounds, and finding that his country men,
like Gallant Thebans, won the day: animam efflavit; he fell gloriously into the
bosom of true honor and renown: These exemplars of virtue have (doubtless)
attracted your Resolutions to imitation of your Ancestors, and have enflamed
your affections with true and right principles of Nobleness and honor. But
that which renders you most lovely to all who know your Lordship, is that
incomparable service, which by your prudence, fidelity, secrecy, and courage:
was transacted and effected, together with the Duke of Albemarle, and his
brother the Lord Bishop of Hereford: in order to his Majesty's Restoration:
which makes three Kingdoms happy. This is the chiefest loadstone and motive,
that makes me address to your Lordship for patronage and protection in this
argument, wherein I endeavor to prove; that truth may be in company with
Traitors, and Loyalty amongst Rebels, as Hushai the Archite who was King David's
best friend, and most faithful subject in his greatest danger. It is true; many
worthyes did attend his Majesty's Person, in pinching extremityes abroad for
many years, and many thousand loyal Subjects of the three Kingdoms endured
insupportable miseries from usurping and bloody Wolves at home, and the stings
of a sort of Trepanning creeping Serpants, (as equally venomous as dangerous)
hardly to be avoided. These true Royalists were (on all occasions) active in
their persons, in their counsels, in their relations, and their friends in
their purses, and their prayers, and by all ways and interests, to promote his
Majesty's Restoration. But your Lordship (as a more signal instrument of much
happiness) has received gracious marks of Noble trust, honor and favor,
from his Majesty; and the thanks of all England in the Kingdoms Representative
the Parliament, which will prove a happy record of your honor to posterity,
and blessed for ever be those hands and hearts, who have contributed much, or
cast in, if but a mite, to that blessed work. There is another small and tender
branch, which budded seasonably about seven years since, and appeared in the
Kingdom; under the complexion and color of a Translation in the case and
Parallel of Lewis the fourth the French King. This, first went abroad to keep
alive those loyal sparks, which lay-under the ashes of Cruelty and Persecution,
in the year 1654. and meeting with courteous tinder, it took fire, and inflamed
many affections toward the King. This small piece was reprinted eight months
before his Majesty's return to England; and it proved so prosperous, that some
thousand copies were dispersed and vented in forty hours. And then it grew
suddenly a public discourse in the City and Country (videlicet:) the Kings
Case in the Parallel of Lewis the fourth of France: This Branch leans on your
Lordships Patronage and favor, and is added to this discourse, to perpetuate
all Subjects resolutions in their allegiance to their Princes, and as a part of
justice and merit, that his endeavors nay be discerned, who gave it life, and
first fixed and planted it in England, and so not to be any longer fathered on
adopted authors. Tulit alter honores. Virgil.
My Lord, I shall not afflict your Lordship with any further present trouble;
but wishing the increase of happiness and honor; daily to redound on your
Lordship and your enobled family. I cordially subscribe my Self; ( My honored
Lord,)

Your Lordships faithfully obliged Servant EDWARD WOLLEY, D.D.

LOYALTY AMONGST REBELS The true Royalist OR Hushai the Archite A happy
Counselor in King David's greatest danger.
DOminion and Soveraignities, the highest trust, and most illustrious gift that
Quid majus inter homines quam unum praesse pluribus? leges and jussa ponere?
maria terras. Pacem and bella moderari? I. Lips. ad Reges imperat. Principes,
Epist. dedica. Polit.
God bestows on his creature man, for what degree can be more sublime then
for one to be supreme; and to command many thousands: to make laws, and to
impose decrees that shall force obedience. And having an influence on men's
lives, liberties, and fortunes; to hold the raines of government in all
affairs, both by sea and land, and by the rights of an unlimited just
prerogative to have power to regulate and moderate the vicissitudes of Peace
and War: and by grant and Commission from Heavenb to superintend, and to
exercise an imperial and sovereign power in all concernments; 1 Cor. 3.5.
whether Ecclesiastical, Civil or Martial: this dignity only suites and seems
fit for some terrestrial diety, (...). Psalm, 82.6. Dixi dii estis. Proverb.
8.15. Per me Reges regnant.
and therefore may justly expect and challenge a Person of Greatest worth and
most complete capacities; and the rather because the state of K James duty of
a. K. in his Royal office. p. 2.
Monarchy is the supreamest thing upon earth. And Kings are not only Gods
Lievtenants upon earth, but by God himself they are called Gods, whom they much
resemble in several Attributes, of Wisdom, Power, justice, Mercy and the like.
Thus Kings as mortal Gods create or destroy; make or unmake at pleasure, give
life or send death to their subjects, are judges over all, and owe account to
none but God, they humble or advance them at their pleasure; and as
Arithmeticians placing their figures, cause their subjects (at their pleasure)
to signify a greater or smaller number, or to be as mere ciphers, that shall
be utterly useless and insignificant. To this supreme order of mortals, to
Kings and sovereign Princes, is due the affection of the Soul and the service
of the body from all their subjects. And from this principle and root of
obedience springs up the branches of fidelity, Allegiance and Loyalty; which is
to be paid and performed to lawful Kings and Princes, from all their subjects;
none but seditious and traitorous spirits dare assert the contrary; and this
later Age has too much been poisoned with such distillations and dangerous
untruths: which, though they produced many horrid mischiefs and monsters, (the
ugly common births of Rebellion and Treason,) are now unmasked and more clearly
discerned, by the beams of experience; and a more perspicuous light which has
in a great proportion dispersed those mists and foggs that engendered and begat
so many prodigious and horrid effects to a gracious K. Charles the first the
royal martyr.
King, and a most unhappy and miserable People. A Civil war and confusion and
distractions of almost twenty years.
So then there needs no dispute nor direction of the Subjects to there duty;
seeing all are involved to the rules of obedience, by the laws of God and man,
but it may be of some concernment to many, who love the company and comfort of
a good conscience as Christians, and to others, who thirst after nothing more,
then true honor and Reputation, as men or subjects, to make a privy search
into their own souls, and so to bring there actions words and affections to
the touchstone of truth, whereby they may find there failings from, or their
performance in, their loyal duties to wards their Sovereign; and so abandoning
all excuses, and waveing all unjust pretenses, make out a happy satisfaction to
themselves: though not to others, who either too supercilious, as Cato, Cato
uticensis stoica disciplina severus; nudis interdum pedibus, brevique toga in
Publicum prodibat. Plut. Timon Atheniensis temporibus Peloponia ci belli, in
humanus, ab Atheniensibus (...), appellatus quasi genus hominum infensum
fuerit. Caro. Stepha.
or to rigid as Timon the Athenian, undiscreetly or uncharitably censure all
men's actions but their own, in this scrutininy, that so nearly concerns honor
and conscience: the proceedings ought to be impartial, and the examination
strickt, because the concernment is so considerable, and in this particular,
neither politic rules, great and more eminent examples, nor glorious and
advantageous successes, are to guide or gratify affections, or to blindfold
and captivete reason; but an untainted judgment, settled and fixed on true
principles of honor and Christian sincerity, is the truest light in such a
dark and dangerous path; where self interest, flattery, opinion, hope, fear,
and many such inherent companions are industrious to divert good inclinations,
and to exchange them from the love of virtue and truth. As to the rules of
humain politics (as mush-rooms in a night) they are conceived in secrecy of
Councels; and have their birth and appear in the day: and those maxims are as
alterable as the wind, which in an instant moves from one point to another of
the card or compass. As to examples, though never so great or numerous they are
not to sway, a noble mind from what is truly honorable, nor a good Christian
from any point or tenet that is religious and just; and as to successes, though
never so prosperous, they ought not to move or prevail with a generous and
pious spirit, to make him vicious, hyprocritical or false. For if honor be
rather in the opinions or estimations of others, then in our selves rather in
merit and truth, then titles and forced Ceremonies; and victory unjustly or
more cunningly and obscurely gotten, brings less of true renown: how ingrate
must successes to riches, and advancement to great places be without an
honorable achievement, and just acquisition. These considerations stated, a
loyal person may more easily sift himself, and after so many difficulties and
trials of a civil war, enter more securely into the secrets of his own soul;
and their removing all scruples, may more clearly discern how faithfully and
sincerely he has adhered too, or how perfidiously and falsely he has apostated
and fallen from his duty to God and to his King. It is true the world is too
full of excuses and apologies, each person (clad with the resolutions of self
interest, either too much magnifying his own merits, or too much extenuating
his own crimes and errors) is sick of self love. And as Minerva blowing a
Flagellet or pipe puffed up her cheeks though to a deformity: many swell and
grow big with the breath of self opinion, and though their ways and works
have been never so dissonant or opposite to honor, reason or truth; Yet in a
Thrasonical humor, or Pharisaical pride, they cry up and justify all their
own proceedings, with all the circumstances of their dictates and designs, and
at the same time are ready to decry and detract from others: though never so
square in their actions and sincere and candid in all their resolutions. Seeing
then that Philautia, self love and adulation so easily, suddenly, and
pleasingly surpriseth men's phansies, corrupts their judgments, captivateth
reason: and in fine enslaveth the soul, it may well become all who are truly
enamored with virtue, honor, justice and the hopes of a good report, or (to
mount a step higher) to love the peace and tranquillity of a calm and unspotted
conscience, in this nice point, carefully to submit there senses to reason, and
the strength of reason, to the force and power of godliness, which is the best
preservative of the soul in all trials and more refined probations.

And it is Piety that is the touchstone that discovers the metal whether it
be true or false; It is the scale that ballanceth every word and action, and
determines them either weighty or light. This as the rudder of the Ship
governs, as the anchor it holds, as the Pilot it directs, and as the
keile swimming in the bottom of the angry waves, it secureth and supporteth all
the superstructure of the floating artificial Castle, that overglideth and
surmounteth the lofty billows of the Ocean. Conscience is the daughter of
Piety, which (grounded on the principles of truth, and a good cause,)
encourages men to be divinely affected toward God, and loyally resolved
toward their Prince. It is probable in this great revolution and stupendous
vicissitude of government, the streams of the subjects affections, returning
passionately to their King, and to monarchy, that all, or at least the greatest
number of the people of the three Kingdoms may plead a cooperation or a
concurrency in this miraculous change. And as the laborers in the vineyard to
boast and proclaim, that they have not only suffered and sweat, but even born
the brunt and bickerment of the day: others may perhaps challenge to themselves
the merit, not only of pardon and amnesty, but of thanks, grace and favor;
because they appeared serviceable at the last hour: and doubtless royal bounty
will not deny them the wages of their loyalty, if their return to their Prince
be cordial and sincere. But the case of Hushai the Archite stated rightly, may
like a bright Beacon set on fire, and (flaming on some high Mountain,) give an
Alarm, and luster, to the amazement of all spectators. In this president of
Hushai, a loyal subject may see the warrant, the reasons, the matter, the
manner, and the truths of his duty, being such an example in the King, who
employed him in the person, who was commanded and trusted, and for the eminency
and concernment of the service, wherein he was employed, that hardly and humain
or holy history can parallel the like, and all these circumstances conduce much
to guide the Prince to his royal care, whom to trust or employ, and as equally
concerns the the subjects and people how to dispose of themselves even in their
greatest dangers of their lives and fortunes, toward their King and Sovereign.
This has been the condition of many gallant and loyal souls, who not only in
their personal valor, but in all their contrivances, and councels, have made
it their choicest interest, as equally near as the saving of their souls, to
hold up the honor of the crown withal its just rites and prerogatives, ever
since the first commotions, and troubles of the late war, or that the late
formidable rebellion had so intoxicated and bewitched the giddy humors of the
People of his Majesty's three kingdoms; and as persons of these affections,
resolutions and principles were led and fixed to their Prince, so, a zealous
duty to the Church of England their mother, wrought their persuasions, to a
careful preservation of that truth and religion; which the most learned and
most judicious sober Christians hold fourth, for, both doctrine and discipline
to be the purest profession, the best form of serving God; and to come nearest
to the pious practice of the primitive Christians: and though in the three
Kingdoms, it was forced like a Dove to the clefts of the Rocks, to fly into
upper chambers, private Closets, or secret corners, yet the honor of God, the
saving of Souls, the beauty of Sion, was (ever during the violence of the
persecution) so precious, that the Church of England found dutiful children,
and courageous Sons and Daughters in her blackest Afflictions. And as the Ark
had the protection of a Royal Patron and nursing Father abroad for many years,
K. Charles the 2.
so it was supported and preserved by the dutiful hands and hearts of many
thousands of the three Kingdoms, whose very souls did pray and long for
nothing more then his Majesty's joyful Restoration, and that the Ark might
return happily with him. And now (not to loose the argument) a review may be
more Genuinely taken, and a stricter examination made in Hushai the Archites
great and wise undertakings, and his happy and high performances and successes,
both to the Church, the Crown and the Kingdom of Judah and Israel, for all,
who made bonefires, caused Bells to ring, and with other external circumstances
made Heaven and Earth to rejoice with cheerful and loud acclamations: were not
Israelites indeed, like Nathaniel, or wise and courageous and loyal Hushai: it
may be believed that many who had wide throats and made loud vociferations at
his Majesty's return, had but narrow affections; and it is possible, that guilt
or fear, or danger, may force a compliancy, where the stream was so strangely
turned, and ran as a mighty Tide or torrent with such irresistible violence.
Therefore Hushai's wisdom and loyalty, and the conduct of his affairs (in so
dangerous a Crysis and juncture of extremities,) may prove a more happy Pattern
for all ages, and like Ariadnes clue of Silk, direct all worthy subjects, like
Theseus, more prosperously to encounter the minotaure or monster of Rebellion;
and having slain that bloody and savage beast more securely to return out of
the labyrinth and interrigues of such Hellish delusion; in the company of true
honor, triumph and victory: It is not to be doubted but many pretend to this
noble Israelites worth and merits, who if rightly reflected on; know well (as
conscious to themselves) that either they have forfeited their Faith and
Allegiance ever since the original commencement of the late civil wars, or in
an over activity in their Rebellious endeavors, have done most horrid injuries
to their King and Country, or in a tepid fit of Newtrality, have been lukewarm;
and basely complacent to both parties, or else in a degree yet more ignoble and
fordid, having (animas venales) vendible and mercenary spirits, have
entertained the wages of iniquity, and under the guise and pretense of loyal
subjects and faithful Patriots have betrayed and destroyed the Prince and his
People, or (if there can be any thing worse) there is a brood and generation of
pretenders, to the best and most loyal services, because they attended in the
Navy, that wafted and refluctuated the King into England; that they had
adventured to Breda, to Brussels to Holland, to France, to Germany, that they
had been active at home, and dutiful abroad, and had contrived and contributed
most, both in their persons and purses, toward his Majesty's Restoration.

And it were an unkindnesse, if not a crime to derogate from such pretensive
merits: but the sting that causes a sore swelling, is that these new brooms
(returned to loyalty,) sweep all so clean, that they leave no work, not the
least Atome of honor in this high concern to those nobler spirits, who never
forfeited their fidelity to their King; but as Hushai ever walked by the
influence of his Majesty's commission or commands, and in all conditions,
whether active or passive, in the concerns of their Faith and Allegiance, never
swerved, nor so much as warped from their Native obedience, or from the rules
and dictates of Honor and a good Conscience. This great Hero and exemplar of
his fidelity to his Prince, is recorded in the Sacred book of God, and thence
recommended to all subjects, of all ages, and of all Kingdoms, as a lively
pattern to direct them in their duty and service toward their Sovereign; and
in many excellencies he is hardly imitable, for the holy Historian tells the
world, 2 Samuel 15.
that this loyal Israelite, unsummon'd, unsent for, no sooner heard the news of
the Kings sad condition, that Absolon was unnaturally turned Traitor against
his Father. and the people in Rebellion against their King, but instantly this
great worthy marches after his Prince, and finding him on the top of the
Mount, where he worshipped God, he attended his Sovereign Lord with diligence
and haste, though his sad posture presented the Affliction and sorrow of his
soul, (for his coat was rent, and his head was covered with earth,) and what
posture could better become a loyal heart, then what clearly expressed grief,
or indignation, to see or hear of a disobedient Son persecuting a loving
Father, or a stubborn deluded people infatuated into a high and horrid
Rebellion: but Hushai was neither startled at his Princes dangerous condition,
nor consulted for his own safety, nor was catched with flattery and the large
promises of the Traitors oil and smooth tongue, nor did he dread or stand
amazed, at the oraculous Counsels of Achitophel, (the grand politician,) but
his Native duty conducts him speedily to wait on his Prince; and true and
unspoted loyallty and allegiance directing him in his march, without any doubts
or disputes, laying his life at his Masters feet; he in an instant bespeaks
himself a perfect Royalist, and so with his life, friends, and fortune ready to
obey whatever commands the King thinks fit to impose upon him. Some noble
Heathens have left to the world famous examples of their love and loyalty to
their Princes: and to the shame and dishonor of many infamous Christians, have
exceeded them for their fidelity and true allegiance. Plutarch Hephaestion unut
ex Alex. magni ducibus; quem ille cum Cratero ita conterebaiut hunc quidem
(...)Hephastionem vero (...)appellaret Plutarch. in vita Alexandri.
has recorded Hephaestion, (to the memory of his immortal honor,) that he
passionately loved and esteemed the person of Alexander the great, and in his
discourse with Craterus, the Conqueror told him that Hephaestion did not only
love him as a King, but did most affectionately honor him as Alexander. And it
was a royal mark and distinction of Alexanders own creating, to style Craterus
a lover of the King, but Hephaeston a lover and admirer of Alexander, and it
seems his duty to his Prince, as it received bounty from his Sovereign whiles
he lived, was rewarded with high honor when he was dead, for the same Author
affirms, that this noble Emperor, in a grateful memory to so faithful a
subject, and so courageous a commander, magnificently expended more then twelve
thousand Talents upon his exequies and Funerals. There is such another passage
of Clitus Clitus inter pracipuos Alexan. Maced. familiares eidemque charissimus
quod filius essetnutricis illi us, tum quod ab illo in vitae discrimine fuisset
servatus: hunc in convivio liberius in Persicos mores invectum, Rex temulentus
spiculo trajecit, cujus facti postridie tanta cepit paenitentia discussa jam
ebrietate ut totum triduum a cibo abstinuerit, decreveritque omuino inedia sibi
mortem concissere ac amicum optime de se meritum ad inferos persequi and
sumptuoso cumfunere sepelivit. Plutarc. in vita Alexandri.
who having been Alexanders nurcesson, and in his person and Relations most
serviceable to the King in many of his greatest dangers. The Emperor advanced
him to great favors and enriched him with Princely munificency: and when a
Persian intemperate excess and debauchery had drowned the Kings reason, and
had raised a tempest in his passions; so that in his fury with a javelin he had
slain his favorite: yet this sad accident so deeply affected the Emperor,
when he had recovered his confounded reason, that he appeared to be overwhelmed
in a gulf of shame and sorrow, and so giving rules for his own penance,
obliged himself to a hard duty; hence determining and decreeing, that his
intemperance should be rewarded with penury, and that he who had so ignobly
abused plenty, and in such extravagant luxury slain his friend, should justly
dye and perish for want of food: hereby the King proposed a more speedy death
to himself, that he might more suddenly follow the Ghost of Clytus to the
imagined shades below. Such a character of true worth and loyalty, Darius gave
of his dear Zophyrus, who waging war and besieging the vast City of Babylon,
(but without success or victory,) trusted the possibilities of the effecting
of that design to the fidelity, courage and wisdom of faithful Zophyrus, who
the better to disguise himself and to accomplish the conquest with greater
safety to his person, and more secure success to his Sovereign, disfigured his
face to a high deformity, and having permitted his ears, his Nobilis Persa ipse
sibi nasum, aures and labia amputavit and ita Babylonas, quasi transfuga se
contulit conquerens de crudelitate sui Regis; receptus egitur a Babyloniis and
dux belli constitutus, urbem Dario tradidit, unde Darius solebat dicere; se
Zophyrum malle integrum quam viginti capere Babylonas, Herod. lib. 4.
lips, and his nose to be cut off (as pretended by a Persian barbarous
cruelty,) in this posture he adressed to the Babylonians, as an abused and
tortured Persian fugitive, where being received and advanced to great trust and
command as a General of their Army, by his prudence and valor subdued Babylon,
and delivered the City to his own Master and Lord; for which signal service,
Darius was wont to say familiarly, that he did owe so much true honor and
respect to his dear Zophyrus, that he would rather have received him from
Babylon, without any blemish or mutilation then to have twenty Cities such as
Babylon subdued to his imperial Scepter. Menelaus, Agamemnon, and Ulysses had
great service effected by the fidelity, ingenuity and courage of Sinon Virgil
2. Aeneidos.
, who like a stout daring and subtle Greek, insinuated and ensnared the Trojans
to their ruin, and so effected a happy success, attended with much honor and
renown to the Greeks in their long siege to Troy. Marcus Antonius was a true,
faithful and loyal friend to Caesar, and when he could do him no longer service
in the Imperours life, being slain by the conspirators, he took his royal Robe
stained with blood, stabbed, cut and mangled, and making his funeral Orations
to the people, filled their eyes with tears, their souls with sorrow, and by
degrees, drew them to vindicative resolutions to revenge Caesar's death;
Plutarch' in vita Bruti.
which caused Cymber and Brutus and the chief conspirators to fly for fear of
popular insurrection and fury against the Traitors: the light of these Pagan
and Heathen examples, is not so dim, but that it may serve to guide this
present age into the paths of virtue, and resolutions of loyalty: nay, it may
serve as a help to detect and discover the falsehood, treachery, cowardice, and
ignoble disloyalty of many, whom neither the laws of God, nor of the Land, have
been strong enough to oblige them to the duty and Allegiance they owe and ought
ever to pay to their Sovereign. But these, and all other moral examples of
this kind, come infinitely short of that transcendent worth, that appeared so
glorious in this noble Israelite; for their grounds were at best, but Honor,
Emulation or Interest, and though founded on the basis of virtue, friendship,
or fortitude, yet their chiefest Actions and endeavors were accompnied with
vainglory and arrogance, if not tainte and stained with revenge, proud
ambition, or sordid avarice. But Hushai was led to his duty by the light of
grace, by the gratitude of a noble mind, by the laws of God which commands
Psalm 105.
Touchnott mine Anointed, because as the wiseman Wis. 6.3. Data est a Domino
potestas regibus, and virtus ab altissimo.
assures power is given to Kings from the Lord, and Sovereignty from the
Highest. St. Paul, therefore writing to the Roman Christians, directs in the
Apostolical Canon Romans 13.1. Romans 13.4. Non tantum summo magistratui sed
infimis quibusvis magistratus potestate fuugentibus debetur obedientia. Theod.
Beza. Annota.
Let every Soul be subject to the higher powers. And this is backed with many
reasons, because Kings receive their sword from God, because they are his
ministers, because they are empowered to protect and punish, and from this
principle and fountain of evangelical truth, it Naturally flows and follows,
that Kings in their persons, and in their lawful heirs and successors, and in
all their just rights and commands are to be observed and obeyed. Hence it is,
that Jews and Christians, Greeks and Barbarians, all persons of all sorts, are
commanded, to render to every man what is due, whether it be Tribute, fear or
honor; and that duty is to be performed not only for wrath, but for conscience
sake. non propter iram sed propter conscientiam. Romans 13.(...)Romans 13.2.
The rule seems positive and infallible: that whosoever resists the power,
resists the ordinance of God, and they that resist shall receive to
themselves damnation: St. Peter was as highly concerned in this point with the
Jews, as St. Paul with the Gentiles, and therefore they are directed and taught
to submit themselves to every Ordinance of man for the Lords sake, 1 Pet. 2.13.
p. 17.
whether it be to King as supreme, or unto Governors, as unto them that are
sent by him: this command is redoubled again by the same Apostle, Fear God,
honor the King. So then the duty of loyalty and allegiance to Princes is not
only grounded on legal but evangelical principles, and has not only
Prophetical but Apostolical foundations to warrant and support this truth: and
as the primitive and best Christians, both in their active and passive
obedience, gave testimony of this truth even to Heathen and Pagan Princes, and
Emperors; so Christ, who is the way, the truth and the life, preached this
doctrine and commanded to give unto Caesar, what was Caesar's, and to God what
was Gods. This day spring from an high probably did influence and enlighten
Hushai the Archites noble and loyal Soul, who seasonably and succesfully
encountered the greatest danger, disappointed the deepest policy, and dissolved
and dispersed the most unnatural Treason that the age had hatched or produced,
wherein King David lived; and it is a just obligation that lies strictly on
the resolution and affections of all subjects to the utmost of their reason and
power, to imitate, if not exceed the great worth and virtue of this noble
Archite in their duty and devoirs toward their Sovereign, who being a
Christian Monarch of a lawful Royal line, for the succession of many hundred
years, may expect and require most justly the most exact performance of loyalty
and true Allegiance: and that not only because prescription, custom, reason,
and laws, but sacred oaths, which are the highest bonds; and call God himself
to witness, oblige and conjure the subjects to their fidelity and duty; and
this was performed punctually and completely by Hushai to King David, who being
one of the sons of Iesse, was the first of his family who sat on the throne,
and succeeded with as much conflict as honor, his unhappy predecessor Saul:
yet this noble person, though the Monarchy was but a later foundation, and
translated from the house of Saul to the house of David; yet he did neither
boggle nor startle, and though Absalon by his flattery of reformation ensnared
and infatuated the popular multitudes, pretending justice when he traitorously
invaded the person of the King, and the prerogatives of the Crown, yet none of
these circumstances, nor, that the headpiece and politician Achitophel, was in
the conspiracy, could deter Hushai from his duty, but that he would adventure
his life, fortune and all that was dear to him in the Kings cause, and so just
a necessity: he resolved that his courage, his wisdom and his fidelity could
never be more serviceable, and therefore this loyal subject is more active and
diligent to preserve King David's rights, and to immortallize his own honor, in
this unfortunate juncture of extremities: many thousands loyal subjects of his
Majesty's three Kingdoms, had Hushaies resolutions and affections in the late
barbarous and unnatural wars; some royalists by virtue of their Sovereigns
commission raised troops of Horse and foot, fortyfied Towns and Castles,
equipped ships, and using the utmost of their endeavors, hazarded their lives,
relations and fortunes, and to render a full assurance of their loyalty to
their Prince were not daunted with fire or sword, nor discouraged with
imprisonment, banishment, or any degree of the most tormenting crucruelties,
nay death, in so just a cause leading and laying them in a bed of honor; they
feared neither the loss of limbs or lives in their service of their King and
Country: and when (after many tedious years) their forces, subdued by excessive
power, or betrayed by cunning Treachery, did fail, the Kings party cherished
loyalty in their hearts, and though they were plundered unmercifully, sequestered
and decimated illegally, and forced to slavish compositions, and harased with
cruel asperities and ignominies, as bitter as death; yet as soon as their Hair,
as Sampsons, did begin to spring, after so many sharp raisors and shavings, and
their strength began to come to them, they were active in their designs and in
their contrivances, ever attempting some noble enterprise, that might recover
their King to his Throne, and themselves to the liberty and privilege of free
born subjects, some in their capacities attended his Majesty, and the royal
branches in their perigrination abroad: others as laborious Bees toiled and
worked (if the day was fair and secure) in their several stations or circuits
of their interests, in their own Countries. And (upon occasion) saluting or
tasting the inclination of every flour they met with, they make it their only
business to convey the thyme and honey of true loyalty to the Royal Hive: some
are very active in their purses, others turned the cock to the streams of other
men's plenty, others in their prayers: some did use their most refined
abilities, to distract the Counsels of the many headed monster the long (at
last,) Rumping Parliament: some noble spirits (who dearly paid for their
Testimony of Loyalty) designed the death of the grand Imposture and Usurper,
Cromwell, whose Son like an Ignis Fatuus quickly vanished: some gave with daring
ingenuity, and occasion of great distraction in the Army, and raised
jealousies, and distrust amongst the Officers and soldiers: some, for many
years discreetly acted their parts and very prosperously, amongst the Aldermen,
Common Council, and more Eminent stickling Citizens, who being easily
persuaded, that Trade generally decayed, that their ships were taken daily by
the men of war at sea, and that a pinching Poverty was ready to seize on them,
armed themselves privately, and as some of the gallant Senators stoutly (on
several occasions) told the Relics of the long Parliament, the Committy of
Safety, and Officers of the Army, that The Treasure of the City was exhausted,
trade utterly lost, and many thousand families impoverished.

So neither could nor would they advance any moneys any further, to maintain
that disorderly and illegal rabble of Ianizaries and Soldiers, who as they had
a long time inter, rupted the prosperity and commerce in the City, and over
the whole land. So they now resolved to defend their Liberties, Rights and
Properties, as carefully as their lives, and being threatened with terror and
menaces of Plundering, imprisonment, and other hostile and horrid injuries by
fire and sword, they very gallantly replied, that they would unanimously stand
on their guards, to defend themselves, maugre all opposition, as they had
prosperously in such cases of danger, when they suspected a tumultuary rising
of the rabble in the reigns of King Richard the third, when he marched against
Henry the seventh to the battle at Bosworth-field: as they had in King Henry
the eights reign when he went to Bullen in France: as they had equipaged
themselves in Queen Elizabeth's reign An. Dom. 1588. And according to several
presidents of this kind; for which services the City received solemn thanks
from the Crown, for their great care of themselves and the Royal City, as it
appears in their City records and transactions of their political affairs:
they then thus provoked, thus disposed, quickly resolved to hold fast their
purses, though they could neither their tongues nor their hands; monyes (the
nerves of the monstrous body, suddenly shrinking,) the Officers of the Army
fell into distraction, and the private soldiers wanting pay, quickly began to
rail and revile, to kick and to cut, and to scorn and cashiere their
Officers, and in a few days both became as odious as ridiculous, to the
generality of the people of the three Kingdoms, who resolving to shake of
their Iron yoke of vassalage, comforted themselves in their hopeful
possibilities. And as lines running most naturally to the center, began to fix
their thoughts and hopes in their Sovereigns Restoration. The hearts of men
waxing warm with these desires, and possibilities, they began to talk freely
and plainly that neither City nor Country could be happy until the King should
be restored, that the whole Land was in a sad confusion and horrid distress;
and the City and Common Council discerning a happy conjunction of affection and
assistance from all parts, sent stout answers (on several occasions) to the
tedious long Parliament, to the Officers of the Army, to Fleet wood, and his
Walling for dians at the Committee of safety; that the City was for want of
Trade and through the loss of many hundred ships so impoverished, and reduced
to such extremities, that they neither could nor would advance any further
summers of monyes. These unexpecte Resolutions and assurances, caused the
Enemies of Monarchy

First, to shiver and splinter into distraction, and then to fall into
despair, and each Brother growing jealous of his Fellow Traitor, guilt of
horrid Crimes: in securing their condition, the better to avoid popular fury,
they think of addresses to the clemency of their Prince, which in such high
offenses, is ever the happiest refuge and Asylum, whiles the simptomes of the
new modeld Anarchy thus fully appear. And the frame of the monstrous and
tottering Government was thus shaken: many noble Hushaies, and true Royallists,
The Duke of Albemarle, the Earl of Bath,
took fast hold on these encouraging opportunities, and most successfully,
proved most wise conducters of Affairs, mightily tending to the Restoration of
the King, and with his Majesty; The Lord Bishop of Hereford.
the recovery of our Religion, liberties and laws, which without his presence
and protection seemed much like to a consumptive dying patient, ready at the
last gasp to give up the Ghost.

But whiles these unspotted Royallists for almost twenty years continuance in a
confused Government, and the outrages of a Civil war, were constantly Active or
Passive in their duty for the Crown. Another party (either conscious of their
error, or convinced in their judgment, or at least concerned in their
respective interest,) showed themselves like brothers of the half blood, to
have a deep resentment of the great injuries, perpetrated against an imperial
Crown, and to own their fellow subjects for Auxiliaries and Coadjutors in the
public concernment of their King and Country, which like a violent torrent, or
overflowing inundation, carrying all before it, circled the Presbyterians in
the same interest: and as Jews, Turks, Pagans, and Christians, in a storm or
tempest at Sea, exercise their wits, pour our their prayers, employ their hands
to save the ship, that after the storm, all Passengers may arrive safe on
shore: (for so did Jonah with the Mariners, Jonah 1.2. Act. 27.17.
and St. Paul with the Soldiers.) So all parties of the three Kingdoms,
seeing the Royal Sovereign sailing with so prosperous a Gale, and that the
providence of Heaven had so ordered, that the King inevitably should be
restored, they put on the loyal dress, and if not to serve their King, yet to
preserve themselves, appear on the sudden courtly converts and perfect
royalists, and as every good subject is obliged to rejoice at the Kings
restoration to the Crown, so is he to congratulate the conversion of his
Enemies to those principles which cannot but confirm and justify his
resolutions to loyalty for ever.

But this latter or second sort of converted subjects come somewhat short of the
excellency and worth of those nobler minds, which were never stained with
Apostasy or defection from the crown, and they are more deeply obliged to duty
and fidelity, to loyalty and gratitude to their Prince, because they are not
only secured by his clemency and pardon, but likewise have liberally tasted of
his bounty and favors, and though the royal party, like the poor Israelites in
Egypt endured much bondage, and yoaks, hard taskmasters, trod clay, and made
brick; and in the savage wilderness of horrid confusion, were pinched with
cold and nakedness, and had there souls filled with scorn and reproach: yet
they are not envious at their reconciled Brethrens happiness, nor troubled
that they have portions and dividents in the land of Canaan, and share with
them in the blessings of his Majesty's restoration submissively recommending
all such comfortable possibilities to the providence of God, and to the
goodness, bounty, wisdom and justice of their Prince; who cannot but out of so
many sad afflictions gain much knowledge, and by such an universal experience
of the humors and tempers of his subjects, discern more clearly, whom to
employ or trust, and whom to promote, pass by, or punish: all this while,
there is no pretense for excuse, much less of merit, in reconciled and converted
Enemies. First, for excuse or apologies, the most innocent can hardly plead any
thing above a simplicity of their hearts, as those silly sheep who hearkened too
much to Absolons flattery: and though liberty of conscience, a through
Reformation of Religion, and the laws, the hopes of more clear Gospel truths,
and a more exact and perfect way to Heaven, and many such canting, cunning, and
juggling pretenses, were, as more pleasant baits whispered in the ear, swelled
from the Press, and thundered cheatingly from the Pulpits: yet the the late
Royal Martyr in his prophetical spirit and golden pen, found out the malice,
treason, fraud and malignity of those intoxicating and venomous delusions,
advising his dear Son the Prince, with his own observation, Kings book Eikon
asilike page 235.
that the Devil of Rebellion does commonly turn himself into an Angel of
Reformation, and the old Serpent can pretend new lights: when some men's
consciences accuse them for sedition and faction, they stop its mouth with the
name and noise of Religion, when Piety pleads for Peace and Patience, they cry
out zeal; so the worst of men, lurk under the pretensions of Reformation of
Religion, and auspicious beginnings have often the worst designs. In the
judgment and Counsel then of this sacred Orator, there can be no excuse for
traitorous errors and such disloyal deviations. King James of ever blessed
memory, gave the like advice to Prince Henry his Son, commanding him as a
Father and a King. Take heed therefore my Son to such Puritans, very pests in
the Church and Commonweal, whom no deserts can oblige, neither oaths nor
promises bind, breathing nothing but sedition and calumnies, aspiring without
measure, K. James in the duty of a King p. 9.
railing without reason, and making their own imaginations (without any warrant
of the word) the square of their consciences: from these words the King raises
his resentment of injured Majesty, saying. I protest before the great God, and
since I am here upon my testament, it is no place for me to ly in, that ye
shall never find with any highland or border Thieves, greater ingratitude, and
more lies and vile perjuries then with these Phanatick spirits; and suffer not
the principles of them to brook your land, if you like to sit at rest. These
two royal Princes had much judgment and wisdom, great learning and
experience. The one tells the world that these virulent Phanaticks did persecute
him before he was born, being not at rest in his Royal mothers womb, and the
other having suffered many injuries in his life, was sooner hurryed to an
ignoble and untimely death. As to excuses and apologies, it was the ancient
satanical devise, which having first ruined Adam and Eve, deluded them to
extenuate their infidelity, disobedience and crime, with a second kind of
error, pleading even before God himself, as Adam, Genesis 3.12.13. Vnde tibi hoc
accidit? quis te in tantam induxit alterationem St. Chrysostom. in Genes.
It was not I but the Woman, and so Eve, it was not I but the Serpent; but an
ingenuous confession is the best and surest remedy in the case of delinquency,
and Repentance proves the best cordial in such a fowl and loathsome dangerous
disease: it is not then a way to impunity or pardon to plead, I was misguided
or mistaken, transported with zeal, or catched by the ears by the insinuation
of deluding Hypocrites: these and such thin fig leaves, are not competent or
comely veiles to cover or excuse sins of such a scarlet complexion, nor
jealousies and fears, which have blown up some, into tumultuous and rebellious
resolutions, an ingenious acknowledgment of crimes and errous committed, with
the promise and practice of loyalty and true obedience, is a more exact and
ready path to safety and satisfaction: and as for apologies and excuses, none
may (in the least degree pretend to them,) who have been such lavish prodigals
of the King and Kingdoms blood and Treasure, and as there is no place for
apologies or excuses, so much less for merit or deserts, for though many did
grow weary of usurpation, Tyranny and injuries toward their King and the loyal
party, or rather (disappointed of those ends of power and command, which they
phancied and proposed to themselves,) began to totter, and turn from those
possibilities to which they had leaned so long, yet by assed by a different
faction and Interest, they reflect on the Crown, with a loyal aspect, and in
this second choice engage their persons and party, and run many dangers and
hazards of life and fortune to make themselves considerable, and this service
or alteration, (though from a discontented party, or reconciled enemy) in
policy, was not to be refused or unacceptable, for though it might not much
strengthen the King, yet in some proportion, it did debilitate and weaken the
enemy, and it might be probably hoped, that as some branches had fallen from
the Rebellious body; others might follow their example, or at least learn from
them, that an Army or party, like a house or Kingdom divided within it self,
has no long duration and cannot stand, this declension from evil principles,
as it was an external testimony of repentance and grace, so it must be
acknowledged to be good service, and a fair praeludium to future good effects:
but duty and endeavor of this Nature may rather and more fitly be reputed
expiations for former crimes, then pretensions to reward and merit, which ever
(as the acute School men testify) Moritum importat aqualitatem justitiae Aquin.
3. quas. 19.
implies and imports an equality of justice and right: and justice does not
beg but boldly plead for desert and merit, and to have and receive its rights,
not out of bounty or favor, but as its due and debt: a sovereign Throne cannot
endure such petulant and bold pleaders. This temper were rather tolerable in
equals, (and Kings know none) then inferiors, and might better suit with
commanders, (and sovereign Kings acknowledge none but God, Rex a Deo primus
nulli secundus.
) then with those who have been offenders: and in the highest privileges ought
to attend as humble petitioners. So then, though the service be never so
infinite, yet rising from the art and power of those who have so deeply
offended: there can be no pretenses to merit, which in a second reveiw, is not
to be granted, or admitted without a lessoning and diminution to the
prerogatives of sovereignty which is so absolute, that it cannot endure any
intimation of command. Meritum est actio qua justum est ut agenti aliquiddetur.
Aquin. 3.49. c. 6.
Now merit (as the Schools teach) is an action whereby, it is not only might
but necessary, that reward and recompense be paid as a debt, to him who has
acted: now when the Actions and prevarications of those who have so highy
injured, and deeply wounded sovereignty, and disturbed the peace and prosperity
of three Kingdoms, are balanced and put into the Scales with their good works
of loyalty, (though never so weighty) they will be found utterly too light for
reward or merit, and rather justly prove objects of their Princes grace and
clemency: and in case their sovereign, like Ahasuerus, have inclined his royal
Scepter toward them, and thereby testified his bounty and goodness, and so
capacitated them with royal favor, trust and honor, these obligations as they
magnify the virtue of the Prince, so they are as so many stronger chains, to
bind those who are obliged by them, to greater perfection of loyalty, and more
exact and vigilant performances of their duty, or else those favors will prove
as so many witnesses to evidence against them, and to accuse them of odious and
monstrous ingratitude. Meritum congrui and, condigni Aquin. l. 2. q. I 14. c.
6.
And as to the medium or modification of the School distinction of condignity
or is not to be admitted in this case for that of condignity or adequate merit
is absolutely taken away, and that of congruity, or rather convenience is
totally and entirely to be recommended to the Princes Will, Grace, Wisdom and
Judgment, who as he pleases, may promote or punish as well as pardon, by act
of indemnity or amnesty, as to royal pleasure, shall seem expedient. Apologies
and excuses in delinquents thus exploded, and all pretenses to merit in those
who have legally forfeited their lives, liberties and estates, by the laws of
the land, utterly abrogated, what refuge can such offenders fly and address to,
as cordials to preserve their honor, or their consciences, perhaps some may
plead, their promise, their vow, their protestation their engagement, or the
covenant, or their abjuration: these were, (if righty judged and exammined,)
cunning, subtle, and sinful designs in the projectors and contrivers, who
framed them, were Trumpets of Rebellion: Sedition and faction: sounded and
blown up by those who promoted them, and proved as snares to their Souls, who
either weakly submitted, or with temporizing appetites did greedily swallow
them, and these cobweb lines (spun out of the body and womb of a venomous
spider,) are not strong enough to hold a subjects hand or heart from his duty
of faith and allegiance toward his Sovereign; and each one of these feeble and
subsequent obligations being sifted by truth and reason, as well as laws and
justice will crumble to nothing, before the oaths of allegiance and supremacy,
and the light of that duty, that by municipal decrees, by the laws of nature,
and birthright, every subject owes to his Prince, being born under his
prerogative and power, and in any of his Kingdoms or Dominions.

First as to promises Promissio est actus iationis, quia est enuntiatio and
ordinatio alicujus. T. Aquin. 22. quae. 88. a. 1.
(which are the sudden, and usually most transient verbal obligations, and
ought to be effected of all persons of understanding, Religion and Honor) they
ought ever to be acts of sound reason and judgment, raised on good
foundations, and duly considered, before they come to be published and
proclaimed by the tongue or signed by the hand, and even the strictest promises
or paroles, do not oblige the Faith or Honor of him that Promissa non debent
securari, si estillicitum quod promittiur: vel si sint mutatae conditionis
personarum, vel negotiorum. Ad hoc ergo quod homo debeat servare quod
promiserat oportet ut sit licitum quod promittitur, and quod omnia immutata
permaneant Aquin. 22 ae. quest. 110. a. 35.
promises, if what be promised be illicit, or unlawful, or if the conditions
of Persons or affairs be changed and altered. These essentials rightly
considered, what ever promises have been made by subjects against the
sovereignty of their Princes liberties, of their Country and laws of the land,
do fall to the Ground, and dissolve of themselves, because of their illicit and
ununlawful foundation, And as to the mutation of persons or affairs, subjects
are not to make new promises of combination or conspiracy, against the true old
principles of faith, and true allegiance to their Kings, for whether they sit
gloriously and puissantly on their thrones, or by any black misfortune, are
reduced to a low degree, their character is indelible, and being Gods
vicegerent: in all conditions, their subjects owe them reverence and true
allegiance. The first scruple thus easily blown over, the second may prove of
lesser difficulty: some more zealous then judicious, proceed further, and plead
they have not only promised, but vowed; now a vow seems to be a cord of
stronger twisting, the rather because an act of more serious consultation, and
of more sacred restriction: Votum a voluntate dictum quasi deliberatione and
propositio profectum Buca instit Theo. l. 45.
promises, are commonly made to men, but (...): sic Eustath.
Vows seem to mount a step higher, and being offered to the Deity, are
observed with a more divine and dreadful attestation of God; and to violate
vows is much more dangerous, the votaries may plead, but in this point it will
appear, that an unlawful vow is as easily and justly to be broken, as a rash
and undiscreet or disloyal promise, the rather because a vow properly is an
Votum est actus latriae and Religionis Tho. Aqui. 22 ae q 88. a 5. Votum
promissio Deo facta de meliori bono. idem, Votum testificatio quaedam
promissionis spontanea qua debet fieri Deo, de iis quae Dei sunt. Aqui. 22ae.
quest. 88. Ad Votum tria requirunt, deliberatio, Propositum, and promissio.
idem.
act of religious worship. It is a promise to God of the intention and
resolution to some better good, because it is a solemn testification of a
deliberated voluntary promise made and offered unto God, to perfect and
complete which, are a resolute purpose and a certain or constant promise. Now
these circumstances and requisites are such, as the votary need nor err, unless
he will be affectely ignorant, or rashly and wilfully sinful. Now for a
subject to vow to that which is unlawful, to sign to that which is sinful, to
offer such a sacrifice to God, which is odious and unacceptable, is an
aggravation of the crime: and therefore not to be kept, but to be broken off,
with more bitter repenrance and more zealous detestation (...) Votum temerarium
and illegitimum; quod de rebus illcitis; malo fine ae personis etiam non ui
juris suscipitur Bucan. The. Instit. I. 45. quest. 4.
And if every perty sin be offensive before the eternal God, how abominable
must those sins appear, which like scarlet and crimson are of a double dye,
aggravated with sollemn vows and promises, and yet so much the more sinful
because attempted and perpetrated, by those, who in the case of loyalty, as
subjects, cannot be absolved from their oaths of allegiance to their King: and
so not being sui juris, at liberty, have no power to make illicit, vows of this
kind, and are not to give so much as consent to their illegallity. The subjects
in This case of allegiance being as strictly restrained, and durifully obliged
to their Prince in his power and pleasure, and the justness of the laws, as
children under the power of their Parents, as a Wife during the life of her
Husband, as servants are obliged to their Masters until they are at liberty Number
30.4.5.7. Votum animae vinculum. Vota eorum infringi poterant.
: If a vow (though lawful) were by Gods word thus stated in the power of the
Parent, the Husband, the Master, a minore ad majus: much more are illicit vows
to be abrogated and broken, in subjects vowing, not only against their Princes
consent, but against the houour and safety of their sacred persons, and their
royal Crown and dignity, by these arguments, it plainly appears that neither
rash and unvised advised promises, nor serious sinful, and deliberated vows are
to be kept or observed no more then that Anathema, under which some desperate
zealous bloody Jews bound themselves neither to eat, nor drink, till they had
slain St. Paul. Act. 23.12.14. Stulto zelo correpti mentiri and occidere
quidvis denique tibi licere arbitrabantur T. Beza in loc.


There is a third bond or obligation, that some tender curiosities lay hold on,
The 3. protestation.
and that is the protestation, which (though never formed nor forced into the
nature of a municipal and binding law) yet was cunningly devised by some state
politicians, and sent and dispersed over the Kingdoms, to taste the
inclinations of the people, or at least as Shiboleth, to distinguish who were
really and truly Royalists, and who were not, which form of obliging a party
(very probably) took its example from Germany, where the Lutherans solemnly
protested against some doctrinal and practical, proceeding of the Church of
Rome, And from this root sprang the distraction that those reformed Christians,
who deserted the communion of the Roman Church, were commonly called
Protestants: but the protestation of a later and parliamentary conception and
birth, was not so much to distinguish Christians of several Churches, as to
discern persons how they stood affected to the King, or to his great Council,
whether they would as loyal subjects adhere to the Sovereignty of their Prince,
or (in case his Majesty dissented from his two houses) whether they would
adventure all, and to live and dye with a Parliamentary party of their fellow
subjects, and be subservient to their ends and interests, this protestation was
an early cunning bait, and like Manna it pleased most pallats, because it
contained in it a variety of lawful good things, and what could be more
acceptable to a true Son of the Church of England, then to defend her doctrine?
what duty more agreeable to a subject then to defend the prerogatives of his
Sovereigns crown, and what endeavor more honorable then to preserve the
privileges of Parliament, and the laws of the land? These four dishes
seasonably served might relish well, and find a good digestion being duties in
themselves, rightly understood, fit for a good resolutition in any subject, who
honored his King, loved his Country, or had a care of his soul, yet the
branches of that protestation, did spread into so great a latitude, in respect
of the variety of the definitive points of the doctrine of the Church, the
unlimitted prerogatives of the Crown, undetermined privileges of Parliament,
and the difficulty of understanding the multitude, and body of the learned
laws, that after the protestation was licked into a form, and as a golden pill
quickly swallowed by about t weny members of the Commons House. The pill being
tasted by a more judicious palate, was disrelished, and had stopped there, if
these words, viz. (as far as lawfully I may) had not as a more safe ingredient
been added to it, and there (as if a warrantable dispensation had been given to
every man's conscience, sense and reason,) it was clearly swallowed without
chawing, or the least dispute.

The protestation, then was (at most) but a conditional asseveration, stuffed
with great variety of dificulties and obscurityes. And though the doctrine of
the Church of England, the Kings prerogative and the laws of the land had
elbow-room in those few lines, yet the privileges of that Parliament, which in
time, destroyed the King, the Church and the laws, (under a specious name,)
deluded the bewitched people into a horrid rebellion which caused great misery
and devastation to three flourishing Kingdoms, and now when those, who took
the protestation, have considered of the contrivances, intrigues, and interests
of that cunning trap and popular bait, they ought to retreat from the danger of
those snares: and now having recovered their sense and reason by repentance and
a better consultation, may better know how to perform their duty to God in his
Church, and to their King and Country.

The mask of the protestation thus pulled off, and the curtains drawn, the face
of loyalty is more clear and visible: yet there is another brood, and sort of
persons, who cry out of their peirced and wounded consciences, and tell the
world they have with hearts and hands lifted up to heaven, taken the national
and general covenant, and they cannot quit fairly with this delight and darling
of their souls. This, as Diana from Jupiter (they urge) fell from Heaven, and
though the Covenant was the contrivance of a few confederated seditious heads,
yet the covenanters hold themselves obliged to keep it as stirctly, as if it
had been the breath, motion and dictates of the sacred spirit of God, and many
suppose that having lifted up their hands in a pious delusion, they cannot nor
must not let them fall in a repentant and humble submission to their Sovereign,
and the laws of their Country: but such infatuated Zelots are much deceived,
and ought to see more clearly, the scales of their delusion being taken from
their eyes, but if an irrational sturdy obstinacy still possess their
resolutions, willfulness, blind's reason, and obduration cauterize their
consciences: their best cure may be procured by advising with the incomparable
reasons of the University of Oxford against the covenant: and if those reasons,
prove not a welcome sovereign cordial, let such passionate Zelots apply
themselves to their Princes remedy, and Probatum, or for ever hold themselves
in their Honor, Souls and Consciences to be incurable. And the late blessed
Royal Martyr, t does most pathetically and powerfully advise and argue. Eikon
asilike chap. 14. of the covenant page 110.
The enjoynings of Oaths upon people must needs, in things doubtful, be
dangerous, as in things unlawful, damnnable, and no less superfluous, where
former religious and legal Engagements, bound men sufficiently to all
necessary duties: nor can I see how they will reconcile such an innovating Oath
and Covenant, with that former protestation, which was so lately taken to
maintain the Religion established in the Church of England, since they count
discipline so great a part of Religion. And in the the next page the King says
(in the candor and kindness of his spirit) I am prone to believe and hope that
many who take the covenant, are yet firm to this judgment, that such later
vows, oaths or leagues can never blot out those former gravings and
characters, which by just and lawful Oaths were made upon their Souls. And
again, the blessed King urges the third time, that which makes such
confederations by way of Solemn Leagues and covenants, more to be suspected,
is, that they are the common road in all factions and powerful perturbations of
State or Church, where formalities of extraordinary zeal and piety, are ever
more studied and elaborate, then, when Politicians most agitate desperate
designs, against all that is settled or Sacred in Religion and Laws; which by
such service, are cunningly yet forcibly wrested by secret steps, and less
sensible degrees, from their known rule and wonted practice to comply with the
humor of those men, who aim to subdue all to their own will and power, under
the disguises of holy combinations. These were the counsels and command of a
dying King, who sealed these truths with his royal blood, and they may serve as
cautions or preventive physic, not to be refused; as cordials, to comfort
languishing and fainting spirits, as sovereign remedies, to recover relapsed
patients, to a sound and heathful disposition of both Soul and body, and they
are not to be neglected or despised by any rational subjects, but who doom
themselves to discontent, or wilfully are dementated to a self perdition.

When the protestation and the covenant, 3. Engagement.
like old and useless Almanacks were laid aside, a successive juggling,
prevailing party found out vicious matter, to compose new bird lime, and
shuffling the cards, and then cutting and dealing cuningly, devised by an
Engagement to catch some credulous and timorous complying inclinations, or at
least, utterly to pack the Presbyterian out of the stock of power and interest.
This obortive Embrio and Precocious birth was quickly tumbled out of the body
of the bear, and by some smooth bloody tongues licked into a form, or rather
confusion of words; which reduced to neither mood or figure, were so illogical,
that the Engagement was looked on as a factious seditious snare, and not strong
enough to hold the foot of the lightest Lark. The weakest person that complied
to be entangled in it, as to the form (if any) it was a subscribed promise,
before an illegal Magistrate. And as to the matter, it was a fancy or dream
like that of Vtopia, of a common wealth which was no where in England, unless
in some men's brains, who were sick of ambition, and pride, and longed for
Government. This republic they styled, settled, when the world saw the-three
Kingdoms in disorder and confusion, and the Authors and Abettors of this
Ridiculous monster, panting, quaking, and sculking under continual suspicions,
and the pinching torments of fears and jealousies: but that which occasioned
greatest scorn and laughter of this seditious bugbear, was, that it was
covetously contrived, to be a vendible commodity, and so easily gained from the
justice of Peace or his Clark, for half a Crown; and in a short time it proved
a more common contemptible drug, and was familiarly bought for twelve pence,
until at last, it was not valuable. On which devise, all judicious and sober
Persons did look as a state cheat, or a mere moral promise to things imaginary,
irrational and impossible under the pressure of tyrannical usurpers, and in it
self no way legal or binding, being like tow in an instant set on fire by some
sulphurous sparks, and flaming for a moment, dyed and was suddenly extinguished.

Vsus jurandi ducit hominem ad perjurium. D Ber. ser. 32. de perjurio.
A fourth, but more black, traitorous and odious obligation and oath, was that
of the abjuration, which most horridly did conjure the perjured swearers, to
renounce their lawful King, and his royal line, and the successors of that
imperial and renowned family.

Sicut mentiri non potest qui non loquitur, sic pejerare non poterit qui jurare
non appetit. D. Bernard ser. 32. de perjurio.
And this potion though dangerous and damnable like viper wine, went pleasantly
down with two many, who if not soundly purged with true repentance, may feel
the acerbity of this venomous composition attended with pangs and torments, in
their gauled consciences for ever. This was a treason of the highest degree, a
fin of a great magnitude, a daring crime, aiming prodigiously to destroy the
roots, and branches of the royal stemm: and though it was hatched and contrived
by a cunning hypocritical Crocodile and his bloody Sycophants; Cromwell.
yet as if Heaven and Earth, God and man did abhor such an odious oath and
combination, how suddenly did it please God, that his arm of providence should
appear and incline the hearts, not only of his loyal subjects but even of those
who had been bitter Enemies to the royal throne, to endeavor and cooperate for
his Majesty's restoration. And now all these Withes and new Cords being broken
by a Samsonian strength and influence from true Sovereignty, are untwisted and
unravel'd to an odium and a scorn. And the Parliament has judiciously and
nobly determined and damned the covenant, the Engagement and the oath of
Abjuration to be illegal, factious and seditious papers, and all rational
subjects may securely acquiess in their judgment and determination. Malum quod
juramus facere, non debemus impl^^^ D. Ber. de perjur. ser. 32.


If this Collyrium clear not the eyes of all Protesters, Covenanters, Engagers
and abjurators, nor all these reasons reduce the phanatically deluded to their
fidelity and allegiance to their King: let them beware least the judgment, as
well as the sins of detestable perjury follow, or fall upon them. This is a
horrid crime, which the Schoolmen lay open to the world in this dress, that
Perjurium est mondacium juramento. firmatum. Aurey, These. Eccles. lib. 4. did.
39.
perjury is a ly confirmed and ratified by an oath, and this is a most fearful
aggravation. And it is St. Hieroms resolution Ius jurandum tres habet comites
veritatem judicium and justitiam. Hieron. super Hieremi. 22. q. 2.
that no oath is lawful, unless it be attended, with three indispensable
concomitants. viz. Truth, Judgment and Righteousness, and where all or any of
these three fail, an oath is perjury, St. Austin is more strict, claring
plainly Cum sit vel putat falsum esse and tamen pro vero jurat D. Aug. de ver.
Apost. ser. 28.
that he is perjured, that swears voluntarily, what he knows to be false,
with a deceitful design, or if he perfectly know it not, thinks it to be
false. The Fathers make an outcry, and declaim severely against this crime,
and call it Bellua detestanda, a most detestable beast, and filthy sin. The
schoolmen seem yet more severe then the Fathers Iurans rerum, quod putat esse
falsum, vel jurans falsum quod putat esse verum, est perjurus T. Aquin. 22. ae.
q. 98, 1.3.
and Aquinas determins that he who swears the truth which he thinks to be
false, or swearing that which is false thinks it to be truth, is a perjured
person. Where the sin is so notorious, the infamy and obloquies so odious, and
the judgments of the Eternal revenger, so terrible and dangerous against
perjured persons; how careful should subjects be to recover themselves to the
duty of loyalty, and thereby to repair their credit and to vindicate themselves
from eternal plagues and infamy.

The clouds thus dispersed by the beams of truth, and rational arguments. It is
most evident that those subjects who started from their allegiance and loyalty,
can neither plead excuse or merit, for their tergiversation and Apostasy, and
as to any unlawful oaths wherewith their souls were ensnared or entangled,
they are by the supreme laws of God and the laws of men discharghed and
absolved from them, unless hardened with obstinacy, they will as it is in the
Greek proverb (...) i. e. malum malo meditatur sophocles and Aeneas Platonicus.
ad sin unto sin, force one nail with driving another, and to perjury add
wilful impenitency, but better things may be hoped from all subjects, who as
men look on themselves, as born for rational society or as Christians
professing the truths of sacred religion, and not longer adhering to self
opinion, or seditious faction, be perfectly converted to be true cordial
royalists: remembering the caution and counsel the late royal Eikon asilike
cont. 19. page 174.
Martyr gave, not to pretend a reformation, and to force a rebellion, nor to
hearken or give credit to those parasitick preachers who dared to call those
Martyrs, who dyed fighting against their King the laws, their oaths and the
religion established. But sober Christians know that glorious title of Martyrs
can with truth be applied to those, who sincerely preferred Gods truth and
their duty in all particulars before their lives, and all that was dear to them
in this world, who where religiously sensible of those ties to God, the Church
and the King, which lay on their souls, both for obedience and just assistance.
By this time apostatized and deluded subjects (their eyes being as well opened
with sad experience, as bright beams of reason and truth) may clearly see
their errors and more securely avoid their dangers. But least as those who
behold their faces in a glass, they may upon aremoval utterly forget their
features or complexions. It may not prove improper to set before us those pure
Christals of Piety, Wisdom, Religion, Honor and Government, which the
customs and laws of former ages have conveyed to this present generation,
engaging both the King and people to their respective duties, whereby the
sovereign and all his subjects are comprehended under ^^mental obligationds.
Fidelis sermo retinet locum sacramenti Iuramento non egit veritas D. Ber. Sermon.
32.
This difference and distinction only admitted that glorious Princes of the
imperial Crown of England, have in their royal grace, and voluntary
condescension accustomed themselves to solemn oaths at their coronation: but
the Kings subjects are obliged by oaths settled, formed and confirmed by laws to
exhibit and perform their homage, Fealty, allegiance and Fidelity to their
Kings as Gods anointed and in these high privileges and prerogatives, the
Kings of England seem to have a more legal tie and sovereignty, over their
subjects, then either the Crown of France or Spain, whose subjects are
commanded in greater vassalage, and as brighter and leading stars, that sacred
oaths and obligations are here presented, which pious Kings and Queens have
accustomed to take at their coronation, when they sealed to their sacred vows,
in the communion and sacrament of the body and blood of Christ; and then as
better fitted, have laid their hands on the blessed Evangelists, bowing their
heads have kissed the book, (the best eternal evidence of the affection of the
heart) and thus prepared, they have usually received the Imperial Crown and
Scepter; with other Regalia and Emblems of royal Majesty from Gods altar, as
holding all their power and sovereignty from the King of Kings, and Lord of
Lords, that God, Angels, and Men, Heaven and Earth, and the whole world, and
all ages to come, may behold the pious integrity of Sacred Princes.

The Kings Oath at his Coronation
L. Bishop of London. SIR, will you grant and keep, and by your Oath confirm to
the people of England, the Laws and Customs to them granted by the Kings of
England, your lawful and religious predecessors; and namely the Laws, Customs
and Franchises granted to the Clergy, by the glorious KING St. Edward your
predecessor, according to the Laws of God, the true profession of the Gospel
established in this Kingdom, and agreeing to the prerogative of the Kings
thereof, and the ancient customs of this Realm.


The King. Igrant and promise to keep them.


Lord Bishop. Sir, will you keep peace and Godly agreement entirely according
to your power both to God, the holy Church, the Clergy and the people.


King. I will keep it.


L. Bishop. Sir, will you to your power cause law and justice and discretion in
mercy and truth to be executed, in all your judgments.


King. I will.


L. Bishop. Sir, will you grant to hold and keep the rightful Customs which
the commonalty of this your Kingdom have? will you defend and uphold them to
the honor of God so much as in you lies?


King. Igrant and promise so to do.


The Petition of the L. Bishops read by the L. Bishop of ROCHESTER.
O Lord our King, we beseech you to grant and preserve unto us, and the
Churches committed to our charge, all Canonical privileges, and due Law and
Justice; and that you would protect and defend us, as every good King in his
Kingdom ought to be a Protector and defender of the Bishops, and Churches
under their Government,

The King answered? With a willing and devout heart, I promise and grant my
pardon, and that I will preserve and maintain to you and the Churches committed
to your charge, all Canonical privileges and due law and justice, and that I
will be your Protector and Defendor to my power, by the assistance of God, as
every good King in his Kingdom, ought in right protect and defend the Bishops
and Churches under their Government.

Then the King went to the Altar where laying his hand upon the Evangelists, he
took the Oath following,

The things which I have here before promised, I shall perform and keep, so God
me help, and by the contents of this Book, and so kissed the Book.

The Homage of the Archbishop of Canterbury, for himself and all the Bishops,
(he kneeling down, and all the Bishops behind him) said,
I William Archbishop of Canterbury, shall be faithful and true, and Faith and
Truth shall bear unto you our Sovereign Lord, and your Heirs, Kings of England,
and I shall do and truly acknowledge the service of the Lands which I claim to
hold of you, as in right of the Church, So God me help.

Then he arose and kissed the Kings left cheek, as did the rest of the Bishops.

The Homage of the Nobility.
I James Duke of York become your Leigeman of life and limb, and of earthly
worship, and Faith and Truth I shall bear unto you, to live and dye against all
manner of folk, So God me help.

The Oath of a Lord Chancelour.
YOu shall swear that well and truly you shall serve our Sovereign Lord the
King, and his people in the office of Chancelour: and you shall do right to all
manner of people, poor and rich, after the laws and usages of this Realm, and
truly you shall counsel the King, and his Counsel: you shall layne and keep,
and you shall not know nor suffer the hurt or disheriting of the King, or that
the rights of the Crown be deceased by any means as far forth as you may let
it: and if you may not let it, you shall make it clearly and expressly to be
known unto the King, with your true advice and council, and that you shall do
and purchase the Kings profit in all that you reasonably may. As God you help,
and by the contents of this book.

The Oath of a privy Counceller.
YOu shall swear to be a true and faithful servant unto the Kings Majesty as
one of his privy counsel, you shall not know or understand any manner of thing
to be attempted, done or spoken against his Majesty's Person, Honor, Crown or
Dignity Royal: but you shall let and withstand the same, to the utmost of your
power, and either cause it to be revealed to his Majesty himself, or to such
of his privy Council as shall advertise his Highness of the same. You shall in
all things, to be moved, treated and debated in Council, faithfully and truly
declare your mind and opinion, according to your heart and conscience, and
shall keep secret all matters committed and revealed unto you, or shall be
treated off secretly in Counsel, and if any of the same Treaties or Counsels
shall touch any of the Councellers you shall not reveal it unto him, but shall
keep the same until such time, as by the consent of his Majesty or of the
Council, publication shall be made thereof. You shall to your uttermost bear
Faith and Allegiance unto the Kings Majesty, his Heirs, and lawful
successors, and shall assist and defend all jurisdictions, preheminences, and
authorities granted to his Majesty and annexed to his Crown, against all
foreign Princes, Persons, Prelates and Potentates, by act of Parliament or
otherwise. And generally in all things you shall do as a faithful and true
servant and Subject ought to do to his Majesty: So help you God and by the
holy contents of this book.

The Oath of a Secretary of State.
YOu shall swear to be a true and faithful Servant unto the Kings Majesty, as
one of the Principal Secretaries of State to his Majesty: you shall not know
or understand of any manner of thing to be attempted, done or spoken against
his Majesty's person, Honor, Crown or Dignity-royal, but you shall let and
withstand the same to the uttermost of your power, and either do, or cause it
to be revealed, either to his Majesty himself or to his privy Counsel, you
shall keep secret all matters revealed and committed unto you, or that shall be
secretly treated in Counsel, and if any of the said treaties or Counsels shall
touch any of the Counselors, you shall not reveal the same unto him, but shall
keep the same until such time as by the consent of his Majesty, or the
Connsel, publication shall be made thereof; you shall to your uttermost bear
Faith and Allegiance to the Kings Majesty, his heirs and lawful successors,
and shall assist and defend all jurisdictions, preheminences and authorities
granted to his Majesty and annexed to his Crown, against all foreign Princes,
Persons, Prelates or Potentates, etc. By act of Parliament or otherwise, and
Generally in all things you shall do as a true and faithful servant and subject
ought to do to his Majesty. So help you God, and by the holy contents of this
book.

Subscription of such as are to be made Ministers according to the 37 canon and
constitution, Anno Dom. 1603. and in the reign of our Sovereign Lord James, by
the grace of God King of England, Scotland, France and Ireland the first, and
of Scotland the 37. in the Synod begun at London.

No person shall hereafter be received into the Ministry, nor either by
institution or collation admitted to any Ecclesiastical living, or by the
Archbishop or Bishop of the Diocese, except he shall first subscribe to these
three Articles in such sort and manner as we have here appointed.

Article. I.
That the Kings Majesty under God is the only supreme Governor of this Realm,
and of all other his Highness Dominions and Countries, as well in all spiritual
or ecclesiastical things, or causes, as temporal: and that noforrain Prince,
Person, Prelat or Potentate have or ought to have any jurisdiction, power,
superiority, pre-eminence or authority, Ecclesiastical or Spiritual, within his
Majesty's said Realms, Dominions and Countries.

Article II.
That the book of Common Prayer, and of ordering of Bishops, Priests and
Deacons, contains nothing in it contrary to the word of God, and that it may
lawfully be used, and that he himself will use the form in the said book
prescribed, in public prayer and administration of the Sacraments, and none
other.

Article III.
That he allows the book of Articles of Religion agreed upon by the
Archbishops and Bishops of both Provinces, and the whole Clergy in the
convocation held at London, in the year of our Lord God one thousand five
hundred sixty and two, and that he acknowledges all and every the Articles
therein contained, being in number nine an thirty, besides the Ratification to
be agreeable to the word of God.

The form of words, to avoid all ambiguities, follows viz. Setting down his
Christian and Surname.
I, N. N. do willingly and ex Animo, subscribe to these three Articles above
mentioned, and to all things contained in them.

An Oath against Symony, at institution into Benifices,
I N. N. do swear that I have made no symonical payment, Can. 40.
contract or promise, directly or indirectly, by my self, or any other to my
knowledge, or with my consent, to any person or persons whatsoever, for
concerning and obtaining this ecclefiastical dignity, place, preferment, office
or living, (respectively and particularly naming the same, whereunto he is to
be admitted, instituted, collated, installed or confirmed,) nor will at any
time hereafter perform or satisfy any such kind of payment, contract or
promise made by any other without my knowledge or consent, So help me God,
through Jesus Christ.

And as the Clergy are obliged to subscribe ex Animo to the three Articles
contained in the 37 canon, so are they (when they receive holy orders, and are
made Deacons or Priests, at their ordination, or when they receive institution
to any Ecclesiastical Living or Promotion, and Installation to any Dignity in
the Church) obliged to canonical obedience, to their respective Diocesans, and
the Bishops likewise are (at their consecrations) obliged to promise Canonical
obedience, to their Metropolitans, and the respective Archbishops of either
Provinces and Sees of Canterbury and York: and the Archbishops likewise
promise and vow the duties of Faith and true Allegiance to the King, when (at
their homage, kneeling before the King) they take an Oath of Fealty and
Obedience to the King, and his lawful heirs and successors.

These are most holy and sacred Iuramentum est confirmatio verbi; dequo
juratur. Orig.
bonds, more fit for all the Sons of Aaron and the Tribe of Levy, and These
do breed, keep and cherish Peace and unity in the Church; Quid est jurare per
Deum nifi testis est Deus? D. August de verbis Apostoli sermn. 28.
oblige the inferior orders to their superiors; and in fine, unite all
ecclesiastic subjects in true Allegiance to their King. And though the
Anabaptists and some squemish Phanaticks, (cunningly instructed, or factiously
engaged) are shy of such sacred oaths and obligations: yet, it is warranted
from the holy Scripture. Thus Abimelech and Phicol required an Oath from
Abraham, Genesis 21.23.
Now therefore swear unto me here by God, that thou will not deal falsely with
me, nor with my Son, nor with my Sonns Son. Thus Moses directs Israel, Deuteronomy.
6.13.10.12.13.4.
Thou shall fear the Lord thy God and serve him, and swear by his name. Thus
Ezra. 10.5.
Ezra arose and made the chief Priests, the Levites, and all Israel to swear,
that they should do according to this word: and they swear. And if yet, any
deluded or factious Curiosity, be not satisfied, but will object evangelical
strict Commands against lawful Oaths: because Christ has preached Matt. 5.34.
1 Iam. 5.12.
Swear not at all: and St. James advised, Hanc elimenta jurandi, pessimam
consuetudinem habere Iudaeinoscuntur. D. Hiero. in 5. Mat.
above all things (my brethren swear not.) Yet these sacred Cautions and
Commands, were not to take away the lawful and holy, but the unlawful and
profane use and custom of Oaths. Thus St. Hierom commenteth. Our Savior does
not utterly forbid an Oath, sed per coelum and terram jurare! St. Augustine
seems more full and plain, saying, that Counsel was given to prevent an idle
and sinful habit of swearing; which from a profane facility, might quickly run
into custom, and so fall into perjury; or, that no persons should be affected
with customary Oaths or swearing; Dico vobis non jurare omnino, ne scil.
jurando ad facilitatem jurandi Porventatur, and en facultate jurandi ad
conseitudinem and a consuetudine in Perjurium decidatur. D. August. de
mendacio, cap. 15.
or greedily with delight and delectation to seek and hunt after Oaths, which
on good grounds may be lawful: and for a good end and purpose, to discern
truth, and to end all Controversies; And thus St. Paul (on several occasions)
has presented himself an Apostolical exemplar to Gods Church. And to all that
has been said, it may be further added. That it is a Theological determination
of the Church of England; Articles of Religion. 39. Article.
to which every true son has or ought to subscribe and submit. That as vain
and rash swearing is forbidden Christian men by our Lord Jesus Christ, and
James his Apoctle: so we judge that Christian Religion does not prohibit, but
that a man may swear, when the Magistrate requires, in a cause of faith and
charity. So it be done according to the Prophets teaching, in Justice,
Judgment and Truth.

The Oath of Allegiance and Supremacy; enjoined by order of Parliament.
The Oath of Allegiance.
I A. B. Do truly and sincerely acknowledge, profess, testify and declare in
my conscience before God and the world, that our Sovereign Lord King Charles is
lawful and rightful King of this Realm, and of all other his Majesty's
Dominions and Countries; and that the Pope, neither of himself, nor by any
authority of the Church or See of Rome, or by any other means with any other,
has any power or authority to depose the King, or to dispose any of his
Majesty's Kingdoms or Dominions, or to authorize any Foreign Prince to invade
or annoy him or his. Countries, or to discharge any of his Subjects of their
Allegiance and obedience to his Majesty, or to give license or leave to any of
them to bear Arms, raise Tumults, or to offer any violence or hurt to his
Majesty's Royal Person, State or Government, or to any of his Majesty's
Subjects within his Majesty's Dominions.

Also I do swear from my heart, that notwithstanding any Declaration or
sentence of Excommunication or Deprivation made or granted, or to be made or
granted by the Pope or his Successors, or by any Authority derived or
pretended to be derived from him or his See, against the said King, his Heirs
or Successors, or any Absolution of the said Subjects from their Obedience; I
will bear Faith and true Allegiance to his Majesty, his Heirs and Successors,
and him and them will defend to the uttermost of my power, against all
conspiracies and attempts whatsoever which shall be made against his or their
Persons, their Crown and Dignity, by reason or color of any such Sentence or
Declaration or otherwise; and will do my best endeavor to disclose and make
known unto his Majesty, his Heirs and Successors, all Treasons and Traiterous
Conspiracies which I shall know or hear of, to be against him or any of them.

And I do further swear, That I do from my heart abhor, detest and abjure, as
impious and heretical, this Damnable Doctrine and Position, That princes which
be excommunicated or deprived by the Pope, may be deposed or murdered by their
Subjects, or any other whatsoever.

And I do believe and in conscience am resolved, that neither the Pope nor any
person whatsoever has power to absolve me of this Oath, or any part thereof
which I acknowledge by good and full Authority to be lawfully administered unto
me, and do renounce all pardons and dispensations to the contrary. And all
these things I do plainly and sincerely acknowledge, and swear according to
these express words by me spoken, and according to the plain and common sense
and understanding of the same words, without any equivocation, or mental
evasion, or secret reservation whatsoever: And I do make this Recognition and
acknowledement heartily, willingly and truly, upon the true faith of a
Christian. So help me God, etc.

The Oath of Supremacy.
I A. B. Do utterly testify and declare in my conscience, that the King 's
Highness is the only Supreme Governor of this Realm, and of all other his
Highnesse's Dominions and Countries, as well in all Spiritual or Ecclesiastical
things or causes as Temporal; And that no Foreign Prince, Person, Prelate,
State or Potentate, has or or ought to have any Jurisdiction, Power,
Superiority, Preeminence or Authority Ecclesiastical or Spiritual within this
Realm: And therefore I do utterly renounce and forsake all Foreign
Jurisdictions, Powrs, Superiorities and Authorities, and do promise that from
henceforth I shall bear Faith and true Allegiance to the King's Highness, his
Heirs and lawful Successors, and to my power shall assist and defend all
Jurisdictions, Privileges, Preeminences and Authorities granted, or belonging
to the Kings Highness, his Heirs and successors or united and annexed to the
Imperial Crown of this Realm. So help me God, and by the contents of this book.

These Platforms and models of Oaths, as they are of holy use to unite our
fidedelity to God and Man, so they are of Divine Authority, and seem to be
influential from Heaven, from whence we have the Sacred example; so the
Scriptures testify. Exodus, 33.1. Depart hence unto the Land which I swear unto
Abraham Isaac and Jacob. Thus divine usage is very frequent with God. Deuteronomy
1.8.34.35. Psalm. 95.9. Luke 1.73. Heb. 6.13. Heb. 7.21. And as God pleased to
confirm his promise with an Oath. So King David Gods anointed voweth and
swears, calling on God and praying, Lord remember David and all his
Afflictions, how he swear unto the Lord and vowed to the mighty God of Jacob.
Psalm. 132.1. 2. And Solomon his royal Son gave Counsel to all his subjects, and
all the world. I counsel thee to keep the Kings commandment and that in regard
of the Oath of God. Eccles. 8.2.



Having now set fourth the sacred Oaths and obligations of the Kings and Queens
of England, and of some of the chief Officers and Ministers of State, together
with the Homage of the Ecclesiastical Hirarchy, and temporal Nobility, and of
the three great Officers of Court: the Lord high Steward, the Master of the
Horse, and the Lord Chamberlain, by their Oaths as privy counselors under,
whose immediate command and power, all servants at Court, are sworn to fidelity
and obedience, in their respective relations, and ranks of order, degrees and
subordinations. It is plain and easy to every rational subject to discern and
see the most excellent form of Government that the prudence and piety of former
ages has conveyed to the English to this present time: and we cannot do less
then admire and magnify the gracious providence, and riches of Gods favors to
the Kingdom of England, who has with the golden chain of harmonious
Government so lincked Kings and Queens to himself, and all their subjects and
people to their sovereign Princes, that no Kingdom under the canopy of Heaven,
has a better frame of Government, either for Church or State, or the
transaction of Ecclesiastic or civil concernments and affairs, in which there
is such an incementing concatenation by wholesome laws, and customs, for
justice, and the happy preservation of all the peoples Rights, that as the King
may sit as happily and securely on his Throne as any Monarch on earth, so his
people may as prosperously thrive under his gracious Government, and reposing
themselves under their own vines and figtrees; as cheerfully enjoy the
inestimable blessings of their own just rights, and labors, Milk and Honey,
with the overflowing favors of Peace and Plenty. How great a crime must it
then be, to wrest or break one of the invaluable lincks of this golden
concatenation, which Sovereign Princes graciously please to strengthen and
consolidate (if possible) by their sacred Oaths to God, which cannot but
indear and more oblige ingenuous subjects to greater exactness of duty and
fidelity, considering that these pious proceeding, are more acts of Grace and
voluntary and Princely condescentions flowing from the fountains of their own
royal goodness, being methods of high degrees of kindness and love; where words
or promises, and those at their royal wills and pleasure, are to be looked on,
not only as certainties and assurances, but as deeds and complete performances.
The civil Law expects as much from Noble men, and Persons of Honor, that
there words be equally esteemed as their deeds, Promissa nobilinm pro factis
habentur. And Iser. c. 1. Tantum fidei and legalitatis presumitur in Nobilibus
ut si quicquam promiserint id per equesit certum ac indubitatum ac si jam
factum esset. And Iser. c, 1.
thus Homer honorably mentions Agamemnon (...). Homer. Iliad. 18.
the word was no sooner out of that great worthies mouth, but it was his act
and deed, but Princes are of more sublime and higher qualities as being earthly
Gods, their words are more Sacred and Sovereign. Thus Pylat though an inferior
Potentate, toul'd the Jews, quod scripsi, scripsi. And Servius commenting on
those words of the Poet Virgil. lib. 12. Aeneid.
Do, quod vis, been inquit, presenti usus est tempore: nam promissio in Diis
pro facto est. I give what thou will, the God did well to use the present
tense, as if the will and words of Princes were very Acts and Deeds, but if any
knot can bind faster then words or promises, see the gracious dispositions and
customs of the Kings of England, offering up (as in the beauty of holiness,)
the sacrifice of pious resolutions to God Almighty, in sacred oaths for their
most Princely government.

And as Kings thus unite themselves. by these most Sacred bonds to the King of
Kings, so their Officers and Ministers of State, and servants of their Courts,
are engaged by special Oaths of Obedience and Fidelity, and all their subjects
are obliged by a national Law, to swear to the Oaths of Allegiance and
Supremacy, no rank being to be excused (at the age of Eighteen) from these just
and rational obligations, unless the Lords and Peers of the Realm, whose
refined Honor being as equivalent, if not more superlative, does as powerfully
indear them to loyalty and true allegiance to their Princes; it cannot then but
be justly censured a crime of the highest nature to violate sacred bonds with
treachery and infidelity; and yet that soul sin may be presented more ugly,
when any in greater and nearer trust about the King, (as a Minister of his
royal affairs, or a sworn servant of his Court) shall perfidiously or
timorously forfeit his Faith, which by duplicated Oaths being sealed on his
Soul, as a door more secure under a double lock ought to be more firm, and not
to be forced by any Art or Engine: and if single perjury be so notorious a
crime, how horrid and hellish will it appear in the multiplication of false
illegal and perjurous and damnable Oaths.

The link and jonts of government, thus reaching from Heaven to Eatth, from God
to Man, and from the King of Kings to Kings and Princes on earth, they thence
graciously descend from royal thrones, to the meanest and lowest of all their
people: who in a community participate of the blessings of Monarchy, under the
protection and Grace of their Prince, and the benefit and provision of most
excellent and wholesome laws, against whose sacred Person (as being Gods
anointed) or rules of government, if any should be so traitterous or
seditious, as to dare to contrive or conspire, they merit the severest degrees
of punishment, and though they be as near to the Crown in blood as Absalon to
King David, or as near in trust and Counsels, as the grand oraculous politician
Achitophel, yet no relation or employment can so palliat the blaknesse of their
offenses, but that all good subjects are obliged as Hushai the Archite, to
preserve their Prince in his royal Crown and dignity, and to detect and
discover, dissipate and destroy all treacherous conspiraces, and rebellious
Treasons against their Prince. This was the resolution and adventure of Noble
Hushai, who commanded by King David obeyed his royal pleasure, and leaving the
King in a deplorable sad condition, addressed to the usurper and traitor
Absalon, and seemingly confederated with that unnatural Arch Traitor, and
Achitophel and his accomplices; but God had so appointed that this loyal subject,
by his wisdom and fidelity intrapped Absalon to his merited ruin, and so
infatuated the Councels of Achitophel, that the despairing Traitor (hanging
himself,) became his own executioner, and the rebellious army being routed, and
totally defeated, and Absalon hanged by the head in a tree, King David was
gloriously restored to the royal City of Jerusalem.

But least any presume to be loyal Hushites, who cannot reasonably merit the
opinion or Name of true Royalists, and so not prove King David's friends. It is
necessary that some characters and distinctions be intermitted for cleerer
truth, and plainer perspicuiry of what is dross, what is sophisticated false
and fained metal, and what (in this point) by the impartial touch stone is
judged pure and perfect gold.

The story of this concernment is a sacred record, written by the holy Prophet
Samuel, 2 Samuel 15.
which describes King David's danger and deliverance, his enemies and his
friends, presents to the world the undutifulness of an unnatural Son, and the
rebellious attempts of ambitious and traitorous subjects, Absalon was the Arch
traitor, and Achitophel the chief Counselour in this foul conspiracy and black
Treason, and the Prophet (as if to forewarn the world from future delusion and
infatuation of that kind) describes the Traitors and Conspirators. Traitorous
crimes or marks, 1. defamation or detraction.
First, defaming and dishonoring the Kings government, sowing sedition, and
disgracing the royal Courts of Justice, saying, 2 Samuel 15.3. See, says
Absolon, thy matters be good and right, but there is no man deputed of the King
to hear thee. This design was countenanced with the pomp and pride of a
popular train. 2 Samuel 15.1. to amaze or allure the vulgar, 2 Popular pomp and
pride.
Absolon prepared Charriots and Horses, and fifty men to run before him. A
great pretense to execute judgment, 3 A pretense to do justice and execute
judgment.
and do justice, promoted this rebellion, so the grand Impostor made way to
advance his rebellion saying 2 Samuel 15.4. O that I were made Judge in the land,
that every man that has any suite or cause might come unto me, (as the Supreme
Magistrate and chief Justice) And I would do him justice, 4 Restless watching
day and night.
vigilance, diligence and indefatigable industry and attendance; to caress and
court the people, were active practices of this popular politician so Samuel
sets forth the traitor in the 2 Samuel 15.2. Absolon rose up early and stood
beside the way of the Gate, 5 Flattery and adulation.
and when any man that had a controvercy came to the King for judgment, then
Absolon called unto him, and with oily courtship quickly deluded common
capacities, and simple credulity: this venomous and traitorous infatuation,
that so swelled the people with avarice and ambition, was as epidemick and
national, as infectious and insnaring, 6 Traitorous infection is usually
epidmical
For, on this manner did Absolon to all Israel that came to the King for
judgment. 2 Samuel 15.6. Traitors usually pules every vain, try all tempers, and
incline all humors to augment and corroberate their party, and to effectuate
their evil contrivances and machinations,

7 Traitors are most courty crafty and fullest of dissimulation.
And as traitors lay their plots and designs, for general advantages, so they
bend and humble themselves to court and catch all capacities. Thus Cataline
caressed the lowest of the Romans as he passed in the streets. And it is
remarkable in Absolon, how like a Serpent he insinuated, creeping and cringing,
bending and bowing to the earth; so the Prophet observes him in his carriage to
the meanest Israelite, 1 Samuel 15.5. And it was so that when any man came nigh
to him, to do him obeisance, he put forth his hand and took him and kissed him.
But that which was the chiefest cheat, 8 Hypocrisy or the holy cheat
and both deluded King David and his subjects, was cunning hypocrisy, or (in
the abused canting phraise of these juggling times) Liberty of conscience, and a
pretense to holiness, or performance of religious vows; so the Prophet
describes the deceiver. 2 Samuel 15.7.8, And it came to pass after forty years
that Absolon said unto the King, I pray thee let me go and pay my vow, which I
have vowed unto the Lord in Hebron, for thy servant vowed a vow while I abode
at Geshur in Syria, saying if the Lord shall bring me again indeed to
Jerusalem, then I will serve the Lord. And as this arch conspirator Absolon, so
his councellor Achitophel seemd to be very zealous, and religious: so the
Prophet takes notice that Achitophel being sent for by Absolon, He was it his
City of Giloh where he was raising rebellion when offering sacrifices. 2 Samuel
15.12, There were many thousands engaged and envolved in the conspiracy, and
some few hundred more innocent, or rather less malicious Traitors: and the
Prophet to their comfort records both their number and their qualities, 2 Samuel 15.11. And with Absolon went two hundred men out of Jerusalem, that were
called, and they went in their simplicity, and they knew not any thing. 9
Traitors are false and most persidious.
There is yet one attendant more, that is concomitant and adherent to
traitorous dispositions, which are for the most part, very false and horridly
perfidious; thus Absolon had no sooner leave to go in peace to Hebron, but
immediately he sent his spies through all the tribes of Israel, saying, as soon
as ye hear the sound of the Trumpet, then ye shall say Absolon reigns in
Hebron, 2 Samuel 15.10. These nine characters whiles they continue engraven on
traitorous subjects hearts; they cannot be permitted to the reputation of true
royalists, as Hushai the Archite, that noble Israelite, who was not tainted
with any of these defiling qualities, but positively and in the affirmative was
richly endued with many heroic virtues, which did highly capacitate his noble
soul, for the service of his God the God of Israel, and for David the King the
Lords anointed, and for the Peace, Liberty and Hapiness of the Kingdom and
Country, where he was an honorable Courtier, a prudent Counselor, a loyal
subject, and faithful Patriot; and the holy pen of that sacred writer, who did
set forth and character Absolon, Achitophel and their traitorous confederates,
does delineate and portray in most (lively colors) the most incomparable and
supereminent virtues of the true and perfect royalist in the great abilities
and worth of Hushai the Archite, who (says the Prophet) was in zealous
passion, Characters of true royalists. 1 Holy indignation, for their King in a
sad conditon. 2 Samuel 15.32.
or holy indignation, to see his King in a sad condition, his people in
rebellion, and the whole Kingdom in such a wild confusion and distraction,
Ecce occurrit ei Chusai Arachites, scissa vest and terra pleno capite. Behold
Hushai the Archite came to meet the King with his coat rent, and earth upon his
head. Good subjects they neither value liberty, 2 Attend there Prince in
greatest danger.
life or limb, riches or fortune, nor any personal concernment; but when their
King and his Crown is in danger, and his royal Person in the field, they hazard
and adventure all; as loyal subjects in their Princes service, and they are not
only to attend, but to be active, quick and lively in the concernment of a
Crown: this great worthy is a noble example of diligence and activeness in his
swift endeavors, to advance his princes cause, their is no mention made of
declaration or proclamation, of the call of a drum or sound of trumpet, but as
soon as the royal Standaris mounted, 3 True royalists ought to be quick and
active for their King in danger.
and it is but whispered, or at least but rumourd that King David was in
danger, and his people in rebellion, Hushai speedily posteth and addresseth to
the royal camp, so the Prophet expresses, Chushai Arachites occurrit, ran (as
with all haste) to meet the King, impatient until he came to his Princes aid
and assistance. This worthy Israelite was neither timorously or cowardly
inclind, as ignoble Poultrones, nor treacherously affected as Laodicean
newters, nor shackled and imprisoned with the fetters of base and filthy lusts,
as lacivious and lu xurious epicures, but, as on a sudden abandoning and
quitting all delights prophits and concernments; as swift as lightning, he
flies to attend his Prince in his dangerous extremities, as Hushai was quick
and active for the preservation of his King: 4 The best royalists the most
religious. (...) Plato in Apol. 2 Samuel 15.32. Ista ingeniorum scabies ut omnes
disputare malint quam viveve. Seneca epist. 2.5.
so he appears (which was his greater honor and commendation,) religious, and
rightly settled for his principles in Gods worship and service; he was no black
soul'd Atheist, whose devotion entirely attends his interest, nor factious
Schismatic, hypocritical separatist, or brain sick Phanatick, but a true
Israelite indeed; and so it appears, by the double circumstances of the manner
and time of his attendance; for the manner it was in a Jewish mode and dress,
his clothes rent, and his head covered with earth, emblems of sorrow and
indignation, and a religious condolement and compassion. And as to the time of
his address, it proved either by design or providence to be at that instant,
When the King was come to the top of the Mount, where he worshipped God, behold
Hushai the Archite came to meet him. Even then when the King was at his prayers
and earnestly said, 2 Samuel 15.31.
O Lord I pray thee turn the Counsel of Achitophel into foolishness. 5
Fortitude requisie in true royaliste.
Then as joining in holy devotion, did Hushai most happily attend his Kings
commands. To these excellent capacities and fitness, King David found Hushai a
man of courage and magnanimity, neither fearing the Enemies power, nor
distrusting the Kings more weak and sad condition, not of a low and
pusillanimous spirit, nor of a ranting and vaporing humor, who like some
squibs and crackers will thunder and roar like lions, (and though the cause be
never so good) in an instant change their notes, and like timorus Hares betake
themselves to there heels. This Israelite was a person of honor and courage,
truly valiant, 6 Temperance requisite in all royalists,
and therefore more proper for service of highest trust, and as this bright
shining virtue did show it self in Hushai; so temperance (doubtless) kept him
company, without whose influence understanding, sense and reason, or what can
be thought honorable to a Prince, will suddenly be drowned and overwhelmed in
the stinking puddles of gluttony, drunkenness, riot, luxury, or detestable
debaucheries. Temperance and valor, loves to keep company with justice; And
it is very probable that this golden rule of doing right, and giving to every
man his due, was a chief motive to King David to employ one of so just and
righteous resolutions, 7 Justice and upright dealing.
who so dutifully paying his loyalty to his Prince as so cheerfully to hazard
and adventure his life, might (possibly) be more succesful in so near a
concernment as the preserving of a King on his Throne, and the appeasing and
extinguishing of the flames of so formidable a treason. These three fair Ladies
are never without the society and counsel of Prudence, 8 Prudence,
and in this perilous juncture she might be more highly useful, because as
Plato, she is the chiefest guide that best advises humain actions. Prudentia
sola praeit and ducit ad recte faciendum. Plato in menae.
Aristotle is more plain urging Fieri non potest ut quisquam vere probus sine
prudentia audiat. Arist. and hic.
that no man can be justly styled good or honest, who is not prudent, as
necessary to true Policy and Government, as the line and plummet to the skilful
Architect Vt Architectis nullum epus recte processcrit sine libella and I. Lips,
. This as the rudder turns the Ship and best steers the course when she is
under sail: the King experiencing a quick and lively spirit, a great judgment
and more solid understanding in his loyal subject the Archite, resolved to make
choice of his faithful abilities, when his Crown and life and all that was
sovereign and truly royal, seemed to be in an ambiguous and dangerous state. To
all these the constancy, the fidelity, the secrecy, the extraordinary
friendship, passionate love and amity, that King David had for Hushai, or that
Hushai had for the person and high calling of the King: these happy experiences
might rationally incline King David's confidence, 9 Constancy, Fidelity, Secresy
are requisite in true loyalists.
to recommend and commissionate his faithful subject to manage and conduct this
weighty business. These are lively marks of true loyalists, and well worthy and
becoming the imitation of all who pretend to be loyal subjects; yet this case
of Hushai seems to be of a most remarkable and extraordinary quality, both in
respect of King David and in relation to Hushai. First, in regard of the King,
who (surprised with a rebellion, under a pretense of Religion, and a vow to be
performed at Hebron) was forced to a sudden necessity, to use his greatest Art
and Policy to disperse and dissolve that growing traitorous cloud which began
to spread, and to look so formidable. Thus a great Critic adventures to
comment on the text, Non deserebant Davidem in tantis malis suae Arts, sed ubi
Leonina non proderat, assumit vulpinam. H. Grotius in 2 Samuel 1^.
and says David as a great commander and experienced general, wanted neither
wit nor arts, and martial designs, to crush in pieces, and counterplot Absolons
ambitious aims, others conjecture that this extraordinary command and
commission, was given to Hushai from David as his King, who having a sovereign
power over all his subjects might exact obedience, having a superlative
Authority, in so great a peril to circumstance his royal pleasure in this
service: as the King should please to judge fit for persons, time and place,
and this seems very probable from the Prophet Samuel 2 Samuel 15.33.34. Si
veneris mecum eris mihi oneri.
who thus records the dialogue betwixt the King and Hushai, If thou passest on
with me, thou shall be a burden to me, but if thou return into the City thou
may defeat the Counsel of Achitophel. And Vatablus Videsne tu? valesne tu in
concilio, quod si vales concilio revertere, plus enim mihi profueris redeundo
quam manendo Vatablus in loc. 2. Sam. 1^.
seems to incline much to this purpose, as if the King had reasoned Nonne
videns es? nonne Propheta es? si dominus responderit tibi redeundum in urbem
redito, Chal. Paraph.
the case and debated with Hushai, thus; saying, thou art a subject of great
experience, as sharp-sighted as an Eagle in popular commotions, strong in
judgment, prudent in Counsels, Eloquent and powerful in persuasion, a Lion for
courage, and a Lamb for courtship: civility and courtesy, go thou into the City
Jerusalem, and if possible defeat Achitophels counsel; there is a third
conjecture, which seems to carry with it the clearest truth, and that is in
this unexemplary command and service, King David as a Prophet, and the Lords
anointed, by a divine direction or infusion from above in this sea of
troubles, guided more especially by the dictates of Gods holy spirit, found out
this happy expedient to avoid his Enemies, and to destroy their traitorous
combinations, this seem to be genuinly derived from the sacred history, 2 Samuel
15.31.
which relates that King David worshipping God, fell to his prayers and said 2 Samuel 15.34. Dixeris Absalom servus tuus sum Rex; Patere me vivere.
O Lord I pray thee turn the counsel of Achitophel into foolishness, and the
King had no sooner ended his prayers, and was come to the top of the mount
where he worshipped God but Hushai came to meet him, and the King (as directed
by the spirit of God) immediately commands Hushai instructing him with the
matter and a form of such words, as seemed to be suitable only for such a
service, as he was employed in, and as sent from Heaven to save a King from
perishing, and to preserve a Kingdom a Say (Hushai) unto Absolon I will be thy
servant O King, as I have been thy Fathers servant hitherto, so will I now be
thy servant also. This commission was only suitable to such a sovereign Prince,
whose divine spirit, was directed from above and it is very colligible from the
context of this story: that King David had for the transaction of this high
concern (wherein a King, a Church and Kingdom were all in such eminent danger)
an extraordinary and prophetical spirit, and that will plainly manifest itself,
when it is observed and scanned how Hushai comported himself in this royal
trust wherein the King employed him, which was so succesful; that (by Gods
assistance) it caused the ruin of the traitors and that high rebellion. The
Prophet mentions Hushai's insinuation into Absolons presence, and into his
Counsels, wherein as he showed his obedience to his Prince and his own
matchless wisdom, and invincible courage, who was neither catched with
Absolons flattery, nor danted with the oraculous policy of perfidious
Achitophel. Hushai made his way as King David commanded him, saying, to Absolon
2 Samuel 16.16. Salve Rex. Salve Rex.
God save the King, God save the King: and now having by fair speeches justly
ensnared the flatterer, and gained acceptance and credulity, Hushai attends
his opportunity, to annihilate and destroy the traitors and their treason,
which he brought to good effect: first, by opposing and decrying the counsels
of Achitophel, which being refused, the despairing Statist, went forth and
hanged himself. 2 Samuel 17.25.
It cannot but be pertinent to observe how justly the judgments of God found
out this prodigious matchiavil; who sowed the tares of dissension betwixt a
Father and his Son: and cherished the seeds of Rebellion in the subjects
against their Liege Lord and King: the horror of his crimes, (as yet more
odious and abominable in the eyes of God and men) are recorded to his lasting
infamy in the sacred History, where the diversity of Achitophels and Hushai's
counsels are set forth at large, with the success of both. First, Absolon
calls for Achitophel 2 Samuel 16.20.
and said give me counsel, what we shall do, and as he presently venteth the
poison of his soul, damnably advising Absolon to go into his Fathers
Concubines, which he has left to keep the house, and all Israel shall hear that
thou art abhorred of thy Father, then shall all the hands that are with thee be
strong. This evil counsel was to well entertained and practiced, and prosecuted
with as much impudency as impiety, So they spread Absolon a Tent upon the top
of the House, and 2 Samuel 16.22.
Absolon went into his Fathers Concubines in the sight of all Israel. As this
foul sin was prepared to make not only a breach, but an abhorrency betwixt the
Father and the Son, so the Gibeonite proceeded in his dangerous and destructive
counsels persuading Absolon, that he might have the choice of twelve thousand
men, that he might arise and pursue after David in the night, and says he I
will come upon him while he is weary and weakhanded, and will make him afraid,
and all the people that are with him shall flee, and I will smite the King
only. Sam. 17.1.2.
Herein was much mischief contained as the force of a considerable Army, the
terror of a pursuit in the night, and blood thirsty cruelty threatening, to
chase or surprise a feeble and fainty marching Army; and most maliciously to
smite and murder the King only, but God prevented the mischiefs of this bad
counsel and fowl design. For it pleased the providence of Heaven, to order that
Absolon should call likewise Hushai the Archite and to hear what he said and he
(obedient to King David's instructions, and guided by the breathings of the holy
spirit gave counsel) of another complexion, saying boldly and faithfully 2 Samuel
17.7.
That the counsel that Achitophel has given is not good at this time for (
said Hushai) thou know that thy Father and his men be mighty men, and they
be chafed in their minds Bitter of Soul.
as a bear that is robbed of her whelps in the field, and thy Father is a man
of war and will not lodge with the people behold he is now hid in some pit, 2 Samuel 17.7.8.9.10.11.
or in some other place: And it will come to pass when some of them be
overthrown at the first, that whosoever hears it, will say, there is a
slaughter among the people that follow Absolon. And he also that is valiant and
his heart as the heart of a Lion shall utterly melt: for all Israel know that
thy Father is a mighty man and that they that be with him be valient men.
Therefore I counsel that all Israel be gathered generally to gather from Dan
even to Beersheba, as the sand that is by the sea for multitude, and that thou
go to battle in thy own person, so shall we come upon him in some place where
he shall be found, and we will light upon him as the dew that falls upon the
ground, and of him and of all the men that are with him, there shall not be
left so much as one. Moreover if he be gotten into a City, then shall all
Israel bring ropes unto that City and we will draw it into the River, until
there be not on small stone to be found there.

This counsel was clean contrary to Achitophels presenting King David and his
Army not feeble but formidable, and admitted not of Achitophels but of Absolons
own advancing with his Army of Rebels, and as God had appointed and ordered,
even so it came to pass. 2 Samuel 17.14.
And Absolon and all the men of Israel said, the counsel of Hushai the Archite
is better then the counsel of Achitophel. This endeavor succeeding
prosperously, it was to be hoped that the traitors being distracted in their
counsels, might not prosper in their black design which fell out accordingly.
God and the King having instructed Hushai, the work went on the better and the
holy record bears witness of the truth. For the Lord had 2 Samuel 17.14.
appointed Nutu domini the original bears had commanded
to defeat the good counsel of Achitophel: Vt induceret Dominus malum, super
Absolon; to the intent that the Lord might bring evil upon Absolon. These
great transactions, thus wisely and faithfully managed; Hushai (according to
the Kings command) imparted the secrets and results of the counsels to Zadock
and Abiathar the Priests, saying, thus and thus did Achitophel counsel Absolon
and the Elders of Israel, and thus and thus have I counseled, now therefore
send quickly 2 Samuel 17.15.16.
and tell David, saying, lodge not this night in the plains of the wilderness,
but speedily pass over, least the King be swallowed up, and all the people that
are with him. Now Jonathan and Ahimaaz stayed by Enrogel ( for they might not
be seen within the City) and a wench went and told them, Verse. 22.
and they went and told King David and he arose upon this intelligence, and all
the people that were with him and passed over Jordan by the morning light,
there lacked not one of them that was not gone over Jordan. The King thus
advised of the Enemies designs, advanced to Mahonaim and taking a view of his
forces, divided his Army into three Brigades, and set one third part under the
command of his General Joab, King David's generals Ioab Aibshai Ittai. 2 Samuel
18.2.6.7.
another third part under the command Abishai the Son of Zerviah, and a third
patt under the hand of Ittai the Gittite; the Army then and thus advancing, the
battle was in the wood of Ephraim where the people of Israel were slain before
the servants of David, and there was a slaughter that day of twenty thousand
men, and Absolon (as neither worthy of favor from Heaven or Earth) riding on a
mule his head was caught hold on by the thick boughs of the Oak, and the Mule,
(the very beast whereon he rode) forsook him and went away and left him to be
pierced through with the darts of vengance, and the weapons of death. The
Traitors thus dispersed and routed, good news of a happy victory, 2 Samuel 18.31.
and tidings of Salvation was posted to King David in the mouth of Chushi n so
the Prophet Samuel relates that Chushi came, and Chushi said, tidings my Lord
the King, for the Lord has avenged thee this day on all those that rose up
against thee. The Enemies discomfited and the victory proclaimed Israel as well
as Judah fell into a zealous emulation and contention for loyalty, and King
David's Enemies strive to manifest themselves chearsul and obedient subjects:
this is evident in the sacred passages of this royal story, Israel fled every
man to his tent, and as at an instant in the next verse says the Prophet and
all the people were at strife, through all the tribes of Israel saying, The
King saved us out of the hands of our Enemies, 2 Samuel 19.6.
and he delivered us out of the Philistines, and now he is fled out of the
Land, for Absolon, and Absolon whom we have anointed over us is dead in battle.
Now therefore why speak ye not a word of bringing the King back. Thus the Kings
greatest Enemies in his sudden prosperity became his friends, but as for Judah
his loyal party, the King (returning toward Jerusalem in triumph) had an eye
principally on them. And King David sent to Zadock and to Abiathar, saying,
speak unto the Elders of Judah saying, why are ye the last to bring back the
King to his house, 2 Samuel 19.10.11.
seeing the speech of all Israel is come to the King even to his house, ye are
my brethren, ye are my bones, and ye are my flesh, wherefore then are ye the
last to bring back the King. Thus at King David's return and restoration
toward Jerusalem Judah and Israel, 2 Samuel 19.15.
friends and foes all being King David's subjects, 1 Vnanimi consensu Tremel in
loc
united their acclamations in this happy occasion of solemn joy: 2 Samuel 19.41.42
43.
and as rivals seemed to contend whether Tribes should appear more absolute and
perfect royalists, the Prophets expressions are most emphatical. And behold all
the men of Israel came to the King, Tribules Iehudae and qui pro Davide
militarant quibus copiis freti audaciores erant in sua responsione Iunius
and said unto the King, why have our brethren the men of Judah stolen thee
away, and brought the King and his household and all David's men with him over
Jordan? And all the men of Judah answered the men of Israel, because the King
is near of kin to us, Wherefore then be ye angry for this matter? have we eaten
at all of the Kings cost? Refellendo rations Israelitaru^ and ludifican do co
insolentius adhuc locuti sunt, quam Israelitae. Tremel, in loc.
or has he given us any gift? And the men of Israel answered the men of Judah,
and said, we have ten parts in the King, and we have also more right in David
then ye, why then did ye despise us, that our advice should not be first had in
bringing back our King? and the words of the men of Judath were fiercer then
the words of the men of Israel. as justly despising their pretenses to merits
and thanks who had so lately co-assisted in such a bloody rebellion. The storm
thus over of King David's troubles, and the confusions so calmed and allayed by
the Kings incomparable wisdom, his Generals courage and conduct in the Army,
and the unparaleld counsel and fidelity of Hushai, the King was gloriously
restored to his throne, the Priests admitted peaceably to attend at the Altar,
and all the subjects, both Judah and Israel contended for more exact precedence
in the duty of loyalty and allegiance. These were the effects of these noble
endeavors conferring much advantage to the King and Kingdoms happiness, and
these examples of Fidelity and Loyalty may direct all subjects of future ages
to intimate (to their utmost power) the sincere and faithful Israelite, and
that none may over admire, or too much flatter themselves or services,
Observations on Hnshai,
Hushai was (first) passionately afflicted, when he heard of the Kings
distress and danger, and dutifully attended his royal person and commands:
(secondly) he sturred not from the King until David commanded him. Absolon in
his counsels, but not without the Kings privity and instruction: (fourthly)
Zadock and Abiathar the Priests and their two sons Jonathan and Ahimaaz men of
piety, fidelity and soberness: (sixthly) Hushai was so high in esteem with King
David that he was both by the King and his Enemies, owned as King David's
friend, (seventhly) Absolons flattery or Achitophels Counsels, and so defiled
their souls with Treason and Rebellion:) to become cordial and true converts to
their Prince; and laying fast hold on his mercy and clemency to repent them
truly for their crimes and errors. For this is the plain Path to true Content,
and high way, and passage to Heaven.

depiction of a crown

The Parallel betwixt King CHARLES the II. King of ENGLAND, And LEWIS the IV.
the FRENCH King.

THe Father of King Lewis the fourth of France was deposed, and dead in Prison:
his Subjects in Rebellion; and at the same time, he an Exile in England: but
the success of time changed the face of all affairs and struck a deep sense
into the Rebels thoughts, so that they who so evil entreated the Father,
recalled the Son to elevate him to the Royal Throne.

Behold here that Gallant young Prince at the Seaside, and in the view of
those Vessels; wherein he sailed, from Dover to Calis; Thus Congratulating his
Subjects, before he accepted the present of his Scepter.

Published first. 1654.

Reprinted again. 1659.

LEWIS the IV. To his Revolted Subjects.
BEfore I shall receive your Oath of Fidelity, which I may justly demand, and
you ought dutifully to take, I shall let you know you have recalled (this day)
a Prince (who during his Exile) had nothing else to do, but to study how to
Rule and Reign; and hereby I shall enforce you to believe that you shall not be
able to make a Royal Throne a passage into my Fathers prison: And after you
have presented me with a Crown, to dare to wish me so much ill, as once to
think of Chains and Irons. I know well, that this discourse will surprise you,
and that you did not believe when you presented me with a Scepter, that I
should not rather have received it with Thanks, then Reprehensions; but this
act is extraordinary in its commencement, in its progress and in its
conclusion; and it is just that all circumstances should be proportionable. Let
it then suffice you only to know, that if I be ignorant to what point Subjects
are to pay their obeisance, yet I am not ignorant to what degree Sovereigns may
extend their clemency: Notwithstanding there is this difference betwixt them,
that the Subjects have no limits for the first, but Sovereigns have for the
latter. The People are obliged to the Princes wills, both by their Births and
their Laws. They owe them their goods, their lives and their liberties; and
their Princes owe them nothing but Justice, which can hardly pardon Traitors.
If these Truths and Maxims had been equally understood, and followed by the
late King my Sovereign, and you his People, affairs had not been in that sad
condition as they now are. The State had not been reduced to such confusion;
the Provinces had not been Cantonized; Germany had not been so full of
Factions; Italy had not been so divided; all the Cities of the Kingdom had not
had so many kings as they now have Governors; you had not been guilty of the
crime of Treason, in elevating an Usurper to the Throne, the King my Father
might still have Reigned, or (at least) I might have received the Crown from
his hands, and not from yours; his Tomb might have been bedewed with my tears,
his Scepter had not been profaned, his Hearse might have been covered with
Trophies, and not with Chains. you might have been happy and innocent. But as
his Clemency, and your Rebellion were the sole causers of all these evils, so
your Obedience, and my Justice, are the only means to make reparation. Consider
a little (I pray you) (that you fall not back in the same estate wherein you
were,) in what Relation you now stand; and in what condition I am. First, you
have violated all sorts of Rights in the person of your King, you have raised a
War against him; you have assaulted him, and afterward poisoned him; you have
abused the confidence he had in you, you have detained him prisoner with as
great Treason as Injustice, with as great insolency as cruelty: an injury which
was never offered (hardly) to the person of an ordinary Herald. Thus you have
violated, and impudently abused your King; you have detained him prisoner
during a Treaty of Peace, for five years together led him from prison to
prison; you have forced him not only to set by his Militia and to depose his
Crown; but you have constrained him with violence to transfer it into other
hands then to mine. To conclude, you put him to death, and you have reduced my
self to a strict necessity, to search my safety in my flight, and to go and
show my misery beyond the Seas. Yet this is not all, you have done one thing
which never any did before, it has been seen sometimes that the Grandees of a
Kingdom have interposed themselves against a Tyranny, and have destroyed it;
but 'twas never seen that they themselves elevated a Tyrant to the Throne as
you have done: In these kind of crimes the Abettors may be said to be more
criminal then he who has received all the fruit: For if each one of you in
particular had aspired to set the Crown upon his own head, you might have been
more excusable, then to have snatched it from your lawful Prince to place it on
the head of an Usurper. But you will say to me, the Prince that bore it was not
able to support it. To that I shall answer, As I have the honor to be his Son,
and was his Subject, it belongs not to me to determine what he could, or what
he could not: seeing he was my Father, I ought not to presume to be his judge,
and seeing he was my King, I ought not to be so impudent to censure, much less
to condemn his actions, he being not obliged to render an account to any, But
God alone. Believe then, the same respect I have for his memory, you ought to
have had for his person, he was your King as well as mine: seeing then that
Kings are called the Fathers of the people. Their Subjects are obliged to have
for them a true resentment of a respect, which their very birth may infuse into
them: Besides, as Sovereigns are the true Images of God, and that the splendour
of their puissance is abeam and ray of his power; Subjects ought to have an
equal submission to their Sovereigns will. When you see a Comet appear, the Sun
eclipsed, the Thunder bolt fall on innocent heads, when you see Floods drown
whole Towns, by their inundation, and the Sea (passing his bounds, and
swallowing whole Provinces in the bottom of the deep) devour them up: When you
see an Earthquake make Kingdoms tremble, and cause horrid devastations of whole
Countries, then (I say) it is permitted to the People to murmr? Do you not
discern the contrary, how in these occurrences they redouble their vows and
prayers, and that they are never more obedient to God, then at such a time, as
if God had forsaken his providence of the Universe? and when it shall so
happen, that Heaven (for the punishment of your sins) gives you a Prince under
whose Reign policy and prudence are not well observed, during whose Government
Foreign and Civil Wars devour all with cruel ravages: it belongs not then
to you to reprehend and condemn your Sovereign; for is he feeble? then you
ought to sustain him: is he unfortunate? you ought to bemoan him: is he wicked?
you ought to look upon him as a scourge and chastisement sent from Heaven, and
to wait with Patience for a remedy from that hand, which has caused your
evil. For when a Prince commands an Army, and gives Battle; if it so happen
that the Soldiers perform not their devoirs and duty, that his squadrons
yield, the main body be broken, and (in the end after he has done even
miracles in his person, he be yet constrained to quit the field, and to retreat
from his Enemies? is it not the Prince that loses the Battle? Is it not the
Prince that suffers the disgrace? Is it not the Prince that is reputed
vanquished? And that bears the loss and infamy of the day? Notwithstanding,
that by his own particular actions he has merited to be conqueror? seeing it
is thus, why will not you (in such conjunctions) bear with the infirmities, and
misfortunes of your Princes, as well as they do with yours? Or (to speak
something yet nearer to the quick) why do you not repair these disorders by
your own more exact obedience? The Prince alone is obvious in a Battle to the
infamy, Cowardice and misfortune of his whole Army, and you are thousands, who
are obliged to strengthen the Authority and honor of your King, which he
cannot support with his single valor. Believe me, if all Subjects would be
loyal, no Kingdom could be miserable: and if all Princes thought more of
severity then of Clemency, there would not be so many Subjects; Rebels.
Moreover, if it were permitted to the Capritious people to take and give
Crowns, when they fancied a change: I conceive there is not a Shepherd but
might hope to be a King, and not a King but might be reduced to be a Shepherd;
so unruly and uncertain are their floating judgments. But (to speak the truth
to you) these things ought not thus to pass: we are your Masters, and you ought
not to become ours. It is not that I am ignorant that God disposes of Scepters
and Crowns, as he pleases, and gives them as he lists, and bestows them on, or
takes them from whom he will, and what he always does is without all
injustice; sometimes permitting that the people shall elevate to the Throne,
those who never pretended to such a high degree. But when such an accident
happens, it is usually in favor to those extraordinary persons in whom
Virtue has impressed a Royal Character so visible, that it were almost injustice
not to admit them Kings. To conclude, that which precedes, and that which
follows, ought to be sufficient to justify the effect, and it became Charles,
Martel, Pepin, and Charlemain puissantly to erect a Throne, which was not
founded upon a line of right succession, yet even in this re-encounter you will
see the event to this present has not authorized your design; The Engine of
this enterprise has been slain in battle: The Archbishop of Rhemes preserved
not his life, but three days after he had anointed the Usurper. But it is not
seasonable (to day) to exaggerate the injustice of your proceedings; I am not
willing to particularize other things, and I shall satisfy my self with
telling you, in general, that Kings ought not to lose their Crowns, but with
their lives, and that nothing can dispense Subjects from the respect, and
loyalty, which they owe to their Sovereigns, nor any pretense (whatsoever)
Authorize Treason and Rebellion. If sacred persons may not enjoy their
particular privilege, (which is derived from none but God) they shall be
exposed, more then others, to all sorts of miseries; Their guards will appear
to them instead of enemies, their Thrones will rather seem a direful precipice
then a place of honor, and safety; a King (of this kind) is no better then an
illustrious slave, when he shall have as many Masters as Subjects. This first
disorder will quickly cause a second, for when the Nobles of a Kingdom fail in
their duty to their Prince, their own Vassals, and Tenants will forfeit their
fealty to them, and then Rebellion communicated from the Grandees to the
Commons, and so descending from one Soul to another, an universal confusion
swells and devours all. Every one will command, and no person obey, (and in
this resentment of Levelling equality) each person proves a slave to his own
ambition, and no one, either rationally Commands himself or others. In effect,
this is the most sad condition that a Kingdom can fall into, when there is no
subjection, and where (for their punishment) the Prince has not force to
reduce the people to their obedience. For mine own part, when I consider my
self to be the Son of a King, the successor of so many Kings, and yet,
notwithstanding that I immediately succeed not my Father: This Idea imprints in
me, a strange confusion as toward you, and an extreme grief as toward my
self: for when I reflect how the same Subjects who inchained Charles in
Fetters, and gave the Crown to Robert, placed Lewis on the Throne, the malice
which they bore to the Father, may it not easily fall upon the Son? and may not
they fear that the Son will revenge the outrages committed against the Father?
but yet (may some one say,) those who have searched after you, and passed the
Seas to present you with a Scepter, they need not fear that the memory of their
ancient injustice will obliege you to punish them: They have reason rather to
believe, that this submission should blot out the memory of the first
disservice: It is certain, in the exact Rule of justice, no noble Action ought
to pass without his recompense: and it is really as true, That no crime ought
to escape without his punishment. After all these reasons, what ought you not
to fear? and what not to hope? you have recalled me to the Throne, it is true,
but if you had not, had you not been as Criminal against Lewis, as you had been
against Charles? he who gives to another, that which he has taken from him,
restores without doubt that which he has taken, but his restoration is not a
free present, and he ought not to expect thanks for an Action of that nature.
No, it suffices of one punish not the first, without intending any recompense
for the second. I may say also, that you understand not rightly all my present
concernments; for why? because you have not left me still in exile, because you
have rendered what justly appertained to me, Because you understood that I came
to re-demand mine own, not with a powerful Army: and (being tired with your
crimes and miseries) you believe you may probably disarm the fury of Heaven,
by this Act of justice: No, no, confide not in any of these pretenses, for if I
had not stronger considerations then these, I should commence my Reign with the
punishment of your treasons, I should send them to prison, who restrained the
person of my Father, and expose them to the most cruel tortures, who contrived
and caused his death, with the greatness of his misfortunes. Those black crimes
are such which nothing can exterminate; Repentance and tears from common
errors, where humane frailty may plead excuse, and not for Traitors and
Rebels, nor for those, who have destroyed Thrones and Scepters, inchaind Kings,
created and protected Tyrants. Think not then, that by taking an Oath of
fidelity (which is your duty) that I am thereby engaged not to do what
becomes a King. No, I scorn a Throne where I should be a slave, and I had
rather be obscured in prison, as my Father was, then not to Reign as Sovereign.
Those people with whom Loyalty is elective forbear not to make their Kings
absolute, because they could have no pretense of Justice to do otherwise: judge
then, if those who hold their Crowns from Heaven ought to acknowledge their
subjects for their Masters, and whether they ought not rather to punish, or
pardon, as best agrees with their pleasure. In a word, I find it far more
glorious to be a loyal Subject, then to be a King disobeyed. Prepare then your
selves to render me all that obedience which you owe me, and (without farther
informing you, whether you are to hope more for Clemency or Justice) resolve
your selves to an absolute submission, I know well some peevish Politicians
will censure, that I act not as I ought in this conjuncture, and that I should
reflect on former passages with some sweetness, and gratify you with Presents,
to encourage you with future hopes, but I presume my Policy is more generous,
and more secure then theirs; for if I had so persuaded you, perhaps you would
have believed me to have been more fit to wear my Fathers Irons then his Crown;
and would have more suspected me of weakness and dissimulation, this excessive
indulgence would give you more of fear, and me less of honor and estimation: I
(being then so far from following such Maxims) tell you once more, that I
declare my self to be your King. And (without farther capitulation with you) I
ascend the Throne by the steps of mine own Authority as Soveraignly, as if not
recalled by you at all. Hitherto I have let you know I am not ignorant how far
the duty of Subjects ought to bend: But moreover, I judge it fit to acquaint
you to what degree Sovereign Clemency may extend it self; to this end, that by
that resentment, you may reasonably know what to fear, and what to hope. Know
then, that although a Prince may justly punish Traitors, he may likewise pardon
penitent offenders, principally then, when he discerns his pardon shall reclaim
insolency to obedience, and fidelity: For, seeing Kings are the Fathers of the
people, they ought not always to be too severe in justice; and seeing that a
Prince may afford grace and pardon to his enemies, he may without doubt show
pity and mercy to his own Subjects: He cannot well punish them all, but must
(in part) enfeeble himself; nor sluice out their blood without emptying his own
veins; wherefore he ought to spare as far as Reason and Justice can make the
way passable. When then a particular accident grows up against a Prince, or
State, it may suffice that the heads of some chief offenders be sacrificed to a
reparation, and that by some severe examples, others may be instructed with
exemplary terror. But seeing that the number of the offenders may prove
infinite, and if all should be punished, a desolation of entire Provinces might
succeed, and consequently more men be lost then 15. main Battails could devour,
so that the piles of dead corpse should make mountains, and severe execution of
revenge cause Rivers of blood: in such considerations (I say) It may be better
to use a great example of Clemency, then of Justice, and hazard something,
rather then to loose the lives of so many miserable souls: and there cannot be
a greater Victory then to vanquish ones own passion in such dangerous
conjunctures. Fear not then that I shall abuse my Authority, since if I should
punish all who have offended, I should reduce my Kingdom to a forlorn Desert:
For who is there among you that has not failed of his duty? Some have done
mischief, others have desired it, or at least permitted it to be acted: some
have assisted Robert, others have directly fought against their King: some have
most perfidiously laid their hands upon their Anointed Lord, and committed a
sacred person into prison, and others have (at least) forsaken him. The public
good is pretext of all things, but Rebellion alone is the mother of that horrid
Monster. The Nobles agitated (as they did) for their own interest, and the
people by their madness, and unavisedness, seconded their fury, and put in
execution the intention of the Parricides: Your wives and your children are not
exempt from these crimes, seeing (without doubt) they made vows for their
Parents offending, and prayers against their Prince. Whereas then I cannot
punish you all, but that I must utterly exterminate you; it rests at my
choice, whether I would become a King without Subjects, or to pardon you out of
pure grace and bounty, and not by Obligations. It may be that during your lives
you may repent you of your ancient crimes, and become as faithful as you have
been disobedient. But (perhaps you will tell me) as to our selves, we have
repented formerly before we sent to you to come, and receive the Scepter which
belongs to you. It Is true, it may be as you have said, and that I have
considered your Addresses to me were to make reparation of what formerly
passed, and that with those hands you would advance to the Throne his Son whose
Father you had barbarously removed. But (after all) whosoever can abandon the
path of Virtue to make choice of that Vice, can again embrace that occasion if
presented. Wherefore you owe greater obligation to me then I can confidence to
you; for had I not resolved to show Grace and Pardon, the great number of
Nobles which the King of England, my Uncle, has presented to me to attend my
person, had not come without Soldiers; each one of these who incircle me have
troops at their command: and I would not have received my Fathers Crown but in
the head of a victorious Army, in the midst of a Field covered with dead, and
dying men; bedewed with the blood of ten thousand Rebels: I would have been the
Conqueror of my Kingdom, and not have mounted unto the Throne supported by the
same hands who snatched it from my Fathers head. But I call to mind I am your
King, as you are also my Subjects, and in this relation I can love you yet, as
guilty as you are: I can have pity for your errors, and kindness for your
obstinacy; and I will not put my self into a condition of sadness after the
Victory: I am then come to you without an Army, to receive what is mine. This
Action (without doubt) is hardy, bold, and well deserves glory; and is
sufficiently obliging to demerit your acknowledgement in all degrees of
fidelity. Before that you were criminous, the Divine and humane right conjured
you notto forsake your Prince, but this day a new obligation chaineth you to
more strict obedience. It is not enough alone to be faithful, so to satisfy
your duty; but it is your part to blot out the memory of what is past, and to
justify what is present; you ought not to look on me merely as your King, but
as a King of your own choice, as a King who has pardoned you, as a King who
confideth in you, who now is commending his person into your hands, and commits
the very care of his life to your protection, next to Heaven: Study then to
gratify such pressing endearments, and provoke not the wrath of Heaven upon
your heads by new rebellions. Those who have examined your by past actions,
approve not (doubtless) that resolution that I have taken to return into France
as I have done; for (they will tell me) what confidence can you have in those
who had no regard to their lawful Sovereign? They pretend much to desire your
presence, but their fears exceed their desires: And it is rather to secure your
person, then to advance your Scepter, that though you are this day recalled,
yet as long as your youth continued, they suffered you to live in exile, and
obeyed Robert; but he being dead (at present) and they seeing that you were in
a condition to obtain by force that which they now offer, they seem to repent,
not so much regarding your loss, as themselves. Behold the reasons which have
here contested with my resolution, which (seeing they are not without some
rational ground) I have not desisted to persuade my self, and that in double
choice, whether to make a War with you, or confide in you, I have chose the
latter as more glorious, and I love rather to hazard my person then the
destruction of all my Kingdoms. Those who taught me the art to Reign have well
foreseen the Exigencies to which I am now reduced, and therefore without doubt
they took so much care to advise me what to do in justice, and what I might be
allowed to do in Clemency: These two Virtues appear as contraries, but are
not; they accord easily in the heart of a Prince. They mutually give place each
one to the other in the Empire of his Soul, according to the diverse occasions
which are presented, for he ought always to abound in Clemency, and he ought
not likewise to be ever too severe with the strict measure of justice. Mercy
and justice are two excellent Virtues, but Prudence ought to employ them both:
And the Princes sole Will, ought to be the only rule to guide them. Having then
conjured you to an equal confidence in me, as I have in you, let an Act of
Oblivion pass, and let us remember no more former crimes, unless it be to
prevent relapses. Let us not look on the Tomb of Charles, but merely to bedew
it with the tears of tender Repentance: Not to make it an Altar whereupon to
sacrifice his Enemies; let us Raze to the ground those horrid Cells which
served for his Imprisonments, thereby (if possible) to destroy the memory, and
not to leave a mark or point to posterity of those black crimes; let us ascend
the Throne with as much splendour as if it had never been profaned, and let us
Reign (if possible) with more honor King my Sovereign did. But do not think I
shall be able to effect it without the aid and succors of my Subjects; deceive
not your selves, the valor and prudence of the Prince are not sufficient of
themselves to make a Kingdom happy: The Subjects ought to contribute their
proportions. The Nobles are to offer their loyal Obedience, and the people to
follow their good example, and both degrees ought to be united in virtue: for
otherwise he who gives Victory and Masters Fortune, will approve the virtue of
the Prince in punishing the vice of the Subjects. Those who are valiant, do not
always gain the Battle; and those who are wise, are not always fortunate:
However let us place our selves in such a capacity, that we may be successful,
though we cannot merit it. See here what your Prince has said unto you, who in
Lieu of punishing you, has pardoned you; instead of fighting with you,
prepares to defend you; instead of being your Enemy, becomes your Conservator,
and who by his own birth and your choice, is now your Lord, your Master, and
your King. These two qualities permit me not to Capitulate farther with you: It
suffices that I only add this; That I admit you to hope for clemency,
whilst I Reign, as I wish you to fear always my justice, and beware that you
put not your selves in a condition to make trial of the second, or of loosing
the former.

FINIS.
The Censure on King LEWIS the IV. of FRANCE.
C. Julius Caesar did in his youth C. Julius Caesar quam Syllam fugeret
etiamnum adolescens incidit in Piratas Cilices: derisit praedones vilut que^
ignaros cepissent; seque duplum dare pollicitus est; imperavit illis ut
silerent nec sibi dormienti ob streperent. Stupidos ac barbaros appellabat,
cumque risu minitabatur se illos acturum in crucem, quod and perfecit.
sparkle and radiat forth, the beams of Majesty: who, avoiding the rage of
Sylla, and then falling into the hands of the Cilician Pirates; contemned those
barbarous Sea-Rovers: who asking a poor sum for Caesar's Ransom, francly
promised twice as much as they demanded, and being detained until his Ransom
was paid; boldly commanded the slaves to silence: and not to dare to interrupt
their Prisoners rest with noise. When they vilifyed verses and orations of
Caesar's own Composure, he called them dull and stupid barbarians; and was so
incensed and highly displeased, that he did threaten the villains with the
Gallows, which decree and resolution, was in a short time, most puissantly
effected. And as Caesar; so Alexander did suffer no thought to rise from his
magnanimous soul; but what was truly Great and Noble Plutarch. An non hie
statimagnescis indolem Alexandri Magni? cui nihil mediocre satis esse posset?
idem in vita.
It is from the stemm, and Root of Royalty, that Princely Actions bud and
Germinate; and such an action and endeavor, became Lewis, (at this juncture
and glorious opportunity,) which did carry with it, much of generosity, as well
as prudence, and did not so much savor of fierceness and the impetuosity of
youth: as of the sage and noble Conduct of a truly Generous and magnanimous
Prince. Yet some may object, and politickly urge, what state, prudence,
counseled this young Monarch to speak to his Subjects so high, when he was so
low? and having scarce got well on horsback, thus to salute his Subjects; who
had there Arms in their hands? Rebels, Subjects, who had lately tumbled his
Father from the Throne, who had torn the Crown from of his Sacred Head, changed
his Scepter into chains, and his Palace into a prison? might not this bold
entrance to the Throne have rather provoked them to desperation then obedience?
and raised a new tempest, which could not be appeased without much difficulty?
might not this noise have served to awaken them to fresh jealousies and fears,
which their own prudence should have taught them? Certainly this objection (at
the first view) seems invincible, that Lewis did not appear so discreet and
judicious as his condition required, notwithstanding he failed not in his
kingly craft, for whosoever shall examine this great Action from the bottom,
and weigh the arguments maturely, will be convinced of this opinion, and
neither condemn the Generosity, nor the resolution of Lewis in this eminent
action. The Counsels of prudence prove different, according to several
conjunctures of occasions, and ought to change their countenances according to
the present diversities, and important alterations of affairs. And, as hardy
and bold resolutions are not always seasonable, so neither are timorous and
fearful proceedings ever wise and safe: that Politician who trembles, and is
not confident, who dares do nothing generously and stoutly, for fear he may
prove too rash and inconsiderate, shall be seldom fortunate, he is too
speculative a Contemplator, and proves rarely quick, and active. And whiles he
amuseth himself with curious Considerations, whether he should, or should not
undertake the enterprise, whether he should speak or be silent; be an
industrious actor, or a dull phlegmatic spectator, the opportunity (by this
time) may be well lost, the stars change their situations; Aspects alter, and
so the fatal moment, whereon depended the good or ill success of a grand
design, slip clean away without advantage. The Philosopher (whom some censured
overwise) found that his tedious doting on too much consideration brought
forth no fruit but folly, and that his most subtle conclusions were no better
then fancies and dreams, of one newly awaked out of sleep, The Augurs telling
an old Captain that the pullets would not eat; he quickly discerned the
mystery, and answered, if they would not eat except they drank, they should
have their fill, and so caused them to be flung into the Sea; at which summons
he gave battle to his enemies and gained the day, An old soldier told his
General, that their enemies were twenty times more then they; but he replied
gallantly, and for how many then do thou account me? Another told his General
that the enemies darted Arrows like showers of hail; he replied instantly,
it is so much the better for us, we shall fight against empty quivers, and but
shadows of men. The Policy Caesar quum maximi Pontificis ambiret dignitatem
(competitore Qu. Catislo.) o matter aut inquit, Pontificen^^ habebis filium; aut
exulem: excelsa indoles omnis que repulse impatiens. Erasmus Apo de Casare.
Plutarch, in vita I. Caesar.
of high born Heroes, and lowhearted peasants is not the same. The mariners
dispute in one fashion aboard their ships, and the Commanders and soldiers
after another in their Trenches. And as these persons are very distinct, and
different in their qualities, so are they in their Counsels, and agitations.
Those who walk in dangerous precipices ought to march boldly, if they intend to
pass securely. And in those attempts, he who stays to measure the depth of
peril in his way, either will prove so fearful as not to adventure, or else
will be in great danger of a ruinous fall. To judge then of the Action of Lewis
the fourth, a man ought to consider, what this Prince preponderated, how his
Fathers gentleness and civility was his ruin, that he spoke to the same
Rebels, who had ravished his Fathers Crown from his head, and deptiv'd his
person of his liberty: And that by the same capricious humor they recalled the
Son: who had destroyed the father, and lest that sore might ranckle and swell
again, and so infect and destroy the Son as it had the Father, it concerned him
to let them know, that he came now to inherit his Fathers Kingdom, and not his
infirmities: That, though first impressions may exchange, or obliterate ill
humors, yet it is with great hazard and difficulty. Wherefore it was more
important to his purpose to strike deeper at the root at first, to gain
advantages. If Lewis his feet had been seen to tremble, when he was to ascend
the Throne, he must have then discovered a capacity to fall again. If he had
received the Crown with a dull and phlegmatic deportment, he had been rather
made a King by his Lords and Masters then his Subjects, and he would have
unfolded to his people the passion of cowardly fear, rather then have procured
due regard from them. We may conclude then, that this Prince was wise, in being
stout and Gallant in this occasion, that his Policy was not indiscreet, and
(coping with soldiers, and men of arms and valor) his discourse was not
improper, as containing nothing that might give the shock to Sovereign
prudence: but rather, on the contrary; what well became the Grandeur, and
Majesty of a King.

FINIS.
The CONTENTS.
I. Sovereignty, the highest trust. Page 1 II. The duty of Subjects. p. 3 III.
Of Hushai and his undertakings. p. 14 IV. Converted Royalists duty. p. 41 V. No
excuse, Apology or merit to be pleaded for, by Rebels. p. 45 VI. Of a Promise.
p. 53 VII. Of a Vow. p. 54 VIII. Of the Protestation. p. 58 IX. Of the
Covenant. p. 62 X. Of the Engagement. p. 66 XI. Of the Oath of Abjuration. p.
69 XII. The Kings Oath at his Coronation. p. 77 XIII. The Archbishops Homage.
p. 82 XV. The Oath of a Chancellor. p. 83 XVI. The Oath of a privy Councellor.
p. 84 XVII. The Oath of a Secretary of State. p. 85 XVIII. The Clergies
subscription. p. 88 XIX. The Oath against Symony. p. 91 XX. The Oath of
Allegiance. p. 97. XXI. The Oath of Supremacy. p. 99 XXII. The nine marks of
Traitors. p. 110 XXIII. The nine Characters of true Royalists. p. 116 XXIV. The
Parallel betwixt King CHARLES the second; and King LEWIS the fourth of France.
p. 143 XXV. The Censure on King Lewis the fourth of France. p. 172
Errata Emendata.
Page 1. lin. 2. read Sovereignty is p. 5. l. 19. r. Scrutiny. p. 8. l. 25. r.
decry. p. 19. l. 20. r. oily. p. 31. l. 26. r. nor death. p. 49. l. 15. r.
can. p. 51. l. 6. r. or congruity. p. 55. Greek Cota. (...) p. 56. l. 4. r.
not, l. 20. r. sui p. 58. margent. p. 59. l. 2. r. distinction p. 61. l. 8. r.
then. p. 66. l. 24. r. vicious. p. 75. l. 13 r. juramental. p. 76. l. 10. r
those. p. 76. l. 20. r. external. p. 95. marg. hanc enim per elimenta. p. 112.
l. 6. r. Pulls. p. 138. l. 17. r. Confidents. Evist Dedicat. Rear-Admiral for
Vice Admiral. Creeping servants for creeping serpents.


