THE HIGH COURT OF JUSTICE. OR CROMWELLS New Slaughterhouse in ENGLAND. With
the Authority that constituted and ordained it, Arraigned, Convicted, and
Condemned; for Usurpation, Treason, Tyranny, Theft, and Murder. Being the III.
Part of the History of Independencie: written by the same Author.

Printed Anno Dom. 1651.

The History of INDEPENDENCIE.
THat every thing is kept and maintained by the same ways and means it was got
and obtained; Vnumquodque conservatur eodem modo quo fit.
is a rule true both in Philosophy and Policy. And therefore Dominion gotten by
fraud and force, must by fraud and force be preserved. Things impiously got,
must be impiously kept. When usurped Tyranny lays its foundation in blood, the
whole Superstruction must be built with Mortar tempered with blood. One Sin
must defend and make good another. And hence arises a Necessity upon Ambitious
men to flanck and fortify one Crime with another. But to plead this Necessity,
which they have so wilfully drawn upon themselves, in justification of their
wicked Courses, To expect submission, Obedience and an equal Engagement from
men uninterressed therein, and to entitle the Divine Providence and unrevealed
will of God thereto (in opposition to his will revealed and declared in the
Scriptures, as is now a days used) is to accuse the Holy Ghost of our Sins,
and an hypocrisy so impudently sinful and damnable, that I doubt no age but
this, (the Dregs and lees of time) ever gave an example of the like.

TO illustrate my first Maxim by some foreign Examples (before I lay the
Bastard at our own doors) Sylla at Rome, by the power of the Sword, proclaimed
(or voted) himself Dictator: to make good which usurpation with a Mask of
Authority, he compelled the Senate (or Parliament) to approve of all his fore
passed villainies, Murders and illegal Acts, and to confer a power upon him;
To kill whom he pleased and confiscate their Estates; To build and destroy
Cities; Dispose Kingdoms; And exercise an Arbitrary, Supreme Authority, and
then (to establish himself in his selfe-created power) he posted up as Rome,
and in most Cities of Italy, Bills of Proscription, or Outlawry, containing the
names of such persons, as (without any form of Law, or Justice) he appointed
to be slain by his Soldiers. These Proscribed men were (for the most part)
such as having some Sparks of Roman virtue in them, durst love the Ancient
Government, Laws and Liberties of Rome, and were therefore thought fit to be
weeded out, as Malignants against his Innovations and Arbitrary courses. Yet
many mean spirited fellows, were proscribed and murdered, partly for
confiscation of their Estates, and partly to gratify the Malice and hatred of
particular friends who (in that carriage) praid in aid of Syllas sword to ridd
them of their Enemies.

After this Augustus Caesar at Rome, having by terror of Arms made himself
Consul, and finding himself not strong enough fingly to subjugate his Country,
he called Antonius and Lepidus to join with him, with whom entering into
confederacy to subvert the Fundamental Government, and usurp the Supreme
Authority, They divide that vaste Empire between them, and passed a Decree
amongst themselves; That they should be called the Triumvirate for Reforming
and Reestablishing the Commonwealth (well enough before if they had let it
alone) with Supreme Authority to give Estates and Offices to whom they thought
fit; without asking the advice of Senate or People. They appointed what
Consuls, Magistrates and Officers they pleased: They designed rich donatives,
and 18 of the chief Cities of Italy to be given to their Soldiers, if, by
their valor, they should obtain victory over Brutus and Cassius, They fixed
public listes or Tables of Proscription, naming such Persons as they exposed
to slaughter. They Proscribed at one time 130 Senators, at another time 150 and
2000 Knights. Whereby the best men for understanding, conduct Resolution and
Affection being cut off, the rest (terrified by their example) became but Terra
Maledicta (as Chymickes call it) dull liveles Ashes or clods of earth, without
power or virtue to quicken them, or make them productive. After some
revolutions wherein Augustus and Antonius had discarded the dull and stupid
Lepidus, and (at last) Augustus had subdued Antonius: Augustus usurped the
Title of Tribune of the people, whereby his Person became sacred and
inviolable; and (humouring the irrational Animals) took upon him the especial
Protection of that Brutish heard, the Rascal multitude, The Tribunes of the
People having bin originally instituted to protect the People. His next step
was to make himself Perpetual Dictator, whereby he arrogated to himself a
vaste, unlimited power above all Laws. The Tribuneship was his Buckler, The
Dictatorship was his Sword. And last of all (for Ornament only) He having
already the full power of an absolute Monarch (although he forbore the Title of
(King) because it was hateful to the People and against the Laws ever since
the Regifugium) he took upon him the Title of Princeps Senatus, or President of
the Senate; to keep a corresponding power over that great Counsel or
Parliament: And finally usurped the Title and Office of Imperator or
Generalissimo of all forces by Land and Sea, Garrisons, etc.

Philippe King of Spain Lord of the 17 Belgike Provinces by several Titles, and
under several Limitations, Privileges, Exemptions and Fundamental Laws
according to which he was to govern and they to obey: In novum regnum vi
armisque partum redigere, atque aliis Novis legibus domanere ac guginare
Beberum. Meteran. in anno 1567. Roidan. in anno 1566. John Fraunces Petit.
Thuanus.
Resolving to subvert the Fundamental Laws and Government and reduce those 17
Petty Signiories into one mere, absolute Monarchy; sent the Duke D'Alva
thither (a warrior of a resolute, stern nature) Governor with a powerful
Army. Who taking advantage of some rude commotions formerly raised by the
Protestants in throwing down Images and sacrilegiously plundering Churches,
erected a New Tribunal Criminal, or (to speak in our modern, uncowth
language) A High Court of Justice, consisting of 12 Commissioners or Judges
purposely chosen, most of them hangers by of the Law, of mean fortunes,
practice, birth and breeding; Covetous, Ambitious and slavishly addicted to the
Spanish faction. To these was given by special Commission full power and
Authority to inquire into, and judge (or to hear and determine) the forepassed
commotions, whereupon they styled this Court, Concilium Turbarum, but the
multitude called it Concilium Sanguinis; or the Bloody Conventicle. This
Counsel or Inquisition did supersede and extingnish the Authority of all other
Courts of Judicature, and make void all Laws, Constitutions, Jurisdictions and
Privileges of the Nation, as to the aforesaid commotions, and all other causes
they pleased to call high Treason. They had no other bounds, nor limit i^
their proceedings, then what they prefixed to themselves, in certain Articles.
Some few whereof I will here present unto my Reader, because they judged of
high Treason by those Articles, not by the known Laws of the Land (a thing very
observable and applicable to my purpose) so that they were not only Judges,
Leges dicere: but also Lawmakers, Leges dare: as all Judges are who take upon
them a lioertie to observe no set forms of proceedings: but at their own
pleasure.

1. ARTICLE. Petitioning against Innovations in Government, and for the known
Laws made Treason, ^he like the Parliament Practices against such as
Petitioned for Peace by accommodation. And against our High Court of Justice,
Arbitrary Imprisonments and Taxes.
All Petitions heretofore tendered to the States, or Cities Corporate against
the erecting of New Episcopal Sees; or against the Holy Inquisition; or
requiring a Moderation of Decrees or Acts of State or Parliament, are accounted
mere Conspiracies against God and the King.

2. ARTICLE. All Nobles, Gentry, Judges, Magistrates, and all others who
connived at Heretical Sermons, plundering of Churches, and delivering such
Petitions as aforesaid, pretending the necessity of the times, and did not
resist and oppose them.

3. ART. We have forfeited our laws by Conquest or else our Grandees would not
pass the two Acts for Treason 14 May. 17 July 1649. Nor erect the High Court
of Justice, and abolish out ancient Laws and Government. See Pol. 3. Oct. 1650.
and the Case of the Kingdom stated.
Whosoever affirms, That all his Majesty's Subjects of Belgia have not
forfeited their ancient Privileges, Immunities and Laws for Treason: and
that it is not lawful for the King to use and handle them for the aforesaid
Treasons as he pleases, to prevent the like Treasons for the time to come, and
that the King is not absolved thereby from all Oaths, Promises, Graunts,
Contracts and Obligations whatsoever.

4. Compare this with the two Acts for New Treasons. 14. May. 17. July 1549.
and the Act 26. March 1650. and Sr. Jo. Gells case stated.
ART. They that affirm, This Counsel or high Court of Justice to exercise
Tyranny in their Proceedings, or Judgments; and that they are not Supreme and
competent Judges in all causes Criminal and Civil.

5. Our High Court of Just. exceedes all this. See Sr. J. Gells case stated,
Printed Aug. 1650.
ART. Those that in case of Heresy deny, that all manner of Informers and
witnesses of whatsoever Degree and condition they be, are to be credited: and
that upon the Testimony of any two witnesses, this High Court ought to proceed
to Judgment execution and conflication of life and goods, without publishing
the cause or charge, and without any legal form of Trial. All these are guilty
of high Treason against God and the King.

The Rigor, Cruelty and Injustice of this New erected Counsel of Blood, or
High Court of Justice, enforced the Low Countries to revolt and cast off the
King of Spain.

LEt us now examine whether in some one little Province or Island belonging to
that vast Roman Empire; and in some mean, petty fellows, (Natives of that
Island) men even at home of obscure birth, breeding and fortunes; we can not
find examples of Ambition, usurpation and Tyranny, as high and transcendent,
as bloody and destructive; as covetous and greedy; as any of the forecited
presidents? And (which is worst of all) carried on by those that call
themselves Christians; nay, Saints (which is more than they vouchsafe to Saint
Peter and the rest of the Apostles, though glorified Saints in the Church
Triumphant) and such as in all their bloody, oppressing, cheating Designs,
(promoted by perjury, Treachery, breach of Faith, Oaths and public
Declarations) pretend to the singular favor, Providence and will of heaven as
confidently, as if they could show Gods special commission, to warrant
Usurpation, Treason, Tyranny and Thievery.

It is not unknown by what Artifices, frauds, falsified promises, Oaths and
covenants, a party of Antimonarchists, Schismatics and Anabaptists lurking in
the Parliament fooled the People to contribute their blood and money toward
the subduing of the King (and in him, of themselves) and how by the same ways
and subtleties the said Party in the two Houses (now combined openly, under the
General Title of Independents) engaging and conspiring with the Officers of
the Army and Soldiery expelled by armed force seven parts of eight of the
House of Commons, leaving not above 43 or 44 of their own engaged Party
sitting, men enriched with public spoils) and voting under the power of the
Armies commanders, whose commands are now become a law to the said sitting
Members, as their Votes are become Laws to the Kingdom. In Obedience to their
said Masters of the Army, The said Remainder of Commons voted down the House of
Lords, (though an integrall and principal Member of the Parliament of England,
far antienter then the House of Commons, and having a power of Judicature and
to administer an Oath, (which the House of Commons, never had nor pretended to
have, until this time that they overflow their Bounds and the whole Kingdoms,
under the protection of their Army,) which prerogative of the House of Lords is
clearly demonstrated by the House of Commons standing bare before them at all
conserences, as the Grand Enquest does before the Judges) because they rejected
the Ordinance for Trial of the King. And now these Dregs and Lees of the House
of Commons, take upon them to be a complete Parliament: To enact and repeal
Statutes, to subvert the Fundamental Government, Laws, and Liberties of the
Land: To pull up by the Roots without Legal proceedingss) every man's private
property and possession, and destroy his life. To burden the people with
unsupportable, unheard of, unparliamentary Taxes, Impositions, Excise,
Freequarter, buying of New Arms after the Country have been disarmed of their
old Arms three times in one year; In their Tax Rolls, they usually set in the
Margent to every name private notes of distinction. An M. an N or P. The letter
M. stands for Malignant; he that is so branded, is highly taxed, and his
complaints for redress slighted, N. stands for a Neuter he is more
indifferently rated and, upon cause shown, may chan^e to be relieved. The
letter P. signifies a perfect Parliamentarian. He is so favorably taxed, as he
bears an inconsiderable part of the burden, and that they may the better
confume with Taxes and want, all such as do not concur with them in the
height of their villainies. The pretended Harliament, are now debating to raise
the Monthly Tax to 240000. lib or to deprive every man of the third part of
his Estate, both Real and Personal, for maintenance of their immortal
wars, and short lived Commonwealth. Besides Excise, Customs, Tonnage and
Poundage, Freequarter, finding Arms and Horses; and the sale of Corporation
Lands now in agitation. Whilst our Grandees enrich all the Banks of
Christendom with vast summer raised by public theft and Rapines.
Pressings and Levying of Soldiers, Sequestrations, Plundering of Houses and
Horse, and many other oppressions; more than the Turk, Russe or Tarter ever
heard of: of all which our Grandees are free, and lay them upon others as
partially as they please, purposely to consume them. To make Religion but a
stalking horse to their designs, and the Ministers thereof but hostlers, to
rub down, curry and dress it for their riding: to whom they send Commands;
what they shall, and shall not preach to the people; as if preaching were the
Ordinance of man, not of God. At last by way of preparative to their
machinanations, they pass these following votes.

1. That all Supreme power is in the people.

2. That the Supreme Authority under them, is in the peoples Representatives,
or delegates in Parliament assembled. Meaning themselves, (you may be sure) the
Quintessence and Elixar of the House of Commons, extracted by those learned
Chimicks, Doctor Fairfax, Doctor Cromwell, and the rest, graduated at that
degraded University of Oxford. Here note they voted the Supreme power to be in
the people, that they might use those Gulles, as Conduit Pipes or Trunks to
convey the Supreme Authority into themselves, the better to enslave the people:
And tickle them, whilst they fasten about their necks the Iron yoke of a
Military Oligarchy, wearing the Mask of a perpetual Parliament.

3. That whatsoever the Commons in Parliament shall enact, shall have the power
and force of an Act of Parliament, or Law, without the consent of the House of
Lords, or the Kings Koyal Assent: any statute, law, custom or usage to the
contrary notwithstandingr ( they might have said all our statutes, laws,
customs, etc. notwithstanding) This one vote has more of Dissolution and more
of Usurpation and Innovation in it, than any I yet ever read of; This is
universally Arbitrary, and lays the Ax to the root of all our Laws,
Liberties, Lives and properties at once.

What these men will, they vote: What they vote is Law; Therefore what they
will is Law.
4. That to wage war or bear Arms against the Representative body of the
People or Parliament is high Treason. By the law all Treasons are committed
against the King, his Crown and Dignity.

5. That the King has taken up Arms against this Parliament, and is therefore
guilty of all the blood shed this war, and should expiate those crimes with
his blood. If the King were not guilty, these men are; And therefore they
passed this Vote, Se defendendo. Yet observe that herein they became Judges in
their own cause; and forejudged his Majesty before his Trial; if that may be
called a Trial, that was carried on by men, who were both Accusers,
Prosecuters, parties and Judges; and had neither law, President, formality of
proceedings, nor any other foundation of Justice or Reason to warrant them, nor
were delegated by any lawful Authority?

These Votes thus passed, and by this kind of men, were the foundation upon
which they built their great Engine to destroy the King and Kingly Government
together with the Religion, Laws, Liberties, Lives and Properties of the
people: all condemned in that deadly sentence given against the King) For
having (as aforesaid) created (by their own Votes) themselves as absolute a
power as they pleased and cast the people and all they have into that
bottomless Chaos of their Arbitrary Domination; They erect an Extrajudiciall,
unpresidented High Court of Justice to Try (or rather to condemn without
Trial) the King: Consisting of 150. Commissioners; Soldiers, Parliament men,
Trades men; the most violent, engaged and factious incendiaries of all the
Antimonarchicall faction: Amongst whom were many low conditioned mechanics,
and Banquerouts, whose fortunes are since repaired out of the Kings Estate, and
other public Lands, Goods and Offices; as a reward for that Royal Blood they
spilt. See Stat. Recognition 1. Iac. The Oaths of Allegegeance, Obededience and
Supremacy and all our Law Books.
The King (the Fountain of Law, Justice, Mercy, Honor, War and Peace; The Head
of the Parliament and Supreme Governor over all persons, and in all causes)
thus violently removed; presently (as if the Mounds and Banks of the Sea had
been overturned) an impetuous innundation of bloody, thievish Tyranny and
Oppression brake in udon us: So that no man can call his life, liberty, house,
lands, goods or any other his Rights or Fraunchises his own, longer than the
gracious aspect of some of our Graundees, shine favorably upon him.

In the next place: contrary to their own Declarations of the 9. Feb. and 17.
March 1648. Wherein they promise that in all things concerning the lives,
liberties, and properties of the people, they will observe the known laws of
the Land, with all things incident thereto) They pass misbegotten Acts of
Parliament one of the 14. This Stat. 25. Ed. III. e. 2. S. John's against
Strafford calls the security of the people. And the Stat. 1. Hen 4. chap. 10.
Ed. VI. Chap. 12. 1. Mariae J. ratify and highly commend.
of May, another of the 17. of July 1649. whereby) in derogation and
annihilation of that excellent Stat. 25. Ed. III. Chap. 2. Ascertaining
Treasons and reducing them to a small number, And leaving nothing to the
interpretation of the Judges, that the people might not be ensnared) they
exceeding by multiplying Treasons, bringing bare words as well as deeds within
the compass of that offense: and making many duties to which the laws of God
and the land, the Protestation and Covenant, the oaths of allegiance, obedience
and Supremacy oblige us, to be high Treason, and these new acts of Treason
penned in obscure, ambiguous terms purposely to leave a latitude of
Interpretation in (their own creatures) the Judges; that the People may be
ensnared.

The King thus taken out of their way. They pass dretended Hcts. They have
converted our ancient Monarchy into a Free State; and tell us they are the
strate. They tell us they have bestowed Liberty upon the People: but they and
their petty faction only are the People. All the rest of the English Nation
are annihilated, and reduced to nothing, that these fellows may become all
things: Mere ciphers, serving only to make them of more account. And this
gross fallacy must not be disputed against, least their New Acts of Parliament
call it Treason.
1. To Disinherit his children. 2. To abolish Kingly Government for ever. 3. To
convert our ancient well tempered Monarchy into that (which they call a
Commonwealth, or Free State; although nothing be therein free, but their
lusts: nor has it any form or face of Civil and just Government; Wherein a
confused Multitude rule by their own Wills, without Law: and for their own
benefit; no consideration being had of the good and happiness of the People in
general. 4. They Constitute a Senate or Council of State of 40. men (amongst
which some Tradesmen, Soldiers, illiterate Lawyers, Parliament Members, men
already engaged over head and ears in sin, therefore to be confided in) to
these or any nine of these they entrust the Administration of this Utopian
Commonwealth, and these they would have us believe (without telling us so) are
the Keepers (or Gaolers) of the Liberties of England.

These things being but Introductions to the Usurpation of these Kinglings: and
having been already showed to the world by many pens. I content my self to give
a cursory view of them: and have to my intended task, to show that this Usurped
power, is kept and administered, by as wicked and violent policies, as it was
gotten by.

The first endeavor of all Tyrannical Usurpers is. To lessen the number of
their Enemies; either by flattering and deceiving them: or by violently
extirpating and rooting them out. And such have been the attempts of our new
Cromwellian Statists, ever since (without any calling from God or the people)
they toook upon them the Supreme Authority of the Nation; subverted our well
mixed Monarchy and created themselves a Free State.

1. 1. A Collusive Accommodation.
They endeavored to sweeten and allure to act with them, as many of the
Secured and Secluded Members, Ministers and other Phesbyterians, as they could,
to the end that ex post facto being guilty of their Sins, they might be
engaged in one common defense, and go halfs with them in their ignominy and
punishment, though not in their power, profit and preferments: in which the
Godly will admit no Rivalls, but (like their Patron the Devil) cry all is mine.
But this Design failed for the most part.

2. 2. An intened Massacre
Their second Endeavor was how to dimmish the number of their Opposites,
Royalists and Presbyterians by a Massacre, for which purpose many Dark
Lanthorns and Ponyards were provided last Winter, 1649. But same prevented this
plot: which coming to be the Common rumor of the Town; put them in mind of the
danger, infamy and hatred, that would overwhelm them. So this was laid aside.

At last they invented two other Engines, no less bloody then, and as
effectual as a Massacre.

3. 3. The Engagement.
The Engagement is the first of these two Gins) which all persons are enjoined
to subscribe by their Act ^. Jan. 1649. To be true to the Commonwealth of
England, as it is now established, without a King or House of Peers. And this
is obtruded under no less penalty, then; To be totally deprived of all Benefit
of Law whatsoever. Now the Laws of the Land being the only Conservators of our
lives, Liberties and Estates (without which laws all men have a like property
to all things, and the strongest have right to all is possessed by the weaker;
since the Law only distinguishes Meum and Tuum) what is this but to expose
the Liberties of the Non-Engagers to false Imprisonments; our Estates to
rapine, spoil, and Injustice: and our Lives and Persons to wounds and Murders,
at the will and pleasure of such as will engage with our Usurpers: but
especially at the pleasure of their own Soldiers: to whom (I conceive) this
Outlawry was intended as an Alarm or Invitation to plunder and massacre the
Non-engagers, and to pay themselves their Arrears of which these Parliament men
have cousened them) out of their Estates, and though the Soldiers were not so
wicked as their Masters, Yet we daily see many good Families in England
despoiled of their Estates, for want of protection of the laws, brought to
miserable beggary, rather than they will wrong their consciences by subscribing
this damnable Engagement contrary to the Protestation and Covenant imposed by
this Parliament contrary to the known law of this land, which this Parliament
has declared to observe and keep in all things concerning the lives, liberties
and properties of the people, with all things incident thereto; contrary to
this Parliaments reiterated votes, that they would not change the Ancient
Government, by a King, Lords and Commons. And contrary to the Oaths of
Allegiance, Obedience and Supremacy: whereby (and by the Stat. of Recognition
1. Jac.) our Allegiance is tied only to the King, his Heirs and Lawful
Successers: from which no power on earth can absolve us; and so much we attest
in the Oath of Supremacy. Politicus (Interpreter to our new State-Puppet play)
Numb. 19. from Sept. 19. to Sept. 26. out of the dictates of his Masters tells
us, that in Answer to the Kings Act of oblivion granted, the Parliament intends
to pass an Act of General pardon; for which they expect in future a General
obedience and submission to the government: (you see though they will not be
the Kings subjects, they will be his Apes) and in the beginning of the said
Pamphlet, Politicus says; That Protection implies obedience, otherwise they
may be handled as public Enemies and outlawes, and ought to be destroyed as
Traitors. Here you have the end to which this general pardon is intended: it
is but a shooing-horn to draw on the utmost penalty upon Non-engagers,
appointed by the said pretended Act 2. Ian. 1649. to weed them out of this good
Land, that the Saints only may enjoy the earth and the fullness thereof; to
which purpose all their new coined Acts and Laws are directed. The Scripture
points forth these kind of men, when it says, The Mercies of the wicked are
cruel. The sum of all is; If we will not acknowledge Allegiance to these
Mush-romes, we shall be Traitors without Allegiance (a Treason never yet heard
of in any Law) If we will acknowledge Allegiance, we put our selves in a
capacity to be Traitors, when they shall please to make us such. But let them
know; That we are all Englishmen, Freeborn alike, under the Protection of an
ancient, legal Monarchy, to which we owe Allegiance: and how we come to
forfeit that legal Protection, our settled, laws and Government; and be
subjected to a New, unknown Protection obtruded upon us by a Company of
upstarts (Mushromes of Majesty, so mean in birth and breeding (for the most
part) that the place of a Constable equals the highest of their education)
imposing what Laws and conditions upon us they please; I would be glad to
hear without being hindered by Guns, Drums, High Courts of Justice and other
Instruments of violence and Murder. But the greatest Mystery in this cheat is,
That our Self-created Supremists, having voted the original power to be in the
people, and but a derivative Authority to be in themselves as the
Representative of the people, should notwithstanding so yoke their Sovereign
Lord the people, and make them pay Allegiance to their own Delegates (the 8.
part of a House of Commons) under the penalty (unless they subscribe as the far
major part have not) of outlawing and depriving all the people of this Land of
all benefit of the Laws they were born to; and consequently of annihilating
and making them no longer a Nation or people. As if they were mere Salvages,
newly conquered, collected and formed into a Politic body or Commonwealth, and
endowed with Laws newly invented by these Novice Statists. But the
unlawfullness of the said Engagement with the Injustice of the Self-created
power that obtrudeth it, has been handled by many good pens: especially by the
Cheshire and Lancashire Ministers in their Plea for Non-Subcribers. Therefore I
pass on to my principal scope; The second Engine appointed to root out all
such as are of a different Party, The High Court of Justice. A formidable
Monster, upon which no pen (that I know of) has yet adventured.

4. 4. The High Court of Justice.
In treating of the High Court of Justice, I must consider. 1. By what Persons
and Authority this new erected, unpresidented Court is constituted? 2. Of what
Persons it is constituted? 3. The way and manner of their proceedings? What
formalities and Laws they observe therein? How suitable to the known Laws of
the Land, and the Parliaments Declarations, Protestations and Covenant they
are? 4. To what end this Court is constituted?

1. The Persons constituting this extrajudiciall Court are the present,
pretended Parliament, consisting of 40 or 50 thriving Commons only, who
conspired with Cromwell and the Army to expel 7. parts of 8. of their
follow-Members, without any cause shown, abolished the House of Peers, erected
this High Court of Justice ( in nature of a Court Martial) to murder the King,
abolished Kingly Government: Turned it into a thing they call a Free State;
disinherited the Royal Family, and now usurp to themselves (without any
calling from God or the People) more then a Regal, Legal or Parliamentary
Authority, wherewith they have subverted the Fundamental Government, Religion,
Laws, Liberties and Property of the Nation, and envassallised and enslaved them
to their Arbitrary Domination; the Authority by which they erect this
extrajudiciall Court is, The usurped, Legislative power: By color of which
they passed an Act dated 26. March 1650. establishing the said High Court of
Justice. Yet their own creature Master St. John's, in his Argument against the
E. of Strafford, (in a Book called Speeches and Passages of this great and
happy Parliament, printed by William Cook 1641. page 24.) says, The Parliament
is the Representative of the whole Kingdom, wherein the King as head, The Lords
as the more Noble, and the Commons the other Members, are knit together as one
body Politic; The Laws are the Arteries and Ligaments that hold the body
together. (And a little after) Its Treason to embesell a Judicial Record,
Strafford swept them all away. Its Treason to counterfeit a 20s piece; here is
a counterfeiting of Law (so in these counterfeit new Acts) we can call neither
the counterfeit nor true one our own. Its Treason to counterfeit the great
Seal for an acre of Land, no property hereby is left to any Land at all (no
more is there by the votes and practice of our new Supremists (thus far Master
St. John's. But that the Parliament does necessarily consist of the King and the
two Houses assembled by his Writ, and can pass no Act, without their joint
consent: See the Praeambles of all our Statutes, all our Parliament Records,
all our Law Books: Modus tenendi Parliamentum. Hackwells manner of passing
Bills. Sr. Tho. Smith de Repub. Anglorum. Cambdeni Britannia. All our
Historians, Politicians, and the uninterrupted practice of all Ages. That it is
now, lately otherwise practiced; is not by any Law of the Land, but by the will
of lawless power and Rebellion, that has cancelled all our Laws, Liberties
and Properties, and subverted our Fundamental Government, and disfranchised
and disinherited the whole Nation. Yet Master St. John's in his said Argument
against Strafford p. 38. was then of opinion: That to subvert the Laws and
Government, and make a Kingdom no Kingdom, was Treason at the Common Law. This
Act 26. Mar. 1650, is a new modelled Commission of Oier and Terminer: And all
the people of the Land, are by the consequence thereof disfranchised and
proscribed. The illegality and tyranny thereof, they have introduced, who in
this Parliament so zealously complained against the Court of the President and
Counsel of York or of the North, as an intolerable grievance (notwithstanding
it had been of as long continuance as from 31. H. 8,) as appears by a worthy
Members speech or Argument against it (in the said Book of Speeches and
Passages p. 409. made by order of the House of Commons in April 1649. I find
not one Exception there made against the Court of York, to which this upstart
high Court is not more liable then it. 1. The Commissioners of this high Court
are not appointed to inquire, per Sacramentum proborum and legalium hominum,
that is, by Iuries; as by Magna Charta, and above 30. Statutes confirming it,
all Commissions ought to run. 2. They are not appointed (nor sworn) to hear
and determine, Secundum Leges Angliae, according to the known Laws (as they
ought to be) but according to certain Articles and powers given in the said Act
26. March 1650. 3. The said Act 26. March leaves a dangerous latitude to the
interpretation and discretion of the Commissioners (contrary to what is done in
the Act 25. Ed. 3. chap. 2.) namely; It has one Clause enabling them to
inflict upon Offenders such punishment, either by death or otherwise
corporally, as the said Commissioners, or the major part of them present shall
judge to apperteine to Justice. This leaves it in the breasts of the
Commissioners, (without any Law or rule to walk by) to inflict what torments
and ignominious punishments they please, although not used in our Nation; and
arbitrary corporal pains are proper to slaves; not to Subjects. Here (after
the loss of all but their bodies) the people may see their bodies subject to
the lawless wills of our Grandees. And by another clause, this Act impowreth
the Commissioners, To examine witnesses upon oath, or otherwise, if need be.
This word ( or otherwise, etc.) gives them power to examine witnesses without
oath (if they cannot procure witnesses so far the sons of Belial, and
cauterised in conscience as to adventure upon an oath) even in case of life and
death, and mutilation of members; contrary to the current of all our Laws, and
practice of all our Courts of Law, and of all Nations. See Stat. 1. Ed. VI.
chap. 12. 5 Ed. VI. chap. 11. Cooks 3. Inst. page 24, 25, 26. Deuteronomy. 17. 6. Ex
ore duorum vel trium peribit qui-occidetur. Deuteronomy. 17. 6. Matthew. 18. 16. John
18. 23. 2 Cor. 13. 1. Heb. 10. 28. This is the most arbitrary and destroying
liberty that ever was given to Judges; And such as none but professed thieves
and murderers will accept or make use of. The Scripture says, An oath is the
end of controversy between man and man. How then can they end and determine a
controversy without oath? But the end of all controversies before this
Butcher-row of Judges, is cutting of throats, and confiscation of estates. And
by the same clause of the said Act ( To examine witnesses) They may, and (I
hear) do examine witnesses clandestinely, and proceed upon bare Depositions
read in Court, whereas they ought to produce the witnesses face to face in open
Court, and there swear them, See Stat. 5. Ed. VI. chap. 11. and Cooks. 3.
Inst. page 26.
that the Party accused may interrogate them, and examine the circumstances,
and whether they contradict themselves, or one another, for clearing the
Evidence? And whether they be lawful witnesses or no? Nay (I hear) they do
privately suborn and engage witnesses without oath. And then produce them to
swear what they have formerly related only: and if they scruple at an oath,
punish them for misinforming the State. 4. That I may make some more use of the
aforesaid Members words, Whether the King, or a prevailing Party usurping his
Kingly power, may canton out a part of his Kingdom) or cull and mark out for
slaughter, some principal men, and deny them the benefit of law, in order
thereto, as these Judges do) to be tried by special Commission, since the
whole Kingdom is under the known laws and Courts established at Westminster?
It should seem by this Parliaments eager complaint against the special
Commission of York, this Parliament has determined this question in the
negative already, (whatsoever their present practice to carry on their Design
is) See Stat. 17. Car: 1. against the Star Chamber. To what purpose serve those
Statutes, of Magna Charta and the Petition of Right, if men may be fined and
imprisoned (nay murdered) without Law according to the discretion of
Commissioners? This discretion is the quick-sand that has swallowed our
Properties and Liberties, (but is now ready to swallow our carcasses:) Thus far
that Gentleman, Whose words then carried the Parliamentary stamp upon them. Let
me add some more exceptions of my own against this high Court of Injustice. 5.
Soldiers of the Army are appointed by the Act 26. March, to be assistant to the
Commissioners, contrary to the peaceable proceedings of the Law, which never
makes use of any but civil Magistrates and Officers of the Law. See Stat. 7.
Ed. l. 2. Ed. III. chap. 3. 7. R. II. chap. 13. 6. And contrary to the old oath
which all Judges ought to take, in these words. You shall swear well and
lawfully to serve the King and people, in the Office of Justice, etc. And that
to what estate and condition they be, come before you in the Sessions with
force and arms, against the peace, against the Statute thereof made, to
disturb the Execution of the Common Laws, or to menace the people, that you
arrest their bodies, etc. Stat. 18. Ed. III. in An. Dom. 1344. p. 144. Poultons
Book of Stat. at large. But the oath appointed for these Commissioners to take,
is not penned in terms of Indifferency. Nor does any ways oblige them to the
people. 26. Mar. 1550. (viz:) You shall swear well and truly according to the
best of your skill and knowledge, to execute the several powers given you by
this Act, (not well and lawfully to serve the people.) Besides they swear to
execute the several powers given, ( not to do Justice according to the Laws.)
Now the Laws are the only Rules of Justice, by which we distinguish crooked
from straight, true from false, right from wrong. This is not the work these
Judges are packed for, but to execute Acts of power and will. But powers are
often usurped, tyrannical, illegal and unjust: So are these. Injuria est quod
contra legem fit. 7. How can the House of Commons (if it were full and free)
constitute a new unpresidented Court of Justice, nominate and ordain Judges,
and enable them to administer Oaths, having never had, nor so much as pretended
to have, any power to judge, to nominate Judges, or to administer an oath; as
having never been more then the grand Enquest of the Kingdom, humbly to present
to His Majesty in a petitionary way, the grievances of the people? Nemo dat,
quod non habet. 8. Suppose the House of Commons had power of Judicature,
delegated to them from the people as their Representative? Delegatinon possunt
substituere Delegatos, et Pro^estatam sibi concreditam, in alios transfer.
legates can not make subdelegates, and transfer their trust to others. See Col.
Andrews 3 Answers given into this High Court, for his defense. Printed at the
later end hereof.

2. My Second consideration will be, Of what Persons delegated or commissioned,
this Court Consists? The pretended Act 26. March 1650. names 25.
Commissioners, all which (for their better credit) it enacteth Esquires,
amongst whom are four or five, that have professed the Law (as far as wearing a
lawyers gown come too) but were better known by their leisure then by their
law; until by adhearing to our prevailing Schismatics, in subverting our
laws, they seem to be eminent lawyers. Of Keeble see the Trial of Lieutenant
Col. John Lilburn, first and second part. Steel cited expired Statutes at
Winchester against Captain Burley. The rest are (for the most part) poor
ignorant Tradesmen, some so young they are but lately out of their
Apprentiships, others Broken Tradesmen that have compounded with their
Creditors, some of vilde and base Professions; One or two of those Wolvish
Saints (I hear) have with some difficulty escaped the gallows for Manslaying:
William Wibearde Esquire is a Rope-seller: this employment may happily help him
to the Hangmans custom. William Pemoier Esquire was heretofore an Ape-carrier,
Cherry-lickom or Mountredinctido. Cook a Vintner at the Bear at the Bridge
foot, he keeps a vaulting school for our sanctified Grandees, and their Ladies
of the Game. If the House of Commons had power to make Judges (which I have
disproved) yet, Ex quovis ligno non fit Mercurius. They must name such Persons
as may be competent Judges. And therefore must not choose. 1. Ignorant men. 2.
Nor such as the Law calls, Viles Personas, men base or contemptible for their
Persons or Sordide callings; Mechanics of the lowest rank. 3. Persons of
Scandalous life and conversations. 4. Not Banquerouts and Indigent Persons.
Necessitas cogit ad turpia. 5. Not partial and preingaged Persons, chosen to
suppress another party. As these Commissioners are engaged to the present
power to suppress all others. 6. Nor such as Schismatically or Heretically
affected, are seasoned with such Doctrines and Principles, as neither agree
with the Duties of a good Christian, a good Commonwealths man, nor a good
Judge, Which two last Objections not only these Commissioners, but the
pretended Parliament that commissioned them are apparently guilty of, as being
all of the Independent faction, conspiring to robb and root out all other
Parties: Royallists, Presbyterians and Levellors: For which purpose this New
Tribunal or Inquisition is set up. Independency being a mere complication and
Syncretismus, or rather a Sink and Common Sewer of all Errors, Heresies,
Blasphemies and Schisms (though they peevishly differ in some inconsiderable
Tenants) yet having one General End or scope at which they all chiefly aim
(viz.) power, preferment, profit, and the suppression of the Truth and
Magistracy, they have likewise some common principles to soader them together,
which they use as a Means conducing to that general End. Some few whereof I
will here set down for my Readers satisfaction. 1. To tolerate no King nor
Magistrate Superior to themselves. As being a Tyranny or Bondage over the
Christian Liberty of the Saints and Kingdom of Christ. Because they know no
Christian Magistrate can tolerate them, being (by the Genius of their Sect)
enemies to all Civil Societies, whether Monarchical, Aristocraticall,
Democraticall or Mixed; as the Kingdom of England was, before these men
destroyed it. Besides their common Doctrine, That they are appointed to break
the powers of the Earth to pieces, To level the hills and fill up the
valleies, That they are called, To bruise the Nations with a rod of Iron, and
break them in pieces like a Potters vessel: Which they have done in England,
and threaten the like in France, Germany, etc. whereof their pulpits and
discourses sound. Observe their Practices in the Low Countries. Where having by
their spies and Emissaries, found out some Burgers of the same humor with
themselves; They propagated their Doctrine so far; as to endeavor To strike
the Aristocraticall Members out of that Commonwealth by abetting some of the
States Provincial to lessen (and so to abolish by degree) The Lords States
General (the Optimates of that State) To ruin the Prince of Orange, to whose
Family they owe their Liberty; To dissolve the General Union of the said
United Provinces, and so take in pieces the whole Frame of that Republike. To
say nothing of their Insolences in fighting and killing their men, because the
Belgike Lion will not strike sail to their Cross and Harp; and in blowing up
the Antelope in Helversluice: Which shows what good Neighbors Holland, and
other parts, are like to have of the New State of England and Ireland (when
they have made themselves entirely by the purchase of Scotland) that is born
(like our English Richard the 3.) with Teeth in its head; and snappeth at its
Neighbors before it be out of its Swaddling clouts. This is the cause that
Cromwell, before he set sail for Ireland, caused his Journeymen, the pretended
Parliament, To pass an Act for tolleration of all Errors, Heresies and
Schisms, under the Notion of liberty of Conscience, and Ease for tender
Consciences. 2. Their second principle is, That the good things of this World
belong only to the Saints (that is, themselves) all others being usurpers
thereof: and therefore they may rob, plunder, sequester, extort, cheat and
confiscate (by illegal Laws of their own making, by extrajudiciall Courts and
partial Judges of their own constituting) other men's Goods and Estates; upon
as good Title as the Jews spoiled the Egyptians; or expelled the Canaanites.
3. Their third principle. That the Spirit (which sanctifies and illuminates
these men) in every particular man blows when and where it will, sometimes this
way, sometimes that way, often contrary ways: And therefore they can make no
profession of any certain Rule of Doctrine or Discipline, because they know not
which way the Spirit will inspire. For this reason they are still pulling down
old and setting up new Doctrines, as the Nomades do Cottages, only constant in
unconstancy. They profess their consciences are the Rule and Symbol both of
their Faith and Doctrine, by this Leaden Lesbian Rule they interpret, and to
this they conform the Scriptures; not their Consciences to the Scriptures;
setting the Sun Dial by the clock; not the clock by the Sun Dial. That
every man must pray according to the Dictates of his private Spirit; They
reject the Lords Prayer, for fear of quenching the Spirit. When they break
their Faith, Articles, Promises, Declarations and Covenants, they allege, the
Spirit is the Author thereof. When Cromwell (contrary to his Vows and
Protestations made to the King) kept him close prisoner in Carisbrook Castle;
He affirmed the Spirit would not let him keep his word. When, contrary to the
Public Faith, they Murdered Him: they pretended: They could not resist the
Motions of the Spirit. Sua cuique Deus sit dira libido. This Hobgoblin serves
all turns. 4. Their fourth principle is. That they may commit any Sin, and
retain their Sanctity in the very act of sinning: For what is sinful in other
men, is not so in the Saints; who may commit any crime against the Law of God,
and yet it cannot be imputed to them for Sin; Because they know in their
Consciences what they do. So tender and delicate are their Consciences; That
they are capable of any Offense against their Neighbor, without breach of
Justice or Charity. A righteous man is a law to himself. 5. Their fifth
principle is. That 7. make a Church: although men women and children, and that
this Church is Independent upon any other. The Anabaptists (though they neither
profess to follow Paul nor Cephas) yet declare themselves to be some of
Cromwels Church, some of John Goodwins, some of Kiffins, some of Patiences and
some of Carters Church. 6. Their sixth Independent principle is. That if a man
be questioned for any crime, though his Judges have neither competent
witnesses, proofs nor Evidence of his guiltiness, yet if they think in their
Consciences he is guilty; they may condemn him out of the Testimony of their
own private consciences. Is it not fit men so principled should be Judges and
Jury too; and condemn men by inspiration? So Col. Andrews and Sr. John Gell
were condemned; for Bernard and Pits (witnesses against them) were apparently
suborned by Bradshaw and Sir Hen. Mildmay against them: and forsworn in the
same cause; and good proof offered to the Court, that they were both Flagitious
men, of scandalous life and conversation. The letter (supposed to be sent by
Andrews to Gell) was delivered to Bradshaw, whereof Bradshaw sent a Copy only
to Gell at ten of the clock at night; and had a warrant then ready to arrest
Gell, which was done early next morning before he could conveniently discover
it: Yet was Gell sentenced for Misprison of High Treason. See Sr. John Gells
case stated, August 1650. with Colonel Andrews Attestation (in his behalf)
under his hand a little before his death. And though Sr. John was Impeached and
Mr. Attorney prosecuted him only for Misprision; yet had he much a do to keep
that blood thirsty old curre Keeble from taking a leap at his throat, and
giving Judgment against him for High Treason. So for want of law Sr. John had
like to be hanged by Inspiration and Instinct of the spirit. He that will see
more of these Independent Tenets, Let him read Cl. Salmasius chap. 10.
Defensionis Regiae. Elenchus Motuum nuperorum in Anglia. And the History of
Independency, 1, and 2. part. These 6. I have selected, that by comparing their
Doctrine with their daily Practice, the Reader may perceive what pious
Christians, good Patriots, and upright Judges, these engaged, Independent
Commissioners of the High Court of Justice are like to prove. The builders of
this New Commonwealth or Babel, hold forth to the People, Justice and Liberty,
as their Motto: as if those excellent gifts had never received their birth,
nor bin so much as shown to the People until they murdered the King, and
stepped into his Throne. But how righteous a Free State or Commonwealth is this
like to be? And how well are the People therein like to be instructed in the
ways of Righteousness, Justice and Charity, and improved in good life and
conversation, by men so principled as aforesaid, Let the world judge.
Especially when they observe, That our New Statists have enacted in the said
pretended Act 2. Jan. 1649. enjoining the Engagement, That whosoever will
promise Truth and fidelity to them by subscribing the Engagement may deal
falsely and fraudulently with all the world besides. And break all Bonds,
Assurances and Contracts made with Non-engagers, concerning their Estates; and
pay their Debts by pleading in Bar of all Actions, That the complainant has
not taken the Engagement: This is to robb the Egyptians of the good things of
this world, This is to break their Faith by the motions of the Spirit. This is
to cheat and rob their Neighbors without breach of Charity or Justice, and
without imputation of Sin, according to their aforesaid Tenets.

3. I am come now to consider in the third place, The way and Manner of their
proceedings; How consonant they are to the usual proceeding of our known Laws,
and Legal Courts of Judicature? (the best Inheritance of all Freemen) whereof
see Colonel Andrews 3. Answers in his Defense given into the said High Court,
Here with printed.

1. The first Course they commonly take is; To break open men's Houses, Studies,
Chests, etc. and seize their Papers; and thereby hunt for Matter of Charge
against them: And then to examine them against themselves, upon the said
Papers, contrary to Magna Charta, which says, Nemo tenetur prodere seipsum.
And contrary to the Doctrine of Christianity, which forbids a man to destroy
his own life, or be, Felo de se, as many men unwittingly do, who answer to
captious, ensnaring questions. What that tempting question was put to Christ;
Art thou the King of the Jews? He returned no other Answer then: Thou say
it: Why ask thou me? A^ke them that heard me, That is, Ask witnesses. It was
objected against the Oath ex Officio, That it was High Injustice to examine a
man against himself: Because his Answers may only serve to condemn, but not to
acquit him.

2. They usually break open houses with Soldiers, at all hours of the night,
pulling men out of their beds with great violence and terror, and so carrying
them away, under pretense whereof Robberies and Murders have bin committed.
Whereas by the Stat. 1. Edw. VI. chap. 12. and 5. and 6. Edw. VI. chap. 11. A
man ought not to be accused of High Treason, but to one of the Kings Counsel;
or to one of the Kings Justices of Assize; or to one of the Kings Justices of
the peace being of the Quorum: or to 2. Justices of the Peace, where the
Offense is committed, Cooks 3. Inst. chap. High Treason p. 26, 27, 28.

3. They Commit men to prison without any Accusation or Accusor made known, and
during pleasure: and detein them in prison many years together without any
Legal proceedings or charge against them; sharing their Estates, Offices and
Revenues (by Sequestrations and Suspensions of the Profits) amongst themselves,
without any Crime objected: And so leave them to sterve, rot or dye in nasty
Gaoles, for want of Maintenance, under the cruelty of covetous and merciless
Gaolers, whom they bear out (for money) in all their Extortions. And being thus
imprisoned and wounded with the displeasure of the State no man dares
adventure, upon any security, to lend him money for fear of incurring the
disfavour of the State, Witness about 3000. Scottish Prisoners of War starved
to death at Durham: where they eat one another for hunger. These were taken at
the battle of Dunbar An. 1650. 3. Sept. and many hundred Prisoners have been
murdered in Goales, with hunger, cold, nastinesse, and contagion: after they
have been robbed of their Estates and no Crime laid to their Charge: This is
now become a daily practice.
and a Note of Malignancy, whereby their Prisons are become private Slaughter
houses, as well as their Courts Public Shambles of Injustice. Prisoners in the
Tower of London (To which prison no Jail delivery belongs) were always wont
in the time of ( that supposed Tyrant) King Charles I. and his Predecessors, to
have allowance from the King, according to their several degrees; As 5l. a
week for an Esquire etc. although the King deprived them of no part of their
estates until conviction, and this Maintenance was provided for them by the
Lieutenant of the Tower; and in respect of his care and pains in procuring it
he had Fees, and not otherwise; though now they continue and increase the said
Fees; the cause being taken away the effect cease not. But these men now in
power, after they have Committed men and robbed them of their Estates, without
cause shown, are so far from giving them any allowance to feed them; that
they shut them up close Prisoners in unwholesome chambers, denying them the
Liberty of the Tower, and the benefit of fresh Air (the Cameleons Diet) for
their health, and resort of friends, for their accommodation. And that they may
be sure to deprive them of all legal means by habeas cotpus to recover their
liberties; They commit men by illegal warrants not expressing any particular
Offense or cause for their commitment; so that it is impossible for the keeper
of the prison to obey the habeas corpus, which is directed to him in these
words: Precipimus tibi quod compus A. B. una cum causa detentionis fuae, habeas
coram nobis etc. ad recipiendum ea quae curia nostra. etc. Whereupon the Jailer
or Sheriff is to bring his Prisoner to the Bar and tender his mittimm to the
Court, showing the particular cause of his Imprisonment, that the Court may
judge whether it be Legal, or no. Dolosus versatur in Generalibus. In the Acts
of the Apostles chap. 25. ver. 26. 27. Festus thought it unreasonable to send
Paul a Prisoner to Caesar (to whom he had appealed) and not withal to signify
the Crimes laid to his Charge. See Cooks 2. Instit. fol. 591.

4. Their usual course of practicing and suborning witnesses, tempting them
with hopes and terrifying them with fears, is so notorious; that it is known
the Counsel of State have hundreds of Spies and Intelligencers, Affidavit-men
and Knights of the Post, swarming over all England as Lice and Frogs did in
Egypt: and have both Pensions and set rates for every polle brought in: So that
now the whole Nation is proscribed, and every man's head set to sale, and made a
staple commodity, (far beyond the definite proscriptions of Silla and the
Triumvirate aforesaid) These sons of Belial are sent forth to compass the
earth seeking whom they may devour. These (with the Liberty of Privileged
Spies) speak bold Language to draw other men into danger: and plot
conspiracies, which themselves derect and are rewarded like Decoy Duckes for
their pains. Of this sort are Bernard and Pits set on work to betray Gell and
Andrews, as aforesaid. For which Bernard had 300l. and a Troop of horse
conferred upon him. Johnson that falsely accused Sr Rob. Sherly and Col. Egerton
for their charity in releiving his wants, is another; Varney is a fourth. So
well are they fitted with these Sons of Belial, that no Naboth can keep his
Vineyard, if a Grandee cast a covetous eye upon it; they can prove what they
list. Nay it is usual for our Grandees to molest one man with examining him
20. or 30. several times, against one Prisoner, and upon one point, to
distract his memory, and not to let him be quiet until he perceive, He must
speak what their questions and discourses lead him to, to redeem himself from
vexation. To say nothing of their Menaces, To torture men if they will not
confess, what they impudently pretend is already discovered by other means: And
their insinuating into the affections of witnesses by asking them: Whether the
State does not owe them money? And why they do not use fitting means and
opportunities to recover it? And why they do not make means for some beneficial
employment?

5. In Magna Charta, chap. 29. it is enacted, That no Freeman shall be taken or
imprisoned; or be disseised of his Freehold or Liberties or free Customs, or
be outlawed or exiled, or any otherwise destroyed; nor we will not pass upon
him or condemn him, but by lawful Judgment of his Pears, or by the Law of
the Land. We will sell to no man, We will not deny or defer to any man,
Justice or Right. See Statut, 2. Ed. III. chap. 8. 5. Ed. III. chap. 9. 14. Ed.
III. chap. 14. 25. Ed. III. chap. 4. 11. R. II. chap. 10. Pet. of Right. 3.
Car. 1. 10. Ed. IV. fol. 6. Dier. fol. 104. Cook lib. 5, fol. 6. lib. 10. fol.
74. lib. 11. fol. 99. Regist. fol. 86. Where note the word ( Peers) signifies,
that no man is to be condemned or destroyed, but by the lawful verdict of a
Jury of 12. sworn men of the Neighborhood where the Fact was committed;
because (in probability) Neighbors may have best cognizance of the Fact, and
of the life and conversation of the Party Accused. And these only are Competent
Judges of Matter of Fact; and in many cases of Matter of Law too, if they will
take the knowledge of the Law upon them. Neither can this Petty Jury of 12. men
go upon the prisoner, unless a Bill of Indictment containing the whole Matter
of charge be first found in open Court by a Grand Jury or Enquest of sworn
men; who are to enquire of the Fact upon the Oaths of two lawful witnesses
(at least) to every material Point of the Enditement and then, when the Grande
Enquest are all agreed, the Foreman endorseth upon the back of the Bill (
Billa vera) and then presents it in open Court, as the Information for the King
of the whole Enqueste: otherwise the Enditement is quasht, and null. Cooks 3.
Instit. chap. High Treason and Petty Treason. And whereas the Statut. says,
(but by his Peers, or by the Law of the Land) Lex Terrae, signifies, The
Ancient Customs of the Land; Amongst which Fundamental Customs; Trials by
Juries hold a principal place. And when the King Charles I. accused this
Parliament, That they disposed of the Subjects Lives and fortunes by their
votes, contrary to the known Laws of the Land, This Parliament in their
Remonstr. Sep, 1642. (1. Part. of the Book of Declarations fol. 693.) highly
resented it. And Magna Charta being nothing else but an affirmation of the
common Law, inserted this Clause ( or by the Law of the Land) as a special
caution, not to annihilate or frustrate (no; not so much as tacitly, or by
preterition) any of the said Fundamental Laws or Customs, nor any other
particular lawful Customs, which are not one and the same in all parts of
England; Witness the Custom of Savelkind in Kent. I have told you what our known
ancient. Legal Courts of Justice do. And I must tell you that Legal forms
and set Modes of proceedings are so essential unto Justice, that without them
we cannot measure the Rectitude or obliquity of justice or injustice: where
they do not chalk forth the way, both Judges, Lawyers, Officers and Atturneys
will tread what subtle, obscure paths they please, usurp an Arbitrary power
and latitude to prevaricate; and so far corrupt and work the Law to their
sense, that they will rather Leges dare, then Leges dicere, so that what is Law
in one man's case, shall not be so in another man's, They will so intricate and
entangle causes; that every case shall be Casus pro amico; as Civilians call
it; when upon full hearing, The Merits of the cause appear so equal, and
undistinguishable on both parts; that the Judge may (according to his
discretion) look upon the Merits of the Persons only: and give the cause;
Pauperiori, via Charitatis, or digniori, ratione virtutis. Justice not fixed by
formalities, will become such a vagrant, that no man shall know where to find
her. Let us now see what our new shambles out upstart High Court does. Which in
this work of Reformation and Destruction, so much abhors superstition and
ceremonies, and sticks so close to a summary way of proceeding, that they have
not only stripped, but flead her: as their Masters the Parliament not only
fleece, but flea the People. In lieu of a Bill of Presentment, by a Grande
Enquest, the pretended Parliament or Counsel of State, send a List of such
Persons names, as they have proscribed, And set a Nigrum Theta upon, (as men
dangerous to their designed interest) to the Masters of their Slaughterhouse,
The said High Court, together with such Depositions as they have taken in
corners, against the Prisoners: and this is such a fore judging of them, that
the said Court neither will not dare acquit, whom their Masters and pay-Masters
have precondemned. Next Articles of Impeachment in nature of a charge are drawn
up against the Prisoner (although such Articles are nothing in Law, which
regards only a Bill of Indictment) Then the Prisoner after a close Imprisonment
for he knows not what) upon two days warning is led to the Bar; where the
first work is to dazzle his eyes, amase and distract his judgment and memory
with the terror of their soldiers, the Numerousnesse, high affronting words
and looks of his Judges; having thus mortified the Prisoner, he is commanded to
hear his charge read: and bid plead to it. Guilty; or not Guilty. If he own
their jurisdiction and plead the said General Plea, they have him where they
would have him: they never ask him; how he will be tried? Whether by God and his
Country? for God has no hand in these proceedings, nor amongst such Judges;
and this rod of Iron is provided to bruise his Country, as well as himself.
Lieutenant Col. Lilbornes Trial has taught them That it is an easier Matter
for them to pack a Butcher Row of confiding, partial Judges, then a Jury; who
are liable to be challenged, if suspected of partiality. When Col. Andrews
claimed to be tried legally as a Freeman by a Jury and vouched Great Charter,
and many other Statutes, (whereof see his aforesaid three Answers) that
sneaking Bloodsucker, illitterate Keeble answered. Those Statutes were out of
date now, (meaning they were taken away by conquest,) So that this shamble Row
of Judges, take upon them to be, both Judges of the Law, (without acknowledging
the Fundamental Laws of the Land, or taking any Oath of Indifferency to the
People) Triors of the Fact, or Jurates of life and Death (without being sworn
to find according to Evidence) as well as Parties and Prosecutors. Thieves upon
the high way may as justly arraigne a true man before them, because he brought
no money in his purse, offered to draw his sword and hid his money about him in
contempt of their jurisdiction and Authority; and condemn him upon such a mock
Trial and mummery or interlude of Justice, as these Fellows. If they allow him
counsel, his Counsel must apprehend the minds of his Judges, at his peril;
and not be so faithful and diligent as to help his client in earnest; Least
the Counsel of State, or some other power (whose will is a Law) interpose and
banish him 20. miles from London; as they did Master Sprat, Sr John Gells
Solicitor, before Sr John's business was ended; whereby Sr John's was left
destitute of means to follow his business, himself being close Prisoner. If they
permit any witness to speak on the prisoners part, He coms at his peril: Sr
John Gells first witness was so baffled in Court, that the rest stole away and
durst not appear. I have not heard whether they give any Copy of their
Articles of Impeachment to the Prisoner, (for they cover all their doing with
such a Plaguey Egyptian D^^knes, that we cannot see a glimpse of light) or
whether they go a Star Chamber way, and make him Answer Ore tenus, and ex
tempore for his life and Estate. But if they give him any copy, or any time to
answer, it is not above four or five days, or a week, nor do they allow him
Counsel, or any other Clearing of the way to his defense, until he have
ensnared himself by owning their jurisdiction, and pleaded the general Plea,
Not Guilty. If he plead not an issuable Plea, and yield to their jurisdiction,
quitting all benefit of the Law and Legal proceedings, the Razor is at his
throat, they thirst after his Blood; and they presently sentence him guilty of
contumacy and take it pro confesso. And if he do submit and plead: His plea will
have the operation but of a psaelm of Mercy, prolonging his life but for a
short time, in the interim Keeble and his Court plays with him as a Cat does
with a Mouse, and then devours him. For no man is sent to this Court to be
tried, but to be condemned. In hac arena dimicatur sine missione. Herein they
show themselves much more tirannous and bloody then the Duke D' Alva when he
erected his said counsel of Troubles, called Concilium Sanguinis, or the bloody
conventicle; as this will shortly be. For says Strada Declar. 1 lib. 7.
Procurator regius menses 4. Conficiendae Accusationi accipiens sibi; 5
Concedebat ad Defensionemreis (Egmontio, Hornano, etc) The Kings Attorney took
four Months time to draw up the Charge or Accusation, and gave five Months time
to the Respondents to make their defense. And had he given less then five
Months time, To Instruct Counsel, Pen their Answers, produce and summon
witnesses, inquire into the lives and conversation of their Accusors, his feet
had been swift to shed blood. Nulla unquam de morte hominis cunctatio longa
est, But our Inquisitors take whole years to themselves to hunt for Matter of
Accusation and hire and engage witnesses against men kept in ignorance and want
with close imprisonment: and allow not them so many days to make their
Defense. All manner of Accusors and witnesses, though apparently suborned and
forsworn in the same cause, and proofs without exceptions offered to the Court
that they are of infamous life and conversation, are in this Court (the Object
of whose desires are blood and Confiscations, not Justice) lawful witnesses,
such witnesses were the said Bernard and Pits; Monsters of man. See Sir John
Gels case stated: Printed about August, 1650. To Cite any ancient, known Laws
or Statutes, or any other then their own new coined Acts, passed by this 8.
Part of a House of Commons, (since they became elect Members chosen by Thomas
Pride) is to incur the High Indignation of the Court, expressed abundantly in
their words and looks. But to put them in mind of the Parliaments many
Declarations, to maintain the ancient known Laws, Liberties, and Properties of
the people, is to scandal the present Government and incur the Censure of that
unknown mysterious Crime, which knaves call Malignancy. The witnesses and
Judges being thus irrefragable, the first may swear what they will, the second
may judge what they will, since they are left at large and have all things in
scrinio pectoris: and Book Law must give place to Bench Law; The Jurisdiction
and Authority of this New unparalelled Court is such a Mystery of iniquity, so
unscrutable and unquestionable, that if a prisoner scruple (in the least)
either it, or any of the uncouth proceedings of it; it is a Mortal sin to him,
and he is presently interrupted, and affronted both with disdainful words and
looks. And told, See the Trial of K. Charles I. in the History of Independency
2. Part. p. 19 etc.
We are satisfied with our Authority, that are your Judges, (so are Thieves
upon the High way satisfied with their Authority that rob and murder us by
Gods Providence and permission.) It is upon Gods Authority and the Kingdoms,
(yet what they do is against the will of God revealed in his Scriptures; and
against the known, established Laws, Statutes, and continual Practice of the
Kingdom:) Which Authority commands you in the name of the People of England to
answer them. (Yet at lest) 9. parts of 10. of the people so much abhor these
and other their Practices that every man's mouth speaks against them with
bitter curses and reproaches to restrain which they have minted Acts of New
Treasons, to make men Offenders, nay Traitors, even for bare words; and erected
this bloody, illegal Theater, The High Court (so called, for its High
Injustice) as a Spanish Inquisition over them, and every man's hand would be
about their ears, did they not keep an Army of Janisaries to suppress them.)
Their Authority they do avow to the whole World, that the whole Kingdom are to
rest satisfied therewith. (You see here a Whip and a Bell provided to keep the
whole Kingdom in aw: the declared Supreme power of their Sovereign Lord the
people, must resign their known Laws to their Trustees, their Representatives
in parliament, and take new Laws from their Arbitrary Votes, or woe be to their
Necks and Shouldiers) I must interrupt you, what you do is not agreeable to the
Proceedings of any Court of Justice. You are about to enter into Argument and
dispute concerning the Authority of this Court; before whom you appear as a
prisonner; you may not dispute the Authority of this Court: nor will any Court
give way to it, you are to submit to it. (It is not safe to confute a lie told
with Authority. Yet if a man be Endicted of Treason or Felony in the Court of
Common Pleas, a man may Demurre to, and dispute the Jurisdiction of that Court;
because it is not in Criminal Causes, Competens Forum; nor the Judges
Compentent Judges; every man and every cause must be tried Suo Foro, non
Alieno. 80 if a Peer be Arraigned in the Kings Bench. And for this upstart,
unpresidented High Court; it is no Court of Judicature at all, as being erected
without lawful Authority; Consisting of Incompetent Judges, no Records
belonging to it: and tending to disinherit, and disfranchise all the People of
England: and to murder them.) You may not dispute the Jurisdiction of the
Supreme and Highest Authority of England, from which there is no Appeal, The
Votes of the Commons of England assembled in Parliament is the Reason of the
Kingdom. (Oh Brutish, irrational Kingdom!) Where 40. or 50. Anabaptisticall
Members, the Dregs and Lees of the House of Commons, after all the best and
sincerest (7. parts of 8.) had been racked and purged out at the Bunghole by
Cromwell the Brewer and Pride his Drayman, shall be called the Reason and Law
of the Land. This confirms the truth of what King Charles the I. Objected to the
Parliament (whereof I have formerly spoken ( That they disposed of the Subjects
Lives and Fortunes, by their own Votes, against the known Laws of the Land. But
that there should be no Appeal to their declared Sovereign Lord the people,
from their subordinate Trustees in Parliament is wonderful; Considering that
in all Governments, The last Appeal is ever to the Highest and most Absolute
power. But it may be they will be the Peoples Trustees in spite of their
Teeth, and by the power of the Sword; and so free themselves from rendering any
account of their Stewardship.) You may not Demurre to the Jurisdiction of the
Court. If you do, they let you know, that they over rule your Demerrer, and
affirm their own Jurisdiction. Reason is not to be he heard against the Highest
Jurisdiction the Commons of England, make a direct and positive Answer, either
by denying or confessing, and put in immediately an issuable Plea, Guilty, or
Not Guilty of the Charge, or we will record your Default and contumacy, and by
an implicit confession take you guilty pro confesso, and immediately give
judgment against you. (This (as I told you before) is it that blanches the Deer
into the Toil, But God deliver us from that Jurisdiction that is too high to
hear Reason; and that over rules Demurrers before they be heard.) I have told
you as much of the proceedings of this Court, as the Novelty, Obscurity,
uncertainty and confusion thereof will give me leave. Let me now (by way of
overplus) give you the great dangers and slavery that will be fall all sorts of
People, if they tamely and cowardly suffer themselves to be deprived of their
auticent, legal Trials by Endictment and Juries of the Neighbor hood: (then
which the whole world cannot boast of a more equal way) and suffer their
Lives, Liberties, Estates, and Honors to be subject to an Arbitrary,
Extrajudiciall conventicle of Blood, ( Cromwels new Slaughter house) which has
neither Law, Justice, Conscience, Reason, President or Authority Divine or
Humane, but only the pretended Parliaments irrational Votes and the power of
the Sword to maintain it, which will prove a Cittadell over their Liberties, a
snare to their Estates, a Deadfall to their lives, and a scandal to their
honors and familes, if not timely opposed.

1. By the Law the Endictment must specify what the Treason is, and against
what Person committed; As against our Sovereign Lord the King, his Crown and
Dignity. But in the said Articles of Impeachment, it is alleged that the
Treason is committed against the present Government, or, against the Keepers of
the Liberties of England; but in this dead-water our turning Tide between the
old Regal, and this new unknown Government; no man knows how to do, look or
speak for fear of contracting the guilt of an Interpretative Treason, upon the
said two Statutes for New Treasons, and before this boundless, lawless new
Court. And to say, that Treason is committed against a Government in abstracto,
is Nonsense: it must be said that Treason is committed against the Governors
in Concreto, naming them. For there being no Treason without Allegiance; And
Allegiance being a personal Obligation, must be due from a certain known
Person, to a certain known Person, or Persons. And therefore the Keepers of the
Liberties of England, not being yet made known to us, who they are, or where to
be found, or what their power, duty or office is; and being not tied by any set
Oath to deal well and truly with the People, (as Kings are by their Coronation
Oath; for if the stipulation be not mutual, the People are Slaves, not
subjects) since the Duties of Allegiance and Protection, Obedience and Command
being reciprocal (as they must needs be, the Parliament having declared the
Supreme power to be in the People; they must not govern them Mero Imperio (by
lawless Votes) like Turkish, Tartarian and Russian Slaves. I cannot ow nor
perform Allegiance to those individua vaga (the Keepers or Gaolers of our
Liberties) nor to an Utopian Commonwealth. And without Allegiance no Treason:
for in all Endictments of High Treason, it must be alleged; That the accused
did (Proditorie) perpetrate such and such Crimes; Contra debitam Allegantiam
suam. And the word ( Proditorie) signifies the betraying of a Trust: According
to the Proverb; In Trust, is Treason. Now where there is no profession of
Allegiance, there is no acceptance of a Trust, no man can trust me against my
will. I was born under a Regal Government, have read the Stat. Recognition, 1.
Jac. Have taken (as well as others) the Legal Oaths of Allegiance, Obedience
and Supremacy to the King his Heirs and Lawful Successors: imposed upon me by
lawful Authority, and from which no power on Earth can absolve me: and so much
I attest in the Oath of Supremacy. And how I should now come (after the New
Moduling of the Parliament and Kingdom by Soldiers) to ow Allegiance to
Cromwell the Brewer, Scot the Brewers Clerk, Bradshaw the murderous petty
fogger, Sr. Hen. Mildmay the Court pander and projector, Holland the Linckeboy,
John Trenchard that packed a Committee (in which he was a Member) and Voted to
himself 2000l. Love the super-inducted Six Clerk, or any other of that
Self-created Authority, let them sheath their swords and tell me.

2. An Endictment must certainly allege the Offense committed, See the
Additionel Post script at the Latter end of this Book.
in respect of the Matter, Time, Place, persons and other circumstances; But in
these Articles of Impeachment they tie themselves to no such certainties;
Whereby the Accused knows not at what ward to lie, nor how to make his Defense.
The Circumstances of time, place and person, being the assured Testimony of all
Humane Actions. This lawless Court leaves him in a vast Sea of Troubles,
without pole-starre, card or compass to steer by: The Arbitrary Opinions of
this Court, declared upon emergent Occasions, being a falls hearted Pilot to
him. These Judges not being of Counsel with the prisoner, as our Legal Judges
are, who swear to do Justice according to the Law.

3. By the Law, any learned man that is present, may inform the Court; for the
benefit of the prisoner, of any thing that may make the proceedings erroneous.
Cooks 3. Instit. page 29. But the whole proceedings of this Court, their
meeting and sitting being erroneous, here is no room left for admonition, To
take away their errors, is to take away the Court.

4. Cooks 2. Inst. p. 51. expounding the 29. chapter of Magna Charta, has
these words. All Commissions ought to be grounded upon the Law of England (not
upon the Votes of the House of Commons) and to contain this clause in them. To
do what is just according to the Laws and customs of England; (not to execute
the several powers given them by the Act 26. March 1650) and a little further
he says. Against this Ancient and Fundamental Law I find an Act of
Parliament made 11. Hen. VII. chap. 3. That as well Justices of Assize as
Justices of the Peace, without any finding or presentment by the verdict of
twelve men, upon a bare Information for the King before them made, should have
full power and Authority by their Discretions, to hear and determine all
Offenses and Contempts committed, or done by any person or persons, against the
Form, Ordinance or effect of any Statute made and not repealed; saving Treason,
Murder or Felony. By color of which Act shaking this Fundamental Law, it is
not credible what horrible Oppressions and Exactions, to the undoing of
infinite number of people, were Committed by Empson and Dudley Justices of the
Peace throughout England. And upon this unjust and injurious Act, a new Office
was erected (as commonly in like cases it falls out) and they made Masters of
the Kings Forfeitures. (I hear such an other Office will be erected, when the
novelty of this wonderful High Court is lessened, and the yoke thereof
thoroughly settled upon the people necks) Yet observe the said Act 11. H. 7. cap
3. went not so high as to Treason, Murder, and Felony. But by the Stat. 1. Hen.
VIII. chap. 6. the said Act 11. Hen. VII. was repealed, and the reason given,
For that by force of the said Act it was manifestly known; That many sinister
and crafty, forged and feigned Informations had bin pursued against many of the
Kings Subjects, to their great damage and wrongful vexation. The ill success
hereof (says Cook) and the fearful end of these two Oppressors, (who were
Endicted and suffered for High Treason for all the said Act 11. Hen. VII.
passed in a full and free Parliament: Cook. 3. Instit. page 208.) Should
admonish Parliaments, That in stead of this Ordinary and precious Trial by the
Law of the Land, they bring not in Absolute and partial Trials by discretion.
And in his 4. Instit. p. 41. Cook says, Let Parliaments leave all Causes to be
measured by the golden and straightened wand of the Law, and not the uncertain
and crooked cord of Discretion: for it is not almost credible to foresee, when
any Maxim or Fundamental Law of the Land is altered, what dangerous
inconveniences will follow; as appears by this unjust and strange Act 11. Hen.
VII. chap. 3.

5. This Parliament always declared they bore Arms against the King, in
Defense of the Laws, Liberties and properties of the people. This way ran the
whole current of their Declarations. And they alwaies-reckoned Magna Charta,
the Petition of Right and Trials by ^uries, the Chief and most Fundamental of
all our Laws. See their Remonstrance: Therefore in their 7. Article against
Strafford. They charged him with High Treason, for giving Judgments against
men's Estates, without Trials by Juries. Much aggravated by Mr. St. John's in his
aforesaid Argument against Strafford. And for the better preservation of Legal
Trials by Juries, it is provided in the Bill of Attainder of Strafford, that
the case of the same Earl should not be used as a President in succeeding
times. And in two of this Parliaments late Declarations 9 Febr. and 17. March,
1648. The Parliament promises. To preserve and keep the Fundamental Laws of
the Land, for preservation of the lives, Liberties and Properties of the
People, with all things incident thereto. Now to erect an Arbitrarie, Lawles
High Court, to give Judgment against men's lives and Estates, and attain their
bloods, without Enditement found by a Grande Jury, and a Trial by a Jury of 12
sworn men vicineto; is a far fouler breach of Trust in them against their
Sovereign Lords the People, then all they Charged the King withal; and a far
Higher Act of Tyranny and Injustice then either the late King; or Empson and
Dudley or Strafford were accused of. But if they allege: They do not put down
Juries in General, but only in some particular men's cases, and upon
Necessity. I Answer. That we are all born Freemen of England alike; That our
Ancient known Laws, Laws Courts and Trialls by Juries are our Inheritance
equal alike to all. And one Party or part of the People ought not to be
disherited, disfranchised or forejudged no more then another. No man can be
said guilty of any Crime until he be legally convicted and sentenced: the Law
must first go upon him and condemn him. Vbi lex non distinguit, non est
distinguendum. If we do not live all under one Law, and form of Justice, we
are not all of one Commonwealth, See the before mentioned Gentleman's Argument,
against the Special Commission of the Court of York. For Necessity: Our
present power is under none: but the fears and terrors of their own guilty
consciences. No appearance nor probability of any enemy by their own confession:
nor can they plead in their excuse, a Necessity which they have brought upon
themselves. I know some Kings have, de facto, used the Animadversion of the
Sword to cut off such powerful and dangerous Persons as could not safely be
called to account by the Law; so died Joab, Adoniah, etc. For which the rule
is. Neminem adeo eminere debere, ut Legibus interrogari nequeat: qui Jus aequum
far non potest, in eum vim haud in justam fore. No man ought to advance
himself above the powers of the Law: He that will not submit to equal Right,
if he be cut off by violence, suffers no wrong: But this is to be understood of
the Eminency and greatness of the Person, not of the greatness of the Crime;
whereof no man is to be forejudged; because a great Crime may prove a great
Calumny, until a Legal Trial have adjudged it. But there is no Person in
England so eminent for power or Authority, but that the least of Bradshaws
Ban-dogs can drive him to the Slaughterhouse, and make him offer his throat to
Keeble. Therefore Animadversio Gladii, if at any time lawful, is now
unlawful. To make great examples, upon men of little power, is great
Injustice. But the way of this Court is not Animadversio per Gladium. It is a
Mocking, a Counterfeiting, an Adulterating and Alchimisting of Justice: it is
to falsify her waights and Balance, and steal her Sword to Commit Murder
withal.

6. By the known Laws Matter of Fact is entrusted to the Jury; See Col.
Andrews 3 Answers.
Matter of Law to the Judges; to prevent all Errors, Combinations and
Partiallities. The Judges are sworn to do Justice according to the Law; The
Jury are sworn to find according to their Evidence. But in this High Court
the Commissioners or Judges are all packed, Confiding men, chosen by and out of
one Party, to destroy all of a different Party. They usurp the Office of Judges
not being sworn to deal well and lawfully with the People (as by the said Stat.
18. Edw. III.) nor to do Justice according to the Law. But only to execute
powers given by the said Act 26. March 1650. And they arrogate (as Jurymen) to
be Triers of the Fact, without being sworn, To find according to Evidence. So
that they are Judges, Juries and Parties, and (for ease of their tender
Consciences (without any Oath of Indifferency. A most excellent Compendium of
Oppression. They may go to the Devil for Injustice, and not be forsworn. Great
is the Privilege of the Godly.

7. The Prisoner may except against his Jurers, either against the Array, if
the Sheriff or Baily impannelling the Jury, be not wholly disingaged and
Indifferent; both to the cause, and to the Parties, Prosecuting and Prosecuted.
Or against the Poll, he may Challenge 35 peremptorily; and as many more as he
can render Legal Cause of Challenge for. As for defect of Estate, or other
Abilities, or for Partiality, Disaffection, Engagement, Infamy. But this Array
of Jury-men-Judges ( A Medley so new we know not how to express it) though
picked and empannelled by an Engaged Remainder of the Commons, and obnoxious to
all exceptions, must not be challenged, their backs are too much galled to
endure the least touch. Take heed you scandal not the Court (cries Master
Attorney) See Col. Andrews 3 Answers.

8. Many Exceptions in a Legal Trial, are allowed against Imperfections,
Uncertainties and Illegallities in the Bill of Enditement, for the advantage of
the Prisoner. But no Exceptions are allowed against these Illegal Articles of
Impeachement; which are made uncertain, intricate, obscure and ambiguous
purposely to pussle, confound, and entangle the Respondent.

9. By the Law a Bill of Enditement must have two full and clear lawful
witnesses to every considerable Matter of Fact; Where there is but one witness,
It shall be tried by combat before the Earl Martial Cook ibidem.
both at finding the Bill and at the Trial. Cooks 3. Instit. page 25. 26. And
Probationes debent esse luce clariores. Proofs must be as clear as the Sun;
not grounded upon Inferences, Presumptions, Probabilities. And the Prisoner
must be Provablement Attainte, says the Stat. 25. Ed. III. chap. 2. Cooks 3.
Instit. page 12. The word (Atteinted) shows he must be legally proceeded with:
not by absolute power as formerly had bin used (and as is now used by this
bloody High Court) But before these Slaughter-men of the High Court, all manner
of witnesses, Legal or Illegal, one or two, sworn or not sworn, or apparently
forsworn and suborned, and all proofs clear or not clear are sufficient. The
Prisoner is sent thither fore-doomed, and has his deaths Marck, his fate in
his forehead.

10. The said Act 26. March 1650. Carries two faces under one hood; and looks
backwards as well as forewards. To facts Precedent as well as Subsequent the
said Act, Contrary to the Nature of all Laws, whose Office is to prohibit
before it punish, to warn before it strike. Where St. Paul defines Sin to be
The breach of Commandment, or Law. I had not known Sin but by the Law. The
Law must therefore be precedent to the Offense. But these Acts are not Laws to
admonish, but Lime-twigges and Trappes to ensnare and Catch men. See Col.
Andrews 3. Answers at the latter end of this Book.

Fourthly, and lastly I am to consider. To what end and purpose this New
invented High Court is constituted and appointed? Concerning which see a Letter
dated 6. June 1650. Stilo veteri, from the Hague, (supposed to be Walter
Strick-lands, the Parliaments Agent there) as I find it in Walter Frostes
Brief Relations of some Affairs and Transactions, etc. from Tuesday June 11. to
June 18. 1650. wherein the Epistoler has these words. One piece of the cure
(viz: of the dangers that threaten your New State) must be Phlebotomy, but
then you must begin before Decumbency, and then it will be facile to prevent
danger, etc. They are here most of all afraid of your High Court of Justice,
which they doubt may much discourage their party, they wish you would not
renew the power thereof, but let it expire: then they think that after
Michilmas they may expect Assistance with you. And indeed that Court is of
almost as much use to you as an Army: and will prevent the rising of as many
Enemies, as the other will destroy, only you must be sure to execute Justice
there with all Severity. A few of the first stirrers taken away by the power
thereof, without respect to cosen or Country will keep all the rest quiet.
But whosoever that Court condemns, let them be as already dead, etc. But let
them be most free in cutting the vena Coephalica (that is the Presbyterian
Party) for the Basilica (or Royal Party) will be latent. The Median (or
levellors) would be spared as much as may be, that the body be not too much
emaciated. Besides the blood is most corrupt in the Coephaliks ( or
Presbyterians) and is the very causa continens of your disease, You need not
fear to take freely of this vein, etc. Here you see this State-Mountebancke
gives you the use and Application of this corrasive. (The High Shambles of
Justice) so fully that I shall not need to comment upon it. And in the latter
end of a Letter from Cromwell, dated from Dunbar 4. September 1650. (as I find
it in Politicus) speaking of his new purchased victory over the Scots. Cromwell
says; God puts it more and more into your hands to improve your power, (viz.
your absolute Authority) we pray own his People more and more, (that is; The
Army) they are the Chariots and Horsemen of Israel (of the Kingdom of the
Saints) disowne your selves but own your Authority (which you enjoy under the
Protection of the Army, your Lords Paramounte) and improve it; to Curb the
Proud and the Insolent, etc. (That is all men of different Opinions and Parties
from them; that will not engage to be true and owe Allegiance to the Kingdom of
the Saints, and resign their Laws, Liberties and properties to their lusts
and wills) That I have not misconstrued the contents of Cromwells mistical
Letter will appear by a Discourse in the same Politicus Numb. 17. from Thursday
September 26. to October 3. 1650. Where (according to his Custom) delivering
forth State Oracles to the people: He tells them in plain English. That after
the Confusions of a Civil war, there is a Necessity of some settlement, and
it can not in reason, be imagined, (the Controversy being determined by the
sword) that the Conquerers should submit to the conquered, though more in
number then themselves. Nor are they obliged to settle the Government again
according to the former Laws; and Constitutions, but may erect such a form as
they themselves conceive most convenient for their own preservation. For after
a Civil war the written Laws (viz. established Laws of the Nation) are of no
force, but only those which are not written. (And a little after) The King
having by Right of war, lost his share and interest in Authority, and power,
being conquered, by Right of war the whole must needs reside in that part of
the People which prevailed over him: There being no middle power to make any
claim, and so the whole Right of Kingly Authority in England being by Military
Decision resolved into the prevaling Party, what Government soever it pleases
them to erect, is as valide de Jure, as if it had the consent of the whole Body
of the People. That he should affirm That after a Civil war the Established
Laws cease: is so gross a piece of Ignorance, that there is hardly any
History extant but confutes it; After our Barons war and the Civil war
between York and Lancaster, Our Established Laws flourished; so did they after
the Norman Conquest. How many Civil Wars in France have left their Laws
untouched? That of the Holy League lasted 40 years, Belgia keeps her Laws
maugre her intestine Wars: What is now become of the Parliaments declared
Supreme power and Sovereign Lord the People, the Original and Fountain of all
Just power? are they not all here proclaimed Ear-bored slaves for ever? But I
had thought that an Army of Mercinary Saints raised, paid and commissioned by
the Parliament to defend the Religion, Laws, Liberties and Properties of the
People; and the Kings Crown and Dignity, according to the Protestation and
Covenant: and the Parliaments Declarations, would not have made such Carnal and
Hypocritical use of their Victories gotten by Gods Providence and the Peoples
Money, as to destroy our known Laws, Liberties, and Properties, and claim by
Conquest, and impose their own lusts, for Laws upon us, Thereby rendering
themselves Rebels against their God, their King and Country. Nor was it ever
the State of the Quarrel between the King and Parliament whose Slaves the
People should be? Or whether we should have one King, Governing by the known,
established Laws? or 40 Tyrants Governing by their own lusts and Arbitrary
votes, against our written Laws? Nor can the success make a Conquest just,
unless the cause of the war were Originally just, and the prosecution thereof
justly managed. As 1. To vindicate a Just Claim and Title. 2. Ad res
repetendas. To recover Damages wrongfully sustained. 3. To repel an Injury
done to your self, or to your Ally in league with you.

The ultimate end of these wicked Endeavors is, To establish and cement with
the blood of their Adversaries, the Kingdom of the Brambles or Saints; already
founded in blood. By cutting off all such by their said New Acts of Treason and
High Court of Justice, as will not bow their Necks to their Iron yoke. Which
appears more clearly in an Additionall Act giving farther power to the said
High Court, (dated 27. Aug. 1650.) To hear and determine all Misprisions or
concealments of Treasons mentioned or contained in any of the said Articles or
Acts of Parliaments: And to inflict such punishments and award such execution,
as by the Laws and Statutes have bin, or may be, inflicted. This Law (if I
miscall it not) considering how they have multiplied Treasons by their said 3
New Statutes, 14. May. 17. July 1649. and 26 March 1650. Whereby bare words
without Act are made High Treason; Contrary to those well approved Statutes.
25. Ed. III. chap. 2. 1. Hen. IV. chap. 10. 1. Edw. VI. chap. 12. I. Mariae
chap. 1. Cook 3. Instit. says, That words may make an Heretic, not a
Traitor, Chap. High Treason. And the Scripture denounces a woe to him; That
makes a man an Offender for a word) is one of the cruelst, and most generally
dangerous and entrapping that ever was made. For hereby all Relations; Husband
and Wife; Parents and Children; Brothers and Sisters, Masters and Servants are
all enjoined to be informers against, and Accusors of one another (which is to
take upon them the Devils Office (and be, Accusatores Fratrum) for light and
vain words spoken only in Passion or ignorantly: or else they fall into the
Jaws of this alldevouring Court (from whence, no more then from Hell, there is
no Redemption) for Misprision of Treason: the Penalty whereof is loss of
Liberty and Lands for life; and of Goods for ever, Who can imagine less
heerby, but that our Statistes intend to raise a yearly revenue by this Court,
by Forfeitures and Confiscations: and to erect an Office of Master of the
States Forfeitures: like Empsons and Dudleis in Hen. VII. time aforesaid. 10.
Dec. 1650. a New Act passed, for establishing an High Court of Justice in
Norfolk, Suffolk, Huntington, Cambridge, Lincoln and the Isle of Ely, etc. And
so by degrees this gangrene shall enlarge it self all the Kingdom over.
And so continue this Court, to weed out the Ancient Inhabitants Cananites
and Amalechites. The said Additional Act, 27. Aug. 1650. concludes, That the
said High Court shall not examine, Try or proceed against any Person other then
such as shall be first by name appointed by the Parliament or Counsel of State.
It should seem the Parliament and Counsel of State supply the want of a Grand
Enquest; and their Appointment is in stead of a Bill of Enditement found and
presented. As assuredly as The High Inquisition was erected in Spain by
Firdinando and Isabella to extirpate the Mohammedan Moors: And the said Council
of Blood in the Low Countries, by the Duke D'Alva to weed out the Lutherans,
Calvinistes and Anabaptists. So is this High Court set up in England to root
out the Royallistes, Presbyterians and Levellors; and generally all that will
not wholly concur with our Independents in Practice and Opinions. As will
manifestly appear when their work is don in Scotland, which will soon be
effected: the more zealous Scots being now as ready to sell their Kingdom; as
they wear formerly to sell their King.

I Conclude therefore upon the Reasons aforesaid; That because the
Commissioners or Judges are not sworn to do Justice according to the Laws: And
are Parties pre-in-gaged (as well as their Masters, and Pay-Masters, that named
them) ignorant men, and of vild and base professions incapable of places of
Judicature, Necessitous Persons, and some of them Scandalous; and the High
Court it self has neither Law, President, nor any just Authority for
Constituting thereof or the Judges therein. And all proceedings before them are
directly Contrary to Magna Charta, the Statut. 25. Edw. III. chap. 2. The
Petition of Right and all other known and Established Laws, and the continual
Practice of our Nation; and (in many Points (Contrary to the Law of God and the
Dictates of Right Reason. That these Commissioners are Incompetent Judges;
Their Court an Extrajudicial Conventicle, tending to disinherite, disfranchise
and enslave all the Freemen of the Nation; and all Proceedings before them are
void and Coram non Judice, See Col, Andrews. 3. Answers, The said High Court of
Justice to be a mere bloody Theater of Murder and Oppression. It being against
Common Reason, and all Laws Divine and Humane, That any man should be Judge in
his own Cause. Neminem posse in sua Causa Judicem esse. Is the Rule in Law. But
this Parliament and Counsel of State know they can not establish and confirm
their usurped Tyranny, (The Kingdom of the Saints,) ea^e up the People with
Taxes, and share Public Lands, Offices and Money amongst themselves: enslave
the Nation to their Lawles wills and Pleasures, but by cutting off the most
able and active men of all opposite Parties by some such expedient as this
Arbitrary Lawless High Court is. The old Legal way by Juries (being found by
John Lilbourns Trial) to be neither sure enough nor speedy enough to do their
work. A Butcher-Rowe of Judges being easier packed, then a Jury who may be
challenged. So that it fares with the People of England, as with a Traviler
fallen into the hands of Thieves. First they take away his Purse, And then, to
secure themselves, they take away his life. So they Rob him by Providence,
And then Murder him by Necessity. And (to bring in their Third Insisting
Principle) they may allege; They did all this upon Honest Intentions; to
enrich the Saints and robb the Egiptians. With these 3. Principles they Justify
all their Villainies. Which is an Invention so merely their own, That the Devil
must acknowledge: They have propagated his Kingdom of Sin and Death more by
their Impudent Justifications, then by their Turbulent Actions.

An Additional Postscript.
SInce the Conclusion of the Premises has happened, the Trial of that worthy
Knight Sr. John Stowell of the County of Sommerset: Who having bin often before
this Court, has so well defended himself, and wiped off all Objections, and
made such good use of the Articles of the Rendition of Excester, that in the
Opinion of all men, and in despite of their ensnaring Acts for New Treasons, he
can not be adjudged guilty of any Treason, Old or New, which was the Sum and
Complement of the Charge against him. Wherefore the Court put off his Trial for
a longer time, to hunt for New Crimes and witnesses against him. At last came
into the Court as a witness John Ash, notwithstanding he is a Party many ways
engaged against him. 1. Ash is a Parliament man; in which capacity Sr. John
Stowell bore Arms for the King against him. 2ly. Ash as a Parliament man is
one of the constitutors of this Murderous Court and the Judges thereof, and
therefore their Creatures (who expect rewards from them) bear a more awful
respect to his testimony, then a witness ought to have from Judges. 3ly. It is
publicly known that Ash has begged of the House a great sum of money out of
the Composition for, or Confiscation of Sr. John's Estate. And 4ly. It is known
to many That during Sr. John's many years Imprisonment Ash often labored with
Sr. John to sell unto him for 4000l. a Parcel of Land which cost Sr. John above
10000l. promising him to pass his Composition at an easy rate, to procure his
enlargement from prison, and send him home in peace and quiet if he granted his
desire. But although with all their malicious diligence, they cannot find him
guilty of High Treason, yet their Articles of Impeachment Charge him in general
Terms with Treason, Murder, Felony and other High Crimes and Misdemeaners; and
amasse together such a Sozites and and Accumulation of Offenses as if one fail
another shall hit right to make him punnishable in one kind or other: such a
hailshot charge cannot wholly miss; either they will have life, estate, or
both; Contrary to the Nature of all Enditements and Criminal Charges
whatsoever; which ought to be particular, clear and certain (Lamb: page 487)
that the accused may know for what Crime he puts himself upon Issue, But this
Court (as High as it is) not being Constituted a Court of Record; the
Prisoner, and those that are concerned in him, can have no Record to resort
to either. 1. To demand a writ of Error, in Case of Erroneous Judgment. 2. To
ground a plea of Auterfois Acquit, in Case of New Question for the same fact.
3ly. Or to demand an Enlargement upon Acquitall. or 4ly. To demand a writ of
conspiracy, against such as have combined to betray the life of an Innocent
man. Whereby it follows; That this prodigious Court has power only to
Condemn and Execute; not to Acquit and give Enlargement; Contrary to the
Nature of all Courts of Judicature, and of Justice it self: it is therefore a
mere Slaughter - house to Commit Free - State Murders in, without, nay against
Law and Justice: and not a Court of Judicature; to condemn the Nocent, and
absolve the Innocent. And the Judges of this Court run Parallel with their
Father the Devil; who is ever the Minister of Gods wrath and fury; never of
his Mercy.

The humble Answer of Col. Eusebius Andrews Esquier, to the Proceedings
against him before the Honorable, The high Court of Justice 1650.
THe said Respondent (with favor of this Honorable Court) reserving and
praying to be allowed, the benefit and Liberty of making farther Answer, if it
shall be adjudged necessary, offers to his Honorable Court.

That by the Stat. or Charter styled Magna Charta, (which is the Fundamental
Law, and ought to be the Standard of the Laws of England, Confirmed above 30
times, and yet unrepealed, it is in the 29 Chapter thereof granted and enacted.

1. That no Freeman shall be taken or imprisoned, or be disseised of his
Freehold or Liberties, or Free Customs; or be outlawed or exiled, or any other
ways destroyed, Nor, we shall not pass upon him, but by a lawful Judgment
of his Peers, or by the Law of the Land.

2. We shall sell to no man, nor defer to any man Justice or Right.

By the Stat. 42. Ed. III. chap. III. The Great Charter is commanded to be kept
in all Points: and it is enacted.

That if any Stat. be made to the Contrary, That shall be holden for none.

By the Act 26. March 1650. entitled, An Act for Establishing, An High Court
of Justice. Power is given to this Court; To Try, Condemn and Cause Execution
of death to be done, upon the Freemen of England, according as the Major Number
of any 12 of the Members thereof shall Judge to appertein to Justice.

And thereupon the Respondent does humbly infer, and affirm, that the Tenor
of the said Act is diametrically opposite to, and inconsistent with the said
Great Charter. And is therefore by the said recited Stat. 42. Ed. III. to be
holden for none.

Secondly, That it can with no more Reason, Equity or Justice, hold the
reputation or value of a Law, (if the said Stat. had not bin) then if (contrary
to the 2d. Clause of the 29. chap. of Magna Charta) it had bin also enacted,
That Justice and Right shall be deferred to all Freemen and sold to all that
will buy it.

By the Petition of Right, 3o. Car: upon premising: That contrary to the Great
Charter, Trials and Executions had bin had and don against the Subjects, by
Commissions Martial, etc. it was thereby prayed, and by Commission enacted.
That:

1. No Commissions of the like nature might be thenceforth issued, etc.

2. To prevent least any of the Subjects should be put to death, Contrary to
the Laws and Franchises of the Land.

The Respondent hereupon Humbly observes; and affirms: That this Court is
(though under a different style) in nature, and in the Proceedings thereby
directed, the same with a Commission Martial. The Freemen thereby being to be
tried for life, and adjudged by the Opinion of the Major Number of the
Commissioners sitting, as in Courts of Commissioners Martial was practiced;
and was agreeable to their Constitution: And consequently against the Petition
of Right: in which he, and all the Freemen of England (if it be granted there
be any such) has and have Right and Interest, and he humbly claims his Right
accordingly.

By the Declarations of this Parliament, Dec. 15. and Jan. 17. 1641. The
benefit of the Laws, and the ordinary Course of Justice are the Subjects
Birthright.

By the Declarations 12. July 16. October. 1642. The prosecution of the Laws, and
due administration of Justice, are owned to be the justifying cause of the war,
and the end of the Parliaments Affairs managed by their Swords and Counsels,
and Gods curse is by them imprecated, in case they should ever decline those
ends.

By the Declaration 17. April 1646. Promise was made not to interrupt the
Course of Justice, in the ordinary Courts.

By the Ordinance or Votes of Non-addresses, Ian. 1648. It is assured, That,
though they lay aside the King; yet they will govern by the Laws, and not
interrupt the course of Justice, in the ordinary Courts thereof. They forget
the 2. Declarations 9. Febr. 17. March 1648.


And therefore this Respondent humbly averreth and affirms, That the
constitution of this Court, is a breach of the Public Faith of the Parliament
exhibited and pledged in those Declarations and Votes to the Freemen of England.

And upon the whole matter, the Respondent (saving as aforesaid) does affirm
for Law and claims as is Right. That:

1. This Court in defect of the validity of the said Act, by which it is
constituted, has no power to proceed against him, or to press him to a
further Answer.

2. That by virtue of Magna Charta, the Petition of Right and the before
recited Declarations, he ought not to be proceeded against in this Court; but
by an ordinary Court of Justice, and to be tried by his Peers.

And humbly prays: That this his present Answer and Salvo may be accepted and
registered. Eusebius Andrews.

The Second Answer of Col. Eusebius Andrews Esquire, To the Honorable, The High
Court of Justice. 1650.
THe said Respondent (with the Favor of this Honorable Court) reserving and
praying to be allowed the Benefit, and Liberty of making further Answer, if it
shall be Necessary. In all humbleness for the present Answer offers to this
Honorable Court.

That by the Letter and genuine sense of the Act entitled An Act for
establishing an High Court of Justice. The said Court is not qualified to try a
Freeman of England (such as the Respondent averreth himself to be for life in
Case of Treason.

For that: 1. The said Court is not Constituted a Court of Record; neither has
Commission returnable into a Court of Record.

So that: 1. The State cannot upon Record (and but upon Record cannot at all)
have that Account of their Freemen, which Kings were wont to have of their
Subjects, and States exact else where at the hands of their Ministers of
Justice.

2. The Freemen, and those who are or may be concerned in him, can have no
Record to resort to, by which to preserve the Rights due to him and them
respectively. viz.

1. A writ of Error in case of erroneous Judgment.

2. A plea of Auterfoies acquit, in case of new question for the same fact.

3. An Enlargement upon Acquitall.

4. A Writ of Conspiracy, not to be brought until Acquitall, against those who
have practiced to betray the life of the Respondent.

1. The Writ of Error is due by presidents.

Paschae 39. Ed. III. John of Gaunts Case Rot. Parliament. 4. Ed. III. Number. 13.
Count de Arundells Case. Rot. Parliament 42. Ed. III. Number. 23. Sr. John of Lees
Case.

2. Auterfois acquit appears by:

Wetherell and Darleis Case. 4. Rep. 43. Eliz. Vaux his Case. 4. Rep. 33. Eliz.

3. The Enlargement appears by:

Stat. 14. Hen. VI. chap. 1. Diers Reports fol. 121. The year book of Ed. IV.
10. fol. 19.

4. The writ of Conspiracy, by:

The Poulters Case. 9, Rep. fol. 55.

This Court is to determine at a day; without account of their proceedings, and
have power to try, judge, and cause Execution: but not to acquit or give
Enlargement. So that the nocent are thereby punishable; the injured and
betrayed not vindicable. Which are defects incompatible with a Court of
Justice, and inconsistent with Justice it self; and the honor of a Christian
Nation and Commonwealth.

2. The members of this Court, are by the said Act directed to be sworn.

1. Not in Conspectu populi; for the Freemans satisfaction.

2. Not in words of Indifferency and obliging in equality.

3. But in words of manifest partiality, viz.

You shall swear; That you shall well and truly, according to the best of your
skill and knowledge, execute the several powers given you by this Act.

1. If the Court be Triers and Judges too, it is humbly offered by the
respondent, that it is but reasonable; that they should be sworn as Triers; in
the sight of the Freeman who shall be upon his Trial.

2. And, That as Justices of Oyer and Terminer (They being authorized to hear
and determine by the words of the Act. They should take an oath, such as is
usual and equal, set down E. III Viz: You shall swear, That well and lawfully
you shall serve our Lord the King, and his People in the Office of Justice,
etc. And that you deny to no man Common Right.

3. Or that this Court (taking Notice of such high matters as Treason, upon the
guilt whereof the Freemens life depends) should take an Oath (at least) as
equal as a Justice of the Peace. Daltons Just. of Peace, fol. 13. the words
are.

I A. B. do swear that I will do equal Right, etc. according to my best wit,
cunning and power, after the Laws and Customs of the Land, and the Statutes
thereof made, etc.

4. If the Court will be Judges and Triers too: (for they have power given them
to conclude the Freemen, by the opinion of the major number of twelve, holding
some resemblance (but with a signal difference) with the verdict of a Jury) it
were but reasonable that they should take an Oath correspondent to that usually
administered to Iury-men. The words are,

You shall well and truly try, and true deliverance make, between the Keepers
of the Liberties of England, and the Prisoner at the Bar, according to your
Evidence. So help you God, etc.

5. When this Court (as it is now constituted) has condemned a Freeman, by
applying their skill and knowledge to the power given them, whether justly or
not: the Oath enjoined them by the Act 26. March 1650. is not broken,
literally; as to be exactible by man, though God will have a better account.

And therefore upon the whole matter premised: The Respondent (saving as
before) averreth for Law and Reason; This Court by the words of the Act
constituting it; is not qualified, (in respect of the objected defects) to
pass upon him for life in case of Treason. And prays this his 2l. Answer may
be received, with the Salvo's, and registered.

Eusebius Andrews.

The third Answer of Col. Eusebius Andrews Esquire, to the Honorable, The High
Court of Justice 1650.
THe said Respondent (with favor of this Honorable Court) reserving and
praying to be allowed the benefit and Liberty of making farther Answer, if it
shall be necessary, in all humbleness for present Answer offers to this
Honorable Court,

1. That it is his Right (if he admit this Court to be duly and legally
established, and constituted as to their being a Court) to be tried by his
Peers; men of his own condition and Neighborhood.

2. That it is within the power of this Court, by the Letter of the Act 26.
March 1650. Or (at least) not repugnant to the Act; to try him by such his
Peers, etc.

1. That it is his Right to be tried only so, appears by: Mazna Charta chap.
29. 25. Ed. 3. chap. 9. 28. Ed. 3. chap. 4. 42. Ed. 3. chap. 3. 25. Ed. 1.
chap. 1. and 2. 25. Ed. 3. chap. 2. and 4. 37. Ed. 3. chap. 18.


By all which this Right is maintainable; And the Proceedings contrary
thereunto will be held for none, and to be redressed as void and erroneous.

So that if the Laws and Courts were not obstructed in the cases of some sort
of Freemen of England, the whole proceedings contrary to these Laws without a
Jury of his Peers, were avoidable and reversable by Writ of Error, as appears
by the Presidents vouched in the Respondents 2d. Answer.

3. That it is in the Courts power, To try the Freeman, and consequently the
Respondent by a Jury, of his Equals; The Court is humbly desired to consider
the words of qualification.

1. The Court is authorized; To hear and Determine: and so (if at all
Commissioners) then Commissioners of Oyer and Terminer, and such Commissioners,
in their natural Constitution and practical execution, do proceeed against
Freemen according to Law by a Jury of their Peers, and not otherwise.

2. Authorized to proceed to Trial, Condemnation and Execution: But not
restrained to the manner limitative: As, to Trial by the Opinion of the Court,
as Triers. Nor exclusive, As, to Trial per pares. But is left in the Manner,
as in the Judgment it self, To the Opinion of the major part of 12. and if
they shall think fit to try by a Jury, it will be no offense against the Act,
there being no prohibition to the contrary.

And though this Respondent insisteth upon his said Right, consisting with the
Courts said power, and the more to induce the Court to grant him his said
Right; He humbly represents the wrong done to himself, and in him to the
Freemanzy of England in the following particulars, against their just Rights
depending upon such Trialls to be allowed or denied.

1. Challenges to his Triers peremptory, or with cause of Challenge.

2. Seeing, hearing, and Counter-questioning the witnesses for clearing of the
Evidence; in matter of Fact and Circumstance.

3. The being convicted or acquitted by a Full and fully consented verdict.

To all which benefits as his undoubted Right, and the Right of all the Freemen
of England, the Respondent makes claim by these Reasons, Laws and Presidents
following.

1. The benefit of Challenges by the learning of Stanford in his Pleas of the
Crown, Title Challenge fol. 150. To Challenge 35. without Reason showed; and
with Reason shown, without Number Adjudged 32. Hen. VI. in Poinings case,
abriged by Fitzherb. Tit. Challenge, fol. 26. allowed in Hillary 1. Iac. S^.
Walter Rawley and Brooks.

2. To the hearing and questioning the value and weight of the witnesses. The
Laws are plain in Stanfords pleas of the Crown fol. 163. 164. Stat. 1. and 2.
of Phil. and Mary, Chap. 10, 11. 1 Ed. VI. chap. 12. Cooks 3. Institut. page
12. upon the words in the St. 25. Ed. III. chap. 2. (Provablement atteint)
Because the punishment was heavy, the proof must be punctual, and not upon
presumptions or Inferences or streins of wit, nor upon Arguments simili, or
Minori ad Majus, etc. But upon good and clear proofs, made good also by the
Stat. 1. Ed. c. 6. 19. Ed. c. 1.

3. A verdict by Jury passes from all, or not at all, In this way of
proceeding by the Court immediately: it passes by way of concurrence (or
voting) the great fault found with the Star Chamber; and all Commissionary
Courts, proceeding without presentment or or Enditement.

4. A Verdict passes from a Jury before discharged, upon their Affairs of
business, or supplies of Nature; to prevent corruption by money or power. In this
way of Trial a man may be heard to day, and a Sentence given at leisure, when
the power and will of those by whom the Freeman is prosecuted, be first known.
And from such a proceeding this Respondent can hope little equality; he being
(to his knowledge) forejudged already by them.

And therefore (if at all this Honorable Court think fit to proceed to a
Trial, of this Respondent) he claims the Benefit of Trial per pares: by
Evidence viva voce. And rests on the Opinion of the Court; saving (as formerly)
Liberty of farther Answer, if over ruled.

And prays that this his Answer and Salvos may be accepted and Registered.
Eusebius Andrews.


