THE VVITTY JESTS AND Mad Pranks OF JOHN FRITH Commonly called, The
Merry-Conceited-MASON, Brother and Fellow-Traveller WITH Captain James Hind
The Famous High-way-Man.

LONDON, Printed for Tho. Passenger, at the Three Bibles upon the middle of
London Bridge. 1673.

And first of his Birth and Boys Tricks.
LIeutenant John Frith, which is the subject of our following Discourse, was
born at Deep Dalle in Derbyshire, of honest paren^age, his Father being a free
Ma^on, and brought him up to his Latin, and to write all hands usual, intending
to send him to the University, he was an excellent Mason; having such good
par^s he grew proud, and lighting into bad company, being kept short of money,
and took wild courses; he then studies how to compass money to spend, and
chose vile company rather then the University or his trade; being for his
Mirth, Birth and Trade, called The Merry conceited Mason.

How he feasted his Fellows at another time*
HE and his Fellows being in an Inn, having been very merry, and their coin
growing very short, and being very hungry, they knew not how to get a dinner,
but John that was quick-witted, soon contrived how to get one. In that Inn was
a Wedding kept, with variety of good cheer, so soon as dinner was set on the
table, one of his Accomplices went out into the yard, se^^ two Mastiff dogs
together by the ^are, hollo^^, calls his fellows to see the sport, which
stirred not, then run all the people out both the family and stran^ers, in runs
his friend, l^cks the door in merriment, keeps all out till they had din's;
then opened the door, permitting them to take the rest; and to make themselves
more spor, in the dead of the night they took a ca^, shoes her with
Walnut-shells ^^^'d with pitch, ties a Bell about her neck, and turns her into
the Bridegrooms Chamber, which made such harmony that affrighted both the Bride
and Bridegroom.

How he furnished himself with moneys at a Tavern.
JOhn being at a Fair, and in a gallant Guard, espied some Graziers and other
Contrymen telling fifty pounds upon a table in a Tavern where they were
drinking, the one party would not receive it except more were added to it, the
other would not take it back again, saying, it was his bargain; whilst they
were thus contending, in steps Frith, str^kes the moneys suddenly, being most
of it gold, into his hat, runs out at the door, draws his sword, betakes him to
his heels cries An Arrest, An Arrest, runs to his horse, mounts and out-r;ides
them all, thus bought he fifty pounds at a Fair.

An Excellent Prank performed by Frith amongst four Bears.
There was a Bearward that kept four lusty Bears, with whom he traveled the
Country, and coming where Frith at that time lay with his Accomplices to catch a
Purchase. It being Fairtime, the Bears were tied in a great barn on the
outside of the town, close to an house that sold Ale; they to make themselves
sport ^^ls two marrow-bones with honey, casts them between two and two, sets
them all to sighting, and then whipped them, having first placed themselves upon a
beam; but in conclusion the bears brake loose, and made at their new game, the
Whip^^ers take their heels, and escaped very narrowly with their lives, the
Bears brake into the Alehouse, pulled down the drink, pulled out the caps; eat
up all the raw meat, brake down an Oven, pulled out the bread: all this while
the Bear wards were drunk, and knew nothing; but missing the bears in the
Morning, found them as drunk as they themselves were overnight, and was forced
to pay for the loss the house sustained.

How he served one Anthony Topley which led a Bear about the Country.
ONe Anthony Topley that lived once a Bisley, having a small parcel of Land
let him by his Father, sold the same, and bought with that moneys a great
Year, and a Bear-dog, and hired a man to travel with him; one time, lodging by
a Market Town in the night* his bear brake into the Ale-Cellar, and drank as
long as he could find the way up into a Chamber or loft finds a bed, lies down
upon it, and falls asleep; it happened that a man and two women lay in that bed;
they waked, feeling so heavy a weight upon their feet, and having such strong
puffings, put forth their hands to feel what it was, and by the (...) and
roughness, their actions being (...) concluded it to be the devil, and so (...)
all (...) cross the house; and (...) being (...), cried out in a most horrible
manner The devil, the devil, the devil, help Neighbors, good Neighbors help;
John that was su^pected to let the bear loose* bring^ in the Watch, where they
found (...) drunk, and the three in the (...) rehearsed* all three was sent to
Bridewel ^o beat hemp.

How he found the aforesaid Topley with his Bear.
FRith, as is before rehearsed, being taxed for letting the bear loose, sought
revenge on Topley, and so dissembled the m^^^er, that he pro^^r'd assistance to
(...), and traveling from Stableforth to Nottingham in hot weather, between
Bramcote and Hemlock-hills, his bear being lazy, went into a Pond, and was hard
to be gotten forth again: John with his three Gentlemen, riding (...) after,
(...) the Bear laid down at the end of he fallow lands, where the husbandmen
were plowing, persuades him to have him drawn by horses, immediately appear a
kennel of hounds hunting the Hare on Bramcote-hills with open cry: Anthony
fearing his bear would be torn in pieces by the hounds, gave a shilling to the
Plough-men, they clapped on their Plough-chains on the bears collar, lashes their
horses, John and his men hollow, the bear roars and foams, the horse^ hearing
so hideous a noise, smelling such a terrible stink, run a full mile toward
Lenton, then stopped at a gate that goes into Lenton fields, just opposite to
Woollerton-Hall, which is said to have as many windows in it as there are days
in the year; but coming up to the bear they found him as dead as all herring,
his head plucked clear from his shoulders, but John rid strait away to
Nottingham; upon this the free-school-boys made these verses following, Anthony
Topley that unluckie heir,
Sold his land and bought a bear;
He went to Nottingham to tan his skin,
To make a bag to beg bread in.


A merry Jest how he hunted the squirril.
ON a time he with several Gentlemen went to hunt the squirril, a rare sport in
our Country, and having a simple fellow in their company, he promised the
fel^ow the first Squirril they caught, but did not, notwithstanding the fellow
claimed promise; the next Squirril they took fell down at the feet of the dogs
in a Cock gload seeming dead; John knowing their natures, took the Squirril by
the nape of the neck, gives her into the hand of Martin, for so was the fellow
named; the Squirril finding ease and liberty swallows the lower part of his
hane, that her teeth met; but Martin striving to th^ke her off she stuck the
faster, till the smart forced him to cry out with vehemence, I Will none of her,
I Will none of her, I Will none of her; after much mirth and laughter they look the
Squirril off.

Martin at that time deeply swore,
He never would hunt the Squirril more.
How he came to London, and cheated an Upholster of a great sum.
After this he came to London, and lodged in the house of an Upholster in the
suburbs, pretending great dealings in the Country for diverse commodities, and
so demeaned himself, as none mistrusted him paying justly for every thing; not
a boy sent of an errant, but he gave him a good reward; no linen washed but he
pa^d nobly, never was seen to be disguised in drink, his Landlady being a lusty
lively young woman, beautiful and fair, to color his design the better, he
made much of his Landlord; if he went to the Alehouse or the Tavern he paid
his R^ckoning for him; he never went without his pockets well lined with Gold
and silver; but time emptied his pockets* and now he must replenish, or of
necessity perish: Where came a pack^t of Letters to his hand from West-Chester*
signifying that there was an hundred and fifty pounds lay ready, if he would
come and receive the some, and withal to bring down forty pounds worth of
Goods more, and receive all his moneys together: then showed he these Letters
to his Landlord, to confirm his belief, borrows forty pounds of him to buy
these Goods, persuades him to hire two horses to carry them both down, and
traveling to West-Chester, took up their Inn: John enquires if such a
Gentleman was not yet come, naming a person of quality, Answer was returned he
had not been there yet, then he stormed, saying, he promised to meet me here
about the time; then hespake be a large Supper, saying, that he expected some
friends to sup with him, calls for wine in abundance for the Londoner; this
done, he goes to the Stable, hires a Boy to conduct him to the forenamed
Gentleman's house, takes both the horses with the Portmantues a mile out of the
town, dismisses the boy, and returns no more to the Vpholster, leaving him to
buy another horse, and look for his money.

How he left one horse and gained another.
IT fortuned in a skirmish between four thieves, and six true men, one of
Friths Accomplices had his horse shot under him; he sets his wits at work to get
another, and heard that a Parson whom he hated was to ride eight miles to
preach a Funeral Sermon; caused his pretended servant to travel on foot to a
convenient place by the way-side: the Parson rid upon a lusty gray Mare, and
John upon a black horse as black as Iet, and himself all in black from head to
foot, with a coal-black Periwig: his horse can full speed with all his vigor
and strength to cover the Mare, and did so be-clout the Parson with his iron
(...) was, that he almost killed him, and so falling from the beast, the
Footman pretending pity, came and took the Mare away to k^ep her from danger;
but the Parson loves not a stone-horse to this very day.

Set a Knave to catch a Knave.
IT happened that in a Countrey-town where John lay in the time of the wars,
being then a Lieutenant, that he noted the passages between a young couple, and
it was thus, an ancient rich Gentleman had married a very fair and beautiful
young woman, which before had many Suitors, one of the which, though he was a
married man, did often frequent her company; and walking into the Orchard to
solace themselves, free from all company, under a fair pear tree, whose fruit
was much coveted; it happened that a Schoolboy went up in a Moon-wine night, to
fill two Satchels with pears. After him came Frith, pretending for to steal
pears, the boy fearing that he would beat him, supposing him to belong to the
Orchard, begged pardon, it was granted, and Silence commanded: immediately came
this young Gallant and his young Gentlewoman just under the pear tree, where
the man threw by his weaver-hat, pulls out his purse of moneys, knife and keys,
pulls off his coat, spreads it upon the ground to keep his Ladies clothes
clean, lays her upon it, and to Venus sport they go with joy and great delight,
(...) made John's (...) water; and having no longer power to forbear, with
violence threw down a Satchel of pears upon them, then another, saying, then
take the bags, the pears and all, then in all haste lept down out of the tree;
but this couple supposing the devil to be there, ran with all speed away,
leaving the hat, coat, knife* keys and moneys behind, next Sabbath John went
to the Parish Church in that hat and coat, but the loser durst never own it.

Of a merry Jest at a Wakes.
IT happened that these four Gallants went to a Country- Wakes to be merry,
where there was much dancing, and Music; in the midst of this jollity he spied
a young man sitting in a corner, with his hand upon or in a young woman's
placket, one of his Accomplices called to him, demanding what sign to meet at
next, he replied with a loud voice, looking them full in their faces, saying,
At the sign of the hand in Placket: At this the Youth removes his hand, Hold,
hold, (^a^s John) Friend, if you remove the sign, we shall not know the house;
this caused much laughter through the whole multitude of Guests.

How he made Captain Hind merry when Melancholy.
IT fell out suddenly after that he came to live with Captain James Hind his
Master, who fell into a great Melancholy, whereupon certain of the Society
carried both Master and Man into a Tavern, where was variety of Music, Wine
and good Cheer in abundance, not could not all this avail to make Hind once
for to smile: but his man professed, as he was a true man, an honest man, and a
Gentleman, if he could not make his Master laugh, and forsake his humor of
Melancholy, his Master should se^k a new man, and he for his own part would
seek a new Master within two days: the Musicians went to dinner, John privately
carried all their Fiddle-cases into a back-room, and unloo^'d a (...) into
every one of them: then he called for a lesson, that he nor none never heard,
but they could not answer his expectation: then he ^aused them to be dismissed,
and putting up (...) Instruments they depart: but ^^fore they went to the
Sta^^^^^^, he called them again, ^aying, Ihave it, I have it, Come, play it
quickly, whilst it is in my mind, Play me, The Case is Altered, or, All-turd;
then they brought forth their Instruments, which was so foully bewrayed, that
it caused Captain Hind to laugh so heartily, and all the whole Company, that
they w^r^ forced to hold him in his Chair: so John had five pounds given him
for his pains, for the quick curing of his Master.

How he Cheated an Innkeeper of forty pounds.
THe Merry conceited Mason traveled in the habit, and went by the name of a
rich Countrey-Grazier, well known in London, and at such time as he know he was
not in London, came into an Inn. calls for Beer, drinks with the Innkeeper: in
comes one of his Accomplices in the habits of a Drover, stands bare to him, and
is very observant; Why, How now, Ned, says he, what good News have thon
brought? how far are my cattle off? what time will they be here to night? Sir,
said Ned, two of the biggest oxen, the brended and the black one are both
fallen lame, and it is well if they get to London time enough for the next
Market; than demanded he, if such a Friend of his were come to town, naming a
rich Grazier. Ned said no, for some of his were fallen sick also, and he stayed
to come along with the cattle; then he ^^ampt, protesting he must pay one
hundred pounds the next day before Sunset upon bond, and as yet he had but
fourscore; the Innkeeper by their discourse thought be could not have less
then four hundred pounds worth of cattle coming out of the country lent him
forty pounds; he promised payment next day, but never came.

How he caught a silver Bird of great value
JOHN being in London in a gallant garb passing along, espied a silver Flagon
standing on a Court-Cupboard, a young Gentlewoman being at door, he pretended
his bird flew in, she gave him admitance, be thanked her, but the silver flagon
was never heard of.

How he Cheated a Grazier's Wife of an Hundred pounds.
THe merry conceited Mason being quite out of moneys, in a gallant Garb,
traveled the Country to find out adventures to gain a considerable sum of
money in a short time, lodging in an Inn where the greatest booty was likely to
be had, drinking his pot, heard the discourse betwixt a Grazier and a farmer,
the Grazier had bought cattle of the Farmer that came to 100 l. but had not
money, but told the Farmer when he came from home be left word with his wife,
that if he bought a bargain, he would send a Messenger for a hundred pounds by
such a token, with such a receipt with his own hand to it, that it is impossible
any should deceive her; John seeing what hand he writ, and having the tenor of
the Receipt, gets into a back-room, takes horse, having time by the forelock,
comes to the woman, and tells her, that he came from her husband, her husband
was well, and lodged in such an Inn, he had bought a great bargain of cattle,
and hoped to gain twenty pounds by it, tells her all the tokens: She demands
why her husband sent such a one as he was for the moneys (...) himself by a
great Gentleman's (...) dwelt there, said, it was because (...) more conscience
(...) him ^uen (...) other, and that he had deal with him (...) hundreds of
pounds; (...) you this, said he; (...) said the good wife, and so (...) him an
hundred pounds, (...), and left (...), but never came to (...) any more.

How he and his two Accomplices robb^d a Gentleman and his Man of three hundred
pounds, and repaid it again at that time.
He and two of his Accomplices met a Gentleman and his man upon a Plain, that had
three hundred pounds in two Port^^^^^^, that they received for Kent, set upon
them both, but the servingman stood at a distance, beholding his Master fight
valiantly, crying, Ah, well fought, Master; Ah, bravely fought, Master; (...)
came to help him; the Gentle(...) him for it: so I will, said one; riding up
toward him took away his Portmantue, then beats him with the flat side of his
sword, the man cried, You Rogue, do you take away my money, and then beat me;
What, you think to serve me as you did my Master, but I Will see you hanged
first; then draws his sword, fought (...), the rest standing amazed the (...)
wounded the Chief, so that he (...), then thrust his sword into the Flanck of
the horse: then said the Gentleman, being my Man will fight we will try our
Fortunes for our moneys: Mason sets upon the Gentleman, the other upon his man,
the skirmish was maintained with courage on both sides, that it was doubtful,
but his man cuts one of the Thieves over the pate, he tumbles, and was
incapable to fight: turn both sets upon the Masers, (...) compelled him to
return the moneys: the Mason requested friendship, and so they agreed not to
discover them, carries the worst wounded man behind the Gentleman's Man to an
Inn, where they set up their horses and their woman (...) together, and in the
(...) brake fast together, swore secrecy in each other with promise not to
discover them, and the Gentleman never to be robbed, ride what road he will,
using only a byword.

How they rob^d a man of two hundred pounds, and paid it again at six months.
Three of these Blades, meeting with a Londoner with two hundred pounds which
he went to pay upon bond for stuff he had received at London, they carried him
to a By-house, where they refreshed themselves; the Sun growing low, the
Londoner called for a Reckoning, but the Mason told him he must pay all the
money he had, if it were five hundred pounds be seeing no remedy, said, I hope
you are Gentlemen, you will save my life: Yea, said Frith, but see that you do
not discover us, so they set him on his horse, conducted him to the road, and
so dismissed him.

How at six months end they were discoverd
ABout six months after, the Tradesman walking the streets espied three horses,
at a Tavern-door: well-knowing them, to belong to the Robbers, he takes out a
writ, employs two Marshals-men to arrest them: besides a Justices Warrant with
a Constable and Aid if need required: then he first attaques their horses, a
Watch over them, plants his Marshals men in one Room, the Constable and Aid in
another, orders them to call for what Wine they like best, and he would pay for
all, then goes he in his own person unto these Gentlemen, presents them with a
gallon of the best Sack, drinks a merry C^y to them all, gives them many thanks
for their last kindness, they stiffely deny that ever they saw him before,
saying, Come let us be gone, and let us know what is to pay; Gentlemen said the
Tradesman, I can tell you; how can you tell, said they; Very well, says he,
for you must pay me two hundred pounds that I lent you in such a place, they
utterly denied it; but he showed them he had seized their horses: and there
(...) Marshals-men to Arrest you, or if you please, there (...) the Constable
with a warrant and a guard to carry you before the next Justice: As you was
Civil to me so will I be to you, either pay the moneys, or choose which of the
other pleases you best, but they finding no other remedy, paid him all his
moneys and charges, and gave him a large Colat^or, gained promise not to
discover them, and he never to be robbed, and so part to very good friends.

How they robbed a Rich man in the North, and came to London, and Acquitted
themselves of the Fact.
THere was a Man who dwelt in the North of England, who never married, nor
could (...) woman, no not his own Sister; he was exceeding rich, having Chests
full of moneys, and kept but a small (...); To his house five of these resorts,
and being troubled in their minds that so much treasure should be hid from the
world, contrived how it might be disposed of for the good of many, to do this,
one gains Acquaintance with the Serving-man, and often repairs to the house in
his Masters absence: the Master some time after being abroad, he carried his
man to the win^, and made him drunk, leads him home, lays him upon the bed,
immediately comes the other Five, takes these Instruments, opens the lock^,
fills all their Portmantues, locks up the outer door, having first bound the
drunken man upon his head, then came with all speed for London, where it was
agre^^, that one should put the rest in prison, (...) but a little before the
De^sions, the merry conceited Mason apprehends them, accuses them of suspicion
of Felony before the Justice, that they had robbed him and a North-Countrey
gentleman of several sums of money, but there was no Bill found, and they were
quit by Proclamation.

A Merry Jest of a Trunk worth 600 l.
These merry conceited fellows lying in an (...), understood by the
Chamberlains worth there was such a trunk of moneys and plate: they determined
the same into their Portmantues, or convey it out, no notice was taken: but
when these Blades were in their beds, the Innkeeper having been deceived
before, brought in another trunk just like the real trunk, and conveyed the
real trunk into a safer place, giving notice to the Chamberlain not to mind if,
they seeing an opportunity, conveyed away the trunk to an house that was privy
to their Actions, supposing it by the weight so be the (...), but opening the
same, found it stufft with bags of straw, brickbats, and such stuff, and for
garnish they found a large pair of Rame-horns, together with a Rope and butter,
at which they were all amazed, knowing it portended their being hanged.

How they committed a notable Robbery, and the Merry conceited Mason was taken,
imprisoned, and how he escap^d.
These Gallants having bad but bad success in the last Enterprise, resolved
upon a more sure Purchase; They all went to a Gentleman's house, alights, tells
the Porter they had earnest business, and must speak with his Master
immediately, they had admitance, leaving one to look to their horses, having
their Pistols cockt and hand upon sword, promising to burt no creature,
commanding the Gentleman up-stairs, half of them attending him, and took away
500 l.

How he was taken and Escaped.
A short time after, being committed to prison for a great crime, and so like
to suffer, the assizes being near, where some of his Accomplices came to see him,
invited him to drink, the Cellar being without the prison, his friends takes
their leave, he (...) two horses bridled and sadled, gets upon one of them, and
so went over into Ireland.

FINIS.

