THE LATE PROPOSAL OF UNION AMONG PROTESTANTS, Reviewed and Rectified:

BEING A VINDICATION of the most Reverend Father in God, EDWIN, Lord
Archbishop of York; And the Reverend Dr. Tillotson, Dean of Canterbury;

FROM The Misprisions of an Apocryphal Proposer; With a full ANSWER to his
PROPOSAL:

Presented to the PARLIAMENT.

Psalm. 129. 1. Saepe oppugnaverunt a juventute, verum non praevaluerunt.

Isa. 51.32. (Et) qui (adhuc) vexant, dicunt, Inclinare and transibimus.

LONDON. Printed by A. Godbid and J. Playford, for R. Clavel, at the Peacock in
St. Paul's Churchyard. 1679.

THE LATE PROPOSAL OF UNION AMONGST PROTESTANTS Presented to the PARLIAMENT,
Reviewed and Rectified.
SIR,
I Received your Letter, and I have seriously perused the Address, Humbly
presented to the Parliament; I like the Title very well, [ A Proposal of Union
amongst Protestants] and the Design, in general, cannot but be commended: but
how well it is enforced from the last Will of the most Reverend Dr. Sands, some
time a Archbishop of York; and whether that is to be looked upon as the
Sentiment of the first Reformers, will require a farther Examination. In the
interim, as once for the Divisions of Reuben, so now for those of England,
there are great thoughts of heart; and who knows not, that Peace is a Jewel of
great price, and to be purchased at any rate that may reasonably secure the
possession of it. This indeed is the Legacy which our dearest Lord has left to
his Disciples: But alas! many of the Legatees have renounced their part in it;
because they cannot be allowed to make their own will of his Church and
Kingdom. By Peace, our Blessed Lord never intended a Conspiracy against the
Rules of Decency and Order: Peace with God, and Conscience, and amongst
Brethren, is the Fruit of Righteousness. Isa. 32.17.
Righteousness is the Foundation of Christ's Kingdom, and Peace a
Superstructure. Romans 14.17.
Now you know it is the part of Righteousness, to give every one their due; the
best Method therefore to be at Peace, is to become just, that is, to become
obedient, and to pay our due respects to the Laws, and to our Superiors. The
Author of one Project for the good of England, tells us, That good Laws, and a
just Execution of them (and not Oaths) are the natural and real Security of a
Government. I am very much of his mind herein: For to relax the Reins of
Government, opens a door to Licentiousness; and that is no good friend to Peace
and Unity. Besides, if there can be such a thing as a Rope of Sand, there may
be a stupid quietness betwixt the parts, but no solid, useful strength; which
depends upon Command and Order, as much as the attractive splendor and beauty
of Societies. This, Sir, is one Reason, why the Jesuits so little value the
shattered Parties of Protestants, that they think them not worth a Consult or
Plot, in comparison of the Church of England. Let Authority be owned as sacred,
and the Laws be kept inviolable, and these will prove the best Bulwark of our
Peace and Union. Protestants abroad are generally of this persuasion; and if
any of our own Communion be otherwise minded, we are to look upon them as loose
Stones, that will never stand to support the Building, but rather flinch and
slip away to betray it, as occasion serves.

These Dissenters complain of hard measure, heavy burdens, and oppressing
yoaks, as if their Persons were imprisoned under hatches, their Estates torn
from them under the Harrows of Sequestrators, and their Wives and Children
forced to dance a tedious attendance at Goldsmiths-Hall, to make their
Composition; whereas, in truth, it is the great advantage some of them reap
from thence, which makes them still in love with their gainful Meetings against
Authority.

This Apocryphal Anonymus tells us, these Dissenters would do any thing for
Peace, only they dare not forsake Holiness, neglect their Duty, nor wound their
Consciences, by offending God. Sir, if there be not some foul tincture of
Malice in these Insinuations, yet are they no less unjust and scandalous, than
extravagant. What Law, what Canon, what Rite, or Practice, enjoined by the
Constitutions of this Church; or what Governor amongst us, does oblige them to
any such matter, nay that does not charge and fortify them to do the contrary?
As a learned man told those Dissenters, in the days of Queen Elizabeth, With us
there is leave for all men to be good, if they will by God's grace endeavor
it. Laur. Deios. That the Pope is that Antichrist, pa. 147. Printed 1590. and
Preached at St. Paul 's-Cross.


Those desperate Plots, that are on foot against this poor maligned Church, we
resent with no less horror than themselves: But while the Pope and his
Emissaries, the Jesuits, with their Vassals, are at work to undermine the
Foundation, Why do these Dissenters make it their business to assault and
batter the Walls and Terrets of it? They attempt to blow it up, and these seek
to pull it down: they endeavor to extinguish the Name and Essence; and at the
same time (as cooperating to her ruin) these labor (at least) to Eclipse the
Glory of it. The learned Author, Ibid. p. 178.
even now mentioned, had good ground to conclude, That if any thing will bring
the Antichristian Yoke upon this Land again, (which God turn far from us) it
will be Dissension.

We readily grant, that violent storms should drive the Sheep together; burin
such a season, all sober men will think, that the straggling sheep should run
into the common Fold, and not quarrel with their faithful Shepherd; nor labor
to pluck down that Fold which is their best shelter. We know too, without this
na^^less Informer, That the Red of God should teach us peace and quietness; and
having been so many years in the Furnace of Affliction, we should be so
thoroughly melted, as to run easily into one: But whether it be more reasonable
that the Church should run into their Conventicles, (which can never be united)
or their Conventicles into the bosom of the Church, let wise men judge. This
Church of England has been as a Lilly amongst the Thorns; and the dissenting
Party has been the Rod of God's indignation, to chastise her: but tho the Rod
be not cast into the Fire (through the clemency of a gracious Sovereign) vet
she like Moses his Bush has been miraculously preserved in the midst of flames;
and the right hand of the Most High has been no less remarkable in her Enemies
defeat, than in her own happy restoration. Nor is it unknown to the wisely
considerative, what Relentings she has had, while they have persisted stubborn
and inflexible. Nevertheless this officious Advocate craves leave, to beg on
their behalf, That what God has not set up in the Church may he pulled down;
and that rejected, as an Innovation, which is not as old as the Apostles, and
and nothing imposed upon Ministers or People, but what has footing and
warraint in the holy Scriptures.

To which I answer, That we have nothing established in our Church, but what
God has set up by general directions and a just authority; nor have we any
thing in use and practice amongst us, but what is [in the root and ground of
it] as old as the Apostles: nor is any thing imposed upon Ministers or People,
but what has such sufficient footing and warrant in the Holy Scriptures. That
the Church has power to institute external Rites, prescribe Forms, to make
Canons and Constitutions, to assist her Children, and regulate their Practice
in the public Worship and Service of God, is not only the unanimous
Confession of all Protestant Churches of any creditable denomination; but is
exactly consonant to the mind of God, revealed to us in his holy Scriptures,
where he gives the Church a charge to do all things to edification, and to his
glory. To this end he enjoins her to perform all her holy Offices decently and
in goad order. This is God's express command in general, but his Word has no
where determined the particulars, wherein that decency or order does or shall
consist; it follows therefore undeniably, that the Word of God or the Holy
Scriptures do suppose or establish a Power in the Church to institute Rules,
prescribe Forms, and make Canons to that purpose.

For a clearer Demonstration hereof let us seriously reflect upon these
Considerations.

1. That Christ and his Apostles intended Unity, and to obtain and preserve
that Unity they enjoined Order and Uniformity in the Churches. Christ's intent
is evident in his ardent Prayer, that his Disciples might Joh. 17.
be one, and made perfect in one. And we may read the great Apostle's aim in
his earnest conjuring them, Ephesians. 4.1.
to keep the unity of the spirit in the bond of peace. Romans 16.17.
For there is one body and one spirit, one Lord and one Faith, one Baptism, one
Hope of our calling. And elsewhere he is no less vehement; Now I beseech you,
Brethren, 1 Cor. 4.17.
mark them which cause divisions and offenses, contrary to the doctrine which
ye have learned, and avoid them. That Order and Uniformity are enjoined to
preserve this Unity is no less evident; 1 Cor. 14.40
Let all things be done decently and in order. Order is the Parent of Decency;
and to observe the same Rule is to follow Order. Hence the Apostle exhorts the
Philippians, Phil. 3.16.
Let us walk by the same rule, let us mind the same things. And this is the
only way to keep out Schism; whereupon he uses this Observation to the
Corinthians, 1 Cor. 1.10.
Now I beseech you, Brethren, by the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that ye all
speak the same thing, and that there be no divisions amongst you; but that ye
be perfectly joined together in the same mind and in the same judgment. And he
tells us to what end he requires this, viz. That ye may with one mind and one
mouth glorify God, Romans 15.6.
even the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ. And upon this account their Order in
the Church of Coloss was a Prospect of so much pleasure to him: Col. 2.5.
For though I am absent in the flesh, yet am I with you in the spirit, joying
and beholding your order, and the stedfastness of your faith in Christ. For
when men begin to break order, they presently grow loose in their Faith both to
God and Man.

2. Consider, that the Apostles, at their first Preaching of the Gospel, did
not presently establish that Order, which the state of the Church did afterward
require. The Church was to be gathered first, and afterward Orders prescribed
how it should be governed. This is evident not only from those Decrees made in
the first Council at Jerusalem, but from the express resolution of S. Paul,
Acts 15. 1 Cor. 11.34.
the rest will I set in order when I come.

3. Consider, that the Apostle expected such a Settlement should be made by
such as were entrusted with the Government of the Church. This is clear from
his advice and command to Titus, For this cause left I thee in Crete, that thou
should set in order the things that are wanting, or left undone. From whence
two things may be inferred irrefragably; 1. That at his first Preaching of the
Gospel S. Paul left some things undone, which in his own judgment were
afterward fit to be done. 2. That he expected the performance thereof from the
care of Titus.

4. Consider, that the Apostle gives certain general rules or Canons to direct
the Governors of the Church, Instit. l. 3. c. 19. sect. 15.
in making such Establishments: such are these, Let all things be done to the
glory of God. Let all things be done to edification. Let all things be done
decently and in order. Hereupon Mr. Calvin does acknowledge such Ecclesiastical
Constitutions to be lawful, as consonant to the Word of God. And Beza accounts
them celestial and divine, in respect of their foundation and end, which is
that general decorum commanded to be observed in God's Worship.

5. Consider, that the Apostle left it to the Judgment of Church Governors to
determine the particulars to be established in such cases. For this cause left
I thee ( Titus, Titus 1.5.
a single person, and at least a Bishop) in Crete, that thou should set in
order the things that are wanting. David, Solomon, and Jehosaphat, Hezekiah,
Josiah, and all godly Princes, made Laws for the Church of God, and were
approved: yea, the Laws and Decrees of Nebuchadnezar, of Cyrus, and Darius,
were for the benefit of it. And God has promised, that Kings shall be nursing
fathers, and Queens nursing mothers, to the Church. And it was truly and
worthily said in Queen Elizabeth's time, by that Author before mentioned, That
Princes especially serve Christ even in making Laws for Christ. L. Drios p. 162
Now let us lay these Principles together: 1 That the solemn Worship and
Service of God cannot be performed without Circumstances, (for of necessity
Circumstances must cloth every action under the Sun.) 2. That these
Circumstances are to be observed according to the rules of decency and order;
and that these rules are to be adjudged and determined by such as are invested
with Authority to that effect; it will follow unavoidably, that all Subjects
and Members of the Church are obliged in Conscience to obey such Determinations
and Establishments. For it is most certain, where some are empowered to command,
others are enjoined to obey; else the Power given to Superiors were given to
no effect. Vbi supra.
Hereupon Mr. Beza does acknowledge, though these Ecclesiastical Constitutions
be humane and mutable, and do not bind the Conscience properly and of
themselves; yet if they be just and honest, we are obliged to observe them, as
they contribute to the edification of the Church, and that we may avoid
scandal. Nor want we a better Authority than that of Mr. Beza, the great
Apostle gives this charge, Heb. 13.17.
Obey them that have the rule over you, and submit your selves. If you demand
how far this Submission does extend, the Apostle has resolved that too to a
reasonable satisfaction, Whatsoever things are true, whatsoever things are
honest, [such as are venerable for their gravity and comliness] whatsoever
things are just, Georg. Calixt.
whatsoever things are pure, whatsoever things are lovely, whatsoever things
are of good report; if there be any virtue, and if there be any praise, think
on these things to do them. I am very confident there is nothing enjoined in
this Church of England, but what is very fairly comprehended within this
Latitude of the Apostle.

But this Author goes on with confidence, and tells his Reader, that certainly
it cannot be prejudicial to the Church, to yield in those things which she her
self calls indifferent; and upon that score are at best (according to his
Irreverence) but Chips in Porridge, not worth contending for. But in all
matters of indifferency we say these Dissenters have the same liberty to comply
with, as we have to recede from the use and practice of them. And herein we
judge it most convenient and dutiful, both for our selves and them, to conform
to the Law and Judgment of our Superiors. The Apostle was sometime very tender
and yielding in matters of indifferency to the infirmity of new Converts; but
it was in favor of such as had been prepossessed by education and the
appearance of a divine Law, and but lately called off from the prejudice of
such a Dispensation; and this was before such time as Authority had thought fit
to determine any thing in the case. But this is not pleadable in Bar to a
deliberate and legal Settlement of Rites and Orders for the Discipline and
Practice of the Church in after Ages. And I pray remember, it was a thing
indifferent, which God himself was pleased to make choice of for the trial and
exercise of Man's Obedience. The Law of Nature did not tie up the hands of our
first Parents from the Tree of Knowledge; it was but a positive Law, which
retrenched their Liberty from the use and pleasure of it. And I am afraid it is
that forbidden fruit which has set men's teeth on edge, and makes them at this
day so unapt to relish any restraint in matters of Indifferency. For (to let us
see the great Veneration they have for Authority when it is not vested in
themselves) they stick not to tell us plainly, that what they have a moral
liberty to do, they will therefore refuse and contradict, because commanded by
Authority. But if we duly weight how fatal the Transgression was in the first
Instance of that nature, me thinks it should make us dread the Issue; lest
(besides what we have contracted from Adam's sin) we should draw a further
Guilt upon our selves, by an untoward and unwarrantable imitation.

But this Pius Anonymus is very much mistaken in affirming, it cannot be
prejudicial to the Church, to yield to those things which she herself calls
indifferent, seeing these Dissenters account them sinful; for herein they
willingly renounce their own liberty, that they may prejudge ours; and by this
means they become uncharitable to us, and dogmatize themselves into that very
Superstition which the Apostle condemns amongst the Colossians, [ Touch not,
taste not, handle not. Col. 2.2.
] That this squeamish refusal of things indifferent is Superstition, we have
good warrant from the nature (...). Plut. de superstitione.
of the thing, as well as from the words of the Apostle; for what is
Superstition but a vain and anxious observation of things above the (...). Ibid.
common rule and standard as matters of Religion. A superstitious man is a
person affected with a vain and superfluous fear of God; Qui metuit ibi Deum
offendere, ubi non offenditur, says Calvin; One that fears to offend God in
that wherein he is not offended. (...). Lexicon Jurid. verbo superstitiosus.
And this may consist in Abstention and Omission, as well as in any Addition
whatsoever. Si quis contra mandatum Domini in solo pane celebraret, esset
surperstitio; est enim haec privatio superslua. Et licet omissio minas ponat in
re quam esse debeat, animus tamen sic omittendi, plus ponit in voluntate, quam
per legem Religionis esse debeat. Malderus de Just. and Relig. Tract. 10. c. 7.
dub. 1. ad. 4.
For Superstition is a scrupulous excrescence of fear, which grows respectively
out of both sides of Religion; if you please you may call it positive or
negative. The positive Superstition consists in a scrupulous observation or the
doing of something which God has not commanded, or (if once he had) has now
abolished. Of this kind of Superstition mention is made by the Apostle in
diverse places, and particularly Gal. 4.10, 11. Ye observe, days, and months,
and times, and years: I am afraid of you lest I have bestowed upon you labor
in vain. The Observation of Erat enim legalis Observantia jam olim pro tempore
Religio, deinde facta est Superstitio. Ambr. Cathar. ad Col. 2.18.
Times, Rites, and Ceremonies, matters of Indifferency in their own nature,
when obtruded upon us as part of God's Worship, as matters of Religion and
Merit, as necessary to Salvation, as Duties of Holiness and Righteousness, as
obligatory to Conscience of their own nature, this is determined to be
Superstition. But when they are enjoined to prevent See the 20th. of the
Queen's Injunctions.
disorder, and keep up a solemn gravity and decorum, in the Performance of all
Sacred Offices in God's Public Worship and Service; in this case they are no
way allied to Superstition, but depend upon the lawful Power and Authority of
such as are entrusted with the Conduct of the Church. This is the unanimous
Acknowledgment of the most Learned Protestants, Calvin, Aretius, Zanchy,
Davenant, as may be observed in their respective Commentaries upon Col. 2.16.
and Gal. 4.10. to which I refer the Judicious Reader.

There is a second kind of Superstition, which we may call (...). Plut. de
superstit.
Negative, consisting in a vain and scrupulous Omission, Aversation, and
Abstinence from such things as God has no where forbidden. Thus the Reverend
Bishop Sanderson concerning Sunday (Dies Solis) that some men are shy of the
Name, and condemn the use of it as profane, heathenish, and unlawful, it
proceeds (he says) from In the first of his 8 Cases.
Superstition. But we have the Apostle's Instance, Col. 2.20. If you be dead
with Christ from the rudiments of the world, why as though living in the world
are ye subject to ordinances, (and what are they but Ne esitaveris. G. Calixt.
Prohibitions and Negatives?) Touch not, taste not, handle not? Grot. ad
Coloss. 2.16. Vna clausula comprehendit and Judaizantes and Pythagorizantes,
vino abstinere perpetud non erat Judaicum, nisi in paucis: apud Pythagoristas
frequens. Cibis nonnullis Judaei abstinebant, multo pluribus Pythagoristae. --
Ne admit tales magistros, qui talia non observantes spesalutis excludunt.
Haec Grotius.
De crescentibus verbis indicatur in quantum creverit superstitio, says
Calixtus; The lessening of the words does intimate the increase of
Superstition. And he does make use of the Number Three that he may comprehend
all, says Cajetan. And (as he goes on) though we cannot tell certainly and in
specie, what Ordinances he means, yet we are sure they concern Observances of
an external carnal nature as Religious. But by the Cardinal's good leave they
placed Religion in the Aversation and Non-observance of them; wherein the
Apostle reproves their vain Scrupulosity and affected Superstition. Modern
Expositors have not expressed themselves distinctly and clearly in this matter:
Ad Col. 2.
but S. Ambrose (though in few words) delivers himself full enough to our
purpose; Omnis qui baptizatur in Christo moritur mundo: cunctis enim
superstitionum erroribus abrenunciat, and solam colit fidem Christi. Every one
that is baptized into Christ is dead to the world: for he renounceth all the
errors of Superstition, that he may observe the faith of Christ only as his
Religion. Those beggarly Elements of the Levitical Law, and the Traditions and
Ordinances of old Philosophers, S. Ambrose calls the Observance of them
Superstition. For Superstition is an awful veneration of something that is dead
under a notion that it still lives in a state of Glory. Now those Philosophical
and Jewish Ordinances (which the Apostle reproves) are as well dead to us as we
to them. Wherefore look upon them as surviving those Dispensations which gave
them life and being, and to have their imaginary Ghosts in veneration, is
certainly a most vain and gross Superstition. To shut up this part of our
Discourse: By things indifferent we mean such things as God has left free to
us; Col. 2.16.
things neither commanded nor forbidden, concerning which these Rules may be of
use to direct our common Practice.

1. Such as are afraid they should offend God and wound their Conscience, Col.
2.21. 1 Cor. 10.25, 27.
by the use and practice of such things as God has not forbidden, they are
superstitious.

2. Such as are afraid they should offend God and wound their Consciences, Gal.
4.10, 11. Mar. 7.5, etc.
by the omission or disuse of such things as God has not commanded, they are
Superstitious.

3. Such as make the use and practice, Such was the Case in Gal. 4.10, 11. and
Mar. 7.5.
or the omission and forbearance, of things indifferent, a matter of merit of
Religion or Divine Worship, of necessity to Salvation, Justification, and
Holiness, and binding the Conscience of their own nature, or upon any such
account, they are Superstitious.

4. Such as are not led away by an affected singularity in matters that are
indifferent, 1 Pet. 2.16. with 18. Heb. 13.7, 17. Gal. 5.13. 2 These. 3.6, 7.
Romans 16, 17, 18.
but do fix the use of their (otherwise) indeterminate Liberty, according to
the commands of a just Authority, having respect to Polity, Decency, and good
Order; they do govern themselves prudently, according to Apostolical direction.

But Lastly, such as out of an opinion of Religion do refuse to conform to the
Constitution of a just Authority, in determining the use of their Christian
Liberty about things indifferent, to the ends aforesaid; they do walk (...).
disorderly in reference to the Government, and are (upon the matter)
superstitious, schismatical, and scandalous. In short then, according to the
Apostles way of Arguing, [Touch not, taste not, handle not] by a parity of
reason, the bogling at those Instances amongst our selves appointed for Decency
and Order, in the solemn performance of God's public Worship and Service, [viz.
Touch not the Surplice, kneel not at the Sacrament, sign not with the Cross]
are an Ataxy in Government, a denial of Authority in determing the use of
things indifferent, a retrenchment of our Christian Liberty, a reviving of an
old Superstition in other Instances, and highly scandalous, by casting a snare
of necessity upon the Conscience, and fixing an Opinion of Religion upon such
Abstentions and Omissions, as are but indifferent in their own nature? This was
charged upon dissenting Brethren by a Learned Man in the time of Queen
Elizabeth, La Drios ubi supra page 172.
where he faith thus, [ Those Mistakers and Tolerators (so he calls them) have
forgotten the last and extremest degree of Revolters, of Forsakers, of Refusers
and plain Contemners, whose case is much to be pitied, especially of those
mistakers, because through them they (the rest) are come into this downfall.

By this time I presume you will readily conclude, that the Church has great
reason not to yield in those things, which she her self calls indifferent,
though the Dissenters account them sinful. For it is evident that hereby,

1. She should betray the Truth and our Christian Liberty.

2. She should give scandal to her weaker sort of Children, who look upon these
things as indifferent, and submit to the use and practice of them as lawful,
out of obedience to Authority.

3. She should hereby throw dirt upon the face of our first Reformers, and
condemn their vigilant Successors, not only as unwise in putting these chips
(according to the Irreverence of this Author) into our Porridge; but as unjust
and tyrannous in imposing things sinful to wound the Conscience.

And lastly, She should hereby encourage these Dissenters in their
disobedience, confirm them in their error and superstition, and so cast a snare
upon their Consciences. That she may not be forced to do them this unkindness,
the Church finds her self obliged to deny them their unjust demands.

I see in the opinion of this Author, these things are but bones of contention
and stumbling blocks; but we know some Spirits are of that temper, they will
stumble at the best Constitutions under Heaven, if themselves have not a hand
in them. Christ himself is such a stumbling block, as cannot escape their
wanton kicks and censures; 1 Pet. 2.8. Mat. 11.6.
which makes him leave this Aphorism upon record, Blessed is he whosoever shall
not be offended in me.

Let us obtain so much Charity of these dissenting Brethren, as to believe us
in this our serious Profession, that we look not upon the Rites and Ceremonies
of the Church as matters of Religion, or parts of God's Worship; but as outward
circumstances of Decency and Order in the performance of it; and that coming
into any other Protestant Church, which differs from us herein, we can as
freely and sincerely communicate with them as in our own.

This Author tells us, Rome was not built in a day; but the structure which
takes up much time and pains in rearing up, may be pulled down speedily; and
Children are able to demonstrate this by their petty Experiments. The first
Reformers (he confesses) cast out abundance of filth and rubbish; and what
should be done more? I hope there are none so ill advised, as to overturn the
Fabric of the Church, and grub up her foundation. He says, they could not
finish the work, nor add the top stone to the Reformation: but (I pray) what
hindered them? did they want skill or wisdom, zeal or courage, authority or
power? I suppose there is no man so shameless as to affirm, they wanted any
thing needful to an advisable Reformation. He faith indeed, such was the
iniquity of the Times, the rage of their Enemies, and the Opposition they met
with, they could not do it. But reflecting upon the Proceedings of that Work,
we find that none gave them more trouble from time to time than these
dissenting Brethren.

To take offense at every thing which is in use and practice in the Church of
Rome, (and for that very reason only, Because it is so) is very childish and
ridiculous: and for this I appeal to all the Lutherans, with the most Learned
and Judicious of the Reformed Churches. The Learned Author in Queen Elizabeth's
Reign, La Deios, p. 113.
so often mentioned, told those Dissenters of that Age, It is certain, that a
great part of the public prayers in that Book which the Romans use, was
practiced in the Church before the Beast came into that Chair: and oftentimes
God's people have either taken or resumed those things to God's Worship, which
have been abused by Idolatry. The spoils of Egypt and Jericho, the Vessels of
the Temple abused by the Babylonians, were again applied to God's Service. If
we used any thing wherein the Pope shows himself to be the Beast, as his
worshipping of dead Saints and Images, and the Mass, and such like; then we
might be said to bear his Image or his Mark; but in the Prayers that we have
there is no part, no limb, no claw of that Beast.

Some men (I know) to serve their own ends, and some for want of better
information, are apt to take up that old thredbare method, so fit to delude the
hearts of the simple people. They are ready to charge others with an
inclination to Popery, who stand at a further distance from it than themselves,
and upon much better grounds; not as rash Zelots, but as prudent Christians,
not out of design to secure their Estates, but out of Conscience to save their
Souls.

Yet we must not run so far from Rome (as the manner of some is) as to leave
the Holy Scriptures, the Apostolical Constitutions, and the whole practice of
the primitive Church, with our common Faith, the Creed and Sacraments behind
us. The Lines that are drawn to the greatest distance from this center have the
least strength in them. L. Deios p. 114
It Is very well said of the Author even now commended, The people of God must
not fashion themselves like the Canaanites, nor the Heathen about them, in any
thing wherein they are Idolatrous and Impious: but in that they have as men,
God's people may be like them. As they are Papists we will not be like the
Romans; but as they are Christians, we may be like them. We must not use the
Bible, nor the Name of God or Christ, nor Baptism if we will have nothing that
they have. This was sound Protestant Doctrine in the happy days of that Queen
of ever blessed Memory.

Consonant hereunto the most eminent Protestant Divines, both at home and in
foreign Churches, do unanimously profess to detest and renounce nothing of the
Church of Rome; but her Errors, her Corruptions, her Contagions, her Idolatry,
Superstition, and Tyranny. And albeit these her Pollutions would not permit
them to communicate with her in the outward exercises of Religion (so
contaminated;) yet they profess they never altered their purpose of persevering
in the faith and practice of those things which are good in her. And for this I
appeal to Bishop Jewel in his Latin 12. page 88. etc.
Apology, and to Dr. Andrew Rivet in his In Quarto, tom. 1. tract. 2. q. 2. p.
289.
Cathol. Orthodoxus, and to the Learned H. Zanchy in his Cap. 24. sect. 19. in
p. 157.
Faith concerning matters of Religion, written when he was 70 years of age.

Sir, when all is done, the only Judges of public Constitutions are our
Governors, invested with Authority to that effect. And I must tell you freely,
never were matters more thoroughly sifted and examined, for six score years
together, than these Church matters; never more care and pains taken, than to
adapt and fit them to the S^lemnities of God's Worship. See her Act for
Uniformity at the end
It was the care of Queen Elizabeth and her Commissioners, to ordain and
publish such Rites and Ceremonies, as were most for the advancement of God's
glory, the edifying of his Church, and the due reverence of Christ's holy
Mysteries and Sacraments. And truly I am of opinion, that her Royal Highness
and her Commissioners were as wise, as pious, and as learned as our Dissenters.
They cried out of things as Popish and Antichristian in those days, Page 154.
as these do in ours. And that Author so often mentioned did rarely encouter
them at that time, and we need no other Confutation: Now then (says he) how
shall we know whetehr a thing be Popish and Antichristian or no? By the Names?
That cannot be; Names of their (own) nature be indifferent: the Things
contained in the Names as they are used of us might be examined. And how shall
we find whether they be Popish and Antichristian? If they serve to promote
Popery, then are they Popish, then are they Antichristian. But if none of these
things (which they except against) help to maintain Idolatry, or the Pope's
Supremacy, or men's Traditions against the written Word, or Free Will against
the Grace of Christ, or men's Merits against Justification by Faith, or the Idol
and Sacrifice of the Mass, or Pilgrimages, or Purgatory, or Prayer for the
Dead, or Auricular Confession, (whereby the Priest keeps the Lock and Key of
the Penitent's Conscience, and makes it his Spy to discover his secret
Inclinations, and the his Press-master to engage him to execute any design of
mischief) or Satisfactions for sins by Penance, or Indulgences, or the keeping
of the Word of God from the people in any unknown Tongue, or the like; if they
do not maintain vice or unjustice, nor Heresy amongst us; but are directed to
root out Popery, to keep us in the true faith, to advance the Word of God, to
establish our Justification by Faith, to further Repentance and good works, to
punish sin, to define that which is equal and right, to keep the common peace
of the Church: Then are they not Popish, seeing they are bent and exercised to
the ruin of Popery. But they are Christian and holy, and appertaining to the
Church of Christ, forasmuch as they further the Kingdom and Glory of Christ our
Savior. Thus stood the Church and the Protestant Religion amongst us in the
day of Q. Elizabeth.

To this most excellent Princess succeeded King James, a Prince wise and
learned to a prodigy and wonder; and His Majesty being importuned by the
repeated noise and clamours of such Dissenters; was pleased himself to hear
their Objections with an unwearied Patience, and (notwithstanding the prejudice
of his Education under Buchanan) he did solemnly declare, that all their
exceptions were light and frivolous; for which reason he forthwith issued out
his Royal Proclamation to reinforce Uniformity, which you may find well worth
your reading about the beginning of the former Book of Common Prayer. That wise
and learned King (who was much more able to judge than you or I) looked upon
this our English Jerusalem as a Bride made ready for her Husband; but these
Dissenters would be pulling off her dress and deflower her beauty, to show
their own skill in Religious Drapery and Trimming. And indeed they have made
little less than Prophecy of the Words of that Person in the time of Queen
Elizabeth, where he says thus; [ While men seek to perfect Churches, they will
bring to pass, L. Drios p. 174
that there will be amongst us no Church at all.] If you would see the King of
Saints in his beauty, (as that Anonymus has it) you must have patience till
you get your passage into Heaven; and if you would see Christ upon his throne,
you must expect till he comes to sit in Judgment. When that great day of
restitution comes, that corruption shall have put on incorruption, and
infirmity be swallowed up of glory and perfection, then he will cast all
scandals out of his Kingdom, Ephesians. 5.27.
and present to himself a glorious Church not having spot or wrinkle, but
completely holy and without blemish. In the mean while as long as the Church is
militant, she looks forth as the morning, fair as the Moon, clear as the Sun;
her Beauty is overcast with Clouds, stained with Spots, subject to Eclipses.
Christ has told us, that Offenses will come; Cant. 6.10.
and the Tares will spring up amongst the Wheat; and he that looks for any
other Paradise or Heaven on Earth, does but feed upon his own dreams, and
flatter himself with his own delusions.

In the Name of God, what would men be at? Our pious and wise Reformers have so
far departed from all the corruptions, from all the unwarrantable Doctrines and
Practices of the Church of Rome, that a Reverend Person well able to judge in
the case, has put this his solemn Profession into public view; Dr. Tillotson's
Sermon on 1 Cor. 3.15.
[ I do believe in my conscience the Church of England to be the best
constituted Church this day in the world, and that as to the main the Doctrine,
and Government, and Worship of it, are excellently framed to make men soberly
religious, securing men on the one hand from the wild freaks of Enthusiasm, and
on the other from the follies of Superstition.] And this I take the confidence
to averr, that the grounds upon which the Church of England now stands gives us
great advantage above all other particular Churches, to encounter and beat off
all the force of Rome. And this is undeniably evinced by experience. It was the
Obtestation of that worthy Person in the time of Queen Elizabeth, L Deios ubi
supra 106.
[ All that is proper to Antichrist we withstand, and therefore Antichrist
seeing himself cast off, and us not gathered in his Name, striveth by force and
policy to gather us to himself again.] For this reason it is, that those
Emissaries of his put themselves into all shapes and trades, become Tailors and
Shoomakers, Presbyterians and Independents, Anabaptists and Quakers, or men of
the Fifth Monarchy, to attaque and ruin us. And as long as any Conventicles are
allowed, there will be so many Scenes and Stages for Popish Priests and Jesuits
to act their parts undiscernibly; and this cannot be avoided but by a strict
Conformity. Because they are not able to stand against us in the open field by
force of Argument, they attempt to do it by Stratagem, that is, by the most
unjustifiable methods of Murders, Treasons, and Assassinations. If this Church
of England were not the very best Church under Heaven, they would never impugn
it with a Malice so implacable; and if they found it not much too hard for
them, by the advantage of the ground it now stands on, they would never engage
in such desperate courses to remove it. Wherefore it highly concerns all worthy
Persons, who love the Settlement of the Protestant Religion here at home, (even
in favor to the Protestants abroad) to unite their strength and study by all
just and prudent Methods to support it; that our subtilest Enemies the Jesuits
may by no means obtain the advantage of an After game to ruin us. We know they
are like Moles, and work under ground; if we suffer others to peck away any of
our materials, which now stand so firm and so well cemented, they will
insinuate themselves into a breach of a small latitude to undermine our whole
Fabric and enter in upon us postliminio.

I confess, the union of all the Protestants as well abroad as at home, is a
noble design; but whether it be practicable or needful, or whether we shall
meet with a fair compliance from other Churches in such an Attempt, is very
doubtful. For, 1. That which pleases the Lutherans will not please the
Calvinists; and to be sure amongst such Protestants as are Subjects under
Popish Dominions, this Project of Union is unpracticable. If we attempt to
unite them to our selves, we betray them to be ruined by the jealousy of their
own Princes. Amongst Protestants therefore under such circumstances no such
union can reasonably be expected. 2. Nor is this at all needful, for do we not
all profess it lawful for particular Churches to have their different Rites and
Ceremonies, Forms and Customs? Do not all Protestant Churches declare, that it
is their Christian Liberty to have it so? and does not each particular Church
and Party stiffly adhere to their own Rites and Forms upon that account? and
must we of the Church of England be the only Changlings of the Reformation? De
Religione Fides cap. 24. sect. 15.
I pray let us consider the Advice of the Learned Zanchy; There are two sorts
of things (says he) wherein the unity of the Church may consist: The first, in
such things as are delivered in the Word of God; the other, in such things as
are not expressed in the Word, and of this sort are many Ecclesiastical Rites
and Ceremonies. In the first kind we hold unity to be always and every where
necessary: in the later, although unity is not of it self necessary, but it is
convenient to have different Rites, according to the constitution and quality
of different Times and Places; nevertheless where a certain Order is appointed
and received touching such things, for the Edification of the Church; it is our
Judgment, that there Unity in such matters ought to be retained, and the Orders
of the Church ought not to be disturbed: according to the rule of the Apostle,
Let all things be done decently and in order, to the edification of the Church.
Concerning which things we do wonderfully approve and embrace those two
Epistles of S. Austin, viz. 118. and 119. to Januarius, after 70 years of age,
when the heat of his Disputes and Controversial Labors were at an end. This
was the Faith and Religion which that Learned man professed and died in.

And whatsoever alteration we can project, I am confident 'twill generally give
more offense than satisfaction; and wise men in foreign parts will be apt to
value us the less for such our levity. However with Free States and Princes
which are Protestants, we may enjoy a firm union by a mutual confederation, (as
is usually done upon all other occasions) without any change of Laws, Rites,
Forms, or local Constitution on either part.

And 3. will other sorts of Protestants be so easily persuaded to suffer their
deliberate Constitutions to be disputed and contradicted? Let us take our
measures herein from our late Assembly of Divines, whose Advice and Resolution
to the then Parliament was this; The Advice of the Assembly concerning a
Confession of Faith, chapter 20. sect. 4.
They who upon pretense of Christian Liberty shall oppose any lawful Power, or
the lawful exercise of it, whether it be Civil or Ecclesiastical, resist the
Ordinance of God; and for their publishing such Opinions, or maintaining of
such Practices, as are contrary to the Light of Nature, or to the known
Principles of Christianity, whether concerning Faith, Worship, or Conversation,
or to the Power of Godliness, (whereof we may be sure they intended to be the
Judges) or such erroneous Opinions or Practices, as either in their own nature,
or in the manner of publishing or maintaining them, are destructive to the
external peace and order, which Christ has established in the Church, (that
is, by their Presbyterian Model) they may lawfully be called to account, and
proceeded against by the Censures of the Church, and by the Power of the Civil
Magistrate.

But let us leave the Protestants of foreign Churches, and keep our eyes at
home; and here we cannot but observe to our great grief, that the Sects and
Factions are many and various, and which of them should we design our kindness
for? For Presbyterians or Independents, Anabaptists, Quakers, or Socinians?
Where ever you resolve to pitch, I believe you will have but a little to
gratify the humor of some Party, which you can never oblige. For it is not to
be imagined, that our Governors will ever part with so much as has been
impetuously required; for then we shall lay a colorable ground to justify
their Solemn League and Covenant, with all those horrid Mischiefs which ensued
upon it; and we shall most certainly deform the Church, and unhinge the
Government, which may be of a worse consequence than a temporary Toleration. If
you grant but little, they will conclude they have given the Church a defeat
therein, and will triumph in it: yet this will be too weak a Charm to make them
acquiesce, and be at peace with us. For this sort of men (as well as others)
are observed to be so restless in their humor, that instead of studying to be
quiet, and to do their own business, they are always laboring to be uppermost,
and in order to that they are always studying new Objections against all
established Forms of Decency, maugre all alterations intended for their
satisfaction. Sometimes they cry down the Rites and Ceremonies, because they
are dumb, that is, dark and unedifying: but since the dumb beast has had her
mouth opened to convince the madness of these Prophets, See the Preface before
the Common Prayer and Ceremonies, etc.
they cry out against them for having too much Tongue, that is, for being too
significant and useful. And as another Instance of their Unquietness, we may
observe their watchfulness and artifice in perverting such charitable
Discourses, as are designed to draw them into the Communion of the Church, to
palliate their Dissent from it. And how tender and scrupulous soever they make
themselves at this day, yet they will not let us forget, that not very long
since, while they strained at the very same Gnats, they could swallow Camels;
and thought it just to force others (as much as in them lay) to do the like.

Sir, if these Practices have any affinity with the Definition of Infirmity,
(or a weak Brother) I must confess my self at a loss to understand what it is
to be stiff; wilful, and unteachable. In short, by offering these Dissenters to
yield them they know not what, upon the Solicitation of we know not whom, we
shall expose our selves and our Religion to no purpose. The Popish Party will
upbraid us for our levity; and perhaps in departing from the decent and
harmless Rites and Usages of the Ancients, (long before Popery had a being) we
may give a scandal to such as have come over to us from their Communion. And
what are we like to get by it? As far as I am able to discern, we shall give
ground to a professed Adversary, and make a wilful breach upon our wholesome Laws
and Discipline, to make a new experiment. For if it does not succeed well,
(which none but God Almighty can foresee) how shall we recover our ground
again? and who shall stand in the gap to make up the breach for us?

We are come at last to the Authority alleged by that Apocryphal Anonymus; in
the first whereof I find a double mistake, for first the Name of that Reverend
Archbishop was not Edward but Edwin Sands, who died at York Aug. 8. 1588. The
said Reverend Person, when he was Vicechancellor of Cambridge, at the
Instigation of the Duke of Northumberland, preached up the Title of Jane Gray,
for which he was imprisoned by Queen Mary. Godwyn of Bishops.
Afterward being set at liberty upon the Intercession of some Friends, he went
over into Germany, and staid there till he was called back in the Reign of
Queen Elizabeth. From thence it is probable he might bring over with him some
Inclinations to the Models of Reformation, which he had observed amongst some
Protestants in those Countries. But besides this mistake in the Name, there is
a greater in the Title Page, and I am a little jealous it was wilful and
advised; for he represents it as the sentiment of the first Reformers, when it
was but the single Opinion of that Reverend Archbishop, in or about the
thirtieth year of that Queens Reign; all the rest of the Governors (as far as
we are able to inform our selves) were of another Judgment, as their Successors
generally have been ever since. But let us hear the Bistop's own Words (at
least if they be his own) he says thus; [ I have ever been and presently am
persuaded, that some of them (Rites and Ceremonies) be not so expedient for
this Church now, but that in the Church Reformed, and in all this time of the
Gospel, wherein the Seed of the Scripture has so long been sown, they may
better be disused by little and little, than more and more urged.] This is that
which the Archbishop declares, and it is observable, that he does not name any
one of those Rites and Ceremonies, but refers the particularities to the
discretion of the Godly-wise. What have been disused and altered since that
time, I shall leave to the Observation of considering men: What are retained
amongst us, have been severely and minutely examined; and the Godly-wise find
them so far from a disposition to choke the seed of the Gospel, that they
approve them as congenial to the general Dictates and Directions of it, and
very decent in the solemn Worship and Service of God under it.

That our Ecclesiastical Policy in some points may be bettered, that Bishop
does acknowledge, and so do we. In the Preface to the Commination we are told
of a Godly Discipline in the Primitive Church, which both they and we wish
heartily might be restored; but this is not to be hoped for, till the
generality of men become more governable, that is, more humble, more
obsequious, to wholesome Discipline, and carry a greater veneration for the
Authority of the Church.

But that this Reverend Archbishop was not of the mind of these Dissenters, his
last Will and Testament, (which is here produced) gives us sufficient Evidence.
For he says, 1. That the state of a small private Church (such as Geneva for
example) and the form of a large Christian Kingdom, neither would long like,
nor at all brook, one and the same Ecclesiastical Government. 2. He says,
Concerning Rites and Ceremonies by Political Constitutions authorized amongst
us, I am and have been persuaded, that such as are set down by public Authority
in this Church of England, are no way either ungodly or unlawful, but may with
a good Conscience (for order and obedience sake) be used of a good Christian.
Are the Dissenters of this mind? why then do they not conform to them? and why
does this their Advocate upbraid them as sinful and ungodly, and charge them
with an edge and sting that wounds the Conscience? 3. That Reverend Archbishop
tells us further, I do utterly mislike, even in my conscience, all such rude
and undigested Platforms, as have been more lately and boldly, than either
learnedly or wisely preferred; tending not to the Reformation, but to the
destruction of the Church of England. What would this pious Soul have said, if
he had lived to see our tender consciences clothing themselves in Arms of
Steel, marching with Pikes, Swords, and Pistols, bartering down our established
Laws and Government with Guns and Cannons, and setting up their own new models,
not with the noise of Axes and Hammers, but with the more confused noise of
Wars and Tumults, and with garments rolled in blood? They have given this best
of Churches the Stab, made the gaping wounds, yea and with their precious balms
have broken our much more precious head; and now they call earnestly for a
tender hand, for a cementing healing spirit, as if all the hurt had been done
not by, but upon themselves.

These Observations upon the Discourse of that Reverend Person being submitted
to the Judgment of every Reader, I shall proceed to the remarkable passage of
that Reverend and Worthy Dean, which he sets down in these words; It is not
for private persons to undertake in matters of public concernment; but I think
we have no cause to doubt, but the Governors of our Church (notwithstanding
all the advantages of Authority, and we think of Reason too, on our side) are
Persons of that Piety and Prudence, that fox peace-sake, and in order to a firm
Union among Protestants, they would be content (if that would do it) not to
insist upon little things, but to yield them up, whether to the infirmity or
importunity, or perhaps in some very few things, to the plausible Exceptions of
those who differ from us.

Before I return an account of the Sense of that Reverend and Learned Person, I
shall endeavor to undeceive the nameless Allegator. He thinks that to some
very few things, these Dissenters have very plausible Exceptions. Sir, I am
heartily glad to hear their Exceptions are but plausible, and reduced to so
small a number. We have Exceptions against the Presbyterian Discipline and
Government, and against the Congregational Churches too, and those not a few,
and much more than plausible. But what Constitution, what Court, what Person,
what any thing in the world, shall be allowed to stand, if a few plausible
Exceptions be sufficient to pull it down? There have been plausible Exceptions
against A House of Lords, plausible Exceptions against the best of Princes, and
things that are most sacred. When we hear of Exceptions and plausible, we
should well consider the Persons to whom they are so: There are exceptions
against the holy Scriptures; but they are plausible* only to the profane
Atheist; Exceptions against the eternal Son of God, but they are plausible
only to Scribes, Pharisees, Hypocrites, to Jews, Infidels, and Heretics. When
Ignorance and Faction have made exceptions, Pride and Interest will strive hard
to make them plausible. A thing may be very plausible which is no way just, but
highly inconvenient. It is therefore an Argument of a light and ungenerous
mind, to argue in matters of so great importance, from such popular and loose
Topics. Prudent and Pious Persons were not wont of old to do so; we may
instance in Hooker, Hammond, Sanderson. Nor must we look upon this as the
Judgment of that Reverend Dean, but as the fond Opinion which these Dissenters
have of their own Conceptions.

Nor can this Allegator think, that a few things will satisfy them. To
rectify his Judgment herein, let him peruse their Solemn League and Covenant,
as the Mother of all the rest, their Directory, their Form of Government for
England and Ireland, their Confession of Faith, their lesser and larger
Catechisms, their Jus Divinum of the Presbyterian Government; and (since His
Majesty's happy Restruration) their Petition, with the Review and Alteration of
the Book of Common Prayer; their Petition for Peace, with their Reformation of
the Liturgy.

Again, this confident Allegator looks at the wrong end of the Telescope, when
he judges these matters to be so little. For to yield up such things, and upon
such accounts as they demand them, we must yield up a branch of truth and our
own reason, with some part of our Christian Liberty, (which is never a whit the
less considerable to us, because we desire not to make use of it for a cloak of
Pride, Malice, or Disobedience) Some Laws and Canons also are to be yielded up,
and some rays of Authority to be eclipsed, if not extinguished, by this
Concession.

Besides, what is little in its own nature may be great in its consequence. The
Pin of a Watch is a small matter if we look upon the bulk of it yet the loss of
such a Pin disorderss the whole Movement, or makes the Wheels to stand still,
and so you lose your aim and the time or the day by it. The taking away of a
little Turf is but a small matter in appearance, but such, as are well
acquainted with the Po-Dyke Law, will tell you it may occasion a breach in the
whole bank, and let in such an Inundation as may drown a fruitful Level: for
which reason such a wilful Breach is made Felony by Statute.

But grant the things to be so little as is ordinarily imagined; Deios ubi
supra p. 172.
for that Learned Man said very right in the days of Queen Elizabeth, [The
Controversies wherein we differ have small weight in the matters, and less in
the proofs.] But it seems these Dissenters have no great value for Authority,
(when it was not vested themselves) that such little matters can give them
occasion to quarrel with it. If the matters be smell, the performance is the
more easy, and consequently the disobedience the more intolerable. And this is
acknowledged by no less Authority than an Act of Parliament; for in the Preface
to the Book of Common Prayer, under the Title of Ceremonies, it is declared,
that Although the keeping or omitting of a Ceremony, in it self considered, is
but a small thing; yet the wilful and contemptuous transgression and breaking
of a Common Order and Discipline, is no small offense before God. We find
therefore that Instances of contempt in the smallest matters have been punished
with the greater rigor. To pick up a few sticks one would think no great
violation of the Sabbath; yet 'twas so high an affront to Government, the
Lawgiver would not dispense with it. Number. 15* 32.


It Is true, such Affronts may be prevented, if the Law be changed by the same
Authority that made it; but this course in preventing one, would draw on
another, and a much greater mischief. For as that Reverend Dean observes,
[There is no greater disparagement to a man's understanding, Dr Tilloison's
Sermon on 1 Cor. 3.15.
no greater argument of a light and ungenerous mind, than rashly to charge ones
Religion.] Eft enim proprium viri nobilie constantem esse in re laudabili
honoreque digna; nec sinere se ab honesto proposito vel secundis vel adversis
rebus abduci, says the Learned Zanchy. This chopping and changing leaves a
legible brand of unsteddiness and levity, and argues want of good advisement,
when the Law was first established: and this is the readiest way to make the
gravest Councils ridiculous, and their Laws contemptible.

This that wise and learned Prince very well understood, K. JAMES.
and therefore in his Proclamation for the Uniformity of Common Prayer he
concludes thus: And last of all we do admonish all men, that hereafter they
shall not expect nor attempt any further Alteration in the Common and Public
Form of God's Service, from this which is now established; This Proclamation
was printed before the old Book of Common Prayer.
for that neither will we give way for any to presume, that our own Judgment
having determined in a matter of this weight, shall be swayd to alteration by
the frivolous suggestion of any light spirit. Neither are we ignorant of the
Inconveniences that do arise in Government, by admitting Innovation in things
once settled by mature deliberation; and how necessary it is to use Constancy
in the upholding of the public Determinations of States: for that such is the
unquietness and unstedfastness of some Dispositions, affecting every year new
Forms of things, as if they should be followed in their Unconstancy, would make
all Actions of State ridiculous and contemptible; whereas the steadfast
maintaining of things by good advice established, is the Weal of all
Commonwealths.

And now (Sir) I shall take leave to do right to that Reverend and Worthy Dean,
whose Words are alleged by this Apocryphal Writer to his own ends, but with a
Construction far distant from the Dean's intended sense and meaning.

For 1. The Dean does avouch himself to be of our Governors side, but these
Dissenters are professedly against them.

2. The Dean tells you, It is not for private persons to undertake in matters
of public concernment: but whatever they have done since, I am sure the
Dissenters in the time of Queen Elizabeth thought it lawful to attempt any
thing (which they were pleased to call a Reformation) by Clamor, Tumult, and
Violence; and sometimes they did act accordingly without and against Authority.

In evidence whereof we need produce no other than the words of that Author so
often mentioned; Laur. Deios in the said Discourse p. 163, 164.
This their Liberty (says he of those Dissenters) is one of the chief Points
wherein they stand. Here neither Prince, nor Counselor, nor Bishop, nor Law
must restrain them from refusing or casting off whatsoever they mislike; or
from taking upon them, and putting in practice any thing they have determined
or concluded to be done; seeing according to their conceit they have sound out,
that Bishops and all other Officers in our Church are Popish, and that the
Ministry (as they suppose) bears Popish Names and Marks, and the Laws are
Popish; they will neither sue to Prince nor Council for the removing of any of
these things; but with all speed cast the Yoke from their own necks. And seeing
they have found in their fancies, that an Eldership, and no other Laws but the
written Word is to be heard, therefore they will erect these things amongst
themselves. And it were to be wished that the same humor did not reign
incorrigibly among them at this day; witness the late Practices in Scotland,
which agree exactly with their seditious Principles, for which Ireser the
Reader to a Book entitled Raviliac Redivivus, and their late Declaration.

3. The pious Inclination of that Reverend Dean was for a not-insisting upon a
few little things. These Dissenters are for a change of all, viz. the Liturgy,
Discipline, and Government of the Church.

4. These Dissenters demand a change of things as sinful. The Dean taken them
only for indifferent, having all the advantages of Authority and Reason; which
he would never have alleged if he had thought such things sinful.

5. The Dean doubts not in the last of the Piety and Prudence of the Governors
of the Church; but he finds no such relenting melting temper in these
Dissenters. For after such a Condescension in our Governors (as he supposes to
be attainable) he is still doubtful of those Dissenters Conformity and
Obedience, which makes him say, [If that would do it.] In short, when his heart
was warm with Meditation and a Discourse of Charity, the Reverend Dean freely
utters his pious Sentiments for peace-sake, and in order to a firm union among
Protestants, [If that would do it.] And what Christian Soul would not do the
like for an End so noble and glorious? This was no more in effect than what
fell from the mouth of that Great and Excellent Person the Lord Archbishop
Juxton, who discoursing with my self about Indulgence to Dissenters, (at his
first coming to Lambeth after the King's Return) was pleased thus to express
himself: That if the yielding of some few small matters would win them to join
cordially with us in the Practice of the rest, he could very well be content
with it. And this signified just as much as Mr. Dean's Expression with this
Proviso, [If that would do it.] But I must not dissemble, that His Grace added
thus much; You know Mr. N. I have sometimes sat at the Helm, and truly I have
studied the temper of these men, and could never find them so The Bishop added,
That there was no way to govern this sort of people, but by a straight Rain.
ingenuous. For gratify them in any thing, and you do but encourage them to
ask more. They will use your Condescension as an Argument of your Conviction,
that your own Practice is ill, and their Requiries just and reasonable. Nor
will they rest satisfied, till all matters of Decency and Order be laid aside,
to make way for their own newfangled Innovations. If my Lord were mistaken in
the temper of these Dissenters, I shall be heartily glad to see it in their
practice and compliance.

In the interim it concerns the Prudence of all that are in Authority, to have
regard to those Worthies who have sat at the Stern heretofore, who without all
doubt watched all opportunities to secure the Government, with the Interest of
the Church and Kingdom. To call their Prudence and Piety into question, will
make our own suspecte^, and put our Integrity under some dispute. Such were
Cranmer, Whi^gift, Bancroft, (to name no more) amongst our Bishops; and amongst
our Sovereign Princes such were Q. Elizabeth, K. James, and K. Charles, of over
blessed memory. To secure the Ark of God, and keep it steady, they could never
be induced to set it upon new Carriages, nor to trust the stumbling Oxen with
the conduct of it, but left that to the care of the ancient Hierarchy. We see
(Sir) the memory of those great persons is precious and had in honor; and if
we consult our own reputation with our tranquillity, we shall find it the
fairest and nearest way to it, to tread in their steps. And if these Dissenters
(notwithstanding their pretenses to Religion) should be of implacable spirits,
resolved to carry then beats and animosities down to the grave with them, their
speedy march off would be a mercy to the Church and Nation, unless God please
to mollify their hearts into a dutiful compliance, upon terms of Truth,
Justice, and Ingenuity. And if this their zealous Advocate be not able to
prevail with them to this effect, we may very well expect from his modesty,
that he should acquiesce in the premises, or at lea^^ that he should solicit
their Cause no more, till he has given us some tolerable satisfaction to these
important Quare's.

1. What sort of Dissenters he does plead for? 2. What Commission he can show
that they have appointed him to be their Advocate? 3. What Alterations they are
which he can undertake they shall acquiesce in? 4. What Security he can give
the Church, that they will cordially join with us in the practice of all the
rest? 5. What he can propound to satisfy Dissenters of other sorts, who may
plead an equal right to the like See Puritans-Papismus page 29. by Oliver
Ormerod, Printed 1605.
Indulgence.
But I perceive this is too hard a task for him; whereupon he does very wisely
excuse himself from it in these words, [ It is not for me, the meanest of ten
thousand, to act the Dictator; no, no, I will turn Orator, and humbly pray.
When his Prayer is done, I must remind this Orator of his own Acknowledgments;
That Peace is that Legacy which our dearest Lord has lest to his Disciples.
That Union and Communion among Christians is both the beauty and strength of
the Church. That which renders her lovely as a City compacted together, and
terrible as an Army with Banners.

Next, I must remin^ him of that Reverend Dean's Doctrine; That men ought to
bring along with them a peaceable disposition, and a mind ready to comply with
the Church in which they were born and baptized, in all reasonable and lawful
The Archbishop owns ours to be lawful. See above.
things, and desirous upon any terms that are tolerable to return to the
Communion of it; a mind free from passion and prejudice, from peevish
Exceptions and groundless and endless scruples. Herein the nameless Orator
prosesseth most cheerfully to yield to him: Oh that it may be according to his
word, that (as he says) there may be no more crumbling into Parties and
Factions, but that all the sons and daughters of Zion may worship God in the
beauty of holiness, with one shoulder and with one consent, ( of mind and
mouth, in forms and gestures, And then (our Morals and Conversation being
consonant to our Religious Worship) we may assure our selves, that upon all our
Assemblies there will be a glory, and upon that Glory a defense and through
God's blessing that Defense will be Impregnable: Which God of his mercy grant
us. Amen.

FINIS.

