AN ANSWER TO THE GENTLEMAN'S Letter to his Friend: SHOWING THAT BISHOPS MAY BE
JUDGES IN Causes Capital.

PSALM. 82.1. Deus stat in Congregatione Dei: in medio Deorum judicat.

LONDON, Printed by Tho. Braddyll for Robert Clavell at the Peacock in S. Paul's
Churchyard, 1680.

AN ANSWER TO THE GENTLEMAN's Letter to his Friend: SHOWING THAT BISHOPS MAY BE
JUDGES IN CAUSES CAPITAL.
SIR,
I Thank you for the Gentleman's Letter you sent me, touching the Right of
Bishops sitting as Judges in Cases Capital. This Order of Men is not Sacred
enough, it seems, in the Constitution, to secure it against (the Iniquity of
these last Times) Attempts of Rage and Extirpation.

Not to mention Martin Mar-Prelates, nor others of former Times; within our own
Memory, Mr. Prym led up the Van against them (1640.) in a Book of this Title,
viz. [Lord-Bishops, none of the Lords Bishops.] After their Divine or
Apostolical Constitution, they began to question their Right to Sit in
Parliament. This occasioned that Quodlibetical Question, [Whether the Bishops
make a Fundamental and Essential part of the English Parliament. The Rational
and Solid Answer to which Question was Printed in 1661, and now Reprinted (as
then put forth at first) for the Information of some, the Confirmation of
others, and the satisfaction of all.

The Gentleman who wrote this Letter, seems to grant the Bishops a large share
of Power within this Kingdom; yet as to Secular Matters, he does insinuate some
kind of Prohibition they are supposed to lie under, though his Arguments are
very inconsequent to prove it. The Rescript of Honorius (he says) and
Theodosius, and the Decree of Justinian forbid them to have to do in Secular
Matters? Therefore the Kings of England (who are of another Mind, upon good
experience of their judgment and fidelity) may not admit them to have any
Communion with Public Functions: Nor is the Argument less inconsequent, which
the Gentleman insinuates from the Apostles Declaration and Practice. The
Argument must be this, A few men are appointed by our Lord to propagate the
Gospel, and plant the Christian Church all the world over; and they think it
unreasonable they should neglect this generous Employment (imposed upon them
immediately from Heaven, to serve Tables, that is, to relieve the Temporal
Needs of indigent Disciples) therefore when the Church is generally
established, Bishops settled in every Diocese, and Ministers in every Parish, it
is equally unreasonable that the King should entrust any of the Clergy with any
Secular Employments.

But after these By-blows, this Gentleman tells us, This is none of his
business (which he had therefore done better to have let alone;) It Is the
Critical point he stands upon, which he calls Vexata Quaestio, what is to be
done in Parliament, that is, in their Judicial way upon Trials, not in their
Legislative Capacity, passing Acts of Attainder, in which the Gentleman is
pleased to confess [ I know that Bishops have born a part; but (says he) that
is not now the Question, but only this, Whether the Lords Spiritual have a
Right to stay and sit in Court, till the Court proceeds to the Vote of Guilty,
or Not Guilty.] This Gentleman concludes, They ought not. But the Question
truly and precisely stated, is only this; Whether of Right they may or may not?
And having diligently examined what has been said on both sides (as the
Gentleman has advised me) I profess to differ from him, finding no sufficient
Reason to change my Opinion, which is for the Affirmative.

But the better to carry on his Negative, this Gentleman falls upon Two
Questions more, which may be thought preliminary to this other. The First is,
touching the Peerage of the Lords Spiritual: The Second, Whether they make a
Third Estate in Parliament? These two fall in collaterally, and must be
considered before we fall upon his main Battalia, mustered up for the Defense
of the Opinion we oppugn.

1. That the Bishops make a Third Estate in Parliament, there is very much
alleged in the Treatise forementioned (from the Examples of all Christian
Kingdoms of the Gothic Model, from Titus Livius, Sir Edward Cook, the
Parliament- Rolls of King Richard the Third, and the Recognition of the Lords
Spiritual and Temporal with the Commons, 1 Eliz. 3. and 8. and what is argued
from thence, p. 16, 17. of the Rebels Plea, Printed 1660.) to which I shall add
that Mr. Sheppard in his Grand Abridgment, and the Word Parliament tells us,
That the Parliament in England is the Assembly of the King and the Three
Estates of the Realm, viz. the Lords Spiritual, the Lords Temporal, and the
Commons. And this Gentleman does acknowledge ( p. 86) that the Subjects of
England are divided into Three Estates, The Nobility the Clergy, and the
Commonalty. These, he says, are the several Estates of the Kingdom. But if the
Bishops be not One of these Estates, then one of the Three Estates of the
Kingdom is not Represented at all in Parliament (for he says, ( p. 88.) that
the Convocation where all the Clergy are present in their Persons, or their
Representatives, is no part of the Parliament,) which is absurd. The Authority
of Mr. Seldom to the contraay, is most consonant to Reason; and the Practice at
the Ratification of the Peace with the French King, 9 H. 5. and 11 H. 7. are
further Confirmations of it.

But this Gentleman says ( p. 88.) The Three Estates of Parliament are clean
another thing; each must have a Negative Voice to all that passes there: I
might take notice by the By of his Mistake herein; for there is nothing passes
where use is made of the Negative Voice: but I must observe, that this is a
cleanly begging of the Question. As for the Bishops being intermingled with the
Earls and Barons, and so if they be an Estate, it is an Estate within an
Estate, like a Nest of Boxes, one within another, there is no absurdity at all
in it: for when Christianity had prevailed (not to recur to the time when all
the Members of Parliament sat in one House together) the Piety and Prudence of
those times thought the State of the Church (with all its Rights and Interest)
safe enough among the Nobility, without any peculiar Negative voice to secure
it; and yet the Bishops Right of Protesting (upon just occasion) serves very
well instead of such a Negative.

But this Gentleman thinks it would be a great Disparagement to the Peerage of
England, that Two Estates must be put together, to keep the Balance even with
the House of Commons, who are but One Estate; and that their Two should
signify no more than that One: (taking no notice how much more they signify,
though they do very much,) To this I answer in the general, That Numbers of
persons add no Right or Privilege to a Politic Estate: The Peerage of England
had the same Power arid Dignity when they were not half so Numerous.

But to be more particular, Experience tells us (and we have an Instance too
fresh in memory) That neither the Bishops Protestation, nor the Temporal Lords
Negative Voice, nor the Kings Le Roy S'avisera, are sufficient to hold the
Balance even when the Commons depart from the Principles of Honor, Justice,
and Loyalty. And as they never pretended to be infallible, so have they not
always been observed to be so calm and steady in their Proceedings, as becomes
the Wisdom and Honor of so Grave and Solemn a Convention. In 50 E. 3. they
desired, that the Lord Latimer, the King's Chamberlain, (for pretended
Oppression) might lose all his Offices, and be no longer of the King's Council;
which the King granted; yet afterward 51 E. 3. at the Request of the Commons
themselves, he was restored to all, and declared innocent. This Gentleman was
so sensible of this their Prejudice and Rashness (attended with so much Levity)
that he could not pass it by, without setting some Remark upon it, p. 12.

But when Justice, Loyalty and Honor governs their Debates and Resolutions, we
may put the King, and (to use his own Illustration) all the Three Estates of
Parliament into the same Nest of Boxes, and yet their respective Interests
(which is the Interest of the whole Kingdom interwoven) will be secure, and
preserved inviolate.

But the Gentleman tells us further, That if the Bishops be one of the Three
Estates, nothing can pass in Parliament without them. This may be generally
true among States coordinate, without a Sovereign Head over them; and when a
Rival is set up, to give Check-mate to the Sovereign Authority, as it was in
the time of Hen. 8. mentioned by this Gentleman (at p. 92. when the Question
was [To whom the Supreme Jurisdiction did belong, to the King, or to the Pope?]
(In the time of such a Competition, the Crown is obliged to secure it self
against such an Usurpation, and does most justly abandon the Clergy that sides
with it.

But 2. If Acts have passed without the Bishops, they have likewise done so (as
by him is said) sometimes without the Commons. Egbert, who first united the
Seven Kingdoms of the Saxons, under the common Name of England, he caused to be
convened at London His Bishops and Peers of the highest Rank, to advise upon
some course against the Danish Pirates, (this was a Military Business, and
Bloodshed might have ensued upon the Stubbornness of those Pirates) who
infested the Seacoast of England. And King Ethelwolph in Parliament or
Assembly of his States, at Winchester, Anno 855. These Great Councils were the
Parliaments of those Times, Let. p. 72.
by the Advide and Counsel of the Bishops and Nobility, confirmed unto the
Clergy the Tenth Part of all men's Goods; and Ordered that the Tithe so
confirmed unto them, should be free from all Secular Services and Impositions.
And Wingate in his Abridgment, and the World Parliament, tells us, out of the
Mirror of Justices, of an Act in Aelfred's Time, That Parliaments should be
held twice a year, and oftener if need required. But (note, says he) This was
by the King and Lords only. And I believe we may observe the like practice
among some of this Gentleman's Precedents.

But it is much more satisfactory, when the Laws are Enacted by the Sovereign
Authority, at the Request of the Commons, with the consent of the Lords
Spiritual and Temporal; that is, by the King, with the joint Assent of the
Three Estates of Parliament; let us not therefore dissolve or drive them away
when we have them.

That which is alleged out of Bishop Jewel and Crompton, p. 93. to 98.
I refer you to the Answer of the Quodlibetical Question for your satisfaction.

That King James was of this Judgment, is evident from the very Words and
Speech produced by this Gentleman to the contrary. The Parliament (says he) is
composed of a Head and a Body; The Head is the King, the Body are the Members
of the Parliament: This Body again is subdivided into two parts; the Upper and
the Lower House; the Upper House compounded partly of Nobility, Temporal men,
who are Hereditable Counselors to the High Court of Parliament, by the Honor
of their Creation and Lands; and partly of Bishops, Spiritual men, who are
likewise by virtue of their Place and Dignity, Counselors ad vitam,
Life-Renters of this Court. The other House is composed of Knights for the
Shires, and Gentry and Burgesses for the Towns.] Here we see, though the King
makes but Two Houses, yet he does clearly distinguish them into Three Estates,
though he does not call them so.

To what is said by Stephen Gardener and Finch, I oppose the Testimonies of
Livy, Seldom, Cook and Sheppard: To the Expressions of the Late King of B.
Memory, in his Answer to the 19 Propos. (when he was fluctuating in the midst
of a Storm gathering round about him,) and to the Declaration of the Commons, 2
H. 4. n. 32. I might Answer, That the Upper House, in a large sense consisting
of Lords Spiritual and Temporal sitting and voting together) may be taken for
One Estate: But taken precisely, and in a strict sense, as their Concerns and
Interests are distinct, so they are clearly Two. But to those Authorities, I
shall rather oppose the Act of Recognition; 1 Eliz. 3. Where the Lords
Spiritual and Temporal, and the Commons in that Parliament Assembled, do
Recognize the Queens Majesty to be their true, lawful, and undoubted Sovereign
Lieged Lady and Queen in these words, [ We Your most Faithful, Loving, and
Obedient Subjects, representing the Three Estates of this Realm] which
evidently shows the Queen was not (there) esteemed one. So when the Funerals
of Hen. 5. were ended, the Three Estates did Assembled and Acknowledge his Son
King. To think to elude such Evidence, by saying (as this Gentleman does in the
like case) that such Expressions are delivered obiter, upon the By, is to make,
what we fancy not, in any Statute, utterly void, and of none effect.

The next Question concerns the Bishops Peerage; For the Affirmative, we have
these things to say,

1. That the Prelates are called by the same Writ (for Form and Manner) with
that directed to the Temporal Barons: so the Answer to the Quodlibetical
Question: That they Sit and Vote there by a double capacity; as Bishops first,
in reference to their several Sees; and secondly, as Peers, in respect of their
Baronies. Hereupon they affirm to the Lords Temporal in Parliament holden at
Northampton Hen. 2. as Seldom reports, We sit not here as Bishops only, but as
Barons; we are Barons, and you are Barons; here we sit as Peers. And some
Statutes call them Peers of the Land in terminis.

2. It Is his Grace of Canterbury's Title, Primus Par Angliae. That the first
Peer should be no Peer, is an unheard of Solecism. If he be a Peer, the rest of
the Bishops are his Com-peers, what ever they are to the Lords Temporal. John
Stratford Archbishop of that place, in the time of Ed. 3, claimed this
Privilege in the Right of his See. And the Protestat. of W. Courtney,
elsewhere mentioned, with the rest of the Bishops, is another pregnant Evidence
to this purpose. And 25 Edw. 3. The Prelates put up this Petition to the King
(as the Gentleman himself relates it, p. 83.) Seeing Archbishops and Bishops
hold their Temporalties of the King in capite, and therefore are Peers of the
Land as other Earls and Barons are, that you will be pleased to grant unto
them, that no Judge may henceforward, for mere contempts, cause their
Temporalties to be seized. Here we have a Prayer, that their Temporalties may
not be seized, and the Reason of it; because they are Peers, as Earls and
Barons are. The King grants their Petition, and allows the Reason. The King
cannot err in Titles; his Allowance therefore is a sufficient confirmation of
their Peerage. And this Gentleman, p. 93, etc. when he argues against their
being a third Estate, he tells us, William the first erected the temporalties
of Bishops into Baronies, to hold in capite; and upon account of those
Baronies, both the Temporal Lords and Spiritual had of right place in
Parliament, and were bound to serve him there. They were all Foedal Barons, all
holding by one tenure, and by that tenure sitting in Parliament. And a little
after he says, They are still qualified to be Members of Parliament, as
before, a Baron sat as a Baron, an Earl as an Earl. Being made by Patent, or
by Writ, or by holding such a proportion of Land, alters not the Case as to
their sitting in Parliament; for it is being of such a degree which makes them
Peers of Parliament.] One would think this is clear enough for the Bishops
Peerage. But besides, either the Bishops sit in Parliament as Peers, or as
Commoners: if as Commoners, then his own Argument, p. 90. will be returned upon
him; Would it be for the Honor of the House of Lords, that Commoners must be
put to them, to keep the Balance even with the House of Commons? And most
clearly it would be a Disparagement to the Peerage of the Kingdom, the Temporal
Lords, and would make them to be a poor Estate, that a number of Commoners must
be joined to them, to make up their Negative Voice, and set them upon even
ground with the House of Commons. But the truth is, the Bishops Sit and Vote in
Parliament (as we said before) by a double capacity; as Bishops, first, in
reference to their several Sees; and secondly, as Peers, in regard of their
Baronies. All the Lords are equal in respect of their Peerage, and so they make
up but one House; but they are distinguished by their Nobility and Spirituality
respectively, and so they make up two Estates distinct and different.

But to prove that they are no Peers, Page 85. Cap. 14. and 29.
this Gentheman fetches an Argument from Magna Charta it self, I know it says,
Every man that is tried at the King's Suit, must be tried by his Peers, whether
he be Amerced, or Imprisoned, or Disseised, or Outlawed, etc. it must be by his
Peers. But this Argument makes clear against him; for he himself informs us, p.
11, 12. that the Lord Latimer, who was the King's Chamberlain, for Oppression
in several places in Britain, and in England, was by the Bishops and Lords
adjudged to be imprisoned, and put to Fine and Ransom; and the Lord John Nevil,
a Privy Counselor; for buying some Debts due by the King, at easy Rates, to
make advantage to himself: He mentions some others, and concludes; At all these
Trials the Bishops were present, and no body says but they might: which makes
it evident (if the Law of Magna Charta were observed) that the Bishops sat as
Peers in giving Judgment upon those Culprit-Lords.

But for all this, the Gentleman has a very strong Objection out of Magna
Charta against the Bishops Peerage; and it is this, If any Bishop be tried for
any Capital Offense, Ibid. 85.
he is tried by the Commoners, and that is the Common Law and Practice of the
Land; then (says he) must Commoners be his Peers, and he and Commoners must be
Pares. p. 86.
A Temporal Lord, Duke, Earl or Baron cannot be Judge in the case of a Bishop,
(out of Parliament) nor can any Bishop be their Judge, how then can they be
said to be Pares, Fellow-Peers? For my part (says he) I see not. But I will
undertake to read the Riddle to him: the King may restrain his Favors, and
limit his Grants as himself pleases: the Dignities and Privileges of the
Lords Spiritual are not Hereditary like those of the Lords Temporal, but only
Personal, and conferred upon them in regard of their Holy Function. Hereupon,
when they are impeached for any heinous Crime, which is supposed to desecrate
their persons, they are interpretatively (though not formally) degraded
Privilegium personale amittitur, extincta persona cui id concessum est. And
such persons are reputed dead in Law.
, and by a Fiction of Law (not unusual) dead in that capacity, divested of
their Peerage with their Spiritualities, and so (being in the sense of the Law
reduced to that condition) they come to be tried as Commoners. And thus much
for the Bishops Peerage.

3. For their Right to Sit as Judges in Cases Capital, as this Gentleman says,
p. 3. It deserves a strict enquiry, and we should do well to consider upon what
ground the Prelates were prohibited having Votes in Cases of Blood. Such a
Prohibition indeed is extant; but it is Authentical only in the Canon Law, as
we shall evince anon: but this Law is Popish, grounded upon Principles of
Superstition, Usurpation, and Papal Tyranny; and is very irrational and
uncharitable, according to the usual practice of it. This I doubt not to make
appear to the unprejudiced and impartial Reader.

In the Interim, I think to remove a great mistake of this Gentleman, who tells
us, that Mat. Paris a Monk, one that would not be partial for the Lords
Temporal in relating matters, Let. p. 73.
to give them more power in Judicature, and less to the Lords Spiritual, than
of right belonged to each, and looking upon this exclusion of the Prelates from
the power of Judging in such cases, to be some diminution of their Omnipotency,
which they were so ambitious of, he therefore ranks it amongst the
Consuetudines iniquas, the wicked Customs of the former times. I say, herein
the Gentleman has committed a great mistake. It Is true, their presence in
Parliaments, at such Debates was debarred, and the restraint was put upon them
by this Law, and none else: but so far were the Clergy of those times from
ranking this Canon-Laws amongst those wicked Customs, that indeed they had it
in too high a veneration; and this the Gentleman himself observes in diverse
places of his Letters, averring it to be that Law, to which only the Clergy of
those times would be subject, conceiving themselves above, and not bound by any
other. p. 68. And some Laws before that, p. 22. He confesses, The Canon Law
was to them above all Laws, and what was forbidden by that Law, they could not
have a thought that it could in any sort be Lawful for them to challenge, as
their right upon any account. This Gentleman knew, they did look upon it as
sacred: They appeal to it, and plead it for their exemption; and this he sets
down with his own Hand (at p. 20.) in these words: Quid in praesenti
Parliamento agitur de nonnullis materiis in quibus non licet nobis alicui eorum
juxta sacrorum Canonum instituta, quomodo libet personaliter interesse: Because
in this present Parliament some things are to be transacted, at which it is not
lawful for us, by the Decrees of the Holy Canons to be personally present: This
is the ground and reason of their protestation. The wicked Customs therefore
which that Monk inveighs against, and which cost Becket so severe a Penance,
must be sought for elsewhere, amongst the rest of those Sixteen Constitutions
of Clarendon.

But whatever Opinion the Clergy of those times had of this Canon, I doubt not
to make it evident that it is grounded upon Principles of Superstition, Determ.
11.
for as the Reverend Davenant has it, Quid impium, quid illicitum? What is in
it that is impious, What that is unlawful, What that is contrary to the Office
or Sacredness of a Priest where there is a just authority for it, to bridle and
restrain such as are notoriously wicked, and disturbers of the Christian
Commonwealth, by civil penalties, and corporal inflictions? The Angels of
Heaven think it no way disagreeable, at Gods command, to inflict corporal
punishments upon the wicked. And why should the Angels of the Church at the
appointment of the King, who is Gods Image upon Earth, think it unlawful to
adjudge the same wicked persons to deserve punishment? The Act and Exercise of
civil Jurisdiction of its own nature is not disagreeable to the most holy
person, nor any way opposite to the Sacerdotal Function. We have the Authority
of God himself in the practice of his most Ancient Church, to justify this
Jurisdiction. Under the Law God himself joined it to the Sacerdotal Office; it
is not strange therefore, nor forbidden by Divine Law, that the Priest should
obtain a Civil Jurisdiction. We find it exemplified in Eli and Samuel, and the
Maccabees, See Numb. 25.7, 13.
and all that were invested with the Office of High Priest. This could not be
expected amongst the Apostles, because then the Civil Magistrates were not
Christians: yet S. Peter had once a supply of Civil Authority by a Miracle; and
to show that it was not unlawful for an Apostle to give Sentence in Cases
Capital, He pronounced Saphira's Doom for Sacrilege and Lying, Acts 5.9.
Behold the feet of them which buried thy Husband, are at the Door, and shall
carry thee out. But these New Masters of Israel were afraid a Sentence of
Justice should defile them with the Blood of a Malefactor; like the Priests and
Elders among the Jews, John 18.28. when they had bought and sold the Life of
our Blessed Lord, and used all the Tricks that Craft and Malice could suborn to
destroy him; so precise they were for all that, they would not go into Pilates
Judgment Hall, least they should be defiled and unfit to eat the Passover.
'Twas the Superstition of those Men, to think they could render the Priests
Office more Sacred, and put more veneration upon his person, then Gods own
Institution had done. They would not have him interess or concern himself in a
Case of Blood; least it should desecrate and unhallow his Person, and stain his
Function. But we know that all Virtue is Ornamental; and it is as well an Act of
Justice, to condemn the Guilty, as to acquit the Innocent.

2. Here is Usurpation in this Canon, and it is flatly against the King's
Supremacy. By this means a Foreign Power restrains the Sovereign Authority of
the Kingdom from commanding the Service, or making use of the Duty of his
Subjects in such Cases. The Force of this Canon divided the Prelates of those
times between the Prince and the Pope; either they did not understand, or they
did wilfully neglect their Duty; and some Instances of the mischievous effects
hereof this Gentleman gives us in his Letter. He tells us, p. 7, 8. 5 E. 3. The
Parliament was declared to be called for the redress of the Breach of the Laws,
and of the Peace of the Kingdom. And because the Prelates were of opinion, that
it belonged not properly to them to give counsel about keeping the Peace, nor
punishing such Evils, they went away by themselves, and they returned no more.
Nor did their Disobedience stop here; but the Gentleman tells us further, at p.
96. That 20 R. 2. the Bishops upon occasion of the Statute of Provisors, enter
a Protestation against whatsoever should be done in derogation or restriction
of the Power of their Holy Father the Pope, saying, they were sworn to his
Holiness, and to the Court of Rome. These, and the like Insolences were the
Fruits of those Immunities which the Prelates of those times received by the
Decrees of those Holy Canons.

And as this Canon was grounded upon Superstition, and did confront the Kings
Supermacy, so the Practice of it (in those times) was irrational and
uncharitable.

First Irrational; for, 1. Why were the Prelates debarred the liberty of
sitting Judges in such Cases? Was it because they wanted Knowledge, Reason, or
Discretion? I suppose not: If it were not because they had too little, but too
much of these Qualifications: That was Irrational.

2. That the Prelates have been, and may be Judges of Misdemeanors, this
Gentleman does grant, at p. 18. But there may be an Impeachment for sundry
Offenses under the name of Treason, which really, according to the Rule of Law,
are no more than Misdemeanors. Why may not the Bishops sit as Judges in such
Cases? Must the Culprit be delivered up to Justice upon such Impeachments,
without any further Trial or Examination, what will it amount unto? This would
be a kind of Hallifax-Law; and that is Irrational.

3. In the Case of Sir John Oldcastle, this Gentleman tells us, Page 38, 39.
The Popish Bishops did excommunicate and condemn him for an Heretic, and so
turned him over to the Secular Judgment (for execution) yet certainly ( says
this Gentlem. p. 39.) those good men, I mean those Popish Bishops would have no
more to do with him, as to his further Execution, that the World might see they
were not men of Blood. So that it is pretended at least, that this Holy Canon
(as they call it) was designed for Caution, that the Prelates might have no
hand in Blood; and yet the practice is so irrational, it does not sufficiently
prevent it. For in their Legislative capacity, this Gentleman grants, p. 3.
that they may Sit, and Vote, and pass Bills of Attainder He says p. 51 the E.
of Straffords Trial was completed that way.
. And, p. 104. Acts of Attainder are Laws, and every Freeman is supposed to
give his consent to every Law, either by his Representative, or in person, if a
Memer of Parliament; and Bishops being Members, may, I think (says he) claim
to do it personally. And though there be a great stir about such things as are
preliminary, and preparatory to Condemnation, Let. p. 71.
yet the Constitutions of Clarendon enjoined them to attend the Court quousque
perveniatur ad diminutionem Membrorum, vel ad Mortem; till it comes to loss of
Life or Member (which the Lawyers understand to be the Sentence of Guilty or
Not Guilty.) Now I would fain be resolved, whether these proceedings be not in
agitatione causae sanguinis? p. 1.
whether according to this practice a Case of Blood be not all the while in
agitation? And then reflecting upon the Gentleman's Rule in Logic, Causa causae
est causa causati, and upon the Story of Chaucer's Friar, let the Reader please
to peruse p. 64, 65, 66, of the Letter, and then judge whether the practice be
not, (as I said) Irrational. And then,

Secondly, This practice of those Popish times was uncharitable; for if the
Bishops were debarred sitting as Judges in such Cases Capital, out of a
suspicion of their Integrity, it was uncharitable to the Bishops; if out of a
jealousy they might be too soft and yielding in their clemency, it were
uncharitable to the Delinquent; if out of fear they might be too severe in
point of Justice, it is uncharitable to the Commonwealth; for Discretion ought
to take her Rules from Charity, when Pity, and when Severity are to be used for
the advantage of the Public. Sometimes Justice may be provoked into Severity,
and when Impeachments are preferred with rigor, it is possible the Prudence and
Piety of such grave and holy persons intervening, a rash and unadvisable
Sentence may be stopped and prevent a Deluge of Mischiefs, which might otherwise
ensue. See the Case, p. 26, 27, 28. of the Letter.
Had the Bishops been present at Haxeye's Trial, they might as well have
prevented his Condemnation, as obtained his Pardon.

The Canon Law then gave the first rise and beginning to this Usage (as this
Gentleman seems to acknowledge, p. 68.) But the Ground of that Canon was
Superstition, and it did confront the Kings Supremacy, and was irrational and
uncharitable in the practice of it: Let us therefore examine what Force it had,
and by what Authority. That this was in use while the Pope had a concurrent
Jurisdiction here, cannot be denied; but whether ever it received a Civil
Sanction, and an express Ratification, and had the stamp of
Parliament-Authority set upon it, is the matter now in question. And this I do
steadfastly deny, and the Gentleman as earnestly affirm and contend for.

To prove this, he does allege a double confirmation, and to give it the more
Credit, he carries it up as high as the days of Edward the Confessor. But I
desire the Reader to observe, that in the management of his Evidence, he turns
an Indulgence into a Prohibition; a Privilege into a complete Act of
Parliament; and a Protestation into a Statute.

He does allege the Year-Book of 10 E. 4. Term. Pasch. n. 35. Let. p. 78.
Where we have set down the manner of their Trials in Parliament; [When a Lord
is indicted, etc. he shall plead Not Guilty, and this shall be tried by his
Peers; and then the Lords Spiritual, who may not consent to the Death of any
man, shall make their Proctor, etc. This (says he) I allege, to show that
even by the Law of the Land, the Bishops cannot be Judges in a Case Capital.]
Here the Gentleman says, Their making a Proctor; was Error Temporis; the Error
of those Times. Why? Because that practice was not for his purpose. But, if, by
the Law of the Land, he means the Statute Law (as he seems to do) I must have a
Writ of Error, to reverse his Judgment. For the Pope having then a concurrent
Jurisdiction here in England, the Canon Law was in force amongst them; and in
declaring that the Lords Spiritual might not consent to the Death of any man,
they have respect to the Prohibition of the Canon Law, but this is not any the
least confirmation of it.

But this Gentleman will needs have it confirmed by a Civil Sanction, and so
become the Law of the Kingdom.

The first Confirmation, p. 69, etc.
he says, was about the time of 10 H. 2. amongst the sixteen Constitutions of
Clarendon, which (besides the Authority of Parliament (to make the Observation
of them the more inviolable) were established by the Solemnity of an Oath, p.
72.
which is the greatest Obligation that Mankind is capable of, making even God a
Party to it, to see it obeyed, and punish the Transgressors. Here is a fair
Plea for a solemn Confirmation, if the Gentleman were not partial or mistaken
in the Business. But the Case was this, upon the account of their Immunities,
the Prelates especially grew very remiss and careless of their Duties (as was
noted formerly.) Hereupon, in that Great Council (which was then their
Parliament) amongst the rest, the King made this, (the 11th. of those
Constitutions,) The Archbishops, Bishops, and universae personae Regni, (not
all the Dignified Clergy of the Land, p. 71.
as this Gentleman renders it, but) all persons whatsoever, who have a Tenure
in capite, shall hold their possessions from the King as a Barony, and shall
answer for their Estates unto the Kings Justices and Ministers, and shall
observe and obey all the Kings Laws; and together with other Barons they are to
be present in all Judgments in the Kings Courts. [This is the Duty they are
obliged and solemnly sworn to; and the follows an Indulgence or Priviledge]
till the Sentence comes to the loss of Life or Member; and here they are left
to their Liberty to observe the Decree of the Holy Canon. p. 73.
Hereupon we may build our Faith, that there was really such as Usage (as this
Gentleman infers) in ancient times, and that a liberty was left to continue it
(according to the Canon, and in veneration of it) but that 'twas ratified and
confirmed, we have not one Syllable to prove it.

The Second Confirmation this Gentleman finds, was in 11 R. 2. upon the
Protestation of the Archbishop, p. 18, etc. 71, etc.
for himself and the other Bishops. And here (after some fluctuation and
unsteadiness,) p. 75. to make it a Law, he tells us, The subject matter enacted
did consist of two Particulars; the one, That the Prelates had a Right to sit
and vote in all other Businesses; the other, That they had no Right, nor was it
lawful for them to be present in Parliament, when such Businesses were in
question: But the Tenor of their Protestation is, "That they intend to be
present, to consult, to treat of, and to determine, in omnibus, in all things,
saving their Rights, their State and Dignity. But because some things were to
be transacted in that Parliament, at which, by the Decrees of the Sacred
Canons, it was not lawful for them to be personally present, therefore they
protested, that while such things were in agitation, they would absent
themselves. Which Protestation, being read in Full Parliament, at the instance
and prayer of the Archbishop and other Prelates, was entered upon the
Parliament-Roll, by the Kings Command, with the Assent of the Lords Temporal
and Commons. This, the Gentleman will needs contend to be a Law of Parliament,
(or a Law of the Land.) Why? Because it was entered in the Roll or Journal Book,
that such a thing was agreed upon by the King and Two Houses; Which (says he)
was all the Formality of passing Laws in Parliament, p. 23.
in those times. But what was it that the Bishops petitioned might be entered
upon the Parliament-Roll? Was it the Decree of the Sacred Canons, which
debarred their presence in the House at such Debates? That indeed had been
somewhat to the purpose: but here was no such matter desired; it was their
Protestation: and if every thing that is entered upon the Parliament-Roll by the
Agreement of the King and the Two Houses, becomes an Act of Parliament
forthwith, then let this Protestation, for the present, pass for an Act of
Parliament; and we shall see anon what it will amount to.

In the Interim let us return to the Constitutions of Clarendon, where there
seems to be most color for such a Confirmation. There we may observe Two
things in that 11th. Constitution, a Duty enjoined, the Prelates attendance at
the Kings Courts; and then a Liberty or Privilege indulged; That they may
withdraw and forbear that attendance, when it comes to sentence for loss of
Life or Member. That this is a Privilege or a Liberty, cannot be denied. Mat.
Paris reckons it inter Libertates, amongst the Ancient Liberties Let. p. 71.
; and this Gentleman could not choose but observe it, (though it was not for his
purpose to distinguish this Privilege from the Injunction One would think
(says he) they (the Bishops) might look upon (it) as a Right and Privilege,
to be exempt from being obliged to attend in such Cases, Cases of Blood. It a
Privilege, then I may use or I may forbear it. To say, I may do such a thing,
therefore I shall do it, is irrational; ill Logic, and worse Polity.
Privileges, say the Lawyers, are Franchises and Liberties, or Immunities
granted to a Person, an Office, or a Corporation. Such as have them, may either
enjoy or refuse them. It is the Privilege of Attorneys and Clerks in they
Kings Bench, they cannot be pressed for Soldiers, they cannot be compelled to
bear Offices in their Parishes; yet Volunteers they may be in both Cases. No
man should be compelled to use his Privilege; for then his Franchise would be
no Liberty, but the more inthrall him. We may observe accordingly, that the
Prelates very well understood this their Liberty; for sometimes they would use
their Privilege, absent themselves, when Cases Capital were upon Trial, and
withdraw, when Matters of Blood were in agitation; and this is obvious to every
eye in the perusal of the Gentleman's Letters. But many times (which is very
considerable in the Case) when they did withdraw, they either made a Proxy to
represent them, or entered their Protestation to preserve their Rights. It Is
true, the Gentleman does except against their way of Proxy's, as
Unparliamentary; and three or four exceptions he has, which are sufficient to
elude and Testimony: For either it is Error Temporis, an Error of those times;
of spoken obiter, upon the By, and of no importance; or it is unparliamentary
and extravagant, or else Repealed: Such a provision of Evasions as may serve to
help a man out of the Noose of any Argument that can be produced in Matters of
this Nature.

For the Protestation, he would elude the force of that, by saying, Their
Salvo, that which they would ensure to themselves, is their Right of sitting to
consult, p. 21.
treat of, and determine in that, and all other Parliaments, when Capital Cases
are not in question: but there was no need of a Protestation to this effect:
This was their Duty, to which the Clarendon Constitution, and a Solemn Oath
obliged them. When men protest a Right, it is not to be understood of that Right
which no man doubts of, and therefore is not liable to question; but of that
Right which they give some color to be questioned, because they decline and
forbear the use and practice of it: This was a Right to debate, vote and sit as
Judges in Cases Capital, if possibly the Decree of that Canon should come to be
null (as now it is) or altered.

I must not forget to tell you of two Rules observable about such Privileges
as are granted to Subjects by the King, as this of the Clarendon Constitution
was to the Prelates. The first is, That they are not to be u^derstood to debar
the Kings Commands, nor ought to be a Supersedeas to his Sovereign Authority,
for this were a derogation to his Royal Office, a diminution to his Crown and
Dignity; not to be granted by him upon any pretense whatsoever. By the
constitutions of Clarendon, the King did exempt the Bishops from attending his
Court of Parliament at such Trials in Capital Cases in general; but he did not
absolve them from their Duty and Obedience to his own special commands, upon
any just occasion. Hereupon in the 11th. Hen. 2. Archbishop Becket, in a Solemn
Council at Northampton, being accused of Treason, and other Misdemeanors, where
Bishops were his Judges, as well as Temporal Lords; when those Lords and
Bishops could not agree about pronouncing the Judgment, they putting it off
from one to the other; at last the King commanded the Bishop of Winchester to
do it. This happened soon after the Ratification of the Clarendon Constitution,
which all the Lords and Bishops had taken their corporal Oath to observe for
ever: And it is not to be imagined they could forget what had been so lately
done amongst them; wherefore we must conclude that they did not take themselves
to be obliged either by that Oath or Constitution, to absent themselves always
from such Trials; for though the Constitution says, Debent interesse judiciis
curiae Regis, sicut caeteri Barons; That they ought, as well as other Barons,
to attend all the Judgments of the Kings Court; quousque perveniatur ad
diminutionem membrorum, vel ad mortem; till the Matter comes to Sentence, for
the loss of Life or Member.

Yet (whatsoever William Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, and the rest of the
Bishops had said in their Protestation, 11 R. 2.) The Constitution of Clarendon
does not say, Debent se absentare, that the Bishops ought to withdraw and
absent themselves from such Sentence. p. 60, 61.
This Gentleman endeavors to invalidate this so pregnant an Evidence, because
it is taken out of a Manuscript made by the Monk Stephanides; and none of the
Ancient Historians of those times say any thing of Becket's being accused for
Treason. But I must tell you, it is not the Print that adds Truth or Authority
to any Writing; and I shall trust Mr. Selden's Judgment, rather than this
Gentleman's Conjectures: Besides, A Negative Argument from Authority is of no
force; for why do we read variety of Historians upon the same Subject; but
because we suppose what one fails in for want of Memory or Information, another
may supply by a better Diligence and Enquiry.

The Second Rule observable in matters of Privilege, is this, Privilegia omnia
sine prejudicio Tertii concedenda and concessa intelligenda sunt: We must
understand all privileges that are granted, to be granted without any
prejudice to any third person. Now this Gentleman quotes Brompton's Chronicle,
p. 108.
reciting among the Laws of King Athelstan, this concerning Bishops; Debent
Episcopi cum seculi Judicibus interesse Judiciis, ne permittant, si possint, ut
aliqua pravitatum germina pullulaverint; The Bishops ought to be present in
Judgments with the Secular Judges, not to suffer any Buds of wickedness to
sprout up if they can hinder it. And does not the Law of God oblige such as are
in Authority, to use their Power as well to rescue the oppressed, as to punish
evil doers? Let us consult the wise man, Prove. 24.11, 12. If thou forbear to
deliver them that are drawn unto death, and those that are ready to be slain;
if thou say, Behold we knew it not; does not he that pondereth the Heart
consider it? and he that keeps thy Soul, does not he know it? and shall not
he render to ^very man according to his works? This, says the Author of the
Synopsis, concerns especially such as are in Authority: And (as Dr. Tho.
Cartwright comments upon the place) Quamvis periculum certum non sit, si tamen
suspitio aliqua mortis imminentis justa subsit, non est cunctandum, donec morti
quis adjudicatus fuerit; facilior enim est Liberatio, dum exitus adhuc dubious
est, quam cum lata est Mortis sententia: And I must not omit what the same
Author says a little after; Quemadmodum autem insontes, si possis, non
liberare; sic maleficorum, quantum in te est supplicium non promovere, atrox
flagitium est: and for this, the said Cartwright quotes the same Solomon, Prove.
17.15. This is a matter of so great importance, every man who has a Right and
Power of Judicature, ought especially to consider it. And if this Gentleman be
as sincere in his Profession toward the Bishops (which I have no reason to
question) as he is just and modest in saying, that he does not envy them their
Honor. I hope he will be so ingenuous also, as not to deny the King their
faithful counsel, nor the Country their pious Aid and Service.

For the Body of his Epistle, it consists of Record and Precedents, which most
men want means and opportunity to examine This Task therefore is fallen into a
more able hand.
, and very many skill to construe and comment on: This is the Evidence which
this Gentleman does produce, and that it may be the better understood, I shall
lay down some undoubted Principles, Rules and Observations, that the Reader may
the better judge of it. And I shall observe,

1. The Lords Spiritual, being Barons, Peers, and Great men, they are many
times comprehended under these Titles, when they are not styled by their proper
and distinctive Names of Bishops or Prelates. I shall need to instance in no
more than that of Magnates, Great men. In the Reign of Edrid (948) we read
thus, Here Archbishops and Bishops are Magnates as well as others.
In Festo Nativitatis B. Mariae, cum universi Magnates Regni per Regium edictum
summoniti, tam Archiepiscopi, and Episcopi, quam caeteritotius Regni Proceres,
and Optimates Londini, etc. 2. A Negative Argument from Authority is of no
validity, v. g. Such a Writer does not report such a thing; therefore there was
no such Matter: this does not follow. 3. The practice of Ancient times, in the
case before us, was very variable: For they were under the Popes Jurisdiction,
who kept the Canon Law in force; and among the rest, this Canon touching the
Bishops Recess from all Trials in Cases capital. In obedience to which Canon
they did, for the most part, absent themselves. But when H. 2. by the
Constitution of Clarendon enjoined all Prelates, as well as other Barons, to
attend his Courts, he granted them withal a Liberty or Privilege to absent
themselves (if they should think good) from Trials of that nature: Hereupon
they did sometimes use their Privilege, and absented themselves; sometimes
they did refuse their Privilege, and sat as Judges. 4. We may observe how the
Matter was carried, running through all the Trials upon Record, as this
Gentleman gives account of them With what care and fidelity is left to others
to examine and make report.
, and in his Method.
1. The first is 4 E. 3. in Mortimers Case; where we have Earls, Barons, the
Peers; afterward, Earls, Barons and Peers: the Bishops may be comprehended
under either Title of Barons or Peers; for they were both.

5 E. 3. The Bishops would not understand their Duty at all: they would neither
keep the peace, nor punish a Battery. This was a stupid Neglect; but signifies
nothing to the deciding of the Controversy.

3. 25 E. 3. The Bishops may be comprehended under the Name of Grantz,
Magnates, the Great men.

4. 42 E. 3. Here the Bishops were present by their title of Prelates.

5. 50 E. 3. The Bishops were present at these Trials, yet two of the
Delinquents were Lords.

6. 1 R. 2. They were, and they were not present; the Case is doubtful.

7. 3 R. 2. If the Bishops were not present, it is confessed they might have been;
for what was done, was done by the Legislative Power, and in that capacity to
pass Bills of Attainder, the Gentleman grants they have a Right.

8. 4 R. 2. If the Bishops be Peers of the Realm, and Lords of Parliament, they
might be comprehended there. To say they are always expressed by the Name of
Prelates, is to beg the Question.

9. 7 R. 3. It seems the Lords Spiritual were absent.

10. 10 R. 2. Here the Bishops were present, and judged of Misdemeanors, which
(for ought we know) upon Trial, might have amounted to Merit of Death.

11, 11 R. 2. The Bishops were virtually present by their Protestation.

12. 20 R. 2. Thomas Haxey Clerk (whether he was a Member of the House may be a
question) but his fault (however aggravated) seems to be but a Misdemeanor, at
the Trial whereof, the Bishops had right undoubtedly to be present; whether
they were present, seems doubtful: but it is most certain it had been more safe
and charitable to prevent the Condemnation, than to run the hazard of an
After-Game, when he was condemned, to seek his Pardon.

13. 21 R. 2. In this Parliament, the Bishops were present by their
Representative, by Proxy, and that three several times, upon three several
Occasions.

14. 1 H. 4. Here they were present, but gave no Judgment.

15. 2 H. 4. It does not appear that the Bishops were present.

16. 5 H. 4. The Bishops may be comprehended under the title of Peers, and the
Matter being found but a Trespass, their right of Sitting, the Gentleman cannot
deny them.

17. 7 H. 4. Here the King commanded the Advice only of the Lords Temporal,
which was a special Case.

18. 5 H. 5. Here the Bishops had declared Sr. John Oldcastle Heretic, and
delivered the Prisoner over to the Secular Power; and yet in the Sentence, they
may be comprised under the Title of The most wise Lords of this present
Parliament.

19. 2 H. 6. It is not certain the Bishops did Vote.

20. 28 H. 6. The two Archbishops and 13 Bishops were present, did Debate and
Vote in the Case.

21. 31 H. 6. The Bishops doubtless (as well as in the 28) were present, being
Peers of the Realm, as I have proved.

22. 38 H. 6. The Commons did accuse; the King answered, He would be advised;
and so the Matter ended.

Here we have 22 Precedents cited by this Gentleman, from the time of Clarendon
Constitutions to the Trial of the E. of Strafford; whereof one is a special
Case; three are insignificant and null, in regard there was either nothing at
all done, or a stupid neglect of their Right, or a careless throwing off of all
Duty. Four are doubtful; Ten are for their presence at such Trials, either in
person under the Names and Titles of Bishops, Prelates, Peers, Great men, or
Lords of Parliament; or present virtually, by their Proxies, or their
Protestations; so that there are but four of all the 22, for their not
appearing, or not voting at such Trials.

5. For a Supersedeas to all further enquiry or dispute about this matter, we
must take notice that the Canon which required the Bishops to withdraw at all
Trials in Cases Capital, is abolished, and the Lords Spiritual are under no
obligation to observe it. To say the Civil Sanction does still enforce it, is
absurd; for what is that Civil Sanction but an Act of Parliament? and if an Act
of Parliament has abolisht it, it has likewise abolisht all other Acts, which
might seem to ratify and confirm it; otherwise it should be abolisht, and not
abolisht, taken away, and yet in force still; which are Contradictions, and
absurd.

The Gentleman takes notice of this to be the Bishops Plea, ( p. 67, 68.) That
it is only by the Canon Law that this restraint is upon them, and that the
forbearance of their Predecessors being Papists, and so subject to that Law,
was only in that respect; which Law being of no force at present, and taken
away by Act of Parliament, they are now at liberty, though in Modesty they
think fit sometimes to withdraw, but have a Right to continue sitting if they
please.

What does the Gentleman answer to this? He says, I do not deny but the Canon
Law might give the first rise to such an Usage; but it came afterward to
receive a civil Sanction; the stamp of Parliament-Authority, and several
confirmation, ibid. But I have evinced already that his Allegations do not
prove what he pretends to undertake; and the practice of the Bishops
withdrawing at such Trials, having no other bottom to rely on than the Canon
Law, That being absolutely dissolved and broken by Act of Parliament, cannot
now support it.

6. And lastly, Seeing there is no other Authority to continue and inure this
practice but that Popish Canon, I should think it a very dangerous thing (if
the King should be severe) for any person to attempt it; for upon the Clergies
submission to the King 25 H. 8.19. the Statute says thus, [ Be it therefore
now enacted by Authority of this present Parliament, according to the said
submission and petition of the said Clergy, that they nor any of them, from
henceforth shall presume to attempt, allege, claim or put in ure any
Constitutions or Ordinances, Provincials or Synodas, or any other Canons,
unless the same Clergy may have the Kings most Royal Assent and License -- upon
pain of every one of the same Clergy, doing contrary to this Act, and being
thereof convict, to suffer imprisonment, and make fine at the Kings Will.

After those Precedents abovementioned, the next the Gentleman meets with, was
the Earl of Straffords, whose Trial in Parliament was completed in a Judicial
way; but he was attainted and condemned by the Legislative Power, where this
Gentleman does acknowledge a Right in the Bishops to be present. Why they did
then withdraw themselves, such as were not Eyewitnesses or Observers of those
times, may best learn from Mr. Hobbes his History of them.

To conclude, the Author does protest, that he has the very same Design, Aim,
and Wishes with that Gentleman; for that Right may prevail is the natural wish
of every good man. And the prevention of those Mischiefs which the Enemies to
our Religion and Government have plotted, and do atchieve to put in execution,
has incited me to this task to satisfy my self and others, where the Right is.
My Sentiments herein I humbly submit to the High and Honorable Court of
Parliament; and if I have written any thing that gives a just cause of offense
to my Superiors, I do here solemnly retract it.

This Gentleman is Ingenuous, and leaves his Reader to his Liberty, to weigh
the Arguments on both Sides, and judge for himself. I have taken the freedom he
allows me, and delivered my Opinion: I pray take you the same course without
Partiality, and then judge for your self.

FINIS.

