A SHORT COLLECTION OF THE Most Remarkable Passages from the original to the
dissolution OF THE VIRGINIA COMPANY.

LONDON, Prined by Richard Cotes for Edward Husband, at the Golden Dragon in
Fleetstreet, 1651.

To the honorable Company of the Adventurers for the Summer (alias Bermudas)
Islands.
My Lords and Gentlemen,
HAving received this following Collection some years since, by the
appointment of Mr. W. Woodnoth deceased, without further directions then what
might be gathered from the Postscript and purpose of the whole Relation; I
remember the Author Mr. Arthur Woodnoth to have been a worthy m^mber, and
sometimes Deputy of this Company, and an ancient Adventurer and diligent
prosecutor of the best ends for the advancement of the Virginia Plantation. I
conceive his purpose might be to take a fitting time for reviving the original
rights of this Plantation, and thereby to encourage this Company in their best
endeavors, by setting forth the honor and constant goodness of Sir John
Danvers likely to give the greatest assistance therein And considering the
respect and gratefulness of most of the members and best interessed persons of
this Company, in choosing that worthy person Sir John Danvers your Governor,
and finding his constant endeavors to answer the greatest of your
expectations, in preserving your just rights and privileges; I judge it now a
^it time to publish the same; and shall forbear to say more of his worth, so
fully charactered throughout this Discourse.

A. P.

An Account and Observation taken by A. W. a true friend and Servant to Sir
John Danvers, and the Parliament-int^rest. Containing a great part of his more
Public Transactions, concerning the Plantation of VIRGINIA, etc.
After some years spent at several times in travel beyond the se^s, he was
shor^ly after his return into England, swo^ne Servant to P. Henry, of his
Priv^-ch^^ber in ordinary, ^emaining under the countenance of his favor till
h^e di^d. But the light of the Court se^ming to him much obscured after the
setting of that bright star, and some relish taken of the uncertainty of
Court-favour toward any that should show themselves cordial for Public good
(which was alw^i^^ his aim) in Parliam^nt, or other-where; he was unwilling to
fix himself in any particular dep^nd^nce upon the Court: all that he sought
was some just r^commendation from this King, who upon that occasion told him,
that he would value him with the best of his Servants of his condition, for
the love he knew his brother bore to him; whereunto Sir I. Danvers answered, it
was so great a favor, as that he would ask no better then to be continued in
his esteem, which he would value as much as if he had preferred him to some
great office or place in his service.

And further considering the proceedings of K. and Court, where the ordinary
transactions by men of all conditions were mostly directed toward the
advancement of absolute power and tyranny, he was less frequent in Court, and
renewed his former care and diligence, spending much time in advancing the
honorable design^ for the Plantation of Virginia.

The Continent of Virginia discovered in the time of Q Elizabeth (who gave it
that name) was in the beginning of K. James his reign much advanced in
reputation, and the advantages promised thereby seemed then worthy the best
consideration how to make it a Plantation for the English: Whereupon many
wor^hy Patriots, Lords, Knights, Gentlemen, Merchant^, and others held
consultation, which produced a large subscription of Adventurers of all
qualitie^ in several proportions, to the value of 200000. l. or thereabouts.
By which time a Patent was procured with great privileges and immunities for
the Adventurers, as establishing and impowering a Coun^ell of State, as well as
a general Company, whereby the whole affairs of that Plantation should in
perpetuity be governed; when a great and forward con^idence was cast upon Sir
Thomas Smith, Governor of the East India, and diverse other Companies in
London; who because he was imprisoned in the Tower, after the Earl of Essex h^d
rested at his h^use (being Sheriff at that time his Lordship w^nt to appeal to
the Citizens of London, the day of his last restraint) wa^ though^ a better
Patriot then afterward approved. But he so far preva^l^d, or some others in
his behalf, that he was constituted the first Governor of that Company, but
under the title of Treasurer, whereby he had ^he chief power and purse o^ the
Company.

And about thi^ time one Sir Thomas Ga^^s, reputed a worthy, dis^r^^t, and
experienc^d Soldier, wa^ sent a^ Go^ernour into V^rgin^a, which drew on a great
increase of people voyaging (...), and planting there, wh^ were to have
^h^pping and provisions sent them by the said Treasurer and Company; which
accordingly was ordered, and in some reasonable manner in appearance performed
for the space of three years, or thereabouts, the time limited for the
Government of the said Sir Thomas Gates.

But in short time the reputation of this undertaking grew so high, and the
government of Virginia was thought so considerable, as it must be confirmed
upon some Peer of the Realm, and the L. de la War was nominated thereunto,
and went Governor by Patent from the Company for three years. But through the
failing of industry upon the place, and of supplies of sweet victuals, and
other accommodations by shipping from England, and the sickliness the Lord
Governor had contracted there, he came home before his time was expired. When
Sir Thomas Smith used means by his Courtship rather to blame the
unhealthfulnesse of that Country, then to have any fault imposed upon the
undertakers, for want of sending supplies in due time to Virginia.

Nevertheless, Henry Earl of Southampton, whose goodness equalled his honor,
having long understood as well by the general notions he had of the place, as
by persons partitularly employed in such discovery, that it was no less
healthful then fruitful, if rightly ordered by some industrious person, his
Lordship procured Sir Thomas Dale a worthy and experienced Soldier in the
Low Countries to be sent thither as Governor, by whose judicious observation
and industry they might be assured of the whole state and condition of the
Country and People on that Plantation. And he by the ability of his body as
well as mind, through much indurance, by want in the miscarriage of supplies,
brought home, as a great instance of his labors and value of the Country, at
least sixteen several sorts of staple commodities, to be raised and propagated
in this Plantation.

And now the best affected of this Nation having found the pulse of the Court
beating wholly in observance of the Spanish Counsels and ends, by interrupting
at home, and bar^ing our trade to the W. Indies, laid hold on this expectation
of Virginia, as a providence cast before them of double advantage, by means
whereof those also that would avoid Court dependence, might most honorably
employ themselves in attending the meetings of that Company and Co^ncell;
whilst in short time some other new discoveries were made by the adventures and
charge of the s^^d Company, as that of the Bermudas, which by reason of its
natural strength, and convenient scitu^^ion gave additionall encouragement,
and seemed to promise security for warlike shipping and navigation t^roughout
the English Plantations.

Frequent consultations were now had of these affairs in the A^^emblies of that
Council and Company, and otherwise amongst those who were most distasted with
the proceedings of the Court, and stood best affected to Religion and Liberty;
which occasioned that passionate speech of K. James, swearing, The Virginia
C^mpany was a seminary for a seditious Parliament, which caused a more close
and considerate proceeding in those affairs. But the meetings authorized by
several Parents granted under the great Seal did exclude or divert the
Prerogative-destructive intrusion; whilst a number of great Lords and some
others remained sedulous and united toward the right end^ declared.

And by this time it appeared palpably that encouragements were giv^n on all
hands to disturb and interrupt the regular and forward proceedings of the
Company, and the care and circumspection of the Council in like manner made
burdensome and prejudicial to many worthy persons in pa^^icular. When also in
a first place the Plantation of New England, though at first under the patent
and limitation of Virginia; was aft^r much dispute and prosecution by Sir
Fard^nand ^^rges then Governor of Plimmouth, and of the Court. Party, by a new
Patent under the specious title of the Weste^n Plantation divided from the
first undertaking and had gr^ate^ compliance with the King and Court-interest,
the more to divide the strength, and weaken the power of the Council and
Company of Virginia, residing in and about London. Which nevertheless the
wisdom of God has made in these days to appear a ble^sing upon that
undertaking. Other interruptions were from turbulent persons, whose weakest
pretentions against the Company or eminent persons therein concerned, were
winged with powerful recommendation from Court, but not so considerable yet,
as to hinder the sedulity of those worthy persons and Parriots, who still
consulting the ways and means for the wished ends, and finding Sir Thomas
Smith involved with the Court and Spanish party, it was as soon suspected that
by his super-intendence as President and Governor, he had willingly omitted
the care and vigilance which should have forwarded and secured the supplies;
the want whereof had distressed and discouraged the chief undertaking. Nor was
there any such account appea^ing, but that much money received was unaccounted
for; but managed in such an intricate or delusive way as could not well be
charged on the Treasurer, nor directly on any other responsable person.

At private meetings of the E. of Southampton, Sir Edwin Sandys, Sir John
Danvers, etc. several observations and proposalls occasioned this result, that
nothing would serve to redeem the honor and reputation of the design for
Virginia, and re-advance the prosperity thereof, so much as an entire and real
account published, the better to discover former negligences or corruptions,
and to beget a better care for the future. And hereupon at a great and general
Quarter-Court, Sir Edwin Sandys, Sir John Danvers, Mr. I. Wroth, Mr. Abbots,
afterward Sir Maurice Abbots, and Mr. Abdey afterward Alderman, were five
Auditors authorized to draw on all manner of accounts, for satisfaction of the
world as well as the Company.

Against any good effect by such Audit much endeavor and backwardness
appeared in all kind of Accountants, but most in Sir Thomas Smith's Creatures
or dependents; whereby great difficulty, or at least dilatoriness was found,
which Sir M. Abbots, and Alderman Abdey took for occasion to tell the rest,
that they being Merchants, their necessary business would not afford them time
for a work of such unhopefull an issue, by reason of the various intricacies of
Accounts, and of such uncertain voyages as those for Plantations. They desiring
and forcing to be excused, left the whole care and pains to Sir E. Sandys, Sir
John Danvers, and Mr. Wroth, who finding a multiplication of difficulties and
interruptions from day to day, were forced after two or three months time;
first, to suppositate a new and direct method for accounting for the future,
which in a book of Account exposed weekly at every Court on the Table, might
the better satisfy; whilst a larger time was taken to rake up the more ancient
obstruction or concealment. In which pursuit Sir E. Sandys, Sir I. Danvers, and
most times Mr. I. Wroth were together five days of the week, from between nine
and ten of the clock in the morning, till five or six in the evening, for the
space of nine months; not without retryving and possibility of gaining in a
very considerable sum, to be charged on Sir Th. Smith, as was generally
believed.

Mean while much industry was used by Bed-chamber-men, and other
super-intendent great persons to beget a disrelish in K. James against the
proceedings of the Virginia Company, upon the score that he was to uphold Sir
Thomas Smith's honor and reputation, so prevalent in Companies, and amongst
the most wealthy Citizens, to procure him loans for supplying his most
necessary 'occasions: which by means of Sir John Danvers familiar
correspondence with some of the Bedchamber, that did serve P. Henry, was
prevented, by inculcating the consideration of palpable injustice, in
obstructing the power granted to the Company: as others in like manner were
careful, whereby the business of Virginia forced (as it were) a passage
through opposition, both forain and domestic; for the Spanish Ambassador
(whose power was great in the Court Counsels) was very sedulous, and spared no
money to hinder the same.

The good hope of this Plantation bringing on the ancient Adventurers, and
their moneys, encouraged also the prosecution and attaining the grant of a
Lottery over all England, which seconded with respective private Letters to the
generous and well affected persons in every County, caused great sums of money
to be brought in, and employed for the Plantation, which brought on the casting
out Sir Tho. Smith, and establishing Sir Ed. Sandys Treasurer and Governor of
the Company, by whose great care and abilities Virginia's increase and plenty
seemed a very hopeful addition to the dominion of England.

Mean-whiles the care and circumspection of the now Governor drew all sorts of
experienced persons of other Nations as Mineral men from Germany, Vignerons
from France, etc. to present themselves, who were in numbers entertained to
assist the industry of the Planters, which with many other concurrent
circumstances of encouragement appeared in one years time advantageous to the
design beyond expectatiod, as by Sir E. Sandys account of his Transactions was
made manifest unto hundreds of Lords and Gentlemen assembled at their Quarter
Court in Easter term, the time for the new election of the Treasurer or
Governor. At which time when the Court prepared to make a new election, most
intending to choose Sir Edwin Sandys for another year, Mr. Robert Kirkham one
of the Clerks of the Signet, with Mr. Alderman Hammersley, presented themselves
as Messengers from K. James, congratulating the hopeful progress of the
Virginia Plantation, but withal professing his Majesty's great care, where so
many of his subjects were concerned. And therefore the Country being so
remote, and wherein the greatest Merchants might be most knowing through their
experience and interest, his Majesty recommended six persons, whereof he
expected one should be that day chosen their Governor; which struck a silence
into the whole Court for a time, but in conclusion declared (as believed) by
Will. E. of Pembrooke, Henry E. of Southampton, and others, to be against the
Companies just freedom of election granted by Letters Patents, and caused by
some misinformation given the King, whereof they would speak with him. In the
mean time an order was entered for continuance of that Quarter Court on a day
the week after.

The same Court again assembled, and those Lords desired a preparatve meeting
of the Council for Virginia, where it was freely recounted, how K. James
remained obstinately excepting against the person of Sir Edwin Sandys,
declaring him his greatest enemy, and that he could hardly think well of
whomsoever was his friend, and all this in a furious passion returning no other
answer, but Choose the Devil, if you will, but ^^t Sir Edwin Sandys.

Hereupon the generality of the Company being in the height of discontent, and
the Lords and others of the more timorous nature in trouble how to proceed in
the presence of a very considerable Assembly in a cause so lately rais^d to
such expectation, which now they could not but account lost by this
discouragement, Sir John Danvers entreated some private conference with the E.
of Southampton, a most cordial stickler for this Plantation, and asked,
whether his Lordship would be pleased to own the place, if the Company chose
him Treasurer, whilst they should not fail by all means to f^ce him from the
pains and trouble by nominating such a Deputy as would please his Lordship and
the whole Company, in prosecuting still those ways which might give
satisfaction and encouragement to the undertakers. That most Noble Lords answer
was, I know the King will be angry at it, but so the expectation of this pious
and glorious work may be encouraged, let them do with me what they please. And
accordingly the council and Company in a fair way chose the Earl Treasurer,
and Sir E. Sandys Deputy, which such other co-incid^nt officers for ^ropagating
the work intended, as was generally acceptable and applauded by all good men.

The public asserting of those rights and immunities granted under the great
Seal of England, much raised the spirits, and increased the number^ of those
that made preparation for this Plantation; for within the following year there
we^e above fifty Patents granted under the Seal of the C^mpany to several
person^, who were to have land set out and allotted unto them, propo^tionable t^
the numbe^s of people they engaged to transplant from England: the least number
so c^ntracted for in any one Patent wa^ a hu^d^ed some 5 hundred^ some a
thousand^ and diverse in greater proportions, and these pat^ntees were not the
meanest in honor, virtue and godlines^.

And now was likewise so great a compliance in this pio^^ work, an^ moneys came
in so plentifully from the Lottery, ^^d by payment of Arrears upon fo^mer
subsc^iption^, as seemed almost to promise as well as to invite a great part of
the Nation to withdraw themselves from an oppressing unto a more free
government establishing in Virginia, whither great store of shipping was
engaged and even in readiness; when in the conclusion of a broken Parliament
by K. James, both the E. of Southampton and Sir Edwin Sandys were committed
close Prisoners, upon private assumed suggestions, which struck some terror
into most undertakers for Virginia. Nor did the shipping and Passengers know
which way to derive those Orders, Warrants, and Allowances which were many ways
necessary and pertinent for setting forward of their voyages. The complaints
and apprehensions thereupon coming to the place where the Courts and Registries
were kept (the house of Mr. Farrars Merchant in St. Syths-lane^ London.) much
bewailing and consultation was there had. Where after consideration of the
power granted to the Company; the two Farrars Brothers by their discretion and
affection assisting much herein) it was resolved, That the Company might and
should proc^ed, as if their Governor and Deputy were hindered by sickness, or
other diver^ion, and finding the whole proceeding like to be more advantaged if
Sir John Danvers would show himself to keep and govern the Courts, a number
w^nt with Mr. Nicholas Farrar home to his house, imploring his assistance,
which (though knowing, as my Lord of Southampton said, the King would not be
pleased therewith) he readily undertook, to the great satisfaction of many the
Adventurers and Planters. In which time of his transaction, which was about a
month or three weeks, there were fraighted and went out from London 25 sail of
considerable shipping and numbers of Passengers for Virginia, besides others
about the same time from the Western ports.

The E. of Southampton, and Sir Ed. Sandys were by this time released, and
nothing appearing against them, rejoiced the more, to ^ind the dispatch of the
shipping, etc. so well over. And though by a contrived sudden complaint in
Parliament, against the Lotteries for Virginia, as pernicious to the countries
where they were introduced, with seconding informations suggested; the
Lotteries were voted down, and the great^st stream for supplies of money now
stopped, yet consultation and endeavors gave new hope of benefit other ways,
which more then probably might still advance the Plantation, wherein many
parties had their aims and expectation.

Whilst th^se forementioned passages were in hand, the Court and Spanish
faction failed not to give assist^nce and ^ncouragem^nt to all those (and they
were very many) that strained by any way or means to divert or interrupt the
affairs under the care of this Council and Company. Which drew on their
considera^ion for the displacing of Sir Thomas Smi^^, and constituting of Sir
Edwin Sandys Governor of the Bermudas or Summer-Ilands Company, and
Plantation, which was an appendan^ o^ Virginia, the labor and safety of both
being the same, and by the members thought fit to be trusted in one way, and in
hands and counsels best approved. Sir Ed. Sandys settling in that government,
was incountred with much information of neglect or infidelity committed
therein, by Sir Thomas Smith, the I^land wholly wanting ammunition to maintain
it against an enemy: which the place b^ing of that importance, seemed much to
startle the undertakers, the most whereof were the principal Earls, Lords, and
Gentlem^n of best thought^ and affection in the Virginia Company, who as they
were par^icularly in^eressed by purchase, so had they a special care of the
Castles, Fortresses and harbor there, capable to preserve and maintain a Fleet
of ships, fit to succor and protect Virginia, and other American Plantations
in expectation to be added ther^unto^ from the ampli^ude of a l^^e^ Pat^n^ f^r
compr^hending a ^umb^r of other Islands as well as the Bermudas, within the
limitation of the Virginia Plantation.

And now it was advertised from the E. of Somerset, the then Favorite and
Favour^r of the English r^ghts, that he understood by confident intelligence,
that the Spaniards h^d a design about a certain time of tha^ year to att^mpt
^he seizing of that ^^land, because it was wholly unprovid^d of powder and
ammunition, and appr^hended as at this time without vi^ible possibility of
present supplies^ But it pl^as^d God through the ne^lective way of Sir Tho.
Smith the gove^nm^nt of ^he Island was disposed into the hands of one M^re, who
upon sight of two Spanish Vessels of good burden approaching towa^ds the chi^f
Castle at the entrance of the Port, got powder and shot for the charging only
of two pieces of Artillery, which levelled and discharged near at once upon
those ships. The Commander thinking himself betray^d, because he was assured
he should find no manner of ammunition, weighs anchor, and se^s sail away from
thence^ as the first return of shipping from the ^^rmudas made cl^er unto the
Company, etc.

This happy escape aggravating the omission or corruption of Sir Tho. Smith,
seemed to revive and give a new vigor ^o the Partners in this Plantation, and
there being nothing of more spe^dy advantage on the place for return to the
owners and adventurers then the planting and transporting of Tobacco (whilst it
might be imported, as from Virginia for 5 percent^ for their custom) great
store thereof was made and preparing, when upon some tender of a large r^nt for
the sole sale of Tobacco, an order of the Council Board did impose paym^nt of
the highest custom, as to thirty or forty in the hundred upon the Bermudas
Tobacco, proportionably with all other, notwithstanding the ^^emption within
their Pa^^nt: which, with other things, much intr^nching upon the ^ight^ and
privileges of the Adventurers, gave occasion of a through consultation of the
Earls, Lords, Gentl^men and ^^r^hant^ concerned, and in conclusion caused an
address of thems^lve^ personally, desiring audience of K. James, which being
attained, and prosecut^d by the society o^ the Earl^s of Pembrooke,
Southampt^n, and others, the Lord Cavendish being appointed to express the
nature of complaint and appeal to the King, his Lordship had no sooner e^^red
into the matter, but that his Majesty began to show much discontent, and with
much ado was drawn to any patience, which gave much dis^ouragem^nt in the
case, and prevented the declaring of the most just cause of importunity
appointed to my Lord Cavendish; when Sir John Dan^ers fell on his knee, and
besought the King to hear him, as the first time he ever had the honor to
speak unto his Majesty in a serious business: and having leave, he stoutly
inculcated that point of justice, which could not be denied, at which the King
flang away in greater passion; insomuch that the Prince who is now King, drew
Sir I. Danvers aside, as in favor to him, desiring he would urge the King no
fur^her, and undert^ok to speak with Sir I. Danvers, and accordingly to move
the King at some other time, which was unperformed, though more then once
desired by Sir I. Danvers.

According to which course or vogue of State, some Lords and others, though
Members of the same Company, t^ok up speciou^ly the corrupt interest of those
that had been formerly ^onstituted and employed in places and a^fairs o^ trust
belonging to these Planta^ions, as some of the former Governors sent in time
of Sir Thomas Smiths Government, either to Virginia or the Bermudas, etc. who
b^ing concurrently obnoxious in point of Account, were as firmly supported by
him and his friends, with the Spanniolized ^action of the Council Board, and
the King^ Bedchamber. Which proceedings excited the better and more cons^ant
faithful party to the more careful and laborious pe^severance, when the
prospering of the undertaking toward so great an addition of Dominion, was
from time to tim^ interrupted, as about this time by Quaeres to the number o^
two or three and thirty from the Council Board, by the Kings special
appointment^ pretending great care that such numbers o^ his subject^ gone to
the Plantations, might be circumstantially provided ^or in their laws,
freedoms, etc. These Quaeres sent on the Sa^u^day were to be satis^ied the
Tuesday following^ at sitting of the Council in the afternoon. The Lo^d
Ca^e^d^sh^ Sir ^dwin Sandys^ Sir John Danvers and Mr. Ni^h^la^ Farrar mee^ing
by appointment of the Company, with power to c^n^ider and present what they
should ^ind pertinent therein, ^ound a hard ^a^ke to answer so many particulars
in so s^^^t time. Yet ^inding that the truths c^uch^d or exem^li^^ed in the
^eiger-books of the Company would s^ti^^^e the Q^aeres and obj^cti^ns
thereupon, Mr. Farrar desired the bu^ine^^^ and s^^rch might be divided into 4
parts^ wherein he would take that of greatest labor: which wa^ concluded b^
the other thr^e, and accordingly brought together the Tue^d^y morning^ and
presented to the Coun^^ll Board in the ^fternoon, and gave the Lord a most
unexpected satisfaction, as was confessed. When by way of congratulation it was
proposed, that now there was so great numbers and Trade like to follow in that
Plantation, some care might be taken for their safety by special
fortifications, and an account thereof made to the King. Whereupon it was
ordered at the Board, that William Earl of Pembrooke, Southampton and other
Lords of the Council and Company for Virginia, should make enquiry and
acquaint his Majesty of what was, and would be done in that point, for
preservation of the lives of his subjects against enemies, either Natives of
Virginia, or others, since he had vowed, that if he had not satisfaction
therein, he would think himself bound to take the whole government and the
appointing of Governors into his own hands. Which occasioned the calling
together of a Council for Virginia of all that were near, who as they clearly
saw the desperate malignity of the Secret-Court-Spanish party, so often
appearing in persecution of this Plantation; so had they a great apprehension
the King could not be easily satisfied, since the Companies treasure was
exhausted, and there was little hopes of more contribution or Adventurers,
whilst they lay under such discouragement. Sir John Danvers remembering some
notion of hope, and looking over the books of Letters from Virginia, he
observed that throughout the year past there was never less then 17 sail of
shipping in James River, the heart of the Plantation, inferring, that if the
Kings fairer compliance should keep the Company in the same encouragement, the
strength of so many floting Forts in that flat situation, would be equivalent
to, if not exceeding any possible speedy fortification; which the E. of
Pembrooke, etc. conceived fully sufficient to satisfy the King, if he had not
an inveterate disaffection to the work: and this proved an answer appearingly
well received by the King.

Now had the Company a little leisure from the storms or inquisition of the
Council Board, whilst nevertheless particular persons of all ranks, and diverse
under the countenance of those disaffected Lords and others, were fallen from the
true sense and justice of the work chiefly intended. But it was not long before
Sir Lionel Cranfield, presently after E. of Middlesex, about the time of his
approaching to be L. Treasurer, seemed seriously to renew his former professed
contemplation of, and affection to the work of this Plantation, with many
reasons and instances of his well-wishing, and ^t last made this specious
overture. It is a misfo^tune (says he) not to be avoided, that whilst the
Plantations in their present infancy have their whole subsistence by the trade
of tobacco, the Kings necessities casting him upon all, and any ways for
advancement of his revenue, a tender is made of more then 20000. l. per annum,
for the whole importing and sale thereof, and when the Virginia or
Summer-Islands Company offer to plead their freedom in the case, the Lawyers
say, it is a poisonous drug which the King might justify to banish or burn,
and not to be accounted as a staple or national commodity, in which case it
was in the Kings power to do his pleasure in any sort concerning the same; But
to comply for the advantage of the Plantation, the Company might, and should if
they pleased, have the sole importation to them and in their mannaging, for
20000. l. per ann. And to make his zeal and care appear for the prosperity of
this great and pious work, he would put the Company into a way, whereby 200000.
l. more should be gained over and above the Rent, to recompense their want of
supplies by the Lottery, or by the freedom of their own Tobacco from the
necessitated height of custom. And further declares, that their providing for
the Kings interest in so fixed a rent, would make him every way capable and
assistant to all their future endeavours^ which by some collateral means
bending a great part of the most diligent adventurers of the Company to comply
with this Proposition (some conceiving they should find a better glyde in the
business, others to have some advantageous employment in the m^naging of the
Tobacco farme^ and these considerations by way of result promoted by several
stirring spirit^ on Middlesex his grounds) the contract seemed concluded, and
the managing pa^ts designed to special persons. When as soon almost it was
app^rent that nothing of good was intended toward the Company, for now many
base and false suggestions were raised against the E. of Southampt. Sir E.
Sandys, and others, not a little aggravating in the minds of many ingenuous
persons, who had no belief in such loosening of legal interest by Patent, the
just ground of the whole undertaking, which with many lurking and distributed
inventions diverted and broke the contract, whilst the subtilty of Cranfield
advanced the same f^rm with avowed neglect of the Company and persons adhering
ther^unto. And when the greatest disturbance on this and other occasions had
wrought the members of this Company into eminent distraction, a Commi^^ion and
Instructions by way of inquisition were issued with power ^o Judge I^nes, Sir
Henry Spiller, etc. to examine the proceedings of the Vi^ginia and
Sommer-I^lands Company, as especially of the E. of Southampton, and Sir E.
Sandys, which howsoever strictly and strangely carried [as when a Noble person
asked the Judge, how he that was sworn to the laws, durst own proceedings in
that nature, his answer was openly, There was one law of the land, but another
law of the Kings Commissions] yet many days and weeks of the inqui^^tion or
persecution discovered no unworthiness against them, or any other of their
consorts. After this the Council, Company, Adventurers and Planters for
Virginia, conceiving their estate and condition grown more hopeful, having
p^st through the fire of such several rigorous inquisitions, and the
undertak^r^ having far engaged therein, a great rise of confid^nce and
assurance appeared generally, as a renewing encouragement. But their sedulity
and fervency was suddenly quas^t by a Quo W^rranto brought in the Kings Bench
against their P^tent. And notwithstanding it was more then presumed by some,
that the most rightful contest or waging in a legal way would be fruitless,
yet the Company by vote and order thereupon entertained counsel of the best
Lawyers they could get, and resolved to spend the remaining part of their stock
and cash to plead their cause to a due issue; when also some good number of
unknown persons sent in money, plate, and jewels, to animate and assist so just
a defense as this Companies right and interest, whilst many could not but
conceive and fear the example might be most pernicious in other c^^es. Yet
nevertheless before the end of the same term a judgment was declared by the
Lord Chief Justice Ley against the Company and their Charter, only upon a
failer, or mistake in pleading. Which destroyed the hopes of all that looked in
a just and righteous way toward that pious and public work of Plantations.
What was after prosecuted by force of the Kings Commissions may appear by
others, who have thought fit to embrace hope under such constitutions.

Through the calamity of the forementioned sentence, very many honest and
worthy persons declining to act under the Kings ^ommiss^o^-laws, su^^cased from
their exemplary indust^y toward Plantations; only the Company of Bermudas
dependent and derived by particular purchase, and for valuable consideration
from the Virginia Company, with con^irmation by special Charter under the
great Seal, persisted in greater hope and confidence by reason their chief
undertakers were E^rls, Lords, and others of quali^y, but most of them failing
in short time, either by compliance or neglect, the care of this Plantation
fell into the hands of some Members of the Company, less considerable, as to
Court-interest and qualification, no^ without discouragement in the general;
which was the more dispersed by diverse suggestions, as that those Islands had
been declined or forsaken by the Spaniards, because they had found the place to
be only a ^hell or shoale of ^ocks, that had contracted a small thickness of
earth by the falling of leav^^ from the trees, and herbs growing up between
the rocks, which a short time would wear out^ and quickly discover the folly of
those that pretended to plant upon that soil; and that if any further thought
should be to fortify thereon, or have shipping there, in probability to offend
or interrupt the Spa^iards interest or trading in those parts, their power in
the W^st-Indies, would be sure to ruin all that the English had effected b^
whatsoever charge of any particular Company, unless the King would undertake to
back them with his power, whereunto he seemed utterly averse. Nevertheless,
by the incessant good endeavors of some few worthy Patriots, seasonably
assisted by Sir I^h^ Dan^ers, and others, upholding and encouraging them from
time to time, a competent number of the owners of several shar^s of land,
still remained well affected to maintain the Companies and every m^ns just
interest. Who by choosing persons of eminency to bear the name of Governour^ of
their Company, that were willing to appear ^^r their support, and by driving an
annual small trade of Tobacco, etc. held on the regular government of the
Company here, and at the Island^, through various interruption^ in hope of such
fairer times a^ might afford opportunity for highest thoughts of advantage to
the undertakers^ in which ^as^ thou^h almost l^ngui^hing they may not despair
of some good issue of their bes^ desire^.

It may not be unfit in this place to call to mind some special acts of Sir
John Danvers, wherein he took opportunity faithfully and kindly to serve his
worthy friends. One whereof was this, That shortly after the judgment against
the Virginia Company, one Mr. Collingwood came unto him, recounting his
acknowledgement of great obligations for recommending him to the place of
Secretary to the Virginia Company, which was growing every day more valuable,
in case it had been happily continued: and at the same time acquainted him,
that three Merchant men, one after another had been with him at his house,
commending his parts and abilities for employment, and much pitying his case
to be now destitute of means for the maintenance of him and his family, but
concluding in a subtle and soothing way, that as he might perceive the Kings
displeasure against the E. of Southampton, and Sir E. Sandys, so would he gain
employment and great benefit to himself for all the days of his life, by saying
or discovering ought of their transactions, or otherwise, that should bring any
ill reflection upon their persons. When his answer was, That he knew nothing
but honor and justice in their ways, nor upon any terms would be drawn to such
unthankfulness, as to offer the least matter against them. It is true (said
he) they mentioned nothing relating to your self (which he thought was forborne
in regard of the particular relation and obligation he had to him.) Nor ^ould
Mr. Collingwood think it possible openly to detect and convince those Merchants
of this wickedness, because they came singly unto him, and by the same knavery
would deny their attempts, but that this only was to be taken as a caution
against such kind of base insinuation. Sir John Danvers asking further, where
there was any of relation to those affairs that might be tempted to such
villainy: he answered, there was an indigent person, whom he had made use of to
write and make entries for his assistance, whose handwriting and intelligent
apprehension had caused him to be sent for diverse times to Southampton house,
and employed in dictates by that Earl and Sir Ed. Sandys, and he being of
unsettled or loose life, might possibly be drawn to serve the turns of
Malevolents, etc. Sir I. Danvers took speedy course to engage him for a long
time, most whiles locked up in a Chamber, til he had fairly copyed the I^eiger
Court books of all the main transactions of the Company for Virginia,
accordingly at tested for true copies, and th^n encouraging him into the
country to see his friends, giving him a part of reward for his pains, and
obliging him to come to him again for the remainder, by which means he kept him
wholly out of the way, and from temptation. And as soon after as he could speak
with my Lord of Southampton, carried him the said authentical copies,
declaring the information of Collingwood, and that having sometimes heard of a
great governing court Lady, who was desirous to dispossess a femal Heir that
had married a young Gentleman, as to make her rather a wi^e to a creature or
attendant of her own, and after working somewhat in diverting their affections
each from other, a legal prosecution was had to disprove the marriage, which
notwithstanding was affirmed by all sorts of circumstance and witnesses, yet by
corrupting a Register, who in his Entries put a negative for an affirmative, He
that was Judge of the cause secundum allegata and probata expressed on the
Registry, declared a nullity of the former marriage, whereby the heir was
remarried to a second person. This said Sir John Danvers gave him to consider,
how the malice against the Earl, etc. failing in all other inventions, might
possibly in like manner corrupt the records of the Virginia Company, getting
them, as they did not long after into their custody and power. Wherefore he
presented his Lordship with those true copies to be always ready for
justification. The Earl was so affected therewith that he took Sir I. Danvers
into his arms with very great thankfulness, saying, Who could have thought of
such a friendship but Charles Danvers his brother, who was the truest friend
that ever man had? and thereupon calling his kinsman Mr. Wriothsley chiefly
^ntrusted by him, declared the whole discourse, and in conclusion said, Let
those books be carried, and safely kept at my house at Tichfield, they are the
evidence of my honor, and I value them more then the evidence of my lands.

Sir I. Danvers still applying his greatest care and interest for the advantage
of his friends; finding Mr. Will. Carr in some degree of honor with the King,
after his kinsman the E. of Somerset was set aside, and falling into discourse
with him concerning the great worth and parts of Sir Edwin Sandys, whose
kinswoman he had married, and therefore might be presumed the more read^ to
serve him^ Sir I. Danvers put him in mind of the Kings great d^s^leasure
against that Noble Knight, and desired him at some seasonable time to enquire
of the King, what might be the ground of his distaste and hatred against him:
to whom the King gave this answer, that he knew Sir Ed. Sandys to be a man of
exorbitant Ambition, upon the esteem he had of his own abilities, and that
because by his incessant importunity he could not prevail to be made Secretary
of State he had used his utmost endeavor to cross the Kings best intentions
both ge^erall and particular; and this considered, the King said, he could not
think well of any that would hold friendship with him. Mr. Carr communicating
this to Sir I. Danvers, he told him, there was but one trial more to be made,
that since possibly, according to the usual stratagems practiced in Court,
some might have unseasonably importuned the King in his behalf, and under the
pre^ence of friendship done him some great prejudice in incensing the Kings
hatred against him, he would be pleased to venture so far, as to press the
King to know who they were that solicited his Majesty for him, without his
concurrence in a business that had brought so much of his displeasure upon
him. Which Mr. Carr as nobly undertook, when the King was fain to take on him
the whole matter and circumstance, saying, Sandys was too crafty to put his own
ambitious design into any other hand, or move it otherwise then by his own
mouth, from whom he had received such encroaching importunities as had utterly
destroyed any interest he might ever expect in his good opinion: and so the
King fell off in so great a fury, and with such imprecations from Mr. Carr,
that he meeting with Sir I. Danvers bewailed the case with a very great
doubtfulnesse what to think, moving questions about the integrity of Sir Edw.
Sandys, which had been so much declared and believed. and so Sir I. Danvers and
Mr. Carr parted, much wondering at this.

Not long after the Court being removed to Greenwich, Sir Edw. Sandys having
some business with my Lord Privy-S^ale, repaired thither, and being espied by
Sir I. Danvers near to the Privy-chamber, who went to salute him, he demanded
what room that was so full of company, and Sir I. Danvers telling him it was
the Kings Privy-chamber, where many staid to see the King at dinner, he said he
would f^^n see the King too, so as the King might not see him, because (as he
said) he had understood by his best friends, the Kings impatience would wrong
him should he come near him. Whereupon Sir John Danvers told him he would
warrant to stand so before him in the throng that he might have full view of
the King without being discovered by him; which was accordingly performed for
about a quarter of an hour, and so both retired out of that room. And
afterward Sir Edwin Sandys wondering that the King was so much altered in body
and countenance since he had seen him last, which was when he came first out of
Scotland, where he was with him. Is it possible, said Sir John Danvers,
(thinking of the passage Mr. Carr had told him) that you having been so much in
Parliament, and about London, should never have seen the King in so long a
time? it seems almost past belief. Sir Edwin assuredly affirmed it, adding that
from some apprehension given the King from his being in Scotland, when he had
discourse with him, but of nothing that might give any offense, he had been
warned by entire friends, and had observed by many passages in his own
particular, that it would neither be ^it nor safe for him to come in his sight.
The same day toward evening Sir John Danvers meeting with Mr. Carr, told him
of this encounter in matter and circumstance, who lifting up his hands and
eyes, said, Now God bless all good men, for my Master is a very -- ^ All which
endeavor with Mr. Carr's leave was made known to Sir Edwin, who d^ubtlesse
made a right use of thi^ discovery.

These instances, with others of like nature, too large to be remembered here,
confirm the observation of those two worthy Genesis Mr. John and Nich^l^s Farrars,
the one a Merchant of known hone^^y, and the other eminent in all kind of
learning, and true piety, (who with their most virtuous Mother deserve an
honorable memory for their deserts, by laying out a good part of their
plentiful fortune in piously advancing the undertaking for the Virginia and
Bermud^s Plantation). That the Earl of Southampton was a noble person, of true
honor and impartial justice. Sir Edwin Sandys, a man of great worth,
learn^ng, and knowledge, but Sir John Dan^ers of a single entire heart, and firm
in friendship.

POSTSCRIPT.
I Des^re my Cosen Will. W^odnoth to offer this seasonably according to the
communica^ion had thereof between us; and if in the me^n time he can get to
view the Co^^^ h^^^^s of the Virginia Company, and the Orders of the Council
Board, he sh^l do we^l to add the year of our Lord in the Ma^gent a^ every main
Transaction

A. W.
FINIS.

