Moses and Aaron; THE KING AND THE PRIEST.

By the Author of the Examination of Tilenus before the Triers, in the time of
the late Rebellion.

PSALM. 77. the last. Thou leddest thy people like a flock by the hand of Moses
and Aaron. ZECH. 6. 13. And the counsel of peace shall be between them both.
LONDON: Printed by A. Maxwell for R. Clavel, at the Peacock near the West End
of St. Paul's. 1675.

1 SAMUEL 24. 5. And it came to pass afterward, that David's heart smote him,
because he had cut off Saul's Skirt.
THe Service of this day is designed to celebrate the glorious Memory of King
Charles the Martyr. Yet he was arraigned as a Malefactor, and a high Court of
Justice was erected for his Trial. A Court that was no ways High, but in Guilt
and Impudence: No way capable of the Title of Justice, but by an Antiphrasis;
because it was so eminently unjust, as well in it is illegal Constitution, as in
their direful proceedings against their Royal Sovereign. Yet before this Court
he is led, even as a Lamb to the Slaughter; and the Scene is dressed up, with
all the formalities of a legal Trial, that he might with the better Grace be
mocked out of his life, by a Pageantry of Justice.

But whether such Barbarous attempts upon the Person of a King, by his own
Liege People, be warrantable in the sight of Heaven, will be best decided by
the vote and practice of a worthy subject, who was a great sufferer, under the
Power of a Severe Sovereign; yet himself a great Prince, and a Stout Soldier,
and a man after Gods own heart. And upon this Account I have made choice of
this Text, for the subject of my Discourse at this time. And it came to pass
afterward, that David's heart smote him, because he had cut off Saul's Skirt.

Which words do intimate, 1. Temptation, and, 2. declare the Issue of it. The
Temptation was, To destroy Saul, his Royal Sovereign: 2. The Issue of it was,
an Act of Policy, with his Remorse and Repentnce for it.

The first words of the Text do refer us to the Temptation: And it came to pass
afterward. The latter do report the Issue: David's heart smote him, because he
had cut off Saul's Skirt.

In the first, we shall consider the strength of the Temptation; how it was
fortified, with what force of argument it was armed, and with what vigor of
Importunity it was managed, to assault him.

In the second we shall observe two things.

1. What David did, He cut off the Skirt of Saul's Military Robe.

2. What he suffered, His heart smote him for it.

1. The Temptation came upon him (as the wiseman observes Poverty to come upon
the slothful,) like an armed man; and did most impetuously assault him upon
many accounts. For there was a mighty Provocation, and a seeming necessity; and
advantageous Providence and a fair opportunity, a clear Title to the Crown and
a pretended Oracle; to make way and lay claim to it. These were very plausible
arguments, and there wanted not a Combination of Agitators, or a pathetical
Importunity to inforcethem. O peraepretium est etiam ipsorum militum audire
consultationem, eo quod exhortationis versuta malitia, illustrat justi mentem
solidam it inconcussam. Chrysostom. Hom. de D avide et Saul Eras interpret.


1. The Temptation was armed with a specious kind of necessity, which has no
Law to govern it. The implacable malice of Saul, and his frequent Machinations
to destroy David, without any cause or color of offense, were a mighty
provocation. His malice being wilful and of this complexion, no duty of David's
could possibly either oblige or satisfy. Saul was haunted with an evil Spirit.
And when the fit was upon him, none could be found so able to apply an
effectual remedy as David: he is earnestly invited to attend, the v. Chap 18.
and 19.
charms of his hand and harp do becalm the distemper, that did afflict him;
yet so ignoble, so mean, so vile was his malice, he paies his Physician and
music with a Javelin. The King of beasts is not half so fierce and raging: The
Lion may be made gentle, and kindness will oblige him; where he meets with a
due submission, he will exercise a Princely Clemency: But such was the perverse
humor of this King of Israel, no duty in David, no worthy performance could
mitigate his displeasure: David's prudence did increase his jealousy; his merits
did inflame his envy, and his best Services did the more inrage his malice.
When David conducted his forces by his own order, his best success became not
only a matter of suspicion, but a crime, as if it had bin an attempt of Treason
to defeat his enemies. But the most unreasonable of Readiness fears and jealousies
were those, which arose upon the account of Gods presence and blessing in his
enterprises; he was afraid of David, because the 1 Samuel 18 12.
Lord was with him. But it is the property of a wicked man, to carry the fear
of a slave toward Almighty God, because he wants that of a dutiful Son, a
pious Servant.

Whether it were out of tenderness: or Shame, or Policy; once he was resolved
not to engage his own hand in so Barbarous an Act, as the murdering of him; he
designs therefore to take him off by Stratagem, and to ruin him in the way of
Generosity; 1 Samuel 18. 13. with 25.
he does advance him to be a Captain: in his Army, but it is with Design to
have him cut off by the sword of the Philistines; Then he gives him his Daughter
in marriage, that 1 Samuel 18. 21. 25.
his bed might become a snare to him; for his intent was, that David's life
should pay for her dowry. When these Designs and the attempts of Assasinates
had, through Divine Providence, become improsperous: And when David's incounters
with the Philistines, had out of hazard brought him Honor, out of peril
Triumph; Then Saul resolves to act that part himself which was most proper for
so ill a nature, the part of a Tyrant and a Butcher. And then he pursues him in
his own Person, as a Partridg upon the mountains; and many fetters were
employed and watchful to entrap him. But Divine Providence was ever ready to
step into his rescue; for one while he is arrested in his pursuit, by the
Spirit of Prophesy, which came upon him; another while he is diverted by the
incursion of the Philistines into his Territories. And thus the All-wise God
does order the attempts of malicious enemies to be subservient to his own
overruling Power, for the safety of the faithful; but this respite from
Persecution was of no long continuance. The Philistines are no sooner retired,
but like an unwearied Blood-hound Saul takes the scent afresh, and follows this
innocent Lamb, as if he had bin a beast of prey; nor can the desolate
wilderness secure him against his causeless Indignation. He does march up such
craggy rocks and mountains as threaten the subject-vallies with their
prominency, and strike terror into the passengers with the danger of their
falling; mountains that were almost inaccessible, affording no ordinary
passage, but for wild Goats. His rage was so desperate, Ad init. cap.
his malice so deadly, no danger could discourage, no difficulty could stop
him. He does expose himself and his whole Army to a perilous expedition, that
he might quench his insatiable thirst after the innocent blood of a most worthy
Son and Subject. Now, Vim vi repellere, what more frequent? Does not the very
Law of Nature warrant the Practice, To repel force with force? If David had
made a virtue of this necessity, and stretched out his hand to take away the
life of such a malicious Aggressor, in his own defense; surely the Argument of
Self-preservation was pleadable in his justification; especially, if Providence
falls in to second this necessity, as it did here; which brings a fresh supply
to the force of the Temptation.

2. There was it seems, about Engedi a vast Cave, where the Shepherds were wont
to secure their Flocks against the scorching Sun, and ravenous wild beasts;
thither David was retired to shelter himself and that small party, which was
his Guard. While the Kings Army was upon their March, Divine Providence, which
overrules Nature, and steers the actions of Princes, directs Saul into this
Cave, whether to take his rest, or to relieve nature some other way is
uncertain. Hereupon David's Officers are animated to tell him, that now he had
an opportunity to make that Cave the slaughterhouse and tomb of his deadly
Enemy. They tell him that to shake hands with such a Providence is to take
leave of it; not to embrace it were to slight it; not to follow it were to
cross it, and the ready way to provoke God to wink at his destruction, who had
watched so long carefully for his safety. What the Prophet said to Ahab, in the
name of the Lord, after he had dismissed Benhadad his deadly enemy, whom the
Lord had delivered into his hands: Because 1 King. 20. 42.
thou have let go out of thy hands a man whom I appointed to utter destruction;
therefore thy life shall go for his life, and thy people for his people. To
this effect did those Agitators of David's Army argue, in respect of Saul. And
to enforce the Argument and the Temptation,

3. They alledg an Oracle, which in their opinion had devoted Saul to
destruction, as a Sacrifice to Divine Justice, and their own Peace Offering.
For the men of David said unto him, Behold the day, of which the Lord said to
thee, Behold I will deliver thine enemy into thy hand, that thou may do to
him as it shall seem good unto thee. Where and when, and by whom this Oracle
was delivered is uncertain, whether by Gad, or by Nathan, or by Samuel; but
such an Oracle they pretend David had received, to support and comfort him in
his Persecutions; and he had made report of it to his followers to encourage
them to adhere firmly to him. And time and providence being the best
interpreters of such predictions, they took the confidence upon this occasion,
to plead that it might be put in practice. Otherwise not to act upon such a
warrant, would be an inexcusable remisness, if not a stupid cowardice and
disobedience. It would be a means to offend and provoke God, to neglect his own
life and safety, and to wrong them his most faithful servants.

4. That they had advised David to kill Verse. 10.
Saul is evident, and without doubt they urged the execution with much
importunity, as well for their own ease, as for their Masters rescue. They had
been his constant Companions in his travels, in his exile, in his durance; many
a hard march, many a hungry meal had they endured under his Conduct, to attend
and guard his person; many hazards had they run, and many dangers had they
escaped; and now they carried their lives in their hands, while they were hotly
pursued by an enraged Prince, and a puissant Army. Though David's life was the
main quarry that was hunted after, yet they were part of the Covie, and it was
the common game to make them prey and booty as well as their Master. They could
not but long to be rescued out of this jeopardy; To return home and sit quietly
under their own vines, and enjoy their dear Relations: This was a very
desirable satisfaction; but not to be hoped for so long as Saul was so
implacable. And their sad experience had convinced them, this malice was so
mortal it was not to be extinguished but with his life. Nor did they desire to
press David's tenderness or generosity so far as to put the office of an
executioner upon him: They desired but his Order, nay his leave had been
sufficient warrant to them to attempt his rescue with their own. And being thus
redeemed out of his enemies hand, and out of his Jurisdiction too, this would
have been a Crowning Mercy unto David, and have put it absolutely into his
power to reward their honest and suffering Loyalty. Therefore if not out of
love to himself, yet out of kindness and a grateful compliance with them, he
was obliged to listen to their counsel. For though careless of his own safety,
yet to betray theirs was inhumanity; if his own life were not dear to him, yet
(when he has the remedy in his own hands, and may so easily prevent it) to let
them still dwell in danger, was such a piece of improvidence as was not
pardonable in a Soldier and a General; being inhansed by a double guilt 1. of
unkindness, and 9. ingratitude. And these united Grievances might amount to so
high a provocation, as to beget a mutiny in his party, and induce them to
consult their own peace, and leave him to shift for himself.

5. And no doubt they did enforce the temptation further upon the account of
his title to the Crown; and so twisted his interest into the argument together
with their own. David was the Lords Anointed, and declared Heir-Apparent to the
Kingdom by a sentence from Heaven. God (say they) has entailed the Crown upon
thee, and will thou be so tame as to suffer Gods declared enemy to cut off that
intail, by taking away thy life, before thou can inherit? Saul knows very
well upon whom the Crown is to descend; so Verse. 20.
that in seeking to destroy thee he fights against God, and attempts to cross
the Decrees of Heaven, and to frustrate the Counsel of the most High. To fight
against him therefore is to fight the Lords battle; to remove him is the way to
accomplish Gods revealed will together with his secret Beneplaciture, and to
establish thy self according to Gods Ordinance. Saul has rendered himself
unworthy of the Crown, and unfit to govern; he has ruined himself and the
whole Kingdom; barbarously slain the Priests and Servants of the Lord, and
spared those enemies whom the Lord had expressly devoted to destruction. We have
the Prophets declaration, That the Lord is departed from him; That 1 Samuel 15.
12. 13. 27.
he has rejected him, and rent away his Kingdom and given it unto thy self.

When he is divested of his Princely Power, and Regal Majesty, and the Crown
settled upon thy head by an Act of Heaven; not to assert thine own right and
title is more than an effeminate weakness, it can be no less than a supine
stupidity. And has the holy Oil been poured upon thy head to so little purpose?
If that Oil has made thy person sacred, has it added no vigor, no activity to
thy spirit? He that has given thee the Crown has given thee the sword also to
secure and guard it; and not to draw it in thy own defense is to receive it in
vain. Give some proof of thy Princely Prowess and Magnanimity, and suffer not
thy Title to be any longer subject to dispute or question. Lay hold upon the
present opportunity, which a happy Providence has put into thy hand; and let
this day be the period of his reign, that it may be the commencement of thy
own. These we may imagine were the Arguments which David's Servants had mustered
up to strengthen their temptation, when they did advance the proposition to
assault his Loyalty.

And now behold the Philosophical moderaration of David's spirit. Behold a
Conflict, a Victory, a Crown and Triumph. That Cave was the field, and the
Combat was wonderful; David wrestles, and Anger played the Champion. Saul was
the matter of the Combat, God the spectator and the judge. What a sharp
Conflict was here betwixt Sense and Reason, Self-love and Loialty, kindness
toward his suffering friends, and allegiance toward his dread Sovereign? But
David was as firm and steadfast as a Rock in his resolved integrity. Neither the
memory of former sufferings, nor the sense of present streights, nor the fear
of future dangers, nor the solitude of King Saul, nor the imporunity of his own
party, nor the hopes of impunity, nor the possession of the Kingdom upon the
death of Saul, could prevail with him to avenge himself, or shake his steadfast
Loyalty.

This victory was more glorious than his triumph over the Giant, the proud
Philistine; for there he subdued but a single enemy, but here he conquered
himself and his whole Army. Readiness life was precious in David's 1 Samuel 16. 21.
eyes, and he did abhor to kill him. Nor was this Policy in David, but
Conscience. That which was Readiness fear, was his best security. He was afraid of
David, because God was with 1 Samuel 18. 12.
him. And why so? God does restrain the spirit of Princes: And he it was that
bridled up the spirit of David. As Joseph in another case, How shall I do this
great wickedness and sin against God? Such a wickedness David deemed it to take
away Readiness life; and therefore when he had him at another time at the like
advantage, he gave this charge to his Captain Abishai, Destroy him not, for who
1 Samuel 26. 9.
can stretch forth his hand against the Lords Anointed, and be guiltless?

Obj. But this Prince was wilful, merciless, Agitator.
and a Tyrant.

Sol. We are obliged to be dutiful, Not only 1 Pet. 2. 17, 18.
to the just and gentle, but also to the morose and froward. And if I be under
a violent persecution, it is not lawful for me, vim vi repellere, to encounter
force with force; but when the Aggressor is my equal or fellowsubject: And then
it must be done, cum inculpata tutela, when I can make no escape by flight, and
have no other way for my defense. But my Prince has his Authority over me from
Heaven; and therefore I must be subject to him, out of Conscience, as for the
Lords sake. The sword is put into his hand by Almighty God; and for For the
King is not anointed over single Persons, but over Gods Inheritance, 1 Samuel 10.
1. and Chap 15. 17. the head of the Tribes.
any private Person, or any Club of subjects, * to wrest it out, is a double
Usurpation. They do invade Gods Sovereignty, who say, Vengeance is mine and the
Princes Perogative, whose office it is to protect and punish; when we will be
our own Protectors, and defend our selves against the order of God and Man, we
deservedly forfeit the Protection of them both.

Obj. But that Power, which God had put into this Prince's hands to enable him
to Protect, he did employ to persecute.

Sol. Why in that case, there is no necessity to resist, because then, God has
made it our duty to suffer. And it is better, if 1 Pet. 3. 17.
the will of God be so, to suffer for well-doing than for evil-doing. God gives
thee an opportunity to exercise thy Faith and Patience; thy self-denial and thy
meekness; thy Equanimity and generous Reliance upon him. And when he calls thee
to this suffering, he is well able to reward thee for it. Blessed are they that
are persecuted for righteousness sake. You are not left without a precedent;
For the joy that was set before Mat. 5. 10. 1 Pet. 3. 14.
him, Christ himself was pleased, to endure the Cross and despise the shame.
And he Heb. 12. v. 2.
left us an example that we should not avenge our selves, but follow his steps
in Obedience unto blood, committing both our cause and our selves 1 Pet. 2. 21,
23.
to him, who judges righteously. And this was exactly David's Practice. The
Lord judge between 1 Samuel 24. 12, 13.
me and thee, and the Lord avenge me of thee; but mine hand shall not be upon
thee. As says the Proverbs of the Ancients, Ab impiis egredietur impietas, (
which is, H. Card.
an argument, quod impium est se ulcisci) wickedness proceeds from the
wicked, but mine hand shall not be upon thee. This was his profession unto
Saul; and his complaint to Almighty God was to the same effect; Princes have
persecuted me without a cause, Psalm. 119. v. 161.
but my heart stands in aw of thy word.

Obj. But the Soldiers do here remind Agitators.
David of something that had bin delivered by God himself in favor of their
pretensions.

Sol. When Soldiers turn Preachers, every Act of Providence that seems to
favor their designs, shall be the voice of God; every opportunity to do
mischief to such as they oppose, shall be interpreted a command from Heaven to
do it. And for ought appears in the sacred Text, there was nothing else in
their Allegation. Let us grant that the Lord had said to David in express
Terms; Behold, I will deliver thine enemy into thy hand: Yet he did not
determine the Person; he did not tell him, That enemy was his Sovereign: If he
had said expressly; Behold, I will deliver Saul into thy hand; Yet, what to do,
had bin a further question? what? to kill him; no, that thou may do verse. 4.
to him, as it shall seem good to thee. And a loyal heart will Interpret this
of an happy opportunity to show a signal duty and kindness; not take it for a
commission to destroy him, against so many Pregnant Interdictions to the
contrary. And this was the sense and the sentence of David, and he was a
Prophet.

3. For the argument drawn from Providence it is not only irrational and unsafe
but impious. When Judas committed a rape upon Divine Providence to gratify his
Avarice, he did highly aggravate his own guilt: so our Blessed Savior argues
the case before Pilate, Thou could have no Power John 19. 11.
at all against me, except it were given thee from above; therefore he that
delivered me unto thee has the greater sin. And sure David had not taken
Divine Providence by the right handle, if he had abused it unto Parricide; As
long as he continued steadfast in his duty, he might rely upon it, that
Providence was not weary to protect him, but awake to watchover him, and to put
him into possession of the Throne, whenever it should legally become void for
him. But we cannot offer a greater contumely to Almighty God, than to set his
Providence at variance with his Commands, and make his Goodness contradict the
Justice of his own Ordinance. If it be lawful to forsake the plain path of his
Commands, to follow the maze of Providence; then the misfortunes of any
Adversary would be a good warrant to destroy him, and the rule of our practice
should not be, as the Apostle has set it, If thy enemy hunger, feed him; if he
thirst, give him drink: but thus, If thy enemy hunger, starve him; if he
thirst, give him gall and vinegar, and heap coals of fire upon his head: Not
to melt him into a reconciliation and kindness, but to consume him into ashes.
And if this had bin warrantable, what had David's own doom bin, when he was
forced to flee from the face of Absalom? when God had put out his Glory, and
cast his Throne down to the ground? Then the Inference had bin Irrefragable,
Persecute him and take him, for there is none to deliver him. But this is ill
Logic and worse Divinity.

-- Careat successibus opto,
Quisquis ab eventu facta notanda putet.
Let us reflect upon David's imprecation against such as follow Providence, that
they may add affliction to affliction. Let their Table be made a snare, and
their welfare a trap, pour out thine indignation upon them, Psalm. 69. 26.
and let their habitation be desolate; why? for they persecute him whom thou
have smitten; and they talk to the grief of those whom thou have wounded.

4. It Is true David was anointed to succeed, but till he was duly put into
possession, he was but a Subject: And being heir Apparent to the Kingdom, it
became him so much the less to be a Traitor to that Crown, to which he had so
fair a Title.

5. And to be afflicted in the Minority of his exaltation, may be of Singular
advantage to him. The Rod may discipline the Scepter, and he that has felt how
keen the sword is, may learn by that sad experience, to manage it so much the
better; when it is actually put into his hands by the Lord of Hosts; he that
has practiced obedience in the Passive sense, knows the better how to govern
others. The Captain of our Salvation was made perfect through sufferings. And
herein David was to be his Type; and therefore he must not ascend the throne
upon steps made by the treasonable slaughter of his Predecessor, but be led to
it by the Cross, and take Persecution in the way to his Coronation. And his
faithful Servants must be content to suffer with him, that they may be advanced
and glorified together. And thus much of the Agitators plea, and of that
Combination of Probabilities which did concur to attempt his loyalty, viz.
Provocation and a seeming Necessity, Prediction and Providence, Opportunity and
a just Title to the Crown, with the Importunity of almost forlorn Adherents.

Qu. We have the Issue of the Temptation in two particulars:

1. In what David did. 2. In what he suffered.
1. He did not slay him; he abhorred that practice, Saul's life was precious in
his eyes. But to prevent a further mischief of his enraged Soldiers, he arose
up himself, and cut off the Skirt of his military robe. And he had a threefold
end in it.

1. To confute the Calumnies of his enemies, who had accused him for a Traitor;
wherefore, says he, do thou give ear to the insinuations of those men, who
would persuade thee, that David seeks thy life? [Where by the way we may
observe, that David does not impute it to Readiness inclination, (his duty taught
him to believe the King of himself would do no wrong;) but to the malice of
some Sycophants. Behold, thine eyes see, that the Lord has this day delivered
thee into my hands, and I was advised to kill thee; but mine eye has spared
thee, for I said, I will not put forth my hand against my Lord, for he is the
Lords Anointed.

2. And hereby he does vindicate his own Innocence. As it was a demonstration
of Christ's Power to make a rescue, when the Soldiers which came to apprehend
him, were struck down backward at the dread of his presence: So it was a
Demonstration of David's Innocence, that he cut off but Saul's skirt, when it
was in his Power to cut off his life. My Father, see the skirt of thy Robe in
my hand. My taking this only, and not thy life from thee, is a clear evidence,
That I have no Treason or Malice in my heart against thee. And David had

A Third end in it: To convince Saul of the error into which some Sycophants
had misled him, and to melt him into reconciliation and kindness: And so it
happened; for Saul melted into tears, and an ingenuous acknowledgment of David's
tender loyalty: And it came to pass when David had made an end of speaking
these words unto Saul, that Saul said, Is this thy voice, my son David? And
Saul lift up his voice, and wept; and he said to David, Thou art more righteous
then I; for thou have rewarded me good, whereas I have rewarded thee evil. And
thou have Verse. 16. to 20.
showed this day how thou have dealt well with me, for as much as when the Lord
had delivered me into thy hand, thou killedst me not; for if a man find his
enemy, will he let him go well away? Wherefore the Lord reward thee good for
that thou have done unto me this day. This was the first, What David did.

2. What he suffered; His heart smote him. There was a palpitation of the heart
doubtless in him, through the commotion of his blood and spirits, and the
tumult of his passions. For hope and fear, anger and compassion, were in
conflict, while he was upon such a hazardous attempt. But this in the Text was
not a natural palpitation of the heart, but a check, nay a sharp stroke of
Conscience. For show me a guilty Person, and I will presently show thee his
lictor, his Tormentor: Show me a Traitor, and I will show thee a Scaffold where
the block and Axe lies for his Execution; that is, the Conscience of the
malefactor: Conscience is the Sentinel of the Soul, placed there to descry the
enemy upon his approach, to give us the Alarm and notice of the danger; If the
enemy has stolen upon us, and entered our Quarters by surprise, it is his office
then to check us, and rouse us up to make resistance and expel him. And upon
this account, and to this effect did David's heart smite him. For David found
himself guilty, and the Rabins say, he was afterward punished by Retaliation,
when his own garments would not serve to keep him warm. Yet others tell us he
was Innocent, for what he did was to a good end, and out of an honest and good
intent; only, say they, it is the part of good minds to startle at the Face of
the Serpent, at the appearance of evil, and to fear guilt where really there is
none to be found. But, by the favor of these Civil Advocates, a good end
cannot sanctify a bad action: If the fact be undecent, a good meaning can
never give it a good Complexion. We must not make our Prince his weakness a
Foil to set off our own integrity. When Hanun had cut 1 Samuel 10.
off the garments of his Ambassadors, David could not but resent the affront,
and was so highly incensed at it, he revenged it with a sharp Hostility. And
shall David offer such an indignity to the King his Master? Kings are jealous
of their Honors; and good subjects are modest upon that account, fearful many
times to receive due praise, lest it should beget suspicion, and raise envy, by
a misconstruction, as if it were a means to draw the eyes and hearts of
subjects from their Prince to themselves: for this reason Joab when he had
besieged Rabbah and brought it to so great distress, it could not hold out a
storm; he sends to his Prince to come and take the honor of the Conquest: Now
therefore gather the rest of the People together, and encamp against 2 Samuel 12.
28.
the City and take it, lest I take the City, and it be called after my name. It
sounded very harsh in Readiness ears, he did not like the music at all, when the
women sung to their Tabrets, Saul has slain his thousands, 1 Samuel 18. 6.
and David his ten thousands. For a subject to be eminently prosperous against
his Princes enemies, is not always safe for him; but to attempt any thing
against his Person that may lessen his Grandeur or his Prudence in the esteem
or opinion of his People, is injurious; and if it be a matter of reproach to
his Royal Dignity, it is more heinous, and amounts to Treason.

Do thou see thy Prince cover his feet Saul)? Do thou observe any thing
undecent in his conversation? Thou may have a loyal heart, no design to
destroy him; but draw not out the sword of a virulent tongue, to cut off his
skirt (to diminish his due esteem and splendor), to curtail his Robe of
Defense and Dignity; the wealth, and strength, and honor, and reputation of a
Prince; for his Prudence, Justice, Valor; and other Virtues, are as his
Military Robe; They do clothe, defend, and adorn his Majesty. If any passion or
temptation has prevailed with thee to cut off any Skirt of this Robe, to
eclipse or impair any of thy Princes Interest; Recollect thy self, and reflect
upon the offense, and let thy heart smite thee; and as a fruit of thy true
repentance, study to make amends for it. So did David, confregit viros suos;
His Party were bent to murder Saul, but he broke their obstinate resolution, by
his loyal exhortation, The Lord forbid, says he, that I should stretch forth
my hand against Saul; For though there be nothing in his nature, nothing in his
temper, nothing in his carriage toward us, that may oblige me; yet there is a
civil obligation lies upon me, Ver. 6, 7.
he is my Master; and a pious Reverence I owe him, for he is the Lords
anointed. When he could alledg nothing else, he does fetch an argument from
heaven to plead on his behalf; though non propter sanctitatem, yet, propter
sacramentum: God has put the holy oil upon him, and that renders his Person
Sacred and inviolable. The Grace that has dignified him, does restrain me;
whatever the qualities of his natural Constitution are, His Majesty is most
excellent; and as he is Gods Vicegerent, I must have a Religious veneration for
him. And wtih these arguments he breaks the stubbornness of his rough Soldiers,
and charms them into calmness and submission.

And now tell me, Shall we take our Creed in this point of Loyalty, from the
Sword-man, or from the Prophet? Shall we govern our Practice by the bloody
Counsel of the Soldiers of Fortune, or by the Judgment and Practice of the man
after Gods own heart?

What a vast distance, what a direct opposition there is betwixt the Principles
of David, and those of our late pretended Godly Party, the bloody Tragedy that
was acted this Day upon our Gracious King of ever blessed memory, does
sufficiently witness.

If Divine Providence allowed them an opportunity for this their attempt of
Parracide, it was designed for their trial, and as well to shame, as to
discover their secret malice and hypocrisy. They had no Provocation but their
own Guilt; no necessity but of their own making; no Prediction but a mercenary
Almanac; and I am sure, no Title to the Kingdom, but what was pleaded by the
Husbandmen in the Gospel, This is the heir, come let us kill him, and seize
upon his Inheritance. And this Argument, pressed by their own Avarice and
Ambition, with the Clamours of a malicious giddy multitude, prevailed.

What Jacob upon his deathbed, bequeathed to those Brethren in iniquity, I
shall apply to them, and so conclude; Simeon and Levi (for they went by
couples, whether you count them by Nation, or by Faction, matters not) are
brethren, Instruments of cruelty are in their habitation. O my soul, come not
thou into their secrets; unto their Assembly, my honor, be not thou united:
For in their anger they slew a man; A man of Gods right hand; A man (as much as
any) after Gods own heart; the best of men, and the best of Princes: And in
their self-will they dug down a wall; A Government that was a Bulwark to our
lives, our liberties, our fortunes; to defend them from violence and invasion:
Cursed be their anger for it was fierce, and their wrath for it was cruel.

But God be blessed, who has repaired that Wall, by restoring the Son of that
Royal Martyr to reign over us.

And for such of that Combination and Brotherhood, whose hearts are still so
reconciled to their bloody Practices, that they do not yet smite them; Jacobs
Prophecy (which follows in the very next words) be their portion; I will
divide them in Jacob, and scatter them in Israel; Let their Factions be as the
dust before the wind; and their designs as the grass upon the housetop, that
withers before it be plucked up.

But let thy hand, O Lord, be upon the man of thy right hand, our Gracious
Sovereign; make him strong for thine own self; Clothe his enemies with shame,
upon himself let his Crown flourish: That under his Government we may lead a
quiet and peaceable life in all godliness and honesty. So we thy People, and
the sheep of thy Pasture, will give thee thanks for ever, and show forth thy
Praise to all generations.

Amen.
NUMB. 17. 10. And the Lord said unto Moses, Bring Aarons rod again before the
Testimony, to be kept for a token against the Rebels; and thou shall quite take
away their murmurings, from me, that they die not.
WHen the flames of dissension do break out in the house of God, a Religious
Prince can do nothing more noble, nothing more becoming his Royal Office, than
to bring water to quench it. God having entrusted him with the Supreme Power,
is pleased also to deposite the Court-rolls of Heaven Deuteronomy. 17. 18.
in his hands. He creates him, Custos utriusque Tabulae, Defender of the Faith,
and a Nursing Father of the Church. David even for Gods sake was glad to be a
doorkeeper in the house of God, that he might shut out profanation, and debar
intruders from invading the Sacred Office, and committing a Rape upon Holy
Things. Besides, there is no Prince so strong in his Militia, and the
affections of his people, but he will stand in need of Gods assistance; and the
Priests interest lies chiefly here. Though weak and defenseless in himself, yet
he has the conduct of a Spiritual Militia; Preces and Lacrymae, Prayers and
Tears are at his Devotion. And these can prevail with God, and bring relief, if
distressed, unto Caesar's Legions. So that Interest alone is sufficient to
procure a reciprocal aid between them. The Priest is obliged to pay Homage to
the Prince, to bless him in Gods name, to honor him before the people; and the
Prince is reciprocally obliged to succor and support the Priest. Aaron was
assigned to Moses for a coadjuton, to be his Prophet, his Spokesman Exodus 7. 1.
to God and to the people. And Moses was enjoined to be to Aaron instead of
God, a Sun, Exodus 4. 16.
and a Shield, a Defense and Comfort.

Indeed Controversies in Religion are seldom managed with that temper, that
should keep them within their proper sphere. Men for the most part contending
not so much for Truth as Victory: Debates commonly beget Animosities, and those
Animosities are fomented into Parties and Factions. So that a Schism can no
sooner arise in the Church, but it is presently attended with Sedition in the
State. When the Church is in jeopardy through the commotions of a tumultuating
people, the fluctuation of those raging waters does usually make the State
sick, put the whole body Politic into a distemper. If Aaron be disturbed in
his Office, Moses cannot long sit quiet upon his Throne. Divine Providence does
thus order it, that the Prince may find himself concerned, as well in kindness
to himself, (for his own tranquillity) as in love to God, to becalm such raging
tempests, to bridle and restrain such stubborn dispositions. When the offices
of Prince and Priest were united in one single person (as they were in
Melchizedec, and by the law of nature in the firstborn;) the necessity hereof
was more visible, but not more important. When the administration of these
Offices is committed to distinct persons, their interest is so mixed and
twisted, that like Twins they thrive and fade, live and die together. Though
the pretended quarrel be for Liberty in Matters of Religion, yet the
Insurrection hereupon is as well against Moses as against Numb. 16.
Aaron. Hereupon the Crown and the Myter, the Scepter and the Crosier are
concerned in Prudence to engage in an inviolable league, for the mutual defense
of one another. Upon this account Moses does espouse the quarrel of the
Priesthood, owns its Interest, and becomes its Patron under all perils. And
this he does not fondly and rashly, but in the fear of God, and upon good
advice; yea by Gods own order and appointment. And the Lord spoke unto Moses,
etc.

Here we have a great controversy about a Title of office. The office of the
Priesthood; In which there are three things considerable:

1. The Case, 2. The Trial, 3. The Record.

1. The Case is Aaron's; wherein we shall consider, 1. The Competitors,
(amongst whom we shall find a Plaintiff and the Defendant). And 2. The Patron.
In the 2. the Trial; we shall consider, 1. the Jury, and 2. the Verdict. A Jury
of Gods own Impannelling, so that we may be sure it was upright and impartial.
Take twelve rods according to the number of the Tribes of Israel; And write the
Prince of every Tribe his name upon his Rod. And lay them up in the Tabernacle
of the Congregation before the Testimony, where I will meet with you. And it
shall come to pass Verse. 2. 3, 4, 5.
that the man's Rod, whom I shall choose, shall blossom.

2. The Verdict, not given by way of Oracle; for they had no great confidence
in Moses, who was to report the Oracle. Therefore God speaks to their eyes by
way of miracle; and so the Verdict is according to Gods own direction. And it
came to pass Verse. 8.
on the morrow, That Moses went into the Tabernacle of witness, and behold the
Rod of Aaron for the house of Levi was budded, and brought forth buds, and
bloomed blossoms, and yielded almonds. In the third the Record, we shall
consider, 1. the Exemplification of it; and 2. the Design. And these are
expressly in my Text, Refer virgam ut servetur in signum. And the Lord said unto
Moses, Bring Aarons Rod again, before the Testimony, to be kept for a token
against the Rebels. This I call the Exemplification of the Record, Et quiescant
querelae; And thou shall quite take away their murmurings from me, that they
dye not. This is the Design, and purpose of it.

1. We will begin with the Case, Aarons Case, and first of the Patron of it,
which was Moses: Dixitque Dominus ad Mosem. The Hierarchy of the Church was not
of Moses's Institution. The God of Order established an imparity amongst the
officers of the Church. Aaron and his Sons were advanced to the Priesthood, and
the Levites settled in a state of Subordination to them, by Gods own
appointment. Thou shall appoint Aaron Chap 6. 10.
and his sons, and they shall wait on their Priests office. They are
immediately dedicated unto God to serve him in the highest sphere of
Ministration: And thou shall give the Verse. 9. Verse. 10.
Levites unto Aaron, and to what end? Bring the Tribe of Levi near, and present
them before Aaron the Priest, that they may Minister unto him. The Investiture
is from Moses, but the Direction and Authority is from God himself.

Moses, we see, had good warrant for this; but the Peoples jealousy suggested,
that he had his own ends to serve under pretense of Gods Institution. They
suspected he had a design to establish his own Throne and an usurped
Prerogative; and they thought there was no way so likely to accomplish this, as
by advanceing his allies; his elder brother, Aaron, to the Highpriests Office.
And if he could persuade the People that this establishment was by Gods own
appointment, while the Glory of the Myter did put out their eyes and dazzle
their judgments, he might take his Advantage to make himself an absolute Prince
over them. That this was their sense is evident from their discourse, Ye take
too much upon you; will ye put out the eyes of this People? and will thou
[Moses] Verse. 3, 13, 14.
make thy self altogether a Prince over us? Hereupon as well to vindicate the
Integrity of Moses, as the Authority of his own Institution, God appoints Moses
to be the Patron of Aarons Case, Dixitque Dominus ad Mosen; And the Lord said
unto Moses, etc. It Is strange an Office that lies under so much contempt
amongst some, should be a matter of so much emulation amongst the Princes of
Israel. Indeed it is a great Privilege to have so free an access to God, as the
Priest ever had; and a great Dignity to be next Moses (the Prince) as well in
point of Honor as Authority. But if their eyes were dazzled with the splendor
of the Myter, Number. 18. 1.
their heart should have weighed what a burden it is to bear the iniquity of
the Sanctuary, and of the Priesthood. This happily might have taken off the envy,
and we should not have had so many Rivals to promote a Faction against the
right Incumbent in the vid. Bonfr. in Chap 16. 2.
holy Office. Ambition started the dispute, which was promoted by Corah out of
envy, and the Sons of Ruben his confederates; and began upon this pretense.
Before the Number. 16. 1.
Tribe of Levi was separated to the Priests Office, the firstborn of every
Tribe was hallowed, as it were by right of Primogeniture Chap. 3. Verse. 45.
to perform the duty. They took it ill to be divested of this Right (which the
Law of nature had intailed upon them) and to see it translated entirely upon
Aaron and his Sons, created matter of envy and indignation (especially in Corah
and the Sons of Ruben). If one Priest must needs be settled over all the Tribes,
why not the Son of Ruben, the firstborn? For though his Father forfeited his
birthright, yet Gods Law does Genesis 49. 3. 1. Chron. 5. 1.
not extedn the penalty beyond the third or the fourth Generation; and by this
time the intailed curse being cut off, it is just his posterity should be
restored to the right of Primogeniture. This was very plausible for the
Rubenites to plead, while they aimed likewise, in all probability, at the
Scepter. But this would not serve Corah's turn, he affected an Ecclesiastical
supremacy himself (so Moses tells him:) But he could not tell Chap 16. 10:
well how to make out his Title, for though he was of the Tribe of Levi, yet he
was head but of the Second house; Aaron was of the first. He was therefore to
gratify Exodus 6. 21.
his envy by procuring Aarons Jurisdiction to be voted down, and his Power
levelled, that himself might be exempted from all Canonical Obedience, and
become an Independent. And then his Ambition suggested, That by his popularity
and little Arts of insinuation, he might gather a numerous congregation. And to
this end he courts the People, Chap 16. 3.
and pleads the cause of a Godly party; Ye take too much upon you, seeing all
the congregation are holy, every one of them. And therefore sufficiently
qualified to choose their own Priest, or administer to themselves. This
Doctrine did so bewitch the People, that (even after the Ringleaders of the
Faction, Corah and the Sons of Ruben were removed by a Signal and Stupendous
vengeance) all the Chap 16. 42.
congregation (not one Tribe excepted) conspired against Moses and against
Aaron, to carry on the design, until fourteen thousand and seven hundred of
them were swept away with a new plague, and the rest silenced by a Miraculous
decision of the controversy. In the interim, how does Aaron the Defendant,
behave himself in this quarrel? why, he shows himself (as becomes a Type of
Christ) worthy that Office, which they maliciously contended to wrest from him,
when he sees Number. 16. 48.
that wrath is gone out and the plague begun: He takes his Censer to make an
Atonement, and standing between the dead and the living, He exposes his own
life as a sacrifice for these his enemies; but for his cause he pleads not one
word, but submits himself and it, wholly to him that judges righteously: and
so we proceed to,

2. The Trial. But had not a special Verdict past against them already? Had
they not acknowledged a judgment, upon the loss of 15000 Souls, swept away by a
threefold Vengeance, the devouring earth, the consuming fire, and a wasting
plague? But this is thought imputable to some rashness of conduct in the
business; or to Moses's Interest and importunity with God. And so their Spirits
being imbittered and their hearts hardened, those judgments made no impression
upon them. In mercy therefore, God deals with them in cool blood, and summons
them to a new Trial; wherein he vindicates the Authority of his own
Institution, and seals Aarons Pattent for the sacred Office with a miracle.

In this Trial we are to consider, 1. The Jury, 2. The Verdict. In the Jury we
may consider, 1. The nature, 2. The number, 3. The place of their meeting.

1. They are Rods. Men many times do so far degenerate, become so unreasonable,
that God appeals to senseless creatures to take up the dispute and decide the
controversy, that he has with them, Hear O ye mountains the Lords controversy.

Besides, the Rod is an Emblem of Authority, an Ensign of Jurisdiction. The
Lord shall Psalm. 110. Heb. 11. Psalm. 89. 32. Apoc. 21. 15.
send the rod of thy power out of Sion. And there is a threefold use of the
Rod, consonant to that Emblematical. signification. For 1. Support; for 2.
Chastisement; and 3. Mensuration. And it belongs to the justice of Authority to
support the weak and innocent, to chastise the wicked and impenitent, and to
mete out reward and punishment respectively unto all. The Rods therefore are
not unfitly put upon the Jury to find for the Priests office. And the Rods of
Almond-Trees most opposite to this purpose; for this being the first of Trees
that awakes out of the dead of Winter, and shoots up to cloth and dress it
self, to it belongs the right of Primogeniture amongst the Trees; and therefore
it is so much the fitter to determine upon what Tribe the Sacred Priesthood, a
special branch of the right of Primogeniture, is to be transferred.

2. For the number of these Rods, there is some difference amongst
Interpreters, because the Tribe of Joseph was divided into two Families, and
had a double portion in the land of Canaan, and so upon that civil account,
there were twelve Tribes besides the Tribe of Levi; therefore some think there
were twelve Rods besides the Rod of Levi. But such an inequality had been apt
to breed another quarrel; and therefore it is more probable, there were but
twelve Rods, according to the number of the Tribes in their Original; and that
these Rods were all of the same stock, the same growth, the same gathering and
preparation, that there might be no disparity to beget new cavils touching the
decision.

And because the Tribe of Levi was divided into two Families, though Corah head
of the second House, and Aaron's Competitor or Numb. 26. 11.
Adversary at least, was extinguished, and his Sons (being preserved by special
Providence) probably had yielded the pre-eminence to Aaron, (deeming it
sufficient honor for them to be dignified with that luster that would be
reflected upon them from the Glory of the head of their Elder Family,) yet to
take off all color of dispute about the Succession, God gave express order,
That Aaron's, and not Levi's name, should be written upon the Rod for the Tribe
of Levi.

3. For the place where this Jury of Rods were put together, it was the
Tabernacle of Verse. 3.
the Covenant before the Testimony, before the Tables of the Law, by the Pot of
Manna; Psalm. 94.
to signify that the Rod is an excellent Usher of obedience to the Law; and if
it prevails not to that effect, that then it is a ready instrument to drive us
from the comfort of the Pot of Manna, the benefit of the Sacrament. Or it might
be intended that the sacredness of the place should take away all suspicion of
fraud, and add Authority to the miraculous obsignation of Aaron's office. This
being the place where God did vouchsafe to exhibit his Gracious presence to
determine them upon appeal, in all doubtful Cases: the Rods were placed here,
to signify, that this being a kind of Sacred Lottery, the event was wholly at
Gods disposal; (...), Greg. Nyss. That the grace of Priesthood is not of men
but of God. Ideo and Aaron Sacerdotem ipse elegit; ut non humana cupiditas in
eligendo sacerdote praeponderaret, sed gratia Dei: non Ep. l. 10. Ep. 82.
voluntaria oblatio, nec propria assumptio, sed caelestis vocatio, Ambros.

And now this Emblematical Grand Jury. will afford us an excellent Definition
of a Priest or Bishop; he is a person slipped off the common stock of Mankind by
a special act of separation, not rooted in the earth, not fed with the crude
juices of nature, to soften and infeeble him, to make him pliant to the bent of
evil inclinations; but mortified to the motions of the flesh; dead to the
Temptations of the World; that being impregnated with blessings supernatural,
with grace and knowledge, he may bring forth abundant fruit for the service of
Gods Church. And the Verdict which went for Aaron represents him to be such a
person: For behold, his Rod had budded buds, and brought forth leaves, and
bloomed blossoms, and yielded Almonds. Verse. 8.


Here is a production, which nature never had a due conception of, at least
never traveled for it. A dry Rod swelled into turgent buds, and buds dilated
into lovely blossoms, and digested into wholesome fruits, and all ex tempore; a
threefold miracle to render Aaron's election the more certain and
unquestionable. Buds and Flowers and Fruit; here is provision for posterity by
an orderly succession. And the order of their pullulation is an evidence that
Gods Grace does not destroy Nature, or pervert the common course of it; but
only assist, quicken, and advance her in her operations.

Austin calls this Rod, Sacramentum Sacerdotale; De Temp. Ser. 99. ep. l. 1.
ep. 50. Lib. 10. ep. 82. Origin. Pelusiot. Ambr. Austin. Fructus nucis amaram
quidem and aspiram cortium habet, sub qua latet quod est esculentum, etc.
Theod. and Hier. in Jer. 1.
and Is. Pelusiot, (...), The Type of the Priesthood. And what does it
signify, Nisi quod nunquam Sacerdotalis marcescat gratia, says St. Ambrose.
The Fathers observe further of this Tree, that the outside, the rind, the
husk, the shell, are hard and astringent, sharp and bitter; but the inside, the
fruit, the kernel, are sweet, nutritive, and refreshing. This is a significant
Hyerogliphick of the Priests duty. It instructs him to be vigilant and active
in his office, austere and mortified in his life, patient and hardy to endure
the storms of reproach and opposition, while he is discharging himself in a
salutary fruitfulness. Let him be clothed with the leaves and blossoms of a
decent Conversation; but laden with the fruits of all good works; that the
Church under the inspection of such Pastors may be as a Garden of Nuts, and the
Spouse delight to descend into it with his train of Graces, and inconceivable
consolation.

In short, all Priests have their Rods; but all Rods are not thus florid, thus
fruitful. Such as are so, without all peradventure are of Gods election and
establishment, as was Aaron.

And now I hope such as are of Israel, of what Tribe soever, will submit to
Gods Arbitration, and be reconciled to Aaron, and kiss his Rod; pay a due
regard, a dutiful veneration to that Office and Ministry, which God has
vouchsafed to dignify with a threefold miracle. To this end a public Record is
made of it, to be kept inviolable. And the Lord said unto Moses, bring Aarons
Rod again before the testimony, etc.

1. Before the testimony, That whenever they came to consult God about any
emergent difficulty, they might not presume to seek his assistance to degrade
the Priesthood, or cut off the line of succession, which he had established by
such wonderful Prodigies, and to which he had assigned Sanctuary in his holy
place; for thither the Rod is brought, and brought thither it is.

2. Vt servetur, that it might be kept; such as attempt to undermine Gods
sacred Constitutions by the rudeness of popular tumults, do but make them take
the firmer roots, and engage God the more to show signs and wonders for their
preservation. Aarons Rod shall find Sanctuary, and be preserved in perpetuam
rei memoriam.

3. Vt servetur in signum, It shall be kept for a sign. Man's memory is
naturally treacherous; and nothing can spoil it sooner than ingratitude and
envy. Therefore God does here teach us an Art of Memory, by prescribing tokens
to cure us of our forgetfulness; such memorials being significant to Hic et
Chap. 16. 38.
the use of edifying: though but Ceremonies, God prescribes them, and though
they be Jos. 22. 10.
but of Man's Institution, he allows of them. Such signs do not confer Grace ex
opere operato, not by any real efficacy; no nor yet by way of impetration, they
cannot do it. They have no Natural Power, no divine Promise for it. But they
are fair Objects to excite and refresh the Memory. And he that will either
eschew evil or do good, must first remember that it is his duty, and in this
sense and to this effect, every monument of Gods Justice, every remanent
instance of the Divine Mercy, may become sacramental to us.

But had Almighty God left himself and his Servant Aaron without witness
hitherto? No, those 250 men with Corah and some Numb. 26. 10.
others, they became a sign. And the brazen Censers of those that offered
incense, were made a sign too; they were converted into plates for a covering
of the Altar to be a Chap. 16. 40.
Memorial unto the children of Israel. They could not approach the Altar, but
the reflection of those plates was a clear conviction of their late
Miscarriages. But when men will proceed in their sin after judgment, they
provoke God to erect more signs to upbraid their stubbornness and ingratitude;
when they importune him contrary to his express Revelations, they get nothing
by it in the end, but the brand of a more lasting infamy: For

4. This Rod is kept in signum Rebellium filiorum Israel, for a token against
the Rebels. God had past an Act of oblivion upon Moses's Intercession, in
favor of this People, Numb. 14. 21.
Dimisi peccatum populi hujus, juxta verbum tuum. But God forgets our sins,
upon condition we keep a Record and repent of them. If we do repeat them, we
revive the memory of our past transgressions; and set up a light, by which
those dim characters of our guilt, over which the hand of charity had drawn a
curtain, become legible. And yet even here the inestimable Goodness of God is
remarkable; he does so mercifully chastize their pride, that the testimony of
their contumacy shall be the means of their cure, a provision for their
amendment, and an Antidote against the peril of Recidivation. This Rod is to be
kept for a token, Vt quiescant querelae, ne moriantur. To take away their
Murmurings from me, ( yea and against me too, for they were not so much against
Aaron as against the Lord); That they die not, and that was the Design in this
Transaction.

Vt quiescant querelae, to silence and still their Murmurings. Ambition is
restless and knows no bounds. Cogitet qui honorem affectat tempestatem se
affectare. He that affects Honor does court a tempest, for, Quid est
potestas culminis nisi tempestas mentis? Philo.
Such as climb the pinnacle of Ambition are psalm. 106. 16.
tossed with the greatest tempests. These Israelites began with Envy, proceeded
to Murmuring, and at last grew insolent even to an insurrection; they make a
forcible entry upon the sacred office, and commit a notorious riot, wherein
many thousands perish. God having installed Aaron and his Sons in the Priests
Office, added this sanction to the Numb. 3. 10.
establishment, The stranger that comes near shall be put to death. Yet their
Ambition was grown so great, and their Animosities so high; That God saw it
time to take up the quarrel, else all the Tribes had died in it. The earth
swallowed them up; and yet they murmured: The Fire consumed them; and yet they
murmured; The Plague made havoc of them, and yet they murmured. And this
spirit of perverseness was so great a provocation to a noble and ingenuous
nature, God could not but be severe in punishing Numb. 14. 10.
of it. They had rejected their Guides, and were ready to stone any charitable
Informer. Nothing but a lasting miracle can shame and silence them; Aarons Rod
inshrin'd in the sanctuary, must compose their spirits, and make peace betwixt
God and them, betwixt them and themselves. If it cannot heal their
perversities, it will so far charm them into temper, as to bridle and restrain
their boldness. They will now suffer Aaron quietly to perform his Office; and
his Ministry will be a means to keep off future judgments. And to this end, the
Lord said unto Moses, Bring Aarons Rod again, before the testimony to be kept,
etc.

What Aaron was amongst the Tribes of Application.
Ifrael, the same, upon the matter, is the Bishop in his Province, and Corah
was the figure of such as make Rents and Schisms in the Church of Christ; who
are therefore said to have perished in the gainsaying of Corah, as Jud. Ep. v.
11.
in their Representative. And yet, Good God! What an Insurrection has been
made amongst us upon that account? Aaron, he was voted down and deposed; and in
fine you cannot forget what became of Moses. But (to make haste out of that
wilderness, and from amongst those fiery serpents that stung so deadly) Moses
must be recalled to appease our tumults, to still our murmurings and settle us
in Tranquillity. To this end Dixit Dominus, The Lord spoke unto his Majesty;
not Immediately by a voice from Heaven, but by the voice of holy Scriptures and
ancient Councils; by the voice of Reason and Experience, by the voice of
fundamental Laws and Customs; by the voice of Orthodox Fathers and dutiful
Sons; by the voice of Royal blood, and by the voice of our great disorders and
confusions. Many Cobwebs were to be swept down from our Church-windows, and
much rubbish to be swept out of our Church-doors; and much dust to be brusht
off the garments of inferior Priests and Levites; some things were amiss in
the house of God, and no such Rule as Aarons Rod to square out a Reformation.
These were the Lords voice crying unto Moses, to the King, refer virgam, bring
the Rod again, etc.

But had we not a Rod already? A rod with a vengeance, a Rod of Corah's own
stock, of Corah's own gathering; Floruit virga, Ezekiel. 7. 10, 11.
germinavit superbia, iniquitas surrexit in virga. Ours was just of the same
constitution. The Radix, the root of it was iniquity, and that branched out
into oppression and violence: A rod of Iron this was, that broke the Royal
Scepter, and beat down the Royal Branches, and dashed the Church in pieces; A
ragged staff, whose fangs were steeled with Malice, and died with innocent
blood. It knocked down Moses, and thrust out Aaron: away with such a Rod, and
God be thanked, this Rod of the wicked did not rest upon the lot of the
Righteous; though it was somewhat long in motion, rolling up and down, yet it
did not, it could not rest, it was acted by such a vertiginous spirit. This Rod
was at last thrown away, and Moses restored. And the Lord said unto Moses,
bring Aarons Rod again before the testimony.

Not a Rod of Aarons own growth or gathering, but a plant which the Heavenly
Father has planted: For no man takes this Heb. 5.
Honor to himself, but he that is called of God as was Aaron. Our Rod is that,
which undoubtedly sprung from the root of Jesse: As Joh. 20.
my Father sent me, so I send you.

Out of that ground it shoots up in the Church of God; and all Antiquity sets
forth the Lineage of it, in the visible succession of Bishops, from the
Apostles, in the several Churches of their plantation.

In Tabernaculum, Bring it into the Tabernacle; there it has the Approbation
of Gods eye, the protection of his Presence. From hence therefore it must take
direction to minister in subordination to the Authority and Honor thereof;
there it is installed, ut servetur in signum; lodged there in safety; obliged
therefore to serve the Interest of the Church, which is the Interest of God and
of immortal Souls. In order hereunto it is set up in signum, for a sign; Yes,
and in signum ad sagittam too, as a mark for the Arrow. It is the Prophets
complaint, Behold I and the children, which God has given me, are for signs
and wonders. It was our Saviors own lot, he was set up, in signum
contradictionis, a sign liable to great contradiction; against him they shot
out their Arrows, even bitter words. And, if so bold with Aaron himself, they
will not forbear his substitute; if they forbear not the chief Bishop, they
will not spare his shadow. As long as Aaron is set up for a sign in the Church,
there will be found such Archers; we have them in our Text, with their quiver
full of bitter Arrows; nay their Arrows are upon the string, and upon the
flight too. As long as they continue to be, filii Rebellionis, while they
retain their froward disposition, non quiescunt querelae, we shall never be
free from Murmurings.

But are there any of this breed left in our Israel? Has not the Gracious Act
of oblivion quite extinguished this unquiet spirit? 1 Samuel 15. 14.
If it has, what means then this lowing and this bleating, which we hear? Are
there not a many Murmurers attempting to exasperate the people into a new
insurrection, that they may once more wrest the Rod out of the hand of Aaron?
And do these men look for a sign too? yes, they do, and they might see a
wonderful sign from heaven, if they were not blinded with pride and prejudice,
and an obstinate Spirit: Ecce Dominus, behold the Lord himself has given us a
sign; Dedisti Psalm. 69. 6, 7.
metuentibus, thou have given a token for them that fear thee. At the tears and
prayers of the Church, God saved her with the wholesome defense of his own
right hand. For the change amongst us, by the Restoration of the King, was no
other than mutatio dextrae Altissimi, wrought by the right hand of the
most-high. A sign from heaven this was, without all peradventure. Yet these men
are not satisfied, they look for, and preach for, and pray for, another sign,
and what sign would they have? The seven Angels with the seven Apoc. 15.
plagues and vials of Gods wrath? Would they have more fire come down from
heaven? Alas! They know not what spirit they are of He that came not to destroy
men's Souls, but to save them; did not ordain Aarons Rod for such a sign. If
that Rod did turn Number. 20. 9.
the rock into water (as some have imagined) yet, to be sure, it did not turn
the water into blood: It may bring forth contrition and refreshment, but not
destruction: It bodes better: things to mankind, even to these Refractory and
stubborn children: It Is signum salutare ne moriantur; A sovereign preservative,
That they die not.

That is the end for which the Rod is introduced and deposited in the
sanctuary. This 2 Cor. 10. 8.
Power of Discipline, Dedit nobis in aedificationem, God has given it for
edification, says the Apostle, and not for your destruction. And yet he has
taught us to distinguish betwixt yours and you. Something 2 Cor. 10. 8.
was to be destroyed in them, though not their Persons; yet their Carnalities,
their vices, their Schisms and Disorders, These works of the flesh. The Rod is
to be administered, in interitum carnis, for the destruction of the flesh, That
the spirit may be 1 Cor. 5. 5.
saved in the day of the Lord Jesus. Mortification is the way to life, and
Reformation Jam. 5. ult.
the door of safety, He that converteth a sinner from the error of his way,
shall save a Soul from death. This is the right Method; Gods Method in the
Text, et quiescant querelae, etc. Thou shall quite take away their Murmurings,
etc.

We see then why the Rod is placed in the sanctuary; not so much for Aaron's
own advantage, that he may pride himself in the Power and Beauty of it, but for
the benefit of others, even of such as do most oppose it. The remoter end is,
ne moriantur, that they die not; but in order to this, the immediate end is, Vt
quiescant querelae eorum, to still their murmurings: The our must begin here,
care must be taken in the first place, as much as is possible to take away
their complaints and murmurings, and how shall that be effected?

Why, Virga est matter disciplinae, the Rod will open the eyes, if it be
administered with 1 Samuel 14. 27.
a little honey applied to the top of it; when the asperity is sweetened with
mildness and compassion, The Rod and reproof gives wisdom. Pro. 29. 14.
If the viper be beaten with a rod, it takes away his venom, and he becomes an
excellent Antidote against poison. If we cannot heal their perversities, at
least we may still their murmurings. And to this end the constitution of the
Rod is very considerable.

It must be a straight Rod, that the infliction Deuteronomy. 25. 2.
may be equal to the fault, est enim verus praesul virga recta, aequaliter
justitiam exercens atque semper vigilans. It must be a solid Rod H. P. ad. Ez.
3.
to support the weak, and a smart Rod to correct the wicked, and a stiff Rod to
defend the Innocent. Or (to keep still to the Metaphor) it should have these
properties; It should be, 1. solid, 2. vital, 3. florid, and 4. fruitful.

1. A solid Rod, not hollow, loose or spungy, Ezok. 19. 11. Chap. 2. 4. 6.
Chap. 3. 8, 9.
like a cane: For it is concerned many times to encounter with a Rock; the
heart of flint, and the face of brass; and therefore it had need be solid and
steeled with Resolution, that it may not yield to the applications, nor receive
the impressions of an importune and stubborn spirit.

2. It must be a vital Rod, (and they say Aaron's Rod did never wither, was
never barren after it was deposited in the sanctuary.) And this life must
appear in a threefold germination; it must bud, 1. a vital eye, 2. a vital
tongue, 3. a vital sting. 1. A vital eye, and so it must be, virga vigilans,
like that of Jer. 1. 11.
Jeremy, A watching Rod. 2. A vital tongue, and so it must be, virga clamitans,
like that Mic. 6. 9.
of Micah, a preaching Rod. 3. A vital sting, and so it must be, virga
stimulans, like that of St. Paul, a goading and a quickening 1 Cor. 4. ult.
Rod.

1. It must be a watching Rod, Vigilat autem virga, cuncta populi peccata
considerans, ut percutiat et corripiat delinquentes. I have Hieron. in Jer. 1.
11. Ezekiel. 33. 8. Heb. 13. 17. and 2 Timothy 4. 5.
made thee a watchman, says the Lord to the Prophet, The very essence of the
Bishops Office consists in a superintendency, his work is to watch for Souls.

2. A preaching Rod, if it be a genuine Rod of Aaron, it will speak to every
man, and to every sin in its own Language. And St. Chrysostom tells us, that
two things are requisite for corection and reproof, (...) a discreet mildness
with an ingenious liberty of speech. Plus tamen erga corrigendos agat
benevolentia quam severitas; plus cohortatio quam commotio, plus charitas quam
potestas, says Leo. Kindness is more prevalent toward the correction of
Delinquents, than severity; charity of more efficacy than an imperious Power.
For some dispositions (as St. Austin observes) are wrought upon, magis docendo
quam jubendo, magis monendo quam minando; more by Persuasion than by 1 Cor. 4.
21.
menaces; such dispositions as are unrelenting at the spirit of meekness, to
such other applications are highly necessary; and upon this account, the Rod is

3. Virga stimulans, a smart and goading Rod; and in this case, the great
Apostle, out of very charity, resolves to use sharpness. 2 Cor. 13. 2, 10.
The virtue of good-men is not sine cuspide vel aculeo, not without some sting;
and there are some tempers will require it.

Yet I would not have this Rod turned into Exodus 7. 12. 2 Timothy 3. 8.
a Serpent, unless it be with a design to swallow up the Rods of Jannes and
Jambres, when they bewitch the People to withstand Moses. If any be so
obstinate that they will not be corrected by Aaron's Rod; neither obedient to
the voice, nor awed by the eye, nor quickened by the sting of it; especially if
any be so insolent as to wrest the Rod out of Aaron's hand; if he provokes
Aaron to appeal to Moses, and Moses's Rod be thrown out after him, and that
becomes a Serpent to him, he may thank his own stubbornness for that
Transubstantiation; for instead of a gentle Rod he deserves to be whipped with
Scorpions. The Prophet Jeremy saw a Rod, Jer. 1. 12, 13.
and a seething Pot too; and it is the observation of Origin, Si ergo tali
virga (Disciplinae) non emendaris, in cacabum mitteris, and cacabus in Psalm.
38. Homil. 2.
succendetur. If the Rod of Discipline cannot reform thee, thou shall be cast
into the seething Pot to be consumed.

3. It must be a florid Rod; some leaves it should have, not broad enough to
lodge or shelter Serpents, but sovereign to heal, and then to hide the scar and
blemish of the infirm and surprised Patient. But some sores are so deep, foul,
and offensive, they must be drawn and laid open, in order to their cure; to
furnish leaves to cover such, is to skin over an old sore, till it rankles,
till it become more noisome and contagious.

But to make the Rod florid it must have blossoms as well as leaves. It is
expected (whatever Habits are in fashion amongst others) that the Priests
should be clothed with righteousness and salvation; that they should be endued
Psalm. 132. 16:
with the flower of Learning, and the beauty of Holiness. And why should not
this have the advantage of Wealth and Honor to adorn and dress it up, as well
as other Rods? Though such Secular accessions cannot make it the more Sacred,
yet they may make it the more awful, which will make it also the more
serviceable, both to the Church of God, and to Moses his Vicegerent. And this
would be a means to make it what it should be.

4. A fruitful Rod; some perhaps do really mind nothing, but the leaves and
blossoms to cloth and adorn them. So they may be kept warm and gay, they care
for nothing else. But as Leo has it, Tua Conscientia honorem Ep. 93. Chap. 16.
sibi debitum vindicant, qui pro animabus sibi creditis non laborant? Bestiae
irruunt, and septa ovium non claudunt. Fures insidiantur, and excubias non
praetendunt. Morbi crebrescunt, and remedia nulla prospiciunt. Feed Mic. 7. 14.
thy flock with thy Rod, says the Lord to his Prophet. The flock must be fed,
and to that effect the Rod must be fruitful.

There are bitter Almonds whose virtue is to allay the fumes, digest the
crudities and dry up the inundations of Intemperance, to open Obstructions,
those of Covetousness and Oppression, to expel the wind, that flatus of pride
and vanity, to purge the reins and the inner man of all inordinate lusts and
passons, and very useful to smooth the skin of a Christians outward
conversation, to make it beautiful and lovely. And there are sweet Almonds too,
which afford an oil and milk to close the wounds of a broken heart, to refresh
the weak, to cool the Calentures of distempered Consciences, and bring them to
repose and comfort.

When we have such solid and such vital, such florid and such fruitful Rods as
these set before the flock. Methinks we should all be of Jacobs breed, our
inward conceptions, and outward productions; our hearts and our works should be
of the same complexion, by the transforming Power of a happy imitation.

To conclude, life consists in motion, and the vigor of life discovers it
self in the quickness of that motion; and even by the constitution of his Rod,
Aaron is instructed to use Expedition in the Administration of his Discipline.
For the Almond-tree has its name from the forwardness of it is productions.
When causes, which fall under the Inspection of this Rod, are kept too long
before they come to a Decision, this is an ill sign; and provokes justly to
complaint and murmuring. It argues the Rod to be blind or dumb; soft or stupid;
without sting or life, not like the Rod that shoots up by Gods appointment; for
that Jer. 1. 11, 12.
is followed with a speedy sentence, and a due execution.

Let the Rod be Expeditious in its Process, that there be no cause of murmuring
upon that account, and then men will stand in awe of the sting, and reverence
the eye and obey the voice of it. And not only so, but finding shelter and
protection in the leaves, Beauty and Ornament in the blossoms, Food, Physic
and refreshment in the fruit, they will delight to dwell under the shadow of
it. When they see it Sovereign to heal and sweeten all our bitter waters of
strife, they will really believe of this, what the Jews do but fable of that
other, That it descends from the tree of life; They will cry out Servetur
endeavor to have it flourish, and pray that it may be preserved and prosper,
in the Church amongst us, to the Worlds end, Amen.

FINIS.

