THE QUEEN-LIKE CLOSET; OR, RICH CABINET: Stored with all manner of RARE
RECEIPTS FOR Preserving, Candying and Cookery Very Pleasant and Beneficial to
all Ingenious Persons of the FEMALE SEX.

By HANNAH WOLLEY.

LONDON, Printed for R. Lowndes at the White Lion in Duck-Lane, near
West-Smithfield, 1670.

Licensed, Nov. 16, 1669. Roger L' Estrange.

THE QUEENE-LIKE CLOSET RICH Or CABINET


TO THE TRULY VIRTUOUS AND My much Honored Friend Mrs. GRACE BUZBY, Daughter
to the Late Sr. HENRY CARRY, Knight Banneret; and WIFE to Mr. ROBERT BUZBY,
Gentleman, and Woollen Draper of LONDON,
Madam,
YOur Kind and Good Acceptance of my Endeavors in Work for You, and that
Esteem You have for what else I can do, make me bold to present this Book to
You; which by that time You have perused, I doubt not but You will deem it
worthy of the Title it bears; and indeed it was never opened before: If it may
yield You any Delight or Benefit, I shall be glad; for as You have a true Love
and Esteem for me, so I have a very great Love and Honorable Esteem for You;
and shall always be

Your most Observant Servant, HANNAH WOLLEY.

To all Ladies, Gentlewomen, and to all other of the Female Sex who do delight
in, or be desirous of good Accomplishments.
Ladies and Gentlewomen,
I Presume those Books which have passed from me formerly, have got me some
little credit and esteem amongst you.

But there being so much time past since they were Printed, that methinks, I
hear some of you say, I wish Mrs. Wolley would put forth some New Experiments;
and to say the Truth, I have been importuned by diverse of my Friends and
Acquaintance to do so.

I shall not give an Apish Example every Day or Week to follow ridiculous and
foolish Fancies; nor would I be too like the Spaniard, always to keep in one
Dress: I am not ashamed, nor do I disown what I have already Printed, but some
of you being so perfect in your Practices, and I very desirous still to serve
you, do now present you with this Queen-like Closet: I do assure you it is
worthy of the Title it bears, for the very precious things pou will find in it.

Thus be seeching your kind Acceptance of this Book, and of my earnest Desires
to you, I take my Leave, but shall always be to all who have esteem for me,

Their Faithful and Humble Servant, HANNAH WOLLEY.

LAdies, I do here present you (you
That which sure will well content
A Queen-like Closet rich and brave;
(Such) not many Ladies have:
Or Cabinet in which does set
Iems richer than in Karkanet;
(They) only Eyes and Francies please,
These keep your Bodies in good ease;
They please the Taste, also the Eye;
Would I might be a stander by:
Yet rather I would wish to eat,
Since bout them I my Brains do beat;
And it is but Reason you may say,
If that I come within your way;
I sit here sad while you are merry,
Eating Dainties, drinking Perry;
But I Am content you should so feed,
So I may have to serve my need.
Hannah Wolley.

THE Ladies New Closet. OR RATHER Rich Cabinet.
I. To make Aqua Mirabilis a very delicate way.
TAke three Pints of Sack, three Pints of White Wine, one quart of the Spirit
of Wine, one quart of the juice of Celandine leaves, os Melilot-flowers,
Cardamomseeds, Cubebs, Galingale, Nutmegs, Cloves, Mace, Ginger, two Drams of
each; bruise them, and mix them with the Wine and Spirits, let it stand all
night in the Still, not an Alembeck, but a common Still, close stopped with Rye
Paste; the next morning make a slow fire in the Still, and all the while it is
stilling, keep a wet Cloth about the neck of the Still, and put so much white
Sugar Candy as you think fit into the Glass where it drops.

II. The Plague-Water which was most esteemed of in the late great Visitat^^^.
Take three Pints of Muskadine, boil therein one handful of Sage, and one
handful of Rue until a Pint be wasted, then strain it out, and set it over the
Fire again.

Put thereto a Peniworth of Long Pepper, half an Ounce of Ginger, and a quarter
of an Ounce of Nutmegs, all beaten together, boil them together a little while
close covered, then put to it one penniworth of Mithridate, two penniworth of
Venice Treacle, one quarter of a Pint of hot Angelica Water.

Take one Spoonful at a time, morning and evening always warm, if you be
already diseased (if not) once a day is sufficient all the Plague time.

It is a most excellent Medicine, and never fails, if taken before the heart
be utterly mortified with the Disease; it is also good for the Small Pox,
Measles, or Surfets.

III. A very Sovereign Water.
Take one Gallon of good Claret Wine, then take Ginger, Galingale, Cinnamon,
Nutmegs, Grains, Cloves, Anniseeds, Fennelseeds, Caraway-seeds, of each one
dram, then take Sage, Mints, Red-Rose leaves, Thyme, Pellitory of the Wall,
Rosemary Wild Thyme, Camomile, Lavander, of each one handful, bruise the Spices
small and beat the Herbs, and put them into the Wine, and so let stand twelve
hours close covered, stirring it diverse times, then still it in an Alembeck,
and keep the best Water by it self, and so keep every Water by it self; the
first you may use for aged People, the other for younger.

This most excellent Water w(...) from Dr. Chambers, which he kept secret till
he had done many Cures therewith w^^^t w^^^forteth the Vital Spirits; it
helpe^^ the inward Diseases that come of Cold; the shaking of the Palsy; it
helps the Conception of Women that are barren; it kills the Worms within
the Body, helps the Stone within the Bladder; it cures the Cold, Cough, and
Toothache, and comfort the Stomach; it cures the Dropsy, and cleanses the
Reins; it helps speedily the stinking Breath; whosoever uses this Water, it
preserves them in good health, and makes seem young very long; for it
comfort Nature very much: with this Water Dr. Chambers preserved his own
life till extreme Age would suffer him neither to go nor to stand one whit, and
he continued five years after all Physicians judged he could not live; and he
confessed that when he was sick at any time, he never used any other Remedy but
this Water, and wished his Friends when he lay on his Deathbed to make use of
it for the preservation of their Health.

IV. To make Spirit of Mints.
Take three Pints of the best white Wine, three handfuls of right Spear-mint
picked clean from the stalks, let it steep in the wine one night covered, in
the morning, put it into a Copper Alembeck, and draw it with a pretty quick
fire, and when you have drawn it all, take all your Water, and add as much Wine
as before, and put to the Water, and the same quantity of Mint as before; let
it steep two or three hours, then put all into your Still, and draw it with a
soft fire, put into your Receiver a quantity of Loaf-Sugar, and you will find
it very excellent; you may distill it in an ordinary Still if you please; but
then it will not be so strong nor effectual.

Thus you may do with any other Herbs whatsoever.

V. To make the Cordial Orange-Water.
Take one dozen and half of the highest colored and thick rin'd Oranges, slice
them thin, and put them into two Pints of Malago Sack, and one Pint of the best
Brandy, of Cinnamon, Nutmegss, Ginger, Cloves and Mace, of each one quarter of
an Ounce bruised, of Spear-mint and Balm one handful of each, put them into an
ordinary Still all night, pasted up with Rye Paste; the next day draw them with
a slow fire, and keep a wet Cloth upon the Neck of the Still; put in some Loaf
Sugar into the Glass where it droppeth.

VI. To make Spirit of Oranges or of Limons.
Take of the thickest rin'd Oranges or Limons, and chip off the Rinds very
thin, put these Chips into a Glass-bottle, and put in as many as the Glass will
hold, then put in as much Malago Sack as the Glass will hold besides; stop the
Bottle close that no Air get in, and when you use it, take about half a
spoonful in a Glass of Sack; it is very good for the Wind in the Stomach.

VII. To make Limon Water.
Take twelve of the fairest Limons, slice them, and put them into two Pints of
white Wine, and put to them of Cinnamon and Galingale, of each, one quarter of
an Ounce, of Red Rose Leaves, Burrage and Bugloss Flowers, of each one handful,
of yellow Sanders one Dram, steep all these together 12 hours, then distill them
gently in a Glass Still, put into the Glass where it droppeth, three Ounces of
Sugar, and one Grain of Ambergris.

VIII. A Water for fainting of the Heart.
Take of Bugloss water and Red Rose water, of each one Pint, of Red Cows milk,
half a Pint, Annise-seed and Cinnamon, of each half an Ounce bruised,
Maidenhair two handfuls, Hart's-tongue one handful, bruise them, a^^ (...) all
these together, and distill them in a (...) Still, drink of it Morning and
Evening with a little Sugar.

IX. To make Rosemary Water.
Take a Quart of Sack or white Wine with as many Rosemary Flowers as will make
it very thick, two Nutmegs, and two Races of Ginger sliced thin into it; let it
infuse all night, (...) it in an ordinary Still as your oth^^ ^^ters.

X. To make a most precious Water.
Take two Quarts of Brandy, of Balm, of Wood-Betony, of Pellitory of the Wall,
of sweet Marjoram, of Cowslip-Flowers, Rosemary-Flowers, Sage-Flowers,
Marigold-Flowers, of each of these one handful bruised together; then take one
Ounce of Gromwel seeds, one ounce of sweet Fennel seeds, one Ounce of Coriander
seeds bruised, also half an Ounce of Aniseeds, and half an Ounce of
Carawayseeds, half an Ounce of Juniper Berries, half an Ounce of Bay Berries,
one Ounce of green Licoras, three Nutmegs, one quarter of an Ounce of large
Mace, one quarter of an Ounce (...) Cinnamon, one quarter of an Ou^^^ (...)
Cloves, half an Ounce of Ginger (...) these well together, then add to them
half a pound of Raisons in the Sun stoned, let all these steep together in the
Brandy nine days close stopped, then strain it out, and two Grains of Musk, two
of Ambergris, one pound of refined Sugar; stop the Glass that no Air get in,
and keep it in a warm place.

Doctor Butle^^^ ^^eacle Water.
Take the roots of Polipody of the Oak bruised, Lignum Vita thin sliced, the
inward part thereof, Saxifrage roots thin sliced, of the shavings of
Hartshorn, of each half a pound, of the outward part of yellow Citron not
preserved, one Ounce and half bruised, mix these together,

Then take of Fumitory-water Of each one Ounce. Carduus water Camomile water.
Succory-water of Cedar wood one Ounce, of Cinnamon three drams, of Cloves three
drams, bruise all your forenamed things;

Then take of Epithimum two ounces and a half, of Cetrarch six ounces, of
Carduus and Balm, of each two handfuls, of Burrage Flowers, Bugloss Flowers,
Gilly flowers, of each four ounces, of Angelica root, Elecampane root beaten to
a Pap, of each four ounces, of Andronichus Treacle and Mithridate, of each four
ounces; mix all these together, and incorporate them well, and grind them in a
Stone-Mortar, with part of the former Liquor, and at last, mix all together,
and let them stand warm 24 hours close stopped, then put them all into a Glass
Still, and sprinkle on the top of Species Aromatica rosata and Diambre, of the
Species of Diarodon abbatis, Diatrion Santalon, of each six drams; then cover
the Still close, and lute it well, and distill the water with a soft fire, and
keep it close.

This will yield five Pints of the best water, the rest will be smaller.

XII. The Cordial Cherry Water.
Take nine pounds of red Cherries, nine pints of Caret wine, eight ounces of
Cinnamon, three ounces of Nutmegs, bruis your Spice, stone your Cherries, and
steep them in the Wine, then add to them half a handful of Rosemary, half a
handful of Balm, one quarter of a handful of sweet Marjoram, let them steep in
an earthen Pot twenty four hours, and as you put them into the Alembeck to
distill them, bruise them with your hands, and make a soft fire under them, and
distill by degrees; you may mix the waters at your pleasure when you have drawn
them all; when you have thus done, sweeten it with Loaf Sugar, then strain it
into another Glass, and stop it close that no Spirits go out; you may (if you
please) hang a Bag with Musk and Ambergris in it, when you use it, mix it
with Syrrop of Gilly-flowers or of Violets as you best like it; it is an
excellent Cordial for fainting fits, or a Woman in travel, or sor any one who
is not well.

XIII. A most excellent Water for the Stone, or for the Wind-Collick.
Take two handfuls of Mead-Parsly, otherwise called Saxifrage, one handful of
Mother-Thyme, two handfuls of Perstons, two handfuls of Philipendula, and as
much Pellitory of the Wall, two ounces of sweet Fennel seeds, the roots of ten
Radishes sliced, steep all these in a Gallon of Milk warm from the Cow, then
distill it in an ordinary Still, and four hours after, slice half an ounce of
the wood called Saxifrage, and put into the Bottle to the water, keep it close
stopped, and take three spoonfuls at a time, and fast both from eating and
drinking one hour after; you must make this water about Midsummer; it is a very
precious water, and ought to be prized.

XIV. The Cock water most delicate and precions for restoring out of deep
Consumptions, and for preventing them, and for curing of-Agues, proved by my
self and many others.
Take a Red Cock, pluck him alive, then fiit him down the back, and take out
his Intrals, cut him in quarters, and bruise him in a Mortar, with his Head,
Legs, Heart, Liver and Cizard; put him into an ordinary Still with a Pottle of
Sack, and one quart of Milk new from a red Cow, one pound of blew Currants
beaten, one pound of Raisins in the Sun stoned and beaten, four Ounces of Dates
stoned and beaten, two handfuls of Peniroyal, two handfuls of Pimpernel, or any
other cooling Herb, one handful of Mother-thyme, one handful of Rosemary, one
handful of Burrage, one quart of Red Rose water, two ounces of Hartshorn, two
ounces of China root sliced, two ounces of Ivory shaving, four ounces of the
flower of French Barley, put all these into your Still, and paste it up very
well, and still it with a soft fire, put into the Glass where it droppeth one
pound of white Sugar Candy beaten very small, twelve peniworth of Leaf-Gold,
seven grains of Musk, eleven grains of Ambergris, seven grains of Bezoar
stone; when it is all distilled, mix all the waters together, and every morning
fasting, and every evening when you go to bed, take four or five Spoonfuls of
it warm, for about a Month together; this has cured many when the Doctors
have given them over.

XV. Walnut water, or the Water of Life.
Take green Walnuts in the beginning of June, beat them in a Mortar, and distill
them in an ordinary Still, keep that Water by it self, then about Midsummer
gather some more, and distill them as you did before, keep that also by it
self, then take a quart of each and mix-them, together, and distill them in a
Glass Still, and keep it for your use; the Virtues are as follows; It will
help all manner of Dropsies and Palsies, drank with Wine fasting; it is good
for the eyes, if. you put one drop therein; it helps Conception in Women if
they drink thereof one spoonful at a time in a Glass of Wine once a day, and it
will make your skin fair if you wash therewith; it is good for all infirmities
of the Body, and drives out all Corruption, and inward Bruises; if it be drunk
with Wine moderately, it kills Worms in the Body; whosoever drinks much of
it, shall live so long as Nature shall continue in him.

Finally, if you have any Wine that is turned, put in a little Viol or Glass
full of it, and keep it close stopped, and within four days it will come to it
self again.

XVI. To make Wormwood Water.
Take four ounces of Aniseeds, four ounces of Licoras scraped, bruise them well
with two ounces of Nutmegs, add to them one good handful of Wormwood, one root
of Angelica, steep them in three Gallons of Sack Lees and strong Ale together
twelve hours; then distill them in an Alembeck, and keep it for your use.

XVII. A very rare Cordial Water.
Take one Gallon of white Wine, two ounces of Mithridate, two ounces of
Cinnamon, one handful of Balm, a large handful of Cowslips, two handfuls of
Rosemary Flowers, half an ounce of Mace, half an ounce of Cloves, half an ounce
of Nutmegs, all bruised, steep these together four days in an earthen Pot, and
covered very close, distill them in an ordinary Still well pasted, and do it
with a very slow fire; save the first water by it self. and the small by it
self, to give to Children; when you have occasion to use it take a spoonful
thereof, sweetened with Loaf-Sugar; this Water is good to drive out any
Infection from the heart, and to comfort the Spirits.

XVIII. Another most excellent Cordial.
Take Celandine, Sage, Costmary, Rue, Wormwood, Mugwort, Scordium, Pimpernel,
Scabious, Egrimony, Betony, Balm, Carduus, Centory, Peniroyal, Elecampane
roots, Tormentil with the roots, Horehound, Rosa Solls, Marigold Flowers,
Angelica, Dragon, Marjoram, Thyme, Camomile, of each two good handfuls;
Licoras, Zedoary, of each one ounce; slice the Roots, shred the Herbs, and
steep them in four quarts of white Wine, and let it stand close covered 7 days,
then distill it in an ordinary Still pasted-up; when you use it, sweeten it with
fine Sugar, and warm it.

XIX. To make Rosa Solis.
Take a Pottle of Aqua Composita, and put it into a Glass, then a good handful
of Rosa Solis clean picked, but not washed, put it to the Aqua Composita, then
take a pound of Dates stoned and beaten small, half a peniworth of Long Pepper,
as much of Grains, and of round Pepper, bruise them small, take also a pound of
Loaf Sugar well beaten, a quarter of a pound of Powder of Pearl, and six leaves
of Book Gold; put all to the rest, and stir them well together in the Glass,
then cover it very close, and let it stand in the Sun fourteen days, ever
taking it in at night; then strain it, and put it into a close Bottle; you must
not put in the Pearl, Gold, nor Sugar till it has been sunned and strained,
neither must you touch the Leaves of the Rosa Solis with your hands when you
pick it; keep it very close.

XX. The Heart Water.
Take five handfuls of Rosemary Flowers, two drams of red Coral, two drams of
Powder of Pearl, two drams of white Amber, two drams of Cinnamon, two pound of
the best Prunes stoned, six Pints of Damask Rose water, two Pints of Sack; put
all these into a Pipkin never used, stop it up with Paste, let them stand upon
a soft fire a little while, then distill it in an ordinary Still pasted up.

XXI. The Plague Water.
Take Rosemary, Red Balm, Burrage, Angelica, Carduus, Celandine, Dragon,
Featherfew, Wormwood, Peniroyal, Elecampane roots, Mugwort, Bural, Tormentil,
Egrimony, Sage, Sorrel, of each of these one handful weighed, weight for
weight; put all these in an earthen Pot, with four quarts of white Wine, cover
them close, and let them stand eight or nine days in a cool Cellar, then distill
it in a Glass Still.

XXII. The Treacle. Water.
Take one pound of old Venice Treacle, of the Roots of Elecampane, Gentian,
Cyprus, Tormentil, of each one ounce, of Carduus and Angelica, half an ounce,
of Burrage, Bugloss, and of Rosemary Flow ers one ounce of each; infuse these
in three Pints of white Wine, one Pint of Spring Water, two Pints of Red Rose
water; then distill them in an ordinary Still pasted up.

This is excellent for Swounding-Fits or Convulsions, and expels any
venomous Disease; it also cures any sort of Agues.

XXIII. The Snail water excellent for Consumptions.
Take a Peck of Snails with the Shells on their Backs; have in a readiness a
good fire of Charcoal well-kindled, make a hole in the midst of the fire, and
cast your Snails into the fire, renew your fire till the Snails are well
roasted, then rub them with a clean Cloth, till you have rubbed off all the
green which will come off.

Then bruise them in a Mortar, shells and all, then take Clary, Celandine,
Burrage, Scabious, Bugloss, five leaved Grass, and if you find your self hot,
put in some Wood Sorrel, of every one of these one handful, with five tops of
Angelica.

These Herbs being all bruised in a Mortar, put them in a sweet earthen Pot
with five quarts of white Wine, and two quarts of Ale, steep them all night;
then put them into an Alembeck, let the herbs be in the bottom of the Pot, and
the Snails upon the Herbs, and upon the Snails put a Pint of Earthworms slit
and clean washed in white Wine, and put upon them sour ounces of Anniseeds or
Fennel-seeds well bruised, and five great handfuls of Rosemary Flowers well
picked, two or three Races of Turmerick thin sliced, Hartshorn and Ivory, of
each four ounces, well steeped in a quart of white Wine till it be like a
Ielly, then draw it forth with care.

XXIV. To make a rare sweet water.
Take sweet Marjoram, Lavender, Rosemary, Muscovy, Maudlin, Balm, Thyme, Walnut
Leaves, Damask Roses, Pinks, of all a like quantity, enough to fill your Still,
then take of the best Orrice Powder, Damask Rose Powder, and Storax, of each
two ounces; strew one handful or two of your Powders upon the Herbs, then
distill them with a soft fire; tie a little Musk in a piece of Lawn, and hang it
in the Glass wherein it drops, and when it is all drawn out, take your sweet
Cakes and mix them with the Powders which are left, and lay among your Clothes,
or with sweet Oils, and burn them for perfume.

A very good surfeit water.
Take what quantity of Brandy you please, steep a good quantity of the Flowers
of Red Poppies therein, which grows amongst the Wheat, having the black bottoms
cut off, when they have been steeped long enough, strain them-out, and put in
new, and so do till the Brandy be very red with them, and let it stand in the
Sun all the while they infuse, then put in Nutmegs, Cloves, Ginger and Cinnamon,
with some fine Sugar, so much as you think fit, and keep it close stopped; this
is very good for Surfets, Wind in the Stomach, or any Ilness whatever.

XXVI. An excellent water for the Stomach, or against Infection
Take Carduus, Mint and Wormwood, o each a like quantity, shred them small and
put them into new Milk, distill them in an ordinary Still with a temperate fire;
when you take any of it, sweeten it with Sugar, or with any Syrup, what pleases
you best; it is a very good water, though the Ingredients are but mean.

XXVII. The Melancholy water.
Take of the Flowers of Gilliflowers, four handfuls, Rosemary flowers three
handfuls, Damask Rose leaves, Burrage and Bugloss fiowers of each one handful,
of Balm leaves six handfuls, of Marigold flowers one handful, of Pinks six
handfuls, of Cinnamon grossly beaten, half an ounce, two Nutmegs beaten,
Anniseeds beaten, one ounce, three peniworth of Saffron; put them all into a
Pottle of Sack, and let them stand two days, stirring them sometimes well
together; then distill them in an ordinary Still, and let it drop into a Glass
wherein there is two grains of Musk, and eight ounces of white Sugar Candy, and
some Leaf-Gold; take of this Water three times in a week fasting, two spoonfuls
at a time, and ofter if you find need; distill with a soft fire; this is good
for Women in Childbed if they are faint.

XXVIII. To make the Elder water, or Spirit of Sambucus.
Take some Rye Leaven, and break it small into some warm Water, let it be a
sour one, for that is best'; about two Ounces or more: then take a Bushel of
Elder Berries beaten small, and put them into an earthen Pot and mix them very
well with the Leaven, and let it stand one day near the Fire; then put in a
little Yeast, and stir it well together to make it rise, so let it stand ten
days covered, and sometimes stir it; then distill it in an Alembeck; keep the
first Water by it self, and so the second, and the third will be good Vinegar,
if afterward you color it with some of the Berries.

Distill it with a slow fire, and do not fill the Still too full.

This Water is excellent for the Stomach.

XXIX. To make the Balm water Green.
Take any Wine or Lees of Wine or good Strong Beer or Ale with the Grounds, and
stir them all together very well, lest the Wine Lees be too thick, and burn the
bottom of the Pot; put them into an Alembeck with good store of Balm unwashed;
therein still these till you leave no other taste but fair water, and draw also
some of that, draw two Alembecks full more as you draw the first, until you
have so much as will fill your Alembeck, then put this distilled water into
your Alembeck again and some more Balm, if you draw a Wine-Gallon, put to it
half a pound of Coriander seeds bruised, two Ounces of Cloves, one quarter of
an Ounce of Nutmegs and one quarter of an Ounce of Mace bruised all of them,
then set a Receiver of a Gallon under it, and fill it with fresh and green Balm
unwashed, and your Water will be as green as Grass; put still more and more of
the Herbs fresh, and let it stand a week to make it the more green.

Take this Green water, and put to it one quart of the best Damask Rosewater,
and before you mix your Balm-water and Rose Water together, you must dissolve
two pounds of fine Sugar in the first distilled Water, then take Ambergreece
and Musk, of each eight Grains, being ground fine, and put it into the Glass in
a piece of Lawn; put also a little Orange or Limon Pill to it, and keep it cool
and from the Air.

XXX. To make the very best Surfetwater.
Take one Gallon of the best French Spirits, and a Pint of Damask-Rose-water,
half a Pint of Poppy water, one pound of white Sugar Candy bruised, then take
one pound and half of Raisins in the Sun stoned, half a pound of Dates stoned
and sliced, then take one Ounce of Mace, one Ounce of Cloves, one Ounce of
Cinnamon, one Ounce of Aniseeds rubbed clean from the dust, then take a quarter
of an Ounce, of Licoras clean scraped and sliced, and all the Spices grossly
beaten, let all these steep in the Spirits four days; then take a quarter of a
peck of Red Poppy Leaves fresh gathered, and the black part cut off, and put
them in, and when it has stood four or five days, strain it and put it into
your Glass, then put in your Sugar Candy finely beaten, twelve peniworth of
Ambergreece, six peniworth of Musk, keep it close, and shake it now and then,
and when you use it, you may put some kind of Syrup to it, what you please.

XXXI. To make the true Palsie-water, as it was given by that once very famous
Physician Doctor Mathias.
Take Lavander Flowers stripped from the stalks, and fill a Gallon Glass with
them, and pour on them good Spirit of Sack, or perfect Aquavitae distilled
from all Phlegm, let the quantity be five quarts, then circulate them for six
weeks, very close with a Bladder, that nothing may breath out; let them stand
in a warm place, then distill them in an Alembeck with his Cooler, then put into
the said water, of Sage, Rosemary, and Wood-Betony Flowers; of each half a
handful, of Lilly of the Valley, and Burrage, Bugloss, and Cowslip Flowers, one
handful of each; steep these in Spirit of Wine, Malmsie, or Aquavitae, every
one in their Season, till all may be had, then put also to them of Balm,
Motherwort, Spike-flowers, Bay leaves, the leaves of Orange trees, with the
Flowers, if they may be had, of each one ounce, put them into the aforesaid
distilled Wine all together, and distill it as before, having first been steeped
six weeks; when you have distilled it, put into it Citron Pill, dried Piony
seeds hull'd, of each five Drams, of Cinnamon half'an ounce, of Nutmegs,
Cardamom seeds, Cubebs, and yellow Sanders, of each half an ounce, of lignum
Aloes one dram; make all these into Powder, and put, them into the distilled
Wine abovesaid, and put to them of Cubebs anew, a good half pound of Dates, the
stones taken out, and cut them in small pieces, put all these in, and close
your Vessel well with a double Bladder; let them digest six weeks, then strain
it hard with a Press, and filtrate the Liquor, then put into it of prepared
Pearl, Smaragdus, Musk and Saffron, of each half a Scruple; and of Ambergreece
one Scruple, red Roses dried well, Red and Yellow Saunders, of each one ounce,
hang these in a Sarsenet Bag in the water, being well sewed that nothing go out.

The Virtues of this Water.
This water is of exceeding virtue in all Swoundings and Weaknesses of the
heart, and decaying of Spirits in all Apoplexies and Palsies, also in all pains
of the Ioints coming of Cold, for all Bruises outwardly bathed and dipped
Clothes laid to; it strengthens and comfort all animal, natural and vital
Spirits, and cheareth the external Senses, strengthens the Memory, restores
lost Speech, and lost Appetite, all weakness of the Stomach, being both taken
inwardly, and bathed outwardly; it takes away the Giddiness of the Head,
helps lost Hearing, it makes a pleasant Breath, helps all cold disposition
of the Liver, and a beginning Dropsy; it helps all cold Diseases of the
Mother; indeed none can express sufficiently; it is to be taken morning and
evening, about half a Spoonful with Crumbs of Bread and Sugar.

XXXII. For a Cough of the Lungs, or any Cough coming of Cold, approved by many.
Take a good handful of French Barley, boil it in several waters till you see
the water be clear, then take a quart of the last water, and boil in it sliced
Licoras, Aniseeds bruised, of each as much as you can take up with your four
Fingers and your Thumb, Violet Leaves, Strawberry Leaves, five fingered Grass,
Maidenhair, of each half a handful, a few Raisins in the Sun stoned; boil these
together till it come to a Pint, then strain it, and take twelve or fourteen
Jordan Almonds blanched and beaten, and when your water is almost cold, put in
your Almonds, and stir it together, and strain it; then sweeten it with white
Sugar Candy; drink this at four times, in the morning fasting, and at four of
the Clock in the Afternoon a little warmed; do this nine or ten days together;
if you please, you may take a third draught when you go to Bed; if you be bound
in your body. put in a little Syrrop of Violets, the best way to take it, is to
suck it through a straw, for that conveys it to the Lungs the better.

XXXIII. To make the best Bisket-Cakes.
Take four new laid Eggs, leave out two of the Whites, beat them very well,
then put in two spoonfuls of Rose Water, and beat them very well together, then
put in a pound of double refined Sugar beaten and searced, and beat them
together one hour, then put to them one pound of fine Flower, and still beat
them together a good while; then put them upon Plates rubbed over with Butter,
and set them into the Oven as fast as you can, and have care you do not bake
them too much.

XXXIV. Perfumed Roses.
Take Damask Rose Buds, and cut off the Whites, then take Rose Water or
Orange-Flower water wherein has been steeped Benjamin, Storax, Lignnm Rhodium,
Civet or Musk, dip some Cloves therein and stick into every Bud one, you must
stick them in where you cut away the Whites; dry them between white Papers,
they will then fall asunder; this Perfume will last seven years.

Or do thus.

Take your Rose Leaves cut from the Whites, and sprinkle them with the
aforesaid water, and put a little powder of Cloves among them.

XXXV. To make Tincture of Caroways.
Take one quart of the Spirits of French Wine, put into it one pound of
Carroway Comfits which are purled, and the Pills of two Citron Limons; let it
stand in a warm place to infuse, in a Glass close stopped for a Month,
stirring it every day once.

Then strain it from the seeds, and add to it as much Rosewater as will make
it of a pleasant taste, then hang in your Bottle a little Ambergreece, and put
in some Leaf-Gold; this is a very fine Cordial.

XXXVI. To get away the Signs of the Small Pox.
Quench some Lime in white Rosewater, then shake it very well, and use it at
your pleasure; when you at any time have washed with it, anoint your face with
Pomatum, made with Spermaceti and oil of sweet Almonds,

XXXVII. To make Clouted Cream.
Take Milk that was milked in the morning, and scald it at noon; it must have a
reasonable fire under it, but not too rash, and when it is scalding hot, that
you see little Pimples begin to rise, take away the greatest part of the Fire,
then let it stand and harden a little while, then take it off, and let it stand
until the next day, covered, then take it off with a Skimmer.

XXXVIII. To make a Devonshire-White-pot.
Take two quarts of new Milk, a penny white Loaf sliced very thin, then make the
Milk scalding hot, then put to it the Bread, and break it, and strain it
through a Cullender, then put in four Eggs, a little Spice, Sugar, Raisins, and
Currants, and a little Salt, and so bake it, but not too much, for then it will
whey.

XXXIX. To make the Portugal Eggs.
Take a very large Dish-with a broad brim, lay in it some Naples Biscuit in the
Form of a Star, then put so much Sack into the Dish as you do think the Biskets
will drink up; then stick them full with thin little pieces of preserved
Orange, and green Citron Pill, and strew (...)store of French Comfits over
them, of diverse colors, then butter some Eggs, and lay them here and there
upon the Biskets, then fill up the hollow places in the Dish, with several
colored Iellies, and round about the Brim thereof lay Laurel Leaves gilded
with Leaf-Gold, lay them slanting, and between the Leaves several colored
Iellies,

XL. To Candy Flowers the best way.
Take Roses, Violets, Cowslips, or Gillyflowers, and pick them from the white
bottoms, then have boiled to a Candy height, Sugar, and put in so many Flowers
as the Sugar will receive, and continually stir them with the back of a Spoon,
and when you see the Sugar harden on the sides of the Skillet, and on the
Spoon. take them off the fire, and keep them with stirring in the warm Skillet,
till you see them part, and the Sugar as it were sifted upon them, then put
them upon a Paper while they are warm and rub them gently with your hands, till
all the Lumps be broken, then put them into a Cullender, and sift them as clean
as may be, then pour them upon a clean Cloth, and shake them up and down till
there be hardly any Sugar hanging about them; then if you would have them look
as though they were new gathered, have some help, and open them with your
fingers before they be quite cold, and if any Sugar hang about them, you may
wipe it off with a fine Cloth; to candy Rosemary Flowers or Archangel, you must
pull out the string that stands up in the middle of the Blossom, and take them
which are not at all faded, and they will look as though they were new
gathered, without opening.

XLI. To pickle Cucumbers.
Take the least you can get, and lay a layer of Cucumbers, and then a Layer of
beaten Spices, Dill and Bay Leaves, and so do till you have filled your Pot,
and let the Spices, Dill, and Bay Leaves cover them, then fill up your Pot with
the best Wine Vinegar, and a little Salt, and so keep them.

Sliced Turnips also very thin, in some Vinegar, Pepper and a little Salt, do
make a very good Sallad, but they will keep but six Weeks.

XLII. To make Sugar-Cakes.
Take a pound of fine Sugar beaten and searced; with four Ounces of the finest
Flower, put to it one pound of Butter well washed with Rosewater, and work them
well together, then take the Yolks of four Eggs, and beat them with four
Spoonfuls of Rosewater, in which has been steeped two or three days before
Nutmeg and Cinnamon, then put thereto so much Cream as will make it knead to a
stiff Paste, roll it into thin Cakes, and prick them, and lay them on Plates,
and bake them; you shall not need to butter your Plates, for they will slip off
of themselves, when they are cold.

XLIII. To make a very fine Cream.
Take a quart of Cream, and put to it some Rosewater and Sugar, some large
Mace, Cinnamon and Cloves, boil it together for a quarter of an hour, then take
the yolks of eight Eggs, beat them together with some of your Cream, then put
them into the Cream which is boiling, keep it stirring lest it curdle, take it
from the fire, and keep it stirring till it be a little cold, then run it
through a Strainer, dish it up, and let it stand one night, the next day it
will be as stiff as a Custard, then stick it with blanched Almonds, Citron Pill
and Eringo roots, and so serve it in.

XLIV. To make Syrrop of Turnips for a Consumption.
Take half a peck of Turnips washed and pared clean, cut them thin, put to them
one pound of Raisins of the Sun stoned, one quarter of a pound of Figs cut
small, one Ounce of Aniseeds bruised, half an Ounce of Licoras sliced, one
Ounce of Cloves bruised, two handfuls of Burrage Flowers, and so much water as
will cover all, and two fingers breadth above them, then boil it on a great
fire in an earthen Vessel covered, until the roots be soft and tender, then
strain out the Liquor, and to every Pint of it put a pound of fine Sugar, the
Whites of two Eggs beaten, boil it to a Syrrop, and use it often, two or three
Spoonfuls at a time,

XLV. For a Consumption.
Take a Pint of Red Cows milk, then take the yolk of a new laid Egg potched
very rare, then stir it into the Milk over a soft fire, but do not let it boil,
sweeten it with a little Sugar Candy, and drink it in the morning fasting, and
when you go to bed.

XLVI. To make Bottle Ale for a Consumption.
Take a quart of Ale, and a Pint of strong Aquavitae, Mace and Cinnamon, of each
one quarter of an Ounce, two Spoonfuls of the powder of Elacampane root, one
quarter of a pound of Loaf Sugar, one quarter of a pound of Raisins of the Sun
stoned, four spoonfuls of Aniseeds beaten to Powder, then put all together into
a Bottle and stop it close.

Take three spoonfuls of this in a morning fasting, and again one hour before
Supper, and shake the Bottle when you pour it out.

XLVII. To make Cakes of Quinces.
Take the best you can get, and pare them, and slice them thin from the Core,
then put them into a Gallipot close stopped, and tie it down with a Cloth, and
put it into a Kettle of boiling water, so that it may stand steady about five
hours, and as your water boiles away in the Kettle, fill it up with more warm
water, then pour your Quinces into a fine hair Sieve, and let it drain all the
Liquor into a Basin, then take this Liquor and weigh it, and to every pound
take a pound of double refined Sugar, boil this Sugar to a Candy height, then
put in your Liquor, and set them over a slow fire, and stir them continually
till you see it will jelly, but do not let it boil; then put it into Glasses,
and set them in a Stove till you see them with a Candy on the top, then turn
them out with a wet Knife on the other side upon a white Paper, sleeked over
with a sleek stone, and set them in the Stove again till the other side be dry,
and then keep them in a dry place.

XLVIII. To make Marmalade of Apricocks.
Take Apricocks, pare them and cut them in quarters, and to every pound of
Apricocks put a pound of fine Sugar, then put your Apricocks into a Skillet
with half of the sugar, and let them boil very tender and gently, and bruise
them with the back of a Spoon, tillt hey be like Pap, then take the other part
of the sugar, and boil it to a Candy height, then put your Apricocks into that
Sugar, and keep it stirring over the fire, till all the Sugar be melted, but do
not let it boil, then take it from the fire, and stir it till it be almost
cold; then put it in Glasses, and let it have the Air of the fire to dry it.

XLIX, To make Limon Cakes.
Take half a pound of refined sugar, put to it two spoonfuls of Rosewater, as
much Orange Flower-water, and as much of fair water, boil it to a Candy height,
then put in the Rind of a Limon grated, and a little Juice, stir it well on the
fire, and drop it on Plates, or sleeked Paper.

L. To make Wafers.
Take a quart of Flower heaped and put to it the yolks of four Eggs, and two or
three spoonfuls of Rosewater, mingle this well together, then make it like
Batter with Cream and a little sugar, and bake it on Irons very thin poured on.

LI. To make Marmalade of Cherries with Currants.
Take four pounds of Cherries when they are stoned, and boil them alone in
their Liquor for half an hour very fast, then pour away the Liquor from them,
and put to them half a Pint and little more of the juice of Currants, then boil
a pound of double refined sugar to a Candy height, and put your Cherries and
Juice of Currants in that, and boil them again very fast till you find it to
jelly very well.

LII. To preserve Rasberries.
Take the weight of your Rasberries in fine sugar, and take some Rasberries and
bruise them a little, then take the clearest of the bruised Rasberries, I mean
the Juice and the weight of it in sugar, and your other sugar, named before,
and boil it, and scum it, then put in your whole Rasberries, and boil them up
once, then let them stand over the fire without boiling till you see it will
Ielly, and that it look clear, then take up your Rasberries one by one, and put
them into Glasses, then boil your Syrrop, and put it over them.

LIII. To make Syrrop of Ale, good for weak, People to take inwardly, or to
heal old Sores, applied thereto.
Take two Gallons of Ale Wort, the strongest you can get, so soon as it is run
from the Grounds, set it on the fire in a Pipkin, and let it boil gently, and
that you do perceive it to be as though it were full of Rags; run it through a
strainer, and set it on the fire again, and let it boil until it be thick, and
scum it clean, and when it is much wasted, put it into a lesser Pan to boil, or
else it will burn; when it is thick enough, take it off, and when it is cold,
put it into Gallipots, take as much as a Walnut fasting, and as much when you
go to bed.

LIVE. To make whipped Sillibub.
Take half a Pint of Rhenish Wine or white Wine, put it to a Pint of Cream,
with the whites of three Eggs, season it with Sugar, and beat it as you do
Snow-Cream, with Birchen Rods, and take off the Froth as it arises, and put it
into your Pot, so do till it be beaten to a Froth, let it stand two or three
hours till it do settle, and then it will eat finely.

LV. To make Raisin Wine or Stepony.
Take four Gallons of Spring Water, four pounds of Raisins of the Sun stoned,
the juice of four good Limons, and the Rind of two cut thin boil the Raisins,
and Pill in the Water for half an hour or more, then put in the Juice of Limon,
and a little Spice, Sugar and Rosewater, and let it stand but a little more
over the fire; then put it into an earthen pot, and beat it together till it be
cold, then bottle it up, it will keep but a few days.

Memorandum, Two pounds of Sugar to one pound of Cowslips is enough for
Conserve.

LVI. To boil Samphire.
Take water and Salt so strong as will bear an Egg, boil it, and when it boils,
put in your Samphire unwashed, and let it scald a little, then take it off, and
cover it so close that no Air can get in, and set the Pot upon a cold Wisp of
Hay, and so let it stand all night, and it will be very green, then put it up
for your use,

LVII. To make Cabbage Cream.
Take twenty five Quarts of new Milk, set it on the Fire till it be ready to
boil, stir it all the while that it creams not, then pour it into twenty
several Platters so fast as you can, when it is cold, take off the Cream with a
Skimmer, and lay it on a Pie Plate in the fashion of a Cabbage, crumpled one
upon another, do thus three times, and between every Layer you must mingle
Rosewater and Sugar mingled thick, and laid on with a Feather; some use to take
a little Cream and boil it with Ginger, then take it from the fire and season
it with Rosewater and sugar, and the Juice of Jordan Almonds, blanched and
beaten, then stir it till it be cold, that it cream not; then take Toasts of
Manchet cut thin, not too hard, nor brown, lay them in the bottom of the Dish,
and pour the Cream upon them, and lay the Cabbage over.

LVIII. To make a Trifle.
Take sweet Cream, season it with Rosewater and Sugar, and a little whole Mace,
let it boil a while, then take it off, and let it cool, and when it is
lukewarm; put it into such little Dishes or Bowls as you mean to serve it in;
then put in a little Runnet, and stir it together; when you serve it in, strew
on some French Comfits.

LIX. To make thick Cream.
Take sweet Cream, a little Flower finely searced, large Mace, a stick of
Cinnamon, sugar and Rosewater, let all these boil together till it be thick,
then put into it thick Cream, the yolks of Eggs beaten, then let it sees but a
little while for fear of turning, then pour it out, and when it is cold, serve
it in.

LX. To pickle Purslan to keep all the Year.
Take the Leaves from the stalks, then take the Pot you mean to keep them in,
and strew salt over the bottom, then lay in a good row of the Leaves, and strew
on more salt, then lay in a row of the stalks, and put in more salt, then a row
of the Leaves, so keep it close covered.

LXI. To stretch Sheeps Guts.
After they are clean scowred, lay them in water nine days, shifting them once
a day, and they will be very easy to fill, and when they are filled, they will
come to their wonted bigness.

LXII. To make Cream of Pastes and Iellies.
Put Eggs into the Cream as you do for a Fool, and slice your sweetmeats very
thin, and boil with them, then sweeten it, and put it into a Dish.

LXXIII. To make a rare Medicine for the Chine-Cough.
Make a Syrrop of Hysop-water and white sugar Candy, then take the Powder of
Gum Dragon, and as much of White sugar Candy mixed together, and eat of it
several times of the day, or take the abovenamed Syrrop, either of them will
do the Cure.

LXIV. For a Consumption.
Take of Syrrop of Violets, Syrrop of Horehound, Syrrop of Maidenhair and
Conserve of Fox Lungs, of each one ounce, mix them well together, and take it
often upon a Liquoras stick in the day time, and at night.

LXV. To make very rare Ale.
When your Ale is tunned into a Vessel that will hold eight or nine Gallons,
and that has done working, ready to be stopped up, then take a Pound and half
of Raisins of the Sun stoned and cut in pieces, and two great Oranges, Meat and
Rind, and sliced thin, with the Rind of one Limon, and a few Cloves, one Ounce
of Coriander seeds bruised, put all these in a Bag, and hang them in the
Vessel, and stop it up close, when it has stood four days, bottle it up; Fill
the Bottles but a little above the Neck, and put into every one a Lump of fine
sugar, and stop them close, and let it be three Weeks or a Month before you
drink it.

LXVI. To make Ale to drink within a Week.
Tun it into a Vessel which will hold eight Gallons, and when it has done
working, ready to bottle, put in some Ginger sliced, and an Orange stuck with
Cloves, and cut here and there with a Knife, and a pound and half of Sugar, and
with a stick stir it well together, and it will work afresh; when it has done
working, stop it close, and let it stand till it be clear, then bottle it up
and put a Lump of Sugar into every Bottle, and then stop it close, and knock
down the Corks, and turn the Bottles the Bottoms upwards, and it will be fit to
drink in a Weeks time.

LXVII. For the Griping of the Guts.
Take a peniworth of Brandy, and a peniworth of Mithridate mixed together, and
drink it three nights together when you go to rest, or take a little Oil of
Aniseeds in a Glass of Sack three times.

LXVIII. To make a Sack Posset.
Take twelve Eggs beaten very well, and put to them a Pint of Sack, stir them
well that they curd not, then put to them three Pints of Cream, half a pound of
fine Sugar stirring them well together, when they are hot over the fire, put
them into a Basin, and set the Basin over a boiling pot of water, until the
Posset be like a Custard, then take it off, and when it is cool enough to eat,
serve it in with beaten Spice strewed over it very thick,

LXIX, To make Pennado.
Take Oatmeal clean picked and well beaten, steep it in water all night, then
strain it and boil it in a Pipkin with some Currants, and a Blade or two of Mace
and a little Salt; when it is well boiled, take it off, and put in the Yolks of
two or three new laid Eggs beaten with Rosewater, then set it on a fost fire,
and stir it that it curd not, then sweeten it with Sugar, and put in a little
Nutmeg.

LXX. To make Cakes without Fruit.
Take four pounds of fine Flower, rub into it one pound of Butter very well,
then take warmed Cream, and temper it with Ale yeast, so mix them together, and
make them into a Paste, put in a little Rosewater, and several Spices well
beated, let it lie by the fire till the Oven heat, and when you make it up,
knead into, it half a pound of Caraway Comfits, and three quarters of a pound
of Bisket-Comfits, make it up as fast as you can, not too thick, nor cut it too
deep, put it into a hoop well buttered, and wash it over with the White of an
Egg, Rosewater and Sugar, and strew it with some Comfits; do not bake it too
much.

LXXI. A Sack Posset without Milk.
Take thirteen Eggs and beat them very well, and while they are beating, take a
quart of Sack, half a pound of fine Sugar, and a Pint of Ale, and let them boil
a very little while, then put these Eggs to them, and stir them till they be
hot, then take it from the fire, and keep it stirring a while, then put it into
a fit Basin, and cover it close with a Dish, then set'it over the fire again
till it arise to a Curd, then serve it in with some beaten spice.

LXXII. A very fine Cordial.
One Ounce of Syrup of Gilly-flowers, one dram of Confection of Alkermes, one
Ounce and half of Burrage-water, the like of Mint-water, one Ounce of Dr.
Mountford's water, as much of Cinnamon water mixed together.

LXXIII. The best way to Preserve Goosberries green and whole.
Pick them clean and put them into water as warm as milk, so let them stand
close covered half an hour, then put them into another warm water and let them
stand as long, and so the third time, till you find them very green; then take
their weight in fine Sugar, and make a Syrup, then put them in, and let them
boil softly one hour then set them by till the next day, then heat them again,
so do twice, then take them from that Syrup and make a new Syrup and boil them
therein, till you find they be enough.

LXXIV. To make the Orange Pudding.
Take the rind of a small one pared very thin, and boiled in several waters,
and beaten very fine in a Mortar, then put to it four Ounces of fine Sugar, and
four Ounces of fresh Butter, and the Yolks of six Eggs, and a little salt, beat
it together in the Mortar till the Oven heats, and so butter a dish and bake
it, but not too much; strew Sugar on it and serve it to the Table, Bake it in
Puff-Past.

LXXV. To make French Bread.
Take half a Bushel of fine Flower, ten Eggs, one pound and half of fresh
Butter, then put in as much Yest as you do into Manchet, temper it with new
milk pretty hot, and let it lie half an hour to rise, then make it into Loaves
or Rowls, and wash it over with an Egg beaten with Milk; let not your Oven be
too hot.

LXXVI. To make a made Dish.
Take four Ounces of sweet Almonds blanched, and beaten with Rosewater, strain
them into some Cream, then take Artichoke bottoms boiled tender, and some
boiled Marrow, then boil a quart of Cream with some Rosewater and Sugar to some
thickness, then take it off, and lay your Artichokes into a Dish, and lay the
Marrow on them, then mix your Almond Cream, and the other together, and pour
it over them, and set it on Coals till you serve it in.

LXXVII. To make a Cake with Almonds.
Take one pound and half of fine Flower, of Sugar twelve Ounces beaten very
fine, mingle them well together, then take half a pound of Almonds blanched,
and beaten with Rosewater, mingle all these with as much Sack as will work it
into a Paste, put in some Spice, some Yest, and some plumped Corans with some
Butter, and a little salt, so make it into a Cake and bake it.

LXXVIII. To make a Sillibub.
Take a Limon pared and sliced very thin, then cover the bottom of your
Sillibub Pot with it, then strew it thick with fine Sugar, then take Sack or
white Wine, and make a Curd with some Milk or Cream, and lay it on the Limon
with a Spoon, then whip some Cream and Whites of Eggs together; sweetened a
little, and cast the Froth thereof upon your Sillibub, when you lay in your
Curd, you must lay Sugar between every Lay.

LXXIX To make fine Water Gruel.
Take the best Oatmeal beaten, and steep it in water all night, the next day
strain it, and boil it with a Blade of Mace, and when it is enough, put in some
Raisins and Corans which have been infused in a Pot (in a Pot of seething
Water) and a little Wine, a little Salt, a little sugar, and so eat it.

LXXX. To make Limon Cream.
Take a quart of Cream, keep it stirring on the fire until it be blood warm,
then take the Meat of three Limons sweetened well with Sugar, and a little
Orange Flower water, sweeten them so well that they may not turn the Cream,
then stir them into the Cream, on the fire with some yolks of Eggs, and serve
it in cold; Limon Posset thickened with yolks of Eggs, makes a fine Cawdle for a
sick body.

LXXXI. To make rare Cakes with Almonds.
Take two Pounds and a half of Blanched Almonds beaten fine with Rosewater, mix
them with a Pound and three quarters of fine Sugar and some Musk, and
Ambergreece, six Whites of Eggs beaten to a Froth, let them stand a little,
then set them on a Chasing-dish of Coals, and dry them a little, stirring them
all the while, then take half a Peck of Flower, put into it a little salt,
three Pints of Ale-Yest, have in readiness your Cream lukewarm, strain your
Yeast, and put into it six spoonful of Sack, put in spice into your Flower, and
make all these into a stiff Paste with the Cream, work it well and lay it by
the fire to rise one hour, then work into your Paste two pounds and a quarter
of fresh Butter; pull your Paste in pieces three times, then strew in a Pound
of Caraway Comfits, and make this Paste into five Cakes, lay them upon buttered
Plates or double Papers, then strew Caraway Comfits on the top and double
refined sugar, one hour will bake them sufficiently.

LXXXII. To make Shrewsbury Cakes.
Take four Pounds of Flower, two Pounds of Butter, one Pound and half of fine
sugar, four Eggs, a little beaten Cinnamon, a little Rosewater, make a hole in
the Flower, and put the Eggs into it when they are beaten, then mix the Butter,
Sugar, Cinnamon and Rosewater together, and then mix them with the Eggs and
Flower, then make them into thin round Cakes, and put them into an Oven after
the Household Bread is drawn; this quantity will make three dozen of Cakes.

LXXXIII. To make Gooseberry wine.
Bruise ripe Goosberries with an Apple-Beater, but do not beat them too small,
then strain them through a hair strainer, and put your Juice into an earthen
Pot, keep it covered four or five days till it be clear, then draw it out into
another Vessel, letting it run into a hair sieve, stop it close, and let it
stand one fortnight, then draw it out into quart Bottles, putting one Pound of
sugar into eight Bottles, stop them up close, and in a week or fortnights time
you may drink them.

LXXXIV. To make Damson wine.
Take four Gallons of Water, and put to every Gallon of Water four Pounds of
Malago Raisins, and half a Peck of Damsons:

Put the Raisins and Damsons into a Vessel without a head, cover the Vessel and
let them steep six days, stirring them twice every day, then let them stand as
long without stirring, then draw the Wine out of the Vessel, and color it with
the infused juice of Damsons sweetened with sugar, till it be like Claret Wine,
then put it into a Wine-Vessel for a fortnight, and then bottle it up.

LXXXV. To pickle Cucumbers the very best way.
Take those you mean to pickle, and lay them in water and salt three or four
days, then take a gooe many great Cucumbers, and cut the outsides of them into
Water, for the insides will be too pappy, boil them in that Water, with Dill
seeds and Fennel seeds, and when it is cold, put to it some salt, and as much
of Vinegar as will make it a strong Pickle, then take them out of the Water and
salt, and pour this Liquor over them, so let them stand close covered for a
fortnight or three Weeks,

Then pour the Pickle from them and boil it, and when it is cold add to it
some more Vinegar, and put it to them again, so let them stand one Month
longer, and now and then when you see occasion, boil it again, and when it is
cold, put it to them, and every time you boil it, put some Vinegar thereto, and
lay the seeds and pieces of Cucumbers on the top, and after the first fortnight
when you boil it, put in some whole Pepper and some whole Cloves and Mace, and
always put the Liquor cold over them.

LXXXVI. To make the best Orange Marmalade.
Take the Rinds of the deepest colored Oranges, boil them in several Waters
till they are very tender, then mince them small, and to one pound of Oranges,
take-a Pound of Pippins cut small, one Pound of the finest Sugar, and one Pint
of Spring Water, me't your Sugar in the Water over the fire, and scum it, then
put in your Pippins, and boil them till they are very clear, then put in the
Orange Rind, and boil them together, til you find by cooling a little of it,
that it will jelly very well, then put in the Juice of two Oranges, and one
Limon, and boil it a little longer; and then put it up in Gally-pots.

LXXXVII. To preserve White Quinces.
Take the fairest you can get, and coddle them very tender, so that a straw may
go through to the Core, then core them with a scoop or small knife, then pare
them neatly, and weigh them, to every pound of Quinces, take one Pound of
double refined sugar, and a Pint of the Water wherein thin slices of Pippins
have been boiled; for that is of a Iellying quality, put your sugar to the
Pippin water, and make a syrup, and scum it, then put in your Quinces, and boil
them very quick, and that will keep them whole and white, take them from the
fire sometimes, and shake them gently, keep them clean scummed, when you
perceive them to be very clear, put them into Gally Pots or Glasses, then warm
the Ielly and put it to them.

LXXXVIII. To make Conserve of red Roses.
Take their Buds and clip off the Whites, then take three times their weight in
sugar double refined; beat the Roses well in a Mortar, then put in the sugar by
little and little, and when you find it well incorporated, put it into Gally
Pots, and cover it with sugar, and so it will keep seven years.

LXXXIX. To make plain Bisket-Cakes.
Take a Pottle of Flower, and put to it half a Pound of fine sugar, half an
Ounce of Caroway seeds, half an Ounce of Anniseeds, six spoonfuls of Yeast,
then boil a Pint of Water or little more, put into it a quarter of a Pound of
Butter or little more, let it stand till it be cold, then temper them together
till it be as thick as Manchet, then let it lie a while to rise, so roll them
out very thin, and prick them, and bake them in an Oven not too hot.

XC. To make Green Paste of Pippins.
Take your Pippins while they be green, and coddle them tender, then peel them,
and put them into a fresh warm Water, and cover them close, till they are as
green as you desire. Then take the Pulp from the Core, and beat it very fine in
a Mortar, then take the weight in sugar, and wet it with Water, and boil it to
a Candy height, then put in your Pulp, and boil them together till it will come
from the bottom of the Skillet, then make it into what form you please, and
keep them in a stove.

XCI. To make Paste of any Plumbs.
Take your Plumbs, and put them into a Pot, cover them close, and set them into
a Pot of seething Water, and so let them be till they be tender, then pour
forth their Liquor, and strain the Pulp through a Canvas strainer, then take to
half a Pound of the Pulp of Plumbs half a Pound of the Pulp of Pippins, beat
them together, and take their weight in fine sugar, with as much Water as will
wet it, and boil it to a Candy height; then put in your Pulp, and boil them
together till it will come from the bottom of the Posnet, then dust your Plates
with searced sugar, and so keep them in a Stove to dry.

XCII. To make Almond Ginger Bread.
Take a little Gum-Dragon and lay it in steep in Rosewater all night, then take
half a Pound of Jordan Almonds blanched and beaten with some of that Rosewater,
then take half a pound of fine sugar beaten and searced, of Ginger and Cinnamon
finely searced, so much as by your taste you may judge to be fit; beat all
these together into a Paste, and dry it is a warm Oven or Stove.

XCIII. To make Snow Cream.
Take a Pint of Cream, and the Whites of three Eggs, one spoonful or two of
Rosewater, whip it to a Froth with a Birchen Rod, then cast it off the Rod into
a Dish, in the which you have first fastened half a Manchet with some Butter on
the bottom, and a long Rosemary sprig in the middle; when you have cast all the
Snow on the Dish, then garnish it with several sorts of sweetmeats.

XCIV. To preserve Oranges and Limons that they shall have a Rock Candy on them
in the Syrup.
Take the fairest and cut them in halves, or if you will do them whole, then
cut a little hole in the bottom, so that you may take out all the meat, lay
them in water nine days, shifting them twice every day, then boil them in
several Waters, till a straw will run through them, then take to every Pound of
Orange or Limon one Pound of fine sugar, and one quart of Water, make your
syrup, and let your Oranges or Limons boil a while in it, then let them stand
five or six days in that syrup, then to every Pound, put one Pound more of
sugar into your syrup, and boil your Oranges till they be very clear, then take
your Oranges out, and boil your Syrup almost to a Candy, and put to them.

XCV. To make Sugar Plate.
Take a little Gum Dragon laid in steep in Rosewater till it be like Starch,
then beat it in a Mortar with some searced sugar till it come to a perfect
Paste, then mould it with sugar, and make it into what form you please, and
color some of them, lay them in a warm place, and they will dry of themselves.

XCVI. To make Artisicial Walnuts.
Take some of your Sugar Plate, print it in a Mould fit for a Walnut Kernel,
yellow it over with a little Saffron, then take searced Cinnamon and Sugar, as
much of the one as the other, work it in Paste with some Rosewater, wherein Gum
Dragon has been steeped, and print it in a Mould for a Walnut shell, and when
they are dry, close them together over the shell with a little of the Gum water.

XCVII. To make short Cakes.
Take a Pint of Ale Yeast, and a Pound and half of fresh Butter, melt your
Butter, and let it cool a little, then take as much fine Flower as you think
will serve, mingle it with the Butter and Yeast, and as much Rosewater and
Sugar as you think fit, and if you please, some Caroway Comfits, so bake it in
little Cakes; they will last good half a year,

XCVIII. To preserve red Roses, which is as good and effectual as any Conserve,
and made with less trouble.
Take Red Rose Buds clipped clean from their Whites one pound, put them into a
Skillet with four Quarts of Water, Wine measure, then let them boil very fast
till three Quarts be boiled away, then put in three Pounds of fine Sugar, and
let it boil till it begins to be thick, then put in the Juice of a Limon, and
boil it a little longer, and when it is almost cold, put it into Gally-Pots,
and strew them over with searced Sugar, and so keep them so long a; you please,
the longer the better.

XCVIII. A fine cordial Infusion.
Take the Flesh of a Cock Chick, cut in small pieces, and put into a Glass with
a wide Mouth, put to it one Ounce of Hartshorn, half an Ounce of Red Coral
prepared, with a little large Mace, and a slice or two of Limon, and two Ounces
of White Sugar Candy, stop the Glass close with a Cork, and set it into a
Veslel of seething Water, and stuff it round with Hay that it jog not; when you
find it to be enough, give the sick Party two spoonfuls at a time.

XCIX. For a Cough of the Lungs.
Take two Ounces of Oil of sweet Almonds newly drawn, three spoonfuls of
Coltsfoot Water, two spoonfuls of Red Rose Water, two Ounces of white
Sugar Candy finely beaten; mingle all these together, and beat it one hour with
a spoon, till it be very white; then take it often upon a Licoras stick. This
is very good.

C. To Preserve Grapes.
Take your fairest white Grapes and pick them from the stalks, then stone them
carefully, and save the juice, then take a pound of Grapes, a pound of fine
Sugar, and a pint of water wherein sliced Pippins have been boiled, strain that
water, and with your Sugar and that make a Syrup, when it is well scummed put
in your Grapes, and boil them very fast, and when you see they are as clear as
glass, and that the Syrup will jelly, put them into Glasses.

CI. To make Collops of Bacon in Sweetmeats.
Take some Marchpane Paste, and the weight thereof in fine Sugar beaten and
searsed, boil them on the fire, and keep them stirring for fear they burn, so
do till you find it will come from the bottom of the Posnet, then mould it with
fine Sugar like a Paste, and color some of it with beaten Cinnamon, and put in
a little Ginger, then roll it broad and thin, and lay one upon another till you
think it be of a fit thicknes and cut it in Collops and dry it in an Oven.

CII. To make Violet Cakes.
Take them clipped clean from the whites and their weight in fine Sugar, wet
your Sugar in fair water, and boil it to a Candy height, then put in your
Violets, and stir them well together, with a few drops of a Limon, then pour
them upon a wet Pye-Plate, or on a slicked paper, and cut them in what form you
please; do not let them boil, for that will spoil the color: Thus you may do
with any Herb or Flower, or with any Orange or Limon Pill, and, if you like it,
put in a little Musk or Ambergrease.

CIII. To Preserve white Damsons.
Take to every pound one pound of fine Sugar and a quarter of a pint of fair
water, make your Syrup and scum it well, then take it from the fire, and when
it is almost cold put in your Damsons, and let them scald a little, then take
them off a while, and then set them on again; when you perceive them to be very
clear, put them into Pots or Glasses.

CIV. To make very good Cake.
Take to a peck of Flower four pound of Currants well washed, dried and picked,
four pounds of Butter, one pound of Sugar, one ounce of Cinnamon, one ounce of
Nutmegs, beat the Spice and lay it all night in Rose Water, the next day strain
it out, then take one pint and an half of good Ale-Yeast, the Yolks of 4 Eggs,
a pint of Cream, put a pound of the butter into the warmed Cream, put the rest
into the Flower in pieces, then wet your Flower with your Cream, and put in
your Currants, and a little Salt, and four or five spoonfuls of
Carraway-Comfits and your Spice, mix them all and the Yeast well together, and
let it lie one hour to rise, then make it up and Bake it in a Pan buttered: It
may stand two hours.

CV. To make Paste Royal.
Take Quince Marmalade almost cold, and mould it up with searsed Sugar to a
Paste, then make it into what form you please and dry them in a Stove.

CVI. To make Paste of Pippins colored with Barberries.
Take the Pulp of Codled Pippins, and as much of the Juice of Barberries as
will color it, then take the weight of it in fine Sugar, boil it to a Candy
height, with a little water, then put in your Pulp beaten very well in a
Mortar, boil it till it come from the bottom of the Posner, then dust your
Plate with Sugar, and drop them thereon, and dry them in a Stove or warm Oven.

CVII. To preserve Barberries.
Take one Pound of stoned Barberries, and twice their weight in fine Sugar,
then strip two or three handfuls of Barberries from their stalks, and put them
into a Dish with as much Sugar as Barberries, over a Chafingdish of Coals, when
you see they are well plumped, strain them, then wet your other Sugar with
this, and no Water, boil it, and scum it, and then put in your stoned
Barberries, and boil them till they are very clear.

CVIII. To make Ielly of Currants or of any other Fruit.
Take your Fruit clean picked from the stalks, and put them into a long
Gally-pot, and set it into a Kettle of Water close covered, keep the Water
boiling till you find the Fruit be well infused, then pour out the clearest,
and take the weight of it in fine Sugar, wet your Sugar with Water, and boil it
to a Candy height, then put in your clear Liquor, and keep it stirring over a
slow fire till you see it will Ielly, but do not let it boil; the Pulp which is
lest of the Liquor, you may make Paste of if you please, as you do the Pippin
Paste before named.

CIX. To make a Goosberry Fool.
Take a Pint and half of Goosberries clean picked from the stalks, put them
into a Skillet with a Pint and half of fair Water, scald them till they be very
tender, then bruise them well in the Water, and boil them with a Pound and half
of fine Sugar till it be of a good thickness, then put to it the yolks of six
Eggs and a Pint of Cream, with a Nutmeg quartered, stir these well together
till you think they be enough, over a slow fire, and put it into a Dish, and
when it is cold, eat it.

CX. To make Perfumed Lozenges.
Take twelve Grains of Ambergreece, and six Grains of Musk, and beat it with
some Sugar-plate spoken of before, then'roule it out in thin Cakes, and make
them into what form you please, you may make them round like a Sugar Plumb, and
put a Coriander seed in each of them, and so they will be fine Comfits, and you
may make them into Lozenges, to perfume Wine with.

CXI. To Candy Eryngo Roots.
Take the Roots new gathered, without Knots or Ioints, wash them clean, and
boil them in several Waters till they are very tender, then wash them well, and
dry them in a Cloth, slit them, and take out the Pith, and braid them in Braids
as you would a Woman's Hair, or else twist them, then take twice their weight in
sine Sugar, take half that Sugar, and to every Pound of Sugar, one quarter of a
Pint of Rosewater and as much fair water, make a syrup of it, and put in your
roots and boil them, and when they are very clear, wet the rest of the Sugar
with Rosewater, and boil it to a Candy height, then put in the Roots, and boil
them, and shake them, and when they be enough, take them off, and shake them
till they are cold and dry, then lay them upon Dishes or Plates till they are
thoroughly dry, and then put them up; thus you may do Orange or Limon, or Citron
Pill, or Potato Roots.

CXII. To preserve Goosberries.
Take your Goosberries, and stone them then take a little more than their
weight in fine Sugar, then with as much Water as will melt the Sugar, boil it
and scum it, then put in your Goosberries, and boil them apace till they be
clear, then take up your Goosberries, and put them into Glasses, and boil the
syrup a little more, and put over them.

CXIII. To make Leach and to color it,
Take one Ounce of Isinglass and lay it in Water four and twenty hours,
changing the Water three or four times, then take a quart of new Milk, boiled
with a little sliced Ginger and a stick of Cinnamon, one spoonful of Rosewater,
and a quarter of a Pound of sugar, when it has boiled a while, put in the
Isinglass, and boil it till it be thick, keeping it always stirring, then
strain it, and keep it stirring, and when it is cold, you may slice it out, and
serve it upon Plates; you may color it with Saffron, and some with Turnsole,
and lay the White and that one upon another, and cut it, and it will look like
Bacon; it is good for weak people, and Children which have the Rickets.

CXIV. To take away the Signs of the Small Pox.
Take some Spermaceti, and twice so much Virgins Wax, melt them together and
spread it upon Kids Leather, in the shape of a Mask, then lay it upon the Face,
and keep it on night and day; it is a very fine Remedy.

CXV. For Morphew or Freckles, and to clear the Skin.
Take the Blood of any Fowl or Beast, and wipe your Face all over with it every
night when you go to bed for a fortnight together, and the next day wash it all
off with White Wine, and white Sugar Candy, and sometimes hold your face over
the smoke of Brimstone for a while, and shut your eyes, if you add the Juice of
a Limon to the white Wine, it will be the better.

CXVI. To make Almond Butter to look white.
Take about two Quarts of Water, the bottom of a Manchet, and a Blade of large
Mace, boil it half an hour, and let it stand till it be cold, then take a Pound
of sweet Almonds blanched, and beaten with Rosewater very fine, so strain them
with this Water many times, till you think the virtue is out of them, and that
it be a thick Almond Milk, then put it into a Skillet, and make it boiling hot,
that it simper, then take a spoonful of the Juice of a Limon, and put into it,
stirring of it in, and when you perceive it ready to turn, then take it from
the fire, and take a large fine Cloth, and cast your Liquor all over the Cloth
with a Ladle, then scrape it all together into the middle with a Spoon, then
tie it hard with a Packthred, so let it hang till the next morning, then put it
in a Dish, and sweeten it with Rosewater and Sugar, put a little Ambergreece if
you please.

CXVII. For the Ptisick.
Take a Pottle of small Ale, one Pound of Raisins of the Sun stoned, with a
little handful of Peniroyal, boil these together, and add a little Sugar Candy
to it, and take five or six spoonfuls at a time four or five times in a day for
a good while.

CXVIII. Marmalade of Apricocks.
Take the ripest and stone them, and pare them, and beat them in a Mortar, then
boil the Pulp in a Dish over a Chafing Dish of Coals, till it be somewhat dry,
then take the weight in fine Sugar, and boil it to a Candy height, with some
Rosewater, then put in your Pulp, and boil them together till it will come from
the bottom of the Skillet, and always keep it stirring, for fear it burn, then
put it into Glasses.

CXIX. Syrup of Turnips.
Take of the best and pare them, and bake them in a Pot then take the clear
Juice from them, and with the like weight in fine Sugar make it into a Syrup,
and add a little Licoras to it, and take it often.

CXX. To make good Ielly.
Take a lean Pig, dress it clean, and boil it in a sufficient quantity of Fair
Water, with four Ounces of green Licoras scraped and bruised, Maidenhair two
handfuls, Coltsfoot one handful, Currants half a Pound, Dates two Ounces stoned
and sliced, Ivory one Ounce, Hartshorn one Ounce, boil these to a strong Ielly,
and strain it, and take off the Fat, then put to it half a Pound of Sugar, and
half a Pint of white Wine, and so eat it at your Pleasure.

CXXI. A most excellent Cordial proved by very many.
Take three Grains of East Indian Bezoar, as much of Ambergreece, powder them
very fine with a little Sugar, and mingle it with a spoonful and half of the
Syrup of the juice of Citrons, one Spoonful of Syrup of Clovegilliflowers, and
one spoonsul of Cinnamon Water, so take it warmed.

CXXII. To make the black Juice of Licoras.
Take two Gallons of running Water, three handfuls of unset Hysop, three pounds
and half of Licoras scraped, and dried in the Sun and beaten, then cover it
close, and boil it almost a whole day in the Water, when it is enough, it will
be as thick as Cream, then let it stand all night, the next morning strain it,
and put it in several Pans in the Sun to dry, till it will work like wax, then
mould it with White Sugar Candy beaten and searced, and print it in little
Cakes, and print them with Seals, and dry them.

CXXIII. To make Marchpane.
Take two Pounds of Jordan Almonds, blanch and beat them in a Mortar with
Rosewater, then take one Pound and half of Sugar finely searced, when the
Almonds are beaten to a fine Paste with the Sugar, then, take it out of the
Mortar, and mould it with searced Sugar, and let it stand one hour to cool,
then roll it as thin as you would do for a Tart, and cut it round by the Plate,
then set an edge about it, and pinch it, then set it on a bottom of Wafers, and
bake it a little, then Ice it with Rosewater and Sugar, and the White of an Egg
beaten together, and put it into the Oven again, and when you see the Ice rise
white and high, take it out, and set up a long piece of Marchpane first baked
in the middle of the Marchpane, stick it with several sorts of Comfits, then
lay on Leaf-Gold with a Feather and the White of an Egg beaten.

CXXIV. To preserve Green Pippins.
Scald some green Pippins carefully, then pecl them, and put them into warm
water, and cover them, and let them stand over a slow fire till they are as
green as you would have them, and so tender as that a straw may run through
them, then to every pound of Apples, take one pound of fine Sugar, and half a
Pint of water, of which make a Syrup, and when you have scumm'd it clean, put
in your Apples, and let them boil a while, then set them by till the next day,
then boil them thoroughly, and put them up.

CXXV. To preserve Peaches.
Take your Peaches when you may prick a hole through them, scald them in fair
water, and rub the Fur off from them with your Thumb, then put them in another
warm water over a flow fire, and cover them till they be green, then take their
weight in fine Sugar and a little water, boil it and scum it, then put in your
Peaches, and boil them till they are clear, so you may do green Plumbs or green
Apricocks.

CXXVI. Marmalade of Damsons.
Take two Pounds of Damsons, and one Pound of Pippins pared and cut in pieces,
bake them in an Oven with a little sliced Ginger, when they are tender, pour
them into a Cullender, and let the syrup drop from them, then strain them, and
take as much sugar as the Pulp does weigh, boil it to a Candy height with a
little water, then put in your Pulp, and boil it till it will come from the
bottom of the Skillet, and so put it up.

CXXVII. Marmalade of Wardins.
Bake them in an earthen Pot, then cut them from the Core and beat them in a
Mortar, then take their weight in fine Sugar, and boil it to a Candy height
with a little water, then put in your Pulp with a little beaten Ginger, and
boil it till it comes from the bottom of the Posnet; and so do with Quinces if
you please.

CXXVIII. Marmalade of green Pippins to look green.
Scald them as you do to preserve, then stamp them in a Mortar, and take their
weight in fine Sugar, boil it to a Candy height with a little water, then boil
it and the Pulp together, till it will come from the bottom of the Posnet.

CXXIX. To preserve green Walnuts.
Take them and steep them all night in water, in the morning pare them and boil
them in fair water till they be tender, and then stick a Clove into the head of
each of them, then take one Pound and half of sugar to every Pound of Walnuts,
and to every pound of Sugar one Pint of Rosewater, make a Syrup of it, and scum
it, then put in your Walnuts, and boil them very leasurely till they are
enough; then put in a little Musk or Ambergreece with a little Rosewater, and
boil them a little more and put them up; it is a very good Cordial, and will
keep seven years or more.

CXXX. To dry old Pippins.
Pare them, and bore a hole through them with a little Knife or Piercer, and
cut some of them in halves, take out the Cores of them as you cut them, then
put them into a syrup of sugar and water, as much as will cover them in a broad
preserving Pan, let them boil so fast as may be; taking them sometimes from the
fire, scuming them clean, when you perceive your Apples clear, and Syrup thick,
then take them up, and set them into a warm Oven from the Syrup, all night, the
next morning turn them, and put them in again, so do till they are dry; if you
please to glister some of them, put them into your Candy-Pot but one night, and
lay them to dry the next day, and they will look like Crystal.

CXXXI. To preserve Bullace as green as Grass.
Take them fresh gathered, and prick them in several places, scald them as you
do your green Peaches, then take their weight in fine sugar, and make a Syrup
with a little water, then put in your Bullace, and boil them till they be very
clear, and the Syrup very thick.

CXXXII. To preserve Medlars.
Take them at their full growth, pare them as thin as you can, prick them with
your Knife, and parboil them. reasonable tender, then dry them with a Cloth,
and put to them as much clarified sugar as will cover them; let them boil
leisurely, turning them often, till they have well taken the sugar, then put
them into an earthen Pot, and let them stand till the next day, then warm them
again half an hour; then take them up and lay them to drain, then put into that
Syrup half a Pint of water wherein Pippins have been boiled in slices, and a
quarter of a Pound of fresh sugar, boil it, and when it will jelly, put it to
the Medlars in Gallipots or Glasses.

CXXXIII. To make Conserve of Violets.
Take a Pound clean cut from the whites, stamp them well in a Mortar, and put
to them two or three Ounces of white Sugar Candy, then take it out and lay it
upon a sleeked Paper, then take their weight in fine sugar, and boil it to a
Candy height with a little water, then put in your Violets, and a little Juice
of Limon, and then let them have but one walm or two over the fire, stirring it
well; then take it off; and when it is between hot and cold, put it up, and
keep it.

CXXXIV. To cast all kinds of shapes, what you please, and to color them.
Take half a pound of refined Sugar, boil it to a Candy height with as much
Rosewater as will melt it, then take moulds made of Alablaster, and lay them in
water one hour before you put in the hot Sugar, then when you have put in your
Sugar turn the mould about in your hand till it be cool, then take it out of
the mould, and color it according to the nature of the Fruit, you would have
it resemble.

CXXXV. To dry Pears without Sugar.
Pare them and leave the stalks and pipps on them, then bake them in an earthen
pot with a little Claret Wine, covered, then drain them from the Syrup and dry
them upon Sieves in a warm Oven, turning them morning and evening, every time
you turn them hold them by the stalk and dip them in the Liquor wherein they
were baked and flat them every time a little.

If you do them carefully they will look very red and clear and eat moist, when
they are dry put them up.

CXXXVI. To make Rasberrie Wine.
Take Rasberries and bruise them with the back of a spoon, and strain them and
fill a bottle with the juice, stop it, but not very close, let it stand four or
five days, then pour it from the Grounds into a Basin, and put as much
White Wind or Rhenish as your juice will well color, then sweeten it with Loaf
Sugar, then bottle it and keep it, and when you drink it you may perfume some
of it with one of the Lozenges spoken of before.

CXXXVII. To preserve Oranges in jelly.
Take the thickest rind Oranges, chipped very thin, lay them in water three or
four days, shifting them twice every day, then boil them in several waters,
till you may run a straw through them, then let them lie in a Pan of water all
night, then dry them gently in a Cloth, then take to every Pound of Oranges one
Pound and half of sugar, and a Pint of water, make thereof a syrup; then put in
your Oranges, and boil them a little, then set them by till the next day, and
boil them again a little, and so do for four or five days together, then boil
them till they are very clear, then drain them in a sieve, then take to every
Pound of Oranges one quarter of a Pint of water, wherein sliced Pippins have
been boiled into your syrup, and to every quarter of a Pint of that water, add
a quarter of a Pound of fresh sugar, boil it till it will jelly, then put your
Oranges into a Pot or a Glass, and put the Ielly over them; you may if you
please, take all the Meat out of some of your Oranges at one end, and fill it
with preserved Pippin; and if you put in a little Juice of Orange and Limon
into your Syrup when it is almost boiled, it will be very fine tasted.

CXXXVII. To make Crystal Ielly.
Take a Knuckle of Veal and two Calves Feet, lay them in water all night, then
boil them in Spring water till you perceive it to be a thick Ielly, then take
them out, and let your Ielly stand till it be cold, then take the clearest, and
put it into a Skillet, and sweeten it with Rosewater and fine Sugar, and a
little whole Spice, and boil them together a little, and so eat it when it is
cold.

CXXXVIII. To make China-Broth.
Take three Ounces of China sliced thin, and three Plnts of fair water, half an
ounce of Hartshorn, let it steep together twelve hours, then put in a Red Cock
cut in pieces and bruised, one Ounce of Raisins of the Sun stoned, one ounce of
Cnrrans, one ounce of Dates stoned, one Parsley root, one Fennelroot, the Pith
being taken out, a little Borage and Bugloss, and a little Pimpernel, two
Ounces of Pearl Barley; boil all these together till you think they be well
boiled, then strain it out.

CXXXIX. To make Court perfumes.
Take three Ounces of Benjamin, lay it all night in damask Rose buds clean cut
from the white, beat them very fine in a stone Mortar till it come to a Paste,
then take it out and mix it with a dram of Musk finely beaten, as much Civet,
mould them up with a little searsed Sugar, and dry them between Rose Leaves
each of them, then dry them very well and keep them to burn, one at a time is
sufficient.

CXL. A Syrup for a Cold.
Take Long-wort of the Oak, Sage of Jerusalem, Hysop, Coltsfoot, Maidenhair,
Scabious, Horehound, one handful of each, four Ounces of Liquoras scraped, two
Ounces of Anniseeds bruised, half a pound of Raisins of the Sun stoned, put
these together into a Pipkin with two quarts of Spring water, let them stand
all night to infuse close stopped, when it is half boiled away, strain it out,
and put to it to every pint of liquor a pound of Sugar and boil it to a Syrup.

CXLI. To make white Marmalade of Quinces.
Quoddle them so tender that a straw may run through them, then take grated
Quinces and strain the juice from them, then slice your scalded Quinces thin
and weigh them, and take a little above their weight in fine Sugar, wet your
Sugar with the raw juice, boil it and scum it, then put in your sliced Quinces
and boil them up quick till they jelly, then put them into Glasses.

CXLII. The white juice of Liquoras.
Take one pound of Liquoras clean scraped, cut it thin and short and dry it in
an Oven, then beat it fine in a Mortar, then put it into a stone Iugg, and put
thereto of the water of Coltsfoot, Scabious, Hysop and Horehound, as much as
will stand four fingers deep above the Liquoras, then set this Iugg, close
stopped, into a Kettle of water, and keep the water boiling, let it be stuffed
round with hay that it jog not, let it stand so four hours, and so do every
other day for the space of ten days; then strain it into a dish, set the dish
over boiling water, and let it vapor away till it be thick, then add to it one
pound of fine Sugar Candy, the best and whitest you can get, beaten very well,
then put it into several dishes and dry it in the Sun or in a warm Oven,
beating it often with bone knives till it be stiff, then take as much Gum
Dragon steeped in Rose Water as will make it pliable to your hand, then make it
into little Rolls, and add two gra^ins of Musk or Ambergrease and a few drops
of Oil of Anniseed, and so make them into little Cakes, and print them with a
Seal and then dry them.

CXLIII. To dry Plumbs naturally.
Take of any sort and prick them and put them into the bottom of a Sieve dusted
with Flower to keep them from sticking, let them stand in a warm Oven all
night, the next morning turn them upon a clean Sieve, and so do every day till
you see that they are very dry.

CXLIV. To dry preserved Pears.
Wash them from their Syrup, then take some fine Sugar and boil it to a Candy
height with a little water, then put in your Pears and shake them very well up
and down, then lay them upon the bottom of a Sieve, and dry them in a warm Oven
and so keep them.

CXLV. To make little Cakes with Almonds.
Put into a little Rose Water two grains of Ambergrease, then take a pound of
blanched Almonds and beat them with this Rose Water, then take a Pound of your
finest Sugar, beaten and searced, and when your Almonds are well beaten, mix
some of the Sugar with them, then make your Cakes, and lay them on Wafer
sheets; and when they are half baked, take the rest of the Sugar, being boiled
to a Candy height with a little Rosewater, and so with a Feather wash them over
with this, and let them stand a while longer.

CXLVI. To make very pretty Cakes that will keep a good while.
Take a Quart of fine Flower and the yolks of 4 Eggs, a quarter of a pound of
Sugar, and a little Rosewater, with some beaten Spice, and as much Cream as
will work it into a Paste, work it very well and beat it, then roll it as thin
as possible, and cut them round with a Spur, such as the Pastry Cooks do use;
then fill them with Currants first plumped a little in Rosewater and Sugar, so
put another sheet of Paste over them and close them, prick them, and bake them
but let not your Oven be too hot; you may color some of them with Saffron if
you please, and some of them you may Ice over with Rosewater and Sugar, and the
White of an Egg beaten together.

CXLVII. To make a Paste to wash your hands withal.
Take a Pound of bitter Almonds, blanch them and beat them very fine in a
Mortar with four Ounces of Figs, when it is come to a Paste, put it into a
Gallipot and keep it for your use; a little at a time will serve.

CXLVIII. To keep Flowers all the Year.
Take any sort of pretty Flowers you can get, and have in readiness some
Rosewater made very slippery by laying Gum Arabic therein:

Dip your Flowers very well, and swing it out again and stick them in a sieve
to dry in the Sun, some other of them you may dust over with fine Flower, and
some with searced Sugar, aster you have wetted them, and so dry them.

either of them will be very fine, but those with Sugar will not keep so well
as the other; they are good to set forth Banquets, and to garnish Dishes, and
will look very fresh, and have their right smell.

CXLIX. Conserve of Barberries.
Take Barberies infuse them in a pot as other Fruits spoken of before then
strain them, and to every pound of liquor take two pounds of Sugar, boil them
together over the fire till it will come from the bottom of the Posnet, and
then put it into Gally-pots and keep it with fine Sugar strewed over it.

CL. To preserve Barberries without Fire.
Take your fairest bunches and lay a Lay of fine Sugar, into the bottom of the
pot, and then a Lay of Barberies, and then Sugar again, till all be in, and be
sure to cover them deep with Sugar last of all, and cover your pot with a
bladder wet and tied on, that no Air get in, and they will keep and be good,
and much better to garnish dishes with than pickled Barberries, and are very
pleasant to eat.

CLI. To Candy Almonds to look as though they had their Shells on.
Take Jordan Almonds and blanch them, then take fine Sugar, wet it with water,
and boil it to a Candy height, color it with Cochineal, and put in a Grain of
Ambergreece; when you see it at a Candy height, put in your Almonds well dried
from the Water, and shake them over the fire till you see they are enough, then
lay them in a Stove or some other warm place.

CLII. To Candy Carrot Roots.
Take of the best, and boil them tender, then pare them, and cut them in such
pieces as you like; then take fine Sugar boiled to a Candy height with a little
Water, then put in your Roots, and boil them till you see they will Candy; but
you must first boil them with their weight in Sugar and some Water, or else
they will not be sweet enough, when they are enough, lay them into a Box, and
keep them dry; thus you may do green Peascods when they are very young, if you
put them into boiling water, and let them boil close covered till they are
green, and then boiled in a Syrup, and then the Candy, they will look very
finely, and are good to set forth Banquets, but has no pleasant taste.

CLIII. To make Syrup of Violets.
Take Violets clipped clean from the Whites, to every Ounce of Violets take two
Ounces of Water, so steep them upon Embers till the Water be as blew as a
Violet, and the Violets turned white, then put in more Violets into the same
Water, and again the third time, then take to every Quart of Water four Pounds
of fine sugar, and boil it to a Syrup, and keep it for your use; thus you may
also make Syrup of Roses.

CLIV. To make Syrup for any Cough.
Take four Ounces of Licoras scraped and bruised, Maidenhair one Ounce,
Aniseeds half an Ounce, steep them in Spring water half a day, then boil it
half away, the first quantity of water which you steep them in must be four
Pints, and when it is half boiled away, then add to it one Pound of fine Sugar,
and boil it to a Syrup, and take two spoonfuls at a time every night when you
go to rest.

CLV. A pretty Sweet-meat with Roses and Almonds.
Take half a Pound of Blanched Almonds beaten very fine with a little
Rosewater, two Ounces of the Leaves of Damask Roses beaten fine, then take half
a pound of Sugar, and a little more, wet it with water, and boil it to a Candy
height, then put in your Almonds and Roses, and a grain of Musk or Ambergreece,
and let them boil a little while together, and then put it into Glasses, and it
will be a fine sort of Marmalade.

CLVI. The best sort of Hartshorn Ielly to serve in a Banquet.
Take six Ounces of Hartshorn; put it into two Quarts of Water and let it
infuse upon Embers all night, then boil it up quick and when you find by the
Spoon you stir it with, that it will stick to your mouth, if you do touch it,
and that you find the Water to be much wasted, strain it out, and put in a
little more than half a Pound of fine Sugar, a little Rosewater, a Blade of
Mace, and a Stick of Cinnamon, the Juice of as many Limons as will give it a
good taste, with two Grains of Ambergreece, set it over a slow fire, and do not
let it boil, but when you find it to be very thick in your mouth, then put it
softly into Glasses; and set it into a Stove, and that will make it to jelly
the better.

CLVII. To make Orange or Limon Chips.
Take the parings of either of these cut thin, and boil them in several waters
till they be tender, then let them lie in cold water a while, then take their
weight in Sugar or more, and with as much water as will wet it, boil it and
scum it, then drain your Chips from the cold water and put them into a
Gally-pot, and pour this Syrup boiling hot upon them, so let them stand till
the next day, then heat the Syrup again and pour over them, so do till you see
they are very clear, every day do so till the Syrup be very thick, and then lay
them out in a Stove to dry.

CLVIII. To make Cakes of Almonds in thin slices.
Take four Ounces of Jordan Almonds, blanch them in cold water, and slice them
thin the long way, then mix them with little thin Pieces of Candied Orange and
Citron Pill, then take some fine Sugar boiled to a Candy height with some
water, put in your Almonds, and let them boil till you perceive they will
Candy, then with a spoon take them out, and lay them in little Lumps upon a
Pie-plate or sleeked Paper, and before they be quite cold strew Caroway Comfits
on them, and so keep them very dry.

CLIX. To make Chips of any Fruit.
Take any preserved Fruit, drain it from the syrup, and cut it thin, then boil
Sugar to a Candy height, and then put your Chips therein, and shake them up and
down till you see they will Candy, and then lay them out; or take raw Chips of
Fruit boiled first in Syrup, and then a Candy boiled, and put over them hot,
and so every day, till they begin to sparkle as they lie, then take them out,
and dry them.

CLX. To preserve sweet Limons.
Take the fairest, and chip them thin, and put them into cold water as you chip
them, then boil them in several waters till a straw may run through them, then
to every pound of Limon, take a pound and half of fine Sugar, and a Pint of
water, boil it together, and scum it, then let your Limons scald in it a
little, and set them by till the next day and every other day heat the syrup
only and put to them; so do 9 times, and then at last boil them in the Syrup
till they be clear, then take them out, and put them into Pots, and boil the
Syrup a little more, and put to them; if you will have them in Ielly, make your
Syrup with Pippin water.

CLXI. To make a Custard for a Consumption.
Take four Quarts of Red Cows Milk, four Ounces of Conserve of Red Roses,
prepared Pearl, prepared Coral, and white Amber, of each one Dram, two Ounces
of white Sugar Candy, one grain of Ambergreece, put these into an earthen pot
with some leaf gold, and the yolks and whites of twelve Eggs, a little Mace and
Cinnamon, and as much fine Sugar as will sweeten it well, Paste the Pot over and
bake it with brown Bread, and eat of it every day so long as it will last.

CLXII. To make Chaculato.
Take half a pint of Claret Wine, boil it a little, then scrape some Chaculato
very fine and put into it, and the Yolks of two Eggs, stir them well together
over a slow Fire till it be thick, and sweeten it with Sugar according to your
taste.

CLXIII. To dry any sort of Plumbs.
Take to every pound of Plumbs three quarters of a pound of Sugar, boil it to a
Candy height with a little water, then put in your Plumbs ready stoned, and let
them boil very gently over a slow fire, if they be white ones they may boil a
little faster, then set them by till the next day, then boil them well, and
take them often from the fire for fear of breaking, let them lie in their Syrup
for four or five days, then lay them out upon Sieves to dry, in a warm Oven or
Stove, turning them upon clean Sieves twice every day, and fill up all the
broken places, and put the skins over them, when they are dry, wash off the
clamminess of them with warm water, and dry them in the Oven, and they will
look as though the dew were upon them.

CLXIV. To make Ielly of Quinces.
Take your Quinces, pare them and core them, and cut them in quarters, then put
them into a new earthen pot with a narrow mouth, put in some of the cores in
the bottom, and then the Quinces, paste it up and bake it with brown Bread,
then run it through a bag of boulting stuff as fast as you can, and crush it
pretty hard, so long as it will run clear, to every pound of it take a pound of
fine Sugar, and put into it, and let it stand till it be dissolved, then set it
over a slow fire, and scum it well, and keep it stirring till it Ielly, then
put it into Glasses and keep it in a stove.

CLXV. To make a Posset.
Take a Quart of white Wine and a quart of Water, boil whole Spice in them,
then take twelve Eggs and put away half the Whites, beat them very well, and
take the Wine from the fire, then put in your Eggs, and stir them very well,
then set it on a slow fire, and stir it till it be thick, sweeten it with
Sugar, and strew beaten Spice thereon, then serve it in.

You may put in Ambergreece if you like it, or one perfumed Lozenge.

CLXVI. To make a Sack Posset.
Take two quarts of Cream and boil it with whole Spice, then take twelve Eggs
well beaten and strained, take the Cream from the fire, and stir in the Eggs
and as much Sugar as will sweeten it, then put in so much Sack as will make it
taste well, and set it on the fire again, and let it stand a while, then take a
Ladle and raise it up gently from the bottom of the Skillet you make it in, and
break it as little as you can, and so do till you see it be thick enough; then
put it into a Basin with the Ladle gently, if you do it too much it will whey,
and that is not good.

CLXVII. Another way for a Posset.
Boil a Quart of Cream as for the other, then take the Yolks of fourteen Eggs
and four Whites, beat them and strain them, take the Cream from the fire, and
stir in your Eggs, then have your Sack warmed in a Basin, and when the Cream
and Eggs are well mixed, put it to the Sack, and sweeten it to your taste with
fine Sugar, and let it stand over a Skillet of seething water for a while.

CLXVIII. To preserve Pippins in thin slices in Ielly.
Take of the fairest Pippins, pare them, and slice them into cold water, to
every pound of Pippins take a pound of Sugar, and a Pint of Water, boil it and
scum it, then shake your Pippins clean from the Water, and put them into the
Syrup, boil them very clear and apace, then put in some thin Chips, or Orange
or Citron preserved, and to one Pound of Pippin, put the Juice of two Oranges
and one Limon, then boil them a little longer till you see they will jelly, and
then put them into Glasses, but take heed you lay them in carefully, and lay
the Chips here and there between, then warm the Ielly and put softly over them.

CLXIX. To preserve Currants in Ielly.
Take the fairest and pick them from the Stalks, and stone them, then take
their weight in sugar, wet it with water, boil it and scum it, then put in your
Currants, and boil them up quick, shake them often and scum them, and when they
will jelly, they are enough; then put them into Glasses; thus you may do white
and red both, and they will be in a stiff Ielly, and cut very well, do not
cover them before they be cold.

CLXX. To Preserve ripe Apricocks:
Take them and stone them, then weigh them, and to every Pound of Apricocks
take a Pound of fine Sugar beaten small, then pare your Fruit, and as you pare
them, cast some Sugar over them, and so do till all be done, then set them on
the fire, and let the Sugar melt but gently, then boil them a little in the
Syrup, and set them by till the next day, then boil them quick, and till they
be very clear, then put them in Pots, and boil the Syrup a little more, and put
it to them, if you would have them in Ielly, you must put some of the Infusion
of Goosberries, or of Pippins into your Syrup, and add more Sugar to it.

CLXXI. To preserve Cornelions.
Take the fairest and weigh them, then take their weight in Sugar, and lay a
Lay of Sugar into the Pan, and then a Lay of Cornelions till all be in, and let
your last Lay be Sugar, then put a little water into the midst of the Pan, and
set it on the fire, and when the Sugar is melted boil them up quick, and take
them often and shake them, and scum them, when you do perceive them to be very
clear, they are enough.

CLXXII. To make Marmalade of Cornelions.
Take them and stone them, and weigh them, and to every pound of Fruit take a
pound of Sugar, wet it with water, and boil it to a Candy height, then put in
your Fruit and boil it very clear and quick, and shake it often, and scum it
clean; when you see it very clear and very thick, it is enough; you must keep
it in a Stove or some warm place.

CLXXIII. To preserve Damsons.
Take the fairest, not too ripe, and take their weight in Sugar, wet your Sugar
with a little water, boil it and scum it, then put in your Damsons and boil
them a little, then set them by till the next day, then boil them till they be
very clear, and take them from the fire sometimes, and let them stand a while
to keep them from breaking, when they are clear, take them out, and put them
into Glasses, and boil the Syrup to a Ielly and pour on them; be very careful
how you take them to put them into your Pots or Glasses for fear of breaking
them.

CLXXIV. To make Orange Marmalade.
Take half a Pound of Orange Chips tenderly boiled in several waters, and
beaten fine in a Mortar, then take a Pound of fine sugar, wet it with water,
boil it and scum it, then put in your Orange, and half a Pound of Pippin also
beaten fine, and let them boil together till they are very clear; then put in
the Juice of one Orange and one Limon, and stir it well, and let it boil a
while longer, and then take it off and put it into Glasses.

CLXXV. To make Ielly of Pippins.
Take Pippins, pare them thin into a long Gallipot, and set that into boiling
water close covered, and so let it stand three or four hours, they must be
slieed thin as well as pared; when you think they are infused enough, pour the
Liquor from them, and to every Pint, take a Pound of Sugar double refined and
put it into your Liquor, boil them together till you find it will Ielly, then
put little small pieces of Orange Pill into it finely shred, the Juice of one
Orange and one Limon, and let it boil a little longer, and so put it into
Glasses, and set them into a Stove, with the Pulp that is left you may make
Paste if you please.

CLXXVI. To Candy Angelica.
Take the tender green stalks and boil them in water till they be tender, then
peel them, and put them into another warm water, and cover them till they are
very green over a slow fire, then lay them on a clean Cloth to dry, then take
their weight in fine Sugar, and boil it to a Candy height with some Rosewater,
then put in your stalks and boil them up quick, and shake them often, and when
you judge they be enough, lay them on a Pie-plate, and open them with a little
stick, and so they will be hollow, and some of them you may braid, and twist
some of them, so keep them dry.

CLXXVII. To make Seed-stuff of Rasberries.
Take Rasberries and bruise them, and take their weight in fine Sugar, and boil
it to a Candy height with a little water, then put in your bruised Rasberries,
and boil them till you see they will Ielly very well.

CLXXVIII. To make Syrup of Gillyflowers.
Take Clove-gilly flowers, and cut them from the Whites, then take their weight
in sugar beaten fine, then put a little sugar into your Gally-pot, and then a
Lay of Flowers, and then sugar again till all be spent, and let sugar be the
last, then put in a Clove or two, according to your quantity, and a little
Malago Sack, and so tie your Pot up close and set it into a Pot or Kettle of
boiling water, and let them stand till they are infused; then pour out the
Liquor and strain the rest, but not too hard, then take this Liquor and vapor
it away over seething water till it be of a good thickness, then take your
strained Gilliflowers and put them into a Pot with some white Wine Vinegar, and
cover them over with fine sugar, and so keep them; they are a better Sallad
than those you pickle up alone; as you make this, you may make syrup of any
Herbs or Flowers.

CLXXIX. To make most excellent Cake.
Take to a strik'd Peck of Flower, six pounds of Currants, half an Ounce of
Mace, half an Ounce of Cinnamon, a quarter of an Ounce of Cloves, as much of
Nutmeg, half a pound of fine sugar, and as much Rosewater as you please; beat
your Spice, and put that and your Fruits with a little Salt into your Flower,
then take Cream or new Milk as much as you think fit, dissolve therein two
Pounds of Fresh Butter, then put it in a Basin with the sugar and a Pint of
Sack, knead it with a Wine-Pint of Ale-Yeast, knead it till it rise under your
hand, let all things be ready and your Oven hot before you go to knead the Cake.

CLXXX. To make Pomatum the best way.
Take the Caul of a Lamb new killed, pick it clean from the Skin, and lay it in
Spring Water nine days, shifting it every day twice, then melt it, then take
yellow snails stamp them, and put them into a Glass with Rosewater four days,
stop the Glass and shake it three or four times a day, then take white Lilly
roots, stamp them, and strain them, put the Juice of them into the Glass with
the Snails, then set a Skillet on the fire with fair water, and let it boil,
then put your tried Lambs Caul into an earthen Basin, and let it melt, then
take your Glass with Snails and roots, and strain it through a thick cloth,
then put it into that tried stuff, then take half an Ounce of white Sugar Candy
unbeaten, put it in, and stir it over the fire till that be dissolved, then
take it from the fire, and put in three Ounces of sweet Almonds, then keep it
boiling and stirring a little longer, then take it off, and let it stand till
it be reasonably cool, then beat it with a wooden Slice till it be very white,
then put in a little Rosewater, and beat it a little longer, and then keep it
in Gallipots; you must put in a crust of Bread when you melt it in the Skillet,
and when the Sugar Candy goes in, take it out.

CLXXXI. To make the Bean-Bread.
Take a pound of the best Jordan AImonds blanch them in cold water, and slice
them very thin the long way of the Almond with a wet Knife, then take a pound
of double refined Sugar well beaten, and mix with your Almonds, then take the
White of one Egg beaten with two Spoonfuls of Rosewater, and as the Froth
arises, cast it all over your Almonds with a Spoon, then mix them well
together, and lay them upon Wafer sheets, upon flowered Plates, and shape them
as you please with your Knife and your fingers, then strew Caroway Comfits, and
Orange and Citron Pill cut thin, or some Coriander Comfits, so set them into an
Oven not too hot, and when they have stood about half an hour, raise them from
their Plates, and mend what you find amiss before they be too dry, then set
them into the Oven again, and when they are quite dry, break away the Wafers
with your fingers, and then clip them neatly with a pair of Scizzers, and lay
on some Leaf-Gold if you please.

CLXXXII. To make an excellent Cake with Caroway Comfits.
Take five Pounds of Manchet Paste mingled very stiff and light without Salt,
cover it, and let it be rising half an hour, when your Oven is almost hot, take
two pounds and half of Butter, very good, and melt it, and take five Eggs,
Yolks and Whites beaten, and half a Pound of Sugar, mingle them all together
with your Paste, and let it be as lithe as possible you can work it, and when
your Oven is hot and swept, strew into your Cake one Pound of, Caroway Comfits,
then butter a baking-Pan, and bake it in that; let it stand one hour and
quarter; when you draw it, lay a course Linen Cloth and a Woollen one over it,
so let it lie till it be cold, then put it into an Oven the next day, for a
little time, and it will eat as though it were made of Almonds, you must put in
your Sugar aften your Butter.

CLXXXIII. To make Diet Bread or Iumbolds.
Take a Quart of fine Flower, half a Pound of fine Sugar, Caroway seeds,
Coriander seeds and Aniseeds bruised, of each one Ounce, mingle all these
together, then take the Yolks of eight Eggs, and the Whites of three, beat them
well with four spoonfuls of Rosewater, and so knead these all together and no
other Liquor, when it is well wrought, lay it for one hour in a linen cloth
before the Fire, then roll it out thin, tie them in Knots and prick them with a
Needle, lay them upon Buttered Plates, and bake them in an Oven not too hot.

CLXXXIV. To make Cider or Perry as clear as Rock water.
Take to two Quarts of Cider, half a Pint of Milk, put them both in an Hipocras
bag, and when it runs clear, bottle it up, and when it is a Month old, it will
sparkle in the Glass as you drink it.

CLXXXV. To make Almond Bread
Take a pound of Almonds blanched, and beaten with Rosewater, then take a pound
of Sugar beaten fine, and a little grated Bread finely searced, put them into a
Platter with your Almonds, and stir them well together, set them over a Chasing
dish of Coals, and boil them till they are as stiff as Paste, stirring them
continually, then mould them well and put them in what shape you please; print
them, and set them into some warm place to dry.

CLXXXVI. To make good Almond-Milk.
Take Jordan Almonds blanched and beaten with Rosewater, then strain them often
with fair water, wherein has been boiled Violet Leaves and sliced Dates; when
your Almonds are strained, take the Dates and put to it some Mace, Sugar, and a
little Salt, warm it a little, and so drink it.

CLXXXVII. To make white Leach.
Take sweet Almonds blanched and beaten with Rosewater, then strained with fair
water, wherein has been boiled Aniseeds and Ginger, put to it as much Cream,
wherein pure Isinglass has been boiled, as will make it stiff, and as much
Sugar as you please; let it be scalding hot, then run it through a strainer,
and when it is cold, slice it out, it is very good for a weak body.

CLXXXVIII. To make Red Leach or-Yellow.
Red by putting Tornsel into it, or Cochineal; Yellow, by putting Saffron in it.

CLXXXIX. Cinnamon or Ginger-Leach.
Take your Spices beaten and searced, and mix them with your searced Sugar,
mould them up with Gum Arabic infused in Rosewater, and so print them and dry
them.

CXC. To make Leach of Dates.
Take your Dates stoned and peeled very clean within, beat them fine with
Sugar, Ginger and Cinnamon, and a little Rosewater till it will work like Paste,
then print them and keep them dry.

CXCI. To make fine Cakes.
Take a Quart of Flower, a Pound of sugar, a Pound of Butter, with three or
four Yolks of Eggs, a little Rosewater, and a spoonful of Yeast, then roll them
out thin, while the Paste is hot, prick them, and set them into the Oven not
too hot.

CXCII. To make Cornish Cakes.
Take Claret Wine, the Yolks of Eggs, and Mace beaten fine, and some Sugar and
Salt, mingle all these with Flower and a little Yeast, knead it as stiff as you
can, then put in Butter, and knead it stiff again, and then shape them and bake
them.

CXCIII. A Cordial Syrup.
Take one Pound of Juice of Burrage, and half so much of the Juice of Balm,
boil them together, and when the grosseness of the Juice arises, then put in
the Whites of two Eggs beaten with Rosewater, and when you see them begin to
grow hard, put in a little Vinegar, let them boil together, and scum it clean,
and run it through a Ielly-Bag, then set it over the fire again, and add to it
one Pound of fine Sugar, and a little Saffron, and so boil it till you think it
be enough.

CXCIV. For a Consumption.
Take of Hart's-tongue and Maidenhair, of each one handful, Hysop and Balm, of
each half a handful, Licoras sliced, one Ounce, Piony Root, one Ounce, boil
these together in two Pints and half of Spring water until it be half consumed,
then strain the Liquor from the Herbs, then take four Ounces of Currants washed
clean, dried and beaten in a Mortar, boil them in the Liquor a little while,
then strain it, and put to the Liquor half a Pound of Sugar, and so boil it to
a Syrup, and take often of it.

CXCV. For a Consumption.
Take a Pint of good Wine-Vinegar, and half a Pint of Colts-foot-water, half a
Pound of Figs well bruised, then strain it, and boil it with a Pound of Sugar
to a thick Syrup.

CXCVI. A very good Perfume.
Six spoonfuls of Rosewater, Musk, Ambergreece and Civet, of each two Grains, a
little Sugar beaten fine, mould them up together with Gum-Dragon steeped in
Rosewater, make them in little Cakes and dry them.

CXCVII. A Cordial to cause Sleep.
Two spoonfuls of Poppy water, two spoonfuls of Red Rosewater, one spoonful of
Clove-Gilly flower Syrop, and a little Diascordium, mingle them together, and
take them at the time of rest.

CXCVIII. To perfume Gloves,
Take four Grains of Musk and grind it with Rosewater, and also eight Grains of
Civet, then take two spoonfuls of Gum dragon steeped all night in Rosewater,
beat these to a thin Ielly, putting in half a spoonful of Oil of Cloves,
Cinnamon and Iessamine mixed together, then take a Sponge and dip it therein,
and rub the Gloves all over thin, lay them in a dry clean place eight and forty
hours; then rub them with yourh ands till they become limber.

CXCIX. A very good Perfume to burn.
Take a ounces of the Powder of Juniper Wood, 1 Ounce of Benjamin, one Ounce of
Storax, 6 drops of oil of Limons, as much oil of Cloves 10 grains of Musk, 6 of
Civer, mold them up with a little Gum Dragon steeped in Rosewater, make them in
little Cakes and dry them between Rose Leaves, your Juniper wood must be well
dried, beaten and searced.

CC. To preserve Cherries in Ielly.
Take fair ripe Cherries, and stone them, then take a little more than their
weight in fine Sugar, then take the juice of some other Cherries, and put a
spoonful of it in the bottom of the Posnet, then put some of your Sugar beaten
fine into the Posnet with it, and then a little more juice, then put in your
Cherries, then put in Sugar, and then juice, and then Cherries again, thus do
till you have put in all, then let them boil apace till the Sugar be melted,
shaking them sometimes, then take them from the fire, and let them stand close
covered one hour, then boil them up quick till the Syrup will jelly.

CCI. To dry Apricocks or Pippins to look as clear as Amber.
Take Apricocks and take out the stones, and take Pippins and cut them in
halves and core them, let your Apricocks be pared also; lay these Fruits in an
earthen dish, and strew them over with fine Sugar, set them into a warm Oven,
and as the Liquor comes from them put it away, when all the Liquor is come away
turn them and strew them thick with Sugar on every side, set them into the Oven
again, and when the Sugar is melted lay them on a dry dish, and set them in
again, and every day turn them till they be quite dry. Thus you may dry any
sort of Plumbs or Pears as well as the other, and they will look very clear.

CCII. To dry Pears or Pippins without Sugar.
Take of the fairest and lay them in sweetwort two or three days, then lay
them in a broad preserving Pan of earth, and bake them, but let the Oven be but
gently hot, then lay them upon lattice Sieves and set them into a warm Oven,
and turn them twice a day till they are dry.

CCIII. The Spanish Candy.
Take any sort of Flowers well picked and beaten in a Mortar, and put them into
a Syrup, so much as the Flowers will stain, boil them, and stir them till you
see it will turn Sugar again, then pour it upon a wet trencher, and when it is
cold cut it into Lozenges, and that which remains in the bottom of the Posnet
scrape it clean out, and beat it and searse it, then work it with some Gum
Dragon steeped in Rosewater and a little Ambergreece, so make it into what
shape you please, and dry it.

CCIV. To make Naples Biscuit.
Take four Ounces of Pine Apple seeds, two Ounces of sweet Almonds blanched,
the Whites of two Eggs, one spoonful of Ale-Yeast, one spoonful of Rice Flower,
one spoonful of sweet Cream, beat all these together in a Mortar, then add to
it Musk or Ambergreece, drop it upon a Pie-Plate, and make it in what shape you
please, and so bake it.

CCV. To make Italian Biscuit.
Take Sugar searced fine, and beat in a Mortar with Gum Dragon steeped in
Rose Water, and also the White of an Egg till it come to a perfect Paste, then
mould it up with searced Sugar, Powder of Aniseeds, and a little Musk, and make
them in what shape you please, and bake them on Pie-Plates, but not too much.

CCVI. To make Hipocras.
Take to every Gallon of Sack or white Wine, one Pound of Sugar, one Ounce of
Cinnamon, one Ounce of Ginger, one quarter of an Ounce of Nutmegs, a quarter of
an Ounce of Coriander seed, with a few Cloves, and a little Long Pepper or a
few Grains, let all these steep together four and twenty hours, stir it twice
or thrice in that time; then put to every Gallon one Pint of Milk, and run it
through a Ielly-Bag, and then bottle it, and let them be stopped very close,
set them in a cool place, it will keep a Month.

CCVII. To make Tuff-Taffity Cream.
Take a quart of thick Cream, the whites of eight Eggs beaten to a Froth with
Rosewater, then take of the Froth and put it into the Cream, and boil it, and
always stir it, then put in the Yolks of eight Eggs well beaten, and stir them
in off the Fire, and then on the fire a little while, then season it with
Sugar, and pour it out, and when it is cold, lay on it Ielly of Currants or
Rasberries, or what you please.

CCVIII. Caroway Cake.
Take one Quart of Flower, and one pound of Butter, rub your Butter into your
Flower very well, then take two Yolks of Eggs, and one White, two spoonfuls of
Cream, half a Pint of Ale-Yeast, mix them all together, do not knead it, but
pull it in pieces, then set it to the fire to rise, and so let it lie almost
one hour, turning it often, then pull it in pieces again, and strew in half a
pound of Caroway Comfits, mingle them with the Paste then take it lightly with
your hand, and fashion it like an Oval, and make it higher in the middle than
the sides, let your Oven be as hot as for a Tart, be sure your Oven or Cake be
ready both at once, put it upon a double paper buttered, and let it stand
almost an hour, when it goes into the Oven, strew it thick with
Caroway-Comfits, and lay a paper over least it scorch.

CCIX. To Candy Barberies.
Stone the fairest Bunches you can get, and as you stone them strew in a little
Sugar, then take so much water as you think will cover them, and let them boil
in it with a little Sugar a little while, then put them into a deep thing that
the Syrup may cover them, then boil a little water and sugar to a Candy height,
then having your Barberies drained well from the Syrup put them into the hot
Candy, stir them gently till the Sugar be dissolved, but do not let them boil
in it, then open every branch and lay them upon the brims of dishes, shift them
often on clean dishes and open them every time, then set them into an Oven ox
Stove to dry.

CCX. To make a very fine Sillibub.
Take one Quart of Cream, one Pint and an half of Wine or Sack, the Juice of
two Limons with some of the Pill, and a Branch of Rosemary, sweeten it very
well, then put a little of this Liquor, and a little of the Cream into a Basin,
beat them till it froth, put that Froth into the Sillibub pot, and so do till
the Cream and Wine be done, then cover it close, and set it in a cool Cellar
for twelve hours, then eat it.

CCXI. Fine sweet Powder for the hair.
Take one pound of the best starch you can get, put it into a Basin with half a
Pint of Rosemary water, as much Rosewater, stir them well together with a
Spoon, then dry them well in the Sun, then take the searced Powder of Damask
Roses, and four grains of Ambergreece, mix it well with your Starch, and sift
it fine.

CCXII. To make Cakes of Pistachoes.
Take half a pound of Almonds blanched, half a pound of Pistachoes blanched,
four Ounces of Pineapple seeds, beat these together in a Mortar with a little
Rosewater till it come to perfect Paste, then put in the weight of it in Sugar,
and beat it again then mould it with searced Sugar, and lay it upon Wafer
sheets, and fashion them as you please, then stick them with quartered
Pistachoes; that they may make it look like a Hedghog, then with a Feather Ice
them over with the White of an Egg, Rosewater and Sugar, then bake them
carefully.

CCXIII. To make Cakes of Apricocks in Lumps.
Take Apricocks, and pare them and cut them in halves,, then take their weight
in Sugar, put half this Sugar and the Apricocks into a Posnet, let them boil
apace till they look clear, then boil the other part of the Sugar to a Candy
height; then put them together, and stir them a while, then put them into
Glasses and set them into a Stove, and when the one side is dry, turn the other.

CCXIV. To make Rasberry Sugar.
Take the Juice of Rasberries and wet your Sugar with it, and dry it in a Stove
in little Cakes; this will keep all the year, a little of it being put in a
Glass of Wine, will give it as good a taste as you can desire, and as good a
color; in this manner you may make Sugar of any Fruit, Flower, or Herb.

CCXV. To dry Apricocks.
Take your fairest Apricocks and stone them, then weigh them, and as you pare
them, throw them into cold water, have in readiness their weight in fine sugar,
wet it with some of the water they lie in, and boil it to a Candy height, then
put in your Apricocks, and boil them till they are clear, when they have lain
three or four days in the Syrup, lay them out upon Glasses to dry in a stove,
and turn them twice a day.

CCXVI. To make rough Marmalade of Cherries.
Stone your Cherries, and infuse them in a long Gallipot in a Kettle of boiling
water, when they are all to pieces, then take their weight in fine sugar boiled
to a Candy height with a little water, then put in your Apricocks and stir them
over a slow fire, but do not let it boil, when it will Ielly, put it into
Glasses.

CCXVII. To make smooth Marmalade of Cherries.
Infuse them as you do the other, then strain them hard, and boil the Juice
with a Candy as you do the other.

CCXVIII. To make white Trencher-Plates which may be eaten.
Take two Eggs beaten very well, Yolks and Whites, two spoonfuls of Sack, one
spoonful of Rosewater, and so much flower as will make it into a stiff Paste,
then roll it thin, and then lay it upon the ontsides of Plates well buttered,
cut them fit to the Plates, and bake them upon them, then take them forth, and
when they are cold, take a pound of double refined Sugar beaten and searced,
with a little Ambergreece, the White of an Egg and Rosewater, beat these well
together, and Ice your Plates all over with it, and set them into the Oven
again till they be dry.

CCXIX. To make the Froth Posset.
Take three Pints of Cream or new Milk, set it on the fire, then take sixteen
Eggs and put the Whites into a Basin very deep, and beat the Yolks by
themselves, make a Custard with them, and the Cream which is on the fire, then
beat the Yolks to a Froth with a little Sack, and a little Sugar, when it is a
thick Froth, cast it into another Dish with a Spoon, then take half a Pint of
Sack, and sweeten it with Sugar, set it on a Chafing Dish of Coals in a large
Basin, when it is hot, put in as much Froth as the Sack will receive, stir it
in very well, then take your Custard and pour upon it, stir it all one way
when you put it in, then if the Froth do not cover the top of the Posset, put
in more, and stir it very well, and cover it close with a warm Dish, let it
stand a while upon Coals, but not too hot; you may know when it is enough by
putting your Spoon into the Basin, for then it will be clear in the bottom,
Curd in the middle, and Froth on the top.

CCXX. To make Banbury Cake.
Make a Posset of Sack and Cream, then take a Peck of fine Flower, half an
Ounce of Mace, as much of Nutmeg, as much of Cinnamon, beat them and searce
them, two pounds of Butter, ten Eggs, leaving out half their Whites, one Pint
and half of Ale-Yeast, beat your Eggs very well, and strain them, then put your
Yeast, and some of the Posset to the Flower, stir them together, and put in
your Butter cold in little pieces, but your Posset must be scalding hot; make
it into a Paste, and let it lie one hour in a warm Cloth to rise, then put in
ten pounds of Currants washed and dried very well, a little Musk and Ambergreece
dissolved in Rosewater, put in a little Sugar among your Currants, break your
Paste into little pieces, when you go to put in your Currants, then lay a Lay of
broken Paste, and then a Lay of Currants till all be in, then mingle your Paste
and Currants well together, and keep out a little of your Paste in a warm Cloth
to cover the top and bottom of your Cake, you must roll the Cover very thin,
and also the Bottom, and close them together over the Cake with a little
Rosewater; prick the top and bottom with a small Pin or Needle, and when it is
ready to go into the Oven, cut it in the sides round about, let it stand two
hours, then Ice it over with Rosewater or Orange Flower and Sugar, and the
White of an Egg, and harden it in the Oven.

CCXXI. To make Cambridge Almond Butter.
Take a Quart of Cream and sixteen Eggs well beaten, mix them together and
strain them into a Posnet, set them on a soft fire, and stir them continually;
when it is ready to boil, put in half a quarter of a Pint of Sack, and stir it
till it run to a Curd, then strain the Whey from it as much as may be, then
beat four Ounces of blanched Almonds with Rosewater, then put the Curd and
beaten Almonds and half a pound of fine Sugar into a Mortar, and beat them well
together, then put it into Glasses and eat it with bread, it will keep a
Fortnight.

CCXXII. To make a Sack Posset without Milk or Bread.
Take a Quart of Ale and half a Pint of Sack, boil them with what spice you
please, then take three quarters of a pound of sugar, and twenty Eggs, Yolks
and Whites well beaten and strained, then take four Ounces of Almonds blanched
and beaten with Rosewater, put them to the Eggs, and put them to the other
things in the Posnet upon the fire, and keep them stirring, and when it boileth
up, put it into a Basin, and strew on beaten spice and sugar; you must also
sweeten it when the Eggs go in.

CCXXIII. To preserve Figs and dry them.
To every pound of your large ripe English Figs, take a pound of Sugar, and one
Pint of Water, boil your Sugar and Water, and scum it, then put in your Figs
and boil them very well till they are tender and clear; boil them very fast,
when they have been in the Syrup a week, boil some sugar to a Candy height, and
put in the Figs, and when you perceive they are enough, lay them out to dry.

CCXXIV. To pickle Mushromes.
Take them of one nights growth, and peel them inside, and outside, boil them
in Water and Salt one hour, then lay them out to cool, then make a Pickle of
white Wine and white Wine Vinegar, and boil in it whole Cloves, Nutmegs, Mace,
and Ginger sliced, and some whole Pepper, when it is cold, put them into it,
and keep them for Sauces of several Meats, and if you would dress them to eat
presently, put them in a Dish over a Chafingdish of Coals without any Liquor,
and the fire will draw out their natural Liquor, which you must pour away, then
put in whole Spice, Onions and Butter, with a little Wine, and so let them stew
a while, then serve it in.

CCXXV. To preserve whole Quinces to look red.
When they are pared and cored, put them into cold water, and for every Pound
of Quince take one Pound of Sugar, and a Pint of Water, make a Syrup thereof,
then put in your Quinces, and set them on a slow fire, close covered till you
see they are of a good Color and very tender, then take them out, and boil
your Syrup till it will Ielly.

CCXXVI. To make very good Marma- of Quinces to look red.
Weigh your Quinces and pare them, cut them in quarters and core them, and keep
them in cold water, then take their weight in sugar, and a little water and
boil it, and scum it, then put in your Quinces, and set them on a slow fire,
close covered, till you see it of a good color, then uncover it, and boil it
up very quick till you find that it will jelly very well,

CCXXVII. To make Musk Sugar.
Bruise six Grains of Musk and tie them in a piece of Tiffany, lay it in the
bottom of a Gallipot, and then fill it with sugar, and tie it up close, when
you have spent that sugar, put in some more, it will be well perfumed.

CCXXVIII. An excellent way to make Syrup of Roses, or of any other Flower.
Fill a Silver Basin three quarters full of Spring water, then fill it up with
Rose-Leaves or any other, and cover it, and set it upon a pot of seething water
one hour, then strain it, and put in more, and do in like manner, and so do
seven times, then take to every Pint one Pound of Sugar, and make a Syrup
therewith.

CCXXIX. To dry Rose Leaves.
Pick your Roses, and dry them upon the Leads of a House in a Sunshine day,
and turn them as you do Hay, and when they are through dry, keep them in broad
mouthed Glasses close stopped.

CCXXX. To Candy Flowers.
Boil some Rosewater and Sugar together, then put in your Flowers being very
dry, and boil them a little, then strew in some fine Sugar over them, and turn
them, and boil them a little more, then take them from the fire, and strew some
more sugar over them, then take them out and lay them to dry, and open them,
and strew sugar over them, they will dry in a few hours in a hot day.

CCXXXI. The making of Sugar-Plate and casting of it into Moulds.
Take one Pound of double refined Sugar beaten and searced, and three Ounces of
pure white Starch beaten and searced, then have some Gum-Dragon steeped in
Rosewater, and put some of it with the Sugar and Starch and a little of
Ambergreece into a Mortar, and beat them till they come to a perfect Paste, you
must also put in a little white of an Egg with the Gum, then mould it with
searced Sugar, then dust your Moulds with Sugar, then roll out your Paste and
lay it into the Mould, pressing it down into every hollow part with your
fingers, and when it has taken impression, knock the Mould on the edge against
a Table and it will come out, or you may help it with the point of your knife;
if you find you have put in too much Gum then add more Sugar, if too much Sugar
then more Gum, work it up as fast as you can, when they come out of the Moulds
trim them handsomely; if you would make saucers, dishes, or bowls, you must
roll it out thin and put your Paste into a saucer, dish, or bowl for a Mould,
and let them stand therein till they be very dry, then guild them on the edges
with the white of an Egg laid round about the edge with a pencil, and press the
Gold down with some Cotton, and when it is dry brush off the superfluous loose
Gold with the foot of an Hare, and if you would have your Paste exceeding
smooth, as for Cards or the like, then roll your Paste upon a slicked paper
with a very smooth Rouling-pin, if you would color any of it, you must take
the searced powder of any Herbs or Flowers, first dried, and put to it when you
beat it in a Mortar with the Gum.

CCXXXII. To make Paste of Almonds.
Take four Ounces of Valentia Almonds, blanched and beaten with Rosewater till
it come to a perfect Paste, then take stale white bread, grate it and sift it
and dry it by the fire, then put that to your Almonds with the weight of all in
fine Sugar, beat them very well, and put in some Spice beaten and searced, then
when it is a little cool, roll it out, dust your Moulds and print it, and dry
it in an Oven, you may if you please put the juice of a Limon into it when it
is beating, you may make some of it into Iumbolos, and tie them in knots and
bake them upon Buttered Plates, and when they are baked, ice them over with
Rosewater, Sugar, and the White of an Egg, and set them into the Oven again for
a while.

CCXXXIII. To make French Biscuit.
Take half a Peck of fine Flower, two Ounces of Coriander seeds, the Whites of
four Eggs, half a Pint of Ale Yeast, and as much water as will make it up into
a stiff Paste, let your water be blood warm, then bake it in a long Roll as big
as your Thigh, let it be in the Oven but one hour, when it is two days old,
pare it and slice it thin overthwart, then ice it over thin, and set it into
the Oven to dry.

CCXXXIV. To make Ginger-bread.
Take three stale Manchets grated and sifed, then put to them half an Ounce of
Cinnamon, as much Ginger, half an Ounce of Licoras and Aniseeds together, beat
all these and searce them, and put them in with half a Pound of fine Sugar,
boil all these together with a quart of Claret, stirring them continually till
it come to a stiff Paste, then when it is almost cold, mould it on a Table with
some searced Spice and Sugar, then bake it in what shape you please.

CCXXXV. Another sort of Ginger-bread.
Take half a Pound of sweet Almonds, blanched and beaten, half a Pound of fine
Flower first dried in an Oven, one Pound of fine sugar, what sorts of Spices
you please, beaten and searced, and also Seeds, beat all these together with
two Eggs, both Yolks and Whites, then mould it with flower and Sugar together,
and so bake it in what shape you please.

CCXXXVII. To make Puff-Paste.
Take a quart of the finest Flower, the Whites of three Eggs, and the Yolks of
two, and a little cold water, make it into a perfect Paste, then roll it abroad
thin, then lay on little bits of Butter, and fold it over again, then drive it
abroad again, and lay on more Butter, and then fold it over, and so do ten
times, make it up for your use, and put your Fruit or meat therein and bake it.

CCXXXVII. Another way for Puff-Paste.
Take fine Flower half a Peck, the Yolks of five Eggs and one White, one Pound
of Butter, half a Pint of Cream, and a little fair water, break your Butter in
little Bits, and do not mould it too much, but roll it abroad so soon as you
can, and let the Butter be seen in spots; for that will make it hollow when it
comes into the Oven, then put in your Meat or Fruit, and close it over, and
wash it over with the Yolk of an Egg and Cream beaten together, just when you
set it into the Oven; let your Oven be quick, but do not let it stand too long,
for that will spoil it.

CCXXXVIII. To make short Paste without Butter.
Bake your Flower first, then take a quart of it, and the Yolks of three Eggs
and a pint of Cream, two Ounces of fine sugar, and a little salt, and so make
it into Paste.

CCXXXIX. To Candy whole Spices with a hard Rock-Candy.
Take one Pound of fine Sugar, and eight spoonfuls of Rosewater, and the weight
of sixpence of Gum. Arabic that is clear, boil them together till a drop will
run as small as a hair; then put it into an earthen Pipkin, and having before
steeped your spices one night or two in Rosewater, put your spices into the
Pipkin, and stop it up close that no Air get in, keep it in a hot place three
weeks, then break your Pot with a Hammer.

Thus you may do with preserved Oranges and Limons, any kinds of Fruits and
Flowers, or Herbs if you please.

CCXL. To make a very fine Biscuit.
Take half a Pound of searced Sugar, the Yolks of six Eggs, a little searced
Spice and Seeds, and a little Ambergreece or Musk, your Eggs must be very hard,
then put all these into a Mortar, and beat them to a Paste with a little Gum
Dragon steeped in Rosewater all night, then mould it up with fine Sugar; and
make it into pretty Fancies, and dry them in a warm Oven.

CCXLI. To make Orange, or Limon or Citron Biscuit:
Take either of these preserved and Washed from their Syrup, beat them well in
a Mortar, and then put in a little Gum Dragon as before, beat them again
together till it be a perfect Paste, then mould it up with Sugar searced, and
make them up in what shape you please and dry it.

CCXLII. To make Biscuit of Potato-Roots or Parsneps.
Take their Roots boiled very tender, and beat them in a Mortar with their
weight of searced Sugar, then put in a little Gum Dragon as before, beat them
to a Paste, and mould them up with Sugar searced, and make them up in what
shape you please, and dry them.

CCXLIII. To pickle Oranges or Limons, taught me by a Seaman.
Take those which are free from any spots, and lay them gently in a Barrel,
then fill up the Barrel with Seawater, and so cover your Vessel close; for
want of Seawater, you may take fair water, and make it so strong with Bay
Salt, that it will bear an Egg, and put to them in like manner.

CCXLIV. To keep Grapes fresh and green, taught me by a Sea-Captain.
Take your fairest Grapes without any blemish, then lay some Oats in a Box, and
then a Lay of Grapes, and then more Oats, and so do till you have laid all in,
then cover the Grapes well with Oats, and close your Box fast that no Air get
in.

CCXLV. To dry Grapes to keep longer.
Take your best Clusters and hang them up in a Room upon Lines, and be sure you
do not let them touch one another, they will keep four months.

CCXLVI. To make Marmalade of Oranges or Limons.
Boil the Rinds of them in several Waters till they be very tender, beat them
small with their weight of Pippins, then take the weight of all in fine Sugar,
and to every Pound of Sugar a Pint of Water, boil your Water and Sugar
together, and make a Syrup, then put in your Pulp, and boil it a good while
till it be clear, then put in the Juice of some Orange and Limon, so much as
will give it a fine taste, then boil it a little longer till you see it will
Ielly very well, then put it into Glasses, and keep it in a reasonable warm
place; this is very Cordial, and stops Rheum.

CCXLVII. To make green Ginger wet.
Take one pound of Ginger, and steep it in Red-Wine and Vinegar equally mixed,
let it stand so close covered twelve days, and twice every day stir it up and
down, then take two quarts of Red-Wine and as much Vinegar, and boil them
together a little while, then put in three pounds of Sugar and make a Syrup
therewith, then put in your Ginger and boil it a while, then set it by till the
next day, so boil it every day a little, till it be very clear, and so keep it
in the Syrup.

CCXLVIII. To make a Sallad of Limons.
Take the rinds of Limons cut in halves, and boil them in several waters till
they are very tender, then take Vinegar, Water and Sugar, and make a Syrup,
then put in your Limons, first cut as you would an Appleparing, round and round
till you come at the top, boil them a while in the Syrup, then set them by till
the next day, then boil them again a little, and so do till yo(...) they be
clear, and the Syrup thick; when you serve them to the Table, wash them in
Vinegar,

CCXLIX. To stew Prunes without fire.
Take your largest Prunes well washed, and put them into a broad mouthed Glass,
then put to them some Claret. Wine, and whole Spice, and cover your Glass very
well, and set it in the Sun ten days or more, and they will eat very finely;
you must also put a little Sugar into the Glass with them.

CCL. To make Syrup of the Juice of Citrons or Limons.
Take the Juice of either of them, and put twice the weight of fine sugar
therein, put it into a long Gallipot, and set that pot into a Kettle of boiling
water, till you see they be well incorporated, then take it out, and when it is
cold put it up.

CCLI. To make Punch.
Take one Quart of Claret Wine, half a Pint of Brandy, and a little Nutmeg
grated, a little Sugar, and the Juice of a Limon, and so drink it.

CCLII. To make Limonado.
Take one Quart of Sack, half a Pint of Brandy, half a Pint of fair Water, the
Juice of two Limons, and some of the Pill, so brew them together with Sugar and
drink it.

CCLIII. To make Paste of Pomewaters.
Take your Pomewater Apples, and put them in a long Gallipot, and set that Pot
in a Kettle of boiling water, till your Apples are tender, then pare them, and
cut them from the Core, and beat them in a Mortar very well, then take their
weight in fine Sugar, and boil it to a Candy height with a little water, then
put in your Apples, and boil them till it will come from the bottom of the
Posnet, when it is almost cold mould it with searced Sugar, and make it in
Cakes and dry them.

CCLIV. To make Syrup of Rasberries, or of other Fruits, as Grapes, or the like.
Take the juice of your Fruits and the weight thereof in fine Sugar, mix them
together and put them into a long Gally-pot, and set that pot into a Kettle of
seething water, and when you see it is enough let it cool, and then put it up;
after you have strained out your juice, you must let it stand to settle three
or four days before your put the Sugar into it, and then take only the
clearest, this is exceeding good and comfortable in all Fevers.

CCLIV. To make a Caudle for a sick body both pleasant and comfortable.
Take a quart of white Wine, and boil it a while with a Blade of large Mace,
and a little whole Cinnamon, then take four Ounces of sweet Almonds blanched and
beaten with a little Rosewater, then strain your Almonds with the Wine, and set
it over the fire again, and when it is scalding hot, put in the Yolks of four
Eggs, and as much Sugar as you think fit.

CCLV. How to cover all kinds of seeds, or little pieces of Spices, or Orange
or Limon Pill, with Sugar for Comsits,
First of all you must have a deep bottomed Basin of Brass or Latin, with two
ears of Iron to hang it with two Cords, over some hot coals.

You must also have a broad Pan to put Ashes in, and hot Coals upon them.

You must have a Brass Ladle to let run the Sugar upon the Seeds.

You must have a Slice of Brass to scrape away the Sugar from the fides of the
hanging Basin if need be.

Having all these things in readiness, do as follows;

Take fine white Sugar beaten, and let your seeds and Spice be dry then dry
them again in your hanging Basin:

Take to every two pounds of Sugar one quarter of a pound of Spices or Seeds,
or such like.

If it be Aniseeds, two pounds of Sugar to half a pound of Aniseeds, will be
enough.

Melt your Sugar in this manner; put in three Pounds of sugar into the Basin,
and one Pint of water, stir it well till it be wet, then melt it very well and
boil it very softly until it will stream from the Ladle like Turpentine, and
not drop, then let it sees no more, but keep it upon warm Embers, that it may
run from the Ladle upon the seeds.

Move the seeds in the hanging Basin so fast as you can or may, and with one
hand, east on half a Ladle full at a time of the hot sugar, and rub the seeds
with your other hand a pretty while, for that will make them take the sugar the
better; and dry them well after every Coat.

Do thus at every Coat, not only in moving the Basin, but also with stirring of
the Comfits with the one hand, and drying the same, in evrey hour you may make
three pounds of Comfits; as the Comfits do increase in bigness, so you may take
more Sugar in your Ladle to cast on:

But for plain Comfits, let your sugar be of a light decoction last, and of a
high decoction first, and not too hot.

For crisp and ragged Comfets, make your decoction so high, as that it may run
from the Ladle, and let it fall a foot high or more from the Ladle, and the
hotter you cast on your sugar, the more ragged will your Comfits be; also the
Comfits will not take so much of the sugar, as upon a light decoction, and they
will keep their raggedness long; this high decoction must serve for eight or
ten Coats, and put on at every time but one Ladle full.

A quarter of a pound of Coriander seeds, and three pounds of sugar, will serve
for very grear Comfits.

See that you keep your Sugar in the Basin always in good temper, that it burn
not in Lumps, and if at any time it be too high boiled, put in a spoonful or
two of water, and keep it warily with your Ladle, and let your fire be always
very clear, when your Comfits be made, set them in Dishes upon Papers in the
Sun or before the Fire, or in the Oven after Bread is drawn, for the space of
one hour or two, and that will make them look very white.

CCLVI. To make a fine Cullis or Ielly.
Take a red Cock, scald, wash, and dress him clean, sees it in white wine or
Rhenish wine, and scum it clean, put in a Pint of thick Cream to it, then put
in whole Spices, Sugar and Rosewater, and boil them together.

CCLVII. A white Ielly with Almonds.
Take Rosewater and Gum Dragon first steeped, or Isinglass dissolved, and some
Cinnamon whole, sees these together, then take one pound of Almonds blanched
and beaten with Rosewater, then put them in and sees them with the rest, stir
them always, and when it is enough, sweeten it to your taste, and when it is
cold eat it.

CCLVIII. To make sweet Cakes without Sugar.
Wash some Parsnep roots, scrape them, and slice them very thin dry them in a
Dish in an Oven, and beat them to a Powder, mix them with an equal quantity of
fine Flower, mix them with Cream, beaten Spice and Salt, and so make them and
bake them.

CCLIX. To keep Roses or Gilliflowers very long.
Take them when they are very fresh, and in the bud, and gathered very dry, dip
them in the whites of Eggs well beaten, and presently strew thereon searced
sugar, and put them up in luted Pots, and set them in a cool place, in sand or
gravel, and with a Fillip of your finger at any time you may strike off the
coat, and you will have the Flower fresh and fair.

CCLX. How to keep Walnuts long fresh and good.
Make a Lay of the dry stampings of Crabs when the Verjuice is pressed forth,
then a Lay of Walnuts, and then Crabs again, till all be in, then cover the
Vessel very well, and when you eat them, they will be as though they were new
gathered.

CCLXI. To pickle Quinces.
Put them into a Vessel, and fill up the Vessel with small Ale, or white Wine
Lees, which is better, and cover your Vessel well that no Air get in.

CCLXII. To keep Artichokes.
Take your Artichokes, and cut off the stalks within two inches of the Apple,
and of these stalks make a strong Decoction, slicing them into thin and small
pieces, and boil them with water and salt; when it is cold, put in your
Artichokes, and keep them from the Air.

When you spend them, lay them first in warm water, and then in cold to take
away the bitterness.

CCLXIII. To make Clove or Cinnamon Sugar.
Put sugar in a Box, and lay Spices among it, and close up the Box fast, and in
short time it will smell and taste very well.

CCLXIV. To make Irish Aquavitae.
Take to every Gallon of good Aquavitae, two Ounces of Iicoras bruised, two
ounces of Aniseeds bruised, let them stand six days in a Vessel of Glass close
stopped, then pour out as much of it as will run clear, dissolve in that clear
six great spoonfuls of the best Molasses, then put it into another Glass, then
add to it some Dates and Raifins of the Sun stoned; this is very good for the
Stomach.

CCLXV. To distill Roses speedily.
Stamp your Roses in a Mortar with a little Rosewater, and then distill them:
This way will yield more water by much than the common way.

CCLXVI. To make Scotch Brewis.
Take a Manchet and pare off the crust, then slice it thin and whole round the
Loaf, and lay these slices into a deep dish cross ways, one slice lying upon
the edge of the other a little, that they may lie quite cross the dish, then
fill it up with Cream and put whole Spice therein, so set it over a
Chafing Dish of Coals very hot, and always cast the Cream all over the Bread
with a spoon till all be spent, which will be above an hour, then take some
Sack and sweeten it with Sugar, and pour all over it, and serve it to the Table.

CCLXVII. To make fine Black Puddings.
Take the Blood of a Hog, and strain it, and let it stand to settle, putting in
a little Salt while it is warm, then pour off the water on the top of the
Blood, and put so much Oatmeal as you think fit, let it stand all night, then
put in eight Eggs beaten very well, as much Cream as you think fit, one Nutmeg
or more grated, some Pennyroyal and other Herbs shred small, good store of Beef
Sewet shred very small, and a little more Salt, mix these very well together,
and then have your Guts very well scoured, and scraped with the back of a
Knife, fill them but not too full, then when you have tied them fast, wash them
in fair water, and let your water boil when they go in, then boil them half an
hour, then stir them with the handle of a Ladle and take them up and lay them
upon clean straw, and prick them with a Needle, and when they are a little cool
put them into the boiling water again, and boil them till they are enough.

CCLXVIII. To make the best Almond-Puddings.
Take a quart of thick Cream and boil it a while with whole Spice, then put in
half a pound of sweet Almonds blanched and beaten to a Paste with Rosewater,
boil these together till it will come from the bottom of the Posnet,
continually stirring it for fear it burn:

Then put it out, and when it is cool, put in twelve yolks of Eggs, and six
Whites, some Marrow in big Bits, or Beef Suet shred small, as much Sugar as you
think fit, then fill your Guts being clean scraped; you may color some of them
if you please, and into some put plumped Currants, and boil them just as you do
the other.

CCLIX. To make a Rice Pudding to bake.
Take three Pints of Milk or more, and put therein a quarter of a pound of
Rice, clean washed and picked, then set them over the fire, and let them warm
together, and often stir them with a wooden Spoon, because that will not scrape
too hard at the bottom, to make it burn, then let it boil till it be very
thick, then take it off and let it cool, then put in a little Salt, some beaten
Spice, some Raisins and Currants, and some Marrow, or Beef Suet shred very
small, then butter your Pan, and so bake it, but not too much.

CCLXX. To make a Pudding of wild Curds.
Take wild Curds and Cream with them, put thereto Eggs, both yolks and whites,
Rosewater, Sugar, and beaten Spice with some Raisins and Currants, and some
Marrow, and a little salt, then butter a Pan, and bake it.

CCLXXI. To make Pudding of Plum-Cake.
Slice your Cake into some Cream or Milk, and boil it, and when it is cold, put
in Eggs, Sugar, a little Salt and some Marrow, so butter a Pan and bake it, or
fill guts with it.

CCLXXII. To make Biscuit Pudding.
Take Naples Biskets and cut them into Milk, and boil it, then put in Egg,
Spice, Sugar, Marrow, and a little Salt, and so boil it and bake it.

CCLXXII. To make a dry Oatmeal Pudding.
Take your Oatmeal well picked, and put into it a little salt, some Raisins and
Currants, and some beaten spice, and good store of Beef Suet finely shred, so
tie it up hard in a Cloth, and let your water boil when you put it in, and let
it boil very well; if you would butter it, then leave out the Suet; and if you
would leave out the Fruit, then put in sweet herbs good store.

CCLXXIII. To make Almond Puddings a different way from the other.
Take two Manchets and grate them, then scald them in some Cream, then put in
some Almonds blanched and beaten as you do other, with Rosewater, let there be
about half a Pound, then put in eight Eggs well beaten, some Spice, Sugar, Salt
and Marrow, and having your Guts well stowred and scraped, fill them, but not
too full, and boil them as you do the other, or bake it if you please; Currants
will do well in it.

CCLXXIV. To make a Quaking Pudding.
Take Grated Bread, a little Flower, Sugar, Salt, beaten Spice, and store of
Eggs well beaten, mix these well, and beat them together, then dip a clean
Cloth in hot water, and flower it over, and let one hold it at the four corners
till you put it in, so tie it up hard, and let your Water boil when you put it
in, then boil it for one hour, and serve it in with Sack, Sugar and Butter.

CCLXXVI. To make good Dumplings.
Take some Flower and a little salt, and a little Ale-Yeast, and so much water
as will make it into a Paste, so let your water boil when you do put them in;
boil them but a little while, and then Butter them.

CCLXXVII. Another way to make Dumplings.
Take half a quarter of a Peck of Flower, and one Egg, yolk and white, half a
Pound of Butter broke in little Bits, mix them together with so much cold milk
as will make it up, do not break your Butter too small, for then they will not
flake; make them up like Rouls of Butter, and when your water boils, put them
in, and do not boil them too much, then Butter them.

CCLXXVIII. Another way to make Dumplings.
Take Flower and temper it very light with Eggs, Milk, or rather Cream, beaten
Spice, Salt, and a little Sugar, then wet a Cloth in hot water, and flower it,
and so boil it for a Pudding, or else make it pretty stiff with the Flower and
a little grated Bread, and so boil them for Dumplings, then butter them, and
serve them in.

CCLXXIX. To make a green Pudding to Butter.
Take a Quart of Cream and boil it, then put in twelve Eggs, yolks and whites
well beaten, and one Manchet grated small, a little salt, beaten spice, and
some Sugar:

Then color it well with some Juice of Spinach, or if you will have it yellow,
color it with Saffron, so boil it in a wet Cloth flowred as before, and serve
it in with Wine, Sugar and Butter, and stick it with blanched Almonds split in
halves, and pour the sauce over it, and it will look like a Hedghog.

You may at some time stick it with Candied Orange Pill or Limon Pill, or
Eringo Roots Candied, you may sometimes strew on some Caroway Comfits, and if
you will bake it, then put in some Marrow, and some Dates cut small, thus you
have many Puddings taught in one.

CCLXXX. To make a Pudding of a Hogs Liver.
Take your Liver and boil it in water and salt, but not too much;

Then beat it fine in a Mortar, and put to it one Quart of Cream; a little
Salt, Rosewater, Sugar, beaten Spice and Currants, with six Eggs beaten very
well: mix it well.

And if you bake it, put in Marrow, or if you boil it in Skins.

But if you boil it in a Cloth, then leave it out; and Butter it when it is
boiled.

CCLXXXI. To make a Rasberry Pudding.
Take a Quart of Cream and boil it with whole Spice a while, then put in some
grated Bread, and cover it off the Fire, that it may scald a little; then put
in eight Eggs well beaten, and sweeten it with Sugar; then put in a Pint or
more of whole Rasberries, and so boil it in a Cloth, and take heed you do not
boil it too much, then serve it in with Wine, Butter and Sugar.

You may sometimes leave out the Rasberries, and put in Cowslip Flowers, or
Goosberries.

CCLXXXII. To make a Calves foot Pudding.
Take those which are tenderly boiled and shred them small with Beef-Sewet,
then put to four Feet one quart of Cream and eight Eggs well beaten, a little
Salt, some Rosewater and Sugar: some beaten Spice, and one Pound of Currants,
mix all these well together, and boil it or bake it; but if you would Butter
it, then do not put in Sewet.

CCLXXXIII. To make a Pudding to roast.
Take a Pint of Cream, sealed a little grated Bread in it, then put in three
Eggs beaten, a little Flower, Currants, beaten Spice, Sewet, Sugar and Salt,
with some Beef Sewet finely shred, make it pretty stiff, and wrap it in a Lambs
Caul, and roast it on a Spit with a Loin of Lamb, if you please, you may put in
a little Rosewater.

CCLXXXIV. To make Cream of diverse things.
Take a quart of Cream and boil it a while, then put in eight yolks of Eggs,
and six Whites well beaten, put them in over the Fire, and stir them lest they
turn, then when it is almost enough, put in some Candied Eringo Root, Orange or
Limon Pill Candied, and cut thin, preserved Plums, without the Stones, Quince,
Pippin, Cherries, or the like; if you do not like it so thick, put fewer Eggs
into it.

CCLXXXV. To make Cream of Artichoke Bottoms.
Take a quart of Cream and boil it with a little whole Mace a while; then have
your Artichoke Bottoms boiled very tender, and bruise them well in a Mortar,
then put them into the Cream, and boil them a while, then put in so many yolks
of Eggs as you think fit, and sweeten it to your taste; when you think it is
enough, pour it out, and serve it in cold.

CCLXXXVI. To pickle Barberries.
Take your Barberries and pick out the fairest Bunches of them, then take the
Refuse, and with some Water and Salt, so strong as will bear an Egg, boil them
together for half an hour or more, then lay your fair Bunches into a Pot, and
when the Liquor is cold, pour it over them.

CCLXXXVII. To pickle French Beans.
Take them before they be too old, and boil them tender, then put them into a
pickle made with Vinegar and Salt, and so keep them; it is a very good and
pleasant Sallad.

CCLXXXVIII. To pickle Oysters.
Take your great Oysters, and in opening them save the Liquor, then strain it
from dross, add to it some White Wind, and White Wine Vinegar, and a little
Salt, and so let them boil together a while, putting in whole Mace, whole
Cloves, whole Pepper, sliced Ginger, and quartered Nutmegs, with a few Bay
leaves; when the Liquor is boiled almost enough, put in your Oysters and plump
them, then lay them out to cool, then put them into a Gally-pot or Barrel, and
when the Liquor is cool, pour it over them, and keep them from the Air.

CCLXXXIX. To make the best sort of Mustard.
Dry your Seed very well, then beat it by little and little at a time in a
Mortar, and sift it, then put the Powder into a Gally-pot, and wet it with
Vinegar very well, then put in a whole Onion, pilled but not cut, a little
Pepper beaten, a little Salt, and a lump of stone Sugar.

CCXC. Another sort of Mustard.
Dry your Horseradish Roots in an Oven very dry, then beat them to Powder and
sift them, and when you would use any, wet it with Wine Vinegar, and so it will
rather be better than the other.

CCXCI. To keep boiled powdered Beef long after it is boiled.
When your Beef is well powdered, and boiled thoroughly, and quite cold, wrap it
up close in a linen cloth, and then a woollen one, and so keep it in a Chest
or Box from the Air.

CCXCII. To make Clouted Cream.
Take three Gallons of new Milk, set it on the fire and boil it, then put in
two Quarts of Cream, and stir it about for a while over the fire, then pour it
out into several pans, and cover it till the next morning, then take it off
carefully with a Scimmer, and put it all into one dish one upon another, then
eat it with Wine and Sugar.

CCXCIII. An excellent damask Powder.
Take of Orrice half a Pound, Rose leaves four Ounces, Cloves one Ounce, Lignum
Rhodium two Ounces, Storax one ounce and an half, Benjamin one ounce and an
half, Musk and Civet of each ten Grains, beat them altogether grossly, save the
Rose leaves you must put in afterward. This is a very fine Powder to lay among
Linen.

The End of the First Part.
The SECOND PART of the QUEEN-LIKE CLOSET; Having an Addition of what has
already been treated of, and directing a very true and excellent way for all
manner of COOKERY, BOTH FISH, FLESH and PASTRY.

Showing the true Seasoning of all things for COMPLETE TABLES.

Also all Kinds of SAUCES and PICKLES in a very brevious Way.

Here is to be noted, that in diverse of these Receipts there are Directions for
two or three several Things in one, not confounding the Brains with multitudes
of Words to little or no purpose, or vain Expressions of things which are
altogether unknown to the Learned as well as the Ignorant; this is really
imparted for the good of all the FEMALE SEX.

By Hannah Wolley, alias Chaloner.

London, Printed for R. L. 1670.

THE Ladies New Closet. OR RATHER Rich Cabinet.
The SECOND PART.
I. To make Elder Vinegar, and to color it.
TAke of your best white Wine Vinegar, and put such a quantity of ripe Elder
Berries into it as you shall think fit, in a wide mouthed Glass, stop it close,
and set it in the Sun for about ten days, then pour it out gently into another
Glass, and keep it for your use; thus you may make Vinegar of Red Roses,
Cowslips, Gilliflowers, or the like.

II. To make Metheglin, either Brown or White, but White is best.
Take what quantity you please of Spring Water, and make it so strong with
Honey, that it will bear an Egg, then boil it very well, till a good part be
wasted, and put in to it boiling a good quantity of whole Spice Rosemary, Balm,
and other cordial and pleasant Herbs or Flowers.

When it is very well boiled, set it to cool, it being strained from the Herbs,
and the bag of Spices taken out;

When it is almost cold, put in a little Yeast and beat it well, then put it
into Vessels when it is quite cold, and also the Bag of Spice, and when it has
stood a few days, bottle it up; if you would have it red, you must put the
Honey to strong Ale Wort instead of Water.

III. To make Coller'd Beef.
Take a good Flank of Beef, and lay it in Pump water and salt, or rather
Saltpeter one day and one night, then take Pepper, Mace, Nutmegs, Ginger and
Cloves with a little of the Herb called Tarragon, beat your Spice, shred your
Tarragon, and mingle these with some Sewet beaten small, and strew upon your
Beef, and so roll it up, and tie it hard, and bake it in a Pot with Claret Wine
and Butter, let the Pot be covered close, and something in the Pot to keep the
Meat down in the Liquor that it may not scorch, set it into the Oven with
Household bread, and when it is baked, take it out, and let it cool, then hang
it up one night in the Chimney before you eat it, and so as long as you please.

Serve it in with Bay Leaves, and eat it with Mustard and Sugar.

IV. To make Almond Puddings with French Rolls or Naples Biskets.
Take a quart of Cream, boil it with whole Spice, then take it from the Fire,
and put in three Naples Biskets, or one Penny French Roll sliced thin, and
cover it up to scald; when it is cold, put in four Ounces of sweet Almonds
blanched, and beaten with Rosewater, the Yolks of eight Eggs, and a little
Marrow, with as much Sugar as you think fit, and a little Salt; you may boil
it, or bake it, or put it into Skins; if it be boiled or baked, put Sugar on it
when you serve it in.

V. To make Barley Cream.
Take two Ounces of French Barley, and boil it in several Waters, then take a
quart of Cream, and boil it with whole Spice, put in your Barley, and boil them
together very well,

Then put in the yolks of six Eggs well beaten, and as much Sugar as you think
fit; stir them well over the fire, then pour it out, and when it is cold serve
it in; thus you may make Rice Cream, only do not boil that, but a very little
in Milk, before you put it into the Cream.

VI. To make Cheescakes.
Take four Gallons of new Milk, set it with a little Runnet, and when it is
come, break it gently, and whey it very well, then take some Manchet, first
scalded well in new Milk, let the Milk be thick with it, and while it is hot,
put in a quarter of a pound of fresh Butter, and stir it in, when it is cold,
mix that and your Curd together very well, then put in one Pound and half of
plumped Currants, some beaten Spice, a very little Salt, Rosewater, and the
yolks of eight Eggs, half a Pint of Cream, and a little Sugar, mix them well
together, then make some Paste, with Flower, Butter, the yolk of an Egg and
fair water, and roll it out thin, and so bake them in bake-pans, and do not
let them stand too long in the Oven.

VII. Another way for Cheese-Cakes.
Take the Curd of four Gallons of new Milk, and put thereto half a pound of
Almonds blanched and beaten fine with Rosewater, then put in one Pint of Raw
Cream, the yolks of ten Eggs, some beaten Spice, a little Salt, one pound and
half of plumped Currants, a little Rosewater, and some Sugar, and so mix them
very well, and put them into your Crust and bake them.

VIII. Another way for Cheese-Cakes.
Take the Curd of four Gallons of new Milk, beat it well in a Mortar with half
a pound of fresh Butter, and then season it as you do the other abovenamed.

IX. Another way for Cheese-Cakes.
Take the same quantity of Curd, and mix it with half a Pound of Rice boiled
tender in Milk, one quarter of a Pound of fresh Butter, the yolks of eight
Eggs, one Pint of Cream, beaten Spice, two pounds of Currants first plumped,
Rosewater and Sugar, and a little Salt, and so bake them, not too much.

X. To make a sresh Cheese.
Take some very tender Cheese-Curd, stamp it very well in a Mortar with a
little Rosewater, wherein whole Spice has been steeped, then let it stand in a
little Cullender about half an hour, then turn it out into your Dish, and serve
it to the Table with Cream, Wine, and Sugar.

XI. Another way for a fresh Cheese.
Take a quart of Cream, and boil in it whole Spice, then stir in the yolks of
eight Eggs, and four whites well beaten, and when they are hot, put in so much
Sack as will give it a good taste, then stir it over the Fire till it runs
on a Curd, then beat it in a Mortar as the other, and serve it to the Table
with Cream and Sugar.

XII. To make Oatmeal Pudding.
Take Oatmeal beaten fine, put to it some Cream, beaten Spice, Rosewater and
Sugar, some Currants, some Marrow, or Beef Sewir shred fine, and a little Salt,
then butter your pan and bake it.

XIII. Puddings in Balls to stew or to fry.
Take part of a Leg of Veal, parboil it, and shred it fine with some Beef
Sewet, then take some Cream, Currants, Spice, Rosewater, Sugar and a little
Salt, a little grated Bread, and one handful of Flower, and with the yolks of
Eggs make them in Balls, and stew them between two Dishes, with Wine and
Butter, or you may make some of them in the shape of Sausages, and fry them in
Butter, so serve them (...) Table with Sugar strewed over them.

XIV. To boil Pigeons.
Take your largest Pigeons and cut them in halves, wash them and dry them, then
boil a little Water and Salt with some whole Spice, and a little Faggot of
sweet Herbs, then put in your Pigeons and boil them, and when they are enough,
take some boiled Parsley shred small, some sweet Butter, Claret Wine, and an
Anchovy, heat them together, then put in the yolks of Eggs, and make it thick
over the Fire, then put in your Pigeons into a Dish, garnished with pickled
Barberries and raw Parsley, and so pour over them your Sauce, and serve it to
the Table.

XV. To make an Apple Tansie.
Take a Quart of Cream, one Manchet grated, the yolks of ten Eggs, and four
Whites, a little Salt, some Sugar, and a little Spice, then cut your Apples in
round thin slices, and lay them into your Drying Pan in order, your Butter
being hot, when your Apples are fried, pour in your Batter, and fry it on the
one side, then turn it on a Pie-Plate, and slide it into the Pan again, and fry
it, then put it on a Pie-Plate, and squeez the Juice of a Limon over it, and
strew on fine Sugar, and serve it to the Table.

XVI. To make a green Tansie to fry, or boil over a Pot.
Take a quart of cream, the yolks of one dozen of Eggs and half their Whites
well beat mix them together, and put in one Nutmeg grated, then color it well
with the Juice of Spinach, and sweeten it with Sugar; then fry it with Butter
as you do the other, and serve it in the same manner; but you must lay thin
slices of Limon upon this.

If you will not fry it, then Butter a Dish, and pour it therein, and set it
upon a Pot of boiling water till it be enough; this is the better and easier
way.

Thus you may make Tansies of any other things, as Cowslips, Rasberries,
Violets, Marigolds, Gilliflowers, or any such like, and color them with their
Juice; you may use green Wheat instead of Spinach.

XVII. To make an Amulet.
Take twelve Eggs, beat them and strain them, put to them three or four
Spoonfulls of Cream, then put in a little Salt, and having your drying pan
ready with some Butter very hot, pour it in, and when you have fried it a
little, turn over both the sides into the middle, then turn it on the other
side and when it is fried, serve it to the table with Verjuice, Butter and
Sugar.

XVIII. To make a Chicken-Pie.
Make your Paste with cold Cream, Flower, Butter and the yolk of an Egg, roll
it very thin, and lay it in your Baking-pan, then lay Butter in the Bottom:

Then lay in your Chickens cut in quarters with some whole Mace, and Nut meg
sliced, with some Marrow, hard Lettuce, Eryngo Root, and Citron Pill, with a
few Dates stoned and sliced:

Then lay good store of Butter, Close up your Py and bake it:

Then Cut it oqen, and put in some Wine, Butter, and Sugar with the Yolk of two
or or three Eggs well beaten together over the fire, till it be thick, so serve
it to the Table, and garnish your Dish with some pretty Conceits made in Paste.

XIX. To make a Collar of Brawn of a Breast of Pork.
Take a large Breast of Pork, and bone it, then roll it up; and tie it hard
with a Tape, then boil it in water and Salt till it be very tender, then make
Souce drink for it with small Beer, Water and Salt, and keep it in it:

Serve it to the Table with a Rosemary Branch in the middle of it, and eat it
with Mustard.

XX. To souce Veal to eat like Sturgeon.
Take what part of Veal you like best, and boil it with Water and Salt, and a
bundle of sweet herbs, and a little Limon Pill, when it is boiled enough, put
into your Liquor so much Vinegar as will make it taste sharp, and a Limon
sliced, and when it is cold, put in your Veal, and when it has lain four or
five days, serve it to the Table with Fennel, and eat it with some Vinegar; you
must tie it up as you do Brawn.

XXI. To make a Pasty of a Breast of Veal.
Take half a peck of fine Flower, and two pounds of Butter broken into little
bits, one Egg, a little Salt, and as much cold Cream, or Milk as will make it
into a Paste; when you have framed your Pasty, lay in your Breast of Veal
boned, and seasoned with a little Pepper and Salt, but first you must lay in
Butter.

When your Veal is laid in, then put in some large Mace, and a Limon sliced
thin, Rind and all, then cover it well with Butter, close it and bake it, and
when you serve it in, cut it up while it is very hot, put in some white wine,
sugar, the yolks of Eggs, and Butter being first heated over the Fire together,
this is very excellent meat.

XXII. To make a Pigeon-Pie.
Make your Paste as for the Pasty, roll it thin, and lay it into your
baking-pan, then lay in Butter, then mix Pepper and Salt and Butter together,
and fill the bellies of your Pigeons, then lay them in, and put in some large
Mace, and little thin slices of Bacon, then cover them with Butter, and close
your Pie, and bake it not too much.

XXIII. To boil a Capon or a Hen with Oysters.
Take either of them, and fill the Belly of it with Oysters, and truss it, then
boil it in white Wine, Water, the Liquor of the Oysters, a Blade or two of
Mace, a little Pepper whole, and a little Salt, when it is boiled enough, take
the Oysters out of the belly, and put them into a Dish, then take some Butter,
and some of the Liquor it was boiled in, and two Anchoves with the yolks of
Eggs well beaten, heat these together over the fire, and then put your Oysters
into it, then garnish your Dish with Limon sliced thin, and some of the
Oysters, also some pickled Barberries and raw Parsley, then lay your Capon or
Hen in the middle of it, and pour the sauce upon the Breast of it, then lay on
sliced Limon and serve it in.

XXIV. To make an Olio.
First lay in your Dish a Fricasy made of a Calves head, with Oisters and
Anchovies in it, then lay Marrow-bones round the Dish, within them lay Pigeons
boiled round the Dish, and thin slices of Bacon, lay in the middle upon your
Fricasie a powdered Goose boiled, then lay some sweet-breads of Veal fried, and
balls of Sawsage-meat here and there, with some Scotch Collops of Veal or of
Mutton, Garnish your Dish with Limon or Orange and some toasts for the Marrow
so serve it in.

XXV. To make Cracknels.
Take half a Pound of fine Flower, and as much fine Sugar, a few Coriander
seeds bruised, and some Butter rubbed into the Flower, wet it with Eggs,
Rosewater and Cream, make it into a Paste, and roll it in thin Cakes, then
prick them and bake them; then wash them over with Egg and a little Rosewater,
then dry them again in the Oven to make them crisp.

XXVI. To make good sauce for a boiled Leg of Mutton.
Take the best Prunes and stew them well with white Wine or Claret, and some
whole Spice, then strain them into a Dish and set it over a Chafingdish of
coals, put to it a little grated Bread, juice of Limon and a little salt, then
lay your Mutton in a Dish, being well boiled with Water and Salt, pour your
sauce to it:

Garnish your Dish with Limon, Barberies, Parsley, and so serve it in.

XXVII. To roast Pork without the Skin.
Take any joint of Small Pork, not salted and lay it to the fire till the Skin
may be taken off, then take it from the fire and take off the Skin, then stick
it with Rosemary and Cloves and lay it to the fire again, then salt it and roast
it carefully, then make Sauce for it with Claret Wine, white bread sliced thin,
a little water, and some beaten Cinnamon, boil these well together, then put in
some Salt, a little Butter, Vinegar, or Juice of Limon, and a little sugar,
when your Pork is roasted enough, then flower it, and lay it into a Dish with
the Sauce, and serve it in.

XXVIII. To roste a Pig like Lamb.
Take a Pig, cut it in quarters, and truss it like quarters of Lamb, then spit
it, and roast it till you may take off the Skin, then take the Spit from the
fire, and take the skin clean off, then draw it with Parslie, and lay it to the
fire, baste it with Butter, and when it is enough, flower it and serve it to
the Table with Butter, the Juice of Orange, and gross Pepper, and a little Salt.

XXIX. To make Codling Cream.
Take fair Codling Apples, and when you have scalded them very well, peel them,
and put them into warm water over a few Embers covered close till they are very
green, then take a quart of Cream and boil it with a blade of Mace, and then
bruise six of your Codlings very well, and when your Cream is almost cold, put
in your Codlings, and stir them very well over a slow fire for fear they turn,
then put in the yolks of Eggs well beaten, and what Sugar you think fit, and
let it be upon the fire, stirring it till you think it be enough, then serve it
in cold.

XXX. A very dainty Summer Dish.
Set a little morning Milk with Runnet, as for a Cheese, when it is come, slice
it out with a thin Slice, and lay it into the Dish you mean to serve it in, and
put to it a little raw Cream, what Wine you please, and some Sugar, and so eat
it.

XXXI. To Butter Lobsters, Crabs or Crafish.
Take out their Meat and mince it small, and set it over a Chafingdish of Coals
with a little white Wine, a little Salt, and a blade of Mace, and when it is
very hot, put in some Butter and some Crumbs of white bread, then warm the
shells against the fire, and fill them again with their Meat, and so serve them
in.

You may do Shrimps or Prawns thus, only you must not put them into the shells
again, but garnish your Dish with them.

XXXII. To make a very good Cheese.
Take a Pail full of Morning Milk and Stroakings, and set it together with two
spoonfuls of Runnet, and cover it; when it is come, put it into the
wheying-Cloth gently, and break it as little as you can; when the Whey is run
clean from it, put it into the Vat, and turn it in the Evening, next morning
take it out and salt it a little, and turn it twice a day upon a clean Board,
and when it is a week old, lay it into some Nettles, and that will mellow it.

Before you set your Milk, you mayif you please, color it with the Juice of
Marigolds, Spinach or Sage.

XXXIII. To boil a Rump of Beef.
Take a Rump of Beef a little salted, and boil it in as much Water as will
cover it, and boil a Net full of hard Lettice with it, and when it is boiled,
take your hard Lettice, some Wine, either White or Claret, some Gravie, some
Butter and some Nutmeg, and warm them together; then Dish your Meat, and pour
your Sauce over it, and garnish your Dish with Parsley.

XXXIV. To make Fritters of Liver or of any other Meat.
Take your Liver, Capon or Veal, parboil it, mince it small, and then put to it
some Cream, Eggs, Spice and Salt, and make it pretty thick, and so fry them;
you may add a little Flower if you will, serve them in with beaten Spice and
Sugar strewed over them.

XXXV. To make an Almond Pudding to be baked and Iced over.
Take a pound of Almonds blanched and beaten with Rosewater, the Yolks and
Whites of twelve Eggs well beaten and strained, then put in Sugar, beaten Spice
and Marrow, with a little Salt, not in too hot an Oven let this be baked; when
it is baked, stick it full of blanched Almonds, and Ice it over with Sugar,
Rosewater, and the White of an Egg beaten together, then set it into the Oven
again, that the Ice may rise and dry, then serve it to the Table with fine
Sugar strewed upon the brims of the Dish.

XXXVI. To souce a Pig in Collars.
Take the two sides of a large fat Pig and bone them, then take Sage, Salt and
grated Nutmeg a good quantity, and strew all over the insides of them, then
roll them up hard, and tie them well with a Tape, then boil them, and also the
Head very well in Salt and Water till they be tender; then take them out of the
Liquor, and lay them to cool, then put some Vinegar and a Limon sliced into
your Liquor, and heat it again, and when it is cold, put in your Collars and
Head, and when they have lain a week, serve them to the Table with Mustard.

XXXVII. To bake Venison or Mutton to keep six or eight Months.
Take a haunch of Venison, or for want of it, take a large Leg of Mutton, bone
it, and stuff it well with gross Pepper, Cloves, Mace and Nutmeg mingled with
Salt, then rub it all over with the like, then put it into a Pot with good
store of Butter, and bake it with Household Bread, and let it be pasted over:

Then pour out all the Liquor, and when it is cold, take only the Fat, and some
more Butter, and melt them together in a Stone-Pot set into a Kettle of boiling
water, then pour it into the Pot to your Venison or Mutton, and so keep it,
slice it out, and serve it to the Table with Mustard and Sugar, and garnish it
with Bay Leaves.

XXXVIII. To pot Pigeons, or wild Fowl, or a Goose or Rabbits.
Take either of these, and fill their bellies with the before named Spices and
Salt and Butter, and rub them over with the same, then do just as you do the
Venison.

XXXIX. To boil a large Pike and Eels together.
Take a large Pike, and gut him and wash him, and be sure to save what is good
within him, then take two great Eels and scowr them well, throw away their
Heads, gut them, and wash them well, and cut them in pieces, then boil some
white Wine and Water; Salt and sweet Herbs together, with some whole Spice, and
when it boils apace, put in your Fish, and when it is enough, take some of the
Liquor, two Anchovies, some Butter, and some Shrimps taken out of their Shells,
and heat all these together, then put in the Yolks of two or three Eggs, and
heat all together, then lay some Sippets of French Bread into your Dish, and
set over a Chafingdish of Coals, and lay your Fish in order upon them, then
pour your Sauce all over it, and garnish your Dish with Shrimps, Barberries and
raw Parsley, so serve it to the Table very hot.

XL. To roste Eels with Bacon.
Take great Eels and scour them well, and throw away the Heads, gut them, and
cut them in pieces, then cut some fat Bacon very thin, and wrap them in it, and
some Bay Leaves, and so tie them fast to the Spit, and roste them, and baste
them well with Claret Wine and Butter, and when they are enough, dredge them
over with grated bread, and serve them in with Wine, Butter, and Anchovies;
Garnish your Dish as you please.

XLI. To make a Pie with Eels and Oisters.
Make your Paste, and roll it thin, and lay itinto your baking-Pan, then take
great Eels and flay them, and gut them, cut them in pieces, and wash them, and
dry them, then lay some Butter into your Pie, and season your Eels with Pepper,
Salt, Nutmeg, Cloves and Mace, and lay them in, then cover them all over with
great Oifters, and put in three or four Bay leaves, then put in more of your
beaten Spices and Salt, then cover them well with butter, and put in two or
three Spoonfuls of white Wine, so close it and bake it, then serve it in hot to
the Table.

XLII. To make a Pie with Parsneps and Oisters very good.
Take your Parsneps tenderly boiled, and slice them thin, then having your
Paste ready laid in your baking-pan, put in good store of butter, then lay in a
Lay of Parsneps, and some large Mace, and Pepper cracked, then some Oisters and
Yolks of Eggs hard boiled, then more Spice and butter, then more Parsneps, then
more Oisters, then more hard Eggs, more Spice, and cover it well, and bake it,
and serve it in hot.

XLIII. To dress Artichoke Suckers.
Take your Suckers of Artichokes, and pare them as you would an Apple, and cast
them into water to keep their Color, and to take away the bitterness of them,
put also to them the Meat which is in the stalks of great Artichokes, then boil
Water and Salt together, and when it is boiling apace, put in your Suckers and
Stalks tied up in a thin Cloth with a blade or two of Mace, and when they are
enough, melt some butter and vinegar together very thick and hot, and a little
Pepper with it, then lay them in a Dish, and pour the Sauce over them, strew
on a little Salt, and about the Dishes, and so serve it in.

XLIV. To boil Cucumbers.
Take your largest Cucumbers, and wash them and put them into boiling Water
made quick with Salt, then when they are boiled enough, take them up and peel
them and break them into a Cullender, and when the Water is well drained from
them, put them into a hot Dish, and pour over them some Butter and Vinegar a
little Pepper and Salt strew Salt on your Dish brims, lay some of the Rind of
them about the Dish cut in several Fancies, and so serve them to the Table.

XLV. To make several Sallads, and all very good.
Take either the stalks of Mallows or Turnip stalks when they run to Seed, or
stalks of the herb Mercury with the seedy head, either of these while they are
tender, put into boiling Water and Salt, and boiled tender and then Butter and
Vinegar over them.

XLVI. To make a Sallad of Burdock, good for the Stone, another of the tender
Stalks of Sow-thistles.
Take the Inside of the Stalks of Burdock, and cut them in thin slices, and lay
them in water one whole day, shifting them sometimes, then boil them, and
butter them as you do the forenamed.

Also the tender stalks of Sow-thiftles done in like manner, are very good and
wholesome.

XLVII. To make a Tart of Spinach.
Take a good quantity of green Spinach, boil it in water and salt, and drain it
well in a Cullender, then put to it plumped Currants, Nutmeg, Salt, Sugar and
Butter, with a little Cream, and the yolks of hard Eggs beaten fine, then
having your Paste ready laid in your baking-pan, lay in a little butter, and
then your Spinach, and then a little Butter again, so close it, and bake it,
and serve it to the Table hot, with Sugar strewed over it.

XLVIII. Artichoke Cream.
Take the tender bottoms of Artichokes, and beat them in a Mortar, and pick out
all the strings, then boil a quart of Cream with large Mace and Nutmeg, then
put in your bottoms, and when they have boiled a while, put in the yolks of six
Eggs well beaten, and so much Sugar as you think fit, and heat them together
over the fire, then pour it into a Dish, and when it is cold, serve it in with
Sugar strewed over it.

XLIX. To make very sine Rolls for Noble Tables.
Take half a Peck of fine Flower, the yolks of 4 Eggs and a little Salt, with a
Pint of Ale yeast, mix them together, and make them into a Paste with warm Milk
and a little Sack, then mould it well, and put it into a warm Cloth to rise,
when your Oven is hot, mould it again, and make it into little Rolls, and bake
them, then rasp them, and put them into the Oven again for a while, and they
will eat very crisp and fine.

L. To make short Rolls.
Take half a peck of fine Flower, and break into it one pound and half of fresh
Butter very small, then bruised Coriander seeds, and beaten Spice with a very
little Salt and some Sugar, and a Pint of Aleyeast, mix them well together, and
make them into a Paste with warm Milk and Sack:

Then lay it into a warm Cloth to rise, and when your Oven is hot, make it into
Rolls, and prick them, and bake them, and when they are baked, draw them and
cover them them till they be cold; these also eat very finely, if you butter
some of them while they are hot.

LI. To dress Soals a fine way.
Take one pair of your largest Soals, and flay them on both sides, then fry
them in sweet Sewet tried up with Spice, Bay leaves, and Salt, then lay them
into a Dish, and put into them some Butter, Claret Wine and two Anchovies,
cover them with another Dish, and set them over a Chafingdish of Coals, and let
them stew a while, then serve them to the Table, garnish your Dish with Orange
or Limon, and squeeze some over them.

LII. To stew Fish in the Oven.
Take Soals, Whitings or Flounders, and put them into a Stew Pan with so much
water as will cover them, with a little Spice and Salt, a little white wine or
Claret, some Butter, two Anchovies, and a bundle of sweet herbs, cover them and
set them into an Oven not too hot; when they are enough, serve them in; Garnish
your Dish wherein they lie with Barberries, raw Parsley, and slices of Limon,
and lay Sippets in the bottom.

LIII. To bake Collops of Bacon and Eggs
Take a Dish and lay a Pie plate therein, then lay in your Collops of Bacon,
and break your Eggs upon them

Then lay on Parsley, and set them into an Oven not too hot, and they will be
rather better than fried.

LIVE. To make Furmity.
Take some new Milk or Cream, and boil it with whole Spice, then put in your
Wheat or Pearl Barley boiled very tender in several Waters, when it has boiled
a while, thicken it with the yolks of Eggs well beaten, and sweeten it with
Sugar, then serve it in with fine Sugar on the Brims of the Dish.

LVI. To make Barley Broth.
Take French Barley boiled in several waters, and to a Pound of it, put three
quarts of water, boil them together a while with some whole Spice, then put in
as many Raisins of the Sun and Currants as you think fit. when it is well
boiled, put in Rosewater, Butter and Sugar, and so eat it.

LVII. To make Barley Broth with Meat.
Take a Knuckle of Veal, and the Cragend of a Neck of Mutton, and boil them in
water and salt, then put in some Barley, and whole spice, and boil them very
well together, then put in Raisons stoned, and Currants, and a few Dates stoned
and sliced thin, when it is almost enough, put in some Cream and boil it a
while, then put in plumped Prunes, and the yolks of Eggs, Rosewater and Sugar,
and a little Sack, so serve it in; Garnish your Dish with some of the Raisins
and Prunes and fine Sugar; this is very good and nourishing for sick or weak
people.

LVIII. To make Furmity with Meat-Broth.
Boil a Leg of Beef in water and salt, and put in a little whole Spice; when it
is boiled tender; take it up, and put into the broth some Wheat ready boiled
such as they sell in the Market, and when that has boiled a while, put in some
milk, and let that boil a while, then thicken it with a little Flower, or the
yolks of Eggs, then sweeten it with sugar and eat it.

LIX. To make Furmity with Almonds.
Take three Quarts of Cream, and boil it with whole Spice, then put in some
pearled barley first boiled in several waters, and when they have boiled
together a while, then put in so many blanched. Almonds beaten fine with
Rosewater as you think may be enough, about four Ounces of barley to this
quantity of Cream will be enough, and four Ounces of Almonds, boil them well
together, and sweeten it with sugar, and so serve it in, or eat it by the way,
you may put in Saffron if you please.

LX. To make a hasty Pudding.
Take one quart of Cream and boil it, then put in two Manchets grated, and one
pound almost of Currants plumped, a little Salt, Nutmeg and Sugar, and a liitle
Rosewater, and so let them boil together, stirring them continually over the
Fire, till you see the butter arise from the Cream, and then pour it into a
Dish and serve it in with fine Sugar strewed on the brims of the Dish.

LXI. Another way to make a hasty Pudding.
Take good new milk and boil it, then put in Flower, plumped Currants, beaten
spice, Salt and Sugar, and stir it continually till you find it be enough, then
serve it in with butter and sugar, and a little Wine if you please.

LXII. To make Spanish Pap.
Boil a quart of Cream with a little whole Spice, when it is well boiled, take
out the Spice, and thicken it with Rice Flower, and when it is well boiled, put
in the yolks of Eggs, and Sugar and Rosewater, with a very little Salt, so
serve it to the Table either hot or cold, with fine Sugar strewed on the brims
of the Dish.

LXIII. To make Gravie Broth.
Take a good fleshy piece of Beef, not fat, and lay it down to the fire, and
when it begins to roast, slash it with a Knife to let the Gravie run out, and
continually bast it with what drops from it and Claret Wine mixed together, and
continually cut it, and bast it till all the Gravie be out, then take this
Gravie and set it over a Chafingdish of Coals with some whole Spice, Limon
Pill, and a little Salt, when you think it is enough, lay some Sippets into
another Dish, and pour it in, and serve it to the Table; Garnish your Dish
with Limon and Orange; it you please you may leave out the Sippets and put in
some poach'd Eggs, done carefully.

LXIV. To make French Pottage.
Take an equal quantity of Chervil, hard Lettice and Sorrel, or any other Herb
as you like best, in all as much as a Peek will hold pressed down, pick them
well, and wash them, and drain them from the water, then put them into a Pot
with half a Pound of fresh Butter, and set them over the fire, and as the
Butter melts, stir them down in it till they are all within the butter, then
put some water in, and a Crust of bread, with some whole Cloves and a little
Salt, and when it is well boiled, take out the Crust of bread, and put in the
yolks of four Eggs well beaten, and stir them together over the fire, then lay
some thin slices of white bread into a deep dish, and pour it in.

LXV. To make Cabbage Pottage.
Take a Leg of Beef and a Neck of Mutton, and boil them well in water and salt,
then put in good store of Cabbage cut small, and some whole Spice, and when it
is boiled enough, serve it in.

LXVI. To make a Sallad of cold meat.
Take the brawn of a cold Capon, or a a piece of cold Veal, and mince it very
small, with some Limon pill, then put in some Oil, Vinegar, Capers, Caviare,
and some Anchovies, and mix them very well, then lay it in a Dish in the form
of a Star, and serve it in; Garnish your Dish with Anchovies, Limon and Capers.

LXVII. To dry a Goose.
Take a fair fat Goose, and powder it about a Month or thereabouts, then hang
it up in a Chimney as you do Bacon, and when it is thoroughly dry, boil it well
and serve it to the Table with some Mustard and Sugar; Garnish your Dish with
Bay leaves: Hogs Cheeks are very good dried thus.

LXVIII. To dress Sheeps Tongues with Oisters.
Take your Sheeps Tongues about six of them, and boil them in water and salt
till they be tender, then peel them, and slice them thin, then put them into a
Dish with a quart of great Oisters; a little Clarret wine and some whole Spice,
let them stew together a while, then put in some Butter and the yolks of three
Eggs well beaten, shake them well together, then lay some Sippets into a Dish,
and put your Tongues upon them; Garnish your Dish with Oisters, Barberries, and
raw Parsley, and serve it in.

LXIX. To make a Neats-tongue Pie.
Let two small Neats tongues or one great one be tenderly boiled, then peel
them and slice them very thin, season them with Pepper and Salt, and Nutmeg,
then having your Paste ready laid into your baking-pan, lay some Butter in the
bottom, then lay in your Tongues, and one pound of Raisins of the Sun, with a
very little Sugar, then lay in more butter, so close it and bake it, then cut
it up, and put in the yolks of three Eggs, a little Clarret Wine and Butter,
stir it well together, and lay on the Cover, and serve it; you may add a little
Sugar if you please.

LXX. A Capon with white Broth.
Take a large Capon, and draw him, and truss him, and boil him in water and a
little salt, with some whole Spice:

When you think it is almost enough, put in one pound of Currants well washed
and picked, four Ounces of Dates stoned and sliced thin, and when they have
boiled enough, put in half a pound of sweet Almonds blanched and beaten fine
with Rofewater, strain them in with some of the Liquor, then put in some Sack
and Sugar; then lay some thin slices of white bread into a deep Dish, and lay
your Capon in the midst, then pour your Broth over it.

Garnish your dish with plumped Raisins and Prunes, and serve it in.

LXXI. To make a Calves foot Pie.
Take six Calves feet tenderly boiled, and cut them in halves, then make some
Paste with fine Flower, Butter, cold Cream and the yolk and white of one Egg,
roll it very thin, and lay it into your baking-pan, then lay some butter in the
bottom, and then your Calves feet with some large Mace, half a pound of Raisins
of the Sun, half a pound of Currants, then lay more butter and close it and bake
it, then cut it up, and put in the yolks of three Eggs, some white wine, Butter
and a little salt, and so serve it to the Table; Garnish your Dish with pretty
Conceits made in Paste, and baked a little.

LXXII. To make an Artichoke Pie.
Make your Paste as before named, and roll it thin, and lay it into your
baking-pan.

Then lay in butter sliced thin, and then your bottoms of Artichokes tenderly
boiled, season it with a little salt, a little gross Pepper, and some sliced
Nutmeg, with a blade or two of Mace and a little Sugar, then lay in some
Marrow, Candied Orange and Citron Pill, with some Candied Eringo Roots; then
cover it with butter, and close it with your Paste, and so bake it, then cut it
up, and put in white wine, butter, and the yolks of Eggs and sugar, cover it
again, and serve it to the Table.

LXXIII. To make an Oister-Pie.
Make your Paste as before, and lay it in your Pan, then lay in butter, and
then put in as many great Oisters as will almost fill your Pan with their
Liquor strained; some whole Pepper, Mace and Nutmeg; then lay in Marrow, and
the yolks of hard Eggs, so cover them with butter, close them, and bake your
Pie, then put in White Wine, Anchovies, Butter and the Yolks of Eggs, cover it
again and serve it to the Table.

LXXIV. To make a Pig-Pie.
Take a large Pig and slit it in two, and bone it, only the two sides, not the
Head, then having your Paste ready laid in your Pan, and some butter in the
bottom, lay in your Pig, season it with Pepper, Salt, Nutmeg and Mace, and one
handful of Sage shred small and mixed with the spice and salt, then lay in more
Butter, close it, and bake it.

Serve it in cold with Mnstard, and garnish your Dish with bay Leaves.

If you would eat it hot, you must leave out the Pepper and some of the Salt,
and put in store of Currants, and when it comes out of the Oven, put in some
Butter, Vinegar, and Sugar, and so serve it.

LXXV. To make a Rasberry Tart.
Take some Puffe-paste rolled thin, and lay it into your baking-Pan, then lay
in your Rasberries and cover them with fine Sugar, then dose your Tart and bake
it; then cut it up, and put in half a Pint of Cream, the yolks of two or three
Eggs well beaten, and a little Sugar; then serve it in cold with the Lid off,
and sugar strewed upon the brims of the Dish.

LXXVI. To make a Carp Pie.
Have your Paste ready laid in your bakepan, and some Butter in the bottom.

Then take a large Carp, scale him, gut him, and wash him clean, and dry him in
a Cloth, then lay him into your Pan with some whole Cloves, Maee, and sliced
Nutmeg, with two handfuls of Capers, then put in some white Wine, and mix some
butter with salt, and lay all over; then close it, and bake it; this is very
good to be eaten either hot or cold.

LXXVII. To boil a Goose or Rabbits with Sausages.
Take a large Goose a little powdered, and boil it very well, or a Couple os
Rabbits trussed finely; when either of these are almost boiled, put in a Pound
of Sausages, and boil them with them; then lay either of these into a Dish, and
the Sausages here and there one, with some thin Collops of Bacon sryed, then
make for Sauce, Mustard and Butter, and so serve it in.

LXXVIII. To make a Fricasie of Veal, Chicken, or Rabbits, or of any thing else.
Take either of these and cut them into small pieces, then put them into a
frying pan with so much water as will cover them, with a little salt, whole
Spice, Limon Pill, and a bundle of sweet herbs, let them boil together till the
Meat be tender, then put in some Oisters, and when they are plumped, take a
little Wine, either white or Clarret, and two Anchovies dissolved therein with
some butter, and put all these to the rest, and when you think your Meat is
enough, take it out with a little Skimmer, and put it into a Dish upon Sippets;
then put into your Liquor the yolks of Eggs well beaten, and mix them over the
fire, then pour it all over your Meat, Garnish your. Dish with Barberries, and
serve it in; this Dish you may make of raw meat or of cold meat which has been
lest at Meals.

LXXIX. To make Scotch Collops of Veal or Mutton.
Take your meat and slice it very thin, and beat it with a rolling-pin, then
hack it all over, and on both sides with the back of a Knife, then fry it with
a little Gravie of any Meat, then lay your Scotch Collops into a Dish over a
Chasingdish of Coals, and dissolve two Anchovies in Clarret wine, and add to it
some butter and the yolks of three Eggs well beaten, heat them together, and
pour it over them:

Then lay in some thin Collops of Bacon fried, some Sausage meat fried; and the
yolks of hard Eggs fried after they are boiled, because they shall look round
and brown, so serve it to the Table.

LXXX. To make a Pudding of a Manchet.
Take a Manchet, put it into a Posnet, and fill the Posnet up with Cream, then
put in Sugar and whole Spice, and let it boil leisurely till all the Cream be
wasted away, then put it into a Dish, and take some Rosewater, and Butter and
Sugar, and pour over it, so serve it in with fine Sugar strewed all over it.

Your Manchet must be chipped before you put it into the Cream.

LXXXI. To make a Calves head Pie.
Make your Paste, and lay it into your Pan as before, then lay in Butter, and
then your Calves Head, being tenderly boiled, and cut in little thin bits, and
seasoned with Pepper, Salt and Nutmeg, then put in some Oisters, Anchovies and
Clarret Wine, with some yolks of hard Eggs and Marrow, then cover it with
Butter, and close it and bake it, when it is baked, eat it hot.

LXXXII. To dry Tongues.
Take some Pump water and Bay Salt, or rather refined Saltpeter, which is
better; make a strong Brine therewith, and when the Salt is well melted in it,
put in your Tongues, and let them lie one Week, then put them into a new Brine,
made in the same manner, and in that let them lie a week longer, then take them
out, and dry-salt them with Bay Salt beaten small, till they are as hard as may
be, then hang them in the Chimney where you burn Wood, till they are very dry,
and you may keep them as long as you please; when you would eat of them, boil
them with in the Pot as well as Water for that will make them look black, and
eat tender, and look red within; when they are cold, serve them in with Mustard
and Sugar.

LXXXIII. To make Angelot Cheese.
Take some new Milk and strokings together, the quantity of a Pail full, put
some Runnet into it, and stir it well about, and cover it till your Cheese be
come, then have ready narrow deep Moats open at both ends, and with your
flitting Dish fill your Moats as they stand upon a Board, without breaking or
wheying the Cheese, and as they sink, still fill them up, and when you see you
can turn them, which will be about the next day, keep them with due turning
twice in a day, and dry them carefully, and when they are half a year old, they
will be fit to be eat.

LXXXIV. To make a Hare-Pie.
Take the flesh of a very large Hare, and beat it in a Mortar with as much
Marrow or Beef Sewet as the Hare contains, then put in Pepper, Salt, Nutmeg,
Cloves and Mace, as much as you judge to be fit and beat it again till you find
they be well mixed, then having your Paste ready in your Baking-Pan, lay in
some Butter, and then your Meat, and then Butter again; so close it, and bake
it, and when it is cold, serve it in with Mustard and Sugar; and garnish your
Dish with Bay leaves; this will keep much longer than any other Pie.

LXXXV. To roast a Shoulder of Venison or of Mutton in Blood.
Take the Blood of either the Deer or the Sheep, and strain it, and put therein
some grated bread and salt, and some Thyme plucked from the Stalks, then wrap
your Meat in it and roast it, and when you see the blood to be dry upon it,
baste it well with butter, and make sauce for it with Clarret Wine, Crumbs of
Bread and Sugar, with some Beaten Cinnamon, salt it a little in the rosting, but
not too much; you may stick it with Rosemary if you will.

LXXXVI. To stew a Pig.
Lay a large Pig to the fire, and when it is hot, skin it, and cut it into
diverse pieces, then take some white wine and strong broth, and stew it therein
with an Onion or two cut very small, a little Pepper, Salt, Nutmeg, Thy me, and
Anchovies with some Elder Vinegar, sweet Butter and Gravie; when it is enough,
lay Sippets of French Bread in your Dish, and put your Meat thereon;

Garnish your Dish with Oranges and Limons.

LXXXVII. To make a Fricasie of Sheeps feet.
Take your Sheeps feet tenderly boiled, and slit them, and take out the knot of
hai^ within, then put them into a Frying-pa^ with as much water as will cover
them, a li^^tle Salt, Nutmeg, a blade of Mace, and (...) bundle of sweet herbs,
and some plumped Currants; when they are enough, put in some Butter, and shake
them well together, then lay Sippets into a Dish, and put them upon them with a
Skimmer, then put into your Liquor a little Vinegar, the yolks of two or three
Eggs, and heat it over the fire, and pour it over them; Garnish your Dish with
Barberries, and serve it to the Table.

LXXXVIII. To make a Steak-Pie with Puddings in it.
Lay your Paste ready in your Pan, and lay some butter in the bottom, then lay
a Neck of Mutton cut into steaks thereon, then take some of the best of a Leg
of Mutton minced small, with as much Beef Sewet as Mutton; season it with
beaten Spice and Salt, and a little Wine, Apples shred small, a little Limon
Pill, a little Verjuice and Sugar, them put in some Currants, and when they are
well mixed, make it into Balls with the yolks of Eggs, and lay them upon the
steaks, then put in some Butter, and close ^our Pie and bake it, and serve it
in hot.

LXXXIX. To dress Salmon or other Fish by Insusion, a very good way.
Take a Ioul of Salmon, or a Tail, or any other part, or any other Fish which
you like, put it into a Pot or Pan, with some Vinegar, Water and Salt, Spice,
sweet herbs, and white Wine; when it is enough, lay it into a Dish, and take
some of the Liquor with an Anchovie or two, a little Butter, and the yolks of
Eggs beaten; heat these over the fire, and pour over your Fish; if you please,
you may put in shrimps, but then you must put in the more Butter; Garnish your
Dish with some Limon or Orange, and some Shrimps.

XC. To make Loaves to Butter.
Take the yolks of twelve Eggs, and six whites, a little Yeast, Salt, and
beaten Ginger, wet some Flower with this, and make it into a Paste, let it lie
to rise a while, and then make it into Loaves, and prick them, and bake them,
then put in white wine and Butter and Sugar, and serve it in.

XCI. To make a Calves Chaldron Pie, and Puddings also of it.
Take a fat Calves Chaldron boiled tender, and shred it very small, then season
it with beaten spice and salt:

Then put in a pound of Currants and somewhat more, and as much Sugar as you
think fit, and a little Rosewater; then having your Pie ready, fill it with
this, and press it down; close it and bake it, then put some Wine into it, and
so eat it.

If you will make Puddings of it, you must add a little Cream and grated bread,
a little Sack, more Sugar, and the yolks of Eggs, and so you may bake them, or
boil, or fry them.

XCII. To make Rice-Cream.
Boil a quart of Cream, then put in two handfuls of Rice Flower, and a little
fine Flower, as much sugar as is fit, the yolk of an Egg, and some Rosewater.

XCIII. To make a Pompion-Pie.
Having your Paste ready in your Pan, put in your Pompion pared and cut in thin
slices, then fill up your Pie with sharp Apples, and a little Pepper, and a
little salt, then close it, and bake it, then butter it, and serve it in hot to
the Table.

XCIV. To fry Pompion.
Cut it in thin Slices when it is pared, and steep it in Sack a while, then dip
it in Eggs, and fry it in Butter, and put some Sack and Butter for Sauce, so
serve it in with salt about the Dish Brims.

XCV. To make Misers for Children to eat in Afternoons in Summer.
Take half a Pint of good small Beer, two spoonfuls of Sack, the Crum of half a
penny Manchet, two handfuls of Currants washed clean and dried, and a little of
grated Nutmeg, and a little sugar, so give it to them cold.

XCVI. To fry Toasts.
Take a twopenny white Loaf, and pare away the Crust, and cut thin slices of
it, then dip them first in Cream, then in the yolks of Eggs well beaten, and
mixed with beaten Cinnamon, then fry them in Butter, and serve them in with
Verjuice, Butter and Sugar.

XCVII. Te boil or rather stew Carps in their own Blood.
Take two fair Carps, and scowr them very well from slime with water and a
little salt, then lay them in a Dish and open their bellies, take away their
Guts, and save the Blood and Rows in the Dish, then put in a pint of Clarret
Wine, some whole Spice, and some Salt, with a little Horseradish, Root, then
cover them close, and let them stew over a Chafingdish of Coals, and when they
are enough, lay them into a Dish, which must be rubbed with a Shelots, and
Sippets laid in, then take a little of the Liquor, and an Anchovie or two, with
a little Butter, heat them together, and pour it over them, then garnish your
Dish with Capers, Oranges or Limons, and serve it in very hot.

XCVIII. To make Fritters.
Take half a pint of Sack and a pint of Ale, a little Yest, the yolks of twelve
Eggs, and six Whites, with some beaten Spice and a very little salt, make this
into thick Batter with fine Flower, then boil your Lard, and dip round thin
slices of Apples in this Batter, and fry them, serve them in with beaten spice
and sugar.

XCIX. To pickle Coleflowers.
Take some white wine, Vinegar and salt, with some whole Spice, boil them
together very well, then put in your Coleflowers, and cover them, and let them
stand upon Embers for one hour, then take them out, and when they are cold, put
them into a Pot, and boil the Liquor again with more Vinegar, and when it is
cold, put it to them, and keep them close from the Air.

C. To preserve Orange or Limon Pill in thin slices in Ielly.
Take the most beautiful and thickest Rinds, and then cut them in halves, and
take their Meat clean out, then boil them in several waters till a straw will
run through them, then wash them in cold water, and pick them and dry them:

Then take to a Pound of these, one quart of water wherein thin slices of
Pippins have been boiled, and that the water feels slippery, take to this water
three pounds of Sugar, and make thereof a Syrup, then put in your Pills and
sealed them, and set them by till the next day, then boil them till you find
that the Syrup will Ielly, then lay your Pills into your Glasses, and put into
your Syrup the Juice of three Oranges and one Limon, then boil it again till it
be a stiff Ielly, and put it to them.

CI. To make Cakes of the Pulp of Limons, or rather the Juice of Limons.
Take out all the Iuicie part of the Limon without breaking the little skins
which hold it, then boil some Sugar to a Candy height, and put in this Juice,
and stir it about, and immediately put it into a warm Stove, and put in fire
twice or thrice a day, when you see that it does Candy on the one side, then
turn them out of the Glasses with a wet knife on the other upon a sleeked
Paper, and then let that candy also, and put them up in a Box with Papers
between them.

CII. To make good Minced Pies?
Take one Pound and half of Veal parboiled, and as much Sewet, shred them very
fine, then put in 2 pounds of Raisins, 2 pound Currants, 1 pound of Prunes, 6
Dates, some beaten Spice, a few Caroway seeds, a little Salt, Verjuice,
Rosewater and Sugar, so fill your Pies, and let them stand one hour in the Oven:

When they go to Table strew on fine Sugar.

CIII. To make a Loaf of Curds.
Take the Curds of three quarts of Milk rubbed together with a little Flower,
then put in a little beaten Ginger, and a little Salt, half a Pint of Yeast,
the yolks of ten Eggs, and three Whites; work these into a stiff Paste with so
much Flower as you see fit, then lay it to rise in a warm Cloth a while, then
put in Butter, Sugar, Sack, and some beaten Spice, and so serve it in.

CIV. To make Cheese Loaves.
Take the Curds of three quarts of Milk, and as much grated Bread as Curd, the
yolks of twelve Eggs, and six Whites, some Cream, a little Flower, and beaten
Spice, a little Salt, and a little Sack, when you have made it into a stiff
Paste with a little flower, roll some of it thin to fry, and serve them in with
beaten Spice and Sugar strewed over them.

Then make the rest into a Loaf, and bake it, then cut it open, and serve it in
with Cream, Butter and Sugar.

CV. To fry Oisters.
Take of your largest Oisters, wash them, and dry them, then beat an Egg or two
very well, and dip them in that, and so fry them, then take their Liquor, and
put an Anchovy to it, and some Butter, and heat them together over the fire,
and having put your fried Oisters in a Dish, pour the Sauce over them nd serve
them in.

CVI. To broil Oisters.
Take your largest Oisters, and put them into Scollop Shells, or into the
biggest Oister shells with their own Liquor, and set them upon a Gridiron over
Charcoals, and when you see they be boiled in the Liquor, put in some Butter, a
few Crumbs of bread, and a little Salt, then let them stand till they are very
brown, and serve them to the Table in the Shells upon a Dish and Pit-Plate.

CVII. To roast Oisters.
Take the largest, and spit them upon little long sticks, and tie them to the
Spit, then lay them down to the fire, and when they are dry, bast them with
Claret Wine, and put into your Pan two Anchovies, and two or three Bay Leaves,
when you think they are enough, bast them with Butter, and dredge them, and
take a little of that liquor in the Pan, and some Butter, and heat it in a
Porringer, and pour over them.

CVIII. To make most excellent and delicate Pies.
Take two Neats Tongues tenderly boiled, and peel them, and mince them small
with some Beef Sewet or Marrow, then take a pound of Currants, and a pound of
Raisins of the Sun stoned, some beaten Spice, Rosewater, a little Salt, a
little Sack and Sugar.

Beat all these with the minced meat in a Mortar till it come to a perfect
Paste, then having your Paste ready laid in your baking-Pan, fill it or them
with this Meat, then lay on the top some sliced Dates, and so close them, and
bake them, when they are cold they will cut smooth like Marmalade.

CIX. To make fine Custards.
Take two quarts of Cream and boil it well with whole Spice, then put in the
yolks of twelve Eggs, and six Whites well beaten and strained, then put in
these Eggs over the fire, and keep them stirring lest they turn, then when they
are thoroughly hot, take it off and stir it till it be almost cold, then put in
Rosewater and Sugar, and take out the whole Spice, then put your Custard into
several things to bake, and do not let them stand too long in the Oven; when
you serve them in, strew on small French Comfits of diverse colors, or else
fine Sugar, which you please.

CX. To make a Stump Pie.
Take a pound of Veal and as much Sewet, parboil your Veal, and shred them
together, but not very small, then put in one pound of Raisins, one pound of
Currants, four Ounces of Dates stoned and sliced thin, some beaten Spice,
Rosewater and Sugar, and a little Salt, then take the yolks of Eggs, well
beaten, and mix amongst the rest of the things very well, then having your Pie
ready, fill it and press it down, then lid it, and bake it.

CXI. To make Egg-Pies.
Take the yolks of eight hard Eggs, and shred them small with their weight of
Beef Sewet minced very small also, then put in one pound of Currants, four
Ounces of Dates stoned and sliced, some beaten Spice, Limon pill, Rosewater and
Sugar, and a little Salt, mix them well together, if you please, you may put in
an Apple shred small, so fill your Pies and bake them, but not too much, serve
them to the Table with a little Wine.

CXII. To make hashed Meat.
Take a Leg or a Shoulder of Mutton, lay it down to the fire, and as it does
roast, cut it off in little bits, and let it lie in the Pan, bast it with
Clarret wine and butter, and a little Salt, and put two or three Shelots in
your Pan, when you have cut off so much as you can, lay the bones into a Dish
over a Chafingdish of Coals, and put you Meat to it with the Liquor, and two
Anchovies, cover it, and let it stew a while, when it is enough, put in some
Capers, and serve it in with Sippets; Garnish your Dish with Olives and Capers,
and Samphire; thus you may do with any cold meat between two Dishes.

CXIII. To make a Fricasie of Oisters.
Take a quart of Oisters and put them into a frying pan with some white Wine
and their own Liquor, a little Salt, and some whole spice, and two or three Bay
Leaves, when you think they be enough, lay them in a dish well warmed, then
add to their Liquor two Anchovies, some Butter, and the yolks of four Eggs;
Garnish your Dish with Barberries.

CXIV. To make a Fricasie of Eels.
Take a midling sort of Eels, scour them well, and cut off the heads and throw
them away, then gut them, and cut them in pieces, then put them into a frying
pan with so much white Wine and water as will cover them, then put in whole
Spice, a bundle of sweet herbs and a little Salt, let them boil, and when they
be very tender, take them up and lay them into a warm Dish, then add to their
Liquor two Anchovies, some Butter and the yolks of Eggs, and pour over them:

Thus you may make Fricasies of Cockles or of Shrimps, or Prawns.

Garnish your Dish with Limon and Barberries.

CXV. To make an Eel-Pie.
Take your largest Eels, and flay them, and cut them in pieces, then having
your Pie ready with Butter in the bottom, season your Eels with Pepper, Salt
and Nutmeg, then lay them in and cover them with Butter, so close it and bake
it, if you please, you may put in some Raisins of the Sun, and some large Mace,
it is good hot or cold.

CXVI. To souce an Eel and Collar it.
Take a very large fat Eel and scour it well, throw away the head and gut her,
and slit her down the back, season her with Pepper, Salt, Nutmeg and Mace, then
boil her in white wine, and Salt and water, with a bundle of sweet herbs and
some Limon pill, when it is well boiled, take it up and lay it to cool; then
put good store of Vinegar into the Liquor, and when it is cold, put in your
Eel, and keep it:

You must roll it up in a Collar and tie it hard with a Tape, and sew it up in
a Cloth, then put it in to boil; when it has lain a week, serve it to the
Table with a Rosemary Branch in the middle, and Bay Leaves round the Dish
sides; eat it with Mustard.

CXVII. To stew Eels.
Take them without their heads, flay them and cut them in pieces, then fill a
Posnet with them, and set them all on end one by one close to one another, then
put in so much white Wine and water as will cover them, then put in good store
of Currants to them, whole Spice, sweet herbs, and a little salt, cover them and
let them stew, and when they are very tender, put in some Butter, and so shake
them well, and serve them upon Sippits; Garnish your Dish with Orange or Limon
and raw Parsley.

CXVIII. To make a Herring Pie.
Take four of the best pickled Herrings, and skin them, then split them and
bone them, then having your Pie in readiness with Butter in the bottom, then
lay your Herrings in halves into your Pie one lay of them, then put in Raisins,
Currants and Nutmeg, and a little Sugar, then lay in more Butter, then more
Herrings, Fruit and Spice, and more Butter, and so close it, and bake it; your
Herrings must be well watered.

CXIX. To roast a Pike and to lard it.
Take a large Pike, and scale it, gut it, and wash it clean, then lard it on
the back with pickled Herring and Limon Pill, then spit it and lay it down to
the fire to roft, bast it often with Claret Wine and Butter, when it is enough,
make Sauce for it with Claret Wine and Butter, and serve it in.

CXX. To boil fresh Salmon.
Take a Ioll or a Tail of fresh Salmon, then take Vinegar and Water, Salt and
whole Spice, and boil them together, then put in your Salmon, and when it is
boiled, take some Butter and some of the Liquor with an Anchovie or two, and a
little white Wine and a quart of Shrimps, out of their Shells, heat these
together, and so Dish your Salmon, and pour this over it.

Garnish your Dish with Shrimps and Anchovies, and Slices of Limon.

CXXI. To boil a Cods Head.
Boil Wine, Water and Salt together, with whole Spice and sweet herbs, and a
little Horse Radish Root, then put in your Cods head, and boil it very well,
then drain it well from the Water, and lay it in a dish over a Chafingdish of
Coals:

Then take some of the Liquor and two Anchovies, some butter and some Shrimps,
heat them over the fire, and pour over it, then poach some Eggs and lay over
it, and also about the Brims of the Dish; Garnish your Dish with Limon and
Barberries, so serve it to the Table very hot:

Thus you may do Haddocks or Whitings, or any other fresh Fish you like best.

CXXII. To make Olives of Veal.
Take thin slices of a Leg of Veal, and have ready some Sewet finely shred,
some Currants, beaten Spice, sweet herbs, and hard yolks of Eggs, and a little
salt mixed well together, then strew it upon the insides of your slices of
Meat, and roll them up hard, and make them fast with a scure, so spit them and
roste them, baste them with Butter, and serve them in with Vinegar, Butter and
Sugar.

CXXIII. To make an Olive Pie.
Having your Paste in readiness with Butter in the bottom, lay in some of the
forenamed Olives, but not fastened with a Scure, then put in Currants, hard Eggs,
and sweet Butter, with some herbs shred fine; be sure you cover it well with
Butter, and put in a little white Wine and Sugar, and close it, and bake it,
eat it hot or cold, but hot is better.

CXXIV. To make a Ball to take stains out of Linen, which many times happens
by Cooking or Preserving.
Take four Ounces of hard white Soap, beat it in a Mortar, with two small
Limons sliced, and as much Roch Allom as a Hazle Nut, when they are beaten well
together, make it up in little Balls, rub the stain therewith, and then wash it
in warm water, till you see it be quite out.

CXXV. To make a fine Pomander.
Take two Ounces of Labdanum, of Benjamin and Storax one Ounce, Musk six gr. as
much of Civet, as much of Ambergreece, of Calamus Aromaticus, and Lignum Aloes,
of each the weight of a Groat, beat all these in a hot Mortar and with a hot
Pestel, till it come to a perfect Paste, then take a little Gum Dragon steeped
in Rosewater, and rub your hand withal, and make it up with speed, and dry
them, but first make them into what shapes you please, and print them.

CXXVI. A very fine washing-Ball.
Take three Ounces of Orrice, half an Ounce of Cypress. wood, 2 Ounces of
Calamus Aromaticus, 1 ounce of Damask-Rose leaves, 2 ounces of
Lavender-flowers, a quarter of an Ounce of Cloves, beat all these and searce
them fine, then take two pounds and an half of Castile Soap dissolved in
rosewater, and beat all these forenamed things with the Soap in a Mortar, and
when they are well incorporated, make it into Balls, and keep them in a Box
with Cotton as long as you please.

CXXVII. To make French Broth called Kinck.
Take a Leg os Beef and set it over the fire with a good quantity of fair
water, when it boils scum it, and what meat soever you have to dress that day,
either of Fowl or small meat, put it all into this Liquor and parboil it, then
take out those small meats, and put in some French Barley, and some whole
Spice, one Clove or two of Garlic, and a handful of Leeks and some salt, when
it is boiled enough, pour it from the Barley, and put in a little Saffron, so
serve it in; and garnish your Dish with sliced Oranges or Limons, and put a
little of the juice therei.

CXXVIII. To make Broth of a Lambs Head.
Boil it with as much water as will cover it, with whole Spice, and a little
Salt, and a bundle of sweet herbs, then put in strained Oatmeal and Cream, and
some Currants, when you take it up, put in Sack and Sugar, then lay the head in
a Dish, and put the Broth to it, and serve it in.

CXXIX. To season a Chicken-Pie.
Having your Paste rolled thin, and laid into your baking pan, lay in some
Butter, then lay in your Chickens quartered, and seasoned with Pepper, Nutmeg,
and a little Salt, then put in Raisins, Cutrrans and Dates, then lay Butter on
the top, close it and bake it, then cut it up, and put in Clouted Cream, Sack
and Sugar.

CXXX. To make an Herb-Pie.
Take Spinach, hard Letuce, and a few sweet herbs, pick them, wash them, and
shred them, and put them into your Pie with Butter, and Nutmeg and Sugar, and a
little Salt, so close it and bake it, then draw it and, open it, and put in
Clouted Cream, Sack and Sugar, and stir it well together, and serve it in.

CXXXI. To roste Lobsters.
Take two fair Lobsters alive, wash them clean, and stop the holes as you do to
boil, then fasten them to a Spit, the insides together; make a good fire, and
strew Salt on them, and that will kill them quickly, bast them with Water and
salt till they be very red, then have ready some Oisters stewed and cut small;
put them into a Dish with melted Butter beaten thick with a little water, then
take a few Spoonfuls of the Liquor of the stewed Oisters, and dissolve in it
two Anchovies, then put it to the melted Butter, then take up your Lobsters,
and crack the shells that they may be easy to open,

CXXXII. To make a Pumpion-Pie.
Take a Pumpion, pare it, and cut it in thin slices, dip it in beaten Eggs and
Herbs shred small, and fry it till it be enough, then lay it into a Pie with
Butter, Raisins, Currants, Sugar and Sack, and in the bottom some sharp Apples,
when it is baked, butter it and serve it in.

CXXXIII. To make an Artichoke Pudding.
Boil a quart of Cream with whole Spice, then put in half a pound of sweet
Almonds blanched, and beaten with Rosewater, when they have boiled well, take
it from the fire, and take out the Spice, when it is almost cold, put in the
yolks of ten Eggs, some Marrow, and some bottoms of Artichokes, then sweeten it
with sugar, and put in a little salt, then butter a Dish, and bake it in it,
serve it to the Table stuck full of blanched Almonds, and fine Sugar strewed
over it.

CXXXIV. To pickle Sprats like Anchovies.
Take a Peck of the biggest Sprats without their heads, and salt them a little
over night, then take a Pot or Barrel; and lay in it a Lay of bay salt, atd
then a lay of Sprats, and a few bay leaves, then salt again; thus do till you
have filled the Vessel, put in a little Limon Pill also among your Bay Leaves,
then cover the Vessel and pitch it, that no Air get in, set it in a cool
Cellar, and once in a week turn it upside down; in three Months you may eat of
them.

CXXXV. To keep Artichokes all the Year.
Gather your Artichokes with long stalks, and then cut off the stalks close to
them, then boil some water with good Pears and Apples sliced thin, and the Pith
of the great stalks, and a Quince or two quartered to give it a relish, when
these have boiled a while, put in your Artichokes, and boil all together till
they be tender, then take them up and set them to cool, then boil your Liquor
well and strain it, when your Artichokes be cold, put them into your Barrel,
and when the Liquor is cold, pour it over them, so cover it close that no Air
get in.

CXXXVI. To make a Pasty of a Ioll of Ling.
Make your Crust with fine Flower, Butter, cold Cream, and two yolks of Eggs:

Roll it thin and lay it in your Bake-pan, then take part of a Ioll of Ling
well boiled, and pull it all in Bits, then lay some Butter into your Pasty and
then the Ling, then some grated Nutmeg, sliced Ginger, Cloves and Mace,
Oisters, Muscles, Cockles, and Shrimps, the yolks of raw Eggs, a few Comfits
perfumed, Candied Orange Pill, Citron Pill, and Limon Pill, with Eringo Roots:

Then put in White Wine, and good store of Butter, and put on a thick Lid, when
it is baked, open it, and let out the steam.

CXXXVII. To make French Servels.
Take cold Gammon of Bacon, fat and lean together, cut it small as for
Sausages, season it with Pepper, Cloves and Mace, and a little Shelots, knead
it into a Paste with the yolks of Eggs, and fill some Bullocks Guts with it,
and boil them; but if you would have them to keep, then do not put in Eggs.

When you have filled the Guts, boil them, and hang them up, and when you would
eat them, serve them in thin slices with a Sallad.

CXXXVIII. To make a Pallat Pie.
Take Ox Pallats and boil them so tender that you may run a straw through
them; to three Palates take six Sheeps tongues boiled tender and peeled, three
sweet-Breads of Veal, cut all these in thin slices, then having your Pie ready,
and Butter in the bottom, lay in these things, first seasoned with Pepper, Salt
and Nutmeg, and Thyme and Parsley shred small, and as the Season of the year
is, put into it Asparagus, Anchovies, Chestnuts, or what you please else, as
Candied Orange Pill, Limon Pill, or Citron Pill, with Eringo roots, and the
yolks of hard Eggs, some Marrow and some Oisters, then lay in good store of
Butter on the top, so close it and bake it, then put in white Wine, Butter, the
yolks of Eggs, and Vinegar and Sugar; heat them together over the fire, and
serve it in.

CXXXIX. To make Sauce for Fowls or Mutton.
Take Claret Wine, Vinegar, Anchovies, Oisters, Nutmeg, Shelot, Gravie of
Mutton or Beef, sweet Butter, Juice of Limon, and a little Salt, and if you
please, Orange or Limon Pill.

CXL. To make Oat-Cakes.
Take fine Flower, and mix it very well with new Ale yeast, and make it very
stiff, then make it into little Cakes, and roll them very thin, then lay them
on an Iron to bake, or on a baking stone, and make but a slow fire under it,
and as they are baking, take them and turn the edges of them round on the Iron,
that they may bake also, one quarter of an hour will bake them; a little before
you take them up, turn them on the other side, only to flat them; for if you
turn them too soon, it will hinder the rising, the Iron or Stone whereon they
are baked, must stand at distance from the fire.

CXLI. To make a rare Lamb Pie.
Take a Leg of Lamb, and take the meat clean out of it at the great end, but
keep the skin whole, then press the Meat in a Cloth, and mince it small, and
put as much Beef Suet to it as the Meat in weight, and mince it small, then put
to it Naples Biscuit grated fine, season it with beaten Spice, Rosewater, and a
little Salt, then put in some Candied Limon Pill, Orange Pill, and Citron Pill
shred small, and some sugar, then put part of the Meat into the skin, then
having your Pie in readiness, and Butter in the bottom, lay in this Meat, then
take the rest of yo ur Meat, and make it into Balls or Puddings with yolks of
Eggs, then lay them into the Pie to fill up the Corners, then take Candied
Orange, Limon and Citron Pill, cut in long narrow slices and strew over it; you
may put in Currants and Dates if you please, then lay on Butter, and close up
your Pie and bake it, and leave a Tunnel, when it is baked, put in Sack, Sugar,
yolks of Eggs and Butter heat together, if you put in Marrow, it will be the
better.

CXLII. To fry Garden Beans.
Boil them and blanch them, and fry them in sweet Butter, with Parsley and
shred Onions and a little salt, then melt Butter for the Sauce.

CXLIII. To make a Sorrel Sallad.
Take a quantity of French Sorrel picked clean and washed, boil it with water
and a little Salt, and when it is enough, drain it, and butter it, and put in a
little Vinegar and Sugar into it, then garnish it with hard Eggs and Raisins.

CXLIV. To make good cold Sallads of several things.
Take either Coleflowers, or Carrots, or Parsneps, or Turnips after they are
well boiled, and serve them in with Oil, Vinegar and Pepper, also the Roots of
red Beers boiled tender are very good in the same manner.

CXLV. To make the best sort os Pippin Paste.
Take a pound of raw Pippins sliced and beaten in a Mortar, then take a pound
of fine Sugar and boil it to a Candy height with a little fair water, then put
in your Pippins, and boil it till it will come from the bottom of the Posnet,
but stir it for fear it burn.

CXLVI. To make Sauce for a Leg of Veal roasted.
Take boiled Currants, and boiled Parsley, and hard Eggs and Butter and Sugar
hot together.

CXLVII. To make Sauce for a Leg of Mutton roasted with Chestnuts.
Take a (...)tity of Chestnuts, and boil them (...)ff, and bruise th(...)ll,
(...) them Claret wine, Butter and a little Salt, so put it into the Dish to
the Meat, and serve it in.

CXLVIII. To keep Quinces white, either to preserve whole, or for white
Marmalade or Paste.
Coddle them with white Wine and Water, and cover them with sliced Pippins in
the Codling.

CXLIX. To make little Pasties with sweet Meats to fry.
Make some Paste with cold water, butter and flower, with the yolk of an Egg,
then roll it out in little thin Cakes, and lay one spoonful of any kind of
Sweet meats you like best upon every one, so close them up and fry them with
Butter, and serve them in with fine Sugar strewed on.

CL. To boil a Capon on the French fashion.
Boil your Capon in water and salt and a little dusty Oatmeal to make it look
white, then take two or three Ladles full of Mutton Broth, a Faggot of sweet
herbs, two or three Dates cut in long pieces, a few parboiled Currants, and a
little whole Pepper, a little Mace and Nutmeg, thicken it with Almonds; season
it with Verjuice, Sugar, and a little sweet Butter, then take up your Capon and
lard it well with preserved Limon, then lay it in a deep Dish, and pour the
broth upon it; then garnish your Dish with Suckets and preserved Barberries.

CLI. To souce a Pike, Carp or Bream.
Draw your Fish, but scale it not, and save the Liver of it; wash it very well,
then take white Wine, as much water again as wine, boil them together with
whole spice, salt and a bundle of sweet herbs, and when it boiles put in your
Fish, and just before it a little Vinegar; for that will make it crisp: when it
is enough, take it up and put it into a Trey, then put into the Liquor some
whole Pepper, and whole Ginger, and when it is boiled enough, take it off and
cool it, and when it is quite cold, put in your Fish, and when you serve it in,
lay some of the Ielly about the Dish sides, and some Fennel and Sawcers of
Vinegar.

CLII. To boil a Gurnet on the French Fashion.
Draw your Gurnet and wash it, boil it in water and salt and a bundle of sweet
herbs; when it is enough, take it up and put it into a Dish with Sippets over a
Chafingdish of Coals; then take verjuice, butter, Nutmeg and Pepper, and the
yolks of two Eggs, heat it together, and pour over it; Garnish your Dish as you
please.

CLIII. To roast a Leg of Mutton on the French fashion.
Take a Leg of Mutton, and pare off all the Skin as thin as you can, then lard
it with sweet Lard, and stick it with Cloves when it is half roasted, cut off
three or four thin pieces, and mince it with sweet herbs and a little beaten
Ginger, put in a Ladle ful^ of Claret wine, and a little sweet butter, two
spoonfuls of verjuice and a little Pepper, a few Capers, then chop the yolks of
two hard Eggs in it, then when these have stewed a while in a Dish, put your
bonie part which is roasted into a Dish, and pour this on it and serve it in.

CLIV. To roast a Neats Tongue.
Chop sweet herbs fine with a piece of raw Apple, season it with Pepper and
Ginger, and the yolk of an Egg made hard and minced small, then stuff your
Tongue wiah this, and roast it well, and baste it with butter and wine; when it
is enough, take verjuice, butter, and the Juice of a Limon, and a little
Nutmeg, then Dish your tongue and pour this Sauce over it and serve it in.

CLV. To beil Pigeons with Rice.
Take your Pigeons and truss them, and stuff their bellies with sweet herbs,
then put them into a Pipkin with as much Mutton broth as will cover them, with
a blade of Mace, and some whole Pepper; boil all these together until the
Pigeons be tender, and put in Salt:

Then take them from the fire, and scum off the Fat very clean, then put in a
piece of sweet Butter, season it with Verjuice, Nutmeg and a little Sugar,
thicken it with Rice boiled in sweet Cream; Garnish your Dish with preserved
Barberries and Skirret Roots boiled tender.

CLVI. To boil a Rabbit.
Take a large Rabbit, truss it and boil it with a little Mutton Broth, white
wine and a blade of Mace, then take Lettuce, Spinach, and Parslie,
Winter-Savory and sweet Marjoram, pick all these and wash them clean and bruise
them a little to make the broth look green, thicken it with the Crust of a
Manchet first steeped in a little broth, and put in a little sweet Butter,
season it with Verjuice and Pepper, and serve it to the Table upon Sippets;
Garnish the Dish with Barberries.

CLVII. To boil a Teal or Wigeon.
Parboil either of these Fowls and throw them into a pail of fair water, for
that takes away the Rankness, then roast them half, and take them from the
fire, and put sweet herbs in the bellies of them, and stick the Breasts with
Cloves, then put them in a Pipkin with two or three Ladles full of Mutton
broth, very strong of the Meat, a blade of whole Mace, two or three little
Onions minced small; thicken it with a Toast of Household bread, and put in a
little Butter, then put in a little Verjuice, so take it up and serve it.

CLVIII. To boil Chickens or Pigeons with Goosberries or Grapes.
Boil them with Mutton Broth and white Wine, with a Blade of Mace and a little
Salt, and let their bellies be filled with sweet herbs, when they are tender
thicken the Broth with a piece of Manchet, and the yolks of two hard Eggs,
strained with some of the Broth, and put it into a deep Dish with some Verjuice
and Butter and Sugar, then having Gooseberries or Grapes tenderly scalded, put
them into it, then lay your Chickens or Pigeons into a Dish, and pour the
Sauce over them, and serve them in.

CLIX. A made Dish of Rabbits Livers.
Take six Livers and chop them fine with sweet herbs and the yolks of two hard
Eggs, season it with beaten Spice, and Salt, and put in some plumped Currants,
and a little melted Butter, so mix them very well together, and having some
Paste ready rouled thin, make it into little Pasties and fry them, strew Sugar
over them and serve them.

CLX. To make a Florentine with the Brawn of a Capon, or the Kidney of Veal.
Mince any of these with sweet Herbs, then put in parboiled Currants, and Dates
minced small, and a little Orange or Limon Pill which is Candied, shred small,
season it with beaten Spice and Sugar, then take the yolks of two hard Eggs and
bruise them with a little Cream, a piece of a short Cake grated, and Marrow cut
in short pieces mix all these together with the forenamed Meat, and put in a
little Salt and a little Rosewater, and bake it in a Dish in Puff-Paste, and
when you serve it in, strew Sugar over it.

CLVI. A Friday Pie with out Fish or Flesh.
Wash a good quantity of green Beets, and pluck out the middle string, then
chop them small; with two or three ripe Apples well relished, season it with
Pepper, Salt and Ginger, then add to it some Currants, and having your Pie
ready, and Butter in the bottom, put in these herbs, and with them a little
Sugar, then put Butter on the top, and close it and bake it, then cut it up,
and put in the Juice of a Limon and Sugar.

CLXII. To make Umble Pies.
Boil them very tender, and mince them very small with Beef Sewet and Marrow,
then season it with beaten Spice and Salt, Rosewater and Sugar and a little
Sack, so put it into your Paste with Currants and Dates.

CLXIII. To bake Chickens with Grapes.
Scald your Chickens and truss them, and season them with Pepper, Salt and
Nutmeg, and having your Pie ready, and Butter laid in the bottom, put in your
Chickens, and then more butter, and bake them with a thin Lid on your Pie, and
when it is baked, put in Grapes scalded tender, Verjuice, Nutmeg, Butter and
Sugar, and the Juice of an Orange so serve it in.

CLXIV. To make a good Quince. Pie.
Take your fairest Quinces and Coddle them till a straw will run through them,
then core them and pare them, then take their weight in fine Sugar, and stuff
them full of Sugar, then having your Pie ready, lay in your Quinces, and strew
the rest of your Sugar over them, and put in some whole Cloves and Cinnamon,
then close it, and bake it, you must let it stand in the Oven four or five
hours; serve it in cold, and strew on Sugar.

CLXV. To make Tarts of Pippins.
Having some Puff-Paste ready in a Dish or Pan, lay in some preserved Pippins
which have Orange Pill in them, and the Juice of Orange or Limon, so close them
and bake them a little.

CLXVI. To make a good pie of Beef.
Take the Buttock of a fat Ox, slice it thin, mince it small and beat it in a
Mortar to a Paste, then lard it very well with Lard, and season it with beaten
Spice, then make your Pie, and put it in with some Butter and Claret wine, and
so bake it well, and serve it in cold with Mustard and Sugar, and garnish it
with Bay Leaves.

CLXVII. To bake a Swan.
Scald it and take out the bones, and parboil it, then season it very well with
Pepper, Salt and Ginger, then lard it, and put it in a deep Coffin of Rye Paste
with store of Butter, close it and bake it very well, and when it is baked,
fill up the Vent-hole with melted Butter, and so keep it, serve in as you do
the Beef-Pie.

CLXVIII. To bake a Turkey or Capon.
Bone the Turkey, but not the Capon, parboil them, and stick Cloves on their
breasts, lard them, and season them well with Pepper and Salt, and put them in a
deep Coffin with good store of Butter, and close your Pie, and bake it, and
soak it very well, when it is baked, fill it up with melted butter, and when it
is quite cold, serve it in and eat it with Mustard and sugar: garnish it with
Bay Leaves.

CLXIX. To make Fritters.
Take the Curds of a Sack Posset, the yolks of six Eggs, and the Whites of two,
with a little fine Flower to make it into a thick Batter, put in also a
Pomewater cut in small pieces, some beaten Spice, warm Cream, and a spoonful of
Sack, and a little strong Ale; mingle all these very well, and beat them well,
then fry them in very hot Lard, and serve them in with beaten Spice and fine
Sugar.

CLXX. To bake Woodcocks, Black-birds Sparrows or Larks.
Truss and parboil them, then season them with Pepper and Salt, and put them
into a Pie with good store of butter, and so bake them, then fill them up with
Butter.

CLXXI. To bake a Goose.
Bone your Goose and parboil it, and season it with Pepper and Salt, and lay it
into a deep Coffin with good store of Butter top and bottom, then bake it very
well, and when it is baked, fill up the Pie at the Venthole with melted Butter,
and so serve it in with Mustard and Sugar and Bay Leaves.

CLXXII. To make Pancakes so crisp as you may set them upright.
Make a dozen or a score of them in a little Frying pan, no bigger than a
Sawcer, then boil them in Lard, and they will look as yellow as Gold, and eat
very well.

CLXXIII. To make Blanched Manchet.
Take six Eggs, half a Pint of sweet cream, and a penny Manchet grated, one
Nutmeg grated, two spoonfuls of Rosewater, and two Ounces of Sugar, work it
stiff like a Pudding, then fry it in a very little drying pan, that it may be
thick.

Fry it brown, and turn it upon a Pie-Plate; cut it in quarters and strew sugar
on it, and serve it in.

CLXXIV. To make a fierced Pudding.
Mince a Leg of Mutton with sweet herbs, and some Sewet, make it very fine,
then put in Grated bread, minced Dates, Currants, Raisins of the Sun stoned, a
little preseaved Orange or Limon, and a few Coriander seeds bruised, Nutmeg,
Ginger, and Pepper, mingle all together with Cream and raw Eggs wrought
together like a Paste, and bake it, and put for sauce the yolk of an Egg,
Rosewater, Sugar and Cinnamon, with a little Butter heat together, when you
serve it in, stick it with Almonds and Rosemary; you may boil it also if you
please, or roast some of it in a Lambs Cawl.

CLXXV. To make a Fricasie of Eggs.
Beat twelve Eggs with Cream, Sugar, beaten spice and rosewater, then take thin
slices of Pomewater Apple, and fry them well with sweet butter; when they are
enough, take them up, and cleanse your pan, then put in more butter and make it
hot, and put in half your Eggs and fry them; then when the one side is fried
lay your Apples all over the side which is not fried, then pour in the rest of
your Eggs, and then turn it and fry the other side, then serve it in with the
Juice of an Orange and Butter and Sugar.

CLXXVI. To make a Cambridge-Pudding.
Take grated Bread searced through a Cullender, then mix it with fine Flower,
minced Dates, Currants, beaten Spice, Sewet shred small, a little salt, sugar
and rosewater, warm Cream and Eggs, with half their Whites; mould all these
together with a little Yeast, and make it up into a Loaf, but when you have
made it in two parts, ready to clap together, make a deep hole in the one, and
put in butter, then clap on the other, and close it well together, then butter
a Cloth and tie it up hard, and put it into water which boiles apace, then
serve it in with Sack, Butter and Sugar.

You may bake it if you please in a baking-pan.

CLXXVII. To make a Pudding of Goose Blood.
Save the blood of a Goose, and strain it, then put in fine Oatmeal steeped in
warm milk, Nutmeg, Pepper, sweet herbs, Sugar, Salt, Sewet minced fine,
Rosewater, Limon Pill, Coriander seeds, then put in some Eggs, and beat all
these together very well, then boil them how you do like, either in a buttered
Cloth or in Skins, or roast it within the neck of the Goose.

CLXXVIII. To make Liver Puddings.
Take a Hogs Liver boiled and cold, grate it like Bread, then take new Milk and
the Fat of a Hog minced fine, put it to the Bread and the Liver, and divide it
into two parts, then dry herbs or other if you can, minced fine, and put the
Herbs into one part with beaten Spice, Anniseeds, Rosewater, Cream and Eggs,
Sugar and Salt, so fill the Skins, and boil them.

To the other part put preserved Barberries, sliced Dates, Currants, beaten
Spice, Salt, Sugar, Rosewater, Cream and Eggs, so mix them well together, and
fill the Skins and boil them.

CLXXIX. To make a Chiveridge Pudding.
Take the fattest Guts of your Hog clean scoured, then stuff them with beaten
spice and sliced Dates, sweet herbs, a little salt, rosewater, sugar, and two
or three Eggs to make it slide; so fill them, tie them up like Puddings and
boil them; when they are enough serve them.

CLXXX. To make Rice Puddings in Skins.
Take two quarts of Milk and put therein as it is yet cold, two good handfuls
of Rice clean picked and washed, set it over a slow fire and stir it often, but
gently; when you perceive it to swell, let it boil apace till it be tender and
very thick, then take it from the fire, and when it is cold, put in six Eggs
well beaten, some Rosewater and Sugar, beaten spice and a little salt,
preserved Barberries and Dates minced small, some Marrow and Citron Pill;
mingle them well together and fill your Skins, and boil them.

CLXXXI. To make a stewed Pudding.
Take the yolks of three Eggs and one White, six spoonfuls of sweet Cream, a
little beaten spice, and a quarter of a pound of Sewet minced fine, a quarter
of a pound of Currants, and a little grated bread, rosewater, sugar and salt;
mingle them well together, and wrap them up in little pieces of the Cawl of
Veal, and fasten them with a little stick, and tie each end with a stick, you
may put four in one Dish, then take half a pint of strong Mutton Broth, and six
spoonfuls of Vinegar, three or four blades of large Mace, and one Ounce of
Sugar, make this to boil over a Chafingdish of Coals, then put in your
Puddings, and when they boil, cover them with another Dish, but turn them
sometimes, and when you see that they are enough, take your Puddings and lay
them in a warm Dish upon Sippets, then add to their Broth some Sack, Sugar,
and Butter, and pour over them, garnish your Dish with Limon and Barberries.

CLXXXII. To make a Suffex Pudding.
Take a little cold Cream, Butter and Flower, with some beaten Spice, Eggs, and
a little Salt, make them into a stiff Paste, then make it up in a round Ball,
and as you mold it, put in a great piece of Butter in the middle, and so tie it
hard up in a buttered Cloth, and put it into boiling water, and let it boil
apace till it be enough, then serve it in, and garnish your dish with
Barberries; when it is at the Table cut it open at the top, and there will be
as it were a Pound of Butter, then put Rosewater and Sugar into it, and so eat
it.

In some of this like Paste you may wrap great Apples, being pared whole, in
one piece of thin Paste, and so close it round the Apple, and throw them into
boiling water, and let them boil till they are enough, you may also put some
green Goosberries into some, and when either of these are boiled, cut them open
and put in Rosewater, Butter and Sugar.

CLXXXIII. To make French Puffs.
Take Spinach, Parsley and Endive, with a little Winter-savory, and wash them,
and mince them very fine, season them with Notmeg, Ginger and Sugar, wet them
with Eggs, and put in a little Salt, then cut a Limon in thin round slices, and
upon every slice of Limon lay one spoonful of it.

Then fry them, and serve them in upon some Sippets, and pour over them Sack,
Sugar and Butter.

CLXXXIV. To make Apple Puffs.
Take a Pomewater, or any other Apple that is not hard or harsh in taste, mince
it with a few Raisins of the Sun stoned, then wet them with Eggs, and beat them
together with the back of a Spoon, season them with Nutmeg, Rosewater, Sugar
and Ginger, drop them into a frying pan with a Spoon into hot Butter, and fry
them, then serve them in with the juice of an Orange and a little Sugar and
Butter.

CLXXXV. To make Kickshawes, to Bake or Fry in what shape you please.
Take some Puff-paste and roll it thin, if you have Moulds work it upon them
with Preserved Pippins, and so close them, and fry or bake them, but when you
have closed them you must dip them in the yolks of Eggs, and that will keep all
in, fill some with Goosberries, Rasberries, Curd, Marrow, Sweet-breads, Lambs
Stones, Kidney of Veal, or any other thing what you like best, either of them
being seasoned before you put them in according to your mind, and when they are
baked or fried, strew Sugar on them, and serve them in.

CLXXXVI. To make an Italian Pudding.
Take a penny white loaf and pare off the crust, then cut it like dice, then
take some Beef Sewet shred small, and half a pound of Raisins of the Sun
stoned, with as many Currants, mingle them together and season them with beaten
Spice and a little Salt, wet them with four Eggs, and stir them gently for fear
of breaking the Bread, then put it in a dish with a little Cream and Rosewater
and Sugar, then put in some Marrow and Dates, and so butter a dish and bake it,
then strew on Sugar and serve it.

CLXXXVII. To hash Calves Tongues.
Boil them tender and pill them, then lard them with Limon Pill, and lard them
also with fat Bacon, then lay them to the Fire and half Roast them, then put
them in a Pipkin with Claret Wine, whole Spice and sliced Limon, and a few
Caraway Seeds, a little Rosemary and a little Salt, boil all together and serve
them in upon Toasts. Thus you may do with Sheeps Tongues also.

CLXXXVIII. To boil a Capon.
Take strong Mutton Broth, and truss a Capon, and boil him in it with some
Marrow and a little Salt in a Pipkin, when it is tender, then put in a pint of
White Wind, half a pound of Sugar, and four ounces of Dates stoned and sliced,
Potatoe Roots boiled and blanched, large Mace and Nutmeg sliced, boil all these
together with a quarter of a pint of Verjuyce, then dish the Capon, and add to
the Broth the yolks of six Eggs beaten with Sack, and so serve it; garnish your
dish with several sorts of candied Pills and preserved Barberries, and sliced
Limon, with Sugar upon every slice.

CLXXXIX. To boil a Capon with Rice.
Truss your Capon and Boil him in water and Salt, then take a quarter of a
pound of Rice, first boiled in Milk, and put in with some whole Spice and a
little Salt, when it is almost enough put in a little Rosewater, and half a
pound of Almonds blanched and beaten, strain them in, and put in some Cream and
Sugar, then when your Capon is enough, lay it in a dish, and pour the Broth
thereon; garnish your dish as you please, and serve it in.

CXC. To Boil a Capon with Pippins.
Parboil your Capon after it is trussed, then put it into a Pipkin with Mutton
Broth and Marrow, and a little Salt, with a quart of White Wind, a little
Nutmeg and Dates stoned and sliced, then put in a quarter of a pound of fine
Sugar, then take some Pippins stewed with Sugar, Spice and a little water, and
put them in, then lay your Capon into a Dish, and lay some Naples Biskets for
Sippets, then bruise the yolks of eight hard Eggs and put into your Broth, with
a little Sack, and pour it over your Capon; Garnish your Dish and serve it in.

CXC. To boil Chickens with Lettuce the very best way.
Parboil your Chickens and cut them in Quarters, and put them into a Pipkin
with some Mutton Broth, and two or three sweet Breads of Veal, and some Marrow
and some Cloves, and a little Salt, and a little Limon Pill; then take good
store of hard Lettuce, cut them in halves and wash them, and put them in; then
put in Butter and Sack and white Wine, with a little Mace and Nutmeg, and
sliced Dates, let all these stew upon the fire, and when they be enough, serve
them in with Toasts of white Bread for Sippets; Garnish the Dish with Limon and
Barberries; and what else you please; thus you may do Pigeons.

CXCI. To boil a Rabbet with Grapes or with Gooseberries.
Truss your Rabbet whole, and boil it-in some Mutton Broth till it be tender;

Then take a Pint of white Wine, and a good handful of Spinach chopped, the
yolks of hard Eggs cut in quarters, put these to the Rabbet with some large
Mace, a Faggot of sweet herbs and a little salt and some Butter, let them boil
together a while, then take your Rabbet and lay it in a Dish and some Sippets,
then lay over it some Grapes or Gooseberries, scalded with Sugar, and pour
your Broth over it.

CXCII. To boil a Rabbet with Claret Wine.
Boil a Rabbet as before, then slice Onions and a Carrot root, a few Currants
and a Faggot of sweet herbs, and a little salt, minced Parsley, Barberries
picked, large Mace, Nutmeg and Ginger, put all these into a Pipkin with the
Rabbet, half a Pound of Butter, and a Pint of Claret Wine, and let them boil
together till it be enough, then serve it upon Sippets.

CXCIII. To boil a wild Duck.
Truss and parboil it, then half roast it, then carve it, and save the Gravie,
then take Onions and Parsley sliced, Ginger and Pepper, put the Gravie into a
Pipkin, with Currants, Mace, Barberries, and a quart of Claret Wine, and a
little Salt, put your Duck with all the forenamed things into it, and let them
boil till it be enough, then put in Butter and Sugar, and serve it in upon
Sippets.

CXCIV. To boil a tame Duck.
Take your Duck and truss it, and boil it with water and salt, or rather Mutton
broth, when it has boiled a while, put in some whole Spice, and when it it
boiled enough, take some white Wine and Butter, and good store of Onions boiled
tender in several waters, with a little of the Liquor wherein the Duck has
boiled, and a little salt, put your Duck into a Dish, and heat these things
together and pour over it, and serve it; garnish the Dish with boiled Onions
and Barberries.

CXCV. To boil Pigeons with Capers and Samphire.
Truss your Pigeons, and put them into a Pipkin with some Mutton Broth and
white Wine, a bundle of sweet herbs, when they are boiled, lay them into a
Dish, then take some of the Broth with some Capers and Limon sliced, and some
Butter, heat these together and pour over them, then fry thin slices of Bacon,
and lay upon them, and some Samphire washed from the Salt, and some slices of
Limon; Garnish your Dish with the same and serve it in.

CXCVI. To boil Sausages.
Take two pounds of Sausages, and boil them with a quart of Claret Wine and a
bundle of sweet herbs, and whole Cloves and Mace, then put in a little Butter,
when they are enough, serve them in with this Liquor and some Mustard in
Sawcers.

CXCVII. To boil Goose Giblets.
Boil them with water and salt, and a bundle of sweet herbs, Onions and whole
spice, when they are enough, put in Verjuice and Butter, and some Currants
plumped, and serve them upon Sippets.

Thus you may dress Swans Giblets.

CXCVIII. To boil Giblets with Roots and good Herbs.
Boil them in a quart of Claret, Ginger and Cloves, and a Faggot of sweet
herbs, Turnips and Carots sliced, with good store of Spinach, and a little
salt; when they are enough, serve them upon Sippets.

And add to the Broth some Verjuice and the yolks of Eggs; Garnish your Dish
with Parsley and pickled Barberries.

CXCIX, To smoor a Neck of Mutton.
Cut your Steaks, and put them into a Dish with some Butter, then take a Faggot
of sweet herbs and some gross Pepper and a little salt, and put to them; cover
your Dish, and let them stew till they are enough, turning them sometimes, then
put in a little Claret Wine and Anchovies, and serve them upon Sippets.

CC. To smoor Veal.
Cut thin Slices of Veal and hack them over with the back of a Knife, then lard
them with Lard, and fry them with strong Beer or Ale till they be enough, then
stew them in Claret wine with some whole Spice and Butter and a little salt:

Garnish your Dish with Sausages fried, and with Barberries, so serve them in.

CCI. To smoor steaks of Mutton another way.
Cut part of a Leg of Mutton into steaks, and fry it in white Wine and a little
Salt, a bundle of herbs, and a little Limon Pill, then put it into a Pipkin
with some sliced Limon, without the Rind, and some of the Liquor it it was
fried in, and Butter and a liitle Parslie, boil all together till you see it be
enough, then serve it in, and garnish your Dish with Limon and Barberries.

CCII. To smoor Chickens.
Cut them in Ioints and fry them with sweet Butter, then take white wine,
Parsley and Onions chopp'd small, whole Mace and a little gross Pepper, a
little Sugar, Verjuice and Butter, let these and your fried Chicken boil
together, then fry the Leaves of Clary with Eggs, put a little Salt to your
Chickens, and when they are enough, serve them in with this fried Clary, and
garnish your Dish with Barberries.

CCIII. To fry Muscles, or Oisters, or Cockles to serve in with Meat, or by
themselves.
Take any of these and parboil them in their own Liquor, then dry them, flower
them, and fry them, then put them into a Pipkin with Claret wine, whole spice
and Anchovies, and a little Butter, so let them stew together, and serve them
in either with a Duck, or by themselves, as you like best.

CCIV. To dress Calves feet.
Take Calves feet tenderly boiled, and slit them in the middle, then put them
in a Dish with sweet Butter, Parsley and Onions chopped, a little Thyme, large
Mace, Pepper with a little wine vinegar, and a little salt, let all these stew
together till they are enough, then lay your Calves feet in a Dish, and pour
the Sauce over them, then strew some raw Parsley and hard Eggs chopped together
over them with slices of Limon and Barberries.

CCV. To hash Neats tongues.
Boil them and blanch them, and slice them thin, then take Raisins of the Sun,
large Mace, Dates sliced thin, a few blanched Almonds and Claret wine with a
little salt; boil all these together with some sweet butter, verjuice and
sugar; when they are enough, serve them in and thicken the sauce with yolks of
Eggs; garnish your Dish with Barberries.

CCVI. Another way to hash Neats Tongues.
Boil Neats Tongues very tender, peel them and slice them thin, then take
strong meat broth, blanched Chessenuts, a Faggot of sweet herbs, large Mace,
and Endive, a little Pepper and whole Cloves and a little salt; boil all these
together with some butter till they be enough; garnish your Dish as before.

CCVII. To boil Chickens in white-Broth.
Take three Chickens and truss them, then take two or three blades of Mace, as
many quartered Dates, four or five Lumps of Marrow, a little salt and a little
sugar, the yolks of three hard Eggs, and a quarter of a Pint of Sack, first
boil your Chickens in Mutton broth, and then add these things to them, and let
them boil till they be enough, then lay your Chickens in a Dish, and strain
some Almonds blanched and beaten into it, serve it upon Sippets of French
Bread; garnish your Dish with hard Eggs and Limons.

CCVIII. To boil Partridges.
Put two or three Partridges into a Pipkin with as much water as will cover
them, then put in three or four Blades of Mace, one Nutmeg quartered, five or
six Cloves, a piece of sweet Butter, two or three Toasts of Manchet toasted
brown, soke them in Sack or Muskadine, and break them, and put them into the
Pipkin with the rest, and a little salt, when they are enough, lay them in a
Dish, and pour this Broth over them, then garnish your Dish with hard Eggs and
sliced Limon, and serve it in.

CCIX. To boil a Leg of Mutton.
Take a large Leg of Mutton and stuff it well with Mutton Sewet, Salt and
Nutmeg, boil it in water and salt. but not too much, then put some of that
Broth into another Pot, with three or four Blades of Mace, some Currants and
Salt, boil them till half be consumed, then put in some sweet Butter, and some
Capers and a Limon cut like Dice with the Rind on, a little Sack, and the yolks
of two hard Eggs minced; then lay your Mutton into a Dish upon Sippeas, and
pour this Sauce over it; scrape Sugar on the sides of your Dish, and lay on
slices of Limon and Barberries.

CCX. To stew Trouts.
Put two Trouts into a fair Dish with some white Wine, sweet butter, and a
little whole Mace, a little Parsley, Thyme and Savory minced, then put in an
Anchovy and the yolks of hard Eggs; when your Fish is enough, serve it on
Sippets, and pour this over it, and garnish your Dish with Limon and
Barberries, and serve them in; you may add Capers to it if you please, and you
may do other Fish in this manner.

CCXI. To boil Eels in Broth to serve with them.
Flay and wash your Eels and cut them in pieces about a handful long, then put
them into a Pot with so much Water as will cover them, a little Pepper and
Mace, and sliced Onions, a little grated bread, and a little Yeast, a good
piece of sweet butter, some Parsley, Winter Savoury and Thyme shred small; let
them boil softly half an hour, and put in some salt, with some Currants; when it
is enough, put in verjuice and more butter, and so serve it; Garnish your Dish
with Parsley, Limon and Barberries, put Sippets in your Dish.

CCXII. To boil a Pike with Oisters.
Take a fair Pike and gut it and wash it, and truss it round with the Tail in
the mouth, then take white Wine, water and salt, with a bundle of sweet herbs,
and whole Spice, a little Horseradish; when it boils, tie up your Pike in a
Cloth, and put it in, and let it boil till it swims, for then it is enough;
then take the Rivet of the Pike, and a Pint of great Oisters with their Liquor,
and some vinegar, large Mace, gross Pepper, then lay your Pike in a Dish with
Sippets, and then heat these last named things with some Butter and Anchovies,
and pour over it; garnish your Dish as you please.

CCXIII. To make a grand Sallad.
Take a fair broad brimm'd Dish and in the middle of it lay some pickled Limon
Pill, then lay round about it each sort by themselves, Olives, Capers, Broom
buds, Ash Keys, Purslane pickled, and French Beans pickled, and little
Cucumbers pickled, and Barberries pickled, and Clove Gilliflowers, Cowslips,
Currants, Figs, blanched Almonds and Raisins, Slices of Limon with Sugar on
them, Dates stoned and sliced.

Garnish your Dish Brims with Candied Orange, Limon and Citron Pill, and some
Candied Eringo roots.

CCXIV. To roast a Pig with a Pudding in his Belly.
Take a fat Pig and truss his head backward looking over his back, then make
such Pudding as you like best, and fill his belly with it, your Pudding must be
stiff, then sew it up, and roast your Pig, when it is almost enough, wring upon
it the Juice of a Limon, anud when you are ready to take it up, wash it over
with yolks of Eggs, and before they can dry, dredge it with grated Bread mixed
with a little Nutmeg and Ginger, let your Sauce be Vinegar, Butter and Sugar,
and the yolks of hard Eggs minced.

CCXV. To roast a Leg of Mutton with Oisters.
Take a large Leg of Mutton and stuff it well with Mutton Sewet, with Pepper,
Nutmeg, Salt and Mace, then roast it and stick it with Cloves, when it is half
roasted, cut off some of the under side of the fleshie end, in little thin Bits,
then take a Pint of Oisters and the Liquor of them, a little Mace, sweet Butter
and Salt, put all these with the Bits of Mutton into a Pipkin till half be
consumed, then Dish your Mutton and pour this Sauce over it, strew Salt about
the Dish side, and serve it in.

CCXVI. To make a Steak-Pie.
Cut a Neck of Mutton in steaks, then season it with Pepper and Salt, lay your
Paste into your Baking Pan and lay Butter in the bottom, then lay in your
steaks, and a little lagre Mace, and cover it with Butter, so close it, and
bake it; and against it is baked, have in readiness good store of boiled
Parslie minced fine, and drained from the water, some white Wine and some
Vinegar, sweet Butter and Sugar, cut open your Pie, and put in this Sauce, and
shake it well, and serve it to the Table; it is not so good cold as hot.

CCXVII. To roast a Haunch or a Shoulder of Venison, or a Chine of Mutton.
Take either of these, and lard it with Lard, and stick it thick with Rosemary,
then roast it with a quick fire, but do not lay it too near; paste it with sweet
butter: then take half a Pint of Claret wine, a little beaten Cinnamon and
Ginger, and as much sugar as will sweeten it, five or six whole Cloves, a
little grated bread, and when it is boiled enough, put in a little sweet
butter, a little Vinegar, and a very little Salt, when your meat is roasted,
serve it in with sauce, and strew salt about your Dish,

CCXVIII. To roste a Capon with Oisters and Chestnuts.
Take some boiled Chestnuts, and take off their shells, and take as many
parboiled Oisters, then spit your Capon, and put these into the belly of it,
with some sweet Butter, roast it and bast it with sweet Butter, save the Gravie,
and some of the Chestnuts, and some of the Oisters, then add to them half a
Pint of Claret Wine, and a piece of sweet Butter, and a little Pepper, and a
little Salt, stew these together till the Capon be ready, then serve them in
with it; Garnish your Dish as you please.

CCXIX. To roast a Shoulder or Fillet of Veal with farcing herbs.
Wash your meat and parboil it a little, then take Parsley, Winter-Savoury, and
Thyme, of each a little minced small, put to them the yolks of three or four
hard eggs minced, Nutmeg, Pepper and Currants and Salt; add also some Sewet
minced small, work all these with the yolk of a raw egg, and stuff your Meat
with it, but save some, and set it under the meat while it does roast, when your
meat is almost roasted enough, put to these in the Dish, a quarter of a Pint of
white Wine Vinegar, and some Sugar, when your meat is ready, serve it in with
this Sauce, and strew on Salt.

CCXX. To make boiled Sallads.
Boil some Carots very tender, and scrape them to pieces like the Pulp of an
Apple, season them with Cinnamon and Ginger and Sugar, put in Currants, a little
Vinegar, and a piece of sweet Butter, stew these in a Dish, and when they begin
to dry put in more Butter and a little Salt, so serve them to the Table, thus
you may do Lettuce or Spinach, or Beets.

CCXXI. To boil a Shoulder of Veal.
Take a Shoulder of Veal and half boil it in Water and Salt, then slice off the
most part of it, and save the Gravie; then take that sliced meat, and put it in
a Pot with some of the Broth that boiled it, a little grated Bread, Oister
Liquor, Vinegar, Bacon scalded and sliced thin, a Pound of Sausages out of
their skins, and rouled in the yolks of Eggs, large Mace and Nutmeg, let these
stew about one hour, then put in one Pint of Oisters, some sweet herbs, and a
little Salt, stew them together, then take the bone of Veal and broil it and
Dish it, then add to your Liquor a little Butter, and some minced Limon with
the Rind, a Shelot or two sliced, and pour it over, then lay on it some fried
Oisters; Garnish your Dish with Barberries and sliced Limon, and serve it in.

CCXXII. To boil a Neck of Mutton.
Boil it in water and salt, then make sauce for it with Samphire and a little
of the Broth, Verjuice, large Mace, Pepper and Onion, the yolks of hard Eggs
minced, some sweet herbs and a little salt, let these boil together half an
hour or more:

Then bear it up with Butter and Limon; then dish your Meat upon Sippets, and
pour it on; garnish your Dish with the hard Whites of Eggs and Parsley minced
together, with sliced Limon, so serve it; thus you may dress a Leg or a Breast
of Mutton if you please.

CCXXIII. To stem a Loin of Mutton.
Cut your meat in Steaks, and put it into so much water as will cover it, when
it is scummed, put to three or four Onions sliced, with some Turnips, whole
Cloves, and sliced Ginger, when it is half stewed, put in sliced Bacon and some
sweet herbs minced small, some Vinegar and Salt, when it is ready, put in some
Capers, then Dish your Meat upon Sippets and serve it in; and garnish your Dish
with Barberries and Limon.

CCXXIV. To boil a Haunch of Venison.
Boil it in water and salt, with some Coleflowers and some whole spice; then
take some of the Broth, a little Mace, and a Cows Udder boiled tender and
sliced thin, a little Horseradish root searced, and a few sweet herbs, boil
all these together, and put in a little Salt, when your Venison is ready, Dish
it, and lay your Cows Udder and the Coleflowers over it, then beat up your
Sauce, and pour over it; then garnish your Dish with Limon and Parsley and
Barberries, and so serve it, this Sauce is also good with a powdered Goose
boiled, but first Larded.

CCXXV. To make white Broth with Meat or without.
Take a little Mutton broth, and as much of Sack, and boil it with whole Spice,
sweet herbs, Dates sliced, Currants and a little Salt, when it is enough, or
very near, strain in some blanched Almonds, then thicken it with the yolks of
Eggs beaten, and sweeten it with sugar, and so serve it in with thin slices of
white Bread:

Garnish with stewed Prunes, and some plumped Raisins.

This may be: served in also with any meat proper for to be served with white
Broth.

CCXXVI. To make good stewed Broth.
Take a hinder Leg of Beef and a pair of Marrow bones, boil them in a great Pot
with water and a little Salt, when it boiles, and is skimmed, put in some whole
Spice, and some Raisins and Currants, then put in some Manchet sliced thin, and
soaked in some of the Broth, when it is almost enough, put in some stewed
Prunes, then Dish your Meat, and put into your Broth a little Saffron or red
Saunders, some white Wine and Sugar, so pour it over your Meat, and serve it
in; Garnish your Dish with Prunes, Raisins and fine Sugar.

CCXXVII. To stew Artichokes.
Take the Bottoms of Artichokes tenderly boiled, and cut them in Quarters, stew
them with white Wine, whole Spice and Marrow, with a little Salt:

When they are enough, put in Sack and Sugar, and green Plumbs preserved, so
serve them; garnish the Dish with Preserves.

CCXXVIII. To Stew Pippins.
Take a pound of Pippins, pare them and core them, and cut them in quarters.

Then take a pint of water and a pound of fine Sugar, and make a Syrup, and
scum it, then put in your Pippins and boil them up quick, and put in a little
Orange or Limon Pill very thin; when they are very clear, and their Syrup
almost wasted, put in the juice of Orange and Limon, and some Butter; so serve
them in upon Sippets, and strew fine Sugar about the dish sides.

CCXXIX. To make a Sallad with fresh Salmon.
Your Salmon being boiled and souced, mince some of it small with Apples and
Onyons, put thereto Oil, Vinegar, and Pepper; so serve it to the Table: Garnish
your dish with Limon and Capers.

CCXXX. To roast a Shoulder of Mutton with Oisters.
Take a large Shoulder of Mutton, and take sweet herbs chopped small, and mixed
with beaten Eggs and a little Salt, take some great Oisters, and being dried
from their Liquor, dip them in these Eggs, and fry them a little, then stuff
your meat well with them, then save some of them for sauce, and roast your
mutton, and baste it with Claret Wine, Butter and Salt, save the Gravie, and
put it with the Oisters into a Dish to stew with some Anchovies, and Claret
Wine: when your meat is enough, rub the Dish with a Shelot, and lay your meat
in it; and then put some Capers into your sauce, and pour over it, so serve it
in; Garnish your Dish with Olives, Capers and Samphire.

CCXXXI. To roast a Calves He ad with Oisters.
Split your Calves Head as to boil, and let it lie in water a while, then wash
it well, and cut out the Tongue, then boil your Head a little, also the Tongue
and Brains, then mince the Brains and Tongue with a little Sage, Oisters and
Marrow put amongst it when it is minced, three or four Eggs well beaten,
Ginger, Pepper, Nutmeg, Grated Bread and Salt, and a little Sack, make it
pretty thick, then take the Head and fill it with this, and bind it close, and
spit it and roast it, and save the Gravie which comes from it in a Dish, bast it
well with Butter, put to this Gravie some Oisters, and some sweet Herbs minced
fine, a little white Wine, and a sliced Nutmeg; when the Head is roasted, set
the Dish of Sauce upon hot Coals with some Butter and a little salt, and the
Juice of an Orange, beat it up thick and Dish your Head, and serve it in with
this Sauce; garnish the Dish with stewed Oisters and Barberries.

CCXXXII. Sauce sor Woodcocks or Snites.
When you spit your Fowl, put in an Onion in the Belly, when it is roasted, take
the Gravie of it, and some Claret Wine, and an Anchovie with a little Pepper
and Salt, so serve them.

CCXXXIII. To make Sauce for Partridges.
Take grated Bread, water and salt, and a whole Onion boiled together, when it
is well boiled, take out the Onion, and put in minced Limon, and a piece of
Butter, and serve them in with it.

CCXXXIV. To roast Larks with Bacon.
When your Larks are pulled and drawn, wash them and spit them with a thin
slice of Bacon, and a Sage Leaf between the Legs of every one, make your Sauce
with the Juice of Oranges and a little Claret Wine, and some Butter, warm them
together, and serve them up with it.

CCXXXV. To make Sauce for Quails.
Take some Vine Leaves dried before the Fire in a Dish and mince them, then put
some Claret Wine and a little Pepper and Salt to it, and a piece of Butter, and
serve them with it.

This Sauce is also for roasted Pigeons.

CCXXXVI. To roast a whole Pig without the Skin, with a Pudding in his Belly.
Make ready the Pig for the Spit, then spit it and lay it down to the fire, and
when you can take off the Skin, take it from the fire and flay it, then put
such a Pudding as you love into the belly of it, then sew it up, and stick it
with Thyme and Limon Pill, and lay it down again, and roast it and bast it with
Butter, and set a Dish under it to catch the Gravie, into which put a little
sliced Nutmeg, and a little Vinegar, and a little L'mon and some Butter; heat
them together: when your Pig is enough, bread it, but first froth it up with
Butter and a little Salt, then serve it in with this Sauce to the Table with
the Head on.

CCXXXVII. To fry Artichokes.
Take the Bottoms of Artichokes tenderly boiled, and dip them in beaten Eggs
and a little salt, and fry them with a little Mace shred among the Eggs; then
take Verjuice, Butter and Sugar, and the Juice of an Orange, Dish your
Artichokes, and lay on Marrow fried in Eggs to keep it whole, then lay your
Sauce, or rather pour it on, and serve them in.

CCXXXVIII. To make Toasts of Veal.
Take a roasted Kidney of Veal, cold and minced small, put to it grated Bread,
Nutmeg, Currants, Sugar and Salt, with some Almonds blanched and beaten with
Rosewater, mingle all these together with beaten Eggs and a little Cream, then
cut thin slices of white Bread, and lay this Compound between two of them, and
so fry them, and strew Sugar on them, and serve them in.

CCXXXIX. To make good Pancakes.
Take twenty Eggs with half the Whites, and beat them well and mix them with
fine flower and beaten Spice, a little Salt, Sack, Ale, and a little Yeast, do
not make your Batter too thin, then beat it well, and let it stand a little
while to rise, then fry them with sweet lard or with Butter, and serve them in
with the Juice of Orange and Sugar.

CCXL. To fry Veal.
Cut part of a Leg of Veal into thin slices, and hack them with the back of a
Knife, then season them with beaten Spice and Salt, and lard them well with
Hogs Lard, then chop some sweet herbs, and beat some Eggs and mix together and
dip them therein, and fry them in Butter, then stew them with a little white
Wine and some Anchovies a little while, then put in some Butter, and shake them
well, and serve them in with sliced Limon over them.

CCXLI. To make good Paste.
Take to a peck of fine Flower three pound of Butter, and three Eggs, and a
little cold Cream, and work it well together, but do not break your Butter too
small, and it will be very fine Crust, either to bake meat in, or fruit, or
what else you please.

It is also a very fine Dumplin, if you make it into good big Rolls, and boil
them and Butter them, or roll some of it out thin, and put a great Apple
therein, and boil and Butter them with Rosewater, Butter and Sugar.

CCXLII. To make good Paste to raise.
Take to a Peck of Flower two pounds of Butter, and a little tried Sewet, let
them boil with a little water or Milk, then put two Eggs into your flower, and
mix them well together, then make a hole in the middle of your Flower, and put
in the top of your boiling Liquor, and so much of the rest as will make it into
a stiff Paste, then lay it into a warm Cloth to rise.

CCXLIII. Paste for cold Baked meats.
Take to every Peck of Flower one Pound of Butter or a little more, with hot
Liquor as the other, and put a little dissolved Isinglass in it, because such
things require strength; you may not forget Salt in all your Pastes, and work
these Pastes made with hot Liquor much more than the other.

CCXLIV. To make a Veal Pie in Summer.
Take thin slices of a Fillet of Veal, then having your Pie ready and Butter in
it, lay in your Veal seasoned with a little Nutmeg and Salt, so cover it with
Butter, and close it and bake it, then against it be drawn, scald some
Gooseberries or Grapes in Sugar and water as to preserve, and when you open
your Pie, put in pieces of Marrow boiled in white Wine with a little blade of
Mace:

Then put these Grapes or Gooseberries over all, or else some hard Lettnce or
Spinach boiled and buttered.

CCXLV. To make a Pie of Shrimps, or of Prawns.
Pick them clean from their Shells, and have in readiness your Pie with Butter
in the bottom, then lay in your Fish with some large Mace and Nutmeg, and then
Butter again, and so bake it:

Then cut it up and put in some white wine and an Anchovy or two, and some
Butter, and so serve them in hot; thus you may do with Lobsters or Crabs, or
with Crafish.

CCXLVI. To make a Pie of Larks or of Sparrows.
Pluck your Birds and draw them, then fill the Bellies of them with this
mixture following; grated bread, sweet herbs minced small, Beef Sewet or marrow
minced, Almonds blanched and beaten with Rosewater, a little Cream, beaten
Spice, and a little Salt, some Eggs and some Currants, mix these together, and
do as I have said, then having your Pie ready raised or laid in your
Baking-pan, put in Butter, and then fill it with Birds:

Then put in Nutmeg Pepper and Salt, and put in the yolks of hard Eggs, and
some sweet herbs minced, then lay in pieces of Marrow, and cover it with
Butter, and so close it and bake it; then cut it open and wring in the Juice of
an Orange and some Butter, and serve it.

CCXLVII. To make a Lettuce Pie.
Take your Cabbage Lettuce and cut them in halves, wash them and boil them in
water and salt very green, then drain them from the water, so having your Pie
in readiness, put in Butter; then put in your boiled Lettuce, with some marrow,
Raisins of the Sun stoned, Dates stoned and sliced thin, with some large Mace,
and Nutmeg sliced, then put in more Butter, close it and bake it; then cut it
open, and put in Verjuice, Butter and Sugar, and so serve it.

To stew a Neck of Mutton.
Put your Neck of mutton cut in Steaks into so much Wine and Water as will
cover it, with some whole Spice, let it stew till it be enough, then put in two
Anchovies, and a handful of Capers, with a piece of sweet Butter, shake it very
well, and serve it upon Sippets.

CCXLVIII. To make a Pie of a roasted Kidney of Veal.
Mince the Kidney with the Fat, and put to it some sweet herbs minced very
small, a quarter of a pound of Dates stoned, and sliced thin and minced, season
it with beaten Spice, Sugar-and Salt, put in half a pound of Currants, and some
grated bread, mingle all these together very well with Verjuice and Eggs, and
make them into Balls, so put some Butter into your Pie, and then these Balls,
then more Butter, so close it and bake it;

Then cut it open, and put in Verjuice, Butter and Sugar made green with the
Juice of some Spinach, add to it the yolks of Eggs, and heat them together,
and pour it in.

CCXLIX. To make a Potato Pie.
Having your Pie ready, lay in Butter, and then your Potatoes boiled very
tender, then some whole Spice and Marrow, Dates, and the yolks of hard Eggs,
blanched Almonds, and Pistacho Nuts, the Candied Pills of Citron, Orange and
Limon, put in more Butter, close it and bake it, then cut it open, and put in
Wine, Sugar, the yolks of Eggs and Butter.

CCL. To make a Pig Pie.
Spit a whole Pig and roast it till it will flay, then take it off the Spit, and
take off the Skin, and Lard it with Hogs Lard; season it with Pepper, Salt,
Nutmeg and Sage, then lay it into your Pie upon some Butter, then lay on some
large Mace, and some more Butter, and close it and bake it: It is either good
hot or cold.

CCLI. To make a Carp Pie.
Take a large Carp and scale him, gut and wash him clean, and dry him well,
then lay Butter into your Pie, and fill your Carps belly with this Pudding;
grated bread, sweet herbs, and a little Bacon minced small, the yolks of hard
Eggs and an Anchovie minced, also a little Marrow, Nutmeg, and then put in a
little Salt, but a very little, and make some of this up in Balls, then Lard
the Carp, sew up his Belly, and lay him into your Pie, then lay in the Balls of
Pudding, with some Oisters, Shrimps and Capers, and the yolks of hard Eggs and
little Slices of Bacon, then put in large Mace and Butter, so close it and bake
it, then cut off the Lid, and stick it full of pretty Conceits made in Paste,
and serve it in hot.

CCLII To make an Almond Tart.
Take a quart of Cream, and when it boils, put in half a pound of sweet Almonds
blanched and beaten with Rosewater, boil them together till it be thick, always
stirring it for fear it burn, then when it is cold, put in a little raw Cream,
the yolks of twelve Eggs, and some beaten Spice, some Candied Citron Pill and
Eringo Roots sliced, with as much fine Sugar as will sweeten it, then fill your
Tart and bake it, and stick it with Almonds blanched, and some Citron Pill, and
strew on some small French Comfits of several colors, and garnish your Dish
with Almonds blanched, and preserved Barberries.

CCLIII. To make a dainty White-Pot.
Take a Manchet cut like Lozenges, and scald it in some Cream, then put to it
beaten Spice, Eggs, Sugar and a little Salt, then put in Raisins, and Dates
stoned, and some marrow; do not bake it too much for fear it Whey, then strew
on some fine Sugar and serve it in.

CCLIV. To make a Red Deer Pie.
Bone your Venison, and if it be a Side, then skin it, and beat it with an Iron
Pestle but not too small, then lay it in Claret wine, and Vinegar, in some
close thing two days and nights if it be Winter, else half so long, then drain
it, and dry it very well, and if lean, lard it with fat Bacon as big as your
finger, season it very high with all manner of Spices and Salt, make your Pie
with Rye Flower, round and very high, then lay store of Butter in the bottom
and Bay Leaves, then lay in your Venison with more Bay leaves and Butter; so
close it, and make a Tunnel in the middle, and bake it as long as you do great
Loaves, when it is baked, fill it up with melted Butter, and so keep it two or
three months, serve it in with the Lid off, and Bay Leaves about the Dish; eat
it with mustard and sugar.

CCLV. To make a Pie of a Leg of Pork.
Take a Leg of Pork well powdered and stuffed with all manner of good Herbs,
and Pepper, and boil it very tender, then take off the Skin, and stick it with
Cloves and Sage Leaves, then put it into your Pie with Butter top and bottom,
close it and bake it, and eat it cold with Mustard and Sugar.

CCLVI. To make a Lamprey Pie.
Take your Lamprey and gut him, and take away the black string in the back,
wash him very well, and dry him, and season him with Nutmeg, Pepper and Salt,
then lay him into your Pie in pieces with Butter in the bottom, and some
Shelots and Bay Leaves, and more Butter, so close it and bake it, and fill it
up with melted Butter, and keep it cold, and serve it in with some Mustard and
Sugar.

CCLVII. To make a Salmon Pie.
Take a Ioll of Salmon raw, and scale it, and lay it into your Pie upon Butter
and bay leaves, then season it with whole spice and a little Salt, then lay on
some Shrimps and Oisters with some Anchovies, then more Spice and Butter, so
close the Lid and bake it, but first put in some white Wine, serve it hot, then
if it wants, put in more Wine and Butter.

CCLVIII. To make a Pudding of French Barley.
Take French Barley tenderly boiled, then take to one Pint of Barley half a
Manchet grated, and four Ounces of sweet Almonds blanched and beaten with
Rosewater, half a Pint of Cream, and eight Eggs with half the Whites, season it
with Nutmeg, Mace Sugar and Salt, then put in some Fruit, both Raisins and
Currants, and some Marrow, mingle these well together, and fill Hogs Guts with
it.

CCLIX. To make a hasty Pudding in a in a Bag or Cloth.
Boil a Quart of thick Cream with six spoonfuls of fine Flower, then season it
with Nutmeg and Salt, then wet a Cloth, and flower it and butter it, then boil
it, and butter it, and serve it in,

CCLX. To make a Shaking Pudding.
Take a Quart of Cream and boil it, then put in some Almonds blanched and
beaten, when it is boiled and almost cold, put in eight Eggs, and half the
Whites, with a little grated Bread, Spice and Sugar, and a very little Salt;

Then wet Flower and Butter, and put it in a Cloth and boil it, but not too
much, serve it in with Rosewater, Butter and Sugar, and strew it with small
French Comfits.

CCLXI. To make a Haggus Pudding.
Take a Calves Chaldron well scowred, boiled, and the Kernels taken out, mince
it small, then take four or five Eggs, and half the Whites, some thick Cream,
grated bread, Rosewater and Sugar, and a little Salt, Currants and Spice, and
some sweet herbs chopped small, then put in some marrow or Sewet finely shred,
so fill the Guts, and boil them.

CCLXII. To make an Oatmeal Pudding.
Take the biggest Oatmeal and steep it in warm Cream one night, then put in
some sweet herbs minced small, the yolks of Eggs, Sugar, Spice, Rosewater and a
little Salt, with some marrow, then Butter a Cloth, and boil it well, and serve
it in with Rosewater, Butter and Sugar.

CCLXIII. To make Puddings of Wine.
Slice two Manchets into a Pint of white Wine, and let your Wine be first
mulled with Spice, and with Limon Pill, then put to it ten Eggs well beaten
with Rosewater, some Sugar and a little Salt, with some Marrow and Dates, so
bake it a very little, strew sugar on it, and serve it; instead of Manchet you
may use Naples Biscuit, which is better.

GCLXIV. To make Puddings with Hogs Lights.
Parboil them very well, and mince them small with Sewet of a Hog, then mix it
with bread grated, and some Cream and Eggs, Nutmeg, Rosewater, Sugar and a
little Salt, with some Currants, mingle them well together, and fill the Guts
and boil them.

CCLXV. To make Stone Cream.
Boil'a Quart of Cream with whole spice, then pour it out into a Dish, but let
it be one quarter consumed in the boiling, then stir it till it be almost cold,
then put some Runnet into it as for a Cheese, and stir it well together and
color it with a little Saffron, serve it in with Sack and Sugar.

CCLXVI. To make a Posset Pie with Apples.
Take the Pulp of roasted Apples and beat it well with Sugar and Rosewater to
make it very sweet, then mix it with sweet Cream, and the yolks of raw Eggs,
some Spice and Sack, then having your Paste ready in your Bake-pan, put in this
stuff and bake it a little, then stick it with Candied Pills, and so serve it
in cold.

CCLXVII. To dry Pippins about Christmas or before.
When your Household Bread is drawn, then set in a Dish f^ll of Pippins, and
about six hours after take them out and lay them in several Dishes one by one,
and flat them with your hands a little, so do twice a day, and still set them
into a warm Oven every time till they are dry enough; then lay them into Boxes
with Papers between every Lay.

CCLXVIII. To make Snow Cream.
Take a Quart of Cream, and 4 Ounces of blanched Almonds, beaten and strained,
with half a Pint of white Wine, a piece of Orange Pill and a Nutmeg sliced, and
three Sprigs of Rosemary, mix these things together, and let them stand three
hours, then strain it, and put the thick part into a deep Dish, and sweeten it
with Sugar, then beat some Cream with the Whites of Eggs till it be a thick
Froth, and cast the Froth over it to a good thickness.

CCLXIX. To boil Whitings or Flounders.
Boil some White wine, Water, and Salt, with some sweet Herbs and whole Spice;
when it boils put in a little Vinegar, for that will make Fish crisp, then let
it boil apace and put in your Fish, and boil them till they swim, then take
them out and drain them, and make Sance for them with some of the Liquor and an
Anchovie or two, some Butter and some Capers, heat them over the Fire, and beat
it up thick and pour it over them; and garnish your Dish with Capers and
Parsley, Oranges and Limons, and let it be very hot when you serve it in.

CCLXX. To make a Pie of a Gammon of Bacon.
Take a Westphalia Gammon, and boil it tender with hay in the Kettle, then take
off the skin and stick it with Cloves and strew it with Pepper, then make your
Pie ready, and put it therein with Butter at the bottom, then cover your Bacon
with Oysters, parboiled in Wine and their own Liquor, and put in Balls made of
Sausage meat, then put in the Liquor of the parboiled Oisters, some whole Spice
and Bay Leaves, with some Butter, so close it, and bake it and eat it cold, you
may put into it the yolks of hard Eggs if you please; serve it with Mustard
Sugar and Bay Leaves.

CCLXXI. To bake a Bullocks Cheek to be eaten hot.
Take your Cheek and stuff it very well with Parsley and sweet herbs chopped,
then put it into a Pot with some Claret Wine and a little strong Beer, and some
whole Spice, and so season it well with Salt to your taste, and cover your Pot
and bake it, then take it out, and pull out the Bones, and serve it upon tosted
Bread with some of the Liquor.

CCLXXII. To bake a Bullocks Cheek to eat cold, as Venison.
Take a Bullocks Cheek, or rather two fair fat Cheeks, and lay them in water
one night, then take out every bone, and stuff it very well with all manner of
Spice and Salt, then put it into a Pot, one Cheek clapped close together upon
the other, then lay it over with Bay Leaves, and put in a Quart of Claret Wine,
so cover the Pot, and bake it with Household Bread, when you draw it, pour all
the Liquor out, and take only the Fat of it and some melted Butter, and pour
in again, serve it cold with Mustard and Sugar, and dress it with Bay Leaves,
it will eat like Venison.

CCLXXIII. To make a Bacon Froize.
Take eight Eggs well beaten, and a little Cream, and a little Flower, and beat
them well together to be like other Batter, then fry very thin slices of Bacon,
and pour some of this over, then fry it, and turn the other side, and pour
more upon that, so fry it and serve it to the Table.

CCLXXIV. To make fried Nuts.
Take Eggs, Flower, Spice and Cream, and make it into a Paste, then make it
into round Balls and fry them, they must be as big as Walnuts, be sure to shake
them well in the Pan and fry them brown, then roll some out thin, and cut them
into several shapes, and fry them, so mix them together, and serve them in with
Spice beaten, and Sugar.

CCLXXV. To make a Suffex Pancake.
Take only some very good Pie paste made with hot Liquor, and roll it thin,
and fry it with Butter, and serve it in with beaten spice and sugar as hot as
you can.

CCLXXVI. To make a Venison Pasty.
Take a Peck of fine Flower, and three Pounds of fresh Butter, break your
Butter into your Flower, and put in one Egg, and make it into a Past with so
much cold Cream as you think fit, but do not mould it too much, then roll it
pretty thin and broad, almost square, then lay some Butter on the bottom, then
season your Venison on the fleshy side with Pepper grossly beaten, and Salt
mixed, then lay your Venison upon your Butter with the seasoned side downward,
and then cut the Venison over with your Knife quite cross the Pasty to let the
Gravie come out the better in baking, then rub some seasoning in those Cuts,
and do not lay any else because it will make it look ill-favored and black,
then put some paste rouled thin about the Meat to keep it in compass, and lay
Butter on the top, then close it up and bake it very well, but you must trim it
up with several Fancies made in the same Paste, and make also a Tunnel or Vent,
and just when you are going to set it into the Oven, put in half a Pint of
Clarret Wine, that will season your Venison finely, and make it shall not look
or taste greasy, thus you may bake Mutton if you please.

CCLXXVII. To make a brave Tart of several Sweet Meats.
Take some Puff-paste and roll it very thin, and lay it in the bottom of your
baking-pan, then lay in a Lay of preserved Rasberries, then some more Paste
very thin to cover them, then some Currants preserved, and then a Sheet of Paste
to cover them, then Cherries, and another Sheet to cover them, then any white
Sweet-Meat, as Pippins, white Plums or Grapes, so Lid it with Puff-paste, cut
in some pretty Fancy to show the Fruit, then bake it, and stick it full of
Candied Pills, and serve it in cold.

CCLXXVIII. To make Ice and Snow.
Take new Milk and some Cream and mix it together, and put it into a Dish, and
set it together with Runnet as for a Cheese, and stir it together, when it is
come, pour over it some Sack and Sugar, then take a Pint of Cream and a little
Rosewater, and the Whites of three Eggs, and whip it to a Froth with a Birchen
Rod, then as the Froth arises, cast it upon your Cream which has the Runnet in
it, till it lies deep, then lay on Bunches of preserved Barberries here and
there carelessly, and cast more Snow upon them, which will look exceeding well;
then garnish your Dish being broad brimm'd with all kind of Iellies in pretty
Fancies, and several Colors.

CCLXXIX. To make a Mutton Pie.
Cut a Loin or a Neck of Mutton in steaks, and season it with Pepper and Salt,
and Nutmeg then lay it in your Pie upon Butter; then fill up your Pie with
Apples sliced thin, and a few great Onions sliced thin, then put in more
Butter, and close it and bake it, and serve it in hot.

CCLXXX. To poach Eggs the best way.
Boil Vinegar and Water together with a few Cloves and Mace, when it boiles
break in your Eggs, and turn them about gently with a Tin Slice till the White
be hard, then take them up, and pare away what is not handsome, and lay them on
Sippets, and strew them over with plumped Currants, then take Verjuice, Butter
and Sugar heat together, and pour over, and serve them in hot.

CCLXXXI. A good Sallad in Winter.
Take a good hard Cabbage, and with a sharp Knife shave it so thin as you may
not discern what it is, then serve it with Oil and Vinegar.

CCLXXXII. Another Sallad in Winter.
Take Corn Sallad clean picked and also well washed, and clear from the water,
put it into a Dish in some handsome form with some Horse Radish scraped, and
some Oil and Vinegar,

CCLXXXIII. To make Sorrrel Sops for Green Geese or Chickens, or for a Sick
Body to eat alone.
Take a good quantity of French Sorrel clean picked, and stamp it in a Mortar,
then strain it into a Dish, and set it over a Chafingdish of Coals, and put a
little Vinegar to it, then when it is thick by wasting, wring in the Juice of a
Limon and sweeten it with Sugar, and put in a little grated Bread and Nutmeg,
then warm another Dish with thin slices of white Bread, and put some Butter to
your Sorrel Liquor, and pour over them, serve them in with Slices of Limon and
fine Sugar.

CCLXXXIV. To make Green Sauce for a powdered Leg of Pork, or for a Spring.
Take a great quantity of French Sorrel, and pick out the Strings and wash it
well, and drain it clean from the water, then stamp it in a Mortar till it be
extreme fine, then put in grated Bread and beat it again, then a few Currants,
and the yolks of hard Eggs, and when it is beaten to a kind of Pap, put in a
little Vinegar and Sugar into it; so serve it in upon a Plate with your Meat.

CCLXXXV. To make Vin de Molosso; or Treacle Wine.
Take fair Water and make it so strong with Molossoes, otherwise called
Treacle, as that it will bear an Egg, then boil it with a Bag of all kinds of
Spices, and a Branch or two of Rosemary, boil it and scum it, and put in some
sweet herbs or flowers, according to the time of the year, boil it till a good
part be consumed, and that it be very clear, then set it to cool in several
things, and when it is almost cold, work it with Yeast, as you do Beer, the
next day put it into the Vessel, and so soon as it has done working, stop it
up close, and when it has stood a fortnight, bottle it, this is a very
wholesome Drink against any Infection, or for any that are troubled with the
Ptisick

CCLXXXVI. For a Consumption, an excellent Medicine.
Take Shell Snails, and cast Salt upon them, and when you think they are
cleansed well from their slime, wash them, and crack their Shells and take them
off, then wash them in the distilled Water of Hysop, then put them into a Bag
made of Canvas, with some white Sugar Candy beaten, and hang up the Bag, and
let it drop as long as it will, which if you bruise the Snails before you hang
them up, it is the better; this Liquor taken morning and evening a Spoonful at
a time, is very rare.

CCLXXXVII. A suitable Dish for Lent.
Take a large dish with broad Brims, and in the middle put blanched Almonds
round about them, Raisins of the Sun, and round them Figs, and beyond them all
colored Iellies, and on the Brims Fig-Cheese.

CCLXXXVIII. To make a Rock in Sweetmeats.
First take a flat broad voiding Basket, then have in readiness a good thick
Plum Cake, then cut your Cake fit to the bottom of the Basket, and cut a hole
in the middle of it, that the Foot of your Glass may go in, which must be a
Fountain-Glass, let it be as high a one as you can get; put the foot of it into
the Hole of the Cake edgling that it may stand the faster, then tie the Cake
fast with a Tape to the Basket, first cross one way and then another, then tie
the foot of the Glass in that manner too, that it may stand steady, then cut
some odd holes in your Cake carelessly, then take some Gum Dragon steeped in
Rosewater, and mix it with some fine Sugar, not too thick, and with that you
must fasten all your Rock together; in these holes which you cut in your Cake
you must fasten some sort of Biskets, as Naples Biskets, and other common
Biscuit made long, and some ragged, and some colored, that they may look like
great illfavoured Stones, and some handsome, some long, some short, some bigger,
and some lesser, as you know Nature does afford and so me of one color and
some of another, let some stand upright and some a slaunt, and some quite a
long, and fasten them all with your Gum, then put in some better Sweetmeats,
as Mackeroons and Marchpanes, carelessly made as to the shape, and not put on
the Rock in a set form, also some rough Almond Cakes made with the long slices
of Almonds (as I have directed before;) so build it up in this manner, and
fasten it with the Gum and Sugar, till it be very high, then in some places you
must put whole Quinces Candied, both red and white, whole Orange Pills and
Limon Pills Candied, dried Apricocks, Pears and Pippins Candied, whole Peaches
Candied, then set up here and there great lumps of brown and white Sugar Candy
upon the stick, which much resembles some clusters of fine Stones growing on a
Rock; for Sand which lies sometimes among the little Stones, strew some brown
Sugar; for Moss, take Herbs of a Rock Candy; then you must make the likeness of
Snakes and Snails and Worms, and of any venomous Creature you can think of;
make them in Sugar Plate and color them to their likeness, and put them in the
holes that they may seem to lurk, and some Snails creeping one way and some
another; then take all manner of Comfits, both rough and smooth, both great and
small, and color many of them, some of one color and some of another, let
some be white and some speckled, then when you have colored them, and that
they are dry, mix them together and throw them into the Clefts, but not too
many in one place, for that will hide the shape of your Work, then throw in
some Chips of all sorts of Fruit Candied, as Orange, Limon, Citron, Quince,
Pear, and Apples, for of all these you may make Chips; then all manner of dried
Plumbs, and Cherries, Cornelions dried, Rasps and Currants; and in some places
throw a few Prunelles, Pistacho Nuts, blanched Almonds, Pine Kernels, or any
such like and a pound of the great round perfumed Comfits; then take the lid of
the top of the Glass and fill it with Preserved Grapes, and fill another with
some Hartshorn Ielly, place these two far from one another, and if you set
some kind of Fowl, made in Marchpanes, as a Peacock, or such like, and some
right Feathers gummed on with Gum Arabic; let this Fowl stand as though it did
go to drink at the Glass of Hartshorn Ielly, and then they will know who see
it, that those two liquid Glasses serve for resemblance of several Waters in
the Rock:

Then make good store of Oister shells and Cockle shells of Sugar Plate, let
some be pure white as though the Sea water had washed them, some brown on the
outside, and some green, some as it were dirty, and others worn away in some
Places, some of them broke, and some whole, so set them here and there about
the Rock, some edgling, and some flat, some the hollow side upward, and some
the other, then stick the Moss, some upon the shells, and some upon the stones,
and also little Branches of Candied Fruits, as Barberries, Plums, and the like,
then when all is done, sprinkle it over with Rosewater, with a Grain or two of
Musk or Ambergreece in it; your Glass must be made with a reasonable proportion
of bigness to hold the Wine, and from that, in the middle of it, there must be
a Conveyance to fall into a Glass below it, which must have Spouts for the Wine
to play upward or downward, then from thence in another Glass below, with
Spou's also, and from thence it has a Conveyance into a Glass below that,
somewhat in form like a Sillibub Pot, where the Wine may be drunk out at the
Spout; you may put some Eringo Roots, and being colored, they will show very
well among the other Sweetmeats, tie your Basket about with several sorts of
small Ribbons: Do not take this for a simple Fancy, for I assure you, it is the
very same that I taught to a young Gentlewoman to give for a Present to a
Person of Quality.

TO THE READER.
Courteous Reader.
I Think it not amiss, since I have given you, as I think, a very full
Direction for all kinds of Food, both for Nourishment and Pleasure, that I do
show also how to eat them in good order; for there is a Time and Season for all
things: Besides, there is not any thing well done which has not a Rule, I
shall therefore give you several Bills of Service for Meals according to the
Season of the Year, so that you may with ease form up a Dinner in your Mind
quickly; afterward I shall speak of ordering of Banquets; but these things
first, because Banquets are most proper after Meals:

All you who are knowing already and Versed in such things, I beseech you to
take it only as a Memorandum; and to those who are yet unlearned, I presume
they will reap some Benefit by these Directions; which is truly wished and
desired by

Hannah Wolley alias Chaloner.

A Bill of Service for extraordinary Feasts in the Summer.
1. A Grand Sallad. 2. A boiled Capon or Chickens. 3. A boiled Pike or Bream.
4. A Florentine in Puff-Paste. 5. A Haunch of Venison roasted. 6. A Lomber Pie.
7. A Dish of Green Geese. 8. A Fat Pig with a Pudding in the belly. 9. A
Venison Pasty. 10. A Chicken Pie. 11. A Dish of young Turkeys. 12. A Potato
Pie. 13. A couple of Caponets. 14. A Set Custard.
The Second Course.
1. A Dish of Chickens roasted. 2. Souced Conger or Trouts. 3. an Artichoke
Pie, 4. A Cold Baked Meat. 5. a Souced Pig. 6. a Dish of Partridges. 7. an
Oringado Pie. 8. a Dish of Quails, 9. another cold Baked Meat. 10. Fresh
Salmon. 11. a Dish of Tarts. 12. a Ioll of Sturgeon.
The Third Course.
1. A Dish of fried Perches. 2. a Dish of Green Pease. 3. a Dish of Artichokes.
4. a Dish of Lobsters. 5. a Dish of Prawns or Shrimps. 6. a Dish of Anthovies.
7. a Dish of pickled Oisters. 8. Two or three dried Tongues.
Another Bill of Fare for Winter Season.
1. A Collar of Brawn. 2. a Capon and White Broth. 3. A boiled Gurnet. 4. a
Dish of boiled Ducks or Rabbets. 5. a roasted Tongue and Udder. 6. a made Dish
in Puff-Paste. 7. a Shoulder of Mutton with Oisters. 8. a Chine of Beef. 9. a
Dish of Scotch Collops of Veal. 10. Two Geese in a Dish. 11. an Olive Pie. 12.
a Pig. 13. a Loin of Veal. 14. a Lark Pie. 15. a Venison Pasty. 16. a Dish of
Capons, two in a Dish or three. 17. a Dish of Set Custards.
The Second Course.
1. Young Lamb cut in Ioints, three Ioints in a Dish Larded. 2. a Couple of Fat
Rabbets. 3. a Kickshaw fried or baked. 4. a Dish of roasted Mallards. 5. a Leash
of Partridges. 6. a Pigeon Pie. 7. Four Woodcocks in a Dish. 8. a Dish of Teal,
four or six. 9. a cold baked Meat. 10. a good Dish of Plover. 11. Twelve Snites
in a Dish. 12. Two dozen of Larks in a Dish. 13. another cold baked Meat.
The Third Course.
1. An Oister Pie hot. 2. a Dish of fried Puffes. 3. Three or four dried Neats
Tongues. 4. a Ioll of Sturgeon. 5. Laid Tarts in Puff-paste. 6. Pickled
Oisters. 7. a Dish of Anchovies and Caveare. 8. a Warden Pie or Quince Pie.
Note, That when your last Course is ended, you must serve in your
Meat-Iellies, your Cheeses of several sorts, and your Sweetmeats.

A Bill of Fare for Lesser Feasts.
1. AN Almond Pudding boiled or baked. 2. a Dish of boiled Pigeons with Bacon.
3. a Leg of Mutton boiled with good Sauce, or a Leg of Pork. 4. a Dish of
roasted Olives of Veal. 5. a Dish of Collops and Eggs. 6. a piece of roasted
Beef. 7. a Dish of Scotch Collops. 8. a Loin of Veal. 9. a fat Pig roasted. 10.
Two Turkies in a Dish. 11. a Venison Pasty. 12. a Dish of Pheasants or
Partridges. 13. a Dish of Custards in little China Pots.
The Second Course.
1. Three or four Ioints of Lamb roasted asunder, though never so small. 2. a
Couple of Rabbets. 3. a Dish of Mallard, Teal or Widgeon. 4. a Leash of
Partridges or Woodcocks. 5. a Pigeon Pie. 6. a Dish of Plovers or Snites. 7. a
Dish of fat Chickens roasted. 8. a Warden or Quince Pie. 9. a Sowced Pig. 10. a
Dish of Tarts of several sorts. 11. a Dish of Lobsters, or Sturgeon. 12. a Dish
of Pickled Oisters.
A Bill of Fare for Fish Days and Fasting Days in Ember week, or in Lent.
1. A Dish of Butter newly Churned. 2. a Dish of Rice Milk or Furmity. 3. a
Dish of Buttered Eggs. 4. a Dish of stewed Oisters. 5. a Dish of Gurnets
boiled. 6. A boiled Sallad. 7. a boiled Pike or two Carps stewed. 8. a Dish of
Buttered Loaves. 9. a Pasty of Ling. 10. a Dish of Buttered Salt Fish. 11. a
Dish of Smelts. 12. a Dish of White Herrings broiled. 13. a Potato Pie or
Skirret Pie. 14. a Dish of Flounders fried. 15. an Eel Pie or Carp Pie. 16. a
Dish of fried Whitings. 17. a Dish of Salt Salmon, 18. a Dish of Custards. 19.
a Ioll of Sturgeon. 20. a Dish of Pancakes or Fritters.
The Second Course.
1. A Dish of Eels spichcockt. 2. a Fricasie of Eels. 3. a Dish of fried Puffs.
4. a Dish of Potatoes stewed. 5. a Dish of fried Oisters. 6. a Dish of Blanched
Manchet 7. an Oister Pie with Parsneps. 8. a Pippin Pie Buttered. 9. a Dish of
Buttered Shrimps. 10. Two Lobsters roasted. 11. a Dish of Tarts of Herbs. 12. A
Dish of souced Fish. 13. a Dish of pickled Oisters. 14. a Dish of Anchovies and
Caveare.
A Bill of Fare without feasting; only such a number of Dishes as are used in
Great and Noble Houses for their own Family, and for familiar Friends with them.
The first Course in Summer Season.
1. A Fine Pudding boiled or baked. 2. A Dish of boiled Chickens. 3. Two Carps
stewed or a boiled Pike. 4. a Florentine in Puff-Paste. 5. a Calves head, the
one halfhashed, and the other broiled. 6. a Haunch of Venison roasted. 7. a
Venison Pasty. 8. a Couple of fat Capons, or a Pig, or both.
The Second Course.
1. A Dish of Partridges. 2. an Artichoke Pie. 3. a Dish of Quails. 4. a cold
Pigeou Pie. 5. a Souced Pig. 6. a Ioll of fresh Salmon. 7. a Dish of Tarts of
several sorts. 8. a Westphalia Gammon and dried Tongues about it.
A Bill of Fare in Winter in Great Houses.
1. A Collar of Brawn. 2 a Capon and White Broth, or two boiled Rabbets. 3. Two
roasted Neats Tongues and an Udder between them. 4. a Chine of Beef roasted. 5. a
made Dish in Puffpaste. 6. a Shoulder of mutton stuffed with oisters. 7. A fine
Sallad of diverse sorts of Herbs and Pickles. 8. an Eel Pie or some other Pie.
9. Three young Turkies in a Dish. 10. a Dish of souced Fish, what is most in
season.
The Second Course in Winter in great Houses.
1. A Quarter of Lamb roasted, the Ioints Larded with several things, and roasted
asunder. 2. a Couple of Rabbets. 3. a Kickshaw fried. 4. a Dish of Mallard or
Teals. 5. a Cold Venison Pasty, or other cold Baked meat. 6. a Dish of Snites.
7. a Quince or Warden Pie. 8. a Dish of Tarts. 9. a Ioll of Sturgeon. 10. a
Dish of pickled Oisters.
A Bill of Fare for Fish Days in Great Houses and at Familiar Times.
1. A Dish of Milk, as Furmity, or the like. 2. a Dish of stewed Oisters or
buttered Eggs. 3. a boiled Gurnet, or such like. 4. a Dish of Barrel Cod
Buttered. 5. a Dish of Buttered Loaves or fried Toasts. 6. a Pasty made of a
Ioll of Ling. 7. a Potato Pie, or Skirret Pie. 8. a Dish of Plaice or
Flounders. 9. a Piece of Salt Salmon. 10. a Carp Pie cold, or Lamprey Pie.
The Second Course to the Same.
1. A Dish of Eels spitchcockt. 2. a Chine of Salmon broiled. 3. a Dish of
Oisters fried. 4. an Apple pie buttered. 5. a Dish of fried Smelts. 6. a Dish
of buttered Shrimps. 7. a Dish of Skirrets fried. 8. Two Lobsters in a Dish. 9.
a Dish of pickled Oisters. 10. a Dish of Anchovies.
When all these are taken away, then serve in your Cheeses of all sorts, and
also your Creams and Iellies, and Svveet-meats after them if they be required.

Thus I have done with the Bills of Fare in Great Houses, although it be
impossible to name half which are in season for one Meal; but this will serve
you for the number of Dishes, and any Person who is ingenious, may leave out
some, and put in other at pleasure.

A Bill of Fare for Gentlemen's Houses of Lesser Quality, by which you may also
know how to order any Family beneath another, which is very requisite.
The first Course in Summer Season.
1. A Boiled Pike or Carp stewed. 2. a very fine Pudding boiled. 3. a Chine of
Veal, and another of mutton. 4. a Calves head Pie. 5. a Leg of mutton roasted
whole. 6. a Couple of Capons, or a Pig, or a piece of roast Beef, or boiled
Beef. 7. a Sallad, the best in season.
The Second Course to the same.
1. A Dish of fat Chickens roasted. 2. a cold Venison Pastie. 3. a Dish of fried
Pasties. 4. a Ioll of fresh Salmon. 5. a Couple of Lobsters. 6. a Dish of
Tarts. 7. a Gammon of Bacon or dried Tongues.
After these are taken away, then serve in your Cheese and Fruit, Note, That
this Bill of Fare is for Familiar times.

A Bill of Fare for Gentlemen's Houses at Familiar Times in Winter Season.
The first Course.
1. A Collar of Brawn. 2. A roasted Tongue and Udder. 3. a Leg of Pork boiled.
4. A piece of roast Beef. 5. a Venison Pasty or other Pie. 6. a marrow Pudding.
7. A Goose, or Turkey, or Pig. 8. a Sallad of what is in season.
The Second Course to the same.
1. Two Ioints of Lamb roasted. 2. a Couple of Rabbets. 3. a Dish of wild Fowl
or Larks, 4. a Goose or Turkey Pie cold. 5. a Fried Dish. 6. Sliced Venison
cold. 7. a Dish of Tarts or Custards, 8. a Gammon of Bacon, or dried Tongues,
or both in one Dish.
When these are taken away, serve in your Cheese and Fruit as before I have
told you.

A Bill of Fare for Gentlemen's Houses upon Fish Days, and at Familiar Times.
1. A Dish of Buttered Eggs. 2. an Almond Pudding Buttered. 3. a Dish of Barrel
Cod Buttered. 4. a Sallad of what is in season. 5. a Dish of Fresh Fish boiled.
6. a Dish of Eels Spitchcokt. 7. an Oister Pie or Herring Pie. 8. a Frieasie of
Eels and Oisters. 9. a Carp Pie cold, or Lamprey Pie.
The Second Course to the same.
1. An Apple Pie Buttered, or some Pancakes or Fritters. 2. a Dish of sried
Smelts. 3. a Dish of broiled Fish 4. a Dish of Buttered Crabs. 5. a Dish of
Lobsters and Prawns. 6. A Ioll of Sturgeon or Fresh Salmon. 7. a Dish of Tarts
or Custards. 8. a Dish of Anchovies or Pickled Herring.
When these are taken away, serve in your Cheese and Fruit as before I have
told you.

NOw because I would have every one Complete who have a Desire to serve in
Noble or Great Houses, I shall here show them what their Office requires; And,
First, For the Kitchen, because without that we shall look lean, and grow
faint quickly.
THe Cook, whether Man or Woman, ought to be very well skilled in all manner of
things both Fish and Flesh, also good at Pastry business, seasoning of all
things, and knowing all kinds of Sauces, and pickling all manner of Pickles, in
making all manner of Meat Iellies; also very frugal of their Lord's or of their
Master's, Ladies or Mistresses Purse, very saving, cleanly and careful,
obliging to all persons, kind to those under them. and willing to inform them,
quiet in their Office, not swearing nor cursing, nor wrangling, but silently
and ingeniously to do their Business, and neat and quick about it; they ought
also to have a very good Fancy, such an one, whether Man or Woman, deserves the
title of a fit Cook.

For the Maid under such a Cook.
SHe ought to be of a quick and nimble Apprehension, neat and cleanly in her
own habit, and then we need not doubt of it in her Office; not to dress her
self, especially her Head, in the Kitchen, for that is abominable fluttish, but
in her Chamber, before she comes down, and that to be at a fit hour, that the
fire may be made, and all things prepared for the Cook, against he or she comes
in; she must not have a sharp Tongue, but humble; pleasing, and willing to
learn, for ill words may provoke Blows from a Cook, their heads being always
filled with the contrivance of their business, which may cause them to be
peevish and sroward, if provoked to it; this Maid ought also to have a good
Memory, and not to sorget from one day to another what should be done, nor to
leave any manner of thing foul at night, neither in the Kitchen, nor Larders,
to keep her Iron things and others clean scowred, and the Floors clean as well
as places above them, not to sit up junketting and gigling with Fellows, when
she should be in bed, such an one is a Consumer of her Masters Goods, and no
better than a Thief; and besides, such Behavior savoureth much of Levity. But
such an one that will take the Counsel I have seriously given, will not only
make her Superiors happy in a good Servant, but she will make her self happy
also; for by her Industry she may come one day to be Mistress over others.

Now to the Butler.
HE ought to be Gentile and Neat in his Habit, and in his Behavior, courteous
to all people, yet very saving of his Masters Goods, and to order himself in
his Office as a faithful Steward, charge and do all things for the honor of
his Master or Lady, not suffering their Wine or Strong Drink to be devoured by
ill Companions, nor the Small to be drawn out in waste, nor Pieces of good
bread to lie to mould and spoil, he must keep his Vessels close stopped, and
his Bottles sweet, his Cellars clean washed, and his Buttery clean, and his
Bread-Bins wholesome and sweet, his Knives whetted, his Glasses clean washed that
there be no dimness upon them when they come to be used, all his Plate clean
and bright, his Table, Basket and Linen very neat, he must be sure to have all
things of Sauce ready which is for him to bring forth, that it may not be to be
fetched when it is called for, as Oil, Vinegar, Sugar, Salt, Mustard, Oranges
and Limons, and also some Pepper; he must also be very neat and handy in laying
the Clothes for the Chief Table, and also the Side boards, in laying his
Napkins in several Fashions, and pleiting them, to set his Glass;, Plate, and
Trencher-Plates in order upon the Side-Boards, his Water-Glasses, Oranges or
Limons; that he be careful to set the Salts on the Table, and to lay a Knife,
Spoon and Fork at every-Plate, that his Bread be chipped before he brings it
in; that he set drink to warm in due time if the season require; that he
observe a fit time to set Chairs or Stools, that he have his Cistern ready to
set his Drink in, that none be spilt about the Room, to wash the Glasses when
any one has drunk, and to wait diligently on them at the Table, not filling
the Glasses too full; such an one may call himself a Butler.

To the Carver.
IF any Gentleman who attends the Table, be employed or commanded to cut up any
Fowl or Pig, or any thing else whatsoever, it is requisite that he have a clean
Napkin upon his Arm, and a Knife and Fork for his use, that he take that Dish
he should carve from the Table till he has made it ready for his Superiors to
eat, and neatly and handsomely to carve it, not touching of it so near as he can
with his Fingers, but if he chance unawares to do so, not to lick his Fingers,
but wipe them upon a Cloth, or his Napkin, which he has for that purpose; for
otherwise it is unhandsom and unmannerly; the neatest Carvers never touch any
Meat but with the Knife and Fork; he must be very nimble lest the Meat cool too
much, and when he has done, return it to the Table again, putting away his
Carving Napkin, and take a clean one to wait withal; he must be very Gentile
and Gallant in his Habit lest he be deemed unfit to attend such Persons.

To all other Menservants or Maidservants who commonly attend such Tables.
THey must all be neat and cleanly in their Habit, and keep their Heads clean
kembed, always ready at the least Call, and very attentive to hear any one at
the Table, to set Chairs or Stools, and not to give any a foul Napkin, but see
that every one whom their Lord or Master is pleased to admit to their Table,
have every thing which is fit for them, and that they change their Plates when
need shall be; also that they observe the eyes of a Stranger what they want,
and not force them still to want because they are silent, because it is not
very modest for an Inferior to speak aloud before their Betters; and it is
more unfit they should want, since they have leave to eat and drink: they must
wait diligently, and at a distance from the Table, not daring to lean on the
Chaires for soiling them, or showing Rudeness; for to lean on a Chair when they
wait is a particular Favor shown to any superior Servant, as the Chief
Gentleman, or the Waiting Woman when she rises from the Table; they must not
hold the Plates before their mouths to be defiled with their Breath nor touch
them on the right side; when the Lord, Master, Lady or Mistress show that
favor to drink to any Inferior, and do command them to fill sor them to
pledge them, it is not moeesty for them to deny Strangers that favor, as
commonly they do, but to fulfill their Commands, or else they dishonor the
Favor.

When any Dish is taken off the Table, they must not set it down for Dogs to
eat, nor eat it themselves by the way, but haste into the Kitchen with it to
the Cook, that he may see what is to be set away, and what to be kept hot for
Servants; when all is taken away, and Thanks given, they must help the Butler
out with those things which belong to him, that he may not lose his Dinner.

They must be careful also to lay the Cloth for themselves, and see that
nothing be wanting at the Table, and to call the rest of the Servants to Meals,
whose Office was not to wait at the Table, then to sit down in a handsome
manner, and to be courteous to every stranger, especially the Servants of those
Persons whom their Lord or Master has a kindness for.

If any poor Body comes to ask an Alms, do not shut the door against them
rudely, but be modest and Civil to them, and see if you can procure somewhat
for them, and think with your selves, that though you are now full fed, and
well clothed, and free from care, yet you know not what may be your condition
another day: So much to Inferior Servants.

To the Gentlewomen who have the Charge of the Sweetmeats, and such like
Repasts.
Gentlewomen,
PErhaps you do already know what belongs to serving in fine Cream Cheeses,
Iellies, Leaches or Sweetmeats, or to set forth Banquets as well as I do; but
(pardon me) I speak not to any knowing Person, but to the ignorant, because
they may not remain so; besides really there are new Modes come up now adays
for eating and drinking, as well as for Clothes, and the most knowing of you
all may perhaps find somewhat here which you have not already seen; and for the
ignorant, I am sure they may ground themselves very well from hence in many
Accomplishments, and truly I have taken this pains to impart these things for
the general good of my Country, as well as my own, and have done it with the
more willingness, since I find so many Gentlewomen forced to serve, whose
Parents and Friends have been impoverished by the lare Calamities, viz. the
Late Wars, Plague, and Fire, and to see what mean Places they are forced to be
in, because they want Accomplishments for better.

I am blamed by many for divulging these Secrets, and again commended by others
for my Love and Charity for so doing; but however I am better satisfied with
imparting them, than to let them die with me; and if I do not live to have the
Comfort of your Thanks, yet I hope it will cause you to speak well of me when I
am dead: The Books which before this I have caused to be put in Print, found so
good an acceptance, as that I shall still go on in imparting what I yet have,
so fast as I can.

Now to begin with the Ordering those things named to you:

If it be but a private Dinner or Supper in a Noble House, where there they
have none to honor above themselves, I presume it may be thus;

In Summer time, when the Meat is all taken away, you may present your several
sorts of Cream Cheeses; One Meal one Dish of Cream of one sort, the next, of
another; one or two Scollop Dishes with several sorts of Eruit, which if it be
small fruit, as Raspes or Strawberries, they must be first washed in Wine in a
Dish or Basin, and taken up between two Spoons, that you touch them not.

With them you may serve three or four small Dishes also with sweet meats, such
as are most in season, with Vine Leaves and Flowers between the Dishes and the
Plates, two wet Sweet meats, and two dry, two of one color, and two of
another, or all of several colors.

Also a Dish of Iellies of several colors in one Dish, if such be required.

If any be left, you may melt them again, and put them into lesser Glasses, and
they will be for another time:

If any dry ones be left, they are soon put into the Boxes again.

If any persons come in the Afternoon, if no greater, or so great as the Person
who entertains them, then you may present one or two Dishes of Cream only, and
a whipped Sillibub, or other, with about four Dishes of Sweetmeats served in, in
like manner as at Dinner, with Dishes of Fruit, and some kind of Wine of your
own making; at Evenings, especially on Fasting Days at Night, it is fit to
present some pretty kind of Creams, contrary from those at Dinner, or instead
of them some Possets, or other fine Spoon Meats, which may be pleasaut to the
taste, with some wet and dry Sweetmeats, and some of your fine Drinks, what may
be most pleasing.

At a Feast, you may present these things ollowing.

So soon as the Meat is quite taken away, have in readiness your Cream Cheeses
of several sorts and of several Colors upon a Salver, then some fresh Cheese
with Wine and Sugar, another Dish of Cloured Cream, and a Noch with Cabbage
Cream of several Colors, like a Cabbage; then all sorts of Fruits in season,
set forth as follows:

First, You must have a large Salver made of light kind of Wood, that it may
not be too heavy for the Servitor to carry, it must be painted over, and large
enough to hold six Plates round about and one larger one in the middle, there
must be places made in it to set the Plates in, that they may be very fast and
sure from sliding, and that in the middle the seat must be much higher than all
the rest, because that is most graceful; your Plates must not be so broad as
the Trencher Plates at Meat, and should be either of Silver or China.

Set your Plates fast, then fill every one with several sorts of Fruits, and
the biggest sort in the middle, you must lay them in very good order, and pile
them up till one more will not lie; then stick them with little green Sprigs
and fine Flowers, such as you fancy best; then serve in another such Salver,
with Plates piled up with all manner of Sweetmeats, the wet Sweetmeats round
about and the dry in the middle, your wet Sweetmeats must be in little glasses
that you may set the more on, and between every two glasses another above the
first of all, and one on the top of them all; you must put of all sorts of
dried Sweetmeats in the middle Plate, first your biggest and then your lesser,
till you can lay no more; then stick them all with Flowers, and serve them: And
in the Basin of Water you send in to wash the Hands or Fingers of Noble
Persons, you must put in some Orange Flower Water, which is very rare and very
pleasant.

In Winter you must alter, as to the season, but serve all in this manner; and
then dried Fruits will also be very acceptable, as dried Pears and Pippins,
Candied Oranges and Limons, Citrons and Eringoes, Blanched Almonds, Prunelles,
Figs, Raisins, Pistachoes and Blanched Walnuts.

FINIS.
The Contents.
The CONTENTS of the First Part.
A.
ARtichoke Cream. 175 Almond Pudding. 166 Almond Pudding. 169 Artichokes kept.
162 Almond Ielly white. 160 Almond Paste. 145 Almond Butter. 138 Apricocks
dried 134 Apricocks in Lumps. 133 Apricocks dried clear. 126 Almond Bread. 120
Almond Milk. Ib. Angelica Candied. 113 Apricocks Preserved. 109 Almond Cakes.
101 Almonds Candied. 97 Almond Butter white. 75 Artificial Walnuts 64 Almond
Ginger-Bread. 62 Ale to drink speedily. 47 Ale very rare. 46 Aqua Mirabilis. 1
B.
Biscuit Pudding. 168 Black Pudding. 165 Biscuit very fine. 149 Banbury Cake. 137
Barberries Candied. 131 Bean Bread. 117 Barberries preserved without fire. 96
Bullace preserved. 84 Black Juice of Licor as. 79 Barberries preserved. 70
Biscuit Cake. 28 Balm Water Green. 22 Biscuit Crange, Limon or Citron. 150
C.
CLouted Cream. 178 Cream of diverse things. 174 Card Pudding. 167 Clove Sugar.
163 Cinnamon Sugar. 163 Cake without Sugar. 160 Cullis or Ielly. Ib. Comfits of
all sorts. 156 Caudle for a sick body. Ib. Candy as hard as a Rock. 149
Carroway Cake. 130 Cherries in Ielly. 126 Cordial for sleep. 124 Consumption.
123 Cordial Syrup. Ib. Cornish Cake. 122 Cakes very fine. Ib. Cider clear. 198
Clear Perry. Ib. Caroway Cake. 118 Cake. 115 Cornelions preserved. 110 Currants
in Ielly. 108 Chaculato. 104 Custard for a Consumption. 103 Chips of Fruit. 102
Chip. of Orange or Limon. 101 Candied Carots. 97 Conserve of Barberries. 96
Cordial. 78 Cakes to keep long. 75 Cakes with Almonds. 93 Court Perfumes. 90
China Broth. 89 Crystal Ielly. 89 Conserve of Violets. 85 Cakes very good 69
Cakes of Violets 68 Collops like Bacon in Sweetmeats. 67 Cough of the Lungs. 66
Cordial Infusion. Ib. Cakes very short. 65 Conserve of Red Roses. 60 Cucumbers
pickled. 57 Cake with Almonds. 54 Cake with Almonds. 52 Cordial 50 Cake without
Fruit. 41 Consumption. 46 Chine Cough. 45 Cream. Ib. Cabbage-Cream. 43 Cakes of
Quinces. Ib. Consumption Ale. 36 Consumption. 35 Cream very fine. 34 Cucumbers
pickled. 33 Candied Flowers. 32 Clouted Cream. 30 Cough of the Lungs. 27
Cordial. 14 Cordial. 1b. Cock. water most excellent. 12 Cordial Cherry Water.
10 Cordial Orange Water. 5
D.
DAmask Powder for Cloths. 179 Dumplings. 171 Dumplings. 170 Dumplings. 1b.
Distilled Roses. 164 Diet Bread. 119 Damsons preserved. 111 Damsons preserved
white. 68 Damson Wine. 56 Devonshire White-pot. 31 Doctor Butlers water. 8
Doctor Chambers water. 3
E.
ELder Water. 21
F.
FRench Biscuit 146 Flowers Candied. 143 Figs dried. 139 Flowers the best way to
Candy. 32 Froth Posset. 136 Flowers kept long. 74 French Bread. 51
G.
GReen Pudding. 171 Green Ginger wet. 153 Grapes dried 152 Grapes kept fresh.
151 Ginger-bread. 146 Green Walnuts preserved. 83 Gooseberries preserved. 73
Gooseberry Fool. 71 Grapes preserved. 67 Gooseberry Wine. 56 Gooseberries
green. 50 Griping of the Guts. 47
H.
HIpocras. 129 Heart Water. 16
I.
IRish Aquavitae. 163 Italian Biscuit. 129 Iumtolds. 119 Ielly of Pippins. 112
Ielly of Quinces. 109 Ielly of Hartshorn. 100 Juice of Licor as white. 91
Ielly very good. 78 Iringo Ro^t Candied. 72 Ielly of Currants. 71
L.
LEmonalo. 155 Limon Sallad. 153 Leach white. 121 Leach yellow. Ib. Leach of
Ginger. Ib. Leach of Cinnamon. Ib. Leach of Dates. 122 Limons preserved. 103
Leach. 74 Lozenges perfumed. 72 Limon Cream. 54 Limon Cakes. 38 Limon Water. 6
M.
Mustard. 177 Mustard. Ib. Marmalade of Limons. 152 Marmalade of Oranges. Ib.
Muck Sugar. 141 Marmalade of Quinces. Ib. Mushroms pickled. 140 Marmalade of
Cherries 135 Marmalade of Oranges. 111 Marmalade of Cornelions 110 Marmalade
white. 91 Medlars preserved. 84 Marmalade of Pippins. 82 Marmalade of Wardens.
Ib. Marmalade of Damsons. 81 Marchpane. 79 Marmalade of Apricocks. 77 Morphew
or Freckles. 75 Marmalade of Oranges. 58 Made Dish. 52 Marmalade of Cherries
and Currants. 39 Marmalade of Apricocks. 34 Melancholy Water. 21
N.
NAples Biscuit. 129
O.
OAtmeal Pudding. 168 Oranges in Ielly preserved 87 Orange Pudding. 51 Oranges
and Limons to preserve 63
P.
PIckled Oisters. 176 Pickled French Beans. Ib. Pickled Barberries. 175
Powdered Beef kept long. 178 Pudding to roast. 174 Pudding of Calves feet. 173
Pudding of Rasberries. Ib. Pudding of Hogs Liver. 172 Pudding of Cake. 167
Pudding of Rice. 166 Paste of Pomewaters. 155 Punch. Ib. Prunes stewed without
Fire. 154 Pickled Oranges or Limons. 151 Potato Biscuit. 150 Parsnep Biscuit. 150
Paste short without Butter. 148 Puffpaste. 147 Puffpaste. 148 Pistachio Cakes.
133 Powder for the Hair. 132 Pears or Pippins dried. 127 Pippins dry and clear.
126 Perfume to burn. 124 Perfumed Gloves. 125 Perfume to burn. Ib. Pomatum. 116
Pippins in Ielly. 107 Posset. 106 Posset with Sack. Ib. Posset. 107 Plumbs
dried. 104 Preserved Pears dried. 93 Pretty Sweet-meat. 99 Paste for the Hands.
74 Plumbs dried naturally. 92 Pears dried. 86 Pippins dried. 83 Pippins green
preserved. 80 Peachs preserved. 98 Phtisick Drink. 76 Paste of Pippins. 70
Paste royal. 69 Paste of Pippins. 61 Paste of Plumbs. 61 Plain Biscuit Cake. 60
Posset without Milk. 49 Pennado. 48 Purslane pickled. 44 Portugal Eggs. 31
Perfumed Roses. 28 Palsy water by Dr. Mathias. 24 Plague Water. 17 Precious
Water. 7 Plague Water. 1
Q.
QUaking Pudding. 169 Quince pickled. 162
R.
ROses kept long. 161 Rose Leaves dried. 143 Red Quinces whole. 141 Rasberry
Sugar. 134 Rasberry Wine. 87 Red Roses preserved. 65 Rasberries preserved. 39
Rosa Solis. 16 Rosemary Water. 7
S.
SCotch Brewis. 164 Syrup of Rarberries, or other Fruits, as Grapes, etc. 156
Syrup of Citrons. 154 Sugar Plate. 144 Syrup of Roses or other Flowers. 142
Sack Posset. 139 Sillibub. 132 Spanish Candr. 128 Syrup of Gilliflowers. 114
Seed stuff of Rasberries. 113 Syrup for a Cough. 99 Syrup of Violets. 98 Syrup
for a Cold. 90 Syrup of Turnips. 77 Signs of Small Pox taken away. 74 Sugar
Plate. 64 Snow Cream. 62 Shrewsbury Cakes. 55 Sillibuh. 53 Sack Posset. 48
Sheeps Guts stretched. 45 Samphire boiled. 42 Stepony or Raisin Wine 41
Sillibub whipped. 41 Syrup of Ale. 40 Syrup of Turnips 35 Sugar Cakes. 33 Signs
of Small Pox taken away. 30 Surfeit Water the best. 22 Sweet Water. 19 Snail
Water. 18 Spirit of Oranges and Limons. 6 Spirit of Mints. 4 Sovereign Water. 3
T.
TO cast all kinds of Shapes, and to color them 86 Tufftaffity Cream. 130
Thick Cream. 44 Trifle. 43 Tincture of Caroways. 29 Treacle Water. 17
W.
VVAlnuts kept long. 161 White Plates to eat. 135 White Quinces preserved. 59
Water Gruel. 53 Wafer. 38 Water against Infection. 20 Wormwood water. 14 Walnut
water. 13 Water for the Stone. 11 Water for Fainting. 7
The End of the Contents of the First Part.
The CONTENTS of the Second Part.
A.
ARtichoke Suckers dressed. 207 Artichoke Cream. 210 Artichoke Pie. 223
Artichoke Pudding. 256 Artichokes kept long. 257 Artichokes stewed. 317
Artichokes fried. Ib. Artichok-Pudding. 256 Almond Pudding. 186 Apple Tansie.
191 An Amulet. 193 Almond Pudding. 202 Angelot Cheese. 229 Apple Puffs. 285
Almond Tart. 326
B.
BRown Metheglin. 184 Beef Collered. 185 Barlie Cream. 186 Barlie Broth without
Meat. 214 Barlie Broth with Meat. Ib. Balls to take out Stains. 252 Broth of a
Lambs Head. 254 Beef-Pie very good. 274 Blanched Manchet. 278 Bullocks Cheek
baked to eat hot. 336 Bullocks Cheek baked to eat cold Ib. Bacon Froize. 337
C.
CHeesecakes. 187 Cheesecakes. 188 Chicken Pie. 193 Collar of Brawn. 194 Capon
boiled. 196 Cracknels. 197 Codling Cream. 199 Cheese very good. 201 Cucumbers
boiled. 208 Collops of Bacon and Eggs. 213 Cabbage Pottage. 218 Capon with
White Broth 221 Calves foot Pie. 222 Carp Pie. 225 Calves head Pie. 228 Calves
Chaldron Pie with Puddings in it. 234 Coleflower pickled. 237 Cheese Loaves.
240 Custards very fine. 243 Cods Head boiled. 250 Chicken Pie. 255 Capon
boiled. 265 Chickens boiled with Goosberries 270 Chickens boiled with Grapes.
273 Capon baked 275 Cambridge Pudding. 280 Chiveridge Pudding. 282 Calves
Tongue hashed 287 Capon boiled. Ib. Capon boiled with Rice. 288 Capon boiled
with Pippins. Ib. Chickens boiied with Lettuce 289 Chickens snsoored. 295
Calves feet hashed. 296 Chickens in white Broth. 298 Capon roasted with Oisters.
305 Calves head with Oisters. 314 Carp Pie. 325 Consumption Remedy. 344
D.
DRied Tongues. 228 Delicate Pies. 242 Ducks boi'ed. 291
E
ELder Vinegar. 183 Eeles and Pike together. 204 Eeles roasted with B con. 905
Ee's and Oister Pie. 206 Egg Pie. 244 Eel Pie. 246 Eel souced and collered. 247
Eels stewed. 248 Eels in Broth. 300
F.
FResh Cheese. 189 Furmity. 213 Furmity with Meat Broth. 215 Furmity with
Almonds. Ib. French Pottage. 218 Fricasies of several sorts. 226 Fricasie of
Sheeps feet. 231 Fried Toasts. 236 Fritters. 237 Fricasie of Oisters. 245
Fricasie of Eels. 246 Fresh Salmon boiled. 249 French Broth. 253 Fine washing
Balls for the Hands. 256 French Servels. 259 Florentine baked. 271 Friday Pie
without Fish or Flesh. 272 Fritters. 276 Farced Pudding. 278 Fricasie of Eggs.
279 French Puffs. 285 Flounders boiled. 335
G.
GReen Tansie. 192 Gravie Broth. 217 Goose dried. 219 Goose Giblets with
Sausages. 226 Garden Beans fried. 262 Gurnet boiled. 266 Goose baked. 277 Goose
Giblets boiled with Roots and Horbs. 293 Goose Giblets boiled. Ib. Grand
Sallad. 301 Gammon of Bacon Pie. 335 Green Sauce for Pork. 342
H.
HAsty Pudding. 216 Hasty Pudding. Ib. Hare Pie. 230 Hashed Meats. 245 Herring
Pie. 248 Herb Pie. 215 Haunch of Venison roasted. 304 Haunch of Venison boiled.
309 Haggus Pudding. 331 Hasty Pudding. 330
I.
ITalian Pudding. 286 Ice and Snow. 340
K.
KIck shaws to bake or fry. 286
L
LObsters buttered. 200 Liver Fritters. Ib. Loaves to Butter. 233 Limon Cakes.
239 Loaves of Curds. 240 Lobsters roasted. 255 Lamb Pie. 261 Leg of Mutton
roasted. 266 Leg of Mutton boiled. 199 Leg of Mutton With Oisters. 303 Loin of
Mutton stewed. 305 Lark pie. 321 Lettuce pie. 322 Lampry pie. 328 Lenten ^. 344
Metheglin 184 Misers for Childrens Collation. 235 Minced Pies. 239 Made Dish
of Rabbet Livers. 270 Mutton smoored. 294 Mutton smoored. 295 Mutton Pie. 340
N.
NEats Tongue Pie. 221 Neats Tongue roasted. 267 Neats Tongue hashed. 297 Neck
of Mutton boiled. 308 Neck of Mutton stewed. 322 Nuts fried. 337
O.
OAtmeal Pudding. 331 Olio of several Meats. 197 Oisters and Eels in a Pie. 206
Oisters and Parsneps in a Pie. 207 Oister Pie. 223 Oranges and Limons in Ielly.
238 Oisters fried. 241 Oisters broiled. Ib. Oisters roasted. 242 Olives of Veal.
251 Oatmeal Pudding. Ib. Oat-Cakes. 260 Olive Pie. Ib.
P.
Puddings in Balls. 190 Pigeons boiled. 191 Pasty of Veal. 195 Pigeon Pie. Ib.
Pork roasted without the Skin. 198 Pig roasted like Lamb. 199 Potted Fowl. 204
Parsnep pie with Oisters. 207 Pig pie. 224 Pudding of Manchet. 227 Pompion pie.
235 Pompion fried. Ib. Pike roasted and larded. 249 Pomander very fine. 252
Pompion pie. 236 Pickled Sprats. 257 Pasty of Ling. 258 Pallat pie. 259 Pippin
paste. 263 Pasties to fry. 264 Pigeons boiled with Rice. 268 Pigeons boiled
with Gooseberries 270 Pippin Tart. 274 Pancakes crisp. 277 Pudding of Goose
Blood. 281 Pudding of Liver. Ib. Pigeons boiled with Capers and Samphire. 292
Partridges boiled. 298 Pike boiled with Oisters. 301 Pig roasted with a Pudding
in his Belly. 302 Pippins stewed. 212 Pig roasted without the Skin, with a
Pudding in his Belly. 316 Pancakes crisp. 252 Pancakes very good 318 Paste very
good. 319 Paste to raise. Ib. Paste for baked Meat to eat cold. 320 Pie of
Veal. Ib. Pie of Shrimps or Prawns. 321 Pie of roasted Kidney. 323 Potato Pie.
324 Pig Pie. Ib. Pork Pie. 328 Pudding of French Barlie. 329 Pomander very
fine. 263 Pudding of Wine. 332 Pudding of Hogs Lights. Ib. Posset Pie. 333
Pippins dried. 334 Poached Eggs. 341 Pippin paste. 301 Pippins stewed. 302
Q.
QUodling Cream. 14 Quinces to look white. 264 Quince Pie very good. 273
R.
RUmp of Beef boiled. 201 Rolls for Noble Tables. 210 Rolls very short, 211
Rasberry Tart. 224 Rabbets with Sansages. 225 Rice cream. 234 Rabbet boiled.
268 Rice Pudding. 282 Rabbet boiled with Grapes. 290 Rabbet boiled with Claret.
Ib. Red Deer Pie. 327 Rock of Sweet Meats. 345
S.
SOuced Veal. 194 Sauce for Mutton. 198 Summer Dish. 200 Souced Pig. 203
Several Sallads. 208 Several Sallads. 209 Soles dressed very fine. 212 Spinach
Tart. 209 Stewed Fish. 212 Spanish Pap. 217 Sallad of cold Meat. 219 Sheeps
Tongues with Oisters. 220 Scotch collops. 227 Shoulder of Venison, or Shoulder
of Mutton roasted in Blood. 230 Stewed Pig. 231 Steak Pie with Puddings. 232
Salmon dressed by Infusion. 233 Stewed Carps in blood. 236 Stump Pie. 244 Sauce
for Fowl. 260 Sorrel Sallad. 262 Sallad cold. Ib Sauce for Veal. 293 Sauce for
a Leg of Mutton. Ib. Souced Fish. 265 Swan baked. 275 Small Birds baked. 276
Stewed Pudding. 283 Sussex Pudding. 284 Sausages boiled. 292 Shellfish fried.
296 Steak, Pie. 303 Shoulder of Venison roasted, 304 Sallads boiled. 306
Shoulder of Veal boiled. 307 Stewed Broth good. 310 Sallad of Salmon. 312
Shoulder of Mutton with Oisters. 313 Stewed Artichokes. 311 Sauce for Fowl. 315
Sauce for Partridges. Ib. Sauce for Quails. 316 Salmon Pie. 329 Shaking
Pudding. 330 Stone Cream. 333 Snow Cream. 334 Sussex Pancake. 338 Snow and Ice.
340 Sillibub. 132 Sack Posset. 139 Sugar Plate. 144 Sallad in Winter. 341
Sallad in Winter. Ib. Sorrel Sops. 342 Scotch Brewis. 164
T.
TO boil a Teal or Wigeon. 269 Turkey baked. 275 Trouts stewed 300 Toasts of
Veal fried. 317 Tart of several Sweetmeats 339 Treacle Wine. 130
V.
VEnison baked to keep. 203 Umble Pies. 272 Veal smoored. 294 Veal roasted with
farcing herbs. 305 Veal fried. 318 Venison Pasty. 338 Vin de Molosso. 343
W.
WIld Fowls boiled 308 White Broth with Meat. 310 White Broth without Meat. Ib.
White Pot. 326 Whitings boiled, 335
Postcript.
NOw good Readers, here are three hundred and ten choice Receipts added for a
Second Part of the Queen-like Closet, and you may I am sure make many more of
them if you observe how many I have taught in one; if I had not taken that
course, only for brevity sake, and that it might not be tedious and impertinent
to you, I might have enlarged this Volume very much.

FINIS.

