Eremicus theologus, OR, A Sequestered Divine HIS APHORISMS, OR, BREVIATS of
Speculations. IN TWO CENTURIES. By Theophilus Wodenote, B. D. sometimes fellow
of Kings College in Cambridge.

Cantic. chap. 4. ver. 16. Awake, O Northwinde, and come thou South, blow upon
my garden, that the spices thereof may flow out. LONDON, Printed by T. W. for
Andrew Crook, at the Green Dragon, in S. Paul's Churchyard, 1654.

TO THE HIGHLY BORN, HONORABLY MINDED. AND WORTHY OF HONORABLE AND HIGH
RESPECT, MATTHEW HALSE of Efford in the County of Devon Esquire, THEOPHILUS
WODENOTE one of his obliged Orators dedicates these his Aphorisms, or Breviats
of Speculations; And daily beseeches God for him, that both he, and all his
issue, so specious already by affinity with so many Noble Progenies, and still
growing more and more eminent by their own sincere and abundant piety and
charity, may by divine mercy be preserved, thorough faith, unto salvation.

APHORISMS, OR, BREVIATS of Speculations.
The first Centurie.
1.
BEfore, and after, and in all businesses, and at all times, remember Prayer:
how can thou hope to speed in any thing thou do, if thou do it not in
Gods fear, and with his favor, which is the very soul of thy soul, and life
of thy life, so profitable, so necessary, that by it thy souls salvation, and
life it self lives? Let not thy unworthiness deterr thee, though thou art
subject to many passions, and can not pray as thou ought; Elias was
subject to the like, and yet prayed, and was heard James 5.17, 18.
. Upon a cry made the thief seeks to fly, and neighbors come to help: upon a
prayer made, the Devil shifts away, and God comes to succor.

2.
IN petitioning Almighty God, Ask, and it shall be given you; seek and ye
shall find; knock and it shall be opened unto you Matthew. 7.17.
; Not alone ask, and it shall be given you, there is not a full point; but seek,
and knock, as well as ask: our Savior uses a threefold phrase, and urges the
duty from one degree to another, with interposition of proportionable promises,
to signify, that we must pray often, be earnest; and zealous, for cold suitors
prove cold speeders. Cold and superficial requests can never pierce the
clouds, nor find any manner of access to the Throne of Grace. The prayer of the
righteous avails much, but with this condition, if it be fervent James 5.16.
; but put not ferventness in copiousness of syllables, but of sense, not in
lip-labor, but in heart-labour; God esteems not the loudness, or the length,
but the strength of prayer, nor weighes he the ready words, but the radical
devotion of him that praeth; Thou may pray, and cry, and outcrie others,
even without crying out: Moses prayer could not be heard on earth, Exodus 14.15.
and yet the cry of it came up to heaven: when the tongue cannot speak to God,
if with heart we can sigh to him, he understands that language, and we shall
be sure of help; A sigh sometimes will serve, if truly from the soul.

3.
TRust not with the Papists, to scale the high fort of Heaven, by the broken,
and rotten ladder of the merits of Saints, or thy own works or worthyness; but
place all thy hopes, and moove all thy suits, in the Name of Jesus Christ,
without whom neither thou, nor any of the Saints, have any thing to do with
God; but pray God for thy right in Jesus Christ, not to enter into judgment
with thee; but claim all thy right to blessedness by thy right in Jesus
Christ; without whom no man has right in any thing, saving in Gods
indignation, and his own destruction.

4.
PRay that thy faith may be scientious and unfeigned; that thy lise may be
conscientious and unspotted; Man's life and religion are for the most part like;
A sound faith, a sweet behavior; A false faith, a debauched demeanor; The
fountain being foul and noisome, can the water be fair and wholesome? Can a
bad tree bring forth good fruit? Do men gather grapes of thorns, or figs of
thistles Matthew. 7.16.
? Neither can their outward conversation be pure, whose inward persuasion is
not perfect.

5.
WHat books soever other men admire and make their Jewels, Let the Scriptures
be dearer unto thee, than all other books together: Let them be a lamp to thy
feet, and a light unto thy paths Psalm. 119.105.
. Set and settle thy continual considerations upon them: Wherein nothing is
superfluous, nor any thing wanting; wherein, whatsoever is taught, is truth,
whatsoever is commanded is goodness, whatsoever is promised is perfect
happiness; yea, which not only for pure and perfect matter, but for high and
heavenly expressions, so far excel, that they are not to be mentioned with
any other writings by way of comparison.

6.
HOw ragged are men's expressions? How poor the pithiness of their discourses?
In sight of the sacred Scriptures, their most accomplished Treatises are not so
much as the light of a candle, to the glorious brightness of the Sun in his
chiefest splendor: In Gods book every particle has his poize, every tittle is
useful; every syllable is sententious; every word is wonderful; He that once
truly knows it, cannot choose but love it; He that truly loves it, cannot choose
but with all the veins of his heart commend it to others.

7.
TAke not upon thee to justify whatsoever any the most learned men without
special inspiration has published; but whatsoever any penman of Scripture,
to whom the Holy Ghost did dictate, has set down, defend to thy death, and
with thy death; Men may err not knowing the Scriptures Matthew. 22.29.
; not attaining to the perfect sense of them; Apollo's a learned Doctor,
fervent in the Spirit, and mighty in the Scriptures, yet was he ignorant in
diverse things, and received instruction from Aquila and Priscilla Acts 18.26.
. We know in part, and we prophesy in part said S. Paul 1 Cor. 13.9.
, after long study, and many wonderful revelations; after God had exalted him
to the third heaven, and there showed him more than a man might conceive. In
sundry things, as men, we are many times much mistaken; but not a word in all
the sacred volumes, that can be either false, or faulty, the Scriptures of God
cannot err.

8.
TAke not advantages, but advertisements by Scripture; read it not to feed a
faction, but to find a truth; look both forward and backward, and diligently
ponder the circumstances, that thou may the more clearly perceive the
substance; catch not at the words, or phrases, but consider what the will of
the Lord is; Think not, when Christ says, that all that ever came before him
were thieves and robbers John. 10.8.
, that therefore Moses, Elias, Elisha, Isaiah, Jeremiah, and the rest of the
Prophets were no better than thieves and robbers; because they went before
Christ in time; but that such only were thieves; as professed themselves to be
the door of the sheep, or received, or showed any other than Christ himself;
think not when Saint Paul said, that he was made all things to all men 1 Cor.
p. 22.
, that therefore he did at his pleasure that which God had directly forbidden
to be done, that therefore he did make himself a libertine, or establish
libertinism, or purchase a protection for every man to do what seems good in
his own eyes; but that in matters free and indifferent, and undetermined, which
were not iepugnant to the Word, which were neither forbidden, nor commanded by
God, such as may indifferently be either used, or not used, with a good
conscience; according as the rules of godly discretion, circumstances duly
considered, shall direct: he, without hurting the faith, or offending the
righteous, changed himself into all fashions, and applied himself to the
conditions of all, that by all means he might save some.

9.
FRom particular privileges in Scripture, appointed by Almighty God for some
singular choice purposes, as from the Israelites spoiling the Egyptians of
their Jewels Exodus 12.36.
, or Samsons pulling down the house upon himself and others Judge. 16.30.
, as from Elias his calling of fire from heaven 2 Kings 1.10.
, or Elisha his cursing the children 2 Kings 2.24.
, or the like, collect not general precepts, or perpetual directions for the
Church; extraordinary facts are no ordinary rules; every example is not a Law
to bind every man to equal practice; thy argument taken from example is
naught, unless thy warrant be alike good.

10.
SUch allegories, as thou find expounded in the holy Scriptures, embrace, as
rules of Gods worship, matters of faith, and parts of religion, necessary to
salvation; but such as men's several devices frame out of them, and commend to
the world as hidden senses newly found out, neither believe them, nor desire to
know them; but leave them to such as love a hidden divinity, and a secret
religion devised in their own conceits, which will not abide the trial of the
light; such pleasing various fancies, without sacred evidence of Gods certain
approbation, are but plausible allusions, and no probative allegations, can
never work in the heart a full Theological persuasion. Conceive not with some
passionate Papists, in the heat of their disputations, that Gods Word is a
potentiall only, no active rule; that the Scriptures are not authentical
without the authority of the Church; that the authority of the Scriptures
depends upon the authority of the Church necessarily; Not go for advice to
the Church necessarily, but to the Law and to the testimony says the Prophet
Isaiah Isaiah 8.20.
, at that least examine and try the truth; Not what says the Church? but what
is written in the Law? how read thou? says our Savior Luke 10.26.
. Not the Church but the Scripture is the sole and supreme Judge of all
questions and Controversies of religion; The Church cannot give thee faith
whereby thou believe in Christ, and layest hold of eternal life, It is the
Scripture that works it by the inspiration of the holy Spirit; Thou may
set the dial by the Sun, Thou can not set the Sun by the dial; Thou may
appeal from the judgment of the Church to the Scriptures, Not from the
Scriptures to the Church.

12.
AS the wisemen stretched not their course beyond the direction of the star
Matthew. 2.9, 10, 11.
, so wander not thou in thy discourse, beyond the direction of the word; so
much knowledge of divine mysteries, as God has revealed in his sacred volumes,
content thy self with, and offer not thy self to pry any further into them. Be
sure thou make a resting place where God has placed a full point; resign thy
self up to his wisdom, adore his Counsels, and be not overcurious in any of
his doings, Neither suffer any, within thy walk and power, to make any
superfluous questions about them; If any do out of infidelity, or too much
curiosity, Answer him briefly with that holy and judicious Father Saint Austin,
(than whom few could better resolve doubts) Do thou dispute it, I will believe
it; Do thou reason it, I will admire it Tu disputa, ego credam, tu ratiocinare
ago mirabar.
; and rather seriously adore the worker, than curiously inquire the manner.

13.
GIve free ears of body, and full regard of mind to whatsoever God speaks in
a plain form, and frame of words; but give an excellent heedfulnes to the Lord,
where he uses a singular manner of speaking; There conceive some special
thing is to be marked; there think thou art called to that special parenthesis
of our Savior, who so reads let him understand Matthew. 24.15.
; where the Lord speaks strictly and artificially, be sure to add to thy
accustomed diligence a strict and artificial diligence, set thy attention
where he sets his words.

14.
WHatsoever scriptures thou read or hear, attend them carefully, and
apply them usefully some way or other unto thy self; for whatsoever was written
before time, was written (not at all adventures, or as histories, to hear, or
read for pleasure, but) for our learning, that we thorough patience and comfort
of the Scriptures might have hope Romans 15.4.
. What shall a salve do, be it never so sovereign, if it be not laid to the
sore? or what can the medicine avail, if it be not applied to the disease? We
do not find it written of David in particular, that he should do the will of
God, and yet in the volume of the book it is written of me, says he, that I
should do thy will, O God I am content to do it Psalm. 40.7.
; and yet he applies it in particular to himself, as if it had been spoken to
him by name.

15.
BE not like those bare-tonguy Christians in these days, whose mouths are full
of religion, but their hearts altogether empty; who show their faith by words,
not by works; who think to be perfectly trusted for their pure talking. Ty not
Gods Word to thy tongue, but bind it to thy fingers; not only profess it with
thy lips, but express it also, yea chiefly, in thy life: write it not in a
scroul, as the Romanists do Saint John's Gospel, tying it about their necks
for external preservation, or (as the Pharisees did the Decalogue between
their brows,) for external sign of holiness; but write it in the table of
thine heart, that thou may the better remember to put it in practice.

16.
TO Countenance sin allege not examples, hope not to stand upon the fall of
others; conclude not thy self safe, if thou can produce some holy men that
have gone before thee in the same sins; we may not imitate the vices but the
virtues of good men; sanctity goes not by presidents but by precepts; we are
not to live by examples; but by the Word, whereby our actions must be guided as
by a rule, and by no example without it: Examples in Scripture are not all
written for our imitation, that we may learn what to do; but a great number of
them for our admonition, that we may know what to shun.

17.
WHom thou now truly believe to be invisible, and immortal and
incomprehensible, Think not at any time that God is in earnest like one of us,
or that God has a body, because the Scriptures sometimes give him our parts,
because we read of the heart of God, eyes, ears, arms, hands, feet, and such
like; for the holy penmen, by now and then the things of God by the phrases of
men, for men's better apprehension, and readyer understanding; because we cannot
understanding; because we cannot understand how one should see without eyes, or
hear without ears, or show strength without arms. I speak after the manner
of men, says Saint Paul, because of the infirmity of your flesh Romans 6.19.
I speak as men commonly use, in regard of your weak capacities, and carnal
imaginations: taking the best way to be understood, to instruct your souls, and
affect your hearts. Come not to the hearing, or reading of such speeches, as
the Corinthians came together, not for the better, but for the worse 1 Cor.
11.17.
; gather not the more error from them, but the more knowledge: Hear them, or
read them, to that end, for which they were written, even for thy clearer
conception, and easier persuasion.

18.
IN all places, and amongst all persons, let thy maine care always be, to set
forward Gods cause, to defend his truth, to maintain his Name and estimation;
whenever it is any way questioned or evil spoken of. Have a greater care of
Gods glory, than of any others, or of thine own; and let it go nearer unto
thee, to hear Gods Name dishonored, than to have thine own destroyed; yea
rather than thou, O Lord, should lose any part of thy glory, which is most
proper, and precious unto thee, glory be for ever taken away from us, and our
honor with all contempt and disgrace laid in the dust, loss of credit and
reputation be to all our doings, and sayings, loss to our goods and good name,
and whatsoever in this world is most dear unto us.

19.
BE slow to wrath in the greatest in juries inferred upon thy self; but in the
least affront offered to God, put on all the indignation and rigor thou have:
Be mild, and forbearing, suffering, and soft, in causer of thy own, but in the
quarrel of God be magnanimous and fervent, sharp and severe, according to thy
power, and place. Moses in his own quarrel, in matter concerning himself, was
a man most meek, and had not an equal unto him in his time, for peaceable and
gentle behavior Numb. 12.2, 3.
; he quietly bare wonderful wrongs, and was easily persuaded to depart from
his right: But when he was to deal for God, he took upon him an holy
obstinanacy; He would not consent unto Pharao, that so much as an hoof should
remain behind them Exodus 10.26.
; but, when he spyed a Calf in the camp, when he perceived idolatry committed,
and Gods glory coming into question, He proclaimed a bloody massacre, and
pronounced the execution to be a consecration; yea he with his partakers
speedily sacrifised to God the blood of three thousand malefactors Exodus
32.27, 28, 29.
. S. Paul was not moved with thought of his own troubles, or danger of death;
but when he saw the City of Athens wholly given to idolatry, his spirit was
stirred in him, and though he did not as Moses, because he had not the like
authority, yet he disputed in the Synagogue with the Jews, and with the devout
persons, and in the Market daily with them that met with him Acts 17.16, 17.
.

20.
MAke, O make no long, yea no little tarrying to turn unto the Lord; put not
off from day to day, from youth to old age, when Summer is turned into Winter,
when the rain descends, and the floods come, and the winds blow Matthew. 7.27.
, when men are beset with troubles and sickness, with pain and grief, and
torment, when their wits and senses are taken up to devise remedies against
their diseases, to prevent, or to sustain the pangs of death; but remember thy
Creator, and remember a convenient time for thy Creator, remember thy
Creator in the days of thy youth, in thy young years, in thy flourishing
days, in thy time of prosperity; whilst thy senses are sharp, thy memory
quick, thy wit ripe, thy capacity ready, thy understanding deep; Remember his
might that thou may believe, his mercy that thou may hope, his justice
that thou may be fearful, his goodness that thou may be thankful
Augustinus.
.

21.
LOve all Gods children for his sake, and obey all superiors whom he has
appointed; The debt of love is general, we all owe it, and we owe it unto all;
but trust in God, and depend upon him only, join not any creature with him;
He is contented and has commanded, that we should perform all other duties to
all others, to whom they belong; Render therefore to all their dues, tribute to
whom tribute is due, custom to whom custom, fear to whom fear, honor to whom
honor appertains Romans 13.7.
; provided always that we yield them all to him chiefly, to him ever, and to
none so much as him; But the worship of confidence he has reserved wholly to
himself, neither may we communicate it to any other, upon any conditions,
without extreme disloyalty to him; what is it less than idolatry for the
meanest upon earth to tender it? and as much as it as sacrilege for the
mightiest up^arth to take it.

22.
OPen thy mouth, and thy mind, for thy brethren, when they are molested and
maligned, and laden with scandals and reproaches; but much more then for his
cause, and for his glory, that made thy mouth and thy mind. Be not ashamed of
his righteousness, or of his Gospel, lest he be ashamed of thee; confess his
Name before the sons of men, and thou shall be sure to be confessed before the
sons of God; Acknowledge Christ's truth, and he will acknowledge thee, before
the Angels and before his Father.

23.
IT has been the custom always of the best sort, to offer, in the best
manner, the best they had unto the best, that is to the Lord himself: Offer
thou likewise the best to God whenever thou have cause to offer, if ever thou
desire to be in the number of the best; otherwise the worst sort shall rise up
in judgment and condemn thee; the very idolaters that worshipped the works of
their own hands, and turned the truth of God into a lie, shall go before thee
into the Kingdom of heaven: They in their oblations thought not the worst they
had, or what came first to hand, as good enough, but brought the best they had,
would have brought better if they could, and thought nothing too much for their
newly devised God, they were content to spoil themselves that they might adorn
their idols Exodus 32.2, 3.


24.
STand upon thy credit, and provide things honest before men; A good name is
rather to be chosen than great riches, and loving favor than silver and gold
Prove. 22.1.
; It seasoneth the gifts that we have received, and makes them profitable unto
others. Be our parts never so transcendent, Be our gifts never so excellent, Be
we never so laden with spiritual grain, and food and treasure; yet if we
have not a good name to grace them, and countenance them, we can do very little
or no good with them. It was an honor to Demetrius that he had a good report
of all men, and of the truth if self 3. Epist. John v. 12.
: but stand no more upon thy credit than upon thy conscience, neither regard
more the shame of men, than the fear of God; Have him still before thine eyes,
who has thee always before his eyes, look up unto him continually, who never
leaves to look down upon thee; so shall thou walk evermore in his presence,
and be sure to become ever the more upright.

25.
NEither derogate any thing from the Majesty of God, albeit he vouchsafe
ordinarily to use external and ordinary means, in bringing his purposes to
pass; for he uses them freely, not of necessity, and he is as well able to
manifest his power, without them, as with them; He has a prerogative above the
prerogative of any Prince, to work above, and besides, yea and against nature.
Neither yet magnify the creatures, which the Lord at any time is pleased to
use, above that which is convenient, for any rare gifts and qualities that we
see in them; for that were to set them in the place of God, who have no more
efficacy than that which is given them from above from him who is the guide of
nature and the cause of causes, according to his own pleasure; but first and
above all give thou glory to God, to whom only it is due; and then for the
Lords sake honor thou the means, because God has put the honor of an
instrument upon it.

26.
NEver distrust in thy least, or greatest vexation, any the least or greatest
promise of God; for not one jot or one tittle of any shall fail to be
performed, in due time. Man is variable in his love and promises to his
neighbor; Men are subject, even the best men, both to deceive, and to be
deceived; Men promise much, and perform little: but, as God is not deceived, so
he cannot deceive, and, if thou be of any spiritual experience, thou can not
but know, that the Lord often brings to pass, more than he promises to do:
Doubt not therefore at any time of his Word, who is many times better than his
Word.

27.
ACcount it and acknowledge it always with all thankfulness, as a great mercy
of God, that he sends thee to school, and speaks to thee (who art not able
to abide the beauty and brightness of his majesty) by men and brethren like
unto thy self, and subject to like passions; If God himself should appear unto
thee, and utter his voice, his voice from heaven, then would thou fear, and
quake, and fall down as a dead man; or cry out with great astonishment as many
of the Fathers did, Alas I shall dye: we hear not the thunder without fear, we
behold not the brightness of the Sun without dazeling; how then should we hear
the immediate voice of God, or see his glory, without confusion? Then, if by
Gods mercyes, thou recoverest thy senses, thou would make request to have the
ministers of the Word to speak unto thee again, whom now thou despisest; and
whose words thou contemnest now as base, and contemptible, thou would then
desire and embrace.

28.
REmember it, and consider it, as a principle, whenever thou hear; that
howsoever we may not obey either man or Angel, if he speak any thing contrary
to the written Word, though he come with all show of learning, and all
appearance of unspotted and undefiled pureness: yet the greatest princes of the
world are bound to hear and obey the meanest man that God does send, so far as
he teaches according to his commission; If Princes resist the word of truth in
the Preachers mouth, they resist not the messenger, but the master that sent
him.

29.
GRow better, as thou growest elder; Be not like a dead hedge, with the many,
by standing longer, waxing rottener; Art thou past growth in body? yet art thou
not come to thy full growth in soul; thou so journest here in this valley of
tears, until thy faith be turned into vision, and thy hope into fruition. As
a new born babe desire the sincere milk of the Word, that thou may grow
thereby (...) I Pet. 2.2.
; The Apostle speaks it to the eldest as well as to the youngest. There is no
bound for this thy growth, but the common bound of thy mortality: Grow still in
grace, and in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ 2 Pet. 3.18, etc.
; without whom, all knowledge is ignorance, all wisdom foolishnes, all
learning madness, and all religion error, or hypocrisy, or superstition; and
of whom, the greatest part of that which thou know is not the least part of
that which thou know not; Never be to teach unwilling, or to learn ashamed.

30.
THink not thou have knowledge enough, for then thou clearly bewrayest thy
want of knowledge; such as have attained and received the greatest knowledge,
do find in themselves the greatest ignorance; such as imagine themselves to be
most sure and rich in understanding, are indeed most sottish and childish in
the matters of God: like empty vessels that make the greatest sound. Hereby
thou shall try thy self, whether thou have reached to any measure of acceptable
knowledge; if it work and kindle in thee a desire of more knowledge; if it do
praferre facem, hold the light before thee, to see thy own weakness; and if it
teach thee that still thy wants are greater than thy wealths.

31.
DEspise not, undervalew not, the the holy Word of God, because it is conveied
unto thee by sinful man: Forsake not the exercises of religion for the
wickedness or unworthiness of the Minister; As thou art not to receive his
doctrine for his good life, so thou art not to reject it for his evil life: An
evil Messenger may deliver a good message. The Pharisees in the days of
Christ were lewd livers, full of pride, covetousnes, hypocrisy, and
dissimulation, and many of them of other tribes than of Levy; yet so long as
they fate in Moses chair, that is, held themselves to Moses text and doctrine,
the disciples are commanded ded to hear them (as damned hypocrites as they
were) and to do whatsoever they commanded Matthew. 23.2, 3.
; which words our Savior would never have delivered, if either the Minister
might have defiled the Word, or any man be allowed for the faults of the
Minister to have rejected and refused the Lords Mysteries.

32.
IF thou would increase in learning, and grow in grace, set thine ears to
harken to the Word; if thou would not have thy prayers despised, despise not
the Word; to hear the Word come thou never careless, lest thou depart
fruitless; come thou never with any contempt, least thou reap condemnation;
whosoever busieth himself in other things, as gazing here and there, observing
clothes, and countenances, remooving, talking, beckning, nodding, and such like
gestures, whilst he is hearing, hears but with half an ear, if with half an
ear, whereas both are too little for so high a work; whereas all the powers
both of soul and body should for that time wait upon the voice of the Preacher.

33.
Whenever thou art resolved to hear, be an humble suter to God for a blessing
both upon thy self and the preacher; upon the preacher to prepare his speech,
upon thy self to persuade thy soul: For though hearing of necessity go before
faith, yet faith does not of necessity follow after hearing; The fowler
catches not every bird he calls, neither does the preacher win every soul
he wooeth; whom the Holy Ghost teaches not inwardly they return unlearned Quos
Spiritus Sanctus non intus docet, indocti redeunt. August. in epist. Johan.
tract. 3.
; It is not man's words that makes man understand Gods Words, It is God that
makes him to understand Non ver by hominis fit ut intelligatur verbum Dei,
facit Deus ut intelligatis. Aug.
; He has his chair in heaven that mooveth hearts on earth Cathedram in coele
habet qui corda movet. Aug.
.

34.
COme not to the house of God, only to hear others taught, but to learn thy
self too; come not to refresh thy self, but to reform thy life; Affect not such
teaching, as appears to be most plausible, but such as is most profitable;
not that which may please the ear, but that which may pierce the heart: Attend
not so much what well digested order, what eloquence, what learning the
preacher shows, as what misopinions he detecteth, what schisms or heresies
he convinces, what sins he reprooveth, that so thou may the sooner come to
repentance. There is danger in not hearing, and no less danger in hearing and
not profiting; It is not more wicked not to come to hear, than to come and
hear, and mind to be wicked; Better not come to hearing, than not come, by
hearing, to be better.

35.
HEar not the Word by parts, and parcels, by clauses or cantels only, so far
as it agrees with thy humor, and keeps fair and far off from meddling with
thy offenses; but attend and hear as well the judgments of God thundered out
against thee, in the Law, as the sweet promises pronounced, and offered in the
Gospel; as well the laying open of thy own sins, as the publishing of the sins
of other men: we are ready to hear all things that are commanded thee of God,
says Cornelius Acts 10.33.
, when Peter came to preach at his house; not to hear only such things as we
like, but to hear all things that are commanded thee of God; though thou be
charged to press most earnestly upon us, to turn from our most pleasing ways. O
who comes to hear now adays with the like mind? And yet, as he must be
reformed whosoever will be saved, so he must with a calm, and subdued heart,
intertain all just reproofs, whosoever desires to be reformed.

36.
SUbmit thy self unto thy Minister with reverence and patience, not only when
thou hear pleasing things, precious promises, and gracious comforts; but
when thou hear him, according to Gods Word, sounding an alarm in thine ears,
uttering reproofs, delivering threatenings, and denouncing judgments, against
the prevailing sins of the time (and therefore perhaps thine amongst the rest)
as lying, slandering, murmuring, and treason, pride and oppression, malice and
cruelty: The which howsoever it seem as bitter potions and very distasteful to
flesh and blood, yet is it very wholesome for the soul and spirit, may help to
purge away the gross humors of sin, and preserve from eternal death. No
wickeder man than he, who being hardened in sin hates to be reprooved, who
cannot without raging endure to hear him, by whom he is meekly and wisely
rebuked for his sins.

37.
THat thou may not perish, but profit, by the threatenings of God; know that
the denunciations of Gods Judgments, are, for the most part, conditional, not
absolute, toward his people; and to be undestood with this exception, except
they repent Luke 13.3.5. Apoc. 2.5.
; If we be hereupon stirred up to repentance and new obedience, even in the
greatest and most fearful threatenings of Gods heavy Judgments, there is
comfort remaining, and hope of grace and mercy to be found, there is health in
sickness, and life in death.

38.
NEither read, nor hear, as travailers by the Law might ear grapes Deuteronomy. 23.25.
, that is, eat some for the present time, but carry none away with them; but
whatsoever good thou read or hear, learn to remember it, and remember to
follow it; remember it, love it, practice it; remember it that thou may
earnestly love it, love it that thou may continually practice it, and
persevere in it; to read it, or hear it, and not to remember it, is ridiculous;
to remember it, and not to love it, is vain; to love it, and not to practice
it, is absurd; but to remember it, love it, practice it, and persevere in it,
is the way to everlasting blessedness.

39.
UNderstand this and mark it, that outward service separated from inward
obedience is not respected but rejected of God; If thou keep from him the one,
he cares not for the other; naked hearing is but a needless halting in Gods
sight, which God cannot abide; bare receiving of the holy Sacrament, without
faith, without love, without conscience, is but a base deceiving of thy own
soul.

40.
KNowledge and practice of Gods will are as two wings whereby we must fly up
to heaven; there is no flying with the one alone; It is not enough to know what
to do, unless we labor to do what we know; knowledge without obedience and
employment is not a virtue for good, but a venom for hurt, and in such an
unthrifty steward, the more, increase of science, the more increase of sorrow:
For what can he look for in the end, but an equal number of stripes, according
to the measure of his unfruitful understanding? Even ignorance thorough want
of the means, shall exempt no person from offense, or condemnation; He that
knows not his masters will shall not altogether escape unpunished, though his
case be more tolerable, though his censure shall be the less, though he be
beaten with fewer strips; but on him, to whom the Lord has vouchsafed the
means of knowledge, will he be sure to power down the greater vengeance; but
that servant that knew his Masters will, and prepared not himself, neither did
according to his Luke 12.47, 48.
will, shall be beaten with many stripes; the better he knows, the worse he
shall be beaten.

41.
ADscribe neither too much, nor too little to thy Minister; Neither despise
him, nor deify him, as the manner of some is; Esteem him not as a principal
author, but as a subordinate actor, Not as a Lord, (which the Apostles every
where disclaim) but as a steward, Not as a Master, but a Minister; And yet
account him, not as a common and ordinary servant, but a man of God 2 Kings
4.27.
, a servant of the most high God, that shows unto thee the way of Salvation
Acts 16.17.
; And yet account him, as he is indeed, not only a seer, but an overseer Acts
20.28.
, a steward of Gods high secrets 1 Cor. 4.1.
, a messenger of the Lord of hosts Malac. 2.7.
, who is appointed to be the opener and declarer of the will of God amongst the
people; by whose embassage there is peace concluded and reconciliation
ministerially made between God and man 2 Cor. 5.18, 19, 20.
; the mouth of God unto the people by preaching, and by praying the mouth of
the people unto God; one that in special place stands before God, and
ministers unto him upon earth, as the Angels minister unto him in heaven Rev.
1.20.2.1.3.1.
.

42.
WHatsoever public mislike, or private unkindness fall out, yet fall not out of
charity with him, whom God has thought fittest to make thy Pastor; That
special proviso, that strict charge, is not yet out of date, but in full force
all thy life long, Take heed to thy self that thou forsake not the Levite, as
long as thou live upon the earth Deuteronomy. 12.19.
; Did God, as men commonly do, make slight account of the Levite, he would not
set so strong a guard about him, for his credit, and preservation. The Jews
have a saying, that whosoever dies in the displeasure of his Rabbi, that is,
of him that has charge of his soul, he shall not be forgiven in this world, or
the world to come: I dare not affirm so much; But this I dare affirm, and can
confirm, that dying, or living, to despise thy overseer, if it be not
unpardonable, yet it is unprofitable, and that for thy self: obey them that
have the rule over you, and submit your serves (to their good exhortations) for
they watch for your souls, as they that must give an account, that they may do
it with joy, and not with grief, for that is unprofitable for you, says the
Apostle Heb. 13.17.
, For if you grieve your overseers you will make them faint and quail away,
and so you shall want guides to go in and out before you, and then you shall be
ready and a fit prey for that roaring Lion that goes about seeking whom he may
devour. Nay I dare boldly say more, to despise thy Priest, though never so low,
is a sin of so high nature, that it is no lower than to despise the high Priest
Christ Jesus, He that despises you (in thought, word, or deed) despises me;
and he that despises me, despises him that sent me, says Christ himself Luke
10.16.
.

43.
FAithless wretches and no better let them ever be in thy esteem, Never think
them trust-worthy, whom thou see maliciously bent against the persons of
their faithful Pastors; Revile not, abuse not, offend not any of those that
are called of God to be the Ministers of his Word, to be the stewards of his
mysteries 1 Cor. 4.1.
, and to be his Ambassadors 2 Cor. 5.20.
, whom he has set to be near unto him, and to be in special grace and favor
with him. Dare any contend with him that is the Kings friend or favorite? Do
not all desire, and seek his favor? How then dare any disgrace and dishonor
those, and seek their utter ruin, whom God has pleased to make, as it were,
of his privy Counsel, not to give him Counsel, but to take counsel from him,
and to reveal his counsel to the sons of men Amos 3.7. Acts 20.27.
?

44.
IN all thy secret and unknown sins (which thou tookest not to be sins, which
thou in weakness and ignorance have committed), A general acknowledgment, and
general (if serious) mourning for them, may procure thy pardon; but thy known
sins thou must confess in special, the several kind of them at least, though
thou can not remember the individuals; and pray with earnestnes of spirit, as
for life, and death, for the remission of them; thou must uncase, and uncover
them, with all their circumstances, if thou would have God to cover them with
the precious garment of JESUS CHRIST; Blessed is the man whose sins are
covered, David says Psalm. 32.1.
, but whose sins are covered by Christ, not by himself; himself must open them;
David's heart smote him after he had numbered the people out of his mere pride
and vanity to know how many thousand strong he was: and when he saw multitudes
of the people swept away with the pestilence for his sin, with extreme sorrow
of heart he cried unto the Lord, and said, Lo I have sinned, and I have done
wickedly, but these sheep what have they done? Let thy hand, I pray thee, be
against me, and against my Fathers house 2 Samuel 24.17.
.

45.
Always remember that there are privative sins, as well as positive, negative,
as well as affirmative; Not to do good, is to do evil; As well the forsaking
or neglecting of necessary duties, as the practicing and pursuing opposite
evils may make a man stand guilty of sin in Gods sight; He is called a wicked
and slothful servant, who put not his Lords money to the exchangers, thought
he had hid it in the earth, and kept it safely; and the same is cast into utter
darkness not for wasting his talent, or abusing it unto oppression, but for
letting it rust, for not endeavoring to use it to his masters the Donors
advantage, according to his appointment Matthew. 25.26, 27, 30.
; Even Christ himself yields this much against himself, that if he had not
done that good deed to the man with the withered hand, he had done evil, and
if he had not given life to that dead member of his, he had so far killed him
Luke 6.9.
; It was not acting enmity, but omitting amity, not the taking away of others
goods, but not giving of his own, that threw that delicious cormorant Dives
into Hell Non quod abstulerit aliena, sed quod non donarit sua. Greg. homil.
40. in Evang.
; He took nothing from Lazarus, He robbed him not of a rag, He got not from him
a crum of bread, or a drop of water; and yet he is accounted cruel and
unmercifull, and is cast into torments Luke 16.23.
.

46.
BEware of superficialnes, and intertain seriousness whenever thou art about
any divine office either for others, or for thy self; Let not thy mind wander,
remember what thou have in hand, consider what thou art doing, do it with thy
best exactness; In examination call not only thy proceedings and deeds, but thy
intents and thoughts to account; In humiliation condemn thy inward cogitations
which appear vain, as well as thy outward courses which appear violent; In
reformation omit not to purge thy soul from impious imaginations, when thou
meanest to cleanse thy life from ungodly conversation. Oh there is no sin can
be so small, but it deserves the anger of God, and is too great to be
cherished; Nay the very entrance and being of any vile conceit within us,
though we do not cherish it, though neither deed follow, nor heart consent, is
yet no less than a traitor to Gods Majesty.

47.
TRust not to thy trembling at the judgments of God, to thy fear to commit sin,
to thy sorrow for it when thou have committed it; trust not to the contrition
of thy heart, to the confession of thy tongue, to the repaiment of the ill
gotten-goods, which the common Papists make to be the three essential parts of
true repentance; For even the very reprobate may go so far in their profession,
and yet afterward fall away; All such qualities and practices might be found
in some measure in Judas, that betrayed his master Matthew. 27.34.
; but let thy repentance proceed with conversion to God, with hope of mercy,
with prayer for pardon, with bewailing whatsoever is amiss, and laboring to
amend whatsoever thou bewailest; with hatred of sin, with love of
righteousness; but let it proceed with turning thine eyes that were windows to
let in iniquity, into doors to let it out; but let it persevere with a true
turning of thy heart, and a right reformation of thy life; For that is the way
that has the promise: He that confesses, and forsakes his sins, shall have
mercy Prove. 28.13.
; He that joins with his acknowledgment of what he has offended in, a settled
purpose to renounce and strive against the same, yea and all corruptions else,
He it is whom God accepts, He it is which shall find favor with the Lord; He
that confesses his sins, and would forsake his sins, before the earthly Judge,
is many times condemned; but he that confesses his sins, and forsakes his
sins, before the heavenly Judge, is always acquitted.

48.
WHat though thou can not attain to loath sinsulness with so great a
detestation, and to follow righteousness with so great a desire, as some other
Saints have done? yet be not maskered, be not disanimated, fear not the losing
of thy reward, if thou keep on still according to thy strength, to fly the one
truly, and follow the other faithfully: God uses not to charge any man with
the evil which he allows not, but hates, and striveth against, though his
seet be sometimes in a wrong path; and he cannot thoroughly avoid it; and how
mercifully does he approve every man for the good that he desires and
indeavoureth to do, though he now and then swarve from it, and cannot perfectly
effect it?

49.
IF thy soul be truly penitent, with great grief and heaviness of heart, for
all thy sins; If thou sincerely cry to God for mercy, and forgiveness, and
bring forth fruits worthy amendment of life; If thou renounce al merit of
righteousness in thy self, and fly to the merits and righteousness of Christ;
Never account thy estate and condition forlorn and desperate; Never doubt of
Gods mercy though thou have sinned often, and often showed thy weakness in the
same sins; Dare thou set any bounds to Gods grace? When the Apostle S. Peter
asked Christ how often he should forgive his brother, whether seven times? Did
not our Savior answer, Not seven times only, but seventy times seven Matthew.
18.22.
, in the bare letter of the text, but according to the true meaning of the
same, even so many times as he trespassed against him, though they were times
beyond special number Toties quoties August. sermon. 15. de verbis Domini.
Vicibus innumerabiliter innumer abilibus, Maldonat. in locum. Species numeri
magni pro numero magno in genere. Piscator in loc.
? O speech full of consolation, how does it any mate us to repose on the Lords
mercy? Is not the Lord greater than man? Is he not better than man? If he
require so great compassion in a man, in a sinful man, to forgive his brother
trespassing against him so often; what compassion is in himself, to forgive his
own poor penitent creature that prostrates himself to his mercy? The Lord, who
has enjoined us to forgive so often, will much more freely do it himself;
whose mercy is infinite, whose favor is incomprehensible, whose loving
kindness indureth for ever.

50.
LOok both behind thee to bewail sins past, and before thee to beware of sins
to come; He repents not heartily that amends not thoroughly, refolveth not at
least thoroughly to mend. With a right deploration of sin, there is ever a true
detestation of sin; Death may defeat the performance of thy purpose, or God may
permit Satan to tempt thee afresh presently, and powerfully, but there must be
in thine heart a resolution, at least, an intent of reformation, or else it is
no sincere, but a seeming repentance.

51.
Think it not enough to make conscience of some greater sins, so long as thou
neglectest smaller; Neither yet make conscience of some petty sins, neglecting
greater: Beware of limiting thy duty to God, perform obedience to thy utmost
power; If, when thou have done thy best, thou yet fail in fit measure; Be not
sour in thy self where God is sweet, vex not thy self out of measure; God
measures not our work but out will, He remitteth what is wanting, He receaveth
what what is well.

52.
NEver think it enough to believe only in general, that God is just, and that
Christ has suffered to satisfy the justice of God; For (whatsoever some prime
Papists teach Bellar. lib. 1. de justific. cap. 7.
, what can a confused and implicit faith profit? how can that faith ever save
thee, when the ungodly and Satan believe as much, when the Devils believe and
tremble? but endeavor, by all good means, to be able to apply Christ and his
benefits unto thy self in particular; The particular faith is the only
comfortable faith, and by this the just man lives Habac. 2.4.
; As faith is the life of a Christian soul, so an individual application is
the life of faith; O God, thou art my God, says David Psalm. 63.1:
; and again, Deliver me O my God, out of the hands of the wicked Psalm, 71.4.
; and again, Thou art my God, and I will praise thee, thou art my God, I will
exalt thee Psalm. 118.28.
; and so in many other Psalms; My Lord and my God, says Thomas John 20.28.
, being ravished with Christ's assured presence, and his having obtained victory
over his doubting: who has loved me, and given himself for me, says Paul
Galat. 2.20.
, apprehending and applying the merits of his Savior to his soul, as the
medicine to the malady.

53.
IF the departing of others from their faith, whom thou conceivedst more likely
to have departed from their lives; Satan's alleging and aggravating thine
infirmities, affronting and affrighting thee with Gods Justice, troubles and
persecutions, one after another (like Job's messengers) shake and stagger thee,
make thee question thy own faith; yet if with thy faith in God thou feel in
thy self a hatred of sin, and a desire of righteousness, which refraineth thee
from much wickedness, and stirs thee up to some works of virtue (although
there remain in thee the relicts of sin, yea a motion unto sin contrary to the
Spirit of God, which also breaks out sometimes into actual sins) yet if thy
conscience shall not upbraid thee with sin wilful and presumptuous; if thy
hearts delight has always been in Gods Statutes, and thy study to thy strength
to abandon all iniquity, soundly without guile, and humbly without pride, It is
a hand and seal unto thy soul to make it sure thou shall be saved.

54.
Do thou doubt and fear that thou truly love not grace and salvation, and
yet love all the ordinances of God for man's salvation, and yet hungrest and
thirstest after the word and Sacraments, and all other Christian exercises? Be
not deceived, be not discouraged, These are sure effects of sincerity; These
things make it apparent that thy doubts are of no weight, and thy fears
frivolous; Thou could not with so great care and circumspection seek, if thou
were not willing to find; Thou could not with so great speed and resolution
travel, if thou had not hearty mind to thy journeys end, even the salvation
of thy soul 1 Pet. 1.9.
.

55.
Do thou feel sometimes a doleful change in thy mind? Is thy soul cast down,
and disquieted within thee? Does thy faith sometimes fearfully stagger? Art
thou ready to give over thy hold of God? Yet out of his gracious goodness will
he never give over the hold that he has of thee; His anchor is so firmly
settled and fixed upon the ground of thy heart, that no storms or tempests can
shake or loose it; Art thou prone sometimes to leave God? yet is he resolved
not to leave thee, or to lose thee; The Lord has bought thee at too high a
price to part upon such low terms from thee,

56.
See thou the wicked so forward to put evil motions in practice, that they
no sooner apprehend them, but approve them, no sooner approove, them than
execute them, yea proceed and continue in them cheerfully and constantly? Tell
not them of Bears or Lions in the way: They are busy in pursuing their game,
and they will get it whatsoever it cost them, for they have so decreed and set
it down; Oh be thou as ready to intertaine the good motions of Gods holy
Spirit; Esteem of them highly, and embrace them heartily, practice them freely
and faithfully, and return the strength to the giver; so shall God plentifully
power down his grace upon thee, so shall thou never want favor after favor;
God will never fail to add good to him, who imployes that good which he has
received; Employ all those gifts thou have, and look for more; Employ them not,
and look to lose what thou have; whosoever has to him shall be given, and he
shall have more abundance Matthew. 13.12.
, and whosoever has not from him shall be taken even that which he seems to
have Luke 8.18. (...).
.

57.
BE not a sluggard in any good calling, and much less in thy calling to
Christianity; notwithstanding all discouragements, temptations and oppositions
to the contrary, that may stand up in the way to hinder thee; The calling of a
Christian can least of all others stand with idleness; If the idle man's belly
shall be pinched and starved for want of food Prove. 6.11.
, and his back clothed with rags Prove. 23.21.
; If by doing nothing he shall bring himself to nothing, and having no calling
poverty have a calling to arrest him; How shall the idle Christians soul
speed; what regard, what intertainment shall that have? wish not only for grace
and salvation, but work out thy salvation with fear and trembling Philip. 2.12.
; If every languishing and lazy flash of every wisher and woulder were enough,
there would be swarms of reprobates in heaven, flocks and flights of people
would never fall into destruction, if words and desires without religious and
righteous deeds would preserve them from it; Balaam that wretched, covetous
hypocrit, wished that he might die the death of the righteous Numb. 23.10.
, but he took no care to live the life of the righteous, which might have
assured him of dying well; The foolish Virgins would have gladly gone in with
the Bridegroom, they hoped after oil of the wiser Virgins, and begged hard to
be let in, if that might have prevailed; But they bewailed their want, and went
to buy oil for their Lamps when it was too late, but they would not be at the
pains and charges to provide themselves of oil in due time; but they had it
not in readiness when the Lord came suddenly in the night: and therefore they
reaped the sour fruit of their sweet security, they had the gates of the
Bridegroom, and the door of eternal life shut up against them, and were
excluded into perpetual darkness where is weeping and gnashing of teeth Matthew.
25.2, 3, etc.
.

58.
IN all the actions and transactions of thy life, Let thy projects be pious and
righteous, and thy practices proportionable and allowable; to aim at the best
ends by by-ways is schismatic, to walk in the most worthy ways to wry
intents is hypocritical, to desire neither lawful works nor lawful ways is
Atheistical, but to labor at least for the right prize by the right path, is
always both comfortable and commendable, is both the office and wisdom of a
Christian.

59.
LEt there be in thy purpose sincerity in thy practice integrity, in thy
disposition diligence, in thy proceeding perseverance; Let thy duties both to
God and man, be without dissembling, without diminishing, without repining,
without revolting.

60.
BE always rich in the work of the Lord 1 Cor. 15.58.
, ready to distribute, willing to communicate 1 Timothy 6.18.
; Be ready to every work Titus 3.1.
, which either the common duty of Christianity, or thy own private calling
requires of thee; or with such sacrifices God is well pleased Heb. 13.16.
; and faith very probably prooved; The historical faith, or faith of miracles
may appear without good works as in the Devils who have one of them, and in
Judas that damned reprobate who had both of them; but the true justifying faith
that ingraffs thee into Christ, that reconciles thee to God, that quits thy
sin, and saves thy soul can never be known to others nor to thy self, but by
good works; There may happily be works where there is not faith, but there is
certainly no true faith where there are no works; They are the tokens and
trials, the pulse and breath at least of a lively faith; and by want of them,
thou may as well conclude want of faith, as by the ceasing of the pulse, and
breath, conclude the ceasing of life.

61.
IT is not enough to do well, unless thou speedily dispatch what thou do;
Delays, in any thing that is good, are ill, and in the best things worst;
deadness and drowsiness in doing duty is no fit service in his sight, who
requires ferventness; and cheerfulness in all good actions; There may be as
great a fault in practicing a virtue too late, as in performing a vice too
soon; say not to thy neighbor, go and come again, and to morrow I will give
thee, when thou have it by thee Prove. 3.28.
, when thou have wherewith to supply his wants to day: To morrow may never
come, either to him, or thee, or, if it come to thee, it may come unseasonable
and unable to do him good; what avails it to let the grass grow when the
horse starveth? or when the steed is stolen to shut the stable door?

62.
ARt thou advanced to authority, and established in high place? make not much
of vile persons of what estate soever, whose true title, for all their other
titles, is, that they are the enemies of God: but make much of and be sure to
honor those that sear the Lord, and walk in his ways, how mean soever they
are upon earth, if ever thou desire and hope to inherit glory with them in
heaven. Look not with so great regard how personable men are, or of what birth,
or wealth, as of what faith and conscience, and pious deportment; show most
curtesy to those that are most Christian, and give best countenance to them
that are of best behavior. If God have deputed thee to keep his room, to
resemble his Majesty, to bear his image, it is not only comely but necessary,
thou should follow his example, whose bountiful favors never fail the
righteous, nor the light of his loving countenance at any time shines on the
wicked.

63.
LOve all, even thy deadlyest enemies, and do good unto them, and that not only
in their prosperity and flourishing estate, but in their greatest need, so far
as thou do not maintain, and help them against Christ; yea as thou see the
gifts of God more clearly to shine, and more manifestly to multiply in them, so
let thy love increase toward them; Let not their will or work to hurt thee,
overcome thy will or work to help them; Adjoin not thy impatiency to their
injustice, keep them not off from thee by opposing, or upbraiding, but rather
draw them nearer unto thee, by prayer and kindness; It is in vain for thee to
represent and press, what evil they have done unto thee, how many ways they
have wronged thee; should Christ have loved none but his friends, he had never
loved thee; It is impossible for men to do that wrong one to another, which we
have done all to God; There can be no surer pledge to thy soul, that thy sins
are forgiven with God, and that he favors thee, than if thou find a
readiness in thy self to remit injuries, and to favor those that do them; but
especially make much of the household of faith, but more affectionatly and more
liberally Christians by profession, Majori and affectu and effectu. Ber.
Saints by calling, heirs by faith, but especially do good to those that are
the sons of God by grace and adoption, that are thy brethren by grace and
sanctification, whom God has engraven as a signet in the palm of his hand, and
whom he tendereth as the apple of his ey; Let them have the privilege of an
elder brother, even a doubly portion; who when for thy miscarriages they
privately blame thee, do not meanly profit thee, and pleasure thee, by showing
thy sins to thy self, and covering them from other; and yet that is all the
injury thou art like to receive from them.

64.
BE not hollow-hearted, but sincerely affected; Be not, like subtle Saul 1 Samuel 18.17.
, and hypocritical Absalon 2 Samuel 15.5.
, only kind in fair salutations, and friendly words; but, like faithful
Jonathan 1 Samuel 18.4.
, and honest Onesiphorus 2 Timothy 1.16. (...)
, in deeds make good thy kindness, and manifest thy truth; and that not
forcibly, or with grudging, but with good will, cheerfully, and that not
sparingly, or basely, but bountifully, and with a large hand; If thou shall do
this from the true ground, because God has commanded, and to a right end, that
God may be glorified, and thy neighbor bettered, there shall not be wanting
any thing to true liberality.

65.
SUch as are wronged, and oppressed, and cannot help themselves, be ready to
help, by all good means thou can afford; by thy deeds, and by thy words, by
thy Counsel and by thy comforts, by thy pleading with men for them, and
prayers to to God; and the more help them the weaker they are to help
themselves, and the stronger thou art to help them; He that hasteneth to be
merciful to another, shall himself in the like case soonest obtain mercy;
Neither is there a surer sign than mercy to be found of any man's present being
under mercy.

66.
FOr thy neighbors virtues allow not his vices; Neither for his vices condemn
his virtues; Hate not so much his sudden passions, as never to love his sober
actions; obscure not the glory of Gods gifts upon whomsoever bestowed; but
wisely distinguishing between every man's good properties, and his bad, Let the
one be as a rock, the other as a rule, let the one divert thee, the other
direct thee.

67.
NEither seek, nor admit imbowelled intireness, or any special familiarity
with those notorious hypocrites, those soul-murderers, who either poison the
Church with heresy, Pejus est Ecclesiam scindere, guam idolis sacrificare.
August.
or (which is worse than to sacrifise to Idols) dismember and rent it asunder
with schism; who labor to alienate the minds of men from their right teachers,
and from the Word and Sacraments in the Church of this Land, because of their
private dislikings and discontents; (to the hinderance of the chief business,
and furtherance of the common enemy) whose friendship is servitude and abides
not equality, whose kisses are treasons, whose religion is policy, and whose
policy wickedness; who infect all whom they can draw within the compass of
communication; and intise as many as they can possibly within that compass;
with whom a man cannot peaceably live in this world, except he will believe
with them, and with whom a man cannot believ, if he perfectly trust to live in
the world to come.

68.
BE not more careful what thou eatest, or drinkest, than amongst whom thou
eatest, or drinkest: For there are some whose places we should rather desire,
than their persons, and their rooms, rather than their company; who have
forsaken God, and whom God has forsaken; with the which loathsome and
despicable men, more virulent and contagious than the breath of a Basilisk, we
may neither eat, nor drink, that is, not familiarly converse; Evil words
corrupt good manners 1 Cor. 15.33.
; and what then does evil company do? Oh what dangerous infection has evil
conversation often brought and wrought in those, who had made no small progress
in Christianity? conversation breeds that in continuance, that is not beaten
off in any continuance.

69.
ARe they only now adays held complete and furnished cap-a-pe that can sort
themselves to all companies, that can indifferently converse with all manner of
persons, yea though they know their ill qualities as well as if they were
stamped in their foreheads? yet consider with all diligence whom thou admittest
into thy house, or in whose house thou betakest thy self to dwell; avoid all
private and customary conversation with the wicked, though not public commerce
Malorum consortia fugere debemus quoad privatam consuetudinem non quo ad
publicam conversationem. Ambrosius offic. lib. 1. cap. 18.
; Decline their very presence as much as thou may, except thou be to
discern their diseases, and minister medicines to cure them, or necessity of
some duty of religion, or of thy vocation, or love or humanity command thee to
be with them. What man in his right wits would wittingly and wilfully thrust
himself into the hands of thieves, having no less charge than the precious
graces of Gods Spirit about him? Enter not into the path of the wicked, says
Solomon, and go not in the way of evil men, avoid it, pass not by it, turn
from it, and pass away Prove. 4.14, 15.
; what an heap of words does he use? and to what serve so many repetitions? but
to show the exceeding danger of communicating with the wicked, and how hardly
we are drawn to leave them.

70.
BEtter others by thy company, or by thy company better thy self; Either
always learn some good of others, or be teaching some good thing to others;
Has thy neighbor any resplendent grace? make it thine; Have thou any rare
gift? make it his; what rather should be the center of all our conversation and
conference, than to help and further one another in knowledge, and the practice
thereof, than to make those that are bad good, and those which are good better?

71.
FLatter not thy self that any sin is the less, the more commit it; walk not on
the bolder in any sin, because thou see a multitude of fellows in it; For
what is an unregenerate and unsanctified company, but a rout of Rebels and an
heap of confederates conspiring together against God? Even the learned
heathen thought it not the least part of their glory, to steer a course (like
the Antipodes) clean opposite to the liking of the vulgar; How much more,
though thou have multitudes wilfully to go before thee, should thou know,
whom they follow, before thou willingly follow and join thy self with them? If
thou offend with others, thou shall be punished with others; and, if thou sin
with great troops, thou shall suffer with great troops; can thou think it
will be any consolation unto thee, in the end, that, as thou have not sinned
alone, so thou shall not be punished alone? what profit has the thief that is
going to the place of execution, to see a train of many others bear him
company? Is his judgment any whit the soster? or is his comfort any whit the
sounder?

72.
PUll up thy spirits, and excite thy self, not only to do good, but to be
chief in doing good, but to labor, like S. Paul, more abundantly than others 1
Cor. 15.10.
; Hasten and strive in any good course to run before others, to lead them the
way; that thou may have the greater and better reward in that great day; The
chief and principal in any good work that draw on and encourage others in the
way of godlyness by their earnest example, their reward, no doubt, shall be
exceeding great, they shall have a chief and principal compensation; the wages
shall be sure to be according to the works.

73.
ADmire not all the fayings and doings of worshipful and wealthy men; Neither
think that all that have power and titles are surely wise; but rather more
especially pray for them, that they may be wise; for it is good, yea necessary
for them, who have gotten the greatest inheritances, to get the greatest
wisdom; that will make their possessions yet better, and that will bring them
to a better use of their possessions, that will incite them to prayer, and
thankfulness; that will moove them to compassion and mercy, and make them able
and ready to exercise every good duty in their calling: As on the other side
their wealthyness, without wisdom, will be a ginne and temptation to lewdness,
and but as a sword in a madd man's hand.

74.
LEt not the dew of Heaven, and the store of the Earth become snares unto thee
and occasions of falling; If thou be hedged about with outward blessings, and
God have given thee great abundance to enjoy; If riches increase, though by
never so honest means, though never so well gotten, or well saved, or well
employed; yet trust not in them, boast not of them, set not thy heart upon
them: set thy eyes and hands and marks and seals upon them, but not thy heart,
at least settle not thy heart upon them; settle that wholly and soly upon God;
settle not the least piece of it upon any other delight whatsoever; God loves
indeed a broken heart, as the Psalmist says Psalm. 51.17.
; but not broken into pieces between him and the world, but a wounded heart he
means, lanced and torn with anguish for sins, because it is guilty of much
undutifull, and offensive carriage toward God.

75.
SEarch not so much after pedegrees, as after piety, which is the chiefest
ornament of a Christian; Neither respect so much first and noble birth in the
world, as second and new birth in Christ; what is the best blood worth without
the best belief? what boots it to be well descended, if thou be ill disposed?
to be before others in greatness, if thou be behind them in grace? what avail
ancient progenitors without answerable duties and goodness according? what
shall it profit thee to come of nobles according to the flesh, if thou nothing
resemble them in the Spirit? He is Noble who is the Child of God, who is born
from above he is honorable, being son to a King, brother to a King, Heb. 2.11.
heir to a King, Romans 8.17. yea to the King of glory, Psalm. 24.7. to the King
of all Kings higher than the highest, Ecclesiast. 5.7. If thou esteem true
nobility, labor by faith to be engraffed into Christ, and to be invested into
the virtues of a Christian; to have thy name written in the book of life, and
to be reckoned in the roll of the righteous; At this let all thy practice, let
all thy pleasure level at this; so shall thou be certain to attain that
blessing, of which thou can not say how much thou do attain; so shall thou
be made both an heir of the earth, and have a title of inheritance in heaven.

76.
DIsdain not those that are most nearly linked and allied unto thee, though
never so mean; but let kindred persuade and procure kindness; but succor them
and befriend them, whereinsoever thou may do them good; as the Law of nature
teaches, and Christian duty binds; count them not a blemish to thy blood,
nor a burden to thy state, the one argues thy scornfulnes, the other thy
miserableness; Disdain rather the cursed condition of those monsters in nature,
so visible daily before our faces, who being in place and power exalted, warm
and well furnished with all comforts, yet not only affect their own flesh and
blood least, and most unnaturally prefer strangers before them, but herein
worse than Heathen and Savages, can see and suffer without compassion, their
nearest allies by nature to abide wants, and endure extremities.

77.
KNow thy place, and maintain the honor of thy place, but by discretion, not
by disdain; but by making a just and meek account of others, if thou would
be had in account by others; For otherwise every one does bear a Kingdom in
his breast; howsoever his outward obedience or reverence may be wrested from
him; Remember that thy neighbors body was framed out of the same dust, and his
soul breathed into him by the same God, as thine was; consider that you were
both redeemed with the same price, are subject to the same law, and belong to
the same master, and yet all that is not all the relation between you; but you
are much nearer yet, even members of the same mystical body, whereof Christ
Jesus is the head; yea members one of another. Be thy place therefore never so
high, yet look not upon thy inferiors with so great strangeness, as if the ey
had never seen the foot, or the heart never known the legs.

78.
LOve not any worldly blessing too much, of what account soever it be, lay it
not too near thy heart, take not too much comfort and delight in it; love it
with unfeignedness, but notwith unmeasurableness; Thou hold it but at the
will and pleasure of the great and high Landlord of all the world; what know
thou how soon it may be taken away? May not the true and absolute owner of all
the good things thou enjoyest do what he will with his own? So love it, that
thou desire not to part with it, if God so please; yet so love it, that thou
can be content to part with it, if God so please.

79.
GEt heavenly graces, which make their possessours the better, rather than
earthly riches, which often make men worse; and seek to be furnished inwardly,
more than outwardly; what though thy greatness vanish? thy maintenance decrease?
thy strength decay? thy friends forsake thee? (as what in this world is not
mutable?) what though all worldly things remaining cannot secure thy heart from
griefs, and fears, from troubles and vexations? or from thy adversaries violent
pursuings and villainous practices? (as in such cases, like Jobs friends, what
miserable comforters are they commonly found?) yet thy god iness, thy wisdom,
thy love, thy humility, thy mercy, patience, gentleness, temperance, and the
like, will abide with thee, and stand to thee, and suffer no misery to seize
upon thee.

80.
BE not like those gormandizers, those slaves to their appetites, whose God is
their belly and whose felicity is meat, and drink; but retain temperance, and
soberness, and discretion in thy repasts; live not to eat and drink, but eat
and drink to live; that thy body may not faint in the midst of necessary
duties; that thou may be the better able to employ thy self in thy vocation;
Feed thy body to serve, and not to rule, to obey, and not to lead the Spirit,
lest (as we also say of fire, water, and money) of a bad servant it prove a
worse master; Full meals make foggy minds, and fat bodies make lean souls.

81.
IF thou desire and hope for Gods blessing upon thy own labors defraud not any
other any way of the fruit of his labors; Restrain thy heart from coveting,
thy eyes from desiring, thy hands from handling, thy house from holding other
men's substance, lest whilst thou likest that which belongs by just right to
thy neighbor, thou lose for ever that which is thine own; lest, if thou reap
where another has sown, another thresh that which thou have reaped.

82.
WHatsoever bad practices now adays are every where to be seen. Howsoever some
closely thrive like motes in books and garments, by others losses; and some
openly make no scruple, to take bread by force out of other men's mouths;
corrade not possessions, lands, or revenews, by sacrilege, treason,
depredation, plundering, oppression, stealth, or fraud, or by any indirect and
unwarrantable dealing: Make stay of purloyning goods unjustly; but make no stay
of discharging thy hands justly of them; Enrich not thy self by the spoil of
others, nor fill thy house with the furniture of iniquity, lest thou fill it
also with the vengeance of God, which is the reward of iniquity. Live, and give
of thy own substance, which thou have gotten by lawful means, though never so
mean; It is better virtuously to want, than viciously to abound; (...).
There is more comfort in a little honestly gotten, and heartily given, than in
great riches and incomes of the wicked, and mighty, that carry with them Gods
marks, and curses, being wrongfully obtained, and wilfully retained.

83.
CAst not conscience overboard, though it be to reach the port of the greatest
worldly contentment; Let not present gladsomness abolish all thought of future
happiness; Account this world but an Inn to lodge in, not an house to dwell
in; Always prepare for removing, here is no place for remaining.

84.
MAny would be at the rich man's table in this world, and in Abraham's bosom in
another; Many would be Demas while they live, and Paul when they are dead; but
that thou may be in Abraham's bosom, and with Paul, at thy death, Be not a
Dives, be not a Demas whilst thou live; He that lives ill seldom dies well,
but he whose life is good, his death is sure not to be bad Non potest male
mori, qui been vixit, and v^x potest been mori, qui male virit. Aug. de Doct.
Christi.
.

85.
IN buying of truth, and heavenly matters, offer not slowly, or niggardly, be
not too base a bidder; but in worldly wares and earthly commodities, be not too
franck a chapman; part not with the fear of God, and faith in his providence,
for vanity of vanities and only vanity; pay not too dear for wealth though thou
win it, or for preferments though thou purchase them; compass not any thing
with disturbing of thy conscience, or destroying of thy soul.

86.
WHat though the common conceit presume, that if a man thrive in the world then
God loves him; and, if he be crossed in outward things, then God hates him? yet
measure not the favor and love of God toward thy self, or others, by
prosperity, or adversity; If thou would find comfort in thy heart and
unfeigned testimonies of Gods special respect toward thee, seek not for them
in outward benefits, or in want of outward benefits; (both which are common to
the godly and ungodly) but in joy in the holy Ghost, in remission of sins, in
repentance from dead works, in the Spirit of adoption, in faith in Christ, in
peace of conscience, which passes all understanding; As for other things place
not thy heaven or happiness in them, for they afford no such assurance; If
blessings come receive them thankfully; If crosses happen endure them
cheerfully.

87.
COnform thy fashions to thy fare, thy manners to thy means, our several
conditions require feverall carriages; If thou be tried with adversity bear it
without stubborness, or impatiency; If thou be called to prosperity, use it
without insolency, or ingratitude; Debase thy self in the one as God has
debased thee, and take no more stare upon thee in the other than he has given
thee; Let not thy mind be so reflective upon thy degree in the world, as upon
thy conscience; but especially remember always the Judge of thy conscience; who
as in his mercy he has lifted thee up, so in his wisdom can bring thee down;
or, as in his wisdom he has brought thee down, so in his mercy can lift thee
up.

88.
DIsable not thy self from being in the state of blessedness, for the life to
come, because thou art in great misery in this life; yea though thou be justly
punished for thy sins, for the which thou art not yet sufficiently penitent;
Thou shall but add to thy sorrows, and needlessly increase the weight of thy
burden, if thou condemn thy state of election, because the Lord has elected
thee to chastise thee for thy faults; if thou relinquish thy hope of happiness
in heaven, because thou art recompensed with judgments on earth; yea therefore
are not Gods Children free from all manner of temporal plagues, that they may
be free from everlasting, perdition; A man may be sealed by the holy Spirit of
God unto the day of redemption Ephesians. 4.30.
; A man may be as secure from hell, as Satan is secluded from heaven, and yet
his calamities may make him groan, and cry, and roar all the day long; and yet
day and night Gods hand may be heavy upon him Psalm. 32.3, 4.
.

89.
BY deliverance from troubles past, assure thy self of deliverance from dangers
present, and by former benefits never doubt of future favor, in Gods good
time, so far forth as it may stand with thy spiritual good; God loves not, as
men do, for a day, or two, and so farewell, but it was, it is, and it will be
always true, God is the Lord, he changes not: whom he once loves, he loves
to the end; and where he has once showed mercy, he will persevere in kindness;
being yesterday, to day, and the same for ever Heb. 13.8. Idem Objective
Subjective Effective.
. When Saul told David that he was but a youth, and therefore too weak to
combat with that strong Goliath the champion of the Philistines, who had been a
man of war from his youth; How soundly and comfortably did David reason from
the experience he had in times past of Gods helping hand, that he who had
delivered him from the paw of the Bear, and the jaw of the Lion, would also
save him in that duel which he was to undertake with an uncircumcised
Philistin that defied and oppressed the people of God 1 Samuel 17.34, 35, 36.
? And how cheerfully did Saint Paul make the same argument, that God did
deliver him, does deliver him and hereafter will deliver him assuredly 2 Timothy
4.17, 18.
?

90.
TAke up and bear the yoke of poverty with patience; poverty is no sin; nor
always only the punishment of sin; Even Christ the Lord of heaven and earth,
even the Lord of all have, lead of all, and could say, Matthew. 8.20.
The Foxes have holes, and the birds of the air have nests, but the Son of Man
has not where to lay his head; showing, that as he was the Son of Man, the
beasts and fowls were richer than he; he was poorer than the beasts and the
birds. Art thou without this worlds goods? yet be not without Christian
courage; God oftentimes recompenseth compenseth the want of earthly blessings,
with great abundance of heavenly graces; such gifts in the day of trouble, and
in the hour of temptation, shall minister more comfort, and more true peace
unto thee, than all things which begin with pleasure, and end with corruption.

91.
HOwsoever thou can challenge nothing at Gods hands, as due debt unto thee,
but calamities and sorrows, which are the fruit of thy sins; yet know this,
that God often protecteth thee from much harm which thou know not of;
Consider often with all humbleness and thankfulness, that God not only
foreseeth thy dangers before they can come near thee, but preserves thee from
many a mischief, and much affliction, which through blindness and ignorance
thou neither do nor can perceive; How much more then will he support
thee, when thou know thy self to be in trouble, and powrest out thy earnest
prayers unto him, for deliverance out of trouble? He that performs the
greater will always be ready to accomplish the less; He that keeps thee back
from the pit that was hidden, will help thee to escape from that which lies
open; He that is so forward to help thee when he is not requested, will not be
backward to succor thee when he is entreated.

92.
IN thy greatest affliction and most grievous extremity, be thy wants never so
great, thy means of ease never so small; be thy hopes in respect of outward
helps never so few, the difficulties through which thou must pass, never so
many; Regard not so greatly the things that are seen (which may work deadly
discouragement and anguish) as that which is not seeen with mortal ey, namely
Gods omnipotence; Look not so much to the danger of death before thee, as to
the power of God above thee, which is never at a stand, never at a loss; which
then begins to show it self when human help ends ubi desinit humanum auxilium
ibi incipit divinum.
; when men's cases seem most desperate, and help is thought to be furthest of,
then is Gods mercy greatest, and his presence nearest, then is his power made
perfect through our weakness. When does the Devil and his children more
insult, than when they have men under? but when men are most miserable, then
does God show most mercy; when faith was enfeebled by long looking, and hope
began to faint with much watching, when the burdens were increased, and the
straw was taken away, then came Moses Exodus 5.20.
; when the Israelits were hedged in on either side with mountains, when, they
had the Sea before them, and the Egyptians marching behind them, and there
appeared no way, no remedy, no hope of subterfuge in the sight of man, when
Moses warrant might seem now to express rather a dream of desolation, than a
day of deliverance, Then did the Lord cause the Sea to part in two, and stand
like walls on the right hand and on the left, till the Israelites had passed
over on dry land; and when Pharao followed he made them join again, and
drowned him and all his; Then did God (oh admire both his might and his mercy)
save his servants and destroy their enemies Exodus 14.30.
, to the terror of all those that shall persecute the Church of God and his
people.

93.
See thou a man in distress, in troubles, crosses, dangers? If thou know
him not, censure him not, censure not his manners by his misery, remembering and
considering that neither all wicked men are so punished, nor all so punished
are wicked men; I mean wicked above others: By profaneness judge of
calamities, not by calamities of profaneness.

94.
MUrmur not in troubles, storm not in afflictions, as many do; knowing, from
whom they come, and to whom they oft'nest come, better than many do; Do thou
know they come from God, and dare thou once repine? Do thou know how the
like are accomplished in all the Saints which are, or have been, or shall be in
the world, and dare thou look to be spared? who in these thoughts would
grudge that his case is no better, and not rather comfort himself that it is no
worse? who would not rest contented with that, which is the pleasure of his
Father, and the portion of all his brethren?

95.
IN all thy afflictions, howsoever suppullulating one after another, and
exceeding each other in degrees, bristle not up thy affections against the
pleasure or proceeding of the Almighty, whose judgments thou have so many times
deserved; Look not so much upon thy sorrows, as upon thy sins; and freely
acknowledge that not only in that manner, but in a greater measure God might
justly punish thee; He might plague thee more severely because thou art
sinful; but he punishes thee mildly because he is merciful, because his
judgments are always mingled with mercy, because his justice and goodness go
still together.

96.
AS God chastises thee, because he loves thee, because he would separate from
thee that which he misliketh, the dross of thy corruptions, as gold is fined in
the furnace; so love thou him because he chastises thee; There is no surer
sign of thy having the spirit of patience, and of thy being translated from
death to life, than when his mercy brings forth fear in thee, and his justice
love; He loves the party heartily, that can love him when he wrongeth him; and
(though God can do us no wrong) He loves God unfeignedly, that can love him
when he scourges him.

97.
WHatsoever Satan often suggests to men beset and encompassed with any
trouble, conclude not the estate of the wicked to be the better, because they
live for the present in pleasure and prosperity; Neither esteem the condition
of the godly to be the worse, because they abide for a while under adversity:
For if the gold must pass the furnace, shall not the dross, be rejected? If the
good corn must be ground in a rough Mill, and baked in a hot oven, before it
become good bread, shall not the chaff be burned up with fire unquenchable?
Conflicts, and cares, fightings without, and fears within [m] 2 Cor. 7.5.
, The outward and inward molestations of good men do not bring them behind the
wicked, but rather show that the sufferings and sorrows of the wicked are yet
behind.

98.
IF thou see any mourn more than is meet, or more impatient than thou have
commonly seen, for the loss of their yoak-fellowes, or children, brethren or
kindred; more weakly complaining that they are gone, than wisely considering
whether they are gone; Yet cast them not off with thy uncharitable censures,
lest thou condemn the righteous with the wicked; but bear a part of their
burdens, upon thy Christistian counsels, and comforts, and contribution (if
thou be able, and they want it) or at the least upon thy prayers, that they
with thee, and thou with them, like feeling members of the same infirmities,
may sustain your crosses by your mutual supplications, and obtain your
assistance by the precious blood of your blessed Savior.

99.
BE not willing to sin, nor unwilling to suffer for sin; Be not impatient if
God punish thee a little, when thou have provoked him much; but be drawn and
driven by it, nearer unto God, and unto his Word; but humble thy self with
thankfulness, under the mighty hand of God, that out of his great indulgence
his afflicting of thee is tolerable; that he does not exercise that extremity
upon thee, which he justly might; and ingenuously confess with holy Jeremy,
that it is of the Lords mercyes (that it arises from the abundance of his
favor that thou art suffered still to enjoy the benefit of life) that thou art
not (utterly) consumed [a] Lament. 3.22,
, that thou art not, according to thy deserts, stricken dead upon a sudden for
thy transgressions.

100.
ARt thou troubled, and grieved, vexed, and oppressed, with changes, and armies
of sorrows? Does thy heart in the judgment of flesh so faint within thee, with
pinching fear and pensive heaviness, that, knowing not how much thou art able
to bear by the mediation and strength of CHRIST, thou think thou can no
longer hold out, unless God help thee by such a season? Now what is the wisest
man, that he should presume to assign unto the only wise God his stemming? Is
it meet that man should direct God, as if it were his duty to minister to him,
or as if there wanted discretion in him to know when to measure out his
favors? Does not the governor of all the world best discern his own
opportunities, as for justice and judgment, so for mercy and compassion? It is
good (says the Prophet) that a man should both hope, and quietly wait for the
salvation of the Lord Lament. 3.26.
; prescribe not unto the Lord the time of thy deliverance, but patiently leave
it to his determination; Fit not the time to thy self, but fit thy self to the
time that he has appointed.

APHORISMS, OR, BREVIATS, of Speculations. THE SECOND CENTURIE.
1.
HAving sincerly prepared, and devourly disposed thy self, according to thy
skill, and power, (for how dare any man speak to Almighty God without
premeditation?) Be not out out of heart, or hope, but make thy addresses in the
Name of Jesus, to the Throne of Grace, with an humble confidence and holy
cheerfulness; Let thy prayers proceed from a lively faith against all
faintness, from a stirring zeal against all slackness, from a steadfast
indurance against all weariness; what though the Lord grant thee not at first?
yet he will at last; what though he grant thee not at all that same thing which
thou desire? He will give thee as good a blessing, or a better.

2.
GIve not over thy prayers, though not presently heard, but with faith, and
perseverance, crave, and with hope, and patience, expect Gods grace, and mercy,
to help in due and convenient time; Be thy wound never so deep, thou art not
past help, so long as thou art not past desire to be helped; who art thou, or
what merit can thou allege that therefore thy suit ought to receive a present
dispatch? what know thou for what reasons God puts thee off? perhaps not
intending utterly to deny thee, but for sundry main and important causes; we
tarry man's pleasure, and wait upon him after many petitions; where then is Gods
honor? why not wait much longer and willinger upon God? who both knows our
need, and when it is most meet to supply it, better than our nearest friends,
better than we our selves, and never fails or forsakes those who unfeignedly
put their trust in him; who will be sure to do in the end that which shall be
most for our good, and his own glory.

3.
NEglect not Prayer under any pretense, though never so plausible, no, not
under pretense of Gods knowing and understanding all things, or of his power
enabling thee to do all things, or of his providence determining all things;
but know that Almighty God has commanded prayer as an instrument of continual
use, profitable for all things; for the performance of all those things which
he has promised, and appointed; He has ordained many other means to bring his
purposes to pass, but none more excellent than prayer, which procures a
blessing upon all the rest, and without the which the rest cannot prevail.

4.
WHen thou prayest for the forgiveness of thy sins, as thou art daily bound to
do, thou plainly confessest, that thou art not able to satisfy for them; that
there can be no satisfaction made to Gods Justice for sins by our works: How
then can thou supererogate, as some teach and believe? How then can the
worthiness of thy deserts be so great, that doing God more service than can be
sufficiently rewarded in thy own person, thou can deserve heaven, not only to
thy self, but for others too? How then can thou have an overplus of works, or
the measure of thy works running over, which may be disposed or sold (if he
will liberally come off with his coin) to the spiritual benefit of another,
which may go for payment of thy fellows transgressions, when thou have not
enough to supply thy own necessity?

5.
HOw earnestly soever thou pray, against the pride, malice, and all the devices
of the wicked, that God will not suffer their actions to prosper, lest they
more and more offend; yet still pray for the offenders, that God may open their
eyes, that they may come to see the truth, love it, and embrace it; yet without
exception of persons, remember still to pray for the love of God, the grace of
Christ, and the working of the Spirit upon all; upon the godly that they may be
confirmed, upon the ungodly that they may be converted.

6.
WHen thou art about to take rest, and know not what a night or an hour may
bring forth, and know not whether thou shall ever work or wake again, or no;
ly not down in thy bed, as a dog lies down in a kennell, or a swine in his
sty, or an ox in his stall, without any prayer, any ejaculation, any good
motion to Godward; but commit thy self, thy soul, thy body, thy goods, thy
brethren, into Gods hand, as a most faithful keeper; but remember and
consider, that God is nigh thee, both in his essence, whereby he fills
heaven, and earth, and in his presence, whereby he beholds thy heart, and all
thy courses, watching what thou do; He is about thy paths and about thy bed,
and spieth out all thy ways Psalm. 139.3.
; To him not only the light is light, but darkness is light; both the light
and the night to him are all one in clearness Psalm. 139.11, 12.
; He therefore, that will rise in his favor, must ly down in his fear.

7.
HOwsoever worldly men, who savor nothing but of the eart, who see nothing but
with fleshly eyes, are unable to behold the beauty of the Church, and therefore
account it no part of their happiness, to live within the compass and bosom of
it; yet esteem it thou more excellent and precious than all other societies in
the world; and with humblest thankfulness consider, how highly thou art bound
to God, that thou art made a free denizen of so glorious a Corporation; yea
prefer always the good condition of Gods Church before all concernments of
thine own; In the welfare thereof most joy, In the wrong thereof most grieve;
Let natural affections move thee much, but let spiritual affections sway thee
more; so many cogitations of the distressed estate of the Church, so many
tears and prayers for her; Let thy zeal to her evidence thy right in her; Thou
can not get a better argument or surer witness to thy own heart of being
ingraffed into that body, whereof Christ Jesus is the head, of having the life
of Christianity, and being possessed with the love of godliness, than the
having a sensible feeling of the Churches distress, and a sincere and zealous
affection and respect to the common good of religion, and the Churches
prosperous estate.

8.
Marvel not if wicked men get advantage but too soon, and prosper but too
well; if such as have no fear of God before their eyes have their projects in
some degree performed, and their presumptions in part pleased; if the violent
tread down the virtuous, and might now and then overcome right; Be not dismayed
if the public enemies sometimes prevail and get the upper hand against the
Church, God gives not always victory for favor, or overthrow for
displeasure, but for some other ends; to raise the wicked, that their fall may
be the greater -- tolluntur in altum ut lapsu graviore ruant. Claudian.
; to rowse his own, that their faith may be the stronger.

9.
IF thou be not fit to profit the Church or Commonwealth, by thy person, yet
seek the good of both of them by thy Prayer; that they may endure, and
flourish, and increase, and not be overthrown and suppressed by those that so
cruelly seek, not their reformation, and conversion, but subversion and utter
undoing; that peace and plenteousness, and holiness and righteousness may be
always with them, and the free and public use of the Gospel; that such
notable and rare men, as are wise in politic affairs, as are endued with all
gifts and qualities fit for Statesmen, may be put in place, held in grace, and
have employment, and they which are so employed may show themselves faithful,
and they which are faithful may also be prosperous in effecting their
purposes, so a layman may become a beneficial Churchman, so a private person
may do good service to his sovereign, and all within the precincts of his
jurisdiction.

10.
IT is not only not orderly, but very odious, for mean men to pry too far into
the counsels or practices of Princes; of which for want both of knowledge, and
warrant, they are not meet to be judges: It is his protestation that had the
holy Ghost, that his heart was not hauty, nor his eyes lofty, neither did he
exercise himself in great matters, or in things too high for him; but he
behaved and quieted himself as a child that is weaned of his mother Psalm.
131.1, 2.
; But art thou therefore free from regarding any public affairs? Is there no
kind of inquiring after them required of thee, being a private man? Now be
thou never so mean, yet art thou bound both in duty and wisdom (as far as
thou can by good means attain unto it) to inform thy self of states-matters,
that are not impertinent unto thee; not out of mere curiosity, like the heathen
Athenians, whose ears itched after strange and new reports; who gave
themselves to little else, to nothing else (as too many do now) but to hear, and
tell news; but the better to direct thy prayers, according to the occurrences
both for State and Church; Not out of envy to either, Not out of a plotting
humor how to dispose of the Scepter; but out of an earnest desire that the
Scepter may rightly dispose of thee, and thine, being assured that Princes are
fingers of that great hand that governs all the world.

11.
HOwsoever the persecutors of these times pretend piety, and the destroyers
boast of devotion; Howsoever they bear themselves in hand, or would make others
believe, that they are the only children of God, and truly religious; yet
never think them truly reconciled to God, who hate or wrong any of his
servants; He that loves not his brother abides in death, whosoever hates his
brother is a murderer, and ye know that no murderer has eternal life
abiding in him 1 John 3.14, 15.
; They that are reconciled to God against whom they formerly contended, and are
at variance with sin with whom they formerly conjoined, cannot but be sound and
kind and peaceable and and favorable toward all those who are sins foes, and
Gods followers.

12.
BElieve not all those seeming sanctificeturs, who count zeal superstition, and
dutiful adoration idolatry, those who detest the errors of Popery, who loath
to be accounted Papists, and would take it as a great injury done them to be so
termed, for many such now adays if we weigh their practices, live more like
unto Atheists: conceive not all those to be truly righteous who cry out against
idolatry, who would think themselves greatly slandered to be reputed
worshippers of a false God, for many such in these times, if we look to their
fruits, are found rather to worship no God at all.

13.
ACcount it not enough to keep thy self from idols, or to abhor Idols, if thou
keep not thy self from sacrilege, and coveting of goods set apart to holy use;
for else thou runnest but from one rock unto another, from loving the false God,
to the spoiling of the true God, which seems to be much worse than the
worshipping of Images, and giving our selves to the sin of idolatry.

14.
TAke heed and beware of covetousnes, says our Savior Luke 12.15.
; As if he had said, it is a subtle Serpent, it assaulteth secretly, it
enters like a friend, it has pretenses many and fair; but how much more than
had thou need to beware of sacrilege, which is a fruit of extreme
covetousnes, and which is the main engine the Devil has to overthrow the
Churches; If thou have never been sacrilegious, pray God thou never may; If
thou have, add not thirst unto drunkenness, wallow not in the mire any more,
labor to get pardon in the merits and glorious righteousness of Jesus Christ;
repent, restore, ask mercy, and never be sacrilegious again. It was a meek and
pious resolution of Elihu, one of Jobs friends, If I have done wickedly, I will
do no more Job 34.32.
; will many a mean Christian rather starve than steal? then will a constant
convert, a resolute professor, say, I will beg, I will starve, I will rather
die, than be sacrilegious; for the which sin the wrath of God shall surely
demolish all my oother estate; and I in mine, or I and mine, be sure to come to
ruin. Achan dreamed of a golden day when he had gotten a goodly Babylonish
garment, two hundred shekels of silver, and a wedge of gold of fifty shekels
weight, which should have been all delivered into the Lords treasury, which God
had set apart for himself, and would not have converted to the private profit
of any; He thought to have been rich upon a sudden, He thought to have
benefited himself and his children for ever by so brave a booty; but it fell
out to his own destruction, and the destruction of all that belonged unto him;
but he with all his were stoned with stones, and burned with fire for his
labor Joshua 7.24, 25.
.

15.
THe name of a traitor is most odious amongst all men, heathens Cicer. Catil.
4. Valor. Max. lib. 9. Tacit. Annal. lib. 1.
, as well as Christians; no man can abide to be so accounted; Beware then
especially that thou be not a traitor to God, by unfruitful purloining, and
obstinate detaining any thing that is his: It is a vain thing to say thou thou
art not a traitor, thou hate the very name of treason, if thou nourishest
open rebellion against God who is the King of Kings; such as lard their leaner
revenews with fat collops sacrilegiousle cut out of the sides or flanks of the
Church, such as perpetually defraud God of his revenews, his tithes and
offerings, and peremptorily live upon his dues and ancient demeanes, are
without question rank traitors, and we need crave no pardon if we boldly avouch
and aver them to be children of rebellion; Neither yet if we say, that (if we
consider them unpassionately) Theudas and Judas of Galilee Act. 5.36, 37.
shall be justified as no rebels in comparison.

16.
THink not (with the newfangled in these days) that the abuse of things ought
always to take away the use: that every thing abused by wicked men is
therefore not to be used by sober men; for then the Sun, the Moon, and the
Stars should be pulled out of heaven, in as much as the whole host of heaven
has been worshipped as Gods Deur. 4.19. Jer. 7.18.
; Then the holy Scriptures must be forsaken which the tempter abused, and holy
prayers which the Pharisees abused, and the holy Sacraments, Baptism and the
Lords Supper, which the Corinthians abused; Then Civil conversation of life
and holy Christian exercises, reading, meditation, conference, fasting, alms,
should be cast off and detested, because false Prophets have abused them, and
do still abuse them to deceive the people of God, and lead them into error, to
color and countenance all their crafts and conveiances of corrupt doctrine;
Then men must abhor their meat and drink because some be drunken, and some
surfeit; Then must our wits, memories, health, strength, be taken away, because
every part, and the whole man, has been miserably abused by us all, through
our many, and manifold transgressions.

17.
BE not so unadvised as to malice or utterly mislike any lawful vocation,
because the professors, or practisers of it demean themselves unworthily or
impiously; This or that officer may be hurtful, and yet his office still may
be useful; was not Bennaiah the son of Jehoiada put over the Host in Joabs
room, and in the room of Abiathar, Zadock the Priest 1 King. 2.35.
? Did not Eliakim a faithful and diligent man succeed Shebna the hypocrite, in
the stewardship of Ezechiahs house Isaiah. 22.20.
? what a monster amongst men was Judas? a traitor to his Master, a murderer to
himself, censured by Christ to be no less debauched than a Devil John 6.70.
; And yet it is not said of him, let the Bishopric be taken away, Let there be
no more Bishoprics for Judas his sake: but let the Bishopric remain, and let
another take Acts 1.20.
it that deserves it better, who will not only bear the name, but discharge
the trust, and more rightly perform the employment.

18.
Does the world commonly like earnestnes in any thing rather than religion? Is
that ancient and heavenly fire, which once appeared most worthily in many, both
in their entrance, and progress, of their good course of piety, and a good
conscience, now turned to ashes, and extinct; or does it burn so closely and
feebly, that it can hardly be discerned? yet keep thy spirit, thy forwardnes,
and heat of heart, and be not at any time without zeal in the service of God.
It well becomes every Saint to be earnest, to stick close to those holy
duties which God has laid upon him, and not to be flitting off and on, and
unsettled, as many are who yet would be taken to be of the forwardest sort. It
is good to be zealously affected always in a good thing Galar. 4.18.
; in the practice whereof good zeal with small learning is better than great
learning with small zeal; But as knowledge is not sufficient without zeal, so
neither zeal without knowledge. But let not the most spiritual project be
without spiritual prudence, but in thy greatest heat let meek discretion in a
proportionable rate order thy zeal; Least unawares thou purchase Gods
displeasure by the miscarriage of thy wel-meaning devotion, such as God never
appointed, never approved, and such as he has often both misliked and severely
punished; zeal without knowledge is not zeal, but stomach, not a blessed
holiness, but a brainsick giddiness; A brutish and savage passion and
perturbation: such as is in that headstrong part of furious persons, whose
zeal is to depart from the Church, yea even that Church, that first brought
them to that knowledge and faith that they have, if in truth and soundnes they
have any at all.

19.
BE sometimes severe to beat down. the sin, but commonly kind to win the
sinner: Be at all times serving to befriend, but at no time soothing to betray.

20.
Mar not a good cause with ill handling, meddle not with evil, no not the
least, that good, though the greatest, private, or public may come thereof;
Thou can not please God more with a good intent, than thou may displease
him by using bad means to effect it.

21.
OBserve still the days worthily set apart to give thanks to God for his
Apostles; for those benefits which he has bestowed upon us by their ministry;
for their eminent graces on earth, and now such unspeakable glory in heaven;
whom though with the Papists, we neither do, nor dare adore, yet well may we
admire and imitate, and well may we pray God to give us grace to follow them,
both in their believing, living, and dying, who having now by their faith
attained that which they desired, are an excellent direction for us, how to
seek what they have attained.

22.
NEither harbor an ill thought against thy Sovereign; Neither admit any the
least depravation of him, no not in the whispering of thy conscience: No,
though he give cause to be evil thought of; No, though thou be wronged or
worse thought of than thou deservest. It skilleth not much what his person is,
when most sure it is, his power is of God; when of what nation, or nature
soever, the Magistrate is, Jew or Gentil, Christistian or Heathen, good or bad,
he has his authority from God the Magistrate of all Magistrates; not from the
Law of Nations, as some are not ashamed to aver Bellar. de Pontif. Romans lib. 1.
cap. 7. paragr. praeterea.
, but as from God and his Law. By diligent care in good services please thy
governor as well as thou may, and that in most awful and loyal manner,
and with all due circu^spection beware how thou kindle his anger; Be far from
those tumultuous and rebellious practices that may give him cause of
provocation against thee, and keep thy self from those fierce and fiery
fellows, those desperate or hypocritical companions, which may stir thee up
to stand upon points with him, and imbolden thee against him. From
Church-robbers, and traitors, it is not pride, but a point of wisdom and godly
policy, to affect always a stern kind of strangegeness aloof; It is Salomons
injunction, in the giving whereof he was directed by Gods Spirit, and be it
ever in thy remembrance, My son fear thou the Lord, and the King, and meddle
not with them that are given to change Prove. 24.21.
that are desirous of alteration, and changes, in the state according to their
private and peevish humors.

23.
HOw ardently are wilful hearts enamoured with worldly greatness? How greedily
do natural men affect dominion? How mightily do some men long to Lord it over
their neighbors, in honor and dignity, power and authority? some are resolved
to rise, and be in some office, or other, or it shall cost them a fall, yea a
fall into hell; some had rather be traitors, than not Magistrates: But let us
not be desirous of vain glory says S. Paul Gal. 5.26.
; But seek not thou the acclamation of man, more than the approbation of God:
Be thou no Magistrate, no officer, yea no man, rather than a traitor.

24.
IF cunning rebellion under a show of religion, and vizard of virtue, without
fear of Gods vengeance or shame of men's reproof, cast his fiery darts at thee,
let faithful loyalty and loyal faithfulness be ready to quench them; if
seditious persons, and such as love innovations, seek with guilefull speeches
to steal thy soul from God, and thy heart from thy sovereign, let wisdom
shape them an answer and send them packing; Be averse to follow the mightiest
rebels for all their smooth persuasions, and sweet allurements, but more averse
to persuade and allure others to rebellion; If they shall be sure to smart (as
without repentance surely they shall) who rebel by other men's occasions, how
much more shall they suffer, who are the occasions or give the occasions unto
others?

25.
BE not refractory to any lawful authority; Be a diligent observer of good
orders and good laws; submit thy self unto superior powers, procure,
according to thy calling, whatsoever it be, the benefit of thy sovereign to
whom thou art a subject, and the profit of the Church whereof thou art a member.

26.
WHen thou go about to effect a good work, not only cast how good it is, but
consider what warrant thou have to do it; If it be a general good duty it
belongs unto thee in particular; but if a special practice, thou must have a
special precept; It is not for private men to reform public abuses, or to
dispose of public affairs; It is not for one calling to intrude upon another,
no more than for one bodily member to usurp the work of another; what another
may not omit without iniquity, thou may commit iniquity if thou offer to do
it; and that may be for thee a most heinous sin, which may be for another a
most holy service.

27.
BE not backward when thou should be zealous, nor forward when thou should
be quiet; Make not too much have with Balaam Numb. 22.21.
, nor too little with Lots wife Genesis 19.26.
.

28.
Might thou be freed from sequestration and sundry other oppressions?
Might thou be preferred to offices, and sundry other favors; would thou
but confer thy self to some men's humors, help to set up the new superstition
and oppose government and all good order? Alas what trifling and temporary
baits are these? refuse them, yea despise them; who, to obtain those profits
which nature regards, would forsake those duties which the God of Nature
requires? who that has hope of heaven would not willingly suffer any thing
that God imposes, rather than wilfully do any thing that God detesteth?

29.
LEt neither love, nor fear, steal courage from thy heart, or thy heart from
the Lord; Let no storms of troubles or calmes of pleasure, turn thee back from
Christ, or bring thee to deny him, lest thou be denied of him in his Kingdom;
though the Loadstone draw Iron, yet let it not moove gold; though Jeat gather
up the light straw, yet let it not take up the pure Steel. Be not moved, or
carried a way, as some are, with the various blasphemous errors, and gaudy
pious pretenses of these times; Let no worldly promises or profits draw thee,
or peremptory persecutions drive thee, to forsake thy Lord and Savior, or to
engage thy self in any apparent sin; what though plunderers have thy goods, or
a prison, or worse punishment thy person, yet let God still have thy service,
lest the Devil in conclusion have thy Soul.

30.
INcurr not Gods enmity, to increase thy neighbors amity; fall not out with
God, to keep in with men; to make thy self acceptable to the one, make not thy
self abominable to the other; yield not so to peace, as to yield unto sin
withal; who would not rather undergo man's unjust detestation, than Gods just
damnation? Be content to lose the love, and bear the displeasure of the whole
world, for the love thou bear to God and his truth; Thou refusest to be in
the body, if thou will not suffer the hatred of the world with thy head Recusas
esse in corpore si non vis odium mundi sustinere cum capite. Augustine. 87.
tract. in Johan.
.

31.
LOve thy life, and preserve it by all good means, but love thy faith as thy
life, and more than thy life, preserve that whatsoever become of thy life; Be
not so desirous of retaining they natural life, as rather to deny the Truth of
God, and forsake the Gospel of Christ, than to make profession thereof, and
yield sincere obedience to it, with hazard and peril; He which choseth to
forgo life, rather than the services of God, and a good conscience, shall keep
it to eternal life, be saved and glorified for ever; without which hope, if
any man with all his skill could get all the world into his hands, and order all
things every where according to his own pleasure, what were it available?

32.
REjoice under the cross, and be glad when thou suffer for the truth; let
the cause, for which thou suffrest, more comfort thee, than the trouble that
thou indurest dismay thee; show thy cheerful obedience in suffering, as well
as in doing, the will of God: Christ our blessed Savior, the most perfect
pattern of obedience, performed his part both ways, both by doing and
suffering; And what is the substance of the Gospel, but to declare to all
people, what he did, and what he suffered?

33.
NEither rashly thrust thy self into any needless affliction, nor cowardly
desert thy station; true faith is neither bare-headed, nor bird-witted, neither
foolhardy, nor fainthearted; but when necessity requiteth, and duty designeth,
it refuses not any dangers be they never so great, with a trust and hope to
glorify God, both in life and death.

34.
THou art not bound wilfully to cast thy self into the mouths of devouring and
ravening persecutors; but never deny the Truth of God, nor thy self to be a
professor of it, if thou be called in question for it; Not only believe
confidently, but confess cheerfully, whenever occasion is offered justly; for
otherwise thou go not beyond the Devils, whose faith is equivocall, and
their confession forced, who believe God is, but believe not in him, and
confess Christ, not of love, but of constraint.

35.
ARt thou controlled, reviled, and sequestered from thy share in the world? Know
that it is not without a providence; acknowledge the Judgments of God, often
secret, but ever just; sequester, thy self yet further from all those vain
worldly delights, wherein some place their chiefest happiness; and live, as it
were, carried up in regard of those ways of licentiousness, wherein others
walk: Bind thy self to the good behavior, and apply thy self more closely, and
more constantly to God; As the Prophet David when he was vexed by unexpected
enemies, when he had complained that his friend and companion Psalm. 55.16.
rose up against him, he gave himself unto prayer; and again, when for his love
he found adversaries, where did he fly but unto God for comfort Psalm. 142.
?

36.
BEstow not thy blood on schism or heresy, it is a foolish death where the
cause is fowl; can thou be content to suffer? be sure it be in a good cause;
either for God who knows all, or for that which thou know in thine own
conscience to be well pleasing to God; Suffer not either out of fashion or out
or faction, either as ambitious of honor, or to satisfy thy malignant humor;
for such suffering can neither merit thanks of God, nor praise of men; Blessed
are they which are persecuted for righteousness sake Matthew. 5.10.
; not for superstition, self-will, and singularity, but for righteousness sake;
our sufferings are no argument of our righteousness, but our righteousness an
ornament of our sufferings Non ex passione certa est justitia sed ex justitia
passio gloriosa est. Aug. cont. epi. Parmen lib. 1. cap. 7.
A red color is not beautiful if it be not grounded on a fair white; The
pain has no grace if the suffering have no truth; where the says is not
true, there is no true Martyrdom.

(37)
DElight not in brawles and controversies, which are easily begun, not so soon
ended; seek no credit by opposition, pick no quarrels, nor desire to fall out
with any man; strive not at any time, though never so meekly, but when a just
necessity presses thee to stir; when sin is not to be connived at, but
contended against; when the truth is not to be forsaken but contended for; when
thou can not undergo the wrong without great damage to thy estate, nor
otherwise but by that course in joy thy right.

38.
IF thou know not how to pacify man, to bring him to a firm and unfeigned
reconciliation, to obtain, and enjoy a sound and well-grounded peace with him,
seek more and more to be at amity with God, to appease and please the Lord by
thy holy obedience to his Commandments; Hide Gods Word within thy heart, that
thou may not sin against him Psalm. 119.11.
refrain thy feet from every evil way, that thou may keep his Word Psalm.
119.101.
when a man's ways please the Lord, He makes even his enemies to be at peace
with him Prove. 16.7.
He, that has the hearts of all men in his own hands, be they in never so
great places, or have they never so great spirits; He, in whose only power it
is to turn all hearts which way he will, who is not only a searcher of hearts,
but a worker, and changer of them, as seems best to his godly wisdom; He
will not only make his friends to be more faithful unto him, but even his
enemies to be at peace with him, if their favor and friendship be expedient
for him; He will be sure either to remoove his enemies malice, or restrain
their mischief, either to make them not willing, or not able to hurt him.

39.
BE not to be carried away with every little puff of vain persuasion; be not to
be bandyed by the racket of other men's tongues into what Hazard they please; be
not so unskilful and unstable, as lightly to believe every thing that is
idly or cunningly told thee, or unadvisedly to yield to every thing imposed
upon thee; but use thy best skill, and pains, in hearing more, inquiring
further, searching, and trying, before thou give any credit, or assent to it,
yea though a multitude join in persuading thee Non statim multitudinis
acquiescamus judicio; Hieron. comment. in Isaiah cap. 3.
; How common is it in these days to spread the nets of humility, and weave
them with the knots of subtilty, till men have effected their policy, and then
they bewray their hypocrisy; be not so subtle as to be guile others, not so
simple as to be beguiled by others; be not taken at the first sight, and offer,
with never so fair words or shows, though they seem to bring an honest meaning
along with them; be circumspect for thy safety, as well as sincere for thy
innocence; loath the venom and poison of the Serpent, but learn his wisdom;
follow the harmelesness of the Dove, but fly her simplicity.

40.
SOme carry themselves sincerely, but not wisely, some order themselves wisely,
but not sincerely; but approove thy self, as far as thou art able, both before
God and men; before God, in bearing thy self sincerely, before men, demeaning
thy self wisely; perhaps, for all thy wariness, some may be offended with thee,
which by thee are not offended; but such offenses being not given of thee, but
taken of them, are not thy faults, but their follies; woe indeed to that man by
whom offenses come; that is, come justly; but an offense, fondly taken, not
justly given, intangleth no man besides the taker.

41.
IN this subtle vizard age, in these times every day more and more
degenerating from the former goodness, truth, and honest plainess; In these
dangerous and dissolute intercourses; wherein faithful friends are for the
most part gone to God, and their return is not to be expected; wherein we live
amongst so many serpentine and subtle, so many malicious and mischievour men,
with whom we may unawares be compelled to traffic, be conscionable, but
circumspect, keep not only lawful, but wise demeanours; God requires wisdom
but simple, and simplicity but wisdom; If thou have wariness mingled with true
sincerity, having thy spirit without guile, and thy actions without
dissimulation; It is both lawful and expedient to set wisdom against wisdom,
and policy against policy, and care against care, and understanding against
understanding, that so by the enemies subtilty, and thy simplicity, thou be not
surprised in the cunning traps, and crafty wiles which are laid for thee.

42.
Labor to have peace always with God, and, (if it be possible) with men, to
the great glory of thy Heavenly Father, the profitable example of all
beholders, and the abundant comfort of thy own heart; yea though it cost thee
some temporal profit, as meek Abraham with worldly loss procured it betwixt
his Nephew Lot and himself Genesis 13.11.
; learn and labor to cut off all occasions of contention even from those that
seek occasions; but with the World, Flesh, Devil, at no time admit either
peace or parley; call not Satan to thy company, consult not with flesh and
blood; contemn familiarity with the world, lest they suddenly get some
advantage and overcome thee; Fight always with all thy courage against all
these, clad with the whole armor of God, and do thy best to vanquish them; yea
this war is no war to the peace thou ought to keep, but that peace is
preserved by this war, and the more painfully thou thus warrest, the more
peacefully thou still walk.

43.
CAre not, and yet care for to morrow; care not out of distrustfulness, but
care out of duty; care not as relying upon the means, without Gods blessing
(which is an humor that cannot dwell in Gods Children) but care as trusting to
Gods favor upon thy endeavor; laboring both under a tender and heavenly
Father, whose blessing no Counsel can hinder, no curse can take away; too
little care is want of grace, too much care is want of faith; too little care
is presumption, too much care is desperation.

44.
EXclude not God at any time resting on thy self and second causes, neither
cast all upon God neglecting the means; either in temporal things for the
saving of thy body, or in spiritual things for the salvation of thy soul;
Almighty God has from everlasting ordained both the ends and the means not the
ends without the means, nor the means without the ends, but both of them; All
lawful means may well stand with Gods providence and faith therein; yea by not
divorcing the means from the end we both declare our sincere obedience in using
such weak means as are subordinate thereunto, and decline security, and
presumption, two main enemies of our most holy faith.

45.
BY daily prayer and practice stir up the gifts of the Holy Ghost in thee, lest
in the end, thou lose thy store, with stock and all; constantly keep on rowing
against the stream of thy natural corruption; against which if thou do not
strive continually, but stand at a stay, it will carry thee away and all thy
merchandise, as a boat standing loose upon the river is carried backward, if it
be not wafted forward; is, by the sway of the water, driven downward, unless it
be still laboring to go upwards.

46.
OBserve diligently what adversaries be abroad, and warily watch that there be
no traitors at home; All that hurt thee are not without thee, there are
enemies too within thee; and such as may do thee more harm than all the rest:
look upon thy outward senses, and reflect upon thy inward affections, lest by
the former evils enter, and lest by the later evils conquer.

47.
TAke heed to thy mouth that thou speak not unadvisedly, and to thy hands that
they act not unpreparedly; but especially and above all things look to the
inward affections of thy heart; for as the fountain is, such is the river that
runs from it; If the fountain be sweet, the river that flows from it will
not be sour; as the Wood is, so the Fire will be, unsavory wood will make
unwholesome fire, but pure Frankincense or dry Juniper will yield a pleasant
perfume: so if the soul be sanctified, the lips will be seasoned, but if the
thoughts and affections be ungodly, they will bring forth lewd words and wicked
actions; for out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks, said the God
of Truth who knew the heart Matthew. 12.34.
, what the heart reads the mouth repeateth.

48.
COnsider thy proper and personal sins, whereunto, by the corruption of thy
nature, thou art most inclined; from which thou can hardliest abstain, as
being more strong, and more working in thee than some others are; and against
them make thy spiritual compacts and barricadoes most durable, and most guard
thy walls with Redoubts and outworks; where the hedge is lowest, every beast
will seek to enter, and where we are weakest, Satan that beast will be
strongest, his temptations will be thickest, where our defense is slenderest.

49.
STand to thy watch, look to thy ways, keep a continual guard over thy self,
in all occurrences; and not only beware of personal sins, toward which thy
nature most bends, but of those also which are incident to thy present estate,
whatsoever it is. In wealth beware of high-mindedness, in health of wantoness,
in mirth of forgetfulness, in want to distrustfulness, in loss of pensiveness,
and in death of fearfulness.

50.
ABstain, as far as thou can, not only from every sin, but also from every
bait that may be a means to bring thee unto it; Look not thou upon the wine,
says the Holy Ghost by the mouth of Solomon, when it is red, when it gives
his color in the cup, when it mooveth it self aright Prove. 23.31.
; and accordingly look not upon the meat, that may betray thy appetite, and
then thy affections; young Daniel refused the meat that was allotted unto him
by Nebuchadnezzar, (which of it self was lawful to be received with
thanksgiving) because the King should not entice him thereby to forsake his own
God, or to lean to the others Religion Dan. 1.8.
.

51.
CHeck not Gods Word with the licentious Antinomian, give not Gods Spirit the
lie, who in every place warns us, that the Moral Law is not abolished by the
Law of faith, but established Marth. 5.17, 18, 19, 20.
; In the uprightness and integrity of thy heart, endeavor to walk still in the
old way of Gods Commandments, if ever thou mean to come to Heaven by the new
and living way Christ Jesus; For every man that has this hope in him purifieth
himself, even as he is pure 1 John 3.3.
; Examine and prove thou still, and fashion thy works by the Law, as by a right
level, which God has left to be a rule of righteousness, to remain in full
strength, power and virtue for ever. Although thou can not fulfill it, yet
put it not out of thy sight, or care; stray from it as little as thou can,
though thou can not obey it so fully as thou would.

52.
HOwsoever thou fall through infirmity, or human frailty, into sin (as who is
free from falling, It is not possible for any mere man to be without all
offense) (...). Chrysostom.
Howsoever being surprised by Satan, inveigled by slights, enticed by sinners,
thou be taken, and upon a sudden overtaken in a fault (for it were a proud
persuasion above man's state, and against-Gods Truth, to think thy self safe
from sin) yet be not so insolent and impudent, stand not in justification of
it; for that shows less grace and more corruption; while men (though
otherwise badly disposed) blush and are touched with some bashfulness, though
they cannot contain themselves, yet there is hope of them; some sign of
salvation is the acknowledgment of sin Signum salut is agnitio peccati. Bern.
; but when they justify their bad doings, and boldly defend what they have
done, they are almost desperate, and give small hope of amendment, without
special grace To sin is human weakness, but to plead for it wilful wickedness;
Defense of a fault doubles it, and is a forerunner of obduration; Thy sin
perhaps was small as thou did commit it, but surely 'twill be great if thou
strive to maintain it, for that cuts off all repentance, Nay it makes thy sin
grow up into a wicked height of scandal, and so it may be not only a snare to
thy self, but an unhappy seducement to other, warranting many more to be
sinful.

53.
THere are many things evil in themselves, of which thou may speak without
any evil; as of stealing, killing, which are wicked to be practiced, not
wicked to be published; but there are other things lawful to be done, which
are non dicendas, unlawful and unhonest to be plainly spoken of; and therefore
forbear (unless it be upon good cause and with great modesty) so much as to
mention them; Let no corrupt communication proceed out of thy mouth, but that
which is good to the use of edifying; that it may minister grace unto the
hearers; grieve not the Holy Spirit of God Ephesians. 4.29, 30.
, Neither give him occasion, touching his comfortable and defensive presence to
depart from thee.

54.
LEt not thy heart be in thy mouth, but thy mouth in thy heart, unless it be to
glorify God, or edify thy brethren; or for justice and equity in behalf of
them that are thrust down, and injuriously dealt with by some unconscionable
oppressor; unless it be to speak such things as are just and acceptable in the
sight of God, and good and profitable for the use of the hearers; unless thy
speech be gracious and powdered with salt Coloss. 4.6.
, that is holy and wholesome for the matter, and discreet and seasonable for the
manner; Either vent good matters, or break not good manners, Either speak that
which is better than silence, or else keep silence still (...). Eurip.
; we commonly make little reckning of vain words, but even the least vain word
is not the least sin, of which one day we must give a great account.

55.
SUspect all thy doings; like Job that holy man, that feared all his ways Job
9.28.
, yea though he had much less cause to fear, than we have, who come far short
of his carefulness; Suspect either thy negligence in them, or pride of them, or
some corrupt affection mingled with them; And when thou have done the uttermost
thou can, when thou have bent all thy strength to serve the Lord in special
manner, say not thou art righteous, like the Pharisee that condemned another,
and justified himself; Be so far from setting up thy rest, or crest upon it,
that thou condemn thy self for an unprofitable servant Luke. 17.10.
; desiring remission, not deserving reward; As Christ said to the young man
that was so forward in the Gospel, that seemed zealous in the ways of God,
and even to make have to the Kingdom of Heaven, yet one thing is wanting Luke
18.22.
, so still cry out to thy soul, either for the matter, or for the manner, some
thing is wanting; Assure thy self, there is some want of holiness, nay, some
unholiness in thy holiest aons.

56.
BE not Eagle-eyed, and sharp-sighted, to observe the behavior, and look into
the lives of other men, so long as being overcome with self-love, thou art
pur-blind in regarding, and backward in reforming thine own; but first begin
with thy self, and end with others; but first look to thy own ways, and
without partiality consider how hard it is to subdue the strength of sin in thy
self, and to over-master thy own corruptions, so shall thou be more charitable,
and less severe to others.

57.
MAke conscience of the least sin, that thou may be afraid of the greatest,
strain at every such gnat, and thou shall not easily swallow a Camel; use to
pull out but such a moat in thine ey, and thou shall not soon suffer a beam to
stick in it; to prevent sin at the beginning, the labor is little, but to
shake off a custom is the work of a Samson.

58.
MAke not thy self guilty of other men's sins, by counsel, or commandment, or
consent, by commending, or justifying, or concealing, or not opposing, if thou
be able; For though thou do not execute it in the work, and apparently practice
it with the hand, yet, if thou prevent it not, when it is in thy power so to
do, thou come within the compass of the sin, in Gods account; If God have
made thee strong, and thou make thy self weak, the evil that thou suffer
shall be required of thee.

59.
LEt not the fatness of another portion trouble thee, nor yet the leaness of
thine own; Never envy that another has more, not yet repine and grudge that
thou have less; Make not slight of that which thou enjoyest, because thou
want something that thou desire; It is not Gods Ordinance that al should
be alike, or that al should be aloft, or that all should abound in riches; As
the Lord can give riches without contentment, so he can give contentment
without riches. Be not sick for another wealth, or another office, or
another honor, but constantly and equally content thy self, with that honor,
or office, or wealth, or mean estate, that God has given thee; but satisfy
thy self with that low or last place wherein he has settled thee, and
acknowledge that the meanest place is far more than either thou can challenge,
or can deserve; I am not worthy of the least of all thy mercyes, says Jacob
Genesis 32.10.
; Not worthy of the greatest, No, not of the least; the least drop of thy
mercies is greater than all my deserts.

60.
WHat though some, far unlike to just Lot Pet. 2.7.
, are nothing troubled in their souls with the filthy conversation of the
wicked? Nay, which is worse, what though some can delight and sport themselves,
can laugh and clap their hands, to behold men laden with drink tumble like
swine, or observe how they rail upon the truth, and those that profess it,
besides many other ungracious speeches; little imagining that by such
applauding behavior they seem also to rejoice in the Devils conquest over
their brethren; yet mourn thou for the sins of others as if they were thine
own, for if thou do not thou will thereby make them thine own; If thou mourn
for them, they are theirs not thine, but, if thou do not mourn, they are both
theirs and thine; they are smitten in Ezechiel that mourned not for the
abominations committed, as well as they that did commit them Ezech. 9.5.
.

61.
WHat intolerable oppression soever the malice of men shall not cease to
multiply upon thee, let Christian wisdom and magnanimity subdue thy passions;
Be so far from revenging thy self indeed for injuries done unto thee, as not in
big words or bold assertions to threaten, or in the secret corners of thy mind
to purpose any vengeance; commend thy cause to God, stay his leisure till he
deliver thee; or, if thou live where God has appointed a governor, appeal to
his Vicegerent, the public Magistrate, who bears not the sword in vain, and
abide his determination; rather undergo a second injury, than with thy own
revenging hand requite the first; rather with a good heart be ready to bear any
thing, than by any thing, whereof thou have no warrant, seek satisfaction; Art
thou a Christian and wilt be revenged? Tarry a while, thy Lord and Master
Christ Jesus is not yet revenged of his own death; Vindicari vis Christian?
Nondum vindicatus est Christus August. in Psalm. 30.
put away all rage, put on the Lord Jesus Christ Romans 13.14.
; pray, as thy blessed Savior both did, and taught, that thy enemies may
rather be pardoned, than punished.

62.
NEither bite thy neighbor present, nor backbite him absent; Neither bite him
nor backbite him with what thou know, and much less with more than thou
know; Moove not any tale, whether false or true, whereby the credit of thy
neighbor may be lost, or lessened; All truths are not to be told at all times;
Thou may bear false witness when thou make a true report, false witnesses
do not always deliver untruths, but deck their fowl intents with a fair show
of verity; the truth of the matter excuses not the guilt of the slander
Veritas convitil non excusat convitium.
.

63.
BE not careless of thy companions carriage, but exhort and edify him, as far
as thou may, lest the man perish that is a friend, and the Devil rejoice at
it that is an enemy; Be frequent in admonishing thy friend, and sometimes spare
not sharply to check him, never rebuke him bitterly, never reject him utterly.

64.
LIe not for thy friend, or for thy self, or for Almighty God; God requires me
to love him, but not to lie for him; will you speak wickedly for God? and talk
deceitfully for him? says Job Job 13.7.
, checking in his friends a false speech, although it tended to defend the
Lord; speak not at any time that which thou know to be false, nor at all
times that which thou know to be true; conceal as far as lawfully thou
may, that which may do hurt spoken; Thou art not ever bound to tell all the
truth, but thou art ever bound that all be truth thou tellest; It is not a ly
when silence keeps back something that is true, but when speech utters
something that is false.

65.
SEll not one sin to buy another, amend not one error or corruption by
another, but purge out the old leaven that thou may be a new lump 1 Cor. 5.7:
, Forsake not riotousness, to embrace covetousness, Neither leave secret
repining, to fall into open rebellion; In avoiding superstition, become not
either schismatic, or profane; Neither in abhorring profaneness fall into
mere formality and hypocrify; To abandon Epicurisme, admire not Stoicisme,
Neither run into Anarchy, to shun Tyranny; but seek, and turn to, and keep the
golden mean, prescribed by the Lord in his Word; From the which the wider thou
walk, the worser thou wanderest, and the further off from thy journeys end.

66.
BE fervent and zealous, but not fierce and violent; Be diligent for the
increase of thy wealth, but not a slave to the world; Be neither remiss in thy
vocation, nor yet too severe a taskmaster over thy self to the oppressing of
thy mind, or body; soon changeable is thy life with rest, and recreation; but
without recreation or rest it cannot be long durable.

67.
ABhor have, and love leisure, when thou art to undertake any serious business,
lest, if thou go on with little heed, thou come off with less honor; Many
circumstances belong to things of substance; Matters of moment are not to be
managed but with much deliberation; It is safer and easier in such eases, to
practice when thou have pondered, than to ponder when thou have practiced.

68.
APproximate none to thy secrets, neither willingly make choice of any to serve
thee in any office, though of never so serviceable qualities or useful
indowments otherwise; but such as are careful to serve God, according to their
apprehension and ability; but such as are religious and virtuous, and adorned
with true worthyness; but such as are more willing, at least, to heavenly
causes, than quick in worldly matters; He, who has freely sanctified their
hearts with grace, will surely direct their ways with judgment; They will not
faulter in their business, nor will God fail in his blessing; They will be
faithful and prudent in the managing, and God will be gracious and merciful in
the prospering of all those employments which they take in hand.

69.
HOwsoever thou art before others in prerogative of birth and blood, and in
many other things there be a great difference between thee and thy neighbor;
Howsoever God has invested thee with right unto titles, and revenews; and in
worldly matters perhaps too has nothing, whereas thou have all things and
want nothing; yet in the mainest matters and things of most worth,
acknowledge him and account him thy equal. The lowest have as good a title to
salvation, and the Kingdom of Heaven, as the highest, and the poorest as the
richest; There is neither Jew, nor Greek; There is neither bound nor free;
There is neither male nor female: for ye are all one in Christ Jesus Gal. 3.28.
quantum ad sidei Statum and dignitatem. Diony. Carth. in locum. quantum ad
justificationem attinet. Nicolaus Hemingius in locum.
. It is not the meaning of Gods mercy to countermand any civil respects; In the
world there must be differences, and degrees; it must be so for policy and
order, but in Christ Jesus all are one; All have one Redeemer; All are members
of one body, Christ has redeemed all of all sorts that believe in him.

(70)
THere is an excellent wisdom beyond the rules of Physic, beyond all
sovereign medicines whatsoever, in the weakness of our bodies for their
restoration, and in the good estate of our bodies for the continuation and
strengthening of life; to send to heaven by prayer for the increase of faith,
and fear of God, and that increase will make the heart better, and that
beterness will procure more true cheerfulness, and that cheerfulness will stir
up more found health, comforting natural heat, and dispersing it all over the
body; and that health will multiply our days, and augment the years of our
life; whereas raging, hopeless, heartless sorrow, like a devouring Harpye
consumes our blood and spirits, dries our bones, and suddenly dissolves and
destroys us.

71.
See thou a man smitten with diseases, and lying in extremity and anguish;
his heart panting, his strength failing, his flesh and bones tormenting; and,
which is yet more lamentable, do thou perceive that Satan (as he commonly
uses upon such occasions,) endeavors now especially to breed no small
troubles and terrors in his soul? send up thankful thoughts unto thy most
gracious Lord God, for holding his hands, and not laying the like upon thee,
for not dealing with thee severely as he might justly: God is always to be
glorified of us both in our bodies and in our souls; not only for his
proceeding to profit us, but also for his forbearing to punish us.

72.
AS it is a great fault not to put up a small wrong; So it may be no small
fault to suffer a great injury; thou art bound in such a case not to make thy
self a prey, but to make thy cause known, not to whet on others to lay on load
upon thee, but (as Gods servants have done from time to time) to crave and call
for the help of the Magistrate, and seek remedy from his hands, whom God has
left as his Lieutenant, and set to supply his place, either for the preventing
of further wrong, or for the punishment of the doer of wrong; God binds our
hands from unjust revenge, but he shuts not our mouths from just complaint;
God is offended as sure when lawful means are not used, as when unlawful
means are practiced.

73.
NOt only labor to serve God thy self, but stir up, and inflame others to
serve him, to believe his truth, and walk in his Commandments; Him will God
love most, who shall win most to the love of God Is in amore Dei major erit,
qui plurimos ad ejus amorem trahit. Greg. in hom.
: wherefore has God given thee light, but that thou should give light to
others? How can thou be sure of thy own calling, if thou have no delight to
call others? Thou art not turned to God thy self, if thou bear not that heart,
that thou would even think thy self happy, might thou be a means to turn
another unto God. The Prophet Isaiah, that Evangelical Prophet, and Prophetical
Evangelist, prophesying of the Kingdom of Christ, brings in the people so
full of zeal, that they stir up one another, saying, Come ye, and let us go up
to the mountain of the Lord, to the house of the God of Jacob, and he will
teach us of his ways, and we will walk in in his paths Isaiah 2.3.
. And Zachariah says, They that dwell in one City, shall go to another,
saying, Let us go speedily to pray before the Lord, and to seek the Lord of
Hosts Zachar. 8.21.
.

74.
BE not wise to thy self; Be not a niggard of thy knowledge, but communicate
thy knowledge to others; Cover not thy candle with a vessel, neither put it
under a bed, but set it on a candlestick, that they which enter in may see the
light Luke 8.16.
; So shall thou perform the intent of thy stewardship; so shall thou be of the
number of those, who profiting teach, and by teaching profit; knowledge may
fitly be resembled to the Widows oil, which, the more it was powered out, the
more it increased; knowledge may be well likened to the five loaves, which the
more they were distributed the more they multiplied; As contrariwise, if
knowledge be not imparted, it will be impaired, If we keep it private, we shall
be deprived of it.

75.
ARt thou learned, and able to teach others? yet disdain not that any should
teach thee; what mortal mere man ever attained to that depth of judgment as not
to be yet ignorant in many profitable concernments? Even in the same profession
that may be hidden from one, which is known to another; to attend is no
hinderance but that a man may speak, to speak is no hinderance but that a man
may hear; therefore Job matcheth them together, saying, Let a man of
understanding tell me, there is he prepared to learn, let a wise man harken to
me Job 34.34.
there is he provided to speak; speaking and hearing amongst all that are
wise-hearted cannot be prejudicial one to another.

76.
ATtend as often, and as carefully, as thou may, to all wholesome and
convenient directions; Be more desirous to harken to others, than to hear thy
self; but especially when thou meetest with such, as excel in knowledge, as
are filled with the knowledge of Gods will in all wisdom and spiritual
understanding; by whom in many things thou may exactly cure thy ignorance by
learning in silence; who are as profitable Well-springs plentiful and
perpetual; such as fail not, nor can be drawn dry at any time; whose hearts
feed their mouths; and thereout excellent observations in one useful respect
or other, readily flow, as a free stream from a full fountain.

77.
COntemn not, neither lightly pass over such things as thou see; but
seriously search and seek, not only what temporal, but especially what
spiritual use thou can draw from them, that may enrich thy soul, and help to
build thee up in Christ Jesus; learn which the Be, to gather celestial honey,
as well from the weed, as from the flower; learn by the Dust thy baseness, by
the Grass thy frailty, by the Ant diligence, by the Sheep patience, by the Ox
thankfulness, by the Clouds bountifulnes; learn by the Darkness the time of thy
ignorance, by the Light the time of the Gospel, by every thing something that
may wean thee from earth, and win thee to Heaven.

78.
COmmune often with thy own heart, and let thy spirit make diligent search
wherein thou have offended, in thought, word, deed, by sins of omission or
commission; against God, thy neighbor, and thy self; stand not in thine own
light, be not partial, but examine thy self earnestly, thoroughly, uprightly;
Neither only examine, but upon examination condemn thy self, fall at Gods feet,
and humbly cry for mercy; Thus if thou judge thy self before thy self in this
thy day, thou shall not be condemned in the last day, before the Judgment Seat
of Christ, in the presence and audience of all the world.

79.
DIscover to thy Surgeon thy sores, to thy Physician thy disease, to Almighty
God thy sins; It is a good disgrace, that procures grace; He preventeth his
cure that does not publish his cause Ipse sibi denegat curam qui suam medico
non publicat causam. Aug. epist. 188.
. The Lord indeed knows all things, but yet requires thy confession; is
acquainted with all thy wishes, and all the volutations of thy mind, but
nevertheless expects thy words Novit Deus omnia vocem tatamen tuam expectat.
Ambros. de poenit. l. 1. cap. 23.
.

80.
THink not thy self immediately made clean from all thy iniquity,
transgression, and sin, if thou shed a few tears and bewail them; but be
sorrowful for them, and sorrowful that thou can be no more sorrowful;
considering that if a river were turned into tears flowing from thine eyes,
thou could never sufficiently be grieved for thy offenses; if God should in
his Justice only require it; and yet despair not, but take a true and
comfortable, and fast hold upon God by a lively faith; who is gracious and
abundant in mercy; whose mercy has neither bottom nor measure; who will not
the death of a sinner, but rather that he should repent and live; disliking
himself for his manifold misdemeanors, and cleaving to God for his manifold
mercyes.

81.
BE not so cast down in the sight of thy own unworthyness, as to think, because
thou deservest not Gods mercy, therefore thou shall never be partaker of it;
For how plentiful are his gracious promises every where of favor and
compassion? the which though there be no cause in thee why he should confirm,
yet is there cause enough in himself why he should perform; who, whatsoever he
will, he can, and, whatsoever he has promised, he will, who always uses to
be as good as his word, who is infinite in his mercy, and infallible in his
truth.

82.
IF thou would repent truly and thoroughly, pray earnestly to the Lord, that
it would please him of his infinite compassion, to look upon thee with the eyes
of his grace; The most merciful God is the only giver of repentance unto life
(n); Act. 11.18.
It is not in man's power to repent when he will, but when God will; It is not
thy own, or any others endeavor, that can do any thing in this way, till God
put to his help; until Christ did look back upon Peter, with his Spirit, as
well as with his ey, thereby to work upon his conscience, He was not moved He
was not touched with compunction, He had no heart at all to go out, nor will to
mourn and weep bitterly for his sins.

83.
See thou thy neighbor drawn into a dangerous sin? draw not out thy
stilletto of final condemnation upon him; look not upon him without hope;
deprave not his former graciousness, as though it had never been real, nor
conclude his future reprobation, as though he could never be righteous; what
know thou, but that he that is fallen, may rise again? as a member that is
out of joint may be set in again; And what know thou, but that the same,
which is to day his sin, may be to morrow thy wickedness? reprove him and
admonish him thou may and must, according to thy office and opportunity; So
thou begin and proceed with a charitable construction, and Christian
compassion; but to aggravate and amplify slips, or falls, as worldlings use to
do, and to sentence offenders to the pit of hell, that is a power for the
potter, not for the clay Non est judicium luti sed figuli. Aug. de correp. and
great. cap. 5.
; Thou have no part nor fellowship in that authority.

84.
BEholdest thou any slain together in the field? or drowned together in the
Sea? or any way else come to the same destruction together? yet conclude them
not equally virtuous, or vicious, or their rewards after death, alike happy or
miserable: For their lives may be contrary though their deaths be the same; or
though they agree a long time in their race, yet may they differ before their
races end; The two malefactors that suffered with our Savior, on the Cross,
had the like external punishment, but not the like eternal condemnation; in
their death they were not divided, they both dyed a violent death; but in their
souls they were plainly parted, the one went to heaven, the other to hell.

85.
JUdge not any man by his distemperature in his sickness, but by his
disposition in his health, or by the strangenes of his death, but by the
strictness of his life; whereof the constant course is the best rule whereby to
conjecture his future estate; unless thou will be judged thy self to be full of
malice and empty of charity. They are usual mischiefs and not extravagant
misdemeanors; (No not raving and blaspheming in case of violent disease
disturbing the head and brain) that can make any probable argument, or likely
sign of a son of perdition.

86.
ABhor that pe remptory censure, that this man is a Saint, and that man is a
sinner, he the servant of God, and he the child of the Devil; For who is able,
without special revelation, to say determinately and assuredly, touching
another, that he is the child of the Devil, or that he is the Child of God?
cannot grace easily cut off the oldest and strongest entail of wickedness? Are
there not many Wolves within the very Church, whose hypocrisy the Lord will in
time discover? and are there not many sheep without the sheepfold of Christ,
which God in his time will call August. hom. 45. upon John.
? What man is there, of so weak a faith, or so wicked a life, but that one day
Christ out of his infinite goodness may call him and heal him? How far was Paul
out of the way, and in what wrong and violent course in his former years? He
breathed out threatenings and slaughter against the Disciples of the Lord Acts
9.1.
, he was a blasphemour and an oppressor 1 Timothy 1.13.
. But was he so always? Did not God reduce him, and reform him in his later
years? whilst he was striking, was he not stricken into his conversion? and of
a ravenous and most cruel wolf was he not made first a mild sheep, and then a
most diligent and excellent shepherd? And where is he that dare take upon him
so to judge of another man's future estate, as to say certainly that he is
damned, or he is saved? Is it not more than he has any warrant for? Who art
thou that so judge another servant? Is it not to his own master only, who
perfectly knows him, to whom he stands, or falls, and not to thee who art not
able to know his heart? Is not his own master only that one Lawgiver who is
able to save and to destroy James 4.12.
? Who art thou that take such authority, and severity upon thee? that dealest
so unmercifully with thy brother? He is a sinner, and so art thou a sinner, so
either thou art, or have been, or may be; Judge thy self, try and examine thy
own works, search and sift them; Judge thy self, and judge not him, lest thou
be condemned of the Lord, for not judging and judging.

87.
BEfore thou receive the holy Sacrament, whose price is unvaluable and the
virtue no less than the Communion of the Body and Blood of Christ 1 Cor. 10.16.
; To the partaking whereof no man should rashly and rudely thrust himself, or
come without religious fear and trembling; lest instead of a seal of Gods
mercy, he receive a pledge of his wrath; if thou be not fit for such a favor,
of so high, and holy a nature, endeavor to make thy self fit, and the way to
make thy self fit, is examination of thy self in what case thou stand;
Examine thy repentance whether it be sincere, thy purpose whether it be
steadfast, thy faith whether it be lively, thy thankfulness whether it be real,
and thy charity whether it be general.

88.
BE frequent and forward in coming to the holy Sacrament, a visible pledge of
Gods grace, and holy covenant with thee; a Seal to assure thee of the
performance of the gracious promises made to thee in the Word; a part of the
most delicate and delightful souls food, that ever was tasted, or that can be
in the world; Deprive not thy self of so excellent a help both to provoke
obedience, and to strengthen faith, and to increase the comfort of the inward
man; Make preparation, but make not excuse; Thou would think thy self
wronged, if having furnished thy table and provided liberally for thy guests,
any one of them frowardly should reject thy kindness; what a wrong is it then
to refuse the table and feast of Almighty God? It is no less danger to abstain
from the Lords Supper wilfully, than it is to receive it unworthily.

89.
WHat though Gods gifts be sure without sealing, as he himself is sure without
changing? what though the Sacraments of themselves cannot confer grace ex opere
operato, by the work wrought, that is, by force and virtue of the work and Word
done and said in the Sacrament, as the Papists affirm Conc. Trident. Sess. 6.
cap. 8. Rhem. Acts 22. Sec. 1. To. 6. Sect. 5.
, blasphemously giving that power to the creature, which belongs only to the
Creator? yet are they instruments of Gods merc es, which he uses of his
goodness toward us, to convey to our feebleness good things; and to make us
more secure of his love; They are the King of Kings gracious pardon to confirm
the weakness of our faith, to make good the truth of his own promises, to seal
up unto us forgiveness of sins; Being then by Gods institution very available,
frequent them with a feeling of thy wants, with a reverence of his ordinances,
with hungring after his graces, with calling upon his Name, to fit thee and
prepare thee for that heavenly work.

90.
DEceive not thy own heart with a Zodiac of false signs; Rest not thy self in
seeking after common gifts, general knowledge and illumination, diversity of
tongues, and interpretation of tongues, all which are common to all sorts of
men both good and bad; but labor and covet to be partaker of such gifts as are
peculiar and proper to the elect, and do always accompany salvation, and
eternal life; but labor to feel a certain knowledge of thy reconciliation to
God in Christ, the gifts of regeneration, a dying unto sin, and rising up to
newness of life, the grace of hearty prayer, meekness in bearing rebukes,
delight in those that excel in virtue, comfort in distresses, and such like,
which the elect of God find in some measure wrought in them; If these be in
thee and abound, thou shall have that peace of conscience through them, that
passes all understanding; but if these be not in thee, whatsoever knowledge
thou have besides, though thou have tasted of the heavenly gift, been
enlightened by the Spirit, been partaker of the holy Ghost, tasted of the good
word of God, and received the Gospel with joy, thou shall find no more sound
comfort in them, than many most wicked men have had, who were enlightened by
God, but shall never be saved; who attained to great and high knowledge, but
never grew so high as faith.

91.
ACcording to the truth of the Word in mercy revealed unto thee, grow in grace
more and more, and make every day some progress to the Kingdom of heaven; still
press, and endeavor onwards to obtain it; Thou shall find many lets and
hindrances in the way, which to pass over may seem to be hard in the beginning
(especially if they be looked upon with an eye of flesh;) but a settled course
and continual practice of faith and repentance will within a while make all
that was laborious, lightsome, the matter easy and evident, and the way plain
and comfortable. A scorner seeks wisdom and finds it not; but knowledge
is easy to him that understands Prove. 14.6.
; that understands to desire it, and humbles himself.

92.
THink not thy self discharged either by Gods sovereign, or by the Priests
subordinat working; but that thou must also put to thy help, and work out, not
the price, but the assurance of thy own salvation Philip. 2.12.
; but that thou must also by using the appointed means, by walking in all the
Commandments of God without reproof, and continual increasing in
sanctification (which is a sign and seal of our justification) procure to thy
self an assurance of thy election a Pet. 1.10.
; but that thou must also by fighting the good fight, and keeping the faith,
put thy self into an expection of the Crown of righteousness 2 Timothy 4.8.
; If thou would be sure to have salvation follow, then must holy and careful
serving of God go before.

93.
Have thou but little abilities, and few gifts, either of nature, art, or grace
bestowed upon thee? beholdest thou a double portion in others, and a poor
pittance in thy self? yet be not dismayed, be not out of heart, but in an
humble co^tentation and devout thankfulness, proceed according to thy power,
and thy labor shall not be in vain in the Lord; God desires not toreap where
he has not sown, nor requires he much, but where he has given much; He
looks not for laboring beyond thy strength, nor travailing further than thy
gifts can reach; When Ezechiah prayed for the people, that the Lord would
pardon every one that prepared his heart to seek the Lord God of his Fathers,
though he were not cleansed according to the purification of the Sanctuary, the
Lord heard him, and harkened unto him, and healed the people 2 Chro. 30.18, 19,
20.
.

94.
COntent not thy self with knowledge and understanding, with utterance and
discourse, or with ability to dispute and determine many difficult points of
Religion, though these faculties be in thee very eminent and singular; but
consider what faith thou have to believe, and conscience to perform obedience;
but look what power Gods Spirit has in thee, to sanctification of life, to
amendment of errors and misdoings: of the Spirit illuminating the fruits are
often given to the wicked ( Balaam and Saul may Prophecy, Caiphas may have
some transient revelations) but the fruits of the Spirit sanctifying are
vouchsafed to none but only to Gods Elect; Not he that knows most, but he,
that makes best use of what he knows, is the man whom God will know, and
prefer, in the day of eternal retribution, in the day of his glorious
appearance, when he shall destroy all the wicked, and make happy his own for
ever.

95.
THe free-hearted Jews still brought, either gold, or silver, or precious
stones, or fine linen, or spices, or silk, or hair, or one thing or other, to
the building of the material tabernacle; and they left not building till they
were prohibited by proclamation; In building thy spiritual tabernacle to the
Lord, leave not praying reading, hearing, learning, meditating, applying,
practicing, till thou be stayed by death; In thy spiritual progress, repine not
at thy pains past, neither think much of that which is to come, but keep on
still; Be not weary of good intents and gracious employments.

96.
LEt the examples of thy neighbors dying round about thee daily, thy own
decaying in strength and health, the many calamities in this dangerous world,
incite thee to apply (whilst thou have time) both thy body and mind to do good;
stir thee up to prepare thy self, both in profession and practice for thy
departure; so shall neither life, nor death, no not sudden death, part thee
from thy Savior; so shall death be unto thee, nor death indeed, but a bare
name, and no worse; so shall death not be terrible unto thee, but as welcome,
as quiet sleep to a wearied and over-wearied traveller.

97.
BE not so heartless as to fear death, nor yet so senseless, as to pray for
death before the time appointed by the Lord thy Governor: It is a sin to work
thy death before men, and it is a sin to wish thy death before God; Indeed
death which brings the dissolution of nature, and is a passage to a better
life, is a welcome guest to them that are the Lords; all the godly do make
themselves ready to receive him, to meet and intertain him: Death to the wicked
comes with a sting, but to the godly has lost it; O death where is thy sting?
O Hell where is thy victory 1 Cor. 15.55.
? Christ has both abated the sting of the pain, and increased the strength of
the patient; Joyful and glorious is the happyness to be with God; but ask not
thy wages before thou have done thy work; and who can tell when he has done
all that? God may have something more for thee to dispatch, There may be some
further office of a good servant, designed for thy part, to perform amongst thy
fellow servants; It is better to live to God, than to be with God; If thou be
with God thou shall be glorified, but if thou live to God, God shall be
glorified; It was the Spirits special warrant, that made old Simeon desire to
depart; If we have not the like warrant, It is a great weakness to desire not
to be, rather than to be in misery; Petition not to die but to live, and declare
the works of the Lord, and labor further in his employments; Ask not, seek not
for any means of death, but seek and sue for a blessing upon all those good
means, that may maintain thy life, to do more good therein to the Church of God.

98.
LEt not any of Gods Judgments either seen, or heard, pass without heedfulness,
or be observed without usefulness; Let his vengeance justly fallen upon others,
though it do not touched thee, yet teach thee, and stir thee up to amendment of
life; God smites a few to warn many, and sometimes punishes but one, to
profit all; what a happyness shall it be, if, by Gods grace, we so consider
others punishment, that we our selves may never be made examples of punishment
unto others?

99.
MAke what use thou can of Gods Judgments upon others, and learn at their
charge, and by their stripes, to get some instruction to thy self; Meditate
often upon the fearful Judgments of God, which he brings upon the world, that
they may bring thy heart to a greater dread, and reverence of his holy Majesty;
but especially ponder upon the last judgment in the end of the world, and of
thy particular judgment at the hour of death; that so having made thy peace
before hand with God, by the mediation of thy blessed Lord and Savior, thou
may be sure to escape Gods wrath, and be saved; for if the tree fall toward
the South or toward the North, in the place where the tree falls, there it
shall be Ecclesi. 11.3.
, As the tree falls, so it must ly, whether it be to the North of Gods
Judgments, or to the South of his mercy; If the tree fall toward the South,
(if a man die in faith) or toward the North (without faith) there it lies; As
God does find thee, when he does call thee, so does he judge thee.

100.
DAily consider, and daily practice to mind thy eternal life, in this thy
temporal life, and have thy conversation in heaven, whilst thou walk upon
the earth, by using this world as though thou did not Phil. ^.20.
use it 1 Cor. 7.31.
, having another respect in the use of it than for it self; and not only
thinking, or talking, or wishing of heaven, not only meditating or discoursing
of God, but doing Gods will, as the Angels in heaven, readily, willingly,
faithfully, without let, murmur, or deceit; by seeking those things which are
above, where Christ sits on the right hand of God; by setting thy affections
on things above, not on things on the earth Coloss. 3.1, 2.
; whatsoever thou would do at the last gasp, and groan, when thou art dying,
do the same every day, whilst thou art living; He that would live when he is
dead, must die when he is alive.

Proverbs 4.13. TAke fast hold of instruction, let her not go: keep her, for
she is thy life.

2. Epist. of John verse. 9. He that abides in the doctrine of Christ, He has
both the Father and the Son.

Cyprianus Epist. Lib. 1. Epist. 4. Humanos errores, and mend^^^^ relinquamus,
and in veritate Dei maneamus.

Let us leave the errors, and lies of men, and abide in the truth of God.


FINIS.

