THE DESIGN OF Part of the BOOK OF Ecclesiastes: OR, The Unreasonableness of
Men's restless Contentions for the present Enjoyments, REPRESENTED IN AN ENGLISH
POEM.

LONDON: Printed for James Knapton, at the Crown in St. Paul's Churchyard.
1691.

TO THE READER.
THE following Poem is not the effect of any extraordinary skill, which I
pretend to in Poetry; but was first begun merely as the exercise and diversion
of a few hours, that I was not capable of spending better. For tho (as you will
imagine) I had never made Poetry my business, nor ever intended to try whether
I had any Genius that way; yet I had in course (as others do) read some of the
Latin and Greek Authors, had now and then admired the performances of the chief
of our own Countrymen too, had learned in some measure how to form Idea's of
things in my mind, and got some rude and more general conceptions of the nature
of Poesy; which was enough for my purpose, who propounded but to fill up some
odd unserviceable vacancies in my time, and by being employed about a proper
subject to deceive them more insensibly.

But I was not long permitted thus quietly to entertain my self, the same
causes, that disabled me for better things, increasing upon me and disabling me
for this too. So, in short, the few indigested materials, which I had collected
among my own thoughts in order to a Poem, were thrown by and forgotten. In this
state of neglect they lay for some years; till lately, tumbling over some other
trifles, I found them in the heap, and could not let them pass, inconsiderable
as they were, without reflecting upon those circumstances, which put me upon
this Essay. At last, being once engaged in meditation and led by it from one
thing to another, I concluded to go on with what I had begun, and after my
manner to finish it. This I have done, and (which is more) for some reason or
other (forgive me, Reader,) have made it public too.

And here tho I do not discover the reason that has induced me to publish it;
yet if any one shall ever give himself the trouble to guess at it, I will
direct his conjecture a little, by telling him, what are not the reasons. In
the first place, it is not Interest. For as it is addressed to no great Name,
which I might possibly hope to oblige by it; so neither is it calculated to
gratify any particular humor, that I know of. Nor, again, is it Ostentation.
For, if that had prevailed in me, I should either have accomplished my self
better for such a work; or have attempted something, that I was already better,
tho never so little better, prepared for; or rather, I should have remained
altogether silent, by which Fools are often taken to be wise, and I perhaps
might have gained the reputation of knowing my self. Nor, in the third place,
was it the importunity of Friends. For upon supposition that I have any, and
that I have showed it them, it might be demanded, what made me publish it so
far as that; and then, if they did give me a complement, it would be but a rude
return, for their civility to make them sharers in my faults.

But to come at length to the thing it self, that is published, I hope it will
be found what the Tit^e-page [filled with no promises of mighty matters] does
declare, viz. The representation of the design of part of the Book of
Ecclesiastes, or the Unreasonableness of Men's restless contentions for the
present enjoyments, in an English Poem. And in order to this give me leave to
explain this Inscription of it.

I. It is the representation of Solomon's design. A Translation turns the Words
and Idioms of one Language into those of another. A Paraphrase exhibits the
thoughts and meaning of an Author, either in the same or any other Language, by
making just such additions to the Text, or alterations in it, as are necessary
to that end. But this Poem, tho it follows the method of Solomon's, insists
upon his Topics, and speaks too in his Person, yet does not precisely confine
it self either to his words or thoughts; but taking the main proposition, or
argument, or the like, included in any verse or paragraph, makes bold to
represent it after its own manner, frequently inserts what seems conveniently
to introduce or illustrate or prove it, and sometimes on the other side omits
things of less importance to it.

II. It represents the design but of part of the book of Ecclesiastes. This
book I take to be a collection of thoughts concerning Happiness, in which the
Penman shows sometimes by what it is attainable, and sometimes by what it is
not. In the negative part of it he taxes nothing more than the eager designs
and immoderate labors of Mankind, which they undertake only for the sake of
secular advantages. Therefore having just mentioned the general vanity of the
World, he immediately infers the unreasonableness of this humane Drudgery for
the things of it, and of expecting Happiness from them. But lest this
unreasonableness should not be evident enough from a bare single assertion of
vanity in sublunary things, he enumerates some particular Vanities and Evils,
that affect these worldly labors; proving, that men get by them, either
nothing, or but that which is transient and unsatisfactory. This he does, as
occasion serves, through the whole Treatise, but the principal place, where he
insists longest upon it, and in the most uninterrupted series, is from the
beginning to chap. 4. v. 7. and this is that part, which I have endeavored to
give the drift and intention of. Indeed he has not quite left the subject in
the following Paragraph, but because he there applies himself to a particular
sort of men, that have no Son nor Brother, and because I had occasion too to
touch upon the like case before, therefore I have followed him no further.

III. It represents Solomon's design in an English Poem. Here having given it a
name according to those notions I have of Poetry, it may not be improper to let
you know, what they are. For however imperfect or false they are, they may
still discover what I intended by this appellation.

History I suppose is addressed to the Understanding or Apprehension: and its
Excellencies are, the truth of the Relations; a natural and clear disposition
of things, showing their mutual connections and dependencies; and an apt and
lively expression, that leaves sufficient Images of them upon the Reader's
mind. Oratory directs it self not only to the Understanding, but also to the
Judgment, or some Passion apt to lead the Person, in whom it is raised, into
assent: and its Virtues are therefore, close and conclusive Arguments; a
powerful application to the Love or Hatred, Fear or Hope, Compassion or
Severity of the Auditory; a method unforced, and easy to be comprehended;
language, that is strong or taking; and a period agreeable to the matter, and
falling gratefully upon the ear. But now Poetry penetrates through all these to
the Admiration also; not only informs, or persuades, but exceedingly and above
all delights us too; entertains our Fancy, and curdles our Blood. Here then
every thing is more exalted; if the argument be Historical, it is not told
directly, but with contrivance and unexpected surprises ( -- Per ambages,
deorumque ministeria, and fabulosum sententiarum tormentum praecipitandus est
liber spiritus, ut potius furentis animi vaticinatio adpareat, quam religiosae
orationis sub testibus fides, Satyr.
says Pet. Arbiter): when the World is to be convinced of the worth of any
Person or thing, it is either insinuated with more art, or displayed in more
lofty strains: when any Affection is to be moved or allayed, it is handled with
more exactness: in fine, the subjects and the topics insisted upon in pursuit
of them, are both more select; the (...) of manners, and circumstances of
things are delineated more fully and visibly; figures are more frequent and
bold; and the words are so placed, as not only to sound well, but Musically.
This I take to be the general notion of Poetry, by which it is differenced from
the other ways of writing or speaking. But, after all, it must be noted, that
when this general account of Poetry is applied to particular Poems, it rises or
falls, is more or less conspicuous according to their several natures, which to
be sure are not all of the same elevation.

The principal kinds of Poems are, either those that tend to the advancement of
Virtue: as, the Epic Poem, which sets before us the achievements of those,
that have been famous and Heroic, as patterns for others in their
circumstances: Tragedy, which teaches us not to overvalue or rely upon
temporal advantages, by the falls of those who have had the most of them; to be
tenderhearted, by using to pity their misfortunes; to be courageous, by
looking at their patience; and to be humble, by observing what the greatest of
men may come to: Ode, that excites our devotion, by singing the attributes of
the Deity; or a laudable emulation, by celebrating the praises of some Worthy:
Eclogue, which commends to us the innocence of rural life: and Elegy, that
continues a pious remembrance of the deceased Friends of our Country, of
Learning, or our selves: Or those, on the contrary, that tend to depress and
discredit Vice: as Comedy, which presents to view the faults of common
Conversation: and Satyr, which by its arguments exposes, not so much men, as
their unreasonableness and enormities.

This last is that, which we are now concerned in. I might therefore take this
opportunity to tell a long story about that ancient Poem among the Greeks,
which they called (...) or (...); how it was an appendage to Tragedy, Hor. de
Art Poet. v. 220.
and in a manner co-eval to it; and how, as that was invented in honor to
Bacchus, so this seems to be in honor to those Satyrs, who were accounted his
(...) and Companions. AEl. Hist. var. l. 3. c. 40.
Or I might enter into a dispute about the Latin Satyr before Livius
Andronicus's time: whether it was transplanted from Greece, Poet. l. 1. c. 12.
as Scaliger thinks, or sprung up again at Rome of its own accord, as it had
done there before, De Sat. Hor. l. 1. Sat. 10. v. 66.
according to Casaubon and the Romans themselves. But neither of these are at
all like that Satyr, which has obtained for eighteen hundred years. Quint. l.
10. c. 1.
The Grecian Satyr was Dramatic, as appears not only from what is said before,
but also from Euripedes's Cyclops still extant; whereas the more modern Satyr
is Diegematic. And the old Latin Satyr, tho it might be something better than
the first Fescennine Poetry, yet consisted mostly in some incondit effusions of
Ribaldry, and a little petulancy of Wit: But the latter, however preserved from
the superstition of too critical Rules, is nevertheless become a just Poem,
Hor. l. 1. Sat. 10. v. 67.
far more regular and polished, and should be more modest and virtuous. To this
may be added, that the Primitive Satyr of the Romans was joined with Music and
Dancing, and a great deal of gesticulation; and therefore when it had given
occasion to Livius Andronicus to introduce elaborate Plays, Live. l. 7. Hor. l.
2. Sat. 1. v. 62.
it was swallowed up in them, or at least annexed to them under the name of
Exodium. So that the Satyr, which after this Ennius and others, but especially
Lucilius, began to write, was new and quite of another nature.

What this nature is, it is now time to enquire. Some place it in Mirth and
Drollery; others in Severity or Acrimony. Those propose Horace for a pattern;
and these contend, that Iuvenal is for them. But, if I may be admitted to
deliver my own opinion freely, I think neither of them are right. For the
first, tho it may be of use in Satyr, yet continued through the whole work is
Buffoonish, and belongs rather to the Exodium of an Atellan Fable, or at best
to Old Comedy. And the other, tho it has a place too in Satyr, yet constantly
and rigidly prosecuted is the property of an Iambic or Invective Poem. Beside,
tho Horace has a very familiar and pleasing Air, yet his discourses are for
the most part argumentative and true, and consequently different from that
which they call, (...), that minds jest more than truth, and considers men
rather as risible than rational. He must be a man of a pleasant conceit, that
can be provoked to laugh by his Arguments against Covetousness, L. 1. S. 1. L^
2. S. 2. and alibi.
Luxury, etc. tho these (which ought to be noted) do admit of laughter much
more naturally than many other subjects. What can be more grave than that
reasoning against Intemperance? L. 2. S. 2.
-- Vides, ut pallidus omnis
Caena desurgat dubia? Quin corpus onustum
Hesternis vitiis animum quoque praegravat una,
Atque affigit humo divinae particulam aurae.
Or that answer to him, who to defend this Rioting and Luxury, pleaded the
largeness of his Estate, and how well it would bear it? -- Ergo
Quod superat, non est melius, quo insumere possis?
Cur eget indignus quisquam, te divite? Quare
Templ^ ruunt antiqua Deum? Cur, improbe, carae
Non aliquid patriae tanto emetiris acervo?
And so, on the other side, tho Iuvenal does indeed write generally with more
concern and awfulness than Horace, as indeed his subjects most commonly
require, yet he is not so hot and violent, as some would make him. Methinks he
looks a little like Horace, where he argues against them, that boast of their
Family, but do nothing worthy of it: S. 8. v. 30.
-- Quis enim generosum dixerit hunc, qui
Indignus g^nere, and praeclaro nomine tantum
Insignis? Nanum cujusdam Atlanta vocamus, etc.
And presently after: Vos humiles, inquis, vulgi pars ultima nostri, V. 44^

Quorum nemo queat patriam monstrare parentis;
Ast ego Cecropides. Vivas, and originis hujus
Gaudia longa feras: tamen ima plebe Quiritem
Facundum invenies: solet hic defendere causas
Nobilis indocti, etc.
Nay, sometimes he abates so much of his seriousness, as to be even merry; as,
where the Man desires the sportula for his absent Wife, S. 1. v. 123. S. 2. v.
36. S. 3. v. 100.
pretending her to be in the Litter with him; where Laronia takes up the
Philosopher; where he describes the humor of the Greeks; V. 203.
the account of Codrus's furniture; all that story of the Fish, the Council
called upon it, S. 4.
the blind Senators speech and wonderment, etc. The truth is, neither drolling
nor inveighing; nay more, neither pleasantness nor gravity of reprehension
(which yet are more properly found in the forementioned Authors) do express the
nature of Satyr. They are but modes of it, and to be used as occasion requires,
sometimes the one, and sometimes the other. For the Satyrist, having variety of
matters to treat of, cannot accommodate one sort of Satyr to them all, but must
make the complexion of it differing according to the quality of his subject.
But to give my thoughts, such as they are, concerning the nature of Satyr, and
dispatch what I have to say upon it at once; 1. As to the matter of Satyr, I
suppose it should consist of Arguments against something, that is vicious or
unreasonable. I know Lucilius brought in an evil allay to that perfection,
which he first gave this latter Satyr, by levelling it at Persons rather than
Things; but in this he must therefore be followed sparingly and with more
caution than either he himself, or perhaps Horace, Persius, or Iuvenal have
used. For a Poet in justice (and, I think, he that pretends to discourage Vice,
should not himself give an example of so great a one as Injustice) has no more
power over a Man's Name, than over his Life or Estate. Besides, since Persons
are made the subject of Satyr only as vicious or unreasonable, if the fault can
be abstracted from the Person, and that destroyed without hurting this, as it
will be more artificial, so will it be more effectual. For these reasons Varro
and other considerable men, by a contrary extreme, totally disclaimed these
Personal reflections of Lucilius. For to be impartial, it must be confessed,
there are cases, when particular Men may be mentioned; as, when a Man's
wickedness is so open and understood, that such liberty begets no new in^amy to
him; or so very enormous, that he is become as it were an Outlaw to Virtue and
Society, and every Man's prey. For in such instances the Poet questionless is
permitted the prudent use of a common privilege. Therefore I do not say,
Lucilius is absolutely not to be imitated in this; but, that he is not to be
imitated commonly, or without caution and tenderness. 2. As to the manner of
delivering these Arguments, sometimes they ought to be framed by way of slight
and derision; as, when the thing satyrized has something in its nature or
circumstances so ridiculous, that it admits not serious treatment; or so mean
and base, that it deserves it not. L. 1. S. 3. S. 7. S. 8. S. 9. L. 2. S. 3.
The unequal strains of Tigellius, in Horace; the contrast between Rupilius and
Persius; the wooden Priapus and the Witches; the importunity of the Fop; the
management of Damasippus, and his turning Philosopher; Catius's
Kitchin-learning; S. 4. S. 8.
Nasidienus's vanity and sordidness, etc. are things below all arguments, but
the bare exposing of them; and since they are ridiculous in themselves, the
representation of them must be merry. 3. Some crimes ought not to be meddled
with, but seriously; as, when they are so great, of so deep a dye, of such
large extent, or dangerous consequence; that it would be trifling and levity to
pretend to ridicule them, or correct them in that way, which is fitted rather
for peccadillo's and the ^opperies of Mankind; nay, and he might seem to be in
a disposition to commit the same, who could be merry under the sense of them:
or, when they are but the effects of ignorance or infirmity, especially if
invincible; and scarce deserve so much, as to be played with and derided. The
former sort should be handled with gravity and good earnest, if not detestation
or indignation; the other with compassion and pity. Iuvenal could not writ^^
(...) ^^operly against the Degeneracy of the later Rom^^s, than by showing
them, how unlike this made ^^em, and detestable to their virtuous Ancestors in
the other World: -- Curious quid sentit, S. 2. v. 153.
and ambo
Scipiadae? quid Fabricius, manesque Camilli?
Quid Cremerae legio, and Cannis consumpta juventus,
Tot bellorum animae? quoties hinc talis ad illos
Umbra venit, etc.
Nor against that Cheating, which escapes external Courts, better than by an
argument taken from the more certain tortures of Conscience: S. 13. v. 192.
-- Cur tamen hos tu
Evasisse putes, quos diri conscia facti
Men's habet attonitos, and surdo verbere caedit,
Occultum quatiente animo tortore flagellum? etc.
Nor against that excessive Fear of death, which frights Men into the
commission of evil, than by considering the religious ends of life: S. 8. v. 79.
Esto bonus miles, tutor bonus, arbiter idem
Integer, ambiguae siquando citabere testis
Incertaeque rei. Phalaris licet imperet, ut sis
Falsus, and admoto dictet perjuria tauro,
Summum creed nefas animam praeferre pudori,
Et propter vitam vivendi perdere causas.
He could not well tax Sodomy and such abominable filthiness in Philosophers
and Teachers of Morality, Cruelty and Iniquity in Magistrates, Impiety in
Priests, and the like, without detestation: S. 2. v. 1.
Ultra Sauromatas fugere hinc libet and glacialem
Oceanum, quoties aliquid de moribus audent,
Qui Curios simulant, and Bacchanalia vivunt, etc.
Nor the dispoiling an Orphan of his subsistence, and even forcing him to
prostitute himself for bread, without indignation: Quid referam, quanta siccum
jecur ardeat ira,
Cum populum gregibus comitum premat hic spoliator
Pupilli prostantis?
Neither, in the last place, could Persius without some kind of commiseration
blame the error of those, who thought the Gods were plea^ed with Gold; because
being ignorant of the Nature of God, they took their measures from that sense
of things, which they had themselves; and concluded the Gods delighted in it,
because they did: O curvae in terras animae, and caelestium inanes! S. 2. v. 61.

Quid juvat hoc, templis nostros immittere mores,
Et bona diis ex hac scelerata ducere pulpa?
Or of that Young Man, who neglected his opportunities of Learning, through a
no-perception of the excellencies and happiness of it: O miser, inque dies
ultramiser, S. 3. v. 15^
huccine rerum
Venimus?
4. Many things may be treated either seriously or ridiculously; as the Poets
judgment or inclination shall determine him. Horace gravely reprimands
Tullius's Ambition: Invidia accrevit, privato quae minor esset. L. 1. S. 6, v.
26.

But Iuvenal makes sport with Hannibal's: Expende Hannibalem, S. 10. v. 145.
quot libras in duce summo
Invenies?
Nay, the Satyrist in many things has not only liberty to be either jocose or
austere, but even to be either gay or sorrowful. Heraclitus bewept the same
things that Democritus derided. And Lactantius writes of the consecration of
some Heroes among the Heathen, De fall. Rel. l. 1. c. 18.
Equidem stature non possum dolen dumne potius an ridendum putem, cum videam
and graves and doctos and (ut sibi videntur) sapientes viros in tam miserandis
errorum fluctibus volutari, etc. 5. Which way ever things are handled, whether
gravely or merrily, the arguments ought to be apposite and pat: and if besides
the reasonableness of them they contain something, that is uncommon or
moderately daring, some peculiar turn or unusual thought, to take the Reader as
well as convince him, they are better still. That in Iuvenal against the
Prayers, which were made so earnestly for a long old age, is close enough: Sed
quam continuis and quantis longa senectus
S. 10. v. 190.
Plena malis? Deformem and tetrum ante omnia vultum
Dissimilemque sui, deformem pro cute pellem,
Pendentesque genas, and tales aspice rugas,
Qualeis, umbri^eros ubi pandit Tabracha saltus
In vetula scalpit jam matter s^nia bucca, etc.
But that in Horace against being born Noble and Great is surprising: for he
turns those very things into arguments against it, which are the advantages and
pleasures, that other People desire it for. If this had been my case, says he,
I must then have pursued my opportunities of enlarging my Estate; must have
been taken up with visits; could have moved no whither without State and
Attendance, etc. L. 1: S. 6. v. 100.
-- Mihi continuo major quaerenda foret res:
Atque salutandi plures: ducendus and unus
Et comes alter, uti ne solus rusve peregr^ve
Exirem: plures calones atque caballi
Pascendi: ducenda petorita: nunc mihi curto
Ire licet mulo, vel, si libet, usque Tarentum,
Mantica cui lumbos onere ulceret atque eques armos.
But it is folly to pick particular instances of this kind out of Horace; since
he abounds with them every where. For his thoughts are generally rational, and
yet modified with a sort of newness and delicacy almost proper to himself. And
in this it is [not rallery and merriment] that he excels Iuvenal and all the
World beside. 6. The arguments must be intelligible; else the end of Satyr is
defeated. To this purpose they should all look the same way, and be directed to
the proof of some one thing, without that intermixture and confusion of
subjects, which so much displeases Scaliger in Horace's third Satyr of the
first Book, Poet. l. 6, c. 7.
and does indeed not so much benefit or delight the Reader, as lose and perplex
him. They should also be free from such needless ostentation of learning, as
renders them obscure, and is commonly said to be Persius's fault. 7. In
reproving some Vices a special care must be taken not to expose them too
nakedly or particularly: I mean such, as either natural Modesty restrains
those, that have not extinguished it, from talking of; or such, as are either
altogether, or in any part, to many unknown. Without this care the Satyrist may
set his Readers a pattern of such wickedness, as otherwise they had not thought
of; or at least familiarize obscenity and roguery to them, and so dispose them
for that, which he writes against. Against this rule Petronius Arbiter, and
Iuvenal in many places have sinned beyond all pardon.


Lastly, As to the character and style of Satyr, it is bold and free above all
other; sometimes it is so great, that nothing can be more; sometimes again as
low; and sometimes equable and middle to these; it takes allusions, figures,
language and the like; sometimes from things of the highest nature o^ esteem;
and sometimes from those of the vilest; it accommodates it self to the matter
and design in hand, when they require it; and when they do not, to the Genius
of the Poet, or his present disposition. From this freedom of style it
proceeds, that majesty prevails in Iuvenal, and easiness in Horace; and yet
notwithstanding this that the former has some mean strokes, and the other some
that are magnifick; as might easily be showed by particular examples, if there
was any occasion.

But notwithstanding this vast liberty of style, which may be used in Satyr
without the imputation of a crime, I take it to be a greater degree of
excellence to make it as agreeable to the general notion of Poetry, as the
sense and design will permit.

To apply all this to our purpose; I call the following lines a Poem, not only
because I intended them to be something above downright Prose, but more
particularly because I design them for a Satyr, containing arguments against
Men's slavish toils in pursuit merely of the things of this World. Tho in this
it may be I have not exactly observed my own rules; because I was confined in
the main not only to Solomon's topics, but also to a serious way of
representing them, lest I should be said to play with Scripture.

But, after all, whether I have hit the right Idea of Poetry, and particularly
of Satyr; or whether these Papers do at all answer that Idea, I am not very
sollicitous. For supposing, that my account is not a true one, or not tolerably
copied, and so by consequence that, which I have called a Poem, no such thing;
the Critics in Poetry may then indeed blame me for misapplying and profaning a
word, but the thing it self, what other denomination soever it must bear, will
by this means be out of their jurisdiction, which is no contemptible amends.

However before it be degraded for this, or suffer upon any other account,
permit me to pre-occupy some of those Objections, which upon the whole I fancy
are most likely to be made against it; as, 1. That I have altered the nature of
some words by making them proper, when they are really appellative and common.
Thus when Solomon says, he observed from his window a young Man void of
understanding, Prove. chapter 7.
how he met the strange Woman, etc. I have turned the word, which in the
Original signifies young Man, into a Proper Name, and so call him Naar. Of this
sort too is Mocher, Iccar, etc. 2. That some things do not consist with the
truth of Chronology; as, where the name Parush is made in allusion to the
Pharisees, who were later than all the Prophets; and where I use Teveth for the
name of a month, which was not known among the Jews till the Babylonish
Captivity. 3. That other things do not agree with the History of the Jews; as
Statues mentioned among Solomon's curiosities; and elsewhere imprisonment for
debt; which seem neither of them to be used by that People. 4. That I have
alluded to events, which I own not then come to pass; as the slaying Baal's
Prophets, and destruction of Jerusalem. 5. That many descriptions of things are
tedious, especially one or two of War; and that these, beside their
disproportioned length, imply too much horror and dislike of it. 6. That I
have misrepresented the sense of the Text in many places, or at least am
singular. Lastly, That the verse, but especially the Rhimes, are weak, if not
blundered.

My answer to the first of these is, That I am excusable in taking this
liberty, because the feigning of Names is common among Poets; because perhaps
the generality of Names in their first originals were but appellative; but
chiefly because having not History enough before Solomon's days to furnish me
with instances for my purpose, I was in a manner forced upon this shift.

To the second, That, as to Parush, tho there was no Sect of Pharisees formed
in Solomon's time, yet in all places and ages, there have been canting
Pharisaical Knaves, who in compliance with their designs, must keep themselves
distinguished and separated [(...)] from others; Clav. Script. p. 27.
and Hott inger tells us out of two good Authors, Scaliger and L'Empereur, that
some have been called (...), who were not of the Sect of the Pharisees:
wherefore I take the Name not from the Sect, but from the common signification
of that word. As to Teveth, that it might be known among the Jews before the
Captivity, tho there was no occasion for the mentioning of it before that time:
that probably it was known, because they had names for other months, as Abib,
Zif, Ethanim, Bull, etc. and it is very unnatural to have names for some, Ex.
13. 4. 1 K. 6. 1. 8. 2. 6. 38.
and not for all: that however, granting it to be a Chaldee word, Hebrew and
Chaldee are but different dialects of the same Language, between which there
has always been a familiar communication: that the more modern Jews do not
only frequently draw Chaldee words into their Rabbinical writings, but Grotius
tells us, In Synop. Critic.
that even in this Ecclesiastes there are multa vocabula quae non alibi quam in
Daniele, Esdra, and Chaldaeis interpretibus reperias: and that therefore if the
word be not so old among the Jews as Solomon, yet the Jews, and particularly
the Author of this book, have authorized this way of borrowing from the
Chaldeans.

To the third, That, as to Statues, David. b. 1. n. 20.
Mr. Cowley asserts the civil use of them among the elder Jews; tho the rigor
of the later would not accept of their liberty in this case. And as to
imprisonment for debt, our Savior mentions it, Mat. 5. 25, 26. and 18. 30.
upon the first of which places Grotius observes, In Synop. Critic.
Hinc apparet, apud Iudaeos, itidem ut apud Graecos Romanosque solitos fuisse
in carcerem conjici, qui se aere alieno non exsolvebant.

To the fourth, That Solomon being a Prophet, and the things mentioned in the
Objection great enough to be worthy the notice of a Prophetic Spirit, it can be
no extraordinary fault to make him hint them to the World beforehand.

To the fifth, That, as to the general part of the charge, perhaps the whole
Poem may be too long, unless it were better. But as to that particular of War,
I thought it was necessary in consideration of Solomon's character, to make him
represent it as his great aversion; nay, so great, that when he happened to
meet with the subject any where, he should scarce be able to contain himself:
for his Name, his Wealth, his Enjoyments, his Studies, his Wisdom, all speak
him a more than ordinary friend to Peace.

To the sixth, That if I am now and then driven upon a singular interpretation
to make the Text coherent, it is no great wonder; since it seems to be almost
an (...), containing (as Aben Ezra says) (...), and therefore of a very
difficult connection; In Comment.
and since most Interpreters are singular upon this book. However, to show how
unwilling I am to be thought guilty of perverting the sense of the holy
Writings, I have annexed a Paraphrase and a few Notes, which together, by the
Paratheses added to the Text in the former, and by the accounts of more
material or controverted words in the latter, may serve to show, that my way of
understanding this part of Ecclesiastes, which is the ground of the subsequent
Poem, is neither very inconsistent nor unreasonable.

To the last, That I take not any Rhimes, much less my own, to be worth either
defending or excusing. For as I confess my self awkward at making them, so am I
ignorant of their excellence, when they are made: and as they gave me more
trouble, than all the rest, so have they done me that other mischief of
cramping my Thoughts, and in great measure spoiling the Verse; tho, as it
luckily falls out, a naughty Verse is a less fault in Satyr than in any thing
else. Had I been hardy enough like some others (which too late I wish) to have
broken a barbarous custom, and freed my self from the troublesome and modern
bondage of Rhiming (as Milton calls it) the Business, Pref. to Par. lost.
which now immediately follows, had been something better than it is.

I reckon up these as the most obvious, not as the only Objections, that can be
made; for I doubt not, but either affection to the World, which is here accused
of Vanity, or disaffection to him, that represents the accusation, will soon
find out more. But since it cannot be expected, that I should divine or speak
particularly to them; in general, Reader, I beg your pardon, if I have obtruded
any thing upon you offensive to your taste and better Judgment. This I hope the
rather to obtain, because as I was never troublesome to the World by my Poetry
before, so in probability never shall be again.

W. W.
THE DESIGN OF Part of the BOOK OF Ecclesiastes: OR, The Unreasonableness of
Men's restless Contentions for the present Enjoyments, Represented.
THE Words, Satyric Words, that once did flow The Inscription of the book of
Ecclesiastes applied to this first part of it, chapter 1. v. 1.

From th'uncorrupted Pen of Shelomoh,
True Son of him, who first from some aged Beech,
The Echo of the Bethlehem Groves did teach
To answer, as he played his rural themes,
The bleating Ews [his care] or wanton Lambs;
But soon (so did he ripen and aspire)
O'regrew the Pipe to touch the nobler Lyre,
Composed such lofty Odes and mighty Lays,
As all the other Poets never could raise,
And merited a double Diadem,
At once Prince both of Israel and them.
For following him Koheleth learnt to sing,
Thus to decry, and yet charm every thing.
The general Vanity of Worldly things propounded, chapter 1. v. 2.
UNHAPPY thought! How like a Bubble's all
This frothy globe of World, this empty ball!
For look how wide's the view of Heaven's eye,
Or compass of its spangled tapestry;
How wide the outmost superfice of Place,
That coops us in Imaginary space:
So large is VANITY's deceitful face.
When Nature in her swadling-cloaths was laid,
And God the almighty Parent pleased surveyed,
The newborn limbs his plastic Spirit had made,
He then pronounced all good, it is true: but how?
'Twas in the way, that we describe 'em now.
To every thing some end does appertain
(Not Vanity it self was made in vain:)
That Is good, which truly does this end attain.
Good then the World may properly be said;
Because it answers th'ends for which 'twas made.
But if the eternal Cause at first designed
By vanity of things these ends to find;
Then vanity and goodness may be joined.
What, tho the World a set of wonders is,
In shape exact, and undefin'd in size,
In which a thousand stamps and marks proclaim
The Artificer's uncontroverted name;
Tho it is with pleasing Landscape overspread;
Tho it is with stately Lodgings furnished;
Though It does some, some good Company afford
(For but a little does deserve that word);
Though It does delicious viands too supply,
And every Sense has something to enjoy?
For God with purposed kindness for our good
Among all these pleasures Vanity has strow'd;
Such circumstances, as their sweets allay,
Or make their fading colors soon decay:
Lest Cully Man should be provoked to love
The things below, deserting those above.
The restless Labors, with which Mankind nevertheless pursues them, chapter 1. v.
3.
WHAT latent cause and powerful deceit
Makes him his Maker's caution then defeat,
Crowding his life with troublesome affairs,
More than his wants require, or duty bears?
Whence comes his unaccountable expense
Of spirits [the Ministers of life and sense,]
Of strength, and days consumed with all the pains
Desire exacts, or patience sustains?
Nay more, why does he break his inward peace,
And give his moving thoughts no truce for ease,
Levying a Ho^t of projects what to do,
Which way with speed his profit to pursue;
While several Parties of divided cares
Inflame his head with their intestine wars,
Besiege the calmer regions of the brain,
And fright the poor Inhabitant within,
Where it on its Cona^ion does reign?
Here Mocher bustles in a thronged shop,
That swallows all his hours to feed his hope;
And pants, by business elbow'd every way,
Within the narrow limits of the day.
There sails a Tyrian by some distant star,
Bolder than fits of men in deep despair:
Tho winds dissuade aloud, tho gulfs do aim
With their wide gaping mouths to do the same;
Yet on he drives to gain his foreign shore,
Lusting to ravish thence its secret store,
It Is very bowels modified in Oar.
While Iccar keeps within his native sphere,
Always at home, yet too a Traveller:
For daily traping over his spacious fields
He views their state, and what each of them yields;
O'relooks his flocks; o'relooks his Men, that Plow,
Or [his own emblem] corn and ^odder mow;
While sweat, the curse, that vanquished all our Race,
In pearly drops does triumph on his face.
And when the Sun has left mount Gilead,
And sinking turns on us the Earths broad shade;
He late returns the arrears of rest to take,
Which with himself he tick'd e're Morning brake.
But oh that here the catalogue might close!
For still worse ends men to themselves propose;
And still worse roads to reach their goals they choose.
Methinks I see the crafty Gilonite,
Broke from the cords of duty and of right,
Within his Study [forge of treasons] sit,
And scratching prompt his head and stir his Wit,
Seeking through policy and State essays
Himself, tho by his Master's fall, to raise.
While Absalom (what pity't should be he!)
The fairest Youth e're blotted Family,
A more compendious Rebel strives to be;
Through David's and his Father's breast would bore
A purple passage to the Sovereign power.
The Arab there by robbery and stealth,
Drudges to find a nearer cut to wealth;
With danger makes the Traveller to stand,
Rides hard all day, and lodges on the sand.
Here subtler Parush archly does contrive,
By whine and grave hypocrisy to thrive.
And as the Bulls all over the Pastures rove
To vent that excrement their lust does move;
So Naar proles about, and wakes all night
To serve the self same bestial appetite:
Till with his life the bliss perhaps he buys,
Or spilt at once in fighting for the prize,
Or slowly melted by a hot disease
(A noble end! The Phoenix thus expires
Near Heliopol, and boldly broods on fires.)
But Rehab-nephesh, in another chase
And love engaged, for Honor's false embrace,
Descends to woo the senseless populace;
Or lists himself to all the feats of War,
Fate's laborious Executioner.
Here he in tedious marches spends the day;
The night in watching hardly wears away;
Or else the grizly images of Death
In dreams disturb that little sleep he has.
And when the ruffled Colors angry meet,
And hacking steel in clashes speaks a fight;
When Death unmanacled does domineer,
However things go, the greatest Conqueror;
When Souls in scarlet vehicles do fly
Up toward the Mansions of eternity,
And with their numbers almost cloud the sky:
The doughty Hero shows himself all brave,
And struts upon the margin of the grave.
Through hills of carcasses and lakes of blood,
He seeks his Mistress and admired Good;
To lengthen whose dear life he welcomes death,
And kind at last bequeaths her his own breath.
These and a thousand thousand more such ways,
We fools our several Vanities do trace,
And heavily life's short allotment pass.
For shadows we our solid good betray;
While time, that never looks backward, sherks away.
For tho one might expect, that all these throws
And travel mighty births must needs produce;
Yet from the laboring mountains comes a Mouse.
For either they their wished for issue miss,
Or else th'acquest but small, or transient is.
TRANSIENT it is, cause man himself is so, The Unreasonableness of these
Labors proved, I. From the shortness of Man's life, who cannot long enjoy the
product of them, chapter 1. v. 4. to 8.

Only a short Probationer below;
And when his tryal's over, then he must go.
Tho Ophir were by one alone possessed,
Or Mammon all engrost into his chest:
Tho he the center of delights might be
Drawn in from all the World's periphery:
Tho he had fitted out, and fl^dg'd his name
With all the never-moulting plumes of fame:
Tho all authority and power met
To make him only, eminently great:
Yet when he is pressed that unknown Cape to make
Beyond the grave [a voyage all must take;]
Then all these things, tho with his toil obtained,
He must put off upon the living Strand,
And but a naked Ghost the Bark conscend;
As naked as a virgin Soul does lie,
Not dressed nor wedded to a Body yet,
(They say) in some close room, which we forget,
And darker chamber of Philosophy.
If bulky Empires bow to rigid fate,
Grow up, decay, and die, and after that
Their Giant limbs and State are lost: much less
May we escape, that are their particles.
Men a successive circling motion have:
These come into the Seats, which others leave,
When they in course or complaisance give way,
Revolving back into their former clay:
Thus Stars through heaven's mighty whirlpool roll,
And follow one another round the Pole.
The Sun in the morning brings us day and heat;
And then the bashful sparks they soon retreat:
Again he leaves us, and his death the night
Becomes the resurrection of their light.
Thus Winds perform their circuits through the air,
Which them from point to point does onward bear;
Till having wandered all the Compass over,
They just return, where they set out before.
Thus Waters from the great Abyss derive,
Nor of its standard fullness it deprive.
For tho they slily steal away and creep
To springs through Nature's hidden conduit-pipes;
Not long they keep concealed, but must appear
To pay their tribute to some Current near^
Or tho invited by the courteous Sun
To visit his superior region,
They rise in breathing vapors, as they go
Seeming to quit the inferior kin below;
Not long they stay sublime to revel there,
And take their rambles over the Atmosphere:
For over-loaded it does quickly bend,
And they thrown down in broken drops descend:
The shower then to brooks or rivers falls,
By soaking pores o'th'Earth or troughs of Vales.
And these uniting streams draw down again
To muster all their Forces in the Main.
From the unsatisfactoriness of those things, that are the objects of them, chapter
1. v. 8. to 12.
BUT grant a lasting attribute to man,
Which yet he never had, nor ever can:
Grant it were long, e're he did thus rebound
Downward, reciprocating to the ground:
Grant, he alive, his Grandson's Heir more scores
Of years could count, than all the Patriarchs hours:
Nay, grant his lifetime were indefinite,
No death, nor any glimpse of death in sight
With ghastly shape the mortal to affright:
Yet still, even then, we hardly could descry
The smallest pay of true felicity,
Fit to reward the Gainer's industry.
These present things for all that tawdry dress,
With which our forward Senses they entice,
Are but illusion, not realities.
What ever smiling charms they seem to wear,
At our approach the Fantoms disappear;
And when we'd clasp the joy, there is nothing there.
But then however they otherwi^e may please,
They cannot pair with thinking Substances.
This World does in its narrow ring contain
Nothing can fill the roomy Soul of Man.
Can any objects fill the eye or ear?
They but digest the entering light or air;
And then for other objects they prepare.
Material joys much less can fill the Mind:
For still there is something, something still behind.
And yet what is there more for us to try,
Untried by avarice or luxury,
Which often choused provoke our just despair
Of finding any thing, that is worth much care?
For men have long observed and used all means,
That showed themselves with any fair pretense;
Balking no opportunity they met
Pimping to their insatiate appetite:
But still whatever methods they go through,
No holding^satisfaction does accrue.
Always unfixt from this to that they move
By turns the matter of their hate and love.
What they but now admired, again they flight,
And so it sleeps in long oblivion's night.
From Solomon's own more general testimony concerning the things, that are
pursued in them, chapter 1. v. 12. to chapter 2.
I WHO this pungent doctrine now propose
So painful to our Mammonists and Beau's,
And which but few think orthodox and sound
(The Many seldom in the right are found),
Like some defeated Lover, do not write
To gratify revenge and please my spite,
Calling the World and pleasure Vanity,
Because they have been unkind and strange to me.
No, I more of its favors have received,
Than e're, when I had leave to ask, I craved,
Or Envy would hereafter have believed.
Witness thou Sun, who often see me shine
With rays not much inferior to thine!
Witness thou Porch of judgment, which do hear
The awful sentences I utter there!
Witness ye massy Pillars that support
The roof and thwarting cedars over that Court!
Witness that Throne, which Elephants club'd to make
And couchant Lions bear upon their back!
Witness ye Seed of Abraham, that stand
Beneath the shadow of my sceptered hand!
Witness thou India's Golden Chersonese,
Whose mountains my repeated Fleets made less!
Witness my Knowledge that best boon from God,
Which more than all lifts me above the Crowd:
My knowledge, more than through all ages past
The Arabs or Chaldaeans have professed:
Greater than that, which [wondrous too] did grace
The four famed Poets of good Zerah's race:
So great, astonished Princes from afar,
Their Legates sent to pay their homage here,
To th'intellectual Worlds great Emperor!
And as no sullen mood or prejudice
From disobliging usage does arise:
So neither want of diligence to see,
Or power to judge veils any thing from me.
Naught I assert, but what I Have fully known;
I, who am gray in long experience grown.
For being with wealth sufficient qualified,
And with a piercing Judgment filled beside
[E're since in Giboon waked I saw methought
A brighter morn within than that without,
A light which through my closed eyelids came^
When Truth rose on me in a midnight-dream]
I set my self to search the Univ^rse,
But first to see what censure that which near'st
Does lie, this little portion of it, bears^
And, after all, the entertainments here
Are poor and thin, mere dieting on Air,
Which wise Purveyers will not fetch too far.
There Is no expedient; no, no remedy:
Crooked and straight shall in one thought agree
Sooner than they cease to be Vanity.
Amazed indeed and struck my self with this,
A while I stood arrested with surprise.
But when the melancholy bonds were broke,
I thus within my self reflecting spoke.
See, I am now advanced to great estate^
Which was the white my aims all pointed at.
Both riches, grandeur, pleasures, and renown,
With their united luster gild my Crown,
Which proudly thus embellished does outshine
The humble glories of old Heber's Line,
And like a lamp shall light my name and me,
Through all the dusky Ages yet to be.
But yet what profit do I reap by this?
Only a larger crop of Vanities.
For all these blazes but beguile the eye;
While underneath the dazzling shin^ does lie
A sooty crust of foul deformity.
Knowledge, tho best companion here indeed,
It self does something of vexation breed.
To know brings with it an alloy of pain,
Confused thoughts, a hot and aching brain,
Many doubts to be resolved and knots untied,
Many sly errors hard to be denied,
Much curiousness scarce to be satisfied.
Beside there is nauseous work, that does in^est
A Scholar's life, and ever moves his breast.
For Logic first and Rhetoric must teach
Many useless rules for Reason and for Speech:
And when that is over, still he is obliged to read
The excrements of every looser Head;
When motions of State shall squirt 'em out,
Or needless Controversies set a foot.
He must not always look for honest sense
In books; but crambe's, lies, impertinence,
No exercise of Parts, but patience.
Thus Learning's sower'd [too sweet for us, if not!]
And poison's made of life's best antidote.
IV. From Solomon's experience, and a closer examinaion, of some particulars,
that are most admired and labored for, chapter 2.
BUT hold, tho Knowledge and the Fiary scenes
Of Students watching in their lonesome dens,
Some Worldling cries, have many real frights
Immixt with their fantastical delights;
Tho other better things than these there be,
That bilk our wishes quite or in degree:
Yet tho your rule in many things be true,
It has its many just exceptions too.
For there are, which too generally you blame^
Some things adapted to our carnal frame,
That can an equal recompense bestow
For all the pressing toils we undergo.
Such are the pleasures, which our Bodies crave,
The proper guerdon laboring Bodies have.
For sure God did not Bodies just create
To serve a Soul, a thought, we know not what.
To what poor end was he at this expense
Of making Objects fitted to our Sense,
If we may not use the means to make them meet,
And two such Friends as those must never greet?
Why were we not all Soul, and sent to dwell
With meager Spirits and Forms intangible?
But hold again. This common plea I know;
And have examined, whether it be so,
Not only by a slight or general view,
But by particular induction too,
Expecting once to find as much as you.
My first essay was Mirth and gay efforts
Procured by jolly Company and sports. As, 1. Mirth, v. 1, 2.

For this I saw all men are apt to admire:
This is the business of each well-spleen'd Quire.
When they in friendly Feasts or Clubs combine;
This is their first, this is their last design:
Nor do they budge, or sneakingly retire,
Till dying Laugh with fainting jaws expire.
But would you learn more perfectly this trade
Of Mirth, its cause, intrigues, and how it is made,
From what was then observed and seen by me?
A short Apprentiship may make you free.
First labor by discourse to win applause;
And therefore rote it over at every house:
Twill make you ready. But especially
Take care among your Common Places be
Of tuant stories a large treasury.
Be they or true or false, the thing's all one,
So they are sting'd with some sharp jest or pun.
A skilful touch of the Mimic too does well,
If jaunting hands and writhen features tell
Their share of all. And if complete you would be,
To these add confidence and drollery.
(For as for News, what is done at Babylon,
In Egypt, Persia, or here in Town,
That Is dry, and chiefly fits a Prophet's Son.)
If these Arts fail, then you must ^all to Play
To pass your time [and money both] away.
Or 'twill be necessary complaisance,
Among the Female kind, to sing, or dance.
If sing; then choose a Song of Love does treat:
For that a secret pleasure does beget.
If dance; when Music vibrates on the strings,
And general Tarantulism begins,
Be sure you gently squeeze your Lady's hand,
And tell her silent what she will understand.
It Is ten to one but she returns a smile;
And that is the happiness, for which you toil.
These are the ways of Merriment; which tried,
Judgment was easy: Vanity! I cried.
When th'awful Word hereafter ^^all demand,
How well employed we such an hour did spend;
'Twill be a quaint response to say, I played
A game or two at Bowls with neighbor Gad;
Or heard our Isaac gibe or tell a tale;
Or led up Madam Cos^i at a Ball.
Beside there is something in this frolic strain
Seems mad, or antic, to a thinking Man:
To see Folks move, as if some Magic skill
Would neither let 'em go, nor hold 'em still;
Or valiant Knight of Isreal's ancient blood,
Poorly pursue a trundling piece of wood;
Or some great Company on purpose met,
As't were for business, in a circle sit,
And please themselves, confusedly to declaim
Of what is not true, or not belongs to them;
Or else contend for mastery in droll,
At which one winded Scold would beat 'em all.
And what is the end? To laugh; and that is no more
But one dull repetition over and over,
In which there is no great matter to be seen:
For as some laugh, just so do others grin.
Suppose in the article of rising Mirth,
A shade disrobed of prejudice and earth,
Or Angel, in a suit of crystal geer
Should come unseen, unheard, to see and hear
The various tricks and many humors there.
Mean while some deal their jests and ^ree discourse,
And some prop'd Noddles are but Auditors.
At last the intermitted laugh breaks out
Much like that noise, when Pageants born about
Provoke the ovant Mobile to shout.
And then what odd, deformed, peculiar ways
Men have to spoil the muscles of a Face!
What motly peals, how dissonant and loud,
Astonish all the wondering Neighborhood!
If passion e're assaults a Spirit's breast,
I dare divine this would disturb his rest,
So different from the Music of the Blessed.
He his Ethereal substance would contract,
And shrugging thus within himself reflect.
Sure life's a dream, in which imagined sight
Does show these men wild Draughts of false delight,
But not one glance of death; else they would prepare
For that new life, when they must wake elsewhere^
Not waste this time, but use it, e're't be gone;
And catch the dropping sands, before they are run.
Thus all in haste the tired Ghost would fly
The loathed confines of Mortality,
And bear deep signs of anger up on high.
^. Wine, v. 3.
This pleasure answering not the vogue't had won,
To the Vine I made my application,
Noting according to my first intent
The true effects of this experiment.
Often I had heard the qualities of Wine
Described in Dithyrambics as divine:
How't bears up men in soaring ecstasies,
Winged with the vapors from their glasses rise:
Makes Beggars rich, and Subjects great as Kings
[Pleasing, tho but imaginary things]:
To trembling Cowards valor does impart,
And like some Waters petrify the heart:
Gives what more sparing Nature does deny,
And others plod for, Art and Poetry
(Poor Nature dares not always spend so high):
No heats, no thoughts like those this liquid fire,
In noble Breasts does kindle and inspire;
Thoughts, that remain behind, when we are gone,
And make us live to be for ever known^
What is it, that the mighty Vine cannot do?
It Is both the Tree of life and knowledge too.
Thus filled with glosing hopes of something more,
Than in that fiddling Mirth I found before;
And fondly deeming I had hit the joy,
Which could reward Men's labors and employ;
A remedy at least for all their grief,
Wherewith to cure the malady of life;
Much satisfaction sliding to my heart
Doubled the exulting pulses of that part,
Which with a secret tickle rolled from thence,
And hasted through the gratulating veins,
(So was I moved) with their more rapid streams
To tell the outworks and more distant limbs.
I thirsted for a taste of that new bliss,
The bare conceit of which could do all this.
With speed I got those Liquors, that abroad
Were celebrated most for choice and good.
And Vineyards of my own beside I nursed,
So rich, their breasts unpress'd did almost burst.
Such were the clusters Baalhamon bred;
And those adorned mount Carmel's fertile head:
Mount Carmel, which with pride looks down upon
The sober element of weak Kishon;
Carmel, whose sides Bel's Prophets not so red
Shall die, as have the Grapes, that for me bled.
So with their racy juice I crowned my bowl,
And in that bath I washed, I drowned my Soul.
Not the scorched Mower all dissolved in sweat,
And then drunk up with sucking Sun and heat,
More greedily does snatch the welcome pot,
His now transpired Spirits to recruit,
When he from Gibeah's Meadows comes, than I
Diving to find that Pearl, Felicity.
How weak and credulous a thing is Man,
Obnoxious to every small trepan,
That seems to whisper pleasure in his ear,
Tho not the least ingredient often be there!
For all the great Encomiums of Wine
(Tho none I Am sure deserved 'em more than mine)
Are only rants of Men in drunken fits,
And empty visions of enchanted Wits;
Which they themselves next morning must deny,
When sleep unspells the charming fallacy,
And clears the mists, that on their Judgments lie:
When the suggesting active Spirits flown,
And all the fair Idea's dead and gone,
Only the ashes of departed Sin,
To be lamented over, remain within,
And Thoughts, that stalk about them, tho unseen.
Briefly (for tho my Post did not permit,
That Fuddling or the base effects of it
Should touch me, as they use [too oft] to do
The meaner Members of some tippled Crew;
Yet what I felt not, came within my view)
Let them, who have seen the Pagan Priests outdone,
Or raving Bedlams in a Summer Moon:
Them, who have spewed, till Eyes with tears infused
Wept as it were to find themselves abused:
Them, who with frequent falls and nastiness
Have reeled home loathsome Spectacles of vice:
Them, whose light Pockets and dishonest scars
Have of their fault been dear Remembrancers:
Or them, whose tumid face and shooting head
Have once confined 'em to a fulsome bed:
Let them, experienced Persons, if they please,
Or can, be Advocates for Drunkenness;
Which for my part I must profess I hate
More than recoiling stomach does its meat,
Or eager Lovers an unthought defeat,
Or oft-crown'd Valor to be overcome,
Or crowding Nature does a Vacuum.
3. Magnificence and Wealth in Buildings, Gardens, Fountains and Pools,
Servants, Cattle, Money, and Music, v. 4. to ch: 3.
As when the Sun's enlarged from some thick Cloud,
Which it before in sable plaights did shroud,
He darts his radiant shafts the fiercer round,
And with his glittering arms gilds all the ground:
Just so when time my Reason did restore,
Which grossest fogs of Wine had covered over,
Methought it seemed more glorious to appear,
With an effulgence far more bright and clear;
'Cause 'twas more valuable than before,
And more informed; and never on that score
To be obscured and over-clouded more.
Thus I became more soberly inclined,
Something more harmless, if I could, to find;
Some innocenter Delicate for sense
(For tru'st delights consist in innocence.)
The likeliest thing, that did it self suggest,
Was Buildings, such as might my fancy feast,
And fitly entertain a royal Guest.
Therefore lest clumsy work or long delay,
Should pall or wear my appetite away,
Of Servants larger numbers I employed,
Than all the costly Kings on Earth beside.
Have you observing seen the industrious Bees
Perform their constant round of Offices?
Some straggle all the fields and gardens over,
Plundering the wealth of every richer Flower:
Others already filled with spoils abroad,
Till their silk wings crack almost with the load,
By wondrous skill the easiest journey choose,
To reach their common home and Rendezvous:
Others by Companies relieving these,
March out to all the fragrant Provinces:
Others are watchful Guards to drive away
Their Dronish enemies and Bees of prey:
While others pitch and curiously contrive,
Their tents in hexagons spread through the hive.
Thus now engaged and moved by our Command,
Builders and Workmen swarmed about the land.
Some indigested rude materials sought,
Which others with Sidonian axes cut,
Or with their Saws, or Plains, or Chisels wrought.
Full thirty thousand, a List fit for war,
Under the faithful Adoniram's care,
Beside good Hiram's Forces joined to that,
Did whole Libanian woods depopulate.
And thrice as many to be added yet
Such mighty Stones did from the Quarries get,
As might be owned their Children without shame
By those big-belly'd Mountains, whence they came;
While other seven Myriads did convey
The monstrous burdens home.
Nor wanted Metals: For a numerous Fleet
Brought hither these beyond all count or weight.
At last all touched by Huram's dextrous tools,
Or those at least that copied from his rules,
Such Structures to their just completion brought,
Not working Melancholy e're framed a Plot
More noble at the expense of very thought.
Their arduous ridges reared themselves so high
Ore rooms of state and vast capacity,
In The Sky they seemed to fix their proud abode,
Where twinkling Vanes new Constellations showed.
Now, Babel, cease to tell thy Walls; and cea^e,
Memphis, to vaunt thy barbarous Miracles.
Beside that Temple, which I first did raise
For God's own Name and residence a place:
Where every roof, and wall, and post, and door
Was clad with bright Parvaim's purest Oar,
And engraved with curious figures, flowers, and trees,
Among which thick flew Seraphic Images:
Where two large Cherubs shaded with their wings
The seat and archives of the King of Kings:
Where broider'd Tissue made the mystic fence:
Where golden Altar breathed up frankincense:
Where golden tables, golden vessels were
(Gold was the only metal durst come there;
And when it came, seemed too to blush for fear):
Where, answering to this inward glorious side,
Without stood molten Pillars, whose tall heads
With nets, and chain-work wreaths were covered:
Without the Holocausts our faults did bear
Upon an Altar twenty cubits square
(It need be ^trong, when such a weight is there):
Without in brazen banks fresh waves did play;
Fresh, tho they were enclosed in a Sea:
Without courts, porches, lodgings did abound,
Which Parian walls in order compassed round.
Beside all this. -- And yet from this
My other unnam'd fabrics you may guess,
What cost and skill required to finish them;
Such as the towers of our Jerusalem,
Millo, Megiddo, Tadmor, Baalath,
And many more the stumbling-stones of faith,
So numerous and great: But chiefly those
I founded for my own immediate use,
My Palace, and my forest Summer House.
But feeble language labors more to express,
Than I did to effect, their sumptuousness.
For marble there, there cedar, there gold shone,
Confounding rays with paint, and precious stone,
Whose lambent flames and ever-waking light,
Kindled that middle darkness of the Night,
Which with its revolution c^eckers time
In every other meaner place and clime.
Nor was the matter only rare, but Art,
Which God in hidden manner did impart
To make me great by things as yet unknown,
Prevented Ages late perfection.
For many things I had carved with such care,
Tho done of old, they seemed reacted there:
And Worthies looked with such vivacity,
As if, risen from the Dead, they came to see
Themselves excelled, and to admire me:
Me, whose own Statue too was there, so true,
That puzzled, which was I, my self scarce knew.
With these I neither should omit, nor can,
The House I made for my Egyptian,
Beyond the Pyramids, that she had seen,
Worthy my royal Bride and Israel's Queen.
For state and softness tempered did conspire
To give the work a character like her.
And as a fit appendage to all this,
Gardens I made, that equaled Paradise.
Like it the chosen plat of peerless soil
Was stored with all delights, was Eden all,
With all the prime of Vegetables filled,
That sweetly on their great Spectator smiled.
No Serpent, no Forbidden fruit was there;
But all was innocent as well as fair.
The well-plac'd trees in decent order grew,
With equal prospects every way quite through.
Among them those, which Nature made to bear
The Orange, Cherry, Apple, Plumb, or Pear,
(Beside Pomgranates, Olives, Dates, and Nuts,
And all our other kinds of Eastern fruits)
Their several sorts of dangling pendants wore,
Not at their ears, but proudly decked all over.
And those she made with different intent
Only for shelter and for ornament,
That Sun, which gives them life, from us to fence,
The Limes, the Planetrees, or Idean Pines,
Let down a spreading canopy of shade,
Through which no prying ray could me invade.
(So when some furious Father aims his power,
Burning with wrath, at his inferior;
His eldest, tallest Son does interpose,
And kindly intercepts his Parent's blows)
For in the walks, that underneath these lay,
I often deceived the hottest gleam of day:
While all their leafs inspired with the wind,
And trembling with the motion left behind,
In rustling consorts joined: and as they played,
Themselves danced to the Music which they made.
At a due distance from this Guard of trees
Grew tender flowers by their Families:
The Sharon Rose, that kindly left it is home
For Court, where modest blushes rarer come;
The Crown Imperial, fitter for the place,
As both its name declare and stately grace;
Tulips, and Lillies, rivals of my pride
Blanched with the purest light; and scores beside:
Which keeping each their proper area
A regular Scene of colors did display;
So many, that the Rainbow not more ways
On mortal eyes reflects the Solar rays;
Nor more variety of tincture dies
The fringed curtains of the morning Skies,
Not yet quite drawn to let the Racer rise.
No Sense had reason to complain: For there
They all had proper matter to admire.
The Thyme, the Iasmine, and the Tuberose,
With aromatic odours sum'd my nose;
And many more, that breathed their unseen spice
And (which are truest) natural essences.
And here too braided on the walls did grow
Peaches and other trees, whose every bough
So pleasant seemed and pressed beneath their weight,
At once they begged and tempted me to eat.
Nay, the Understanding here might find repast,
And Spirit exercise it is subtle taste,
Seeing the natures of the flowers and trees,
And all their several pretty qualities:
How these by kindly heat conceived of seeds
The Earth with her nutricious virtue feeds;
Till grown too big to stay within her womb,
By gentle force they strive to get more room:
How then being born they more and more appear,
And all the VVinter's victory repair:
How all the parts, with which they are supplied,
Are into sundry figures modified
By different bores of narrow passages
And veins, through which they circulate and rise;
Or else made in such shape, that they may pass
Only the pores led to their proper place:
How they toiled not their diet to prepare,
But trusted Heaven to be their Caterer.
What e're he gave, content they died, or throve
Instructing us our seasons to improve,
And, as they did, to point at what is above.
Pity, as I looked on, methought it was,
Such beauty e're should fade like common grass:
Pity the envious wind should blow upon,
Or ruffle this their peaceful region:
Or any scorching Dog Star squint in there,
Or Teveth hide the glory of the year.
I therefore did what in my power lay,
Desirous to reprieve 'em from decay;
But chiefly Fountains raised, that in the heat
With cordial water might them recreate,
Which duly fell in artificial showers
Upon the adjacent beds and knots of flowers;
Because from them some pleasure does accrue
Almost peculiar to us Great ones too.
And then remembering with delight I Would seen
Rivers in even Meads divide the green,
And as they flowed along between the banks,
Indent their sinuous sides,
I also caused clear Channels to be made,
Through which the fluent Element conveyed
Seemed in continued streams, like Time, to run,
And with unheeded pace still slided on.
Pools too I made to open their spacious eyes,
Which, as they looked undazled at the Skies,
Did in their crystal humor represent
Another World, another Firmament.
In them another Sun there seemed to dive
Unquench'd, and with the hostile Waters strive;
And other Clouds there seemed to float like these
Upon the bounds of the Antipodes.
So like's this World to a deceit of sight,
That with an empty show does seers cheat.
Had I, poor helpless I, been left alone,
Like Adam once just made, both all and one,
My Eden to observe my self and dress;
This had subtracted from my happiness.
I then in vain had cursed the stubborn Spade,
And mourned the crooked furrows it had made
Within the bending of my callous hand,
Not so much Lord, as Servant of my land.
But Providence, to which so much I owed,
Which had such kindnesses on me bestowed,
And seemed full as ambitious to give,
As I it is gifts was ready to receive,
Broke not it is golden thread of love off here,
Which always compassed me and every where.
Beside those Workmen and Artificers
The accounts above imperfectly rehearse,
Servants I had; some Officers, that knew
In course what 'twas their duty bid 'em do;
And some, that waited, till with bended knee
They took the honor of commands from me;
So many, 'twou'd be doubly vain to guess
Blindly a number, that was numberless;
Or dare those mighty multitudes report,
That filled the Trains retaining to my Court.
For me both Sexes emulously strove
In work all day, and joined at night in love.
Whole Families of Slaves were born to me:
Their Souls were almost my propriety.
Add here the warlike Cherethean Band,
And Pelethites, the flower of all the Land,
That round me Guards and Sentinels did stand.
Add here those Governors dispersed about,
Where I their several Borders did allot,
That constantly maintained my dubious board^
With what their fruitful Districts did afford.
Add here my Princes too, whose names remain
In those amazing Annals of our reign,
Where faithful Nathan and the other Seers,
Annex us to the Story of past years.
And since the lower Class of Beasts was made
For our use too, all sorts of these I had.
What Deer my Chases, Purlieus, Parks did keep,
Witness the herds over Bether's lawns do skip.
Both Sheep and Goats my crowded folds did fill,
Or hung upon the pitch of supine hills.
And Droves, whole Droves of true Bashanic breed,
That served my pleasure too as well as need,
O'respread, as they led out their several Clans,
With sleek py'd colors all the champian Plains.
There Bulls and Oxen in their Majesty,
Methought made up an awful Spectacle;
Which I before those cruel sports prefer,
When beasts in Cirques do one another tear.
How gravely paced the pursy Beevs were wont,
To shake the curls upon a surly front!
Upon what rocky well built sculls they bore
Crescent-like Arms, with which their ^oes they gore!
But when they mutual threats and anger spoke,
What Thunder rent the air, what streams of smoke!
But sure the Horse among all Sensitives,
Most pleasure to his Tyrant Master gives.
When in his tinsel furniture he is dressed,
How proud he looks! He vaunts his haughty crest,
And champs his bit, to show how he disdains
The short confinement of the silly reins.
And when he is loosed upon his utmost pace,
He then as fleet as Thought devours the race.
Again when drawn into the martial Field,
He Is fierce to fight and ignorant to yield.
He snuffs, and smells the Battle from afar,
And miserable throngs of impious War;
Joyful to hear the croaking Trumpets sound
From a firm bank of adverse Shields rebound;
Neither affected with his Riders fear,
Nor with the pushing point of Pike or Spear.
He strongly paws and prances over the Dale,
That parts the Armies, Death's small interval,
Longing that while the opposite Troops to meet,
And trample arms and banners under feet.
That nothing of magnificence or state
Might absent be (for I aimed but at that),
With these I peopled Towns, the best that were
In all Mizraim's Stables or elsewhere.
But Money, that is the Master-nerve of all^
For want of which the stoutest Empires fall:
And Crowns are worth, if that don't hold 'em up,
Barely their value in a Goldsmith's shop.
For tho our Subjects talk^ yet surely more
Our current images than us adore.
This is the Idol of the World below,
To which all hearts in general do how,
Which Satan-like defies its Maker too.
This then, which is so highly magnified,
Must have its due regard, at least be tried,
To see what virtues heaps of riches hide.
In Maps where Eziongeher's showed to be
Upon the coral lips of the Red Sea,
A Navy I rigged out, which sailing from that Bay.
Upon the Deep's soft lap did cleave their way
With diving keels to Ophir [now first known],
Where many a clod's a good Estate alone.
Hence they successful brought in full-fraught Pines,
The ^illage got from whole impoverished Mines:
So great, as they in triumph homeward rode,
The yielding Plain bowed with the mighty load,
And in an arch invers'd on either side
Raised up it self to look into their pride.
Scanty Arithmetic could scarce contain
Their sums of Gold in Numbers longest chain.
To these were added all the choicest things,
That make peculiar treasures unto Kings.
For them I did not only fetch, but they
Brought from all differing times and lengths of Day,
Upon the Earths broad face were well laid out,
If every Present but one Proverb bought.
But in particular I cannot omit
(Her faithful Love to me does merit it.
The hardest heart, the arrant'st flint that is,
Admits such strong impressions as these)
The bounty of the wise Sabean Queen,
Which had it self a fair possession been:
Beside those Stones, to me more precious fa^
Than others are, because bestowed by her;
Beside those Gums, born on her happy Sands,
Perfumed too by her only sweeter hands
(For sweeter they than freshest morns in May,
Or quintessence of her Panchaia);
Metal so radiant, none was e're so fine,
But that, which with her borrowed beams did shine,
Worn by her self, when (doleful word!) she gave
Her last kind visit, and so took her leave.
But tho this chink of Money seems to be
To most the most delightful harmony:
Methought it rather grated on my ears,
And with discordant and untuneful jars,
As 'twas turned over, awakened sleeping cares.
To temper and abate this harshness then
With so^ter sounds of Instrumentts and Men,
Mu^ic desired to be admitted in;
Music, that came adorned with mighty names,
And kindred to celestial Anthems claims.
This made our good Iessides send his Prayers,
In airs and gales of Music to the Spheres
And Seats above; while all the listening Quire
Struck with his Lyric numbers wished him there;
There, where he was e're this by sympathy:
For Minds are joined, that in one thought agree.
And true, tho why force should in Measures lie
Not scouting Reason plainly can descry,
We know it does, and that great strength they have:
Within our selves their conquests we perceive.
Therefore such voices I procured, as did
Even Chenaniah's famous School exceed:
Women, whose accents were more taking shrill,
Than from the Poplars breaths the Philomel:
And Men, whose Bases were so plump and deep,
They might contend with largest Organ-pipe.
And these their several parts so well did bear,
They summoned all my Soul into my ear;
I had no sense, no thought, but what was there.
To such a pitch had time improved this skill,
As 'twere against I came, my joys to fill.
For first Men knew no Songs, no Tunes or Notes,
But what were hit by chance in artless throats:
But what those Chanters wildly did express,
Art by degrees taught to adorn and dress.
Nor stopped she soon: For not contented here,
Nature's assistant only to appear,
She further set her self to invent and frame
What Nature never did design nor aim;
As crooked Cornets, Trumpets straight and long,
That were all throat, and spoke without a tongue,
The Cymbal, Viol, Lute, and royal Lyre,
Organ, which is it self a kind of Quire,
And many more, all which to name would be
As hard as reckon Sound's variety.
And with these too, the noblest e're were formed,
My state was still increased, my passions charmed;
While they, as if they kn^w the Audience,
Addressed themselves in their best eloquence,
In words so smooth, not Fame's own flatteries
Were half so powerful or apt to please.
Thus I was great: and sure if Happiness
Could be attained by that, I had no less;
Enthroned, where gaping Princes gazed at me,
On top of Grandeur's highest pinnacle;
Dissolved in pleasures flowing every way;
Exhausting Ages triumphs every day;
Wealthy and rich to that immense degree,
That all the World feared a Monopoly:
Poor Israel never saw the like before,
Amazed at this great novelty the more.
Not Saul, tho he were God's own Successor,
Nor our famed Father e're obtained one hour
Like my whole life.
They were in troubled Seas of warfare tossed,
With poverty and adverse fortunes crossed:
But I in Halcyonian calm have reigned,
And all the depths of peace and plenty drained.
Thus lofty Pines among the bushes grow;
Thus I looked down upon the World below,
Upon puissant Thrones and Princes too;
Greater than any King preceded me,
Or those, that follow after, e're shall be.
Whatever greedy Appetite could crave,
My tender heart consented still and gave;
Till last reviewing all I Would undergone,
I gladly saw the work, long work, was done.
And this in troth the greatest pleasure was,
This the chief meed of many tedious days.
So when some Mathematic problem's solved,
Clear of those doubts, in which it was involved;
The Scholar smil^s to see his Axioms lie
In gradual method and dependency,
And lead to some insipid verity.
But then this truth (here lies the difference)
Detected ushers many consequents,
And small to great discoveries does tend:
Whereas my labors in themselves did end.
Pity the quiet joys of Privacy
To men so unperceived and private be!
With it more sound fruitions sometimes dwell
Than with the glossy Crown of Israel:
The solid trophies of a vanquished mind,
In narrow wishes pleasures unconfined:
A little well built house, retired shade
And walk, a cleanly spring by Nature made:
A few stanch Friends, that seasonably resort,
Without the clog and bustle of a Court:
And to support the comfort of all that
A moderate, independent, clear estate,
From tempting want or superfluity,
From Rich men's scorn, and Poor men's envy free.
Whose fortune's blessed with this, more happy is
Than I with all these huge magnific toys;
Which having perfected, no good I know
Resulting, but to say, 'Twas I did so;
Or stare at what is done, which soon will cloy^
And all Spectators do as well as I.
But when a stricter scrutiny I made,
And all my works with nearer eye surveyed,
They scarce afforded me this tiny joy,
And poor proportion of felicity:
They rather seemed to own their vanity.
For it is naught else but Vanity and Pride
Makes men the bounds of decency exceed,
Above what Nature and their Stations need.
Beside (tho fatal late experience
Is the only argument that will convince)
How many chances hover over them,
That giddy stand upon this steep extreme;
If one of which should beat them from on high,
They fall the deeper into misery?
How many darts of malice must they shock,
With which the fairest marks are soonest struck?
How manifold's their business and their care?
Too sure more than their privileges are.
True, I had Slaves to execute commands:
But then this was but working with their hands.
The plot and management of all was mine:
From me came every action and design.
And thus my Servants, they served me alone;
But I was Servant to them every one.
Power's but Slavery in another name:
For bate that thin disguise, it is much the same.
Therefore when every course of pleasure r^n,
And all its little wagers often won,
At last I turned and looking backward viewed
That useful Wisdom, with which God endu'd
Me setting out; I saw that never spends
It self on these, but on important ends:
Wisdom, true highborn Wisdom, which outvies
The folly, that with doting Worldlings is,
As far as Day adult in full-grown height
Its funeral and mournful Pall of night.
For as when Night has put out humane eyes,
And Form and Color in it buried lies;
At every obvious rotten post men stay
To fumble and enquire out their way,
Embracing with an undiscerning arm
What e're is next, though it be to their own harm.
So they, whose groping Understanding's blind,
When ignorance folds up the mu^^led Mind,
Lay hold on present things, and them they love,
Not kenning what is more distant and above.
But that choice blessing, Wisdom, is a ray
Shot from the Father of eternal day;
And they, whose humble Souls are cleared with this,
From far see glimmerings of a greater bliss,
And all the useless Pomps of Earth despise.
They know Death comes, tho with a tacit pace,
And every part of Time, as it does pass,
Is one step more to the period of their race;
Where they and Fools laid down together have
Their final sleep in one cold Inn, the Grave.
From this none can pretend immunity;
But there all ashes undistinguished lie.
Therefore they argue thus; Why am I wise?
Why feel I in me reasoning faculties?
Not for the sake of sensual Vanities.
For every Fool has Sense as well as I,
And may those objects often as long enjoy,
Since he as long may live, as late may die.
But what I Have done may make me live in Story,
And give what Fools cannot have, immortal glory.
A poor reward! In ancient Authors read
To be in dust and mould twice buried!
To furnish themes for Boys, discourse for Fops,
Paper for Bog, or lumber for the Shops!
But granting this some happiness to be,
Yet still more bad than good fill History.
And History it self in little space
Perhaps expires, and then it wants (alas!)
Another History to tell it was.
Or if some lucky Author chance to bear
The teeth and rage of many an unborn year,
(Suppose the last in all Time's Calendar);
Yet through mistaking ignorance or spite,
Few can or will interpret him aright,
(For some can read as foul as most indite)
Or if his meaning well expressed be known,
As clear as plainest Demonstration;
It Is odds the Reader will not think it true:
The Man writ as Historians use to do,
To serve his, or some Faction's interest,
Or over-credulous loyalty at best.
Thus late Posterity know us no more,
Or little more than we knew them before.
Now all my Works appeared more and more vai^^
And all my studied wonders turned to pain.
Now I grew faint and weary of the light
Offensive to my weak and tired sight,
And sated with th'unsavoury breath I drew,
When out, scarce worth the drawing in a new.
I longed those better buildings to espy,
Not made with hands, that rise beyond the Sky,
Far off, above the approach of Vanity.
But here a thought returned. When I am dead,
My Greatness in two yards of Coffin hid,
Then, then the Ages coming after me,
Some worse effects of what I Have done may see:
When some loofe Unthrift, or close whining Heir,
Shall drop into my workmanship and care,
Not through the merit of his chosen worth,
But labor of that womb, which brought him forth:
When he shall swell with over-big conceit
Of that estate, for which he never sweat;
Shall feed his idle and inglorious ease,
His brutal lust, or pining avarice
With riches, that I foolishly made his;
And so, when I am gone, shall bring me in
An Accessory to the vilest sin.
Indeed there are, whose honest prudent ways
Deserve a Censurer's whole stock of praise,
All whose advantages of wealth or power,
Tend to atchieve what they were given for.
But in a line of Heirs 'twas never known^
This character should suit with every one:
That every Son should be a miracle
As 'twere derived down ex traduce;
Or by a new example, Wit and Sense,
Should still run parallel with Inheritance.
Compare the shol^s of Fools and Debauchees,
With those are truly virtuous and wise;
You Will scarce find one of these for many a score:
Nay, I Am afraid the disproportion's more.
Can any think, that their Succession then
Should be distinguished from the rest of men?
If each third Century produce an Heir
Neither debauched, nor fool, nor knave, it is fair,
And more, all men considered, than their share.
Thus men their buildings, treasures, lands dilate,
And needless honors still accumulate,
To make some undeserving things be great.
What real profit then, what true delights,
Reward their toilsome days and restless nights?
More solid good I Am sure by much accrews
From the free, comfortable, moderate use,
Of what men's cares as moderate produce.
But this a Virtue is, which God more rare
Himself does wisely sprinkle here and there.
The man, whom his Omniscience does try,
And then bear witness to his piety;
That happy man, that Favorite it is,
That he enriches and adorns with this:
When Votaries of worldly pleasure moil,
And mortify themselves with work a while,
On Earth to get a fancied Heaven at last,
A Heaven that is never found or quickly past;
And Misers on the contrary proceed,
Prompted by bottomless desire, not need,
Nor even pleasure, still to heap up more,
And by a monstrous Paradox the sto^e
To think or fear less than it was before;
Nay, tho perhaps they have neither Brother, Son,
Nor any Kin, to throw their bags upon,
When they themselves are quite worn out and done.
And so a servile life they undergo,
Thieves to themselves, Slaves to they know not who
For when, like Asses, they have born the weight,
But never understood the use of it,
They leave it to the man, whom God thinks fit.
V. From the changeableness and uncertain revolution of Times and Seasons (some
of which are here particularized); from whence it comes to pass, that Men are
neither sure of obtaining what they desire, nor, of enjoying long what they
obtain by their irregular labors, ch^ 3. v. 1. to 16.
BUT if obdurate tempers don't believe
The small content their Labors products give,
The uncertainty of them they must: For this
The whole Material system testifies.
See, its Orbs move, and all things else in them;
And every hour brings a peculiar Scheme.
See, how the flitting Seasons, and each age
Of things, stay but to measure out their stage,
Down which [a prone descent] they headlong (...),
And yield their room to that, which next thrusts o^
In short, Time's a continued flight of Nows,
Where one succeeds still as the former goes;
And which, as't flies, fans forward other things
By the wide agitation of its wings,
Bringing to them their turns to be and cease,
As Nature works, or Providence decrees.
And now Great Ghost, from whom good thoughts proceed
By ways unknown as thou from the Godhead,
Enlarge my narrow faculties, while they
Collect some of this World's Phenomenon,
And how they change their aspects every day.
Say how both Life, and Gardens, Palaces,
And Mirth, and Love, Prosperity, and Peace,
Have proper times, in which they only can
Give welcome answers to the suit of Man:
And when they do, those times are quickly gone^
And then again his work is all undone.
That so his Labors either not succeed,
Or shortly lose the Offspring, which they breed.
As there is a time prefixed for man to come
From Nature's silent shop of life, the Womb:
A time, in which his tender body grows,
And fits him for the business he shall choose^
So there is an Ep^cha to follow that,
From which another being he must date
In that remoter World, where once pent in
No Passenger e're yet returned again.
Poor Man declares, when first he does appear,
How short his Part is in this Theater;
Blushes, and with his yet unpracticed breath^
Whimpers the Tragic Prologue to his death.
As there is a season calls to plant or sow;
A space, in which the Vegetables do
Cover the wrinkles of the Spade or Plow:
So they too, leaving us, e're long begin
To die, or are plucked up, as well as Men.
(For there is a time, when Violence or Chance,
The horror of our mortal change enhance;
When slower Nature hasty they prevent,
And pluck us up with Sword or Accident:
As well as one more merciful, when these
Do rather fright than hurt the men they seize;
When Death cannot draw his sting, but civilly
Just licks the trembling prey and passes by).
There is a time, which ruins do deface
With nodding Towers, crashing Palaces;
When age has gnawed their cankered cramps, or war,
Or hurricane the Piles does over-bear:
As well as one that gives us leave to raise
In them our present safety, future praise.
As there is a time, when Trouble's pressures squeeze
Grief's watery Symbols from men's briny eyes,
Until the emptied glands deny supplies;
When gloomy Heaven veils its countenance
In pitchy mists, without the least kind glance;
When faithless Friends no longer deign to know
Their Mates obscured in night, or changed with woe;
But darkness having swallowed up their Sun,
They Are left all melancholy, all alone
To those fierce Specter vex Affliction:
So true, there is a revolution still,
When Heaven does refresh 'em with a smile;
When it returns and vigorously displays
The long (oh long it seems!) eclipsed rays;
With these dries off their cheeks the blubbering tears,
With these dispells their many cares and fears:
And then they laugh, and sing, and dance a while,
Till some new cross the gayety does spoil.
Now precious Stones are fetched from far, and join
To make us burly Princes proudly shine,
Or some Court Lady, wanting helps, look fine.
And now again by ignorance or vice
They Are thrown away like Stones of common price.
Now free admittance to the rites of Love
Lets Man his pleasure legally improve,
And all that mingled Sexes does surprise
Just entered in the Marriage mysteries.
And now again Embraces are denied,
And he or wants, or not enjoys a Bride:
As when [at least] a competent Demain,
Or in the lieu of that some honest Gain
Is lacking to support a double life,
And all the charges married with a Wife;
When sickness does divide the Genial bed;
Or age has quenched the fires of youth, and spread
The ashes over the Old man's hoary head.
Now there is a gracious turn and lucky hit
(For it is no more; tho folks misconstrue it
For forecast, cunning management, or wit),
When all things in a gush of fortune flow,
And riches tumble in, men know not how:
When whatsoever Rumb they chance to steer,
The Ocean's smooth to them, the Heavens clear.
But then another time reverses this,
Full of ill tidings, losses, miseries.
For their gilt Vessel, tho built strong and great,
A stronger tempest often does beset:
And then the sullied calm does disappear,
And clouds contra^t the circle of the Air;
The feathering Sea predicts a shipwreck nigh,
And sporting Dolphins show themselves hard by;
While on a sudden comes the envious blast,
And muttering anger rives the lofty Mast:
At last the Cargo lifted overboard,
The surges cast ashore it is naked Lord.
Now Mourning does invade, and clothes are rent,
As'twere to give the sobbing tumor vent:
When Death arrests Relation or Friend,
And leaves us but imperfect men behind.
Again we cast our jetty weeds, and all
Remains are buried of a Funeral.
And then new friendships we contract apace,
And Wives and Children fill the empty space,
Affording Death more opportunities,
Still to repeat our sorrowful disguise.
Tho our Creator has conferred on Man
An art to speak as no more Livings can
(For Beasts, dumb Linguists, by some ruder note,
A general passion only cipher out:
While men have words, or later made, or ours,
Their thoughts articulate Ambassadors,
Which their intentions to each other show,
And carry all Expresses to and fro);
Yet still he may not use it when he please,
But other things command the tongue, that is his.
Now must the nimble member breathless lie,
And motionless, in inactivity,
Not daring to interpret or reveal,
What it is the Mind is doing in its cell:
Altho't perhaps is weaving something there
Better than all the Fustian it may hear.
A few stiff forms with frontless pride set off
Shall give the better Scholar a rebuff.
Or some ill-willer watching for a word,
Which he perfidious Villain would distort
To some bad use, and to the Speaker's hurt,
Restrains the tongue; while he sits fretting by
For want of color how to make a lie.
Or else the Authority some have or take,
Permits the passive Subject not to speak:
For tho their reasonings, emptiness and froth,
Would turn a Soul, that knows the gust of Truth;
Yet peace be sure, there is no expedient,
Only to bite your lips and be content,
Unless you will be so base to complement.
But now the Prisoner's bonds are loosed;
And now speak you not only may, but must:
Because unseasonable Silence is
(Tho it may be your temper and your choice)
Sometimes as faulty as ungoverned noise.
For if I speaking my own good promote,
I Am false to self, if I forbear to do it.
Or if the Social laws require't of me,
I Am forced to tune my tongue to Company.
But thy praise chiefly shall my words rehearse,
Who on the selvage of the Universe,
Great God, do sit; who fill'st the Land and Air,
And all the race thy fruitful Word did bear;
The whole Creation's everlasting theme,
The Song of Saints and warbling Seraphim.
Be pleased to accept my meaner service here,
Till in that Court and Consort I appear,
Then these Poetic First Fruits I Will throw down
An humble Offering before thy throne,
And spend the coming long Eternity
In Heavenly Hymns, and riper Poetry.
Even Love, which like some universal life
Cements the World's more solid limbs so fast,
That they in stable wedlock piece and last,
And keeps the looser elements from strife,
It self cannot always last, but has its fate,
And sinks into the Grave of Friendship, Hate.
Man's such a complicated humourist,
Made up of passion, pleasure, interest,
So different in kind or in degree,
It Is difficult to define Humanity.
This makes the yoke unequally to press
Friends necks, one drawing that way, the other this.
The knot, which interest and pleasure tied,
Pleasure and interest again divide.
Nay, they, whom equal Sympathy did bind,
And Sex persuades still to continue kind,
Turn Renegades to love, and change their mind.
For Lust (if that alone the marriage knit
Without some nobler thought to second it)
Strangely its object fairest represents
To them, that stand remotest off from thence:
But if the distant prospect be pursued,
It lessens, till it does the sight elude.
And then the recreant Couple soon forget
The Lovers once familiar Alphabet,
The Cant of sighs and tears, of wounds and darts,
The strength of vows, and interchange of hearts.
The o'regrown bodies of whole Polities,
That stretch themselves over many Provinces,
Are not exempted from such turns as these.
Tho they their tumid parts with labor draw,
Upon the gouty legs of State and Law:
Yet in their mutual leagues they run, they fly,
Through all the doublings of inconstancy.
The men, that lately on their Frontiers met,
And joy'd each other civilly to greet,
Distributed their wishes and their prayers,
And cursed the very notion of Wars;
While Peace her influence divides, and pours
On both her blessings and her battening showers;
The Vineyards flourish, and the Figtrees hit,
While under them the Owners safely sit;
The field its full return of harvest bears,
Nor any ravaging destroyer fears;
The flocks not killed nor driven by the Foe,
In their full numbers to Beth-eked go;
The thriving Arts and Sciences increase,
And every School enjoys a learned ease;
These in a pet abjure their happiness.
Some petty cause has blowed the sleeping coal,
Which now begins to burn without control;
Ambition to be filled, a Mistress gained,
Or needy General to be maintained.
For this two infest Kingdoms must engage;
And clangent Trumpets public ills presage,
With their hoarse cadences and trembling note
Soliciting for Soldiers rouud about.
Men from their Callings and their business fly,
Not pitying a helpless Family,
Their childless Parents, their own little Brood,
Or Wives that now commence their Widowhood.
In Companies and Troops they march all day,
Loaded with Arms and hopes of some small Pay.
At night supped with a Snapsack's stint of bread,
What lately was their board, becomes their bed;
And when they rising their fatigue renew,
They leave the measures of their graves in dew.
Nay [worse than this] all bars are now broke down:
No Law nor no Religion is known,
But Irresistibility alone;
No future life, no God, no sacred Word;
But good and bad decided by the Sword.
The sins, that used to dread a witness by,
In darkness skreen'd themselves from humane eye,
And sculk'd to hide their own deformity,
Now making open entries domineer,
Not painted with the signs of shame or fear.
Undauntedly men bid a long Adieu
To all the Legends of the Priestly crew^
No little nook or dark retreat is free
From plunder, violence, and cruelty.
What all their lives poor Laborers have done,
In one sad hour is snatched away and gone,
Nor footstep left of many a tedious Sun.
War robs of all at once, nor even spares
The last reserve of their declining years:
Their dewy sweat now ends in showering tears.
Virgins are raped, their Lovers looking on,
And scarce survive to know they are undone.
The Plowman falls by some unheeded blow,
His trembling fingers beckening to his Plow,
To stay and see its parting Master go.
His Nose (poor man!) makes furrows in that place,
Where last the Coulter and the Share did grase.
Babes from the breast are torn, nay from the womb,
And Life in posse killed, a life to come.
The mitred Priest before the Altar dies
[The Sacrificer made a Sacrifice],
Invoking Heaven with his dying cries.
The strokes the while within the Chancel sound,
And hideous Echo's from the Vault rebound.
Should this Jerusalem (as much I dread)
Be by the impious Casdim conquered;
Rubbish and mangled corpses must deface
The beauteous mansions of this sacred place.
The Temple, nor its holiest part would be
A refuge from the common misery;
Although it Heaven it self does typify.
Its matchless gold, tho by the weight it seem
Loath to remove from thence; and every Gem,
Tho dazzling too the Robbers eyes, must go
To grace the Triumphs of a foreign Foe.
The Vessels stained with Heathen healths and blood
Must serve a Babylonish King or God.
The Corban made for God's emerit Poor
(For that is one reason of this hallowed store)
Must pay a barbarous Host for making more.
Nothing so precious or divine dwells there,
Which daring Sacrilege would deign to spare;
No, not the Records of their Savior.
But last, as 'twere to expiate this theft,
'Twould make a Holocaust of all was left.
These are those mighty Actions, whose praise
Empties the Panegyrist's Commonplace!
But now what pen can suitably repeat
The horror of two Armies, when they meet?
When once the sad Alarm does signify
To Death and them a doubtful battle nigh;
The jaws of Hades and the Grave beneath
Dilated send up steams of poisoned breath.
The Country raised are gadding out to hear,
What Omens tell whose overthrow is near.
The Soldier stunned with sad surprising news
Hardly his broken faculties can use.
He catches at the arms, that next him lie;
Or seeks the Sword that hangs upon his thigh.
Concern and headlong tumult undermine
The formal Military discipline.
Thus they, who huff the gentle Sons of peace,
Whose innocence their only armor is,
Betray that prowess and redoubted might,
Which swaggers when there is no Opposite,
Or only such as never pretend to fight.
The Bravo now could wish the battle won;
Tho all his unjust plunder too was gone.
He dreads that righteous Plain, in which he sees
Th'impendent vengeance of his wickedness,
The strength of Poor men's tears and Widows cries
And their once fruitless importunities.
But now necessity does bid him rouse,
And fear it self makes him courageous.
It Is this supports the honor of the Day,
Teaching the flinching Soldiery to stay:
It Is this with force persuades 'em to come on;
It Is this brings up the formed Battalions.
And now two Woods, whose metal trunks [compact
In lines, that cross each other ^o exact,
They make from any side transparent Glades]
Cacuminate in Pikes;
Two such great moving Woods divide the Field;
Only a few kind turves some respite yield.
A thousand rambling Spirits possess that room,
Expecting ever when their Fellows come.
The fatal Angel hovers over each Host,
Devoting those this Victory must cost.
The tingling Pole with shouts and hallows rings;
And flying Ensigns beat their flapping wings.
Men fire their rage, and throw about their eyes,
Which scatter sparks and angry particles.
Here the bent arm exalts as massy blade,
And tries its blows before the Onset made.
There barbed darts ranged ready for the Fight
Appear like naked teeth prepared to bite.
To fence off these two walls of serred Shields
Expose their boasted Charges and their Fields,
Purchased by some forgotten Ancestor,
Or't may be chance, or money, and no more,
But soon with some rude palt to be eras'd,
Or with the Bearer overwhelmed and lost.
For not these Orbs, tho sevenfold, can bear
The force and inundation of War;
When once the Signal given has drawn the sluice
To all the cataracts of death let loose:
Death, that employs all hands, intends all nerves,
Doubling life's motions;
As 'twere their end the sooner to acquire,
That in their utmost point they might expire.
While he all over the field makes his Parade,
In his triumphant gastliness arrayed.
All wan, with hanging chin, and sinking eyes,
Swift in a Mourning Chariot he hies
About, his bearded weapon brandishing,
Fitly resembling the old Serpent's sting.
No Ethiopian reeds are half so keen,
Nor mortal a whole Parthian Magazine.
Round him lie naked sculls, and mouldering bones^
By which his Cannibal repast he owns.
Behind he wears his Arms, A naked pair
Eating the fruit, which they were bid forbear;
An Adder by, that does himself sustain
Upon his scaly folds and circled train.
Round all a sullen haze is circumfus'd,
Condensed of gasps, which dying lips produced.
In this he slides insensibly along,
Unseen to all the busied fighting throng.
Where e're a wound gapes wide enough to bear
The bigness of his shaft, he steeps it there.
The present venom soon infects the whole,
Moved by the blood, and chases thence the Soul;
Which being turned out of its ruined house
Straightway to reckon with its Landlord goes.
Thus thousands have, and still more thousands must
Leave strength and beauty prostrate in the dust:
While others envy their felicity,
From all their misery and pain set free;
When they among the Carnage grovelling lie,
Almost the pity of their Enemy,
Sighing away their breath by slow degrees,
And wishing every foot their brains might squeeze,
Or some kind stab imprisoned life release.
As when our Fathers left the slavish Kill
And sable Tyrant of the banks of Nile;
The Crimson Sea more kind than he was found,
Transmitting all our Armies on the ground.
But when the cursed Legions followed them,
The billows soon returned, and closed the stream.
Some floated then alone at distant space,
Like Beauty-spots upon a ruddy face;
But more in heaps might for a Mask be ta'n,
Or smoaky Island peering through the Main.
Some with their armor plumb the Deep
[As men go to their beds, before they sleep]:
Some with the muddy'd waves dispute their lot,
Swimming with Horse or shipwrackt Chariot.
Just so the cruddled gore sucks in or rolls
Of separated Minds the mammock'd spoits,
A prey for Dogs, and quarry for the Fowls.
They fall not single but born down by scores,
While all the Welkin with the fragour roars;
As when the conflict of two tilting Clouds
The kindled air with thunderclaps explodes:
Or so, as when the crashing shelves of snow
Or flakes of ice from Ararat's high brow
Do make the Valleys b^llow all below^
Whilst dread the quaking Stranger's fancy fills,
Fearing the tumbling ruins of the hills.
Victory this time her ruddled Scales does poize,
Which with a doubtful beam by turns do rise,
Till added moments fix down that or this.
The shock of Battle then no more remains,
Diffu^'d all over the Mountains and the Plains.
Which way the disarrayed Army takes,
The murdering Victors follow at their backs;
Who now more fierce than in Battalia
Treble the numbers they before did slay:
Beside the many Wretches, which in crowds
Are thrust on precipices and on floods,
Or forced to starve in avious brakes or woods,
Or else compelled to yield, when they are ^a'n,
Their cative necks to an insulting chain.
The mighty sums of War, that sweeps more men,
Than Sea or Pestilence, than Love or Wine!
And after all this vast expense of blood,
And many images of God destroyed;
After Exchequers drained, and money fails,
That might have built a thousand Hospitals;
At length the shattered Regiments return
Their wounds, their rags, their sins, their dead to mourn.
For what is it now men forfeit their repose,
When all the world is always changing thus?
In such an Olio of things as this
They, when they choose, themselves can hardly please.
But when they once have fixed their rolling eyes,
And say, in such a Dish their pleasure lies;
There Is the reward, for which they slave and strive,
And it is for that they chiefly care to live:
Yet they the proper Season for it must wait;
And that perhaps never comes, or else too late
(For every Season bears not every thing,
No more than Autumn fruits adorn the Spring).
But if it does, it makes but little stay;
Next Course of time served up takes it away.
For if you point at pleasures, that require
To be enjoyed by Youth or Age entire;
That age is gone, e're you effect your thought,
Or else more years soon after push it out.
If those things take you, that suppose a Peace;
Or War prevents, or close may follow these,
And you of all your purposes disseize.
But if you such a sanguine Creature are,
To place your main delight in acts of War;
Some milder Being keeps the Nations tight,
Or makes 'em their contentions to remit,
When Death has crammed your mouth with blood and loam,
Or else returned again disabled home,
Perhaps you have satisfied your longing mind,
And left some fragments of your limbs behind.
In short, if Pelf amassed, if Land, or House,
Be the end, to which your labors you dispose;
Only some friendly opportunities
Give the Adventurer so great a Prize,
Without which nothing else but Blanks will rise.
But grant you draw with skill, or hit by chance;
Another chance may rob you of your gains;
Or strike your self, and render you unfit
To taste the grateful relish of that hit;
Or else, Relations dead, debauched, undone,
Embitter Plenty by compassion;
With many more Et caetera's of ills,
The least of which all your enjoyments spills.
Which having well considered, I adore
The care of all the Worlds great Governor,
Who so conducts his Government, that we
Through force might to the true Asylum flee.
For as the golden chain of Providence,
That links together various events
With various contrivance^ forward tends
To reach God's own inscrutinable ends:
So does it guide Observers, that attend,
Up to that Heaven, from whence it does descend.
Here all things altering and unfaithful are;
All methods dark and intricate appear^
This raises our research to that degree,
That from its soaring pinions we can see
A World beyond this Worlds convexity;
Where Happiness is ever sure and true,
And fully proved, presenting to the view
The books of Providence and Nature too;
Those books, which so perplexing to us now
There puny Saints unriddle and read through.
To that most fortunate and blessed Clime
Convoy me, Lord, in thy appointed time.
And e're that great advancement comes, do thou
Kindly vouchsafe this Earnest e're I go^
That I with prudence and content may pass
The unknown tale of my remaining days,
Not too much fretted with that Vanity,
From which but few things in this world are free^
And this my grateful Verse shall ever own
Thy gift and thy beneficence alone.
For well I am assured, that thy Decree
Can never warp or be repealed for me^
But still those Laws, which former Ages swayed,
By this and those to come must be obeyed;
Those Laws, which in the ethereal Arches kept
On Adamantine plates are engraved;
Which Nature and Mankind are governed by,
The constant rules of their inconstancy.
BUT as I turn the Pencil of my eye VI. From the unequal administration of
Justice, by which Men are many times wrongfully disseized of what they get, and
sometimes lose their lives beside, chapter 3. v. 16. to chapter 4.

From Fate and Nature to Society,
What terrifying stories does't portray
Upon the table of the Retina!
Men scrape up riches with disease and pain,
Pleasures and honors hurry to attain;
When some pretended Law or unjust Suit
Recalls them all; it may be life to boot.
And then [too late] they wish, they had bestowed
Their time and strength on some more certain good.
When Man began to multiply his race,
And propagated life did still increase,
The shooting bran^^es intermixed did twist,
And so confounded humane interest.
Each ^ought his own, even with another's wrong,
Though It were the aged Stock, from whence he sprung.
Like hungry Tigers wrestling for their prey
The stoutest bore the bloody pledge away.
So cruel Man, so brutish did he seem,
The Woods had lost their ^erity in him.
Then God exerting favor to Mankind
Them from themselves intended to defend
(Lest they should fall, as Heathen Poets feign
Of our Phenician Neighbors crop of men),
Cleared up their reasons, taught'em to relent,
And wisely to submit to Government;
Where Liberty being circumscribed by rules,
The Weak might live with Strong, with Knaves poor Fools.
But yet both Ethnic Courts, and even thine,
False Israel, pervert the great design:
And what a hedge to justice Heaven meant,
Is made a Blind to catch the innocent.
Justice! A reverend and awful sound,
But the true substance no where to be found;
A barren theme for mooting Colleges
To laugh at, when their disputations cease.
And if the Prophets Schools themselves transgress
Their own so celebrated principles;
What may we think of Civil Sanhedrims,
Where Lucre umpires quarrels, judges crimes?
Trust but a Present to bespeak your Cause,
TO engage the Old man's sight, and hide the Laws,
The Nasi or the Ab-beth-din will bow,
And promise to forswear himself for you.
A Treat tacked to a plausible address,
The interest of beloved Friend or Vice,
A Great man's favor, that implicit Bribe,
A State intrigue, or noisy Baal-rib,
(Beside what Spite, or Ignorance have done,
Or Criticism, or Belial's perjured Sons)
How many right Proprieters have cast?
How many Names smote with a sudden blast?
How many lives, which justice ought to save,
Doomed to a Gibbet and ignoble Grave,
Woose Souls under Heaven's Sapphire altar lie,
And now for vengeance to the Almighty cry?
No matter what or where your Trial is,
Whether it be in Palestine or Greece:
The Urn's a Lottery, and it is a Bet,
Whether the Tau's or Theta's will exceed.
Such are the Tenures, that men labor for,
Which got expose them but to lose the more.
Here turn, my Pen, to meditate upon
A not impertinent Digression.
Sure there is another Life: for else, if not,
How vastly miserable is their lot,
Who through unjust awards are damned to die,
Or pine away in shame and poverty?
Or how can God his Attributes acquit,
Or show his Love and Justice infinite
And equal to that Might, (for so't must be,
To make a balance in the Deity)
Which first gave birth to Adam's family;
Unless a future State shall equalize
The differing inequalities of this;
When the Messiah from the Clouds shall break
The Sun of righteousness, and undertake
To audit and adjust those vast Accounts,
To which the reckoning of the World amounts?
Mean time that such unreasonable Powers,
Who judge with partiality and force,
Might understand how near they are allied
To Wolves and all the ravening Class beside!
True, some things all men help to constitute
Common to them and to the thoughtless Brute.
Both draw the same aereal blasts, which blow
The same dark flame within their veins does flow.
Both to the Earth return, and both from thence
Do their obscure originals commence.
As some of Assur's Monarchs may have sprung
(When this is true, why should I hold my tongue?)
From what was once but bare Plebeian dung;
Although by Matter's restless circling on
The Ordure rose from Close-stool to a Throne:
So now where sleep the royal Careasses,
The very Dogs lift up the leg and piss.
Therefore what specifies the different kind,
Makes Man no Beast, is his immortal Mind.
The brutish Soul, but sensual, never survives
The breaking of that body, where it lives:
But when the Hull's absorpt, in which it pli^s,
It sinks, and true Companion with it dies.
Not so the Soul of Man, whose better make
Does longer life and nobler Kin bespeak:
Whose Understanding with a pier^ing sight
Looks through the World, and peeps at Infinite:
Whose Will through no necessity does act,
But all free its own desires does direct
To this or that, or any newfound Tract.
For thus it is distinguished from that Cell,
Dull cell, in which it sojourns for a while:
And when the doors are opened, to God it flies,
And emulateth Angels in its rise.
So Fire, when grosser parts with weight fall down,
Scarce stops below the Concave of the Moon.
But how can these unequal Judges own
This, tho apparent, wide distinction,
Who by their arbitrary carriage seem
To think all Judgment terminates in them?
The Lion dies not thinking of his prey,
Nor any account to come; just so do they.
So like they make themselves to Savages;
And while they would be more than Men, are less.
Nay, they are fallen below the pitch of Beast,
Who dare be such under that specious vest,
The robe of God's authority impressed.
AS when some weary Traveller has past From that great Oppression practiced in
the world, by which men are often dispoiled of their gains, and reduced to
misery after all their labors, chapter 4. v. 1. to 4.

The difficulties of a dismal Waste;
And now expecting a more pleasant course,
He finds his way degenerate to worse;
Sees craggy rocks and mountains hang before,
Or hears unbridled rivers fiercely roar,
While hasty Night spreads from the Western shore.
So after many tedious journeys made,
Where men with others Lives and Fortunes trade,
(Nor could my Rule correct what there was bad)
I hoped some smoother progress to have had.
But all in vain; such griefs did me dismay,
And damped the comfort of this next survey,
Which to make better (as I use to do
Sometimes) I went about incognito.
I saw a sort of melancholy Folks,
Lurking in covert holes or lonesome walks,
Whose tattered coats and lowering countenance
Showed them in some afflictive circumstance;
So fraid of humane face or two-leg'd tread,
They started, when the leaves but whispered.
At length my method led me to a place,
To which more privilege appendant was,
Either by custom or by strength maintained,
Where such as they a short Protection gained.
Here one less coy asked me, What sly intent
Brought me to trouble their retirement?
No ill attempt upon you, I replied,
But merely Curiosity's my guide,
A large desire of knowing what is done
Among all the gilded objects of the Sun,
Which now for several years has tolled me on
Through many a mournful observation,
And prompts me further to request of you
A true account of this confounding show.
He then composed into a pleasing air,
Which told what once his charms and graces were,
Thus gave his words the wing:
We once were Men, and free as others are
To choose our conversation any where;
When yet we had no urging cause to shun
The barbarous Bailiff or the instant Dun.
But as when Summer days and warmth decay,
The Summer birds grow silent and give way;
In airy troops they call their fellows forth
Fearing the pointed Armies of the North,
Then post themselves in rocks and hollow trees,
Where they endure the Winter's siege and miss
The ravage of their freezing enemies:
So we, when troubles thickened in our Sphere,
Thought it our wisest method to retire;
Some to avoid the inhumane Fiends, that hale
Reluctant Captives to a noisome Iail;
Some to decline their clamorous Creditors,
That still block up or batter at their doors^
All this we undergo, and more than this,
For little peccadillo's, or what is less,
For none; even more than Rhetoric can express.
The eloquence of Misery appears
Most, when it speaks by silence and by tears.
But is it lawful then, said I, to know
To what first cause these grievances you owe?
I don't, returned the Man, impute this ill
To cruelty in God or in his Will.
For when he made the aged Void to teem,
And out of Nothing all these Somethings came;
Lest clashing they should spoil their happiness,
On them peculiar Laws he did impress,
The lasting marks of their Creator's care,
Which they enacted on their bosoms bear.
To Man Reason's this Law, a certain Clue
This Labyrinth of things to lead him through;
Which lost or not observed, he quickly errs,
And hurts himself or Fellow-Passengers.
Hence springs our woe, oppressed by those are great^
But void of Reason (too sure! we suffer by it).
Here Is one, tho of no finer matter made,
Nor better Pedigree traced to the head;
Yet scorns his Brother, an ignoble Swain,
And swells himself for being Gentleman.
He thinks he rivals him, and perks too high;
He Will teach him Manners and his Family:
Tho Guards of Angels at that very time
Perhaps may condescend to wait on him.
Another has observed some petty slight;
The Clown's Devoirs were not shaped out right.
This mighty wrong the Courtier does resent,
Sure to revenge the want of Complement.
The Tradesman thinks his profit is too small,
If, others not suppressed, he gets not all.
The Magistrate hates to be cramped with Laws,
Or wear such Mittens on his greedy claws.
Therefore (for few transcribe from Solomon)
Pretending Public good, when it is his own,
He taxes people out of all they have
Their threatened Properties forsooth to save.
But if that fails, yet he has other ways:
A Plot's the Statesman's well-known Common-place^
A Plot, of which the Father called knows least;
But yet which seldom dies, if neatly dressed.
For when it has tast^d air, it lives and thrives,
And deals in Mercenary Narratives:
Till the poor Innocent in this surprise
Is almost made a spotless Sacrifice:
And tho he scapes, it is with expense and late,
Glad to be banter'd out of his Estate.
By such oppressive means as these undone
We Are forced to tick for bread, then forced to run:
While others caught from some old Prison grate
Are angling for their livings with a Hat;
Or by a tedious Servitude the debt
Work out, which this Oppression did beget,
Their Family perhaps and tender Sons
Sold too, inheriting their Fathers wrongs.
But what torments us more than being undone,
Is (oh!) our ruined reputation,
That heap of scandals and pretended lies,
Which the Oppressor's chiefest engine is,
And top of all our weighty miseries.
But there is no help: For strength and power are there,
While to our shrieks and plaints men deafer are
Than raging Sea to swearing Mariner.
Such is the end of all our mighty pains;
This all, that of our labors now remains!
He ended here, and made me praise the dead
From all their potent Circumventors freed.
But happier they, who never were, to live
And see these evils, which us Beings grieve,
But cannot affect their quiet Negative.
If when so many Arguments conspire From that Envy, which [in the last place]
most surely attends Men's successful labors, and those effects of them, which
are least obnoxious to the forementioned vanities and dangers, chapter 4. v. 4, 5,
6.

To moderate Men's labors and desire,
There Is any need of one more in the rear:
Suppose you're prosperous, and have that luck
T'evade the Oppressor's gripe, and Tyrants stroke;
Yet what another Monster you provoke?
The Envious man; than whom no Feature worse
Sin e're brought forth, or Satan took to nurse.
If but a word drops in another's praise,
What stupifying vapors does it raise
In him? But if he sees his Flock increase,
Free from the Pastor's fear, Wolves and Disease:
Or sees the evening breeze slide over his grain,
And make dry waves upon the bearded plain;
While well-fill'd ears, their gratitude to show,
Before the Fanner of the Country bow:
This jarrs upon his Soul, which in a fit
Draws in it self, and shivers at the sight.
As when some hated Object strikes the eye,
And entering works by strong Antipathy,
The writhen fibers all the Stomach strain,
And every cell conceives a qualmy pain:
So is he moved. His Countenance grows glum,
Or else with quick returns does go and come.
His eyes look glazed and narrow all the while,
Seeming important mischief to foretell.
The Hag, that has drunk poison at a pap,
And dandled many an Imp upon her lap,
Cannot look more venomed malice into those,
That she bewitches, than his lids disclose.
And tho the listless Lubber yawning stands
Within his bosom folding up his hands,
Nor stirs his present blessings to improve,
But pines because more fall not from above;
As if ill nature were the proper means
Appointed to derive us gifts from thence,
And make us Darlings of God's Providence:
Yet to fulfill his rancour and his spite
His mind is brisk, his heavy limbs are light.
He plots to pull that jutting fortune down,
Which hangs above the level of his own.
So vicious is his nature, that if God
In golden showers should descend to load
And stud with lightening Ingots all his grounds,
Comprizing Havilah within their Mounds;
Beside conferring pleasures and renown
Answerable to that other mighty boon:
Yet still he would envy Monarchs and their Power,
And be no more contented than before.
And were he so advanced, and set alone
A formal thing upon a lofty throne,
Put into cumbering furrs and useless gems,
Wrapped up in purple, pressed with diadems,
Gazed at, like Comets in the Country Towns,
When all the Greens are filled with whispering Clowns^
Yet still he would envy on, and if he has
Sense to conceive Superior Essences,
He Would envy those Angelic hosts above,
That now on Heaven's glassy champain move.
And could he but be changed to one of them,
And yet the canker of his mortal frame
With that ethereal nature be the same;
He Would scorn Creation and its upstart brood
To envy what is eternal, even God.
He Would envy that tremendous Shechinah,
Which no pretending mortal can display;
That glorious Throne of purest Diamond,
Which glomerated Clouds and Fires surround;
That Canopy, that covers it, of rays
And Rainbows interweav'd a thousand ways;
Those f^lgid Ministers of Heaven's Court,
That to The Almighty's service do resort;
Those warlike millions of winged Bands
Drawn up, where Michael's flaming Banner stands;
Those Trumpets, and those Songs, that celebrate
The Triumphs of their King and all his State.
In short, how e're preferred, his Envy yet,
The eyesore only changed, would be as great.
Far better is that Cottager's poor case,
Who from his smothering Hive thrusts out his face
Through some kind cranny, which his walls afford
Made of the same frail matter with their Lord,
To ease and cleanse his lungs, with sweeter air,
Of that collected smoke they sucked in there,
And spies six dapp^ed Steeds of some great Peer
Scarce governed by the brawny Charioteer;
Views the proud Chariot drawn in State about,
Proud of its gaudy ornaments without,
But prouder of those glistering Sparks within,
Which there, like Stars, through Glasses must be seen;
Marks the per^ Footmen hanging on the Rails,
And all the waiting, cringing Animals;
And then can pull his head into his clay,
Nor grudge at all the Pomp, that passed that way.
So void of reason, void of happiness
Is Envy, the old Snake's especial Vice.
And yet it is propagated every where;
No Country from the ugly Spawn is clear.
From the utmost Southern point our Fleet descried
To Tyre's last Colony of the other side,
Where e're you choose your dwelling, more or les^
It will attend your fortune and success.
Your squinting Neighbors they will be strange and shie^
And then pretend forsooth, that you are high.
If e're they can, they will lessen your Estate,
Your pleasures quash, your worth depreciate.
The last never fails: for certainly your Name
For uncommitted crimes must bear the blame.
Some odious pranks are whispered up and down,
For which you're often tried by every one
Of The Gossiping and drinking Gangs in town.
These mischiefs do prosperity attend;
And thus at best Men's worldly labors end.
Hence therefore may I neither be remiss,
To love my life in lounging idleness;
Nor lay out all my time, my strength, and care,
Merely for what is but vanity and air:
But may the ends that I propound, be good,
By Heaven commanded, or at least allowed,
And with a fitting industry pursued.
For then tho Worldly ills should obviate,
Or overtake me here; not stirred for that,
With comfort I may wait the Setting Sun
And surer wages of my Days-work done^
A PARAPHRASE ON Part of the BOOK OF Ecclesiastes, Expressing the Sense of it,
and how it is the Ground of the foregoing POEM. With some few NOTES.
CHAP. I.
1. THE [1 Satyrical] Words of 2 Koheleth [or 2 Solomon], the Son [3 and true
Successor in Poetry] of [4 that] David, [who was] 4 King in Jerusalem.

2. O 5 vanity of vanities! (says Koheleth) O 5 vanity of vanities! All [that
this World contains] is [but] 5 vanity [5 lying and deceitful, making great
promises of true Happiness, but in reality being 5 empty and fleeting as a
vapor.]

3. What 6 profit [then] has Man of all his [7 eager, 7 boundless] 7 labor, 7
which he takes ^ merely for these present things] under the Sun [without any
great regard to those of the future World]?

4. [For, in the first place, he is not capable of enjoying long these fruits
of his labors; since still in course] one Generation 8 returns [to the Earth],
and another comes [into their room]; [nay,] and the Earth [it self] abides
[but] for a [certain, tho] 9 unknown time.

5. [And lest Mankind should forget this return to the ground, from whence they
originally came, the like return to the place of setting out is exemplified and
to be seen in other things.] The Sun also arises, and the Sun goes down, and
hastes to the place where he arose.

6. The 10 Wind [too] 10 goes toward the South, and turns about unto the
North: it whirleth about continually, and the Wind returns again according to
its circuits.

7. [And so again] all the Rivers run into the Sea, [and] yet the Sea is not
full: [for it refunds them, either through subterraneous veins and springs, or
by the mediation of vapors and clouds, to channels again. And thus] unto the
place from whence the Rivers come, thither they return again.

8. [But granting Man were longer-lived, than indeed he is; yet still, in the
second place, there is but little Satisfaction to be had from those worldly
enjoyments he so much contends for. For] all things are full of 11 labor [ing
and 11 weakness, and altogether 11 unable to perform those promises of
felicity, which they make him. This is so true, that] man cannot utter [or
sufficiently express] it: the Eye is not satisfied with seeing, nor the Ear
filled with hearing, [nor can any of our other Faculties acquiesce in what they
meet with here as fully adequate to their desires and capacity.]

9. [This is the more evident, because there scarce remains any thing more to
be tried in hopes of Satisfaction, than what the World has had experience of
already.] The thing that has been, is [the same with] that which shall be: and
that which is done, is [as much as] that which shall be done: and there is no
new thing under the Sun.

10. [If any man questions this, let him think, whether he can find any
considerable instance to the contrary.] Is there any thing, whereof it may be
said, see, this is new? [No: whatever enjoyment is mentioned, material to our
Satisfaction,] it has been already of old time, which was before us.

11. [Indeed because Mankind has hitherto been disappointed in all the
experiments made; therefore they are in great measure apt to be forgotten
again, and] there is [little or] no remembrance of [those] former things;
neither [for the same reason] shall there be any remembrance of [many] things
that are to come, with those that shall come after [them. But then this is no
argument, that they never were: it only proves, (as I said) that men were
disappointed upon their trial of them, and found nothing that merited a
Testimony to be left upon record].

12. [12 Thirdly, What I say upon this Subject deserves the more credit,
because] I Koheleth was [that] King over Israel in Jerusalem [s^ justly famed
for Greatness and Knowledge, conferred by the Divine bounty in an extraordinary
manner upon me, above all Mankind].

13. [Nor had I these advantages of knowing the truth of this matter only; but
I added industry and observation also,] and I gave my heart to seek and search
out by [my] knowledge concerning all things, that are done under Heaven ([for]
this sore travel has God given to the Sons of Man, to be1^ exercised [or13
humbled] with it, [ viz. that they cannot know things by intuition, as purer
Beings do, but must find them out, the best of them all, by indagation and
study]).

14. [And now] I have seen [and considered] all the works [of men] that are
done [and terminate in things] under the Sun; [my Judgment is against them,]
and [I must say] behold all is Vanity and 14 vexation of Spirit.

15. [There's no help in this case: for] that which is oblique, [and leads us
beside the ends, that we aim at,] cannot be rectified: and that which is
defective [in those ends, which we do obtain, is so much, that it] cannot be
numbered.

16. [I confess, at first I was something surprised at this my self, and] I
communed with mine own heart, saying, Lo, I am come to great estate, and [that
it might sit the more usefully and becomingly upon me] have gotten more
Knowledge than all they that have been before me in Jerusalem: yea, my heart
has had great experience in Understanding and Knowledge.

17. [For improvement in this has been in great measure my business, ever
since God upon my petition qualified me with Judgment and other faculties
capable of it;] and I gave my heart to understand [what is properly called]
Knowledge, [nay,] and to know [all that too, which usurps the same name, but is
in truth rather] Madness and Folly. [And now is all this nothing? But here,
alas,] I perceived, that [not only] this [unnecessary Greatness (tho I had
Understanding to govern it and make the best of it) was Vanity; but even that
Knowledge it self] also is [ tinctured with it, and often begets] vexation of
Spirit.

18. For in much ^^ Knowledge is much disturb^^ce of mind [not only at the
vulgar follies of Mankind, but even at the nauseous formalities and false
reasonings of those, that pretend to advance Learning]: and he that increases
Knowledge, increases [a] sorrow [-ful prospect].

CHAP. II.
1. [ Fourthly, Lest those that have fixed their thoughts upon the enjoyments
of this life, should not be content with so general a Testimony, I made a
particular scrutiny into the principal of them. And first I made experiment of
that kind of enjoyment, which consists in Iollity:] I said in my heart, Go to
now, I will prove thee with Mirth; therefore enjoy what is 6 proper [to that
end]. And [when I had done so,] behold, this also was Vanity.

2. I said of Laughter [and the ludicrous way of creating it, jesting, dancing,
sporting, etc.] It is [but a transcript of the wry faces, freakish talk, and
antic gesticulations of] mad [folks]: and of Mirth, What [great matter] does
it [tend to? What enchantment is it, that makes men throw away their time and
opportunities of better things upon such extravagance]?

3. [Then, being thus disappointed of true happiness here,] I sought in mine
heart to give my self unto 27 Wine, [and 27 drunkenness, so much in fashion],
(18 and my heart led me according to [its] knowledge [and sagacity the most
advantageous way to it,]) and to lay hold on folly [(for so I must now call
it)], till I might see whether this was that Good for the Sons of Men, which
they should do under the Heaven all the days of their life. [But here I met
with a much greater disappointment still; instead of pleasure misery, so great
and confounding, that I hate to think or say any more of it, but withal so
visible, that I need not.].

4. [Therefore in the next place, to mention but one particular more, but that
of a large extent and much juster pretensions to Happiness, I made ^ large
trial of Magnificence, and State, and Riches, etc. For] I made me great Works:
I builded me Houses: I planted me Vineyards, [which indeed I ought to have
mentioned before; because they supplied me in the experiment of Wine]:

5. I made me Gardens and Orchards; and I planted trees in them of all kind of
fruits:

6. I made me Pools [and other conveniences] of water, to [better my prospect,
and increase my state, as well as to] water therewith the Wood, that brings
forth trees, [and the Flowers, etc.]:

7. I got me Servants and Maidens, and had Servants born in my house^ also I
had great possessions of great and small Cattle, above all that were in
Jerusalem before me:

8. I gathered me also Silver and Gold, and the peculiar treasure of Kings and
of the Provinces^ I got me Men-singers, and Women-singers, and the delights of
the Sons of Men, as 19 Musical Instruments, and that of all sorts.

9. So I was great, and increased more than all that were before me in
Jerusalem ([for beside other advantages, which I had above them, I had this]
also, [that] my Knowledge 20 assisted me):

10. And whatsoever mine eyes desired I kept not ^tom them; I withheld not mine
heart from any joy. [At last I had some pleasure indeed to see all my projects
effected:] for my heart rejoiced in [the finishing of] all my labor, [as is
usual for men to do in the most useless, insipid things]: but this [alas] was
my portion [the poor reward] of all my labor.

11. Then [I began to consider further, and] I looked on all the Works, that my
hands had wrought; and on all the labor, that I had labored to do: and behold
all was Vanity and vexation of Spirit [bringing cares upon me, and exposing me
to envy and danger]; and there was no [true] profit under the Sun [in these
superfluous in^tances of Greatness, the mere effects of pride, or luxury, or
curiosity at best].

12. And [moreover when] I turned my self to behold Wisdom [and useful
Knowledge], and [to compare it with the] Madness and Folly [of the World] (for
[who can do this better than I? Or] what can the man do that comes after the
King? [Nothing, but] that which has been already done):

13. Then I saw [quickly] that Wisdom excels Folly, as far as Light
excels Darkness.

14. [For] the Wise man's eyes are in his head, [he sees before him into the
distant future State, and accordingly propounds such ends, as are conducive to
his happiness in it;] but the Fool [and only he] walks in darkness, [and as
it were groping out his way lays hold of these things, that are next him. This
is the true difference between them; for as to other things, and particularly
their death, their circumstances are much the same;] and I my self perceived,
that one event happens to them all.

15. And [therefore with good reason] I [put this Question to my self, and]
said in my heart, As it happens to the Fool, so it happens even to me; and
why was I then more wise? [It cannot be upon the score of these present objects
of Sense, which the Fool is capable of enjoying as long as I. So that] then I
[concluded and] said [again] in my heart, That this [violent pursuit after
Wealth and Pleasure] is even Vanity, [and either the effect of Foolishness, or
an abuse of Knowledge, which is given for greater purposes].

16. [If it be said, that these great Works, which I have made, and that
Grandeur I have brought my self to, will immortalize my Name in History, and
make me famous for Wisdom and Contrivance, and by that sufficiently recompense
me for all my pains and care; upon examination I fear it will be found
otherwise.] For there is no remembrance of the Wise [propagated] 21 to [future]
unknown ages more than of the Fool; seeing that which now is, in the days to
come shall be forgotten; [either for want, or by the death, or through the
unfaithfulness of History:] and [therefore now] how dies the wise man? as the
Fool: [he has no pre-eminence over him in this neither.]

17. Therefore I [even] hated life, because the work that is wrought under the
Sun, is grievous unto me: for all is Vanity and vexation of Spirit.

18. Yea, [for a greater reason still] I hated all my labor, which I had taken
under the Sun; because I should leave it unto the man, that shall be after me.

19. And who knows, whether he shall be a wise man or a fool? [A fool most
probably; since the number of such exceeds the contrary. However in a
succession of Heirs it must pass through the hands of many. Therefore whether
my circumstances and the Fool's, as to the forementioned instances of present
Sense and future Name be different, or no;] yet shall he [succeed me and] have
rule over all my labor, wherein I have labored, and wherein I have showed my
self wise [in respect of things] under the Sun, This is also [a] Vanity, [which
affects these products of worldly labours].

20. Therefore I went about to cause my heart to despair of all the labor,
which I took under the Sun.

21. For there is a man, whose labor is [done] with understanding, and
knowledge, and 22 success; yet to a man, that has not labored therein, shall
he leave it for his portion. This [I say] also is vanity and a great evil
[indeed].

22. [But it is the greater, because there is nothing to balance all these
evils and disappointments.] For what has Man of all his [excessive] labor,
and of the vexation of his heart, wherein he has labored [for a fancied
Felicity] under the Sun?

23. [Instead of acquiring any great matters, he loses that good, which he
might enjoy here:] for all his days are sorrows, and his business grief; yea,
his heart takes not rest in the night. This is even [ a double] vanity.

24. 23 Is it not [more] convenient for a man, that he should [ moderately] eat
and drink, and that he should make his Soul enjoy [some] good, [so much as is
truly so,] in his [ regular and reasonable] labor? [But] this also I
[considered, and] saw, that it was from the hand of God.

25. For who can eat, or who can hasten hereunto 24 without him?

26. For [it is] he gives to a man that is good in his sight, [true] wisdom,
and knowledge, and joy: but to the sinner he gives travel, to gather, and to
heap up, that he may give to him that is good before God. [In short] this
[whole experiment] is also [(for I must repeat it)] Vanity and vexation of
Spirit.

CHAP. III.
1. [ A fifth argument against men's toiling so intensely for the things of this
world is the uncertainty of them. For] to every thing there is [ but] a 25
Season, and [ but] a 26 time to every purpose under the Heaven, [wherein they
can be either obtained, or kept. So that men either get nothing by such
labors, or but that which is liable to be taken away again in a little space].

2. [For which way ever we turn our eyes, the revolution of contrary Seasons is
visible. There is] a time to be born, and [soon after] a [nother] time to die:
a time to plant, and a [nother] time to pluck up that which is planted:

3. A time for killing [and mortality], and [not always] a time for ^ealing
[the wounds of Sword or Accident]: a time to break down, and [not always] a
time to build up:

4. A time to weep, and [not always] a time to laugh; [or (which is the same)]
a time to mourn [under the sense of affliction], and [not always] a time to
dance:

5. A time [for foolish or vicious folks] to throw away 27 precious stones, and
[not always] a time to gather [these] stones together: a time to embrace, and a
[nother] time to refrain from embracing:

6. A time to get, and a [nother] time to lose [again]; [and so] a time [much
of the same nature] to keep, and a [nother] time [when men are forced] to cast
away, [and part with what they have]:

7. A time to 28 rent [cloaths for the death of Relations or Friends], and a
[nother] time to sew [them up, till some fresh occasion tears the seam again]:
a time to keep silence, and [not always] a time to speak, [however your
industry or your judgment have qualified you for it].

8. A time to love, and a [nother] time to hate: a time of war, and [not
always] a time of peace.

9. What profit [then, at least what lasting profit] has he that works, in
that wherein he labors?

10. [For] I have seen the travel, which God has given to the Sons of Men, to
be exercised in it:

11. [And I believe,] he has made every thing beautiful in his time [; and
that this variety of Seasons and events makes an admirable Scheme of
Providence]: [but then] he has also 29 given them an 29 unknown continuance
[and unknown vicissitudes], so that no man can find out the work that God has
made, from the beginning to the end [; no man can comprehend the method of
Providence at present, or know either when the successful season for labors
will come, or when it is come, how long it will stay and permit him to enjoy
the fruits of them].

12. [Therefore] I am sensible there is no good in them, but [when they agree
with the measures of our duty (for such labors will be recompensed hereafter,
however they speed here), and tend to enable a man] to be cheerful [in God's
service]^ and to do good in his life:

13. And also that [to this end] every man [according to his condition] should
eat and drink [with discretion so much as is sufficient for this purpose], and
enjoy good, [that is, what is proper for him, content at least] in all his
labor. [For] this is the gift of God.

14. [And] I know, [as I said before,] that whatsoever God does, it is for an
unknown time: nothing can be put to it, nor any thing taken from it [; the
Seasons cannot be lengthened, or shortened, or any way accommodated to our
design, but just as he pleases]. And this God does, that men should fear before
him, [and by promoting his glory strive to attain to that better State, where
the History of the World will be exposed to view, and all its intricate
varieties explained].

15. [This is that, which he does, and always has aimed at:] that which has
been, is now; and that which is to be, has already been; and God [still]
seeks the [same] 3^ thing pursued.

16. But moreover [beside the changeable nature of things, in the sixth place,
there is such an unequal administration of Justice; that a man can scarce be
secure of any external possession, nor even of his life it self: which is no
inconsiderable objection against those labors, which are levelled only at such
things, as are to be enjoyed in this life, and may by this injustice one time
or other be ravished from the Owner. For] I have seen under the Sun the place
of Judgment, that wickedness is there; and the place of righteousness, that
iniquity is there.

17. [Upon which I immediately fell into such meditation as this:] I said in
mine heart; [Surely] God will judge the righteous and the wicked: for 31 then
will be a time for every purpose and for every work [to be examined over again,
to the punishment of evil Magistrates, and the recompense of those that have
suffered under them; without which the Divine justice it self can scarce be
impartial and perfect].

18. I said [also] in mine heart concerning the es^ate of the Sons of men [;
Oh], that God would manifest to them, and that they might see, that they
themselves are [like] beasts!

19. For that which befalls the Sons of men [in general], befalls beasts,
even one thing befalls them: as the one dies, so dies the other; yea, they
have all one breath: so that a man has no pre-eminence [in this] above a
beast: for all is vanity.

20. All go unto one place; all are of the dust, and all return to the dust
[again].

21. [But wicked Judges more especially resemble beasts; they are beasts even
in that, which chiefly differences the two Species. For] who [among them]
knows [or considereth] the Spirit of Man, that goes upward, and the Spirit
of the Beast, that goes downward to the Earth? [They act not, as if their
Souls were immortal, or as if they expected any Judgment after their own.]

22. Wherefore I perceive that there is nothing better than that a man should
[propound good ends to himself, and then] rejoice in [the integrity of his
de^igns, and in the lawful fruition of that issue of] his works, [which God
gives them, whatever it is, without eagerness and solicitude for more]; for
that is his portion [here, and a portion that must be taken now or not at all
too]^ for who shall bring him [back after death] to see what shall be after
him, [or give him any more opportunities]?

CHAP. IV.
1. So [leaving this argument] I returned and considered [another, being the
seventh against men's indefatigable moiling for the things of this World, taken
from] all [those other] Oppressions that are done under the Sun, and [proceed
not only from perverted justice in the place of judgment, but from the pride,
covetousness, ill nature, or revenge of those in general, that have power,
subtilty, or wealth enough to circumvent and crush their Neighbors. This is a
grievous evil indeed, often bereaves men of all their dearly earned gains, and at
last leaves them in a forlorn condition, as I my self with a great deal of
horror observed. For] behold, the tears of such as were oppressed, and they
had no [t so much as a] Comforter: and [the reason was,] on the side of their
Oppressors there was power, and [therefore] they had no [one durst be their]
Comforter.

2. Wherefore I praised the Dead, which are already dead, more than the Living
which are yet alive.

3. Yea, better is he than both they, which has not yet been, who has not
seen the evil work that is done under the Sun.

4. Again, [ in the last place,] I considered all travel and [even] every ^2
right [and 32 successful] work, [which as far as is possible, escapes the
forementioned disappointments and chances;] that for this a man is envied of
his Neighbor, [and thereby is forced to conflict with many contumelies and
disturbances]. This is also Vanity and vexation of Spirit.

5. [This is true, tho it be unreasonable; tho] the [envious] Fool [perhaps]
foldeth his hands together, and eats his own flesh, [pining away for what he
has not, but not stirring to obtain that which he so much admires and therefore
envies in others]:

6. [And tho, to allow him his idleness, what he already has, even] a handful
is better with quietness [of mind], than both the hands full with the 33 labor
and vexation of [his] Spirit [: I say, notwithstanding this, envy is the fate
of the best of Worldly labours].

NOTES On the foregoing PARAPHRASE.
1. R. Iarchi upon this place says, (...) that (...) generally signifies words
of reproof, that is, of the nature of a Satyr. But whether this be true or no;
the matter of this book, and especially of that part which I am concerned in,
will admit the Epithet.

2. Tho both the Seventy and our English Version take (...) for an Appellative
name, and render it (...), or, of the Preacher; yet I do not believe this to be
a true account of the word. First, because (...) does not signify, to preach,
but, to assemble a Congregation together, etc. Secondly, it is a thing I
suppose not practiced, in the Title of a book to express the Author, not by his
name, but by some attribute or property; unless it be in a buffoonish way, or
when an Author desires to be concealed. Thirdly, if ever in other cases it is
or may be used, yet certainly the attribute or quality substituted into the
room of the Author's proper name ought to be the most eminent one belonging to
him, and so peculiar to him too, as in this case to distinguish him at least
from the other Writers of the Bible. But if this rule be observed, Solomon can
by no means be here called the Preacher. For in the History of him he is
celebrated for his wealth, his knowledge, his Proverbs, etc. but scarce for his
Preaching. Or however, granting that he may in some sense be called a Preacher,
this cannot distinguish him from many of the other Prophets, who preached more
properly and frequently, than he did; it being the very business they were sent
for, to admonish the people, either of their duty, or the punishments due to
their disobedience. Fourthly, if it be a Common word, it must be a Participle,
and agree with some Substantive. This they say is (...) or (...) or some such
thing understood: and so the sentence filled up runs thus, (...). Now what a
monstrous arbitrary Ellipsis is this? No common mode of speaking, no scope of
an Author, no necessity of the sentence determine these to be the words
suppressed, any more than many others, that might be inserted. It Is true
Vatablus pretends custom for the understanding of these words: and to this
purpose he says, that (...) is understood in that phrase (...) Dan. 9. 23. and
(...) in that, (...) 2 Samuel 13. 39. But to this I answer, that more liberty may
be taken in the body of a History, where the series of the Story will assist
the Reader, than in the Title of a book, which is connected to nothing, and
ought to be the plainest thing imaginable. Beside if (...) be understood in one
place and (...) in another, this is no authority for making both these words
and one more to be understood all in one place. But further, what if neither
(...) nor (...) be understood at all in the forementioned Texts? I am apt to
believe they are not. For as to the first quotation [ Dan. 9. 23.], it is
common in all Languages to use the Abstract for the Concrete. And therefore
Daniel is called (...), the Delight, for (...), delighted in: just as (...) is
put for (...) Ier. 50. 31. (...) for (...) Pro. 13. 6. (...) for (...) Cant. 1.
4. (...) for (...) or (...) in the same book, chapter 2. v. 7. and chapter 3. v. 5.
that is in short, just as Titus is called by Suetonius Amor ac deliciae generis
humani. As to the other [2 Samuel 13. 39.], 1. If the Verb be taken transitively,
as the nature of the Conjugation Piel requires; then (...), David's Wife, or
(...), Absalom's Mother, must be implied in the Feminine Gender here; and the
sense will be, And she, David's Wife, the Mother of Absalom, by her frequent
importunities made David long to go forth to Absalom. Kim^hi says, (...) that
this was A. ben Ezra's opinion. And the truth is, this mode of expressing a
Wife or Mother by a Feminine Verb without putting down either of those words
themselves, is neither unusual nor unnatural. Numb. 26. 59. it is said, And the
name of Amram's Wife was Iochebed, the Daughter of Levi, whom she bare [(...)]
to Levi in Egypt, i. e. whom Levi's Wife, Iochebed's Mother bare. For who else
should bear her; tho nothing be said of Levi's Wife or Iochebed's Mother
before? And 1 Kings 1. 6. And he also was a very goodly man: and she bare
[(...)] him after Absalom, i. e. his Mother, one of David's Wives bare him. So
here, And she made King David long to go forth unto Absalom, etc. i. e. she who
might be supposed to have the most interest in David and concern for Absalom,
as being Wife to the one and Mother to the other. 2. If the Verb be taken
intransitively according to the opinion of some (tho by the way the
Masorethical Note on this place does not at all confirm it, as is pretended.
For it only says, that (...) is found but twice, and in different
significations: and I think to cease, as it denotes, Genesis 24. 19. and to make
to long, are significations different enough. But granting that the Verb be
taken intransitively) then there is an Enallage of the Gender indeed, but
nothing understood; and so the words will be construed thus, And King David
[not, the Soul of King David] longed to go forth to Absalom, etc. The reason of
this perhaps may be to denote the effeminate tenderness of David's heart, that
was quickly moved: just as on the contrary the Masculine Verb joined to a
Nominative of the Feminine Gender in that Judge. 21.21. (...), may imply an
immodesty or boldness in the Daughters of Shiloh above their Sex, who durst
come out to dance so publicly, etc. in that Esth. 1. 20. (...) may signify,
that respect and submission to a Husband is the most heroical Virtue in
Womankind: and in that 2 Kings 3. 26. (...) may denote the Manhood used in War.
But whether this reason hold or no, it is most certain that this kind of
Enallage is common: as is plain particularly from this book of Ecclessiastes,
chapter 7. v. 8. chapter 8. v. 11. chapter 10. v. 15. chapter 12. v. 4. etc. So that in short,
Vatablus's quotations not at all invalidating what I have said, I take (...)
for one of Solomon's Proper Names, of the same form with (...) and (...) Ezr.
2. 55, 57. and (...) 2 Chronicles. 7. 8. I know there lies an Objection against this
opinion too, viz. that chapter 7. v. 27. of this book it is joined with (...), a
Verb of the Feminine Gender. But to this I reply, 1. That this is but a single
instance: for in all other places it has a Masculine Syntax. Now should an
opinion be built upon this one place, or on all the rest? 2. We have seen
above, that the Enallage of the Gender of a Verb is no very strange thing. 3.
It is most probable, that the (...) is misplaced, and that it should be not
(...), but (...). For tho Proper Names do not so generally admit of this (...);
yet sometimes they do: as (...) 2 Samuel 24. 16. (...) Josh. 1. 12. etc. And thus
it is chapter 12. v. 8. of this book, (...). I must add here, that tho (...) is not
well translated, the Preacher; yet I have retained, Ecclesiastes, as the name
of this book, because it is best known by it.

3. I here suppose this Title to be prefixed not by Solomon himself, but by
Ezra and his Assistants, who not only collected the History of the Patriarchal
and Jewish Churches, and methodized the Prophecies and other Holy Writings of
the Old Testament; but also gave the books, which constitute that Canon of
Scripture, their several Titles. So that it is as much, as if it it had been
said, These are Words, which we Ezra and the rest of the Great Synagogue have
found to be Koheleth's the Son of David, etc. and therefore have put them into
the Holy Canon. For this reason, it coming from another and not from Solomon's
own hand, I have represented it to his praise and advantage.

4. These words, King in Jerusalem, in strictness perhaps ought to be referred
to Koheleth or Solomon; yet they may too be allowed to relate to the next
preceding word, i. e. David, for these reasons. First, because David was the
first that entirely conquered Jerusalem, and made it the Seat of his Kingdom,
and therefore seems most properly to claim this Title. Secondly, because
Solomon was born to David^ when he was King in Jerusalem; and therefore this
may be added to distinguish him from those Sons, that were born to David, when
he was only King in Hebron. Thiraly, because whatever is to be said of Solomon
as King in Jerusalem may be more pertinently brought in at v. 12. of this
Chapter: and therefore since David's memory may be a little more emphatically
celebrated here without wrong to his Son, it can be no great fault to do it.

5. (...) seems sometimes to imply a notion of Lying or Deceitfulness; and so
it is used as synonomous to (...) and (...), a Lie; as, Ps. 62. 9. and Prove.
31. 30. Sometimes again it seems to import want either of Solidity or Duration,
that is, something of the nature of a Vapor. Thus the Psalmist speaking of
Man's days and his age, says, He is altogether (...) or Vanity, Psalm. 39. 5.
which St. James expresses by saying, Our life is even a vapor, that appears
for a little time, Iam. 4. 14. And that phrase (...) in Prove. 21. 6. is a
vapor driven to and fro, an empty design that wicked men practice upon one
another. And so also (...) in Chaldee and (...) in Syriack signify a Vapor or
Breath. I have taken in both these thoughts, which together perhaps give the
full signification of the word, and are very proper here: for Worldly things
are deceitful, because (tho they appear taking) they are neither substantial
nor durable.

6. The Verb, from whence (...) is derived, in those Conjugations, in which it
is used in the B^ble, is, to leave or be lef^; and thence it comes to be, to
abound; and thence again it rises higher, and signifies to excel in general,
etc. and from any of these (...) may receive a not impertinent interpretation.
But among the Syrians we find (...) in the Conjugation Peal, denoting, to gain
or obtain; as, (...) Mark 8. 36. and methinks this lets us the most directly
into a true signification of (...), which the English Version turns well by the
word, profit.

7. (...) is not always labor in an illimited sense; but very often only
labor, that is culpable. So it is used twice in Hab. 1. for v. 3. it is joined
with (...); and v. 13. it is what God cannot look upon. And so it must be used
here. For there is a labor, which is not only lawful, but our duty, and
(however it succeeds here) certainly profitable too: as, when men in sincerity
propound good ends to their labors, the manifestation of God's glory, the
improvement of their own Souls by virtue and knowledge, or the obtaining such
circumstances as may enable them to serve God cheerfully, to provide
conveniently for their Families, decently to discharge that share of public
business which belongs to their Station, and upon occasion readily to relieve
those that want: and when these ends are prosecuted with resignation to God and
dependence upon him for success, with such strict justice as shall in no regard
trespass upon any other man, and with such moderation as consists with that
duty we owe to our selves too. The labor therefore intended here must be the
labor of them, that propound wrong ends, the humouring their covetous
inclination, or procuring an opportunity to gratify their lust, or luxury, or
pride, or levity, or the like; and then prosecute these ends by virtue of their
own strength or policy without any sense of God or his Providence, not
distinguishing between Right and Wrong, nor sparing perhaps themselves in some
instances much more than their Neighbors. In short, it is the labor of one
that is merely a Creature of this World, and looks no further. For this
produces no true profit or advantage.

8. I have rendered (...), returns, not, goes, as in the English. First because
the Hebrews having no Compound Verbs, the Simple stand for the Compound too,
when their Construction or the circumstances of the Sentence require. So that
(...) is not only, ivit, but, adivit, abivit, exivit, praeivit, rediit, etc.
And thus it signifies to return in that, (...) Deuteronomy. 16. 7. Secondly, tho it be
common I suppose in all Languages to say men that are dead, are gone; because
the phrase is intelligible enough without adding any more; yet in truth it is a
defective saying; since of necessity some place must be understood, to which
they go. This defect we cannot better fill up than by observing Solomon's own
mode of speaking, chapter 3. v. 20. where he says, All go unto one place; i. e. the
Dust or the Earth. Now, as he says there, since all are of the dust, all return
to the dust; their going is properly a returning. Thirdly, without this sense
of the word the following Simile's of the Sun, and the Wind, and the Rivers,
returning to the same place again, are not very proper.

9. After all the various accounts of (...), it in truth signifies a duration
or time, whose length is (...) or hid from us, of which we know, either not the
beginning, or not the end, or perhaps neither. Thus, with respect to time past,
(...) Job 22. 15. is that way, which wicked men have trodden time out of mind:
and (...) is the Landmark, that has stood for immemorial time. With respect
to future time, many of the Jewish Statutes are called (...) because they were
to continue to that unknown period, when Christ should abolish them: Samuel was
brought to the House of the Lord to abide there (...), for that unknown time he
was to live, 1 Samuel 1. 22. and Ex. 21. 6. the Servant there was to serve his
Master (...), i. e. till his Master should please to manumit him, or it may be
till his Master died, or till he died himself, or till the next Iubile, if that
came first; which was an unknown term of Servitude. And with respect to both,
Abraham calls God (...) Genesis 21.33. A God, of whose beginning or end he knew
nothing; which, tho in strictness it does not express eternity, yet might serve
for it in those simple and less Philosophical ages; or however in Abraham's
judgment was enough to distinguish him from the false Gods; from that host of
them in the Heavens, the Sun, Moon, and Stars, of whose Creation Abraham could
not be ignorant; and from those Idols, whose beginning was known, or at least
whose end might by an easy experiment. This signification of (...) I have
pitched upon, First, because this place requires it. For it is not true, that
the Earth abides to Eternity. Secondly, because (as appears from the foregoing
instances) it may easily be accommodated to all other places, where this word
is used. Thirdly, because it removes that insufferable uncertainty of
signification, which Lexicographers have put upon (...), making it sometimes to
denote infinite duration, and sometimes the quite contrary, that which is not
infinite; sometimes eternity, and sometimes again no more than the span of
human life. For at this rate, if one and the same word may signify two
contraries, Language serves not to inform, but to amuse or seduce us. Fourthly,
because it flows naturally from the Root, which signifies, to hide.

10. There are not a few, that make (...) in the front of this Verse, and (...)
that follows presently after, to agree with (...) in the former Verse: and then
the sense is, That the Sun goes to the Southern Tropic, and returns to the
Northern. But the other opinion, which makes those words to agree with (...),
is much to be preferred. First, because in the preceding Verse he has
completely said as much of the Sun, as he had occasion for. Secondly, because
(...) in the middle of this Verse seem only to be a repetition of that (...)
and (...) in the beginning, to denote the restlesness and inconstancy of the
motion of the Wind: and yet they evidently agree with (...).

11. This word (...) in those two or three other places, where it occurs,
signifies weary or tired out: but here by a Metonymy it must signify that
quality, which is the effect of weariness, i. e. weak and unable to do those
things for us, which men expect from them, deficient and not capable of
satisfying us, (...) as Aben Ezra explains it. For, first, this interpretation
is most agreeable to the design of the place; and is perhaps more properly
premised to the instances following, [ The Eye is not satisfied with seeing,
nor the Ear filled with hearing] than any other that can be named. Secondly, as
to our English Version particularly, which renders the word, full of labor,
that signification is no where to be found. Thirdly, neither in this place is
it true. For all things are not full of labor: there are such things as
idleness, and luxury, and pleasure, which tho men may labor to obtain, yet are
not called labor themselves; tho the means in the way to them may be full of
labor, yet they are not said to be so. But these and all other Worldly things
may be said to be impotent and unable to give the satisfaction looked for.

12. It must be noted here, that many do make Solomon from this place to the
end of the first half of the Book, to dispute in order against four things,
that principally put in their claim to Blessedness and the title of Chief good,
viz. Knowledge, Pleasure, Power, and Riches; and tell us, that from this 12th
Verse to the end of this Chapter, is the Section levelled against the first of
these, and that therefore it relates all of it and only to Knowledge. But from
these men I crave leave to dissent; First, because this method I am almost
confident cannot be made out without a great deal of force to the Text.
Secondly, I cannot imagine Solomon intended directly to dispute against
Knowledge; unless I could be persuaded too, that by having too much of it he
was grown mad (as was once fancied of St. Paul). For this is our chief fence
and remedy against the Vanities of this World: this both teaches us how to
obtain the felicities of that to come, and makes us more capable recipients of
them: and this is that, which Solomon himself elsewhere so highly magnifies,
which he bids us incline our ear to, apply our heart to, cry after, lift up our
voice for, seek as silver, and search for as hid treasure, etc. Thirdly, he
speaks plainly of all things done under the Sun; that he had sought and
searched into them; and that he had found them all to be Vanity. I take this
Section therefore to be a general Testimony of Solomon's concerning Worldly
acquests, which he premises here to a more particular one that follows in the
next Chapter, and in which he is so universal and earnest, that he is ready
indeed to fall upon Knowledge it self, telling us, that even it can hardly be
excepted, but has a tincture of Vanity too, since it is often not only
prostituted to evil and Worldly ends, but even the best of it attended with
some trouble and disappointments: but I cannot think he designed to make
Knowledge the direct object of any part of his Satyr.

13. I have put down two significations of (...), not knowing indeed which to
prefer. For, first, both have good reasons on their side. The first, to be
exercised with it, is abetted by several Versions and Commentators,
particularly Rashi, who expounds it by, (...); by its relation to the word
(...) in the same sentence; and by the use of (...) among the Syrians, who it
is likely had it from the Hebrews. And therefore it is remarkable, that as the
Septuagint turns (...) here by (...); so Luke 10.40. (...) is turned by the
Syriac Testament, (...). The other signification also, to be humbled with it,
has the Suffrages of many, and (which is more,) the use of the word in
Scripture I believe for it too. Thus I doubt not but that (...) in Hos. 5. 5.
ought to be transl^ted, And the pride of Israel shall be humbled before him, i.
e. in the presence of that Lord, whom they in the former Verse did not know or
had rejected. For not only the most Translations understand it so; but the
scope of the place requires this sense. Secondly, both have the same tendency.
For they that interpret the word of being exercised and employed, yet mean such
business as is attended with much trouble, which to be sure must tend to deject
and humble folks.

14. (...) has four several accounts to be given of it. First, some make (...)
the same with (...), and so interpret it thoughtfulness of Spirit; which
perhaps is that, which the Seventy call (...), that carefulness of Soul, when
men beforehand choose and consult about their affairs. Secondly, some again
deduce it from (...) or (...), and translate it, breaking of Spirit; as the
Author of the Targum does, (...). Thirdly, others derive its signification from
(...), and construe it, eating or preying upon the Spirit, The Syriac (...),
and our English, vexation of Spirit seem to include all these. Fourthly, but
there, are others that alter the signification of (...), taking it to denote,
the wind or air; and so make the sense, feeding upon air. And the truth is,
this is very natural and most certainly a Jewish phrase. Hos. 12. 1. (...)
Ephraim feeds on wind, and follows after the East Wind. But because none of
these are very distant from the design of the Author, I have kept to the
English Version in the Paraphrase; and in the Poem, where I had occasion to
touch upon these words at all, I have taken that sense of them, which first
came to my thoughts.

15. (...) is sometimes Wisdom, i. e. Knowledge (...) and properly so called:
But here it should rather be turned, Knowledge in general. First, because v.
13, 17. it seems to be Speculation about the natures of things and opinions of
Mankind. Secondly, because both here and v. 16. it is used as Synonomous to
(...), which is Knowledge in general. Thirdly, because it is false, that in
much Wisdom or Prudence there is much grief. No man ever receives grief or
trouble by the wise choice of good ends, and proper means leading to them. But
of Knowledge not thus limited it is true, that there is a great deal of trouble
both in getting and keeping it; although it be true also, that men may be
sufficiently recompensed for this trouble by the advantages, which their
intellectual faculties and their Virtue are capable of receiving from this
attainment.

16. This is a common signification of the word (...); as, for instance, in
that trite phrase, (...), Do what seems good or proper in your eyes.

17. This place must be understood of drunkenness; First, because the
expression imports as much. For according to the true Grammatical construction
of it, (...) is, to extend my flesh with wine; by which no moderate quantity
can be meant. Secondly, otherwise this had been no new Experiment. For without
doubt this great King of Israel had tasted a glass of Wine with moderation
often enough before this.

18. This Parenth^sis (...) Rabbi S. Iarchi expounds thus, (...) tho my body
was extended with wine, yet my mind as it were rolled it self about, i. e.
exercised it self in wisdom, etc. And this exposition I suppose may proceed
from the more modern acceptance of (...), to accustom or use ones self to any
thing. But no such signification of the word appears to have been known in the
Scripture times. Our English Translation is a kin to this; if not something
worse. For how (...) comes to signify, acquainting; or how Solomon could be
said to get acquaintance with wisdom (by which I suppose is meant improving
himself in it), when he was given up to drinking and excess; are things not
easy to be comprehended. Aben Ezra says, (...) that (...) is the Participle of
a Transitive Verb, whose Accusative is wanting, but is thus to be supplied by
the word (...), and my heart conducted its words with wisdom. But this is a
precarious Ellipsis, and not pertinent neither. The Chaldee and Greek render
it, (...), and, (...), seeming to understand (...), and to make the sense, and
my heart led me in knowledge, or, according to knowledge. This sense is indeed
plain, and agreeable both to the business in hand, and the general use of the
word in the Bible. But I must add, that there is no necessity to understand
this (...) neither. For (...) often involves its own Accusative case by
reflecting a reciprocal signification upon the Person it agrees with: as, 2
Kings 9. 20. (...), he drives himself, or comes on furiously: and so here, my
heart (...), led it self, or led me, i. e. went on according to knowledge, etc.
For whether (...) respects (...) all together, or the Affix of the first Person
only; the difference is not considerable.

19. What (...) means is a Riddle not to be unfolded by any mortal Oedipus.
Interpretations are so various, and all of them so wild and extravagant; that
for want of a better, I have kept to the English Translation.

20. (...) or (...) signifies, he was on my side, i. e. he assisted me: as we
say in English, he was for me, or, he stood to me; or as in Latin, pro me
stetit. The Verb indeed is often omitted; as, (...) Ps. 118. 6. but Dan. 11.
17. we find both (...) and (...) expressed, (...). The phrase was perhaps
originally Military, and taken from the Wars; but metaphorically it may be
applied to any thing else; as particularly here to Solomon's Knowledge, which
assisted him in his pursuit after pleasures, in these words, (...). And
therefore the Targum paraphrases them thus, (...): and the Seventy render them,
(...), that is, (...), the simple Verb being put for the Compound after the
Hebrew manner, which the Hellenistical Dialect is very well known to imitate.

21. See Note 9.

22. (...) signifies, to go on directly toward the end propounded, to prosper,
or succeed; as chapter 11. v. 6. of this Book, In the morning sow thy seed, and in
the evening withhold not thine hand: for thou know not whether (...) shall
prosper, etc. Hence (...) is prosperity, or success; and should be so
translated here, chapter 4. v. 4. and chapter 5. v. 10; which are the only places, in
which it is to be found.

23. (...) understood as a Proposition is, quite contrary to our Version, It is
not good for a man, that he should eat, etc. But if it be understood as a
Question, it is, Is it not good for a man that he should eat, etc. And thus our
Translators took it, notwithstanding the Erotematic (...) be wanting (which
sometimes happens); and from thence proceeded to make it a more vehement
Affirmation, There is nothing better for a man than that he should eat, etc. I
think this is too much; and that the Interrogation had better been retained.
But I only mention this to observe the partiality of them, who swallow this
Translation easily; but abominate the same, or less liberty in that Version of
the Psalms in our Liturgy, Ps. 105. 28. and therefore I omit all the other many
Criticisms, that relate to this Text.

24. I beg liberty here to read (...), not (...), as in the ordinary Copies.
First, because the sense can no other way be made so coherent and proper.
Secondly, because I perceive the Seventy read it so, (...); Other Translations
also follow the same reading. But if any one, that allows this reading, should
yet demand further, how (...) comes to signify without him; I answer, that
indeed I do not remember I ever met with this phrase in any other place of the
Bible; that therefore it admits of nothing but conjecture; but that the sense I
have put upon it is most probable, since it suits best both with the design of
this place, and with the use of the word (...) in other. For it signifies
generally, abroad, or, at a distance; as, Deuteronomy. 23. 12. Thou shall have a place
also (...), abroad with respect to the Camp, or, out of the Camp, whither thou
shall go forth (...) abroad, to some distance, etc. And so here, Who can eat,
or who can hasten hereunto (...) as it were abroad from him, or at a distance
from him, that is (as it seems to me), without him.

25. (...) is no where else to be found among the Holy Writings, but the Books
of the Captivity (as they are called); and there it most plainly signifies an
appointed or determined time. Now there being no authority nor necessity to
alter its signification, the meaning of (...) will be, That God has appointed
to all kind of events certain times or seasons, out of which no human industry
by it self can produce those events, and beyond which it cannot make them last.
This he has done either by the established nature of things, which makes them
incapable of being but under suitable circumstances and respects to other
things; or by those particular and direct decrees which have marked out the
revolutions of Churches and Kingdoms (as appears from the Prophecies relating
to many of them), and even the more general strokes of particular men's lives,
the time and place of their living [ Acts 17. 26.] their condition whether to
honor or dishonor [ Romans 9. 21.] etc. This is a strong argument against the
excessive labors of Worldly men; since they are neither certain of having
success, nor of enjoying long that which they have. But (which ought to be
observed) this is no argument against regular and laudable industry: because
God being with the pious Laborers, he will either direct them to hit upon the
right seasons; or it may be overruled for their sake the course of things; or
at least, if their prosperity interferes with any of his decrees (as we know it
very often has), he will abundantly recompense in a better World their
sufferings and want of success in this.

26. (...) is commonly rendered tempus opportunum, idoneum, or the like; but
seems to have something more of the signification of (...) in it, and to denote
often not so much opportunity of time, as the limitation of it to such and such
purposes and events. Thus (...) and (...) Ier. 15. 11. are, not a time
opportun^ or convenient for evil and affliction (for no men ever expressed
themselves so, as if they thought any time opportune or convenient for
affliction), but the time when God had determined to bring evil and affliction
upon the Jews. This part of the verse therefore is but a repetition of the
former: and each of them confirms the sense of the other.

27. I take (...) here for Precious Stones; First, because (...) is used in
this sense Exodus 28. 11. where (...) is an Engraver of Precious Stone, not a
Carver of Stone in general. Secondly, Because if the word be understood of
Common Stone, this thought will be much the same with that in the later part of
the third verse before.

28. (...) is for (...), i. e. to rent clothes, as particularly upon the death
of Relations and Friends. For otherwise the instance seems too trivial.

29. This saying (...) has perplexed Interpreters with as little reason, as
success. For take the words, as they lie, in their common acceptance, and they
make an elegant proper sense, -- he has given, or, placed a hidden duration in
the midst of them, or in them, i. e. every thing mentioned in the sentence
before. Thus all know (...) is used: thus I have showed already [Note 9.] (...)
is generally to be understood: thus according to the Hebrew idiom (...) is
frequently taken: and thus the Plural Affix joined to it by a Synthesis common
to all Languages may relate to that Collective Nown (...) in the former part of
the Verse. In short, as Ps. 4. 7. (...), is, thou have placed joy in my heart,
or in the midst of me, or in me, i. e. thou have given me joy, or thou have
made me to rejoice; so, he has placed a hidden duration in the heart of them,
or in them, is natuaally and plainly, he has given them an unknown duration,
or, he has made them to endure for unknown periods.

30. Commentators generally apply (...) to Time, which they understand here.
But then they divide about it again; some making it to signify the present,
some the past, and some the future time. To me it seems better to understand it
of none of these, but of that thing or end, which is pursued by God in these
vicissitudes, Is. 51. 1. (...) are they that pursue after righteousness, and
make that the end of their designs: so here (...) is the thing which is aimed
at.

31. (...) signifies, then, as well as, there: and so here it denotes that
time, when God shall judge the righteous and the wicked; as it is said just
before he will. Aben Ezra tells us also, that in the other signification,
there, (...) this word points out to us the future State, without relating to
any thing; as, in that of Job, Naked shall I return thither [(...)] to that
place, of which all men know without saying any more.

32. See Note 22.

33. (...) is a Generical word, and yet sometimes stands for some particular
sort of labor. It is both good and bad labor; and yet Chapter 1. v. 3. it is only
that which is bad (see Note 7.) So again I suppose it is the labor both of
body and mind; and yet here it relates only to the mind. For in the Verse
before the Envious Fool is said to fold up his hands; and therefore it cannot
be understood of his bodily labor, but of the laboring and vexation of a
Spirit disturbed with envy.

FINIS.
ERRATA
THE Reader is desired to excuse some small Errors of the Press, such as these:

1. The omission of a Quotation or two in the Margin of the Epistle to the
Reader. For p. 10. over against l. 15. should be, Ibid. and p. 14. over against
l. 24. should be, Iuv. S. 1. v. 45, etc.

2. The mispelling or altering of a few Words: as, p. 15. l. 27. Stature, for,
Statuere: p. 16. l. 15. and, for, et: p. 23. v. 4. Echo, for, Echo: p. 51. v.
4. more, for, hence: p. 57. v. 19. leafs, for, leaves: p. 60. v. 2. led, for,
lead: p. 98. v. 9. as, for, a: p. 110. v. 1. Woose, for, Whose: p. 144. l. 28.
(...), for, (...), etc.

3. Mistakes in the distinction of Sentences, or their members, especially by
inserting Comma's where there ought to be none; Small letters often put for
Capital, and vice versa; sometimes too it may be Roman Characters, where
Italian might be expected, or Italian, where Roman; Notes of abbreviation
generally omitted in the Hebrew; and such other little things, which either are
of no moment, or easily corrected.

A Catalogue of BOOKS lately Printed for James Knapton, at the Crown in St.
Paul's Churchyard. 1691.
THE Essays or Counsels, Civil and Moral, of Sir Francis Bacon, Lord Verulam,
Viscount St. Alban. With a Table of the Colors of Good and Evil. Whereunto is
added the Wisdom of the Ancients. Enlarged by the Honorable Author himself;
and now more exactly Published.

Directions to a Holy Life, in 3 parts: 1. The Benefit of being truly
Religious: 2. The Necessity of good Works: 3. The Exercise of the Love of God.
By the late Reverend Mellew Scrivener, Vicar of Ha^elingfield, in
Cambridgshire. The Second Edition.

Guide to Eternity, extracted out of the Wr^tings of the Holy Fathers, and
Ancient Philos^phers. Written originally in Latin by John Bona, and now done
into English by Sir Roger L'Estrange. The Third Edition.

The second part of the Weeks P^eparation to the Sacrament, consisting of
Soliloquies, Prayers, Hymns, Ejaculations, Thanksgivings, and Examination for
Sunday Evening after the Celebration of the Holy Communion; together with
directions to lead a Holy Life.

An Earnest Invitation to the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, by Joseph
Glanvill, Chaplain in ordinary to His Majesty. The Sixth Edition, with
additional Prayers.

A Choice Collection of Poems, written by the Eminent Wits of the Age. Printed
in Octavo.

A Congratulatory Poem on the Arrival of the P. of Orange.

A Congratulatory Poem to Queen Mary, on her Arrival in England.

An Ode on the Kings Birth.

An Ode on the Queens Birth.

An Ode on the Kings return from Ireland.

All Written by Tho. Shadwell, Poet Laureat.

Quadriennium Iacobi: or, the History of the Reign of K. James II. from his
first coming to the Crown to his Desertion. The Second Edition.

The Governor of Cyprus: or, the Loves of Virotto and Dorothea. A Novel, in
Twelves.

The Wanton Friar: or, the Irish Amor. A Novel, in two Parts, in Twelves.

The History of the Inquisition as it is Exercised at Goa. Written in French by
the Ingenious Monsieur Dellon, who labored five years under those severities,
with an Account of his Deliverance. Translated into English. Quarto.

Some Observations concerning Regulating Elections for Parliament.

Their Highness's the P. and P. of Orange opinion about a General Liberty of
Conscience; being a Collection of four select Papers. Viz. 1. Mijn Here Fagel's
first Letter to Mr. Stewart. 2. Reflections on Monsieur Fagel's second Letter.
3. Fagel's second Letter to Mr. Stewart.

4. Some Extracts out of Mr. Stewarts Letter, which were Communicated to Mijn
Here Fagel; together with some Reference to Mr. Stewarts Letter. Quarto.

PLAYS.
Fortune-Hunters, a Comedy; written by Captain Carlisle.

Widow Ranter.

Forced Marriage.

Sir Patient Fancy.

Feigned Curtizans; or a Night Intrigue. All four written by Mrs. Behne.

English Friar, by Mr. Crown, Author of Sir Courtly Nice.

Female Prelate; or Pope Joan, by E. Settle.

Mr. Anthony; written by the E. of Orrery, Author of Henry V. and Mustapha.

Devil of a Wife; written by Mr. Ievon.

Deluge; or, the Destruction of the World, an Opera.

Don Carlos; a Tragedy.

Friendship in fashion; a Comedy.

Titus and Berenice, a Tragedy, with a Farce, called the Cheats of Scapin: All
three written by Mr. Tho. Otway.

Spanish Friar; written by Mr. Dryden.

Circe; by Charles D' Avanant, L.L.D.

Anthony and Cleopatra, by Sir Chapter Sidley.

Lucius Iunius, Brutus, by Mr. Lee.

The Siege of Babylon, by Samuel Pordage, Esquire

Sicilian Usurper, a Tragedy, with a Prefatory Epistle in vindication of the
Author, occasioned by the Prohibition of the Play on the Stage.

Citherea, or the Enamouring Girl, by Mr. I. Smith.

The English Monarch, an Heroic Tragedy, by Tho. Rymer, Esquire

All Mr. Dryden's Works, bound in 3 Vol. Quarto.

All Mr. Shadwell's Plays, being bound up in one Vol. Quarto, and contain these
underwritten: Sullen Lovers. Royal Shepherdess. Humourist. Vertuoso. Psyche.
Libertine. Epsom Wells. Timon of Athens. Miser. True Widow. Lancashire
Witches. Woman Captain. Squire of Alsatia. Bury Fair. Amorous Bigot. The
Scowrers.


FINIS.

