The Complete SERVANT-MAID; OR, THE Young Maidens Tutor.

Directing them how they may fit, and qualify themselves for any of these
Employments.

Viz.
Waiting Woman, Housekeeper Chambermaid, Cook-Maid, Under Cook-Maid,
Nursery-Maid, Dairy-Maid, Laundry-Maid, House-Maid Scullery-Maid.
Composed for the great benefit and advantage of all young Maidens.

LONDON, Printed for T. Passinger, at the Three Bibles on London Bridge, 1677.

Licensed January, 20. 1676/7 R. L'Estrange.

THE EPISTLE TO ALL Young Maidens.
Sweet Hearts,

THe great desire I have for your good, advantage and preferment in the world,
is such that I respect it equal with my own, I have therefore with great pains
and industry composed this little Book, as a Rich Storehouse for you, from
whence you may be furnished with such excellent directions as may qualify you
for, and make you capable of serving the greatest person of Honor or Quality,
or Gentleman or Gentlewoman either in City or Country: For besides those
necessary directions which teaches you how to behave and carry your self, and
perform your duty in the several employments of Waiting Woman, Housekeeper,
Chambermaid, Cook-Maid, Under Cook-Maid, Nursery-Maid, Dairy-Maid,
Laundry-Maid, House-Maid, and Scullery-Maid. You have directions for
Preserving, Conserving, and Candying, for Writing the most usual hands for
Women, as Mixed Hand, Roman and Italian Hands: for Arithmetic, as much as is
necessary for your Sex: also the Art of Carving, and Distilling, with choice
Receipts for Physic and Chyrurgery: for Washing and Starching of Tiffanies,
Points, and Laces: for making of Pies, Custards, Cheesecakes and the like: also
for making of Pickles and Sawces, and for dressing of Flesh, Fowl, and Fish,
and for making several sorts of Creams and Syllabubs.

With variety of choice Receipts for preserving the Hair, Teeth, Face, and
keeping the Hands white: Also a Bill of Fare, of the most usual and proper
meats for every Month in the Year. So that if you carefully and diligently
peruse this Book, and observe the directions therein given, you will soon gain
the Title of a Complete Servan^-maid, which may be the means of making you a
good Mistress: For there is no Sober, Honest, and Discreet man, but will make
choice of one, that has Gained the Reputation of a Good and Complete Servant,
for his Wife, rather than one who can do nothing but Trick up her self fine,
an^ like a Bartholomew Baby^ is fit for nothing else but to be looked upon.

This Consideration, will I hope, Stir you up to the Attaining of these most
Excellent Qualifications, and Accomplishments. Which that you may do, is the
earnest desire of your Well Wisher.

General DIRECTIONS TO Young Maidens.
IF You would endeavor to gain the esteem and reputation of a good Servant,
and so procure to your self not only great Wages, but also great gifts and
vales, the love and respect of your Lady, Master or Mistress, and the blessing
of God Almighty upon all your lawful endeavors, you must in the fir^^ place,
be mindful of your duty to your ^reator, according to the advice of Solo^^^^
Eccles. 12. 1. Remember thy Creaton in (...) thy Youth. Be careful that you
(...) ^rayers morning and evening, that ^ou re^d good books, and hear Sermons
as often as conve^iently you can.

2. That you endeavor carefully to please your Lady, Master or Mistress, be
faithful, diligent and suhmis^ive to them, incline not to sloth or laze in bed,
but rise early in a morning.

3. Be humble and modest in your behavior.

4. Be ^eat, cleanly, and huswifely, in your clothes, and lay up what money can
handsomely be spared.

5. Be careful o^ what is given you, o^ what you have in your charge, that by
so doing you may oblige them to be loving and kind to you, and cause them to
speak well of you.

6. Do not ke^p familiarity with any bu^ those, with whom you may improve you^
time.

7. If you are entrusted with any secrets be careful that you reveal them not.

8. Be careful that you wast not, or spoi^ your Ladies, or Mistresses goods,
neither si^ you up junketing a nights, after your Maste^ and Mistress be abed.

Lastly, If you behave your self civilly, a^^ be neat, cleanly, and careful to
(...), yo^ will be cherished and encoura^^^ not onl^ with good words but good
(...).

Thus have I given you s^^e short dire^ctions in general, I shall now give you
particular directions for every employment, from the Waiting Gentlewoman to the
Scullery Maid, that so you may be capable of serving in the highest as well as
the lowest place.

Directions for such as desire to be Waiting Gentlewomen.
IF You desire to be a Waiting Gentlewoman to a person of honor or quality,
you must, 1. Learn to dress well. 2. Preserve well. 3. Write well a legible
hand, good language and good English. 6. Have some skill in Arithmetic. 7.
Carve well.


Having learned these, you must remember to be courteous and modest in your
behavior, to all persons according to their degree, humble and submissive to
your Lord and Lady, or M^s^er and Mistress, neat in your habit, loving to
Servants, Sober in your countenance and discourse, not using any wanton
gesture, which may give Gentlemen any occasion to suspect you of levity; and so
court you to debauchery, and by that means lose a reputation irrecoverabl^^ I
shall now give you some short directions, whereby you may learn to preserve,
write well, carve well, and have some skill in Arithmetic.

Directions for Preserving, Conserving, and Candying.
H^w to preserve Barberies.
Make choice of the largest and fairest bunches, picking off the withered or
shrunk Ba^beries, and wash them clean, drying them in a clean cloth, after this
take a quantity of Barberies, and boil them in Claret Wine till they be soft,
then strain them well through a strainer, wringing the juice hard through it,
boil this strained Liquor with Sugar till it be thick and very sweet, let it
then stand till it be cold, then put your branches of Barberries into Gally
pots, and fill them up with this Liquor: By this means you will have both the
Syrup of Barberies, and their preserves.

To Preserve Pears.
Take Pears that are sound and newly gathered from the Tree, indifferent ripe,
then lay in the bottom of an earthen pot some dried vine leaves, and so make a
lay of Pears, and leaves till the pot is filled up, laying betwixt each lay
some sliced Ginger, then pour in as much old wine as the Pot will hold, laying
some heavy thing on the Pears, that the Pot may not swim.

To preserve green Pippins.
Take half a score green Pippins from the Tree, pare them, and boil them in a
Pottle of water till they are like a pulp, strain them from the cores, then
^ake two pound of Sugar, and mingle it with the Liquor or pulp so strained,
then set it on the fire, and as soon as it boyleth put in the Pippins you
intend to preserve, so let them boil leasurely till they be enough, when they
are preserved they will be green. In like sort you may preserve Quinces,
Plumbs, Peaches, and Apricocks, if you take them green.

To preserve Black Cherries.
Take them fresh or as they come from the Tree and out of the Stalk, take one
pound of Sugar for two pounds of Cherries, sees and clarify them, and when
they are half boiled put in your other Cherries, and let them sees softly
together, until the Sugar may be drawn between the fingers like small Threads;
when it is almost cold put the Cherries in the Pots with the Stalks downwards.

To Preserve Mulb^rries.
Take Mulberries and add to them their weight in Sugar, having wet your Sugar
with some juice of Mulberries, then stir your Sugar together and put in your
Mulberries, and boil them till they are enough, then take them out and boil the
Syrup a while, then put in the Mulberries and let them stand till they be cold.

To Prese^ve Oranges and Lemmons.
Take the fairest you can get, and lay them in water three days and three
nights, to take away their bitterness, then boil them in fair water till they
be tender, make as much Syrup as will make them swim about the Pan, let them
not boil long, for then the skin will be tough, let them lie all night in the
Syrup, that they may soak themselves therein: In the morning boil the Syrup to
a convenient thickness, then with it and the Oranges and Lemmons, fill your
Gallipots and keep them all the year. In this manner you may preserve Citrons.

To Preserve Gooseberries.
Let the Gooseberries be gathered with their stalks on, cut off their heads and
stone them, then put them in scalding water and let them stand therein a little
while, then take their weight of Sugar finely beaten, and lay first a Layer of
Sugar then of gooseberries in your preserving Pot or Skillet, till all be in,
put in for every pound of Gooseberries a spoonful of fair water, set them on
the Embers till the Sugar be melted, then boil them as fast as you can, till
the Syrup be thick enough, when cold put them up. In this manner you may
preserve Raspices and Mulberries.

To Preserve Roses.
Take one pound of Roses, three pound of Sugar, one pint and a little more of
Rose Water, make your Syrup first, and let it stand till it be cold, then take
your Rose leaves having first clipped off all the white, put them in the cold
Syrup and cover them, let your fire be very soft, that they may only simmer two
or three hours, then whilst they are hot, put them out into pots or glasses for
your use.

To Preserve Cherries.
Take Cherries fully ripe and newly gathered, put them to the bottom of the
preserving pan, let the Cherries and Sugar be of equal weight, throw some Sugar
on the Cherries and set them on a quick fire, and as they boil throw on the
Sugar till the Syrup be thick enough, then take them out and put them into a
G^llipot whilst they are warm, it will not be amiss to add two or three
Spoon^uls of Rose Water to them.

To preserve Ripe Apricocks.
Let the weigh^ of your Sugar equal the weight of your Apricocks, what quantity
soever you have a mind to use, pare and stone your Apricocks, and lay them in
the Sugar in the preserving pan all night, and in the morning set them on the
embers all night till the Sugar be melted, and then let them stand and scald an
hour, then take them off the fire and let them stand in that Syrup two days,
and then boil them so^tly, till they be tender and well colored, and after
that when they are colored, put them up in glasses or pots, which you please.

To Preserve green Walnuts.
Take Walnuts and boil them till the water tastes bitter, then take them off and
put them in cold water and peel off their rind, and put to them as much Sugar
as their weight, and a little more water than will wet the Sugar, set them on a
fire, and when they boil up, take them off, and let them stand two days, then
boil them again once more.

To Preserve Eringo Roots.
Take Eringo Roots fair and knotty, one pound, and wash them clean, then set
them on the fire and boil them very tender, peel off their outermost skin, but
break them not a^ you pare them, then let them lie a while in cold water, after
this you must take to every ^ound of Roots, three qu^rte^s of a pound of
clarified Sugar, and boil it almost ^o the height of a Syrrup, and then put in
your Roots, but look that they boil but gently, together, and stir them as
little as may be for fear of br^aking, when they are cold put them up and keep
them.

To Preserve Ennula-C^mpana Roots.
Wash them and scrape them very clean, and cut them thin to the Pith, the
length of your little finger, and as you cut them, put them in water, and let
them lie there thirty days, shifting them twice every day to take away the
bitterness: Then weigh them, and to every pound of Roots, add twelve ounces of
Sugar clarified first, boiling ^he Roots very tender, then put them into the
Sugar, and let them boil upon a gentle fire until they be enough, having stood
a good while on the fire, pot them up between hot and cold.

To make Conserve of Roses.
Take red Ros^buds, clip all ^he white either bruised or wi^hered from them,
then add to every pound of Roses three pound of Sugar, stamp the Ros^s very
small, putting to them a little juice of Lemons or Rosewater as they become
dry: When you think your Roses small enough, then put your Sugar to them, so
beat them together till they be well mingled, then pot it up in Gallipots or
Glasses. In this manner is made the conserves of Flowers of Violets, which does
cool and open in a burning fever or Ague, being dissolved in Almond milk and so
taken, and excellent good for any inflammation in children. Thus yon may also
make the conserve of Cowslips, Marigolds Sage and Scabious, and the like.

How to Candy all sorts of Flowers, as they grow wi^h their Stalk on.
Take the Flowers and cut the Stalks somewhat short, then take one pound of the
whitest and hardest Sugar you can get, put to it eight spoon^uls of Rosewater,
and boil it till it will roll between your little finger and your Thumb, then
take it from the fi^e and cool it with a stick, and as it waxes cold dip all
your flowers, and taking them out again lay them one by one on the bo^^tom of a
Sieve, then turn a Joynt-stool (...) the feet upward, set the sieve on (...)
^eet thereof, then cover it with a fa^^ linen cloth, and set a chafing dish of
^^^^s in the midst of the stool underneath (...) sieve, and the heat thereof
will dry yo^^ ^andy speedily, which will look very pl^y, and keep the whole
year.

To C^ndy Eringo Roots.
Take of your Eringo Roots ready to be preserved and w^igh them, and to every
pound of Roots, you must take of the purest Sugar you can get two pound, and
clarify it with the whites of eggs exceeding well, that it may be as clear as
Crystal: It b^ing clarified you must boil it to the height of Manus Christi,
and then dip in your Roots two or three at once, till they are all candied: put
them in a stove and so keep them all the year.

The best w^y to dry Plumbs.
Take Plumbs when they are fully grown, with the Stalks to them, however let
them be green, split them on the one side, and put them in hot water but not
too hot, and so let them stand three or four hours, then to a pound of them
take three quarters of a pound of Sugar beaten very fine, and eight spoon^uls
o^ water to every pound, set them on hot embers till the Sugar be melted, and
^^^er that boil them till they be very tender, (...) them stand in their Syrup
two or (...) ^^ys to plump them, then take them out and wash the Syrup from
them with warm w^^^^, and wipe them dry in a fair Linen clot^, then set them
on pla^es, and let them dry ^n a stove, dry them not in an Oven; for then they
will be tough.

Colors for Fruit.
If you would color fruit yellow, you must make use of saffron, for the best
green color take sap green, and for the best red, Indian lake, etc. You must
be sure to mix the colors with Gum Arabic dissolved in Rosewater.

To make Marmelade of Quinces.
Take of the fairest Quinces, wash them very clean and stamp them very small,
and wring out as much juice as you can, then take other Quinces and cut them in
six pieces, put them in a pot and let them be evaporated with hot water, until
they be thoroughly mellow, then take half a pot ^ull of the former juice, and
pour it upon the former, stewed and cut to pieces, break it well together and
put the rest of the juice among it, then wring it through a clean thin cloth,
sees no more of this juice at once ^han will fill a box therewith, and put
white Sugar to it as much as you please.

How ^o ma^e Sy^up ^f Violets.
Boil fair water and scum it, and to every ounce so scum'd and boiled, take six
quarters o^ the blew of Violets, only shi^t them as before nine times, and the
last time take nine ounces of Violets, let them stand between times of shi^ting
twelve hours, keeping the Liquor still on hot emb^rs, that it may be but milk
warm, after the first shifting, you must stamp and strain the last nine ounces
of Violets, and put in only the juice of them, then take to every pint of this
Liquor thus prepared, one pound of Sugar finely beaten^ boil it and keep it
stirred till all ^he Sugar be melted, which you must do if you can before it
boil, afterward boil it up with a quick fire.

To make Syrup of Roses.
Take Damas^ Roses and clip off the white of them, for every pint of water,
take six ounces of Roses, boil your wa^er first and scum it, then let them
stand twelve ^^urs, w^inging out the Roses and putting in new eight times, then
wringing out the last put in the juice of four ounces only, and so make it up
as before.

To make Syrup of Coltsfoot.
Take the leav^s of Coltsfoot and wash them very clean, then wipe them wi^h a
clean cloth leaf by l^a^, then dry them well with a cloth, then beat them in a
mortar and put them in a strainer, and wring all ^^e juice ou^ of them and put
it into glasses, and let it stand in them to settle all Night, ^he next day
pour out the clearest of the ^uice from the grounds into a clear basin, and
take for every pint thereof a pound of Suga^ finely beaten, boil the juice of
Colts^foot softly on a Charcole fire, and when you have well scum'd it, put in
the Sugar according to its proportion, and so let ther^ boil together keeping
it with due scummin^ until it will stand on a stiff purl, dropping it on a
plate: Then take it from the fire, and pour it through a Jelly bag into a fair
Basin, putting first a branch or two of Ros^mary into the bags bottom, then
keep it stirring with a spoon until it be lukewarm, otherwise it will have a
Cream upon it, so letting it stand all night, put it in what vessels you think
fit to keep it in, for your future use and service.

By the foresaid rules and directions, you may now make most sorts of Syrups
now in use, as Syrup of Wormwood, Betony, Burrage, Bugloss, Carduus, Cammomil,
Succory, Endive, Strawber^ies, Fumitory, Pu^slain, Sage, S^abious, Scordium,
Housleek and the like.

Thus having given you some short directions for Preferving, Conservi^g, and
Candying, I shall in the next place give yo^ some rules and directions, how you
may attain to write a good legible Hand.

Directions for Writing the most Usual and Legible Hands for Women; as Mixed
Hand, Roman Hand, and Italian Hand.
Before I come to give you full directions ^or the writing of the a^oresaid
Hands, I shall give you some instructions how to make a pen, hold a pen, how to
sit to write, together with some other necessaries for writing.

How to make a Pen.
Having a pe^knife with a smooth, thin, sharp edge, take the first or second
quill of a Goose wing and s^rape it, then hold it in your l^ft hand with the
feather end from you, beginning even in the back, cut a small piece off
sloping, then to make a slit, ente^ the knife in the mid^t of ^he first cut^
put in a quill and forc^ it up, so (...) as you desire the slit should be in
l^ng^h, which done cut a piece sloping a way from the other side above the
slit, and fashion the mo by (...) writing sample writing sample writing sample
off both the sides equally down, then place ^he nib on the nail of your left
hand thumb, and to end it draw the edge into it sl^nting, and being half through
turn the edge almost ^ownright and cut it off.

How to hold your Pen.
Hold the pen in the right hand, with the ^ollow side downward, on the left
side place your Thumb rising in joint, on the left side you^ middle finger near
half an inch from the end of the Nib, and your forefinger on the top, a small
distance from your Thumb.

How to sit to write.
Chose a foreright light, or one that comes on the left hand, hold your head up
^he distance of a span from the paper, when you are writing hold not your head
one way nor other, but look right forward: Draw in your right elbow, turn your
hand outward and bear it lightly, gripe not the pen too hard, with your left
hand stay the paper.

Necessaries for Writing.
Let your Ink be thin, such as may freely run from the pen, let the paper which
you write on be white, fine, and well gumm'd, for dispatch procure a round
ruler, for certainty a flat one, at your first writing rule double lines, with
a quill cut forked the depth of your intended letters, or else with a black
lead pen: Rub your paper lightly with gum-sandarac beaten fine, and tied up in
a linen cloth, which makes the paper bear ink better, and the pen run more
smooth.

Directions for Writing of Mixed Hand.
In writing of this Hand, I would advise you to a pen with an even nib, a long
slit, and not too hard, rule double lines that you may keep your Letters even
at head and foot. Keep a waste paper under your hand, whereon to try every
letter before you write it fair, at the first write slowly and carefully,
diligently mind your Copy, and observe the true proportion and agreement of
Letters.

First, In their compassing, as the a. b. d. g. o. p. q. etc. which must be
made with equal whites.

Secondly, In their lengths and depths, keep them even at head and foot.

Thirdly, Keep the stems of all letters to an equal height.

Fourthly, Let all incline one way, to the right hand or to the left.

Fifthly, In making all heads of long letters, begin them on the left side,
then turn your pen to a flat, and draw it down smoothly on the right side.

These Rules well observed, will be sufficient for this Hand; therefore I shall
proceed to give you

Directions for the Roman Hand.
When double lines are ruled, and every thing ready; with an indifferent size
pen, well cut, first imitate the small l. n. and o. so long till you can make
them well: then proceed to make the small letters that bear resemblance one to
another, as the c. e. a^ o. g. q. then the b. d. f. h. k. l. and A. which stems
or body strokes keep often equal height.

Directions for Italian Hand.
Since the exact writing of these Hands depends wholly on the form of an Oval,
I would advise you to use your hand to the making of a larger and lesser Oval.
This Hand must be written with a pen that has a clear long slit, and a long
small nib; and the hand in writing hereof must be bore lightly and freely. In
your imitation, observe the rule for likeness of letters delivered in the
Roman. In Joining you mu^^ unite all such letters, as will naturally join by
small hair strokes, drawn with the lef^ corner of the pen; and imitate the Copy.

Here place the two Plates.
I shall now give you some directions, whereby you may understand so much o^
Arithmetic, as is necessary for keeping your Accounts; viz. Numeration,
Addition and Substraction.

Directions for Arithmetic.
Of Numeration.
NUmeration is that part of Arithmetic, whereby we may duly value and express
any figure set down in their places, and that you might the better know and
understand what it is, I have here inserted the Table of Numeration.

C. of Millions. X. of Mil^ions. Millions. C. of Thousands. X. of Thousands.
Thousands. Hundreds. Tens. Unites. 1 1 ^ 1 1 1 1 1 1 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 3 3 3 3
3 3 3 3 3 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 7 7 7 7 7 7 7 7
7 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9

This Table has nine places, and in every one of them are set the value of
each figure, at the upper end of the Table; so that by this you may learn to
express any Number. Every figure has its denomination; as one Unites, another
Tens, another Hundreds, etc. So that if you would number the first line, which
are all Ones, you must begin with the first figure on your left hand; look over
the head of it, and you will see its denomination, which is hundreds of
Millions: you must therefore reckon thus, one hundred and eleven Millions, one
hundred and eleven Thousands, one Hundred and Eleven: Two hundred twenty two
Millions, two hundred twenty two Thousand, two Hundred Twenty Two: and so of
any of the rest of the figures.

Thus much for Numeration, which shows you the place of the figures. The next
thing you must learn is Addition, which shows you the adding together of
figures.

Of Addition.
ADdition is that part of Arithmetic, which shows to collect or add diverse
Sums together, and to express their total value in one Sum.

As for example, suppose you had disbursed for your Lady several sums of
money; as, lib. For Wine. 5 For Sugar. 4 For Oranges. 3 For Lemons. 2 In all 14

Now, to know how much the total of this is which you have laid out, you must
add them up together; beginning at the bottom, say, 2 and 3 makes 5, and (...)
and 5 is 14. So that it does (...) the total sum which you (...) ^^^ursed, is
14 pounds; therefore mak^ ^ stroke at the bottom, and set down 14 underneath,
as you see in the example.

Thus much may suffice for pounds alone, but if your disbursments consist of
pounds, shillings, pence and farthings, you must set it down after this manner.

lib. s. d. q. For Wine, 7 12 09 2 For Oranges, 0 17 03 1 For Lemons, 1 02 11 3
For Sugar, 3 09 04 2 For Quinces, 1 15 03 0 For Aprecocks. 0 07 09 0 Total 15
05 05 0

Now to cast up this, you must know that fo^r farthings make one penny, twelve
pence make one shilling, twenty shillings make one pound: Therefore, in ^he
first place add up the farthings; saying, 2 and 3 makes 5, and 1 is 6, and 2 is
8, which is all ^he number of farthings; you must therefore say, 8 farthings
make two pence, which you must carry to the next Row toward your left hand,
which is pence; setting down a cipher or round 0 underneath the farthings,
because there does remain no odd farthings. Now add up the pence, saying, 2
which you carried, and 9 is 11, and 3 is 14, and 4 is 18, and 11 is 29, and ^
is 32, and 9 is 41: Then say 41 pence make three shillings, 5 pence; therefore
^et the 5 pence underneath the title pence, and carry the 3 shillings to the
next row on your left hand, which is shillings; saying, 3 which I ca^ried, and
7 is 10, and 15 is 25, and 9 is 34, and 2 is 36, and 17 is 53, and 12 is 65:
Then say 65 shillings make 3 pound 5 shillings; which 5 shillings set down
under the row of shillings, and car^y the 3 pound to the next row on the left
^and, which is pounds; saying, 3 which ^ carried and 1 is 4, and 3 is 7, and 1
is 8, and 7 is 15; which 15 set down under the row of pounds: and then you will
plainly see, that the total of what you have disbursed comes to fi^teen pounds,
5 shillings, and 5 pence. Now to prove whether your Sum be right added or cast
up, you must cut off the uppermost line, with a stroke drawn as you may see in
this example.

Then cast up all lib. s. d. q. 07 12 09 0^ 00 17 03 01 01 02 11 03 03 09 04 02
01 15 03 00 00 07 09 00 15 05 05 00 07 12 07 02 15 05 05 00 your Sum to that
^^roke; which by so ^^ing, you will find come to seven pound, ^welve shillings,
seven pence, half penny; which set down underneath your ^otal Sum: Then add
(...) Sum with the uppermost line you cut off and if they both make the same
Sum ^ the Total, the Sum is right cast up, other^wise not, as you may see by
this example for seven pound, twelve shillings, seve^ pence half penny, added
to the uppermo^^ line, which is seven pound, twelve shilling^ nine pence, half
penny, makes the tot^^ Sum, which is fifteen pound, five shilling^ five pence.

Thus much for Addition; the next thin^ you are to learn is Substraction.

Of Substraction.
THis rule teaches you to substract a lesser sum from a greater, and then to
know what remains, as suppose your Lady order you to receive of John Jones, an
hundred and twenty pounds, and then to pay ^o Goodman Styles seventy five
pounds, how would you know what you have remaining in your hands? To do this
you must first set down the greatest sum, then underneath the lesser Sum: As
for Example.

Now subtract the lib. Received 120 Paid 75 Remains 45 lesser from the greater,
then you will see what remains which you must do thus: Say 5 from 0 I cannot,
but 5 from 10 and there remains 5. Then say one which I borrowed and 7 is 8, 8
from 12 and there remains 4. which set down under the 7 as you see in the
example^ So you may plainly see if you receive a hundred and twenty pound, and
pay away seventy five pounds, you must have remaining in your hands forty five
pounds.

Another example, Suppose you receiv^ for your Lady at several ^imes, these su^
of money ^ollowing. li. s. d. Received 212 14 10 75 09 0^ 30 12 0^ 05 04 03 In
all 324 00 11 which added up together makes three hundred twenty four pounds
and eleven pence. Then suppose you have paid out these li. s. d. Paid 127 14 06
49 02 04 32 03 09 07 04 10 214 06 05 sums following which added together, makes
in the Total that you have paid, two hundred and four^een pounds, six
shillings, and five pence.

Now to substract and know what you have remaining, set down the total of what
you have received, and underneath the total of what you have paid, thus.

Then substract, saying li. s. d. Received 324 00 11 Paid 214 06 05 109 14 96
five pence from eleven pence and there ^emains sixpence, which set down under
^he pence, then say six shillings from naught I cannot, but take 6 shillings
from twenty and there remains 14 shillings, which set down right under the
shillings, then go to the pounds and say, one that I borrowed and 4 is 5, 5
from 4 I cannot, but take 5 from 14 and there remains 9 which set down right
under 4 in the pounds, then say one as I borrowed and one is 2, 2 from 2 and
there remains nothing, which set down under, then say 2 from 3 and there
remains one, which set down right under the 2 So you will plainly see, there
remains one hundred and nine pounds fourteen shillings and sixpence. Now for
proof to know whether your sum be right, add the two lowermost lines together,
and if they produce the same figures which the uppermost line has, then is
your sum right and not otherwise.

Thus huve I briefly and plainly shown you so much of Arithmetic, as is
necessary for your keeping account of what you receive and disburse for your
Lady, Master, or Mistress. I shall now give you some directions for carving.

Directions for Carving.
I Shall in the first place acquaint you with those proper terms that are used
by the curious in the art of carving.

In cutting up all small birds it is proper to say thigh them, as thigh that
Woodcock, thigh that Pidgean: But as to others say, mince that Plover, wing
that Quail, and wing that Partridge, allay that Pheasant, untack that Curlew,
unjoynt that B^t^ern, disfigu^e that Peacock, display that Crane, dismember
that Hern, unbrace that mallard, frust that Chicken, spoil that Hen, sauce that
Capon, lift that Swan, rear that Goose, tire that Egg: As to the flesh of
Beasts, unlace that Coney, break that Deer, leach tha^ Brawn: For Fish, chine
that Salmon, ^iring that Lamprey, splat that Pike, sauce that Plaice, and sauce
that Tench, splay that Bream; side that Haddock, tu^k that Barbel, culpon that
Trout, transon that Eel, tranch that Sturgeon, tame that Crab, barb that
Lobster etc.

How to Lift a Swan.
Slit her right down in the middle of the Breast, and so clean through the back,
from the Neck to the Rump, and so divide her equally in the middle, without
tearing the flesh from either part. Having laid it in the dish with the slit
side downwards, let your sauce be Chaldron apart in saucers.

H^w to Rear or Break a Goose.
This must be done by taking off the Legs very fair, then cut off the
Bellypiece round, close to the lower end of the breast, lace her down with your
knife clean through the breast, on each side two thumbs breadth from the Breast
bone, then take off the Wings on each side with the flesh which you first
laced, raising it up clear from the bone, then cut up the merry thought, and
having cut up another piece of flesh which you formerly laced, then turn your
Carcass and cut it asunder, the back bone above the loyn bones, then take the
Rump end of the backbone, and lay it at the fore end of the merry-thought with
the skin side upward, then lay your pinnion on each side contrary, set your
legs on each side contrary behind them, that the bone end of the Legs may stand
up cross in the middle of the dish. and the wing pinnions on the out side of
them, put under the wing pinnions on each side, the long slices of flesh which
you did cut off from the breast bone, and let the ends meet under the leg bon^s.

How to Cut up a Turkey or Bustard.
To do this, you must raise up the leg very fair then open the joint with the
point of your sharp knife, yet take not off the leg, then lace down the breast
on both sides, and op^n the breast pinnion, but take it not off, then ra^se up
the merry-thought betwixt the breast bone and the top of the merry-thought, lace
down the flesh on both sides of the breast bone and raise up the flesh called
the brawn, turn it outward on both sides, but break it not, nor cut it off,
then cut off the wing pinnion at the joint next the body, and stick on each
side the pinnion in the place where you turned out the brawn, but cut off the
sharp end of the pinion, take the middle piece and that will just fit the
place, you may cut up a Capon or Pheasant the same way, but be sure you cut not
off the pinnion of your Capon, but in the place where you put the pinnion of
the Turkey, place there your divided Gizard on each side half.

Ho^ to dismember a Hen.
To do this you must take off both the legs and lace it down the breast, then
rai^e up the flesh and take it clean off with the pinnion, then stick the head
in the breast, set the pinnion on the contrary side of the Carcass, and the legs
on the other side, so that the bones ends may meet cross over the Carcass, and
the other wing cross over upon the top of the Carcass.

How to unbrace a Mallard.
Raise up the pinnion and the leg, but take them not off, raise the
merry-thought from the breast; and lace it down slopingly, on each side the
breast with your knife.

To unlace a Coney.
In doing this you must turn the back downwards, and cut the belly flaps clean
off from the kidneys, then put in the point of your knife between the kidneys,
and loosen the flesh from each side the bone, then turn up the back of the
Rabbet and cut it cross between the wings, and lace it down close by the bone
on each side, then open the flesh from the bone against the Kidneys, and put
the leg open softly with your hand: but pluck it not off, then thrust in your
knife betwixt the Ribs and the Kidney, slit it out, then lay the legs close
together.

How to allay a Pheasant.
To do this you must raise his wings and legs, and so proceed as you are before
taught in the dismembring a Hen.

To display a Crane.
In doing this you must unfold his legs and cut off his wings by the joints,
then take up his wings and legs and sauce them with powder of Ginger, mustard,
vinegar and s^lt. You may dismember a Hern in the same manner, and sauce him
accordingly.

Thus have I given you some short; but necessary directions, which may qualify
you for the waiting upon a person of honor or quality.

Directions for such who intend to be Housekeepers to Persons of Honor or
Quality.
THose persons who would qualify themselves for this employment, must in their
behavior carry themselves grave, solid and serious; which will inculcate into
the beliefs of the persons whom they are to serve, that they will be able to
govern a Family well. They must endeavor to gain a competent knowledge in
Preserving, Conserving, and Candying, making of Cates, and all manner of Spoon
meats, Jellies and the like. Also in distilling all manner of Waters. They must
likewise endeavor to be careful in looking after the rest of the Servants,
that every one perform their duty in the^r several places, that they keep good
hours in their up-rising and lying down, and that no Goods be either spoiled or
embezelled. They must be careful also, that all Strangers be nobly and civilly
used in their Chambers, and that your Master or Lady be not dishonored through
neglect or miscarriage of Servants. They must likewise endeavor to have a
competent knowledge in Physic and Chyrurgery, that they may be able to help
their Mamed, sick and indigent Neighbors; for commonly, all good and
charitable Ladies make this a part of their House-keeper's business.

Directions for Distilling of Waters.
To make Aqua mirabilis.
TAke three pints of White Wine, of Aqua vitae and juice of Celendine, of each
a pint; one dram of Cardamum, one dram of Mellilot-flower, Cubebs a dram, of
Gallingal, Nutmegs, Cloves, Mace, Ginger, of each a dram: Mingle all these
together over night; the next morning ^et them a stilling in a glass Lymbick.
This admirable Water dissolveth the swelling of the Lungs, and restores them
when perished: It suffers not the blood to putrify, neither need he or she
to breath a vein, that uses this excellent Water often. It cures the
Heart-burn, and expels Melancholy and Phlegm, it expels Urine, and
preserves a good color in the face, and is an utter enemy to the Palsy: Take
three spoon-fuls of it at a time, morning or evening, twice a week.

To make Dr. Stephens his famous Water.
Take a Gallon of Gascoin Wine, of Ginger, Galingal, Cinnamon, Granes, Cloves,
Mace, Nutmegs, Annis-seeds, Caraway-seeds, Coriander-seeds, Fenil-seed and
Sugar, of every one a dram; then take of Sack and Ale a quart of each; of
Cammomile, Sage, Mint, Red Roses, Time, Pellitory of the Wall, Wild Marjarom,
Wild Time, Lavender, Pennyroyal, Fenil Roots, and Setwal Roots, of each half a
handful: then beat the Spice small, and bruise the herbs, and put all together
into the Wine, and so let it stand sixteen hours, stirring it now and then^
then distill it in a Limbick, with a soft fire. The first pint of the Water by
it self, for it is the best.

The principal use of this Water is against all old Diseases; it preserves
Youth, comfort the Stomach, cures the Stone, of what nature soever, using
but two spoonfuls in seven days. It preserved Dr. Stephens, ten years Bedridden,
that he lived to ninety eight years.

An excellent Water for the Eyes.
Take a new laid Egg and roast it hard, then cut the shell in the midst, and
take-out the yolk, and put some white Coper as where the yolk was; then bind
the egg together again, and then let it lie till it begin to be a Water; then
take the White forth from both sides the Egg, and put the same into a glass of
fair running Water, and so let it stand a while; then strain it through a fair
Linen Cloth, and keep it close stopped in a glass; and therewith wash your
eyes morning and evening.

To make an excellent Plague-water.
Take a pound of Rue; Rosemary, Sage, Sorel, Celandine, Mugwort, of the tops of
red Brambles, Pimpernel, Wild Dragons, Agrimony, Balm, Angelica of each a
pound: Put these together in a pot; then fill it with White Wine above the
Herbs, so let it stand four days; then distill it in an Alembick for your use.

To make an excellent Surfeit-Water.
Take Celandine, Rosemary, Rue, Pellitory of Spain, Sc^bious, Angelica,
Pimpernel, Wormwood, Mugwort, Betony, Agrimony, Balm, Dragon and Tormentil, of
each half a pound; shred them very small, and put them into a narrow mouthed
pot, and put to them five quarts of White Wine; stop it close, and let it stand
three days and nights, stirring it morning and evening; then take the Herbs
from the Wine, and distill them in an ordinary Still; and when you have
distilled the Herbs, distill the Wine also; wherein is Virtue for a weak
Stomach. Take three or four spoonfuls at any time.

To make Angelica-Water.
Take a handful of Carduus Benedictus, and dry it; then take three ounces of
Angelica Roots, one dram of Myrrh, half an ounce of Nutmegs, Cinnamon, and
Ginger, four ounces of each, one dram and an half of Saffron; of Cardonius,
Cubebs, Gallingal and Pepper, of each a quarter of an ounce, two drams of Mace,
one dram of Grains; of Lignum Al^es, Spikenard, Iuncus Odora^us, of each a
dram; Sage, Bourage, Bugloss, Violets and Rosemary flowers, of each half an
handful: bruise them, and steep them in a pottle of Sack twelve hours, and
distill it as the rest.

To make Mint-Water.
Take two parts of Mint, and one part of Wormwood, and two parts of Carduus;
put these into as much new Milk as will soak them: Let them infuse five or six
hours, then distill it as you do Rose Water; but you must often take off the
head, and stir the Water well with a stick. Drink of this Water a Wine-glass
full at a time, sweetened with white Sugar to your taste.

To make a very good Cordial-Water: without stilling.
Take two quarts of Brandy, and keep it in a great glass with a narrow mouth;
put into it of Cloves, Nutmegs, Cinnamon, Ginger, Cardamum seeds, Coriander
seeds, Anis-seeds, Liquorish; of each of these half an ounce bruised; Long
Pepper and Grains, of each one dram bruised, Elecampane one quarter of an ounce
bruised: Let all these steep in the Brandy a fortnight; then pour it out into a
long glass softly, so long as it will run clear: then put more Brandy into the
glass where the Ingredients are, and let that stand three weeks; and so long as
you find there is any strength in the Ingredients, still put in more Brandy,
and let it stand every time longer and longer. Then take your first two quarts
of Brandy which you poured of, and put in it four ounces of white Sugar Candy,
and so much Syrup of Clove-Gilliflowers as will color it, with store of Leaf
Gold: Give two spoonfuls at a time. It is good in case of any Illness or
Swouning, to drive out any infection and venomous humors.

To make Poppy Water.
Take of Red Poppies four pound, put to them a quart of White Wine, then distill
them in a common Still; then let the distilled Water be poured upon fresh
flowers, and repeated three times; to which add two Nutmegs sliced, Red Poppy
flowers a pugil, White Sugar two ounces: set it to the fire to give it a
pleasing sharpness, and order it according to your taste.

To make Rose Water.
Stamp the Leaves, and first distill the Juice, afterward distill the leaves;
and so you may dispatch more with one Still, than others with three or four;
and this Water is every way as Medicinable as the other; serving well in all
Decoctions and Syrups, though it be not altogether so pleasing to the smell.

To make Spirit of Roses.
Bruise the Rose in his own juice, adding thereto, being temperately warmed, a
convenient proportion, either of Yeast or Ferment; leave them a few days to
ferment, till they get a strong and heady smell near like to Vinegar; then
distill them, and draw so long as you find any scent of the Rose to come; then
distill again so often, till you have purchased a perfect Spirit of the Rose.
You may also ferment the juice of Roses only, and after distill the same.

To make a most Excellent Wa^er.
Which comfort the Vital Spirits, and helps the inward Diseases which come
of Cold, as the Palsy, Contraction of Sinnews; also it kills worms, and
comfort the Stomach; it cures the Dropsy, helps the Stone and Stinking
Breath, and makes one seem young.

To make this, take a Gallon of G^scoin Wine; Ginger, Galingal, Nutmegs,
Gran^s, Cloves, Annis-seeds, Fenil-seeds, Carraway-seeds, of each one dram:
Then take Sugar, Mint, Red Roses, Time, Pellitory, Rosemary, Wild Time,
Cammomile, and Lavender; then beat the Herbs and Spices small, and put it all
together into the Wine, and let it stand so twelve hours, stirring it diverse
times; then distill it with a Limbick, and keep the first Water, for it is best.
Of a gallon of Wine, you must not take above a quart.

Directions for the making of some of the choicest Receipts in Physic and
Chyrurgery.
A Receipt for an Ague.
TAke the Root of a blew Lilly, scrape it clean, and slice it, and lay it in
soak all night in Ale; and in the morning stamp it, and strain it, and give it
the Patient to drink, luke warm, an hour before the fit comes.

To cure a Quartan^ Ague.
Take a white Flint-stone, and let it lie in a quick fire until it be red hot;
then take some Small Beer and quench it therein: When the fit is coming let the
Diseased drink a good draught thereof, and another in the midst of the fit, let
this be done ^our several days both in the fit, and when the fit is coming.
This is accounted an excellent Receipt

A very good Receipt to comfort the Stomach.
Take two ounces of old Conserve of Red Roses, and of Mithridate two drams;
mingle them together, and when you are going to bed, eat thereof the quantity
of an Haslenut. This will expel all flatulency, and windiness of the Stomach;
drives away raw Humors, and venomous Vapors; helps digestion, and dries up
Rheum, and strengthens the Sight and Memory.

To cure Corns.
Take Beans, and chew them in your mouth, and then tie them fast to your Corns;
and it will help. Do this at night.

For the Yellow Iaundis:
Take a green white Onion, and make a hole where the blade goes out, to the
bigness of a Chestnut; then fill the hole with Treacle, being beaten with half
an ounce of English Honey, and a little Saffron; and set the honey against the
fire, and roast it well, that the Onion do not burn; and when it is roasted,
strain it through a cloth, and give the juice thereof to the Sick three days
together, and it shall help them.

For the Black Iaundies.
Take Fenil seed, Sage, Parsley, Gromwel, of each a like quantity, and make
Pottage thereof with a piece of good Pork, and eat no other meat that day.

For Inf^ction of the Plague.
Take a spoonful of Running Water, a good quantity of Treacle, to the bigness
of an Hasle-nut: Temper all these together, and heat it lukewarm, and drink it
every four and twenty hours.

For all Fevers or Agues in Sucking Children.
Take Powder of Crystal, and steep it in Wine, and give it the Nurse to drink;
also take the Root of Devil's Bit, with the Herb, and hang it about the Child's
neck.

For the Headache.
Take Rose-cakes and stamp them very small in a Mortar, with a little Ale, and
let them be dried by the fire on a Pot-sheard, and lay it to the nape of the
Neck to Bedward.

An excellent Diet Drink for the Spring, to purge and cleanse the Blood.
Take o^ Scurvygrass half a peck, brook-lime, Watercresses, Agrimony,
Maidenhair, Liverwort, Burrage, Bugloss, Betony, Sage, sweet-Marjarum,
Sea-worm wood, tops of green Hops, Fumitory, of each a good handful, of Ivory,
Hartshorn, and yellow Saunders of each one ounce, Reddock roots two ounces,
Purslain, Fennel, Asparagus roots, of each an ounce, Raisins half a pound, boil
these very well in a Gallon of Beer, then stamp and strain them, and put into
it three Gallons of new Beer to work together.

A good Receipt for the Dropsy, either Ho^ or Cold.
Take of tops of red Mint, of Archange or Blind Nettles, and red Sage of either
^ small quantity, stamp them together and strain the juice of them into some
stale Ale so much as will serve to drink morning an^ evening, do this for ten
days together, an^ God willing it will effect the cure.

Another most excellent for the Dropsy.
Take green broom and burn it in some clean place, that you may take the ashes
o^ it, take ten or twelve spoonfuls of the same ashes, and boil them in a pint
of Whitewine, till ^he virtue thereof be in the Wine, then ^ool it and drein
the Wine from the dregs, and make three draughts of the Wine, one fasting in
the morning, the other at three in the afternoon, and the other when you go to
bed: This seldom fails of the desired effect.

How to Prevent the Toothache.
Wash your mouth once a week in Whitewine, in which Spurge has been ^oyled,
and you shall never be troubled with the ^ooth-ach.

A Present Remedy for the Toothache.
If your Tooth be hollow and paineth you much, take of the herb called Spurge
and ^queeze it, and mingle wheat flower with ^he milk that issues from it,
with this make ^ paste, and fill the Cavity of your Tooth ^herewith, and
leaving it there a while, you must change it every two hours, and the Tooth
will drop out of it self.

A good Receipt for the S^one and Gravel.
Take a hard row of a red herring, and dry it upon a Tile in an Oven, then beat
it to powder, and take as much as will lie upon sixpence every morning fasting,
in a glass of Rhenish wine.

For the Griping of ^he Guts.
Take Anniseeds, Fennelseeds, Bayberries, Juniper berri^s, Tormentil, Bistort,
Balaustins, Pomgranate Pills, each one ounce, Rose leaves a handful, boil them
in milk, strain it and add the yolk of an egg, (...) grains of Laudanum
dissolved in ^he Spirit o^ Mint, prepare it for a glister and give (...) warm.

The Plaster of Plasters.
Take of Roses beaten to powder two pound and an half, Heifers tallow two pound
and a quarter, try it with a gentle fire and cleanse it, when it is cold,
scrape away the dross from the bottom, and melt it in a brass vessel, then
strew in the Rosi^ by handfuls, and stir it with a willow Spatula, continually
stirring it until it be all stirred and melted, then have ready a basin of
pewter, and in it of water of Camomil, of english Briony root, and o^ Damask
Rosewater, of each eight ounces with powder of salt of wormwood, salt of
tartar, salt of Scurvygrass, Vitriol, Camphonete, of each one ounce and an
half, then pour in the melted body, and stir it with the Spatula round
continually, until the body have seemingly swallowed up all the salt and
waters, continue it stirring until the water appear, and thus work i^ till the
body b^ as white as snow, then let it stand a month in the water covered from
dust, and when you use it let it not come near any fire, but work a little at a
time until it be as white as snow on the brawn of your hand over against your
little finger, spread it on a linen cloth or leather, for the best plaster in
the world, for the Reins in all Accidents, and for all bruises and great
conclusions, etc.

For the Falling Sickness or Convulsion Fits.
Take the dung of a Peacock, make it into powder, and give so much of it to the
Patient as will lie upon a shilling, in a little succory water fasting.

For the Worms in Children.
Take Wormseed and boil it in beer or ale, and sweeten it with a little
clarified ^^^ey, and then let them drink it.

For a dry Cough.
Take Aniseeds, Ash seeds, and Violets, and beat them to powder and stamp them
(of each a like quantity) then boil them together in fair water till it grows
thick, then put it up and let the patient take thereof morning and evening.

For the I^ch.
Take the juice of Pennyroyal, the juice of Savine, Scabious, the juice of
Sage, the juice of Pellitory, with some Barrow^ grease and black Soap, temper
all these and make a salve, and with it anoint all your joints.

For Deafness.
Take wild mint, mortify it and sque^^ it in the hand till it renders juice,
then take it with its juice and put it into the ear, change it often, this will
help the deafness if the person ever heard before.

To make Oil of St. John's Wort, good for any Ach or Pain.
Take a Quart of Sallet Oil, and put thereto a quart of the flowers of St.
John^ wort well picked, let them lie therein al^ the Summer, till the seeds o^
that herb b^ ripe, the glass must be kept warm, either in the Sun or in the
water all the summe^ ^ill the seeds be ripe, then put in a quart o^ St. John's
wort seed, and so let it stand twelve hours, the glass being kept open, then
must you boil the oil eight hours, the water in the pot full as high as the Oil
in the Glass, when it is cold strain i^ that the seed r^m^in not in it, and so
keep it for your use.

To make an Oin^ment for any Wound or Sore.
Take two pound of Sheep suet or rather D^er suet, a pint of Candy-oyl, a
quarter of a pound of the newest and best beeswax, melting them altogether and
stirring them well, and put to them one ounce of the oil of Spike, and hal^ an
ounce or the Goldsmiths Burras, then heat them again and stir them all
together, put it up in a Gallipot, and k^ep it close stopped till you have
cause to use it, this is an approved ointment ^or any wound or sore new or old.

A Searcloth for all Ach^s.
Take Rosin one pound, Perresin a quarter of a pound, as much Mastick, D^er
suet the like, Turpentine two ounces, Cloves bruised one ounce, Mace bruised
two ounces, Saffron two drachms, boil all these together in oil o^ Cammomil,
and preserve it for your use, this has done many good when nothing else would.

A m^st exc^llent Balsom for Wounds and other things.
Take of Venice Turpentine one pound, of Oil Olive three pints, yellow Wax half
a pound, of Natural Balsom one ounce, Oil of St. John's Wort one ounce, of Red
Saunders one ounce, six spoon^uls of Sack, cut the Wax, and melt it on the
fire, then let it catch the fire; take it off, and put in the Turpentine to it,
having first w^shed the Venice-Turpentine thrice with Damask-Rose-Water; and
having mingled your S^llet-Oyl with the Sack, put also the Oly to them, and put
them all on the fire, and stir it till it begin to boil; for if it boil much,
it will run over speedily: then suffer it to cool for a night or more, until
the Water and Wine be sunk all to the bottom: then make some holes in the
Stuff, that the Water may run out of it; which being done, put it over the fire
again, putting to it the Balsom and the Oil of St. Iohn's-Wort; and when it is
melted, then put the Saunders to it; stir it well, that it may incorporate; and
when it first begins to boil take it of^ the fire, and stir it the space of two
hours, till it be grown thick. Then put it up, and keep it for your use, as
most precious, for thirty or forty years or more.

The Virtues of this most excellent Balsom are many.

1. It is good ^o heal any wound inward or outward, being squirted warm into
the inward wound, being applied to the outward wound with fine lint or linen,
anointing also those parts thereabouts, it not only takes away the pain, but
al^o keeps it from any inflammation, and also draws forth all broken bones,
or any other thing that might putrefie or fe^^er it, so that the brains or
inwards, as the Liver, Guts, nor Heart be not troubled, it will heal it in four
or five days dr^ssing, so that nothing else be applied thereunto. 2. It heals
any burning or scalding, and heals also any bruise or cut, being first
anointed with the said Oil, and a piece of Linen cloth or Lint dipped in the
same, being warmed and laid unto the place, it will heal it without any scar
remaining. 3. It helps the headache by anointing the Temples and Nostrils
therewith. 4. It is good against the Wind-Colick, or stitch in the side,
applied there to warm with hot cloths morning and evening, at both times you
may use a quarter of an ounce. 5. It helps the biting of a mad dog, or any
other beast. 6. It is good against the Plague, anointing only the Nostrils and
the Lips there with in ^he morning before you go forth. 7. It also heals a
Fis^ula or an Ulcer, being never so deep in any Part of the body, b^ing applied
as a^oresaid is directed for a cut. 8. It is good against worms or Canker,
being used as in a cut, but it will require long^r ^ime to help them. 9. It is
good for one infected with the Plague or Meazles, so as it be presently taken
in warm bro^h, the quantity of a quarter of an ounce four mornings together and
sweat upon it. 10. I^ helps digestion^ anointing the Navel and Stomach
therewith when the party goes to bed, it will stan^h any blood of a great
wound, by putting a plaster of Lint therein, and ^ying it very hard. 11. Take
the quantity of a Nutmeg in sack blood warm and sweat thereon, i^ brings
forth all manner of cl^tted blood, and takes away all Aches. 12. It also
heals the Rose-Gout and Scurvy. 13. It helps all pains of women's breasts,
all chops, or wolf, that comes with a bruise. 14. It helps the small Pox
being anointed there with, without any scar. 15. It helps all sprains and
swellings, and indeed I cannot tell what comes amiss ^o it.
How to help a Stinking bre^^h, which comes from the Stomach.
Take two handfuls of Cummin-s^eds and beat them to powder, and sees it in a
pottle o^ Whitewine until half be boiled away then give the party a good
draught thereof morning and evening as hot as he can suffer it, and in fifteen
or sixteen days it will help them.

To m^ke the Leaden Plaster.
Take two pound and four ounces of Oil of Olive of the best, of good red Lead
one pound, white lead one pound well beaten to dust, twelve ounces of Spanish
soap, and incorporate all these very well together in an earthen pot, well
glazed before you put them to boil, and when that they are well incorporated
that the soap comes upward, put it upon a small fire of Coals continuing it on
the fire, the space of an hour and an half, still stirring it with an iron ball
upon the end of a stick, then make the fire something bigger, un^il the redness
be turned into a gray color, but you must not leave stirring till the matter
be turned into the color o^ Oil or ^omewhat darker, then drop it upon a wooden
Trencher, and if it cleave not to the finger it is enough, then make it up into
Roles it will keep twenty years, the older the better.

The virtues of this Plaster are several.

1. If it be laid upon the stomach it provokes appetite, and take^h a way any
grief in the stomach. 2. Being laid on the belly it is a present remedy for the
Colic. 3. If it be laid to the reins of the back, it is good for the Bloody
Flux, Running of the Reins, Heat of the Kidneys, and weakness o^ the back. 4.
It heals all swellings, bruises, and it takes a way Ach. 5. It breaks
Fellens, Pushes, and other Imposthumes and heals them. 6. It draws out any
running humors, without breaking the skin. 7. Being applied to the fundament
it heals any disease there growing. 8. B^ing laid to the th^oat it is good
for the Uvula, it breaks the headache and is good for the eyes,
For the Wind Colic.
Take the flowers of Walnuts and dry them to powder, and take of them in your
Ale or Beer, or in your broth as you like best, and it will help you.

Thus have I given you some short but suitable directions, for the qualifying
you either as Waiting-Gentlewomen, to a person of honor or quality, or
otherwise to serve them as Housekeepers, which qualifications if you will
endeavor to attain unto, you will raise your self much both in esteem and
fortune. Ladies will much covet and desire your Company, let you have the
honor to sit at Table, and have command in the house: You will gain respect
from the rest of the Servants, you will wear good clothes, and have a
considerable Salary.

I shall now give some directions to servants of a lower Rank.

Directions for such who desire to be Chamber-Maids, to Persons of Honor or
Quality, or Gentlewomen either in City or Country.
WOuld you endeavor to fit your self for this employment, that you may be
capable of serving a person of honor or quality, you must in the first place
learn to dress well, that you may be able to supply the place of the
Waiting Woman, should she chance to fall sick or be absent from your Lady, you
must also learn to wash fine linen well, and to starch Tiff^^ies, Lawns,
Points and Laces, you mu^^ li^ewi^e learn to mend them neatly, and wash white
Sarsenets with such li^e things. Then you must learn to make your Ladies bed,
well, soft, and easy, to lay up her Night-clothes, and see that her Chamber be
kept neat and clean, and that nothing be wanting which she desires or requires
to be done. Then you must learn to be modest in your deportment or behavior,
to be ready at her call, and to be always diligent, never answering again when
she takes occasion to reprove you, but endeavor to mitigate her anger with
pacifying words. Be loving and courteous to your fellow Servants, not gigling
o^ idling out your time, or wantoning in the society of men, you will soon find
the benefit thereof. For an honest and sober man will rather make that woman
his wife, whom he sees employed continually about her business, than one who
makes it her business to trifle away her own and others time. Neither will a
virtuous and understanding Mistress, long entertain such a Servant whom she
finds of such a temper. Be not subject to change, but still remember that a
rouling stone never gets moss, and as you gain but little money, so if you
rumble up and down you will gain but little credit.

If you would fit your self to serve a Gentle woman only, (either in City or
Country) you must not only learn how to dress, wash and starch very well, all
manner of Tiffanies, Lawns, Points and Laces, and to mend the same, but you
must learn to work all sorts of Needle work and plain work, to wash black and
white sarsenets, you must know how to make all manner of spoon meats, to raise
Paste, to dress meat well (though not often required thereunto) to make sawces
both for fish and flesh, to garnish dishes, to make all sorts of pickles, to
see that every thing be served in well and handsomely to the Table iu due time,
and to wait with a graceful decorum at Table if need should require, keep your
Mistress's Chamber clean and lay up every thing in its due place. You mus^ also
learn to be skilful in buying any thing in the Market if you be entrusted
therewith, if there be no Butler in the house. You must see that all things be
decent and ^itting in the Parlour and Dining Room, you must endeavor to take
off your Mistress from all the care you can, giving to her a just and true
account of what moneys you lay out for her, showing yonr self thrifty in all
your disbursements. Be careful in overlooking inferior servants, that they
waste nothing which belongs to your Master and Mistress. Lastly, you must learn
to be diligent to perform whatsoever your Mistress commands you, to be neat in
your habit, modest in your carriage, silent when she is angry, willing to
please, quick and neat handed about what you have to do. If you attain to these
qualifications, and be of an humble good disposition, you will deserve a good
salary, and a great deal of respect, which that you may do I shall give you
^ome short directions for starching of Tiffany, for making clean Points and
Laces, for washing^ and starching of Points, for washing of Sarsenets white or
black, and the like, also for raising of paste, making of spoon meats, sawces
and pickles.

Directions for Starching of Tiffany.
SOap not your Tiffany save only on the Hemns or Laces with Crown Soap, then
wash them very well in three Ladders pretty hot, and let your last Ladder be
made thin of the Soap, do not rince them nor wring them hard, then dry them
over brimstone, and keep them all the time from the air for that will spoil
them. Then make your starch of a reasonable thickness, and blew it according to
your liking, and to a qu^rter of a pound of Starch put as much Alum as an
hazle nut, boil it very well and strain it, and while it is hot wet your
Tiffanies with it very well, and lay them in a cloth to keep them from drying.
Then with your hands clean and dry them, then hold your Tiffanies to a good
fire till they be through hot, then clap them and rub them between your hands
from the fire, till you see they be very clear, then shape them by a piece of
paper, cut out by them before they were washed, and iron them with a good hot
iron, and then they will look glossy like new Tiffany.

Thus you may starch Lawns, but observe to iron them on the wrong side, and
upon a cloth wetted and wrung out again, sometime (if you please instead of
starch) you may lay Gum Arabic in Water, and when it is dissolved wet the
Lawns in that instead of starch, and hold them to the fire as before directed,
clapping them and rubbing them till they are very clear.

Directions for Washing White and Black Sarsenets.
LEt them be very smooth and straight upon aboard, and if there be any dirty
places soap them a little, then take a little hard brush and soap it well, then
dip the brush in water, and with it make a pretty thick ladder, then take the
brush and rub your sarsenet well, the right way of the sarsenet, sideways of
the brush, and when you have washed one side well, turn it and wash the other.
Then have a clean ladder ^calding hot, and cast your hoods in double into it
and cover it, and still as fast as you wash them cast them into that, you must
give them three good washes upon the board, and after the first Ladder let the
other be very hot, and ca^t them in a s^ald every time, then make up a scalding
hot ladder, into which put some Gum Arabic steeped before in water, and some
Smal^ to blew it a little, let them be doubled up in that, close covered for
one hour, when you come for to take them out, be sure you dip them very well
all over, and then fold them up to a very little compass, and squeeze them
smooth betwixt your hands, then smoke them over brimstone, th^^ draw them
between your hands every way till they be little more than half dry, then
smooth them with good hot irons the same way you did wash them, and upon the
right side of the sarsenet.

To wash Colored Silk.
They are done the same way with the white, only there must be no blew nor
smoking over brimstone.

To wash Black Sarsenets.
They are washed the same way with the other, only rinc'd in strong beer cold,
without any Gum, and iron'd upon the wrong side and on a woollen cloth.

To wash Silk Stockings.
Make a strong Ladder with soap, and pretty hot, then lay your stockings on a
Table, and take a piece of such cloth as the Seamen use for their sails, double
it up and rub them soundly with it, turn them first on one side and then on the
other, till they have passed through three ladders, then rince them well, and
hang them to dry with the wrong side outward, and when they are near dry,
pluck them out with your hands, and smooth them with an iron on the wrong side,

To make Clean Points and Laces.
Take white bread of half a day old, and cut it in the middle, and pare the
Crust round the edge, so that you may not hurt your points when you rub them,
then lay them upon a table on a clean cloth, and rub them very well with the
white bread all over, then take a clean little brush and rub over the bread
very well, till you think you have rubbed it very clean, then take your point
or lace and shake the bread clean off, then take a clean linen cloth and gently
flap it over oftentimes. Thus you may get the soil off from white Satin,
Taffety, Tabby, or any colored silk, provided it be not greasy, no^ too much
soiled.

Directions to Wash and Starch Points.
TAke your points and put them into a Tent, then make a strong Ladder with the
best soap you can get, then dip a brush in that ladder, and soundly rub your
points on both sides, so do till you have washed it in four Ladders, then wash
it in fair water alone, then wash it in blew water, and when you have so done
take starch made thin with water, and with your brush on the wrong side wash it
over with it, so let it dry, then lay your Tent upon a table, and with an ivory
bodkin made for the purpose, run into every close and narrow part of it, to
open it betwixt the gimp or overcast, likewise into every Ilet hole, to open
them.

For the Laces, after you have pulled them out well with your hands, you must
iron them on the wrong side: let the water be warm wherewith you make your
Ladder, when you take them out of the tent, iron them on the wrong side, let
not the water be too blew with which you wash them.

To make Clean Gold and Silver Lace.
Take the lace off from your garment, and lay it upon a table, and with a brush
rub it all over very well with burnt Alum beaten fine, till you find it to
become of the right color, then shake it very well and wipe it very well with
a clean linen cloth oftentimes over.

To get Spots of Ink out of Linne^ Cloth.
Before that you suffer it to be washed, lay it all night in urine, the next
day rub all the spots in the urine as i^ you were washing-in water; then lay it
in more urine another night and then rub it again, and so do till you find they
be quite out.

To get the Stains of Fruits out of any Linen Ctoth.
Take them before they are washed, and with a little butter rub every spot
well, then let the cloth lie in scalding hot milk a while and when it is a
little cooled, rub the spotted places in the milk till you see they are quite
out, and then wash it in water and soap.

To take out any greasy Spots out of Silk, Stuff or Cloth.
Take a linen rag and wet it very well in fair water, then with a pair of
Tongs put a live sea cole or wood cole upon the rag, and hastily close the rest
of the rag about the cole, and presently lay it upon the greasy spot whilst it
is smoking hot, and when you perceive it to cool do so again, and so do till
you find the spots are quite taken out.

How to make clean Play.
Wash your plate first in soap suds and dry it, then if there be any spots rub
them out with salt and vinegar, then anoint your plate all over with vinegar
and chalk, then lay it in the Sun or before the fire to dry, then rub it off
with warm linen clothes, very well, and it will look like new.

How to keep the Hair Clean, and Preserve it.
Take two handfuls of Rosemary, and boil it softly in a quart of Spring water,
till it comes to a pint, and let it be covered all the while, then strain it
out and keep it, every morning when you comb your head, dip a sponge in the
water and rub up your hair, and it will keep it clean and preserve it, for it
is very good for the brain, and will dry up Rheum.

To Wash the Face.
There i^ no better thing to wash the face with, to keep it smooth and to scowr
it clean, than to wash it every Night with brandy, wherein you have steeped a
little flower of Brimstone, and the next day wipe it only with a cloth.

To make a Salve for the Lips.
Take two ounces of white Bees wax, and slice it thin, then melt it over the
fire, with two ounces or more of Sallet Oil, and a little white sugar candy,
and when you see it is well incorporated, take it off the fire and let it stand
till it be cold, then set the skillet on the fire again, till the bottom is
warm and so turn it out, anoint your lips, or sore nose or sore nipples with
this, and it will heal them.

To keep the Teeth clean and sound.
Take common white salt one ounce, as much cuttle bone, beat them together and
rub your Teeth with them every morning, and then wash them wi^h fair water.

To make the Hands White and Soft.
Take Daffadil in clean water till it grow thick, and put thereto powder of
Cantarium and stir them together, then put thereto two eggs, and stir them well
together, and with this ointment anoint your hands, and within three or four
days using thereof, they will be white, clear, and soft.

To Smooth the Skin, and take away Morphew and Freckles.
Anoint your face with the blood of a Hare or Bull, and this will take away
morphew and freckles and smooth the skin.

Directions for making of Custards, Cheesecakes, Raising of Paste, and making
of Tarts end Pyes.
To make Custards.
Take a quart of Cream and boil it well with whole spice, then beat the yolks
of ten eggs and five whites, mingle them with a little cream, and when your
cream is almost cold, put your eggs into it and stir them very well, then
sweeten it, and put out your Custard into a deep dish all together, or else
into several small China cups or dishes, like Coffee dishes and bake them, then
if you please you may serve them in with French Comfits strowd on them or
without.

To make Cheesecakes.
Take two Gallons of new milk, put into it two spoonfuls and a half of Runnet,
heat the milk little less than blood warm, and cover it close with a cloth till
you see the Cheese be gathered, then with a scumming dish gently take out the
whey, when you have drained the curd as clean as you can, put it into a Sieve,
and let it drain very well there, then to two quarts of Curds take a quart of
thick Cream, a pound of sweet butter, twelve eggs, a pound and an half of
Currants, a penny worth of Cloves, Nutmeg and mace beaten, half a pound of good
Sugar, a quarter of a pint of Rosewater, mingle it well together, and put it
into Puff-paste.

How to make Puff-paste.
Break two eggs in three pints of flower, make it with cold water, then roll it
out pretty thick and square, then take so much butter as paste, and divide your
butter into five pieces, that you may lay it on at five several times, roll
your paste very broad, and break one part of the said butter in little pieces
all over your paste, then throw a handful of flower slightly on, then fold up
your paste and beat it with a rolling pin, and so roll it out again, thus do
five times and then make it up.

How to make Paste for all manner of Tarts and Pyes.
Take very sweet butter and put it into fair water, and make it boil on the
fire, then take the finest flower you can get, and mix them well together till
it come to a paste, and so raise it, but if you doubt it will not be thick
enough, then you may mix some yolks of eggs with it, as you temper all your
stuff together.

To make an Almond Tart.
Raise an excellent good paste with six corners an inch deep, then take some
blanched Almonds very finely beaten with Rosewater, take a pound of Sugar to a
pound of Almonds, some grated Nutmeg, a little Cream and strained Spinach, as
much as will cover ^he Almonds, green, so bake it with a gentle heat in an oven
not shutting the door, draw it and stick it with Candied Orange, Citron, and
put in red and while Muscadine.

To make a Cowslip Tart.
Take the blossoms of a gallon of Cowslips, mince them exceeding small and heat
them in a mortar, put to t^em a handful or ^wo of grated Naples bisquet, and a
pint and a half of Cream, boil them a little on the fire then take them off,
and beat in eight eggs with a little Cream, if it does not thicken, put it on
the fire till it does gently, but take heed it curdles not, season it with
Sugar, Rosewater, and a little Salt, bake it in a dish or little open tarts, it
is b^st to let your cream be cold before you stir in the Eggs.

To make an Artichoke Pie.
Take the Bottom of six Artichokes, and boil them very ^ender, put them in a
dish and some vinegar over them, season them with Ginger and Sugar, a little
Mace whole and put them in a Coffin of Paste, when you lay them in, lay some
marrow and dates sliced, and a few Raisins of the Sun in the bottom with good
store of Butter, when it is half baked take a Gil of Sack being boiled first
with the Sugar and a peel of Orange, put it into the Pie and set it into the
Oven again till you use it.

To m^ke Marrow Pasties.
Shred the Marrow and Apples together; and put a little Sugar to them, put them
into puff-paste, and fry them in a pan with fresh butter, and serve them up to
the Table, with a little white Sugar strowed on them.

To make a Calves foot Pie.
Boil your Calves feet very well, and then pick all the meat from the Bones,
when it is cold, shred it as small as you can, and season it with Cloves and
mace, and put in good store of Currants, Raisins and Prunes, then put it into
the Coffin with good store of sweet Butter, then break in a whole stick of
Cinnamon and a Nutmeg sliced, and season it with salt, then close up the Coffin
and only leave a vent hole, put insome liquor made of Verjuice, Cinnamon and
Butter boiled together, and so serve it.

To make an Eel Pie with Oysters.
Wash your Eels and gut them, and dry them well in a cloth, to four good Eels
allow a pint of good Oysters well washed, season them with pepper, salt, and
nutmeg and large Mace, put half a pound of butter into the Pie, and half a
Lemon sliced, so bake it, when it is drawn, take the yolks of two eggs, a
couple of Anchovies dissolved in a little whitewine, with a quarter of a pound
of fresh butter, melt it and mix all together and make a leer of it, and put it
into the Pie.

To make a Lamb Pie.
First cut your Lamb into pieces, and then season it with nutmegs, cloves, and
mace, and some salt with currants, raisins of the Sun, and sweet butter. If you
would eat it hot, when it is baked put in some yolks of Eggs, with wine vinegar
and Sugar beaten together, but if you will eat it cold put in no eggs but only
vinegar and Sugar.

To make an Egg Pie, or a Minced Pie of Eggs.
Take the yolks of two dozen of Eggs hard boiled and shred them, take the same
quan^ity of Beef suet, half a pound of Raisins, a pound of Currants well washed
and dried, half a pound of Sugar, a pennyworth of beaten spice, a few carraway
seeds, a little candied Orange peel shred, a little verjuice and Rose Water,
fill the Coffin and bake it with a gentle heat.

To make a Herring Pie.
Put great store of sliced Onions, with Currants and Raisins of the Sun, both
above and under the Herrings, and store of butter, put them into your Pie and
bake them.

To make a Quince Pie.
Take a Gallon of flower, a pound and a half of Butter, six eggs, thirty
Quinces, three pound of Sugar, half an ounce of Cinnamon, the like of Cloves,
the like of ginger, a little Rosewater, Make them up into a Tart, and being
baked strew on them a little double refined Sugar.

To make an Humble Pie.
Lay beef suet minced on the bottom of the Pie, or slices of interlarded bacon,
and cut the humbles as big as small dice, cut your bacon in the same form, and
season it with Nutmeg, Pepper and salt, fill your Pyes with it with slic^s of
bacon and butter, close it up and bake it, liquor it with Claret, Butter and
stripped time, and so serve it up.

To make a Venison Pasty.
When you have powdered your haunch of Venison or the sides of it, by taking
away all the bones, sinews, and skin and ^at, season it with pepper and salt
only, beat it with your rolling pin, and proportion it for the pasty, by taking
a way from one part and adding to another, your paste being made with a peck of
fine flower, and three pound of butter and twelve eggs, work it up with cold
water as stiff a pa^^e as you can, drive it ^orth ^or your Pasty, let it be as
thick as a man's Thumb, roll it up upon a rolling pin, and put under it a couple
of sheets of Cap paper, then your white being already minced and beaten with
water, proportion it upon the pasty, to the breadth and length of the Venison,
then lay your Venison in the said white, wash it round with a feather and put
on a border, season your Venison on the top, and turn over your other leaf of
paste, so close up your pasty, ^hen drive out another border for garnishing the
sides up to the top of the Pasty, so close it together by the rolling pin, by
rolling it up and down by the sides and ends, and when you have flourished your
garnishing and edged your pas^y, vent it at the top, set it in the Oven and let
it have four or five hours baking at the least, and then draw it.

To make a Beef Pasty like Red Deer.
Take fresh Beef of the finest without sinews or suet, and mince it as small as
you can, and season it with salt and pepper, and put in two spoonfuls of
Malmsie, then take Lard and cut it into small pieces, and lay a layer of Lard
and a layer of Beef, and lay a shin of Beef upon it like Venison, and so close
it up.

To make an Oister Pie.
First dry your Oisters, and then put them into your Coffin, with some butter
and whole large mace and then bake it, then take off the Lid and fill it up
with more butter, putting some of the Liquor of the Oisters also thereunto,
^hen season it well with Sugar and serve it up.

To make a Goose Pie.
Break the bones of your Goose, then perboyl him, then season him with pepper
and salt, and a little cloves and m^ce, if you please you may bake a Rabbet or
two in it, because your stubble Geese are very fat and your Rabbets d^y, you
need not Lard either, bake it in good hot butter paste.

To make a Veal Pie.
When your paste is raised cut your Leg o^ Veal into pieces, and season it with
pepper, nu^meg and salt, with some whole large mace, and so lay it into your
prepared coffin, with good store of raisins of the Sun and Curran^s, and fill
it up with sweet butter, then close it and set it in the Oven, and when baked
serve it in.

To make an Eel Pie.
Wash, flea and cut your Eels in pieces, put to them a handful of sweet herbs,
parsley minced with an Onion, season them with pepper, salt, cloves, mace and
nutmeg; and having your Coffin made of good paste, put them in and strew over
them two handfuls of Currants, and Lemon cut in slices, ^hen put on butter and
close ^he Pie, when it is baked put in at the funnel a little sweet butter,
whitewine and vinegar, beat up with a couple of yolks of eggs.

To make a Warden or Pear Pie.
Bake your Wardens or Pears in an Oven with a little water, and a good quantity
of Sugar, let your pot be covered with a piece of dough, let them not be fully
baked by a quarter of an hour, when they are cold make an high Coffin, and put
them in whole, adding to them some Cloves, whole Cinnamon, and Sugar with some
of the Liquor in the pot, so bake them.

To make a Codling Tart.
Take green Codlings from the Tree, and codle them in scalding water without
breaking them, peel the skin from them, and so d^vide them into halves, and cut
out the cores, and lay them into the Co^fin, then put in a good handful of
Quinces sliced, a little oringado, and a good quantity of sugar, a little
Rosewater, then close it up and bake it well.

To make a Gooseberry Tart.
When your Gooseberries are picked and washed, then boil them in wat^r till
they will break in a spoon, then strain them and beat h^lf a dosen Eggs, and
stir them together upon a chafing dish of Coals with some Rosewater, then
sweeten it very well with Sugar, and always serve it cold.

To make an excellent Minced Pie.
Perboyl Neats Tongues, then peel and hash them with as much as they weigh of
beef suet, and stoned raisins and picked currants, chop all exceeding small
that it be like pap, then mingle a very little Sugar with them, and a little
wine and thrust it up, and throw in some thin slices of candied Citron peel,
and put this into Coffins of fine light well reared crust, half an hours baking
will be enough. If you strew a few carraway comfits on the top it will not be
amiss.

To make a Pidgeon Pie.
Truss your pigeons to bake, and set them, and Lard one half of them with
bacon, mince a sew sweet herbs and parsley with a little suet, the yolks of hard
eggs and an onion or two, season it with salt, beaten pepper, cloves, mace,
nutmegs, work it up with a piece of butter, and stuff the bellies of the
pigeons, season them with salt and pepper as before, take also as many
Lamb-stones seasoned as before, with six collops of bacon the salt drawn out,
then make a large Coffin and put in your Pigeons, and ^^ you will, put in
Lamb-stones and sweet-breads and some Ar^ichoke bottoms or other dry meat to
soak up the juice, because the Pie will be very sweet and full of ^t, then when
it comes out of the Oven, put in a little Whitewine beat up with the yolk of an
egg.

To make a Pippin Tart or Pie.
Pare your Pippins and cut out the cores, then make your Coffin of good crust,
take a good handful of Quinces sliced, and lay at the bottom, then lay your
Pippins a top, and fill the holes where the cores were taken out with syrup os
Quinces, then put in Sugar and so close it up, let it be very well baked, for
it will ask much soaking, especially the Quinces.

Directions for making of Spoon Meat, as Caudles, Broths, and Iellies.
TAke a Pint and a half of the strongest Ale may be gotten, twenty Jordan
Almonds clean wiped, but neither washed nor blanched, with two dates minced
very small and stamped, then take the pith of young beef the length of twelve
inches, lay it in water till the blood be out of it, then strip the skin of it
and stamp it with the almonds and dates, then strain them all together into the
Ale, boil it till it be a little thick, give it the party in a morning fasting
to drink six spoonfuls, and as much when they go to bed.

To make an Almond Caudle.
Take three pints of Ale and boil it with cloves and mace, and slice bread in
it, then have ready beaten a pound of Almonds blanched, and strain them out
with a pint of Whitewine, and thicken the Ale with it, sweeten it if you
please, but be sure to scum it well when it boyls.

To make a Cordi^l strengthening broth.
Take a Red Cock, strip off the feathers from the skin, then break the bones to
shivers with a rolling pin, set it over the fire and just cover it with water,
put in some salt and wash the scumming and boiling off it. Put in a handful of
hartshorn, a quarter of a pound of blew currants, and as many raisins of the
Sun stoned, and as many Prunes, four blades of large Mace, a bottom crust of
whiteloaf, half an ounce of China root sliced, being steeped three hours before
in warm water, boil in it three or four pieces of gold, strain it and put in a
little fine Sugar, and juice of Orange, and so use it.

To make China Broth.
Take an ounce of China root clipped thin, and steep it in three pints of water
all night, or embers covered, the next day take a good Chicken clean picked,
and the guts taken out, put in his belly Agrimony and M^iden-hair, of each half
a handful, raisins of the Sun stoned one good handful, and as much French
barley, boil all these in a Pipkin close covered on a gentle fire, for six or
seven hours, let it stand till it be cold, strain it and keep it for your use,
take a good draught in the morning, and at four in the afternoon.

To make a Flummery Ca^dle.
When Flummery is made and cold, you may make a pleasant and wholesome Caudle
with it, by taking some lumps and spoonfuls of it^ and boil it with Ale and
Whitewine, then sweeten it to your taste with Sugar, there will remain in the
Caudle some Lumps of congealed flummery, which are not ungrateful.

To make Ielly of Hartshorn.
Take four ounces of the shaving of Hartshorn of the inside, and two quarts of
water, put this into a P^pkin and boil it very gently till it come to a quart,
the hartshorn must be steeped three or four hours first, afterward put a
little into a sawcer till it be cold, and if it be cold and jellyeth it is
boiled enough, then being warm take it off the fire and strain it hard through a
cloth, and set it a cooling till it be a hard Jelly, then take two whites of
eggs and beat them very well, with a sprig of Rosemary or Birch, but not with a
spoon, till a water come at the bottom then put these beaten eggs and the water
thereof in^o a skillet, and all the jelly upon it, with three spoonfuls of
damask Rosewater, and ^ quarter of a pound of Sugar, and when it boyls stir and
layth it pretty well, then strain it through a cloth and let it cool, and of
this take four spoonfuls in a morning fasting, and at four a clock in ^he
af^ernoon, and this is very good for the weakness in the back.

To make a Cock broth, very good for weak people.
Take a good Cock, pluck, draw, and wash him very well, and bruise his Legs,
boil him in a little water and salt very well for one hour, then add some water
wherein Mutton has been boiled, and put in a quarter of a pound of French
Barley or Rice which you please, with some Time, Winter Savory, and a little
Lemon peel, a little Large Mace and sliced Nutmeg with a clove or two, when it
is clean scum'd let it only stew till it be enough, then take up the Cock for a
while and boil the broth very well, then put him in again, and heat him
thoroughly, then serve him into the Table, and Garnish your d^sh with Lemon and
Barberries.

To make White Broth of Chicken or Capon.
First boil the Capon or Chicken in water and salt, then take three pints of
strong broth and a quart of Whitewine, and stew it in a Pipkin with a quarter
of a pound of Dates, half a pound of fine Sugar, four or five blades of large
mace, the marrow of three marrow bones, a handful of white endive, s^ew these
in a Pipkin very leisurely, that it may but only simper, then being finely
stewed and the broth well tasted, strain the yolks of Ten eggs with some of the
broth, before you dish up the Capons or Chickens, put the eggs into the broth
and keep it stirring that it may not curdle, give it a warm and set it from the
fire, the Fowls being dished up, put on the broth, and garnish the meat with
dates, marrow, large mace, endive, preserved barberries, oranges, boiled
skerrets, pomegranates and kernels, make a leaf of Almond paste and Grape
verjuice.

Directions for making of Pickles and Sawces.
How to Pickle Broom buds.
TAke as many Broom buds as you please, make Linen bags and put them in and
tie them close, then make some brine wit^ water and salt and boil it a little,
let it be cold, then put some brine in a deep earthen pot, and put some bags in
them and lay the weight on them, let it lie there till it look black, and shift
it again s^ill as long as it looks black, boil them in a little Caldron and put
them in vinegar a week or two, and they will be fit to eat.

To Pickle Cucumbers.
Wash your Cucumbers clean, and dry them in a cloth, then take some water,
vinegar, salt, fennel tops and some dill tops and a little mace, make it salt
enough and sharp enough to the taste, then boil it a while, and then take it
off and let it stand till it be cold then put in the Cucumbers, and lay a board
on the top to keep them down, and tie them up close, and within a week they
will be fit to eat.

To Pickle Artichoke Bottoms.
Take the best bottoms of Artichokes and parboyl them, and when they are cold
and well drained from the wa^^r, and dried in a cloth to take away all the
moisture, then put them into pots, and pour your brine on them, which must be
as strong as you can make it, which is done by putting in so much salt to it,
as it will receive no more, so that the salt sinks whole to the bottom, cover
over your Artichokes with this water, and pour upon it some sweet butter
melted, to the thickness of two fingers, that no Air may come in, when your
Butter is cold set up your Pot in some warm place, cover it close from Vermin,
before you put the bottoms in the Pot, you should pull off all the Leaves and
choke, as they are served at Table, the best time to do this is in Autumn, when
your Plants produce those which are young and tender, for these you should
pickle before they come to open and flower, but not before the heads are round,
when you would eat them you must lay them in water, shifting the water several
times, then boil them once again and so serve them.

To Pickle Cornelians.
Gather the fairest and biggest Cornelians when they first begin to grow red,
and after they have lain a while put them up in a Pot or Barrel, filling them
up with brine as for Artichokes, and put to them a little green Fennel, and a
few Bay Leaves to make them smell w^ll, then stop them up very close, and let
them stand for a Month, if you find them too salt, make the Pickle weaker
before you serve them to Table.

To Pickle Red and White Currants.
Take Vinegar and Whitewine with so much Sugar as will make it sweet, then take
your red and white currants being not fully ripe, and give them one walm, so
cover them over in the same pickle, keeping them always under Liquor.

To Pickle Artichokes.
Take Artichokes before they are too fully grown or two full of strings, and
when they are pared round, then nothing is left but the Bottom, boil them till
they be indifferent tender, but not full boiled, take them up and let them be
cold, then take good stale Beer and Whitewine, with a great quantity of whole
Pepper, so put them up in a barrel with a small quantity of salt, keep them
close and it will not be sour, it will serve for baked and boiled meats all the
Winter.

To Pickle Flowers of all Sorts.
Put them into a Gallipot or Glass with as much Sugar as they weigh, fill them
up with Wine-Vinegar, to a Pint of Vinegar a pound of Sugar and a pound of
flowers, so keep them for Sallads and boiled Meats.

To Pickle Oisters.
Take eight quarts of Oisters and Parboyl them in their own Liquor, then take
them out and cleanse them in warm water; then wipe them dry, then take the
Liquor they were parboyl'd in, and clear it from the grounds into a large
Pipkin or Skillet, put to it a Pottle of good Whitewine, a quart of Wine
Vinegar, some Large Mace, whole Pepper and a good quantity of Salt, set it over
the fire and boil it leisurely, scum it clean, and being well Boiled put the
Liquor into Barrels, and when it is cold put in the Oysters and close up the
head.

Directions for making os Sawces.
To make Sauce for Green Geese.
TAke the juice o^ Sorrel mixed with scalded Gooseberries, and served on
sippets with Sugar and Beaten Butter, etc.

To make Sauce for Land Fowl.
Take boiled prunes and strain them with the Blood of the Fowl, cinnamon,
ginger, and Sugar, boil it to an indifferent thickness, and serve it in
Sawcers, and serve in the dish with the Fowl, Gravy, and sauce of the same Fowl.

To make Diverse Sawces for Roast Mutton.
1. Take Gravy, Capers, Samphire, and Salt, and stew them well together.

2. Water, Onion, Claret Wine, sliced Nutmeg, and Gravy boiled up.

3. Whole Onions stewed in strong broth, or Gravy, Whitewine, Pepper, pickled
Capers, Mace, and three or four slices of a Lemon.

4. Mince a little roast Mutton hot from the Spit, and add to it some chopped
parsley and Onions, Verjuice or Vinegar, Ginger and pepper, stew it very tender
in a pipkin, and serve it under any Joint with some gravy of the Mutton.

5. Onions, Claret Liquor, Capers, Claret Gravy, Nutmeg and salt boiled
together.

6. Chopped Parsley, Verjuice, Butter, Sugar and Gravy boiled together.

7. Take Vinegar, Butter, and Currants, put them in a Pipkin with sweet herbs
finely minced, the yolks of two hard eggs, and ^wo or three slices of the
brownest of the Leg (mince it also) some Cinnamon, Ginger, Sugar and salt.

8. Pickled Capers and Gravy, or Gravy and Samphire, cut an inch long.

9. Chopped Parsley and Vinegar.

10. Salt, Pepper, and juice of O^^nges.

11. Strained Prunes, Wine, and Sugar.

12. Whitewine, Gravy, Large Mace, and Butter thickened with two or three ^olks
of Eggs.

13. Oister Liquor and Gravy boiled to^ether, with eggs and verjuice to thicken
^t, then juice of Oranges and slices of Lemons over all.

14. Onions chopped with sweet herbs, vi^egar and salt boiled together.

To make Several Sawces for Roast Veal.
1. Gravy, Claret, Nutmeg, Vinegar, Butter, Sugar, and Oranges, melted together.

2. Juice of Orange, Gravy, Nutmeg, and sliced Lemon on it.

3. Vinegar and Butter.

4. All manner of sweet herbs chopped small, with the yolks of two or three
eggs, and boil them in Vinegar, Butter, and a few Bread crumbs, Currants,
beaten Cinnamon, Sugar, and a whole Clove or two, put it under the Veal, with
slices of Orange and Lemon about the dish.

5. Claret, Sauce of Boiled Carrots and boiled Quinces, stamped and strained
with Lemon, Nutmeg, Pepper, Rose Vinegar, Sugar and Verjuice, boiled to an
indifferent height or thickness, with a few whole Cloves.

To make Sawces for Red Deer.
1. The Gravy and sweet herbs chop'^ small and boiled together, or the Grav^
only.

2. The Juice of Oranges and Lemons an^ Gravy.

3. A Gallendine sauce made with strained Bread, Vinegar, Claret Wine,
Cinnamon, Ginger and Sugar, strain it and be^^ng finely beaten with the spices,
boil it u^ with a few whole Cloves and a spri^ o^ Rosemary.

4. White Bread boiled in water, pretty thick without spices, and put to it
some butter, Vinegar and Sugar.

If you will stuff or farce any Venison, stick them with Rosemary, Time,
Savoury, or Cloves, or else with all manner of sweet herbs minced with Beef
suet.

To make Sawces for Roast Pork.
1. Gravy, chopped Sage, and Onions boiled together with some Pepper.

2. Mustard, Vinegar and Pepper.

3. Apples pared, quartered, and boiled in fair water, with some Sugar and
Butter.

4. Gravy, Onions, Vinegar and Pepper.

To make Sawces for Rabbets.
1. Beaten Butter, and rub the dish with a Clove of Garlic or Shelot.

2. Sage and Parsley minced, roll it in a ball with some Butter, and fill the
belly with this stuffing.

3. Beaten Butter with Lemon and Pepper.

4. In the French Fashion, Onions minced small and fried, and mingle with
mustard and p^pper.

5. The Rabbet being roasted wash the belly with the Gravy of Mutton, and add
to it a slice or two of Lemon.

To mabe Sawces for Roast Hens.
1. Take Beer, Salt, the yolks of three hard eggs minced small, grated Bread,
three or four spoonfuls of Gravy, and being almost boiled, put in the Juice of
two or ^hree Oranges, slices of Lemon and Orange with Lemon peel shred small.

2. Beaten Butter with Juice of Lemon, Oranges and Claret Wine.

3. Gravy and Claret Wine boiled with a piece of an Onion, Nutmeg, and salt,
serve it with the slices of Lemons or Oranges, or the Juice of the same.

4. With Oyster Liquor, an Anchovy or two, Nutmeg and Gravy, and rub the dish
with a clove of Garlic or Shelot.

5. Take the yolks of hard Eggs and Lemon peel, mince them very small and stew
them in Whitewine, Salt, and the Gravy of the Fowl.

To make Sawces for Roast Chickens.
1. Gravy, and the Juice or slices of Orange.

2. Butter, Verjuice, and Gravy of the Chicken, or Mutton Gravy.

3. Butter and Vinegar boiled together, put to it a little Sugar, then make
thin sops of Bread, lay the Roast Chickens on them, and serve them up ho^.

4. Take Sorrel, wash and stamp it, then have thin slices of Manchet, put them
in a dish with some Vinegor, strained Sorrel, Sugar, some Gravy, beaten
Cinnamon, beaten Butter, and some slices of Orange or Lemon, and strew thereon
^ome Cinnamon and Sugar.

5. Take sliced Oranges and put to them a little Whitewine, Rosewater, beaten
Mace, Ginger, some Sugar and Butter, set them on a chafing dish of Coals and
st^w them, then have some slices of M^nchet (...) lay ^he Chickens being
roasted on the sauce.

To make Sawces for Roast Pigeons.
1. Gravy and Juice of Orange.

2. Boiled Parsley minc^d, and put among some Butter, and beaten up thic^.

3. Gravy, Claret Wine and an Onion stewed together wi^h a little salt.

4. Vine leaves roasted wi^h the Pigeons minced, and put in Claret Wine and
Salt boiled together, some Butter and Gravy.

5. Sweet Butter and Juice of Orange, beat together and made thick.

6. Minced Onions boiled in Claret Wine almost dry, then put to it Nutmeg,
Sugar, Gravy of the Fowl and a little Pepper.

7. Gravy of the Pigeons only.

To make Sawces for all manner of Roast Land Fowl. As,
Turkey, Peacock, Pheasant, Par^ridge, and the like.
1. SLiced Onions being boiled, stir them in some Wat^r, Salt, Pepper, some
Grated Bread, and the Gravy of the Fowl.

2. Take slices of White Bread, and boil them in fair water with two whole
Onions some Gravy, half a grat^d Nutmeg and a little salt, strain them together
through a strainer, and boil it up as thick as Water-grewel, then add to it the
yolks of two eggs, dissolv^d with the juice of two Oranges, etc.

3. Take thin slices of the Manchet, a little of the Fowl, some sweet Butter,
grated Nutmeg, Pepper and Salt, stew all together and being stewed put in a
Lemon minced with the peel.

4. Onions sliced and boiled with fair water and a little salt, a few Bread
crumbs beaten Pepper, Nutmeg, three spoonfuls of Whitewine, and some Lemon peel
finely minced and boiled all togethet, being almost boiled put in the Juice of
an Orange, beaten Butter, and the Gravy of a Fowl.

5. Stamp small Nuts to a pa^te, with Bread, Nutmeg, Pepper, Saffron, Cloves,
and the Juice of Orange and strong Broth, strain and boil them together pretty
thick.

6. Quinces Prunes, Currants and Raisins boiled, Muskified Bisquet boiled,
stamped and strained with Whitewine, Rofe-Vinegar, Nutmeg, Cinnamon, Cloves,
Juice of Oranges and Sugar, boil it not too thick.

7. Boil Carrots and Quinces, strain them with Rose-Vinegar and Verjuice,
Sugar, Cinnamon, Pepper, Nutmeg, boiled with a few whole Cloves and a little
Mace.

8. Take a Manchet, pare off the Crust and slice it, then boil it in fair
Water, and being boiled fomething thick, put in some Whitewine, Wine-Vinegar,
Rose or Elder-Vinegar, some Sugar and Butter.

9. Almond paste and Crumbs of Manchet, stamp them together with some Sugar,
Vinegar and salt; strain them with Grape Verjuice, and juice of Oranges, boil
it pretty thick.

To make S^wce for a Stubble or Fat Goose.
1. Take sour Apples, slice them and boil them in Beer all to Mash, then put to
them Sugar and beaten Butter, sometimes for variety add Barberries and the
Gravy of ^he ^owl.

2. Roast sour Apples or Pippins strain (...) grated Bread beaten Cinnamon,
Mustard, and boyl^d Onions strained and put to it.

Sauce for a young Stubble Goose.
Take the Liver and Gizzard, mince it ^^ry small with some beaten Spinach,
sweet herbs, Sage, Salt and some minced Lard, fill the Belly of the Goose and
so sow up the Rump or vent, as also the Neck, Roast it, and then take out the
farsing and put it in a dish^ then add to it the Gravy of the Goose, Verjuice
and Pepper, give it a warm on the fire, and serve it with this sauce in a clean
dish.

The French Sauce for a Goose, is Butter, Mustard, Sugar, Vinegar, and
Barberries.

To make Sawces for a Duck or Mallard.
1. Onions sliced, and Carrots cut square like Dice, boiled in Whitewine,
strong broth, some Gravy, minced Parsley, Savory chopped, Mace and Butter, being
stewed together it will serve for diverse wild fowl, but most proper for Water
fowl.

2. Vinegar and Sugar boiled to a Syrup, with two or three Cloves, and
Cinnamon, or Cloves only.

3. Oyster Liquor, Gravy of the Fowl, whole Onions boiled in it, Nutmeg and an
Anchovy. If the Fowl be lean ^arse and Lard them.

To make Sawces for any kind of Roast Sea Fowl
MAke a Gallendine with some grated Bread, beaten Cinnamon and Ginger, a
quartern of Sugar, a quart of Claret Wine, a pint of Wine-Vinegar, strain the
foresaid materials, and boil them in a Skillet with a few whole Cloves, in the
boiling stir it with a sprig of Rosemary, add a a little Red Saunders and boil
it as thick as Water Grewel.

To make Green Sauce for Pork, Goslings, Chickens, Lamb or Kid.
Stamp Sorrel with white Bread and pared Pippins in a ^tone or wooden Mortar,
put Sugar to it and Wine Vinegar, then strain it through a fine cloth pretty
thick, dish it in Sawcers and scrape Sugar on it.

To make Sawces for Roast or Boiled Salmon.
1. Take the Gravy of the Salmon, or Oyster Liquor boiled up thick with beaten
Butter, Claret Wine, Nutmeg, and some slices of Orange.

2. Gravy of the Salmon, Butter, Juice of Orange or Lemon, Sugar and Cinnamon,
beat up the same with Butter pretty thick, dish up the Salmon, pour on the
sauce and lay on it slices of Lemon.

3. Beaten Butter with slices of Orange or Lemon, or the Juice of them, or
Grape Verjuice and Nutmeg.

4. Gravy of the Salmon, two or three Cloves dissolved in it, grated Nu^meg and
grated Bread, beat up thick with Butter, the yolk of an Egg, or slices of
Orange wi^h the juice of it.

I should give you now some directions for dressing of Flesh and Fish, but you
will find that more properly set down, in my directions to Cook-Maids^

Directions for such who desire to be Nursery-Maids to Person^ of Honor or
Quality, or else to Gentlewomen either in City or Country.
IF you intend to fit your self for this employment, you must naturally incline
your self to love young Children, otherwise you will soon discover your
unfitness to manage that charge, you must be very neat and cleanly about them,
and careful to keep good hours for them, both to a^ise and go to bed, likewise
to get their Breakfasts and Suppers at good and convenient time. Let them not
sit too long but walk them often up and down, especially those who cannot go
well of themselves, you must also be extraordinary careful and vigilant, tha^
they get not any falls through your neglect, ^or by such falls, many (the cause
at first being unperceivable) have grown irrecoverably Lame or Crooked.
Therefore i^ any such thing should happen, be sure you conceal it not, but
acquaint your Lord or Lady, Master or Mistress thereof, with all convenient
speed, that so means may be used for the Child's recovery before it be too late,
you must be extraordinary careful that you be not churlish or dogged to the
Children, but be always merry and pleasant, and contrive and invent pretty
sports and pastimes, as will be most ^uitable and agreeable to the Childrens
Age, keep their Linen and other things always mended, and suffer them not to
run too fast to decay.

Do not let the Children see that you love any one child above the other, for
that will be a means of dejecting and casting down the other.

Be careful to hear them read if it be imposed upon you, and be not too hasty
with them, have a special care how you behave your sel^ before them, neither
speaking nor acting mis-becomingly, lest your bad example prove the subject of
their imitation.

Consider the change you ^ake in hand, and do not desire this employment as too
many do, because it is an easy kind os Life, and void of labor and pains
taking, thinking also that children are easily pleased with any thing, you will
find the contrary, and that it is a troublesome employment, and the charge of a
greater weight, than such vainly imagine.

Directions for such as desire to be Cook-Maids, in Noble, or Gentlemen's
Families.
IF you would fit your self for this employment, and so consequently gain great
wages, good Vales, and the reputation of an accomplished Cook,

You must learn to be skilful in dr^ssing all sorts of Flesh, Fowl, and Fish,
to make variety of sawces proper for each of them, to raise all manner of
Pastes and Kickshaws, to be curious in garnishing your dishes, and making all
manner of Pickles, etc.

And as you must ^now how to dress Meat well, so must you know how to save what
is left of that you have dress^d, of which you may make both handsome and
Toothsome dishes again, to the saving of your Masters purse, and credit of his
Table.

You must be sure to be as saving as you can, and cleanly about every thing,
seeing likewise that your Kitchen be kept clean, and all things scowred in due
time, your Larders also and Cupboards, that there be no bits of bread and Meat
lie about them to spoil and stink.

You must be careful that your Meat taint not, for want of good salting. You
must also keep good hours for your Meals, otherwise you put an house quite out
of order, do not covet to have the Kitching stuff for your Vales, but rather
ask the more wages, for that may make you an ill Huswife of your Masters goods,
and teach you to be a Thief, for you would be apt to put that which should go
in to the tried Suet, into your Pot.

Lay not all your wages upon your back, but lay up something against sickness,
and an hundred other casualties, for you may assure your self it is more
commendable, for one in your employment to go decent and clean, than gaudishly
fine.

I have already in this Book, in my directions to Chamber-Maids, given some
directions for Raising of Paste, for making of Sawces and Pickles.

I shall now give you some directions for the best and newest way of dressing
of Flesh^ Fowl and Fish.

Directions for dressing of Flesh, Fowl and Fish.
First, For Dressing of Flesh.
To Boil a Leg of Veal and Bacon.
LArd your Leg of Veal with Bacon all over, with a little Lemon peel^among it,
then boil it with a middle piece of B^con, when your Bacon is boiled, cut it in
pieces, season it with pepper and dried sage mixed together, dish up the Veal
with the Bacon round about it, send it up with sawcers of green sauce, strew
over it Parsley and Barberries.

To m^ke a Fri^asie of Veal.
Cut your Veal in thin slices, beat it well with a rolling pin, season it well
with Nutmegs, Lemon and Thyme, fry it slightly in the Pan, then beat two eggs
and one spoonful of Verjuice, put it into the pan, stir it together, fry it and
dish it.

To Roast a Haunch of Venison.
If your Venison be seasoned, you must water it, and stick it with short sprigs
of Rosemary, let your sauce be Claret Wine, a handful of grated Bread,
Cinnamon, Ginger, Sugar, a little Vinegar, boil these up so thick as it may
only run like Butter, it ought to be sharp and sweet, dish up your meat on your
sauce.

To Stew a Leg of Lamb.
Cut it in pieces, and put it into your stewing pan, being first seasoned with
salt and Nutmeg, and as much Butter as will stew it, with raisins of the Sun,
Currants and Gooseberries; when it is stewed make a caudle with the yolks of
two or three eggs, and some Wine Vinegar and sugar beaten together, and put it
into your Meat and stew-all a little longer together, then dish it, strew sugar
on the top and serve it up hot.

To make Sco^ch Colo^^s of Veal^
Cut out your Veal into very broad slices ^at and lean, not too thick, take
eight eggs beat them very well with a little salt, grate a whole Nutmeg, take a
handful of Thyme and strip it, then take a pound of Sawsages half a pint of
stewing Oysters, wash and cleanse them from the Gravel, then half ^ry your Veal
with sweet Butter, then put in your sawsages and oysters, then take a quarter
of a pound of Capers, shred them very small with three Anchovies dissolved in
Whitewine and fair water, so put in your Eggs, shred Capers and Anchovies,
Butter and Spice, and mingle them, and strew them in the Pan upon the Veal and
Oysters, serve it with sipits with a little fresh Butter and Vinegar and Lemon
sliced, and Barberries with a little salt. You must have a care to keep the
Meat s^irring, lest the Eggs curdle with the heat of the fire.

To Boil a Chine, Rump, Surloin, Brisket, Rib, Flank, Buttock, or Fillet of
Beef.
Take any of these pieces of Beef, and give them in summer a Weeks powdering,
in winter a Fortnights, you may either stuff them or not, if you stuff them you
must do it with all manner of sweet herbs, and fa^ Beef minced very small, and
some Nutmeg mingled together, you may serve them in on bruess, with roots or
cabbage boiled in milk, with beaten butter.

To Roast a Shoulder of Mutton with Oysters.
Parboyl your Oysters, then mix Winter savory, thyme, parsley and the yolks of
five or six hard eggs, and to these a hal^-penny loaf of grated Bread, and
three or four yolks of eggs, mingle all these together with your hands, when
you have spi^ted your Mutton, make holes in it as big as you think convenient,
put in your Oysters with your other ingredients, about twenty five or thirty
Oisters will be enough, let it roast indifferent long, and take the remainder
of a quart of Oysters, and put them into a deep dish with with Claret Wine,
put to them two or three Onions cut in halves with two or three Anchovies, put
this into the dripping pan under your Mutton and save your Gravy, and when the
meat is enough, put your sauce upon the Coals, and put in it the yolk of an egg
beaten, grated Nutmeg and sweet Butter, dish your mutton and pour in your
Oysters, sauce and all upon it, garnishing your dish with Lemons and Barberries.

To Stew a Rump of Beef.
Season your Beef with some Nutmeg grated, together with some salt and p^pper,
season it on the bony side and lay it in the Pipkin with the fat side
downwards, then take two or three great Onions and a bunch of Rosemary tied up
together, also three pints of Elder Vinegar and three pints of water, stew all
these together in a Pipkin close covered over a so^t fire three or four hours
together, dish it upon sipits, taking off the fat from the Gravy: put some of
the Gravy to the Beef and serve it up.

To Stew a Breast, Loyn, or Neck of Mutton.
Joint either of these very well, draw it and stuff it with sweet herbs and
parsley minced, then put it in a deep stewing dish with the right side downward,
put to it so much Whitewine and strong broth as will stew it, set it on the
Coals and put to it two or three Onions, a bundle of sweet herbs and a little
large Mace, when it is almost stewed take ^ handful of Spinach, Parsley and
Endive, an^ put into it, or else some Gooseberries an^ Grapes, and in the
winter time Samphir^ and Capers, you may add them at any time ^ dish up your
Mutton and put by the Liquo^ you do not use, and thicken the other with yolks
of Eggs and sweet butter, put on the sauce and herbs over the meat, garnish
your dish with Lemon and Barberries.

To Farce, or S^uff a Fillet of Veal.
Take a large Leg of Veal and cut off a couple of Fillets from it, then mince a
handful of sweet-herbs and parsley, and the yolks of two or three hard eggs,
let all these be minced very small, then season it with a couple of grated
Nutmegs and a little salt, and so ^arce or stuff your Veal, ^hen lard it with
bacon and thyme very well, then let it be roasted, and when it is almost
enough, take some of your stuffing and as many curran^s, about a handful, and
put these to a little strong broth, a glass of Claret and a little vinegar: a
little sugar and some mace, when your meat is almost ready, take it up and put
it into this and let it stew, putting to it a little Butter melted, put your
meat in your dish and pour your sauce on it, and serve it up.

To Dress a Leg of Mutton, a Savoury Dish.
Boil your Mutton in water and salt for the space of an hour, then cut it into
thin slices and put it into a dish over a chafing dish of Coals without any
liquor, and in a little time you will find the Gravy will be liquor enough,
then put in a little salt and a little grated Nutmeg, one Onion or two or three
Shelots sliced, a sprig of Thyme and Winter Savory, let it stew between dishes
till it be almost enough, then put in a piece o^ fresh Butter, and when it has
stewed a little longer, take it up and serve it in, garnish your Dish with
pickled Barberries and pickled Oisters.

To Boil a Fore-Loin of Pork, with good Sauce to it.
Let your Pork be reasonably well salted and boil it very well, then have in
readiness a good quantity of Sorrel stripped from the stalks, and beaten in a
mortar as fine as possible you can, then put in a few crumbs of Bread, the
yolks of hard eggs with a little Mustard and Salt; and so serve in your Pork
with this sauce, and garnish your Dish with Parsley, or any other green Leaves.

Directions for Dressing of Fowl.
How to Roast a Hen or Pullet.
Take a Pullet or Hen full of eggs, draw it and roast it, being roasted break
it up and mince the Braun^ in thin slices, save the Wings whole or not mince
the Brauns and save the Rump with the Legs whole, stew all in the Gravy and a
little salt, then have a minced Lemon and put it in the gravy, dish the minced
Meat in the midst of the dish, and the Thighs, Wings, and Rumps about it,
garnish the dish with Orange and Lemon quartered, and serve them up covered.

To Roast Wood^ocks the English way.
First pull and draw them, then being washed and trussed Roast them, baste them
with Butter and save the Gravy, then make Tosts and Butter them, being roasted
bread them with grated bread and Flower, and serve them on a clean dish, on the
Tossed and Gravy.

To Roast Woodcocks the French Way.
Being new and fresh killed that day you use them, pull, truss, and lard them
with a broad piece o^ lard or bacon pricked over the Breast, being roasted serve
them on broiled Tosts, put in Verjuice or the juice of Orange with the Gravy,
and warmed on a fire.

To Roast a Pig the Plain way.
Take a Pig, scald and draw it, wash it clear and put some sage in the Belly,
prick it up and spit it, being roasted fine and crisp make sauce with chopped
sage and currants, well boiled in vinegar and fair water, then put to them the
Gravy of the Pig, a little grated Bread, the Brains and some Barberries, give
these a walm or two and serve the Pig on the sauce with a little beaten Butter.

To Roast a Pig otherways.
Take a Pig, scald and draw it, then mince some sweet herbs either sage or
Penni-royal, and roll it up in a ball with some Butter, prick it up in the Pigs
belly and roast him, being ro^^ted make s^wce with Butter, Vinegar, the Brains
and some Barb^rri^s.

To Roast a H^re.
Take a Hare, flea it, set it, and lard it with small lard, stick it with
Cloves and make a pudding in his Belly with grated Bread, grated Nutmeg and
beaten Cinnamon, Salt, Currants, Eggs, Cream and Sugar, make it good and stiff,
fill the Hare and roast it. If you would have the pudding green, put to it
juice of Spinach; If yellow, Saffron: Make for Sauce beaten Ginger, Nutmeg,
Cinnamon, Pepper, boiled Prunes and Currants strained, biscuit Bread beaten into
powder, Sugar and Cloves, all boiled up as thick as Water-Grewel.

Land, or Sea Fowl, How to Boil them.
HAlf roast your Fowls, sticking on them some Cloves as they roast, save the
Gravy, and when they are half roasted put them in a Pipkin with the Gravy, some
Claret wine, as much strong Broth as will cover them, Mace, Cloves, Pepper,
Ginger, some fried Onions and Salt, stew all well together, and serve them on
carved ^ippets.

How to Boil Plovers, Quails, Blackbirds, Rails, Thrushes, Snipes, Wheat ears,
Larks and Sparrows.
Take them and truss them, or cut off the heads and legs and boil them, scum
your Pipkin and put therein large Mace, Whitewine, Currants well picked and
washed, D^tes, M^rrow, Pepper and Salt, being well stewed, dish them on carved
Sippets, thicken the Broth with strained Almonds, Rose Water and Sugar, garnish
them with Lemon, Barberries, and grated bread.

To Boil Capons, Pullets, Chickens, Pigeons, Pheasants, Par^ridges.
Farce them either with the bone or bon'd, then take off the skin whole, with
the neck, wings and legs on, mince the body with some bacon or beef suet,
season it with some Nutmeg, Pepper, Cloves, beaten Ginger, Salt, and a few
sweet herbs finely m^nced, and mingled amongst some three or four yolks of
eggs, some Sugar, whole Grapes, Gooseberries, B^rberries and Pistaches, fill
the skins and prick them up in the back, then stew them between two dishes with
some strong broth, Whitewine, Butter, some large Mace, Marrow, Gooseberries and
sweet herbs, being stewed serve them on s^pets with some Marrow and sliced
Lemon, in Winter Currants.

To Boil C^p^ns or C^^ckens, with S^^e^ (...).
First boil them in water and salt, then boil some parsley, sage, two or three
hard eggs, chop them, then have a few thin slices of fine manchet and stew all
together, but break not the slices of Bread, stew them with some of the broth
wherein the Chick^ns boyls, some large mace, butter, a little whitewine or
vinegar, with a few barberries or grapes, dish up the Capons or Chickens on the
sauce, and run them over with sweet Butter and Lemon cut like dice, the peel
cut like small Lard, and boil a little peel with the Chickens.

To Boil any large Water Fowl, as Swan, Whopper, Wild or Tame Geese, Crane,
Hern, Duck, Mall^rd, etc.
Take a Goose and salt it two or three days, then truss it to boil, cut lard as
big as your little finger and lard the breast, season the lard with pepper, mace
and salt, then boil it in Beef broth or water and salt, put to it pepper grossly
beaten, a handful or two of Bayleaves, Thyme and Rosemary bound up very well,
boil them very well with the Fowl, then prepare some cabbage boiled very well
with water and salt, squeeze out the water from it and put it into a pipkin
with some strong broth, Claret wine, and a good big Onion or two, season it
with pepper, mace and salt, and two or three Anchovies dissolved, stew these
together with a Ladle full of sweet Butter and a little Vinegar, and when your
Goose is boiled enough, and your Cabbage on sippets, lay on the Goose with some
Cabbage on the breast and serve it up. Thus you may dress any large wild Fowl.

To Boil Pigeons.
Take Pigeons being finely cleans'd and trussed, put them in a Pipkin or
Skillet with some Mutton broth or fair water, set them a boiling and scum them
clean, then put to them large Mace or well washed Currants, some strained bread
strained with Vinegar and Broth, put it to the Pigeons with some sweet butter
and capers, boil them very white, and being boiled serve them on fine carved
sippets in the broth with some Sugar, garnish them with Lemon, fine Sugar,
Mace, Grapes, Gooseberries and Barberries, and run them over with beaten
Butter, garnish the dish with grated manchet.

To Stew Pigeons in the French Fashion.
Take Pigeons ready pulled and scalded, take the flesh out of the skin, and
leave the skin whole, with the legs and wings hanging to it, mince the bodies
with some lard or beef suet together very small, then put to them some sweet
herbs finely minced, and season all with cloves, mace, ginger, pepper, some
grated bread or parmison grated and yolks of eggs, fill again the skins and
prick them up on the back, then put them in a dish with some strong broth and
sweet herbs chopped, large mace, gooseberries, barberries or grapes, then have
some cabbage le^tice boiled in water and salt, put to them butter and serve
them up on fine sippets.

How to Pot up Fowl for to carry to Sea, or otherwise to be spent at home.
Take a good company of Ducks or Mallards, pull them and draw them, and lay
them in a tub with a little pepper and salt for twenty four hours, then truss
them and roast them, and when they are roasted let them drain from their gravy,
for that will make them corrupt, then put them handsomely into a pot, and take
the fat which came from them in the roasting and good store of Butter, and melt
them together in a pot set in a kettle of boiling water, put therein good store
of cloves bruised a little, some sliced mace, nu^meg, bayleaves and salt, and
let them stew in the butter a while, then while it is hot pour it over your
Fowls in the pot, and let the pot be filled so that the Fowls be covered, then
lay a Trencher upon them, and keep them down with a weight or stone until they
be cold, then take of the same kind of spice which you did put into your
butter, beat it very fine and strew over it, and lay some bayleaves on the top
so cover it up, they will keep a good while, drain your Fowl from the gravy,
twenty four hours before you put them into your pot.

Directions for Dressing of Fish.
How to Stew a Ca^p.
DRess the Carp and take out the milt, put it in a dish with the Carp, take out
the Gall then save the blood, and scotch with your Knife the back of the Carp
if the Carp be large, take a quart of Claret or Whitewine, four or five blades
of large mace, ten cloves, two large races of ginger sliced, two sliced
nutmegs, with the tops of thyme, marjoram, savory, and parsley chopped very
small, four great Onions whole, three or four bayleaves and some salt, stew
them all together with the Wine, when the Liquor boyls put in the Carp, with a
quarter of a pound of Sweet Butter, being stewed enough take a large dish, and
laying ^he Carp therein, pour the sauce thereon with the spices, lay on sliced
Lemon with some of the peel cut small, and run it over with beaten Butter,
garnish the dish with m^nchet grated and searced, and carved sipets laid round
the dish, you may ^or variety, the Carp being scaled, garnish the body with
stewed Oisters, some fried in white butter, some in green made by the juice of
spinach.

How to Roast a Carp.
Take a live Carp draw and wash it, taking away the gall, milt or spawn, then
make a pudding with some grated manchet some Almond paste, cream, currants,
grated nutmeg, raw yolks of eggs, sugar, carraway seed candied, some salt and
lemon, make a stiff pudding, and put it through the Gills into the belly of the
Carp, then spit it, and when it is roasted make sauce with the Gravy that falls
from it, with juice of orange, sugar and cinnamon, beat up the sauce thick with
the Butter, and di^h it up.

To Stew Oysters.
Take a pot^le o^ large Oysters, parboyl them in their own liquor, then wash
them from the dregs in warm water, and put them in a pipkin with a good big
Onion or two, and five or six blades of large mace, a little whole pepper, a
sliced nutmeg, a quarter of a pint of whitewine, as much wine vinegar, a
quarter of a pound of sweet butter with a little salt, stew them together on a
soft fire the space of half an hour, then dish them on sipets of french bread,
sliced lemon and barberries on that, then run them over with beaten butter, and
garnish the dish with grated manchet.

To Fry Oysters.
Strain the liquor from them, and parboyl them in a Kettle, then dry and roll
them in flower or make a bitter o^ eggs, flower, a little Cream and salt, dip
them therein and fry them in butter beating it up thick, having warmed the dish
rub it with some garlic and lay thereon the Oysters, garnishing the dish with
sliees of Orange.

To Boil a Pike.
Take your Pike and wash it clean, then truss it whole round with the tale in
his mouth, and his back scotched or cut in three places, then boil it in water,
salt and vinegar, put not the Pike in till the liquor boyls, and then make it
boil apace, and that will crisp your Pike, but afterward softly; The Pike
being boiled dish it, and garnish the dish with grated white bread, or ginger
fine beaten, then beat up the sauce with half a pound of butter, minced Lemon
or Orange, and pour it on the Pike wi^h sipets.

To make the sauce, you must put into a pipkin a pint of whitewine, sliced
ginger, mace, dates quartered, a pint of large Oysters with their liquor, a
little vinegar and salt, boil them a qua^ter of an hour, then mince a few
sweet-herbs and pa^sly, stew them till half the Liquor be consumed.

To Stew a Pike.
Take a Pike, flat it and lay it in a dish, when the blood is clean washed out,
put to it as much whitewine as will cover it, and set it a stewing, when it
boyls put in the Fish and scum it, and put to i^ some large mace, whole
cinnamon and some salt, when thoroughly s^ewed, dish it on sipets finely c^r^e^.

To Boil S^lmon.
Take as much water as will cover your Salmon, then take rosemary, thyme,
winter savory and salt, boil all these very well together, then put in some
wine vinear, and when your Salmon is boiled, let him remain in the same water
always until you have occasion to eat of it.

To Roast Salmon.
Take a Rand or Jole, cut it into four pieces and season it with a little
nutmeg and salt, stick a few cloves and put it on a small spit, put between it
some bayleaves, and stick it wi^h little sprigs of Rosemary, roast it and baste
it with Butter, save the gravy, and add to i^ for sauce some vinegar, butter,
and slices of Orange.

To Fry Salmon.
Take a Jole, Chine or Rand, and fry it in clarified butter, being stiff and
crisp fried, make sauce with a little Claret wine, sweet butter, grated nutmeg,
slices of Orange, and Oyster liquor, stew them all together and pour on the
sauce, and on that Parsley, Alisaunder and Sage leaves fried in butter.

Thus have I given you some short directions, for dressing of Flesh, Fowl and
Fish. I shall now give you directions for making bills of fare both first and
second course, for every month in the year, and so conclude my directions to
Cook-maid^.

A BILL OF FARE FOR Every Month in the Year.
January.
1. BRawn and Mustard.

2. Two boiled Capons and White Broth.

3. A Turkey Roasted.

4. A Shoulder of Mutton hash'd.

5. Two Geese boiled.

6. A Goose roasted.

7. Ribs or Surloin of Beef.

8. Minced Pyes.

9. A Loin of Veal.

10. A Pasty of Venison.

11. A Marrow Pie.

12. Roasted Capons.

13. Lamb.

14. Wooodcocks, Partridges, and smaller Birds.

Second Course.
1. A Sous'd Pig.

2. A Warden Pie.

3. Dried Neats Tongues.

4. A sous'd Capon.

5. Pickled Oysters and Mushrooms toget^er.

6. Sturgeon.

7. A Goose or Turkey Pie.

February.
1. A Chine of Roast Pork.

2. Veal or Beef roasted.

3. A Lamb Pie and Mince Pyes.

4. A Couple of Wild Ducks.

5. A Couple of Rabbets.

6. Fried Oysters.

7. A Skirret Pie.

Second Course.
1. A Whole Lamb roasted.

2. Three Widgeons.

3. A Pippin Pie.

4. A Iole of Sturgeon.

5. A cold Turkey Pie.

March.
1. NEats Tongue and Vdder^

2. Boiled Chickens.

3. A dish of stewed Oysters.

4. A di^h of young Rabbets.

5. A Grand Sallet.

Second Course.
1. A Dish of Soles or Smelts.

2. Marinate Flounders.

3. A Lambstone Pie.

4. An hundred of Asparagus.

5. A Warden Pie.

April.
1. GReen Geese or Veal and Bacon.

2. A Haunch of Venison roasted.

3. A Lumber Pie.

4. Rabbets and Tarts.

Second Course.
1. COld Lamb.

2. Cold Neats Tongue Pie.

3. Salmons, Lobsters, and Prawns.

4. Asparagus.

May.
1. Boiled Chickens.

2. Roasted Veal.

3. Roasted Capons.

4. Rabbets.

Second Course.
1. ARtichoke Pie hot.

2. Westphalia Bacon and Tarts^

3. Sturgeon, Salmon, Lobsters.

4. A dish of Asparagus,

5. A Tanfie.

June.
1. A Neats Tongue or Leg of Mutton and Colliflowers.

2. A Steak Pie.

3. A Shoulder of Mutton.

4. A Forequarter of Lamb.

5. A dish os Pease.

Second Course.
1. Sweetbread Pie.

2. A Capon.

3. A Gooseherry Tart.

4. Strawberries and Cream, or Strawberries, Whitewine, Rose Water and Sugar.

July.
1. A Westphaliaham and Pigeons.

2. A Loin of Veal.

3. A Venison Pasty.

4. Roast Capons.

Second Course.
1. PEase or French Beans.

2. A Codling Tart.

3. Artichokes, or a Pie made thereof^

4. Roast Chickens.

August.
1. CAlves head and Bacon.

2. An Olio or Grand Boiled Meat.

3. A Haunch of Venison.

4. A Pig Roasted.

Second Course.
1. MArinate Smelts.

2. A Pidgeon Pie.

3. Roast Chickens.

4. A Tart.

5. Some Cream and Fruit.

September.
1. CApon and White Broth.

2. Neats Tongue and Vdder roasted.

3. A Powdered Go^se.

4. A Roast Turkey.

Second Course.
1. A Potato Pie.

2. Ro^st Par^ridges.

3. A dish of Larks.

4. Creams and Fruit.

October.
1. ROast Veal.

2. Two Brand Geese Roasted.

3. A Grand Salle^.

4. Roasted Capons.

Second Course.
1. PHeasants, Pouts and Pigeons.

2. A dish of Quails and Sparrows.

3. A Warden Pie, Tarts and Custards.

November.
1. A Shoulder of Mutton and Oysters.

2. a Loin of Veal.

3. Geese Roasted.

4. A Pasty of Venison.

Second Course.
1. TWo Herns one L^^ded.

2. A Sowsed Turbot.

3. Two Pheasants one lard^d.

4. A Roll of Beef.

5. A Sows'd Mullet and Bafe.

6. Iellies and Tarts.

December.
1. STewed Broth of Mutton and M^rrow B^nes.

2. Lambs head and White Broth.

3. A Chine of B^ef roasted.

4. Minced Pyes.

5. A Roast Turkey stuck wi^h Cloves.

6. Two Capons, one larded.

Second Course.
1. A Yung Lamb or Kid.

2. Two Brace of Partridges.

3. B^llone Sawsages, Anchovies, mushrooms, Cavier, and pickled Oysters in a
dish together.

4. A Quince Pie.

5. Six Woodcocks.

Directions for Under Cook-Maids.
IF you would so fit your self for this employment, as that it may be a means
of raising you to higher prefermen^, you must be careful to be diligent and
willing to do what you are bid to do, and though your employment be greasy and
smooty, yet if you be careful you may keep your self from being nasty.
Therefore let it be your care to keep your self neat and clean, observe every
thing in Cookery that is done by your Superior or Head Cook, treasure it up in
your memory, and when you meet with a convenient opportunity, put that in
practice which you have observed, this course will advance you from a drudge,
to be a Cook another day. Every one must have a beginning, and if you be
ingenious and bend your mind to it, and be willing to learn, there is none will
be so churlish or unkind, as to be unwilling to teach you, but if you be
stubborn and careless, and not give your mind to learn, who do you think will
be willing to teach you; you must beware of Gossips and Chairwomen, for they
will misadvise you, take heed of the solicitations of the flesh for they will
undo you, and though you may have mean thoughts of your self, and think none
will meddle with such as you, it is a mistake, for sometimes brave Gallants
will fall foul upon the Wench in the Scullery.

Directions for such as desire to be Dairy-Maids.
THose who would endeavor to gain the esteem and reputation of good Dairy
Maids, must be careful that all their Vessels be scalded well, and kept very
clean, that they milk their Cattle in due time, for the Kine by custom will
expect it though you neglect, which will tend much to their detriment.

The hours and times most approved, and commonly used for milking, are in the
Spring and Summer time between five and six in the morning, and between six and
seven in the evening: And in the Wint^r between seven and eight in the morning,
and four and five in the ev^ning.

In the next place you must be careful that you do not waste your Cream by
giving it away to liquorish persons.

You must keep certain days for your churning, and be sure to make up your
Butter neatly and cleanly, washing it well from the Butter-milk and then salt
it well.

You must be careful to make your Cheeses good and tender by well ordering of
them, and see that your Hogs have the Whey, and that it be not given away to
Gossiping and idle people, who live merely upon what they can get from Servants.

That you provide your winter Butter and Cheese in summer, as in May: And when
your Rowings come in, be sparing of your fire and do not lavish away your Milk,
Butter, or Cheese.

If you have any Fowls to fat, look to them that it may be for your credit and
not your shame, when they are brought to Table.

When you milk the Cattle, stroke them well, and in the summer time save those
strokings by themselves, to put into your Morning milk Cheese.

I look upon it to be altogether needless, for to give you any directions for
the making of Butter or Cheese, since there are very few, (especially in the
Country) that can be ignorant thereof: I shall only say, that the best time to
pot up Butter for winter, is in the month of May, for then the Air is most
temperate, and the Butter will take Salt best. How^ver it may be done at any
time betwixt May and September.

I shall now give you some few directions for made Cream, and for Milk made
better by art, and so conclude my directions to Dairy-Maids.

How to make your ordinary Clouted Cream.
Take a quantity of milk from the Cow, and put into a broad earthen pan, and
set it over a very slow fire, letting it stand there from morning to night,
suffering it not by any means to boil, then take it off the fire and set it in
some place all night to cool, in the morning dish off your Cream, for it will
be very thick.

To make Fresh Cheese and Cream.
Take a Pottle of new milk as it comes from the Cow, and half a pound of
blanched Almonds beaten very small, and make a thick Almond milk with a pint of
Cream strained, and a little before you go to dinner make it blood warm, and
season it with a little Sugar, Rose Water, and ^ierced Ginger, and put to it a
little Runner, and when it is scum'd bread it up and whey it, and put it into a
mould and press it with your hand, and when it is well wheyed, put it into a
dish with Cream.

To make a Cream of Codlings.
After you have scalded your Codlings and peeled of the skins, and scraped the
pulps from the cores with a little Sugar and Rosewater, strain them, and lay
the pulp of your Codlings in a dish, with as much Cream as you please about
them.

To make a Iunket.
Take Ewes or Goats milk, if you have neither of these then take Cows milk, and
put it over the fire to warm, then put in a little Runnet to it, then pour it
out into a dish and let it cool, then strew on cinnamon and sugar, then take
some Cream and lay upon it, scraping Sugar thereon serve it up.

To make Rasbery Cream.
When you have boiled your Cream take two ladlefulls of it being almost cold,
bruise the Rasberrries together with it, and season it with sugar and
rose water, and put it into your Cream stirring it all together, and so dish it
up.

To make S^ow Cream.
Break the whites of six Eggs, put thereto a little Rose Water, beat them very
well together with a bunch of Feathers till they come perfectly to resemble
snow, then lay on the said snow in heaps upon other cream, that is cold which
is made fit for the Table, you may put under your Cream in the bottom of your
dish, part of a penny Loaf, and stick therein a branch of Rosemary and Bays and
fill your Tree with the said snow, so serve it up.

To make a Syllabub.
Take a pint of Verjuice in a bowl, milk the Cow to the Verjuice, then take off
the curd, and take sweet Cream and beat them together with a little Sack and
Sugar, put it into your Syllabub pot, strew Sugar on it and serve it up.

To make a Whipped Syllabub.
Take the whites of two Eggs and a pint of Cream, with six spoonfuls of Sack
and as much sugar as will sweeten it, then take a birchen rod and whip it, as
it rises in froth scum it, and put it into the Syllabub pot, and so continue
it with whipping and scumming till your syllabub Pot be full.

To make an Excellent Cream.
Take a Quart of Cream and set it a boiling with a large mace or two, whilst it
is boiling cut some thick sippets, and lay them in a very fine clean dish, then
have seven or eight yolks of Eggs strained with Rose Water, put some sugar to
them, then take the Cream from the fire, put in the Eggs and stir all together,
then pour on the slices of fine manchet, and being cold scrape on sugar and
serve it.

Directions for such who intend to be Laundry-Maids in Great Houses.
IF you would have the esteem credit and reputation of a complete Laundry-Maid,
you must observe these following directions.

First, You must take care of all the Linen in the house (except Points and
Laces) and whatever you wash do it quickly and do not let it lie and stink and
grow yellow, and so create to your self the trouble of washing it again before
it be used.

Secondly, You must take care that all the bracks and rents in the Linen be
duly mended.

Thirdly, Keep your certain days for washing of your Linen, and other days for
washing of such Rooms as are appointed you to wash and keep clean.

Fourthly, You must be sparing and not lavish and wastful of your soap, fire
and candle.

Fifthly, Entertain no Chairwomen unknown to your Lady or Mistress:

Sixthly, Be careful that your Tubs and Copper, or whatever else you make use
of be kept clean, and in good repair.

Seventhly, You must be careful that you rise early every morning, but more
especially on washing days.

Directions for House-Maids in Great Houses.
1. YOur principal Office is to make clean the greatest part of the House, and
see that you suffer no Room to lie foul.

2. That you look well to all the stuff, as Hangings, Chairs, Stools, etc. And
^ee that they be often brushed and the Beds frequently turned.

3. That you do not misplace any thing by carrying it out of one Room to
another, for that is the way to have them lost, or you soundly chid for not
keeping them in their proper places.

4. That you be careful and diligent to all strangers, and see that they lack
nothing in their Chambers, which your Mistress or Lady will allow, and that
your close stools and Chamber pots be duly emptied, and kept clean and sweet.

5. That you help the Laundry-Maid in a morning on the washing day.

6. That in the afternoon you b^ ready to help the Waiting Woman or
Housekeeper in their preserving and distilling.

Directions for Scullery maids in Great Houses.
1. YOu must be careful to keep sweet and clean, the several Rooms which
belongs to your charge, as the Kitchen, Pantry, Wash house, etc.

2. You must wash and scowr all the plates and dishes that are used in the
kitchen, likewise the dressers and cupboards, also all kettles, pots, pans,
chamberpots, with all other iron, brass, tin, and pewter materials, that belong
to the Chambers and Kitchen.

3. You must wash your own Linen, keeping your self sweet and clean, remembering
always, so soon as you have made an end of your dirty work, to wash and dress
your self neatly, titely and cleanly.

Now if you be careful and diligent, and cleanly in performing this place, you
will have notice taken of you, and you will be advanced to a higher and more
profitable employment.

FINIS.
Books sold by Thomas Passinger at the Three Bibles on London Bridge.
A French and English Dictionary, composed by Mr. Randolph Cotgrave, Folio.

A Mirror or Looking-glass for Saints and Sinners, showing the justice of God
on the one, and his mercy toward the other. Set forth in some thousand of
examples by Sam. Clark late Minister of Bennet Finck London, in two Volumes in
folio.

Royal and Practical Chemistry, by Oswaldus Crollius, and John Hartman,
faithfully rendered into English, folio, price 10 s.

Gods Revenge against Murder, by John Reynolds, containing thirty Tragical
Stories, digested into six Books newly reprinted, folio, price 10 s.

Lord Bacon's Natural History, folio, price 8 s.

Sandy's Travels, containing a description of the Turkish Empire of Egypt, and
the holy Land, of the remote parts of Italy, and Islands adjoining, folio,
price 8 s.

Markham's Masterpiece.

Roman Antiquities, by The. Goodwin, quarto, price 2 s. 6 d.

The famous History of the destruction of Troy, in three Books, quarto, price 3
s.

Valentine and Orson, price 18 d.

Etymologicum parvum, by Francis Gregory, octavo, price 3 s.

Chemical essays by John Beguminus, price 1 s. 8 d.

Spiritual Antidotes against sinful contagion, by Tho. Doolittle, price 18 d.

Pool's Dialogue betwixt a Papist and a Protestant, twelves, price bound 1 s.

Monasticon Favershamiense, Or a Description of the Abbey of Faversham, octavo,
price bound 18 d.

The Christians Crown of Glory, or Holiness the way to Happiness, octavo, price
bound 18 d.

The Path way to Health, price bound 18 d.

The Complete Academy, or Nursery of Complements, bound 1 s.

The Book of Knowledge in three parts, price 10 d.

The Book of Palmistry in octavo, price bound 18 d.

The Wise Virgin, being a Narrative of Gods dealing with Martha Hatfield, price
bound 18 d.

The Pilgrims Port, or the weary Man's rest in the Grave, in twelves, price
bound 1 s.

The famous History of the five wise Philosophers, containing the Life of
Iehosaphat, Son of Avenerio, Emperor of Corma, and his wonderful conversion to
the Christian Faith.

The great Assize, by Sam^ Smith.

The delectable History of Amadis de G^ul.

The pleasant History of Paladine of England.

The Bear-baiting of Women.

The History of Friar Bacon and Friar Bungy.

New conceited Letters.

The Jovial Garland, containing all the newest songs that are now used.

The Penitent Prodigal, or a gracious Reproof for Pharisaical Saints, by I. H.

The Christians best Exercise in the wors^ of times, by I. H.

Scarborough Spaw, being a de^cription of the nature and virtues of the Spaw of
Scarborough in Yo^^shire, by Doctor Witty.

The French Schoolmaster.

Farnabies Epigrams.

Newton's Art of Logic.

Newton's Art of Rhetoric.

The famous History of Don Bellianis of Greece, in three parts, being now
complete.

The famous History of Montelion, Knight of the Oracle.

Hodder's Arithmetic in twelves.

Ovid de Tristibus in English.

Bishop Hall's Soliloquies in twelves.

The Poems of Ben. Johnson Junior.

A plain and familiar Exposition of the ten Commandments, by John Dod.


