THE UNLIMITED GOD, Not limited by any of the CHILDREN of LIGHT, BUT BY Them
who are in the Darkness and Straitness; such would be limiting the Unlimited
God. From the Spirit of the Lord is this given forth, that all such may Read
with the Eye which is not busy, nor looks into things above its Reach. From
one who becomes All to All, to gain some to Christ, and has true Freedom in
the Lord to go into the Water, that I may bring to the Rock, and save one out
of the Sea, which is ready to be Drowned, and Lost. Also, A warning, and a
Charge from the Lord God, to all the Baptists Teachers every where, who are
Ministers of the Letter, and not of the Spirit, to cease Teaching, or Deceiving
any longer. Also, A true discovery of the way to the Kingdom Within, from all
the Priests, and False Teachers, who are crying, Lo here, and lo there
without, In the way of Balaam for Filthy lucre sake, Matthew 24. which Christ
said should come, and John said was come, and the World went out after them,
who went out from the Light sixteen Hundred years ago. Given forth from the
SPIRIT of the LORD, in HVMPHRY WOLLRICH, who was not sent to Baptize, But to
preach the Gospel; yet has Baptized one with Water for the Gospels sake; and
am not without a Law to God, yet am made All things to All, to gain some to
Christ.

PSALM. 78.41. They turned back and tempted God, and limited the Holy One of
Israel.

Such have the Form, but not the Power: but yet would Limit. THe Brotherhood
is in Christ, which is not Divided, out of all Division, Judging, etc censuring
one another, are all that are in him, to whom all Judgment is committed. To
you all, this is the word of the Lord God, and a Charge from my Father to you
all, Judge nothing before the Time, as all do, which Judge with that which is
for Judgment; who have got the Form, but are out of the Spirit, and
Spiritual Man, which Judges all things: and though I am but as yesterday in
comparison of many, who were in Christ before me, yet I care not for man's
Judgment; neither do I judge my own self for that thing for which I am Judged:
but all you my Friends, be sober, and cool in your minds, and wait in that
which is the Everlasting Day, and makes all things manifest, and will not be
limited by any, who are in the Darkness, nor Judged; but will Judge, and
Condemn all who would Judge him, and limit him, as he in all Ages has done:
and he is now the same, and all that have a form, but would limit the power,
shall know it in Gods time; and this is laid upon me from the Lord God
Almighty, to warn all such that they be silent, and stop their mouths before
him, whose ways is unsearchable, and will not be limited now, but is unlimited,
as in all Ages he was: and because I have true freedom in the Lord, and am not
without a law to God herein, which is to Baptize one with water, though I was
not sent to Baptize, but to Preach the Gospel, as Paul was not sent to Baptize,
but did Baptize (1 Cor. 1.17.) by Permission, and not by Commission, that he
might gain some unto Christ, who is the End of all Types, Shadows, and
Figures, and the Everlasting day into which Paul was come, where shadows flee
away, who became all things to all, read 1 Cor. 9.19. for though I be free from
all men, says Paul, I have made my self servant unto all, that I might gain
the more. And unto the Jews I became as a Jew. (Mark) as a Jew, that I might
gain the Jews to them that are under the Law, as under the Law. Consider where
Paul was, whether he were not in Christ, the end of the law, to them that were
without law, as without law, being not without a law to God, but to the weak,
he became as weak: (Mark) Paul the Aged, and chiefest of the Apostles, I am
made all things to all men, that I might by all means save some: and this I do
for the Gospels sake, as he did, that I might be partaker thereof with Joy.

And though I have born an open Testimony for the Lord God, against all them
who have been Baptized with Water, and knew no better a leader and guider
thereinto than the Letter. The sons of God, and servants of God, who were led
into it, or shall be led into it by the Spirit of the Lord, which spirit will
not be limited, I never did, nor never shall condemn any such as this Woman,
having given her testimony in public, both before and since I Baptized her
with Water, that she was led by this Unlimited Spirit, and not from the
Baptists rule and leader, which is the Letter, and kills, but by the Spirit,
the Sons leader; and gives life, and the Children of the light witness this
her testimony to be true: And likewise she has declared that, she was moved of
the Lord to desire me only to Baptize her with Water, and said, The spirit by
which the Baptists are led, did not convince her, nor bring her to the
knowledge of the Truth: And the Baptist Teacher, who would have had her to
receive it of, some of them said he, did believe she was led to it by the
Spirit of the Lord; yet neither he, nor his spirit did she own; and this I
leave upon all who fear the Lord, both small and great to Judge, whether it is
better to save life, or to destroy?

And I have the Testimony of the Lord in me, that this is not against the
Truth; neither shall it be a just occasion of stumbling to any, who are really
therein, but to such as are in the Dark, and are looking, and judging with the
Evil Eye, and have been Disobedient to the Word in their own particulars: to
such this may be a stumbling stone; but all whose minds are without, seeking a
proof of Christ in me; to you, I say, Judge your selves, turn in, and examine
your selves; know you not that Christ is in ye, except ye be Reprobates.
Receive the word as the Bereans did, and then search the Scriptures, Acts 16.3.
Paul, who denied Circumcision, which was outward in the Flesh, circumcised
Timothy, that he might gain the Jews, whose minds were without, and bring
them to the one Circumcision, and one Baptism in spirit, whose praise is not
of men, but of God. Read Acts 21.21, to the 25. where you may read, that Holy
Paul shaved his Head, that he might take away the vail which was over the
Jews, and thereby bring them to their true Head, Christ, the end of the Law,
and the end of all Vows and Oaths, Acts 18.18. and so that none that fears
the Lord may stumble hereat, be ye of what Sect or Form soever, be ye
faithful to what ye know. I am you Brother, and Warn you all, and exhort you
all: Come down into the cool, and low spirit, for you and I must stand or fall
unto the Lord, our own Master: and this is safe for us all, and we shall be
preserved from that which causes War, Striving, and falling out by the way.
And oh, how do I desire, and the Lord Gods knows, to me it is a Joyful thing,
to see Brethren live together in Unity, not Biting, and Devouring one another;
not striving, and contending about those things which Paul could do, or leave
undone, as he saw occasion ministered unto him by them, whom he had a desire to
catch by guile; all mind your own as I do herein, for that which goes out,
and leads you out, will devour and desile you; but if you are staid at home, ye
shall divide the spoil with him that destroys that which defiles you: Prepare
to meet the Lord, ye sons of Jacob, whom the Lord has chosen for his
Peculiar Treasure, and none say in your hearts, is not Christ the end of all
these things which are outward? I say, he is to all that are in him, and sin
not: But all are not come to this, who are convinced of the Truth, and where it
is. And though they have heard the Lord calling them out of Egypt, yet there
is a Baptism in the Sea, and in the Cloud, and a great War, and mighty Enemies
before they come to their Rest, and their desired Heaven: and though the Light
has shined out of darkness, and there be some separation, and a first days
work done, yet is not the new Creation wholly finished, nor the Rest wholly
known, nor fully entered into, which remains to the people of God. For he that
is set down in the Rest, in the Heavenly place in Christ Jesus, is ceased from
his own works, as God did from his: and though the Lord has rained down his
Manna round about your Tents, yet the Clouds may return after the rain, and
while the Figure, the Veil, and the Cloud is standing; and the first
Tabernacle, wherein you have long pitched the way into the Holiest of all, is
not wholly known; so while you are Judging, or condemning without, that which
is for Judgment is standing within, and he who is the first and the last, the
beginning and the end of all shadows, Types and figures, is yet not dwelt in,
nor set down in by you, but lies hid within the veil, which veil is done
away in Christ, where circumcision, nor uncircumcision avails not any thing,
but Faith that works by love: And we are all the Sons of God by Faith. Read
Galathians 3.23. But before Faith came, we were kept under the Law, shut up
unto the Faith which should afterward be revealed. Come down into the Deep you
that have an Ear to hear, or a Heart to understand this, the Law is added
because of Sin, and is the Schoolmaster to bring to Christ, who is the end
both of Sin and the Law, to which it was added: Read, and consider Verse 25.
But after that Faith is come, we are no longer under a Schoolmaster, but we
are all the Children of God by Faith in Christ Jesus: And as many of you, (Mark
you Baptists) as many of you as have been Baptized into Christ, have put on
Christ the end of all, and the body of days, times, and shadows. But this is
not come to you, though you have been Baptized with Water; for your time is not
in the Fathers hand, but your tongues is your own, and your time is always,
though Christ's time, and the Fathers time ye know not; and therein ye can pray
when ye will, and in your own will, which is contrary to God; ye can speak evil
of those things ye know not, and ye exercise your selves in things that are too
high for you. Therefore, to you all, this is the Word of the Lord God: All you
Baptist Teachers, feed not the people with windy Doctrine, or words without the
life: And I charge you all in the presence of the Lord God, which confess you
have never heard his Voice at any time, but says that God speak not since the
days of the Apostles. Cease Teaching any longer, for his sheep hear his voice,
and his voice is the same now, that it was unto Adam, Abraham, and Samuel, not
carnal, but spiritual; neither was it ever heard with any carnal Ear, nor his
shape seen with any carnal Eye, but ye, by your own confessions, are Ministers
of the letter: Therefore I charge you all, that I may be clear of your blood,
leave murdering, for that Kills; but speak, if the Spirit give you utterance,
for that gives life, and brings the Soul out of Death to hear its Shepherds
Voice. And do not say we deny the Scriptures, or any of the Ordinances of God
any more, as ye have often done, until you hear us deny them, which we shall
never do: but we owneth the Bible of the Scriptures to be a true Declaration of
God, and Christ: but I say, all that own the Scriptures as ye do, and set them
up in the room of Christ; and is there any greater Idolatry in Rome than this,
to say the Bible is the sword of the Spirit, and the Judge of the Spirit? when
it says, All Judgment is committed to the Son, and the Spiritual Man
judges all things: And to say the Bible is the Guide, Leader, and Rule to walk
by, when it says, That the Sons of God were led, and guided by the Spirit of
God.

Answer these Queries; was Abraham, Enoch, and Noah, and all the Holy men of
God, before Moses time without a a Leader, a Guide, or Judge? or was any of
these without the Word of the Lord? seeing they had not the Bible which which
ye say is the Rule, and Judge for the Saints to walk by, and the word of the
Lord?

Whether the Jews that had the Bible, had the Word of the Lord? or heard it at
any time? or whether they did not think to have Eternal life in the Scriptures?
and so make an Idol of that which is profitable in its place as ye do, but were
Enemies to the light, as ye are, and would not come to him for life? and
whether any by the Scripture can come to the knowledge of Christ? seeing they
that had them, as ye have, and were painted with words, and had the sheeps
clothing, but knew not Christ thereby? for had they known him, they would not
have Crucified the Lord of Life: and by this, and in this, which you call the
Law and Testimony, they were contending against the Law and Testimony, as ye
are, and said by their law he deserved to die. And this is the state not only
of you Baptists, but of all Sects, and Opinions, and Religions in Christendom,
which have set up any other thing soever, to be Judge, Leader, or Teacher; or
call any other thing the Law or Testimony, then the Spirit of Prophecy, or the
Law, which is Light, and has lighted every man that comes into the world. And
the Eye is blinded in you, which should see the Body, the life, and substance,
and in darkness ye are, and in your sins, and in sorrow shall you lie down,
and your end shall be destruction, who are led by any other thing than the
light within, in whom are found treasures of Wisdom, and treasures of
Knowledge; yea, durable Riches, and exceeding Righteousness, which exceeds
all yours, which speaks of Justification by Christ, but your selves in your
sins: for there is none comes unto Christ, but they come to perfection;
neither does any sin at all, who abide in him, which is perfect, and cannot
sin; Sin is not of Christ, but of the Devil: Therefore see what your way is,
that you are in, and what your Ordinances are to you; who are found doing your
Fathers work, making it your daily work to strive against the Truth, which sets
free from sin, as the Jews did against Christ, and said they were Abraham's
seed, and were never in bondage to any: but could not see his shape, nor hear
his Voice, who should have set them free from sin; nor themselves could they
not see to be servants of sin, and of their Father the Devil, though they were
doing his work, as ye are, for which the Lord God of life, and power, will
reward you with Judgment, unless you speedily repent, and do no more so
wickedly.

And all you professors, of what sort soever, that I may be clear of your
blood, I warn you all in the power of the Lord, do not persecute those despised
people, which by the Scorns are called Quakers: Do not magnify your selves
against them, nor give not your power to the Beast, and false Prophet; nor
gather your selves with Gog and Magog; and look not upon them, because the Sun
has looked upon them, and the heat thereof has scorched them, and made them
black, for the Lord has given his Word unto them, and many are they which
publish it: Kings of Armies shall flee apace before the beautiful Sons and
Daughters of Sion; and though they have lain among the pots, yet shall they be
as the wings of a Dove, covered with silver, and her feathers with yellow gold,
Psalm. 68.13.

Ye are they which have been as of the offscouring of all things whom my soul
is joined unto; and in the bundle of Life is my soul bound up with yours, and
in the Book of Life can you see my name written with yours? if I forget you,
let my right hand forget her cunning, and my Tongue fail that it speak no more,
ye precious sons and daughters of Sion. Arise, and thresh the Mountains, for
the Lamb has opened his mouth, and the threshing Instrument is given you, and
the two-edged Sword is known. Arise, arise, and lay your swords upon your
enemies necks; Let not your hands spare nor your eye pity but wound the wicked,
and the hairy scalp of them that go on in Rebellion; and my soul shall be glad
when it sees the vengeance. Oh my Brethren! and oh my Sisters, which has long
been rejected and despised, be ye all faithful to the Lord God Almighty! let
Righteousness and Innocence be the girdle of your loins, and by you shall
Kings be ungirded, Judges and Counselors shall be led away spoiled; yea, all
the Princes, Nobles, and honorable of the earth, by you is the Lord
overturning Kingdoms, and establishing Kingdoms in Righteousness, even by
you whose weapons are not carnal but mighty, is the Lord God Almighty
overturning, and laying the world as a wilderness, and destroying him that
opened not the door of his prisoner, this spark is kindled; yea, his holy One
will prove a flame, and shall burn up the Briers, and Thorns, and the trees of
the wilderness, and of the forest; the Oaks of Bashan, and the Cedars of
Lebanon shall be few, that a child may write them: The Lion is come out of the
Thicket, and the destroyer of the Gentiles has uttered his voice out of Sion;
therefore tremble, tremble, and be amazed, ye beasts of the Field, flee to your
strong holds, you whose minds be without from the Light, see if the Rocks, or
your earthly holds, can hide you from the presence of our God, and of the Lamb;
see what ye will do in this day wherein the Lord will bear no longer: Ye
Priests and Magistrates, which have long persecuted this poor, and afflicted
people: Repent, repent, and oppress them no longer, for the Lord has looked
upon their low estate, yea, he has remembered his covenant to a thousand
generations; the Covenant which he made with Isaac and Jacob, Abraham his
friend, and his seed for evermore, even the seed of Jacob, which served for a
wife, shall become thousands and millions, and possess the gates of all that
hate them, Genesis 24.60.

Oh England, England! which has called your selves Christians, and have been
long fasting, praying, and fighting for a Reformation, and have called your
selves of Christ herein, and have covered your selves with the Saints words,
and Prophets words, but have been inwardly ravened from the Life and Spirit,
and truth which they were in: And I am troubled for you all, and your iniquity
lies heavy upon me, and what will ye do? and how will you Answer before the
Lord, that when his Son, which he has sent into England, to gather his sheep
as a shepherd, from all the greedy shepherds that has fed themselves, and have
clothed themselves, and scattered the sheep of Gods pasture, which are men
against him have ye all risen as one man, and ye have resisted, and withstood
the Lords Work here in England, which is a mavelous work, and a wonder to all
who have the profession, but their minds is estranged from the light of Christ
within? And I am troubled at my very heart for you all, for I know your end
will be bitter as wormwood; yea, destruction from the Almighty, and a strange
punishment for all you workers of Iniquity; let your profession be what it
will, This is your portion (says the Lord God) unless you repent, and obey
the light of Christ in you, which is the Lords Candle, and searches and tries
all your reins, and shows you your hypocrisy, and how you have but
dissembled, and drawn near to the Lord; and with your tongues have cried, Lord,
Lord, but your hearts have been far both from him, and his righteousness. I
say, Come down out of all your thoughts, reasonings, and imaginations, to the
light, which is the eye, and ye shall see the body of sin is yet standing, and
the body of Christ have not yet been discerned, and ye shall see the bed
whereon ye have stretched your selves too short; and the covering which ye have
had, has not been of the Spirit, and so too narrow to wrap your selves in:
therefore I counsel you all, Come to Christ, buy of me gold tried in the fire,
that ye may be rich; and white raiment, that ye may be clothed, and that your
shame and blindness may appear no longer; for Christ is come unto you not to
bring peace, but war; and against you all is it already proclaimed, and your
utter destruction and ruin is determined of the Lord God of power, unless ye
come down to the light in your Consciences, and take hold of that which is his
strength, and so make peace, and agree with your adversary quickly, while he is
in the way: He is not come to bring salve for you, but a sword; not to build,
but to destroy, and pull down the wall you have built, that's daubed with
untempered mortar: Now is the Sword of the Lord drawn, and made ready for the
slaughter, and shall be bathed in Heaven, and made fat with the blood of Bulls,
Rams, and Goats, even in the blond of all them who are in the stubborn
fighting, and tearing nature, which have devoured, grieved, and oppressed the
innocent lambs, and scattered the sheep of my Fathers pasture; now is the axe
laid to the trees root, which has cumbred the ground (read within) Christ the
light of the world which lights every man, and Satan has been exalted in the
temple of God, and in you has showed and sat as God, and upon the land of my
people is come up thorns and briars, and man which was made upright and
perfect, is gone from the light within, in which he was created, and has
sought ont many inventions, and there has been seeking the Lord in his
thoughts, where God was not to be found.

Come all you Professors, Priests and people, and Magistrates, to the light in
you, for there is a way in the wilderness, which no other eye can see, read Job
28.7. if you have an ear to hear, there is a path which no fowl knows, and
which the Vulters eye has not seen, the Lions whelp has not trodden it, nor
the fierce Lion passed by it, Isai. 35.8. in the habitation of Dragons, an
highway shall be there, and a way, and it shall be called the way of holiness,
the unclean shall not pass over it, but the redeemed of the Lord shall return,
and walk therein, and the ransomed of the Lord shall come to Sion, with songs,
and everlasting joy upon their heads, they shall obtain joy, and gladness, and
sorrow, and sighing shall flee away, and in this day shall be fulfilled that
which is written by the Prophet, With joy shall ye draw water out of the wells
of Salvation, Isai. 12.5. Sing unto the Lord for he has done excellent things;
this is known in all the earth, cry out and shout thou inhabitant of Sion, for
great is the Holy One of Israel in the midst of thee, and then shall the
mountain of the Lords House be established on the top of all the mountains of
Israel, where the sheep have been scattered, even when the Lord has thoroughly
purged away your dross, and taken away all your Tin, and Sion redeemed with
judgment, and her converts with righteousness, (mark, your body is the house
where judgment must begin) and the destruction of the transgressors, and
sinners shall be together, and they that forsake the Lord shall be consumed;
for they shall be as an Oak, whose leaf fades, and as a garden that has no
water; read and understand, Isai, the first, The wise men with the ear, that
can hear, and the strong shall be as tow, and the maker of it as a spark, and
they shall both burn together, and none shall quench them: And I will restore
thy Judges as at the first, and thy Counselors as at the beginning; Remember
Moses the Judge and Counselor who was faithful in all his house; afterward
thou shall be called the City of righteousness, the faithful City: and this
is that new Jerusalem which is free, and the Mother of us all, and the City,
and the way, wherein no unclean thing shall enter, but they that have washed
their robes, and made them white in the blood of the Lamb. Consider this all ye
that speak of being justified by Christ, but live at ease and pleasure, and are
yet in your sins, Rev. 7.13. And one of the Elders answered, saying unto me;
What are these which are arrayed in white robes, and whence came they? And he
said to me, these are they which came out of great tribulation, and have
followed me in the regeneration, and are come from far out of the degeneration,
and have washed their robes, and made them, white: in the blood of the Lamb;
therefore are they before the throne of God, and serve him day and night in his
Temple (consider) there is no night there, and he that sits on the Throne
shall dwell among them, they shall hunger no more, neither thirst any more;
neither shall the Sun light on them, nor any heat (mark ye hot Professors) for
the Lamb that is in the midt of the Throne shall feed them, and shall lead them
unto living fountains of waters, and God shall wipe away all tears from their
eyes; and these are they which sing the new song, who are passed from the old
things, from death to life, and stand before the Throne of God; and these have
the new name, even their Fathers Name, and the Name of the City of their God,
which name none knows but they that have it written in their foreheads; and
here is our joy, and our glorying is not in the flesh, nor our boasting in
self, but we glory in God, and our souls shall make their boasts in the Lord;
this shall trouble the prond, but the humble shall hear thereof, and be glad:
That we know our Redeemer lives, and our election made sure unto us, which
cannot, be deceived, and our Names written in the Lambs Book of life, before
the foundation of the world was laid in man's heart; oh every one that hungreth
and thirsts, eat of the bread which satisfies, and feed no longer, nor spend
your money for that which satisfies not; come all to the waters which he has
showed us, as he did to John, Rev. 22.1. A pure river of water of life, clear
as crystal, proceeding out of the Throne of God, and of the Lamb in the midst
of the streets of it, come down to the eye, and see the River that has
streets, and of either side of the River, was there the tree of life, which
bare twelve manner of fruits, and yields her fruit every month, and the
leaves of the tree were for the healing of the Nations. This is the first
resurrection, the first, and the last, the Alpha and Omega, the beginning and
the end; and abides a Priest for ever after the Order of Melchisedeck, without
beginning of days, or end of life. Consider this, all ye that are accusing us
for denying the resurrection, but are yet in your sins, and have no part in the
first resurrection, which we are witnesses of, for they are blessed and holy,
that has part of the first resurrection; for on such the curse, death and hell
has no power, blessed are they that do his Commandments; yea more blessed then
they that talk of them, for they shall have right to this River, and an
entrance shall be ministered to this tree of Life, which grows in the midst of
the Paradise of God; here are those glorious things witnessed and known in
them, in whom Christ is glorified, which are spoken of the City of our glorious
God, into which none shall enter but such as are purified, and made glorious
within; its not every one that says Lord, Lord, that shall enter in. (Hear O
ye Professors) but such as do the will of my Father which is in Heaven, the
Kingdom is within, and none but the pure in heart can see it, but are crying,
Lo here, and lo there, contrary to Christ's doctrine, which says, Go not out
after them, the kingdom is within the seed, even the light of the world was
within the Jews, and was sown in them, but not grown in them which did crucify
him, Matthew. 24. Read and see whether your Teachers be not the same false
Teachers, deceivers, and false Christ's, which Christ said had the sheeps
clothing, but were inwardly ravened, and did not walk in, but hated the light
wherewith he had lighted them, because their deeds were evil.

In the Epistle of John, John says, Little Children, ye have heard say,
Antichrist shall come in the last time; by this we know it is the last time,
for many Antichrists are come already: And in the Revelations ye may read, That
the World went out and wondered after the Beast, and false Prophet, and said,
Who is able to make war with the Beast, which made war with the Lamb, and slew
the Saints, and them which kept the testimony of Jesus? And this is that
Mystery of Iniquity, which began to work in the Apostles days, even Mystery
Babylon the great, that had in her hand a golden cup full of Fornication, and
Abomination, and the Beast carried her, which made all Nations, multitudes,
tongues and people, Drunk with the wine of her Fornication, and this is 16.
hundred years since John said they were come, which Christ said should come,
and the world went after them, and they that would not receive the mark of the
Beast, and fall down to those Laws which he made then, and ever since have been
looked upon as deceivers, and have been excommunicated, burnt, and tortured,
and have not been suffered to buy, or sell, for this many Generations: these
went out from the true Apostles, which preached freely, and coveted no man's
silver, gold, or apparel: Paul said, They preached for filthy lucre, their god
was their belly, and their end destruction; and from such turn away, who have a
form, but not the power. Peter says, Woe unto them, for they ran greedily
after the error of Balaam, 2 Pet. 2.14, 15. And loved the wages of
unrighteousness. John, who preached freely, said, They went out from them who
were in the power, and light of Christ. Mark, they went out from us, who were
in the light, which is not of the world: into the world they went, and the
world loved them, and heard them, because they were gone from the light, which
reproves the deeds of the world, but had the words, and the form, as the true
Apostles had: these the world went, and wondered after; and these were they that
was like Jannes and Jambres, which Paul complained of, 2 Timothy 3.8, 5. Having a
form of godliness, but denied the power thereof, and life thereof; from such
turn away. And these are they that tell you, you cannot be made perfect while
you live, and creep into Steeple Houses, and your old Masse-houses, when they
have got an Order from the Beast, or received his Mark from Oxford and
Camebridge; and there they learn the Letter, Hebrew, Greek, and Latin, and set
that as the Jews did, above Christ, and would not come unto him, that they
might have life: and so they are become Ministers, and feed people with the
Letter, and Minister that instead of Christ: And herein they are preaching, and
doing like the Ministers of Christ, as Jannes and Jambres, Pharaohs Inchanters
did, Exodus 7.11. So that there is nothing in the true Church, which is in God,
the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, but there is the likeness in Babylon, the
false Church, and synagogue of Satan; there is preaching, praying, and singing
among swearers, liars, and drunkards, as there was amongst the holy Saints, but
it is done by another power, and Spirit, as Pharaohs Inchanters did, who was
acted by the dark power of Egypt, and not by Christ, as Moses was. Now Moses
declared, saying, A Prophet like unto me shall the Lord God raise up in the
midst of your brethren, him shall you hear in what soever he says unto you. So
all that hearken not to Christ, Esaias 55.1. which says, Every one that
thisteth, come ye to the waters; and him that has no money, come ye buy and
eat; yea, come buy wine and milk without money, or without price; wherefore do
ye spend your money for that which is not bread, and your labor for that which
satisfies not: incline your ears, and come unto me; hear, and your souls shall
live, and I will make an everlasting covenant with you, even the sure mercies
of David.

Consider this, how long your Ministers have fed you with the Letter which
kills, instead of the Spirit which gives life: is the Letter the Water here
spoken of? or is it the bread which satisfies? seeing you have been feeding so
long at your Teachers table, and not come to the knowledge of the Truth, which
is Christ the Bread, and gives life to the Soul. Consider, and deal plainly
with your selves, does not the Lord say, That all his children shall be taught
by him, and he will write his law in their hearts, and put his fear in their
inward parts. Jer. 31.31, 33. And I will be their God, and they shall be my
people, and they shall teach no more every man his neighbor, and every man his
brother; saying, know the Lord, for they shall all know me, from the least of
them unto the greatest; and I will forgive their iniquities, and I will
remember their sins no more, says the Lord. Therefore all turn into the Light,
and walk in the light of the Lord, and prise this day of your Visitation,
before it be hid from your eyes. And from the Lord God this is a warning to you
all, that you own that which smites you in your Consciences; obey it, follow
it, and love it, which discerns, and shows you when there is but an evil
thought arises in you, as I said before, not to bring peace, but a sword to
convince the World of sin, and with his sword to cut down the man of sin, and
to bring to light the hidden things of dishonesty; and to search out the hidden
things of Esau, whom God hates; Esaus nature is the same as ever it was; Judas
and Cain is yet alive in all the children of Disobedience, and betrayers of the
Lord they are all, which are in their sins, though they are preaching against
Cain, for killing his brother; Judas, for betraying his Lord, as many of this
Nations teachers do for money. O England, that thou would but consider! lest
this glorious day of Gods everlasting light and love pass over you, and the
night come when thou can not work; therefore all you profane ones, that seem
to be religious, but your tongue is yet at liberty, and unbridled: O what will
ye do upon your death beds! Where will ye hide your selves, when the Judgment
begins in the Temple, and the songs of the house be turned into howling? what
will ye do? and how will ye give an account for every idle word, which ye in
your life time have spoken for, which ye have been condemned by Gods Witness
in your Consciences, you that live in sin, and not in Christ, and cannot
cease from sin; it is because they are gone from the power, even the light of
the world, which is the way of righteousness, in which whosoever walks,
stumbles not, nor sins not, the well is near come down into the deep: come to
the Rock, eat honey, and be satisfied, and let your souls delight it self in
fatness; love not the world, nor the pleasures, delights, and vanities
thereof, but love the light which is not of the world: for if any man love the
world, the love of the Father is not in him, But thou shall love the Lord thy
God, with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy strength; and
this is the strait way, and a gate too narrow for any lustful one to walk in;
the vain talker is not here, it is a path too narrow for all them which are
speaking of Christ, the strait way, but themselves, their tongues, and their
hearts at liberty in the flesh: And O that you would consider, you that spend
your days in vanity! will not this prove bondage and bitterness in the latter
end! O that you were wise to lay it to heart! That you would consider your
latter end, the glorious liberty which is not in the flesh, nor in the lusts
thereof, which the servants and Sons of God enjoy, whom you are accusing, as
the worst of men! did you but possess one day, surely you would cast away all
your lovers, and say, What have I to do any more with Idols? I call you all to
partake with me, who are afar off, and separated from the Lord by sin, as I
have sometime long been, and in that state I was reading, and studdying the
Scriptures, and the vail being over my heart, I could not see them, for they
were a parable to me, as now they are to you. But now has the Lord in his
unsearchable loving kindness, which is great toward me, and I cannot utter
it, has revealed his Son in me, which makes manifest, and reveals the
Father: yea, he has commanded his light to shine out of darkness, which was
veiled over in my heart, while I was in darkness, and could not comprehend it
therein. I say it was his love to me, when I was in hatred, and enmity against
him, following the imaginations of my evil heart; and being in captivity, and
bondage, to diverse hists; and sin was entered, and death by sin reigned over
the seed, to whom all the Promises were; the seed is Christ the Son of God, and
the grace of God, and manifestation which brings salvation, and has appeared
to all men; and did all but obey it, and not rebel against it, or grieve it, it
would be a sufficient Savior of it self to every man; and this you must all
feel working, rising, and operating in your hearts, and in meekness and
lowliness of mind must ye receive this ingrafted Word, that ye may grow
thereby; and here is the true growth in grace, rather then words or wisdom; in
purity and power, rather then in a painted profession, of which there is
enough, and too much in the world, because they are sayers and not doers,
professing Christ which they possess not: And oh how sad is it to hear people
saying, They hope to be saved by Christ, and that they are accepted with God in
Christ Jesus, and yet this hope does not purify them as he is pure, and so
must needs be but as a Spiders web, for sin is a shame for any people, but all
who comes to know the true hope, which is Christ in you the hope of glory; it
makes not ashamed, for it purifies the heart, and redeems man both out of sin
and shame, and what is your faith that leaves you thus in this world, and gives
you not victory over it? is not your faith vain, and all vain while Christ is
not risen in you? you are in your sins, and your righteousness, is it any
better, if so good, as the Scribes and Pharisees which made clean the outside,
but inwardly are full of all abomination? therefore come to that, and feel the
Lords Talent in you, and hide it no longer in the earth, but improve it to the
utmost, for that will not be to give an account with joy, but grief; this
talent is the grace and light of Christ which to every man and woman has
appeared, and this is not common grace as your Teachers tell you, but it is the
saving grace, and would save every man, and would not the death of any man, did
they but obey it, and not always rebel against it; therefore hear this all yet
rebels, even to you I speak, which have long grieved and vexed the good Spirit
of the Lord, with whom he is yet striving, be ye never so wicked and vile;
though your sins be as red as scarlet, and though you have deeply corrupted
your selves, and your spot is not the spot of his children; to you I say, in
the Spirit of the Lord, give not sentence against your selves, by saying, Your
wound is incurable, yea though you have betrayed and crucified the innocent in
you; do not say that your punishment is greater then can be born, nor your sin
greater then can be forgiven; for be ye as far off as ever the Prodigal was, or
as far off as ever I sometime was, yet if ye do but say in your heart I have
sinned, and it profits me not; I will go and return to my Fathers house,
against whom I have sinned; the father himself will come out to meet you, as he
did me, even I, who was disobedient, and afar off, being led away of diverse
lusts, which ruled in my heart while the God of this world had blinded my eye
which should have seen my Savior; and then showed and smote me, for in my
Conscience even me has he gathered off the mountains to himself; yea he has
brought me very near, and reconciled to himself by the blood of his Son, that I
might make known unto you his everlasting kindness in calling sinners to
repentance while they are in their sins, and that in the mouth of two or three
Witnesses this Truth may be confirmed to you all. I with Ezekiel and Peter do
set to my Seal, and bring in my Testimony; read 2 Peter 3.15. Ezekiel. 33.10 to
20. That God desires not the destruction or the death of him which is
destroyed, but had rather they would own his light which is Christ, his power
and strength, and would, and does give power over all sin, yea even power to
become the Sons of God, which sin not: And this I declare to you all is not of
man, nor man's righteousness, which is as filthy rags; yet it is in man, and
there fulfils the righteousness of the Law now in the Saints as ever he did,
Romans 8.4. that the righteousness of the Law might be fulfilled in us, who walk
not after the flesh, but after the Spirit, v. 14. for as many as are led by the
Spirit of God, they are the Sons of God; mark the wise Professors Prayers, and
such as say, ye observe the Ordinances, and use the means, and say you cannot
be perfect in this life, but say ye are justified by Christ's righteousness
which suffered at Jerusalem beyond the Sea, verse. 4. that the righteousness of
the Law might be fulfilled in us. Consider this you that would make Christ a
cover for your sins, as all do who know not Christ in them the hope of glory.
Therefore call not us deceivers any longer, but see how Satan is exalted in
you, and ye your selves are deceived, which are in your sins and beguiled, and
cast the simplicity that is in Christ Jesus (which all that are in, sin not)
and this is true Justification, for any to be in Christ where old things and
sin is done away, for which man is condemned, and unto which the Law was, and
is added, and abides in force while men are in their sins, though in that state
which is woeful, and for condemnation: You will say, you are not under the Law,
but under Grace; therefore count not this deceit any longer as you have
formerly done, but consider what have ye to be deceived of, seeing ye are in
your sins, and have lost the elect which cannot be deceived; and the Apostles
did not write to such as you are, but to the Saints that were in Christ Jesus,
and had something more then you have (who are in your sins) to be deceived of.

Therefore all come down unto Christ the light of the world, which lights
every man that comes into the world, which is the eye, and ye shall see all
your prayers, righteousnesses, Means and Ordinances, which you use to get,
Christ is all one in the sight of God, with your swearing, lying and
drunkenness; read Isai. 66. v. 2. to 5. Hearken unto this ye proud Professors,
but trembles not at the Word of the Lord: He that kills an Ox, as if he slew
a man; he that sacrifices a lamb, as if he cut off a dogs neck; he that
offers an oblation, as if he offered swines blood; he that burns Incense,
as if he blessed an Idol.

Consider the ground and reason of this, ye that say ye cannot be perfect and
holy in this life, whether ye are not in your own ways? and whether ye have
not chosen your own ways? and your souls delighted in that which is
abomination unto Christ, who is the way, the truth, the life; and he that is in
it sins not, what ever you may say, who are in your own inventions, and
righteousness, but are far off from the righteousness which is near to be
revealed in the heart, as all are, who say Revelations are ceased: for I
declare to you all, from my own experience, not from the Letter, but from the
Spirit and Power of the Lord, that I never heard the Voice, nor knew the things
of God from the Letter, but by the Revelation of Jesus Christ: for it has
pleased the Father to reveal his Son in me, who is the light, in which light I
see light, and the Father revealed, who is the fountain thereof: and broken
Cisterns, and corrupt Fountains are all drinking out of, and feeding upon the
wind, and windy doctrine, and vain hopes; and eating that which dies of it
self, and does not satisfy; and are all blind, and dead in their sins, are all
they which says that Revelation are ceased.

And this is a general cry with Priests, and Professors, who are gone in the
way of Balaam, and abides not in the Doctrine of Christ, which should reveal
the Father, and of all Sects and Opinions whatsoever, they are crying, none can
hear the Voice of Christ now but in the Letter. To you I say, who are setting
up the Bible to be your Rule, instead of the Spirit, as the Jews did, who
thought to have eternal life in the Scriptures, and were painted as ye are with
the Saints words, being inwardly ravened from the light and spirit of the Lord,
which does reveal, as ever it did, the things of God. I say you are not like to
hear his voice, who are gone from the hearing ear; nor to see his shape, who
are gone from the Light, the seeing eye; but the Saints and sheep did then hear
his Voice, and followed him; and I witness his Voice to be heard now, as ever
it was, and thousands in England besides me, though I do confess, you which
have the sheeps clothing, but are not sheep; do not, nor cannot hear his Voice,
no more than the Jews did, who had the same clothing, but were inwardly
ravened from the Spirit of the Lord.

Therefore all that would know. God, or the things of God, must come to the
measure of the Spirit in them; a measure of which is given to every man, to
profit withal, and this is nigh you in your hearts, and as ye finke down ye
shall feel it working, rising, and operating in you, and as ye are still, ye
shall feel ye spirit of the holy and pure God which has been imprisoned, and
held in captivity under Pharaoh, and the man of sin, which has been exalted in
you, above the spirit of God in you, so all in this wait which is underneath
the power of darkness, and shines in the darkness, and out of the darkness
shall it arise, for he has long dwelt in thick darkness; and round about him
has been Clouds, and deep Waters: I say, wait in patience, all you that sit in
the region, and shadow of death, and the light shall rise, until darkness be
under his feet, even those dark mountains where you have been scattered, and
are scattered; and how beautiful shall you witness his feet to be upon the
Mountains? Tongue, nor Pen, cannot utter, even he that publishes Salvation,
and says unto Sion, thy King reigns; and this is the reign of Christ, and
the only reign which the Scripture declares of, That all his enemies should be
under his feet; for he must reign till he have subjected all things to himself,
even all that which has captivated the Seed in Egyptian darkness: And then
shall come to pass that saying which is written, and nor till then. Here is
the patience of the Saints, and here shall you feel the sufferings of Christ
that are behind; and here is the time of Trial, and the very day of Jacobs
trouble, when he that has led into captivity, must go into captivity; even as
he ascends out of the grave, and the pit, he receives gifts for men, but man
is not meet to partake of the gift, until that nature which would devour, be
destroyed, And I say, in bowels of everlasting love, whose hearts are but
breathing, though never so little after the Lord, speak not evil of that you
know not, nor judge nothing before the time, until the spirit rise out of
prison in you, unto whom all judgment is committed, and he will judge; even
he, who is the judge of all the earth, aright; he will not condemn the
righteous, with the wicked, nor slay the righteous with the wicked, though man
may, who is gone from the spirit of truth in himself, and knows not that there
is a lie in his right hand, and so calls good, evil, and evil, good; and puts
light for darkness (himself being in that darkness) and darkness for light. I
am grieved for the sons of men at my very heart! and greatly am I oppressed
therewith! and the iniquity of many lies upon my life; and I am pressed
therewith as a cart is pressed that is full of sheaves: And oh! how am I
greived to see people that call themselves Christians, and profess the
scripturers to be their rule, how contrary thereunto they walk, and yet are
condemning us for denying the scriptures, who are in the life of them! And as
for your being Christians, there is no such thing, for you do not at all
resemble God, whom you say is your Father, nor Christ his Son who loves
righteousness, and hates iniquity, and whose loins are girt with
righteousness, and whose throne is established in holiness; and the Scepter of
his Kingdom, is a right Scepter, and his Kingdom is everlasting, and in his
people; and consist in righteousness, Power, and Glory. And not in talk, and
words, which you are in, without the power or Joy in the Holy Ghost; and yet
you are saying, you are his brethren: but to you all I say, who are in vain
words, vain thoughts and actions, in pleasure, frendships, and customs of the
world, which fades away as a flower, and withers as grass, all repent and
turn to the Light, that you may see your sad conditions, and from whence, and
from what are you fallen, for he owns you not, ye workers of iniquity; all your
Sacrifices, while you commit sin, or regard iniquity in your hearts, are
abomination to the Lord, Isai. 66.3. And so to you all, and in love to your
souls, I say, Come down, for your strength is to stand still, and to feel a
seed in your selves, though it be but as a grain of mustard; and as you in
patience wait low out of every thought, reasoning, and imagination, which vails
and clouds this pure seed which I speak of, you shall see, or feel it arise in
you, grow and multiply as the stars in the Firmament, and as the sands in the
Sea shore without number.

THE END.

