ONE Warning more TO THE BAPTISTS BEFORE Their Day be wholly spent and the
Night cover them, in which no man can work for God, which the Lord moved me to
write, or else I should have been silent for ever. With a short Answer to a
Book of Matthew Caffin's one of their Teachers, in Horsham in Sussex,
Entitled, Faith in Gods Promises the Saints best Weapons. With many Queries
also for them to Answer. Also my desire is, that all that read it would send it
to them that they may see how they are degenerated from their first Love, and
are now fighting against the Light of the Day, that did formerly shine more
clear in their Hearts, then now it does, being shadowed over with that which
must perish and come to an end. Written by one that has sat under those
shadows with them, but has now found the day, in which all shadows fly away.
HUMPHERY WOLRICH.

In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was
God, then was there no shadow of death, or covering over the Life. LONDON,
Printed for Robert Wilson, at the Sign of the Black-spread-Eagle and Windmill
in Martins Le Grand, 1661.

Where are the wise?

LEt them be confounded for ever, and vexed by a foolish people; all the
disputers of the world where are they? let their mouths be stopped for
evermore, let Christ speak, and his Eternal Spirit, as in the days past, and
him that spoke in all his Prophets, who is the same yesterday and for ever, let
him speak; and all keep silence, even him whose words are Spirit and Life,
which the fleshly mind and carnal mind (that can neither hear nor perceive the
things that he speaks) be silent before the Lord for ever, and all blind guides
that are setting up the shadow instead of the substance, and things that are
seen with a carnal and visible eye above those things that are eternal,
everlasting, and are not seen but with another eye, nor heard but only with
the ear that can hear what the Spirit says, let this be a warning and a charge
from the Lord to you all, that ye stop your mouths in the dust for ever; let
the wife be mad, and the disputer, and the contradictious blasphemer's tongue
cleave to the roof of his mouth for ever, the eye is open that runs through the
earth, and the hand is stretched out against you all, that is everlasting, and
ye are weighed in an even balance, and found as light as a thing of naught;
you and all your wisdom is comprehended as in a span, and your Mountain will
the Lord thresh with the new threshing instrument, and lay it waste for ever.

There is a way that the Vulturous eye has not seen, and a path that the
fierce Lions whelp has not trodden in, a way of Holiness is it for ever, it
is the same that changes not for ever, known is it to the righteous, and the
redeemed walk in it for ever, and the ransomed of the Lord from generation to
generation; Now are the Dogs angry for want of the Childrens bread, and the
Swine that are feeding on the busks would devour the pearl, and are fighting
against them that have found it, and cannot feed them therewith, now are their
mouths filled with lies and slanders, and their tongues set on fire of hell,
the poison of Asps is in their hearts, the way of Truth they have not known,
there is no fear of God before their eyes, therefore is the Lord God, the
Almighty God risen against all fighters, swearers and liars, and he will dash
to pieces their Idols, and all that rise up against him; the Lord has spoken
it, righteousness shall Reign, and Truth shall be established in the earth; and
Christ the corner Stone (rejected of the Builders, abhored of the Nations and
despised of men) will he set a top of all; he that has been rejected, shall be
exalted on high, and break down all Images, and confound all likenesses, the
Mouth of the Lord has spoken it; he will turn all but his own glory into
shame, and take the Sons of Nimrod that hunted mightily before the Lord in
their own net, and all the Children of Babylon, in the work of their own hands
will he confound, he will exalt the Life and Power, and darken all shadows, and
break the forms with the brightness of his rising, and rent the Vail, and
destroy the Covering that has covered the Mercy Seat; for I have seen the
place of Righteousness and Transgression is there, and Satan is exalted, and
the abomination sits as God in his Temple, where he ought not; also I have
seen the place of Justice, and Iniquity has been there, this have I seen in
the everlasting day in which all shadows fly away, which is dawned in the
Hearts of his Chosen, in whom he is become a Leader and an Instructor in all
Righteousness, as in the days of old a Savior and a Redeemer, as in the
Generations past.

This is the Lord who says, I am the Lord, and besides me there is no Savior,
he is become a hiding place indeed, a shelter and a hiding place to the weary,
a covering that is not too narrow is his Spirit become; therefore are the
children of old Adam only with the Name of Christ, covering themselves with
the shadow instead of the substance, and clothing themselves with their
fig-leave forms, having lost the image of him who is the Substance, Life,
Virtue and Goodness of all shadows, the end and the Finisher of them all, the
first and the last, who was and is from everlasting to everlasting, the
Substance of all Virtue, Life and Goodness of all to his people, in all ages
was he the same and changed not, he was and is and is to come to all that know
him, the Rock of Ages, and the Christ in the Wilderness which followed them,
he is a Teacher, Leader and Guide to his People for ever, he is a Horn of
Salvation for ever, he is the beginner and the end of all that is good, the
Author and Finisher of the Faith of his people in all Generations, in this
Generation is he the same, and in his people does he fulfill the Righteousness
of the Law, as in the Generations past, Romans 8.4. Mark (in us) all ye that are
speaking of Justification by a Christ a far off, who ye never saw, and of Faith
in his Promises, whom ye never heard, but are yet dead in your sins; Now do ye
rage and fill your mouths with venom, because Babylon is falling and your
kingdom departing; Now do you cast out your floods of wickedness to drowned the
Manchild, that will rule you all and vex you in his sore displeasure, (mark)
the Child is born, the Sun is known, that in the days of the Prophets was
born, and given unto them, Abraham saw his day and rejoiced, and heard his
voice and was glad, this is he and he does not change, though to blind man he
appears not the same; and all the Prophets and Righteous men heard his voice,
and he wrought all their works in them and for them, and saved his people from
their sins, and took away the shadowand destroyed death, and ransomed them from
the power of the grave, and did such works in them and for them as never man
ever did, is not this the very Christ? yea this is he, and besides him there is
no Savior, neither do I look for another; he opens the blind eye, and the deaf
ear he causes to hear, he makes the dumb to speak, and the lame to walk, he
opens the heart to discipline, and commands man to depart from iniquity, he
says, and it comes to pass, as ever; the Winds and the Sea does he rebuke,
and still the proud Waves thereof, as in the Generations past, this is the
Lords doing, and in my eyes very mavelous, this is his Name and his Memorial
(the Lord our Righteousness) throughout all Generations, this is he that
says, I am the Lord and change not, that is my Name, and besides me there is
no Savior; let all Disputers of this World be confounded before him whose way
is everlasting, that sits upon the Floods, and walks on the Sea as on dry
land, and the waters sink not under him, that turns the darkness into light,
and the day light into the shadow of death; let all the wise to do evil and
oppose him, be made mad for ever, and let them not find an arm to help them
that cannot see the Arm of Gods Salvation, but are comparing the Holy One of
Israel (the Immanuel) to and with themselves, and likening the invisible and
incorruptible Redeemer of the invisible and immortal soul unto corruptible man,
that are setting up the letter instead of the eternal quickening Spirit that
gives life, that sees not a difference betwixt the flesh that profits not,
and the flesh that is the life, and if I say the Savior of the World, I lie
not, between the word that does wash, cleanse and purify the Hearts of the
Saints, and was like a hammer and a fire in Jeremiah, and in all the Prophets,
and is the same and changes not in all Generations, which word they heard and
believed in it, and therefore spoke, and the Word that the Apostles did feel,
taste, hear and handle, which was in the beginning with God, and was God, and
this is the Savior of the World, and besides him there is not another, but ye
being blind cannot perceive him that took Flesh upon him, and had a Body
prepared to do the will of him that set him; if thou have an ear to hear or an
eye to perceive, this is he that descended, and the same that ascended far
above all Heavens into the bosom of the Father, and sits on the right hand
on the Majesty on high, and is glorified with the same Glory that he had with
the Father before the world began, this is a mystery, if thou can receive it
thou art happy.

But may not I say as once was said to the men of Galilee, Why stand ye gazing?
Why are you seeking the Living among the Dead? Is not he the Resurrection? And
is there any life in any other? Is not this he that is the eternal and
everlasting day in which ye ought to walk? And out of the Bosom of the Father
did he not proceed, and was one with him, who says, This is my beloved Son,
hear Him? And the Holy Ghost did appear in the likeness of a Dove, yet was not
a Dove; so say I, and my sayings are faithful and true, Christ the Savior of
the World came in the likeness of sinful flesh, and took upon him the form of
a Servant, yet was he not sinful flesh, but the eternal Son of God, which was
begotten of the Spirit and is Spirit; there is a Spiritual Body, and there is a
natural Body, there is a corruptible and there is an incorruptible Body, but
this is a mystery to the World; in a few words, time would fail me to declare
his Generation to the uttermost, I may say that which I have seen of him; Oh
the depth and height, length and breadth of his unsearchable riches and
wisdom, and how in all generations he has been to his people an infinite
treasure, a boundless fountain, and an everlasting stream of goodness, life,
virtue, peace, and pure satisfaction in all generations, who was before all,
the Author, Creator, and Maker of all, in whom was Life, and he is not
changed, but in him is life eternal, peace everlasting, and satisfaction
eternally, and his life runs through all, discerns and beholds all, and shines
in the darkness, and none can flee from him, neither is there any darkness
nor shadow of death where the worker of iniquity can hide himself from his
dreadful hand, that it should not find him out; though man being in the first
birth, and born blind, and a transgressor from his mothers womb, does not see
nor comprehend the Light that has enlightened him, though it shine in his
heart, and does convince all, and reprove all of their ungodly deeds, and hard
speeches, that they have wickedly spoken against the Lord; yea, and it will
condemn thee Matthew Caffin, for all thy ungod like and unchristian-like lies
and slanders cast upon the people whom the Lord has blessed, and chosen for
his peculiar treasure, even thee in whom the Father of lies rules, and his
works are wrought in thy wicked heart, out of which comes slanders and lies
abundantly, and them thou do invent thy self, and calst them the Quakers
errors when thou have done, whose foundation and principle thou know not,
but speak evil of that which thou art a stranger unto, and though thou talkest
of faith, and of being a Christian indeed, which thou say few do attain unto,
yet art thou one of the vain disputers of the world, and like Cain art wounding
and shooting thy arrows against the innocent, and like Ishmael art scorning the
Lords people, saying, the Quakers says, turn to the light within; this was
Paul's Commission and the Quakers work, which in this world they have to do,
this was the Prophets work, and John's message, to turn people from darkness to
the light, and from the Power of Satan to God, Act. 26.18. and 1 John 5. and
Paul says, it was the Light that shone in the heart which must give them the
knowledge of the glory of God; and John said, the anointing which was in them,
that was truth and nolye, taught them all things, and with this anointing or
unction they were to try the false Spirits; though thou scornest at the
Quakers, because their message is to turn people to the light, and though it be
true that the light within was sufficient (and it is the same and changes not)
to all the Fathers which died in the faith to save them from all sin, and
redeem them out of all tribulation, and in which Light they walked with God,
who is the Fountain and Father of Lights, and they were translated from death
to life before ever the Scriptures were written, which thou say is the rule
to walk by, though the Scriptures do not say any such thing, but another, that
the Sons of God were both ruled and led by the Spirit of God, and though we do
say and testify these things as the faithful and true sayings of God, and as
John did bear witness of him so do we, that he is the true light that lights
every man that comes into the world, yet those things as thou have wickedly
and maliciously laid them down, as our principles were never spoken nor owned
by us, neither do we slight the Scriptures at all, but own them as they are and
ought to be owned, yet Christ the light the bright and the morning Star, that
is the same and changes not, but spoke in all the Prophets, the eternal arm and
power of the Father to Salvation we say is not changed, but is able to save now
without the Scriptures, as before they were written; so this is not to make
void the Scriptures at all, which do declare what was the Judge of the Spirits,
and Saints rule in all ages, their guide, and what was the wisdom and power of
God to the salvation of their souls, and as the Prophets and holy men found
them to be in themselves, and as this Spirit did inspire them and gave them
utterance, so they spoke of him as his People do in the same spirit in this
age; now this is only to set Christ the Eternal Son of God above all visible
things, and the chief corner stone in his place where it ought to be; and
therefore the builders of Babylon and children of confusion, which are setting
him at naught, and cannot see the hidden treasure which is bread indeed, nor
look any further then the things that are earthly, in whom the treasure and
life is hid, and are feeding upon the husks and shadows with the Swine, are now
condemning them that have been in those carnal Ordinances and washings, but
could never find the pearl in them, where it was not to be found, but now
having found him that is living which is not among those dead things, but only
to be found in Spirit, we leave those things behind us, and go on to
perfection, and look no longer at the things that are seen which are temporal,
but at those things that are not seen, but in that Light which is eternal,
which whilst we look at and believe in, we have strong consolation and
confidence in him that is our hope, and purifies our hearts; as he does arise
he does also condemn fin in the heart, and destroy the Devils work where it
has been wrought, which is yet standing in thy heart, and in the hearts of all
Liars, and false accusers, who are speaking evil of those things they
understand not, but as a natural bruit beasts, wherein they defile themselves
as thou have done, it does finish sin in us, and makes an end of transgression,
and brings in, and us into his everlasting righteousness, which is by faith in
his blood; but the blind will be blind still, and cannot see any blood but that
which does not wash the heart, nor sprinkle the Conscience from dead works, nor
know any, nor believe in any Resurrection but that which does not give the
answer of a good Conscience toward God; I say, if thou can receive it, and
believe in him who is the Resurrection, thou may, but if otherwise, thou
should dye in thy sins, and pine away in thy transgressions, and then Christ
is not risen to thy advantage but condemnation, if thou art yet in thy sins.

Therefore thou Hypocrite who art hipt from the Light, and climbed above the
door of the sheep, who is the incorruptible and eternal Light, and he only it
is that gives an entrance into the Kingdom that is incorruptible, eternal, and
fades not away.

But many have been setting up another Savior then he that saves his people
from their sins, and therefore have his Servants been imagining of a kingdom,
power and glory that is of this fading world, and therefore instead of
harkening to the light and innocent Lamb which faith, My Kingdom is not of this
world, if it were my Servants would fight; therefore such who have rejected the
word of the Lord (which word is Light) as thou do, and scornest the Quakers
for walking in it, they have betaken themselves to carnal weapons, and gone
from the Spiritual weapon, which is the Light, and have sought for a Kingdom
that is of this world, and so in their imaginations have set up both a visible
Savior and Kingdom.

Therefore try thy self whether thou art in that faith which the just lives by,
and purify the heart that comes to see the pure God, if not, thou art but a
reprobate concerning the faith that is a mystery held in a pure Conscience,
which was once delivered or given to the Saints, neither shall thou ever have
the witness in thy self of thy rejoicing, as many that have been in thy dark
and blind condition never had, until they were turned to the Light in their
Consciences, but now can through mercy and grace that is powered out upon his
offspring testify (to his glory and praise everlastingly be it given to him
alone who does the work in us and for us) that in the same place where it has
been said unto us, ye are not my people, there are we called the Children of
the living God; at this may the Serpent catch that is cursed of the Lord, but
own it if thou can, it is thy condemnation in that state thou art in,
eternally thou shall witness it true, except thou repentest.

A little I shall reason with thee concerning thy principle, what some of thy
brethren which thou and they have affirmed in dispute.

First, thou say est the eternal Spirit is not the Savior of the world, but
the man Christ Jesus that dyed and was a body which the Apostles handled
outwardly.

Answ. Did not Christ say who is that Spiritual Rock who saved Abraham and the
Fathers before that body was, into thy hands Father I commend my Spirit; and
then did he not give up the Ghost and dyed? and when the eternal Spirit did
ascend to the Father, was not the body dead without the Spirit, and lay in the
Sepulcher until the same Spirit and power of the Father raised it again? is
your confidence in the flesh or in the Spirit and power that quickened the dead?
do ye believe the Scriptures are true, which say, he ever lives, and is the
same yesterday to day and for ever, I in the Father, and the Father in me? or
do ye believe there was no Savior before he was born in Bethlehem? who was it
then in whom Abraham believed? or who did the Prophet speak of when he says
unto us a child is born, unto us a Son is given? or what do thou in thy dark
mind imagine the Prophet means, when he says, his name shall be called
wonderful Counselor, the mighty God, the everlasting Father, the Prince of
peace? Isa. 9.6. and what was the Hypocrites and Pharisees angry with Christ
for, as thou art with us? was it not because he said he was the son of God, and
before Abraham ^

Thou say Christ is not come the second time to you, or to any upon the
earth. My answer is, Did not the Saints know Christ after the flesh some time,
and said they desired to know him so no more? what do thou imagine his second
appearance to be? was it not without sin unto salvation? and did not they
witness this, that he was in them, and they in him, which saved their souls
from sin? and were they not kept perfect and pure by the anointing and power
which thou wrangleft against, so that the wicked one touched them not? do
thou know what salvation is, or the image and state is in which man was
created, which thou fightest against, and say none can come into in this
life, if this be not it which the Saints did witness, in whom he was glorified
with the same glory he had with the Father before the world began? and whether
they were not come to it which said, as sin has abounded, so grace and truth
which came by Jesus Christ did much more abound? Also ye say Christ was never
crucified but once.

My answer is, Christ was crucified at Jerusalem; but what private
interpretation will thou give to these Scriptures, Gal. 3.1. whether such fools
as thou and the Galatians were who were gone from the Spirit? and does not Paul
say Jesus Christ was evidently crucified amongst them? were they not such as
turned against the Light which had enlightened them who were become a spiritual
Sodom? did not these crucify to themselves afresh, and put him to open shame,
Heb 6.6. Though thou say the eternal Spirit has no blood, I say it is
because thou never sawst it, nor witnessed the blood of the everlasting
Covenant to sprinkle thy Conscience, therefore do thou thus deny it and tread
it under thy feet.

Again ye affirm, that neither Peter nor Paul, Abraham, Isaac, nor Jacob were
redeemed out of the curse, neither were they in the Kingdom of God. My answer
to you is, God is not the God of the dead but of the living, and such as were
lively stones did say they sat in heavenly places in Christ Jesus, Ephesians. 1.3.
Ephesians. 2.6. And Peter says an entrance was ministered abundantly into the kingdom
of Jesus Christ; and Paul says he was wrapped up into the third heavens; but
thou that art in the Kingdom of darkness wilt tread upon this, as thou say
thou do, upon the Quakers principle, for which cause thy self shall be
trodden in the wine press of Gods wrath.

Again ye deny that Christ is a Spirit; To which I say, God is a Spirit, and
that which is born of him is Spirit; and I query of thee what Christ thou
ownest, whether he that enlightneth every man, or another? and what body was
that which thou say ascended, and now sits at the right hand on the
Majesty on high? was it he that first descended, and came out from God, or
another? seeing the Scripture says, if thou will not deny it, or say in thy
dark mind who art a Teacher, as Nicodemus who was a Ruler in Israel, concerning
regeneration, and the way of the Spirit, how can these things be? when Christ
told him a man must be born again; he was as blind, yet I dare not say so
wicked as thou, for he came to Jesus by night, he said can a man that is old
enter into his mothers womb and be born again? if this be not thy state send me
an answer, and tell me if thou be able, who was that spoken of, John 1.10. He
was in the world and the world was made by him, and the world knew him not, he
came to his own and they received him not, but as many as did receive him
received power to become the sons of God, which were born not of the
corruptible but of the incorruptible seed, neither were they born of the will
of the flesh, Mark, nor as thou art, but of God and the immortal seed which
lives and abides for ever. Again, I ask thee who was that which descended,
and what is it? seeing the Scripture says Ephesians. 4.10. he that descended is the
same that ascended up far above all heavens, that he might fill all things,
do thou believe that the Jews did not look upon Christ, who had eyes, and saw
him not to be as very a blasphemer as thou judges the Quakers? John 3.13. no
man has ascended up to Heaven but he that came down from Heaven; mark, was not
this a strange word to them, and will it not be as strange to thee? had not thy
Father taught thee to wrest the words of truth to thy own destruction; even the
Son of man which is in Heaven, was not the Savior of the world without Father,
without Mother, without descent, having neither beginning of days nor end of
life? was not this the Son of God, who is King of Righteousness, and after
that King of Peace, Heb. 6.3. and had not the body which the Jews nailed to the
Cross a beginning, or was it from all eternity? and was that visible body and
form which he took upon him, was that the form and image of the invisible God?
and was that the first born in every Creature? and were all things made by that
visible body? and was that body before all things? and do all things consist by
it, or has Christ two Bodies? seeing the Scripture says, Christ is not
divided, and though there be many Members and Branches, yet is there but one
Body or Vine.

Again you Baptists say, Its Blasphemy to say all that which was spoken by
Christ, Mat. 2.24. was fulfilled in that Generation; might not thou as well and
as truly call Christ a Blasphemer, as thy Brethren the unbelieving Jews did, as
to charge the Quakers with Blasphemy for speaking the very same thing and
witnessing it to be true which he did speak, Mat. 24.34. Verily, verily, I say
unto you, this Generation shall not pass until all these things be fulfilled,
Heaven and Earth shall pass away, but my words shall not pass away; can thy
earthly heart believe this? nay, nay, the world by wisdom knows not it, no nor
the Angels of Heaven, but he to whom the Angels must bow knows it right well;
our God is risen of a certain Truth, he will do a work in this Generation, a
marvelous work and a Wonder, even the God of the despised Quakers shall work;
and who shall let him? he will triumph over Palestine, and over Edom and
Amaleck will he cast his shoe, Moab shall be his wash-pot, the humble shall
hear thereof and be glad, Kings shall melt away, Princes shall be as a thing of
naught, he will exalt his horn, his strength is as the strength of a Unicorn,
in the house of David is his Scepter known, and his dwelling place is become
great in Israel, eternal God, King of Kings, and Lord of Lords is his Name
thoughout all Generations, Kings shall hear of him and submit themselves,
Princes shall be turned aside by the brightness of his rising, who is the
Resurrection and the life, who comprehends the Heavens and the Earth with a
span, and lays up the Sea as in store houses, this is our God, the living and
true God which you Baptists are fighting against.

What was Paul's and the Saints Weapons, I querie of you Baptists? and what was
his Armor which he and the Saints put on? was it not the Lord Jesus Christ the
Light, who is called a Helmet of Salvation and the Sword of the Spirit? Is it
not the Word of God which is Light, unto which word Paul did commit the Saints,
and told them it was able to keep them from falling? Or do you imagine the
Letter to be the Armor of Righteousness, which I say does but only declare of
them? Is your faith begotten by the Preaching of the dead letter, which the
Jews thought to have eternal Life in, or by the Preaching of the Gospel which
is the eternal Word of God, which was Preached to Abraham, and which was and is
and is to come, a Preacher of Righteousness in all Generations, and which the
Apostle says Was Preached to every Creature under Heaven where the Scripture
is not known nor heard of? but this light which you Baptists trample on, I say
all have so heard, so as to be convinced thereby though not saved, because they
have not obeyed; but as the Apostle says, so say I, by the same Spirit and
Faith, Faith comes by hearing, and hearing by this Word of God; the Jews had
not this Word and Faith, and therefore fought against the Life as ye do, but
the Light within they could not endure no more then you, but hated it;
Therefore said Christ, Ye shall die in your sins, except ye believe that I am
he; the Light is the eye, in which Abraham saw his day, and by which I will
guide my people, says the Lord; What is that eye that must be made blind, and
that hand that must be cut off? Is it not the eye that sees not the Son, and
therefore is not satisfied? And was not this eye in Herod, which is the eye of
the Adulterour, and hunteth for the precious Life? And was not this life in
Esau who missed the Blessing, and in Nimrod, and in all the Children of
confusion who are hunting mightily before the Lord without the Spirit, who is
the Lord and should lead you by the Fountains of living Water, and feed you
with the Living Bread of Heaven, which Living Bread you are seeking among the
Graves and Tombs, dead forms, and carnal Ordinances, which I say with J. Fuce,
makes nothing perfect, but Christ the better Hope, who does thoroughly walk and
reform, change and translate out of death into Life, out of darkness into
Light, out of Satan's power and kingdom into Gods Power and Kingdom as the
Saints were; and is not this the same state that Adam was created in, who was
the Son of God, before either Types, Shadows, Vails, Coverings, Death or Grave,
Hell or the Bottomless Pit were? What is your Water Baptism? Is it not a figure
which gives not the answer of a good Conscience? What is your Bread, Wine and
Ordinances which ye like the Jews so much cry up, having lost the Spirit which
the true Jew, and they that had the one Baptism into the one spirit, and the
new wine in the Fathers Kingdom, and the living Bread which came down from
Heaven had.

MATTHEW CAFFIN, For the Truths sake and sim^^^^ ^ an open enemy to it, and
hate the Light, and can not abide that it should be so much Preached. I
shall answer to those things charged against us in thy book, so far as they are
our words and not thy own, with wicked inventions cast upon us by thy venomous
tongue. And as for our Principle, it is the Way, the Truth and the Life, and it
is clear and innocent in it self, though its image and beauty has been more
mared by such as thou (who like the Jews are crying up the Ordinances of the
Lord, which makes the comers thereunto no more perfect then theirs did) then by
any Professors besides in the Nation, and it will clear it self should we be
silent, and spew such as thou art out of its mouth.

1. The first thing thou chargest the Quakers with is, That they say the
eternal Spirit of Light and Power is the Savior of the world.

Ans. This is owned and not denied, but that I or any of the Quakers deny the
man Christ Jesus, is not our Principle, but thy own lie cast upon us, and my
words do not agree with thine, but with the Scripture and Christ's words, John
5. where he says, Ye have neither heard his voice, nor seen his shape at any
time; Now if thou say this was not spoken of Christ but the Father, I say it
was spoken of both, for they are one, if thou could but believe the
Scripture, or own the Light, John 14. I am in the Father, and the Father in me,
the words that I speak, I speak not of my self, but the Father that dwells in
me he does the work, blessed is the eye that sees him, it is satisfied, verse.
8. Philip said unto him, Lord show us the Father and it suffices (mark) Philip
a hearer with the outward ear, but being dull of hearing, and dim sighted, at
the present he was unsatisfied, though he had seen and heard with the outward
ear, verse. 9. Jesus said unto him, have I been so long time with you, and yet
have thou not known me, Phillip, he that has seen me has seen the Father
also; but thou say, the eyes of all in the Synagogue saw him, and were
fastened on him, and thou supposest the Quakers have no show of Scripture to
prove that they which crucified him had any other eyes; here thy malice has
transported thee beyond thy own rule, the Scripture says expressly, The Vail
was over their Hearts, and they had outward eyes and saw him, and said, he was
the Carpenters Son, but Christ said, they were blind leaders of the blind (mark
the Light which he bids them believe in whilst they had it is the eye) and that
they had eyes and saw not, ears and heard not, and hearts but understood not,
Mark 8.18. Ezekiel. 12.2. Jer. 5.21.

Therefore what eye did Paul open, or what ear was he sent to unstop? and what
prisoner was that which he was sent to proclaim liberty unto? and what was that
house and prison he was to bring him out of? what did he minister, and what did
he minister to? was he not a Minister of Christ, after his own eye was opened,
and Christ revealed which before was veiled in him? did he not minister to the
Spirit in prison? (Answer if thou can) and sow the seed of eternal life, read
John 8 47. was not this the cause they could not hear Christ, because they were
of the Devil, for says Jesus, He that is of God hears Gods words, ye
therefore hear them not because ye are not of God; then said the Jews, say we
not well, thou art a Samaritane and have a Devil? is not this thy mind
concerning my words in my Book, because I say the carnal eye and ear did never
see nor hear the voice of the Son of God, verse. 43. why do ye not understand my
speech? even because they cannot hear my words.

2. Thou say George Fox said the flesh of Christ is a figure, and Joseph
Fuce says, the Baptists make flesh their arm.

Answ. The words of George Fox as thou say is in his Book, I never read them
there, nor ever heard him speak the words; but this I say, there is a flesh
that profits not, yea and a vail too, which was a figure of him that was to
come, as says the Scripture, Romans 5.14. and I witness the words of Joseph
Fuce true, who has been a Teacher amongst you my self, that all such as thou
art make flesh their arm, who art an enemy to the light, which is the arm and
power of God to Salvation.

3. Thou say Humphry Smith in his Book says, Christ is come, and this by
thee is counted a great error; I say the same, and much more, the Kingdom is
come and the Righteousness thereof, glory is come and we are come into it,
Righteousness is rained down from Heaven, Truth is springed up in the earth,
Salvation is come, and we sit in Heaven with Christ; yet do not I say or deny
but there is a further weight of glory, and the increase of this kingdom and
glory has no end; neither do I deny but Christ is yet to come the second time,
the Kingdom and the Righteousness thereof is yet to come to all such dark sots
as thou art, although the seed the light is come into thee already, to thy
condemnation.

4. Thou goes on slandering Humphery Smiths Book, entitled The everlasting
Rule, and say in the face of men and Devils he affirms, that there is no
other rule, way, means or name by which man shall ever come to walk with God,
but by that which is manifest of God in him. My heart is one with Humphery
Smith in these words, and in the face of the Devil, and against him and all
such men as take his part, I affirm the same, that he which was the Light in
whom all the Patriarchs and Fathers walked with God (before the Scriptures
(which is thou say thy rule and guide) was written) is the Savior of the
world, and changes not, his Spirit a perfect guide and instructor in all the
ways of Righteousness, and besides him I do not look for another, yet the
Scriptures I own, which are things too high for thee who art an enemy to him
that gives life.

Now I shall come a little to take notice of the form of thy own words, which
begins in the 59. page of thy Book, where thou have drawn up scornfully many
words in thy own form, and replies an answer thy self, and say, Turn to the
Light within, says the Quaker; this thou do not speak so as to own it for
Truth, or the Light and its teaching sufficient, but as if it were a doctrine
contrary to what God, Angels, Prophets, and Apostles taught; therefore I shall
prove thee exceeding blind concerning the Scriptures, to all who are not filled
with envy, as thou art; thou say God spoke by the Prophets, and all should
hear the words that were cried by the words of the former Prophets, and not to
the Light within, as says the Quaker.

Again thou say John sent two of his Disciples unto Jesus, saying, Art thou
he that shall come, or do we look for another; but thou say the true Light
turned him to outward means for his satisfaction, which outward means neither I
nor any of the Quakers deny, if the Light within lead thereunto.

Again thou speaks of John, and the people and Soldiers that came unto him,
saying, Master what shall we do? and thou mocking say turn to the Light
within says the Quaker; but say thou John who had another Spirit then the
Light within, says, let him that has two coats impart to him that has none;
exact no more then that which is appointed, do violence to no man, neither
accuse any man falsely, but be content with your wages, and so thou would make
a great difference, and divide between the Light of Christ in the Quakers, and
the Light and Spirit that spoke in all the Prophets, or as if the Light of
Christ within the Prophets now adays did teach to deny the words that were
spoken by the same Christ and Light in the former Prophets; does not the Light
within, I appeal to the simple amongst the Baptists, which convinces you of
sin in your bed-chambers, whether it does not teach to do righteously, and
impart a coat to him that has none, or if thou have bread to feed the hungry,
and to do to thy neighbor, yea and unto all men as thou would have them to
do unto thee, and whether the whole Law and the Prophets be not contained in
these things? and whether they which were without the Scripture and outward
Law, had not the Law which is Light, as Solomon says Prove 6.23. written in
their hearts, by which nature they did the things spoken of in the outward Law?
and whether this be to deny the Scripture, or contrary to the words of the
former Prophets, or the Apostles, to turn people to the Light of Christ within,
which does fulfill the Scriptures, and is the end of both the Law and the
Prophets, answer these things or confess them true.

Again thou go on in thy former manner, saying, a certain young man came to
Christ and said, what shall I do that I may have eternal life? and the Jews
came and demanded what shall we do that we might work the works of God? and
then again mocking say, turn to the Light within says the Quaker; but say
thou as if Christ were of another mind, then that they should turn to the Light
within, keep the Commandments, and sell that which thou have and give to the
poor; and also to the Jews he said, this is the work of God, that ye believe in
him whom the Father has sent, that thou say wast Christ himself that talked
with them, but was not in them.

Answ. My answer is, nay, Christ was not in them so as he was in the Saints, to
justify them, but the Devil and darkness was in them, which had blinded the
pure eye, which did convince them in their Consciences many times, as thou thy
self have been convinced, that never man spoke as he spoke, neither were the
words which he spoke the words of one that had a Devil, as they said he had.

And further I say, that Christ's whole Doctrine, and the Apostles and Prophets
did proceed from the Light within, for there is a Spirit in man, and the
inspiration of the Almighty gives him an understanding how to speak, and their
very end was to turn them to the Light within; and they testified God was a
Spirit, and dwelt in the Light, and they that walked in the Light had
fellowship with him, and his Son Jesus Christ, and in which both them and their
worship was accepted with the Lord, and all the rest worshipped they knew not
what, as Christ says, John 8.4.24. and what if Christ had said as the Quakers
say in thy own words, turn to the Commandment within; I say, and the Spirit of
Christ in Solomon says the same, Prove. 6. thy Commandment is Light, and what
if he had said this is the work of God, that ye believe in him who is the
Commandment, and given for a Commander, and for a Covenant of Light, would
thou not have scorned him as thy Brethren the Jews did, and as thou do the
Quakers? did not David say I believe in thy word and it has quickened me? and
did he not say it is a Light to my feet, and a lanthorn to my paths? and that
it kept him from sin, and was the way for a young man to have his way cleansed,
if he took heed thereunto; and does not Paul say this word in which David
believed, and is the Author and begetter of the true faith in all that hearken
to it, which faith I know thou art a reprobate concerning, though the Title of
thy Book is Faith in the promises is the Saints best weapon, yet thy self have
another weapon; and as for thy hiding place, slanders and lies is thy refuge,
Romans 10.8. is not this word nigh in the heart? and did not Christ say to the
unbelievers who rejected the word and Law which is Light, While ye have the
Light walk in the Light that you may be Children? and has not this enlightened
every one that comes into the world? and does not Christ say John 8. He that
follows me shall not abide in darkness, but shall receive the Light of Life?
but I say and the Lord has said it, the Life is the Light of man, and shines
in the darkness, though such blind guides and sottish Children as thou art
comprehend it not, John 1. verse. 1. to the 10. Thou bidst thy Brethren take the
shield of faith, and so concludes thy Book. The Lord has said thy faith is
false, and let thy Brethren be warned, least they believe as thou do; but as
thou say in scorn, I say in the integrity of my heart, let the simple among
thy Brethren or elsewhere turn to the Light within, and word which is nigh them
in their hearts, and if thy own day of visitation be not over, do thou hear and
fear; but consider for the time to come, the Jews had thy word, the Letter, and
the unbelievers and Apostates had thy rule, guide, and leader, but were
reprobates concerning this faith which was once given to the Saints, and came
by hearing of the eternal word in their hearts; but how can thou believe on
him thou have not heard, but art vexing thy self because the Quakers cry turn
to the word within; Thou likest such a word and rule well, and the Children of
thy Father ever did, which thou can wrest and turn as thou do the Letter,
to fight against the Life; but that which is a more sure word and foundation, a
tried stone and a perfect rule from generation to generation of them that seek
the Lord, this thou can not endure; but it is my Crown and the Ornament of
the Righteousness in which I rejoice, and tread upon the Serpents head; and
should I never speak more, this I say, the eye is open that sees thee and
comprehends thy muddy mind, thou art weighed in an even balance, the Lord will
bruise thee with the stone thou art lifting at, and the sword and weapon which
thou fightest with shall be a perpetual pain and terror in thy own bowels.

And in the 59. page of thy Book thou go on in a scoffng way to oppose the
Light within, which is to give the knowledge of the glory of God in the face of
Christ Jesus, and thou brings the Prophets words, and John Baptists words, and
Christ and the Apostles words, and Paul and Silas their words, that speaks of
Repentance, and concerning the gifts of the holy Ghost, and these thou brings
to oppose the Light within. Now to all sober people this needs no answer, but
that thou should not exalt thy self among the ignorant, these Queries are
sent unto thee.

Can any repent or have their minds changed, but they must have the Light
within and be turned to it? can any receive the gift of the Holy Ghost, but
they must be turned to the Light within? Is not the gift received within? And
further thou goes on and say, Believe in the Lord Jesus Christ: And then
thou scoffest and say, The Quakers say turn to the Light within.

Now can any believe, but such who are turned to the Light within, which gives
the Light of the knowledge of the Glory of God in the Face of Christ Jesus? as
Cor. 24.

And do not they that believe, come to the Witness in themselves and are past
from death to life? And is not that Witness within? What have thou Preached all
this while that sets such things upon Record, that Generations to come may see
thy Ignorance? This shows that thou art not as the Churches was in the
Primative times, that can not endure the anointing within, nor light within;
the anointing within must needs be light, and how many of the Baptists
Teachers has brought people to the anointing within them, that they need no
man to teach them, but as the same anointing teaches them? And how many have
they brought to the Light within which shines in the heart, to give the
knowledge of the Glory of God in the Face of Christ Jesus?

And how many have the Baptist Teachers brought to the New Covenant, the Law
written in their hearts and put in their minds, that they need not teach every
man his brother, saying, Know the Lord, for they shall all know him, from the
least to the greatest?

How have you Baptists Apostatized from this practice and Doctrine, who now
appear as Antichrist in opposition to it, which was in the Apostles days, who
now look upon Christ, and see him as the Pharisees did, who with the same eye
that looks steadfastly upon him, runs upon him and rages at him; and these are
them that stops the pure eye within, that denies the Light as the Pharisees
did; so you are like to see with no other eyes then the Pharisees did, who know
him no further then the Pharisees did, which flesh and blood does not reveal
him to be the Son of God, and Christ is the substance of all Figures; yet to
the world he is a sign, see if thou can read that figure, and he is an
example, and will thou look for another Christ then he that dyed at Jerusalem?
because Humphery Smith says, He looks for no other, are you Baptists angry at
this? he that looks for another, I must tell you it is that Antichrist.

1. Query, Whether that was not the Light within, that the Pharisees stop their
ears to, and closed their eyes; if it was not, what was it?

2. Are not all eyes stopped, and all ears closed till they come to the Light
within, and all in the ungenerate and impenitent state, till they come to the
Light within?

3. Is not the Light within, the eye that beholds God and Christ?

4. And can any see God or Christ without the Light within? or can they see him
with a Natural eye, who is a Spirit?

5. And is it not the Spiritual eye by which Christ is beheld, and is not that
within? Or is there any fellowship or Unity amongst any people that is of God,
but they must c me to the Light within? Answer these-Queries all you Baptists
who oppose the Light within, or else for ever let your mouths be stopped.

6. Could any one ever hear God, Christ, Prophets, Apostles or Angels, if it
was not with the Light within, which gave to understand their words?

7. Or can any come to the knowledge of the Truth or to Repentance, Faith, or
the Gifts of God, or come to Worship God in the Spirit and Truth, if they do
not come to the Light within.

8. Or can any know Christ to be the Son of God and the Savior, and know his
Resurrection and his Blood, and him to be the offering who remains in the
Heavens and restors all things, and by what he does restore, if it be not by
the Light of Christ within?

9. And do not the Baptists stick in Bread, Water and Wine instead of the
substance?

10. Is this a time for you to brawl, and to jangle, and wrangle about outward
things? could the prodigal fill his belly with the husks? Did not he leave the
husks when he came to the Fathers house? Was not this parable spoken to the
Jews who lived in outward things? And may not this be spoken to you who live in
outward things, warnglers and fighters about them in the field, and comes not
to the Fathers House? Did not Cain k ll his brother in the field, and is not
the field the World?

Friend, in the fourtieth page of thy book, thou charges the Quakers to be in a
very great error, because they say, The Eternal Spirit in man is the Savior of
the World, and to contradict this, thou puts a difference between Christ and
the Comforter in this sense; I have said there is a difference as in his
several Administrations, and as he oppe^^ts in one to condemnation, and is near
in another to justification, in this sense there is a difference, when he
Ministers wrath, and his everlasting burnings against the wicked, and when he
Ministers Peace, Joy, and everlasting assurance to those that love his Light
and have followed it in the way of its Righteous Judgments; so I say there is
a difference, when God who is pure Love, pure Peace in himself, has to do and
deal with man, who is joined to the Seed of Esau and Cain, which is reprobated;
this was always hated by the Lord, and to the froward and perverse Gene^^^^on,
God did always show himself froward, though God changes not neither is he
froward, though he show himself so, and stands with his Right arm as an
Adversary to the wicked, Psalm. 18.26. With the Pure thou will show thy self
Pure, with the Merciful thou will show thy self Merciful, with an upright man
thou will show thy self upright, but with the froward thou will show thy self
froward; verse. 25. and so though there be diversities of administrations, yet
is there but one Lord, who is the same and changes not.

Thou say also, The eternal Spirit which dwelt in the Man Christ Jesus,
which after the Apostles received in them, is called another Comforter, and
that by Christ himself, which would not come unto the Apostles, unless as thou
say, the true Christ went away, and so thou would fain prove that the
Comforters which afterware dwelt in the Apostles, was not the true Christ; and
for proof her of, thou (...)


