This is Written in PLAINNESS OF HEART, and Bowels of Everlasting love to my
PERSECUTORS, WHO HAVE Shot Sore at me, and hated me without a cause.

Both Magistrates, Priests and People in Stafford Sheir, or elsewhere, that ye
all may be turned from the Darkness to the Light, and from Antichrist without,
unto Christ within, who is the Light of the World, and has lighted every man
therein with his saving Light.

Some Queres also, for such who call themselves Ministers of Christ, but are
altogether unlike him, or his Ministers to Answer.

Together with a Warning from the Lord God of Life and Power to Repent, and
leave Persecuting, and striving against, or kicking against the Lord.

Written from one who have been in the Pit, Death, Grave, and Hell; But am come
from Far, and am sit down with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, in the Heavenly
places with them that are in Christ, but unknown to you, I am: But by the Name
I received amongst you, HVMPHRY WOLLRICH.

2 Cor. 3.6. God has made us able Ministers or the New Testament, not of the
Letter, which kills, but of the Spirit which gives Life.

Printed for Robert Wilson, at the sign of the Black-spread-Eagle and
Windmill in Martins-lane near Aldersgate.

COme all ye Magistrates, Rulers and Officers in Stafford, which are sworn to
do Justice, and ex^e^^e Judgment, and lay the sword upon the neck of the
Wicked, and to be a terror to Evil doers, and a strength and a praise to them
that do Well. Come all to the Light, wherewith Christ, who is the True Light,
has enlightened you with (...), and so you shall see the Evil doer, deceiver
and seducer, which (...) to sin, iniquity, and trangression, nearer you than
you were aware; even he which reigns and rules in Stafford, and leads the
Inhabitants thereof into Swaring, Lying, and Drunkenesse: so that your being
Christians is only in words, ye being dead in your trespasses and sins, and
the God of the World having blinded the eye by which the Lord has said he will
guide, and lead his people into all Truth, out of all iniquity, transgression,
and sin, which the Inhabitants of Stafford abounds withal, and yet have
covered themselves with a Profession, and have got the Prophets words, and
Christ's words, but are inwardly ravened, and cast the Law of the Lord behind
them, which is Light, and have rejected the Word of the Lord, which is nigh
them in their hearts, Romans 10.8. And this is the Word that opens the blind
Eye, and is immortal and unchangeable, and is like a fire, and like a hammer.
Sink down and ye shall feel it so, and this is it which was before the Bible
was, which your false Teacher tells you is the Word of the Lord, and opens the
blind Eye; and this is the Word which was before the World was, whom the
Jews, which had the Words, Slew, and Crucified; and this is false Doctrine:
for David prayed the Lord that he would open his eyes, Psalm. 119.18. and Psalm.
146.8. The Lord opens the eyes of the blind, the Lord raises them that are
bowed down, and loses the bonds of the prisoner, Isaiah. 42.6, 7. where you
may read, That it is only the work of Christ, to open the blind Eyes, and to
bring out the Prisoners from the prison, and them that sit in Darkness out of
the Prison house: And this is he which commands the Consciences of men which
love him, and the Condemnation of all that hate him, and rebel against him,
and not the Bible as your blind Guide tells you. And why will you be so blind
as to look upon me as an evil Doer, who was moved of the Lord to question this
Doctrine, that poor ignorant people, who are in their sins might be deceived
no longer; and the Lord God Almighty is my witness, and the testimony of the
Lord stands sure and shall witness for me in you all, that I do not this
wickedly or maliciously, nor in stubbornness either against Magistrate or
Minister, but in obedience to the Lord, and that people which lie in darkness
might be turned to the light, from the power of Satan unto God? and why will
you call this delusion, or a deluding Spirit, that causes Drunkards to leave
off their drunkenesse, and become sober and temperate, and Swarers to leave
their swaring, and Liars to speak the truth; and in the power of the Lord God,
I warn you all to consider what is my transgression or sin amongst you, for
which I have been imprisoned eight or nine times in Stafford? Which of you have
I caused, that was sober, to become a drunkard? or what Countenancers have I
been of liars, swearers, and mockers there amongst you? I say, Is it for any of
these things for which I have been so often imprisoned? or have I not suffered
for bearing a testimony against these things which Stafford does abound with,
notwithstanding all their Profession? And is not your Markets, which I have
been moved of the Lord to speak in, and to cry out against these things, yet
abounding with Swearers and Drunkards, which go reeling up and down the streets
unpunished? neither are they looked upon is deceivers, or deceived; neither are
they counted a disturbance, or troublers of your Israel. And how does your
Steeple Houses abound, and your Church made up of such as these, which profess
Christ in words, but have lost the Life, and are altogether unlike Christ, or
Christians, and to every good word, and work, are reprobates? and by such as
these are we persecuted, and abused, who have lost both form and power of
godliness, and are enemies to the life of Christ, which they in words
profess; therefore the Lord God Almighty has raised up many witness, and in
his Life and Spirit; and by the Power of the Lord are they led to bare a
testimony against all your false Teachers which are run, and God never sent
them; and have cried, the Lord says it unto you, when the Lord has not spoken
to them, but are thieves and robbers, and are climed up another way than by
Christ, the Door: and so are become thieves and robbers, and have stolen
Christ's words, and the Apostles words, and are condemning the Jews for
Crucifying Christ, but themselves are Crucifying him again, and imprisoning,
persecuting, and stoning them in whom he is made manifest and so are you like
the Jews, and your Priests have no other weapons, nor no other sword to cut
down Heretics withal, but prisons, clubs, and staffes, which are Carnal, as
the High Priests weapons were, and not Spiritual, as Paul's was: and the Jews
which had the Prophets words, and thought to have Eternal Life therein, were
Condemning their Fathers for killing the Prophets; but they would not come to
Christ, who the Light of the World, that they might have Life, who was the end
of all the Prophets, and the life of all the Prophets, him they Crucified as a
Deceiver and Blasphemer, and prince of Devils: Therefore in the fear of the
Lord God, I warn you all. Take heed what you do, or how you resist, and
withstand the work of the Lord, which is a mavelous work, and a wonder; and
is begun among you, though you have not an Ear to hear, nor an Eye to see, (who
are gone from the Light of the Lord in you) nor an Heart to understand unto
this day. But why do the Heathens rage, and the People imagine a vain thing;
and have said in their hearts, this man shall not reign over them, whose right
it is to reign?

But in vain do you strive against your Maker, or against his Servant whom he
sends, who has sought nothing but your Souls welfare, and that you might come
to know your Souls Shepherd, and be gathered into the one sheepfold, from all
false Shepherds, which have lived in ease and pleasure; which have eaten the
fat, and clothed themselves with the wool, but have not watched for the soul,
as they that must give an account for them, nor cared for the sheep, but they
have been blind leaders of the blind; and they have not turned you to the
Light, which is the Eye, which the god of the world has blinded, left you
should see them to be deceivers, as they are: Read Ezekiel. 34.3, 4, to the 13
verse. John 10.1. verse to the 15.

And to you, and your Teachers, who are opposing the work of the Lord: to you
all, This is the word of the Lord God, ye are as nothing before him; and all
your strength is but weakness, and as a tottering wall, and our Shield is
departed from you; and he is risen like a Valiant man, and his appearance is
terrible as an Army with Banners; and he will Overturn, Overturn, Overturn you
all, until he reign, whose right it is: And the Lord God Almighty is risen
against all Persecutors, to destroy them, and confound them, unless they
repent, and be warned, and agree with their Adversary, while he is in the way:
be ye wise, and instructed in love to your souls, I warn you all; and kiss
the Son lest he be angry, and brake you with his Iron Rod like a potters
vessel, and tear you in pieces live a Lion, and there be none to deliver you.
And I warn you all, Follow not these Teachers, nor own them to be your Guides,
which are ashamed to give an Answer of what they Preach in public, but run
away as the hireling in Christ's time did, when they see him come whom they call
a Wolf. Let your Teacher, (if he be a Minister of Christ) I charge him, in the
Power of the Lord, never to preach that to the people, which he is ashamed of
before them: And before the Lord God I warn him, or any of them who preach for
Hire, and say the Scripture is their Rule, and accuse us for denying of it, to
Answer these Queres:

I. Whether the Ministers of Christ, who wrestled not with Flesh and Blood, did
ever use Carnal weapons to defend the Truth withal? Or whether they did ever
imprison, or tortour the bodies of those which are called. Heretics, and so
destroy the Handiwork of God? Or whether they which fought the Good Fight, did
not use the Sword of the Spirit only, which is the Word of God, and proceeds
out of the mouth of the Lamb? Or, whether these be not your Mothers weapons,
the Church of Rome, which ye are crying (Whore) against? Come, answer ye
Priests, and ye Orthodox men, and Original men, who have lost the true
Original, and gone from the Spirit of truth, which gave forth the Scriptures,
these Queres which are plain honest things.

Whether you have any better weapons than the High Priests had, which Crucified
Christ; or the Beast Antichrist, and the false Prophet which ye read of in the
Revelations had, which made war with the Lamb and the Saints, and slew them
which kept the testimony of Jesus, and the Word of God? whether you do not
fight the bad fight, as the false Teachers, whose weapons were Carnal in all
Ages did; by which weapons your Church, and your Mother Church of Rome, have
strengthened themselves, and do strengthen themselves to this very day? Is this
to fight the Good Fight, and to wrestle with that wicked Spirit which has
captivated the Seed, and the handiwork of God?

II. Whether Hebrew, Greek and Latin be the Original, by which people must
know the Scriptures, seeing they that had your Original, did Crucify Christ,
the true Original; and did err, not knowing the Scriptures, nor the Power of
God? Come, answer these Queres, or else stop your mouths for ever.

III. Whether the Scriptures, or the Bible, be the Word of God? or, whether
Christ be not the Word of God, which was before the Bible was? or, whether this
be not the Living Word, which was as a Light, and a Lanthern to his feet; and
which David hid in heart, and walked in the Light thereof, that kept him from
sinning against the Lord? and whether they which had the Scripture have not
still proved the greatest Enemies to Christ? and whether he, who was the
immortal, eternal, and unchangeable Word, did abide in them?

IV. Whether the Bible be the Rule and Guide for Saints to walk by, as ye
preach it in your Pulpits to, be? or, whether all that are the Sons of God,
have not in all Ages been ruled, guided, by the Spirit of God?

V. Come, Answer ye Priests: What is the Judge of the Spirits? whether the
Bible be the Judge of the Spirits, or the Anointing which we have received from
the Holy One, by which we must Judge, and try all things? and whether people
must come to the Scripture, which is the Bible; or to Christ within, to whom
all Judgment is committed?

VI. Whether Christ be the True Light that enlightneth every man? and whether,
this Light, being obeyed, and followed, and taken heed too, be not suflicient
of it self to Salve man, and Redeem man out of all sin and iniquity; and
purify his heart, and create in man a clean heart, as God is clean, and to
preserve and keep clean in this present evil world? Come, Answer all, ye
deceivers, which say, none can be perfect in this Life: tell the people plainly
by answering these Queres, whether ye are not the Children of your Mother, the
Church of Rome, which do believe in a Purgatory between Heaven and this Life,
seeing you tell them they cannot be free from sin while they live here, and
no unclean thing can enter into the Kingdom of God?

VII. Whether you be Ministers of Christ, or Enemies to Christ, who are of this
Belief, that none can be perfect and free from sin? seeing Paul says, Ephesians.
4. 11, 12. The work of the Ministry was for the perfecting of the Saints.

VIII. Whether your Preaching and Praying against all Sin, be not sin,
seeing ye Preach and Pray for that which you believe can never be? and whether
all that's not of Faith, be not Sin?

IX. Whether you do not make, and in effect say, Satan is stronger to keep man
in Sin, than Christ who came to destroy Sin, and to Redeem man out of all
Sin?

X. Whether you do not make God a hard Task-master, and charge him, wickedly,
and make his commands grievous to your Hearers? seeing God commands men to be
Holy, as he is Holy; and Pure, as he is Pure: and John says his commands are
not grievous.

XI. Whether you are not the false teachers that Peter speaks of, 2 Pet. 2.
which have forsaken Christ, the right way, and run greedily in the way of
Balaam, after great Benefices and Rewards? and your selves being gone out of
the way, cannot cease from sin, and tell people they cannot cease from sin
also; and so all being gone out of the Council of God, can never profit the
people, but are in the spirit of Error, and are clothed with the Saints words,
and Sheeps clothing, but are inwardly ravened, and erred in your hearts from
the Spirit of the Lord: And whether such who hear you, and learn of you, are
not they which are ever learning, and never able to come to the knowledge of
the Truth, which is Christ; which he that's in sins not.

XII. Whether the knowledge of sin comes by the Bible to any man? or, what that
Law was which Paul came to the knowledge of sin by, seeing, he had the
Letter, while he was alive without this Law?

XIII. Whether Revelation be now ceased with any but such as ye are, which are
in the way of Balaam, and gone from the spirit by which the things of God are
revealed? Answer this, ye false teachers that say Revelation is ceased, and
that the voice of Christ is not heard but in the Letter of the Scripture:
seeing the Letter says, John 10. My sheep hear my voice. And they that had the
Scriptures had neither heard his Voice, nor seen his shape at any time.

XIV. Whether any can come to the knowledge of sin, but by the light within?
and whether this Light be not able of it self alone, to bring man to the
knowledge of God? and whether, by any other thing but by the light which shines
in the heart, man does come to the knowledge of God? and whether this be
sufficient alone to Save man, and, redeem him out of all sin in this life,
and keep him pure, as Christ is pure?

XV. Whether the Bible does open the blind eye, seeing the Bible says, Christ
was sent to open the blind eyes? whether the Bible does command the Conscience
of man, as Noah Bryan did affirm in your Idol Temple at Stafford? or, whether
the Light of Christ in the Conscience does not exercise and command the
Consience?

XVI. What is the Law spoken of, Isaiah 8. and the Testimony? whether it be the
Bible? Come, answer what it is, and where it is? whether it be a thing without,
or within man?

XVII. Where is that Righteousness by which man is Justifed? Is it within man,
and in his heart? or, was it Christ's Righteosnnesse at Jerusalem only, which
sulfilled the Law? or, whether the Righteousness of the Law must not be
fulfilled in man in this generation?

XVIII. Whether Christ were not the same before the World, or Virgin Mary was,
as he was in the days of the Jews; and his body the same which descended,
with that which ascended? and whether any other body did ascend into Heaven,
but the body which is Spiritual, and the only begotten of the Spirit, and was
never seen with any carnal Eye?

Comme all ye Priests, and you which call your selves Ministers of Christ, do
not think to hide your selves any longer, or save your selves in this day of
the Lords mighty power, by persecuting and imprisoning us whom the Lord God
has raised up to bear a testimony against you all: and this is not your way to
save your selves from the overflowing scourge that is coming upon you all: Butt
come down to the Light of Christ in you, and honestly consider, and ye shall
see, and confess that ye are not Ministers of Christ, neither do ye speak as
the Spirit gives you utterance; neither are you Ministers of the Spirit as they
were, but of the Letter which Kills.

If this be confessed, and owned amongst you, then you need not answer these
Queres: But if you will not confess to the Lord, and own your shame, and all
your Worships which is taught you but by the precepts of men then answer these
which follow:

I. Where did the Ministers of Christ hire themselves for so much a year, or
make a bargain with the people, either for less or more? or, whether their
Ministry was not freely given them of the Lord? and whether they were not
freely to give it others? or, whether that be Gods gift which ye buy at Oxford
for so much Money, and learn in so long a time, and sell it again in the
Country for so much by the hour glass? II. Whether the Ministers of Christ,
who were led by the Spirit of Christ, which was never limited by an hour
glass? whether they, did study in the week day, or invent, or speak a
divination of their own brain to the the people, when they were met together?
or, whether they did not speak as the Spirit gave them utterance? Again, where
did the Ministers of Christ teach people to sing David's Psalms with another
heart than David had? or give David's Psalms to a company of mockers, scorners,
and persecutors? and whether David be not made the Song of the Drunkards by you
now as ever he was? III. Where did the Ministers of Christ ever sprinkle
Infants, and tell poor ignorant people it was an Ordinance of God? You which
say the Scripture is your Rule, Answer, and show some Scipture for these
things. IV. Where do you ever read, That the Ministers of Christ did ever
imprison, persecute or sue any man for filthy lucre as ye do. IV. Where do you
ever read, That the Ministers of Christ did ever imprison, persecute, or sue
any man for filthy lucre as ye do. V. Whether you are not those false Teachers,
and antichrists, and false Christ's which Christ, Mat. 24. said should come in
the last times; and John, who as one of his Apostles, in his Epistle said were
come already? and whether John was not in the Light, and they went out from him
in the way of Balaam, and for filthy lucre sake? and whether it be not one
thousand six hundred years ago since John in the Revelations said, all the
world went out after them, and wondered and said, who was able to make War
with the Beast, which made war with the Lamb, and slew the Saints which kept
the testimony of Jesus? Come, answer whether you are not of this Church? and
whether your weapons be such as proceed out of the mouth of the Lamb, or such
as they used who made war with the Lamb, and slew, and cast some of the
Saints into Prison? VI. If your Church be true, then Answer, Where did the
Church of Christ appoint one, and only one to speak at a set-time, and count
it disorder for any for any to speak besides him which stands in the high
place? or whether, if any thing were revealed to another that stood by the
first, ought not to hold his peace? whether this was ever counted confusion and
disorder, by such who were the true Church, and had the Spirit of God; or by
the false Church only, who were gone from the Spirit of the Lord, and to whom
Revealations is ceased? VII. Whether all, who walk not contrary to the
Scripture, as ye do in these things, and abide not in the Doctrine of Christ,
have either the Father, or the Son? and whether such can Minister Christ, who
have him not revealed in themselves? VIII. Whether your Praying, Singing, and
Preaching, and all your Ordinances, and Sacrifices be not sin? and all your
Incense, as if you blessed an Idol, or slew a man; and offered swines flesh,
which is abomination to the Lord? and whether swines flesh, and harlots flesh
be not the fame as ever it was?
Come all you people of what sort or opinion soever you be. Come all you
Independants, Baptists, and, Separatists of what Body or Church soever, who are
not acted, guided, and led by the Pure, Eternal, Unchangeable light of Christ
in your Consciences, the Church of the Firstborn, which is in God, you know
not, nor the general Assembly, whose Names are written in Heaven ye are not
yet come too, but ye are all of the Synagogue of Satan, and the God of the
world has blinded the eye which is the Light, which should lead you to descern
the Body, which is the Church; and my bowels are yerning, and my love is
issuing out toward you all; and by the power of the Lord, and in the Majesty
of the Lord I am constrained to deal plainly with you all, and to wound you
all, and to heal the hurt of none slightly, as your false Teachers have long
done; who have daubed with untempered mortar, and spoken peace to the wicked;
who have not wounded the head of the wicked, nor the hairy scalpe of such as
has been found in rebellion against the Lord; and have laid a foundation, but
have not taken away the rubbish in which the book of the Law has been hid, and
is hid in you, whom the God of the world has blinded the eye which should see
him, who is invisible, and the true foundation and everlasting arm which is
underneath, upon which all the generation of the Righteous did build; but you
are building the New house on your Old foundation; and you are garnishing the
Sepulcher of the dead, and you are clothing your selves with the white raiment,
and setting a goodly Miter upon your heads, but the filthy rags, and rotten
rags, and filthy garment is yet over Joshua the High Priest; and he is slain,
and the world, and the foundations thereof, and the Pillars thereof are set
upon him; and the great Mystery hid from you all, which is Christ within, the
hope of Glory. And you are all in the Darkness, and out of the Light, which
makes manifest Darkness, and the Light shines in the darkness. And you who
are in the darkness, by the children of Light are comprehended, and by him
which is Judged of no man, nor cares not for man's Judgment, are you all
Judged, and Condemned, but the Light your selves cannot comprehend who are in
the darkness.

Therefore all come down into the deep, that you may see the wondrous works
of the Lord in the great waters; and that ye may be drawn out of the waters,
upon which the Whore sits, which waters have gone over, and are over your
heads; (read within, Christ the Head of every man) stand still awhile, that you
may see the Salvation of the Lord, and his his power rise in you, and his arm
bring forth Salvation for you; and the Sea shall be dried up, and the tongue of
the Egyptian shall be smitten in the seven streams, and the foundations of the
World shall be discovered, and the Channells of the Sea shall be seen, and he
shall be known; and what manner of man he is that rebukes the Winds, and the
Sea obey him, and the swaddling Band you shall know which binds and shuts up the
Sea as with doors: and says to the proud, and raging Waves thereof, hitherto
shall thou go, and no further. This is our God whom, we have been looking for;
this is the Living which we have been seeking amongst the dead: he it is which
was in this place, and we knew it not; we will be gald, and rejoice in his day.

This is day of the Lords might power, this is the Day of the Lambs Marriage,
and the Supper of the great King, and the day of the Lords Controversy, with
all his Enemies which are gathered together with Gog and Magog, as the sands of
the Sea; and are persecuting, imprisoning the Saints, and compassing about the
beloved City, and the fire of the Lord is coming out of Heaven to destroy you
all. And the Lion is come out of the Thicket, and the destroyer of the Gentiles
is on his way, and the sword of the Lord is drawn and Made reddy for the
slaughter, and the slain of the Lord shall be many, and made drunk with the
blood of Bulls, Rams, and Goats. Oh that you would, be wise! Oh that you would
understand this! that you would consider your latter end! but you are a people
void of Council; neither is there any understanding in you, for ye have
rejected the pure, eternal, and immortal Word of the Lord, and behind your
backs ye have cast it, and you have lightly esteemed, and counted the Light,
which is the rock of Ages, as a low thing; and ye have stumbled at the
stumbling stone, and the rock that begets, has been lightly esteemed by you,
who are wise in your own eyes, and prudent in your own conceits; and ye have
rejected the Law of the Lord, and the word of love, and what wisdom is there
in you? and the light by you, wherewith Christ has enlightened every man to you
who are high in professions, and above the door, it is become foolishness,
though it be the tried Stone, the Corner Stone, and the Foundation Stone, and
to us that have tried him, and believe in him, he is precious; but to you who
are wise; as I said before, this is too low a thing for you to tell you of
(that) which smites you in your Consciences, and checketh you, reproves you
in secret: this say you, who are in your sins, and pleading for sin, and
saying none can be without sin while they live; this say you, we knew long
since. To thee I say, whoever thou art; thou knew thy Condemnation then; for
had not he come a light into the World, thou had had no sin: wherefore now
thou have no cloak for thy sin. But I say, had thou come down when thou
first knew this thing, and turned at the reproof of the Lord, when he first
smote thee, and made thee to start, and persued thee in the hinder parts, when
thy heart was Adulterated, and went a whoring from the Lord. I say, had thou
then come down, and waited in the Light of the Lord which smote thee, thou
would have found, and felt the Power of the Lord, which is the Word of the
Lord, arisen in thee like a fire, and like a hammer, even the word within the
Veil would have destroyed the covering which has been over all Nations, and
rent the Veil which has been over all people, and is yet over you; and when
the Scriptures you read, with all your Original, as Hebrew, Greek, and Latin,
you cannot understand because the Veil is over your heart; and Christ, the
hope of Glory is entered within the Veil, which should condemn sin, and
finish transgression, and destroy him which has the power of death, which is
the Devil, and bring in everlasting Righteousness.

And this Righteousness are you ignorant of, and in your own you are, which
is as filthy rags, and it does not set you free from sin, because it is
sin, and so you being all gone out of the way, which is Christ within, Gods
Righteousness: you cannot cease from sin, and so your Prayers are sin, and
your striving, seeking, and knocking is sin, because you are striving, and
seeking amiss; and so though thou take unto thee water, and wash thee with
never so much Soap, yet thine iniquity, and thy Righteousness is marked, and
all one before the Lord. Therefore in the bowels of love I Exhort you all, and
in the power and dread of the Lord, I warn you all to come down to the
manifestation of the Spirit of God, and unto the Light of God, and Grace of
God, which has appeared to all men; and freely given from the Lord, and is the
Lords Tallent, and the Lords gift, which is perfect, and pure, as God is pure,
and unchangeable, and varies not, and is freely given to every man to profit
withal.

I say to this, come down, if ever you expect Salvation; feel it, and wait in
it, which is meek, and low of heart: for until this be done, namely, to see
the Light separated from the darkness, and the Precious from the Vile, you
shall never be as Gods mouth, and all your Teachers, who are gone from this,
are out of Gods Counsel, and shall never profit the people; and all ye
Professors, of what Sect soever, or of what Opinion soever, who are gone from
this, you are them, which are not Sons of God, being not led by this spirit
of God, which he has given to every man to profit withal; and the price is in
the hand of the fool, and you are the unprofitable servants which hide your
Lords Tallent, and must be cast into utter darkness, where the worms dies
not, and the fire goes not out, but where there is wailing, weeping, and
gnashing of teeth; and where the Fire of the Lord shall consume and burn for
ever, and the Breath of the Lord as a stream of Brimstone, does blow it up, and
kindle it.

I say again to you all, Come down out of all your own wisdom, and own your
shame, and sit in the dust before the Lord: if so be there may be but hope, and
this is hard for you who are rich, and wise, to become fools for Christ, that
ye may feel, and know the Spirit of the Lord, which is the Spirit of Truth,
from the lying spirit, which is of the World, and leads from the Lord into the
World, and hides the Seed, to which all the Promises are, and vailes the Pure,
which is not of this World, nor its Kingdom, Power, nor Glory is not of this
World: And this is he which you cannot believe in, who are the friendship and
love of the world, worshipping, and honoring, and receiving honor one of
another; in him you cannot believe, who receives not honor of men.

Nevertheless to him you must come, and to him you must how; and whose Image
has been marred in you, and has bowed down, and has been slain since the
world was set in man's heart; and this is the gate, and the door by which the
Sheep enter: and this is the Souls Anchor, which anchors up the Immortal Soul
to God: And this is the Shepherd of the sheep, and has laid down his Life for
the sheep, and they hear his Voice, and follow him through great tribulation;
and in the Regeneration, they are washing their Robes, and making them white in
the Blood of the Lamb. And unless to him you come out of all your own
thoughts, reasonings, and imaginations, and take him for your rule and guide to
to walk by, you shall never know the peace which is upon the Israel of God: And
all ye that kindle a fire, and walk in the light of the sparks which your
selves have kindled, ye shall all lie down in sorrow, says the Lord God.

But Peace upon all, and Joy upon all who walk in the light of the Lord, and
are led by the Spirit of the Lord, who leads out of sin and iniquity which
ye all lie in, in the way of Righteousness, Holiness, and Purity, which
becomes his house for evermore. And oh that thou had hearkened into me, says
the Lord! then had thy Peace been like a River, and thy Righteousness like the
Waves of the Sea; the Seed, the light to which all the Promises are, had been
as the Stars in the Firmament; and the Offspring of thy Bowels, like the sands
of the Seashore, innumerable! Oh that you had taken heed to the light which ye
call a low thing, I would soon have subdued your enemies under you, and turned
my hand aganst all them that hated you; he would have fed you also with the
finest of the Wheat, and with honey out of the Rock would he have satisfied
you! but you would not hearken to my Voice, says the Lord, which smore you,
and reproved you upon your beds: so the Lord has given many of you over to
your sins, and over to your hearts lusts, to see what you will do in the
latter end. And Wisdom has uttered her voice in the streets, saying, Turn
in, for I have mingled my Wine, I have slain my Fatlings, I have furnished my
Table, and all things are ready, and he has long stood at the door and knocked;
and has long waited upon you all, that he might be gracious; and I am a
witness for the Lord against you all, that he has rather desired your return,
than your ruin: and the Lord has long striven with you, and his compassions
have been great, and exceeding large toward his dwelling house, in sending to
you his Messengers, time after time, and day after day: But ye have whiped,
stoned, imprisoned, and persecuted, them, by whom the Lord would have healed
you; but ye have chosen your own ways, and ye have delighted in that, and
lived in that, and been led and taught by that by which the soul of the
Righteous has been grieved, and made sad among you. And what will ye do in the
day of the Lords Controversy, which is near at hand, and coming upon you all
as a sweeping rain, that leaves no food, and as a mighty tempest against the
World, is the Lord God rising, and ye shall feel his Spirit, which ye have
grieved long, shall not always strive with you? And though the Lord has long
waited to be merciful and gracious unto you, I say, though he has been long
still, and refrained himself, and ye have thought he had been altogether such
an one as your selves; and because sentence has not been speedily executed
upon you, and because he has restrained his Anger, and has not stirred up all
his Wrath against you, who are an Hypocritcall Nation, and Children, in whom
there is no truth, which have dealt deceitfully, and treacherously with the
Lord for all his loving kindness, as treacherous Judah did. Yet the Lord will
reprove you for all your iniquities, and set them in order before you: even he
that has long time been still, and refrained himself, will now arise, like a
Traveling Woman he will destroy, and devour at once; and I am trouble for you
all, my Countrymen, for there is cause of a Lamentation, when I weigh, and
consider your sad and woeful estate, my heart is trouble for you all, how you
have covered your selves with the Saints words, Prophets words, Christ's and the
Apostles words, but are out of that life* purity, and holiness* which they
lived in, which becomes the house of God for evermore. And how ye are clothed,
and how your Teachers are clothed; and are like the sheep, and only like them,
but are inwardly ravened from the light, and Spirit of the Lord, and substance
which they were in, which was Christ in them, the hope of Glory: and I am
trouble for you all, and my heart is grieved for the place of my Nativity, and
I can but seek the welfare of all the Israel of God that are among you: For
which, I am but looked upon as to be your enemy, and a disquieter and trouble
of your Israel. And how many false Teachers, and bastards, and false
Professors, and false Christians, that have Christ only in words, as the Jews
had, which slew him, and said, had they lived in the days of their Fathers;
they would not have slain the Prophets? How many of these have risen up
against me in this Nation, and in my own Country, like Sanba^let and Tobiah,
have risen up against me with prisons and stones, and the Jews weapons which
Crucified Christ, to villifie me, as they did Nehemiah, that they might cause
the work of the Lord to cease? And how do they rage, and do plainly declare, by
their persecution, and are grieved at their very hearts, that there is one left
to seek the welfare of his Countrymen?

And I lay it upon you all, and in the power of the Lord God I charge you all
consider, and lay it to heart, before it be too late, and hid from your eyes
what kind of Ministers you have, and whether they are Ministers of the Letter
which kills, or of the Spirit that gives life, 2 Cor. 3.6. Whether Ministers of
Christ, whose Weapons were never carnal, as clubs, or prisons; or Ministers of
Antichrist, whose weapons were not spiritual, but carnal, as the Popes, and
Presbyterians, and their Ministers weapons are, which are imprisoning, and in
all Ages did imprison, and slay the Saints, and such as could not ioyn with the
Idolaters, nor worship in their Masse-houses, nor Idol Temples, but kept the
testimony of Jesus, and the Word of God? And all ye Magistrates in the Nation,
I charge you all in the Power of the Lord, consider what you do, and how you do
persecute, or lay the sword upon them as evil doers, who are moved of the Lord
to come to bear a testimony against all your Idol Temples, Teachers, and their
Worship; or to speak a few words unto you in the name and Power of the Lord, to
turn you from darkness unto light, from the power of Satan unto God. And if you
do but read the Scripture which ye say is your Rule, you shall find, that this
was the practice of Christ, to go into their Synagouges and Temple, and to
preach in the Villages, Streets and Markets, as we do; for which they were
counted disturbers by many, yea, by almost all, the chief Priests that said
they were wise, and such as were as learned, and had the Hebrew, Greek and
Latin, and had the Scriptures, the Prophets words, as your false Teachers, who
are inwardly ravened from the two Original of the Scriptures, which is the
Spirit from whence the Scripture did proceed: these have Christ's words, and the
Apostles words; but are persecuting us, who are led by the Spirit, which the
Sons of God in all Ages, and Christ, and his Apostles were led by, and we are
in the same life, and found in the same practice, for which we are persecuted
as deceivers, and seducers, as they were: and we read, when the Apostles came
into their Synagouges, the Ruler thereof was not like many of you, who give a
charge to your Officers to pull us out; but they said unto them, If ye have any
word of Exhortation for the people, say on.

And what is our transgression? and what is our sin? is it not the same which
the Apostles, and Christ was found in, which was to reprove sin in the gate,
to lay the Axe to the Root? and the sword of the Spirit did they draw against
all Hypocrites, painted graves, and sepulchers, who were inwardly full of all
manner of wickedness, as ye are in Staffordshire. For which my life does
suffer, and bears a testimony against you all, who have a Name to live, but are
dead, and who call your selves Jews, and Christians, but are filled with all
manner of wickedness, and are out of the Lambs nature, and childs nature, and
so are of the synagouge of Satan; and your Goals, and your Officers houses,
which call themselves Christians, and us deceivers, wherein you have imprisoned
me ten times, not for the breach of any Law of the Nation, but for crying out
against Drunkenesse, and all manner of wickedness, which in these Evil doers
houses do abound, which should only, both them and their houses, be for the
punishment not of the Righteous, unto whom the Law was not added, but unto the
Unrighteous, unto which it was.

The End.

