A Full Account of The Great VICTORY obtained by the Protestants in Ireland.
Since the Arrival of his Grace the Duke of SHCOMBERG.
As it was Communicated by the Reverend and Valliant Governor WALKER at
Chester.
Licensed, August 26 1689.

Chester August the24th. 1689.
YEsterday sailed out of High-Lake four Regiments of Horse, and one of
Dragoons, with a fair Wind, and we hope are safely arrived in Ireland; the same
day Embarked the Lord Delamer's Regiment of Horse, and the Lord Devonshire's
Regiment of Horse goes with them, the Guns and Bombs were playing upon
Carrickfergus Castle, when the last Express came away. Upon King James notice
of the Arrival of Duke Shomberg's Army, and that they were safely Landed in
Bangor-Bay, he immediately called a Great Counsel, where himself made the first
Proposal, That upon the first News of a Defeat given by the English, amongst
other things then resolved on, Dublin should be burned to ashes. But the fear
and dread they have since had of the English Army has occasioned them to take
other Measures, and to discharge the Principal Protestants of Dublin that were
in Prison; and being in a great Consternation had removed their Camp from
Rathmine to Drumconragh upon the other side of the Water; and that the late
King James himself was privately retired, but 'twas not known where.

Chester August the 24th.
The Worthy Governor Walker arrived here this Week, and was Entertained very
splendidly, and is set out for London, and we doubt not he will be as well
Received at London, as he has been at Chester. Among other things he brings
the Confirmation of the Inniskilling great Victory, and the following Account.

August 2. 1689. Enniskilling. Honored Sir,
I Arrived at Ballyshannon the Friday after I parted with you, and upon Tuesday
came to this place, where the first News I had was, That Lieurenant-General
Maccarty was before Groom* with Eight Pieces of Cannon, Three Regiments of
Foot, Two of Dragoons, and One of Horse, within Sixteen Miles of this place; I
knew this was in order to Besiege us here; and I apprehended that Sarsfield,
who was marched within Four Miles of Ballyshannon, would join him (which
appears to be their Design by the enclosed Letter); and this Place being of no
Strength, I resolved to fight Maccarty before they could do it, and sent
immediately for all the Troops; upon Tuesday in the Afternoon, I sent
Lieutenant-Collonel Berry with Four Troops of Horse, Two Companies of Foot, and
One Troop of Dragoons to possess himself of an advantageous Post that lay
betwixt us and the Enemy; and upon Wednesday Morning I followed him with the
rest of our Forces; in the way I received Advice from Berry, That the Enemy had
raised the Siege of Croom, and were marching toward this place, and had drove
him from his Post: Whereupon I sent some more Troops of Horse and Dragoons to
sustain him; with which the Enemy were not only put to a stand, but were beaten
back to their main Body (which was Three Miles behind). We killed Major Freane,
and some other Officers Prisoners, and left not a Man; Major General Anthony
Hamilton had his Horse shot under him, and escaped narrowly, and there was
about 100 common Soldiers slain. About Two Hours after I came up to him, and
so marched after the Enemy; when I came within a Mile of the Enemy, our Scouts
brought us word, That they were drawn up before New-Town, upon the Hill; as
soon as I came up, I detached a Party of Musketeers under Coll. Tiffin, and
Lieutenant-Collonel Gore, and set upon them, and beat them from their Post;
when I came up to New Town, I found the Enemy drawn up in great Order, and very
Advantagiously upon the other side of a Bog, over which was no Passage for
Horse but by a Cause-way so narrow, that not above two could go a breast; at
the head of which were their Guns planted. I found I was in a great straight, I
could not stay there for want of Bread, and I could not leave them there
without certain ruin to my self* for I knew they would fall on my Rere if I
faced about, and so I should be snapt betwixt them and Sarsfield, and therefore
resolved to try my Fortune: I sent down Col. Tiffin, Llyod, and Gore with
several Detachments, to try to pass the Bogs, and beat the Enemy out of the
Hedges. Col. Tiffin behaved himself with all the Courage imaginable, he marched
over the Bog, forced the Enemy from all their Posts, and fought his way up to
the Canon, and made way for the Horse to come up, and then the Enemy fled to a
Bog and Wood, where they were all cut off, except some of the Officers, who had
Quarter. Our Horse pursued their Horse and Dragoons, and did great Execution
upon them for five Miles. We do reckon (moderately speaking) that we have cut
off upward of Two Thousand, and taken near five hundred Prisoners, with 39
Commissioned Officers, besides Lieutenant General Maccarty, who is shot through
the Thigh, and run into the Back; viz. Two Majors, one a Frenchman, Twelve
Captains, Ten Lieutenants, eleven Ensigns, one Cornet, two Aid-Majors, and one
Quartermaster. We have taken Four Brass Guns, and one of Iron for Battery, and
three Brass Fieldpieces, all their Baggage and Carriages. All the Prisoners
agree in this, that these Regiments were the Flower of their Army. Most of my
Men marched the day before they fought 20 Miles, and 18 the day we engaged; if
Sarsfield continue in his Camp till Tuesday, I Will visit him; our Foot are as
good as ever fought, and such Marks-Men, that an Officer cannot show his Head,
but they fetch him down. Pray Sir, hasten your Arms here as soon as possible,
and if you would spare a Detachment of four or five hundred of our Old Men, I
think I should be able to give an Account of things here: I am confident you
cannot put your Arms into the Hands of better Men (especially the Firelocks)
than we have here. All this Business was done by betwixt 7 or 800 Musketeers,
for I had sent down no more when the Enemy fled. This Victory has only cost me
one Captain of Foot, a Cornet of Horse, 25 private Sentinels, and about so many
wounded; by all which you may perceive how easy an Enemy we have to deal
withal. I had not with me above 2200 Men, and the Enemy were reckoned to be
5000. Half our Foot are Pike-Men, which are of no use in this Country, and
therefore desire that you will send some more Firearms than were at first
intended, and what Firelocks you can spare. Col. Lloyd, Col. Win, Lieut.
Col. Gore, Lieut. Col. Berry, and Major Stone behaved themselves extremely
well, and indeed all the Officers behaved themselves like Men of Honor. We
want Bread extremely, if you can supply us, you will do us a great Kindness:
Our Men want Clothes and Money, for want of all which I cannot keep my Men
together above two or three days, but am forced to set them go home to their
Friends for supplies, which is of very ill Consequence now we are surrounded
with Enemies; this place and Ballyshannon are of no strength. I have had no
time to go to Donegall, but I hear no great Character of the place. Col.
Hamilton (who was very ill of a Fever) since I came hither, Col. Lloyd, and
Lieut. Col. Gore are very honest Gentlemen, and so are all the English I meet
with here. I have given Order to Sir Albert Cunningham to raise a Regiment of
Dragoons of Twelve Troops; he has the Character of an honest, worthy Gentlemen,
and is well esteemed of, and was turned out of the Lieutenancy of the Ordnance
of K. James; if your Honor Approve of it, I desire you will send his
Commissions. I have just now Information that the Country People have been in
search of the Enemy in the Woods and Bogs near the place where the Fight was,
and have killed several hundreds of them: We are in great want of Surgeons and
Medicines for wounded Men; I was in hopes to have sent some Provisions from
hence, but here is none to be had; here is no Wine, and the Beer and Ale not to
be drunk, they are almost as bad as Inch. My humble Service, pray, to all our
Friends with you; Col. Tiffin and the rest give your Honor their Humble
Service. I am, with all possible Respect and Gratitude,

Your Honors Most Obliged and Faithful Servant, W. Wolseley.
The Person of Note I mentioned to be killed by Lieutenant Colonel Berry's
Party, I am just now informed, was Sir James Phillips, I think he was a Captain
in Barclay's Regiment of Dragoons in England; what Post he had here I know not:
I have his Servant Prisoner.


August 4th. 1689. Enniskilling. Honored Sir,
SInce the Writing my last, I have the News of the Raising of the Siege of
Derry, and that the Duke of Berwick had sent a great Detachment toward
Donegall, but hearing the News of Lord Mount-Castle's Defeat, sent for them
back, and is gone toward Charlemount, burning the whole Country; their design
was to have joined Sarsfield, who I hear is decamped. I had been with him ere
this, but that I want Shot, which I am casting Night and Day. By the Advice I
have early of the Slaughter the Country People have made since the Flight of
the Enemy, I am very confident the whole Party is cut off. I have 8 more
Commissioned Officers just now brought me in Prisoners. I am,

Honored SIR, Your most Obliged, and most Humble Servant, W. Wolseley.



To the Honorable, Major General Kirk.
LONDON: Printed for J. Norman. MDCLXXXIX.


