

THE Accomplished Ladys Delight.

In Preserving, Physic, Beautifying and Cookery.



THE ACCOMPLISHED LADY'S DELIGHT In Preserving, Physic, Beautifying, and
Cookery.

CONTAINING,

I. The ART of PRESERVING and CANDYING Fruits and Flowers, and the making of
all sorts of Conserves, Syrups, and Jellies.

II. The PHYSICAL CABINET, Or, Excellent Receipts in Physic and Surgery;
Together with some Rare Beautifying Waters, to adorn and add Loveliness to the
Face and Body: And also some New and Excellent Secrets and Experiments in the
ART of ANGLING.

III. The COMPLETE COOKS GUIDE, Or, Directions for Dressing all sorts of Flesh,
Fowl, and Fish, both in the English and French Mode, with all Sauces and
Sallets; and the making Pyes, Pasties, Tarts, and Custards, with the Forms and
Shapes of many of them.

LONDON, Printed for B. Harris, and are to be Sold at his Shop, at the
Stationers Arms in Swithins Rents by the Royal Exchange 1675

To the Ladies and Gentlewomen.
Ladies,
THough there have been many Books Extant of this kind, yet I think something
has been deficient in them all, I have therefore adventured to make another,
which I suppose comprehends all the Accomplishments necessary for Ladies, in
things of this Nature. For you have here

1. The Art of Preserving and Candying all Fruits and Flowers, as also of
making Conserves, both wet and dry, and also the preparing of all sorts of
Syrups, Iellies, and Pickles.

2. Here are some Ex^ellent Receipts in Physic and Surgery, for Curing most
Diseases incident to the Body. Together with some Rare Beautifying Waters,
Oils, Ointments, and Powders, for Adornment of the Face and Body, and to
cleanse it from all Deformities that may render Persons Vnlovely; There are
also added some Choice Secrets and Experiments in the Art of Angling; a
Recreation which many Ladies delight in, and is not therefore thought
altogether improper in a Book of this Nature.

Lastly, You have here a Guide to all manner of Cookery, both in the English
and French Mode, with the preparing all kind of Sallets and Sauces proper
thereunto. Together with Directions for making all sorts of Pyes, Pasties
Tarts, and Custards, with the Forms and Shapes of many of them to help your
Practice, with Bills of Fare upon all Occasions. So that in the whole, I hope
it may deserve the Title of the Accomplished Ladies Delight, and may acquire
Acceptance at your fair Hands, whereby you will very much encourage and Oblige,

Ladies, Your very Humble Servant, and Admirer, T. P.

THE Art of Preserving, Conserving, and Candying, Fruits and Flowers, as also
of making all sorts of Conserves, Syrups and Iellies.
1. To make Quince Cakes.
BAke your Quinces in an Oven with some of their own juice, their own Coars
being cut and bruised, and put to them, then weigh some of this juice with some
of the Quince, being cut into small pieces, taking their weight in Sugar, and
with the Quince some quantity of the juice of Barberies. then take the clearest
Syrup and let it stand on the Coals two or three hours, and let them boil a
little on the fire, then Candy the rest of the Sugar very hard, and so put them
together, stirring it while it is almost cold, and so put it into Glasses.

2. To make Conserve of Barberries.
When the stalks are picked off, boil them in fair water till they swell, and be
very soft, then bruise them in a mortar, then strain them, and boil them again
by themselves, then take for every pound of them two pound of Sugar, and boil
them together but not too long, for then it will r^pe.

3. To make Conserve of Roses.
Take of the buds of red Roses and slip away the white ends, and then slip the
rest of the Rose as small as you can, and beat them fine in a marble mortar;
and put to every pound of Roses, three pound and a half of Sugar, then put it
up in a Gally-pot and set it in the Sun for a fortnight.

4. To make Cinnamon Water.
Take a quart of White Wind, a quart of Rose Water, a pint of Muscadine^ half a
pound of Cinnamon bruised, lay the Cinnamon to steep in the wine twelve hours
stirring them now and then afterward put them into an Alerubick and still them
with a gentle fire, and you may draw off from it three pints. But if you will
not have it strong, instead of Muscadine put in so much Rose Water or
White Wind.

5. To preserve Quinces white.
Take to every pound of Quince, a pound and a quarter of Sugar, Clarify this
Sugar with the white of an Egg, coar your Quinces, but not too much, then put
this Sugar, and Water, and Quince being ra^ together, and so make them boil so
fast that you can see no Quince, but forget not to turn them, and take off what
scum you can keep them boiling thus fast till you think they are enough.

6. To preserve Raspices.
Take of the faire^ and well colored Raspices, and pick off their stalks very
clean, then wash them, but be sure not to bruise them; then weigh them, and to
every pound of Raspices, put six ounces of hard Sugar, and six ounces of
Sugar Candy, and clarify it with half a pint of fair water, and four ounces of
juice of Raspices being clarified: boil it to a weak Syrup, and then put in
your Raspices stiring them up and down, and so let them boil till they are
enough, and you may keep them all the year.

7. To make Mackroons
Take Almonds, blanch them, and beat them in a Mortar, with serced Sugar
mingled therewith, with the white of an Egg, and Rose Water, then beat them
altogether till they are thick as Fritters, then drop it upon your Wa^ers, and
take it.

8. To Preserve Cherries.
Take some of the worst Cherries and boil them in fair water, and when the
liquor is well colored strain it, then take some of the best Cherries you can
get, with their weight in beaten Sugar, then lay one laying of Sugar, and
another of Cherries, till all are la^d in the Preserving pan; then pour a
little of the liquor of the worst Cherries into it, boil your Cherries till
they be well colored, then take them up, and boil the Syrup till it will
button on the side of the dish and when they are cold put them up in a Glass
covered close with paper, untill^ you use them.

9. To make Conserve of Oranges and Lemons, or Pippins.
Boil any of these fruits, as you would do to make past thereof and when it is
ready to fashion upon the Pie plate, then put it into your Gally-pots, and
never dry it; and this is all the difference betwixt Conser^e and Past, and
this serves for all ^ar^ fruits, as Pippins, Oranges and Lemmons.

10. To make Symbals.
Take fine flower dried, and as much Sugar as flower, then take as much whites
of Eggs as will make it Past; put in a little Rose Water, with a quantity of
Corianderseed and Anniseed, then mould it up in the fashion you will bake it in.

11. To make Syrup of Clove-gilli-flowers.
Take a pound of Clove-gilli-flowers, the whites being cut off, infuse them a
whole night in a quart of fair water, then with four pound of Sugar dissolved
in it, make it into a Syrup wishout boiling.

12. To make Syrup of Violets.
Take of Violet flowers fresh and picked, a pound, clear water boiling one
quart, shut them up close together in a new glazed pot a whole day, then press
them hard out, and in two pound of the Liquor, dissolve four pound and three
ounces of white Sugar, take away the scum, and so make it into a Syrup without
boiling.

13. To make Murmelade of Quinces.
Take a pottle of water, and four pound of Sugar, and let them boil together,
and when they boil, scum them as clean as you can, then take the whites of two
or three eggs and beat them to froath, put the froath into the pan to make the
scum ^^se, then scum it as clean as you can; take off the Kettle and put in the
Quinces, and let them boil a good while and stir them, and when they are boiled
enough put them into boxes.

14. To make Hippocras.
Take a gallon of White Wind, two pound of Sugar; and of Cinnamon, Ginger, long
Pepper, Mace not bruised, Grains, Galingal Cloves not bruised, of each two
pennyworth, bruise every kind of spice a little, and put them all together into
an earther pot for a day, then cast them through your bags two or three times,
as you see cause and so drink it.

15. To make Almond Butter.
Take your Almonds and blaunch them, and beat them in a mortar very small, and
in beating put in a little water, and when they are beaten pour in water into
two pots and put half into one and half into another, put Sugar to them and
stir them, and let them boil a good while; then strain it through a strainer
with Rose Water, and so dish it up.

16. To preserve Quinces red.
Pare your Quinces, and coar them; then take as much Sugar as they weigh,
putting to every pound of Sugar one quart of water, boil your Quinces therein
very leasurely being close covered, turn them to keep them from spotting^ and
when they are so tender that you may prick a hole through them with a rush and
that they are well colored, then boil the Syrup till it will button on a dish
and so put your Syrup and them up together.

17 To pickle Cucumbers.
Wash your Cucumbers clean and dry them in a cloth, then take some Water.
Vinegar, Salt, Fennel tops, and some Dill tops, and a little Mace, make it fast
enough and sharp enough to the taste, then boil it a while, and then take it
off, and let it stand till it is cold; then put in the Cucumbers, and lay a
board on the top to keep them down, and tie them up close, and within a week
they will be fit to eat.

18. To Candy Pears^ Plumbs and Apricocks to look as clear as Amber.
Take your Apricocks or Plumbs, and give every one a cut to the stone in the
notch, then cast Sugar on them and bake them in an Oven as hot as for Maunchet
close stopped, bake them in an earthen Platter and let them stand half an hour,
then take them out of the dish, and lay them one by one upon glass plates, and
so dry them; if you can get glasses made like Marmalet boxes to lay over them,
they will be the sooner Candyed. In this manner you may candy any other fruit.

19. To preserve Oranges.
Take a pound of Oranges, and a pound of Sugar, pill the outward rind, and
inward white skin off then take juice of Oranges and put them into the juice,
boil them half an hour and take them off.

20. To make Oil of Violets.
Set the Violets in Sallad Oil, and Strain them, then put in other fresh
Violets and let them lie twenty days, then strain them again and put in other
fresh Violets, and let them stand all the year.

21. To make cream of Quinces.
Take a roasted Quince, pare it and cut it into thin slices to the coar, boil
it in a pint of cream with a little whole Ginger, till it taste of the Quinces
to your liking, then put in a little Sugar and strain it, and always serve it
cold to the Table.

22. To make a March-pan,
Steep two pound of picked Almonds one day and two nights in fair water, and
blaunch them out of it, then beat them well in a mortar, and bedew them with
Rose Water, put to your Almonds so many pound of Sugar, and beat your Sugar
with your Almonds; then make very fine ^rust either of past or wafer, and
sprinkle it with Rose Water and Sugar; then spread the stuff on it, and bake it
at a very soft fire, always bedewing it with Damask-water, Civet, and Sugar;
and lastly with a gut of Dates guilt or long Comfits guilt, or with
Cinamon-sticks guilt, or the kernels of the Pineapple and ^o ^et it forth.

23. To make Almond Milk.
Boil French Barley, and as you boil it cast away the water wherein it was
boil^d, till you see the water leave to change color; as you put in more fresh
water, then put in a bundle of Straw-berry leaves: and as much Cullumbine
leaves, and boil it a good while; then put in beaten Almonds and strain them,
and then season it with Sugar and Rosemary, then strew some Sugar about the
dish, and send it to the Table.

24. To preserve Apricocks, or Pearplumbs when they are green.
You may take any of these fruits and scald them in water and peel them, and
s^rape the spungy substance of the Apricocks or Quinces, so boil them very
tender, taking their weight in Sugar, and as much water as to cover them, and
boil them very leasurely; then take them up and boil the Syrup till it be
thick, and when they are cold put them up with you^ Syrup into your preserving
Glasses.

25. To pickle French Beans.
You must take your Beans and string them boil them tender^ then take them off^
and let them stand till they are cold, put them into the pickle of Beer
Vinegar, Pepper and Salt Cloves and Mace with a little Ginge.

26^ To make an excellent Jelly.
Take three gallons of fair water, and boil in it a knuckle of Veal, and two
Calves feet slit in two, with all the fat clean taken from between the claws,
so let them boil to a very tender Jelly keeping it clean scum^d, and the edges
of the pot always wiped with a clean ^^ath, that none of the scum may boil in,
strain it from the meat, and let it stand all night, and the next morning take
away the top and the bottom, and take to a Quart of this Jelly, half a pint of
Sherry sack, half an ounce of Cinnamon, and as much Sugar as will season it, six
whites of Eggs very well beaten, mingle all these together, then boil it half
an hour, and let it run through your Jelly bag.

27. To make Aqua-Mirabil is.
Take of Cloves, Galanga, Cubebs, Mace, Cardamums, Nutmegs, Ginger, of each one
dram; juice of Celandine half a pound, Spirit of Wine one pint, White Wind
three pints, infuse them twenty four hours, and draw off a Quart with an
Alembick.

28. Dr. Stevens Water.
Take of Cinnamon, Ginger, Galanga, Cloves, Nutmegs, Grains of Paradise, seeds
of Annis, Fennel, ^arraways, of each one dram^ herbs of Time, Mother of Time,
Mints, Sage, Pennyroyal Pellitory of the Wall, Rosemary, Flowers of Red Roses,
Camomile, Origanum, Lavender, of each one handful, infuse them twelve hours in
^welve pints of Gascoign wine, then with (...) Alembick draw three pints of
strongwater from it.

29. To make good cherry Wine.
Take the Syrup of Cherries, and when it has stood a while bottle it up, and
tie down the Cork, and in a short time it will be very good pleasant Wine.

30. To make Wa^ers.
Take a pint of flower, a little cream the yolks of two Eggs, a little
Rose Water, with some searced Cinnamon and Sugar work them together, and bake
them upon hot Irons.

31. To Preserve Grapes.
Stamp and strain them, let it settle a while before you wet a pound of Sugar
or Grapes with the juice, stone the Grapes, save the liquor, in the stoning
take off the stalks give them a boiling, take them off, and put them up.

32. To Pickle Purslain.
Take the Purslain and pick it into little pieces, and put it into a Pot or
Barrel, then take a little water, Vinegar and Salt to your taste, it must be
pretty strong of the Vinegar and Salt, and a little Mace, and boil all these
together, and pour this liquor boiling hot into the Parslain, and when it is
cold tie it close, but lay a little board on the top to keep it down, and
within a week or two it is fit to eat.

33. To preserve green Walnuts.
Boil your Walnuts till the water taste bitter, then take them off, and put them
in cold water, and pill off the bark, and weigh as much Sugar as they weigh and
a little more water then will wet the Sugar, set them on the fire, and when
they boil up take them off, and let them stand two days, and then boil them
again once more.

34. To prese^ve Currants.
Part them in the tops, and lay a lane of Currants, and a lane of Sugar, and so
boil them as fast as you do Ras-berries, do not put them in the spoon but scum
them, boil till the Syrup be pretty thick; then take them off, and let them
stand till they be cold and put them into a glass.

35. To make Goose berry Cakes.
Pick as many Goose-berries as you please and put them into an earthen Pitcher
and set it in a kettle of water till they be soft, and then put them into a
five, and let them stand till all the juice be out, and weigh the juice, and as
much Sugar as Syrup, first boil the Sugar to a Candy, and take it off, and put
in the juice and set it on again till it be hot and take it off, and set them
in the Press till they be dry, then they are ready.

36. An excellent broth.
Take a Chicken and set it on the fire, and when it boils scum it, then put in
a Mace, and a very little Oatmeal, and such herbs as the party requires; and
boil it well down, and bruise the Chicken and put it in again and it is good
broth: and to alter it you may put in six Prunes, and leave out the herbs or
put them in as you please, and when it is well boiled, strain it and season it.

37. To make Angellets.
Take a quart of new milk, and a pint of cream and put them together in a
little Runnel, when it is come well take it up with a spoon, and put it into
the Vate softly, and let it stand two days till it be pretty stiff; then slip
it out and salt it a little at both ends, and when you think it is salt enough
set it a drying, and wipe them, and within a quarter of a year they will be
ready to eat.

38. To make Ielly of Hartshorn.
Take four ounces of the shavings of Hartshorn of the inside, and two Ale^
quarts of water, put this in a Pipkin, and boil it very gently till it come to
a quart, the Hartshorn must be steeped 3 or 4 hours first afterward put a
little into a Saucer till it be cold, and if it be cold and Jellieth it is
boiled enough^ Then being warm take it off the fire, and strain it hard through
a cloth, and set it a cooling till it be hard Jelly, then take two whites of
eggs, and beat them very well, er with a sprigg of Rosemary or birch, (but not
with a spoon) till a water come in the bottom, then put these beaten eggs and
the water thereof into a skillet and all the Jelly upon it, with three
spoonfuls of damask Rose Water, and a quarter of a pound of Sugar, and when it
boils, sti^ and lay it pretty well, then strain it through a cloth and let it
cool, and of this take four spoonfuls in the morning fasting, and four a clock
in the afternoon and this is excellent good for the weakness of the ba^k.

40. To preserve Damsons red, or black Plumbs.
Take their weight in Sugar, and water enough to make a Syrup to cover them, so
boil them a little therein being close covered turning them for spotting, let
them stand all night in their own Syrup, then set them upon a pot of seething
water, and suffer your Plumbs to boil no faster then the water under them; and
when they are both sweet and tender take them up, and boil the Syrup again till
it be thick, then put up your Plumbs and it together in your preserving glasses.

41. To make Rosemary water.
Take the Rosemary and the flowers in the midst of May before Sunrise, strip
the leaves and flowers from the stalks, then take 4 or 5 Elecampana roots, and
a handful or two of sage, then beat the Rosemary, sage and roots together, till
they be very small, then take three ounces of Cloves and as much Mace, and half
a pound of Anniseeds, and ^eat these spices every one by themselves then take
the herbs and the spices, and put thereto 4 or 5 gallons of good White Wind,
then put in all these herbs, spices and wine into an earthen Pot, and put the
Pot into the ground about sixteen days, then take it up and distill it with a
very soft fire.

43. To make Pomatum.
Take fresh Hogs suet clean sed from the films and washed in White Wind one
pound and as much sheeps suet washed in White Wind, then take about sixteen
Pomwater Apples cleansed and boil d in Rose Water; add to these Rose-wood,
Sassafras, Roots of Orrice Florentine of each six drams, of Benzoin, Storax
Calamita half an ounce of each and so make it into an Ointment.

44. To maks Oil of sweet Almonds.
Take dried sweet Almonds as many as you please, beat them very small and put
them into a rough hemp^n^ loath, and without fire by degrees press out the Oil.

45. An excellent Water against fit^ of the Mother.
Take Briony-roots, Elder-berries ripe, and d^estat a gentle heat in a furnace
and cleans'd from their stalks, of each two ounces; leaves of Mugwort, Dittany,
Featherfew, Nep, Basil, Pennyroyal, Rue, Sabine, all dried in the Sun^ of each
half an ounce, peels of Oranges the outside dried an ounce and a half, Myrrh,
Castoreum, of each three drams, Saffron one dram; powder them and steep them
eight days in two quarts of the spirit of Wine; then strain through a very
quick hair strainer, keep the strained liquor in a glass very well stopped.

46. To make syrup of Wormwood.
Take Roman Wormwood, or Po^tick Wormwood half a pound, of red Roses two
ounces, Indian spike three drams; old rich White Wind and juice of Quinces of
each two pints and a half, bruise them in an earthen Vessel twenty four hours,
then boil them till half be wasted, strain it, and put to the straining two
pounds of Sugar, and boil it to a Syrup.

47. To make conserve of Quinces.
Take three quarts of the juice of Quinces clarified, boil it until two parts
be wasted then put to it two pounds of white Sugar, then boil them to the
thickness of Honey.

48. To make Syrup of Poppies.
Take the heads and seeds of white Poppy and black, of each fifty drams, Venus
hair fifteen, Licorice five drams, Jujubes thirty Drams; Lettic^ seeds forty
drams, and of the seeds of Mallows; and Quinces tied up in a fine rag, of each
one dram and half; boil them in eight pints of water, until half be wasted,
strain it, and to every three pound of liquor put thereto Perrides, and Sugar
of each 1 pound, boil them to a Syrup.

49. To make honey of Roses.
Take of pure white honey dispumed, fresh juice of red Roses one pound, put
them into a Skillet, and when they begin to boil, throw into them of fresh red
Rose leaves picked, four pounds, and boil them until the juice be wasted;
alway^ stirring it, then strain it, and put it up in an Earthen pot.

50. To make Syrup of Lemmons.
Take of the juice of Lemmons purified by going through a Woolen strainer with
crushing, three quarts and an half, and of white Sugar five pound; boil them
with a soft fire to a Syrup.

51. To make Spirit of Wine.
Take of good Claret, or White Wind, or Sack, enough to fill the Vessel,
wherein you make your distillation to a third part, then put on the head
furnished with the Nose or Pipe, and so make your distillation first in ashes,
drawing about a third part from the whole; as for example, six or eight pints
out of four and twenty, then still it again in B. M. drawing another third
part, which is two pints, so that the oftener you distill it, the less liquor you
have b^t the more strong, some use to rectify it seven times.

52. To make Syrup of Maidenhair.
Take of the herb ^aiden-hair, fresh gathered and cut a little, five ounces, of
roots of Licorish Scraped two ounces, steep them twenty four hours in a
sufficient quantity of hot water then boil them according to art; Add four
pounds of Sugar to five pints of the clarified liquor, and then boil them to a
Syrup.

53. To make Syrup of licorish
Take of the Roots of licorish scraped two ounces of coltsfoot four handfuls;
of Maidenhair one ounce of Hysop half an ounce, infu^e them twenty four hours
in a sufficient quantity of water, then boil them till one half be wasted, add
to the strained liquor, a pound of the best clarified honey, and as much white
Sugar, boil them to a Syrup

54. To make the Kings perfume.
Take six spoonfuls of Rose Water, and as much Ambergris as weighs two
Barley-corns, and as much Cive^, with as much Sugar as weighs two pence
beaten in fine powder; all these boiled together in a perfuming pan is an
excellent perfume.

55. The Queens perfume.
Take four spoonfuls of spike water, and four spoonfuls of Damask water, thirty
cloves, and eight bay leaves shred as much Sugar as weighs two pence; all
these boiled make a good perfume.

56. King Edwards perfume to make your house smell like Rosemary.
Take three spoonfuls of perfect Rosemary, and as much Sugar as half a Walnut
beaten in small powder; all these boiled together in a perfuming Pan upon hot
Embers with a few coals is a very sweet perfume.

57. To make conserve of Rosemary.
Take your Flowers of Rosemary, which you may gather either in March or
September, when you have beaten them to pap, take three times their weight in
Sugar, pound them all together and set them in the Sun and so use them.

58. To make syrup of Cowslips.
Take the distilled water of Cow-slips, and put thereto your flowers of
Cow-slips clean picked, and the green knobs in the bottom cut off, and boil them
up into a Syrup, take it in Almond Milk, or some other warm thing; it is good
against the Palsi^ and ^renzy, and to procure sleep to the si^k.

59. To make Marmelade of Lemmons and Oranges.
You may boil eight or nine Lemmons or Oranges, with four or five Pippins, and
draw them through a strainer; then take the weight of the pulp all together in
Sugar and boil is as you do Marmelade of Quinces and so box it up.

60. To make Angelica wat^r.
Take a handful of Carduus benedictus and dry it, then take three ounces of
Angelica roots one dram of Myrrh, half an ounce of Nutmegs, Cinnamon and Ginger
four ounces of each, one dram and half of Saffron; of Cardonius, Cubels,
Galingal, and Pepper, of each a quarter of an ounce; two drams of Mace, one
dram of grains, of Lignum Aloes, Spikenard, Iunius Odoratus; of each a dram;
sage, Borage, Buglos, Violets, and Rosemary flowers of each half a handful,
bruise them and steep them in a pottle of Sack twelve hours, and distill it as
the rest.

61. To make Quiddany of Cherries.
When your Cherries are fully ripe, and red to the stone, take them and pull
out the stones, and boil your Cherries till they be all broken then strain them
and take the liquor strained out, and boil it over again, and put as much Sugar
to it as you think convenient, and when it is boil^d that you think it is thick
enough put it into your boxes.

62. To dry Cherries.
Take six pound of Cherries and stone them then take a pound of Sugar and wet
it with the juice of the Cherries, and boil it a little, then put in your
Cherries and boil them till they are clear, let them lie in the Syrup a week
then drein them from the Syrup, and lay them on thin boards, or sheets of glass
to dry in a stove, turn them twice a day, and when they are dry, wash off the
clamminess with warm water ^ and dry them a little longer.

63. To make brown Metheglin.
Take strong Ale-wort, and put as much Honey to it as will make it strong
enough to bear an Egg; boil them very well together, then set it a cooling, and
when it is almost cold put in some Ale-yeast, then put it into a strong Vessel,
and when it has done working, put a bag of spices into the Vessel and some
Lemon Peel and stop it up close, and in a few days it will be fit to drink, but
the longer you keep it the better.

64. To candy Oranges or Lemons, after they are preserved.
Take them out of the Syrup, and drain them well, then boil some Sugar to a
candy height, and lay your Peels in the bottom of a ^ive, and pour your hot
Sugar over them, and then dry them in a stove or warm oven.

65. To preserve Oranges after the Portugal fashion.
Open your Oranges at the end, and take out all the meat, then boil them in
several waters, till a straw nay go through them, then take their weight ann
half in fine Sugar, and to every pound of Sugar, a pint of water, boil it and
scum it, then put in your Oranges and boil them a little more, then take them
up, and fill them with preserved Pippins, and boil them again till you think
they are enough, but if you will have them jelly, make a new Syrup with the
water wherein some sliced Pippins have been boiled, and some sine Sugar, and
that will be a stiff Jelly.

66. To make good Vsquebath.
Take two Gallons of good Aquavitae four ounces of the best liquorice bruised,
four ounces of Anniseed brui^ed, put them into a Wooden, Glass, or Stone
Vessel, and cover them close, and so let them stand a week, then draw off the
cleerest and Sweetest with Molosso's, and keep it in another Vessel, and put in
some Dates, and Raisens stoned, keep it very close from the Air.

67. To make Italian Biscuit.
Take serced Sugar; and a little of the white of an Egg, with some Ambergreece
and Musk, beat them all to a past in an Alablaster Mortar, and mould it in a
little Anniseed finely dusted, then make it up in Loaves, and cut them about
like Maunchet, then bake them in an Oven, as hot as for Maunchet, and when they
are risen somewhat high upon the Plates take them forth and remove them not of
the Plates till they be cold, for they will be very apt to break.

68. To make French Biscuit.
Take half a peek of flower, with four Eggs half a pint of Ale-yeast, one ounce
and half of Anniseed, a little sweet cream, and a little cold water, make all
into a Loaf, and fashion it something long, then cut it into thick slices like
Tosts, after it has stood two days, and rub them over with powdered Sugar, and
lay them in a warm Sun, and so dry them and Sugar them as you dry them three,
or four times, then put them into Boxes for use.

69. To make Sugar Plate.
Take serced Sugar, and make it up in past with Gum-dragon steeped in
Rose Water, and when you have brought it to a perfect past, roll it as thin as
^^e you can, and then print it in moulds of what fashion you please, and so let
them dry as they ly.

70. To make Pomander.
Take half an ounce of Benjamin, and as much Storax, and as much Lapdanum, with
six grains of Musk, and as much Civet, and two grains of Amber-grease, and one
dram of sweet balsom, beat all these together in a hot Mortar, then roll it up
in beads as big, or as little as you please, and whilst they are hot make holes
in them to serve for your use.

71. To make conserve of Damsons.
Take ripe Damsons and put them into scalding water, and half an hour after set
them over the fire till they break; then strain them through a Cullender, and
let them cool therein, then strain them (through a piece of Canvas) from their
stones and skins, and then set them over the fire again, then put to them a
good quantity of red Wine, and so boil it often stirring it till it be thick,
and when it is almost boil d^enough, put in a convenient proportion of Sugar,
and stir it very well together, and then put it into your gally-pots.

72. To bake Oranges.
Peel all the bark off, and boil them in Rose Water, and Sugar till they are
^^nder, then make your Pie, and set them whole in it, and put in the liquor
they are boil^d in into the Pie, and season it with Sugar, Cinnamon and Ginger.

73. To preserve Peaches.
Take a pound of your fairest and best colored Peaches and with a were linen
clo^t^ wipe o^^ the white hoar of them, th^n parboil them in half a pint of
White Wind and a pint and a half of running water, and being parboiled peel off
the white skin of them and then weigh them; take to your pound of Peaches three
quarters of a pound of refined Sugar, and di^^olve it in a quarter of a pint of
White Wind, and boil it almost to the height of a Syrup, then put in your
Peaches, and let them boil in the Syrup a quarter of an hour or more if need
require, then put them up and keep them all the year.

74. To preserve Goose-berries.
Take Goose-berries, or Grape, or Barberries, and take somewhat more then their
weight in Sugar beaten very fine and so lay one laying of fruits, and another
of Sugar, till all are laid in your preserving pan, then take six spoonfuls of
fair water, and boil your fruits therein as fast as you can, until they be very
clear, then take them up, and boil the Syrup by it self, till it be thick, when
they are cold put them into gally-pots.

75. To preserve Pippins white.
Pare your Pippins and cut them the cross way, and weigh them, add to a pound
of Sugar a pint of water; then put the Sugar to the water and let it boil a
while, and then put in your Pippins, and let them boil till they be clear at
the core, then take them off and put them up.

76. To preserve Grapes.
^ it settle a while, then wet a pound of Sugar or Grapes with the juice, stone
the Grapes, save the liquor in the stoning, take off the stalks, give them a
boiling, t^ke them off, and put them up.

77. To preserve Angellica Roots.
Wash the Roots and slice them very thin, and lay them in water three or four
days, change the water every day, then put the Roots into a pot of water, and
set them in the embers all night, in the morning put away the water, then take
a pound of Roots four pints of water, and two pound of Sugar, let it boil and
scum it clean, then put in the Roots, which will be bo^l^d before the Syrup
then take them up and boil the Syrup after, they will ask a whole days work
very softly, at St. Andrews time is the best time to do them in all the year.

78. To make Syrup of Quinces.
Take of the juice of Quinces clarified three quarts, boil it over a gentle
fire til^ half of it be consumed, scum it and add to it three pints of red
wine, with four pound of white Sugar, boil it into a Syrup, and perfume it with
a dram and half of C^^ namon, and of Cloves and Ginger, of (...) two scruples.

79. To make Walnut-water.
Take of green Walnuts a pound and half, Garden Radish-ro^rs one pound, green
Afarabacca six ounces, Radish seeds four ounces; Let all of them being bruised
be steeped in three pints of White-wine-Vinegar for three days, and then distill
them in a leaden Still till they be dry.

80. To make Treakle Water.
Take of the juice of green Walnuts four pound, juice of Rue three pound, juice
of Carduus, Marigolds and Balm, of each two pound, green Peta^^ is Roots one
pound and half, the roots of Burs one pound, Angelica and Masterwort of each
half a pound; the leaves of Scordium four handfuls, old Venice Treacle and
Mithridate of each eight ounces, Canary wine six quarts, Vinegar three quarts,
juice of Lemons one quart, digest them two days either in Horse-dung or in a
Bath, the Vessel being close shut, then distill them in Sand, in the
distillation you may make a Theri^cal extraction.

81. To make Syrup of Cinnamon,
Take of Cinnamon grossly bruised 4 ounces ^^eep it in White Wind, and small
Cinnamon water of each half a pound^ three days in a glass by a gentle fire;
strain it, and with a po^nd and half of Sugar boil it gently to a Syrup. This
Syrup refiesheth the Vital Spirits and cherishes the Heart and Stomach, helps
Digestion, and cherishes the whole body exceedingly.

82. To make Syrup of Citron peels.
Take of freth yellow Citron peels, five ounces, the berries of Cherms, or the
juice of the^ brought over to us two drams, spring water two quarts; steep them
all night, boil them till half be consumed, take off the scum, strain it, and
with two pound and half of the whitest Sugar, boil it into a Syrup: let half of
it be without Musk, but perfume the other half with three grains of Musk tied
up in a rag.

83. To make Syrup of Hartshorn.
Take of Harts^ tongue thee^ handfuls, Polipodium of the Oak, the roots of both
sorts of Buglos, barks of the roots of Capers and Tamaris, of each two ounces,
Hops, Dodder, Maidenhair, balm, of each two handfulls; boil them in four
quarts of spring water till it comes to five, strain it, and with four pound of
Sugar, make it into Syrup according to Art.

84. An Oil perfume for Gloves that shall never out.
Take Benjamin two ounces, Storax and Calamint each an ounce ^ut the two first
must be finely bearen by themselves; then take a pound of sweet Almonds, and
mingle it with the Storax and Benjamin upon a marble stone, and then put it
into an earthen pot with more Oil, then put in your Gloves powdered, and so let
it stand very close covered; and when you will perfume a pair of Gloves, take a
little fair water in a spoon, and wipe your Gloves very fine with; take another
spoon, and dip it in your Oil, and rub it on your Gloves, and let them dry this
is excellent.

85. An excellent Water for one that is in a Consumption.
Take three pints of Milk, and one pint of red Wine, twenty four yolks of new
laid Eggs, beat them very well together, then add so much white bread as will
drink up the Wine, and put to it some Cow-slip flowers, and distill them: Take a
spoonful of this, Morning and Evening, in Chicken, or Muton broth, and in one
month it will cure any Consumption.

86. To make Barley Water,
Take a pennyworth of Barley, a pennyworth of Raisins of the Sun, a
pennyworth of Anniseeds, a half pennyworth of Liquorish, about two quarts of
water, boil all together till half be consumed, then strain it, and when it is
cold drink it, your Liquorish must be sliced into small pieces.

87. Dr. Deodates drink for the Scurvy.
Take Roman Wormwood, Carduus benedictus, Scurvy Grass, Brook-lime,
Water-creases, Water-trifoil, of each one handful, Dodder, Cetrach,
Soolopendria. Burrage, Buglos, Sorrel, Vervain, or Speedwel, of each half a
handful, Elicampane root one ounce, Raisins of the Sun three ounces, slices of
Oranges and Lemmons, of each fifteen, boil, or rather infuse these in a double
glass, with so much White Wind as will make a pint and a half of the liquor
when it is done.

88. A conserve to strengthen the Back.
Take Eringo roots, and conserve them as you do damask, white and red Roses in
every respect the pith being taken out; one pound and a half of Sugar is enough
for every pound of Roots, with three pints of water stew them closely at first
as you do your Roses; if you add to them five or six grains of Amber grease
beaten to fine powder, it will be much more cordial.

89. To make excellent Aqua Composita for a Surfeit or cold stomach.
Take a handful of Rosemary, a root of ^nula^ campane, a handful of Hysop, half
a handful of Thyme, six handfuls of Sage, as much Mint and as much Pennyroyal,
half a handful of Hore-hound, two ounces of Liquorish well bruised and as much
Anniseeds: Then take two gallons of the best strong Ale, and take all the herbs
afore^aid, and wring them asunder, and put them into an earthen pot well
covered, and let them stand a day and a night, from thence put all into a brass
pot, and set it on the fire, and let it stand till it boil, then take it from
the fire and set your Limbeck on the pot, and stop it close with past that
there come no air out of it, and still it out with a soft fire, you may add to
it 1 handful of red Fennel.

90. To make Balm water.
Take four gallons of strong stale Ale, half a pound of Liquorish, two pound of
Balm two ounces of Figgs, half a pound of Anniseeds, one ounce of Nutmegs,
shred the Balm and Figgs very small, and let them stand steeping four and
twenty hours, and then put it in a Still as you use Aqua-vitae.

91. To pickle Broom-buds.
Take as many Broom-buds as you please, make linen bags and put them in, and
tie them close, then make some brine with water and salt, and boil it a little,
let it be cold, then put some brine in a deep earthen pot, and put the bags in
it, and lay some weight on them, let it lie there till it look black, then
shift it again still as long as it looks black, boil them in a little Cauldron,
and put them in Vinegar a week or two, and they will be fit to eat.

92. To make good Raspberry Wine.
Take a gallan of Sack, in which let two gallons of Raspberries stand steeping
the space of twenty four hours, then strain them and put to the liquor three
pound of Raisins of the Sun stoned; let them stand together four or five days,
being sometime stirred together, then pair off the clearest and put it up in
Bottles and set it in a cold place if it be not sweet enough you may put Sugar
to it.

93. To make excellent Hippocras in an instant.
Take of Cinnamon two ounces, Nutmegs, Ginger, of each half an ounce, Cloves two
drams, bruise these small, then mix them with as much spirit of Wine, as will
make them into a Past, let them stand close covered in a glass the space of six
days in a cold place, then press out the liquor and keep it in a glass. A few
drops of this liquor put into any Wine gives it a gallant relish and odor,
and makes it as good as any Hippocras whatsoever in an instant.

94. To make artificial Malmsey.
Take two gallons of English honey, put into it eight gallons of the best
springwater, set these in a Vessel over a gentle fire, when they have boiled
gently an hour take them off, and when they be cold put them into a small
Barrel or Runlet hanging in the Vessel a bag of spices, and set it in the
Cellar, and in half a year you may drink thereof.

95. To make artificial Claret Wine.
Take six gallons of water, two gallons of the best Syder, put thereto eight
pound of the best Malaga raisins bruised in a Mortar, let them stand close
covered in a warm place the space of a fortnight, every two days stirring them
well together; then press out the Raisins^ and put the liquor into the s^id
Vessel again, to which add a quart of the juice of Ras-berries, and a pint of
the juice of black Cherries; cover this liquor with bread spread thick with
strong Mustard, the Mustardseed being down^ward, and so let it work by the fire
side three or four days, then turn it up and let it stand a week, and then
bottle it up, and it will taste as quick as bottle Beer and become a very
p^easant drink, and indeed far better and wholsomer then our common Claret.

96. To make spirit of Amber-grease.
Take of Amber-grease two drams, of Musk a dram cut them small, and put them
into a pint of the best spirit of Wine, close up the glass Hermetically, and
digest them in a very gentle heat till you perceive they are dissolved, then
you may use it; Two or three drops or more if you please of this spirit put
into a pint of Wine, gives it a rich odor, or if you put two or three drops
round the brims of the glass it will do as well, half a spoonful of it taken
either of it self, or mixed with some specifical liquor is a most rich cordial.

97. An excell^nt sweet Water.
Take a quart of Orange-flower water, as much Rose water, with four ounces of
Musk-willow-seeds grossly bruised, of Benjamin two ounces, of Storax an ounce,
of Latdanum six drams, of Lavender flowers two pugils, of sweet Marjoram as
much, of Calanius Aromaticus a dram, distill all these in a glass still in
Balneo, the Vessel being very well closed that no vapor breath forth; note
that you may make a sweet water in an instant, by putting in a few drops of
some distilled Oils together into some Rose Water, and brew them well together.

98. Dr. Burges Plague Water.
Take three pints of Muscadine, and boil in it Sage and Rue, of each a handful
till a pint be wasted, then strain it, and set it over the fire again, put
thereto a dram of long Pepper, Ginger and Nutmeg, of each half an ounce being
all bruised together; then boil them a little, and put thereto half an ounce of
Andramachus Treacle, three drams of Methridate, and a quarter of a pint of
Angellica Water. Take a spoonful or two of this morning and evening.

99. To dry Cherries or Plumbs in the Sun.
If it be small fruit you must dry them whole by laying them abroad in the hot
Sun in Stone or Pewter dishes, or tin Pans turning them as you see cause; but
if your Plumbs be large slit them in the middle and lay them abroad in the Sun;
an if they be very large then give each Plumb a slit on each side, and if the
Sun do not shine sufficiently, then dry them in an Oven that is temperately
warm.

100. To preserve Pippins green.
Take Pippins when they be small and green off the Tree, and pare three or four
of the worst, and cut them all to pieces; then boil them in a quart of fair
water till they be pap; then let the liquor come from them as they do from your
Quiddany into a basin; then put into them one pound of Sugar clarified, and put
into it as many green Pippins unp^rd, as that liquor will cover, and so let
them boil softly, and when you see they be boil^d as tender as a Cod^ing, then
take them up and peel off the outermost white skin, and then they will be
green, then boil them again in the Syrup till it be thick and you may keep them
all the year.

101. To maks syrup of Hysop.
Take of Hysop one handful, of Figgs, Raisins, Dates, of each an ounce, boil
these in three pints of water to a quart, then strain and clarify it with the
whites of two eggs, and two pound of Sugar, and so boil them to a Syrup, and
being boil^d enough keep them all the year.

102. To make Rosa Solis.
Take Liquorish eight ounces. Anniseeds and Carr^way of each an ounce; Raisins
stoned and Dates of each three ounces, Nutmegs, Ginger, Mace, of each half an
ounce, Galingal a quarter of an ounce, Cubebs one dram, Figgs two ounces, Sugar
four ounces; bruise these and distill them with a gallon of Aqua-vitae as the
rest, but when it is distilled, you must color it with the herb Rosa Solis or
Alkanet root.

103. To make Muscadine Com^^ts.
Take half a pound of Musk Sugar beaten and searced, then take Gumdragagant
steeped in Rose Water, and two grains of Musk and so beat them in an Alablaster
Mortar till it come to perfect past, then roll it very thin, and cut it in
small diamond pieces and then bake them, and so keep them all the year.

104. To make conserve of Burrage-flowers.
Let your flowers be well colored, and pick the blacks from them, then weigh
them and to every ounce of flowers you must take three ounces of Sugar, and
beat them together in a stone Mortar with a wooden pestle till they be very
fine; then take them out and put the conserve into a pipki^, and ^ea^ it through
hot, put them up and keep them all the year.

105. To candy Ginger.
Take very fair and large Ginger and pare it, and lay it in water a day and a
night; then take double refined Sugar and boil it to the height of Sugar again,
and when your Sugar begins to be cold, take your Ginger and stir it well about
while your Sugar is hard to the Pan; then take it out piece by piece and lay it
by the fire four hours, then take a pot and warm it and put the Ginger in it
tie it up close and every other morning stir it about thoroughly, and it will be
rock-candyed in a little time.

106. To make Manus Christi.
Take half a pound of refined Sugar, and some Rose Water, boil them together
till it come to Sugar again, then stir it about till it be somewhat cold, then
take leaf gold and mingle with it, then cast it according to Art into r^und
gobbets, and so keep them.

107. To make conserve of Strawberries.
First boil them in water, and then cast away the water and strain them; then
boil them in White Wind, and works as in Prunes; or else strain them being ripe
then boil them in White Wind and Sugar till they be stiff.

108. To make conserve of Prunes.
Take the best Prunes put them into scalding water, let them stand a while,
then boil themover the fire till they break; then strain out the water through
a Cullender, and let them stand therein to cool, then strain the Prunes through
the Cullender, taking away the stones and skins, then set the pulp over the
fire again and put thereto a good quantity of red Wine, and boil them to a
thickness still stirring them up and down, when they are almost enough put in a
sufficient quantity of Sugar, stir all well together and then put it up in your
gallypots.

109. To make fine crystal Ielly.
Take a knuckle of Veal, and four Calves feet, put them on the fire with a
gallon of fair water, and when the flesh is boiled tender take it out, then let
the liquor stand still till it be cold, then take away the top and the bottom
of the liquor, and put the rest into a clean pipkin, and put into it one pound
of refined Sugar, with four or five drops of Oil of Cinnamon and Nutmegs, and a
grain of Musk, and so let it boil a quarter of an hour leasurely on the fire;
then let it run through a Jelly-bag into a Basin, with the whites of two Eggs
beaten; and when it is cold you may cut it into lumps with a spoon, and so
serve three or four lumps upon a plate.

110. To make Ielly of Strawberries, Mulberries, Raspisberries or any other
such tender fruit.
Take your berries and grind them in a stone mortar with four ounces of Sugar,
and a quarter of a pint of fair water, and as much Rose Water; and boil it in a
skillet with a little Ising-glass, and so let it run through a fine cloth into
your Boxes and you may keep it all the year.

111. To candy Rosemary flowers.
Pick your flowers very clean, and put to every ounce of flowers two ounces of
hard Sugar, and one ounce of Sugar Candy, and dissolve them in Rosemary flower
water, and boil them till they come to a Sugar again, when your Sugar is almost
cold put in your Rosemary flowers and stir them together till they be enough;
then take them out and put them in your boxes, and keep them in a store for use.

112. To candy Brrrage flowers.
Pick the flowers clean and weigh them, and do in every respect as you did your
Rosemary flowers, only when they be candyed you must set them in a Still, and
sokeep them in a sheet of white paper, putting every day a chafing dish of
coals into your Still, and it will be excellently candyed in a small time.

113. To make Biscuit Cakes.
Take a peck of flower^^ four ounces of Coriander-seed, one ounce of Anniseed;
then take three Eggs, three spoonfuls of Ale-yeast, and as much warm water as
will make it as thick as past for Maunchet^, make it into a long roll and bake
it in an Oven an hour, and when it is a day old, pare it and slice it, Sugar it
with searced Sugar and put it again into the Oven, and when it is dry take it
out, and new Sugar it again, and so box it and keep it.

114. To make Past Royal.
Take a pound of refined Sugar, beaten and searced, and put into a stone
Mortar, with an ounce of Gumdragagant steeped in Rose Water, and if you see
your past be too weak put in more Sugar^ if too dry more gum, with a drop or
two of Oil of Ci^amon, beat it into a perfect past, and then you may print it
in your moulds, and when it is dry guild it and so keep them.

115. To make Apricock Cakes.
Procure the fairest Apricocks you can get, and let them be parboil^d very
tender; take of the same quantity of Sugar whereof the pulp is, and boil them
together very well always keeping them stirring for fear of burning too; when
the bottom of the skillet is dry they are enough, then put them into little
cards sewed round about, and dust them with fine Sugar, and when they are cold
stone them and turn them, and fill them up with some more of the same stuff,
but let them stand three or four days before you remove them from the first
place, when you find them begin to candy take out the cards and dust them with
Sugar.

115. To make Conserve for Tarts all the Year.
Take Damsons, or other good ripe Plums, and peel off their Skins, and so put
them into a Pot, but to Pippins pared, and cut in pieces, and so bake them;
then strain them through a piece of Canvas, and reason them with Cinnamon,
Sugar, Ginger, and a little Rose Water: Boil it upon a Chafing Dish of Coals,
till it be as thick as a Conserve; and then put it into your Gally-pots, and
you may keep it good all the Year.

116. To dry Pippins.
Take the fairest yellow Pippins, and pare them, and make a hole through every
one, then par-boyl them a little in fair water, then take them up, and put them
into as much Clarified Sugar as will cover them, and let them boil very gently
a little while, in that Syrup; then take them out, and put them into an earthen
Platter, then cast fine Sugar upon them, and set them into the Oven half an
hour, then take them out, and cast some more Sugar on them, (being turned) and
do so three times, and they will be well d^yed.

117. To make Paste of Genua.
Take two pound of the pulp of Quinces, and as much of Peaches; strain it, and
dry it in a Pewter Platter upon a Chasing-dish of Coals; then weigh it, and
boil it to the height of Manus Christi, and then put them together, and so
fashion it upon a Pye-plate, and dry it in an Oven with a Chafing Dish of Coals
till it be through dry, and then if you please you may spot them with Gold.

118. To make Leach.
Make your Jelly for your Leach with Calves Feet, as you do your Ordinary
Jelly, but a little stiffer; and when it is cold, take off the top, and the
bottom, and set it over the Fire with some Cinnamon and Sugar; then take your
Turnsole being well steept in Sack, and crush it, and so strain it in your
Leach, and let it boil to such a thickness, that when it is cold you may slice
it.

119. To dry any kind of Fruits after they are preserved.
Take Pippins, Pears, or Plums after they are Preserved out of the Syrup, and
wash them in warm water, and then strew them over with Sugar finely sierced, as
you do Flower upon Fish to fry, and set them into a broad earthen Pan, and lay
them one by another; then set them into a warm Stove or Oven, until they be
dry, and turn them every day till they are quite dry; and if you please, you
may Candy them therewithal; cast Sugar upon them three or four times as you dry
them.

120. To make Quiddany of Quinces.
Take the Kernels out of seven or eight great Quinces, and boil the Quinces in
a quart of Spring Water, till it come to a pint; then put into it a quarter of
a Pint of Rose Water, and one pound of fine Sugar, and so let it boil till it
come to be of a deep color, then take a drop and drop it into the bottom of a
Saucer, and if it stand, take it off; then let it run through a Jelly-bag into
a Basin, then set it over a Chafing Dish of Coals to keep it warm, then take a
Spoon and fill your Boxes as full as you please; when they be cold cover them,
and if you please to print it in moulds, wetting your moulds with Rose Water,
and so let it run in, and when it is cold, turn it into Boxes.

121. To make Sweet Cakes without either Spice or Sugar.
Take Parsneps, and scrape or wash them clean, slice them thin, and dry them
well, beat them to powder, mixing one third part thereof with two thirds of
fine Wheat Flour; make up your Paste into Cakes, and you will find them very
sweet and delicate.

122. To make Wormwood-VVine.
Take small Rochel or Comahe Wine, put a few drops of the Extracted Oil of
Wormwood therein; brew it together out of one pot into another, and you shall
have a more neat and wholesome wine for your Body, than that which is Sold for
right Wormwood-Wine.

123. To make Sweet Bags to lie among Linning.
Fill your Bags only with Lignum and Rhodium finely beaten, and it will give an
Excellent Scent to your Linen.

124. To make Spirit of Honey.
Put one part of Honey to five parts of Water, when the water boyleth dissolve
your Honey therein, scum it; and having boiled an hour or two, put it into a
wooden Vessel, and when it is Bloodwarm set it on fire with Yeast, after the
usual manner of Beer and Ale; turn it, and when it has lain some time, it will
yield Spirit by Distillation, as Wine, Beer, and Ale will do.

125. To Preserve Artichoaks.
Cut off the stalks of your Artichoaks within two Inches of the Choke, and make
a strong Decoction of the rest of the stalks, slicing them into thin small
pieces, and let the Artichoaks lie in this Decoction; and when you use them,
you must put them first in warm water, and then in cold, and so take away the
bitterness of them.

126. To make Syrup for a Cough of the Lungs.
Take a Pottle of fair Running water in a new Pipkin, and put into it half an
Ounce of Sydrack, half an Ounce of Maidenhair, and a good handful of
Elecampane Roots sliced; boil all together, until half be boiled away, even to
a Syrup; then put into it the whites of Eggs, and let it boil two or three
walms; and give the Patient a Spoonful Morning and Evening.

127. To make Banbury Cakes.
Take four pound of Currants, wash, and pick them very clean, and dry them in a
Cloth; then take three Eggs, and put away one Yolk, and beat them, and strain
them with Yeast, putting thereto Cloves, Mace, Cinnamon, and Nutmegs; then take
a pint of Cream, and as much Mornings Milk, and let it warm; then take Flower,
and put in good store of cold Butter and Sugar, then put in your Eggs, Yeast,
and Meal, and work them all together an hour or more; then save a piece of the
Paste, and break the rest in pieces, and work in your Currants; then make your
Cake what quantity you please, and cover it very thin with the Paste wherein
were no Currants, and so bake it according to the bigness.

128. To make Ginger-bread.
Take a quart of Honey, and set it on the coals and refine it, then take
Ginger, Pepper, and Licorise, of each a pennyworth, a quarter of a pound of
Anniseeds, and a pennyworth of Saunders; beat all these, and sierse them, and
put them into the Honey, add a quarter of a pint of Claret Wine, or Old Ale;
then take three penny Manchets finely grated, and strew it amongst the rest,
and stir it till it come to a stiff Past; make them into Cakes, and dry them
gently.

129. To make VVormwood-VVater.
Take two Gallons of good Ale, a pound of Anniseeds, half a pound of Licorise,
and beat them very fine; then take two good handfuls of the Crops of Wormwood,
and put them into Ale, and let them stand all Night, and let them stand in a
Limbeck with a moderate Fire.

130. To make Paste of Quinces.
First boil your Quinces whole, and when they are soft, pare them, and cut the
Quince from the Core; then take the finest Sugar you can get finely beaten or
sierced, and put in a little Rose Water, and boil it together till it be stiff
enough to mould, and when it is cold, roll it and print: A pound of Quinces
will require a pound of Sugar, or thereabout.

131. To make thin Quince Cakes.
Take your Quince when it is boiled soft, as before, and dry it upon a Pewter
Plate with a soft heat, and stir it with a slice till it be hard, then take
sierced Sugar to the same weight, and strew it upon the Quince as you beat it
in a Wooden or Stone Mortar, and so roll them thin, and print them.

132. To make fine Cakes.
Take a Pottle of fine Flower, and a pound of Sugar, a little Meal, and good
store of Water to mingle the Flower into a stiff Plate, with a little Salt, and
so knead it, and roll out the Cakes thin, and bake them on Papers.

133. To make Suckets.
Take Curds, and the paring of Limons, Oranges, or Pome-Citrons, or indeed any
half-ripe green Fruit, and boil them till they be tender, in sweet wort; then
take three pound of Sugar, the whites of four Eggs, and a Gallon of water; beat
the water and Eggs together, and then put in your Sugar, and set it on the
Fire, and let it have a gentle fire, and let it boil six or seven walms, then
strain it through a Cloth, and set it on again, till it fall from the Spoon,
and then put it into the Rindes, or Fruits.

134. To make Leach Lombard.
Take half a pound of blanched Almonds, two Ounces of Cinnamon beaten and
sierced, half a pound of Sugar; beat your Almonds, and strew on your Cinnamon
and Sugar, till it come to a Paste, then roll it, and print it, as aforesaid.

135. To make a rare Damask Water.
Take a quart of Malmsey Lees, or Malmsey, one handful of Marjoram, as much
Basil, four handfuls of Lavender, one handful of Bay Leaves, four handfuls of
Damask-Rose-Leaves, as many Red-Rose, the Peels of six Oranges, or else one
handful of the tender Leaves of Walnut-Trees, half an Ounce of Benjamin,
Calamus Aromaticus as much, of Camphire four Drams, of Cloves an Ounce, of
Bildamum half an Ounce; then take a Pottle of Running Water, and put in all
these Spices bruised into your Water and Malmsey together in a Pot close
stopped, with a good handful of Rosemary, and let them stand for the space of
six days, then Distill it with a soft Fire, and set it in the Sun sixteen days,
with four Grains of Musk bruised. This Quantity will make three quarts of Water.

136. To make Washing Balls.
Take Storax of both kinds, Benjamin, Calamus Aromaticus, Labdanum, of each
alike, and bray them to Powder with Cloves and Orris, then beat them all with a
sufficient Quantity of Soap, till it be stiff, then with your hand work it like
Paste, and make round Balls thereof.

137. To make a Musk-Ball.
Take Nutmegs, Mace, Cloves, Saffron, and Cinnamon, of each the weight of two
pence, and beat it to fine Powder, add as much Mastick, of Storax the weight of
Six pence, of Labdanum the weight of Ten pence, of Amber-grease the weight of
Six pence, and of Musk sour Grains; dissolve and work all these in hard sweet
Soap, till it come to a stiff Paste, and then make Balls thereof.

138. To make Imperial Water.
Take a Gallon of Gascoin Wine, Ginger, Galingal, Nutmegs, Grains, Cloves,
Anniseeds, Fennel-seeds, Caraway-seeds, of each one dram; then take Sage, Mint,
Red Roses, Tine, Pellitory, Rosemary, Wild Thyme, Camomile, and Lavender, of
each a handful, then beat the Spices small and the Herbs also, and put all
together into the Wine, and let it stand so twelve hours, stirring it diverse
times, then Distill it with a Limbeck, and keep the first water, for it is
best; of a Gallon of Wine you must not take above a quart of Water. This Water
Comfort the Vital Spirits, and helps the inward Diseases that come of
Cold, as the Palsy, and Contraction of Sinews; it also kills Worms, and
comfort the Stomach, it Cures the cold Dropsy, helps the Stone, and
Stinking Breath, and makes one seem Young.

139. To make Verjuice.
Gather your Crabs as soon as the Kernels turn black, and lay them a while in a
heap to Sweat, then pick them from the Stalks, blacks, and rotteness, then
crush and beat them all to pieces in a Tub, then make a bag of course
Hair-cloath as big as your Press, and fill it with the crushed Crabs, then put
it into the Press and Press it as long as any moisture will drop out, having a
clean Vessel underneath to receive the Liquor; then Tun it up in sweet
Hogsheads, and to every Hogshead put half a dozen handfuls of Damask Rose
Leaves, then bring it up, and spend it as you have Occasion.

140. To make dry Sugar Leach.
Blanch your Almonds, and beat them with a little Rose water, and the white of
one Egg, and then beat it with a good quantity of Sugar, and work it as you
would work a piece of Paste; then roll it, and Print it, only be sure to strew
Sugar in the Print, for fear of cleaving to.

141. To make fine Iumbals.
Beat a pound of Sugar fine, then take the same quantity of fine Wheat Flower,
and mix them together, then take two whites and one Yolk of an Egg, half a
quarter of a pound of Blanched Almonds, then beat them very fine altogether,
with half a pound of sweet Butter, and a spoonful of Rose Water, and so work it
with a little Cream till it come to a stiff Paste, then roll them forth as you
please; you may add a few fine dried Anniseeds finely rub^d, and strewed into
the Paste, with Coriander seeds.

142. To make dry Vinegar.
To make dry Vinegar, which you may carry in your pocket, you must take the
blacks of green Co^^, either Wheat or Rye, and beat it in a Mortar with the
strongest Vinegar you can get, till it come to Paste, then roll it into little
Balls and dry it in the Sun till it be very hard, and when you have Occasion to
use it, cut a little piece thereof, and dissolve it in wine, and it will make a
strong Vinegar.

143. To make Excellent Date Leach.
Take Dates, and take out the stones, and the white Rind, and beat them with
Sugar, Cinnamon, and Ginger very finely, then work it as you would work a piece
of Paste, and then print them as you please.

144. To make white Ielly of Almonds.
Take Rose Water, Gum-dragant, or Isinglass dissolved, and some Cinnamon grossly
beaten, boil them all together, then take a pound of Almonds, blanch them, and
beat them fine with a little fair water, dry them in a fine Cloth, and put
your Rose Water and the rest into the Almonds, boil them together and stir them
continually, then take them from the fire, and when it is boiled enough take it
off.

145. To Candy Orange Peels.
Take your Orange Peels after they are Preserved, then take fine Sugar, and
Rose water, and boil it to the height of Manus Christi, that is, till it is
Sugar again, then draw through your Sugar; lay them on the bottom of a Siev,
and dry them in an Oven after you have drawn Bread, and they will be Candied.

146. To make Paste of Violets.
You must take Violets ready picked, and brui^e them in a Marble Mortar, and
wring the Juice from them into a Porringer, and put as much hard Sugar in fine
Powder, as the Juice will cover, dry it, and then powder it again; then take as
much Gum-dragant steeped in Rose water as will bring this Sugar into a perfect
Paste, then take it up and print it with your Moulds, and so dry it in your
Stove.

147. To Preserve Pippins Red.
Take your best colored Pippins and pare them, then take a piercer and bore a
hole through them, then make Syrup for them as much as will cover them, and so
let them boil in a broad preserving pan, put to them a piece of Cinnamon, and
let them boil leisurely, close covered, turning them very often, or else they
will spot, and one side will not be like the other, and let them boil till they
begin to Jelly, then take them up, and you may keep them all the Year.

148. To make Spirit of Roses.
Bruise the Rose in his own Juice, adding thereto, being temperately warm, a
convenient proportion either of Yeast, or Ferment; leave them a few days to
ferment, till they get a strong and heady smell, near like to Vinegar; then
Distill them, and draw so long as you find any scent of the Rose to come, then
distill again so often till you have purchased a perfect Spirit of the Rose.
You may also Ferment the Juice of Roses only, and after Distill the same.

149. To make Syrup of Elder.
Take Elder Berries when they are red, bruise them in a Stone Mortar, strain
the Juice, and boil it away to almost half, scum it very clean, take it off the
fire whilst it is hot; put in Sugar to the thickness of a Syrup, put it no more
on the fire, when it is cold, put it into Glasses, not filling them to the top,
for it will work like Beer.

150. To make Orange-Water.
Take two quarts of the best Malaga Sack, and put in as many of the peels of
Oranges as will go in, cut the white clean off, steep them twenty four hours,
then Still them in a Glass Still, and let the water run into the Receiver upon
fine Sugarcandy; you may still it in an Ordinary Still.

151. To make a Caudle of great Virtue.
Take a Pint and a half of the strongest Ale may be gotten, twenty Jordan
Almonds clean wiped, but neither washed nor blanched, with two Dates minced
very small and stamped; then take the pith of Young Beef, the length of twelve
Inches, lay it in water till the blood be out of it, then strip the skin off
it, and stamp it with the Almonds and Dates, then strain them altogether into
the Ale, boil it till it be a little thick, give the party in the Morning
Fasting six Spoonfuls, and as much when he goes to Bed.

152. An Excellent Surfeit Water.
Take Cellandine, Rosemary, Rue, Pellitory of Spain, Scabious, Angelica,
Pimpernel, Wormwood, Mugwort, Betony, Agrimony, Balm, Dragon and Tormentile, of
each half a pound, shred them somewhat small, and put them into a narrow
mouthed Pot, and put to them five quarts of White Wine, stop it close, and
let it stand three days and Nights, stirring it Morning and Evening, then take
the Herbs from the Wine, and Distill them in an Ordinary Still, and when you
have Distilled the Herbs, Distill the Wine also, wherein is Virtue for a weak
Stomach. Take three or four Spoonfuls at any time.

153. To make a Syrup for one short-winded.
Take a good handful of Hyssop, and a handful of Horehound, and boil them in a
quart of Spring Water to a pint, then strain it through a clean Cloth, and put
in Sugar to make it Pleasant. Stir it Morning and Evening with a
Licorise-stick, and take about three spoonfuls at a time.

154. To make Syrup of Sugar Candyed.
Take Sugar Candyed, and put it into a clear Bladder, and tie it, but so that
it may have some vent, then put it into a Basin of Water, so that the water
come not over the top of the Bladder, and cover it with a Pewter Dish, and let
it stand all Night, and in the Morning take of it with a Licorise-stick.

155. To make an Excellent Syrup against the Scurvy.
Take of the juice of Garden ScurvyGrass, Brook^ime, and Watercresses, of each
six Ounces, and after it has stood till it is clear, take sixteen Ounces of
the clearest, and put to it four Ounces of the juice of Oranges and Lemmons,
make it a clear Syrup with so much fine Sugar as will serve the turn.

156. To make Syrup of Roses.
When your Liquor is ready to boil, put as many Roses as will be well steept
into it, cover it close, and when the Roses are thoroughly white, then strain
it, and set it one the Fire again, and so use it thirteen times, and to every
pint of your water or Liquor, you must put a pound of Sugar, and let it stand
together steeping for the Space of one Night, then scum it clean, and sees it
over a quick Fire a quarter of an hour, then take some whites of Eggs and beat
them well together, take off your Pot, and put in the whites, and then set it
on the fire again, and let it boil a good space, then let it run through a
Jelly-bag, till it will stand still upon your Nail.

157. To make a Comfortable Syrup.
Take a handful of Agrimony, and boil it in a Pint of water till half be
consumed, then take out the Agrimony, and put in a good handful of Currants, and
boil them till they are ready to break, then strain them, and make a Syrup of
them, then set it on a Chafing Dish of Coals, and put thereto a little white
Saunders, and drink it either hot or cold.

158. To make an Almond Caudle.
Take three pints of Ale, boil it with Cloves and Mace, and slice Bread in it,
then have ready beaten a pound of Almonds blanched, and strain them out with a
Pint of white wine, and thicken the Ale with it, sweeten it if you please, but
be sure to scum the Ale when it boyls.

159. To Candy Cherries.
Take your Cherries before they be full Ripe, take out the Stones, put
Clarified Sugar boiled to a height, and then pour it on them.

160. To make Syrup of Saffron.
Take a Pint of Endive water, two Ounces of Saffron finely beaten, and steep it
therein all Night, the next day boil it, and strain out the Saffron, then with
Sugar boil it up to a Syrup.

161. To make Rose Water.
Stamp the Leaves, and first Distill the juice being squeezed out, and after
Distill the Leaves, and so you may dispatch more with one Still, than others
will do with three or four; and this water is every way as Medicinable as the
other, serving very well in all Decoctions, and Syrups, etc. though it be not
altogether so pleasing to the smell.

162. To make Suckets of Green Walnuts
Take VValnuts when they are no bigger than the largest Hasel Nut; pare away
the uppermost green, but not too deep; then boil them in a Pottle of water,
till the water be boiled away, then take so much more fresh water, and when it
is boiled to the half, put thereto a quart of Vinegar, and a Pottle of
Clarified Honey.

163. To make white Leach of Cream.
Take a Pint of sweet Cream, and six Spoonfuls of Rose Water, two Grains of
Musk, two drops of Oil of Mace, and so let it boil with four Ounces of
Isinglass; then let it run through a Jelly-bag, when it is cold slice it like
brawn, and so serve it out. This is the best way to make Leach.

164. To Preserve Pome-Citrons.
You must take a pound and a half of Pome-Citrons, and cut them in halves and
quarters, take the Meat out of them, and boil them tender in fair water, then
take two pound of Sugar Clarified, and make Syrup for them, and let them boil
therein a quarter of an hour very gently; then take them up, and let your Syrup
boil till it be thick, then put in your Pome-Citrons, and you may keep them all
the Year.

165. To Pick^e Clove-gilly Flowers for Sallets.
Take the fairest Clove-Gilly-Flowers, clip off the whites from them, put them
into a wide-mouthed Glass, and strew a good deal of Sugar finely beaten among
them, then put as much wine Vinegar to them as will thoroughly wet them, tie
them up close, and set them in the Sun, and in a little while they will be fit
for use.

166. To make Leach of Almonds.
Take half a pound of sweet Almonds, and beat them in a Mortar, then strain
them with a Pint of sweet Milk from the Cow, then put to it one grain of Musk,
two spoonfuls of Rose Water, two Ounces of fine Sugar, the weight of three
shillings in Isinglass that is very white, boil them together, and let it all
run through a strainer, then still it out, and serve it.

167. To Candy Marigolds in wedges, the Spanish Fashion.
Take of the fairest Marigold Flowers two Ounces, and shred them small, and dry
them before the Fire, then take four Ounces of Sugar, and boil it to a height,
then pour it upon a wet Pye-plate, and between hot and cold cut it into wedges,
then lay them on a sheet of white Paper, and put them in a Stove.

168. To Candy Eringo Roots.
Take your Eringos ready to be Preserved, and weigh them, and to every pound of
your Roots take of the purest Sugar you can get two pound, and Clarify it with
the whites of Eggs exceeding well, that it may be as clear as Crystal, for that
will be best; it being Clarified, boil it to the height of Manus Christi, then
dip in your Roots two or three at once, till all be Candyed, and so put them in
a Stove, and so keep them all the Year.

169. To Candy Elecampane Roots.
Take of your fairest Elecampane Roots, and take them clean from the Syrup, and
wash the Sugar off them, and dry them again with a Linen Cloth; then weigh
them, and to every pound of Roots take a pound and three quarters of Sugar,
Clarify it well, and boil it to a height, and when it is boiled dip in your
Roots, three or four at once, and they will Candy very well, and so stove them,
and keep them all the Year.

170. To make Cinamon-Sugar.
Lay pieces of Sugar in close Boxes among sticks of Cinnamon, or Cloves, and in
short time it will have the taste and scent of the Spice.

171. To make a Triste.
Take Cream, and boil it with a cut Nutmeg, add Limon peel a little, then take
it off, cool it a little, and season it with Rose Water and Sugar to your taste;
let this be put in the thing you serve it in, then put it in a little Rundlet
to make it come, and then it is sit to eat.

172. To make Quiddany of Plums.
Take one quart of the Liquor which you preserved your Plums in, and boil six
fair Pippins in it, pared, and cut into small pieces, then strain the thin from
it, and put to every Pint of Liquor half a pound of Sugar, and so boil it till
it will stand on the back of a Spoon like a Jelly; then wet your Moulds, and
pour it thereinto, and when it is almost cold, turn it off upon a wet Trencher,
and so slip it into wet Boxes.

173. To Candy Barberries.
First Preserve them, then dip them quickly into warm water, to wash off the
Ropy Syrup, then strew them over with siersed Sugar, and set them into an Oven
or Stove three or four hours, always turning them, and casting more fine Sugar
upon them, and never suffer them to be cold till they be dried, and begin to
look like Diamonds.

174. To make Cream of Apricots.
First boil your Apricots with water and Sugar, till they be somewhat tender,
and afterward boil them in Cream, then strain them, and season it with Sugar.

175. To make Quince-Cream.
Take a Roasted Quince, pare it, and cut it into thin slices to the Core, boil
it in a pint of Cream, with a little whole Ginger, till it taste of the Quinces
to your liking, then put in a little Sugar, and strain it, and always serve it
cold to the Table.

176. To Preserve Barberries.
Take one pound of Barberries picked from the stalks, put them in a Pottle-pot,
and set it in a brass Pot full of hot water, and when they be stewed, strain
them, and put to them a pound and half of Sugar, and a Pint of Red Rose Water,
and boil them a little; then take half a pound of the fairest Clusters of
Barberries you can get, and dip them in the Syrup while it boyleth, then take
the Barberries out again, and boil the Syrup while it is thick, and when it is
cold, put them in the Glasses with the Syrup.

177. To make a Cullice.
Take a Cock, and dress him, and boil him in White Wine, scum it clean, and
Clarify the Broth (being first strained) then take a Pint of sweet Cream, and
strain it, and so mix them together; then take beaten Ginger, fine Sugar, and
Rose Water, and put them all together, and boil it a little more.

178. To make a Cordial strengthening Broth.
Take a Red Cock, strip off the Feathers from the skin, then break his Bones to
shivers with a rolling-pin; ^^t it over the Fire, and just cover it with water,
put in some Salt, and watch the scumming, and boiling of it, put in a handful
of Hartshorn, a quarter of a pound of blew Currants, and as many Raisins of the
Sun stoned, and as many Pruans, four blades of large Mace, a bottom Crust of a
white Loaf, half an Ounce of China Root sliced, being steeped three hours
before in warm water, boil three or four pieces of Gold, strain it, and put in
a little fine Sugar, and juice of Orange, and so use it.

179. To Candy Grapes.
After they are Preserved, then dip them into warm water to cleanse them from
the Syrup, then strew them over with sierced Sugar, and set them into an Oven
or Stove three or four hours, always turning them, and casting more fine Sugar
upon them, and never suffer them to be cold till they be dried, and begin to
sparkle.

180. To make Sugar-Cakes.
Take one pound of fine Flower, one pound of Sugar finely beaten, and mingle
them well together, then take seven or eight Yolks of Eggs, then take two
Cloves, and a pretty piece of Cinnamon, and lay it in a spoonful of Rose Water
all Night, and heat it almost Blood-warm, temper it with the rest of the stuff;
when the Paste is made, make it up as fast as you can, and bake them in a soft
Oven.

181. To take spots and stains out of Clothes.
Take four Ounces of white hard Soap, beat it in a Mortar with a Limon sliced,
and as much Roch-Allom as an Hasel-Nut, roll it up in a Ball, rub the stain
therewith, and after fetch it out with warm water, if need be.

182. To keep Chestnuts all the Year.
After the Bread is ^rawn, disperse your Nuts thinly over the bottom of the
Oven, and by this means, the moisture being dried up, the Nuts will last all
the Year; but if you perceive them to mould, put them into the Oven again.

183. To preserve Cucumbers Green.
You must take two quarts of Verjuice, or Vinegar, and a Gallon of fair water,
a pint of Bay Salt, and a handful of green Fennel or Dill, boil it a little,
and when it is cold, put it into a Barrel, then put your Cucumbers into that
Pickle, and you may keep them all the Year.

184. To preserve white Damsons Green.
Scald white Damsons in water, till they be hard, then take them off, and pick
as many as you please, take as much Sugar as they weigh, put two or three
spoonfuls of water, then put in the Damsons and the Sugar, and boil them, take
them off, then let them stand a day or two, then boil them again, take them
off, and let them stand till they be cold.

185. To make Cakes of Limons.
Take of the finest double refined Sugar, beaten very fine, and sierced through
fine Tiffany, and to half a Porringer of Sugar put two spoonfuls of water, and
boil it till it be almost Sugar again, then grate of the hardest Rinded Limon,
and stir it into your Sugar, put it into your Coffins, and a paper, and when
they be cold, take them off.

186. To make Artificial Walnuts.
Take some Sugar-plate, and print it in a Mould made for a Walnut-kernel, and
then yellow it all over with a little Saffron-water, with a Feather; then take
Cinnamon sierced, and Sugar a like Quantity, working it to a Paste with
Gum-dragon steeped in Rose Water, and print it in a Mould made like a
Walnut-shell, and when the kernel and shell be dry, close them together with
Gum-dragon.

187. To make Black-Cherry-VVine.
Take a Gallon of the juice of Black-Cherries, keep it in a Vessel close
stopped, till it begin to work, then filter it, and an Ounce of Sugar being
added to every Pint, and a Gallon of White Wind, and so keep it close stopped
for Use.

188. To make Rose-Vinegar.
Take of Red-Rose buds (gathered in a dry time, the whites cut off, then dry
them in the shadow three or four days) one pound, of Vinegar eight Sextaries;
set them in the Sun forty days, then strain out the Roses, and put in fresh;
and so repeat it three or four times.

189. To make syrup of Vinegar.
Take of the Roots of smalledge, Fennel, Endive, each three Ounces; Anniseeds,
smalledge, Fennel, of each an Ounce, Endive half an Ounce, clear water three
quarts; boil it gently in an Earthen Vessel, till half the water be consumed,
then strain, and Clarify it, and with three pound of sugar, and a pint and
half of White-wine-Vinegar, boil it into a syrup.

This is a Gallant syrup for such whose Bodies are stuffed, either with Phlegm,
or tough Humors, for it opens Obstructions or stoppings, both of the stomach,
Liver, spleen, and Reins; it cuts and brings away tough Phlegm, and Choler.

190, To make syrup of Apples.
Take two quarts of the juice of sweetscented Apples, the juice of Bugloss,
Garden, and Wild, of Violet-leaves, and Rose Water, of each a pound, boil them
together, and Clarify them, and with six pound of very fine sugar, boil them
into a syrup, according to Art.

191. To make the Capon-water against a Consumption.
Take a Capon, the Guts being pulled out, cut it in pieces, and take away the
Fat, boil it in a close Vessel in a sufficient quantity of spring water: Take
of this Broth three pints, of Barrage, and Violet-water a pint and a half,
White Wind one pint, Red-Rose leaves two drams and an half, Burrage-Flowers,
Violets, and Bugloss, of each one Dram, pieces of bread out of the Oven half a
pound, Cinnamon bruised, half an Ounce; still it in a Glass still, according to
Art.

This is a sovereign Remedy against Hectick-Fevers, and Consumptions; let such
as are subject to those Diseases, hold it as a Jewel.

192. To make Elder-Vinegar.
Gather the Flowers of Elder, pick them very clean, dry them in the Sun, on a
gentle heat, and to every quart of Vinegar take a good handful of Flowers, and
let it stand in the Sun a fortnight, then strain the Vinegar from the Flowers,
and put it into the Barrel again, and when you draw a quart of Vinegar, draw a
quart of Water, and put it into the Barrel lukewarm.

193. To make China Broth.
Take an Ounce of China-Root clipped thin, and steep it in three pints of Water
all Night, on Embers covered; the next day take a Cock Chicken, clean picked,
and the Guts taken out, put in its Belly Agrimony and Maidenhair, of each half
a handful, Raisins of the Sun stoned, one good handful, and as much French
Barley; boil all these in a Pipkin close covered, on a gentle Fire, for six or
seven hours, let it stand till it be cold, strain it, and keep it for your Use:
Take a good Draught in the Morning, and at four in the Afternoon.

194. To make Paste of tender Plums.
Put your Plums into an Earthen Pot, and set it into a Pot of boiling water,
and when the Plums are dissolved, then strain the thin Liquor from them through
a C^oath, and reserve that Liquor to make Quiddany, then strain the pulp
through a piece of Canvas, and take as much Sugar as the pulp in weight, and as
much water as will wet the same, and so boil it to a Candy height, then dry the
pulp upon a Chafing Dish of Coals, then put your Syrup and the pulp so hot
together, and boil it, always stirring it till it will lie upon a Pye-plate, as
you lay it, and that it run not abroad, and when it is somewhat dry, then use
it, but put to it the pulp of Apples.

196. To make Cream of Codlings.
First, scald your Codlings, and so peel off the skins, then scrape the pulp
from the Cores, and strain them with a little Sugar, and Rose Water, then lay
your pulp of Codlings in the middle of the Dish, and so much raw Cream round it
as you please, and so serve it.

196. To make Sugar of Roses.
Take of Red-Rose-Leaves, the whites being cut off, an Ounce, dry them in the
Sun speedily, put to it a pound of white Sugar, melt the Sugar in Rose Water,
and Juice of Roses, of each two Ounces, which being consumed by degrees, put in
the Rose-Leaves in powder, mix them, put it upon a Marble, and make it into
Lozenges, according to Art.

197. To make a Cream Tart.
Cut the Crust of a Manchet, and grate it small, and mix it with thick Cream,
and some sweet Butter; then take twenty-four Yolks of Eggs, and strain them
with a little Cream, putting thereto a good quantity of Sugar; mix these very
well, and set it upon a small fire, and so let it boil till it be thick; then
make two sheets of Paste as thin as you can, and raise the sides of one of
them, the height of one of your fingers in breadth, and then fill it, and cover
it with the other sheet, then bake it half a quarter of an hour, then put Sugar
on it, and so serve it.

198. To make Artificial Oranges.
Take Alabaster Moulds made in three pieces, bind two of the pieces together,
and water them an hour or two, then take as much Sugar as you think will fill
your Moulds, and so boil it to a height; then pour it into your Moulds one by
one very quick: Then put on the Lid of the Mould, and so turn it round with
your Hand as quick as you can, and when it is cold, take it out of the Mould,
and they will be both whole, and hollow within, and so it will appear, and
resemble the Mould wherein it is put, whether Oranges, Limons, Cucumbers, or
the like.

199. To make Poppy-water.
Take of Red Poppies four pound, put to them a quart of White Wind, then
Distill them in a Common Still, then let the Distilled water be poured upon
fresh Flowers, and repeated three times, to which add two Nutmegs sliced, Red
Poppy-Flowers a pugil, white Sugar two Ounces; set it to the Fire, to give it a
pleasing sharpness, and Order it according to your taste.

200. To make Mathiolus Bezoar Water.
Take of Syrup of Citron-peels a quart, and as much of Dr. Mathiolus great
Antidote, with five pints of the Spirit of Wine, five times Distilled over; put
all these in a Glass that is much too big to hold them; stop it close, that the
Spirit fly not out, then shake it together, that the Electuary may be well
mingled with the Spirit, so let it stand a Month, shaking it together twice a
week (for the Electuary will settle at the bottom) After a Month pour off the
clear water into another Glass, to be kept for your use, stopping it very close
with Wax and Parchment, else the strength will easily fly away in Vapors.

201. To make Marmalade of Red Currants.
Take the juice of Red Currants, and put into a pretty quantity of White
Currants, clean picked from the stalks and buttons at the other end; let these
boil a little together, have also ready some fine Sugar boiled to a Candy
height, put of this to the Currants, acording to your discretion, and boil them
together, till they be enough, and bruise them with the back of your spoon,
that they may be thick as Marmalade, and when it is cool put it into Pots: You
need not stone the whole Currants, unless you please.

202. To make a Syllabub.
Take a Pint of Verjuice in a Bowl, Milk the Cow to the Verjuice; then take off
the Curd, and take sweet Cream, and beat them together with a little Sack and
Sugar, put it into your Syllabub-Pot, strew Sugar on it, and serve it.

203. To make pleasant Mead.
Put a quart of Honey to a Gallon of Water, with about ten sprigs of
Sweet-Marjoram, and half so many Tops of Bays, boil these very well together,
and when it is cold, Bottle it up, and in ten days it will be ready to drink.

204. To make Steppony.
Take a Gallon of Conduit-water, a pound of blew Raisins of the Sun stoned, and
half a pound of Sugar, squeeze the juice of two Limons upon the Raisins and
Sugar, and slice the Rindes upon them: Boil the water, and pour it boiling hot
upon the Ingredients in an Earthen Pot, and stir them well together, so let it
stand Twenty four hours; then put it into Bottles, having first let it run
through a strainer, and set them in a Cellar, or other cool place.

205. To make Syder.
Take a Peck of Apples and slice them, and boil them in a Barrel of Water, till
the third part be wasted; then cool your water as you do for Wort, and when it
is cold, you must pour the water upon three Measures of grown Apples. Then draw
sorth the Water at a Tap three or four times a day, for three days together.
Then press out the Liquor, and Tun it up; when it has done working, stop it up
close.

206. To make Cock-Ale.
Take eight Gallons of Ale, then take a Cock, and boil him well, with four
pound of Raisins of the Sun well stoned, two or three Nutmegs, three or four
flakes of Mace, half a pound of Dates; beat these all in a Mortar, and put to
them two quarts of the best Sack; and when the Ale has done working, put these
in, and stop it close six or seven days, and then Bottle it, and a Month after
you may drink it,

207. To make a Caraway-Cake.
Take three pound and a half of the fineest Flower, and dry it in an Oven, one
pound and a half of Sweet Butter, and mix it with the Flower, till it be
crumbled very small, that none of it be seen; then take three quarters of a
pint of New Ale-Yeast, and half a pint of Sack, and half a pint of New Milk,
with six spoonfuls of Rose Water, and four Yolks, and two Whites of Eggs; then
let it lie before the Fire half an hour, or more; and when you go to make it
up, put in three quarters of Carraway-Comfits, and a pound and half of Biskets.
Put it into the Oven, and let it stand an hour and an half.

208. To make Strawberry-wine.
Bruise the Strawberries, and put them into a Linen bag, which has been a
little used, that so the Liquor may run through more easily; then hang in the
Bag at the bung into the Vessel. Before you put in your Strawberries, put in
what quantity of Fruit you think good, to make the Wine of a high Color;
during the working, leave the bung open, and when it has worked enough, stop
your Vessel: Cherry-wine is made after the same Fashion, but then you must
break the Stones.

209, To make a Cordial Water of Clove-gilly flowers.
Put Spirit of Wine, or Sack upon Clove-gilly-flowers, digest it two or three
days; put all in a Glass-body, laying other Clove-gilly-flowers at the mouth of
it upon a Cambrick, or Boulter-cloath, (that the Spirit rising, and passing
through the Flowers, may ting it self of a beautiful Color) add a Head with a
Limbeck and Receiver: Then Distill the Spirit as strong as you like it, which
sweeten with Syrup of Gilly-flowers, or fine Sugar.

210 To make an Excellent Surfeit-Water.
Take Mint and Carduus four parts, Angelica one part, Wormwood two parts; chop
and bruise them a little, put a sufficient quantity of them into an Ordinary
Still, and put upon them enough New Milk to soak them, but not to have the Milk
swim much over them. Distill this as you do Rose Water, stirring it sometime
with a stick, to keep the Milk from growing to a Cake.

211. To make Mint-water.
Take two parts of Mint, and one part of Wormwood, and two parts of Carduus;
put these into as much New Milk as will soak them: Let them infuse five or six
hours, then Distill as you Distill Rose Water, but you must often take off the
Head, and stir the Matter well with a stick: Drink of this Water a Wine-glass
full at a time, sweetened with fine Sugar to your taste.

212. To pickle Artichoaks.
Take your Artichoaks before they are overgrown, or too full of strings, and
when they are pared round, then nothing is left but the bottom, boil them till
they be indifferent tender, but not full boiled, take them up, and let them be
cold, then take good stale Beer, and White Wine, with a great quantity of whole
Pepper, so put them up into a Barrel, with a small quantity of Salt, keep them
close, and they will not be sour, it will serve for baked Meats, and boiled
Meats all the Winter.

213. To make Rasberry-Cream.
When you have boiled your Cream, take two Ladle-fuls of it, being almost cold,
bruise the Rasberries together, and season it with Sugar, and Rose Water, and
put it into your Cream, stirring it altogether, and so dish it up.

214. To make Snow-Cream.
Break the whites of six Eggs, put thereto a little Rose Water, beat them well
together with a bunch of Feathers, till they come perfectly to resemble Snow;
then lay on the said Snow in heaps upon other Cream that is cold, which is made
fit for the Table; you may put under your Cream in the bottom of the Dish, part
of a penny Loaf, and stick therein a branch of Rosemary or Bays, and fill your
Tree with the said Snow to serve it up.

215. To make Hydromel.
Take eighteen quarts of Spring Water, and one quart of Honey; when the water
is warm, put the Honey into it, when it boyls up scum it very well, even as
long as any scum will rise; then put in one Race of Ginger, sliced in thin
slices, four Cloves, and a little sprig of green Rosemary; boil all together an
hour, then set it to cool till it be Blood-warm, and then put to it a spoonful
of Ale-yeast, when it is worked up, put it into a Vessel of a fit size, and
after two or three days Bottle it up; you may drink it in six weeks, or two
Months.

216. To make a whipped Syllabub.
Take the whites of two Eggs, and a pint of Cream, with six spoonfuls of Sack,
and as much Sugar as will sweeten it, then take a Birchen Rod and whip it, as
it rises in froth scum it, and put it into the Syllabub-pot, so continue it
with whipping and scumming, till your Syllabub-Pot be full.

217. To make Marmalade of Cherries.
Take four pound of the best Kentish Cherries before they be stoned, to one
pound of pure Loaf-Sugar, which beat into small powder, stone the Cherries, and
put them into a Preserving-Pan over a gentle Fire, that they may not boil, but
dissolve much into Liquor. Take away with the spoon much of the thin Liquor,
leaving the Cherries moist enough, but not swimming, in clean Liquor; then put
to them half your Sugar, and boil it up quick, and scum away the Froth that
rises; when it is well incorporated and clear, strew in a little more of the
Sugar, and continue so by little and little, till you have put in all your
Sugar, which will make the Color the fairer; when they are boiled enough, take
them off, and bruise them with the back of a spoon, and when they are cold, put
them up in Pots.

218. To make a Flomery-Caudle.
When Flomery is made, and cold, you may make a pleasant, and wholesome Caudle
of it, by taking some lumps and spoonfuls of it, and boil it with Ale and
White Wind, then sweeten it to your taste with Sugar. There will remain in the
Caudle some lumps of the Congealed Flomery, which are not ungrateful.

219. To Preserve Fruit all the Year.
Put the Fruit into a fit Case of Tin, and soder it together, so that no Air
can get in; then lay it in the bottom of a cold Well in Running water.

220. To make a most Rich Cordial.
Take Conserve of Red Roses, Conserve of Orange-Flowers, of each one Ounce;
Confect. Hyacinthi, Bezoardick, Theriacal Powder, of each two Drams, Confection
of Alkermes one Dram, of powder of Gold one Scruple; mix all these well
together in the form of an Opiate, and if the Composition be too dry, add to it
some Syrup of Red Currants, as much as is needful; take of this Composition
every Morning, the quantity of a Nut.

221. To Pickle Red and White Currants.
Take Vinegar and White Wind, with so much Sugar as will make it pretty sweet,
then take your Red and White Currants, being not fully Ripe, and give them one
walm, so cover them over with the said Pickle, keeping them always under Liquor.

222. To make Red Currans-Cream.
Bruise your Currants with some boiled Cream, then strain them through your
strainer, or Siev, and put the liquid substance thereof to the said Cream,
being almost cold, and it will be a pure Red; so serve it up.

223. To Preserve Medlars.
Take the weight of them in Sugar, adding to every pound thereof, a pint and a
half of fair water, let them be scalded therein, till their skin will come off;
then take them out of the water, and stone them at the Head, then add your
Sugar to the water, and boil them together, then strain it, and put your
Medlars therein; let them boil apace till it be thick; take them from the Fire,
and keep them for Use.

224. To Preserve Mulberries.
Take the like weight of Sugar, as of Mulberries, wet the Sugar with some of
the juice thereof, stir it together, put in your Mulberries, and let them boil
till they are enough, then take out your Mulberries, but let your Syrup boil a
while after; then take it off, and put it into your Mulberries, and let them
stand till they be cold, for your Use.

225. To make white Mead.
Take six Gallons of Water, and put in six quarts of Honey, stirring it till
the Honey be thoroughly melted; then set it over the Fire, and when it is ready
to boil, scum it very clean; then put in a quarter of an Ounce of Mace, and as
much Ginger, half an Ounce of Nutmegs, Sweet Marjoram, broad Thyme, and Sweet
Bryar, of all together a handful, and boil them well therein, then set it by
till it be thoroughly cold, and then Barrel it up, and keep it till it be Ripe.

226. To make Naples-Bisket.
Take of the same stuff the Mackroons are made of, and put to it an Ounce of
Pine-Apple-seeds, in a quarter of a pound of stuff, for that is all the
difference between the Mackroons and the Naples Biskets.

227. To make Chips of Quinces.
Scald them very well, and then slice them into a Dish, and pour a Candy Syrup
to them scalding hot, and let them stand all Night, then lay them on Plates,
and sierse Sugar on them, and turn them every day, and scrape more Sugar on
them till they be dry. If you would have them look clear, heat them in Syrup,
but not to boil.

228. To make Lozenges of Roses.
Boil Sugar to a height, till it is Sugar again, then beat your Roses fine, and
moisten them with the juice of Limons, and put them into it, let it not boil
after the Roses are in, but pour it upon a Pye-Plate, and cut it into what form
you please.

229. To make Conserve of Bugloss-Flowers.
Pick them as you do Burrage-Flowers, weigh them, and to every Ounce add two
Ounces of Loaf-Sugar, and one of Sugar Candy; beat them together, till they
become very fine, then set it on the Fire to dissolve the Sugar, and when it is
so done, and the Conserve hot, put it into your Glasses, or Gally-Pots, for
your Use all the Year.

230. To Pickle Limon and Orange-Piel.
Boil them with Vinegar and Sugar, and put them up into the same Pickle; you
must Observe to cut them into small Thongs, the length of half the Piel of your
Limon, being pared; it is a handsome savoury Winter Sallet: Boil them first in
Water, before you boil them in Sugar.

231. To make Goosberry-Paste.
Take Gooseberries, and cut them one by one, and wring away the juice, till you
have got enough for your turn, boil your juice alone, to make it somewhat
thicker; then take as much fine Sugar as your juice will sharpen, dry it, and
then beat it again; then take as much Gum-dragon steeped in Rose Water as will
serve; then beat it into a Paste in a Marble Mortar, then take it up, and print
it in your Moulds, and dry it in your Stove, when it is dry Box it up for your
Use all the Year.

232. To make Suckets of Lettucestalks.
Take Lettuce-stalks, and peel away the outside, then par-boyl them in fair
water, and let them stand all Night dry, then take half a pint of the same
Liquor, and a quart of Rose Water, and so boil it to a Syrup, and when the
Syrup is almost cold put in your Roots, and let them stand all Night to take
Sugar; then boil your Syrup again, because it will be weak, and then take out
your Roots.

233. To make Musk-Sugar.
Bruise four or five Grains of Musk, put it in a piece of Cambrick or Lawn; lay
it at the bottom of a Gally-Pot, and strew Sugar thereon, stop your Pot close,
and all your Sugar in a few days will both smell and taste of Musk; and when
you have spent that Sugar, lay more Sugar thereon, which will also have the
same scent.

234. To make Prince-Bisket.
Take one pound of very fine Flower, and one pound of fine sugar, and eight
Eggs, and to spoonfuls of Rose Water, and one Ounce of Carraway-seeds, and beat
it all to Batter one whole hour, for the more you beat it, the better your
Bread is; then Bake it in Coffins of white Plate, being basted with a little
Butter, before you put in your Batter, and so keep it.

235. To Candy Rose-Leaves.
Boil Sugar and Rose Water a little upon a Chafing Dish of Coals, then put the
Leaves (being thoroughly dried, either by the Sun, or on the Fire) into the
Sugar, and boil them a little; then strew the powder of double-refined Sugar
upon them, and turn them, and boil them a little longer, taking the Dish from
the Fire, then strew more powdered Sugar on the contrary side of the Flowers.

236. To Preserve Roses, or Gilly-flowers whole.
Dip a Rose that is neither in the Bud, nor over-blown, in a Syrup, consisting
of Sugar double-refined, and Rose Water boiled to it is full height, then open
the leaves one by one with a fine smooth Bodkin, either of Bone or Wood, then
lay them on Papers in the heat, or else dry with a gentle heat in a close Room,
heating the Room before you set them in, or in an Oven, then put them up in
Glasses, and keep them in dry Cup-boards near the Fire.

237. To make Ielly of Quinces.
Take of the juice of Quinces Clarified six quarts, boil it half away, and add
to the remainder five pints of Old White Wind, consume the third part over a
gentle fire, taking away the scum, as you ought; let the rest settle, and
strain it, and with three pound of Sugar boil it, according to Art.

238. To make Ielly of Currants.
Take four pound of good Sugar, and clarify it with whites of Eggs, then boil
it to a Candy height, that is, till it go into flashes; then put to it five
pints, (or as much as you please) of the pure juice of Red Currants, first
boiled, to Clarify it, by scumming it; boil them together a while, till they
be scum'd well, and enough to become a Jelly, then put a good handful or two of
the Berries of Currants whole, and cleansed from the stalks and black End, and
boil them till they are enough. You need not boil the juice before you put to
the Sugar, neither scum it before the Sugar and it boil together, but then scum
it clean, and take care that the juice be very clear, and well strained.

239. To make Syrup of Mint.
Take of the juice of sweet Quinces, and between sweet and sour, the juice of
Pomegranats, sweet, between sweet and sour, of each a pint and half; dried Mint
half a pound, Red Roses two Ounces; let them lie in steep one day, then boil it
half away, and with four pound of Sugar boil it into Syrup, according to Art.

240. To make Honey of Mulberries.
Take of the juice of Mulberries and Black-berries, before they be Ripe,
gathered before the Sun be up, of each a pound and half, Honey two pound; boil
them to their due thickness.

241. To make Syrup of Purslain.
Take of the seed of Purslain grossly bruised half a pound, of the juice of
Endive boiled and Clarified two pints, Sugar two pound, Vinegar nine Ounces;
infuse the seeds in the juice of Endive Twenty four hours, afterward boil it
half away with a gentle Fire, then strain it, and boil it with the Sugar to the
consistence of a Syrup, adding the Vinegar toward the latter end of the
Decoction.

242. To make Honey of Raisins.
Take of Raisins of the Sun cleansed from the stones two pound, steep them in
six pints of warm water, the next day boil it half away, and press it strongly;
then put two pints of Honey to the Liquor that is pressed out, and boil it to a
thickness: It is good for a Consumption, and to loosen the Body.

243. To make Syrup of Comfrey.
Take of the Roots and Tops of Comfrey, the greater and the less, of each three
handfuls, Red Roses, Betony, Plantain, Burnet, Knot-grass, Scabious,
Coltsfoot, of each two handfuls, press the juice out of them, all being green
and bruised, boil it, scum it, and strain it, add to it it is weight of Sugar,
and make it into Syrup, according to Art.

244. To Pickle Quinces.
Boil your Quinces whole in water till they be soft, but not too violently, for
fear of breaking them; when they are soft take them out, and boil some Quinces
pared, quartered, and Cored, and the parings of the Quinces with them in the
same Liquor, to make it strong, and when they are boiled, that the Liquor is of
a sufficient strength, take out the quartered Quinces and parings, and put the
Liquor into a Pot big enough to receive all the Quinces, both whole and
quartered, and put them into it when the Liquor is through cold, and keep them
for Use close covered.

245. To make Plague-water.
Take a pound of Rue, of Rosemary, Sage, Sorrel, Celandine, Mugwort, of the
tops of red Brambles, Pimpernel, Wild Dragons, Agrimony, Balm, Angelica, of
each a pound; put these Compounds in a Pot, fill it with White Wind above the
Herbs, so let it stand four days, then Distill for your Use in an Alembeck.

245. To make Quince-Cakes white.
First Clarify the Sugar with the white of an Egg, but put not so much water
to it as you do for Marmalade, before you Clarify it keep out almost a quarter
of the Sugar; let your Quinces be scalded, and chopped in small pieces, before
you put it into the Syrup, then make it boil as fast as you can, and when you
have scummed it, and think it to be half boiled, then jamire it, and let the
other part of your Sugar be ready Candyed to a hard Candy, and so put them
together, letting it boil but a very little after the Candy is put to it, then
put in a little Musk, and so lay it out before it be cold.

246. To make Red Quince-Cakes.
Bake them in an Oven, with some of their own juice, their own Cores being cut
and bruised, and put to them; then weigh some of the Quince, being cut into
small pieces, taking their weight in Sugar, and with the Quince some pretty
quantity of the juice of Barberries, being baked, or stewed in a Pot; when you
have taken the weight in Sugar, you must put the weighed Quince, and above
three Quarters of the Sugar together, and put to it some little quantity of
water, as you shall see Cause, but make not the Syrup too thin; and when you
have put all this together, cover it, and set it to the Fire, keep it covered,
and scum it as much as you can, when it is half boiled, then symmer it; let the
other part of the Sugar have no more water put to it, then wet the Sugar well,
and so let it boil to a very hard Candy, and when you think they be boiled
enough, then lay them out before they be cold.

247. To make clear Cakes of Quinces.
Prepare your Quinces and Barberries, as before, and then take the clearest
Syrup, and let it stand on the Coals two or three hours, then take the weight
of it in Sugar, and put near half the Sugar to the juice, and so let them boil
a little on the fire, and then Candy the rest of the Sugar very hard, and so
put them together, stirring it till it be almost cold, and so put it into
Glasses.

248. To make Ielly of Raspices.
First strain your Raspices, and to every quart of juice, add a pound and half
of Sugar, pick out some of the fairest, and having strewed Sugar in the bottom
of the Skillet, lay them in one by one, then put the juice upon them with some
Sugar, reserving some to put in when they boil, let them boil apace, and add
Sugar continually, till they are enough.

249. To make all sorts of Comfits, and to cover Seeds, or Fruits with Sugar.
You must provide a Basin very deep, either of Brass or Tin, with two Ears of
Iron to hang it with a Rope over an Earthen Pan, with hot Coals, then provide a
broad Pan for Ashes, and put hot Coals upon them, and another clean Basin to
melt your Sugar in, or a Skillet, as also a Ladle of Brass to run the Sugar
upon the Seeds, together with a Slice of Brass, to scrape away the Sugar from
the Basin that hangs, if there be Occasion. Then take some of the best and
fairest Sugar you can get, and beat it into powder; cleanse your seeds well,
and dry them in the hanging Basin; put a quarter of a pound of seeds, whether
Anniseed, or Coriander-seeds, to every two pound of Sugar, and that will make
them big enough, but if you would have them bigger, add the more Sugar, which
you must melt thus; put three pound of Sugar into your Basin, adding to it one
pint of clean Running-water, stir it well with a brazen slice, till it be well
moistened; then set it over a clear fire, and melt it well, and let it boil
mildly till it ropes from the Ladle, then keep it upon hot Embers, but let it
not boil, and so let it run upon the Seeds from the Ladle: If you would have
them done quickly, let your water be boiling hot, and putting a Fire under the
Basin, cast on your Sugar boiling hot; put but as much water to the Sugar as
will dissolve the same, neither boil your Sugar too long, which will make it
black; stir the seeds in the Basin as fast as you can as you cast on the Sugar,
at the first put in but half a spoonful of the Sugar, moving the Basin very
fast, rubbing the seeds very well with your hand, which will make them take
Sugar the better, and let them be very well dried between every Coat; repeat
this rubbing and drying of them between every Coat, which will make them the
sooner; for this way, in every three hours hours you may make three pound of
Comfits. A quarter of a pound Coriander-seeds, and three pound of Sugar will
make very large Comfits; keep your Sugar always in good temper, that it run not
into lumps. When your Comfits are made, lay them to dry upon Papers, either
before the Fire, or in the hot Sun, or in an Oven, which will make them very
white.

250. To Candy Nutmegs, or Ginger.
Take a pound of fine Sugar, and six or seven spoonfuls of Rose Water,
Gum-Arabick, the weight of six pence, but let it be clear; boil all these
together, till they rope, put it then out into an Earthen Dish, put to it your
Nutmegs or Ginger, then cover it close, and lute it with Clay, that no Air
enter in; keep it in a warm place about twenty days, and they will Candy into a
hard Rock-Candy; then break your Pot, and take them out: In the same manner you
may Candy Oranges and Limons.

251. To make Currans-Wine.
Pick a pound of the best Currants, and put them in a deep streight-mouth'd
earthen Pot, and pour upon them about three quarts of hot water, having first
dissolved therein three spoonfuls of the purest and newest Ale-yeast; stop it
very close, till it begins to work, then give it vent as is necessary, and keep
it warm, for about three days it will work and ferment, taste it after two days
to see if it be grown to your liking, then let it run through a strainer, to
leave behind all the Currants, and the Yeast, and so Bottle it up; it will be
very quick and pleasant, and is admirable good to cool the Liver, and cleanse
the Blood; it will be ready to drink in five or six days after it is Bottled,
and you may drink it safely.

252. To make a Sweet-meat of Apples.
Make your Jelly with slices of Iohn-Apples, but first fill your Glass with
slices cut round-ways, and pour in the Jelly to fill up the vacuities; let the
Jelly be boiled to a good stiffness, and when it is ready to take from the
Fire, put in some juice of Limon and Orange, if you like it, but let them not
boil, but let it stand upon the fire a while upon a pretty good heat, that the
juices may incorporate well; a little Amber-grease added does very well.

253. To make Conserve of Sage.
Take about a pound of Flowers of Sage, fresh blown, and beat them in a Mortar,
afterward put them in a Glass, and stop them close, and then set them by a warm
Fire, or in the Sun, and be sure to (...) them once a day at the least, and it
will keep good a twelve-moneth at the least.

254. To make Paste of Cherries.
Boil some fair Cherries in water, till they come to a pap, and then strain
them through a Siev; then boil some good Pippins unto pap also, put a quarter
of a pound of the Apple-pap to a pound of the pap of Cherries, and mingle them
together, then dry it, and so make it up into Paste.

255. To make Marmalade of Oranges.
After you have pared your Oranges very thin, let them be boiled in three or
four waters, even till they grow very tender; then take a quarter of a hundred
of good Kentish Pippins, divide them, and take out the Cores, boil them very
well to pap, or more, but let them not lose their Color; then pass your Apples
through a strainer, and put a pound of Sugar to every pint of Juice, then boil
it till it will Candy; then take out the pulp of the Orange, and cut the Peel
into long slices very thin, put in your Peel again, adding to it the juice of
two or three Limons, and boil up to a Candy.

256. To make Paste of Apricots.
Let your Apricots be very Ripe, and then pare them, then put them into a
skillet, and set them over the fire without water, stir them very well with a
skimmer, and let them be over the fire till they be very dry, then ^ake some
Sugar and boil it into a Conserve, and mix an equal quantity of each together,
and so make it into Paste.

257. To Pickle Artichoak-Bottoms.
Take the best bottoms of Artichoaks, and par-boyl them, and when they are
cold, and well drained from the water, and dried in a Cloth, to take away all
the moisture, then put them into Pots, and pour your brine upon them, which
must be as strong as you can make it, which is done by putting in so much sait
to it as it will receive no more, so that the salt sinks whole to the bottom;
cover over your Artichoaks with this water, and pour upon it some sweet Butter
melted, to the thickness of two fingers, that no Air may come in; when the
Butter is cold, set up your Pot in some warm place, covered close from Vermin.
Before you put the bottoms in the Pot, you should pull off all the leaves and
choke, as they are served at Table: The best time to do this is in Autumn, when
your Plants produce those which are Young and tender, for these you should
Pickle, before they come to open and Flower, but not before their Heads are
round; when you would eat them, you must lay them in water, shifting the water
several times, then boil them once again, and so serve them.

258. To make Marmalade of Grapes.
Take of the fairest, and ripest blew Grapes, gathered in the heat of the day,
that their moisture be dried up thoroughly, spread them upon a Table, or Hindle
in some Room, where the Air and sun may come in, let them lie so for fifteen or
sixteen days, that they may both sweat and shrink; if it be Cloudy or cold
weather, you may put them into an Oven, when it is only warm; after which,
press them well with your hands, cleansing them from all the seeds, and stalks,
putting the husks and juice to boil in the Kettle, carefully scumming and
clearing it from the seeds; reduce this Liquor also to a third part,
diminishing the Fire as the Confection thickens, stirring often about with your
spoon, to prevent it is cleaving to the Vessel, and to make it boil equally;
then strain it through a siev, or course Cloth. bruising the husks with your
wooden Ladle to squeeze out the Substance, and then serving it out in a press,
then set it again on the Fire, and let it boil once more, keeping it
continually stirring till you think it be sufficienty boiled, then take it off,
and pour it into Earthen Pans, that it may not taste of the kettle, and being
half cold, put it into Gally-pots to keep: Let your Pots stand open five or six
days, and then cover them with Paper that the Paper may lie upon the Conserve,
and when the Paper grows moldy put on another, till all the superfluous
moisture is gone out, which will be in a little time if your Confection was
well boiled, but if it were not, you must boil it again.

259. To Pickle Cornelians.
Gather the fairest and biggest Cornelians when they first begin to grow red,
and after they have lain a while, put them up into a Pot or Barrel, filling
them up with Brine, as for Artichoaks, and put to them a little green Fennel,
and a few Bay Leaves, to make them smell well, then stop them up very close,
and let them stand for a Month: If you find them too Salt, make the Pickle
weaker before you serve them to Table.

260. To make Ielly of Apples.
Take either Pippins or Iohn-Apples, and cut them into quarters, either pared,
or un-pared, boil them in a good quantity of water, till it be very strong of
the Apples; take out the clear Liquor, and put to it a sufficient quantity of
Sugar to make Jelly with the slices of Apples; boil all together till the
Apples be enough, and the Liquor like a Jelly; or else you may boil the slices
in Apple-Liquor without Sugar, and make Jelly of other Liquor, and put the
slices into it, when they be Jelly, and it is sufficiently boiled; put to it
some juice of Limon, and Amber, and Musk, if you will.

261. To make Ielly of Gooseberries.
Let your Gooseberries be full Ripe, then strain them through a strainer, and
to every two pound of Juice put three quarterns of Sugar, boil it before you
mix it, and then boil it again together; when they are mixed try, it upon a
Plate, when it is enough, it rises off.

262. To make Bragget.
Put two Bushels and a half of Malt to one Hogshead of Water, the first running
makes half a Hogshead very good, but not very strong; the second is very weak:
Boil but half a quartern of Hops, put your water to the Malt the Ordinary way,
boil it very well, and work it with very good Beer-yeast: Now, to make Bragget,
take the first running of this Ale, but put less Honey in it than you do for
your Ordinary Mead, but twice or thrice as much Spice and Herbs; then put it in
a Vessel, after it is working with the Yeast, hang within it a Bag of bruised
Spices, rather more than you boiled it with, and let it hang in the Barrel all
the while you draw it.

263. To make Italian Marmalade.
Take fifteen pound of Quinces, three pound of Sugar, and two pound of water,
and boil them all together; when it is well boiled strain it by little and
little through a Cloth, as much as you can, then take the juice and put to it
four pound of Sugar, and then boil it; try it on a Plate, to know when it is
enough, and if it come off, take it presently off the Fire, and put it in Boxes
for your Use.

FINIS.
THE PHYSICAL Cabinet: CONTAINING Excellent Receipts in Physic and Surgery,
for Curing most Diseases Incident to the BODY.

TOGETHER With some Rare Beautifying Waters, Oils, Ointments, and Powders, to
Adorn and add Loveliness to the FACE and BODY.

AS ALSO Some New and Excellent Secrets and Experiments in the Art of ANGLING.

London, Printed in the Year 1675.

PHYSIC AND SURGERY.
1. An Approved Remedy for the Stone and Gravel.
TAke the hard Roe of a Red Herring, and dry it upon a Tile in an Oven, then
beat it to powder, and take as much as will lie upon a Sixpence every Morning
Fasting, in a Glass of Rhenish-Wine.

2. An Excellent Drink for the Scurvey.
Take a pound of Garden-Seurvy^ Grass, six handfuls of Wormwood and Elder-tops,
one Ounce of Carraway-seeds, and one Ounce of Nutmegs; put them all together
into six Gallons of New Ale, and let them work together, and after a convenient
time of working, Drink of it every Morning Fasting.

3. A Receipt for the Cout, known to be very helpful.
Take five or six black Snails, and cut off their Heads, then put to them one
pennyworth of Saffron, and beat them together, and spread it on the woolly
side of a piece of Sheeps Leather, and apply it to the soles of the Feet,
anointing the sore place with the Marrow of a Stone-Horse.

4. For Griping of the Guts.
Take Anniseeds, Fennel, Bay Berries, Juniper Berries, Tormentil, Bistort,
Balaustius, Pomegranate-pills, each one Ounce, Rose-leaves a handful, boil them
in Milk, strain it, and add the Yolk of an Egg, six Grains of Laudanum
dissolved in the Spirit of Mint; prepare it for a Glyster, and give it warm.

5. A Sovereign Medicine for any ach or pain.
Take Barrows-grease, a Lap full of Arch-Angel-leaves, Flowers, Stalks and all,
and put it into an Earthen Pot, and stop it close, and paste it; then put in an
Horse Dunghill nine days in the latter End of May, and nine days in the
beginning of June; then take it forth, and strain it, and so use it.

6. For the Sciatica, and pains in the Joints.
Take Balm and Cinquefoil, but most of all Betony, Nep, and Featherfew, stamp
them, and drink the Juice with Ale o^ Wine. Probatum.

7. For an Ague.
Take the Root of a blew Lilly, scrape it clean, and stice it, and lay it in
soak all Night in Ale, and in the Morning stamp it, and strain it, and give it
the Patient Lukewarm to Drink an hour before the Fit comes.

8. For all Fevers and Agues in Sucking Children.
Take Powder of Crystal, and steep it in Wine, and give it the Nurse to drink,
also take the Root of Devils-bit, with the Herb, and hang it about the Child's
Neck.

9. A good Medicine to strengthen the Back.
Take Comsrey, Knot-grass, and the Flowers of Archangel; boil them in a little
Milk, and Drink it off every Morning.

10. For the Headache.
Take Rose-Cakes, and stamp them very small in a Mortar with a little Ale, and
let them be dried by the Fire on a Tile-sheard, and lay it to the Nape of the
Neck, to Bed-ward. Proved.

11. For the Yellow Iaundise.
Take a great white Onion, and make a hole where the Blade goes out, to the
bigness of a Chestnut, then fill the hole with Treacle, being beaten with half
an Ounce of English Honey, and a little Saffron, and set the Onion against the
Fire, and Roast it well that it do not burn, and when it is Roasted, strain it
through a Cloth, and give the juice thereof to the Sick three days together,
and it shall help them.

12. For the Black Iaundise.
Take Fennel, Sage, Parsley, Gromwell, of each alike much, and make Pottage
thereof with a piece of good Pork, and eat no other Meat that day.

13. For Infection of the Plague.
Take a spoonful of Running-water, a spoonful of Vinegar, a good quantity of
Treacle, to the bigness of a Hasel Nut; temper all these together, and heat it
lukewarm, and drink it every four and twenty hours.

14. For the Cramp.
Take Oil of Camomile, and Fenugreek, and anoint the place where the Cramp is,
and it helps.

15. For the Ach of the Joints.
Take Marshmallows and sweet Milk, Linseeds, powder of Cummin, the whites of
Eggs, Saffron, and white grease, and Fry all these together, and lay it to the
aching Joint.

16. For an Ague.
Take a Pottle of thin Ale, and put thereto a handful of Parsley, as much Red
Fennel, as much Centory, as much Pimpernel; and let the Ale be half Consumed
away, and then take, and drink thereof.

17. To make the Countess of Kents Powder.
Take of the Magistery of Pearls, of Crab's-eyes prepared, of white Amber
prepared, Hartshorn, Magistery of white Coral, of Lapis contra Yarvam, of each
a like quantity; to these Powders infused, put of the black tops of the great
Claws of Crabs, the full weight of the rest: Beat these all into a fine powder,
and sierse them through a fine Lawn sierce: To every ounce of this Powder add a
Dram of Oriental Bezoar, make all these up into a lump, or Mass with Jelly of
Hartshorn, and color it with Saffron, putting thereto a scruple of
Amber-grease, and a little Musk also finely powdered, and dry it in the Air,
after they are made up into small quantities, you may give to a Man twenty
grains, and to a Child twelve Grains. It is Excellent against all Malignant,
and Pestilent Diseases, French Pox, Smallpox, Measles, Plague, Pestilence,
Malignant or Scarlet Fevers, and Melancholy; twenty or thirty Grains thereof
being exhibited (in a little warm Sack, or Harts-Horn-Jelly) to a Man, and half
as much, or twelve Grains to a Child.

18. For the Falling Sickness, or Convulsions.
Take the Dung of a Peacock, make it into Powder, and give so much of it to the
Patient as will lie upon a Shilling, in a little Succory-water, Fasting.

19. For the Pleurisy.
Take three round Balls of Horse-Dung, and boil them in a pint of White Wind
till half be consumed, then strain it out, and sweeten it with a little Sugar;
let the Patient drink of this, and then lie warm.

20. To prevent Miscarrying.
Take Venice-Turpentine, spread it on black brown Paper, the breadth and length
of a hand, and lay it to the small of her Back, then let her drink a Caudle
made of Muskadine, putting into it the husks of about twenty sweet Almonds,
dried, and finely powdered.

21. For the Worms in Children.
Take Worm-seed boiled in Beer and Ale, and sweetened with Clarified Honey, and
then let them drink it.

22. For the Whites.
Take white washed Turpentine, and make up in Balls like Pills, then take
Cinnamon, and Ginger, and roll the Balls in it, and take them as you would do
Pills, Morning and Evening. Proved.

23. For a dry Cough.
Take Anniseeds, Ash-seeds, and Violets, and beat them to powder, and stamp
them, of each a like quantity, then boil them together in fair water, till it
grows thick, then put it up, and let the Patient take of it Morning and Evening.

24. To make Unguentum Album.
Take a pint of Oyl-Olive, and half a pound of Diaculum, Anniseeds a pretty
quantity, and put them together, and put thereto a pound of Ceruse small
grounded, boil them together a little, and stir them always till it be cold, and
it is done.

25. To destroy the Piles.
Take Oil of Roses, Frankincense, and Honey, and make an Ointment of them, and
put it into the Fundament, and put Myrrh unto the same, and use often to
anoint the Fundament therewith, and let the Fume thereof go into the Fundament.

26. For the Canker.
Take a handful of unset Leeks, with the Roots, and a small quantity of Yarrow,
and boil them in White Wind, till they be all very soft, then strain and
Clarify them, and let the Patient drink thereof Morning and Evening Blood-warm.

27. For the Itch.
Take the Juice of Pennyroyal, the juice of Savin, the juice of Scabious, the
juice of Sage, the juice of Pellitory, with some Barrows grease and black soap;
temper all these together, and make a Salve for the Itch.

28. For the Kings Evil.
Take two Ounces of the Water of Broom-flowers Distilled, and give it in the
Morning to the Patient Fasting, and it will Purge the evil Humor downward, and
wastes, and heals the Kernels without breaking them outwardly.

29. To break an Imposthume.
Take a Lilly-root and an Onion, and boil them in water till they be soft, then
stamp them, and fry them with Swines grease, and lay it to the Imposthume as
hot as the Patient may suffer it.

30. For biting of a Mad Dog.
Stamp large Plantain, and lay it to the grieved place, and it will Cure the
Sore.

31. For the Green Sickness.
Take the Keys of an Ashen-Tree, dried and beaten to powder; and take of red
Fennel, red Sage, Marjoram, and Betony, and sees them in Running-water, from a
Pottle to a Quart, then strain them, and drink thereof a good draught with
Sugar, Morning and Evening lukewarm.

32. For Deafness.
Take of Wild Mint, mortify it, and squeeze it in the hand till it renders
juice, then take it with it is juice, and put it into the Ear, change it often;
this will help the Deafness, if the Person has heard before.

33. For the Dropsy.
Take a Gallon of White Wind, and put into it a handful of Roman Wormwood, and
a good piece of Horseradish, and a good quantity of Broom-ashes tied in a
Cloth; then take a good bunch of dwarf-Elder, beat it in a Mortar, and strain
out the juice, and put it into the Wine when you will drink it; but if the
dwarf-Elder be dry, you must steep a good quantity in the Wine. Take of this
half a pint Morning and Evening.

34. For a Sprain in the Back, or any other weakness.
Take a quarter of a pint of good Muskadine, a spoonful of Madder, Incorporate
them well together, then give it the Patlent to drink for three Mornings
together, and if need requires, you may use it often in a day. This will
strengthen the Back exceedingly.

35. An Excellent Water for Sore Eyes.
Take a Gallon of pure Running-water, and eight Drams of white Coperas, and as
much of fine white Salt, mix them together, and let it simper half an hour over
a slow Fire, and then strain it for Use.

Catholicon.
36. A most Excellent Cordial.
Take half a peck of Ripe Elder-Berries, pick them clean, and let them stand
two or three days in an Earthen Pan, till they begin to hoar or mould, then
bruise and strain them, and boil the Liquor ti^^ half be consumed, then putting
a pound of Sugar to every pint of Liquor; boil them to Syrup.

37. A Medicine for an Ague.
Take a quart of the best Ale, and boil it to a pint, and let the Party drink
it as hot as he is able, and then let the Patientlye down upon a Bed, and be
covered warm when the first Fit grudges, and let a Basin be ready to Vomit in.

38. Another for an Ague.
Take a large Nutmeg, and slice it, and so much Roch-Allom beaten to powder,
and put them both into one pint of the best White Wind, and incorporate them,
well together, and let the Patient take one half thereof about half an hour
before the the Fit, and then walk apace, or use some other Laborious Exercise,
and when the Fit begins to come, take the other half, and continue Exercise.
Both these I have known to Cure, to Admiration.

39. For a great Lax, or Looseness.
Take one quart of New Milk, and have ready one half pint of Distilled
Plantain-water, and set your Milk over the Fire, and when your Milk by boiling
rises up, take two or three spoonfuls, as Occasion shall be, to allay the
rising, and and when it rises again, do the like; and so in like manner till
the Plantain-water be all in, and then boiling up as before, let the Patient
drink thereof warmed hot, or how else he likes it; I never yet have sound it
fail of Curing.

40. For Curing of Deafness.
Take Herb-of-Grace, and pound it, then strain it, and take two spoonfuls of
the Juice, and put thereto one spoonful of Brandy-Wine, and when it is well
evaporated, dip therein a little black wool, or fine Lint, being first bound
with a silk thread, and put it into your Ear.

41. For the Scurvey.
Take half a peck of Sea-Seurvey-grass, and as much Watercresses, of
Dwarf-Elder, Roman Wormwood, Red Sage, Fumitory, Hartshorn, and Liverwort, of
each one handful; wash the Watercresses, and dry them well; the other Herbs
must be rubbed clean, and not washed, then add one Ounce of Horse-Raddish, and
a good handful of Madder-Roots; beat these with the Herbs, and strain the juice
well out, for the last is best, then set it on a quick Fire, and scum it clean,
then let it stand till it be settled, and when it is quite cold bottle it up,
and keep it in a cold place: You must take four or five spoonfuls with one,
spoonful of Syrup of Limons put into it, each Morning Fasting, and Fast one
hour after it.

42. An Excellent Remedy to procure Conception.
Take of Syrup of Mother-wort, Syrup of Mugwort half an Ounce, of Spirit of
Clary two Drams, of the Root of English Snake-weed in fine powder one Dram,
Purslain-seed, Nettle-seed, Rochet-seed, all in subtle powder, of each two
drams: Candied Nutmegs, Eringo-Roots, Satyrion-Roots Preserved, Dates,
Pistachoes, Conserve of Suceory, of each three Drams; Cinnamon, Saffron in fine
powder, of each a seruple, Conserve of Vervain, Pine-Apple-Kernels picked and
pilled, of each two drams; stamp and work all these Ingredients in a Mortar to
an Electuary, then put it up into Gally-Pots, and keep it for Use. Take of this
Electuary the quantity of a good Nutmeg, in a little Glass full of White Wind,
in the Morning Fasting, and at four a Clock Afternoon, and as much at Night
going to Bed, but be sure do no violent Exercise.

43. For a sore Breast not Broken.
Take Oil of Roses, Bean-flower, the Yolk of an Egg, a little Vinegar; temper
all these together, then set it before the Fire, that it may be a little warm,
then with a Feather strike it upon the Breast Morning and Evening, or any time
of the day she finds it pricking.

44. To heal a sore Breast, when broken.
Boil Lillies in New Milk, and lay it on to break it; and when it is broken
Tent it with a Mallow-stalk, and lay on it a Plaster of Mallows boiled in
Sheeps Tallow; these are to be used if you cannot keep it from breaking.

45. For a Consumption.
Take a pound and half of Pork, Fat and Lean, and boil it in water, and put in
some Oat-meal, and boil it till the heart of the Meat be out, then put to it
two quarts of Milk, and boil it a quarter of an hour, and give the Patient a
draught in the Morning, Afternoon, and Evening, and now and then some
Barley-water.

46. For the Falling Sickness.
Take Powder of Hartshorn, and drink it with Wine, and it helps the
Falling-Evil.

47. For the Toothache.
Take Feathersew, and stamp it, and strain it, and drop a drop or two into the
contrary Ear to the pain, and lie still half an hour after.

48. For a Wen.
Take black Soap, and mix it with unslaked Lime, made into powder, and lay it
upon the Wen, or Kernel.

49. For the Wind.
Take the juice of Red Fennel, and make a Posset of Ale therewith, and drink
thereof.

50. An Excellent Medicine for the Dropsy.
Take two Gallons of New Ale, then take setwel, Calamus Aromaticus, and
Galingale, of each two pennyworth, of Spikenard four pennyworth; stamp all
together, and put them into a bag, and hang it in the Vessel, and when it is
four days old drink it Morning and Evening.

51. For a Scald Head.
Wash thy Head with Vinegar and Camomil stamped and mingled together; there is
no better help for the Scald: Or grind white Hellebore with Swines grease, and
apply it to the Head.

52. To make the Plague-water.
Take a handful of Sage, and a handful of Rue, and boil them in three pints of
Malmsey, or Muskadine, till one pint be wasted, then take it off the Fire, and
strain the Wine from the Herbs, then put into the Wine two pennyworth of
longpepper, half an Ounce of Ginger, and a quarter of an Ounce of Nutmegs, all
grossly bruised, and let it boil a little again. Then take it off the Fire, and
dissolve in it half an Ounce of good Venice-Treacle, and a quarter of an Ounce
of Mithridate, and put to it a quarter of a pint of strong Angelica-water, so
keep it in a Glass close stopped, for your Use. This Water Cures Smallpox,
Measles, Surfeits, and Pestilential Fevers.

53. A precious Eye-water for any Diseases of the Eye, often proved.
Take of the best White Wind half a pint, of white Rose Water as much, of the
Water of Celendine, Fennel, Eyebright, and Rue, of each two Ounces, of prepared
Tutia six Ounces, of Cloves as much, Sugar rosate a dram, of Camphire and
Aloes, each half a dram; wash the Eyes therewith.

54. A Cordial Iulep.
Take Waters of Endive, Purslain, and Roses, of each two Ounces, Sorrel-water
half a pint, Juice of Pomegranats, and for lack thereof, Vinegar, four Ounces,
Camphire three Drams, Sugar one pound. Boil all these together in the form of a
Julep, and give three or four Ounces thereof at a time.

55. To make the Green Ointment.
Take a pound of Swines grease, one Ounce of Verdigrease, half a Scruple of Sal
Gemm^e, this Ointment may be kept forty Years; it is good against Cancers, and
Running Sores, it fretteth away dead Flesh, and brings New, and heals Old
Wounds, put it within the Wound, that it fester not.

56. For Fits of the Mother.
Take a brown Toast of sour Bread of the neither Crust, and wash it with
Vinegar, and put thereto black Soap, like as you would butter a Toast, and lay
it under the Navil.

57. For the Rickets in Children.
Take of Fennel-Seeds, and Dill-Seeds, but most of the last; ^boyl them in
Beer, and strain it, and sweeten it with Sugar, and let the Child drink often.
Probatum.

58. For the Shingles.
Take the green leaves of Coltsfoot stamped, and mingled with Honey, and apply
it, and it will help.

59. To heal a Fistula, or Ulcer.
Take Figgs, and stamp them with Shoomakers-wax, and spread it upon Leather,
and lay it on the Sore, and it will heal.

60. For a Woman in Travel.
Take seven or eight leaves of Betony, a pretty quantity of Germander, a branch
or two of Pennyroyal, three Marygolds, a branch or two of Hyssop, boil them
all in a pint of White Wind, or Ale, then put into it Sugar and Saffron, and
boil it a quarter of an hour more, and give it to drink warm.

61. To make a Woman be soon delivered, the Child being dead or alive.
Take a good quantity of the best Amber, and beat it exceeding small to powder,
then sierse it through a fine piece of Lawn, and so drink it in some Broth or
Caudle, and it will will by God's help cause the Patient to be presently
Delivered.

62. For Infants troubled with wind and Phlegm.
Give them a little pure Sugar Candy finely bruised, in Saxsifrage-water, or
Scabious-water in a spoon well mingled together.

63. A most excellent Medicine to cause Children to breed their Teeth easily.
Take of pure Capons grease, very well Clarified, the quantity of a Nutmeg, and
twice as much of pure Honey, mingle and incorporate them well together, and
anoint the Child's Gums therewith three or four times a day, when it is
Teething, and they will easily break the Flesh, and prevent Torments and Agues,
and other Griefs, which usually Accompany their coming forth.

64. For Agues in Children.
Take a spoonful of good Oil of Populeon, and put thereto two spoonfuls of good
Oil of Roses, mingle them well together, and then warm it before the Fire,
anoint the Child's Joints and Back, also his Forehead and Temples twice a day,
chasing the Ointment well in.

65. To cause a Young Child to go to Stool.
Chafe the Child's Navil with May Butter before the Fire, then take some Black
wool, and dip it in the Butter, and lay it to the Navil, and it will procure a
Stool: This is also good for one in Years, that can take no other Medicine.

66. For Worms in Children.
Take of Myrrh and Aloes, very finely powdered, of each a pennyworth, and put
thereto a few drops of Chemical Oil of Wormwood, or Savine, and a little
Turpentine; make these up into a Plaster, and lay it to the Child's Navil.

67. To help one that is Blasted.
Take the white of an Egg, and beat it in a Mortar, put to it a quarter of an
Ounce of Coperas, and grind them well together, till it come to an Ointment,
and therewith anoint the sore Face, and it will ease the pain, and take away
the Swelling; and when it is well nigh whole anoint the place with a little
P^puleon, and that will make the skin fair and well again.

68. An excellent Salve.
Take half a pound of Beeswax, a pint of Sallet-Oyl, three ounces of Red Lead,
boil all together in a New Earthen Pipkin, keeping it stirring all the while
till it grows of a darkish color; then keep it for Use, or make Sear-cloaths
of it while it is hot.

It is most approved against any Pain, Sore, Scald, Cut, Burn; to strengthen
the Back, or remove any old Ach whatsoever.

69. A Iu'ep of Dr. Trench, for the Fits of the Mother.
In the time of the Year Distill Black-Cherry-water, Piony flower-water,
Cowslip-water, Rue, or Herb-grace-water; then take of the waters of Cowslip,
Black-Cherries, Piony, Rue, of each an ounce, and add to them water of Castor
half an ounce, Cinamon-water one dram, Syrup of Clove-gilly-flowers three
drams; mix all these together, and take two spoonfuls at a time of it, as often
as you please.

70. For a Tympany.
Take a handful of the Blossoms of Marigolds, stamp them, and strain them, and
give the Juice thereof to the Patient in a draught of Ale Fasting.

71. To provoke Terms, a good Medicine
Take Wormwood and Rue, of each one handful, with five or six Pepper-corns,
boil them all together in a quart of white wind or Malmsey, strain it, and
drink thereof.

72. For the Bloody Flux, or Scouring.
Take a great Apple, and cut out the Core, and put therein pure Virgins-wax,
then wet a paper and lap it therein, then rake it up in the Embers, and let it
roast till it be soft, then eat of it as your stomach will give leave.

73. For a Rheumatick Cough, or Cold.
Take a pint of Hyssop-water, Syrup of Gilly-flowers, Syrup of Vinegar, Syrup
of Maidenhair, Syrup of Coltsfoot, of each one ounce; mingle them all
together, and drink of it when you please.

74. To kill a Fellon.
Take an Egg, and Roast it hard, and take out the Yolk thereof, then Roast an
Onion sost, and beat the Yolk and the Onion together, and lay it to the sore,
and it will kill the Fellon.

75. For the white Flux.
Take the powder of the Flowers of Pomegranats, and drink it in Red Wine.

76. For the Red Flux.
Take Sperma Caeti, and drink it, and tru^s up your self with a piece of black^
Cotton.

77. For the Cancer in a VVomans Breast.
Take The Dung of a Goose, and the Juice of Celandine, and bray them well in a
Mortar together, and lay it to the Sore, and this will stay the Cancer, and
heal it.

78. For an Ague in the Breast.
Take Grounsel, Daisie-leaves and roots, and course W^ eat sisted; make a
Poultess thereof with the Parties own water, and lay it warm to the Breast.

79. For Bleeding at the Nose.
Take Betony, and stamp it with as much Salt as you can hold betwixt your two
fingers, and put it into your Nose.

80. For spitting of Blood.
Take Smalledge, Rue, Mints, and Betony, and boil them well in good Milk, and
drink it warm.

81. To stanch the bleeding of a wound, or at the Nose.
There is not a better thing than the powder of Bole Armoniack, to stanch the
bleeding of a Wound, the powder being laid upon it; or for the Nose, to be
blown in with a Quill. Or take the sha^ings of Parchment, and lay it to the
Wound, and it stancheth and heals.

82. To make the G^scoign Powder.
Take of Pearls, white Amber, Hartshorn, Eyes of Crabs, and white Coral, of
each half an Ounce, of black thighs of Crabs Calcined, two Ounces; to every
Ounce of this Powder put in a dram of Oriental Bezoar, reduce them all into a
very fine powder, and sierse them; then with Harts-Horn-Jelly and a little
Saffron put therein, make it up into Paste, and make therewith Lozenges, or
Trochices for your Use.

Get your Crabs for this powder about May, or in September before they be
boiled; dry your Lozenges in the Air, not by Fire, nor Sun.

83. For the Megrim, or Imposthume in the Head.
Take four penny-weight of the Root of Pellitory of Spain, a Farthing weight of
Spikenard, and boil them in good Vinegar, and when it is cold, put thereto a
spoonful of Honey, and a Saucer full of Mustard, and mingle them well together,
and hold thereof in your Mouth a spoonful at once, and use this eight or nine
times, spitting it out continually.

84. For pain in the ears.
Take the juice of Wild Cucumbers, and put it into the Ears, and it asswageth
the pain. Also put the wood of green Ash in the Fire, and save the Liquor that
comes out at the End, and put it into the Ears, it causes the pain to cease,
and amendeth the Hearing: Also beat the Juice of Wormwood, and drop it into the
Ears.

85. A precious water for the Eyesight, made by K. Edward the Sixth.
Take Smalledge, Red Fennel, Rue, Vervain, Betony, Agrimony, Pimpernel,
Eufrane, Sage, Celandine, of each a like quantity; first wash them clean, then
stamp them, and put them in a fair Brazen Pan, with the powder of fourteen or
fifteen Pepper-Corns, fair ^iersed into a pint of good White Wind; put them
into the Herbs, with three spoonfuls of Honey, and five spoonfuls of the water
of a Man-Child, that is sound; mingle all together, and boil them over the
Fire, and when it is boiled, strain it through a fine Linen Cloth, and put it
into a Glass, and stop it well and close, till you use it; and when you need,
put a little thereof into the Sore Eyes with a Feather, but if it be dry,
temper it with White Wind, and it profits much all manner of Sore Eyes: This
Water was used by K. Edward the Sixth.

86. My Lord Dennies Medicine for the Gout.
Take Burdock-Leaves and stalks, cut them small, and stamp them very small,
then strain them, and cleanse them, and when you have so done, put them into
Glasses, and put pure Oil of Olives on the top of them, and stop it close from
the Air, and when you would use it for the Gout, pour it into a Porringer, and
warm it, and wet Linen Clothes in it, and apply it warm to the grieved place,
warming your Clothes one after another, as they grow cold that are on.

87. Dr. Stephen's Sovereign water.
Take a G^llon of good Gascoign Wine, then take Ginger, Galingale, Cancel,
Nutmeg, Grains, Cloves, Anniseeds, Carraway-seeds, of each a dram; then take
Sage, Mints, Red Roses, Thyme, Pellitory, Rosemary, Wild Thyme, C^momile,
Lavender, of each a handful; then bray both Spices and Herbs, and put them all
into the Wine, and let them stand for twelve hours, diverse times stirring them;
then Distill in an Alembeck, but keep that which you Distill first by it self,
for that is the best, but the other is good also, but not so good as the first.
This water comfort the Vital Spirits, and helps inward Diseases which come
from Cold; it helps Conception in Women that are Barren, and Kills Worms in
the Body; it Cures the cold Cough, and helps the Toothache, it comfort
the Stomach, and Cures stinking breath; it preserves the Body in good liking,
and makes them look Young.

88. The Water called Aqua Mirabilis and Pretiosa, made by Dr. Willoughby.
Take of Galingale, Cloves, Mace, Cucubes, Ginger, Cardamum, Nutmegs, Mellilot,
Saffron four Ounces, and beat all these into powder, Agrimony-water the
quantity of a dram, and somewhat more; then take of the juice of Selandine half
a pint, and mingle all these together, with a pint of good Aqua-Vitae, and
three pints of good White Wind; put all these together in a Still of Glass, and
let it stand so all Night, and on the Morrow Distill it with an easy Fire as
may be: This water dissoveth the swelling of the Lungs without any Grievance,
and helps, and comfort them being wounded, and suffers not the Blood to
putrify; he shall never need be let Blood, that uses this water, it suffers
not the Heart to burn, nor Melancholy, nor Rheum to have Dominion above Nature;
it also expels Rheum, and purifieth the Stomach.

89. To make Allom-water.
Take a pound of Allom, and beat it to Powder, then take a Gallon of clean
water, and set it on the Fire, letting it boil till all the Allom be melted,
then take it off the Fire, and when it is cold put it into a Glass, and keep it
for your Use.

90. To make an excellent Electuary, called the Electuary of Life.
Take Scorlegio, Morre, Gentiana, Grandoret, and Ialaom, of each a like
quantity; stamp them, and strain them, and mingle them with Honey, that has
been well boiled on the Fire, and scummed clean: This is Excellent for Sickness
in the Stomach, or pain in the Belly, Heart, or Head; or for those that are
bitten with any venomous Beast, or Poisoned; it must be taken in water, three
or four spoonfuls at a time, in the Morning Fasting; if the Disease be of any
long time standing, he must drink it fifte^n days together, and he will be
whole. Probatum.

91. Against heat of the Liver.
Take Fennel, Endive, Succory, Plantain, of each alike; Distill them with Red
Wine and Milk, and use it every Morning, nine spoonfuls at a time, with a
draught of Wine and Sugar, or else five spoonfuls thereof alone.

92. For Swooning Fits.
For Swooning, and weakness of the Heart in Fever and Sicknesses, or if it come
of other cause, stamp Mints with Vinegar, and a little Wine, if the Patient
have no Fever, then toast a bit of Bread, till it be almost burnt, and put it
therein till it be well soaked, then put it in the Nose of the Patient, and rub
his Lips, Tongue, Gums, Teeth, and Temples; and let him chew and such the
moistness thereof, and swallow it.

93. A Water for the Eyes, to make a Man see in forty days, who has been Blind
seven Years before, if he be under fifty years of Age.
Take Smalledge, Fennel, Rue, Betony, Vervain, Agrimony, Cinquef oil,
Pimpernel, Eyebright, Celandine, Sage, of each a quartern; wash them clean,
and stamp them, do them in a fair mashingpan, put thereto a quart of good
White Wind, and the powder of thirty Pepper-corns, six spoonfuls of Live Honey,
and ten spoonfuls of the Urine of a Man-Child that is wholesome; mingle them well
together, and boil them till half be wasted, then take it down, and strain it,
and afterward Clarify it, and put it into a Glass Vessel well stopped, and put
thereof with a Feather into the Eyes of the Blind; and let the Patient use this
Medicine at Night when he goes to B^d, and within forty days he shall see: It
is good for all manner of sore Eyes. Wild Tansie-water is good for the
Eyesight, and eating of Fennel-seed is good for the same.

94. For a Web in the eye.
The Leaves of white Honey-Suckles, and Ground Ivy, of each a like quantity
ground together, and put every day into the Eye, Cures the Web. Or else Salt
burnt in a Flaxen Cloth, and tempered with Honey, and with a Feather anointed
on the Eyelids, kills worms that annoint the Eyelids.

95. For moist Scabs after the Smallpox.
Take Lapis Calaminaris, Letharge of Gold and Silver, of each two drams,
Brimstone and Ceruse two Ounces; bring all these into a fine powder, and then
beat them in a Mortar with so much Barrows-grease as is sufficient to make it
up in an Ointment, and anoint the places therewith Evening and Morning.

96. To bring down the Flowers.
Take of Alligant, Muskadine, or Claret a pint, burn it, and sweeten it well
with Sugar, put thereto two spoonfuls of Sallet-Oyl; then take a good Bead of
Amber in powder in a spoon, with some of the Wine after it: Take this Evening
and Morning.

97. To stay the Flowers.
Take Amber, Coral, Pearl, Jeat, of each alike; grind them to a fine powder,
and sierse them, take thereof as much as will lie upon a Sixpence with
Conserve of Quinces, and drink a draught of New milk after it: Use this every
morning.

98. To Cure Corns.
Take Beans, and chew them in your mouth, and tie fast to your Corn, and it
will help: Do this at Night.

99. To make Oil of Roses.
Take Red Rose-leaves a good quantity, and stamp in a Mortar, and put thereto
Oyl-Olive, and let it stand in the Sun twelve days, and then put it in a Glass;
and bind the Glass fast about with Ropes of Hay, and set it in a Pan full of
water, and let it boil softly two hours, and then ^et it cool, then put it in
small Glasses, and put thereto the Leaves of Red Roses, all whole, and stop it
fast, and set it in the Sun for sixteen days, and so use it at your need.

100. For any Itch, or Breaking out.
Take Frankincense, and beat it small in a Mortar, and mingle it with Oil of
Bays, and therewith anoint all over, and it will destroy the Itch.

101. For the Piles after Childbirth.
Make a Bath of Wormwood, Southern-wood, Cinamon-Rinde, and the bark of Cassia
Fistula boiled well in Wine; when the Woman delivered goes forth of the
Bath, put bombace, or Cotton with powder of Alloes, mixed with Oil of
Pennyroyal, unto her lower parts.

102. For a Stich in the Side.
Take three handfuls of mallows, boil them in a little raw Milk, and put
thereto a handful of VVheat-Bran, and let the^ boil together, and then wring
out the Milk, and lay it hot to the Stitch, apply it often. Or take a few
Leaves of Rue and Yarrow, stamp them together, and wring out the Juice, and
drink it with a little Ale.

103. For a Tertian, or double-Tertian Ague.
Take a good quantity of Celandine, a spoonful of Salt, and the bigness of an
Egg in Leven, and as much Alligant and Spanish Soap; stamp them well in a
Mortar, and make a Plaster of them, and apply them to the Patients Feet one
hour before the coming of the Fit; add thereto four or five Yolk of Eggs. Or
take of Anniseed-water, the best you can get, half a pound of Oil of Vitriol,
shake them well together, and drink one or two spoonfuls thereof, an hour
before the Fit comes.

104. For the Spleen.
Boil the Rindes and Keys of an Ash-Tree very tender in white wind, and drink a
good draught thereof for six or seven Mornings together, and it will much ease
the Patient; when you drink this anoint the Spleen with Unguentum Dialthea
every Morning and Evening, applying also a Plaster of Melilot to the place.

105. An Excellent Powder for the Green Sickness.
Take four scruples of Gentian made into fine powder, of raspt Ivory, and
Hartshorn, of each two scruples; make these into fine powder, and give a
spoonful thereof with White Wind, or the like at once.

106. A Drink that heals all Wounds without any Plaster, or Ointment, or
without any taint, most perfectly.
Take Sanicle, Milfoil, and Bugle, of each a like quantity, stamp them in a
Mortar, and temper them with Wine, and give the Sick that is Wounded to drink
twice or thrice a day till he be whole: Bugle holds open the Wound, Milfoil
cleanses the Wound, Sanicle heals it; but Sanicle may not be given to him
that is hurt in the Head, or in the Brain-pan, for it is dangerous. This is a
good and tried Medicine.

107. For pricking of a Thorn.
Take of Violet-leaves one handful, stamp them together, and take a quantity of
Boars-grease, and of Wheat-bran one handful, set it on the Fire in clean water,
and make a Plaster thereof, and lay it to the Grief.

108. To make Oil of St. John's wort, good for any Ach, or pain.
Take a quart of Sallet-Oyl, and put thereto a quart of Flowers of St. John's
wort well picked, let them lie therein all the Summer, till the Seeds of that
Herb be ripe, the Glass must be kept warm, either in the Sun, or in the water
all the Summer, till the Seeds be ripe, then put in a quart of St. John's
wort-seeds whole, and so let it stand twelve hours, the Glass being kept open,
then you must boil the Oil eight hours, the water in the Pot full as high as
the Oil in the Glass; when it is cold, strain it, that the Seed remain not in
it, and so keep it for your Use.

109. For the Tissick.
Take two Ounces of Licorise, scraped and bruised, of Figgs three Ounces, of
Agrimony, Horehound, Enula Campana, of each a handful, boil them all together
in a Gallon of water, till the half be wasted, then strain the Herbs from the
juice, and use it early and late. Also for the dry Tissick, stamp Fennel-Roots,
and drink the juice thereof with White Wind.

110. To make Oil of Fennel.
Put a quantity of Fennel between two Tile-stones, or Plates of Iron, make them
very hot, and press out the Liquor; and this Oil will keep a great while, for
it is good for the Tissick, dry Scab, burning and scalding.

III. To make the black Plaster for all manner of Griefs.
Take a quantity of Oyl-Olive, a quantity of Red Lead, boil these together, and
stir them with a Slice of wood continually, till it be black, and some what
thick; then take it off the Fire, and put in it a pennyworth of Red wax, and a
pound of Rosin, and set it to the Fire again, but do not blaze it, and stir it,
then take it off, and let it stand till it be cold, and make it in a lump: It
is good for a New Wound, ^or to stanch Blood, pour a little of it in a dish,
and if it stick fast to the Dishes side, then it is enough; keep it for your
Use as need requires.

FINIS.
Beautifying Waters, Oils, Ointments, and Powders, to Adorn, and add Loveliness
to the Face and Body.
1. To make the Hair very Fair.
WAsh your Hair very clean, and then take some Allom-water, warm, and with a
Sponge moisten your Hair therewith, and it will make it fair. Or you may make a
Decoction of Turmerick, Rubarb, or the Bark of the Barberry-Tree, and so it
will receive a most fair and Beautiful Color.

2. Another.
Take the last water that is drawn from Honey, and wash your Head therewith,
and it will make the Hair of an Excellent fair Color; but because it is of a
strong smell, you must perfume it with some sweet Spirit.

3. To make the Hair grow thick.
Make a strong Lie, then take a good quantity of Hyssop-Roots, and burn them to
Ashes, and mingle the Ashes and the Lie together, and therewith wash your Head,
and it will make the Hair grow; also the Ashes of Froggs burnt does increase
Hair, as also the Ashes of Goats-dung mingled with Oil.

4. To make the Hair Grow.
Take Marshmallows, and boil them, Roots and all, and wash the Head therewith,
and it will grow in a short time: Also take a good quantity of Bees, and dry
them in a Siev by the Fire, and make powder of them, and temper it witth
Oyl-Olive, and anoint the place where the Hair should grow: Also take the Oil
of Tartar, and warm it, and anoint any bald Head therewith, and it will
restore the Hair again in a short time.

5. To make the Hair Fair.
Take the Ashes of a Vine burnt, of the Knots of Barley straw, and Licorise,
and Sow-bread, and Distill them together in fair water, and wash the Head with
it; also sprinkle the Hair while it is Combing, with the powder of Cloves,
Roses, Nutmegs, Cardamum, and Galingale, with Rose Water; also the Head being
often washed with the Decoction of Beech-Nut-Trees, the Hair will become fair.

6. To make the Hair grow.
Taste Hasle-Nuts with Husks and all, and burn them to powder, then take
Beech-mast, and the leaves of Enula Campana, and stamp the Herb and the Mast
together, then sees them together with Honey, and anoint the place therewith,
and strew the powder thereon, and this will make the Hair grow.

7. To take away Hair.
Take the Juice of Fumitory, mix it with Gum-Arabick, then lay it on the place,
the Hairs first plucked out by the Roots, and it will never permit any more
Hair to grow on the place: Also anoint your Head with the juice of a Glo-worm
stamped, and it has the same Virtue.

8. For the Falling of Hair.
Take the Ashes of Pigeons-dung in Lie, and wash the Head therewith; also
Walnut-leaves beaten with Bears-suet, restores the Hair that is plucked away.
Also the Leaves and middle Rind of an Oak, sodden in Water, and the Head
washed therewith, is very good for this purpose.

9. To make the Face Fair.
Take the Flower of Beans, and Distill them, and wash the Face with the water;
some say, that the Urine of the Party is very good to wash the Face withal, to
make it Fair.

10. For cleansing the Face and Skin.
If the Face be washed with the Water that Rice is sodden in, it cleanses the
Face, and takes away Pimples.

11. A Water to Adorn the Face.
Take Eggs cut in pieces, Orange-peels, the Roots of Melons, each as much as is
sufficient, in a large Vessel with a long Neck, Distill by an Alembeck, with a
strong and careful Fire.

12. To Beautify the Face.
Take of Cuckow-pintle a pretty quantity, bruise the thick parts with
Rose Water, dry them by the Sun three or four days, then pouring more
Rose Water on it, use it.

13. To make the Face look Youthful.
Take two Ounces of Aqua-vitae, Bean-flower-water, and Rose Water, each four
Ounces, Water of Water Lillies six ounces, mix them all, and add to them one
Dram of the whitest Tragacinth, set it in the Sun six days, then strain it
through a fine Linen Cloth; wash your Face with it in the Morning, and do not
wipe it off.

14. A Water to take away wrinkles in the Face.
Take of the Decoction of Briony and Figgs, each alike quantities, and wash the
Face with it.

15. An Excellent water, called Lac Virginis, or Virgins Milk, to make the
Face, Neck, or any part of the Body fair and white.
Take of Alumen Plumost half an ounce, of Camphire one ounce, of Roch-Allom one
ounce and a dram, Sal Gemmi half an ounce, of white Frankincense two ounces,
oil of Tartar one ounce and half; make all these into most fine powder, and mix
it with one quart of Rose Water, then set it in the Sun, and let it stand nine
days, often stirring it; then take Littarge of Silver half a pound, beat it
fine, and sierce it, then boil it with one pint of White-Wine-Vinegar, till one
third part be consumed, ever stirring it with a stick while it boyleth, then
Distill it by a Philter, or let it run through a Jelly-Bag, then keep it in a
Glass Vial, and when you will use those Waters, take a drop of the one, and a
drop of the other in your hand, and it will be like Milk, which is called Lac
Virginis; wash your Face, or any part of your Body therewith, it is mo^^
precious for the same.

16. To take away Sun-burn.
Take the juice of a Limon, and a little Bay Salt, and wash your Face or Hands
with it, and let them dry of themselves, and wash them again, and you shall
find all the Sun-burn gone.

17. To make the Face very Fair.
Boil the Flowers of Rosemary in white wind, with the which wash your Face;
also if you drink thereof, it will make you have a sweet Breath. Also to make
the Face white, make powder of the Root of Serpentine, and of powder of Sepia,
and mingle them with Rose Water, and let it dry, and then let it be put to the
same water again, and dry again, do this four or five times, and then use to
anoint the face therewith.

18. To clear the Skin, and make it white.
Take fresh Boars grease, and the white of an Egg, and stamp them together with
a little powder of Bays, and therewith anoint the skin, and it will clear the
Visage, and make it white.

19. To take away Freckles in the Face.
Anoint your face with oil of Almonds, and drink Plantain-water, or anoint
your Visage well and often with Hares blood.

20. To smooth the Skin.
Mix Capons-grease with a quantity of Sugar, and let it stand for a few days
close covered, and it will turn to a clear oil, with which annoint your face.

21. To Blanch the Face.
Take the pulp of Limons, and take out the Kernels, and put to them a quantity
of fine Sugar; Distill these, and keep the water to wash your face every Night.

22. For Morphew, or scurf of Face or Skin.
Take of Brimstone beaten into powder two ounces, mix it with as much black
Soap that stinketh, and tie the same in a Linen Cloth, and let it hang in a
pint of strong Wine-Vinegar, or Red-Rose-Vinegar, for the space of eight or
nine days; and therewith wash any kind of Scurf, or Morphew, either in Face or
Body, dipping a Cloth in the Vinegar, and rubbing it therewith, and let it dry
of it self. Also drink the water of Strawberries. Distilled, or Tincture of
Strawberries, it certainly kills Morphew or Scurf.

23. For taking away spots in the Face, after the Smallpox.
Mix the juice of Limons with a little Bay Salt, and touch the spots therewith
often^times in a day, for it is excellent good.

24. A good Ointment for the same.
Take Oil of Sweet Almonds, Oil of white Lillies, of either one Ounce;
Capons-grease, Goats-Tallow, of each four Drams, Litharge of Gold one Dram and
half; Roots of Briony, and of Ireos, of either one Scruple, Sugar Candy white
one Dram; make powder of all those that may be brought into powder, and sierce
them, then put them all in a Mortar together, beat them together, and in the
working put thereto Rose, Bean-flower, and white Lilly-water, of each a good
spoonful, put in by little and little, and so work them together till they
become an Ointment; anoint your Face and Hands with it every Evening, and in
the Morning wash it away in water boiled with Barley, Wheaten-Bran, and the
Seed of Mallows.

25. To take away the holes or pits in the Face, by reason of the Small Pox.
For helping of this Accident, I have tried many things, and the best means I
have found, is to wash the Face one day with the Distilled water of strong
Vinegar, and the next day with the water wherein Bran and Mallows have been
boiled; and continue this twenty days, or a Month together.

26. For Redness of the Hands or Face after the Smallpox.
Take Barley, Beans, Lupines, of each one handful; bruise them all in a Mortar
grossly, and boil them in three pints of water, till it grow thick like a Jelly,
then strain it, and anoint the Face and Hands therewith three or four times a
day, for three or four days together, and then wet the Face and Hands as often
with this water following.

27. Another.
Take Vine-leaves two handfuls, Bean-flower, Dragon, Wild Tansie, of either one
handful, Camphire three Drams, two Calves Feet, the pulp of three Limons, a
pint of raw Cream; shred the Herbs small, as also the Limons, and break, and
cut the Calves Feet small, then mix them together, and Distill it in a Glass
Still, and use it. Also the water of May-dew is Excellent good for any high
color, or Redness of the Face.

28. For Pimples in the Face.
Wash your Face with warm water when you go to Bed, and let it dry in; then
take the white of an Egg, and put it into a Saucer, and set it upon a
Chafing Dish of Coals, and put into it a piece of Allom; beat it together with
a spoon, till it become thick, then make a round Ball, and therewith anoint
the Face where the Pimples are.

29. For Heat and Swelling in the Face.
Boil the Leaves of the Blossoms of Rosemary, either in White Wind or fair
Water, and use to wash thy Hands and Face therewith, and it will preserve thee
from all such inconveniences, and also make both thy Face and Hands very
smooth.

30. For a Red Face.
Take Brimstone that is whole, and Cinnamon, of either of them an even
proportion by weight, beat them into small powder, and sierse it through a fine
cloth upon a sheet of white Paper to the quantity of an Ounce, or more; and so
by even proportions in weight mingle them together in clean Clarified
Capons^grease, and temper them well together till they be well Mollified, then
put to it a little Camphire, to the quantity of a Bean, and so put the whole
Confection in a Glass, and use it.

31. To take away Pimples.
Take Wheat Flour mingled with Honey and Vinegar, and lay it upon them.

32. An Excellent Ointment for an Inflamed Face.
Take an Ounce of the Oil of Bays, and an Ounce of Quicksilver, and put them
in a Bladder together, with a spoonful of Fasting-spittle, and then rub them
well together, that nothing of the Quicksilver be seen; take of this Ointment,
when it it made, and anoint the Face therewith, and it will heal it well and
fair; Proved true.

33. For a Rich Face.
Take three Yolks of Eggs raw, as much in quantity of fresh Butter, or
Capons-grease without Salt, Camphire two pennyworth, Red-Rose-water half a
pint, two Grains of Sivet, and boil all these together in a Dish, then strain
them through a clean Cloth, and set it to cool, and take the uppermost, and
use it.

34. To make the Skin white and clear.
Boil two Ounces of French Barley in three pints of Conduit-water, change the
water, and put in the Barley again; do this till your Barley do not dis-colour
the water, then boil the last three pints to a quart, then mix half a pint of
white wind therein, and when it is cold, wring the juice of two or three good
Limons therein, and use it for the Morthew, heat of the Face, and to clear the
Skin.

35. An Excellent Pomatum, to clear the Skin.
Wash Barrows-grease, or Lard oftentimes in May-dew that has been Clarified
in the Sun, till it be exceeding white; then take Marsh-mallow-Roots, scraping
off the outsides, make thin slices of them, and mix them, set them to macerate
in a Balneo, and scum it^ well till it be Clarified, and will come to rope;
then strain it, and put now and then a spoonful of May-dew therein, beating it
till it be through cold in often change of May-dew; then throw away that Dew,
and put it in a Glass, covering it with May-dew, and so keep it for your Use.

36. To take away Spots and Freckles from the Face and Hands.
The Sap that issues out of a Birch-Tree in great abundance, being opened in
March or April, and a Glass Receiver set under it to Receive it: This cleanses
the Skin Excellently, and makes it very clear, being washed therewith. This
Sap will dissolve Pearl, a Secret not known to many.

37. To take away Freckles and Morphew.
Wash your Face in the wane of the Moon with a Sponge, Morning and Evening with
the Distilled water of Elder-leaves, letting it dry into the Skin; you must
Distill your Water in May: This I had from a Traveller, who has Cured himself
thereby.

38. To make the Teeth white and sound.
Take a quart of Honey, and as much Vinegar, and half so much White Wind, boil
them together, and wash your Teeth therewith now and then.

39. A Dentrifice to whiten the Teeth.
Take of Hartshorn and Horses Teeth, of each two Ounces, Sea-shells, Common
Salt, Cypress-Nuts, each one Ounce; burn them together in an Oven, and make a
powder, and work it up with the Mucilage of Gum Tragacinth, and rub the Teeth
therewith.

40. To make the Teeth white as Ivory.
Take Rosemary, Sage, and a little Allom and Honey, and boil them together in
fair Running-water, and when it is well boiled, strain out the fair water, and
keep it in a Glass, and use it sometime to wash your Mouth and Teeth therewith,
and it will make them clean: Also wash your Teeth with the Decoction of Lady
Thistle-Root, and it will cleanse and fasten the Teeth, and the sore gums made
whole^ also the Root of Hore-hound drunk, or chewed Fasting, does quickly heal
the gums, and makes the Teeth clean: Strawberry-leaves also cleanses the
Teeth and Gums, a sure and tried Experiment.

41. To make the Teeth white.
Take one drop of the Oil of Vitriol, and wet the Teeth with it, and rub them
afterward with a course Cloth; although this Medicine be strong, fear it not.

42. For a Stinking Breath.
Take two handfuls of Cummin, and stamp it to powder, and boil it in wine, and
drink the Syrup thereof Morning and Evening for fifteen days, and it will help.
Proved.

43. To make the Breath Sweet.
VVash you Mouth with the water that the shells of Citrons have been boiled in,
and you will have a sweet Breath.

44. To Sweeten the Breath.
Take Butter and the juice of Feather-few, and temper them with Honey, and take
every day a spoonful. Also these things sweeten the Breath, the Electuary of
Aromaticks, and the peels of Citrons.

45. To cleanse the Mouth.
It is good to cleanse the Mouth every Morning by rubbing the Teeth with a
Sage-leaf, Citron-peels, or with powder made with Cloves and Nutmegs; forbear
all Meats of ill Digestion, and raw Fruits.

46. For Running in the Ears.
Take the juice of Elder, and drop i^ into the Ear of the Party grieved, and it
cleanses the Matter and the filth thereof^ Also the juice of Violets used, is
very good for the Running of the Ears.

47. For Eyes that are Blood-shot.
Take the Roots of Red Fennel, stamp them, and wring out the juice, then temper
it with Clarified Honey, and make an Ointment thereof, and anoint the Eyes
therewith, and it will take away the Redness.

48. To make the Hands white.
Take the Flower of Beans, of Lupines of Starch-Corn, Rice, Orice, of each six
Ounces; mix them, and make a powder, with which wash your Hands it water.

49. A Delicate washing Ball.
Take three Ounces of Orace, half an Ounce of Cypress, two Ounces of Calamus
Aromaticus, one Ounce of Rose-leaves, two Ounces of Lavender-Flowers; beat all
these together in a Mortar, siersing them through a fine sierce, then scrape
some Castile-soap, and dissolve it in Rose Water, mix your powders therewith,
and beat them in a Mortar, then make them up in Balls.

50. For the Lips chopped.
Rub them with the Sweat behind your Ears, and this will make them smooth, and
well colored.

51. To prevent marks of the Smallpox.
Boil Cream to an Oil, and with that anoint the wheals with a Feather as soon
as they begin to dry, and keep the Scabs always moist therewith; let your Face
be anointed almost every half hour.

52. To take away Child-blains in the Hands or Feet.
Boil half a peck of Oats in a quart of water till it grow dry; then anoint
your Hands with Pomatum, and after they are well Chased, hold them within the
Oats as hot as you can endure them, covering the Bowl wherein you do your Hands
with a double Cloth to keep in the steam of the Oats; do this three or four
times, and it will do: You may boil the same Oats with fresh water three or
four times.

53. To take away Pock-holes, or any spot in the Face.
Wet a Cloth in White-Rose-water, and set it all Night to freeze in the
Winter, and then lay it upon your Face till it be dry; also take two or three
Poppies, the reddest you can get, and quarter them, taking out the Kernels,
then Distill them in a quart of red Cows-Milk, and with the water thereof wash
your Face.

54. An Excellent Beauty-water, used by the D. of C.
Take of white Tartar two drams, Camphire one dram, Coperas half a dram, the
whites of three or four Eggs, juice of a couple of Limons, Oil of Tartar four
Ounces, and as much Plantain-water, white Mercury a pennyworth, two Ounces of
bitter Almonds; beat all these to powder, and mix them with the Oil, and some
water, and then boil it upon a gentle Fire, strain it, and so keep it; when you
use it, you must first rub your Face with a scarlet Cloth, and at Night wash
your Face with it, and in the Morning wash it off with Bran and White Wind.

55. Against a Stinking Breath.
Take a handful of Wood-bine, and as much Plantain, bruise them very well, then
take a pint of Eye-selt, and as much water, with a little Honey and Allom; keep
all these waters together in a Glass, and wash your Mouth well therewith, and
hold it in your Mouth, and it will destroy all Cankers, and Cure a stinking
Breath, and preserve the Teeth from rottenness.

56. To procure an excellent Color and Complexion in the Face, used by the C.
of S.
Take the juice of Hyssop, and drink it in a Morning Fasting, half a dozen
spoonfuls in Ale, warm; it will procure an excellent Color, is good for the
Eyesight, destroys Worms, and is good for the Stomach, Liver, and Lungs.

57. To keep the Teeth white, and kill worms.
Take a little Salt in a Morning Fasting, and hold it under your Tongue till it
be melted, and then rub your Teeth with it.

58. To procure Beauty, an excellent wash.
Take four Ounces of Sublimate, and one Ounce of crude Mercury, and beat them
together exceeding well in a wooden Mortar, and wooden Pestle; you must do it
at least six, or eight hours, then with often change of cold water, take away
the salts from the Sublimate, change your water twice every day at least, and
in seven or eight days it will be dulcified, and then it is prepared; lay it on
with Oil of white Poppy.

59. A Beauty-water for the Face, by Madam G.
Take Lie that is not too strong, and put two peels of Oranges, and as much
C^tron-peel, Blossoms of C^momile, Bay Leaves, and Maidenhair, of each a
handful, of Agrimony two or three Ounces, of Barley-straw chopped in pieces, a
handful, as much Fenugreek, a pint of Vine-leaves, two or three handfuls of
Broom-blossoms; put all these into the Lie, and mingle them together, and so
wash the Head therewith, put to it a little Cinnamon and Myrrh, let it stand,
and wash your Face therewith every Evening: It is good to wash the Head, and to
comfort the Brain and Memory.

60. Against stink of the Nostrils.
Take Cloves, Ginger, and Calamint, of each a like quantity, boil them in
White Wind, and therewith wash the Nose within; then put in the powder of
Piritrum to provoke one to sneeze: If there be Phlegm in the Head, you must
first purge the Head with Pills of Colchie, or of Hieva picra: Or if the stink
of the Nose come from the Stomach, purge first.

61. To make the Hands white.
To make the Hands white and soft, take Daffodil in clean water till it grow
thick, and put thereto powder of Cantarium, and stir them together; then put
thereto raw Eggs, and stir them well together, and with this Ointment anoint
your Hands, and within three or four days using thereof they will be white and
clear.

62. A Sweet water for the Hands.
Take of the Oil of Cloves, Mace, or Nutmegs, three or four drops only, and
mingle it with a pint of fair water, stirring them a pretty while together in a
Glass, having a narrow Mouth, till they are well mingled together, and wash
your Hands therewith, and it will be a very sweet water, and will cleanse and
whiten the Hands very much.

63. For heat and worms in the Hands.
Bruise a little Chick-weed, and boil it in Running-water, till the half be
wasted away, and wash your Hands in it as hot as you can suffer it, for the
space of six days, and it will drive away the heat, or worms in the Hands.

64. To make the Nails grow.
Take Wheat Flour, and mingle it with Honey, and lay it to the Nails, and it
will help them.

65. For Nails that fall off.
Take powder of Agrimony, and lay it on the place where the Nail was, and it
will take away the aching, and make the^ Nails to grow.

66. For cloven Nails.
Mingle Turpentine and Wax together, and lay it on the Nail, and as it grows
cut it away, and it will heal.

67. For Nails that are rent from the flesh.
Take some Violets, and stamp them, and fry them with Virgins-wax, and
Frankincense, and make a Plaster, and lay it to the Nail, and it will be whole.

68. Another.
Anoint your Fingers with the powder of Brimstone, Arsenick, and Vinegar, and
in short time you shall find great ease.

69. For stench under the Armholes.
First pluck away the Hairs of the Armholes, and wash them with white wind and
Rose Water, wherein you have first boiled Cassia Lignum, and use it three or
four times.

70. For the Yellow Iaundies.
Take the juice of Wormwood and Sorrel, or else make them in Syrup, and use to
drink it in the Morning.

71. To take away VVarts from the face or Hands.
Take Purslain, and rub it on the warts, and it makes them fall away: Also the
juice of the Roots of Rushes applied, heals them.

72. To smooth the Skin, and take away Morphew and Freckles.
Anoint the Face with the Blood of a Hare, or Bull, and this will take away
Morphew and Freckles, and smooth the Skin.

FINIS.


New and Excellent EXPERIMENTS AND SECRETS In the ART of Angling.

BEING Directions for the whole ART.

LONDON, Printed in the Year 1675.

New and Excellent EXPERIMENTS AND SECRETS In the ART of Angling.
To make the Lines.
TAke Care that your Hair be round, and free from Galls, Scabs, or frets, for a
well Chosen, even, clear, round Hair, of a kind of a Glass-colour, will prove
as strong as three un-even scabby Hairs, that are ill chose.

Let your Hair be clean washed before you go about to twist it, and then not
only choose the clearest Hair, but Hairs that are all of an equal bigness, for
such do usually stretch altogether, and not break singly one by one, but
altogether.

When you have twisted your Links, lay them in water for a quarter of an hour
at the least, and then twist them over again before you tie them into a Line,
for those that do not so shall usually find their Links to have a Hair or two
shrunk, and be shorter than all the rest, at the first Fishing with it, which
is so much of the strength of the Line lost, for want of wetting it at first,
and then re-twisting it; and this is most visible in a seven hair Line, which
has always a black hair in the middle, called by Anglers, the Herring-bone:
Those Hairs that are taken from an Iron-gray, or a Sorrel Stone-Horse, and the
middle of the Tail, are best.

A Cement for Floats to Fish withal.
Take black Rozin beaten, Chalk scraped, Beeswax bruised, of each a like
quantity; melt all these over a gentle small-coal Fire in an Earthen Vessel
well leaded, and so warming the two Quills, fix them with a little of it; it
cools immediately, and being cold, is so hard, strong, and tite, that you can
hardly pull the two Quills asunder with both your Hands, without breaking them
in pieces.

To sight your Caps for the Float aright.
Let the uppermost be at the distance from the top of the Quill, and the lower
Cap near to the end of the Quill, as in the Description of it.

To dye Bone or Quills red for ever.
Take some Urine, and put into it as much powder of Brazile as will make it
very red, which you shall know by dropping some with a Feather upon a piece of
white Paper, and put therein Bone or Quills, being first well scraped, and laid
a while in a water made of Argol, and let them lie in it ten or twelve days,
then take them out, and hang them up till they are dry, and rub them with a dry
Linen Cloth, and they will be of a transparent color.

Observations.
A Pike is called,

The first Year a Shotterel.

The Second, a Pickerel.

The Third Year, a Pike.

The Fourth Year, a Luce.

Fish are Fattest about August.

All Fish are in Season a Month or six weeks after they have spawned.

To cleanse Worms.
Take a piece of a Hop-Sack (because that is not so close struck in the Weaving
as other Cloth is) and wash it clean, and let it dry, then take some of the
Liquor wherein a piece of fresh Beef has been boiled, but be sure you take not
the Liquor of Salt Beef, for that will kill all the Worms; dip the piece of
Hop-Sack in the Liquor, and wring it out, but not hard, so that some of the
Liquor abide in the Cloth; put the Worms into this Cloth, and lay them in an
Earthen Pot, the Worms will run in and out through the Cloth, and scour
themselves; let them stand from Morning to Night, then take out the Worms from
the Cloth, and wash the Cloth as before, but not dry it, and wet it again in
some of the Liquor; thus do once a day, and thus you will not only preserve
your Worms alive for three weeks, or a Month, but also make them red and
tough. Probatum.

The Secrets of. J. D.
Would thou catch Fish?
Then here is thy wish:
Take this Receipt
T^ anoint thy Bait.
Thou that desire to Fish with Line and Hook,
Be it in Pool, in River, or in Brook;
To bliss thy Bait, and make the Fish to bite,
Lo here is a means, if thou can hit it right.
Take Gum of Life fine beat, and laid to soak
In Oil, well drawn from that That which kills the Oak, I conjecture to be Ivy.
which kills the Oak.
Fish where thou will, thou shall have sport thy fill;
When twenty fail, thou shall be sure to kill. Probatum.
It Is perfect and good, if well understood;
Else not to be told, for Silver nor Gold.
To unloose the Line in the Water.
Of these there are several sorts, according to several Men's Fancies; that
which I approve of, as being the surest, is a forked stick, about two Yards
long, if it be not long enough to reach the bottom, you may lash it to any
other stick.

These Fish rise best at a Fly.
Salmon. Trout. Vinber. Groyling. Bleak. Cherin, or Chub. Roch. Dace.
Ad Capiendum Pisces.
Recipe musilago vel Scholaris Fortes (Anglice white Mullen) collectae circa
medium Maii, quando Luna, sit plena, distemperata cum nigro sale and serva in
olla terrea, and quando vis occupare ungue manus and lava eas in loco ubi sunt
Pisces.

A good Bait for Fish all Seasons of the year.
Take Wheat Flour, and Tallow of a new slain Sheep, and the white of an Egg,
beat them all together, and make a paste therewith, and Bait with it.

Roch and Dace.
From the tenth of March to the tenth of May is the spawning time for Roch and
Dace.

A Paste for Roch, Dace, Chub.
Fine Manchet, Old Fat Cheese of the strongest, Rusty Bacon; beat these in a
Mortar, and moisten it with a little Brandy, and color it with Turmerick or
Cambogia, or Red Vermilion.

Baits.
1. Take the Flesh of a Rabbit, or a Cat cut small, and Bean-flower, and for
want of that, other Flower; mix these together, and put to them either Sugar or
Honey (but I judge Honey the best) beat these together in a Mortar, or
sometimes work them in your hands (being very clean) then make it into a Ball,
but you must beat it so long, till it be so tuff, that it will hang upon the
hook, yet not too hard neither, that you may the better dough-knead with your
Paste a little white, or yellow wool; if you would have this Paste keep all the
Year, then mix with it Virgins-wax and Clarified Honey, and work it together
with your Hands before the Fire, then make it into Balls, and it will keep all
the Year.

2. Another.
Take a handful or two of the best and biggest Wheat you can get, boil it in a
little Milk (as Furmity is boiled till it be soft) and then fry it very
leisurely, with Honey and a little beaten Saffron dissolved in Milk; you will
find it a choice Bait, and good I think for any Fish, especially for Roch,
Dace, Chub, and Cheven.

3. Another.
The tenderest part of the Leg of a Young Rabbit, Whelp, or Catlin, as much
Virgins-wax, and Sheeps Suet; beat them in a Mortar, till they are well
Incorporated, then with a little Clarified Honey, temper them before the Fire
into a Paste.

4. Another.
Sheeps-Kidney-Suet, as much Old strong Cheese, fine Flower, or Manchet; beat
it into a Paste, and soften it with Clarified Honey.

5. Another.
Sheeps-blood, Old Cheese, fine Manchet, Clarified Honey; make all into a
Paste, as before.

6. Another.
Cherries, Sheeps-blood, Saffron, fine Manchet; make all into a Paste, as
before: You may add to any of these, or other Pastes, Cocalus Indi^e, Assa
faetida, Oil of Polypody of the Oak, the Gum of Ivy dissolved; I judge there is
Virtue in these Oils, but especially in the Gum.

7. Another.
Pull off the Scale from a boiled Prawn, or Shrimp, Bait the Hook with it, and
it is an Excellent Bait for Roch, Dace, Bleak.

8. Another.
Bean-flower, Honey, and the white of a Egg made up into a Paste, is an
Excellent, an d long Experienced Bait for small Fish, which if they once taste
of, they will never for sake till Death.

9. Another.
Gentles, of which kind the best are those that are bred upon a Cat, because
they are the quickest, and liveliest.

If you put some Gentles into a Box, where Vermilion has been, they will live
in it two or three days, and will become of a very Transparent Color, and keep
so in the water when you Fish with them.

When you Fish in a quick Stream, a long Quill or Float is best.

But in an Eddy, or still, Stream, the shorter the Quill or Float is, the
better.

When you Fish at the Well-boats, or at the Bank-side, be there at half Ebbing
water, and Fish upon those Well-boats that lie nearest to the shore, till the
water falls away from them, then go to the outermost Boats.

Some of the Well-boats do sheer to and again from the place where your
Ground-bait lies, to prevent which, and that you may always Fish in that place
where you have cast your Ground-bait, you must have a Buoy to lie out, and then
you are sure to Fi^h right.

10. Another Bait.
Dry Sheeps-blood in the Air upon a dry board, till it become a pretty hard dry
lump, then cut it into small pieces for your Use.

11. Another.
You shall find in the Months of June, July, and August, great quantities of
Antflyes, go to the Ant-hills, and take a great handful of Earth, with as much
of the Roots of the Grass as you can; put all into a large Glass Bottle, then
gather a Pottle of the blackest Ant-flyes, but take heed you bruise them not;
Roch and Dace will bite at these Flies under water, near the Ground.

Directions how to make your Paste.
First, wash your Hands very clean, then get some of the finest Manchet, of two
or three days old, and cut away all the Crust, then lay it in water, or Milk,
which is better; let it lie no longer than till it is soaked just through, then
squeeze out all the water very well, then knead it in your hands very well,
with a little bit of sweet butter, to make it stiff, color it with Vermilion;
if you make it overnight, keep it in a wet Linen rag, all the water being
wrung out of it; in the kneading scrape a little old Cheese among it.

How to Bait with Gentles.
Put your Hook through the middlepart of the Gentle, and no more, then he will
live longest; I mean through the skin and no more: But if you could get some
Oil of Ivy, that is rightly taken from the Tree in the Month of May, and cast
but two drops of it among the Gentles before you use them, you would have sport
beyond expectation.

When to drag upon the Ground, and when not.
When you Fish in a quick Stream drag a Quills length, or more.

Also when the water is not clear, but of a white or Clay Color, and if you
put a little piece of Scarlet a little above the Hook, the Fish will see the
Bait the better.

Sometimes when you are at the Sport the Wind arises, and makes your Float
dance upon the Waves, then always observe, and watch well the motion of your
Float under water, and not the top of your Float.

I saw an Angler whipping for Bleaks and Dace with a May-flye, but he put on a
Gentle upon the Hook besides, and he had excellent sport.

Carp and Tench.
Baits.
1. A Carp will take a red Worm dipped in Tarr, at the bottom.

2. Malt-flower, Old Cheshire Cheese, English Honey, Eggs; temper these
together with a little water (but I should think Milk is far better) color it
with Saffron, and put as much upon the Hook, as the bigness of a large
Hasle-Nut.

Bait the place where you intend to Fish, very well over Night, with Grains and
Blood; the next Morning very early Fish for him, with a well scoured Lob-worm,
or the Past abovementioned.

You may dip your Worm in Tarr, and try what that will do.

A Carp choseth the deepest, and stillest places in Ponds and Rivers, and so
does the Tench, and also green weeds, which he loves exceedingly.

Late in the Evening the Ale, Grains, and Blood,
Well mixed together, is Bait very good
For Carp, Tench, Roch, and Dace to prepare,
If early in the Morn at the River you are.
Strong Tackle for Carp, for Roch and D^ce fine,
Will help thee with Fish sufficient to Dine.
For the Carp, let thy Bait the knotted Worm be,
The rest love the Cadis, the Paste or the Fly.
Chub, Pike, and Bream.
The Pike chooses Sandy, or Clay ground, in still Pools full of Fry; the Bream
loves a gentle Stream, and the broadest part of the River; the Chub loves the
same ground, and spawns in May.

One, who was the best trouler of Pikes in England. used always to troul with a
Hazle-Rod twelve Foot long, with a Ring of wyre in the top of his Rod for his
Line to run through, within two Foot of the Rod there was a hole to put in a
winder, to turn with a Barril, to gather up his Line, and loose it at his
pleasure; this was his manner of trouling with a small Fish.

There are several other ways to take Pikes; there is a way to take a Pike,
which is called the Snap, for with Angling you must have a pretty strong Rod,
for you must Angle with a Line no longer than your Rod, which must be very
strong, that you may hold the Fish to it; your Hook must be a double Hook, made
of a large wyre, and Armed with wyre one or two Links long; you must Bait the
Fish with the Head upwards, and the point must come forth of his Side, a little
above his vent.

In all your Baitings for a Pike, you must enter the Needle where the point
comes forth, so draw your Arming through, until the Hook lies as you think
fit, then make it fast with a thread to the wyre, but first tie the thread
about the wyre, otherwise the Fish will skip up and down, so fall to work: The
Bait must be a Gudgeon, a small Trout, Roch, or Dace.

Now, I will pawn my Credit, that I will show a way, either in Ware, Pond, or
River, that shall take more Pikes, than any Trouler shall do by Trouling; and
it is this.

First, take a forked stick, a Line of twelve Yards long wound upon it, at the
lower end leave a Yard to tie; either a bunch of Flaggs, or a Bladder, to Buoy
up the Fish, to carry the Bait from the Ground, that the Fish may swim clear;
the Bait must be alive, either a small Trout, Gudgeon, Roch, or Dace; the
forked stick must have a slit on the one side of the fork to put the Line in,
that the live Fish may swim at the gauge you set the Fish to swim at, that when
the Pike takes the Bait, the Pike may have the full Liberty of the Line for his
feed; you may turn as ^ou please of these loose in the Pond or River all day
long, the more the better, and do it in a Pond-wind; the Hooks must be double
Hooks.

To Bait the Hook.
Take one of the Baits alive, and with your Needle enter the Fish within a
straws breadth of the Gill, so put the Needle in betwixt the Skin and the Fish,
then draw the Needle out at the hindermost fin, drawing the Arming through the
Fish, until the Hook come to lie close to the Body; but I hold it better, if
it be Armed with wyre, to take off the Hook, and put the Needle in at the
hindermost fin, and so come forth at the Gill, then put on the Hook, and it
will hurt the live Fish the less, so knit the Arming with the live Fish to the
Line.

But I judge the Baiting with a live Fish is done far better, as it is done,
Baiting with a Minew, to Fish for a Trout.

A Rod twelve Foot long, and a Ring of wyre,
A winder and Barril will help thy desire,
In killing a Pike; but the forked stick,
With a slit and a Bladder, and the other fine trick,
Which our Artists call Snap, with a Goose or a Duck,
Will kill two for one, if thou have any luck.
Chub takes a black Snail about August; and for a Bait, take the fourth Receipt
prescribed for Roch and Dace, but color it with Saffron, or Gambogia.

The Pike in the Month of March, before which time it is good Fishing for him,
but after March it is not good till the middle of May: A Smelt is a Rare Bait,
a Pole for trouling should be eleven Foot long, for the Snap twelve Foot.

When you troul, the head of the Fish must be downward at the bent of the hook;
but when you snap, the head must be upward at the shank of the hook.

If you Fish at Snap for a Pike, give him leave to run a little before you
strike, and then strike the contrary way he runs.

If you Fish with a dead Bait for him, take this as a most Excellent one.

Take a Minew, or yellow Frogg, a Dace, or a Roch, and having dissolved some
Gum of Ivy in Oil of Spike, anoint your Bait therewith, and cast it where the
Pikes frequent, and when it has lain a little while at the bottom, draw it up
to the top, and so up the Stream, and if Pikes are in the place where you Fish,
you will quickly perceive them to follow it with much eagerness.

Perch.
The Perch loves a gentle Stream, of a reasonable depth, seldom shallow.

Baits.
1. His Bait is most commonly a red knotted Worm, or a Minew.

2. Another.
Make a Bait with the Liver of a Goat, and Bait your Hook therewith.

3. Another.
Take yellow Butter-flyes and Cheese made of Goats-Milk, of each half an O^nce,
of Opoponax the weight of two French Crowns, of Hoggs-blood half an O^nce,
Galbanum as much; pound them all well, and mix them together, pouring upon them
red Wine, and make thereof little balls, such as you use to make perfumes into,
and dry them in the shade.

4. Another.
To bait your Hook with a live Minew, when you Fish for a Trout, or Perch, with
a Running Line.
First put your Hook in at his Mouth, and out at his Gill, then having drawn
your Hook two or three Inches beyond, or through his Gill, put it again into
his Mouth, and the point and beard out at his Tail, and then tie the Hook and
his Tail with a white thread, which will make it apter to turn quick in the
water; then pull back that part of your Line which was slack, when you put your
Hook into the Mouth the second time; I say, pull that part of it back, so that
it shall fasten the Head, that so the body of the Minew shall be almost^
straight on the Hook; then try how it will turn by drawing it cross the water,
or against the Stream, and if it do not turn nimbly, then turn the Tail a
little to the right or left hand, and try again till it turn quick, for if not,
you are in danger to catch nothing; for know, that it is impossible it should
turn too quick: But if you want a Minew, then a small Roch, or stickle-back, or
any other small Fish will serve as well; If you Salt your Minews, you may keep
them three or four days fit for Use, or longer; Bay Salt is best.

5. Another.
To Bait with a Lob-worm, to Fish for a Trout or Perch with a Running Line,
with a Swivel.
Suppose it be a big Lob-worm, put your hook into him above the middle, then
draw your worm above the Arming of your hook, enter your worm at the tayl-end
of the worm, the point may come out toward the Head, and having drawn him above
the Arming of your hook, put the point of your Hook again into the very Head of
the worm, till it come to the place where the point of the hook first came out,
and then draw back that part of the worm that was above the Shanker Arming of
the Hook. And so Fish with it, you cannot lose above two or three worms before
you attain to what I Direct you, and having attained it, you will find it very
useful, for you will run upon the Ground without tangling, but you must have a
Swivel.

Trout.
The Trout loves small purling Brooks, or Rivers that are very swift, and run
upon Stones, or Gravel; he feeds while he is in strength in the swi^test
Streams, behind a Stone, Log, or some small bank that shoots into the River,
and there lies watching for what comes down the Stream. He spawns about October.

Baits.
1. You shall find in the Root of a great Dock, a white Worm with a red Head,
with this Worm Fish for a Trout at the bottom, he lies in the deep, but feeds
in the Stream.

2. Another.
He also takes very freely a Worm, called a Brandling, of which sort the best
are sound at the Bear-Garden, amongst the Bears Dung.

An Universal Bait to take all manner of Fish, but especially Trouts, which
has been Experienced by an Ancient Angler, and made by a Chy^ist, in 1668.
Take of the Juice of Ca^^omile two spoonfuls, Oil of Spike four drams, Spirit
of Vitriol one Ounce, Oil of Comfrey by Infusion, six drams, Goose-grease one
Ounce; Dissolve these over the Fire, being well melted, let it stand till it is
cold, then put it into a strong Glass, and let it stand three or four days
before you stop it up, with a good Cover made of Parchment and Leather, and it
will keep good for seven Years.

Gudgeons.
A Gudgeon spawns in May, and sometimes in April.

Bait.
A Gudgeon takes nothing but a red knotted Worm, in a Horse Dunghill.

Barbel.
The Barbel (as Gesner says) is one of those Leather-mouth'd Fishes, having
his Teeth in his Throat.

There are diverse ways of Fishing for him, as with a Casting-Line of small
Whip-cord, a Plummet, and a pair of small drablers of Hair.

Others Fish for him with a standing-Line, either of Silk, or small Brass wyre
well nealed, with a Plummet of one, two, three, or four Ounces, according to
the swiftness of the Stream, and a pair of drabbers, as before.

Some Fish for Barbel with Casting-Lines, as at London Bridge, a Plummet of one
pound and half, and a pair of drabbers.

There is yet another way (though against the Statute, and sorbidden by the
Court of Aldermen,) and that is, by scratching with Hooks without Beards.

Baits.
His Baits are green Gentles, strong Cheese, sometimes a Lob-worm, and
sometimes a piece of Pickled Herring.

Eels.
To reckon up the several ways of taking Eels, were almost, if not altogether,
impossible; and therefore I shall only tell you how the Anglers here in London
take them.

Take a shooting-Line, of 10, 12, 14, 16, or 20 Hooks, as many, and as few as
you please; and this cannot but be an Excellent way, either in Pond, ^River, or
Moat.

The manner of making it is very well known to all those that Sell Hooks and
Fishing-Tackle in Crooked-Lane, where you may buy them ready made.

Baits.
His Bait is green Gentles, strong Cheese, Lob-worms, Pickled-Herring, Powdered
Beef, or Periwinkles.

Your Plummet must be three pound, or three pound and an half of Lead.

Bream.
The Bream loves a red Worm, taken at the Root of a great Dock, it lies wrapped
up in a knot, or round Clue. He chooses the same waters as the Pike.

Salmon.
The Salmon (...) ^arge swist Rivers, where it Ebbs and Flows; he spawns at
the latter end of the Year.

To Fish for Salmon.
The first thing you must gain, must be a Rod of some ten Foot in the Stock,
that will carry a top of six Foot; stiff and strong; the Reason is, because
there must be a wyre Ring at the upper end of the top, for the Line to run
through, that you may take up, and loose the Line at your pleasure, you must
have the winder within two Foot of the bottom of your Rod, made in the manner
expressed, with a spring, that you may put it on as low as you please.

The Salmon swimmeth most commonly in the midst of the River, in all his
Travels he desires to see the uppermost part of the River, Traveling on his
Journey in the heat of ^he Day, he must take a B^sh, if the Fisherman espy
him, he goes at him with his Spear, and so shortneth his Journey.

The Angler that goes to Fish for him with a Hook and Line, must Angle for him
as nigh the middle of the water as he can with one of these

Baits.
Take two Lob-worms, and put the hook so near through the middle of them, that
the four ends may hang of an equal length, and so Angle as near the bottom as
you can, feeling your Plummet run on the ground, some twelve Inches from the
hook.

If you Angle for him with a Flve (which he will rise at like a Trout) the Fly
must be made of a large hook, which hook must carry six wings, or sour at the
least; there is Judgment in making these Flies.

The Salmon will come at a Gudgeon in the manner of a Trouling Line, and comes
at it bravely, which is fine Angling for him; you must be sure your Line be of
twenty six, or thirty Yards long, that you may have your convenient time to
turn him, or else you are in danger to lose him, but if you turn him, you are
likely to have him, all the danger is in the running out, both of Salmon and
Trout.

You must forecast to turn the Fish as you do a wild Horse, either upon the
Right or Left hand, and wind up your Line as you find occasion in the guiding
the Fish to the shore, having a large Landing-hook to take him up,

Close to the bottom, in the midst of the water,
I Fish^d for a Salmon, and there I caught her.
My Plummet twelve Inches from the large hook,
Two Lob-worms hung equal, which she ne^r ^orsook:
Nor yet the great hook, with the six winged Fly,
And she makes at a Gudgeon most furiously.
My strong Line was just twenty six yards long:
I gave him a turn, though I found him strong.
I wound up my Line, to guide him from shore;
The Landing-hook helped much, but the Cookery more.
The Names of the Flies that are used in Angling, with the Times when they are
in Season, and what the Bodies and Wings are made of.
1. AStone Fly, which is in Season in April, the Body of it is made with
black-wool, made yellow under the Wings, and under the Tail; the Wings are made
of a Mallards Feather.

2. A Ruddy Fly, is in Season in the beginning of May; the Body is made of red
wool wrapped about with blue Silk, the Wings are made of the Wing of a Drake,
and a red Hackle.

3. The yellow, or greenish Fly, in Season in May, made of yellow wool, his
Wings made of red Hackles, and the Wing of a Drake.

4. The Dun Fly is sometimes of Dunwool, and sometimes black, in Season in
March; his Wings made of Partridge. Feathers, black Drakes Feathers, and the
Feathers under his Tail.

5. The Black Fly, in Season in May, made of black-wool, and wrapped about with
Peacocks Tail, the Feathers of the wings of a brown Capon, with the blue
Feathers in his head.

6. The sad yellow Fly, in Season in June, made of black-wool, with a yellow
List on either side; the wings of a Buzzard, bound with black braked hemp.

7. The Moorish Fly, in Season in June, made of duskish wool, the wings the
black Male of a Drake.

8. The tawny Fly, good till the middle of June, made of Bears-wool, the wings
made contrary one against the other, of the whitish Male of a wild Drake.

9. The Wasp-Fly, in Season in July, made of black-wool, wrapped about with
yellow Silk; the wings of a Drakes Feathers, or Buzzards.

10. The Shell-fly, good in the middle of June, made of greenish wool, lapt
about with Pearl of a Peacocks Tail; the wings of a Buzzards Feathers.

11. The dark Drake-Fly, made of black-wool wrapped about with black Silk; in
Season in August, the wings, the Male of the Black Drake with a black Head.

12. The May-Fly, made of greenish colored Cruel, or Willow color, and darken
it in most places with waxed Silk, or Ribb'd with a black hair, or some of them
Ribb'd with Silver thread, and such wings for the color, as you see the Fly to
have at that Season.

13. The Oak-Fly, the Body made of Orange-tawny, and black Cruel; the wings the
brown of a Mallards Feather.

The best way of Dressing these, and all other sorts of Fish, you may find in
the next Part following.

FINIS.
THE Complete Cook's GUIDE. OR, Directions for the Dressing of all Sorts of
Flesh, Fowl, and Fish, both in the English and French Mode; with the preparing
of all manner of Sawces and Sallets proper thereunto.

TOGETHER With the making of all Sorts of Pyes, Pasties, Tarts, and Custards;
with the Forms and Shapes of many of them.

WITH Bills of Fare, both for Ordinary, and Extraordinary.

London, Printed in the Year 1675.

THE Complete Cook's GUIDE.
1. To make a Lamb Pie.
FIrst, Cut your Lamb into pieces, and then Season it with Nutmegs, Cloves, and
Mace, and some Salt with Currants, Raisins of the Sun, and Sweet Butter; and if
you will eat it hot, when it is baked put in some Yolks of Eggs, with
Wine-Vinegar and Sugar beaten together; but if you will eat it cold, put in no
Eggs, but only Vinegar and Sugar.

2. To make a Rice-Pudding.
Take thin Cream, or good Milk, of what quantity you please, boil it with a
little Cinnamon in it, and when it has boiled a while, take out the Cinnamon,
and put in Rose Water, and Sugar enough to make it sweet and good; then having
your Rice ready beaten, as fine as Flower, and siersed as some do it, strew it
in, till it be of the thickness of a Hasty-pudding, then pour it into a Dish,
and Serve it.

3. To make Cheese-Cakes, the best way.
Take two Gallons of New Milk, put into them two spoonfuls and a half of
Runnet, heat the Milk little less than Blood-warm, cover it close with a
Cloth, till you see the Cheese be gathered, then with a scumming-dish gently
take out the whey, when you have dreyn'd the Curd as clean as you can, put it
into a Siev, and let it drain very well there; then to two quarts of Curds,
take a quart of thick Cream, a pound of Sweet Butter, twelve Eggs, a pound and
half of Currants, a penny. worth of Cloves, Nutmeg and Mace beaten, half a pound
of good Sugar, a quarter of a pint of Rose Water; mingle it well together, and
put it into Puff-paste.

4. To make an Egg-Pye, or Mince-Pye of Eggs.
Take the Yolks of two dozen of Eggs hard boiled, shred them, take the same
quantity of Beef Suet, half a pound of Pippins, a pound of Currants well washed,
and dried, half a pound of Sugar, a pennyworth of beaten Spice, a few
Carraway-Seeds, a little Candyed Orange-peel shred, a little Verjuice and
Rose Water; fill the Coffin, and bake it with gentle heat.

5. To Carbonado Mutton.
Broyl a Shoulder, or Breast of Mutton, then Scotch them with your Knife, and
strew on minced Thyme and Salt, and a little Mutmeg; when they are broyled,
Dish them up: The Sauce is Claret Wine boiled up with two Onions, a little
Camphire and Capers, with a little Gravy, Garnished with Limons.

6. To stew a Pheasant, French Fashion.
Roast your Pheasant, till he be half Roasted, then boil it in Mutton-Broath,
and put into the Broth whole Pepper, whole Mace, and sliced Onions, and
Vinegar, and make it sharp, and put in Pr^ans and Currants, and color your
Broth with bruised Pruans.

7. To make Bisket-bread.
Take half a peek of Flower fine, two Ounces of Anniseeds, two Ounces of
Coriander-seed, the whites of six Eggs, a pint of Ale-Yeast, with as much
warm-water, as will make it up into a Paste, so bake it in a long Roll; when it
is two days Old, pare it, and slice it, then Sugar it, and dry it in an Oven,
and so keep it all the Year,

8. To make a Dish of Marrow.
Take a piece of fine Paste, and roll it very thin; then take the Marrow all as
whole out of the Bones as you can, and cleave it into four quarters; then take
it and season it with a little Pepper, Salt, Sugar, and Dates small minced,
then lay one piece in your Paste, and make it up like a Pescod; so make half a
dozen of them, and fry them in Clarified Butter, scrape Sugar on, and serve
them.

9. To make a Herring-pye.
Put great store of sliced Onions, with Currants and Raisins of the Sun, both
above and under the Herrings, and store of Butter; put them into your Pie, and
bake them.

10. To make Black-puddings.
Take a quart of Sheeps-blood, and a quart of Cream, ten Eggs, the yolks and
the whites beaten together; stir all this Liquor very well, then thicken it
with grated bread, and Oat-meal finely beaten, of each a like quantity,
Beef Suet finely shred, and Marrow in little lumps, ^^^son it with a little
Nutmeg, Cloves, and Mace mingled with Salt, a little sweet Marjoram, Thyme, and
Pennyroyal shred very well together, and mingle them with the other things,
some put in a few Currants: Then fill them in cleansed Guts, and boil them very
carefully.

11. To make a good Spanish Olio.
Take a Rump of Beef, or some of a Brisket or Buttock, cut it to pieces; a Loyn
of Mutton with the Fat taken off, and a fleshy piece of a Leg of Veal, or a
Knuckle, a piece of inter-laided Bacon, three or four Onions, or some Garlic,
and if you will, a Capon or two, or else three great Tame-Pigeons. First, put
into the water the Beef and Bacon, after a while the Mutton, Veal, and Onions,
but not the Capon or Pigeons, only so long till they are boiled enough; if you
have Garavanza's, put them in at the first, after they have been soaked with
Ashes all night in heat, wash them well in warm water; or if you have Cabbage,
Roots, Leeks, or whole Onions, put them in time enough to be sufficiently
boiled. You may at first put in some Crusts of Bread, or Venison Pye-Crust; it
must boil in all five or six hours gently, like stewing; after it is well
boiled, a quarter, or half an hour before you intend to take it, take out a
porringer full of Broth, and put to it some Pepper, and five or six Cloves,
and a Nutmeg, and some Saffron, and mingle them well in it, then put that into
the Pot, and let it boil, or stew with the rest a while, put in a bundle of
sweet Herbs, salt must be put in when it is scumm'd.

12. To Stew Venison.
If you have much Venison, and do make many cold baked Meats, you may stew a
Dish in have thus: When it is sliced out of your Pie, Pot, or Pasty, put it in
your stewing-Dish, and set it on a heap of coals, with a little Claret Wine, a
sprigg or two of Rosemary, half a dozen Cloves, a little grated bread, Sugar,
and Vinegar, so let it stew together a while, then grate on Nutmeg, and Dish it
up.

13. To boil a Leg of Veal and Bacon.
Lard your Leg of Veal with Bacon all over, with a little Limon-peel amongst
it, then boil it with a piece of Middle-Bacon; when your Bacon is boiled, cut
it in slices, season it with Pepper and dried Sage mixed together; Dish up your
Veal with the Bacon round about it, send up with it saucers of green Sauce;
strew over it Parsley and Barberries.

14. To make Furmety.
Take French-barley, and pick it, and wash it, lay it in steep one Night, then
boil it in two or three several waters, and so cover it as as you would do
Wheat to make it swell; then take a quart of good Cream, and boil it with a
Race of Ginger cut in two pieces, one blade of Mace, and half a Nutmeg all in
one piece; then put thereto so much of the Barley as will thicken it, and when
it is almost boiled, stir in two or three Yolks of Eggs well beaten, and fo
strained with a few beaten Almonds and Flower, or five spoonfuls of Rose Water;
then take out the whole Spices, and season your Furmety with Salt, and sweeten
it with Sugar, and serve it.

15. To make a Pig-pye.
Flea your Pigg, and cut it into pieces, and season it with Pepper, Salt,
Nutmeg, and large Mace, lay into your Coffin good store of Raisins of the Sun,
and Currants, and fill it up with sweet Butter, so close it, and serve it hot.

16. To make a Neats-Foot-Pye.
First boil your Neats-Foot, and take out the Bones, then put in as much
Beef Suet as in quantity thereto, and so mince them, then Season it with
Cloves, Mace, Nutmeg, Sugar, and Salt, and put it into your Coffin with some
Barberries, Currants, and Raisins of the Sun, then bake it, and always serve it
hot.

17. To make an Orang ado-pye.
Make a handsome thin Coffin, with hot buttered Paste, slice your Orangado, and
put over the bottom of it; then take some Pippins, and cut every one into eight
parts, and lay them in also upon the Orangado, then pour some Syrup of
Orangado, and Sugar on the top, and so make it up, and bake it, and serve it up
with Sugar scraped on it.

18. To make a Pork-pye.
Boil your Leg of Pork, season it with Nutmeg, Pepper, and Salt; and bake it
five hours in a Round Pie.

19. To make a Fricasie of Veal.
Cut your Veal in thin slices, beat it well with a Rowling-pin; season it with
Nutmegs, Limon, and Thyme, fry it slightly in the Pan, then beat two Eggs, and
one spoonful of Verjuice; put it into the Pan, stir it together, fry it, and
Dish it.

20. To make a Quince-Pye.
Take a Gallon of Flower, a pound and half of Butter, six Eggs, thirty Quinces,
three pound of Sugar, half an Ounce of Cinnamon, half an Ounce of Ginger, half
an Ounce of Cloves, and Rose Water; make them into a Tart, and being baked,
strew on double-refined Sugar.

21. To make a Gooseberry-Fool.
Pick your Gooseberries, and put them into clean water, and boil them till they
be all as thick that you cannot discern what it is; to the quantity of a quart,
take six Yolks of Eggs well beaten with Rose Water, before you put in your
Eggs, season it well with Sugar, then strain your Eggs, and let them boil a
while; put it in a broad Dish, and let it stand till it is cold, and serve it,

22. To make a Tart of Green-Pease.
Boil your Pease tender: and pour them out into a Cullender, season them with
Saffron, Salt, sweet butter, and Sugar; then close it, and let it bake almost
an hour, then draw it forth and Ice it, put in a little Verjuice, and shake it
well, then scrape on Sugar, and serve it.

23. To souce an Eel.
Souce an Eel with a handful of Salt, split it down the back, take out the
Chine-bone, season the Eel with Nutmeg, Pepper, Salt, and sweet Herbs minced;
then lay a pack thread at each end, and the middle roll up like a Collar of
Brawn, then boil it in water, Salt, and Vinegar, a blade or two of Mace, and
half a slice of Limon, boil it half an hour, keep it in the same Liquor two or
three days, then cut it out in round pieces, and lay six or seven in a Dish
with Parsley and Barberries; and serve it with Vinegar in Saucers.

24. To make a Bacon-Tart.
Take a quarter of a pound of the best Jordan-Almonds, and put them in a little
warm water to blanch them, then beat them together in a Mortar with three or
four spoonfuls of Rose Water, then sweeten them with fine Sugar; then take
Bacon that is clear and white, and hold it upon the point of a Knife against
the Fire, till it has dropped a sufficient quantity, then stir it well together,
and put it into the Paste, and bake it.

25. To make an Umble-Pye.
Lay Beef Suet minced in the bottom of the Pie, or slices of Inter-larded
Bacon, and cut the Umbles as big as small Dice, cut your Bacon in the same
Form, and season it with Nutmeg, Pepper, and Salt, fill your Pyes with it, with
slices of Bacon and Butter, close it up, and bake it; Liquor it with Claret,
Butter, and stripped Thyme, and so serve it.

26. To keep Asparagus all the Year.
Par-boyl your Asparagus very little, and put them into Clarified Butter, cover
them with it, and when the Butter is cold, cover them with Leather, and about a
Month after refresh the Butter, melt it, and put it on them again; then set
them under Ground, being covered with leather.

27. To Roast a Hanch of Venison.
If your Venison be seasoned, your must water it, and stick it with short
sprigs of Rosemary: Let your Sauce be Claret Wine, a handful of grated Bread,
Cinnamon, Ginger, Sugar, a little Vinegar; boil these up so thick, as it may
only run like batter; it ought to be sharp and sweet: Dish up your Meat on your
Sauce.

28. To Carbonado Hens.
Let your sauce be a little White Wind and Gravy, half a dozen of the Yolks of
hard Eggs minced, boiled up with an Onion, add to it a grated Nutmeg; thicken
it up with the Yolk of an Egg or two, with a Ladle-full of drawn butter; Dish
up your Hens, and pour over your sauce, strew on Yolks of Eggs minced, and
garnish it with Limon.

29. To fry Artichoaks.
When they are boiled, and sliced fitting for that purpose, you must have your
Yolks of Eggs beaten with a grated Nutmeg or two; when your Pan is hot, you
must dip them into the Yolks of Eggs, and charge your Pan; when they are fried
on both sides, pour on drawn butter: And if you will fry Spanish Potato's, then
the Sauce is, Butter, Vinegar, Sugar, and Rose Water; these for a need may
serve for Second-Course Dishes.

30. To make a Hedge-hog-Pudding.
Put some Raisins of the Sun into a deep wooden Dish, and then take some grated
Bread, and one pint of sweet Cream, three Yolks of Eggs, with two of the
whites, and some Beef Suet, grated Nutmeg, and Salt; then sweeten it with
Sugar, and temper all well together, and so lay it into the Dish upon the
Raisins, then tie a Cloth about the Dish, and boil it in Beef-broath, and when
you take it up lay it in a pewter Dish, with the Raisins uppermost, and then
stick blanched Almonds very thick into the Pudding, then melt some butter, and
pour it upon the Pudding, then strew some Sugar about the Dish, and serve it.

31. To stew a Leg of Lamb.
Cut it into pieces, and put it into your stewing-pan, being first seasoned
with Salt and Nutmeg, and as much butter as will stew it, with Raisins of the
Sun, Currants, and Gooseberries; when it is stewed, make a Caudle with the Yolks
of two or three Eggs, and some Wine-Vinegar and Sugar beaten together, and put
it into your Meat, and stew all a little longer together; then Dish it, strew
Sugar on the brims, and serve it hot.

32. To bake a Pickerel.
Boil your Pickerel, and pull out the Ribs and Bones, then put it into your
Paste, and season it with Pepper and salt, and put in some Butter, and Raisins
of the Sun, and so bake it.

33. To make a Haggess-Pudding.
Take a fat Haggess, par-boyl it well, take out the Kernels, shred it small,
and temper it with a handful or two of grated Manchet; then take three or four
Eggs well beaten, Rose Water, Sugar, Cloves, Nutmeg, Cinnamon, and Mace finely
beaten, Currants and Marrow good store; temper them all together with a quantity
of Cream, being first moderately seasoned with salt.

34. To make a Dish of Meat with Herbs.
Take Sives, Parsley, Thyme, Marjoram, and Roast three or four Eggs hard, and a
quantity of Mutton-suet, Beef, or Lamb, chop them fine all together, and season
it with Cloves, Mace, Ginger, Sugar, and Cinnamon, and a little Salt; then Fry
them with a little sweet butter.

35. To make Cream of Eggs.
Take one quart of Cream, and boil it, then beat four whites of Eggs very well
with two spoonfuls of Rose Water; when the Cream is boiled enough, take it off
the Fire, and when it is cool, stir in the Eggs with a little salt; then
garnish your Dish with fine Sugar scraped thereon, and serve it always cold,
for a closing dish.

36. To make a fine pudding in a Dish.
Take a penny white loaf, and pare off all the Crust, and slice ir thin into a
Dish, with a quart of Cream, and let it boil over a Chasing-dish of Coals, till
the bread be ^lmost dry; then put in a piece of sweet butter, and take it off,
and let it stand in the Dish till it be cold, then take the yolks of three
Eggs, and the quantity of one with some Rose Water, and Sugar, and stirring
them all together, put it into another Dish well buttered, and bake it.

37. To broyl Scollops.
First boil the Scollops, then take them out of the shells, and wash them, then
slice them, and season them with Nutmeg, Ginger, and Cinnamon, and put them into
the bottom of your shells again with a little Butter, White Wind, Vinegar, and
grated bread, let them be broyled on both sides; if they are sharp, they must
have Sugar added to them, for the Fish is luscious, and sweet Naturally;
therefore you may broyl them with Oyster-Liquor and Gravy, with dissolved
Anchovies, minced Onions, and Thyme, with the juice of Limon in it.

38. To boil Wild-Ducks.
First, half Roast them, then take them off, and put them in a shallow broad
pan that will contain them, with a pint of Claret Wine, and a pint of strong
Broth, a dozen of Onions cut in halves, a Faggot or two of sweet Herbs, with a
little whole Pepper, and some slices of Bacon; cover your Pan, and let them
stove up, add gravy to part of the Liquor at least so much as will serve to
Dish them: Garnish them with Bacon and Onions if you please.

39. To make a Venison-Pasty.
When you have powdered your Haunch of Venison, or the sides of it, by taking
away all the bones and Sinews, and the skin, or fat, season it with Pepper and
Salt only, beat it with your Rollingpin, and proportion it for the Pasty, by
taking away from one part, and adding to another, your Paste being made with a
peck of fine flower, and about three pound of butter, and twelve Eggs; work it
up with cold water into as stiff a Paste as you can, drive it forth for your
Pasty, let it be as thick as a Man's Thumb, roll it up upon a Rolling-pin, and
put under it a couple of sheets of Cap-paper well flowered, then your white
being already minced and beaten with water; proportion it upon the Pa^ty to the
breadth and length of the Venison; then lay your Venison in the said white,
wash it round with your Feather, and put on a border, season your Venison on
the top, and turn over your other Leaf of Paste, so close up your Pasty; then
drive out another border for Garnishing the sides up to the top of the Pasty,
so close it together by the Rolling-pin, by Rolling it up and down by the sides
and ends; and when you have flourished your Garnishing, and edged your Pasty,
vent it at the top, set it in the Oven, and let it have four or five hours
baking at the least, and then draw it.

40. To make a Damson-Tart.
Take Damsons, and sees them in Wine, and strain them with a little Cream,
then boil your stuff over the fire, till it be thick, and put thereto Sugar,
Cinnamon, and Ginger, but set it not in the Oven after, but let your Paste be
baked before.

41. To Roast a Rabbet with Oysters.
Wash your Rabbet, and dry it well, then take half a pint of Oysters, wash
them, and wipe them clean one by one, and put them into the Rabbets belly, a
couple of Onions shred, whole Pepper, large Mace, two or three sprigs of Thyme,
sew up the belly; and for the sauce, as usual; the Liver and Parsley, and a
hard Egg, shred them together, and beat some butter thick, put into the Dish,
and serve it.

42. To stew Collops of Beef.
Take of the buttock of Beef thin slices, cross the grain of the Meat; then
hack them, and fry them in sweet butter; and being fried fine and brown, put
them in a Pipkin with some strong broth, a little Claret Wine, and some
Nutmeg; stew it very tender, and half an hour before you Dish it, put to it
some good Gravy, Elder-Vinegar, and a Clove or two; when you serve it, put some
juice of Orange, and three or four slices on it, stew down the Gravy somewhat
thick, and put unto it when you Dish it, some beaten butter.

43. To make a Beef-pasty like Red-Deer.
Take fresh Beef of the finest, without Sinews or Suet, and mince it as small
as you can, and season it with Salt and Pepper, and put in two spoonfuls of
Malmsey; then take Lard, and cut it into small pieces. and lay a layer of Lard,
and a layer of Beef, and lay a shin of beef upon it like Venison, and so close
it up.

44. To bake a Hare.
Take the best of the Hare, minced and seasoned with Pepper, Salt, and Mace;
then make a proportion of the Head, or shoulders, as you make for an
Hare-pafty, and lay in a layer of Flesh, and a layer of Lard, and butter aloft,
and beneath, and make a Gallentine for it in a saucer.

45. To boil a Salmon.
Take as much water as will cover it, then take Rosemary, Thyme, and
Winter-Savoury, and Salt; boil all these very well, and then put in some
Wine-Vinegar, and when your Salmon is boiled, let him remain in the same water
always, until you have occasion to eat of it.

46. To make an Oyster-pye.
First, dry your Oysters, and then put them into your Coffin with some Butter,
and whole large Mace, and so bake it; then take off the Lid, and fill it up
with more Butter, putting some of the Liquor of the Oysters also thereunto;
then season it well with Sugar, and serve it hot to the Table at the First
Course.

47. To Butter Eggs upon Toasts.
Take twenty Eggs, beat them in a Dish with some Salt, and put Butter to them,
then have two large Rolls, or fine Manchets, cut them in Toasts, and Toast them
against the Fire, with a pound of fine sweet Butter, being finely buttered in a
fair clean Dish; put the Eggs on the Toasts, and Garnish your Dish with Pepper
and Salt, otherwise half-boyl them in the shells, then Butter them, and serve
them on Toasts, or Toasts about them.

48. To make a Fricacie of Chickens.
Scald three or four Chickens, and flea off the skin and Feathers together, put
them in a little water; take half a pint of White Wind, and two or three whole
Onions, some large Mace and Nutmeg tied up in a Cloth, a bundle of
sweet-Herbs, and a little Salt; and put them all in a Pipkin close covered; let
them simper a quarter of an hour, then take six Yolks of Eggs, half a pound of
sweet Butter, four Anchovies dissolved in a little Broth; shred your boiled
Spice small, take a quarter of a pound of Capers, and shred them very small,
put the Anchovies dissolved into the Eggs and Butter, and Capers, and so stir
it all together over a Chafing Dish of Coals, till it begin to thicken, then
take the Chicken out of the Broth, and put lear upon them; Serve them with
Sippets, and Limon sliced.

49. To make an Eel-pye, with Oysters.
Wash your Eels, and Gut them, and dry them well in a Cloth; to four good Eels
allow a pint of Oysters well washed, season them with Pepper, Salt, and Nutmeg,
and large Mace; put half a pound of Butter into the Pie, and half a Limon
sliced, so bake it; when it is drawn, take the Yolks of two Eggs, a couple of
Anchovies dissolved in a little White Wind, with a quarter of a pound of fresh
Butter, melt it, and mix all together, and make a lear of it, and put into the
Pie.

50. To make Puff-Paste.
Break two Eggs in three pints of Flower, make it with cold water, then roll it
out pretty thick, and square; then take so much Butter as Paste, and divide
your Butter in five pieces, that you may lay it on at five several times; roll
your Paste very broad, and break one part of the same Butter in little pieces
all over your Paste, then throw a handful of Flower slightly on, then fold up
your Paste, and beat it with a Rolling-pin, so roll it out again; thus do
several times, and then make it up.

51. To make Barley-Broath.
Put your Barley into fair water, give it three qualms over the Fire, separate
the Waters, and put it into a Cullender, boil it in a ^ourth water with a b^ade
of Mace, and a Clove; and when it is boiled away, put in some Raisins and
Currants, and when the Fruit is boiled enough, take it off, and season it with
White Wind, Rose Water, Butter, and Sugar, and a couple of Yolks of Eggs beaten
with it.

52. To bake a Pig.
Take a good quantity of Clay, and having molded it, stick your Pig, and Blood
him well, and when he is warm, put him in your prepared Coffin of Clay, thick
every where, with his Hair, Skin and all (his Entrails drawn, and Belly sewed
up again) then throw him into the Oven, or below the stock-hole under the
Furnace, and there let him soak, turn him now and then when the Clay is
hardened, for twelve hours, and he is then sufficiently baked; then take him,
and break off the Clay, which easily parts, and he will have a fine crispy
Coat, and all the juice of the Pigg in your Dish; remember but to put a few
leaves of Sage, and a little salt in his Belly, and you need no other sauce.

53. A Grand Sallet.
Take a quarter of a pound of Raisins of the Sun, as many blanched Almonds, as
many Capers, as many Olives, as much Samphire, as many pickled Cucumbers, a
Limon shred, some pickled FrenchBeans, a wax Tree set in the middle of the
Dish, pasted to the Dish; lay all their Quarters round the Dish, (you may also
mince the Flesh of a Roasted Hen, with Sturgeon, and Shrimps) and Garnish the
Dish with cut Beans, and Turnips, in several Figures.

54. To make a Sallet of a Cold Hen, or Pullet.
Take a Hen, and Roast it, let it be cold, Carve up the Legs, take the Flesh
and mince it small, shred a Limon, a little Parsley and Onions, an Apple, a
little Pepper and Salt, with Oil and Vinegar; Garnish the Dish with the Bones
and Limon-peel, and so serve it.

55. To boil a Capon, Pullet, or Chicken.
Boil them in good Mutton-Broath, with Mace, a Faggot of sweet Herbs, Sage,
Spinach, Marygold-leaves and Flowers, white or green Endive, Burrage, Bugloss,
Parsley, and Sorrel; and serve it on Sippets.

56. To Stew Ducks, the French Fashion.
Take the Duck, and half-Roast it, put half a score Onions in the belly whole,
some whole Pepper, a bundle of Thyme, and a little salt; when it is
half-Roasted, take it up, and slash it into pieces, put it between two Dishes,
and pierce the Gravy, mix some Claret Wine with that Gravy, and a little sliced
Nutmeg, a couple of Anchovies, wash them, and slit them, slice the Onions in
the Ducks belly, cover the Dishes close, so let them stew while enough; take
some butter, beat it thick, and shred a Limon in it, and serve it: Garnish your
Dish with the Limon-peel, and your Onions.

57. To make a Florentine.
Take the Kidney of a Loyn of Veal, or the Wing of a Capon, or the Leg of a
Rabbit; mince any of these small with the Kidney of a Loyn of Mutton, if it be
not fat enough; then season it with Cloves, Mace, Nutmegs, and Sugar, Cream,
Currants, Eggs, and Rose Water: mingle these four together, and put them into a
Dish between two sheets of Paste, then close it, and cut the Paste round by the
brim of the Dish; then cut it round about like Virginal-Keys, turn up one, and
let the other lie; prick it, bake it, scrape on Sugar, and serve it.

58. To make Curd-Cakes.
Take a pint of Curd, four Eggs, take out two of the whites, put in some Sugar,
(...) Nutmeg, and a little Flower; stir (...) together, and drop them in, (...)
fry them with a little Butter.

59. To Roast a Leg of Mutton, the French way.
Take half a pound of Mutton, and a quarter of a pound of suet, season it with
sweet Herbs, and a little Nutmeg, and two or three shallots; slice these very
small, and stuff the Mutton round; then take some of the best Hackney Turnips,
and boil them in Beef-broath very tender, then squeeze the water from them a
little, set them in a Dish under the Leg of Mutton, when it is half roasted,
and so let the gravy drop into them; and when the Meat is Roasted, serve them
in the Dish with it, with a little fresh butter and Vinegar: Garnish your Dish
with sliced Onions and Parsley, and some of the Turnips sliced.

60. To Stew a Carp.
Take a Living Carp, and knock him on the Head, open him in the Belly, take
heed you break not the Gall, pour in a little Vinegar, and wash out all the
blood, stir it about with your hand, and keep the blood safe; then put as much
White Wind into a pan or skillet, as will almost cover, and set it on the Fire;
put to it an Onion cut in the middle, a Clove, or less of Garlic, a Race of
Ginger shred, a Nutmeg quartered, a Faggot, or bundle of sweet Herbs, and three
or four Anchovies; your Carp being cut out, and rubbed all over with salt, when
the Wine (into which you may put in a little water) does boil, put the Carp in,
and cover him close, and let him stew up about a quarter of an hour, then put
in the Blood and Vinegar, with a little butter; so Dish up the Carp, and let
the spawn, Milt, and Revet be laid upon it; the Liquor that boiled him, with
the butter is the best sauce, and is to be eaten as broth: Garnish the Dish
with Limons and grated bread.

61. To make Marrow-puddings.
Take a pound of the best Jordan-Almonds, blanch them, beat them fine in a
stone, or wooden Mortar (not in brass) with a little Rose Water, take a pound
of fine powder-sugar, a penny-loaf grated, Nutmeg grated, a pint of Cream, the
Marrow of two Marrow-bones, two grains of Amber-griece; mingle them all
together with a little salt, fill the skins, and boil them gently, as before.

62. To make a Sack-posset.
Set a Gallon of Milk on the Fire, with whole Cinnamon and large Mace; when it
boyls, stir in a half, or whole pound of Naples-bisket grated very small,
keeping it stirring till it boyls; then beat eight Eggs together, casting of
the whites away; beat them well with a Ladle-full of Milk, then take the Milk
off the Fire, and stir in the Eggs; then put it on again, but keep it stirring,
for fear of Curdling; then make ready a pint of Sack, warming it upon the
Coals, with a little Rose Water: season your Milk with Sugar, and pour it into
the Sack in a large basin, and stir it apace; then throw on a good deal of
beaten Cinnamon, and so serve it up.

63. To Hash a Rabbit.
When your Rabbit is washed, you must take the Flesh from the bones, and mince
it small; then put to it a little strong broth and Vinegar, an Onion or two,
with a grated Nutmeg, and let it stew up together; then mince a handful of
boiled Parsley green, with a Limon cut like Dice, and a few Barberries; put it
into the Hash, and toast it all together; and when it is enough, put a Ladle^
full of sweet butter to it, and Dish it upon the Chines, and Garnish it with
Limons.

64. To make a Fresh Cheese.
Take some New Milk. or Cream, and a Race of Cinnamon, scald it; then take it
off the Fire, sweeten it with fine Sugar, then take a spoonful of Runnet to two
quarts of Milk, set it by, and keep it close covered, and so let it stand; when
the Cheese comes, strew a little fine Sugar and grated Nutmeg, and serve it in
with Sippets, Sops in Sack, or Muskadine.

65. To make an Artichoak-pye.
Take the bottoms of six Artichoaks, boiled very tender, put them in a Dish,
and some Vinegar over them, season them with Ginger and Sugar, a little Mace
whole, and put them in a Coffin of Paste; when you lay them in, lay some Marrow
and Dates sliced, and a few Raisins of the Sun in the bottom, with good store
of butter; when it is half baked, take a Gill of Sack, being boiled first with
Sugar, and a peel of Orange: Put it into the Pie, and set it in the Oven again,
till you Use it.

66. To make Marrow-pasties.
Shred the Marrow and Apples together, and put a little sugar to them; put them
into puff-paste, and fry them in a pan with fresh butter, and serve them up to
the Table, with a little white sugar strewed on it.

67. To make Green Sauce.
Take a good handful of Sorrel, beat it in a Mortar with Pippins pared, and
quartered, with a little Vinegar and Sugar; put it into Saucers.

Or take Sorrel, beat it, and stamp it well in a Mortar, squeeze out the juice
of it, and put thereto a little Vinegar, sugar, and two hard Eggs minced small,
a little Nutmeg grated, and butter; set this upon the Coals, till it is hot,
and pour it into the Dish on the sippets: This is sauce for Hen, and Veal, and
Bacon.

68. To pickle Oysters.
Take a quart of the largest great Oysters with the Liquor, wash them clean,
and wipe them, add to them a pint of fair water, with half a pint of
White-Wine-Vinegar, half an Ounce of whole Pepper, an handful of Salt, a
quarter of an Ounce of large Mace, with the Liquor of the Oysters strained; put
all together in a pipkin over a soft Fire, let them simper together a quarter
of an hour; when the Oysters are enough, take them up, and put them into a
little fair water and Vinegar, till they be cold, the pickle boiling a quarter
of an hour after the Oysters are taken up; both being cold, put them up
together: When you Use them, Garnish the Dish with Barberries, and Limons, and
a little Mace and Pepper, and pour in some of the Pickle.

69. To make S^^^^^ Cellops, of Ve^^
Cut out your Fillet (...) very broad slices, fat and lean, not to thick: Take
eight Eggs, beat them very well with a little Salt, grate a whole Nutmeg, take
a handful of Thyme, and strip it; then take a pound of Sausages, half a pint of
stewing Oysters of the largest, wash and cleanse them from the gravel, then
half-fry your Veal with sweet Butter, then put in your Sausages and Oysters;
then take a quarter of a pound of Capers, shred them very small, with three
Anchovies dissolved in White Wind and fair water, so put in your Eggs, shred
Capers and Anchovies, Butter and Spice, and mingle them, and strew them in the
pan upon the Veal and Oysters, serve it with Sippets, with a little fresh
Butter and Vinegar, with Limons sliced, and Barberries, with a little Salt. You
must have a care to keep the Meat stirring, lest the Eggs curdle with the heat
of the Fire.

70. To make a rare White-Pot.
Take three pints of Cream, whole Cinnamon, a little sliced Nutmeg; set on the
Cream and Spice, and scald it, take a penny-loaf, and slice it very thin, take
a couple of Marrow-bones, lay the Marrow sliced on the bottom of the Dish, upon
the Marrow lay the Bread, then lay Raisins of the Sun over the Bread, and lay
Marrow again, as before: To the three pints of scalded Cream add nine Yolks of
Eggs well beaten with Rose Water; sweeten the Cream with white Sugar, and take
out the whole Cinnamon, and beat the Cream and Eggs well, fill up a broad
shallow Basin, and bake it, when it is enough, scrape fine Sugar on it, and
stick it with red and white Muscadoes, and so serve it.

71. To make a very fine Custard.
Take a quart of Cream, and boil it with whole Spice; then beat the Yolks of
ten Eggs, and five whites, mingle them with a little Cream, and when your Cream
is almost cold, put your Eggs into it, and stir them very well, then sweeten
it, and put out your Custard into a deep Dish, and bake it; then serve it in
with French Comfits strewed on it.

72. To make minced Pyes of an Eel.
Take a fresh Eel, flea it, and cut off the Fish from the Bones, mince it
small; then pare two or three Wardens, or Pears, mince of them as much as of
the Eel, temper them together, and season them with Ginger, Pepper, Cloves,
Mace, Salt, a little Sanders, some C^rrans, Raisins, Pruans, Dates, Verjuice,
Butter, and Rose Water.

73. To bake Rabbits, to be eaten cold.
When your Rabbits are par-boyled, take out all the Bones you can well take
out, and Lard them, then season them with Pepper, Salt, Cloves, Mace, and
Nutmegs, with a good quantity of Savoury, and forced Meat; then put them into
your prepared Coffin, put in Butter, and close your Pie, bake it, and when it
is cold, fill it with Clarified Butter.

74. To bake a Ioll of Ling in a Pie.
Let your Ling be almost boiled, and then season it with Pepper only, (the skin
being first taken off, strew the bottom of your prepared Coffin with an Onion
or two minced small; close your Pie, and bake it; then take the Yolks and
Whites of about a dozen Eggs, not boiled altogether hard; mince them small with
your Knife, and put them into drawn Butter, toss them together; then draw your
Pie, and pour in this Lear of Eggs all over, and shake it together, so put on
your Lid, and Dish your Pie.

75. To Bake a Turkey.
Boil and Lard your Turkey, when it is par-boyled, season it with Pepper, salt,
and a little Cloves and Mace; then put him into your prepared Coffin, lay on
Butter, and close it; put the Head on the top with your Garnish, then bake it,
and fill it with Clarified Butter when it is cold.

76. To Roast Calves-Feet.
First, boil them tender, and blanch them, and being cold, Lard them thick with
small Lard, then spit them on a small spit, and Roast them; serve them with
sauce made of Vinegar, Cinnamon, Sugar, and Butter.

77. To bake a Goose.
Break the bones of your Goose, and par-boyl him, then season him with Pepper
and Salt, and a little Cloves and Mace; if pou please, you may bake a Rabbit or
two with it, because your stubble-Geese are very Fat, and your Rabbits dry, you
need not Lard either; bake it in good hot butter-paste.

78. To make Apple-pyes, to Fry.
Take about twelve Pippins, pare them, cut them, and almost cover them with
water, and almost a pound of Sugar, let them boil on a gentle Fire close
covered, with a stick of Cinnamon, minced Orange-peel, a little Dill seed
beaten, and Rose Water, when this is cold and stiff, make them into little
Pasties, with rich Paste, and so fry them.

79. To make a Rare Dutch Pudding.
Take a pound and a half of Fresh Beef, all Lean, with a pound and a quarter of
Beef Suet, both sliced very small; then take a stale halfpenny loaf, and grate
it, a handful of Sage, a little Winter-savoury, and a little Thyme; shred these
very small, take four Eggs, half a pint of Cream, a few Cloves, Nutmegs, Mace,
and Pepper finely beaten; mingle them all together very well with a little
Salt, roll it all up together in a green Colwort-Leaf, and then tie it up hard
in a Linen Cloth: Garnish your Dish with grated bread, and serve it up with
Mustard in Saucers.

80. To make Sausages.
Take Pork, more Lean than Fat, mince it exceeding small together; then take
part of the Fleak of Pork, which is the Suet, in pieces, about the bigness of
the top of your Finger, season each apart, with Sage minced, good store of
Pepper and Salt, with some Cloves and Mace mixed in the seasoning each of them;
then take small Sheeps-guts, and cleanse them, (some use Capons-guts) and fill
them with your Funnel; always putting some of the fleak between the minced; if
you have it ready, you may sprinkle a little Sack on the top of the
Sausage-meat, and it will make it fill the better.

81. To stew Beef in Gobbets, the French Fashion.
Take a Flank of Beef, or any part but the Leg, cut it into slices, or Gobbets
as big as Pullets-Eggs, with some Gobbets of Fat, and boil it in a Pot or
Pipkin with some fair Spring Water, scum it clean, and after it has boiled an
hour, put to it Carrots, Parsnips, Turnips, great Onions, some Salt, Cloves,
Mace, and whole Pepper; cover it close, and stew it, till be very tender; and
half an hour before its ready put into it some picked Thyme, Parsley,
Winter-savoury, Sweet Marjoram, Sorrel, and Spinach (being a little bruised
with the back of a Ladle) with some Claret Wine: Then Dish it on fine Sippets,
and serve it to the Table hot; Garnish it with Grapes, Barberries, or
Gooseberries: Or else use Spices, the bottoms of boiled Artichoaks put into
beaten Butter, and grated Nutmeg, garnished with Barberries.

82. To boil a Capon, or Chicken with Sugar-pease.
When the Cods be but young, string them, and pick off the Husks; then take two
or three handfuls, and put them into a Pipkin, with half a pound of sweet
Butter, a quarter of a pint of fair water, gross Pepper, Salt, Mace, and some
Sallet-Oyl; stew them till they be very tender, and strain to them three or
four yolks of Eggs, with six spoonfuls of Sack.

83. To boil Perches.
Let your Liquor boil, and your pan be seasoned with a little White Wind, a
couple of Onions cut in halves, a bunch of sweet Herbs, and a little white
Pepper; boil them up very quick, and flea them on both sides, and Dish them
upon Sippets: Then take a little White Wind, Gravy, and Vinegar, with a grated
Nutmeg, and almost boil it over a Chafing Dish, then pour sweet Butter over it;
Garnish it with Barberries, and sliced Limons.

84. To boil Eels.
Cut the Eels, and stew them; when they are half done, beat a little Ale with
Vinegar, and put into the Liquor, with some Parsley and sweet Herbs; Dish them,
and serve them up in their broth with a little salt.

85. A Turkish Dish of Meat.
Take an inter-larded piece of Beef, cut into thin slices, and put it into a
pot with a close cover, or stewing-pan; then put into it a good quantity of
clean picked Rice, skin it very well, and put into it a quantity of whole
Pepper, two or three whole Onions, and let it boil very well, and take out the
Onions, and Dish it on Sippets; the thicker it is, the better.

86. To boil a Chine of Beef powdered.
Take either a Chine, Rump, Surloin, Brisket, Rib, Flank, Buttock, or Fillet of
Beef, and give them in Summer, a weeks powdering, in Winter a Fortnight, you
may stuff them, or let them be plain; if you stuff them, do it with all manner
of sweet Herbs, with Fat Beef minced, and some Nutmeg; serve them on Brewis,
with Roots, or Cabbage boiled in Milk, with beaten Butter.

87. To make a Hash of a Capon or Pullet.
Take a Capon, or Partridge, or Hen, and Roast them, and being cold, mince the
Brains and Wings very fine, and tear the Legs and Rumps whole, to be
Carbonado^d; then put some strong Mutton-broath, or good Gravy, grated Nutmeg,
a great Onion and salt; then stew them in a large Earthen Pipkin, or sauce-pan,
stew the Rumps and Legs in the same strong Broth in another pipkin; then take
some light French Bread chipt, and cover the bottom of the Dish, steep the
bread in the same broth, or good Mutton Gravy, then pour the Hash on the
steeped bread, lay the Legs, and the Rump on the Hash with some fried Oysters,
sliced Limon, and Limon-peel, the juice of an Orange, and Yolks of Eggs
strained, and beaten butter; Garnish the Dish with carved Oranges, Limons, etc.
Thus you may Hash any kind of Fowl.

88. To Dress a Cods-Head.
Cut off the Cods-Head beyond the Gills, that you may have part of the body
with it, boil it in water and salt, to which you may add half a pint of
Vinegar, the Head must be little more than covered: Before you put it into the
Cauldron, take a quart of the biggest, cleanest Oysters, and a bunch of sweet
Herbs and Onions, and put them into the mouth of the Head, and with a
pack-thread bind the Jaws fast, you must be sure to pick it, and wash it very
clean: When it is boiled enough, take it up, and set it a drying over a
Chafing Dish of Coals; then take the Oyster-Liquor, four Anchovies, and a
sliced Onion; put to them a quarter of a pint of White Wind, and sweet butter,
and melt them together, and pour it on the Cods-Head; stick all, or most of the
Oysters upon the Head, or where they will enter, and Garnish it over with them;
grate on a little Nutmeg, and send it smoking up; garnish the brims of the
Dish with Limon, and sliced Bay Leaves.

89. To boil Widgeons, or Teal.
Par-boyl your Widgeons, or Teal, and then stick whole Cloves in their breasts,
put into their bellies a little Winter-savory, or Parsley; boil them in a
Pipkin by themselves, thicken it with Toasts, season it with Verjuice, sugar,
and a little Pepper; Garnish your Dish with Barberries, and Pruans, and so
serve them.

90. To make a Veal-pye.
When your Paste is raised, then cut your Leg of Veal into pieces, and season
it with Pepper, Nutmeg, and salt, with some whole large Mace, and so lay it
into your prepared Coffin, with good store of Raisins of the sun, and Currants,
and fill it up with sweet Butter; then close it, and set it in the Oven, and
when baked, serve it hot.

91. To make fried Puddings.
Take grated bread, Currants, Cloves, and Mace, with Beef Suet, and Sugar, and
one Yolk of an Egg beaten; mix all well together, and make them into flat
bowls, then fry them in Beef Suet, and garnish your Dish with Sugar; serve them
always at the First Course.

92. To bake a Breast of Veal.
First, par-boyl it, and take out the long bones, and so lay it in a Dish in
Vinegar two or three hours; then take it out, and season it with Pepper and
Salt, and so lay it into a thin fine Paste, with good store of fine sweet
Herbs, finely chopped, and good store of Butter, or Marrow; then bake it, then
put in some juice of Oranges, and Sugar, and serve it hot.

93. To make a Paste for all manner of Tarts.
Take very sweet butter, and put into fair water, and make it boil on the Fire;
then take the finest Flower you can get, and mix them well together, till it
come to a Paste, and so raise it; but if you doubt that it will not be stiff
enough, then you may mix some Yolks of Eggs with it, as you temper all your
stuff together.

94. To make a baked Pudding.
Grate a penny-loaf, and put thereto more suet than bread minced small, with
some Nutmeg and Sugar, and two Yolks of Eggs, tempering it only with
Rose Water: Then butter a little Pewter Dish in the bottom, and put your stuff
after it is well tempered, thereinto, then bake it; when it is baked, stir it up
from the bottom of the Dish, and so turn the under-side uppermost, then strew
some Sugar upon it, and upon the brims of the Dish, and serve it first to the
Table.

95. To boil Sparrows, Larks, or other small Birds.
Take a Ladle-ful of strong Mutton-broath, a little whole Mace, and a handful
of Parsley; put in a little Winter-Savoury, season it with Verjuice, Sugar, and
a little Pepper; thicken it with a spoonful of Cream, and the Yolk of an Egg.

96. To boil a Capon with Asparagus.
Boil your Capon, or Chicken in fair water, and some salt, then put in their
bellies a little Mace, chopped Parsley, and sweet Butter; being boiled, serve
them on Sippets, and put a little of the Broth on them: Then have a bundle or
two of Asparagus boiled, put in beaten butter, and serve it on your Capon, or
Chicken.

97. To boil a Chicken, or Capon in white broth.
First, boil the Capon in water and salt, then three pints of strong Broth,
and a quart of White Wind, and stew it in a Pipkin with a quarter of a pound of
Dates, half a pound of fine Sugar, four or five blades of large Mace, the
Marrow of three Marrow-bones, a handful of white Endive; stew these in a Pipkin
very leisurely, that it may but only simper, then being finely stewed, and the
broth well tasted, strain the Yolks of ten Eggs with some of the broth,
before you Dish up the Capons, or Chickens, put the Eggs into the broth, and
keep it stirring, that it may not Curdle, give it a walm, and set it from the
Fire; the Fowls being Dish'd up, put on the Broth, and Garnish the Meat with
Dates, Marrow, large Mace, Endive, Preserved Barberries, Oranges, boiled
Skirrets, Pomgranats, and Kernels. Make a Lear of Almond-Paste, and
Grape-Verjuice.

98. To boil a Capon with Sage and Parsley.
First, boil it in water and salt, then boil some Parsley, Sage, two or three
Eggs hard, and chop them; then have a few thin slices of fine Manchet, and stew
all together, but break not the slices of bread; stew them with some of the
broth wherein the Capon boyls, some large Mace, Butter, a little White Wind,
or Vinegar, with a few Barberries, or Grapes; Dish up the Chickens on the
sauce, and run them over with sweet Butter and Limon cut like Dice, the peel
being cut like small Lard, and boil a little peel with the Chickens.

99. To Fry Rabbets with sweet Sauce.
Cut your Rabbet in pieces, wash it, and dry it well in a Cloth, take some
fresh Butter, and fry the Rabbet in it; when your Rabbet is little more than
half Fried, take some slices shred very small, a quarter of a pint of Cream,
the Yolks of a couple of Eggs, some grated Nutmeg and salt; when the Rabbet is
enough, put them into the Pan, and stir them all together; take a little
Vinegar, fresh Butter, and Sugar, melt it together, and so serve it with
Sippets, the Dish Garnished with Flowers, etc.

100. To make a French pottage, called Skink.
Take a leg of Beef, and chop it into three pieces, then boil it in a Pot with
three Pottles of Spring Water, a few Cloves, Mace, and whole Pepper; after the
Pot is scumm'd put in a bundle of sweet Marjoram, Rosemary, Thyme,
Winter-savoury, Sage, and Parsley, bound up hard, some salt, and two or three
great Onions whole, then about an hour before Dinner put in three Marrow-bones,
and thicken it with some strained Oatmeal, or Manchet sliced and steeped with
some Gravy, strong Broth, or some of the ^^tage, then a little before you Dish
up the ^^^nk, put into it a little fine powder of saffron, and give it a walm
or two; Dish it on large slices of French Bread, and Dish the Marrow-bones on
them in a fine clean large Dish; then have two or three Manchets cut into
Toasts, and being finely Toasted; lay on the Knuckle of Beef in the middle of
the Dish, the Marrow-bones round about it, and the Toasts round about the Dish
brim: serve it hot.

101. To make Gooseberry-Cream.
First boil, or you may preserve your Gooseberries; then having a clear Cream
boiled up, and seasoned with Old Cinnamon, Nutmeg, Mace, Sugar, Rose Water, and
Eggs; Dish it up, and when it is cold, take up the Gooseberries with a pin, and
stick them on in rounds as thick as they can lie upon the said Cream,
Garnishing your Dish with them, and strew them over with the finest sugar, and
serve them up.

102. To make a Quaking-pudding.
Take a Quart of sweet Cream, and near half a pound of Almonds blanched, and
finely beaten; then strain them; and boil it with large Mace, and season it
with Rose Water and Sugar; then take ten Eggs, and five of their whites well
beaten with small Cinnamon, and two or three spoonfuls of Flower; mix all well
together, and make it of the thickness of Batter, then wet a Cloth, and rub it
with Flower, tying your Pudding round therein, and boil it in Beef-broath two
hours; take it up, and put a little White Wind, Sugar, and sliced Nutmeg into a
Pewter Dish, and put your pudding into it; then scrape some sugar on the brims,
and serve it.

103. To make clouted Cream.
Take New Milk, and set it on the Fire from Morning till Evening, but let it
not boil: And this is called, my Lady Youngs Clouted Cream.

104. To Souce a young pig.
Scald a Young Pig, boil it in fair water, and White Wind, put thereto some
Bay Leaves, whole Ginger, and Nutmegs quartered, and a few whole Cloves, boil
it thoroughly, and let it lie in the same Broth in an Earthen pot.

105. To make Polonian Sausages.
Take the Fillets of a Hog, chop them very small with a handful of Red Sage,
season it hot with Ginger and Pepper; then put it into a great Sheeps-gut, let
it lie three Nights in Brine, then boil it, and hang it up in a Chimney where
Fire is usually kept: These Sausages will keep a whole Year, and are good for
Sallets, or to garnish boiled Meats, or to relish a Glass of Wine.

106. To keep Salmon fresh a whole Month.
First, boil your Salmon as usually, then put it into an Earthen Pot, and cover
it in good white Vinegar, putting thereto a branch of Rosemary, and keep it
very close covered; and so you may keep it, that it will retain its perfect
taste and delicacy for a Month, or more.

107. To make tender and delicate Brawn.
Put a Collar of Brawn in a Kettle of water, and set it into an Oven, as for
Houshold-bread, cover it close, and let it stand as long as you would do bread,
and it will be very excellent Brawn.

108. To keep powdered Beef, after it is boiled, sweet five or six weeks.
When your Beef has been powdered about a fortnight, then boil it well, and
dry it with a Cloth, and wrap it in dry Clothes, and put it into some Pot or
Vessel, and keep it close from the Air, and it will keep sound two or three
Months.

109. To Dress Neats-Tongues and Vdders.
When they are boiled enough in Beef-broath, and scumm'd, you must have your
Turnips ready boiled, cut in pieces, and soaked in butter, or else Colliflowers
and Carrots, or all of them; then put the Turnips all over the bottom of a
large Dish, then slice out the Tongues, and lay the sides one against another,
slice the Udders, and lay them between, opposite to one another; Garnish the
Colliflowers all over them, and the Carrots up and down between the
Colliflowers, with Barberries and Parsley on the brim of the Dish.

110. To make Pannado.
Take a quart of Running-water, and put it on the Fire in a Skillet, then cut a
light Roll of bread in slices, about the bigness of a groat, and as thin as
Wafers, lay it on a Dish on a few Coals, then put it into the water, with two
handful of Currants picked, and washed, a little large Mace, when it is enough,
season it with Sugar and Rose Water.

111. To make Liver-Puddings.
Take the Guts of a Young Hog, wash them very clean, and lay them two or three
days in water, take the Liver of the same Hog, and boil it, till it will grate,
then grate it very small and fine, take to the weight of the Liver almost the
weight of Beef Suet, season it with salt, Cloves, Mace, and Nutmeg finely
beaten, a penny-loaf grated, a pound of the best white Sugar, two pound of good
Currants, a pint of good Cream, a quarter of a pint of Rose Water, three Eggs;
mix all together to such a thickness, that you may fill the Guts, then prick
them, and put them into boiling water, and keep an even Fire for half a quarter
of an hour; then take them up, and lay them upon straw; you must have a care
not to tie them too hard, nor too slack, lest they break in boiling.

112. To make a rare Citron-Pudding.
Take a penny-loaf, and grate it, a pint and half of Cream, half a dozen of
Eggs, one Nutmeg sliced, a little salt, an Ounce of Candyed Citron sliced
small, a little Candyed Orange-peel sliced, three Ounces of Sugar; put these
into a wooden Dish well Flowred, and covered with a Cloth, and when the water
boyleth put it in, boil it well, and serve it up with Rose Water and Sugar, and
stick it with Wafers, or blanched Almonds.

113. To bake a Gammon of Bacon.
Water it fresh enough, and sees it as tender as you may to handle it, then
pull off the skin, and stuff it with Parsley, Pennyroyal, Thyme, Marjoram,
Marigolds, Camomile, and Sage, chop them small, and season them with Salt and
Pepper, Cloves, small Ra^sins, Yolks of Eggs hard Roasted; then stuff your
Bacon, and cut off the Lean of the Bacon, and mince it small, and take a
handful of your stuffing, and mingle it with three or four Yolks of raw Eggs,
and then put it upon the Gammon, then close on the skin again, and close it in
Paste.

114. To boil Woodcocks, or Snites.
Boil them either in strong Broth, or in water and Salt, and being boiled,
take out the Guts, and chop them small with the Liver, put to it some Crumbs of
grated White-bread, a little Cock-broath, and some large Mace; stew them
together with some Gravy, then dissolve the Yolks of two Eggs in some
Wine-Vinegar, and a little grated Nutmeg; and when you are ready to Dish it,
put in the Eggs, and stir it among the Sauce with a little Butter; Dish them on
Sippets, and run the Sauce over them with some beaten Butter and Capers, a
Limon minced small, Barberries, or whole pickled Grapes.

115. To make a made Dish of Apples.
Put on your Skillet of water with some Currants a boiling, then pare about a
dozen of Pippins, and cut them from the Core into the said water; when they are
boiled tender pour them into a Cullender, when the water is drained from them,
put them into a Dish, and season them, (but stay till they are cold, lest it
melt your Sugar) with Sugar, Rose Water, Cinnamon, and Carraway-seeds, then roll
out two sheets of Paste, put one into the Dish bottom, and all over the brims,
then lay the Apples in the bottom round and high, wet it round, and cover it
with the other sheet, close it, and carve it about the brims of the Dish as you
please, prick it, and bake it, scrape Sugar upon it, and serve it up.

116. To make a Fool.
Set two quarts of Cream over the Fire, let it boil, then take the Yolks of
twelve Eggs, and beat them very well, with three or four spoonfuls of cold
Cream, and then strain the Eggs in the Skillet of hot Cream, stirring it all
the time to keep it from burning, then set it on the Fire, and let it boil a
little while, but keep it still stirring, for fear of burning, then take it
off, and let it stand and cool, then take two or three spoonfuls of Sack, and
put it in the Dish, with four or five Sippets, set the Dish and Sippets a
drying, and when they be dry that they hang to the Dish, sweeten the Cream, and
pour it into the Dish softly, because the Sippets shall not rise up; this will
make three Dishes: When it is cold it is fit to be eaten.

117. To boil Flounders, or Iacks, the best way.
Take a pint of White Wind, the Tops of Young Thyme and Rosemary, a little
whole Mace, a little whole Pepper, seasoned with Verjuice, salt, and a piece of
sweet Butter, and so serve it; you may do Fish in the same Liquor three or four
times.

118. To boil a Haunch of Venison.
First, stuff your Venison with a handful of sweet Herbs, and Parsley minced,
with a little Beef Suet, and Yolks of Eggs boiled hard; season your stuffing
with Pepper, Nutmeg, Ginger, and Salt; put your Haunch of Venison a boiling,
being powdered before; then boil up three or four Colliflowers in strong
Broth, and a little Milk: When they are boiled, put them forth into a Pipkin,
add to them drawn Butter, and keep them warm by the Fire; then boil up two or
three handfuls of Spinach in the same Liquor, when it is boiled up, pour out
part of the broth, and put in a little Vinegar, and a Ladleful of sweet
butter, and a grated Nutmeg; your Dish being ready with Sippets in the bottom,
put on the Spinach round toward your Dish side; then take up the Venison, being
boiled, and put it into the middle of your Dish, and put in your Colliflowers
all over it, pour on your sweet butter over your Colliflowers, and Garnish it
with Barberries, and the brims of the Dish with green Parsley minced; Cabbage
is as good, done in the same manner as Colliflowers.

119. To make an Eel-Pye.
Wash, flea, and cut your Eeels in pieces, put to them a handful of sweet
Herbs, Parsley minced with an Onion, season them with Pepper, Salt, Cloves,
Mace, and Nutmeg, and having your Coffin made of good Paste, put them in, and
strew over them two handfuls of Currants, and a Limon cut in slices, then put on
butter and close the Pie; when it is baked, put in at the Funnel a little sweet
butter, White Wind, and Vinegar, beaten up with a couple of Yolks of Eggs.

120. To bake steaks, the French way.
Season the Steaks with Pepper, Nutmeg, and Salt lightly, and set them by; then
take a piece of the leanest of the Leg of Mutton, and mince it small with some
Beef Suet, and a few sweet Herbs, as Tops of Thyme, and Pennyroyal, grated
bread, Yolks of Eggs, sweet Cream, Raisins of the Sun, etc. work all these
together, and work it into little Balls, or Puddings, put them into a deep
round Pie on the steaks; then put to them some Butter, and sprinkle it with
Verjuice, close it up, and bake it, when it is enough cut it up, and Liquor it
with a juice of two or three Oranges or Limons.

121. To make a Warden, or Pear-Pye.
Bake your Wardens, or Pears in an Oven, with a little water, and good quantity
of Sugar, let your Pot be covered with a piece of dough; let them not be fully
baked by a quarter of an hour; when they are cold, make a high Coffin, and put
them in whole, adding to them some Cloves, whole Cinnamon, Sugar, with some of
the Liquor in the Pot, so bake it.

122. To stew a Trout.
Take a large Trout fair trimmed, and wash it, put it into a deep pewter Dish;
then take half a pint of sweet Wine, with a lump of butter; and a little whole
Mace, Parsley, Savoury, and Thyme; mince them all small, and put them into the
belly of the Trout, and so let it stew a quarter of an hour; then mince the
Yolk of an hard Egg, and strew it on the Trout, lay the Herbs about it, scrape
on Sugar, and serve it up.

123. To make sauce for Pigeons.
Melt some Vinegar and Butter together, and Roast some Parsley in the Belly of
the Fowl; or else Vine-leaves, and mix it well together, and pour it on.

124. A General sauce for Wild-Fowl.
The most General sauce for Wild Fowl Roasted; as Ducks, Mallard, Widgeon,
Teal, Snipe, Shel-drake, Plovers, Puets, and the like, is only Mustard and
Vinegar, or Mustard and Verjuice mixed together; or else an Onion, Water, and
Pepper.

125. To Roast a Cows Vdder.
Boil your Udder very well, then stick it thick all over with Cloves, and when
it is cold spit it, and lay it on the Fire, and baste it very well with sweet
butter, and when it is sufficiently Roasted and brown, draw it from the Fire,
and put some Vinegar and Butter on a Chafing Dish of Coals, and crumb in some
white-bread, and boil it till it be thick, then put to it good store of Sugar
and Cinnamon, and putting it into a clean Dish, lay the Cows Udder therein, and
trim the sides of the Dish with sugar, and so serve it.

126. To make a Spinage-Tart.
Take of good Spinach, and boil it in White Wind, till it be very soft as Pap;
then take it, and strain it well into a Pewter Dish, not leaving any
unstrain'd: Put to it Rose Water, good store of Sugar, Cinnamon, and Rose Water,
and boil it till it be as thick as Marmalade, then let it cool, and afterward
fill your Coffin, and adorn it, and serve it; it will be of a green color.

127. To make a Tart of Rice.
Pick your Rice very clean, and boil it in sweet Cream till it be very soft,
then let it stand and cool; put to it good store of Cinnamon and Sugar, and the
Yolks of a couple of Eggs, and some Currants; stir and beat all well together:
then having made a Coffin as for other Tarts, put your Rice therein, and spread
it all over the Coffin, and break many small bits of sweet butter upon it all
over, and scrape some Sugar over it, then cover the Tart and bake it, and serve
it as other Tarts.

128. To make a Codling-Tart.
Take Green Apples from the Tree, and coddle them in scalding-water without
breaking, then peel the thin skin from them, and so divide them into halves,
and cut out the cores, and so lay them into the Coffin, and do as in a
Pippin-Tart, and before you cover it when the Sugar is cast in, sprinkle good
store of Rose Water on it, then close it, and do as in the Pippin-Tart.

129. To make a Pippin-Tart.
Take of the fairest Pippins, and pare them, and then divide them just in
halves, and take out the cores clean; then roll the Coffin flat, and raise off
a small verge, of an Inch or more high; lay the Pippins with the hollow side
down-ward, close one to another, then put in a few Cloves, a stick of Cinnamon
broken, and a little piece of Butter; cover all clean over with Sugar, and so
cover the Coffin, and bake it as other Tarts; when it is baked boil some Butter
and Rose Water together, and anoint the Lid all over with it, then scrape, or
strew on it good store of Sugar, and so set it in the Oven again, and then
serve it up.

130. To make a Cherry-Tart.
Take the fairest Cherries you can get, and pick them clean from Leaves and
stalks, then spread out your Coffin, as for your Pippin-Tart, and cover the
bottom with Sugar, then cover the Sugar all over with Cherries, then cover
these Cherries with Sugar, some sticks of Cinnamon, and a few Cloves; then lay
in more Cherries, Sugar, Cinnamon, and Cloves, till the Coffin be filled up,
then cover it, and bake it in all points as the Codling, and Pippin Tarts, and
so serve it. In the same manner you may make Tarts of Gooseberries,
Strawberries, Rasberries, Bilberries, or any other Berry whatsoever.

131. To make a Minc'd-Pye.
Take a Leg of Mutton, or a Neats-Tongue, and par-boyl it well, the Mutton
being cut from the Bone, then put to it three pound of the best Mutton-suet
shred very small; then spread it abroad, and season it with salt, Cloves, and
Mace; then put in good store of Currants, great Raisins, and Pruans, clean
washed, and picked, a few Dates sliced, and some Orange-peels sliced; then
being all well mixed together, put it into a Coffin, or many Coffins, and so
bake them, and when they are served up open the Lids, and strew store of Sugar
on the Top of the Meat, and upon the Lid.

132. To make a Calves-Foot-Pye.
Boil your Calves-Feet very well, and then pick all the Meat from the Bones,
when it is cold, shred it as small as you can, and season it with Cloves and
Mace, and put in good store of Currants, Raisins, and Pruans; then put it into
the Coffin with good store of sweet Butter, then break in whole sticks of
Cinnamon, and a Nutmeg sliced, and season it with Salt then close up the Coffin,
and only leave a vent-hole, put in some Liquor made of Verjuice, Sugar,
Cinnamon, and Butter boiled together, and so serve it.

133. To make a Tansey.
Take a Certain Number of Eggs, according to the bigness of your Drying Pan,
and break them into a Dish, taking away the white of every third Egg, then with
a spoon take away the little white Chicken-knots, that stick upon the Yolks,
then with a little Cream beat them very well together; then take of green
Wheat-blades, Violet-leaves, Strawberry-leaves, Spinach, and Succory, of each a
like quantity, and a few Walnut-Tree-buds; chop and beat all these very well,
and then strain out the juice; mix it then with a little more Cream, put to it
the Eggs, and stir all well together; then put in a few crumbs of fine grated
bread, Cinnamon, Nutmeg, and Salt; then put some sweet butter into a Drying Pan,
and as soon as it is melted, put in the Tansey, and Fry it brown without
burning, and with a Dish turn it in the Pan as Occasion shall serve, strew good
store of Sugar on it, and serve it up.

134. To Stew a Pike.
After your Pike is Dressed and opened in the Back, and laid flat, as if it were
to Fry, then lay it in a large Dish, put to it White Wind to cover it; set it
on the Coals, and let it boil gently, if scum arise, take it off, then put to
it Currants, Sugar, Cinnamon, Barberries, as many Pruans as will Garnish the
Dish, then cover it close with another Dish, and let it stew till the Fruit be
soft, and the Pike enough, then put to it a good piece of sweet Butter; with
your Scummer take up the Fish, and lay it in a Dish with Sippets; then take a
couple of Yolks only, of Eggs, and beat them together well with a spoonful of
Cream, and as soon as the Pike is taken out, put it into the broth, and stir
it exceedingly to keep it from curdling, then pour the broth upon the Pike,
and trim the sides of the Dish with Sugar, Pruans, and Barberries, with slices
of Oranges and Limons, and so serve it up.

135. To Roast Venison.
If you will Roast any Venison, after you have washed it, and cleansed all the
Blood from it, you must stick it with Cloves all over on the outside, and if
it be lean, lard it either with Mutton, or Pork-lard, but Mutton is best; then
Spit it, and Roast it by a soaking Fire, then take Vinegar, Crumbs of Bread,
and some of the Gravy that comes from the Venison, and boil them well in a
Dish, then season it with Sugar, Cinnamon, Ginger, and Salt, and serve the
Venison upon the Sauce when it is Roasted enough.

136. To Roast a piece of Fresh Sturgeon.
Stop your Sturgeon with Cloves, then Spit it, and let it Roast very leisurely,
basting it continually, which will take away the hardness; when it is enough,
serve it upon Venison-sauce, with Salt only thrown upon it.

137. To boil a Gurnet, or Roch.
First, draw your Fish, and then either split it, or Joint it open in the Back,
and Truss it round; then wash it clean, and boil it in water and Salt, with a
bunch of sweet Herbs; then take it up into a large Dish, and pour into it
Verjuice, Nutmeg, Butter, and Pepper; after it has stewed a little, thicken it
with the Yolks of Eggs; then remove it hot into another Dish, and Garnish it
with slices of Oranges and Limons, Barberries, Pruans, and Sugar, and so serve
it up,

138. To make a Carp-Pye.
After you have drawn, washed and scalded a fair large Carp, season it with
Pepper, Salt, and Nutmeg, and then put it into a Coffin, with good store of
sweet Butter, and then cast on Raisins of the Sun, the juice of Limons, and
some slices of Orange-peels, and then sprinkling on a little Vinegar, close it
up, and bake it.

139. To make a Chicken-Pye.
After you have Trust your Chickens, then break their Legs and Breast-bones,
and raise your Crust of the best Paste, lay them in a Coffin close together,
with their Bodies full of Butter, then lay upon them, and underneath them,
Currants, great Reasons, Pruans, Cinnamon, Sugar, whole Mace and Sugar, whole
Mace and Salt; then cover all with good store of Butter, and so bake it; then
pour into it White Wind, Rose Water, Sugar, Cinnamon, and Vinegar mixed together,
with the Yolks of two or three Eggs beaten amongst it, and so serve it.

140. To make Almond-Cream.
Take blanched Almonds beaten in a Mortar very small, putting in now and then
one spoonful of Cream to keep them from Oyling; then boil as much Cream as you
please with your beaten Almonds, together with a blade of Mace, and season it
with Sugar; then strain it, and stir it, till it be almost cold, and then let
it stand till you serve it, and then Garnish your Dish with fine Sugar scraped
thereon.

141. To make an Almond-pudding.
Take two pound of blanched Almonds, and beat them small, put thereto some
Rose Water and Ambergris often thereinto as you beat them; then season them
with Nutmeg and Sugar, and mix them with grated bread, Beef Suet, and two Eggs,
and so put it into a Dish, tying a Cloth round about, and so boil it.

142. To make Water Gruel.
Take a Pottle of Water, a handful of great Oatmeal, picked and beat in a
Mortar, put it in boiling; when it is half enough, put to it two handfuls of
Currants washed, a Faggot or two of sweet Herbs, four or five blades of large
Mace, and a little sliced Nutmeg, let a Grain of Musk be infused a while in it;
when it is enough, season it with Sugar and Rose Water, and put to it a little
drawn Butter.

143. To Stew Sausages.
Boil them a little in fair water and Salt, and for sa^c^, boil some Currants
alone; when they be almost tender, pour out the water from them, and put to
them a little White Wind, Butter, and Sugar, and so serve it.

144. To make a Rare Fricacie.
Take Young Rabbits, Young Chickens, or a Rack of Lamb, being cut one Rib from
another, and par-boyl either of these well in a Drying Pan with a little water
and salt, then pour the water and salt from it, and Fry it with sweet Butter,
and make sauce with three Yolks of Eggs beaten well, with six spoonfuls of
Verjuice, and a little shred Parsley, with some sliced Nutmeg, and scalded
Gooseberries; when it is fried, pour in the sauce all over the Meat, and so let
it thicken a little in the pan; then lay it in a Dish with the sauce, and serve
it.

145. To make an Oatmeal-pudding.
Take a pint of Milk, and put to it a pint of large, or midling Oatmeal, let it
stand on the Fire till it be scalding hot, then let it stand by, and soak about
half an hour, then pick a few sweet Herbs, and shred them, and put in half a
pound of Currants, and half a pound of Suet, and about two spoonfuls of Sugar,
and three or four Eggs; these put into a bag, and boiled, do make a very good
Pudding.

146. To make an Almond-Tart.
Raise an Excellent good Paste with six Corners, an Inch deep; then take some
blanched Almonds very finely beaten with Rose Water, take a pound of Sugar to a
pound of Almonds, some grated Nutmeg, a little Cream, with strained Spinach, as
much as will color the Almonds green, so bake it with a gentle heat in an
Oven, not shutting the Door; draw it, and stick it with Candyed Orange, Citron,
and put in red and white Muskadine.

147. To boil Pigeons with Rice.
Boil your Pigeons in Mutton-broath, putting sweet-Herbs in their bellies; then
take a little Rice, and boil it in Cream with a little whole Mace, season it
with Sugar, lay it thick on their breasts, wringing also the juice of a Limon
upon them, and so serve them.

148. To Barrel up Oysters.
Open your Oysters, take the Liquor from them, and mix it with a reasonable
quantity of the best White-wine-Vinegar, with a little Salt and Pepper; then
put the Oysters into a small Barrel, and fill them up with this Pickle, and
this will keep them six Months sweet and good, and with their Natural taste.

149. To make a Cowslip-Tart.
Take the blossoms of a Gallon of Cowslips, mince them exceeding small, and
beat them in a Mortar, put to them a handful or two of grated Naple-Bisket, and
about a pint and a half of Cream; boil them a little on the Fire, then take
them off, and beat in eight Eggs with a little Cream; if it do not thicken, put
it on the Fire till it does, gently, but take heed it Curdles not; season it
with Sugar, Rose Water, and a little Salt: Bake it in a Dish, or little open
Tarts; it is best to let your Cream be cold before you stir in the Eggs.

150. To bake a Calves-Head, to be eaten cold.
You must half-boyl a fair Calves-head, then take out all the Bones on both
sides, and season it with the aforesaid seasoning, and lard it with Bacon, and
a little Limonpeel; then having a Coffin large enough, not very high, nor very
thick, but make it apiece, lay on some sheets of Lard on the top, and
butter; when it is baked, and cold, fill it with Clarified Butter.

151. To make Pear-Puddings.
Take a cold Capon, or half roasted, which is much better; then take suet shred
very small, the Meat and Suet together, with half as much grated bread, two
spoonfuls of Flower, Nutmegs, Cloves, and Mace; Sugar as much as you please,
half a pound of Currants, the Yolks of two Eggs, and the white of one, and as
much Cream as will make it up into a stiff Paste: Then make it up in Fashion of
a Pear, a stick of Cinnamon for the stalk, and the Head of a Clove.

152. To make a Hotch-pot.
Take a piece of Brisket Beef, a piece of Mutton, a Knuck^e of Veal, a good
Cullender of Pot Herbs, half minced Carrots, Onions, and Cabbage a little
broken; boil all these together until they be very thick.

153. To make a Tart of Medlars.
Take Medlars that are rotten, then scrape them, and set them upon a
Chafing Dish of Coals, season them with the Yolks of Eggs, Sugar, Cinnamon, and
Ginger; let it boil well, and lay it on Paste, scrape on Sugar, and serve it.

154. To make a Limon^Caudle.
Take a pint of White Wind, and a pint of Water, and let it boil, put to it
half a Manchet, cut as thin and small as you can, put it in with some large
Mace; then beat the Yolks of two Eggs to thicken it, then squeeze in the juice
of half a dozen Limons, and season it with Sugar and Rose Water.

155. To make an Italian Pudding.
Take a fine Manchet, and cut it in small pieces like Dice, then put to it half
a pound of Beef Suet minced small, Raisins of the Sun, Cloves, Mace, Dates
minced, Sugar, Marrow, Rose Water, Eggs, and Cream; mingle all these together,
put them in a buttered Dish; in less than an hour it will be well baked, when
its enough, scrape on Sugar, and serve it up.

156. To make a rare Pudding, to be baked or Boiled.
Beat a pound of Almonds as small as possible, put to them some Rose Water and
Cream as often as you beat them; then take one pound of Beef Suet finely minced,
with five Yolks of Eggs, and but two of their whites; make it as thin as B^tter
for Fritters, mixing it with sweet thick Cream, seasoning it with beaten Mace,
Sugar, and Salt; then set it into the Oven in a Pewter Dish, and when you draw
it forth, strew some Sugar on the top of your Pudding, and Garnish your Dish
with Sugar, and serve it always first to the Table.

157. To make a Gooseberry-Custard.
When you have cut off the sticks and Eyes of your Gooseberries, and washed
them, then boil them in water till they will break in a spoon, then strain
them, and beat half a dozen Eggs, and stir them together upon a Chafing Dish of
Coals with some Rose water, then sweeten it very well with Sugar, and always
serve it cold.

158. To make a Fricacie of Rabbits.
Cut your Rabbits in small pieces, and mince a handful of Thyme and Parsley
together, and season your Rabbits with a Nutmeg, Pepper, and Salt; then take
two Eggs and Verjuice beaten together, then throw it in the Pan, stick it, and
dish it up in Sippets.

159. To make Cracknels.
Take five or six pints of the finest wheat flour you can get, to which put in
a spoonful, and not more, of good Yeast; then mingle it well with Butter,
Cream, and Rose Water, and Sugar finely beaten, and working it well into Paste,
make it into what form you please, and bake it.

160. To make Pancakes.
Put eight Eggs to two quarts of Flower, casting by four whites, season it with
Cinnamon, Nutmeg, Ginger, Cloves, Mace, and Salt; then make it up into a strong
B^tter with Milk, beat it well together, and put in half a pint of Sack, make
it so th^n, that it may run in your pan how you please, put your Pan on the
Fire with a little Butter, or suet, when it is very hot, take a Cloth and wipe
it out, so make your Pan very clean, then put in your Batter, and run it very
thin, supply it with little bits of Butter, so toss it often, and bake it crisp
and brown.

161. To make a Iunket.
Take Ewes, or Goats-Milk, or for want of these, Cows-Milk, and put it over the
Fire to warm, then put in a little Runnet, then pour it out into a Dish, and
let it cool, then strew on some Cinnamon and Sugar, and take some of your Cream
and lay on it, scrape on sugar, and serve it.

162. To make Excellent Marrow-Spinage-pasties.
Take Spinach, and chop it a little, then boil it till it be tender; then make
the best Rich light Crust you can, and roll it out, and put a little of your
Spinach into it, and Currants, and Sugar, and store of lump of Marrow; clap the
Paste over this to make little Pasties deep within, and Fry them with Clarified
Butter.

163. To make a Pine-Apple-Tart.
Beat two handfuls of Pine-Apples with a pricked Quince, and the pulp of two or
three Pippins; when they are well beaten, put to them half a pint of Cream, a
little Rose Water, the Yolks of six Eggs, with a handful of sugar, if it be
thick, add a litte more Cream to it, so having your thin low Coffins for it
dried, fill them up, and bake them; you may Garnish them with Orangado, or
Lozenges of Sugar-Plate, or what else you please.

164. To dry Neats-Tongues.
Take Bay Salt beaten very fine, and Saltpeter, of each alike, and rub over
your Tongues very well with that, and cover all over with it, and as it wastes
put on more, and when they are very hard and stiff they are enough; then roll
them in Bran, and dry them before a soft Fire, and before you boil them, let
them lie one Night in Pump-water, and boil them in the same water.

165. To stew Birds, the Lady Butlers way.
Take small Birds, pick them, and cut off their Legs, Fry them in sweet Butter,
lay them in a Cloth to dry up the Butter; then take Oysters, and mince them,
and put them in a Dish, put to them white wind and Cinnamon, put in the Birds
wi^h Cloves, Mace, and Pepper; let all these stew together covered till they be
enough, then put into it some Sugar, and some toasted Manchet, and put it in
the Dish, and so serve it up to the Table.

166. To make a sweet-Pye, with Lamb-stones, and Sweetbreads, and Sugar.
Slit the Lamb-stones in the middle, and skin them, wash the Sweetbreads, both
of Veal and Lamb, and wipe them very dry; take the Lambs Liver, and shred it
very small, take the Udder of a Leg of Veal, and slice it; season all with a
little Salt, Nutmeg, Mace, and Cloves beaten, and some whole Pepper; then shred
two or three Pippins and Candyed Limon and Orange-peel, half a dozen Dates
sliced, with Currants, white Sugar, a few Carraway-seeds, a quarter of a pint of
Verjuice, and as much Rose Water, a couple of Eggs; roll up all these together
in little Puddings, or Balls made green with the juice of Spinach, and lay a
Pudding, then a sweetbread, then a Lambstone, till you have filled up the Pie,
and cover them with Dates, and sliced Citron, and Limon. When it is drawn, take
two or three Yolks of Eggs, beat them, and put to them a little fresh Butter,
white wind and Sugar, and pour it into the Tunnel, scrape some Loaf-sugar upon
the Lid, and so serve it.

167. To Roast Eels.
When they are flayed, cut them to pieces, about three or four Inches long, dry
them, and put them into a Dish, mince a little Thyme, two Onions, a piece of
Limon-peel, a little Pepper beaten small, Nutmeg, Mace, and Salt; when it is
cut exceeding small, strew it on the Eels, with the Yolks of two or three Eggs;
then having a small Spit (or else a couple of square sticks made for that
purpose) spit through the Eels cross-ways, and put a Bay-leaf between every
piece of Eel, and tying the sticks on a spit, let them Roast; you need not turn
them constantly, but let them stand till they hiss, or are brown, and so do
them on the other side, and put the Dish (in which the Eel was with the
seasoning) underneath, to save the Gravy; baste it over with sweet butter. The
sauce must be a little Claret Wine, some minced Oysters, with their Liquor, a
grated Nutmeg, and an Onion, with sweet Butter, and so serve it.

168. To boil Cocks, or Larks.
Boil them with the Guts in them in strong Broth, or fair water, and three or
four whole Onions, large Mace, and Salt; the Cocks being boiled, make sauce
with some thin slices of Manchet, or grated bread in another Pipkin, and some
of the broth where the Fowl, or the Co^ks boil; then put to it some butter,
and the Guts and Liver minced; then take some Yolks of Eggs dissolved with
Vinegar, and some grated Nutmeg; put it to the other Ingredients, stir them
together, and dish the Fowl in fine Sippets, pour on the sauce with some sliced
Limon, Grapes, or Barberries, and run it over with beaten butter.

169. To broyl Oysters.
Lake the biggest Oysters you can get, then take a little minced Thyme, grated
Nutmeg, grated bread, and a little salt, put this to the Oysters; then get some
of the largest bottom-shells, and place them on the Grid-Iron, and put two or
three Oysters in each shell, then put some butter to them, and let them simper
on the Fire till the Liquor bubbles low, supplying it still with butter; when
they are crisp, feed them with White Wind and a little of their own Liquor,
with a little grated bread, Nutmeg, and minced Thyme, but as much only as to
relish it, so let it boil up again; then add some drawn butter to thicken them,
and Dish them.

170. To pickle Oysters.
Take a quart of the largest great Oysters with the Liquor, wash them clean,
and wipe them, add to them a pint of fair water, and half a pint of
White-wine-Vinegar, half an Ounce of whole Pepper, an handful of salt, a
quarter of an Ounce of large Mace, with the Liquor of the Oysters strained; put
all together in a Pipkin over a soft Fire, let them simper together a quarter
of an hour; when the Oysters are enough, take them up, and put them into a
little fair water and Vinegar till they be cold; let the Pickle boil a quarter
of an hour after the Oysters are taken up; both being cold, put them up
together: When you use them, Garnish the Dish with Barberries and Limon, and a
little of the Mace and Pepper, and pour in some of the Pickle.

171. To make English Pottage.
Make it with Beef, Mutton, and Veal, putting in some Oatmeal, and good
Pot Herbs, as Parsley, Sorrel, Violet-leaves, and a very little Thyme, and
sweet Marjoram, scarce to be tasted, and some Marigold-leaves at last; you may
begin to boil it Overnight, and let it stand warm all Night, and make an end
of boiling it next Morning; it is good to put into the Pot at first twenty or
thirty Corns of whole Pepper.

172. To stew Beef.
Take very good Beef, and slice it very thin, and beat it with the back of a
knife, put to it the Gravy of some Meat, and some Wine, and strong broth,
sweet Herbs a quantity; let it stew till be very tender, season it to your
liking; and varnish your Dish with Marygold-flowers, or Barberries.

173. To make Excellent Minced-Pyes.
Par-boyl Neats-To^gues, then peel and hash them with as much as they weigh of
Beef Suet and stoned Raisins, and picked Currants; chop all exceeding small, that
it be like Pap; employ therein at least an hour more than Ordinarily is used,
then mingle a very little sugar with them, and a little Wine, and thrust in up
and down some thin slices of green Candyed Citron-peel; and put this into
Coffins of fine, light, well reared Crust; half an hours baking will be enough:
If you strew a few Carraway Comfits on the top, it will not be amiss.

174. To Pickle Roast-beef, Chine, or Surloin.
Stuff any of the aforesaid Beef with Pennyroyal, or other sweet Herbs, or
Parsley minced small, and some salt; prick in here and there a few whole
Cloves, and Roast it; then take Claret Wine, wine-Vinegar, whole Pepper,
Rosemary, Bays, and Thyme bound up close in a bundle, and boiled in some
Claret Wine, and wine-Vinegar; make the pickle, and put some Salt to it, and
pack it up in a Barrel that will but just hold it, put the pickle to it, close
it on the Head, and keep it for your Use.

175. To make a double-Tart.
Peel Codlings tenderly boiled, cut them in halves, and fill your Tart; put
into it a quarter of a hundred of Codlings, a pound and half of Sugar, a few
Cloves, and a little Cinnamon; close up the Coffin and bake it. When it comes
out, cut off the lid, and having a Lid cut in flowers ready, lay it on, and
Garnish it with Preserves of Damsons, Rasberries, Apricots, and Cherries, and
place a Preserved Quince in the middle, and strew it with Sugar-biskets.

176. To make a Warden, or Pear-Pye.
Bake your Wardens, or Pears in an Oven, with a little water, and good quantity
of Sugar; let your pot be covered with a piece of Dough, let them not be fully
baked by a quarter of an hour; when they are cold, make a high Coffin, and put
them in whole, adding to them some Cloves, whole Cinnamon, Sugar, with some of
the Liquor they were baked in, so bake it.

177. To bake a Pig, Court-Fashion.
Flea a small Young Pig, cut it in quarters, or in smaller pieces, season it
with Pepper, Ginger, and Salt, lay it into a fit Coffin, strip, and mince small
a handful of Parsley, six springs of Winter-savoury, strew it on the Meat in
the Pie, and strew upon that the Yolks of three or four hard Eggs minced, and
lay upon them five or six blades of Mace, a handful of Clusters of Barberries,
a handful of Currants well washed and picked, a little Sugar, half a pound of
sweet Butter, or more; close your Pie, and set it in an Oven as hot as for
Manchet, and in three hours it will be well baked; draw it forth, and put in
half a pound of Sugar, being warmed upon the Fire, pour it all over the Meat,
and put on the Pye-lid again, scrape on Sugar, and serve it hot to the Table.

178. To make a Pudding of Hogs-Liver.
Boil your Liver, and grate it, put to it more grated bread than Liver, with as
much fine Flower, as of either, put twelve Eggs, to the value of a Gallon of
this mixture, with about two pound of Beef Suet minced small, and a pound and
half of Currants, half a quarter of a pint of Rose Water, a good quantity of
Cloves and Mace, Nutmeg, Cinnamon, and Ginger, all minced very small; mix all
these with sweet Milk and Cream, and let it be no thicker than Fritter-Batter;
To fill your Hogs-guts, you make it with the Maw, fit to be eaten hot at Table;
in your knitting, or tying the Guts, you must remember to give them three or
four Inches scope: In your putting them into boyling-water, you must handle
them round, to bring the Meat equal to all parts of the Gut; they will ask
about half an hours boiling, the boiling must be sober, if the wind ri^e in
them, you must be ready to prick them, or else they will fly, and burst in
pieces.

179. Olives of Beef stewed and Roasted.
Take a Buttock of Beef, and cut some of it into thin slices as broad as your
hand, then hack them with the back of a knife, Lard them with small Lard, and
season them with Pepper, Salt, and Nutmeg; then make a farsing with some sweet
herbs, Thyme, Onions, the Yolks of hard Eggs, Beef Suet, or Lard, all minced,
some Salt, Barberries, Grapes, or Gooseberries; season it with the former
Spices lightly, and work it up together; then lay it on the slices, and roll
them up round with some Caul of Veal, Beef, or Mutton, bake them in a Dish in
the Oven, or Roast them; then put them in a Pipkin with some butter and
Saffron, or none; blow off the Fat from the Gravy, and put it to them, with
some Artichoaks, Potato, or Skir^ets blanched, being first boiled, a little
Claret Wine, and serve them on Sippets, with some sliced Orange, Limon,
Barberries, Grapes, or Gooseberries.

180. To make a French-Barley-Posset.
Put two quarts of Milk to half a pound of French-Barley, boil it small till it
is enough; when the Milk is almost boiled away, put to it three pints of good
Cream, let it boil together a quarter of an hour; then sweeten it, and put in
Mace and Cinnamon in the beginning when you first put in your Cream; when you
have done so, take White Wind a pint, or Sack and White Wind together, of each
half a pint, sweeten it as you love it, with Sugar, pour in all the Cream, but
leave your Barley behind in the skillet; this will make an Excellent Posset,
nothing else but a tender Curd to the bottom; let it stand on the Coals half a
quarter of an hour.

181. To bake chucks of Veal.
Par-boyl two pound of the lean Flesh of a Leg of Veal, mince it as small as
grated Bread, with four pound of Beef Suet; then season it with Biskay, Dates,
and Carraways, and some Rose Water, Sugar, Raisins of the Sun, and Currants,
Cloves, Mace, Nutmegs, and Cinnamon, mingle them altogether, fill your Pyes, and
bake them.

182. How to Stew a Mallard.
Roast your Mallard half enough, then take it up, and cut it in little pieces;
then put it into a Dish with the Gravy, and a piece of fresh Butter, and a
handful of Parsley chopped small, with two or three Onions, and a
Cabbage-Lettuce; let them stew one hour, then season it with Pepper and Salt,
and a little Verjuice, and so serve it.

183. To Stew a Rabbit.
Half-Roast it, then take it off the Spit, and cut it into little pieces, and
put it into a Dish with the Gravy, and as much Liquor as will cover it; then
put in a piece of fresh Butter, and some powder and Ginger, Pepper and salt,
two or three Pippins minced small; let these stew an hour, and Dish them upon
Sippets, and serve it.

184. To make a Pigeon-Pye.
Truss your Pigeons to bake, and set them, and Lard the one half of them with
Bacon, mince a few sweet herbs and Parsley with a little Beef Suet, the Yolks
of hard Eggs, and an Onion or two, season it with Salt, beaten Pepper, Cloves,
Mace, and Nutmeg; work it up with a piece of butter, and stuff the bellies of
the Pigeons, season them with Salt and Pepper, as before: Take also as many
Lamb-stones seasoned as before, with six Collops of Bacon, the salt drawn out;
then make a round Coffin and put in your Pigeons, and if you will, put in
Lamb-stones and sweetbreads, and some Artichoak-bottoms, or other dry Meat to
soak up the Juice, because the Pie will be very sweet, and full of it; then put
a little White Wind beaten up with the Yolk of an Egg, when it comes out of the
Oven, and so serve it.

185. To Stew a Fillet of Beef, the Italian Fashion.
Take a Young tender Fillet of Beef, and take away all the skins and Sinews
clean from it, put to it some good White Wind in a Boul, wash it, and crush it
well in the Wine; then strew upon it a little Pepper, and as much salt as will
season it; mingle them very well, and put to it as much Wine as will cover it,
lay a Trencher upon it to keep it down in a close pan, with a weight on it, and
let it steep two Nights and a Day; then take it out, and put it into a Pipkin
with some good Beef-broath, but none of the pickle to it, but only Beef-broath,
and that sweet, and not salt; cover it close, and set it on the Embers, then
put to it a few whole Cloves and Mace, and let it stew till it be enough; it
will be very tender, and of an Excellent Taste: Serve it with the same broth
as much as will cover it.

186. To boil a Capon, or Chicken with several Compositions.
You must take off the skin whole, but leave on the Legs, Wings, and Head;
mince the Body with some Beef Suet, or Lard, put to it some sweet Herbs minced,
and season it with Cloves, Mace, Pepper, Salt, two or three Eggs, Grapes,
Gooseberries or Barberries, bits of Potato or Mushromes; in the Winter, with
Sugar, Currants, and Pruans: Fill the skin, prick it up, and stew it between two
Dishes, with large Mace, and strong broth, pieces of Artichoaks, Cardones, or
Asparagus and Marrow; being finely stewed, serve it on Carved Sippets, and run
it over with beaten butter, Limon sliced, and scrape on Sugar.

187. To broyl a Leg of Pork.
Cut your Pork into slices very thin, having first taken off the skinny part of
the Fillet, then hack it with the back of your Knife, then mince some Thyme and
Sage exceeding small, and mingle it with Pepper and Salt, and therewith season
your Collops, and then lay them on the Grid-Iron; when they are enough, make
sauce for them with Butter, Vinegar, Mustard, and Sugar, and so serve them.

188. To make a Fricacie of Patridges.
After you have Trussed your Patridges, Roast them till they are almost enough,
and then cut them to pieces; then having chopped an Onion very small, fry them
therewith; then put to them half a pint of Gravy, two or three Anchovies, a
little bread grated, some drawn butter, and the Yolks of two or three Eggs
beaten up with a little White Wind; let them boil till they come to be pretty
thick, and so Dish them up.

189. To bake Calves-Feet.
You must season them with Pepper, Salt, and Currants, and then bake them in a
Pie; when they are baked; take the Yolks of three or four Eggs, and beat them
with Verjuice, or Vinegar, Sugar, and grated Nutmeg; put it into your Pie, then
scrape on Sugar, and so serve it.

190. To Fry Neats-Tongues.
First, boil them, and after blanch them, and then cut them into thin slices;
season them with Nutmeg, Sugar, Cinnamon, put to them the Yolks of raw Eggs, and
a Limon cut into little square pieces, then Fry them in spoonfuls with sweet
butter; make your sauce with White Wind, Sugar, and Butter, heat it hot, and
pour it on your Tongues, scrape Sugar on it, and serve it.

191. To Roast a Hare.
When you Case your Hare, do not cut off his hinder Legs, or Ears, but hack one
Leg through another, and so also cut a hole through one Ear, and put it through
the other, and so Roast him; make your Sauce with the Liver of the Hare boiled,
and minced small with a little Marjoram, Thyme, and Winter-Savoury, and the
Yolks of three or four hard Eggs, with a little Bacon and Beef Suet; boil this
all up with Water and Vinegar, and then grate a little Nutmeg, and put to it
some sweet butter, and a little Sugar; Dish your Hare, and serve it. This may
also serve for Rabbits.

192. To Roast a Shoulder of Mutton with Oysters.
Par-boyl your Oysters, then mince Winter-savoury, Thyme, Parsley, and the
Yolks of five or six hard Eggs, hard boiled; add to these a halfpenny loaf of
grated bread, and three or four Yolks of Eggs; mingle all these together with
your Hands, when you have Spitted your Mutton, make holes in it as big as you
think convenient; put in your Oysters, with the other Ingredients, about twenty
five, or thirty Oysters will be enough, let it Roast indifferent long, then
take the remainder of a quart of Oysters, for you must have so many in all, and
put them into a deep Dish with Claret Wine, two or three Onions cut in halves,
and two or three Anchovies; put all this in the Dripping-pan under your Mutton,
and save your Gravy, and when the Meat is enough, put your sauce upon the
Coals, and put to it the Yolk of an Egg beaten, grated Nutmeg, and sweet
butter; Dish your Mutton, and pour in your Oysters, Sauce and all upon it,
Garnishing your Dish with Limons and Barberries.

193. A Rare Broth.
Take a couple of Cocks, and cut off their Wings and Legs, and wash them clean,
and par-boyl them very well, till there rise no scum, then wash them again in
fair water; then put them in a Pitcher with a pint of Rhenish Wine, and some
strong Broth, as much as will cover them, together with a little China-Root,
an Ounce or two of Hartshorn, with a few Cloves, Nutmeg, large Mace, Ginger
shred, and whole Pepper, and a little Salt; stop up your Pitcher close, that no
steam may come out; boil the Pitcher in a great pot of water about six hours,
then pour out the broth, and strain it into a Basin, and squeeze into it the
juice of two or three Limons, and so eat it.

194. To bake Sweetbreads.
Boil your Sweetbreads, and put to them the Yolks of two Eggs, new laid, grated
bread, with some par-boyled Currants, and three or four Dates minced; and when
you have seasoned it lightly with Pepper, Sugar, Nutmeg, and Salt, put to it
the juice of a Limon; put up all these together into Puff-paste, and so bake it.

195. To make Pottage of French-Barley.
Pick your Barley very clean from dirt, and dust, then boil some Milk, and put
it in while it boyls; when it is well boiled, put in a little salt, sugar,
large Mace, and a little Cream; and when you have boiled it pretty thick, Dish
it, and serve it up with Sugar scraped thereon.

196. To boil a Hanch of Venison.
First, stuff your Venison with a handful of sweet Herbs and Parsley minced
with a little Beef Suet, and some Yolks of Eggs boiled hard; season your
stuffing with Nutmeg, salt, and Ginger; having powdered your Hanch, boil it,
afterward boil up two or three Colliflowers in strong broth, adding to it a
little Milk; when they are boiled, put them into a Pipkin, and put to them
drawn butter, keeping them warm; then boil up two or three handfuls of Spinach
in the same Liquor; when it is boiled up, pour out part of your Broth, and put
to it a little Vinegar, a Ladle-ful of sweet butter, and a grated Nutmeg; your
Dish being ready with Sippets on the bottom, put the Spinach round the sides of
your Dish; when the Venison is boiled, take it up, and put it in the middle of
the dish, lay your Colliflowers over it, pour on sweet Butter over that,
Garnish it with Barberries, and some Parsley minced round the brims of the Dish.

197. To make a Florentine of Sweet-breads, or Kidneys.
Take three or four Kidneys, or Sweet-breads, and when they are par-boyled,
mince them small; season it with a little Cinnamon and Nutmeg, sweeten it with
sugar and a little grated bread, with the Marrow of two or three Marrow-bones
in good big pieces, add to these about a quarter of a pound of Almond-paste,
and about half a pint of Malaga Sack, two spoonfuls of Rose Water, and Musk and
Ambergris, of each a grain, with a quarter of a pint of Cream, and three or
four Eggs; mix all together, and make it up in puss-paste, then bake it; in
three quarters of an hour it will be enough.

198. To stew a Rump of Beef.
Season your Beef with some Nutmeg grated, together with some salt and pepper,
season it on the bony side, and lay it in the Pipkin with the Fat side
downward; then take two or three great Onions, and a bunch of Rosemary tied up
together with three pints of Elder-Vinegar, and three pints of Water; stew all
these three or four hours together in a pipkin, close covered over a soft Fire;
Dish it upon Sippets, blowing off the Fat from the Gravy, put some of the Gravy
to the Beef, and serve it up.

199. To make Pottage of a Capon.
Take Beef and Mutton, and cut it into pieces; then boil a large Earthen pot ot
Water, take out half the water, put in your Meat, and skim it, and when it
boyls season it with Pepper and salt; when it has boiled about two hours, add
four or five Cloves, half an hour before you think it is enough, put in your
Herbs, Sorrel, Purslain, Burrage, Lettuce, and Bugloss, or green Pease; and in
the Winter, parsley-Roots, and white Endive; pour the Broth upon light bread
toasted, and stew it a while in the Dish covered. If your water consume in
boiling, fill it up with water boiling hot. The less there is of the broth,
the better it is, though it be but a porringer-full, for then it would be as
stiff as Jelly when it is cold.

200. To make a Pie with pippins.
Pare your pippins, and cut out the Cores; then make your Coffin of Crust, take
a good handful of Quinces sliced, and lay at the bottom, then lay your pippins
a top, and fill the holes where the Core was taken out with syrup of Quinces,
and put into every pippin a piece of Orangado, then pour on the top syrup of
Quinces, then put in sugar, and so close it up; let it be very well baked, for
it will ask much soaking^ especially the Quinces.

201. To boil Pigeons, the Dutch way.
Lard, and set your Pigeons, put them into a Pipkin, with some strong broth
made of Knuckles of Veal, Mutton, and Beef, let them be close covered, and when
they are scumm'd, put in a Faggot of sweet Herbs, a handful of Capers, and a
little large Mace, with a few Raisins of the Sun minced very small, about six
Dates quartered, a piece of butter, with two or three Yolks of hard Eggs
minced, with a handful of Grapes, or Barberries; then beat two Yolks of Eggs
with Verjuice and some white-bread, a Ladle-full of sweet Butter, and a grated
Nutmeg; serve it upon Sippets.

202. To make Excellent Black-puddings.
Beat half a score Eggs, the Yolks and Whites together very well; then take
about a quart of Sheeps-blood, and as much Cream; when you have stirred all
this well together, thicken it with grated bread, Oatmeal finely beaten, of
each a like quantity; add to these some Marrow in little lumps, and a little
Beef Suet shred small, season it with Nutmeg, Cloves, Mace mingled with Salt, a
little sweet Marjoram, Thyme, and Pennyroyal shred very well together; mingle
all together, put to them a few Currants, cleanse your Guts very well, fill
them, and boil them carefully.

203. To make a Pie of Neats-Tongues.
Par-boyl a couple of Neats-Tongues, then cut out the Meat at the Root-end as
far as you can, not breaking it out at the sides; take the Meat you cut out,
and mingle it with a little suet, a little Parsley, and a few sweet Herbs, cut
all very small, and mingled together; season all this with Ginger, Cloves,
Mace, Pepper, Salt, and a little grated bread, and as much Sugar, together with
the Yolks of three or four Eggs; make this up together, and season your
Tongues, inside, and outside, with your seasoning aforesaid, and wash them
within with the Yolk of an Egg, and force them where you cut forth the Meat,
and what remains make into a sorc'd; then make your Paste into the Fashion of a
Neats-Tongue, and lay them in with Puddings, and little Balls, then put to them
Limon and Dates shred, and butter on the top, and close it; when it is baked,
put in a lear of the Venison-sauce, which is Claret Wine, Vinegar, grated
bread, Cinnamon, Ginger, Sugar, boil it up thick, that it may run like butter,
and let it be sharp and sweet, and so serve it.

204, To stew a Breast, or Loyn of Mutton.
Joint either your Loyn or Breast of Mutton well, draw it, and stuff it with
sweet Herbs, and Parsley minced; then put it in a deep stewing-dish with the
right side downward, put to it so much White Wind and strong Broth as will
stew it, set it on the Coals, put to it two or three Onions, a bundle of sweet
Herbs, and a little large Mace; when it is almost stewed, take a handful of
Spinach, Parsley, and Endive, and put into it, or else some Gooseberries and
Grapes; in the Winter time, Samphire and Capers; add these at any time: Dish up
your Mutton, and put by the Liquor you do not use, and thicken the other with
Yolks of Eggs and sweet butter, put on the sauce and the Herbs over the Meat;
Garnish your Dish with Limon and Barberries.

205. To make a Sallet of Green Pease.
Cut up as many green Pease as you think will make a Sallet, when they are
newly come up about half a Foot high; then set your Liquor over the Fire, and
let it boil, and then put them in; when they are boiled tender put them out,
and drain them very well; then mince them, and put in some good sweet butter,
salt it, and stir it well together, and so serve it.

206. To make a Sallet of Fennel.
Cut your Fennel while it is Young, and about four Fingers high, tie it up in
bunches like Asparagus; gather enough for your Sallet, and put it in when your
water is boiling hot, boil it soft, drain it, Dish it up with Butter, as the
green Pease.

207. To make a Tansie of Spinach.
Take a quart of Cream, and about twenty Eggs, without the Whites, add to it
Sugar and grated Nutmeg, and color it green with the juice of Spinach; then
put it in your Dish, and squeeze a Limon or two on it; Garnish it with slices
of Orange, then strew on Sugar, and so serve it.

208. To make a Hash of a Duck.
When your Ducks are Roasted, take all the Flesh from the Bones, and hash it
very thin; then put it into your stewing-pan with a little Gravy, strong
Broth, and Claret Wine, put to it an Onion or two minced very small, and a
little small Pepper; let all this boil together with a little Salt, then put to
them about a pound of Sausages, when you think they are ready, stir them with a
little Butter drawn: Garnish it with Limon, and serve it.

209. To make French Puffs with Green Herbs.
Take a quantity of Endive, Parsley, and Spinach, and a little Winter-Savoury,
and when you have minced them exceeding small, season them with Sugar, Ginger,
and Nutmeg; beat as many Eggs as you think will wet your Herbs, and so make it
up; then pare a Limon and cut it in thin slices, and to every slice of Limon
put a slice of your prepared stuff, then fry it in sweet butter, and serve them
in Sippets, after you have put to them either a Glass of Canary, or White Wind.

210. To make Excellent stewed Broth.
Take a Leg of Beef, boil it well, and scum it clean, then take your Bread and
slice it, and lay it to soak in your Broth, then run it through a strainer,
and put as much into your Broth as will thicken it; when it has boiled a
pretty while, put in your Pruans, Raisins, and Currants, with Cinnamon, Cloves,
and Mace beaten; when your Pruans are boiled, take them up, and run them also
through a strainer, as you did the bread, then put in half a pint of Claret,
then let it boil very well, and when it is ready, put to it Rose Water and
Sugar, and so serve it.

211. To Stew a Dish of Breams.
Take your Breams, and dress them, and dry them well, and salt them; then make
a Charcoal Fire, and lay them on the Grid-Iron over the Fire being very hot;
let them be indifferent brown on both sides, then put a Glass of Claret into a
Pewter Dish, and set it over the Fire to boil, put into it two or three
Anchovies, as many Onions, and about half a pint of Gravy, a pint of Oysters,
with a little Thyme minced small; when it has boiled a while, put to it a
little melted Butter and a Nutmeg. Then Dish your Bream, and pour all this upon
it, and then set it again on the Fire, putting some Yolks of Eggs over it.

212. To boil a Mullet.
Having scalled your Mullet, you must save their Livers and Roes, then put them
in water boiling hot, put to them a Glass of Claret, a bundle of sweet Herbs,
with a little Salt and Vinegar, two or three whole Onions, and a Limon sliced;
then take some whole Nutmegs and quarter them, and some large Mace, and some
Butter drawn with Claret, wherein dissolve two or three Anchovies; Dish up your
Fish, and pour on your Sauce, being first seasoned with Salt: Garnish your
Dishes with fried Oysters and Bay Leaves; and thus you may season your Liquor
for boiling most other Fish.

213. To Farce, or stuff a Fillet of Veal.
Take a large Leg of Veal, and cut off a couple of Fillets from it, then mince
a handful of sweet Herbs, and Parsley, and the Yolks of two or three hard Eggs;
let all these be minced very small, then season it with a couple of grated
Nutmegs, and a little Salt, and so Farce, or stuff your Veal with it, then Lard
it with Bacon and Thyme very well, then let it be Roasted, and when it is
almost enough, take some of your stuffing, about a handful, and as many
Currants, and put these to a little strong broth, a Glass of Claret, and a
little Vinegar, a little Sugar, and some Mace; when your Meat is almost ready,
take it up, and put it into this, and let it stew, putting to it a little
Butter melted, put your Meat in your Dish, and pour your Sauce upon it, and
serve it.

214. To make a Pudding of Oatmeal.
Take a quart of Milk, and boil it in a Skillet, put to it a good handful of
Oatmeal beat very small, with a stick or two of Cinnamon, and Mace; put in this
Oatmeal as much as will thicken it, before the Milk be hot, then keep it
stirring, and let it boil for about half an hour, putting into it a handful of
Beef Suet minced very small, then take it off, and pour it into a Dish, and let
it stand to cool, if it be too thick, put to more Milk, then put in a Nutmeg
grated, a handful of Sugar, with three or four Eggs beaten, and some
Rose Water, then rub the Dish within with butter, and pour out your Pudding
into it; let it be as thin as Batter, let it bake half an hour, scrape Sugar on
it, serve it up.

215. To make a pudding of Rice.
Take a good handful of Rice beaten small, and put it into about three pints of
Milk, adding a little Mace and Cinnamon, then boil it, keeping it always
stirring, till it grow thick, then put a piece of Butter into it, and let it
boil a quarter of an hour, then pour it out to cool, then put to it half a
dozen Dates minced, a little Sugar, a little beaten Cinnamon, and a couple of
handfuls of Currants, then beat about half a score Eggs, throwing away two or
three of the whites, put in some salt, butter the bottom of your Dish, pour in
your Pudding, bake it as before, put on a little Rose Water and sugar, and
serve it.

216. To make a Florentine of Spinach.
Take a good quantity of Spinach, to the quantity of two Gallons, set your
water over the Fire, and when it boyls very high, put in your Spinach, and let
it remain in a little while, then put it out into a strainer, and let it drain
very well, and squeeze out all the water, then take it and mince it small with
a Candyed Orange-peel or two, add to it about three quarters of Currants boiled
also, season it with Salt, Ginger beaten, Cinnamon, and Nutmeg; then lay your
Paste thin in a Dish, and put it in, adding Butter and Sugar, close it up,
prick it with holes, and bake it; when it is nigh baked, put into it a Glass of
Sack, and a little melted Butter and Vinegar, stir it together with your Knife,
scrape Sugar upon it, and serve it.

217. To make a Tansey of Cowslips.
Take your Cowslips or Violets, and pound them in a Wooden or Marble Mortar,
put to them about twelve Eggs, with three or four of the whites taken out,
about a pint of Cream, a quartern of white Sugar, Cinnamon beaten small, Nutmeg,
and about a handful of grated bread, with a little Rose Water; then take all
these together, and put them in a skillet with a little Butter, and set them
over the Fire, stirring it till it grow thick; then put your Drying Pan on the
Fire, and when it is hot, put some Butter into it, and then put in your Tansey;
when you think it enough of one side, butter a Pewter Plate, and turn it
therewith; when it is Fried, squeeze on a Limon, scrape on Sugar, Garnish it
with Oranges quartered, and serve it.

218. To make Excellent white puddings.
Take the humbles of a Hog, and boil them very tender, then take the Heart, the
Lights, and all the Flesh about them, picking them clean from all the Sinewy
skins, and then chop the Meat as small as you can, then take the Liver, and
boil it hard, and grate a little of it and mingle therewith, and also a little
grated Nutmeg, Cinnamon, Cloves, Mace, Sugar, and a few Carraway-seeds, with the
yolks of four or five Eggs, and about a pint of the best Cream, a Glass of
Canary, and a little Rose Water, with a good quantity of Hogs-suet, and salt;
make all into Rouls, and let it lie about an hour and half before you put it in
the Guts, laying the Guts asteep in Rose Water before, boil them, and have a
care of breaking them.

219. To stew Flounders.
Draw your Flounders, and wash them, and scorch them on the white side, being
put in a Dish, put to them a little White Wind, a few minced Oysters, some
whole Pepper, and sliced Ginger, a few sweet Herbs, two or three Onions
quartered, and Salt; put all these into your stewing-pan, covered close, and
let them stew as soon as you can, then Dish them on Sippets; then take some of
the Liquor they were stewed in, put some butter to it, and the Yolk of an Egg
beaten, and pour it on the Flounders; Garnish it with Limon, and Ginger beaten
on the brims of the Dish.

220. To draw Butter for Sauce.
Cut your Butter into thin slices, put it into your Dish, let it melt leisurely
upon the Coals, being often stirred; and after it is melted, put to it a little
Vinegar, or fair water, which you will, bea^ it up till it be thick, if it keep
its color white, it is good; but if yellow and turned, it is not to be used.

221. To Roast a Salmon whole.
Draw your Salmon at the Gills, and after it is scaled, washed, and dried, Lard
it with pickled Herring, or a fat Eel salted; then take about a pint of Oysters
parboyled, put to these a few sweet Herbs, some grated bread, about half a
dozen hard Eggs, with a couple of Onions; shred all these very small, and put
to it Ginger, Nutmeg, Salt, Pepper, Cloves, and Mace; mix these together, and
put them all within the Salmon at the Gills: put them into the Oven in an
Earthen pan, born up with pieces of Wood, in the bottom of the Dish, put
Claret Wine, and baste your Salmon very well over with Butter before you put it
in the Oven; when it is drawn, make your Sauce of the Liquor that is in the
pan, and some of the spawn of the Salmon boiled with some melted Butter on the
top; stick him about with Toasts and Bay Leaves fried, take ^ut the Oysters
from within, and Garnish the Dish therewith.

222. To make Excellent Sauce for Mutton, either Chines, Legs, or Necks.
Take half a dozen Onions shred very small, a little strong Broth, and a glass
of White Wind; boil all these well together: Then take half a pint of Oysters,
and mince them, with a little Parsley, and two or three small bunches of
Grapes, if in season, with a Nutmeg sliced, and the Yolks of two or three Eggs;
put in all these together with the former, and boil it, and pour it all over
your Meat, and then pour some melted Butter on the top, and strew on the Yolks
of two or three hard Eggs minced small.

223. Another good Sauce for Mutton.
Take a handful of Pickled Cucumbers, as many Capers, and as much Samphire; put
them into a little Verjuice, White Wind, and a little strong Broth, and a
Limon cut in small pieces, and a little Nutmeg grated; let them boil together,
and then beat them up thick, with a Ladleful of Butter melted, and a couple of
Yolks of Eggs, and a little sugar; Dish your Meat upon Sippets, pour on your
sauce, and Garnish it with Samphire, Capers, and Barberries.

224. To make Sauce for Turkies, or Capons.
Take a two-penny white loaf, and lay it a soaking in strong broth, with
Onions sliced therein; then boil it in Gravy, together with a Limon cut in
small pieces, a little Nutmeg sliced, and some melted, put this under your
Turkey, or Capon, and so serve it; you will find it Excellent Sauce.

Because many Books of this Nature have the Terms of Carving added to them, as
being necessary for the more proper Nominating of things; I have thought good
also to add them: As also some Bills of Fare, both upon Ordinary, and
Extraordinary Occasions.
Terms of Carving, both Fish, Fowl, and Flesh.
ALlay a Pheasant. Barb a Lobster. Border a Pasty. Break a Deer, or Egript.
Break a Sarcel, or Teal. Chine a Salmon. Culpon a Trout. Cut up a Turkey, or
Bustard. Dis-member that Heron. Display that Crane. Dis-figure that Peacock.
Fin that Chevin. Leach that Brawn. Lift that Swan. Mince that Plover. Rear that
Goose. Sauce a Capon, or Tench. Sauce a Plaice, or Flounder. Side that Haddock.
Splay that Bream. Splat that Pike. Spoil that Hen. String that Lamprey. Tame a
Crab. Thigh a Pigeon, and Woodcock, and all manner of small Birds. Timber the
Fire. Tire an Egg. Tranch that Sturgeon. Transon that Eel. Trush that Chicken.
Tusk a Barbel. Unbrace a Mallard. Under-tench a Porpuss. Unjoynt a Bittern.
Unlace a Coney. Untach that Curlew Untach that Brew.
Particular Directions how to Carve, according to the former Terms of Carving.
Unlace that Coney.
LAY your Coney on the Back, and cut away the Vents, then raise the Wings, and
the sides, and lay the Carcass and sides together; then put to your sauce, with
a little beaten Ginger and Vinegar.

Thigh a Woodcock.
Raise the Legs and Wings of the Woodcock, as you would do of a Hen, then take
out the Brains, and no other sauce but salt.

Allay a Pheasant.
Raise the Legs and Wings of the Pheasant, as of a Woodcock, as also of a
Snite and a Plover, and only salt.

Display a Crane.
Unfold the Legs of the Crane, and cut off his Wings by the Joints; then take
up his Wings and Legs, and make sauce of Mustard, salt, Vinegar, and a little
beaten Ginger.

To cut up a Turkey.
Raise up the Leg very fair, and open the Joint with the point of your Knife,
but cut it not off; then lace down the Breast with the point of your Knife, and
open the Breast Pinion, but take it not off, then raise up the merry-thought
betwixt the Breast Bone and the top, then lace down the Flesh on both sides the
Breast Bone, and raise up the Flesh, called the Brawn, and turn it outward upon
both sides, but break it not, nor cut it off, then cut off the Wing-Pinions at
the Joint next the Body, and stick in each side the Pinion in the place you
turned out the Brawn, but cut off the sharp end of the Pinion, and take the
middle piece, and that will fit just in the place; you may cut up a Capon, or
Pheasant the same way.

Break a Sarcel, or Teal, or Egript.
Raise the Legs and Wings of the Teal, and no sauce but salt.

Wing a Partridge, or Quail.
Raise his Legs and Wings, as of a Hen, and if you mince him, make sauce with a
little White Wind, and a little beaten Ginger, keeping him warm upon a
Chafing Dish of Coals, till you serve him.

To untach a Curlew, or Brew.
Take either of them, and Raise their Legs, as before, and no sauce but salt.

To Unbrace a Mallard.
Raise up the Pinion and Legs, but take them not off, and raise the
merry-thought from the Breast, and lace down each side with your Knife, waving
it two and fro.

To Sauce a Capon.
Lift up the Right Leg of the Capon, and also the Right Wing, and so lay it in
the Dish in the posture of Flying, and so serve them; but remember, that Capons
and Chickens be only one sauce, and Chickens must have green sauce, or Verjuice.

Bills of Fare for all times of the Tear; and also for Extraordinary Occasions.
A Bill of Fare for the Spring Season.
1. A Collar of Brawn and Mustard. 2. A Neats-Tongue and Udder. 3. Boiled
Chickens. 4. Green Geese. 5. A Lumbard-Pye. 6. A Dish of Young Rabbits.
Second Course.
1. A Haunch of Venison. 2. Veal Roasted. 3. A Dish of Soles, or Smelts. 4. A
Dish of Asparagus. 5. Tansie. 6. Tarts and Custards.
A Bill of Fare for Midsomer.
1. A Neats-Tongue and Colliflowers. 2. A Fore-Quarter of Lamb. 3. A
Chicken-Pye. 4. Boiled Pigeons. 5. A couple of stewed Rabbits. 6. A Breast of
Veal Roasted.
Second Course.
1. A Artichoak-Pye. 2. A Venison-Pasty. 3. Lobsters and Salmon. 4. A Dish of
Pease. 5. A Gooseberry-Tart. 6. A Dish of Strawberries.
A Bill of Fare for Autumn, or Harvest.
1. A Capon and white Broth. 2. A Westphalia Ham, with Pigeons. 3. A Grand
Sallet. 4. A Neats-Tongue and Udder Roasted. 5. A powdered Goose. 6. A Turkey
Roasted.
Second Course.
1. A Potato, or Chicken Pie. 2. Roasted Patridges. 3. Larks and Chickens. 4. A
Made Dish. 5. A Warden Pie, or Tart. 6. Custards.
A Bill of Fare for Winter Season.
1. A Collar of Brawn. 2. A Lambs Head and white Broth. 3. A Neats-Tongue and
Udder Roasted. 4. A Dish of Minced Pyes. 5. A Venison, or Lamb-Pye. 6. A Dish
of Chickens.
Second Course.
1. A Side of Lamb. 2. A Dish of Wild-Ducks. 3. A Quince-Tart. 4. A Couple of
Capons Roasted. 5. A Turkey Roasted. 6. A Dish of Custards.
A Bill of Fare upon an Extraordinary Occasion.
1. A Collar of Brawn. 2. A Couple of Pullets boiled. 3. A bisk of Fish. 4. A
Dish of C^rps. 5. A Grand boiled Meat. 6. A Grand Sallet. 7. A Venison Pasty.
8. A Roasted Turkey. 9. A Fat Pig. 10. A powdered Goose. 11. A Haunch of
Venison Roasted. 12. A Neats-Tongue and Udder Roasted. 13. A Westphalia Ham
boiled. 14. A Joll of Salmon. 15. Minced Pyes. 16. A Sur-Loyn of Roast beef.
17. Cold baked Meats. 18. A Dish of Custards.
Second Course.
1. Jellies of all sorts. 2. A Dish of Pheasants. 3. A Pike boiled. 4. An
Oyster-Pye. 5. A Dish of Plovers. 6. A Dish of Larks. 7. A Joll of Sturgeon. 8.
A couple of Lobsters. 9. A Lumber-Pye. 10. A Couple of Capons. 11. A Dish of
Patridges. 12. A Fricacie of Fowls. 13. A Dish of Wild-Ducks. 14. A Dish of
crammed Chickens. 15. A Dish of stewed Oysters. 16. A Marchpane. 17. A Dish of
Fruits. 18. A Dish of Tarts.
A Bill of Fare for Fish-days.
1. A Dish of Butter and Eggs. 2. A Barrel of Oysters. 3. A Pike boiled. 4. A
stewed Carp. 5. An Eel-Pye. 6. A Pole of Ling. 7. A Dish of green Fish buttered
with Eggs. 8. A Dish of stewed Oysters. 9. A Spinach Sallet boiled. 10. A Dish
of Soles. 11. A Joll of Fresh Salmon. 12. A Dish of Smelts Fried.
Second Course.
1. A Couple of Lobsters. 2. A Roasted Spitcheock. 3. A Dish of Anchovies. 4.
Fresh Cod. 5. A Bream Roasted. 6. A Dish of Trouts. 7. A Dish of Plaice boiled.
8. A Dish of Perches. 9. A Carp Farced. 10. A Potato-Pye. 11. A Dish of Prawns
buttered. 12. Tenches with short Broth. 13. A Dish of Turbut. 14. A Dish of
Eel-pouts. 15. A Sturgeon with short broth. 16. A Dish of Tarts and Custards.
A Bill of Fare for a Gentleman's House about Candlemas.
1. A Pottage with a Hen. 2. A Chatham- pudding. 3. A Fricacie of Chickens. 4.
Leg of Mutton with a Sallet. Garnish your Dishes with Barberries.
Second Course.
1. A Chine of Mutton. 2. A Chine of Veal. 3. A Lark-pye. 4. A Couple of
Pullets, one Larded. Garnished with Orange-slices.
Third Course.
1. A Dish of Woodcocks. 2. A Couple of Rabbits. 3. A Dish of Asparagus. 4. A
Westphalia Gammon.
Last Course.
1. Two Orange-Tarts, one with Herbs. 2. A Bacon-Tart. 3. An Apple-Tart. 4. A
Dish of Bon-Chriteen-pears. 5. A Dish of Pippins. 6. A Dish of Pear-mains.
A Banquet for the same Season.
1. A Dish of Apricots. 2. A Dish of Marmalade of pippins. 3. A Dish of
preserved Cherries. 4. A whole red Quince. 5. A Dish of dried Sweetmeats.
FINIS.
A TABLE TO THE Art of Preserving, Conserving, and Candying.
A.
ALmond-Butter. Page 7 Almond-Candle. 69. Almond-Milk. 10. Angellets to make.
15 Angelica-Roots preserved. 30 Angelica water. 23 Apricot-Cakes. 48 Apricots
preserved. 10 Aqua Composita. 35 Aqua Mirabilis. 12 Artichoak-bottoms pickled.
118 Artichoaks to pickle. 94 Artificial Claret Wine. 38 Artificial Malmsey. 28
Artificial Oranges. 87 Artificial Walnuts. 81
B.
Banbury-Cakes. 54 Barberries Candyed. 75 Barberries preserved. 76
Barley-Water. 34 Baum-water. 36 Bisket-Cakes to make. 36 Black-Cherry-Wine. 81
Bragget to make. 122 Broom-buds to pickle. 36 Burrage-flowers to Candy 47 Dr.
Burges Plague-water 40.
C.
Cakes of Limon. 80 Capon-water. 83 Carraway Cake. 91 Candying Pears, Plums,
and Apricots. 8 Caudle of great Virtue. 66 Cherries to Candy. 70 Cherries dried
in the Sun. 41 Cherries preserved. 4 Cherry-Wine. 13 Cherries to dry. 24
Chesiuts kept all the year. 79 China-broath. 84 Chips of Quinces. 10^ Crystal
Jelly to make. 45 Cinnamon S^gar. 74 Cinamon-water. 2 Clove-gilly flowers to
pickle. 72 Comfortable Syrup. 69 Comfits of all sorts to make. 112 Conserve of
Barberries. 2 Conserve of Burrage-flowers. 43 Conserve of Bugloss flowers. 101
Conserve of Damsons. 28 Conserve of Oranges. 5 Conserve of Prua s. 44 Conserve
of Qunces. 19 Conserve of Roses. 2 Conserve of Rosemary. 23 Conserve of Sage.
116 Conserve to strengthen the Back. 35 Conserve of Strawberries. 44 Conserves
for Tarts all the Year. 49 Cock-Ale to make. 9 Cordial strengthening broth. 77
Cream of Apricots. 76 Cream of Codlings. 8 Cream of Quinces. 9 Cream-Tarts.
Cornelians to pickle. 120 Cordial water of Clove gilly flowers. 92 Cucumbers to
pickle. 8 Cucumbers preserved green. 79 Cullice to make. 77 Currants preserved.
14 Currans-Wine. 115
D.
Damask-water. 57 Damsons preserved. 7 Dr. Deodates drink for the Scurvy. 35
Date-Leach. 62 Dry Vinegar to make. 62
E.
Elder-Vinegar. 83 Elecampane-Roots Candyed. 74 Eringo Roots Candyed. 73
Excellent Broth. 15 Excellent Hippocras presently. 37 Excellent Jelly. 10
Excellent Sur^eit-water. 93 Excellent sweet water. 40
F
Fine Cakes. 56 Flomery-Caudle. 97 French Beans to pickle. 10 French Biscuit to
make. 27 Fruits dried. ^0 Fruits preserved all the year. 97
G.
Ginger to Candy. 43 Ginger-bread to make. 55 Gooseberry-Cakes. 14 Gooseberry
paste. 102 Gooseberries preserved. 29 Grapes to Candy. 78 Grapes preserved. 13
H.
Hartichoaks preserved. 53 Hippocras to make. 6 Honey of Mulberries. 107 Honey
of Raisins. 108 Honey of Roses. 20 Hydromel to make. 95
I
Jelly of Almonds white. 62 Jelly of Apples. 121 Jelly of Currants. 106 Jelly of
Hartshorn. 16 Jelly of Quinces. 105 Jelly of Strawberries and Mulberries. 46
Jelly of Gooseberries. 121 Jelly of Raspices. 111 Imperial Water. 59 Italian
Biscuit. 27 Italian Marmalade. 122 Jumbals to make. 61
K.
Kings persume. 22 K. Edwards persume. 22
L.
Leach of Almonds. 72 Leach Lumbard. 57 Leach to make. 50 Limon and Orange-peel
pickled. 102 Lozenges of Roses. 101
M.
Manus Christi. 44 Marmalade of Cherries. 96 Marmalade of Currants. 88 Marmalade
of Grapes. 119 Marmalade of Oranges. 11^ Marmalade of Oranges and Limons. 23
Marmalade of Quinces. 6 Mackroons to make. 4 Marchpane to make. 9 Marygolds
Candyed in wedges. 73 Mathiolus Bezoar water. 88 Mead, or Metheglin to make 25
Mead pleasant to make. 89 Medlars preserved. 99 Mint-water. 93 Muscadine
Comfits. 42 Musk-balls to make. 59 Musk-Sugar. 103 Mulberries preserved. 99
N.
Naples-Bisket to make. 100 Nutmegs to Candy. 114
O.
Oranges and Limons Candyed. 25 Oranges to bake. 28 Orange-peels Candyed. 63
Oranges preserved. ^ Oranges preserved Portugal Fashion. 25 Orange-water. 65
Oil of Sweet Almonds. ^8 Oil of Violets. 9
P.
Paste of Apricots. 117 Paste of Cherries. 116 Paste of Genua. 50 Paste of
Quinces. 55 Paste Royal. 47 Paste of tender Plums. 85 Paste of Violets. 63
Peaches preserved. 29 Pears or Plums to Candy. 18 Perfume for Gloves. 33
Pippins dried. 49 Pippins preserved green. 41 Pippins preserved red. 64 Pippins
preserved white. 30 Plague-water. 109 Pome Citrons preserved. 71 Pomander to
make. 28 Pomatum to make. 18 Poppy-water. 87 Prince-Bisket. 104 Purslain to
pickle. 13
Q.
Quiddany of Cherries. 24 Quiddany of Quinces. 51 Quiddany of Plums. 75 Queens
perfume. 22 Quince-Cakes to make. 1 Quince-Cakes clear. 111 Quince-Cakes red.
110 Quince-Cakes white. 109 Quince-Cakes thin. 56 Quince-Cream. 76 Quinces
preserved red. 7 Quinces preserved white. 3 Quinces to pickle. 108
R.
Rasberry-Cream. 94 Rasberry-Wine. 37 Raspices preserved. 3 Red Currans-Cream.
98 Red and white Currants pickled. 98 Rich Cordial. 98 Rose-leaves Candyed. 104
Rosemary-water. 17 Rosemary-flowers Candyed. 46 Roses preserved whole. 10
Rose-Vinegar. 8 Rose Water. 70 Rosa Solis to make. 4
S.
Snow-Cream. 9 Spirit of Amber greece 35 Spirit of Honey. 53 Spirit of Roses.
64 Spirit of Wine. 20 Dr. Stephens Water. 12 Steppony to make. 90 Strawberry
Wi^e. 92 Spots out of Clothes. 79 Suckets to make. 56 Suckets of green Walnuts.
7 Suckets of Lettuce stalks. 10 Sugar-Cakes to make 78 Sugar-Leach. 61 Sugar of
Roses. 86 Sugar-plate to make. 27 Surfeit-water. 66 Sweet Cakes without Sugar.
52 Sweet meat of Apples. 115 Sweet bags for Linen. 52 Syllabub to make. 89
Symbals to make. 5 Syrup of Apples. 82 Syrup of Citron-peels. 32 Syrup of
Cinnamon. 32 Syrup of Comfrey. 108 Syrup of Cowslips. 23 Syrup of Elder. 65
Syrup of Clove gilly flowers. 5 Syrup of Hartshorn. 33 Syrup of Hyssop. 42
Syrup of Licorise. 2^ Syrup of Limons. 20 Syrup for the Lungs. 53 Syrup of
Maidenhair. 21 Syrup of Mints. 106 Syrup of Poppies. 19 Syrup of Purslain. 107
Syrup of Quinces. 31 Syrup of Roses. 68 Syrup of Saffron. 70 Syrup for
short-wind. 67 Syrup of Sugar Candy. 67 Syrup against Scurvy. 68 Syrup of
Violets. 6 Syrup of Wormwood. 19 Syrup of Vinegar. 82 Syder to make. 90
T.
Trifle to make. 74 Treacle-water to make. 31
V.
Verjuice to make. 60 ^s^^ebah to make. 26
W.
Walnuts preserved. 14 Walnut-water. 31 Washing-Balls to make. 59 Wasers to
make. 13 Waters against Consumptions. 34 Water against Fits of Mother. 18
Wormwood-wine. 52 Wormwood water. 55 White Damsons preserved green. 80 White
Leach of Cream. 71 White Mead. 100 Whipped Syllabub. 96
The Table to Physic, Beautifying Waters, and Secrets in Angling.
A.
Ach of the Joints. 132 Ach or pain. 129 Ad Capiendum Pisces. 211 Ague in the
Breast. 156 Agues in Children. 151 Ague to Cure. 129 Another. 132 Another. 140
Another. 140 Allom-water to make. 162
B.
Back to strengthen. 130 Baits for Barbels. 230 Baits for Bream. 232 Baits for
Carp or Tench. 219 Baits for Chub and Pike. 220 Baits for Eels. 231 Bait for
Fish all the Year. 211 Baits for Gudgeons. 229 Bait with Gentles. 2^7 Baits for
Perch. 225 Baits for Roch and Dace. 212 Baits for Salmon. 233 Baits for Trout.
228 Beauty to procure. 196 Beauty water for the Fa^e. 197 Beauty-water, called,
Lac Virginis. 178 Biting of a mad-Dog. 137 Blasting to Cure. 152 Bleeding at
the Nose. 1^6 Bleeding of a Wound. 156 Bloody Flux, or Scowring. 154 Black
Plaster for all griefs. 172 Bone or Quills dyed red for Fishing. 207 Breath to
make sweet. 191 Breath to sweeten, another. 191
C.
Cancer to cure. 136 Cancer in a Woman's Breast to cure. 155 Caps to sight for
Fishing. 207 Cement for Floats to Fish. 207 Childblains in Hands or feet to
cure. 194 Conception to procute. 143 Consumption to cure. 144 Cough dry to
cure. 135 Cordial Julip. 147 Corns to cure. 166 Cramp to cure. 132
D.
Deafness to cure. 138 Deafness, another. 142 Delicate washing-ball. 19^
Dentrifice to whiten the Teeth 189 Drink to heal wounds. 169 Dropsy to cure.
138 Dropsy, another. 146
E.
Ears running to help. 192 Ears pained to cure. 158 Electuary of Life. 162
Excellent Beauty-water. 195 Excellent complexion to procure. 196 Excellent
Cordial. 140 Excellent Salve. 152 Excellent wash for Beauty 195 Eyes
blood-shot. 192 Eye-water. 147
F.
Face and Skin to cleanse. 177 Face to Adorn. 177 Face to beautify. 177 Face
to look Youthful. 177 Face to make fair. 176 Face to make very fair. 179 Face
pitted by the Smallpox. 183 Face to whiten. 181 Falling off of Hair to prevent
176 Falling Sickness, or Convulsions. 134 Falling Sickness, another. 145 Fevers
or Agues in Children. 130 Fellon to kill. 155 Fishing-Lines to make. 205
Fishing^Lines to unloose in water. 210 Fits of the Mother. 148 Fistula, or
Ulcer. 149 Fits of the Mother, a Julip. 153 Flowers to bring down. 165 Flowers
to stay. 166 Flies used in Angling, to make. 235 Flux red to cure. 155 Flux
white to cure. 155 Freckles in the Face. 180 Freckles and Morphew. 188
G.
Gascoign Powder to make. 157 Gout to cure. 128 Gout, Lord Dennies Medicine.
159 Green Sickness to cure. 138 Green Sickness, a powder. 169 Griping of the
Guts to cure. 128
H.
Hands to make white. 192 Hands to whiten. 198 Hands, a sweet water. 199 Hair
to make grow. 174 Hair to grow thick. 174 Hair to make fair. 173 Hair to take
away. 176 Headache to cure. 130 Heat of the Liver. 163 Heat and swelling in the
Face. 185 Heat or Worms in the hands. 199
I.
Jaundies black to Cure. 131 Jaundies yellow to Cure. 131 Imposthume to break.
137 Inflamed Face to Cure. 186 Itch, or breaking out to cure. 167 Itch,
another. 136
K.
C. K^nts Powder to make 132 King's Evil to cure. 137
L.
Lax, or Looseness. 141 Lips chopped to cure. 193
M.
Marks of Small pox to prevent. 193 Megrim, or Imposthume in the Head. 1^7
Mis-carrying to prevent. 134 Moist seabs after Smallpox. 165 Morphew or Scurff
of Pace or Skin. 181 Mouth to cleanse. 191
N.
Nails cloven to cure. 200 Nails that fall off. 200 Nails to make grow. 199
Nails rent from the Flesh. 200 Nostrils stinking to cure. 198
O.
Oil of Fennel. 171 Oil of St. John's wort. 170 Oil of Roses. 166 Ointment green
to make. 148 Ointment for pimples in the face 186
P.
Paste for Fishing. 2^2 Piles to destroy. 136 Piles after Childbirth. 167
Pimples in the Face to cure 186 Pimples in the Face, another 184 Plague to
cure. 131 Plague-water. 146 Pleurisy to cure. 1^4 Pock holes in the Face. 194
Pomatum to clear the skin. 187 Powder for Green Sickness. 169
R.
Red Face to cure. 185 Redness, Hands and Face by Small pox. 183 Redness to
take away, another, 184 Rich Face-to help. 186 Rheumatick Cough or Cold. 154
Rickets in Children. 149
S.
Scald Head. 146 Sciatica, or pains in the joints 129 Scurvy to cure. 127
Scurvy, another. 142 Secrets in Angling, by J. D. 209 Shingles to cure. 149
Skin to clear. 187 Skin to smooth, and take away Freckles. 201 Skin to make
white and clear. 180 Skin to make smooth. 180 Sore breast to cure. 144 Spitting
of Blood. 156 Spleen to cure. 168 Sprain in the Back. 139 Dr. Stephens Water.
161 Stinking breath to cure. 190 Stitch in the Side. 167 Stench under the Arm^
holes 201 Stone and Gravel. 127 Sun-burn to take away 179 Swooning-fits 163
T.
Terms to provoke 154 Teeth to make white and Sound 189 Teeth to keep white
and kill worms 190 Teeth white as Jvory 119 Teeth in children to breed easily
150 Toothach to cure 145 Tertian or double Tertian Ague 168 Thorn to draw out
170 Timpany to cure 153 Tissick to cure 171
U.
Unguentum album to make 135
W.
Warts in the face or hands 201 Washing b^ll to make 193 Water for eyesight by
King Edward the 6. 158 Water for the eyes excellent 164 Water for sore eyes 139
Web in the Eye 165 Wen to cure 145 Dr. Willoughbyes water 161 Wind to help 145
Wind and flegun in Children 1^0 Woman in Travel 149 Woman soon delivered 150
Worms in Children 152 Worms in children another 135 Worms to clease for fishing
208 Wrinckles in the face 178 Whites to cure 135
Y.
Yellow Jaundies 201 Young children to go to stool 151
The Table to the Complete Cooks Guide.
A.
Almond Cream 317 Almond pudding 317 Almond Tart 320 Apple pyes to fry 281
Artichoakes fried 255 A^ichoake Pie 274
B.
Bacon Tart 25^ B^rley broth 2^7 Beef pasty like red Deer 262 Beef to keep
Sweet 298 Beef to Stew 333 Beef to stew French fash^^n 283 Black Puddings 245
Birds to stew L. Butlers way 328 Biscuit bread 244 Brawn tender and delicate 298
B.
Breams stewed 358 Breast or loyn mutton stewed 3^4 Breast of veal baked 289
Butter to draw for Sauce 364
C.
Calves foot Pie 312 Calves feet baked 344 Calves feet roasted 280 Calves head
baked 322 Capon or pullet boyld 269 Capon boyld with sage and pa^fly 293 Capon
boyld with Asparagus 221 Capon boyld with sugar pease 284 Capon boyld with
white-broth 292 Capon or Chicken several Compositions 343 Carp Pie 316 Carp to
stew 271 Cheescakes to make 242 Cheese fresh to make 274 Chine of beef poudered
286 Cherry Tart 310 Chicken Pie 316 Chucks of veal to bake 339 Citron pudding
300 Clowted Cream 296 Cods head to dress 287 Codling Tart 309 Cocks or barks to
boil 331 Collops of beef stewed 262 Cows udder roasted 308 Cows^ip Tart 321
Cream of Eggs 258 Cracknels to make 326 Custards to make 278
D.
Damson Tart 261 Dish of marrow 244 Dish of meat with herbs 257 Dutch pudding
282
E.
Eels to boil 285 Eel Pie 305 Eel Pie with Oysters 266 Eels to roast 330 Eels
to Soufe 252 Egg Pie 243 Excellent mincet Pyes 334
F.
Feasant stewed French fashion 244 Fillet beef stewed Ital. fashion 342 Fine
pudding in a dish 258 Flounders or Jacks to boil 303 Flounders stewed 365
French barley posset 339 French pottage called Skink 294 Fricasy of Chickens
265 Fricasy of Rabbits 325 Fricasy of Veal 2^0 Furmity to make 248
G.
Goose to bake 281 Goosberry Cream 295 Grand sallet 268 Green sauce 275
H.
Haggis Pudding 257 Haunch ofvenison boiled 304 Haunch of venison roasted 254
Hare to roast 345 Hash of a Capon or Pullet 28^ Hen Carbonadoed 254 Herring Pie
245 Hotchpot to make 323
I.
Italian pudding 324 Iunket to make 327
L.
Lamb Pie 241 Leg of Pork broild 343 Limon Caudle 323
M.
Made dish of Apples 302 Mallard to stew 340 Marrow Pasties 275 Marrow puddings
272 Medler Tart 323
N.
Neats f^ot Pie 249 Neats Tongues to dry 328 Neats Tongues fried 345 Neats
Tongue-Pye 353 Neats Tongue and Udder 298
O.
Oatmeal pudding 360 Oysters to Pickle 332
P.
Pannado to make 299 Past for all Tarts 290 Pear or warden pie 306 Pe^ch^^ to
boil 284 Pig to bake Court fashion 336 Pig to souse 256 Pidgeon Pie to make 341
Pickarel to bake 236 Pippin Pie 351 Polonian Sausages 297 Pottage of a Capon
350 Pudding to bake ^90 Pudding of Rice 361 Pudding of hogs liver 337 Puff-past
to make 266
Q
Quaking Pudding 295 Quince Pie 250
R.
Rabbits to bake 279 Rabbits to hash 273 Rabbits to stew 340 Rare broth 347
Rare Pudding 324 Rice Pudding 242 Rice Tart 309 Roast beef pickled 334
S.
Sallet of a cold hen 268 Sallet of green Pease 355 Salmon to boil 263 Salmon
to keep fresh 297 Sauce for mutton 366 Sack posset to make 273 Sauce for
Pigeons 307 Sauce for Turkys and Capons 367 Sauce for wildfowl 307 Sansages to
make 282 Scotch Collops of Veal 276 Scollops to b^oil 259 Shoulder of mutton
and Oysters 346 Spanish Oleo 246 Sparrows and Larks to boil 291 Stewed broth to
make 357 Sweet breads baked 347
T.
Tansey to make 312 Tansey of Cowslips 362 Tart of Spinach 309 Trout to stew
307
V.
Veal Pie to make 288 Venison Pasty 260 Venison to stew 247 Umble Pie 253
W.
watergruel to make 318 widgeons or Teal to boil 288
FINIS.

