HERMES-THEOLOGUS or New Descants upon OLD RECORDS

Rom: 2 22. thou yt abhorrest Idols, do thou commit Sacrilege? Romans 10.12
The new Testament

Genesis 17.9 The old Testament

The Christian Math. ^6. 24.



The Jew Isa. 29. 10.



The Turk in Math. 24. 5. 24.



The Pagan Psalm. 7 ^ 11.



engraved title page

Hermes Theologus: OR, A Divine MERCURY Dispatched with a grave Message OF NEW
DESCANTS UPON OLD RECORDS.

No less delightful in the best sense, then truly useful for these Times.

By THEOPH: WODENOTE, B. D. sometime fellow of Kings College in CAMBRIDGE.

LONDON, Printed for R. ROYSTON, 1649.

THE PREFACE To the Readers.
Readers,
THese ensuing meditations, so well fitted, so pathetically penned, and so
rightly applied, to the present temper of these unhappy times, need no Preface
to make way for them unto your friendly acceptance, (if there be in your
breasts, any true remains of Conscience or candor) nor yet any letters of
commendation, to ingratiate their Author into your good opinions; they alone do
fully declare him a Scribe instructed unto the Kingdom of God, who like a good
householder (as you may here find) brings forth out of his Treasure things new
and old.

But my reading them, together with the consideration of him, and his present
condition, gives occasion (and I hope without offense) to breathe forth the
passions of a grieving spirit, that melts daily, for the desolations of
Christ's Vineyard here amongst us, by the violent and cruel ejection of those
faithful and skillful husbandmen, whom he had enabled and employed to dress
and till the same; of which number this truly Reverend and Godly Author was
one, whose name and face perhaps is strange in these more public and active
parts of the Kingdom; but that you may the better know him, be pleased to
understand, that he is a man of Isaacs spirit, one of God Almighties inward
acquaintance, that converseth often in secret with him, and has skill to
contemplate on things that are high.

And as most suitable to so Divine a work, he made choice of a private life,
with violence thereby unto his own Iustre, his true worth disdaining the
affectation of popular applause, or to make a noise in the world as many do,
whose fame is best a far off, where themselves are least known: he was planted
long ago in a remote part of this Kingdom, where for above thirty years (being
Batchelour in Divinity of Ancient standing) he has continued, acting the part
of a faithful Minister, ruling his flock with great prudence and discretion,
and feeding them with the food of heaven, which he most skilfully dressed, and
rightly divided, confining and applying himself within his proper sphere, unto
his own people; amongst whom he was a burning and a shining light: and they
(as they had cause) did rejoice in his light, they sat under his Ministry with
great content, and his Doctrine was sweet unto them; they were in his heart,
and he in theirs, to live, to die, and go to heaven together.

But when they that act as if they were borne to break in sunder what God has
joined, had set up their banners in those quarters, and begun their newfound
Reformation in those parts, a most sorrowful separation was quickly made
between this Godly Pastor and his loving flock, for he being thoroughly guilty
of the scandals of these times ( scil. of Learning, piety, wisdom, Loyalty,
obedience, honesty, and such like) and so not capable to be an Apostate from
the Gospel he had taught, was thought fit for that cause, to be cast aside as a
broken sheard, or a thing of no use in these days, of new lights and
revelations: and so was suspended from his labors, silenced from Preaching,
and Sequestered from his Living, to the end that he and his flock as they had
lived long most comfortably together, might now at the last even perish and
starve together, he for want of Corporal food, and they for want of Spiritual.

But behold from that evil of theirs, good is sprung up to us; from the dark
condition of that particular Parish, the World in general has gained light;
we that are a far off, had not been acquainted with his graces, if we had not
been befriended by his Afflictions; the savor of his spices had never reached
our senses at so great a distance, (his humility did so hinder) had they not
been thus bruised and beaten.

This grave and good man being accustomed all his days to take pains in Gods
Vineyard, had not learned to stand idle, nor can his Aged years be persuaded to
it, though he be knocked off from his holy calling. He cannot sleep, his gray
hairs can take no rest, but near unto, if not within the house of God, though
he be banished from the Temple, yet he must look toward it, though charged to
publish Christ no more in the Congregation, nor to Preach any longer that name,
yet the word of truth being like fire within him, his spirit cannot rest, nor
can he forbear, but the Press must receive something of him, if the Pulpit
does exclude him.

For indeed the fire of the Sanctuary in a pious soul can never be
extinguished; nor can he that does Gods work for Gods sake ever be
discouraged, with all that Earth or Hell can do; the love of Christ is more
powerful with him to constrain unto, then the threats of men or Devils can be
to affright from. I must work (says such a one) the works of him that sent
me while it is day, the night of death will come when I cannot work, as long
as I am in the world, I must be a light therein, and hold forth some light to
it, a necessity lies upon me so to do, and woe unto me if I Preach not, if I
reprove not, if I detect not the worlds sin, one way or other, scriptis saltem,
si non dictis, by writing at least if not by Preaching. I must discharge a good
conscience, else how shall I appear before my Judge, at the reckoning day?

These, or such like, are the inward discourses of an honest heart; and these
doubtless are the resolves of this Reverend man; who has here sent us from
the Spiritual Garden of his soul, a Taste of divine fruit, which we hope is
but an Essay to a larger Banquet, but a glimpse of Ophir where Gold is, of a
rich mine where precious Treasures are to be found.

And most worthy are these his Meditations our serious view, and friendliest
acceptance, for the resemblance they have and bear (which is in special to be
noted) with that form and manner of speaking used by our Savior: sure the
looks and language of this Author plainly show whose Disciple he is, and of
what spirit: It Is said of Christ, that he taught the people by parables, and
without a parable spoke he not unto them; and may not the same be affirmed of
this man, that he teaches us by Parables, and without an History or Similitude
he speaks not? yea, as Christ took occasion from every thing that occurred to
raise some discourse for the benefit of his hearers, so does he here; with
great wisdom and truth fitly applying all particulars to the men and present
conditions of the times: And (lastly) as Christ could not look, or think upon
Jerusalem without tears, in regard of her sins, and approaching sorrows; no
more can this his servant, upon this Church and Kingdom without grief and
passion: Entertain him therefore I know you will (Christian Readers) into your
best thoughts for his Masters sake, whose likeness he bears in his measure
and degree, for sic oculos, sic ille manus, sic ora ferebat.

And now give me leave to lament a little, the miseries of this Nation, for I
could wish with Jeremy, That my head were even full of water, and mine eyes
were fountains of tears, continually to bewail the strange madness and
horrid impudence that is in this sect of people now amongst us, who profess
themselves to relate to Christ, and yet endeavor to destroy him: are called by
his name, and yet would blot it out from being remembered; nay, they pretend to
ingrosse it to themselves, as if they had more zeal unto him then other men,
and loved him better, and yet persecute his Prophets that are sent unto them,
killing some, beating others, and abusing all; not suffering the most faithful
and able of them to do his work: but casting them out, as unsavory salt,
worldly filth, and the offscouring of things: Is this the way to advance
Christ into his Throne? or to promote the Kingdom of Heaven, which is compared
to an houshoulder that went forth at every hour, (not to cast out, but) to call
in workmen to his Vineyard? Sure this speaks rather, that their intentions
are to take Christ's Throne from him, to lay his Vineyard quite waste, and to
expose it to destruction. Indeed they promised at first to set up Lights in the
most remote and obsure corners of the Kingdom, and to settle an allowance for
them; but (alas!) they have exstinguish'd most of those few, which were before
in such places, (whereof this learned Author was one) and where Light shined
most plentifully, they have introduced darkness, and to perpetuate that unto
Posterity, they have seized (as a prey) upon these Revenues which Ancient piety
had consecrated and set apart to maintain Lamps in Gods Sanctuary to the
worlds end: O woe unto us for the same; and a treble woe to them; how many of
those lamps have they put out? How many Church doors have they shut up? How
many Congregations have they blinded or poys^ned, affording them no Preachers
at all, or only such as have skill and will to lead unto perdition? O the vast
difference between the Spirit of him they pretend unto and theirs! When he saw
the multitude, he was moved with compassion toward them, because they fainted,
and were as sheep scattered without a sheapheard: The harvest (says he) is
great, but the laborers are few, pray therefore the Lord of the Harvest to
send forth Labors into his Harvest: but these on the contrary seeing the
multitude are hardened against them, (as appears) for they use all means to
cause them to faint, they smite the Shepherds, that the sheep might be
scattered, and devoured; they think the Harvest too great, and the workmen too
many, and therefore their endeavors are to lessen the number. For as
concerning the rabble of illiterate men, which they have let loose into Gods
field, they merit not the name of Laborers in this sense, for they work not
for God at all, they gather only for themselves, and scatter for the Envious
man, who sowed tares among the good corn, they have neither Ability, nor yet
honesty to till Christ's Garden; but instead of dressing they destroy the same.
So that it is evidently clear, that the Spirit of those who have admitted these,
and excluded the true work men, is not only against them they have cast out,
but also against the Vineyard it self (whose pale, or hedge of Government
they have plucked up;) or rather against the very Lord thereof: for is not every
thing that is entitled His, in the same condition with his Ministers, under
the like obloquy and contempt? his Houses, his Word, his Sacraments, his
Worship, his Religion, his Anointed, and what ever else has his Mark or Name
upon it? yes alas, it is too too manifest to every eye: How do his Houses lie
waste, and quite pulled down in diverse places? in how foul a dress, in what a
profane manner is that Cathedral Church in London, (the glory of that City
and of the Nation) exposed daily to publik view? How would our Grandees rage
and storm, if their own Stables, where their Horses stand, should lie
neglected in so unhandsome and slovenly a fashion, as that famous Temple of God
does at this present?

How are his Scriptures also abused, mis-interpreted and mis-applied daily,
yea, and made fully as the Papists do affirm, like a nose of wax, for all
turns, and for all occasions? How are his Sacraments contemned too, and denied
to those that hunger for them? yea, how are all his pure Ordinances casheired
and banished? instead of wholesome Doctrine and humble Prayers, how are they
for whom Christ dyed, put off with vile blasphemies, and vain bablings? How is
Knowledge vilified? Reading and Book-learning cried out upon, as hindering the
operation of the Spirit, by which the teachers of these times speak? But were
that the Spirit of God which speaks or work in the^, it would be rather
furthered by such means; Timothy is commanded to give himself to Study, that
he might be a fitted Instrument for that holy Spirit: this our Author could not
have writ as he has here done, but by the help of Reading and Book-learning.

How is that public and most honorable form of Gods service scorned, yea,
suppressed from among us, without any reason at all alleged? nay, themselves
can charge it with no crime in the Preface to their Directory, (which is thrust
forth in the room of it) for it seems it is their purpose, to bring us of this
Nation to the practice of blind obedience (which is no other then rank Popery;)
and therefore we must submit, not only our wills, but our judgments also, to
this their groundless and less then humane innovation: their pleasure is to
prefer an Hemlock before a Rose, and we must say it is sweeter.

How do they dote on Jeroboams way, as the most perfect method and platform of
Reformation? as he suppressed the Ancient manner of Gods Worship, neglected the
place thereof, (1 st the people thereby should have turned again unto their
King;) banished the Priests of the Lord, and admitted the lowest of the people
(that were not the sons of Levi) into their places; yea, whosoever would, him
he consecrated to be a Priest: even so have these done in all particulars: and
though the Text says, this thing became sin to the house of Jeroboam to cut it
from off the Earth, yet is it made choice of by these men, for their special
pattern in these times.

Nay, more then this, how are the very Artiticles of Gods holy Religion i^ self
here settled, slighted and cast aside by them, (...) wholly insufficient for our
faith to build upon? How have many of those men, who were bound in special to
defend the same, (in regard of their office and calling, their frequent Oaths
and Protestation, to that purpose) been the Instruments to alter the (...)* the
waged Balaams to blast and disesteeme them? And how have they hereby confirmed
the slanders of our Romish adversaries against us? who have often said, that we
had no Church, no Established Doctrine, no foundation for our Profession: How
are these hereby raised in their hopes to see a restoration of their Babell in
the downfall of our Jerusalme? O that those who call themselves the Assembly of
Divines, and by their gross Apostasy from their first faith and love, have
been the chief means of working all these mischiefs, would but read over, and
lay to heart seriously those passages, which they shall find to this purpose,
in a late Book entitled, Englands complaint for the sin of Rebellion, written
by that constant Brother, and faithful Minister of Jesus Christ, M. Lionell
Gatford, whom most of them well know to be a man of most approved integrity.

But here is not all yet, not the Articles of our Religion only, but the
protector of them, the Anointed of the Lord himself, is in like manner cast
aside: How has he been contemned of late? nay, how has the Majesty and
Authority of God been vi^^^^d in him, together with those Scriptures which
command our Honor and Obedience? How has His sacred Person been railed upon,
slandred and reviled? How has He been persecuted, hunted, and tormented for
His Conscience sake? How has he been robbed and deprived of all his Revenues,
his Comforts, and his Freedom, for His love and affections to the Church of
God; because He was the Head and chief Member of it? there was too much of
Truth, as there was of bitterness in that speech, which since His Majesty was
in bondage, I heard uttered from the Pulpit by a Friar in France: who railing
against the Protestants of that Kingdom, for denying the Pope to be Head of
the Church, who (says he) would they have the head thereof? the King perhaps,
even like their Brethren in England, who first made their King the Head of
their Church, and now they make Him their Slave.

Nay more yet, with the Kings Person and Authority; His graces also are the
object of their scorn and hate, His magnanimity, His patience, His care to
keep His conscience undefiled; yea the maine study and work of these pretenders
to conscience, these bawlers for Liberty of Conscience, has been for a long
time vastare conscientiam Regis, to violate the Conscience of their Sovereign,
and to break the peace thereof.

And what dogged spightfulnesse have they discovered of late, against the
pitifulness of spirit that is in Him? How feign would they be torturing and
murdering of Him for His tenderness of heart toward the miseries of His
people? its well known to all the world, and to themselves too, who began
these wicked Wars, and at whose door the guilt of bloodlies: yet because the
good King seeing them wholly of the Pharisees stamp, abhorring to practice the
lesson that Christ taught, of denying themselves, and confessing their sin; and
yet being desirous to purchase His peoples peace, is content (for their
security of His pardon, and that He will not bring them to a trial by Law, for
their past demerits, but remit them, wholly to the hand of God) to connive even
at their throwing their dirt in His face; what vile Doctrines and cursed Uses,
do their Pamphleteers, and their Pulpiteers, raise from thence, and press upon
the people? why, that God has now resolved the great doubt, has heard his
peoples prayers, in charging the guilt of blood upon the Kings soul, and
brought Him to acknowledge that He has been the cause of all which has been
shed: and therefore it belongs to the people now to see unto it, that Justice
be done upon Him, and upon His friends for it.

Was ever such horrid wickedness heard of, such transcendent villainy in
mortal creatures? would not the Devil himself blush to appear in their
shapes? may we not look for some strange judgment like that of the earths
opening to swallow them up? had David's people when he (to have them spared) had
cried out, it is I that have sinned, spoke of calling him to account for the
loss of 70000 men, they had shown less impudence then these have done; Nay
the malicious Jews though they crucified Christ because he was a King, yet were
not so super-superlatively vile as to consult his death because he was content
in their stead, and for their safety, to be accounted as a sinner. Assuredly
therefore these men have out-gone all before them: for ask now of the days
that are past since the time that God created man upon the earth, ask from the
one side of heaven unto the other, whether there has ever been such bloody
spunges as these show themselves to be, such monsters of nature amongst men: O
the baseness, the impiety, the wormwood, and the gall of their spirits! if
ever the Title of Rex diabolorum was rightly applyable to the King of this
land, it is since the viperine birth of these miscreants. And that such only as
themselves are, might be continued (if possible) in the Nation, there is a
special course taken, that knowledge and good manners might not abound in
those that come after; for the Universities are metamorphised and purged too,
as well as the Church of learned and good men; Thistles are there set instead
of Wheat, and Cockle instead of Barley. Yea all Orders and degrees amongst men
(if some may have their will) must be abolished presently, and confusion
planted in all places, (as it is already in a great measure:) Kings and Princes,
Nobles and persons of Honor must be but as the mean people; which God indeed
may justly permit in respect of some, for those contempts and miseries which
even they have helped to bring upon his Church: sure these things are a
lamentation, and ought to be for a lamentation.

Never was there so foolish and so mad a Nation under the Sun as we have proved
our selves, to the derision of all about us, the ruin and decay of our Ancient
glory, our outward Happiness, and of our souls for ever. O therefore I say
again that mine head were full of water, and that mine eyes were fountains of
tears to bewail these things. O that the people of this Land (especially they
that are got Highest) would but consider what they have done, and yet at last,
before all is lost, set some period to their own doings. O that those men of
wealth and place who advanced at first their whole might, to lay level this
famous Church, to take from it all Honors, orders, and degrees, would but
consider and observe well, how before that sinful work of theirs is quite
finished; the Commonwealth it self, (wherein their own interest chiefly lies)
is following apace in the same tract, and like ere long to lie as level, and
as low as the Church it self. First no Bishop, then no King, then no Lords,
then no Gentlemen, then no people, the name of England will be no more in
remembrance, unless as a byword, and a scorn among all Nations.

O that the Assembly of Divines, who contrary to their many Oaths of
Allegiance, Supremacy, Canonical obedience, and Protestation, have concurred,
and assisted to suppress, and torture their King, to Alter and Change the
Form of Doctrine and discipline in this Church, would but consider coolely and
soberly at length of their own Doctrines and actions, and how they will be able
to answer them before Christ the Judge: that they would but remember the little
comfort and joy, which Balaam and Judas had in that wages of iniquity, which
they got to themselves, by being the instruments of mischief to other men.

And I wish that the inferior Clergy also, who by their ill tongues have
helped to defame, and cast out their fellow Ministers, that desired to live in
peace by them; would but consider the small content which they thereby have
purchased to themselves: for do they reign alone now, like Kings in their
Countries, as they expected? do their people submit quietly unto them? have
they no Sectaries in their parishes, to torture and torment them, to withold
their Tithes, and to preach against them; to seduce their people from them, to
clamor and rail upon them, as themselves were wont to do, upon their brethren?
do not those very spirits which themselves bred and raised at first against
others, flee furiously now in their own faces, and make them even weary of
their own lives and habitations? I wish they would ask their own experience
and consciences of the truth of these things.

And for the people, I wish that they would consider with themselves, whether
they have been so well at case, so well moneyed, so well taught, whether they
have so free a command in their own houses, over their own goods, as when the
Church enjoyed her rights, and Gods true Ministers whom they have mocked,
abused, and cast out from among them, did preach his truth unto them.

But why do I wish for these thoughts in these men; not considering with my
self the madness, blindness, hardness, and perverseness of their spirits, who
are engaged in paths of death and Hell; and cannot lay to heart their own
danger, and misery till they are swallowed up by it? though we mourn in secret
never so truly for their sins, yet will not they be moved by any thing, we say,
or wish for them; have they ever yet believed our report, or regarded Gods
word, which we have spoken, since they entered this way? nay have they not said
to us their seers, See not, to us their Prophets, Prophecy not right things?

Yea but however, we must not neglect our duties, which God has enjoined us to
perform unto them, and for them, though they be as briars and thorns to us;
though they have put us from our Livings, they cannot discharge us of our
Ministry, we must speak, we have authority from God to speak, and to cry aloud
too against them, while they be in their wicked ways, whether they will hear,
or whether they will forbear, that they may at length know and remember, there
have been some true Prophets amongst them; let them kill us for it if they
will, our blood shall preach and cry against them (louder then ever we did)
when we are gone.

And I beseech all my Sequestered Brethren that are forbidden to dispense Gods
truth in Churches, (to those flocks and people which God committed to them)
that they would imitate this Godly Author which is here presented to them:
employ their Talents this other way, discharge their consciences unto the
world, cast their seed about by writing; who knows but God may give a blessing
to it? Israel may be gathered by it, and brought back at last into those good
ways from whence they have erred; however their labor being with the Lord,
they shall receive a recompense from their God, they shall die in peace, and
appear with a good conscience at the great day: we must (as S. Jude says)
contend earnestly for the faith, having received it from our forefathers, and
being entrusted, to mantain it in our generation we must render it entire to
our posterity; our salvation (for ought I know) lies upon it; And doubtless
the coldness of us Ministers, to defend the established truth and order in our
Church, will make the ignorant world think them matters of small consequent
and concernment.

And let us I beseech you (all my Sequestered brethren) pray heartily for them
that persecute and abuse us, that we may in despite of them restore that
luster to the Gospel, which they have cancelled; and manifest the sweet spirit
thereof to be within us: let us believe that we are set thus aside by the
permission of Gods providence for this purpose, and used thus by these men,
that we having this experience of them, might be the more moved in compassion
toward them: our Savior prayed for his persecutors, Father forgive them, and
so did S. Stephen for his, Lord lay not this sin to their charge; and those
prayers were not in vain, the conversion of those 3000 (Act. 2.) is said to be
the effect of the one; and of Saul (Acts 9.) is believed to be the issue of the
other: and perhaps God has determind by our prayers and our patience to
convert, and save these men: Thus if we do, most happy shall we be; To you is
given not only to believe, but also to suffer for his sake (says the Apostle
to us,) we are chosen out from amongst many, for this purpose, to honor Christ
and his Gospel by our sufferings, which we cannot perform in a better way then
this; but if we express it so, we shall do his will, and the spirit of his
Glory shall rest upon us.

Readers farewell: pray for this Reverend Author your Learned and good friend,
and for him also who is together with him,

Your true servant for Christ Jesus sake, EDW: SIMMONS.
November. 3. 1648.
To the Worshipful Mr. JONATHAN WODENOTE of Shavinton in Cheshire Esquire.
Worthy Sir,
TO this Treatise I have chosen you Patron, whom I could never yet come to know
in Person, upon my great acquaintane, besides near alliance, both with your
Grandfather, and Father.

I hope you will receive it no otherwise from me, then as a sure, though mean,
token of my readiness, in all Christian offices to serve both you, and yours,
for their sakes; and continual thankful remembrance of the Family, from
whence, under God, my truly learned, and Religious Father derived his first
being. In which respects I humbly present it to you.

The Lord strengthen the hearts, and hands of all those that favor the good of
Jsrael: more especially settle and enlarge his blessings upon you, and your
posterity; that you may all do worthily in Ephratah, and be famous in
Bethlehem: that you may be on earth, instruments of his glory, to the good of
his Church: so shall you be vessels of glory in the kingdom of heaven. The
which is his daily prayer who is,

Worthy Sir, Yours ever in the Lord to be commanded THEOPH: WODENOTE.

PErhaps, some Reader may account profane,
Descants from Records (as are here) humane.
But yet all wise men know, how Humane story,
Used by Divines, tend much unto Gods glory.
And holy wisdom sweetly does extract,
A blessed use of each true famed fact.
As Rich men use, in hospitality,
He first invites thee to this century.
Somewhat the better, that prepare he might,
And satiate thy purer appetite.
Whose course of study I so fully know,
That for this Humane Century he can show
Of Sacred Story Chiliad-observation,
To gratify at full all expectation:
And if unbias'd hearts these entertai^e,
Hermes next time a Star will shine again,
And out of holy Writ communicate
His rich Select's, in his Sequestered state
And though an Olive do begin the feast,
A Pearl, at last, shall help all to digest.
P. M.

YOu that wed eHistories, and from them draw out
Only the Vulgar and the common Rout
Of Observations, mend your Pens by this;
Write by this Copy you cannot write amiss.
Each Author here speaks his own mind; and we
Receive their writings now for Prophecy:
For our sad Times they so exactly hit,
As if they first had seen them, and then writ.
If the Records Pagan were, these Descants shall
Bptize them all; make them Canonical.
P. M.

NEW DESCANTS UPON OLD RECORDS.
IT was the complaint of the Emperor Adrian, when he lay a dying, Many
Physicians have destroyed the Emperor. (a) Their contrary conceits,
Xiphilinus in Adriano,
and different directions, he meant, had hastened his death, and cut him off
before his time.

There are so many Censurers, and Correctors, of our, not sick, but sound
Religion, approved by the sacred Scriptures, and attested by the blood of many
faithful Martyrs: There are so many Reformers and Rectifiers, of all ages,
sexes, and degrees, of all professions, and trades, that take upon them to
order our Church, according to their several crooked imaginations; that they
have reduced all things in it to a Chaos, and confusion: and defaced and
spoiled one of the most complete Churches, if not the principal, both for
doctrine and discipline, now extant, in the Christian world.

II.
IF Timotheus had not been, we had not had such music; but if Phrynes,
Timotheus his Teacher had not been, we had not had Timotheus, says Aristotle.
Meta. lib. 2. c. 1.
If, as he Music, we consider these times of Mourning, we may as truly, but
with detestation, say, If there had not been discontented people abroad, we had
not heard of so great contentions, and tumults, suffered such plunderings and
oppressions, seen so many wounds, and murders; but if there had not been such
and such Schismatic Priests, like violent winds, moving and troubling the
brains of the people, and inciting them to Rebellion, we had not had such
discontented people: The people would have been peaceable, and tractable, as
heretofore, had not some false Prophets been as bellows, and brands of
Insurrection; had not seditious Orators been as Drummers in a Camp, and as
Trumpetters sounding to a battle.

III.
ANtisthenes the Philosopher, being asked, What a Feast was? Answered, That it
was an occasion of much surfeiting, and many other disorders. If you make a
question now what our Spiritual Feasts, the best liked, and most applauded
Sermons are? They are shiftings and juglings for a wrong Cause; they are
traducings of the KING, and slanderings of the Footsteps of Gods Anointed:
They are the countenancers, and promoters of Civil War, contrary to the
doctrine of the Scriptures, and dictate of Religion and Conscience: They are
Alarums to stir up Sedition, Rebellion, Atheism; They are Invectives against
all Learning and Loyalty; They are casters out of one Devil by another,
abolishers of Idolatry by Sacrilege: They are the gall of bitterness, and the
bond of Iniquity.

IV.
THe Lord Ellesmor, the Lord Chancellor of this Realm, a great lover of
mercy, whose memorial is still blessed, was heard to profess, as I have read,
that if he had been a Preacher, this should have been his Text, A righteous
man regards the life of his beast. Prove. 12.10.
The Prophetical Incendiaries of the late fearful, unnatural War, how far
were they from this disposition? how far from thoughts and bowels of mercies?
how far from a desire to preach mercies? when it was a common course with them,
by Vipcrine glosses to eat out the bowels of a merciful Text; when nothing
was more usual amongst them, then with stony hearts and brazen faces to
allege the words of the Scripture against the meaning, then to wrong, and
wring the Scripture, till it bled, but they would mis-construe, and misapply it
one way or other, to stir and incite men to the shedding of blood: Arm, arm,
Fight, fight, Blood, blood, Kill these Cavaliers, these Popish Pagans, were
still with them deductions from their Texts.

V.
CAmbyses demanding of his Counselors, Whether he might not marry his sister
by the Law of the Land? They answered, They found no Law, that allowed a
brother to marry his sister; but one that permitted the King of the Persians to
do as he list Heredotus.
. Our proud, peevish Brownists, impatient of Government, sons of Belial, a
rebellious and obstinate people, having necks as an iron sinew, and brows of
brass, cannot in all the Scriptures find any sound or seeming proof, for this
their foul rebellion: Neither can their false Prophets, their chief
Counselors, find out any such places for them; but therefore they use, in a
wrong sense, so to enlarge and amplify the great benefit of our Christian
liberty, (the which indeed is a freedom from all hellish, slavish fear, but
not from a holy, and sonne-like fear; a freedom from the curse, but not from
the obedience of the Law) that they have now made many simple people, little
seen in heavenly matters, believe, that the reins are pulled from Christians
necks, and they left to their own dispositions; that there is a liberty
purchased for Christians to do what every man likes, and to live under no
obedience to Ecclesiastical or Civil Governors.

VI.
WHen Mahomet was now about to establish his abominable superstition, wherein
he had mingled the laws and doctrines of Heathens, of Jews, of false
Christians, and Heretics, with the illusions and inventions of his own brain;
he gave it forth for a maine principle, how God at the first to Mankind sent
Moses; after him Jesus Christ, who were endued with the power to work miracles;
but men gave small heed to them: Therefore he determined to send Mahomet, a
Warrior, without Miracles: that whom Miracles had not moved, Weapons might
compel. They may derive their authority perhaps by a long descent from
Mahomets pretended Charter, but I am sure they can find no syllable of
allowance, in the great, assured, sacred Charter of Gods Word, who seek to set
up any Religion by the Sword: The Lord uses to gather his Church by the
mouths of Ministers, not by the swords of Soldiers.

VII.
I Read of one Procustes, a notorious theevish Inkeeper, who, when any
Travailers came to lodge at his house, would make his guests stature equal
with his bed; either by stretching them out to the length of it, if they were
too short; or by cutting off some part of them, if they were too long: He would
not fit his bed to his guests, but his guests to his bed. Nothing more common
shall we find amongst Heretics and Schismatics, then either with salse
senses, to stretch and enlarge, or with loud lies to mince and mangle the
Sacred Scriptures, that so they may frame them to their likings, and make them
serve their own turns, at all essaies: They will either suppress the words,
or else not express the sense; they will either blot out, or else blemish the
Scriptutes, rather then they will abolish, or any whit alter their own
fantasies. Of their own opinions, or writings they will not abide the very
least amendment; but of the holy Word of Almighty God they care not what havoc
they make.

VIII.
ACtius, an ancient Tragedian performing his part on the Stage, was ever sure
of Commendations; but pleading at the bar, never obtained a cause; and being
asked what should be the reason? his Answer was, That on the Stage, he made
every man's Lesson, and no man spoke, but what he first contrived; he prescribed
to every one his decorum and cue as himself conceived best; but (says he) in
the pleading place I cannot bear it so away, Mine adversary quickly makes me
an answer, replyeth, opposes, and sifteth matters so, that I cannot maintain
a bad cause as I would, but it will be controlled: Our new Anabaptists, while
they buz into such men's ears, as are willing to hear no other teachers, while
they talk, without contradiction, amongst their disciples and favorers; whose
hands and hearts they have fitted with their own fond devises; they are all
men of ripe and rare Gifts: Superlatives, sans peers, whose meanings are
Miracles, whose words are Oracles, whose lips alone are presumed to preserve
knowledge; they may not only dip their followers, but draw them further to such
points, as drown men in perdition and destruction: And yet all this while all
their lies are registered and recorded for truth, and themselves accounted and
Canonized for Saints: But when the pride of their tongues, and the bottom of
their skils come to be tried before lawful Judges, when they are called unto
strict rules of dispute; when they are fairly hunted by an Orthodox Divine, a
man of Arts and Parts; who can easily ferret them out of all their hides and
holds, and either presently entangle them, or course them and discourse them
out of breath, with a full cry of Scripture proofs: there is not more
leanness, or less soundness of understanding lightly to be found amongst a
whole Regiment of men: How fitly may it now be said to him that was the
greatest of note before? Alas silly mouse, that appears after the mountains
travel!

IX.
IT is harder to find them out, then to Conquer them: could Caesar say of the
Scythians, they so hide themselves in several caves, and in holds, and in
rocks, and in towers, and in pits, even wheresoever they can be out of sight:
The chiefest and learned Sectaries of these times, are so close in their
conceits, and are so loath to be known what thoughts they maintain; unless it
be amongst their followers (in their hearts they ever follow the fashion of the
Swallow, that delights to fly against the wind, but in their speeches they
play the Lap-wings, who flies aloof from their nests, to withdraw the
passengers thence.) Nay such fair complements do they put upon their false
intents, and with so good pretenses do they cloak their bad desires, that it is
much more difficult to find out their carnal imaginations, and strong holds,
(the snares of the Devil, by which they are led Captive by him at his will)
then by Gods Word to cast them down.

X.
WE may read in Herodotus, how the King his Fathers danger made Atys, Croesus
his dumb son, to speak; He never spoke before, and yet when the Soldier
advanced to cut his Fathers throat, he opened his own throat, and said, O man
kill not my Father! What loyal Subject, what true Son of the Church can choose
but show the people now of this Land, their transgressions; when such base, and
barbarous, and bloody-minded affronts, are most ungratefully, and unaturally
put upon our gracious Sovereign, the lawful and loving Nursing Father of our
Country! when our spiritual Fathers, the Reverend Bishops, and pastors of our
Church, Watchmen of our safety, Shepherds of our souls, Physicians of our
consciences, the sacred instruments, and silver conduit pipes to conveigh grace
unto us; by whom we have been baptized, and begotten in the faith; are wronged
in their good names, Goods and Bodies; and which is above all, when the name of
the Father of us all, Lord of Heaven and Earth is reproached and blasphemed,
without punishment or check, as if we were more incredulous then the Devils in
Hell, who believe and tremble. James 2.19.


XI.
SCipio could say of his Soldiers in Sicily, that there was not one of them,
but would, at his Commandment, cast himself down from the top of a Tower: The
very light of nature had taught them, that obedience was due to their
Governor, though it could not direct them how far it was to be extended; and
therefore they would rather afford him ^ver-measure, then defraud him: There is
no such Allegiance required of us, but only in things that are lawful and
laudable; and for both substance and circumstance, we are referred to the most
indifferent Judge the holy Scriptures, the divine Beam, and the most exact
Balance, by the which all questions in Religion ought to be determined, and
may be cleared: And yet, how loath and unwilling are we Christians to give unto
our lawful Sovereign, that certain right and due, the which by Gods Word
apparently belongs unto him, in respect of his place?

XII.
MArcus Attilius Regulus a Roman, who had often Conquered the Carthaginians,
was at length taken captive by them; as the Romans had taken some of the
Carthaginians. The Carthaginians desirous to redeem their Countrymen, and
upon that condition, content to enfranchize those who^ they had taken from the
Romans, took only an oath of this Marcus Attillius, to return if he did not
speed, (so sacred, and sure a bond was an Oath held amongst the very Heathen)
and so ventured to send him to Rome, to treat with their Adversaries about it.
He also for his part made so great conscience of an Oath, that he preferred his
oath before his life; For, when he was at Rome, where he might have stayed if
he would, and knew, if he did go back, he should undergo torments, and a most
miserable death; yet he chose rather to expose himself to the hands of his
enemies, then to break his Covenant, and perjure himself. Oh how shall these
Heathen rise up in judgment against us, who have the Word of God expressly to
bind us to the reverence and observance of an Oath! and yet many of us make no
regard thereof: Have we never taken the Oath of Supremacy? Have we never taken
the Oath of Allegiance? Have we never been Officers? I am sure some of us have:
How then can our former Oaths stand with our present Actions?

XIII.
THaerida whetting his sword, and asked by one that beheld him, Whether it were
yet sharp enough? Answered, That it was sharper then Calamnie Thearum
Historicum, 659.
From thence implying, that Calumny sinketh deep, and pierces far, and is
mavelous cutting; and if a sword be sharper then that, it needs no more
whetting. What a debaucht and desperate Age then do we now live in, wherein we
not only make no conscience, or scruple, to wound some of our neighbors with
swords, and swords sharper then Calumny; but most unworthily presume to strike
at those, to whom God has subjected us; whom, of all others, in many respects,
we are most justly bound to love, honor, and defend, and for whom we ought to
lay down our own lives, if need should require, both with sharpest swords,
and sharpest Calumnies?

XIV.
XEnophanes having the name of Dastard cast in his teeth, at a Banquet, for
that he refused to play at Dice: I am, I confess, a Dastard, (says he) and
fearful in all dishonest causes. Men are now termed Delinquents, Malignants,
Rebels, if they will not in a distempered choler, renounce their subjection,
break their oaths, and bear Arms, or in some other manner make opposition
against their lawful Sovereign: For me, let my name stand any where, in the
most disgraceful characters, though in a Chronicle, for such a Delinquent,
Malignant, Rebel. I allow not reviling, but I should not grudge to be reviled
for being Loyal. As with an undaunted resolution Job said in another case, so
let me say in this; though mine Adversary should write a book against me, not
only say what evil he please, but write against me, and that even an whole
Book of accusations; would I be put out of heart, or discouraged by it; would I
not take it upon my shoulders, and bind it as a crown unto me Job 6.31.35.36.
?

XV.
When Hortensius that spruce Orator immoderately praised Eloquence; wherefore
(said one) would he lift her up into Heaven, but that himself might go up with
her Cicero in Hortens.
? wherefore do many now adays so earnestly strive to set up their Sect above
others, but that they are cunning in their Sect above others; but that they may
be lifted up with their Sect, and ride upon the Cherubims? but because it is
for their exaltation and preferment, that so they may come to be chief amongst
their neighbors; but because they may triumph upon the vantage ground of their
place and power: yea, lord it over the heritage, and tread down their
neighbors at their pleasure?

XVI.
DIogenes, that counterfeit Cynick, as it plainly appeared to some, for all his
cunning shows, and crafty conveiances, pretending great humility; trampled and
triumphed over Platoes pride, with greater pride; he labored to discredit
Plato to dignifie himself: And what do they, many of them, who now are so
earnest against Bishops, and by calumnious accusations conspired their
disgrace; who would feign down with Bishops, and enjoy their Lands and Livings
for their supposed arrogance, when ten Bishops are not arrogant enough to make
one now leading Presbyterian? They cry out upon the pride of Bishops for ruling
according to the known and approved Laws, that so they themselves may be
subject to no Law, that so they forsooth may come in time to rule as they
please, by their own arbitrary lawless injunctions.

XVII.
ONe beholding Cardinal Wolsey when he was in the height of his pomp and
pride, when, in a Letter of his sent to the Pope, he was so out of his
Politics, and parts, as to put himself before his King, I and my King; Not My
King and I, but I and my King; could not but break out into these words, I pity
this proud Cardinal, that neither knows others, nor himself. What true
thankful Minister can now with patience endure to see so many proud Presbyters
so saucily to insult and triumph over their Bishops, by whom they have been
admitted into their sacred functions, and not express himself with tears, and
say, I am very sorrowful for the insolency of these men, who have no
remembrance left, by whose hands they have received their Orders, and (which is
more strange) have no right or clear thoughts what they are themselves.

XVIII.
LYcurgus being importuned to establish a Popular Estate amongst the
Lacedaemonians, that so the least, and meanest, and most unfit to rule, might
bear like sway with the greatest, and wisest; fitly answered, That he who most
desired it, should begin it first at home in his own house; presuming that in
a private family, Parity would never be long liked. There are now that so
earnestly long for Equality in the Church, that they will no longer dispute for
it, but mean to fight for it; And since they cannot bring it in with their
tongues, they will therefore take help of their hands. I would all so minded
would learn some wit from Lycurgus, in their anger; and first weigh in
judgment, by the poise of wisdom, in the balance of indifferency, hanging
upon the beam and rule of right, the inconvenience of pulling down all
Officers, and establishing community of rule in an Army, and then consider,
whether the like equal Masterdome may be justly put upon the Church, which is
an Army with banners Cant. 6.4.
.

XIX.
WHen a young man, with whom Plato found fault for playing at Dice, said, Do
you find fault with me for so small a matter? The matter is small, (quoth
Plato) but the custom of it is no small matter Diegen. Laert. de vit
Philosophor. lib. 3.
. Agood remembrance for all those who have any Youth to bring up, to be very
careful to keep them from evil practices, lest they grow past shame in
sinning; for if Custom once prevail, and get the place, it will discover no
small wicked power, it will take away all sense and feeling of sin. But it is
worth a noting also for another respect: There is great exception taken, much
complaint made, and even crue^ revenge executed, because some Ministers
heretofore have been silenced, and put from their Livings for Rites and
Ceremonies, (the which indeed are urged, not for Ornament, much less Necessity
of Gods service, but for Order and Polity only, and as a mean to testify
Subjection to the lawful power of the Magistrate.) What? say some, (who little
think how they have done much worse themselves, plundered, tormented,
murdered) Is it not most unrighteous to inflict punishment for such small
matters? Is it not cruel to deprive men and their families of their
livelihood, for rejecting matters of circumstance, and moaths in comparison?
The matters are small, I grant, but the contempt of Authority is not small. But
O, a great necessity lies upon Authority, to vindicate it self from contempt.
The contempt of Authority, though in the smallest matter, deserves no small
punishment. Wherefore were Adam and Eve condemned? Not for the fruit, but for
the forbidden.

XX.
COluthus, being himself but a Presbyter in one of the Churches of Alexandria,
took upon him to give holy Orders: but was that his so doing approved by the
Church? No: But he himself was censured for great presumption, and they taken
for mere Laymen whom he had Ordained. The truth whereof is sufficiently
testified by two Ancient and Learned Fathers of the Church, Athanasius and
Epiphanius. From whence then, I marvel, came their warrant, who being no more
but Priests, without any farther Apostolical authority, make bold to impose
hands, to bless, and ordain other Priests? Can they confirm and justify
this, either by the Scriptures, or practice of the Church? Was not the opinion
of the Primitive Church otherwise? But O! what Christian can choose but blush,
and grieve, and groan, when they who are in no holy Orders themselves, neither
Priests, nor Deacons, dare order and appoint Priests for the people? O what a
company of false Prophets have we now abroad, in these unruly times, put into
office, and set on work but by the next great perverse Schismatic?

XXI.
GReat was the enmity of Pyrrhus to the Romans; yet nevertheless did he give
this praise unto Fabritius, That a man might as soon turn the Sun out of
his course, as turn him from the truth and honesty: He would not be so base
as not to do his mortal enemy right: He would not defraud a Roman of his
deserved commendation. But O! self-love is grown now a-dayes so discourteous,
and envious, that if an enemy have never so commendable gifts, be he learned,
honest, humble, and in part, what not, that is virtuous, yet it cannot afford
him one good word. No, though he need encouragement. Nay, let a man's
righteousness, proceeding from a lively faith indeed, and contrite soul,
exceed the righteousness of Fabritius; yet if he be but different in
affection, or distant in judgment from us, our lips shall slight him, if
others commend him; and malice him, if others maintain him: Nay though they
do it, not to flatter him, but to magnify God; Not for the increase of Man's
pride, but for the advancement of Gods glory.

XXII.
ARistotle having gotten great learning from Plato, by whom he was taught no
less then ten years, afterward became a great enemy unto him, and by all
means sought his discredit. A course clean contrary to all Moral rules, and
even common humane civility: the which unthankfulness caused Plato to call him
Mule Aelian de var. hist.
. The property of which beasts is, when they have well filled themselves with
their mothers milk, to beat their dams with their heels for a recompense.
Well may our Universities, the Nurseries of Gods Vineyard, the Seminaries of
Christian Learning, and Fountains of holy Religion, yea the eyes, the light,
the temper, the salt, the seasoning of the whole Land, take it very unkindly,
that some of them, whom they have not only taught, but maintained with all
necessaries, some ten years, some more, should now be found their greatest
opposers: This may be an Aristotelian, an Heathenish, but surely no Christian
requital. Such unworthy disciples, dissemblers, may be Men in countenance, but
in condition Mules.

XXIII.
SOcrates at a banquet falling at odds with one of his familiars; and openly
rebuking him: Plato could not hold, but said unto him, How much better bad this
been spoken privately? And had not you then done better to have told me so
privately? quoth Socrates. Plato could see Socrates his fault of unseasonable
reprehension, but his own he could not perce^ve. Look but amongst your holy
Brethren, your rank Protestants, your devout D^ssemblers now a-dayes, and they
are not half so forward in examining themselves, as in finding peccadilloes in
others: and they are are not half so curious in their own, as they are
captious and cruel over other men's lives. They can readily accuse others of
blackness and spiritual deformities, saying, They are wicked, He is naught,
They are Antichristian; but when does any one of them, though he has been in
open Rebellion, smite himself on the thigh, saying, Oh what have I done? They
can gaze at the mote in their brothers eye, but care not for putting out the
beam in their own sight: They cannot bear with a few infirmities of their
brethren, no not of their Fathers; but their own foul enormities they can
easily conceal and continue.

XXIV.
PElaretus a Lacedemonian, though a man highly deserving, was not chosen to be
one of the 300. which was a degree of honor at Sparta; and yet he was so far
from complaining, or grudging, or grieving thereat, that, when others marvelled
at his contentment, and inquired of his reason, he told them, That he rejoiced
at the happiness of that Commonwealth, that it had three hundred men more
worthy to govern then himself Plut. in his Apopeth.
How many are there in these times of clear knowledge, wherein it is
apparently known, that true godliness teaches every man contentment with
that orb and place wherein he is set, with that portion which God has given
him, (who, as sore eyes are offended at clearness of light, so envy at the
brightness of other men's virtues, and prosperity: who fret themselves because
of other men's wealth, or honor, and are envious against other men's
advancement:) How many rage and storm like Aeolus, that not three hundred, nor
three, but some one worthier person is preferred before them.

XXV.
ANtoninus Caracalla the Emperor, had murdered his brother Geta, but was
desirous, if it were possible, to preserve his own credit: A Commandment
therefore was given by him to Papinian, an excellent Lawyer, to defend at
least, if not extol, that his fact, before the Senate and People: But what
said Papinian? A murder is not so easy to be excused, as committed Spartianus
in Caracal.
. By the means of some coverous, ambitious, pettish, and newfangled Ministers,
a spiritual murder has been of late executed upon the legally confirmed form
of our Divine Service; the which has been burned, or torn in pieces, or
otherwise massacred, or made away, without any exception of those sacred parts
of it, for the which they might well have forborne all the rest: If the
occasioners of this murder (for all their rare supposed wisdom) were
themselves, and not others for the^, appointed to justify these their own
projects, not by force of Arms, but Arguments: I make no doubt but they will
apparently be found, though not so unwilling to attempt it, as heathenish
Papinian, (for what dare they not undertake?) yet more unable to perform it:
Strange imaginations spring out of every dunghill, but solid and substantial
reasons grow but in few grounds.

XXVI.
LYcurgus (says Plutarch) was not so well advised, when seeing the
Lacedaemonians drink too much, and fall to drunkenness, and so to further Sin,
he commanded to cut down their Vines, and would not suffer any to grow in that
Commonwealth: It had been better (says he) to have dug wels near to the
Vines, and so have allaied and assuaged the strength and licorishnesse of wine
with water: If our Fonts, if our Communion-Tables, Pulpits, Seats, Temples,
have been abused in time of Popery, with a multitude of Superstitious
Ceremonies, and needless inventions, what? shall we therefore use them no
more? Rather let us use them no more so. What? shall we therefore give them
over? that were strange frowardness and folly. Rather let us use them better.
And even herein have we the example of our blessed Lord and Savior, who did
not condemn Moses chair for the life of a Pharisee; but preached where they
had preached, though they were notorious hypocrites, though he denounced so
many woes against them, as against none more; yea, though the Temple in his
time were become a den of thieves, yet then and there sent he up devout and
holy Prayers.

XXVII.
PLiny the younger, a Panym, writing unto Trajan an heathen Emperor, of the
conversation and behavior of the Christians of that time; confesses them free
from all faults, and offenses, both against Prince and people: excepting this,
that before break of day, they usually met and prayed together, and sang
praises unto God. An excellent example in the general for all Christians to the
worlds end, to keep themselves unspotted from the world, and to keep their
devotion at all times sharp and ready. But O! if there were a Certificate now
to be made, our Christian people could not be charged with any such fault; for
not only praying on the week day with one accord in the Temple, but even
praying on the Sabbath is grown quite out of request. Preaching, or rather the
show, or shadow of it, has thrust Praying quite out of doors. O
Supplications, whither are you fled? O Prayers, whither are you gone? O
Intercessions, and giving of thanks, what is become of you? O come again you
Supplications and Prayers, O return you Intercessions and giving of thanks: Oh
that all such may be usually made again, for all men, for Kings, and for all
that are in authority, that we may lead a quiet and a peaceable life, in all
godliness and honesty 1 Timothy 2.1, 2.
.

XXVIII.
I Read, how the Christians living under Prester John, the great King of
Aethiopia, who professes the faith of Christ, though not so purely as it were
to be wished, are bound under great penalties, whenever they have received
the holy Sacrament, not so much as once to spit, until the going down of the
Sun Mat. Dres.
. Fearing, no doubt, lest they should any way seem to slight those holy
mysteries, wherein the unspeakable benefit of life everlasting, purchased for
them by the death and passion of Jesus Christ, is graciously represented unto
them. There is no Nation under the Sun, better instructed in the knowledge of
the Sacraments, or any other points conducing to Salvation, then our English
people are: And yet what small difference are we foulely fallen of late to make,
between the Bread and Wine at the Communion, and at other common times? O are
we afraid to spit presently after the receiving of them? I mean, Are we afraid
of giving any appearance of want of respect? Nay, what rude and ungodly
carriages and practices proceed from many of us, both before and after we have
been partakers of the Lords Table?

XXIX.
POlycarpus that ancient Father, the Apostle Saint John's Scholar, as he was
led to punishment, being persuaded by the Proconsul to save his life, by the
denying of Christ, made this answer, Fourscore and six years have I served him,
and he has never hurt me; how can I now sorsake him, that has hitherto
preserved me? Eusebius. Eccl. Hist. lib. 4. c. 15.
Though not fourscore and six years, yet many years, may many say, they have
religiously observed the memory of Christ's Nativity, Circumcision, Passion,
victorious Resurrection, glorious Ascension into heaven, and gracious sending
of the holy Ghost upon his Disciples; neither have they received any evil, any
unkindnesse from him all this while; O unthankful creatures, then, unworthy to
live, move, or have their being, if any thing should make them now, to leave
off serving him at such times, and fall a serving themselves.

XXX.
THe humanity of Theseus was much talked of, and wondered at, in that he
vouchsafed with his own hands, to wash the dead carcasses of his Soldiers
slain at Thebes. What shall we say, or think, of the goodness of our grand
Captain, CHRIST, Lord of Lords, who was wounded for our transgressions, and
broken for our iniquities, and with whose stripes we are healed? Esaias 53.5.
who for our sake did sweat drops of blood, trickling down to the ground? Luke
22.44.
who disdained not to wash away our sins with his own most precious blood?
shall we not talk of him? shall we not wonder at him? shall we not willingly
take up all occasions to remember him? shall we grudge him any day that ever
was celebrated in remembrance of any of his unmatchable benefits?

XXXI.
AUgerius Busbequius, sometimes Ambassador to the great Turk, assures us,
that in their Synagogues they use so great reverence, that if they do but with
one finger scratch their heads, whilst they are worshipping, they think all
their Devotion is lost: yea they use to say, Would we not be careful of all
our respects, our gestures, our looks, our words, if we were to speak with one
of the Bassaes? How much more then when we speak to God? Legate. Turcicae Epist.
3.
How much worse then are they then Turks, who come into their public
assemblies, where God has promised to be more especially present, without any
such spirits of lowliness and dread? without any such meditations or thoughts
of awe to obey him, or fear to displease him? and there speak to God as
unreverently and rashly, as if they were amongst their companions? Should they
come with the like disrespect and unmannerly speech but to an earthly Judge,
Take away that saucie fellow, says the Judge, Commit him. O remember that God
stands in the congregation of Princes, he is a Judge amongst Gods Psalm. 82.1.
: O consider that even Kings and Princes are to praise God, and all the Judges
of the world Psalm. 148.11.
.

XXXII.
THeodosius the Emperor being by persuasion moved to keep from the Church,
till he had humbled his soul by true repentance, for the great murder
committed by his means in Thessalonica, (for I cannot think that he was
excommunicate, (whatsoever the Canonists say contrary) neither stands
Excommunication of Princes upon any good ground, seeing they have no superior
Judges upon earth: but How will thou, says Saint Ambrose, (according to his
duty unto him, seeking to save the Princes soul with the hazard of his own
life) receive the Lords Body with a bloody hand Theod. hist. l. 5. c. 18.
? was never quiet in heart till he was freed from that impediment; ceased not
in brackish tears to bewail his wretched estate, and day by day with great
earnestness to crave restitution, till he was at last again received into the
Church, to praise the Lord in the great congregation, and amongst much people.
How far from Theodosius his humble spirit, and hearty love to the Church, are
they now a-dayes, who have wilfully divided and rent themselves from our
Church, contemned our Sacraments, and condemned our Religion as Antichristian,
in the mean while betaking themselves to private meetings and secret
Conventicles?

XXXIII.
PYthagoras boundall those, whom he received into his School, to five years
silence, that they might not fly before they were fledge; that as soon as ever
they crept from the shell, they might not aspire to the house top; that their
tongues might not run before their wits; that they might hear sufficiently
before they spoke boldly: and so strong was his (...), so much did his word
prevail with them, that faithfully and constantly they observed his
commandment. Many Tutors now a-dayes, though wiser and better then Pythagoras,
yet, seeing their young ones too forward to make wing, cannot possibly beat
them back into the nest; yet cannot keep their Pupils within the limits of
learners five years; no, nor four years, till they have taken some Degree in
School, but they must needs in all haste take upon them the sacred profession
of preaching Gods Word; and not only some thin, obscure, ignorant Country
Parishes, but Jerusalem, and the chief Cities, but the greatest congregations,
and the most knowing people must take notice of their ripe and rare
intelligence, in their own, though raw in other men's opinions. Being drunken
with pride, they delight to be seen in the most public assemblies, as there
are some that must needs show themselves in the market, or Fair, being drunken
with Wine, or some meaner liquor.

XXXIV.
THere were three Ambassadors sent from Rome, to Bythinia, to appease the
discords, and salve up the differences between Nicomedes and Prusias; whereof
one was troubled with an aching in his head, another with the gout in his toes,
and the third with a fainting in his heart. Of this Embassage what said Cato?
The people of Rome send an Embassage, that has neither head, nor foot, nor
heart. Were Cato Major now alive again, to see our new counterfeit Legates,
without any sacred authority, without any competent ability, taking upon them
sacred functions; how worthily might he say of them, that they have neither
heads of true learning, nor feet of right obedience, nor hearts of godly
sincerity: Fitter for Innovation, then Administration; fitter to make
differences, then to reconcile them; and to scatter the sheep of Christ, then
to gather them together: fitter to raise false reports, and to put their hands
with the wicked to be unrighteous witnesses, then to be righteous reformers.

XXXV.
ALexander seeing one of his Soldiers going to sharpen his dart, when all
other were going to fight, casheer'd him, and cast him out of the Army, saying,
He was unworthy of a place in an Army, who was then to provide Arms, when he
was to use them. How much more is he unworthy to be a Leader in the Spiritual
Army, to ascend into Moses chair, who is then to provide, when he is to put
on, who is then to prepare when he is to preach? how can such a one choose but
disguise the holy word of God, and profane it one way or other? He that
speaks suddenly shall never speak profitably, but presumes too far upon his
own gifts, and too much undervalueth the good of Gods people, and the
business he has in hand. Our (...) (...) ^^^ation should be, as it were,
seasoned with salt, that it may minister grace unto the hearers; How much more
when the Law of God is publicly sought for at our mouths, and to be uttered by
us against noted and cunning Schismatics, and Heretics; when we are openly to
wrestle, not against flesh and blood only, but against principalities, against
powers, against the Rulers of the darkness of this world, against spiritual
wickedness in high places Ephesians. 6.12.
?

XXXVI.
AVenzoar that greatly learned, and experienced Physician affirmed, that he
never gave purgation, but his heart did shake many days before; though no
doubt, so (...) conscionable; as long to commune with his own heart, and with
the chiefest Masters he could meet withal in his profession, that the cure
might the better prosper under his hands, and that success might answer
expectation: How audacious then and insensible, and dissolute in their
undertakings are they, who being Physicians of souls, never deliberate with
themselves what hurt bad physic may do, or take any serious thoughts how
their counsel may be most effectual; who never weigh their prescripts by the
proportion of faith Romans 12 6.
, never suite their words to the wholesome words of the Lord Jesus 1 Timothy 6.3.
, but irreverently, and unworthily, rudely, and rashly administer all their
doctrines, instructions, corrections, consolations, without either dread of bad
haps to fall out, or desire of good success to follow, without either art or
pains in the reading and composing, or awfulnesse, and heedfulnesse in
recollecting and delivering?

XXXVII.
A Lacedemonian having plucked off the feathers of a nightingale, that not long
before had given a delicate and ravishing sound, and seen but a little lean
carrion left (b); thou art a voice, Plutarch in Apoph. Lacon.
says he, naught else. Your new fashioned Sermons so full of edification, as
some conceive, seem, in the ears of such admirers, rare and excellent music,
so far overreaching others notes, as the nightingale in melody passes all the
rest of the birds of the wood: but pluck off the feathers from the discourses,
the news, and more, news of the times, the seditious contumelies, and
treacherous invectives, the idle digressions and multitude of words; as though
they knew their hearers could understand nothing, except they told it them
twenty times over: Disrobe them of such their circumquaques, and circulations
to no purpose; wherein they run their rounds, and yet persuade their hearers,
that they go right forward, with great sobriety and gravity; Dismantle them of
such vain and frivolous ornaments, wherewith they are audaciously clothed; and
lay them naked to the view of true reason, and the body of all their long
stories, what show soever it made before the simple, is but a poor slight
carcass, and has no title or matter of substance in it.

XXXVIII.
IT seemed a marvel to Cato, that a Soothsayer could abstain from laughter,
whenever he beheld another Soothsayer. And why? but because the most ignorant
of them could not but imagine, how the most skillful amongst them did but gull
the people, with the cousening tricks which they played; with their pretended
divinations by the liver, and the heart, and other entrails of beasts, when
nothing can be truly discerned by any such unwarrantable way. And can we think
that our new Teachers do not laugh when they meet one another, and upon that
occasion consider, how no Soothsaiers do more deceive their clients, then they
their hearers, by calling hungry guests unto empty tables, and illuding them
with the show of dishes without meat; by feeding them with words in place of
matter; and roaring and railing in stead of reasons Ezech. 22.25.
? Can we possibly think that they do not highly applaud themselves, when they
recount their wicked profits, how they have ravened the prey, how they have
devoured souls, how they have taken the treasures of precious things, how they
have devoured widows houses, and for a pretense made long prayers? Mat. 23.14.
But woe unto you that are rich, for you have received your consolation; woe
unto you that are full, for you shall hunger; woe unto you that laugh now, for
you shall mourn and weep; woe unto you when all men shall speak well of you,
for so d^d their Fathers to the false Prophets. Luke 6.24, 25, 26.


XXXIX.
EIther take from thy mind, or add to thy might, was the well seasoned
counsel of Archidamus to his Son: And indeed what wise man will reach above
his height, or offer to carry more then he is able? Is it not a vain thing,
not to proportion our attempts to our strengths, our practices to our
knowledges? A good work is never spoiled more, then when it is handled with
much animosity, but little ability. Oh all ye young Divines, who, for all your
breasts so hot, your words so fierce, your gestures so vehement, are too
forward in undertaking controversies with the learned and politic Jesuits,
the chiefest of all the popish Rabbis; by your want of exercise and weakness
of judgment in the Scriptures, animating them and their disciples in their
errors; first labor to be cunning in your profession, and in the light to
your profession, and to all your paths, the Book of God: Either recruite your
learning, or restrain your Zeal.

XL.
SYlla the noble Roman, who was commonly most free and liberal, considering of
Marius the younger's preferment, how unbeseeming, and dangerous it was, said,
that a young man was first to be appointed to the ^are, and then to the stern;
O how much more is this order to be constantly thought upon and carefully kept
in the government of the Church, the chiefest Ship that ever was built; where,
as the calling is weightier, so the danger is greater, when Pastoral charges
are committed to unfit persons; oh then that now old and young are put to
steer before they can row; oh then that now men and boys are set as notable
Pilots to direct the Ships of Christian congregations, how to sail through the
tempests and waves, and to pass the sands, and rocks, whereby in this subtle
world they are subject to miscarry; before they have learned themselves to
avoid one rock, either of presumption or despair! before they are any whit
experienced in their spiritual Card and Compass, the Word of God, by the
which their whole voiages are to be directed, and levelled; they are designed
to govern Ships laden with more costly fraights, then the whole world and all
the glory thereof is able to countervaile Mat. 16.26.
.

XLI.
CIcero coming into the Province, which his brother Quintus, a very little man
governed, and seeing his picture drawn in a very great stature, could not hold
but merrily said: Half my brother (...) ^hole Macrob. Satur (...). Lib. 2. c.
3.
. What large acclamations and eminent promotions, are heaped now adays, upon
some men by their favorers, either because they approve their ways, and
conform themselves to their conditions, willing to wallow in the same puddle
with them, ready to run with them to the same excess of riot; or though they
do not in all humors accord, yet because they consent and join with them, in
some heresies, schism, or faction: between the valuation of whose worth and
rewards, what proportion can any man find? Are such men worthy to be magnified,
to be mounted? Are such men fittest to be placed in the chiefest rooms above
others; because they strongly support a side, and are wily perhaps to contrive
mischief; howsoever (...) any good meditations wondrous weak, and unexpert,
yea silly for their own souls, and altogether without understanding of the
matters of God? How justly may their impartial brethren say, when they see
such men aloof, and applauded, that half such praises, half such
preferments, if they be duly considered, are more then such men's whole deserts?

XLII.
SImeones, beholding Arsacius, an unlearned and unworthy man, in comparison
(whatsoever Cyrill partially thought of him) placed in S. Chrysostomes room, a
Father so Learned, so Godly, so skillful in the Scriptures, cried out, O shame
who is here placed? whom does he succeed Niceph. Lib. 13. c. 28.
? We may justly say the like of many of the late intruders, both into
Fellowships in Colleges, and Benefices in the Country, what are these? in whose
rooms do they come? Are not false and flattering prophets, time-servers,
trencher Chaplains, set up in the rooms of Orthodox and conscientious
Divines? Are not green heads not grown unto any ripeness of judgment,
obstreperous bablers, saucy Sub-Jacks possessed of the preferments of the
Learned and Ancient? Are there not thrust into the dignities of discreet,
pious, and loyal Scholars, cauterized wretches, schismatics and Rebels, as if
they were to be tutors and factors for hell? And yet I am not so sorrowful
that these things should be done, as that they should be practiced under a
counterfeit color of Religious Reformation.

XLIII.
COme not to me, as if I were a neat-herd, but yield me a reason of thy
dealing, quoth the sick Philosopher to the Physician; He would not adventure to
take Physic, though from a kind Physician, upon mere prescription; but he
looked for some farther assurance; and must have some satisfying allegation: If
thou come as a Spiritual Physician to cure the sores of any soul, come not to
me with winning words as heretics use, who are wont first to incite, and then
to instruct; who in stead of reasons, use exclamations, (broken reeds for any
man to lean upon, that has any care of his soul) who cry out lustily, but
confirm lazily; but come to me with pregnant proofs, as true Prophets
observe, who are accustomed first to prove, and then to persuade; I like not
these self fet assertion, as if all the world were bound to the breath of other
men's mouths; show me a proof for that point thou would have me to believe or
follow: prove what thou preachest, if I shall believe thee; I shall ever
embrace one full proof before a thousand flaunting protestations. Tell not me
of uses only, and uses upon uses, I shall ever be afraid to make use of the
room of that house, where I am still in doubt whether the foundation be sure.

XLIV.
IT was an heroical answer which was given by Charles the fifth Emperor to
such as would have persuaded him not to send back Luther, being come unto him
under his safe conduct; that though the performances of promises were clear
banished the face of the earth, yet they should be kept by an Emperor. Going
often into the Sanctuary of God, and having there clearly found so many
precepts, for the reverent handling of Gods word, the which I hope, they have
promised to keep, what though Ministers now adays be earnestly persuaded and
urged to take the name of God in vain, and to Preach extempore? what though
otherwise they are like to loose all esteem amongst worldly men, and to be
outed of all their means? yet is it a good resolution for every Preacher that
fears God, to embrace and observe without exception: Be the impudent guize of
others applauded, and admired and preferred; be fear and reverence banished
from the Church, I will never presume to ascend a Pulpit, without private and
public both prayer and premeditation: By me the sacred word of God shall never
willingly be profaned.

XLV.
THe Lacedaemonians banished Ctesiphon, for that he vaunted that he could
discourse all the day of any subject that was put unto him; they thought that
words should not be long and empty, but short and the subject of much matter;
but like precious jewels, contain great riches in a little room: They
conceived that speech ought to be so precious a treasure, as not to be used in
vain and wastfully: But have the people such an evil conceit now adays, of
copiam verborum, of over-flowers with words, who for a drop of wit have a flood
of elocution, who trust more to the slipperyness of their tongues, then to the
soundness of their cause; (or though they do not banish them,) do they mislike
to hear them? Do they not rather think their wisdom to be as fluent as their
words? Do they not rather take them for the best preachers, that can most vary
phrases, and talk longest, and loudest, though nothing to the business? though
much mudde of vanity must needs issue out, where the sluice of moderation is
plucked up, and passage given to all that can be spoken. And yet how could the
Lacedaemonians come to hear what we have often heard, that for every idle word,
though neither in it self false, nor yet hurtful, and prejudicial unto
others, and therefore much more for tedious Sermons full of tautologies,
(besides unreasonable, treacherous, and profane matters) a strict account
there must assuredly be rendered.

XLVI.
AUgustus Caesar on a time, as he was passing through Rome, and saw certain
strange women lulling Apes and whelps in their arms; What, said he, have the
women of these Countries no other Children? You that so admire and run after
those, as the only profound Teachers, who were never bred as Scholars; who
understand not one of those tongues wherein the holy Ghost wrote, (great helps
to learn his meaning) and therefore cannot convince heretics, as true
Ministers ought; for the translations often fail; and cannot always express
the force of words in the Original; can you find in neither of our famous
Universities, so learned and so holy men, as these your new mountebanks, that
can mount from the boat or the coach to the desk, from the shop-board to the
Pulpit? can you meet with no stronger workmen then such weak hinds? no better
leaders, then such blind guides? no skilfuller Pilots, then such as never
sailed one league from the shore?

XLVII.
Whenever Alexander the Great heard any plaintiff, he was wont to stop one
ear; and being asked why he did so? answered, I keep the other free for the
defense of the accused; that so I may stand indifferent till the truth be
thoroughly canvassed: If an heretic, or schismatic, mutineere or Rebel can
get the first acquaintance with some men; he may easily so forestall and fill
both their ears with a false report, as to leave no room for any farther
information; He may quickly lead them, or rather mislead them, whither his
perverse humor inclines. The first tale cunningly told carries the^ without
bail or mainprize into any crazed opinion, or carnal resolution whatsoever,
against their Country, Prince, yea God himself. Alexander was not more
reserved, and reasonable, then they are weak and wilful.

XLVIII.
WE read of them who dwell about the fall of the River Nilus, where it tumbleth
down from high mountains, that they are made deaf by the greatness of the
sound and noise of the waters. The many great and strange lies that in these
desperate times have been spread abroad by loud-sounding Trumpets, all the
Kingdom over; the tumultuous noise that all Protestant and conformable Divines,
are rank Papists, or Popishly affected; that their faith and service is cursed
and damnable; that a set form of public Prayer is Antichristian and
abominable, and no more acceptable to God, then the offering of swines flesh
was under the Law, which the Lord abhorred; have made many of the common people
(and some no doubt who have a devotion atherwise to serve God aright) so hard
and dull of hearing, that they cannot now for their hearts and souls perceive
the still and soft voice of the truth.

XLIX.
WAlter Mapes sometimes Archdeacon of Oxford (the next age after the Conquest)
having written of a gross Simoniacall bargain made by the Pope, shuts up
his narration thus; Notwithstanding let our Lady and Mother the Church of Rome,
be as a staff bowed in the water, and let us not believe what we see De Nugis
Can.
. Let a true Protestant give but any the least advantage of suspicion, let him
but look over the hedge, (be the complaint never so false, the proof never so
slender, the man never so guiltless) the horse is stolen, and he must needs be
the man; There is no pleading to be made to it, there is no believing the
contrary: but let a brother of the faction apparently commit a most foul
offense, let him be taken in the manner; let the case be clear by sufficient
witnesses; yet we must not believe all that we hear, or see, both our ears and
our eyes may be deceived; the man may be right still as a staff in the water,
how bowed, how crooked soever it appear.

L.
PEnelope but a heathenish woman, was solicited by many unchaste wooers to
wrong her husband Ulysses, who had been absent from her twenty years: yet
neither by suitors promises, nor her own Parents entreaties, could she be
drawn to break her faith which she had made to her husband at his departure,
but still remained faithful. What Regiments, what Fleets of schismatic and
heretical wooers are now in the world, who under pretense of devotion, zeal,
and good intendments compass Sea and Land to make one of their profession? and
what a great cunning crew of them in these Kingdoms? every man striving, what
he may, to advance and advantage his cause. These woo the silly and simple
sort of people, and with words of deceit cease not to entice unstable souls,
to wrong Christ, to break covenant with him, and contract themselves with new
husbands (new Lords, that have new Laws which Christ never used:) but o take
heed and beware, let none of these wooers woo you; or if they woo you, let
them not win you: be true to Christ your loving Ulysses, your true bridegroom,
your dear Sovereign, your gracious Savior; O forget not his parables, his
precepts, his sentences, his Sacraments, his prayer, his peace that he left
with you.

LI.
IT was Annibals saying of Marcellus, that he had to do with him, who could
never be quiet, neither Conqueror nor Conquered Plate in vita Annib.
; but Conquering he would pursue his victories, and Conquered labor to recover
his loss: but much rather may a man say the like of Satan, that great ramping
Lion, the Arch-envier of our peace and happiness, who is the most wrathful
and the most watchful enemy, who is never idle but ever employed in sowing
cockles amongst the Lords good corn; who, though we stoutly resist him, and
overcome him for a time, yet will never rest nor give over, but will be
tempting again; yea will not cease to assay us again and again with the same
temptations, hoping at length to win our consents, and to give us the foil.
Wherefore having often well fought against him, and subdued him, yet watch we
still, and pray we continually to God, that we be not overmastered by him.

LII.
I Would never sit upon that seat, said Themistocles, from which my friends
should receive no more benefit from me, then strangers; And indeed how often do
friends sway the balance of Justice? who has not seen how private respects
cause too many Judges, to leave the truth, and to hear the falsehood? but o the
Scriptures teach Magistrates a clean contrary lesson, when they put on the
persons of Judges, to put off the persons of friends; when they sit in the
place of Justice, not to think they are now husbands, or parents, or kinsmen,
or neighbors, but Judges, and therefore without all by respects, to discharge
that truth, which the great God of heaven and earth has reposed in them, and
expects from them, not once remembering their foes for any pressures, and
altogether forgetting their friends for any partiality.

LIII.
I Socrates an Athenian Orator, in his counsel to Demonicus (a young Gentleman
man like to be called to a great place) says thus unto him: Depart not from an
Office more rich, but more honorable, then when thou undertookest it. The
instruction given by this heathen may shame many Christians; our Officers
regard not with what dishonor, or dishonestie, they keep or leave their
places, so they may be rich: never fear though they tread their Wine out of
other men's grapes, reap their corn out of other men's fields, so they may
store their own houses with provision; so they may make their children great,
and turn them into gallants, they take no care, make no scruple, though they
turn their own souls into hell.

LIVE.
IT is written of Charles of Prague, that he supped often with a few sentences,
and arguments in the Schools D. Humfred. in vita Juelli.
, his meditation was all the meat he had for that meal: But if some of the
most devout Sequestrators now a days most abounding with lip holiness and
righteousness, were restrained and tied for a while to no better allowance;
(the which yet were great kindness to their covetous straitness and
continual cruelty toward their prisoners) there is no doubt to be made, but
you should quickly hear them complain of short commons; I make no question but
you should soon hear them with no small passion exclaim upon their
persecutors malice, covetousness, pride, seeking by others ruins to be
Grandees, and to advance their heads above all that is called their neighbor:
you should then hear at large of their own good breeding, great worth and
deserts, (whereof they were never guilty:) you should then hear the subjects
property displaied and set forth at full, and approved by Laws and reasons,
both humane and Divine.

LV.
HErod, as we find in authentic history, making full account to destroy
Christ, amongst the rest, not only slew all the other children, near the place
where Christ was borne; but spared not his own child, the fruit of his own
loins, flesh of his flesh, and bone of his bone Euscb. lib. 1. c. 9. Macrob.
Saturu. lib. 2. cap. 4.
; what bones made he to pluck up that affection to his child, which nature had
planted in him, or further to set unnatural murder in the place? The which
being reported to Augustus the Emperor, It is better (says he) to be Herod's
sow then his son: To such heavy sufferings, to such hard distresses, to such
evident and extreme calamities have they been driven to in these unmercifull
times, who have spent their times, their spirits, their lives, their
patrimonies, for the good of the Church: such unconscionable and violent wrongs
and oppressions have been practiced of late upon grave, learned, and
conscientious Divines, the chariots and horsemen of our Israel; by the horsemen
and footmen in our Israel, that just cause have they to cry out and say to such
persecutors shame, (saving the honor due unto God) Better be the peoples
plowmen then Priests.

LVI.
IT was the Poets vain and groundless conceit of Hector, that so long as he
lived, Troy could not be destroyed; terming him the immovable and inexpugnable
pillar of Troy: But well may it be said of a faithful man, that he is a mighty
stay, and strength, a maine defender and upholder of the place where he lives,
for whose sake, for whose presence, and prayers, out of the Lords abundant
kindness to all his, even the wicked are often within the shadow of Gods
protection, and spared: as for one just Lot the Angels spared the City Zoar;
Zoar might perhaps be as bad as Sodom, but here was a difference, It had a
righteous Lot within, Sodom had none Genesis 19.21.
.

LVII.
Dionysius the younger, confessed that he maintained many Sophisters, not that
he did admire them, but that for their sakes he might himself be admired:
Though there be no great number now a days that are further liberal to
Scholars, and Ministers, then only in outward complement; yet, I fear, a great
part of them also part not with their kindnesses to please God, who requires
it at their hands, whom they ought to make reckoning of above all; and to
support and relieve those Learned and Religious men who need it, whom they
ought to love as themselves; but rather in a Pharisaicall humor to advance
their own credits and respects in the world; that, how foul soever their
projects are, they may carry them on with fair looks; that what injurious or
irreligious intents, what secret sins, or divelish drifts soever they have,
they may yet be thought to be great lovers of Learning, and Religion.

LVIII.
I See many bodies; countenances and garments of Romans, but no Romans, quoth
that great Captain Marcellus unto his Soldiers: Many bodies and boroughs of
bodies, many sober and devout looks of Protestants, and attires not
unbefitting Protestants, may there be found now abroad in the world: Never was
hypocrisy spun with a fairer thread, never were men more cunning in
counterfeiting; but if you cast your eyes from their looks, to their lives,
from their words to their works, by the which the most subtle souls may best
be discerned, the copy of men's actions is more plain to be read, then the copy
of their countenances. You shall find that you are much mistaken in your
censures; for where is the life of grace, the power of godliness? you shall
perceive that they are no true and real Protestants all this while; but aliens
from Christ, void of Gods spirit, without faith, without hope, without love,
and in brief, mere hypocrites, like Balaam or Saul, or rather more formal,
like Satan himself, when the witch of Endor suborned him in the mantle of
Samuel, and brought him into the presence before Saul 1 Samuel 28.28.
.

LIX.
THere was a ridiculous Stage Player in the City of Smyrna, who pronouncing O
heaven, let down his finger toward the ground; The chiefest man present
beholding it, could not abide to stay any longer, but left the company and said
in anger; This fool has made a solescime, has spoken, as it were, false
Greek with his hand: There was no conformity he meant, between his tongue and
his hand. O how many such absurd actors are there every where to be found,
pointing upwards, poising downwards; pointing at heaven, practicing earth; who
carrying the light of the Gospel in their mouths, carry also in their hands
the filthy water of ambition and covetousness to quench it withal; who seek
in word Gods cause, but break in deed Gods Commandments; whose words are the
words of God, but their deeds are the deeds of the Devil.

LX.
A Painter, being reproved for drawing the picture of S. Peter too high
colored, made answer: That he drew him not as he was on Earth, but as he was
in Heaven; where he blusheth to behold the shameless demeanors of his
successors: I am not now to learn that Peter is ignorant of us here upon
Earth, and knows not his successors; neither am I yet untaught that he is
not yet bodily in Heaven; but howsoever, if a Painter were truly to decypher
any good man now living, he had need make him much more high colored then he
was wont to be; for where is there one such that does not blush to see so many
apparent parasites, creeping up to honors through a thousand dishonours, so
many Christians in profession, so many Saints in show, now adays, that have
Jacobs Voice, and Esaus Hands, that can give Judas Kiss, and Joabs Courtesy,
waited upon by a secret stab, when he basely killed Abner 2 Samuel 3.27.
; and again, when as lewdly he killed Amasa 2 Samuel 20.10.
? where is there one such that does not blush to behold so many double-faced
Janusses, various and inconstant pretenses, changeable Chamelions, apt to all
objects, taking the color of what is next them? where is there one such that
does not blush to view so many like the Mariners needle without the touch,
which will turn every way, and never stand still the way it should?

LXI.
WHen Charles, the ninth of France, propounded to that famous Prince of Conde
this threefold choice: Either Mass, or Death, or perpetual Imprisonment, the
most Christian Worthy made this worthy Answer. God assisting me, I will never
choose the Mass; the other two I refer to the Kings determination; yet so as
I hope God, in whose hands the heart of the King is, by his gracious providence
will guide and dispose of these also. But how few now will suffer any the least
hardship for Christ? If men may avoid death, and imprisonment, and rise upon
others ruins; if they may eat of the fat and drink of the sweet Nehe. 8.10.
, if they may eat the good things of the Land Esaias 1.19.
, impose what Religion you will, either Mass or Mahumetisme, or what else
soever; you shall have servile creatures enough, base fellows of all degrees,
that will be any thing, or of any Sect, that will fit you every way, that will
fashion and put forwards themselves for any employments; the good Centurion
never kept such obedient, ready and resolute servants.

LXII.
ARistotle hearing a proud prauncing Thraso ruffling in his fustian brags; vain
gloriously talking of his own virtues, and representing a great outward
appearance of worthiness: I wish (says he) I were such a one in truth, as
thou think thy self to be, or would seem to others to be, but to be as
thou art, I wish to mine enemies. I dare not desire to the worst of mine
enemies that they may be as many of your new Donatists are, whose outside is
of lambs wool, but their inside of foxes fur; Cato without and Cataline
within; who by fits and upon occasions make a mavelous verbal show of
goodness, when in heart they are nothing like to what they make show of: but I
wish that my self and others were, which some of them no doubt seem to
themselves, and all of them would feign seem to others, walking in all the
Commandments and ordinances of the Lord without reproof.

LXIII.
Julius Caesar in his Commentaries writes of the French Soldiers, that in the
beginning of the battle, at the first onset, they were more then men; but at
the second, or before the end, less then women: They would talk bravely, and
come on courageously, but at length give off cowardly. How many hypocritical
hotspurs in our reformed Churches shall a man meet, who have Gods word swimming
in their lips, but not shining in their lives; who if words may be received,
their pay is gallant; but if deeds be required, their money is not current; who
in professing and protesting are more then Protestants, but in preaching, and
performing, and persevering less then Papists.

LXIV.
BAtus the Tartarian Prince moved by Innocentius the fourth, to receive the
Christian Religion, sent his Ambassadors to Rome, to search and understand
their belief, and manner of Religion; who reporting that the Christians lived
wickedly, and worshipped they knew not what Images contrary to the doctrine
they professed; the Tartarian received the Religion of Mahomet: What Pagan can
we now hope to win, to seek to be one with us, to become a member of our
Church, when he shall see our faith turned into faction, our Religion into
Rebellion, our patience into violence, our zeal into self-love, our fidelity
into perjury, our Christian humility into most cunning hypocrisy, that would
seem to hate hypocrisy? when he shall epsy us to have bread in one hand, and
a stone in the other? when he shall hear us talk like Christians, and see us
live like Turks? when he shall find the words of our mouths softer then
butter, having war in our hearts? when he shall perceive our speeches smoother
then oil, and yet they be very swords Psalm. 55.22.
?

LXV.
IT was divinely said by Alexander the Great, though an Heathen, when he was
reproved by the Questor for being too bountiful in his Sacrifices; If thou
desire long to be happy, be not niggardly to God in matters that belong to his
worship; which if they do not flourish, all other things are sure to decay. O
in what other matters are we so sparing and base? in respects of our pleasures,
of our profits, of our honors, how readily can we lash out so many and so many
pounds, not caring what we spend? but when any thing should come from us to a
good purpose, to a charitable use, but when we should do well, willingly and
freely to disburse, how fast fingred, and close handed are we? but for the
better service and maintenance of the service of God, and advancement of his
glory, not a farthing more can we afford to part with, then what we are taxed
and forced unto. And yet what a gracious promise have they, who honor the Lord
with their substance, and with the first fruits of all their increase? So shall
their barnes be filled with plenty, and their presses shall burst out with new
wine Pro. 3.9, 10.
?

LXVI.
SAint Ambrose writes that Theodosius the Emperor, when he died, had a
greater care of the Church, then of his sickness; his life was not dear unto
him, so the Church might flourish after his death; so peace might be within her
walls, and prosperity within her palaces. Now if men may enjoy health, and
obtain plenty for the back, and the belly, wax rich and great, and live like
Emperors, no matter which way Religion turns, or what becomes of that
state and business, no matter how the Church fares either for the future or
present; how it goes with the Church they respect little, so themselves and
their families may go on. Nay, which is yet a worse symptom, and bewrays the
great power of Satan over them; what scruple at all do they make, to pill, and
spoil, and rob the Church, so as they may enrich themselves and their
posterities?

LXVII.
CAepio with his Soldiers robbed the wealthy Temple of Toulouse a City of
Narbon in France, near the Pyrene mountain; but of those that had a share in
any of those goods, not one ever prospered Guevara.
. It was so generally observed, that it occasioned a Proverb; If any man (by
what means soever decayed) were fallen into poverty, they would say of him, He
has some of the gold of Toulouse. The indowment of all other Churches (whereof
many have been plundered of rich Chalices, and other utensils in these
sacrilegious times) are like the gold of Toulouse, that brought ruin to them
and their families; If any man thrive with them, that holds them by a wrong
tenure, he has better speed then any such malefactor before him. How many
Sacrilegious persons have utterly ruinated themselves, it is easy to find in
many Monuments of learning; how a canker has eaten their estates, as a
gangrene did their consciences; but see the Chronicles, search Histories of
sundry Nations, both ancient and modern, and find me out but one Church-robber
here that has thrived past the third generation.

LXVIII.
I Have read that many things have been given to our Churches with a curse in
the Churches, against any such as should ever presume to take them away:
Whether man's curse shall take hold of Church-robbers, is wholly in the
disposition of God, and a secret; but I am sure he himself has openly cursed
all those, how many or great soever they be, that rob him in Tithes and
offerings Mal. 3.8, 9.
, yea cursed them with a curse redoubling the words, not without great cause,
but emphatically, to signify that they shall be cursed with a strange curse, a
signal curse, such a curse as he that hears his ears shall tingle, and his
knees smite one the other; and many learned, religious, and wise men think,
that this Land now mourns, as for other offenses, so especially for this
great robbery; the grand, the common, the far-spreading, the crying sin of this
Kingdom. As all Israel was plagued till Achan was punished; so they fear God
will not leave to scourge us, till we have rooted out all of Achans generation.

LXIX.
PIttacus, one of the seven wise men of Greece, being asked counsel, whether
in marriage it were best, for every one to choose his equal, bad him that
asked him go to children playing at fence, and they would tell him; every one
to his match. If they which are so greedy to take away that, which has by
devout people, many years ago, been given to the Church, for the better
maintenance of Gods worship, were so wise, as first to be advised, whether it
were lawful; it were no unfit answer for them, to bid them go learn of
children; who hold it both undecent and unlawful, to give a thing to one
another, and then take it away: and therefore much more rudeness is it to take
from God, what has been a long time given unto him, and accepted by him.

LXX.
PEtrus Blesensis making report of the Arch-deaconry of London to Innocentius
then Bishop of Rome, said: It was a Dragon, a stately name, or title,
Archdeacon of London, not having whereof to live except of wind; not having
means, he meant, to maintain a man of breeding, and parts fit for that place.
Were our present Clergy preferments exactly surveyed, and duly considered, with
the corrupt customs, and prescriptions, the common cousenages, conspiracies
and oppressions, which they are subject unto, I verily believe they would most
of them be found more then half empty caskes, of more sound then substance, so
purloined and impaired at the least, that they are nothing near the value,
whereunto they are raised in the worlds opinion; and therefore had more need of
restoring, then abstracting physic.

LXXI.
MAster Lambert who wrote the Perambulation of Kent, a man of sound judgment
in his own profession, the Law, and above many others of his time, of great
knowledge in Divinity; speaking of a Kentish Benefice converted into an
Impropriation; thus delivers his censure upon it; One amongst many of those
monstrous births of covetousness, begotten by the man of Rome in the dark
night of superstition; and yet suffered to live in this daylight of the
Gospel, to the great hinderance of learning, the impoverishment of the
Ministry, and the infamy of our Christian profession. Now then if our new
incomparable Saints, who drcame of so great perfection in themselves above
others, hate all things that have been any way abused to superstition, in times
of Popery; yea though it be a sincere prayer, or sacred ejaculation, first
devised and used by some holy Father, or glorious Martyr; how much more should
they abhor all unjust impropriations, whereof some have been, a long time
heretofore, perverted to Idolatrous uses, and all undoubtedly derive their
original from grossly Popish parents.

LXXII.
HOw odious a creature was a traitor to that Spanish Nobleman, who was
commanded by Charles the fifth, to lodge the Duke of Burbon at his house in
Madrid: I will obey thee, says he to the Emperor, but set my house on fire as
soon as the Duke is out of it: My predecessors never builded it to harbor
traitors The state of the English fugitives.
? Was not his house built to harbor traitors? and was any good man's house
built to entertain sacrilegious persons? who make it a point of conscience, a
part of Religion, to devour what belongs to Religion, that Clergy men
forsooth may not surfeit upon what God has thought meet to allow and appoint
for them. Can any that fear God wittingly make much of those (unless it be in
extreme necessity) who desperately presume to rob God? Now surely though
treason be a great and a grievous sin, a common overthrower and destroyer of
houses; yet what is it in comparison of sacrilege? Treason is a roaring sin,
but sacrilege a thundering sin; And the reason is rendered by S. Austin Cont.
Crescen. lib. 4. c. 10.
, because it cannot be committed, but more directly then other sins, against
almighty God. You have robbed me Mal. cap. 3.8.
.

LXXIII.
ALexander said he was more bound to his Schoolmaster Aristotle, then to his
Father Philip; for by his Father he lived, but by the other he had learned to
live well: Alas a poor well, may you well say, when neither he nor his master
knew the Lord: but surely much more do we owe to those ministers, who have
begotten us in the faith, then to those parents who have begotten them in the
flesh: but o how then beyond all cry, and above all comparison, are we for ever
obliged to the Father of us all, Almighty God, who works all things after the
counsel of his own will Ephesians. 1.11.
, who gives words to the wise, and virtue unto their words, who gives a
blessing to the word preached, making it frultfull by the grace of his Spirit,
to the conversion of the heart?

LXXVI.
IT was a debaucht and inhumane speech that of Tiberius, When I am gone, let
heaven and earth be confounded again, and mingled in their old Chaos: True
charity, though it begin at home, and seek first her own, yet seeks not only
her own, but looks a broad, regards others, and reaches in a provident
care even to those that shall come after us; A faithful man thinks it not
enough to be loving and beneficial to others, yea to let his fountains
(proceeding all from the fountain of goodness) be dispersed amongst them
during his own days, but holds himself bound to have a further respect what
shall become of them when he is dead and gone. And is there a future careful
provision to be made, according to our several places, for private families
after our death? And is there no care to be taken for the continuance of the
Commonwealth and Church, that the truth of God may live when we are dead; that
God may have a people to serve him after our departure?

LXXV.
IT is reported of Alexander the Great, that when he could not handsomely unty
the knot of Gordius King of Phrygia, he hewed it asunder with his sword: The
doctrine, government, and discipline of our Church well twisted and made so
exactly with the bindings and testimonies of the Prophets and Apostles, yea
Christ himself our blessed Lord, and Master, that the cunningest censurers, and
malicious makebates, of the former or of this latter age, could not find any
moderate means to untwine them; there were some therefore that resolved to
take Alexanders violent course, and to sever them in pieces with swords: but
herein they have far exceeded Alexander, for he cut in sunder but a senseless
knot without any hurt to Gordius; but these have not only cut asunder the
knot, but have withal first mangled, tormented, and then destroyed many
sensible, reasonable, and faithful servants of the most high God.

LXXVI.
MAd Fimbria brought a strange action, even in the heathens opinion, against
Quintus Mutius Scaevola, for not receiving the whole weapon, when he caused him
to be wounded, into his body Cicero pro Sext. Rosc.
: But o how much more strangely, and madly have whole families and flocks been
of late accused, condemned, punished, for not receiving poison into their
souls; for not admitting, as lawful, into their Creeds, hatred, variance,
malice, murder, riots, rebellions, errors, heresies, the doctrines of Devils,
forged in hell, and not framed in the shop of the Scriptures? And who are they
that are thus cruelly bent, that are thus fierce and violent toward their
neighbors; but they who would seem not only to be Christians, and good men,
but the chiefest servants, and dearest children of God, the most holy brethren,
the most sanctified people, such as are all for the sincerity of the Gospel,
and pure milk of the word?

LXXVII.
Lucius Neratius took a great pleasure, and thought it no small glory, to beat
men: but however he caused his servant still to carry along with him a purse of
money, that when he had done he might deliver them such recompense, as the Law
had assigned in action of battery Aulus Gellius.
. Many there are now adays, who, though they do not strike men, yet do as bad,
and worse, plunder them, oppress them, undo them, and all those (how
harmless, how many soever) that belong unto them, but where is the money for
recompense, that both the Law of God and man requires? They delight as much,
and more, in wronging of men, then ever Meratius did; but who with him desires
to make satisfaction?

LXXVIII.
THrasilaus a frantic man amongst the Grecians, whenever he saw any Ships
brought into the haven at Athens, thought them all his own, and took an
Inventory of their goods, and boasted of them to all he met with great alacrity
Alemoeus Deipnosophist.
. The late plunderers, those peremptory daytheeves, that without conscience or
covert took away many honest men's goods, and were not afraid by impudence to
profess and boast of their takings; if they had been, as Tharsilaus quite
distraught of their senses; and out of ignorance imagined all that they saw to
be their own; with the which they might do what they listed; they had not had
sin; that is, not so great sin, not so black, and barbarous, and horrid sin:
for something might have been pleaded for them, to have lessened their
offenses; It might have been prayed for them, Father forgive them, for they
know not what they do Luke 23 34.
: But surely knowing both the Laws of God, and man against them, and pretending
that they fought for, the property of the Subject, therefore now they are left
without excuse, therefore now they have no cloak for their sins: o, if ever
their consciences be awakened, how can such audacious presumption but fill
their hearts with the sharper grief, and their faces with the greater shame?

LXXIX.
THere were that would needs persuade Alexander that he was no mortal man, but
an immortal God; but when, at the seige of a City, no small wound was given
him by an arrow, so that he saw the blood streaming from it, where are they
now, says he, that said I was a God Musc. in Psalm. 82.
? A great fame was heretofore spread abroad of some of our new Donatists, that
they were most just men, such as feared God and eschewed evil; yea if not Gods
in the likeness of men, as the men of Lystra thought of Paul and Barnabas Act.
14.11.
, yet the most holy children of the most high God; but now since they have been
so desperately wounded by Satan, and stirred up to all mischievous cruelty,
now since they have showed themselves so bloody and deceiptfull men, now since
they have shed the Saints blood like water round about Jerusalem Psalm. 79.3.
, besides their being defiled with many other ill-favored corruptions: where
are now their followers, their admirers, their applauders, that so boasted up
and down of their truth, and peace, and mercy? where are they that thought
them so humble, so religious, so shining with all heavenly virtues?

LXXX.
SAladine a Turkish Emperor, he that first of that Nation Conquered Jerusalem
l 11 86.
, lying at the point of death, after many glorious Victories, commanded that a
white sheet should be borne before him to his grave, upon the point of a
spear, with this Proclamation: These are the rich spoils which Saladine
carries away with him, of all his triumphs, and Victories; of all the realm;
and riches he had, now nothing is left but this: Why should we so much desire
other men's goods, and seek to get them by hook, or by crook? why should we
devour houses, even widows houses? why should we encroach upon other men's
fields, and seek unlawfully to join land to land, calling the lands after our
own names Psa. 49.11.
, entailing them upon childrens children, to make (as the Lawyers speak) a
perpetuity, when at last, if we could conquer never so much, we must come to
the pit with Saladine, and carry nothing away with us but a shrouding mantle?

LXXXI.
IT was sound direction that Silla gave, that the common enemy should first be
put out of power, before the Citizens were put in suite. We should first
earnestly contend for the faith, which was once delivered unto the Saints, Jude
3.
and not give place to damnable doctrine, though it should cost living and
life: we should first with all our endeavors seek to suppress all
Schismatics, Heretics, Rebels, Church-robbers, Mahumetans, Atheists, and
other enemies of our Churh, and State; the which make a land to languish sooner
then foreign foes; and we fall out and fight with, or plunder and oppress
(for what cause we know not our selves) our fellow-Protestants, faithful
Christians, loyal Subjects, and harmless neighbors; we persecute Saints and
pursue our brethren: all our fraies are against our friends, and not against
our foes; we supplant one another, who should support one another. O that these
homebred contentions and controversies might at length cease, and be blown
away with a breath of mercy in Christ! o that there might be a perpetual holy
league between all the true members of our Church, that so all our Armies and
forces, pikes, and pens, wits, and wills might be readily combined against our
common adversaries!

LXXXII.
THe Lacedaemonians, in their public feasts, used to fox some of their Elots,
(a kind of servants not much differing from slaves) that by their loathsome
inundations, and uncouth deformities, their rude and beastly behavior, their
children might the better discern what a filthy vice drunkenness was, and
from thence grow into an horror and detestation of that sin Plat. in his
Apotheg.
. We may not, I know for any respects (though to stave off others from
insurrection) either occasion, or allow one Rebel. Thou shall not hate thy
brother in thine heart, thou shall in any wise rebuke thy neighbor, and not
suffer sin upon him Levit. 19.17.
. But o, if we might lawfully do it, yet in these times we need not, such
unruly cattle are now grown both innumerable, and intolerable; Their
mischiefs are gone out into all the Land; and their abominations unto all our
neighbor Countries: Neither we nor our fathers have known such horrid fruits
of resisting Sovereign power, as our children have now seen; o that they may
ever retain such an eager abomination of all such Atheistical enormities, as
to hate even the least thought tending thereunto!

LXXXIII.
I Find it related by Herodotus, how Cyrus intending to Conquer Scythia, came
to a great broad River which hindered his journey, whereupon he bethought
himself of this policy, to cut it, and divide it into many parts and sluices,
and so made it passable for all his Army; The like policy has the Devil now
used amongst us, bringing his power of darkeness to invade and overrun us, and
finding his passage stopped by the flowing streams of love and concord, he
has put in practice to separate and divide us into many parts and factions: we
are become like rivelets not joined together, but every man running his own
way, so that the Devil may now ford us, and fashion us, and turn us as he
please. My bowels, my bowels, I am pained at my very heart, my heart makes a
noise in me, I cannot hold my peace, because thou have heard o my soul, the
sound of the Trumpet, the alarm of wars: Destruction upon destruction is
cried, for the whole land is spoiled; suddenly are my tents spoiled, and my
curtains in a moment; How long shall I see the standard, and hear the sound of
the Trumpet Ier. 4.19, 20, 21.
?

LXXXIV.
PAulus AEmilius having put away his wife Papinia without any cause, as it
seemed to others, stretched forth his foot, and said: You see a new and neat
shoe, but where this shoe wringeth me, not you, but I alone know: meaning,
that there were many secret jars happening between the married, which others
could not possibly perceive Plut. in vit. P. AEmil.
. The most wicked men, the greatest enemies to God and his Gospel, may be so
jocund and merry, and show such magnanimity in their faces, that none can
imagine by any outward circumstance, but that they are truly cheerful, and
courageous in their hearts; and yet in the midst of all their meriments, and
greatest delights, they may have secret heart-burnings, and grievous vexations,
what God and themselves only know; The Lord has spoken it twice, and therefore
it must needs be plain and peremptory, that there is no peace to the wicked
Esaias 48.22.57* 21.
; Their looks may be sometimes lively, but their hearts are always heavy.

LXXXV.
Dionysius Heracleotes a sour and severe defender of that Stoicall
unfeelingness of passions, being tormented in his reins; cried out, that all
things were false which he had till then held, and maintained of pain and
grief: as that it might be easily borne and endured whatsoever it was; for now
he felt the contrary, that pain pincheth and will be felt, and is able to make
the strongest stoop, notwithstanding all plasters of phylosophie and humane
reasons: A wounded conscience, many no doubt think, is not so hard to bear, as
some talk, may easily be salved up by many outward carnal helps, Feasting and
merry company, eating and drinking, music and gaming, and things of like
nature, can easily smooth it over; but if ever they feel it indeed, they will
assuredly confess, that all such medicines are naught worth against spiritual
qualmes, and that the horror of a terrified conscience is an importable
burden, no way to be assuaged but by the only mediation of Christ Jesus.

LXXXVI.
PHilip King of Macedon said that he was bound to the Athenian Orators which
reviled him, because they were to him, as fire to gold, wind to corn, file to
rust, soape to linen; because they were an occasion to make him the more
virtuous; and advised, and enforced him, all his life long, both in his actions
and words, to prove them liars: I will therefore so live, says he, that no man
shall believe them, that if I cannot bar the mouths of the slanderers, yet I
may stop the ears of the hearers Plutar. in his Apotheg.
. There is hardly now a learned, Orthodoxe, and conscientious Divine amongst
us, that is not traduced for a Papist, by a sort of saucy, schismatic,
hungry cormorants, that gape for our means; how wisely shall we profit by
their malicious reproach, if thereupon we carry our selves, every day to the
end of our lives, more virtuously then other, having better consciences, that
whereas they speak evil of us as evil doers, they may be ashamed that falsely
accuse our good conversation in Christ 1 Pet. 3.16.
.

LXXXVII.
CRates having lost all by shipwreck, go too fortune, quoth he, I know what
thou meanest, thou intendest only to call me to Phylosophie: Thus he, being a
Pagan, that knew not fortune from God. And shall Christians no sooner begin to
fall into misery, but be at their wits end? shall not they perceive the end of
Gods afflicting them, that he does it to instruct them, the better to know him,
themselves, and the world? to know him whom they have so often offended, and
turn unto him by true repentance; to know their mortal and frail nature,
that wears and wastes away with outward crosses; to know the mutability of
the world, and the deceitfulness of the world; shall not they consider that
when they are judged, they are chastened by the Lord, that they should not be
condemned with the world 1 Cor. 11 32.
?

LXXXVIII.
I Read how Phydius was apt for all practices, could turn his hand to any
trade, could show his cunning as well in any other metal or matter as in
brass: This cannot all do, neither is it fit for all to do: Let every man
abide in the same calling wherein he was called 1 Cor. 7.10.
. Study to be quiet and to do your own business, says the Apostle. 1 These. 4
11.
It is not fit for men to meddle in other men's trades, neither shall we likely
find such another Phideas: but howsoever a true Christian, though he cannot
fashion his hand to every trade, yet should learn to frame his heart to every
estate; he should know how to rise, and how to fall, how to want, and how to
abound; he should be able to swim in prosperity without pride, and to suffer
in adversity without peevishness; humbly and thankfully embracing whatsoever
favor the Lord sends him, and kissing whatsoever cross he lays on his back.

LXXXIX.
IN the Olympian combatings set forth and solemnized in the honor of Satan,
they only woare the Crown, who overcame by doing harm to others, they which
struck the greatest blow went away with the prize: but in our spiritual
conflicts, not they which strike, but these which bear the greatest stroke,
shall go away with the reward; they rather are Crowned, who win the victory by
suffering wrong of others: suffering is the way to glory. Blessed are they
which suffer persecution for righteousness sake, for theirs is the kingdom of
heaven; for as they suffer here with Christ, so they shall reign hereafter
with Christ. Blessed are ye when men shall revile you, and persecute you, and
shall say all manner of evil against you falsely for my sake. Rejoice, and be
exceeding glad, for great is your reward in heaven: For so persecuted they the
Prophets that were before you Mat. 5.10, 11, 12.
.

XC.
WHat a bitter and cruel wrong was that offered to Mauritius the Emperor,
when his ungrateful subject and servant Phocas slew before his face his Wife
and five Children? And yet were not his thoughts so much upon the Adversary to
be vexed, as upon the righteous God to be humbled: And yet spoke he not one
word to the enemy; no, not in such a woeful case Abbas Urs. 158.
: but considering and weighing his own sins, continued still crying, till the
sword sundred his head from his body, just art thou O Lord, and just are thy
judgments. Why then do we (of inferior places, so many degrees behind
Mauritius) in these times of persecution, so earnestly look to the heavines
and grievousnes of the wrongs offered? why then do we so passionately press
the unkindnesse and injustice of the outward agents and instruments? why do we
not rather look up, as we ought, to him that sits at the stern, and
guides all particulars? why do we not rather recount and ponder how many ways
we our selves have offended God, and our neighbors, for which we may justly
suffer? why do we not rather consider that it comes not upon us without our
deserts, because God is just, nor will it be without our profit, because God is
good?

XCI.
EXceeding is the love of earthly heathenish mothers to children; when
Agrippena, Neroes mother, being with child with him, was after great
consultation seriously foretold by Astrologers, that her son should be
Emperor, but when he was advanced, should kill his mother; let me be slain,
says she, so he may reign; and much more no doubt is the love being better
ordered by Gods word, of true Christian parents; but o how infinite is Gods
love to his adopted sons and daughters? Can a woman forget her sucking child,
says the Lord, by the Prophet Isaiah Isay 49.15.
, that she should not have compassion on the son of her womb? as though it
were a thing even impossible, that any thing should be able to master, or kill
that affection, she were to be reckoned as a monster amongst women that should
want it; but suppose any should, for it may be, yet the Lord for all that,
cannot forget any of his whom making him their God, he has made his servants;
yet will not, yet cannot the Lord forget the poorest soul in the world that
trusts in him; and therefore be not faithless, whosoever thou be, if thou be
his, but faithful, and therefore cast all thy care, thou troubled soul, ever
upon the Lord, for he cares for thee.

XCII.
IT is not Kingly, quoth Antigonus the King to a poor man begging a small
matter, but a dram of silver, It is not for Kings to give trifles, but to give
royally like themselves. How bountiful then must we needs think is the King of
Kings, with whom no King is to be compared, who has all treasure in his own
hands, and whose treasury can never be drawn dry; who has in his hands all
the goods and blessings both of this life which is present, and of that which
is to come! How rich is he in mercies! how abundant in kindnesses! How large is
his love, giving more things, and more plentifully, then either we do ask or
think? If any man lack wisdom, or any other good gift, let him ask of God,
which gives to all men liberally, which gives not sparingly, though the
smallest gift be more then we are worthy of, but liberally, and reproacheth no
man, and it shall be given him. Jam. 1.5.

XCIII.
Caesar purposing to pass into Africa, though the rough surges of the raging
seas were against him, cheared up the Master of the Ship, and bade him be
confident to hoyse up sails, and commit himself to the fury of the storm,
because he carried him that was so mighty a Monarch: and yet, had he rebuked
the violent winds, or the unruly waters, never so much, they would never have
yielded him the least obedience. How much rather should a Christian not be
dismayed, but Magnanimous, to whom Christ has said, Be of good cheer, I have
overcome the world Ioh. 16.33.
? I have already won the field, and obtained the victory for you? O how should
a Christian be strong in the Lord, and in the power of his might, Ephesians. 6.10.
against all assaults of tyrants, all temptations of Satan, to whom God has
said, Heb. 13.5.
that he will never leave him nor forsake him, neither in wealth, nor want,
neither in life, nor death? O how should a Christian be encouraged against all
dangers, either of body or soul, in whom God dwells, and he in God? 1 John
4.15.

XCIV.
IT was not a slight and superficial, but solid, though short advice of the
Philosopher Menedemus, to Antigonus the son of King Demetrius, that he should
remember he was a Kings son: thinking that a sufficient motive to keep him
from all base behavior. And how could he well conclude otherwise? For does it
become Princes so to descend, as to follow the conditions of Pesants? should
not they seek to demean themselves in all their carriages according to their
high places? O Christian man, what art thou? Know thy calling, and consider the
blessed state of Christian profession; Thou art the son of God, thou have his
Spirit, the earnest penny, the pawn, the pledge, the inunction, the cry of his
Spirit. But by what means? Through faith. In whom, and by whose merits? In
Christ, For ye are all the children of God by faith in Christ Jesus Gal. 3.26.
. And shall we not therefore scorn and hate sin, so unfit for our estates, and
so unseemly for the children of God? And shall we not therefore abstain from
immoderate mourning for worldly losses, too base and mean for our calling?

XCV.
A King of France hearing the King of Spaines titles at large rehearsed, as
that he was King of Castile, King of Portugal, King of Naples, King of the
Sicilies, and many other Dominions, opposed to every one of them severally, and
to all of them jointly, but only this, that he was King of France: he made
account that France was more excellent then Spain, and all the rest annexed
Kingdoms: A true Christian in the poorest estate, if you weigh him with the
richest worldling, is, as France was by him conceived, and compared with
Spain, though not so great in title, yet greater in truth; though not so good
in outward show, yet better in inward substance; Thou have put gladness in
mine heart, says David, more then in the time, that their corn and wine
increased Psalm. 4.7.
. As much as to say; thy favor, O Lord, has brought me more true, and sound
joy, then others take, or can take in this, that their revenues and incomes do
abound.

XCVI.
SEleucus coming back with a company of armed men to Babylon, from whence he
was expelled, as he made haste into the City, stumbled, and wrested his foot:
His friends moved at it, heaved up the stone, at the which he took his hurt,
and finding under it a ring, in which was engraven the form of an anchor,
supposing it to portend captivity; but Seleucus understood it otherwise, that
the anchor, which they thought to signify captivity, did certainly portend
and promise conquest and security: Be courageous my friends, says he, for this
ground, whereon we now tread as aliens and exiles, we shall undoubtedly
possess as heirs and owners. Wicked men if any crosses befall them, they
begin to sink down under the burden, their hearts fail them, they conceive
and take things in the worst sense; but the children of God being assured upon
better grounds then Seleucus, make no other account, but are resolute and
confident, that neither good can happen to the evil, nor evil to the good
being changed by the blessing of God: that all things, of what sort soever, by
one means or other, shall in the end, without peradventure, work together for
the best unto them.

XCVII.
ECebolius a Sophister of Constantinople, before Julian was Emperor, demeaned
himself as an earnest Christian, both for belief, and life; under Julian he
became a cruel Apostate, and Panym and persecutor; and after Julian was dead,
he would be a Christian again: but his own conscience at last accusing him
for his dissembling, for altering his faith, religion and manners according to
the time; he cast himself flat upon the ground, before the Church-gate, as the
people should pass, and cried, Tread on me that am unsavory salt. O how many
in these times have been on all sides, as the sides still prevailed! who,
though they cast not themselves down at the Church door, as he did, for the
people to tread upon, yet have need presently to cast themselves down, in the
inner temple of their hearts, before God, with hearty repentance and humble
confession, lest if they make no account of recovering his favor, and
reconciling themselves to him, he suddenly cast them out indeed, as unsavory
salt; for as he has a time of mercy, and suffering, so of casting out and
confounding.

XCVIII.
ALexander, having besieged any Rebellious City, was wont to have a fire
kindled before the gate, with this condition, that if they yielded before the
fire went out, they might be received to favor; but if not, they might look
for no mercy: The like course does God take with us all the space of our life,
as of that fire kindled, as given us to repent in; but if it end, before our
repentance begin, no place for pardon. Yet there is hope, yet there is favor,
yet the light appears, but when we are once stepped over the threshold of
death, no man may make agreement with God for us: when we are once departed
this life, it is too late to make any prayers for us, to deal any doles, or to
say Masses, or to go any Pilgrimages for us, yet it is too late then to say for
any, God have mercy on his soul: For we are presently as we depart hence,
either in Abraham's bosom, with poor Lazarus, or in hell torments, with the
rich glutton.

XCIX.
I Read of one Eleazar the son of Hircanus, that being demanded, when it would
be time to repent and amend? he answered, One day before death: and when the
other replied, that no man knew the day of his death, he said, Begin then even
to day, for fear of failing Drusius in his Hebrew and Arabian Apoph. Lib. 1.
. We have all often heard, no doubt, and therefore should well know, though we
often forget, and therefore are still to learn; that our life is of such
uncertainty, that we are no sooner borne, but we are in danger of death; one
foot no sooner on the ground, but the other ready to step into the grave: the
bud is sometimes blasted as well as the blown rose; the wind blows down the
blossom as well as the fruit: yea we some of us confess, with our lips at
least, that nothing is more certain then the change of life, and nothing more
uncertain then the hour when it will change: the which for ought we know may
be this hour; why then do we not this hour call our selves to account, and
amend our lives, lest another hour be denied us, and death find us sleeping in
our accustomed wickedness, and so the gate of mercy which is now open be shut
up for ever?

C.
GAspar a man of no small account in that Machiavilian Council assembled at
Trent, being convicted and urged in his conscience, for the Lawfulness, and
duty of receiving the Sacrament in both kinds, according to the institution of
our Savior Christ, and practice Ecclesiastical for more then a thousand
years, (for the Communion under one kind, was decreed first in the Council of
Constance, 1414.) yet was still obstinately bent, to bar the people from the
cup; and would not yield to restore the use of it; lest, says he, we should
seem to err: They had grievously offended God, and grossly wronged men by
such an imposture, but yet he thought it less damage to the offenders to
stifle their consciences, then to stain their credits; Many wicked and
monstrous opinions, which have since crept into the Church, might be, no doubt,
easily disproved, and abolished, but that the broachers and maintainers of them
may not now entertain the truth, lest they be seen to have been deceived:
that they think would be a great blemish in their Arms, a grievous disfigure
in their faces, and not to be endured; and therefore, though they be sanded and
set on ground, yet they must needs keep up sail still, as if they had water at
their pleasure. O this unwillingnesse of appearing to err, holds men so in
bondage to their errors, that it has destroyed many a soul; has been the
bane of thousands and ten thousands that had rather be damned then saved.

HIERON. ad PAULIN. Esse Christianum grande est, non videri, non vocari.

To be a Christian, is a weighty matter, but not so to seem, not so to be
called.

LEO Epist. 83. Ecclesiae nomine armamini, and contra Ecclesiam dimicatis.

You are armed with the name of the Church, and you fight against the Church.


FINIS.

