A SURVEY OF THE HEAVENS: BEING A Plain Description of the admirable Fabric
and Motions of the Heavenly Bodies, as they are discovered to the Eye by the
Telescope, and several eminent Consequences Illustrated thereby. I. The
Infinite Wisdom, Power, Glory, and Incomprehensibility of God in the Creation.
II. The verifying of the Copernican Hypothesis. III. The probability of more
inhabited WORLDS. IV. The clearing of some difficult places of Scripture from
doubtful Interpretations. V. The higher Exaltation of Gods Attributes in the
business of our Redemption. VI. An Essay to prove the SUN to be the SEAT of the
BLESSED, with several other useful Notions.
To which is added the GOUT Raptures. Augmented and Improved In English, Latin,
and Greek Lyrick Verse.

By Robert Witty Dr in Physic in both Universities, and Fellow of the College
of Physicians in London.

London, Printed for Richard Jones, at the White-Horse in Little-Brittain. 1685.

TO THE President, Council, and Fellows of the Royal Society in London, for the
Improvement of Natural Knowledge.
IT is not from any Tincture of Ambition, that I presume upon this Dedication
to You (Great Sirs) but from the Congruity of an Appeal I ought to make to some
of great Judgment in all the Matters here mentioned. Now as to the Report I
make of new Discoveries among the Heavenly Bodies, which may perhaps seem
strange to many, I appeal to You as to most authentic Witnesses: And touching
the Consequences which on those Grounds I infer, which are many of them of no
small Importance, You are most competent Judges. Concerning the Gout-Raptures;
they refer to the same Subject, though they are Notions mainly founded on
Fancy, and have been some years abroad in the World. Having met with
Acceptance among such as are Learned, I have been encouraged to send them out
again Augmented and Improved, and do think them not improper to be tacked
together in one Piece. I submit all to your grave Judgment, as to a High Court
of Equity, which will neither heed nor need the verdict of the Vulgar. If my
weak Endeavors herein find Acceptance with You, and shall have the Honor of
Your Approbation, it will facilitate its Passage to the Public, to which I
hope in some respect it may be useful; and then I have the Reward of my
Labors, and shall be encouraged to continue, as in truth I am,

Sirs, Your, and the Publicks, most humble Servant, R. WITTY.
Basinghall street August 31. 1681.
ON MY Worthy Friend Dr ROBERT WITTIE's OYPANOSKOPI'A.
BEfore I read your Book, Astronomy
No better was then Heathen Greek to me.
I knew no Star, but what we Courtiers call
St George's Star, which shines from Windsor Hall.
Compared to that your Sirius seemed a Spark,
Or like a Gloworm glist'ring in the dark.
St Paul did read Aratus, that we all
Do know, but did Aratus read St Paul?
You have read both, and on Astronomy
Have made a Systeme of Divinity.
St Luke himself Professor of your Art
Could not have acted a Diviner part.
(...) So Holy Patriarchs in Caldean Plains,
So Royal David in Devouter Strains;
Taught how each Star does Praise and Tribute bring
Unto the Exchequer of the Immortal King.
You Have justified your Art in happy time,
Atheists by Duo Medicorum Opprobria.
Reason cured, the Duo Medicorum Opprobria.
Gout by Duo Medicorum Opprobria.
Rhyme.
BRIAN FAIRFAX Armiger.

ON Dr WITTIE's Serious Survey of the Heavens, AND Jocular Gout-Raptures.
HEre I (methinks) drink Heliconian Twist,
Luke was Physician, and Evangelist.
The Serious part prepond'rates that in Jest,
And yet it is hard to say which is the best.
Weighty the first, the second not too light,
Neither exceeds, or wants; No Heteroclite.
Each does illustrate other, both combine
To represent Physician, and Divine,
Astronomer, and Scholar; all are met
Like Diamonds within a Foyl of Jett.
All make up shining luster, Each bears part,
Both each, and all show Ornament and Art.
Let no man say the Vermin Atheist lurks
Under the Leaves of all Physicians Works.
Since such Divinity one here does teach,
As very few Divines do ever preach;
Does so the Attributes of God explain,
As none could reach but such Seraphick Brain.
Such Heavenly Raptures in this Book ab^und,
As if the Gout had made the Doctor sound,
Or like the Schoolman, called the Profound;
And rapt him with St Paul into that Sphere,
Where he unutterable Things did hear.
It Is Learned, Grave, Facete, Celestial, Pretty,
Divine, Rhetorical; In short, it is WITTY.
T. Guidott Med.

A SURVEY OF THE HEAVENS.
BEING A Plain Description of the admirable Fabric and Motions of the Heavenly
Bodies.
It has been always accounted a great point of Wisdom to study the things of
Nature, viz. of Creation and Providence, and to know what is in Nature, how it
is, and for what ends and use it is; and this knowledge is usually called
Natural Philosophy. Out of this do arise many Arts and Sciences, well becoming
the serious Study of the Wisest of Men, and necessary to be understood by some,
for the manifestation of the most glorious Attributes of the Creator, and for
the displaying of the admirable beauty of the Universe; yea about the matter,
or manner of ordering of these things, is the whole World employed in some
respect or other. And so full of Variety and Intricacy are the Subjects about
which those Arts and Sciences are conversant, that it would take up the whole
Age of a Methusalah to study any of them to a reasonable height; and when he
leaves the World, he might have cause to bemoan that he dies an Ignoramus.

Astronomy or the Study of the Stars, with their Matter, Motions and
Influences, is one of the Sciences belonging to Natural Philosophy, wherein the
Ancients feem to have been very defective for want of the Telescope, which by
the Providence of God has been happily found out in this Age of ours, whereby
we can better discern and judge of the Magnitude, Figures, Number, Matter and
Motions of those Heavenly Bodies, than they could possibly attain unto. And
these are the things that I aim at in this Discourse, to entertain my Friends
and Countrymen with a Narrative of what we see with our Eyes.

Now forasmuch as these new and strange discoveries of things and modes
existent in Nature from the beginning, may in all reason infer some great
Consequences, which for want of them the Ancients, or yet our Moderns who know
them not, could never think on, I have taken some liberty with the ingenuous
Reader modestly to propound what in my judgment I think to be plainly deducible
therefrom, in several particulars, (I hope not ungrateful to any) in all which
I shall be as concise as the nature of the Subjects will bear.

The Excellency of the Study of the Stars.
As for the Study of the Stars and what relates thereto, it is certainly one of
the most excellent Studies in the World; a most noble subject to contemplate
on, next to the Book of God, to wit, the Holy Scripture, wherein the Mind and
Will of God, both as to what we are to believe and do, is clearly laid down in
order to our everlasting wellbeing. This of the Heavens is Natures Book in
folio, to which the Holy Scripture does frequently refer us, by plain and
visible Objects of demonstration to clear up to our narrow Understandings that
which in words could never have been sufficiently expressed, or conceived in
our Minds, the never enough to be adored Attributes of the Divine Essence, as
his infinite Wisdom, Power, Glory, Goodness, and Immensity.

They point out a Deity.
From hence do arise most clear and convincing Arguments to prove there is a
God, which the wanton and profane Wits of the subtlest Atheists in the world
can never evade, without forfeiting their Reason, and ceasing to be men.

If we consider the Heavens even through all the Predicaments, what stupendous
matter of Admiration do they afford! How much more ground then of Admiration
and Adoration too shall we find of that Eternal and Almighty Being of whose
hand they are the Workmanship? unless we can suppose they made themselves, or
that they and the comely Order that is among them came by Chance, or a
fortuitous coalition of Atoms, as some have presumed to assert against Sense
and Reason.

What thing is there in all this World within our ken, that in any reason we
can think has made it self? If we see a noble House, or a neat Watch, or other
piece of Art, we soon reflect in our minds upon some Workman, whom we fancy to
have been an Artist answerable to his piece. Would not all men laugh at him
that should tell he fancied they made themselves? or that they came by chance,
or a fortuitous meeting of Atoms; which though the Air we breath in be full of
them, yet they tend to nothing but to make us wink; neither incline they to
take any form, nor yet in above 5000 years since the Creation have produced the
least trifle in Nature.

The immensity of the Stars.
What less than infinite Power and Incomprehensibility could have made such an
immeasurable space as the Firmament of Heaven, which is only not infinite? They
point out Gods Wisdom and Power.
And what less than infinite Wisdom and Omnipotency could have contrived so
many great and glorious Bodies as the Stars, all of which, even the least we
see, do undoubtedly far exceed this Globe of the Earth, and some thousands of
them many hundred times bigger, as we may reasonably judge? Ptolomy to some may
feem bold in asserting, that the Sun is 166 times bigger; yet he pretends to
make it out by Demonstration. Nay I could here name above a dozen Learned Men,
Ancient and Modern, that have written their Opinions on this Subject, who
though they do exceedingly differ among themselves, yet he that speaks lowest,
judges it to be 140 times bigger, and some of them 1000 times, yea some of them
many thousands: And truly their Arguments seem not to want strength and
solidity, who estimate it to be 1000 times bigger, and Sirius the Dog Star to
be larger than the Sun; as also Aldebaran the Bulls-eye, and other Stars of the
first Magnitude, only seeming less because of their exceeding great distance.
Yea and they judge the Planet Jupiter to be 100 times bigger than the Earth.
And truly all we can do in these matters is to speak upon probable grounds of
reason, as men, reckoning according to rules of proportion, to what we see with
our eyes.

And hence it is that the Holy Scripture designing to make out to our
Understanding some glimpse of these two great Attributes of God, very
frequently leads us to the consideration of his Creating the Heavens and the
Earth: As Psalm. 19.1. The Heavens declare the Glory of God, and the Firmament
shows his handy work. And so Isaiah 40.12. and 26. He tells of meting out the
Heavens with his span, and of measuring the Waters of the Sea in the hollow his
band; of bringing out the Stars by number, and calling them all by their Names.
[So Prove. 30.4.] And hence he proves the greatness of his Might, and the
strength of his Power; intimating there that all these things were made by his
Eternal Power, and according to the Counsel of his own Will, in infinite Wisdom.

Nay God directs his People of Israel when they should sojourn in Chaldea,
(which fell out afterward) how they should defend their Religion among the
Chaldeans, and use this as an Argument to prove him to be God, in that he made
the Heavens and the Earth, Jer. 10.11, 12. Thus shall ye say unto them; The
Gods that have not made the Heavens and the Earth, even they shall perish from
the Earth, and from under these Heavens. And here by the way, it is well worthy
our observation, that whereas all the rest of that Prophecy of Jeremy is
written in Hebrew, this Verse alone is expressed in the Chaldean Tongue,
whereby God puts words into their mouths for the plainer conviction of the
Chaldeans, among whom they were to sojourn: A forcible Argument methink against
the Romanists, who do lock up the mind of God from the common people in an
unknown language, when God directs his own Penman, the Holy Prophet to lay
aside the language he inspired him, and to declare his mind in this most
principal Article of Faith in the language of the Country. By this Argument we
are taught by the Apostles in their Creed to believe in him, (if we may suppose
it was of their composing) being Maker of Heaven and Earth; and directed by our
Savior to pray to him, as being there in his special place of residence.

But to return to our scope -- Without all doubt those great and glorious
Bodies were not only made for us, the Inhabitants of this world to look on, and
so to glorify God objective, wherein it is well if we do our duty, but for other
great ends and uses among themselves. And I do verily believe many things both
as to the Being, and the ends, of the Being of those Celestial Bodies, which we
understand not, we may come to know hereafter; I mean we that inhabit this
Globe of the Earth. We see many things which the Ancients never thought on, are
clearly made out to us: As the turning of the Earth upon its Axis every twenty
four hours, which makes our natural Day, plainly made out by Copernicus, The
Copernican Hypothesis.
which solves all the Phenomenon of Heaven far better than the obscure
Epicycles of the Ancients. Although I find that Aristarchus Samius was the
first Author of that Opinion, who lived 400 years before Ptolomy, and him did
Copernicus follow.

Now though the Notion has gained great credit in the world among Learned and
considerate Men, as any other in Nature, and daily gets ground against all
Objections; yet I must needs say it is rejected by the Vulgar, because it
appears not to their Senses, but rather (they say) it is plain that the Heavens
do move, and the Earth stands still: Objections from sense against it.
And it is also doubted of by many eminently Learned and Pious, because it seems
to thwart the plain sense of Holy Scripture.

To the first I shall answer; I am afraid those Thomases that will be led only
by their Senses, will never become Proselytes to the Doctrine of the
Circulation of the Blood, because they feel it not move, which was as long
latent and unknown to the world, as this of the Earths Motion upon its Axis.
Will they not believe the motion and descent of the meat they eat through the
bowels, from the Stomach to the lowest gut, because they feel it not in its
passage? If those men were on Shipboard in a calm Sea, carried on either by a
smooth Tide, or a very soft gale, would they not believe that the Vessel moved
under them because they feel it not stir? Would they rather incline to think
that the Mountains, Churches and Trees moved, and changed their places, because
they seem to do so to their eye? So smoothly and silently (yea and a hundred
times more) does the Globe of the Earth move upon its Axis; so as if they can
receive any conviction that their Senses are not fit Judges in the aforesaid
cases, there will be no ground of persuasion left to make them Umpire in the
last.

Objections from Scripture.
Now as to the Scriptures which do attribute Stability to the Earth, and Motion
to the Sun; we are to know that in things of this nature the Scripture speaks
according to vulgar acceptance, and outward appearance, so as when men thought
they saw, and did believe that the Sun moved, and the Earth was fixed, the Holy
Ghost in the Penmen of the Scripture applies himself to that vulgar Opinion of
the Age, from which it never designed to withdraw men: so as they go most
impertinently to work that will ground Philosophical notions on Scriptural
expressions.

The Scriptures are able to make us wise unto Salvation, wherein if we hold to
them we are sure we cannot err; though not unto curiosity, or Philosophical
Notions, wherein it matters not much whether we be right or wrong. The Holy
Penmen in things of that lesser alloy, were wont to speak according to the
vulgar Opinions of their Age, and it may be to think so too, or at least not to
examine them, their thoughts being employed in things of greater Consequence.

Their business was to let the world know, that what ever they could conceive
concerning any thing in Nature, throughout the whole Creation, it was from God;
and therefore while they thought the Earth to be so firmly fixed that it could
not be moved, the Psalmist not contradicting the Hypothesis, preaches up the
infinite Power and Sovereignty of God therein, 1 Chronicles. 16.30. and elsewhere in
the Psalms.

Though if the Texts be well considered, the words do not genuinely import what
they would infer against such motion as we are mentioning. The Hebrew word
(...) properly signifies to stagger; the Greek word (...), used by the
Septuagint, signifies to be shaken: and we all agree that the Earth is so
firmly established by the Almighty Power and Providence of God, in its proper
place, that it cannot stagger, nor be shaken from off its foundation; but that
hinders not but it may move upon its Foundation in a regular way, if there be
reason to think so, without straining those Texts. Psalm. 89.37. the Moon is
there said to be established in Heaven; shall any man therefore deny its Motion
from that Text?

So we read that Josuah in his zeal against the Enemies of God and his People,
in the heat of battle, (perhaps led by the vulgar opinion of the Suns motion)
called to the Sun and Moon to stand still, etc. The design was that the light
might be lengthned, till he might destroy the Army of the Amorites, and the day
was accordingly prolonged, so as the Sun went not down for a whole day, and the
Moon also staid -- But why should Josuah call to the Moon to stand still, as
well as the Sun, which could be of no use to him, while the Sun was up? To this
I answer with all due modesty; I do believe Josuah did call thus by
inspiration, and a special impulse from God upon his Spirit: for that which
would make the Sun stand still, would also stay the Moon; and therefore as his
heart was inflamed with zeal from God to call for such an extraordinary thing,
so was his tongue guided to call for more than he needed, and yet that which
Divine Providence would order, and was naturally to attend the other, from the
stopping of the Earths motion, of which we are speaking.

He that from the hasty zealous call of this great General, shall think to
found an Argument to prove the Philosphical notion of the Suns diurnal Motion
about the Earth, by taking the words in a proper literal Sense, may as well go
on, and eke it out a little further, and then he may prove the Sun to have been
in the next great Town, Gibeon, and the Moon in the Valley; but if to all men
this latter shall be judged a weak Inference, I dare say, to many wise men, so
will the former.

And on this occasion let me tell my Observation; that where there is in the
Scripture any seeming difficulty in a Text, in what sense it is to be taken,
there is usually something couched in the Context that clears it, and being
seriously weighed points out the most genuine interpretation.

When we read in Scripture of the Suns rising and setting, and of its rejoicing
as a Giant to run its course, must we needs draw Arguments from thence to
assert the Suns Motion? Do not all men at this day call it the rising and
setting of the Sun, even those that are sure it moves not, but do firmly assert
the Earths motion, which is enough to make out that Phenomenon of the
perpetual Motion of the Heavens, and we are drawn thereto by vulgar
acceptance, and propriety of our modern Language; but must every man be drawn
to defend it because of his compliance with the Vulgar? certainly no, that is
an inference which was never intended, nor can be rationally born with, when
the Argument is laid to the line. It may as well be inferred that the Sun runs
in a progressive motion, by steps as a Giant does, and that it has a reasonable
Soul, and the affection of Joy.

Figures often used in the Scripture.
In the Scripture (as in all other writings, yea and sayings too of the wisest
of men) there are many passages which cannot fall under a plain sense without
gross absurdity. There are many mystical and figurative Expressions that we
frequently meet with both in the Old and New Testament, else we must think that
the Mountains skipped like Rams, and the little hills like Lambs, which would
plainly contradict this stability of the Earth mentioned before. Must our
Savior be understood in a plain sense, when he says, He is the Vine, and the
Father a Husbandman? what absurd consequences would follow from thence!

Such is the ground of the great contest betwixt us and the Church of Rome, in
the Sacramental Elements; they understand it in a proper literal sense, when he
says, This is my Body. We take the words figuratively. They say its become
whole Christ, and therefore yield Adoration: We say its neither so in whole nor
in part, and therefore we worship it not, though we honor its Institution to
such an end and use. The consequence of a literal sense would be strange, while
St Paul, 1 Timothy 1.17. calls Christ the Eternal, Immortal, Invisible, and only
wise God: Are these to be attributed to the Sacramental Elements? It Is not
Eternal, 'twas made by the Baker, or at best by the Priest: Its not Immortal,
for it is subject to putrefaction: Nor is it invisible, we see it, and it is
Bread still: Nor is it wise, for it is inanimate, and so cannot be said to be
God.

But upon the whole matter, we see there is a reasonable scope to be allowed to
scriptural Expressions, (as to all other Writings and Sayings of those that are
wise) which are never to be stretched to absurd consequences, nor inferences
made that are collateral, and not the scope of the place, nor suitable to sense
or reason; and that in particular the Scripture makes out nothing against this
Hypothesis of the Earths motion upon its Axis.

The Copernican Hypothesis examined by Reason.
I will now examine it according to the rules of Reason, and then leave it to
every wise man to judge as he sees cause. Either this Globe of the Earth turns
upon its Center once in Twenty four hours from the West to the East, or else
the Sun runs its course from the East to the West; either of which will serve
to make up our natural day.

Now let us consider upon a Standard of miles, that we may the better
understand what we are speaking of; wherein I follow the generally received
Rules of our best Modern Astronomers, who are much more exact than the
Ancients, and I have the help of Mr Thomas Street, an eminent Mathematician in
London, the Author of that exquisite Book, called Astronomia Carolina.

Of the Earths diurnal motion.
By the Standard of London 5000 feet make an English mile; and 8365 of such
miles is the Diameter of the Earth, or in plain English the thickness from one
side to the other: and the Semidiameter that is to say, the half thickness from
the Center to the Circumference is 4182 miles and. Now six Semidiameters is the
circumference of the Earths Superficies, (something more, but I shall keep to
round numbers) and that amounts to 26280 miles; so that supposing the Earth to
turn about in twenty four hours upon the Aequinoctial line, then the hourly
Motion is 1095 miles, and consequently it must move 18 miles ^ in every minute
of time, upon the said Line, which perhaps is as fast as a Bullet flies out of
a Gun; and probably upon the first consideration it may be thought to be a very
swift motion.

Of the Suns diurnal Motion.
But if we must suppose the Sun to move from the East to the West round about
the Heavens in twenty four hours, then, that we may find what measure of miles
it runs, we are to consider its distance from the Earth; and I find it agreed
on by common consent, that the mean distance of the Sun from the Earth is 13755
Semidiameters of the Earth, according to the Standard aforesaid, which amounts
to 57530287, or in words at length, fifty seven millions, five hundred thirty
thousand, two hundred eighty seven Miles; and then its hourly Motion must be
15061725, viz. fifteen millions, sixty one thousand, seven hundred twenty five
miles, and consequently it must run 251029, viz. two hundred fifty one thousand
twenty nine miles every minute of time, which how it can be, ought to be
considered.

I know some good men having not thoroughly weighed the point, have a ready
Answer wherewith they satisfy themselves, as to the difficulties that gravel
others about this stupendous Motion of the Sun, which they draw from the
Omnipotency of God, who is able to do it; they being not willing to recede from
the Common Notion, upon the account of the Texts of Scripture before mentioned.

To whom I reply thus, I adore all the Attributes of God, and particularly that
of his Almightiness, to which all things are possible; nothing is too hard for
him. And I desire with all good Men to fear him, both for his Greatness and his
Goodness, and would abhor the least thought tending to the questioning of his
Divine Perfections. But every good Man should study to be also wise, that he
may think and speak rightly, as well as reverently in things that relate to
God. As in matters of Religion, we are to be regulated hy his declared Will in
his Word; So in things of Nature, our sentiments ought to be suited to his
manifest works of Providence in the Creation. Now I conceive here we are not to
rest with presuming upon his absolute Omnipotency, and what he is able to do;
but to eye his methods of Providence in the World, and what he uses to do; and
how in things of this Nature he has made manifest the Wisdom of his Will. For
he that by his Power and Goodness has given all things their Being, has by his
Wisdom and Providence stated their manner of Being. Now as to all material and
corporeal things, he has been pleased in his Wisdom so to order them, that they
cannot move or change place at such a rate. Loco-motion in corporeal Substances
(such as we are discoursing of) does by the Methods of his wise Providence
necessarily exact a stated time for a due distance: And though his Omnipotency
is unlimited, so as nothing is impossible with God, yet it is so concordant
with the Wisdom of his Will in all things throughout the whole Creation, which
he has made in due Order, Weight, and Measure, that he is alone able to do what
he will.

Now since its apparent to our Observation, and suitable to our Reason
wherewith he has endued us, to judge of his Works of Providence, that it is
impossible for gross Bodies to move at such a rate (as we have said of the Sun
upon the ground of that Hypothesis) he having disposed them otherwise, we ought
not to expect that from his Power, which crosses the manifest Wisdom of his
Will, lest making his Attributes to enterfere one with another, we fancy him
inconsistent with himself, and so unawares sin against his Holiness, which
highly consists in that harmony that is eminently conspicuous among his
Attributes.

Certainly it is not the way to convert Atheists to attribute Operations to his
Power, which in the Nature of things are impossible; but rather it would tend
to harden Unbelievers in their Atheism, as if he whom we judge to be Omnipotent
in Power, were not also Infinite in Wisdom; when it is manifest his Wisdom has
already opened a plain way for the magnifying of his Power, and all his other
Attributes besides, that we cannot sever them, nor so much as think of any one
of them, but it must of necessity heighten our thoughts into Admiration of them
all.

It Is attended with insuperable difficulties.
But this is not all, there are yet greater difficulties (I had almost said
absurdities) that do attend the Hypothesis of the Suns diurnal Motion about the
Earth: For by the same reason they must assert all the Planets above the Sun to
move as well as the Sun, and that in the same space of time, viz. in twenty
four hours; which though they are all of them some thousands of Semidiameters
of the Earth higher than one another, and have all peculiar Motions of their
own, wherein they do exceedingly differ from each other, and have no dependency
on one another, I mean Saturn, Jupiter, and Mars, yet they all agree in this,
that they all seem to move about the Earth every twenty four hours, as duly and
regularly as the Sun; whose Circles are so much larger than that which the Sun
makes, that Saturn, which is the highest of them, must necessarily move almost
ten times faster and farther in every minute of time than the Sun. I well know
what reference they have to the Sun, yet I would gladly understand what there
is in community among themselves, and with the Sun, that can make them so
agreeable in their diurnal Motions!

Nay they must also assert the Motion of all the fixed Stars, and that in the
same space of twenty four hours, and in all respects as regular, so as we can
judge of the hour of the Night by any of them that shall happen to appear, as
well as we can do of the hour of the Day by the Sun. -- And then such and so
immeasurable is their distance from this Globe of the Earth, (which they most
erroneously fancy to be the Center of the World, and consequently of their
Motion) that they must necessarily move 100 times faster and farther in a
minute, than what we have said of the Sun.

I know they resolve all these by the aforesaid Argument taken from the
Omnipotent Power of God; to which I shall not need to say much more than what I
have said already. Only I desire them to sit down a while, and consider on it,
taking this one thing along with them -- A posse Dei ad esse rei non valet
consequentia.

The Copernican Hypothesis suits best with reason.
And now I shall refer it to any man of Reason, or Reckoning, to consider which
of the two is the more probable Opinion, viz. that our natural Day is made up
by the Motion of the Earth upon its Center, the Sun being fixed, or by the
course of the Sun from East to West round about this Globe, the Earth being
fixed. Upon the whole matter, if it be not contrary to Sense, nor Holy Scripture
(as I have in some measure proved) it does not seem to be against sound Reason,
to assert the Earths diurnal motion upon its Center.

Several of the Planets turn upon their Centers.
And to evince the further probability hereof, I will say somewhat more, that we
have still further ground to think so, because we are as certain, as the sight
of our eyes can assure us, that far greater Bodies than the Earth do turn upon
their Centers. Mr Hook plainly discerns by his Telescope that the Planet
Jupiter turns about upon its Center every ten hours (rather something less) by
a dark spot which he perceives to turn about in the Discus of that Planet, till
after a while it turns off. Mars he observes to turn about much about the same
time with the Earth, viz. in twenty three hours and a little more. Yea and its
plainly discernable by the same Instrument, that the Sun it self turns upon its
Axis once in twenty eight days, or thereabouts.

And since it is so, why may we not judge the like of this Globe of the Earth,
though it appear not to our Senses, from the concession whereof not the least
absurd Consequence does follow? Nay it fully solves all the difficulties, and
Improbabilities (I had almost said Impossibilities) that attend the other
Hypothesis.

I have been the longer upon this, because it is One of the most considerable
things in Nature, and least understood, meeting with much Opposition, even from
some Learned and good Men, while yet it is most clear to others. The rest I
shall more quickly glide over.

The Sun is in the Center of the Heavens.
Another Observable unthought of by the Ancients, is, that the Sun is in the
Center of the Heavens, but assuredly of the Planets Motions, about which every
one of them turns in its Periodical time, while yet each of them has its proper
Orb in which it moves, to which it is also so confined, that it cannot move
beyond its assigned Degrees of distance from the Sun; a Scheme whereof the
Reader may see in Mr. Street's Astronomia Carolina aforesaid, where the Earth
it self is demonstrated to have the said motion about the Sun, which is called
its Annual Motion, The Earths annual motion about the Sun.
to which Book I shall refer the Reader, it being not my present design to
ravel into that, seeing I am drawn into a greater length already than at the
first I intended; neither indeed is that so clear to me, as is the diurnal
Motion, which makes our Day.

This Opinion of the Earths Motion is opposed by many, particularly by
Maurolycus, who is severe against Copernicus for asserting it, and says, he is
Scutica and flagello dignus, etc. worthy of the Lash for it; yet as Learned as
he, are professed Proselytes to it, and are able to defend it at this day, and
make it out with clear Demonstration.

The Planets are dark Bodies.
Another, that the Planets are dark Bodies as well as this Earth on which we
tread, and have no Light but what is reflected from the Sun; and this is
plainly made out by Galilaeus his Glass, highly improved of late by our new
Telescope.

Observations about Jupiter.
So, that the Planet Jupiter has four Satellites, or small Lights that move
about it, as the Moon about the Earth, perhaps of the same nature and for some
like ends. The nearest of them turns about the Planet in two and twenty hours;
the next in three days and a half; the third in seven days, and the farthest in
seventeen days. Although what influence they may have upon the Planet we cannot
say. Yea and Mr. Hook with his Telescope does discover that they Eclipse one
another, sometimes they the Planet, or it them, when they intercept the
Sunbeams from one another, which he can foretell to a minute, both as to the
beginning and duration, as truly as he can foretell, or see the Eclipses between
the Earth and the Moon.

Observations about Saturn.
Likewise that Saturn has some rays of glory, with which that Planet is begirt,
together with three Satellites or Moons that go about it, at some small
distances, which yet probably are greater Bodies than this Globe of the Earth,
now of late discovered by Mounsieur Cassini. A probability of more Worlds in
several of the Planets.
Also the Probability that there is a World in the Moon, and that the Earth is
a Planet, most ingeniously discoursed of by the late Reverend Dr Wilkins Bishop
of Chester. And why I pray pari ratione may not the other Planets be Worlds
too, and have Inhabitants to exalt the great Name of their and our Creator?
Indeed, if the Planet Jupiter be Inhabited, their Day there must be but five
hours long; only they are supplied in the Night by four Moons, which may
probably afford sufficient Light to the Inhabitants for business, besides the
frequent return of the Day.

Not inconsistent with the Scripture.
And if it be so, that some of those Heavenly Bodies are Worlds, that are
Inhabited (of which Opinion are some Learned and considerate Persons whom I
have met withal) then is one great difficulty cleared in that place of
Scripture, Phil. 2.11. which has been usually taken in a Figurative sense,
seeing it may be literally true; where the Apostle says, that God has exalted
Jesus Christ, and given him a Name above every Name,(...), viz. That in the
Name of Jesus every knee may bow, of those in the Heavens, in the Earthy, Some
dark Scriptures cleared.
and under the Earth. If the main scope of that Text be to point out the
Mediatory Office of Christ, and that by bowing the knee is principally meant
praying to God the Father in the Name of Jesus Christ, as the genuine Sense of
the place seems to import, and not merely the Adoration which is to be given to
Christ by all Created Beings, which is clear enough from other Scriptures; then
I cannot see how the word (...), of things in Heaven, can be thought to be
meant of Angels, or Saints departed, such as Enoch and Elias; who being in the
full fruition of the Beatifical Vision, are in need of nothing, and therefore
above Prayer, wholly taken up with Hallelujahs of Praise. And then it being
supposed that there are Inhabitants in those Heavenly places, it is reasonable
enough for us to think that St Paul respects them, and will have us to know,
that God (...) has exalted Christ, (our Language has not a word to express it,
it signifies he has exceedingly exalted him) as that those Rational Beings
that are in the Heavenly places, must pray to God in that Name, even as we. As
for the word (...) of knees under the Earth that must bow, which so much
gravels Interpreters; I take it to be a Pleonasme, a Figure frequently used in
Scripture (as in other Writings) when a thing is designed to be copiously and
very largely expressed: A parallel place to which I find, Jam. 3.7. (...),
where not only all other Creatures on the Earth, but even the Fishes in the Sea
are said to be tamed by Man, a thing scarce practicable. In the one place St
Paul highly extols the Sovereign Authority God has given to Jesus Christ, over
all Created Beings where ever they may be supposed to be: And in the other, St
James describes that absolute Dominion Man has over all the Creatures in the
World. The like Figure is used in John 21. ult. and many other places.

Nor incongruous to Reason.
And why should it seem strange to any man of Reason to think there are more
inhabited Worlds, that shall consider the Immensity of that space of Heaven,
and the Analogy (as I have mentioned in many particulars) that is betwixt some
of the Heavenly Bodies and this Earth, together with the inconsiderable
proportion there is of this in comparison of almost all of them, so as if one
of us were in those Bodies, the Earth could not be seen for its smalness.

We plainly discern them to be dark Bodies like this Globe of the Earth, and to
have a continual Succession of Day and Night, and Moons that surround them,
that give Light by Night to them; and we may probably guess there are other
Influences that must according to the Course of Nature flow from them, and
operate upon their several Planets, as the Moon upon this Globe of the Earth
and Sea; but what signify all these, if there be no Inhabitants, or rational
Beings in them? We are not indeed capable of ascertaining any thing of
Inhabitants there, no more than they can of us, if possibly they can see this
Globe of the Earth and its Moon wherein we resemble them, unless they have it
by Revelation, which we pretend not to, seeing there can be no Commerce
maintained betwixt them and us; but it seems reasonable enough for us to think
they are inhabited, and that they and we are not alike ordered for nothing, but
for like ends and uses.

Suppose some of us were at Sea in a Ship, and some of the Company that were
able to climb up to the Top-masthead, should tell us they discovered a Country
at distance, and should make a Description of some great Palace, or Castle,
that appeared very Noble and Magnificent, like Whitehall or Windsor; bravely
suited with all manner of Conveniences, though the place were inaccessible, nor
could ever any come from thence to make a further report, than what they were
able to discover by the Eye; Were there not ground enough to think that place
were Inhabited, and that it were the Palace of some great Prince that kept his
Court there, and not merely an Enchanted Castle; especially if we could suppose
the same Architect or Workman made them all? Such is the case we are
discoursing of: Nor do I see what absurdity in Reason or Religion can arise
from such reasoning, to think that the All-wise God does use the same Methods
of Providence throughout the whole Universe, for like ends.

Does it not savor of too much Haughtiness, and too high an Opinion of our
Selves, and our Services to God, to suppose that the great God made all those
immense Bodies, that yield so fair a Luster, and that immeasurable space
possessed by them, only for the use of Us on this pitiful invisible point; and
that the Infinite Deity of Heaven should have no active Service or Adoration in
all those Bodies, save only from us, poor Worms! The Nations of the Earth are
compared, Isa. 40.15. to the drop of a bucket, and the small dust of the
balance: Now can any wise Man think that the deep Well of the whole Creation,
and the Bucket were made for the Drop! or that the Balance (than which nothing
requires more exactness and curiosity, both for its Matter and Manner of
composure, with respect to its poise) was made for the sake of the small Dust,
that will not cast the Scale!

That place of Scripture before mentioned in the Epistle to the Philippians,
and two or three places more, I offer to the serious Consideration of our
gravest Divines, viz. Ephesians. 1.9, 10. Having made known to us the Mystery of his
Will, etc. that in the dispensation of the fullness of times, he might gather
together in one all things in Christ, both which are in Heaven, and which are
on the Earth, even in him. So again, Colos. 1.16. the Great Apostle says, That
by Jesus Christ all visible and invisible things, both in Heaven and in Earth,
were Created, even by him, and for him. Here he takes in all Created Beings,
and then he goes on -- It pleased the Father that in him all fullness should
dwell, and by him to reconcile all things to himself -- And lest any should
mistake the discovery of this so great Mystery, he repeats it again -- Yea by
him, whether they be things on Earth, or things in Heaven --

I say, I offer these Scriptures to the serious Consideration of the most
Learned, Pious, and Thinking Men, whether the Apostle Paul, who had been rapt
up into the third Heaven, (and so may well be estimated the most competent
Witness) does not seem to have calculated them for such a Discovery as this, of
inhabited Worlds in those Heavenly Bodies; where he would have us know, that
such Honor and Pre-eminence God has given to Jesus Christ, over all Created
Beings, which he says God made by him, and for him, that all Addresses,
Communion, and Reconciliation both for those (...), in the Heavens, and us on
this Earth, must be made through him; so as if there be ten thousand Worlds,
those Scriptures may be understood literally, and the Figurative sense let go;
in so much as they and we have no other way to come to God but by Jesus Christ,
who is the great Reconciler of God to his Creatures, and the only Mediator for
them all. For us he is the Mediator of Expiation, and both for them and us he
appears by these Texts forenamed, to be the Mediator of Intercession.

And methink it is very Emphatical to this purpose what he says in Ephesians. 3.9.
where he largley explains himself, viz. that it was not only revealed to him in
common with the rest of the Holy Apostles and Prophets, that the Gentiles
should be Fellow-heirs, and of the same body, and partakers of the Promise in
Christ; But that by Revelation he was peculiarly appointed to make the
Gentiles, and all men to know, that there is yet a further Fellowship of the
Mystery of God, hid from the beginning, which he calls (...) the unsearchable
riches of Christ, (the Greek word signifies not to be traced, as if he could
not make out by what footsteps it came thither) viz. that there are some in
those Heavenly places, whom he calls (...), Principalities and Powers, to whom
the manifold Wisdom of God in Christ was made known, and that they were not
only Created by him, but even for him, and that they and we are all of one
Family or Country, as the word (...) imports; as if the Apostle would hint,
that though by reason of distance we seemed to be two Countries, yet in him we
are united, and do agree, and of him both they and we are to be named, or
called Christians, as it is at Verse 15.

And what hinders but I may suppose that some of those (...) St Paul tells of
in 2 Cor. 12.4. unspeakable words or things, which he heard when he was rapt up
into the third Heaven, might be wonders of Creation, as well as of
superabundant Grace, which for Mystery or Multitude he could not express?

The Novelty not to be blamed.
If any man object against the Novelty of these Notions, let such know I am not
imposing them upon any man's Credulity (though they have long made impressions
upon my self) nor am I designing to make out the probability of a plurality of
Worlds from these Scriptures aforementioned; It suffices me if there be reason to
think so on other accounts; nor upon my grounds can any wise Man quarrel with
me, though he differs from me in this matter. But if through the invention of
new advantageous helps, we are become better able to judge of the Nature and
Fabric of the Heavenly Bodies, and so can have plausible grounds to think
(more than the Ancients ever had, that there may be rational Beings, or
Inhabitants in them; And if the Spirit of God, who best understands the things
of God, has inspired his holy Apostle at his Rapture into Heaven, with such
expressions as may suit in a plain sense with our new discoveries, which the
most sagacious among the Ancients could never comprehend, (their old
Interpretations seeming therefore to be harsh, and more strained) then there is
no cause to quarrel at the newness of the Notions, if they may but serve to
explicate old Texts; many of which throughout the Scriptures, may yet remain
obscure a long time, and yet may probably be explained hereafter by Events,
which the Providence of God shall bring to pass in the World.

If this last Century has afforded such helps as I have mentioned, and so many
rare discoveries in those Heavenly places, (and I might reckon up a great many
more, but that I design brevity) why may we not hope that time may produce some
other helps, whereby still more wonders of Creation and Providence may be found
out, especially when we have so many Excellent Heads as our Royal Society
affords, besides others at work both here and elsewhere, to seek after things
of this Nature? Although much more cannot well be expected to supply the defect
of our Eyes in reference to the fixed Stars, which are placed so far beyond all
Parallax, or yet of their Influences and Operations on one another, save only
to us on this Globe.

The application of all the Premises.
And now I suppose it is clear to any ordinary understanding what I hinted
before, that from the Contemplation of the Heavens, their Distance, Fabric,
Motions and Immensity, we have some glimpse of Gods Infinity, even through most
of his Attributes, which without such helps our narrow Understandings could not
so well apprehend; they affording us so many visible Objects of Demonstration,
to raise our thoughts above and beyond them.

Suppose I should discourse with a Man that was born blind, and tell him of
Light, and what a glorious thing the Sun is (as sometimes I have done) all I
could say might heighten his fancy, and put him into raptures of Admiration;
but when all is said, he would not be capable to understand what is Light, nor
what is Sight, nor what is the Sun: perhaps the same Man has walked with a
Guide twenty Miles in a day, and he judges it to be a long walk; Well! I tell
him I see the Sun at this very instant of time, which is judged by all wise Men
that have well studied the point, to be above eight and twenty hundred thousand
times as far from me, as the miles that he has gone; yea and every night I see
the Stars, which perhaps are ten times further off than the Sun. I then
discourse of the supposed immensity of those Bodies, together with their
Fabric and Motions, as I have related, and the innumerable Number of them, and
the vast space of the Firmament of Heaven, as it plainly appears to us all,
beyond which you and I may yet conceive more, even ten times more, for we know
not what should terminate it; and we are the more capable to suppose these
things by what we see. O how would the blind Man be amazed! What raptures of
Admiration would possess him!

Alas! in reference to Gods infinite Attributes, notwithstanding we have these
Helps, we are yet to seek, falling far short, and like the blind man are in the
dark. God is an infinite Essence that highly transcends all Predicamental
Notions, and humane cogitations.

Gods infinite Attributes hereby made out.
If the Light of the Sun be so glorious, O what is the Glory of him that made
it! If the Fabric of Heaven, and the Motions of those Bodies be so stupendous;
what shall we think of the infinite Essence, Wisdom, Power, and Goodness of him
that ordered them so at the first by his Word, and rules them, and every
Circumstance among them, and in this World by his Providence!

But all this is still within the reach of Reason set at work by the external
Senses, and is no more than what several of the Wise Heathens have said, as
Hermes, Plato, Seneca, etc. Although Aristotle, notwithstanding he has
discoursed at large of the Heavens, yet has said little of God that made them;
and perhaps not without good reason, as some Learned men judge, seeing the
Light he had from these was but little to enable him to say much of that
Infinite divine Essence.

That immense Universe, and all the mysterious Furniture thereof he made for
his Dwelling, yet not as we make a Dwelling in our Houses, which we always make
larger than our selves. That Is a Notion by no means to be applied to the Divine
Majesty, in whom there is no quantity, neither can he be circumscribed by any
space, or within any place.

We ought not to think or speak of God, but with all Reverence and Adoration,
and that herein we may be the less subject to Error, I judge it best to hold
fast the form of sound words, which we find among the holy Prophets, who were
immediately inspired by his Spirit. He is higher than the Heavens, and his
Glory is above them. And notwithstanding their immensity, yet the Heavens of
Heavens cannot contain him. He metes out the Heavens with his Span; He holds
the winds in his Fist; He measures the Waters in the hollow of his Hand; He
comprehends the dust of the Earth in a measure; weighs the Mountains in
Scales, and the Hills in a Balance. Heaven is his Throne, and the Earth is his
Footstool. And yet these are low Expressions suited to our capacities to make
out his Incomprehensibility. The immeasurable space of Heaven which we see,
helps us to conceive some Notions of Infinity, and some small glimpse of
Eternity; for an immeasurable Time may be apprehended by our Reason, as an
immeasurable space by our Senses.


And now let every wise Man and good Christian sit down a while, and consider
what has been said in the foregoing Discourse concerning this great Machine of
the World, so made and ordered by the Wisdom and Power of God, consisting of so
many, and so great stupendous parts, at such immeasurable Distance from one
another; yet with such subserviency toward one another, as that they cannot
subsist, nor continue to perform the Ends of their Creation without the Help
and Influences of each upon other. To which of the two Opinions aforementioned
about the making up our natural day, any may shall incline, it matters not
much, but it is certain there could be no Day nor Night in this our Orb, if it
were not from the Sun; nor yet in the rest of the Planets (where perhaps it may
be as universally necessary as it is with us) but from their constant whirling
to and from the Son. Nor could there be with us a continual succession of
Spring, Summer, Autumn, and Winter Seasons, so absolutely necessary to our
Beings and well Beings, if it were not for the Annual variation of Motion
betwixt the Sun and this Globe; and peradventure the like is elsewhere among
the rest of the Heavenly Bodies. What other Influences the rest of the Planets
may have on one another, and every one of them on this Earth, or this Globe on
them, and the fixed Stars on them all, I undertake not to determine, but I
verily believe if any of the Planets were wanting, the whole Fabric of the
Planetary world would come to nothing, for probably they must last and fail
together. And whence, I pray, can we suppose all these to be produced, and so
to be continued in a constant and necessary Subserviency to one another, but
from the Infinite Wisdom, Power and Providence of God? What room then is there
for Atheism, unless men will shut their eyes, and wilfully divest themselves of
that Reason which is implanted in their Nature! If any Man after so many
forcible Arguments of Conviction both to his Sense and Reason, shall yet
continue to be a Speculative Atheist, his own Conscience when ever it comes to
be serious, will assuredly confound him, and the very Law of Nature (if there
were nothing else to do it) will certainly Condemn him for a profligate Heathen.

I doubt not but when we come to be translated into those everlasting Mansions,
we shall see and understand more Arguments of Demonstration, of the Glory of
all, and every one of the Attributes of God, than yet we can imagine, for the
Exaltation of his Praises, and have cause to cry up in Admiration, even in this
Sense also, (...)! O the depth of his Wisdom! O the exceeding greatness of his
Power! How unsearchable are his Judgments, and his Ways past finding out!

And now being drawn to treat of Gods adorable Attributes, I cannot dismiss the
Subject with these low Contemplations, seeing in other respects they appear far
more Gloriously; which I think my self obliged to touch upon, although therein
I may seem to deviate from my designed task of Discourse about the Heavens,
which yet I hope every good Christian will pardon, seeing, being led to speak
of Gods Excellency, I ought not certainly to leave out the mention of those
things wherein he is most highly exalted.

Gods Attributes still higher advanced.
All his forementioned Attributes are yet more eminently conspicuous in his
Creation of Intelligent and Rational Beings, viz. Angels and Men, than in his
making of all the rest of the Universe, for these he made after his own Image,
in Understanding and Knowledge (as he has not done the Heavens) and ordained
them as Judges and Witnesses of his transcendent Excellency, placing both of
them in a most happy State and Condition, with freedom of continuance in both
their Wills, therein plainly manifesting his Attribute of Goodness; with
expectation of Homage and Obedience from both of them according to his declared
Will.

St Paul I find in several of his Epistles makes mention of some other Beings,
that are in the Heavenly Places, which were made by him, called (...),
Principalities, Powers, Mights, Thrones, and Dominions. Our Interpreters think
them to be several Hierarchies of Angels; though how they differ from
Archangels, Cherubim, and Seraphim they understand not. I say again, it were
well worthy Consideration whether they do not all rather seem to be Inhabitants
in those Heavenly Bodies I have mentioned, viz. in Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, etc.
and whether it be not most suitable to the scope of those Texts, as also to the
Wisdom, and Power of God, to think so, and semblable to the plain course of his
Providence manifested to us here on this Earth.

The Angels I believe were those Morning Stars we read of Job 38.7. that Sung
together the Praises of their great Creator, and the Sons of God that shouted
for joy. Although in that State some of them continued not, some Legions of
them revolting through Pride and Malice, which High Provocation against his
Divine Sovereignty provoked him to exert his Attributes of Power and Justice,
His Justice exerted.
which forthwith bound them fast in Chains of outer Darkness and Torment, to be
still further increased at the Judgment of the last day.

These envying at Gods Glory, and the Happiness of Mankind, and maliciously
designing by Lies and Dissimulation to obstruct the one, and ruin the other,
they drew Man into the same Misery and Mischief with themselves. But God had an
Attribute in reserve, which now he made to appear, viz. his Philanthropy, His
Love to Man appeared.
or Love to Man, thus overcome through frailty, and by Temptation. And this of
Love set all the rest of his Attributes at work, His Wisdom exalted.
in order to their Glorification and Advancement. -- His Wisdom contrived a way
for the satisfaction of his offended Justice, His Mercy magnified.
and for the Magnifying of his Mercy, which now he manifested, in sending his
Son into this World, and to take upon him Humane Nature, and therein to suffer
and dye, while by his Godhead he should satisfy. -- Then did the Divine Power
exert it self beyond all reach of Nature, His Power advanced.
and raised him from the Dead, and set him at his own right Hand, triumphing
thereby over Death and Hell, that all Mankind that would believe on him, and
manifest it by Love and Obedience to the Principles and Rules of that
everlasting Gospel which he Preached, might be freed from the Curse which by
the breach of his Law they had incurred, and be also placed in a surer and
safer State of Happiness than that which they had lost; affording them also the
assistance of the Holy Ghost to be their Guide and Comforter to the end of the
World. The rest of Mankind that wilfully refused to close with the tender of
his Son, and shall persevere in their Rebellions against his declared Will, he
left to perish in their Unbelief, and to make some satisfaction to his Justice
in their everlasting Condemnation.

And now God rides triumphantly in the Chariot of Exaltation of all his
Attributes, far higher than in all his aforesaid works of Creation, to the
amazement of Angels and Men, insomuch as the Holy Angels delight to pry into
this Mystery of our Redemption; Of St Paul's lofty style.
and St Paul cannot mention any thing about it without raptures of Admiration,
and lofty Expressions, no Author affording the like. -- The Divine Wisdom which
contrived it is called by him (...), manifold Wisdom. Ephesians. 3.10. and the Wisdom
of God in a Mystery, 1 Cor. 2.7. The Power exerted about the Resurrection of
Christ he styles (...), the might of his strength, and (...), the exceeding
greatness of his Power, Ephesians. 1.19. He seems often not to be able to find words
suitable to express his mind, especially when he is speaking of Gods Love, the
value of Grace, or Heavens Glory, but runs into Hyperboles, (...), from one
Hyperbole to another, as I find in 2 Cor. 4.17. The Greek Tongue which of all
Languages is the most Copious, not affording words significant and lofty enough
to him to make out his Notions, nor can any other into which it is translated,
render the full sense of it.

Gods new and higher Titles.
He who among the Jews was usually called by the Title of, The God of Heaven,
and The Lord of Hosts, and among the Ancient Heathens (...), from his Creating
of this great Machine of the World, and his concurrence to every enterprise
therein, is by the direction of his own Spirit to the Penmen of the New
Testament called by other Names, referring to this work of our Redemption, as
if therein God had acquired to himself new Attributes, and higher Titles
wherein he glories far more, than in his works of Creation, or Providence.

Hence it is that he is called the God of
Love, 2 Cor. 13.11. The God of all Grace, 1 Pet. 5.10. God rich in Mercy, Ephesians.
2.4. His Love was from himself alone, voluntary, and transcendently beyond all
compare. And therefore our Savior describing of it, could go no higher than to
say, God so loved the World that he gave, etc. Joh. 3.16. it is such a sic as
has no sicut. -- His Mercy is Unspeakable, Everlasting, and without all
Parallel, having nothing of Merit to excite it, nor expecting any Retribution
to requite it. -- His Justice beyond Exception, while he only leaves them to
perish in their Misery, who wilfully refuse the Remedy.

The Sum of the Gospel.
These things are the Consummation of the Law which God gave to Moses; the Sum
of the Gospel which Christ and his Apostles preached in the World, of which we
are all bound not only to have the Notions in our Heads, but a Relish of them
on our Hearts, and to manifest the fruit in our Lives. In that Gospel is made
out to us the Infinite Goodness of God the Father; the unspeak-able Love of
Jesus Christ; and the Comfortable Presence and Guidance of the Spirit; enough
to persuade us to be serious and consider, if we have any due awe or Reverence
for that great Name. -- The Purity of the Precepts, the Preciousness of the
Promises, the Amiableness of Virtue, the inestimable value of Grace, and the
Recompense of Reward carry Argument sufficient to engage us to weigh them. The
frequent dangers of Sickness, the certainty of Death, the Examples of Wise Men
when they come to dye, the Hope of Heaven, the Terrors of Hell, and the Account
that must be given, one would think should be enough to awaken us. -- In the
understanding of these things ought Youth to be trained, that they may the
better keep the savor of 'em when they come to be in years. It Is silly not to
know them; it is Folly to neglect them, and desperate Madness to despise them,
since without them we can neither live comfortably, nor dye contentedly.

Mankind does naturally thirst after Wisdom, as that which is the pabulum, The
rationality of the Christian Religion.
or repast of his Rational Soul. Certainly the Christian Religion held forth in
the Gospel teaches the most excellent Wisdom, and is the most Rational thing in
the World, affording the most ample satisfaction to the Soul of a Man, even far
above all the Mysteries in Nature that we reckoned up before, or any other in
Art which the Reason of Man has found out; yea even infinitely beyond all
Mathematical Demonstration. Those are Heavenly Mysteries which the Wisdom of
God found out at the first, which he kept hid from Ages, but now has made
manifest in the World. Such as the Angels covet to peep into, and then much
more should we, whom it specially concerns; seeing if we take care in reference
to them to be be wise unto Sobriety, they are able to make us wise unto
Salvation. But of these things Divines are best fitted to treat; and herein our
own Countrymen since the Reformation have exceeded all others, in abundance of
Volumes, both in Latin and English: These are the Subjects on which they
constantly preach, and which we ought to love to hear, and they are or ought to
be every good Man's Study, in order to his own Souls Health, or his Work to his
Brothers Edification while we are on Earth; yea and these are the ordinary road
that will lead us to the Glory of Heaven. -- And this leads me to a further
enquiry. --

Of the Seat of the Blessed.
We read in Scripture of an Inheritance referved in Heaven, and do believe that
there we shall find an everlasting Rest, and a Consummation of Bliss. Now in
what part of Heaven we may expect this to be, and where is that Seat of the
Blessed, I find our Divines are not thoroughly agreed. -- Some place it above
the Starry Heaven, but from what ground they tell us not. -- That is an
immeasurable Space, and methink not so suitable for Finite Beings, as without
doubt we shall be. Others that I have met withal, think it is in some of the
Planets: But since we are assured that they are dark Bodies, and have no
inherent Light in them, and perhaps of the same Nature, if not Matter, with
this Earth, they seem not to be Places so sit for Glorified Beings. If I may be
allowed to bring my modest Opinion to the Test, I rather think it shall be in
the Sun, where the Light is inherent, where the great King of Heaven will
probably manifest his special Presence, being also in the Center of the
Heavens. Besides I have other Reasons. -- Our Savior, Mat. 13.43. describing
the State of Bliss which the Saints shall have in Heaven, says, they shall
shine as the Sun in the Kingdom of God; which though Divines limit it to a
Spiritual sense, yet why may it not be more comprehensive? -- Again Rev. 12.1.
the Church is represented by a Woman clothed with the Sun, having the Moon
under her feet. If that was an Emblem of the Primitive Church in her State
militant, what hinders but it may be applicable also to Her in her State
triumphant? Especially seeing we find it called by St Paul, the Inheritance of
the Saints in Light, Col. 1.12.

To these I Will add two places more which being compared together seem to make
it much more evident, viz. Psalm. 19.4. where the Septuagint, which is
constantly followed by our Savior and the Apostles who were Penmen of the New
Testament speaks expressly, (...), He has se^ his Tabernacle in the Sun -- with
Rev. 21.3. where the Prophet describing the Heavenly Jerusalem, says, He heard
a great voice out of Heaven, saying, Behold the Tabernacle of God is with men,
and he will dwell with them -- So as it seem to be with Men, and in the Sun.

But I would be modest, and indeed we ought all so to be, that we do not (...),
be not over wise, but always to Sobriety. -- Our Happiness not consisting so
much in the Place that is provided, though we are sure it is in the Heavens, as
in the Beatifical Vision of the Blessed Trinity, and the participation of his
Glory, which seems to be best manifested to such finite Creatures as we are,
and shall be, in glorious Light. Only Rev. 14.4. It is said they shall follow
the Lamb, whithersoever he goes; so that whether it shall be in one place or
other, as by Grace we follow the Lamb here in this our Pilgrimage, we shall
then follow him in Glory; and doubt less there is our chief Bliss and
Happiness, seeing in his Presence is fullness of Joy, and at his right hand are
Pleasure^ for evermore, Psalm. 16.11. -- But this I leave also to the Learned
and Pious of the Clergy, and shall now resume my Subject, and treat of the
Heavens, and their Motions. --

Gods Attributes further made out.
If we consider the Motions of the Planets, either proper to every one of them
about the Sun as they appear to our Eyes, in their annual Revolutions; or the
diurnal Motions of them all, according to that of the first Mover (as
Philosophers speak) from the East to the West, together with the signal
inequality of each to other in respect of time, and yet unalterable regularity,
whereby we can predict their mutual Aspects 100 years beforehand; as also the
Motions of all the fixed Stars from the West to the East, so as since Ptolomy
they have gone half a Sign, viz. 15 Degrees to the East. Likewise if we ponder
upon the Planetary Motions, and their Effects to make Summer and Winter,
produce Fruits, Animals, and what not upon the Earth, and in the Sea, as
natural Causes; Do they not plainly make out the Eternal Wisdom, Power, Glory
and Goodness of God, who has disposed them so?

It was the Philosophers Assertion, That the Heavens are moved by the
Intelligences; as if he would have said, They are moved by supernatural Wisdom
and Power. And truly more he could not well have said, wanting the Light of
Scripture, and immediate Revelation.

The conviction of the Heathens.
These things alone yielded large conviction to the Wisest and most Considerate
Heathens that there is a God, who stretched out that spangled Curtain even to
almost an infinite distance; and gave orderly motion to the Heavens, which can
never be interrupted, till he shall please to fold them up as a Scrowl at the
dissolution of all things, as we are taught to expect.

Now they having such clear ground of Conviction to their Reason that there is
a God, who has by the visible things of the Creation, thus manifested his
Eternal Power and Godhead, while yet they (some of them) ascribed Deity to the
Stars, and adored them; and others of 'em, according to their trifling Fancies,
framed other gods whom they worshipped, are left without excuse, and must
necessarily be condemned by the Law of natural Reason, that arises from their
reading in this Book of his Providence, together with the other Law of Nature
Written in Man's Heart, whereby he knows what is Morally good or evil. Both
which do point out not only that there is a God of Infinite Essence, but that
he alone was to be worshipped, and adored, though they knew not well how; which
was afterward revealed to the Jews, though darkly in Types and Shadows, but
most clearly to us in the Gospel of Christ.

The rise of Astronomy.
The admirable Fabric of Heaven, together with the Stars, and their Motions,
and a hundred things more that depend thereupon, being observed in all Ages by
the Learned, have produced matter and occasion of compiling the most noble Art
of Astronomy; which in its Original is very Ancient, unto which every Age has
afforded some improvement, and this of ours not a little, in the finding out of
many useful Rules, Helps, and new Discoveries mentioned before, not known to
the Ancients; all which conduce to the greater Exaltation of the aforesaid
Attributes of God, by how much more truly we come to understand his most
Glorious works of Creation.

The rise of Astrology.
The Effects of these upon this lower Orb of the Earth and Sea, which are
thought to proceed either from the Temperature of the Stars themselves, or from
the Aspects of the Planets, and their Conjunction with the fixed Stars,
referring either to the alteration of the Weather, or the Humors of our
Bodies, or the Disposition of our Minds, which some fancy to be the natural
Products of those Heavenly Bodies so changing their places, (which whether so
or no, I cannot now stand to discuss) I say these have begot the Art of
Astrology.

And that they have some Effects upon the things here below, I think no Wise
man will doubt, Bringing Rain or Drought, Storms or fair weather. Yea and the
Holy Scripture expresses as much, Job 38. Can thou restrain the influence of
the Pleiades (says God to Job) or loose the Bands of Orion? as if he had said,
Can thou hinder the Rain when it falls? or can thou make it Thaw when it
Freezes? The Pleiades being a moist Constellation in the Shoulder of Taurus
causing Rain, by which the Sun passes in April bringing Showers; and Orion a
dry Constellation rising in November, producing Storms and Frost. Now Astrology
considers some of the Planets in their Influences as propitious to Mankind,
viz. Jupiter and Venus, whom therefore they call the greater and lesser
Fortunes, and think their Aspects to bode well: while they look upon others as
inimicitious to our Nature, viz. Saturn and Mars, and thence do style them the
two Malignants, and judge their Mixture to produce ill Effects; especially
being conjoined with some of those fixed Stars, which they think to be of the
Nature of one of the said Planets, upon which account they pretend to
Prognosticate good or evil to ensue.

That the Art of Astronomy may consist with Christianity, and the Knowledge and
serious Veneration of the great God, I make no Question at all. But as for
Astrology, especially the Judicial Part of it, I have some grounds of
Hesitation. This I fear is that Art of the Heathen, mentioned Jer. 10.1. which
with so much seriousness and Authority, in the Name of the Lord, the Prophet
forbids the Jews and us to learn, viz. Learn not the Art of the Heathen, and be
not dismayed at the Signs of Heaven, for the Heathen are dismayed at them.

I heartily wish there were not too much reason to observe, that those who do
most addict themselves to Judicial Astrology, or telling fortunes by the Stars,
as also such as consult in that kind, can scarce in the Judgment of ordinary
Charity, be accounted serious Christians. And in truth some of them are
apparently ridiculous, and vain in their Imaginations, who while they undertake
to tell others their Fortunes, do not see their own Fates, when they are upon
the very brink of imminent dangers.

Jewish Rabbis.
The Jewish Rabbis report that the Ancient Hebrews were very much addicted to
the Study of the Stars, both as to their Natures, Motions, and Influences; and
that they were the first of the Nations that knew any thing of that kind, from
whom it was diffused to their Neighbors, the Chaldeans and Egyptians; and
this was part of that Learning wherein Moses was said to be well skilled. Aben
Ezra tells that they first divided the Stars into Constellations, and expressed
them all by the Hebrew Letters, which when they had gone through, they added a
second Letter to express the shape, and oft-times a third to set forth the
Nature of the Constellation.

Innocent in their Calculations.
R. Chomer confessed that the Ancient Hebrews observed that which pure
Innocence made out to them, attributing no other Effects to the Stars, than
what was merely natural. Of the Planets they accounted the Sun most fortunate,
as being the Principle of Life, and judged the Child to be of a healthful
constitution, in whose Nativity they saw it predominant: And next that Jupiter
and Venus, because of their great Luster, as also in their active Qualities
they are Temperate. Saturn they thought to be bad by reason of his Coldness,
and Mars through intemperate Heat, and Dryness: Luna in the Increase they
reckoned to betoken Health and Strength, and in the Wain the contrary; and
Mercury to be of a middle Quality, good or bad, according as he was joined with
others.

And thus they also judged of the Signs, and the other Constellations,
according to their Temperature, when they saw them in the Horoscope of a
Nativity, that the Native would incline to Heat, or Cold, or Dryness, or
Moisture; or to be of a temperate humor, and for the same reason to be of a
meek, and affable Disposition, or else heady, hasty, and choleric. Nor did
they go further, says my Author. And of thus much some good use might be made,
while discerning the Inclinations of Children to a Predominancy of some of the
four Qualities, their Diet, and such Air, and other Regimin of Health might be
chosen for them, as might rectify their Constitutions by preserving a
Mediocrity.

But as for the telling of Fortunes, and Predicting the Fates either of Persons
or Kingdoms by the Stars, it is not only Heathenish as beforesaid, but it is also
ridiculous and false, and so has been found in all Ages since it came into use;
and therefore it was wisely forbidden by the Ancient Church, and is most justly
exploded by all wise Politicians and Lawmakers in Europe.

The Holy Patriarchs.
There are some so daring as to averr, That the Holy Patriarchs Abraham, Isaac,
and Jacob were well skilled in Astronomy; and particularly Josephus reports
that Abraham communicated much herein to the Egyptians, while he sojourned
there; but that is gratis dictum, since he lived so many Centuries after
Abraham, that he can neither well prove it, nor give us grounds to believe it,
if we should be skeptical.

I take the Family of Terah, who was Abraham's Father, to have been one of the
best that was in all the East, living in an eminent place, viz. Vr of the
Chaldees; and that Abraham might be presumed to be Educated in what ever was
the breeding or Learning of that Age, and so probably in the Study of the
Stars: But that he and his Sons should be said to have been so eminent therein,
and in Astrology too, especially Judicial, as some would pretend to prove: I
think it is a great presumption grounded on a mistake, in respect of their
frequent postures of Devotion, looking up to Heaven, without any Image before
them, according to the Custom of the Nations among whom they lived; they
thought they were observing the Heavenly Bodies, when they were in their most
serious Devotions and Communion with God. As also, That their removal of their
Families and Herds (wherein consisted the Wealth of that Age) was from the
presages of the Stars, of some evil to come; not understanding that it came
from the immediate Command and Appointment of God, as the Text most plainly
makes out.

I know R. Abarbanel pretends to prove, That they were knowing even in
Astrology, and perhaps too Ceremonious therein, yea more than was owned by any
in that Age; in his Exposition on that Text in the 30th of Genesis 11. Where Leah
having a Child born to Jacob by her Maid Zilpah, she called his Name Gad, which
is the Name among them of the Planet Jupiter (as says Aben-Ezra) and signifies
a Fortune, as now that Planet is called Fortuna major: which Interpretation the
Learned Gaffarellus the French Critic seems to close with.

But what though it signifies a Fortune, and the word be an Epithete of
Jupiter, does it not also signify a Troop? And may not the sense more properly
be such, that finding the Woman fruitful, she thought her self Fortunate in it,
and might expect a great Number, or a Company, or a Troop of Children, as our
Translation renders the word? Yea and Jacob himself, who seems to be the best
Interpreter, plainly takes it in this sense, Genesis 49.19. Gad, a Troop shall
overcome him, but he shall overcome at last. And besides there is another reason
why (methink) it should be taken in this sense, and not with respect to
Jupiter, because none of the other Children are Named with any respect to the
Predominant Planet. And further, if it be meant a good Fortune, then would it
enterfere with the next Child that Zilphah bare, wherein she said she was
happy, and called his Name Asher. Besides, if that had been the matter aimed
at, and a good Fortune had been predicted, it was plainly an Error, in
Prognostication, like others of that kind; for he had no better fortune did
betide him than others of his Brethren, nor yet so good as some of them,
especially Judah, from whom came the Scepter. Nor yet was that which Jacob
foretold of Gad any other than according to the Spirit of Prophecy, as of all
the rest; and not a Prognostication from Jupiters Dominion in the Horoscope of
his Nativity.

Moreover this was said by Leah, a Woman, whom we cannot suppose to have had
any knowledge in Astrology. Nor can it be supposed that she had learnt it from
Jacob, who seems not to have been present at the Births of his Children, but to
have left the Naming of them all to the Women. Besides of all the rest of the
Patriarchs, there was the least reason to think that Jacob understood that Art
of the Heathen, which doubtless his Grandfather and Father knew to be unlawful,
which we see was afterward expressly forbidden to the whole Nation.

After this I find this Knowledge of the Stars was followed by the Greeks.
These either through Pride, or affectation of Repute, that they might seem to
be Inventers of new things, changed the Hebrew Characters into the Names of
Animals, as Beasts, Birds, and Fishes, and some Inanimates also as they thought
fit, of which no good reason can be given: And some they called by their
Heroes, or Women that were famous in Story. To these afterward did the Hebrews
and Chaldeans conform, that there might be a right understanding among them in
those matters; therein yielding to the Learning, Wisdom, and Authority of the
Greeks, who were now of highest Repute in the World; and besides were become
Masters of the Empire, and so might perhaps challenge a Compliance; whom the
Romans also followed, and all the Western Monarchy retain to this day, without
any considerable alteration. And this may be observed in the Septuagints
Translation of the Old Testament, in all the places where any of the
Constellations are mentioned, that those Interpreters hold not to the Hebrew,
as in all other proper Names they use to do; but give other Names, even the
same that are used in all profane Authors, to which all the Learned of the
World to conform, thus Job 9.9. as also Job 38. That which the Hebrew calls
Ash, they call Arcturus; Chesil, they call Orion; and Cimah, they call Pleiades.

Neither is the Study of the Stars eligible for it self alone, affording the
greatest variety of pleasure above all natural Studies in the world; but it is
also useful to other ends, and serviceable to other Arts and Faculties, while
several of them cannot be rightly managed without a due knowledge of them,
their Motions and Influences. I shall content my self with two, viz. Physic
and Navigation.

Astronomy useful in Physic.
All men know the Stars have a great power upon the Humors of our Bodies, as
Second Causes, and do cause great Mutations in order to Health and Sickness;
and therefore we find it requisite for us in the Exercise of our Faculty of
Physic, to observe the risings and settings of great Constellations, and the
Positions of the most ponderous Planets in them, whereby we are enabled to
Predict what Diseases are like to ensue, and prepare accordingly, even before
they invade us.

And hence it is that our great Master Hippocrates (De Aere, Aq. and Loc.)
says, That Astronomy does very much conduce to the Art of Physic, as without
which a Physician cannot manage it to his Reputations as he ought. Especially
it is useful to us in our Prognostics, whereby we are the better enabled to
foretell either the Symptoms, or the event of a Disease, in order to Life or
Death. There are indeed a great many things to be observed in order to the
making of a right Prognostic, as the Nature of the Disease, the Constitution
and Strength of the Patient; together with his compliance or noncompliance to
use Means, the time of the Disease, and the Suitableness to his Constitution,
and the Season of the Year, and several other things; but the Position of the
Stars, especially the Moon, affords no little help.

In acute Diseases we see sudden Mutations many times in order to Life or
Death, which we call Crises; which happen in or near the 7th Day from the
Decumbiture, or 14th, or 21th, etc. Now these depend upon the Moons Motion to a
Trine or Opposition, or to her place at the beginning of the Disease, and do
come sooner or later, as she is in her quick, slow, or mean Motion, which may
be foretold accordingly; and it is certain they prove better and perfecter, if
the Moon apply to Jupiter or Venus, their Influences being found strengthening
to our Nature; and worse if she apply to Saturn or Mars, whose eminent Cold or
Heat, or other occult Influences are hurtful, (Vid. Gal. de diebus
Decretoriis.) And these Crises do usually happen either when the Moon comes to
the first Angle in peracute Diseases, or the second, or third. Now while a
Physician is all along acting for the Patient according to right Reason, and
the Rules of Art, he may depend upon God for Success, and give a rational
account to wise Men, whatever the Event be. And if he has joined to his skill
in his Faculty this Knowledge in Astronomy, to observe the Moons Motions, and
her Conjunction to the fixed Stars, and the Planets, so as he can Predict the
Crises to come sooner, or later, and to be better or worse on probable grounds,
its very Satisfactory to wise Men, and Ornamental to his Faculty, and tends to
his Reputation. But as for those that would have Bleeding, Vomiting, Purging,
etc. to be done only when the Moon is in such or such Signs; as we see our
Almanackmakers direct, (yea and I find some Physicians go that way) I think
they do nimis altum sapere, being more nice than wise: Those are to be done, or
not, according to the Nature of the Disease, the Strength of the Patient,
Natures inclinations, etc. If we should ordinarily stay till the Moon come to
such Signs as they mention, it would undoubtedly tend to the hazard of many a
Man's Life.

But these things would require a peculiar Tract; I Will therefore rather refer
the Learned Reader to Dariotus (de Morbis and Diebus criticis) than enlarge the
Porch any further.

Also for Navigation.
So also the knowledge of the Stars is most necessary to the Art of Navigation;
an Art so useful to the world, that it maintains converse among mankind, and
makes all the Inhabitants of the Universe to be as of one Corporation, and
without which, all Islands would be no less than Prisons to their Possessours;
and we of this should too truly (as was said of old) be divided from the World,
divisos Orb Britannos. By the Elevation of the Pole Star, whether in this or
the Southern Clime, they know the Latitude, and what course or length they
steer; and in case that be Clouded, they reckon by other Stars of prime
Magnitude, that shall happen to appear, or by the Sun, whose Meridian height
they take, and so judge whereabouts they are, when they are without all view of
Land, for Weeks or Months together. And by the help of other Stars of prime
Magnitude, their Rising, Culminating, or Setting, they have a good guess of
their Longitude, which it is hoped in a little time may be yet further improved;
which if ever it come to pass, it must assuredly be performed by the truer and
fuller understanding of the Motions of the Stars.

Perhaps it may seem strange to some, what I have related concerning those new
Observables among the Heavenly Bodies, which they never heard of before, viz.
that the Planets are dark Bodies, and have no light but what they received from
the Sun, and that is by whirling about their Centers in their several Periods,
which makes Day and Night in them; and that some of them have Moons that turn
about them, and that the Sun it self turns upon its Center, etc. Let such know
that the things are not more strange than true; for I have said nothing but
what we see with our Eyes, and of which I have a thousand witnesses. As for the
Consequences which thence I have inferred; that it is probable this Globe of the
Earth and Sea turns like all the rest for the making of our Day and Night; That
the Planets may probably be inhabited Worlds as well as this Earth; That then
those passages in St Paul's Epistles, where he treats of those that are in the
Heavenly places, (which perhaps are some of the (...) St Peter tells of, viz.
things hard to be understood) may admit of a literal sense: I impose upon no
man's belief; nor yet in that Notion, that the Sun is the Seat of the Blessed.
Let him that reads, use his judgment of Discretion. In these things that are
not de fide, let the best Arguments carry it, if they may but consist with the
Sense of Holy Scripture, and cross not matters of Faith.

I have reasoned with modesty according to my module, and shall not wilfully
fall out with any man that differs from me. So I close this Discourse with that
of a Modern Poet:

Non eadem sentire bonos de rebus iisdem
Incolumi licuit semper amicitia.
London, Basinghall-street, July 18.1681.
THE GOUT-RAPTURES, Augmented and Improved. ASTPOAXIA: OR, AN Historical
Fiction OF A War among the Stars. In English, Latin and Greek Lyrick VERSE.
Useful for Schools, and such as would apply themselves to the Study of
Astronomy, and the Celestial Globe.

By Robert Witty, Doctor in Physic in both Universities, and Fellow of the
College of Physicians in London.

LONDON, Printed by J. M. and are to be sold by the Boksellers in London, 1681.

TO THE READER.
THis following Ode has been so acceptable to the truly Learned and Judicious,
in its first Edition, which therefore has been taken into some Schools, and
made use of as an Introduction to the Study of the Celestial Globe, that it has
encouraged me to a second Edition, with the Addition of forty Stanzaes in all
the three Languages, to make it still more useful to those ends.

I was in a fit of the Gout when I first projected it, and being not able to
handle a Pen, or turn over the Leaves of a Book, I happened to fall into a
Contemplation of the Celestial Bodies, with the Modern Opinions of Wise men
concerning their Motions, Aspects and other Accidents; of which I have been
discoursing more at large in my Ouranoscopy, or Survey of the Heavens, to which
therefore I have thought fit to tack this, as both referring to the same thing;
only differing in this, that the other relates to matters of Fact and Judgment,
and this to Fancy. And the Subject running much in my mind, I fancied that it
might be pleasant to make an Historical Fiction of a War among the Stars, and
not improperly, seeing all Astronomers do agree that there are inimicitious
Aspects among them sometimes, as well as amicable; and the Nature and
Influences which are ordinarily ascribed to them, whether they be the Planets,
or fixed Constellations, render them as contrary each to other.

This set my Fancy on work to invent an occasion of Difference among them. Now
Saturn being called by Astronomers Infortunium majus, (or the great Misfortune)
and Capricorn his Day-house being in Opposition to Cancer, where the Moon is
said to be the Lady, and to have the chief Dominion; I pitched the breach of
peace in the Opposition of those two Houses, which are ordinarily called the
two Tropicks, and consequently in his Opposition to Luna, as quarrelling at her
ruling of the Night because of her Female Sex, and so at all the rest of that
Sex in Heaven; and thereupon to fortify himself in Capricorn and Aquarius,
which is the next Sign, and called his Night-house; and Mars whom Astrologers
call Infortunium minus (or the Less Misfortune) to come into Conspiracy with
him, as also the Great Centaure, a Southern Constellation, consisting of a
great many Eminent Stars, and these to bring in Forces from their several
Quarters, unto the Conspiracy of Saturn.

Luna being in Cancer rises in Opposition; Jupiter which is the principal Star
of all, and called Fortuna major (or the greater Fortune) is startled at it,
and sends forth his Scouts, the Eagle and the Little Dog to make discovery of
them. Then he, being exalted in Cancer, called a council of all the
Constellations that bear the Names of Men, some of which we find mentioned in
the Scriptures in several places.

To them he makes a Speech, telling what Saturn and Mars had done, wherein he
does but describe the Nature of those two Planets, and the State of the
Heavens, according to the Vulgar Opinions and acceptance of Astrologers. To
whom Orion in the name of the rest does rejoyn, making a further description of
the Stars.

By their Advice and Help he raises two Armies, the one a standing Army of the
fixed Stars, the other a flying Army of the Planets.

The War is proclaimed by the roaring of the Lion, and seconded by all the
Celestial Cattle and Birds, who do every one send forth an Alarm in their
proper tones. Then he sets upon the Rebels, to whom he found joined in
Confederacy all the Fiends of Hell, and the Idols and Heathen gods in Taurus,
who had now declared another cause of the War.

Then began the fight, where Jupiter did severe Execution upon the
Confederates, and then pursued the Rebels, who fly before him from Sign to
Sign, till coming into Scorpio, (which is said by Astrologers to respect the
Secrets, and to incline those in whose Nativities it happens to be in the
Horoscope, unto Lust) Cupid with an enchanted Arrow, which he is feigned to
shoot out of Sagittary (which is a Sign formed in the Globe like an Archer)
into the Sign Scorpio, puts an end to the War; and by force of the Enchantment
they fall in Love one with another. Mars and Venus are in Conjunction; Mercury
prefers Cupid before all the Gods; Vulcan takes Mars and Venus in his Net;
Jupiter courts Danae and Alcumena; Saturn courts Luna; she applies to Sol, who
is King of the Planets, and of all the Stars, and is fancied to have been
chaced out of Heaven, till Jupiter had run through the Twelve Signs, to scour
out* the Rebels, which he does pass through in the space of twelve years. Sol
by a Northern Constellation is called home again, and by degrees settles all
things in Peace.

In many things the Story may seem to run parallel to the late Transactions in
this Kingdom, especially toward the latter end, referring to his Majesty's
most happy Restoration, and many Circumstances that attended it; although it
cannot be expected that Similitudes should run of four feet, and quadrate in
every Punctilio. And herein I hope the Fancy will offend no man, especially not
my Superiors, whom in every capacity I profess my self ready to serve to my
utmost, and do endeavor never to disoblige.

I have indeed taken a little (I hope) innocent liberty to fetch in matter to
make a formal story for my Fancy to dilate on, which possibly I may do without
offense to such as are Ingenuous, while I only please my self in the Parallel
betwixt the Sun and the King, and the restitution thereof after a long supposed
Darkness and Confusion, to his Majesty's Restoration.

But in this feigned story I have taken occasion to mention all the Planets,
with their Natures and Properties, together with the Twelve Signs of the
Zodiac, and the fifty Constellations noted by the Ancients, especially by
Aratus in his (...).

I add also some other Names of principal Stars, and other parts of Heaven real
and imaginary, whereof frequent mention is made by Astronomers. Likewise I
point at several of the principal Lines and parts of the Celestial Globe, which
being brought into order by way of History, (though feigned) may conduce to
help the memory in the Study of Astronomy, and the use of the Globe. And this I
have done in English, Lavine, and Greek, with propriety of words according to
my module. And the Fancy being projected, and a great many staves made while I
was in the Gout, I call Gout Raptures, which afterward as my other Occasions
would permit, I went on with, and finished.

If any man say, it was time not so well spent as it might have been, I think
so too; yet it was not so ill spent, as perhaps a rigid Momus, or Melancholic
person may suppose. Aratus whom I mentioned before to have writ on the Subject,
was in high esteem for that Poem, among both Ancient and Modern Writers; on
which piece many Greek Writers have made their Scholia, or Animadversions, as
Theon, Eratosthenes, Ptolomy, Hesychius, Proclus, Hyginus, Achilles Tatius, and
as some Learned Men report three times as many more; besides an abundance of
Latin Authors, as Germanicus Caesar, Cicero, Ovid, Avienus, Paulus Gallucius,
etc. and several of our Country men. But above all, I find St Paul did not only
read this Poem of his, but in his Sermon at Athens, Acts 17. verse. 28. he cites
a passage out of it, (...), for we are his Offspring, and is part of the 5th
verse in Aratus; which may suffice among reasonable men to give credit not only
to my Author, but also to the Subject here treated of, to wit, the Stars and
Constellations in Heaven.

If any man strain at the Verse which is not in the usual mode, let him read
the Lyrick Poets in Greek, who I think have taken more liberty than I, both as
to measure and Meeter. Besides my Fancy was to imitate an old sort of Verse
well known to Cantabrigians, made in English, Latin, and Greek, from whence I
took the Notion --

I know more than Apollo,
For as he laid a sleeping,
I saw the Stars at mortal jarrs,
And Vulcan was a weeping, etc.
And further, I am sure, I might have done the same much more easily in
Heroicks, wherein I had not been bound up so strictly to Rhyme or Meeter.

If any object that it is but a Fiction, let such consider well of Jothams
Parable, Jud. 9. Or of the History of Dives and Lazarus, and several that might
be mentioned; nothing being more usual both in Sacred and Profane Writings,
than to teach by way of Fiction, and point out serious things in Parables. And
thus we find the Learning of the Ancients did consist very much in Mythology,
and ours is employed in the frequent use of Tropes and Figures, which without
the annulling of that most noble Art of Rhetoric, we cannot lay aside.

If any man quarrel at some unpolisht expression in the English Copy, which he
fancies might have been better phrased; Let such know, I am not conceited of
any thing here said, nor had he been troubled with the view of them, if I had
not been overcome with the Importunity of some Friends of sufficient Learning,
who thought they might be useful to the public, which we ought all to serve.
But I do express my self, and my sense of things in such words, as did then
best suite my Genius, that the three Languages might explain one another.
Besides (it may be) I do purposely make choice of such Expressions to point out
some Terms of Art, referring to Astronomy, or somewhat in the Globe which I
design to explicate, and then I hold to the Sense in all the Versions,
reserving to each Language its proper Idiom: And herein I do willingly submit
to the judgment of such as understand them all, rather than to the carping
censure of such as know nothing more than their own Mothers Tongue.

Take it as it is, if it may profit or delight any ingenious Reader, I have my
Design; and if by my endeavors herein I do but little good to others; yet this
is great good to me, that by my labor herein I have kept my self in action,
and so do neither hurt to others, nor receive any to my self. In the mean time
as I spent not much time in it, (for I did it at idle hours, and in my
Journeys) so thereby I employed my Fancy in the Study of the Globe, and of the
Languages, especially of the Greek, wherein I should be glad still to make
further improvement.

The Names of the Planets with their Characters.
Saturn Jupiter Mars Sol Venus Mercury Luna.
The Names of the twelve Signs of the Zodiac with their Characters.
Aries Taurus Gemini Cancer Leo Virgo Libra Scorpio Sagittarius Capricornus
Aquarius Pisces
The Names of the rest of the fixed Constellations, as they come in Order in
the Story.
Cassiopeia's Chair. Ariadne's Crown. Andromeda. Berenice's Hair. The Centaur.
The Eagle. The little Dog. Antinous. Arcturus. Orion. Ophiuchus. Castor.
Pollux. Arctophylax. Cepheus. Heniochus. The Horse, i. e. Pegasus. The two
Dogs. The two Bears. The Wolf. The Dragon. The Goat. The Hare. The Serpent. The
Crow. The Swan. The Crane. The Vultur. The Dove. The Peacock. The Phoenix. The
Altar. The Pleiades. The Hyades. The River Eridanus. The Arrow, or Dart.
Perseus. The Gorgons head i. e. Medusa. Hercules. Noah's Ark, or Ship. Boots.
The Milky way. The Viol. The Southern Fishes. The Dolphin. The Whale. The
Northern Crown. The Cup. The Triangle.
Several principal Stars, and parts of Heaven which are occasionally mentioned,
together with other Lines and parts of the Globe, which do frequently occur in
the Writings of Astronomers.
Stars of prime Magnitude.
The Dog Star. Sirius. Aldebaran. Bulls eye. Virgins Spike. Scorpions heart.
Arcturus. Boots.
A Planet may be Direct. Stationary. Retrograde.


Planets have their Houses. Exaltations. Detriments. Ealls.


The Moon has three motions, Slow, Mean. Rapid.


Tropicks two, Cancer. Capricorn.


Hemispheres 2.

Zones 5.

Poles 2.

Imaginary lines Ecliptic. Aequinoctial. Horizontal. Meridian. Parallel.


Imaginary parts Dragons head. Dragons tail. Part of Fortune.


The Spheres and Orbs of the Planets. Mazaroth. i.e. The 12 Signs. Zodiac.
i.e. The Circle of the 12 Signs wherein the Planets move. The Zenith and Nadir,
or two perpendicular points above and beneath us.

After the coming forth of the former Edition of the Gout-Raptures, the late
Reverend and Eminently Learned Gentleman subscribed, sent the Author a very
kind Letter, together with these two Papers of Verses -- Printed exactly by his
own Copy.
In '(...) viri Doctissimi and vere (...) Roberti Witty, M. D.
CArmina de coelo possunt deducere Lunam:
Praestitit ingenio hoc Wittius ecce suo.
Saturnum, and Lunam, and pugnantia vidimus astra,
Stellasque armatas, ordine quamque suo.
Ad nos de coelo deducit Sydera, pugnas
Astrorum nostris dum facit essepares.
Quinetiam haec ternis decantat praelia linguis,
(...) Vates, Ennius ipse Tricor.
Et rhythmis canit and sonulis: haec Musica coeli;
Stellae, and dum pugnant, harmoniam faciunt.
Astronomo, Graece and docto, pariterque Poetae,
Tergeminae huic laus est debita, palma triplex.
Quod siqua in pugna hac Astrorum vulnera fiant,
Sanabit Medicus, quae facit Astronomus.
In Ejusdem Carmen de Podagra.
COrripis and podagram tu, producisque podagram;
Systole an haec licita est, Ectasis atque tibi?
Ars longa est, and Vita brevis; sic longa podagra,
Quam nulla Ars curat; Vita brevis, podagra,
Contrahit haec etiam vitam, sed prorogat artem,
Dum pede corripiens traxcrit ipse Charon.
Morbum pro libitu reddis longumque brevemque
Hexametrum hinc Versum, Pentametrumque facis.
Causidico and lites, Medico producere morbos
Fas est? nonne illum corripere ergo decet?
JA. DVPORT, D. D. Coll. Magd. apud Cantabrigienses Magister.

These following were sent lately to the Author hereof, after perusal of the
Copy of this second Edition, by the Reverend and Learned Author of those two
ingenious Poems -- Conflagratio Londini, and Conflagratio Northamptoniae,
together with the English Translation that follows, made by his Friend a
Graduate of Oxford, Nephew to the Famous Dr Wild.
1. PEde rhythmico fuganti
Atrox pedum nosema
M. D. suo Rob. Wittio
Homogeneum Poema.
2. Podagricos dolores
Qui pharmacis levatis,
Cum balneis and pilulis
Hinc vosmet auferatis.
3. Valete venditores
Cat aplasmatum, valete:
Hinc ollulas and pyxidas
Celerrime amovete.
4. Post artuum quietem
Saepe aureis redemptam,
Quicunque vult non esse stultus,
vult salutem inemptam.
5. Adeste quot quot estis
Pede morbido dolentes,
Cujus malum gravissimum
Lassaverit medentes.
6. Methodo en nova celebris
Arthritidem molestam
Fugat novus Podalirius,
Ingeniosus est tam.
7. Lucubrante mente scandit
Superna, cum fremit pes:
Ad musicam dum sphaericam
Tardigradus salit pes.
8. Descendit inde laetus,
Et bella coelicorum
Ad rythmicos canit modos
Facetus Author horum.
9. Sed tu, fatere, quaeso,
Nonne astra conciendo,
Lyram abstulis-ti Apollinis,
Ita doctus es canendo?
10. Quae pollice insolenti
Mortalis ut feritur,
Contagio Poetico
In ecstases abitur.
11. Ita est, vereor, Amice:
Salientque te canente
Famam ad novi miraculi
Podagrici repent.
12. Sic punctio choreis
Tarantulae levatur:
Sol-fa-mi-la, Taratantara,
Dum musicis sonatur.
13. Finis meae hic sit Odes.
Cum cruribus dolebo,
Adesse si liceat mihi
Wittissimo, valebo.
14. Ipse interim Podagra,
Redeunte si gravere;
Been jubeo cantu suo
Witissimum valere.
15. Ita ludibundus optat
Leporibus referto,
Frui salu te perdiu
Sim. Fordius Roberto.
1. TO Doctor Robert Witty,
Who eased his Gout with rhyming,
Present I pray, this Roundelay,
To his own measures chiming.
2. Farewell you busy Doctors,
For you we have no occasion,
That do pretend you can suspend
Bish. Pinchfoot's Visitation.
3. Good night Apothecaries,
Cumber no more our shelves, Sirs,
With Pot, and Vial, we them defy all,
You may keep 'um for your selves, Sirs.
4. One Toe too many Guineys
Often costs in Pills and Potions:
We Will spend no more upon that score,
For a Song shall help our motions.
5. Come Limpers all, be jolly,
Bestir your stumps, my Masters;
Though the wicked Gout has tired out
The Leeches and their Plasters.
6. For now we have a Doctor
Whose new Receipt will ease ye,
And the Humor root that pains your foot,
Assuredly 'twill please ye.
7. When Is Toe severely pains him,
His mind the Heavens rambles;
Where to the Spheres it pricks its ears,
And to their Music ambles.
8. From thence he comes down rhyming,
And tells us all the greetings,
With all the jars among the Stars,
Which happen at their meetings.
9. But Friend thou do so tune it,
I fear thou plaid'st the wheedle;
And while the god did seem to nod,
Thou stolest Apollo's Fiddle.
10. Which when so'ere it feels
The unwonted contrectation
Of mortal wight, it maekes him write
Meeter by Inspiration.
11. So it is, I fear, and when as
Thou scrapest with thy clutches
That Heavenly Lyre, each gouty Sire
Will dance away his Crutches.
12. Tarantula's thus stinging
With cap'ring is allayed;
Sol-fa-mi-la Taratantara
While on the Lute is played.
13. Thus have I pleased my Fancy,
But now I end my dittie.
When ere the Gout shall frisk about,
Let my Doctor be witty.
14 Sir, when the Gout shall seize you,
And knock you off from motion,
I wish that fit may tune your Wit
To such another Notion.
15. May you never need a Plaster,
But by Wit discharge your Nerves on it,
Prays in earnest, while he rhymes in jest,
Doc. Rob. Wild 's Neph.
Your Servant.

Ad Authorem Sidereum.
QVI podagrae te Medicum, modestus
Gloriari nolueris; Corona
Jam Triumphator merito potitus,
Omnibus ext as:
Et Solum claeudo pede quum nequires
Vel levi pulsu tetigisse; spernis:
Atque sublimi proper as ferire
Vertice coelum.
Nempe quo morbo reliqui figura
Induuntur Quadrupedum, reficti;
Ipse, te, factus Jovis Ales, altum inseris astris.
Joh. How.

Ad Virum Ornatissimum Robertum Witty M. D. in Lucubrationes Podagricas.
PEgaesii Veteres sileant figmenta Caballi,
Cujus sacratas ungula fecit aquas.
Pes tuus Aethereas per inania scandit in Arces,
Atque inter Superos jactat habere locum.
Vngula nunc nostrae cedat tantum ista Podagrae
Quantum Terra sacri distat ab arce Poli.
Tho. Berney.

Gout-Raptures.
* The Reader is desired to observe the Marginal Notes all alone as he goes,
which do explicate the Pages.
1. I Sing of horrid tumults
As the Gout permits to do it;
I stretch my throat in a triple note
That all the World may know it.
2. To Poetry I pretend not,
And pain disturbs invention;
Yet the matter's high, transcends the Sky,
And calls for strict attention.
Urania one of the Nine Muses, who is said to have first writ of Astrology.
3. Urania, here is thy Subject!
Now lend me too thy fancy;
Of all the Nine thou shall be mine,
I Will to the Stars advance thee.
4. I saw the Sun once setting,
Down to the North descending,
When all the Stars fell into jars
About the Rule contending.
5. The Hemisphere was darkened;
The Age securely snorting;
Long was the Night, and sharp the Fight;
As I am now reporting.
Saturn, the great Misfortune.
6. In Capricorn old Saturn,
The worst of all the seven,
Capricorn, his day-house.
Designed the Night to rule in spite
Of all the Stars in Heaven.
.
7. His quarrel was at Luna,
Declaring his Opinion;
None could but vex the Female Sex
Should hold so large Dominion.
and are the 2 Tropicks. Planets are most debilitated in their falls.
8. She lowest of the Planets
The * other Tropic claimed!
But down she shall, and catch a * Fall;
And thus a War's proclaimed.
Cassiopeia's Chair, a Constellation. Ariadnes Crown, a Constable. Andromeda, a
Constellation. II Gemini. Berenices Hair, a Constell.
9. He fret that Cassiopeia
In a Chair of state was placed;
Ariadne's Crown he will have pulled down,
Andromeda debased.
10. Nor will he suffer Children,
The Twins he will tear asunder;
Nor will he spare Berenice's Hair,
But thus he spoke in Thunder.
11. What! Women so to lord it!
Both Gods and Men despise them;
They shall obey, and I will sway
Nights Scepter, and chastise them.
Aquarius, Saturn's Night-house.
12. And now he joined Aquarie
And Mars brought in his forces;
Mars. Centaure, a Constellation.
Yea what is more, the great Centaure,
And crossed the Heavens courses.
... From the Aspects of the Planets, comes the alteration of the weather.
13. Malignants so conjoined
The Clouds began to gather:
The wind blew high, dark was the sky,
You must expect ill weather.
in. Cancer is her proper House. See the Latin version.
14. Luna hereat was crabbed,
And rose in Opposition;
She cast out scorns and showed her horns,
Asserting her Commission.
15. One ray she cast on Saturn
By special intention,
Who by that trick fell Lunatic,
See the Latin.
And raged as * Stories mention.
Jupiter the most principal Star.
16. Now Jupiter appeared
Most terribly to bluster,
To whom no Star may once compare
For Majesty or Luster.
.
17. He Luna's right asserted
Against all that durst with stand her;
In Peace and War bright Jupiter
Was principal Commander.
in his Exaltation.
18. He knew old Saturns malice
Against his Exaltation,
See the Latin.
Which to the end he will defend
Against the Combination.
The Eagle, a Constell. The little Dog, a Constell. The Planets in their proper
motions go from the West to the East to the East, through all the Signs of the
Zodiac.
19. And having thus resolved,
He forthwith sent the Eagle
To spy their force, to smell their course
He next sent out the Beagle.
20. She in her tone described them,
As more than she could number;
He * Eastward ho! barkt out they go,
And all the Signs do cumber.
21. Forthwith he called a Council
Of all the Celestial Sages,
Whose noble fame had raised their Name
Through all preceding Ages.
Several Constellations of Men's Names meet in Council.
22. Antinous, Arcturus,
Orion, Ophiuchus,
Castor, Pollux, Arctophylax,
Cepheus, and Heniochus.
Jupiters Speech in Council.
23. We Have heard (said he) of Saturn
And Mars's Combination,
And the Rebel rout they have cu'ld out
To raze our old Foundation.
Many Stars of prime magnitude are said by Astronomers to be of the nature of
and.
24. You see how they have tainted
The Stars of chiefest stature;
And daily make them to partake
Of their Malignant Nature.
The two Malignants are said to have a great influence upon the World.
25. In Earth they breed Diseases,
In States they make Commotion;
With storms they tear the Atmosphere,
With tempests toss the Ocean.
and in Conjunction produce storms, and thicken the Air.
26. Besides they often oppose us,
And then they storm and bluster;
Both days and nights they stop our lights,
Our glory and our luster.
Their cross Aspects are said to hinder the benign influence of the other
Planets.
27. When we portend good fortune,
They thwart our inclination;
Their cross Aspects make some defects,
Or what is worse, frustration.
By the help of a Telescope is discerned to be begirt with a hoop of light; and
to have 3 Moons attending him, as Jupiter has four. The Poets have a fiction,
that the Cycloys made thunderbolts for Jupiter.
28. See, Saturn goes encircled
In rays of splendid glory;
Besides aspires like Us to have Squires,
Not Paralle'd in Story.
29. Then Jove called forth his Cyclops
To fetch him Ammunition;
With force and skill their pride to quell,
And insolent ambition.
30. And with his feet he stamped,
And flames about him scattered;
He plainly rent the Firmament,
And the frame of Nature shattered.
31. In the Crab Jove was exalted,
When now behold a wonder!
The Aequinoctial Line.
With those two knocks the Aequinox
He plainly clave asunder.
The Ecliptic in the first degrees of and is distant from the other about 23
degrees and an half. Sol moves in the Ecliptic Line, and the Planets in the
Zodiac.
32. Degrees near six times four
Toward the North it started;
Like did betide on the other side,
Where to the South it parted.
33. And thus you have the Ecliptic,
Where Sol shines forth in Glory;
And in that track's the Zodiac,
The Planets territory.
34. And now most noble Heroes
Who dwell in our Dominions,
Let what is said be pondered,
And then speak your Opinions.
The Constellations are all fixed Stars.
35. Why stand ye still, you Heroes?
What need I more importune!
Come let us arm, you are safe from harm
March on in great Joves fortune.
Orion is a mighty Constellation of Stars of prime magnitude arising in
November, causing storms and frost.
36. This said; up rose Orion
Of more than Giants stature,
Never such a face of mortal race,
Or ought of humane nature.
37. A winter storm he raised,
The like I never remember,
Save one, no doubt, that bred my Gout,
In the same Month of November.
Cancer is the Ascendent of Yourk, where this Author lived 20 years.
38. I staid so long in Cancer,
Till his cold blast did harm me,
Who had both strength, and limbs, and length,
To carbonade an Army.
London has Gemini for its Ascendent.
39. To Gemini then I flitted,
So called from two kind Brothers,
Where I was sure my self to cure,
And hoped the like for others.
40. As for a sharp encounter
He was completely furnished,
There are eminent Stars in Orion so called.
With Shield, and Spear, and Semiter,
Shining like Brass new burnisht.
Orion's Speech in Council.
41. Great Jove (said he) we attend thee
With fixed resolution,
We all here stand at thy command,
They are all fixed Stars.
Ready for Execution.
and are called the two Misfortunes by Astrologers, denotes old age, and youth.
42. Saturn an old dull dotard!
Of mischief prime Projector;
Mars fiery, young, and fierce, and strong,
Fitted to be the Actor.
43.So high are they and hauty!
The fixed Stars are much higher than Saturn, which yet is the highest of the
Planets.
While none need fear or love 'em;
The world shall know before we go,
We Are infinitely above 'em.
44. And so said all the Heroes,
Who each had left his border,
And did refer to Jupiter
To place them in due order.
45. These made he grand Commanders
Of the fixed Stars.
Of his vast * standing forces,
Whose reach was long, and power strong
to stop the Rebels courses.
Of the Planets, or wandering Stars.
46. Then formed a flying Army,
With which he meant to chase 'em,
..
Of Luna, Ve-nus, Mercury,
Through all the Signs to trace 'em.
The Moon has Horns both in her increase and wain.
47. And now I well observed
Luna has double armor,
With horns is dressed both back and breast,
That Saturn cannot harm her.
Luna has three motions, viz. slow, mean, and rapid.
48. I Have seen her moving slowly,
As dulled by a Night potion;
But now 'twas plain, she knew no mean,
Was rapid in her motion.
Venus is often found to be horned by the help of a Telescope, and is a Star of
great luster, appearing only in the Mornings or Evenings.
49. Venus went forth like Luna,
And the like Armor beared;
Both Nights and Morns was seen with horns,
And daringly appeared.
50. For beauty and for luster
Mortals were wont to adore her;
Her very touch yet not was such,
That thousands fell before her.
This alludes to the Venercal Disease.
51. Her fresh wounds I observed
Were easy to be cured,
But through neglect, or some defect,
Proved hard to be endured.
Mercury the quickest in motion of all the Planets, and among Astrologers
denotes a crafty fellow. This refers to the nature of Mercury or Quicksilver,
of ordinary use in Venercal Diseases.
52. Though Mercury's no Soldier,
Jove found him serviceable,
Who nimble, quick, to do some trick,
Or stratagem was able.
53. I constantly observed it,
With Mecury who contended,
The nimble youth flew to his mouth,
His tongue and chaps were rended.
54. Some say wounds got by Venus
With Mercury were mended;
But when that failed, and naught prevailed,
I often those Cures have ended.
The Peacock, a Constell.
55. The Peacock bare the Colors,
Whilst all maintained their Stations,
An Azure Moon so often drawn
We see the Peacock's tail flourishes with above 50 Moons of an azure color.
As there were Constellations.
56. Instead of Drum and Trumpet
The Lion. Several Constellations of Brutes. Horse. Bull. Great Dog. Little
Dog. Great Bear. Little Bear. Wolf. Dragon. Goat. Hare. Eagle. Ram. Serpent.
Crow. Swan.
The Lion roard'd to Battle,
Unto whose voice was joined the noise
Of all the Celestial Cattle.
57. The Horse did neigh and whinney,
The Bull did low and mumble;
The Dogs did bark because 'twas dark,
And both the Bears did grumble.
58. Lo! here the Wolf ran howling,
and there the Dragon yelled;
The Goat did blare, squeak did the Hare,
And there the Eagle frilled.
59. The fearful Ram stood bleating,
The Serpent hissed for stinging;
The Crow did croke as she would choke,
The Swan her knell was singing.
60. Crane. Vultur. Dove. Peacock.
The long bill'd Crane did chatter,
The Vultur chides severely;
The Dove did mourn at every turn,
The Peacock shrieckt most clearly.
61. Phoenix. Altar, a Coust.
And now the matchless Phoenix
Upon the Altar flamed;
Though from that dust arise there must
Another Bird so named.
62. O the horrible confusion
That now the Heavens rended!
Here sprang I see the Antipathie
That never shall be ended.
63. Instead of Pike and Pistol
They fought in fiery flashes;
What Is Cannon proof they pierced thr'
No sword can make such gashes.
64. And now all parties fitted,
And among themselves enraged;
No mortal man describe it can,
An uncivil Civil War.
How * sharply they engaged.
The Ram, denotes the face.
65. Into the Ram Jove skipping
He found their scouts, and faced 'em;
He charged the Rout, they faced about,
Taurus.
And to the Bull he chased 'em.
66. Where now the Rebels Army
Fell into great disorders,
Declared their Cause, they like no Laws,
Nor ought on truth that borders.
Infernal Spirits confederate, and the War is blown up by them. The Bulls Eye.
67. Here Pluto and Proserpine,
With Cerberus and Charon,
The Furies and the Harpies stand
Combined in * Aldebaran.
68. They flew about and yelled,
They hellishly blasphemed,
They Swear and Curse, if ought be worse,
And all their own they deemed.
69. Here all the Bulls of Basan,
Idols.
And Calves at Dan and Bethel,
Met in a drove to sight with Jove,
And if ought is beneath Hell.
70. Now Baal, Moloch, Rimmon,
The Idol Bell, and Dragon,
And many more cried up we go
With Ashtaroth and Dagon.
71. The Oracles of the Heathen,
Heathen Gods.
Pan, Bacchus, and Priapus,
Cried in their tone, the day's our own,
Kill, kill, let none escape us.
72. They agreed in Consultation,
No quarter to be given;
But Truth, and Good, and Just they would
Extirpate out of Heaven.
73. Now did I see confounded
The two points above and below.
The Zenith and the Nadir,
The High brought down, the mean in Throne,
The abject turned Invader.
74. You Would wonder had you seen it,
All things were strangely jumbl'd;
Now all Degrees and Qualities
Were topsiturvy tumbled.
Several accidents by Astronomers attributed to the Stars.
75. Now in oblique Ascension,
And then in Declination;
After Ascent comes Detriment,
Falls follow Exaltation.
Thunder and Hail.
76. Hereat great Jove was startled,
And terribly did Thunder;
His bolts did fly like Hail in the Sky,
That all the world did wonder.
77. Now all the Hosts of Heaven
The Bull with flames surrounded,
Within, without, and round about,
The Bull was sorely wounded.
See the Latin. The Bulls Eye is a Star of the first magnitude and of the
nature of Mars, very fiery.
78. I saw him much enraged,
And his hinder parts were maimed;
I did epsy when he lost one Eye,
And the other was inflamed.
79. Now fiery flames were darted
From every Constellation;
The Dog Star; is a most fiery Star, arising with the Sun in July and August,
producing intemperate heats. Whence the Dog Days.
But the Dog Star surpassed by far
All your imagination.
80. For Sirius appearing,
Such flames abroad he scattered,
The scorching heat made them retreat,
Their Army soon was shattered.
81. With Cerberus he grappl'd,
Cerberus the 3 headed Dog of Hell.
Whom now he most disdained,
Fell on at once, broke all his bones,
That not a Skull remained.
82. And so the Bulls of Basan,
And Calves that were in Jewry,
Became likewise a Sacrifice
To Sirius his fury.
83. The Rebels found the Encounter
Too hot to be abided;
They fly, they fly, though stay must I
To tell what now betided.
84. The Fiends to Hell were damned,
The Furies were tormented;
He sent Charon to Acheron,
The Fowls the Harpies rended.
An Idol is nothing in the world.
85. The Idols fell to nothing,
Pans Oracle's confounded;
The Dragon burst, Priap. was cursed,
Bacchus in Sack was drowned.
86. The Rebels now are routed,
The Pleiades, a Constel in the shoulder of the Bull.
And their Adjutants defeated;
In Memory of the Victory,
The Pleiades Jove seated;
87. To be to future Ages
A Monument excelling,
Whose influence reminds our sense
Of the mischief of Rebelling.
The Hyades, a Constel in the face of the Bull that brings rain, to which the
Sun joint in April.
88. So the Hyades he framed,
A watery Constellation;
To purge from thence the filth and stench*
Left by the Abomination.
89. And now let us chase the Rebels,
Who find no Sign can bear 'em;
And though they try, they are forced to fly,
Yea often when none comes near 'em.
90. The more their numbers lessen,
The more their wrath's augmented;
The Zodiac, is the Circle of the 12 Signs.
They soon would wrack the Zodiac,
If not by Jove prevented.
Phaeton. See the Latin.
91. To Phaeton what chanced
They spitefully conspired,
Virgo. The Virgins Spike, a Star of prime magnitude. The River Eridanus, a
Constable.
The Heavens to burn, and ashes turn,
While the Virgins Spike they fired.
92. Which mischief Jove prevented
By calling up a River,
Whose watery streams did quench the flames;
And there 'twill flow for ever.
Libra.
93. They fly next into Libra,
Where now they sadly ponder
Unto what fate they are destinate,
For this their woeful blunder.
Scorpio rules the Secrets.
94. And now they enter Scorpio,
Where all their wrath's abated;
The heat within that caused the din
To another Part's translated.
Cupid the God of Love.
95. For Cupid who'd sat fretting
At all this noise and slaughter,
Found out a way to end the fray,
And turn't to sport and laughter.
Sagittary.
96. Being set in Sagittary,
He shot from's charmed quiver
The Dart, or Arrow, a Constel.
A fiery Dart to the Scorpions heart,
Which made a Star for ever.
Scorpio. Scorpions heart, a Star of the second magnitude.
97. And hence all those young Natives
By the Scorpion respected,
In lust and heart are duplicate,
And all to Sport directed.
Venus is charmed, moving to a conjunction of Mars.
98. Here Venus saw them flying,
Design'dly done to hook her;
She unawares gave chase to Mars,
Who made a stand, and took her.
Mars is Stationary. The Nighthouse of Mars, and the dayhouse of Venus are
opposite. Vulcan was the the Husband of Venus.
99. Thus taken in his Quarters,
Sure none to him was dearer;
By how much more distanc'd before,
So much they joined the nearer.
100. Now Vulcan guard thy noddle,
Make haste, and leave thy limping;
Prevent thy fate ere't be too late,
For Mercury is pimping.
Mercury is charmed, he is the Orator among the gods. Cupid. See the Latin.
Vulcan's Net with which the Poets do feign he took Mars and Venus. Mars is a
fiery Star, and Venus is pale, and appears only mornings and evenings.
101. Upon a Pole high perched
He made a sly Oration;
Before all the Gods he gave the odds
In Cupid's commendation.
102. And now did Vulcan hasten
With His Net he would made for trapping,
Unseen in the Night before 'twas light,
And took the Lovers napping.
103. Then Mars grew red with Choler,
But Venus pale and frighted,
She never since then was seen of men
In any case benighted.
Jupiter is charmed.
104. Great Jove the charm escaped not,
Whose wrath in Courtship ended,
While that same hour in a golden shower
Danae. See the Latin
To Danae he descended.
Alcumena.
105. From thence he went to Alcmena,
Whom craftily he courted;
Cupid was strong, if ye take along
In Amphitryo.
What Plautus has reported.
Perseus, a Constable. Gorgons head, a Constell. Hercules, a Constell. Dragon, a
Constell. See the Latin.
106. Of the one he got brave Perseus,
Who killed the Snake-lock'd Gorgon;
Of the other of these came Hercules,
St George who slew the Dragon.
107. These for their rare atchievments
So famed through bypast Ages,
He placed on high above the Sky,
Among the Heavenly Sages.
Saturn is bewitched.
108. The frozen Corpse of Saturn,
Scarce capable of warming,
Conceived Lust, and Love he must,
Bewitched by Cupid's charming.
applies to. He is slow in Motion, and be tokens old age. See the Latin.
109. And now he courted Luna,
Being all at her devotion;
She said, he is slow, old, and a Foe,
She did not like his motion.
110. In Rule she will own no Rival,
In Love she was provided;
Returned him scorns, and showed her horns,
Retrograde.
So he went away derided.
applies to in her rapid motion.
111. She now in rapid motion
Inclined to Sol's embraces,
T'encrease in light, and look more bright
Than all the Ladies faces.
Sol is King of the Planets and fixed Stars.
112. But oh! how Sol was wished for,
Who should of right have reigned,
As lawful King o'r every thing
Poles 2.
Betwixt the Poles contained.
Sol moves ever in the Ecliptic Line. Noah's Ark, a Constel. called also the
Ship.
113. For Sol had left the Ecliptic,
And beyond the Line retired,
And hid in the Ark, which made it dark
Until the time expired --
Encompasses the Heaven in 12 years.
114. That Jupiter had marched
Through all the Signs of Heaven,
And scoured out the Rebel-rout,
That Phoebus out had driven.
Dragons-tail, an unfortunate part of Heaven in Nativities.
115. Though many Stars appeared
With zeal for Sol inflamed,
The Dragons tail made all to fail,
While Fortunes-part was blamed.
Part of Fortune. Boots, a Constable. Charles-Wain, or the Great Bear, a Constable.
The milky way, a Constell. Whitehall.
116. At length a Northern Comet
Boots left his Station,
With goodly train from Charles's Wain,
And raised our expectation.
117. By a milk white way he marched,
Direct to Sol's fair * Palace;
Broke Dragons tail, and the Ark unvailed,
To all the Heavens Solace.
Pisces. in. This refers to his Majesty's gracious Declaration from beyond Sea.
118. And now the day was dawning,
By a beam from Sol in Pisces,
Which put to flight that dismal night,
According to our wishes.
The Horizontal Line.
119. Being now in the Horizon
The Rebels hearts relented;
No Dog at the Sun did move his tongue,
The Light was well resented.
The Spheres. The Viol, a Constell.
120. Hark how the Spheres ring changes
Apollo tunes his Viol;
The Birds do sing as in the Spring,
And now all things are Loyal.
The South Fishes, a Constell. The Dolphin, a Constell. The eldest Son of the
French King is called the Dauphin. The Whale, a Constell. The Meridian Line.
The Northern Crown, a Constable.
121. I saw the Fishes frisking,
To Apollo's mirth consorting;
The Dolphin danced to a Tune of France,
Leviathan was sporting.
122. Now Sol is in the Meridian,
And of the Crown has seizure;
Enjoined peace all Feuds to cease
On pain of 's high displeasure.
123. The Ancients Laws he stablisht,
All Rights he re-estated;
What Is done by Jove he did approve,
And his Act's perpetuated.
124. Assigned the Stars their Stations,
Disbanded all their Forces;
The Orbs of the Planets. The 12 Signs of the Zodiac. Hemispheres 2. Zones 5.
Poles 2. Parallel Lines.
None to disturb, each keeps his Orb,
And Mazaroth their courses.
125. The Hemispheres he joined;
The Zones he moderated;
The Poles renew their enterview,
And Parallels were states.
The Cup, a Constell. Trine is an Aspect of friendship. The Triangle, a
Constell.
126. And now the Stars were quaffing,
The Cup ends all the wrangle;
In perfect Trine they drank the Wine,
And hence came the Triangle.
127. All that in this sad warfare
Had stoutly fought like Hector,
Now filled the Cup and drank it up,
And then they called it Nectar.
128. To settle peace he ordered
is placed between and both in Orb, and his House.
Saturn and Mars to sever,
Placed Jove between to keep them in,
No more Plots to endeavor.
Medusa, a Constell. To drink Medusa. See the Latin.
129. Who forthwith drank Medusa,
And so began the notion;
The Stars each one were fixed as stone,
And never since had Motion.
This alludes to the Dignity conferred by the King on General Monck, and the
Star worn by His Majesty, and his prime Nobility, which might most properly be
called the Star of Jupiter, the most excellent of them all. See the Latin.
130. To such as best had served him
He was a Princely Donour,
And made the Star of Jupiter
A badge of highest Honor.
131. An Act of Royal Bounty
He furthermore extended,
Of Pardon and Oblivion,
To all that had Offended.
132. Nor would I Have now transgressed
In making this Relation,
Save you to mind how the King was kind,
Upon his Restoration.
133. And thus I Have tried your patience,
But now my Story's ended;
Quit me this score, I Will rhyme no more,
That fault shall soon be mended.
134. You wonder no Historian
Should mention these Disasters!
Good reason why, none saw but I,
And so farewell my Masters.
Lucubrationes Podagricae.
Praefatio.
1. BEllum stupendum cano,
Mihi cum vidisse detur
Soli, voce sed triplice
Ut ab Orb penderetur.
2. Podagricus vix Pedes
Novit ve scansionem,
At vult nova materia
Investigationem.
Urania e Musis una de Astrologia probe scripsit.
3. Urania, argumentum
Tuum! des and acumen,
Ut prae novem te colerem,
Ac esses mihi numen.
Sol.
4. En! Sole occidente
Cum mora pernoctandi,
Vidi astra certantia
De jure dominandi.
5. Obtenebratus Orbis
Tum stertuit securus;
Nox chronica, pugna aspera,
Quae sum recitaturus.
Saturnus Planetarum remotissimus. Is dicitur Infortunium majus.
6. Saturnus Capricorno,
Postremus Planetarum,
Ostentat se Regem nocte,
Spreto ordine stellarum.
domus diurna.. Luna est minus Coeli Luminare ad noctisdominium conditum.
Tropici 2. and. domus. Cassiopeiae Cathedra, Syd. Andromeda, Sydus. Ariadnes
Corona, Sydus. II Gemini.
7. Is Lunae invidendo
Se mente cruciari
Dixit, Sexum foemineum
Tam late dominari.
8. Hanc infimam Stellarum
Et Tropicum tenere!
Quis toleret? mox decidet,
Quod jam vult promovere.
9. Invidit Cassiopeiae
In Cathedra locatae;
Andromedae Coelicolae,
Ariadni coronatae.
10. Nec Geminis pepercit,
Infantes devorabat;
Coma Berenices, Sydus.
Cincinnum and divelleret,
His dictis intonabat.
11. Mulieres regnare!
Id universi vetant;
Morigerae sint Foeminae,
Ac a me jura petant.
Aquarius domus nocturna.... Centaurus, Syd.
12. Aquarium jam junxit,
Mart commilitante;
Et Centauro vastissimo,
Coelo jam trepidante.
A Planetarum aspectibus tempestates oriuntur.
13. A dicta Conjunctione
Coeli obnubilantur;
Flat Boreas, obscuritas,
Tonitrua causantur.
in. In propria domo praepotens habetur, and multo magis si ei approximetur
Jupiter. Poetae fingunt Saturnum filios suos devorasse omnes praeter Jovem,
quem matter Ops e faucibus deliri Senis abscondendo liberavit.
14. Huic Luna in Cancro sita
Opponens saeviebat,
Cornupetens velut demens,
Quod suum jus poscebat.
15. Haec radio Saturnum
Speciali sauciabat;
Fit protinus Lunaticus,
Et Natos devorabat.
Stellarum clarissima. Fortuna Major.
16. Sed Jupiter Stellarum
Clarissima furebat,
Tam Numine quam Lumine
Qui omnes praecedebat.
17. Contra omnes grassatores
.
Lunae consociatur,
Cautissimus Pacificus,
Ac strenuus Bellator.
Alunt Jovem Patrem Suum Saturnum Tyrannum deposuisse, and Regno expulisse.
18. Saturnum probe novit
Contra se bellicare,
Quem corriget, ut disceret
Posthac non combinare.
19. Haec statuens emisit
Aquila, Sydus.
Mox Aquilam spectare
Quem ordinem, quem tramitem
Procyon, seu Canis minor, Syd.
Canem investigare.
Zodiaci Signa 12. Omnes stellae proprio carum motu versus Orientem vergunt per
Signa Zodiaci.
Illa Hosts infinitos
Clangendo dictitavit;
Hic singula calcant Signa
Zodiaci, elatravit.
Is statim convocavit
Concilium Magorum,
Quorum Gesta mira habita
Per secula Majorum.
Constellationes humanae variae.
Antinous, Arcturus,
Orion, Ophiuchus,
Castor, Pollux, Arctophylax,
Cepheus, and Heniochus.
Jovis Oration in Concilio.
Audivimus Saturnum
Martemque combinasse,
Ac millia mancipia
In malum congregasse.
Astronomi observant plurimas Stellas de natura ac participare.
En stellas principales
Hos nostis corrupisse,
Ac habitum malevolum
Eis dudum impressisse.
Aiunt ac conjunctos producere hos effectus.
Ut Terram vexant morbis,
Provincias and bellis;
Sic Atmosphe-ram turbine,
Oceanum procellis.
Porro dum nos oppugnant
Coeli obnubilantur,
Era item obnubilant.
Quo lumina minus nostra
Clarissima cernantur.
Ceu fascinant Ocellis
Nos probe auspicantes,
Ac irrita conamina
Hi reddunt aemulantes.
Open Telescopii observare liceat cingulo lucis investiri, ac tres habere
Satellites, sicut and quatuor.
28. Fastidio turgescens
Gloria circumvallatur,
Ac triplice Satellite
Me procax imitatur.
29. Tum jussit formidandos
Cyclopes evocari,
Ob tot, tanta Mancipia,
Tot fulmina parari.
30. Dixit, bis pede pulsans,
Et flammas expiravit;
Hinc firmamentum trepidum,
Natura vacillavit.
Linea Aequinoctalis, ac Ecliptica.
31. Is juxta Aequatorem
In Cancro accumbebat,
Duobus istis ictibus
Dum Lineam findebat.
Haec in primo gradu, 23 gradus ac dimidium ab Aequatore distat, sicut and in
principio.
32. Quae mox quater sex gradus
Ad Boream micabat,
Pars altera contraria
Ad Austrum evolabat.
lineam Eclipticam in anno pertransit, and Planetae in Zodiaco semper moventur.
33. Eclipticam sic factam
Sol transit annuatim;
Ac patulum Zodiacum
Planetae circulatim.
34. Sed agite Magnates!
In arduis tam multis,
Alta mente perpendite,
Ecquid agendum vultis?
Constellationes antedictae ex stellis fixis constant.
35. Quid sistitis Heroes?
Ad arma properandum;
Nunquid opus est pluribus?
Nil damni formidandum.
Orion est Constellationum maxima, tempestates cogens.
36. Dixit. Et tunc immensus
Orion assurgebat,
Qui robore, vultu; voce
Mortales excedebat.
In Mense Novembris oritur, qui and Hebraice Chisleu dicitur a Chesil, quod est
nomen Orionis Hebraicum. Eboraci signum ascendens apud Astrologos.
37. Hybernam tempestatem
Is statim expiravit,
Cui similem persenserim
Quae Podagram creavit.
38. Dum Cancro insiderem
Is flando me turbare,
Qui viribus quit cominus
Vel Turmas triturare.
Londini signum ascendens.
39. Tum in Geminos migravi,
Ut frigus evitarem;
Ac scilicet ut tam Memet,
Quam alios curarem.
40. Certamini ceu acri
Is extitit paratus,
Hasta, scuto, ac gladio
Dum prodiit armatus.
Orionis Oration in Concilio.
41. Te Jovem appellamus,
Ait, vincti relligione,
De his malis quod statuis
Ad exequendum proni.
42. Saturnus, tardus, plumbeus,
Is mali machinator!
Mars igneus, fur strenuus,
Torosus gladiator!
Orion hic Saturnum Martemque multis gradibus subter Stellas fixas humiliores
narrat.
43. Cum parvi penderentur,
Adeone sunt elati?
Hos eminus despicimus
In altum elevati.
44. Et sic Heroes cuncti
Circumflui dixerunt,
Altitonantis qui Jovis
Imperio cesserunt.
45. Summi fuerunt Duces
i. e. Stellarum fixarum.
Hi cohortum stabilium,
Qui undique resistere
Commotibus Rebellium.
Ex Planetis, vel Stellis erraticis...
46. Sic Agmen struxit volans
Rebels ut sectetur,
Ex Venere, Luna, Hermete,
Ut per Signa venetur.
47. Hinc forsan Luna utrinque
Duo cornua induebat,
Nec cominus hanc Saturnus
Impune lacessebat.
tripliciter movetur, i. e. Tarde, Mediocriter, rapide.
48. Quam prius vidi tardam
Ceu opium sumpsisset,
Celeriter propellitur,
Quasi impetu movisset.
open Telescopii cornuta ad in cernitur.
49. Venus Lunae aemulatrix
Par telum conquisivit,
Et cum duobus cornibus
Terribilis prodivit.
50. Hanc Gentes ob splendorem
Audivi deperisse,
Jam tactu solo Venereo
Scio mill periisse.
Hoc luem Venercam respicit.
51. Quem Venus forte laesit,
Is facile curatur,
Sin disferat, exulcerat,
Ac aegre toleratur.
52. Mercurius bellum nescit,
Ast Jovi famulatur,
Praecipite movens pede
Dum dolos machinatur.
Hoc ad Mercurii sive Hydrargyri usum spectat in curatione Luis Venereae.
53. Dum cum Mercurio certant,
Vidi ora putruisse,
Gingivas item putridas
Madore foetuisse.
54. A Venere sauciati
Mercurio sanantur,
Ast irrito consilio,
A me saepe curantur.
Pavo, Sydus.
55. Vexillifer fit Pavo
Ad dictas Legiones;
Tot fert Lunas caeruleas
Quot Constellationes.
Leo, Sydus
56. Pro tuba vox Leonis
Ad praelium sonabat,
Constellationes Brutorum variae. Lupus. Equus. Aries. Taurus. Canis major.
Canis minor. Vrsa major. Vrsa minor. Draco. Serpens. Hircus. Lepus. Aquila.
Vultur. Corvus. Cignus. Columba. Grus. Pavo. Phoenix, Syd. Ara, Sydus.
Quam pecorum coelestium
Consensus augmentabat.
57. Lup. ululat, Eq. hinnit,
Ar. blacterat, Tau. mugit,
Canes latrant, Vrsae uncant,
Dra. rancat, Leo rugit.
58. Ser. sibilat, Hirc. mutit,
Lep. vagit, Aqui. clangit,
59. Vultur pulpat, Cor. crocitat,
Cig. drensat, Colum. plangit.
60. Grus gruit, Pa. pupillat,
Phoenice tum flagrante
61. In Ara, posse surgere
E cinere sperante.
O horrida confusio
Jam Coelos eversura!
Hinc est orta discordia
Aeternum duratura.
Non hastis aut balislis,
Sed fulgure certare,
Bombardae ne-queant aeque
Vel enses vulnerare.
64. Ad Bellum jam parati
Hi rabie furebant;
Nec quisquam que-at dicere
Quam acriter pugnabant.
Aries faciem designat.
65. Arietem Jup. intrans,
A front adoriebatur
Stantes Turmas, sat timidas,
Taurus.
Quas in Taurum sectatur.
66. Hic Aciem Rebellium
Vidit tumultuantem,
Quicquid libet cuiquam licet,
Pro Causa declarantem.
Inferi confoederasse finguntur cum Saturno and Mart. Oculus Tauri.
67. Hic Pluto, Proserpina,
Sic Cerberus, and Charon,
Cum Furiis and Harpyis,
Conscendunt Aldebaran.
68. Circumvolant, conclamant,
Sceleste blasphemantes,
Pro Tartaris se jam Coelis
Fructuros opinantes.
69. Basanis Tauri pingues
Una coagmentare,
Sicut and Idola.
Et vituli Nebatici
Cum Jove bellicare.
70. Sic Baal, Moloch, Rimmon,
Cum Bele and Dracone,
Ac plurimis ejus gregis,
Ashtaroth and Dagone.
Et dii Ethmici.
71. Oracula Ethnicorum,
Pan, Bacchus, and Priapus,
Dedunt loca coelestia
Sponsalia Deabus.
72. Inierant consilium,
Minas, caedes spirandi,
Vel bonum, verum, ac justum
E Coelis extirpandi.
73. Nunc Ordines Naturae
Stati pervertebantur;
Dum mendicantes culminant,
Magnates minorantur.
74. Non altum vel profundum
Jam poterat videri,
Sed prius and posterius,
Contraria misceri.
Varia accidentia Planetis attributa ab Astronomis.
75. Qui nunc oblique scandunt,
Mox in declive vadunt;
Sic fortes fiunt debiles,
Et exaltati cadunt.
Jupiter fulminat.
76. Hinc Jupiter commotus
Horridius tonabat,
Ac fulmina per Aethera
Stupendius vibrabat.
77. En Taurum jam Coelestem
Catervis obvallatum!
Intus, extra, circumcirca,
Fulgetris laceratum.
Tauri posticae parts in Globo non depinguntur; unicus etiam notatur Oculus,
Aldebaran dictus, Stella admodum coruscans de natura Martis.
78. Hunc vidi debacchantem
Posticis mutilatum,
Plaga factum monoculum,
Ibidemque inflammatum.
79. Flammas ejaculatur
Jam quodlibet Astrorum,
Canis major, i.e. Sirius omnium Stellarum fixarum maxima calores torridos
solet excitare; unde Dies Caniculares.
Canis licet plus praestitit
Quam quodvis caeterorum.
80. Tot Sirius exortus
Fulgetris enitere,
Ut Inferos retrogrados
Hinc liceat videre.
Cerberus Canis Tartari triceps
81. Cum Cerbero contendens
Quem pessime ferebat,
Fregit ossa sua singula,
Ne calva remanebat.
82. Ab hoc Tauri Basanis
In frustula confracti;
A Cane utri-que Vituli
Ceu in pulverem redacti.
83. Rebellibus fit dirum
Certamen, non ferendum;
Nec inde stant, quin terga dant,
De quo nunc est dicendum.
84. Daemonia ad Gehennam,
Ac Furiae amandantur;
Ad Acheron-ta sic Charon,
Harpyiae lacerantur.
Christo nato aiunt Pana obmutuisse.
85. Idola ad nil redacta,
Obmutuit Pan prorsus;
Draco crepat, ruit Priap.
Bacchus vino submersus.
86. Vincuntur jam Rebels,
Ac Turmae foederatae;
Pleiades, Syd. in humero Tauri.
Ob istam rem mirabilem
Sunt Pleiades formatae:
87. Ut sint futuris Seclis
Excellens Monumentum,
Quibus visis fac oderis
Rebellandi commentum.
Hyades, Sydus in facie Tauri pluvias ferens.
88. Sic Hyades paravit,
Ut celso e Palatio
Purgent coenum quod foetidum
Liquit Abominatio.
Planetae Moventur secundum numerum Signorum Orientem versus motu quotidiano.
89. Rebels jam sectemur
Per Signa fugientes;
Si quid cernunt id metuunt,
Ceu larvam intuentes.
90. Dum praelio extinguntur
Plus ira excanduerunt,
Ad terendum Zodiacum,
Ni Jovem metuerunt.
Phaethon Phoebi filius ex Clymene, qui cum a Patre impetrasset, ut uno die
currus sui habenas sibi regendas permitteret, ab aurigandi imperitia toto Coelo
errans, mundum comburebat; quamobrem a Jove sulmine e curru excussus in Padum
fluvium decidit. Virgo. Spica Virginis, Stella secundae magnitudinis.
91. De Phaethonte fictum
Ab his putares factum,
Usturis Spicam Virginis,
Ut sit de Coelis actum.
92. Id Jupiter praevenit
Eridanus fluvius, Sydus.
Eridanum tollendo,
Ejus undis perpetuis
Flagramen extinguendo.
Libra.
93. In Libram nunc sugati
Perpendunt diligenter,
Ob vilius id facinus,
Cui fato destinentur.
Scorpio, Secreta respicit.
94. In Scorpium fugerunt,
Ubi Scena jam mutatur;
Cum fervidum Cordolium
Aliorsum transferatur.
Cupido Deus amoris.
Cupido 95. nam vexatus
Has caedes intuendo,
Sistit dira mox jurgia,
In jocum convertendo.
Sagittarius. Telum, sive Sagitta, Syd. Cor Scorpionis, Stella secundae
maguitudinis de natura and.
96. in Sagittario sedens
Is incantato Telo
Transfixit Scor-pionis Cor.
Ut fulgeat in Coelo.
97. Infantuli qua art
Sub Scorpione nati
Libidini sunt dediti,
Plus aliis dicati.
Venus fascinata est.
98. Hic Venus fugientes
Vidit, sed fraudulenter;
Ipsa innocens Martem sequens
Capta est incontinenter.
Venus in Scorpione domo Martis nocturna..
99. Prehensam domi suae
Humano tractat more;
Ut conjungantur properant
Plus solito fervore.
Vulcanus Veneris maritus.
100. Vulcane jam caveto,
In te nam machinantur,
Mercurius sascinatus est.
Praeproperes quia jam Hermes
Oggannit petulanter.
Mercurius inter Deos Orator habitus est. Non insulse (inquit Lactantius)
quidam Poeta Triumphum Cupidinis scripsit, quem non modo potentissimum deorum,
sed and Victorem facit. Cap. xi. de falsa Rel -- Sic apud Athenaeum. lib.
xiiij. (...) dicitur (...) i. e. Deorum hominumque Imperator.
101. E celsiori loco
Is coetui dicebat,
Prae omnibus Numinibus
Cupidinem ferebat.
102. Cum reti admirando
Vulcani rete.
Vulcanus sestinavit,
Improvisos Amasios
Quo mox illaqueavit.
est Planeta rubicundi coloris, autem pallidi, neque enim haec apparet nisi
mane ac vesperi.
103. Erubuit Mars ira,
Haec metu pallescebat,
Ac postea nocte sera
Vagari non audebat.
104. Sic Jupiter cantatus
Cantatus. Is Danaen violaturus aureos nummos in sinum ejus infudit largiter.
De re Jovis cum Alcumena, vide Plautum in Amphitryone. Perseus Jovis ac Danaes
filius Medusam Gorgona detruncavit. Hercules Jovis and Alcumenae filius
Draconem trucidavit.
Egregie scortatur,
Dum Danae sub specie
Imbris auri stupratur.
105. Mox deperit Alcmenam
Blanditiis quam vicit;
Miranda vis Cupidinis,
Si Plautus vera dicit.
106. Ex illa natus Perseus
Medusam qui truncavit;
Ast Hercules ex hac (scies)
Draconem trucidavit.
107. Hos ambos ob res gestas
Quas Veteres mirari,
Ad Sydera coelestia
Jubebat elevari.
Perseus, Sydus, Cap. Medu. Syd. Hercules, Syd. Draco, Sydus. Saturnus delirus.
108. Perfrigidus Saturnus
A se quantum mutatus!
Prius amens, nunc vero amans,
At plane fascinatus.
ad applicat.
109. Sollicitat jam Lunam
Incoeptans adulari,
Tam nitidam, ac tam bellam
Nequit non admirari.
Planetarum tardissimus, vero celerlter movetur. Ille non nisi triginta annis
cuncta Zodiaci signa pervadit. Haec autem diebus 28. Ille senium denotat; atque
hi duo Planetae Tropicis inter se situ oppositis praeesse dicuntur.
109. Cui Luna respondebat,
Se tardum non morari,
Nec huic Senem amabilem,
Se Hosti adversari.
110. Rivalem Regni nolle,
Nec Amoris admittebat,
Retrogradus.
Deliro hinc retrogrado
Sua cornua tendebat.
ad applicat motu celeri.
111. Haec rapide movetur
Ad coitum cum Sole,
Quo redditur splendidior
Hac foeminina prole.
112. Ast heu! desideratur
Qui Regnum possideret,
Sol. Astrorum Rex.
Ut vere Rex, Coelorum grex
Cui subjici deberet.
Linea Aequinoctialis and Ecliptica. Arca Nohae, Syd.
113. Nam Lineas linquendo
Vtrasque Sol latebat,
Arca Nohae, hinc tenebrae
Ad tempus quo licebat --
Duodecim Zodiaci Signa pervadit 12 annorum spatio.
114. Ut Jupiter Coelorum
Signa bis sex percurrrat,
Rebels and exterminet,
A quibus pulsus erat.
115. Plures videbam Stellas
Huc illuc scintillantes,
Tam fulgure, quam fulmine
Pro Sole dimicantes.
Cauda-Draconis est pars Coeli in Nativitatibus admodum infortunata.
Quarum conatus Cauda-
Draconis frustrabatur,
Dum Pars-Fortunae miserae
A plurimis culpatur.
Pars fortunae queat esse bona vel mala respectu loci in quo reperitur. Boots,
Sydus. Arctus, i.e. Vrsa Major, Syd. Galaxia, i. e. Via lactea, Syd.
116. Ex Aquilone tandem
Boots assurgebat,
Aciem minorum Luminum
Ducendo spem praebebat.
117. Ab Arcto, Galaxia
Heliopolin adivit,
Caudam-draconis illico
Is penitus attrivit.
118. Hinc Radii Solares
Paulatim effulsere,
Ac nebulae pestiferae
Ad vota vanuere.
Linea Horizontalis.
119. Ex Horizonte lucet;
Rebels stupuerunt,
Ac singuli malevoli
Attoniti steterunt.
120. St! Musica Sphaerarum!
Lyra, Sydus.
Apollo tangit Lyram;
Pangunt Aves vere hilares,
Et quisque ponit iram.
Pisces.
121. Apollini conformis
Pisciculus saltabat;
Delphin, Syd. Balaena, Sydus.
Delphin ad Tonum Gallicum,
Balaena triumphabat.
Linea Meridionalis. Corona Septentrionalis, Syd.
122. Sol culminans in Coelis
Coronam sibi tollit,
Nullus (jubet) contenderet,
Qui displicere nollet.
123. Patrum Conscripta firmat,
Suum cuique stabilivit;
Jovis partas Victorias
Trophaeaque sancivit.
124. Astris dat suos Posts,
Planetis ac movere;
Mazaroth, i. e. 12 Signa Zodiaci.
Eccentrice non currere
Nec Mazaroth audere.
Hemispheria 2. Zonae 5. Poli 2. Paralleli.
125. Sic Hemispheria junxit,
Ac Zonas temperavit,
Mundi Polos oppositos
Parallelis ligavit.
126. Atque hoc Stellarum bellum
Crater, Sydus. Trinus est aspecuts amicitiae. Triangulum, Sydus.
Cratere jam peractum;
In Trino stant dum compotant,
Triangulum sic factum.
127. Qui fervide luctarant
Ceu Hector bellicantes,
Jam corona-bant pocula,
Jucunde compotantes.
Inter and collocatur tam respectu Orbium quam Domorum.
128. Ad pacem confirmandam
Maligni separentur,
(Jussit) Jove interstite,
Ne malum machinentur.
Medusam bibere. Lex poculorum apud exteros, qua sancitur, quoties aliquis e
Compotoribus captata Sociorum ridicula and temulenta gesticulatione Medusam
subito increpitaverit, ut omnes in eodem statu, quasi in Saxa obriguerint fixi
permaneant, dum ille prolongato ex industria haustu se proluens, caeteros
interea toti Sodalitio propinat deridendos. Historiam Medusae inde recipient,
quam ob insignem pulchritudinem, praecipue ob crines aureos nitide crispatos,
Neptunum deperisse aiunt, and in Minervae Templo compressisse. Hujus vero
capillos irata Dea in angues mutabat, hoc superaddito incantamento, ut
quicunque eam inspicerent in Lapides statim converterentur. Ejus autem caput a
Perseo antedicto, Jovis ac Danaes Filio detruncatum, cum eo inter Sydera
collocatur.
129. Qui mox bibens Medusam
Instituebat ritum,
Ut immota stent Sydera,
Nec variarent stium.
Hoc respicit Honorem a Serenissimo Rege Albemarliae Duci collatum, and
Stellam, qua Equitum Nobilissimorum summi Ordinis aurati Periscelidis
decorantur pallia, cui proprie Jovis Epitheton addi queat, si ita Dignissimis
Armorum Regibus videretur congruum.
130. Fidelibus Athletis
Dat Tesseras Favoris;
Stellam Jovis dignissimis
Insigne vult Honoris.
131. Diploma Jam Regale
Profert Sacrata mente,
Tam Veniae quam Amnestiae,
Pro quovis Delinquente.
132. Nec sane hos Tumultus
Nec Bella recitarem,
Ni eximiam Clementiam
Regis ut decantarem.
133. Jam salva vestra pace
Finivi Cantilenam;
Ignoscite, si quid culpae,
Sic amovebo poenam.
134. In his Astronomorum
Silentio favete;
Haec ratio, solummodo
Ego vidi,
Valete.
'ASTPOAIA.
1. (...),
(...),
(...)
(...).
2. (...)
(...),
(...)
(...).
3. (...)!
(...),
(...),
(...).
(...).
4. (...)
(...),
(...)
(...).
5. (...)
(...),
(...)
(...).
(...).
6. (...)
(...)
(...)
(...).
7. (...)
(...)
(...)
(...).
8. (...)
(...)!
(...);
(...).
9. (...)
(...),
(...),
(...).
10. (...).

(...),
(...),
(...).
11. (...)
(...),
(...)
(...).
(...).
12. (...)
(...),
(...),
(...).
13. (...)
(...),
(...),
(...).
(...)..
14. (...)
(...),
(...)
(...).
15. (...)
(...),
(...)
(...).
16. (...)
(...),
(...)
(...)
17. (...)
(...),
(...),
(...).
18. (...)
(...).
(...)
(...)
19. (...),
(...)
(...),
(...).
20. (...)
(...),
(...)
(...).
(...).
21. (...)
(...),
(...)
(...).
22. (...),
(...),
(...),
(...).
(...).
23. (...)
(...),
(...),
(...).
24. (...)
(...),
(...)
(...).
25. (...),
(...),
(...),
(...).
26. (...)
(...),
(...)
(...).
27. (...),
(...),
(...)
(...).
28. (...)
(...),
(...)
(...).
29. (...)
(...),
(...)
(...).
30. (...),
(...),
(...),
(...).
31. (...)
(...),
(...)
(...).
32. (...)
(...),
(...)
(...).
33. (...)
(...),
(...)
(...).
34. (...),
(...),
(...),
(...).
35 (...),
(...),
(...),
(...).
(...).
36. (...)
(...),
(...),
(...),
37. (...),
(...),
(...)
(...).
38. (...)
(...),
(...)
(...),
39. (...)
(...),
(...),
(...).
40. (...)
(...),
(...),
(...).
(...)
41. (...),
(...),
(...)
(...).
42. (...),
(...):
(...),
(...).
43. (...)
(...),
(...),
(...).
44. (...)
(...),
(...)
(...).
45. (...)
(...),
(...)
(...).
46. (...)
(...)
(...)
(...).
47. (...)
(...),
(...)
(...).
48. (...)
(...),
(...),
(...).
(...)
49. (...)
(...),
(...)
(...).
50. (...)
(...),
(...)
(...).
51. (...)
(...)
(...)
(...).
(...)
52. (...)
(...).
(...),
(...).
53. (...)
(...),
(...)
(...).
54. (...)
(...),
(...),
(...).
55. (...)
(...),
(...)
(...).

56. (...)
(...),
(...)
(...).
57. (...),
(...),
(...),
(...).
58. (...),
(...),
(...),
(...).
58. (...),
(...),
(...),
(...).
59. (...)
(...),
(...),
(...).
60. (...)
(...),
(...)
(...).
61. (...)
(...),
(...)
(...).
62. (...)
(...)!
(...)
(...).
63. (...),
(...),
(...)
(...).
64. (...)
(...),
(...)
(...).
65. (...)

(...),
.
(...),
(...).
66. (...)
(...),
(...),
(...).
(...)
67. (...),
(...),
(...),
(...).
68. (...)
(...),
(...)
(...).
69. (...)
(...)
(...),
(...)
(...).
70. (...),
(...),
(...),
(...).
71. (...),
(...),
(...)
(...).
72. (...)
(...),
(...)
(...).
73. (...),
(...),
(...),
(...).
74. (...)!
(...),
(...),
(...).
75. (...)
(...),
(...),
(...).
76. (...)
(...),
(...)
(...).
77. (...)
(...),
(...),
(...).
78. (...)
(...),
(...),
(...).
79. (...)
(...),
(...)
(...).
80. (...)
(...),
(...)
(...).
81. (...)
(...),
(...)
(...).
82. (...)
(...),
(...)
(...).
83. (...)
(...),
(...)
(...).
84. (...)
(...),
(...),
(...).
85. (...),
(...),
(...)
(...).
86. (...),
(...),
(...)
(...).
87. (...)
(...),
(...)
(...).
88. (...)
(...),
(...)
(...).
89. (...),
(...),
(...),
(...).
90. (...),
(...),
(...),
(...).
91. (...)

(...)
(...)
(...).
92. (...)
(...),
(...)
(...).

93. (...)
(...),
(...)
(...).

94. (...),
(...)
(...)
(...).
(...).
95. (...)
(...),
(...),
(...).

96. (...)
(...)
(...)
(...).
97. (...)
(...),
(...)
(...).
98. (...)
(...),
(...)
(...).
99. (...)
(...),
(...)
(...).
(...).
100. (...),
(...),
(...),
(...).
101. (...)
(...),
(...)
(...).
102. (...),
(...),
(...)
(...).
103. (...)
(...),
(...)
(...).
104. (...)
(...),
(...)
(...).
105. (...),
(...),
(...),
(...).
106. (...)
(...),
(...)
(...).
107. (...)
(...)
(...),
(...).
108. (...)
(...),
(...)
(...).
109. (...)
(...),
(...)
(...).
109. (...)
(...),
(...)
(...).
110. (...)
(...),
(...)
(...).
111. (...)
(...), (...).

(...)
(...).
112. (...)
(...),
(...)
(...).
113. (...)
(...),
(...)
(...).
114. (...)
(...),
(...)
(...).
115. (...)
(...),
(...)
(...).
(...).
115. (...)
(...), (...).

(...)
(...).
116. (...)
(...),
(...)
(...).
117. (...)
(...),
(...),
(...).
118. (...)
(...),
(...)
(...).
119. (...),
(...),
(...)
(...).
120. (...)!
(...),
(...),
(...).
121. (...)

(...),
(...)
(...).
122. (...)
(...),
(...)
(...).
123. (...),
(...),
(...)
(...).
124. (...),
(...),
(...)
(...).
125. (...),
(...),
(...)
(...).
126. (...)
(...),
(...)
(...).
127. (...)
(...)
(...),
(...).
128. (...)
(...)
(...),
(...).
129. (...)
(...),
(...),
(...).
130. (...)
(...)
(...)
(...).
131. (...)
(...),
(...)
(...).
132. (...),
(...)
(...),
(...).
133. (...)
(...),
(...),
(...).
134. (...)
(...),
(...),
(...)
(...)
Saeviente alio Paroxysmo sic cecini.
Tollere nodosam nescit Medicina Podagram.
TOllere Subjectum circa quod Filius Artis
Versatur, normis Ars vetat ipsa suis.
De Morbis tractans Medicina, (...) esser,
Illorum si quos tolleret art sua.
Quin curat, Causas librans, Symptomata scindens,
Donec mors veniens straverit Artis opus.
Unicuique malo bona fert Medicamina Chiron,
Atque malo nodo par malus est cuneus.
Nodos dissolvens, dicar curare Podagram,
Si brevior fiat, sit licet usque redux.
Mox ergo efficiam ne sit tam longa Podagra,
Quod praestare tamen non Medicina docer.
En quantum e medio dirae jam tollo Podagrae!
Ut gratum Arthriticis fecero, sit Podagra.
At si Patrono Diodorus sostra merenti
Non dederit, faciam ut longa Chiragra siet.
Ejus and articulis nodos infigere cogar,
Sentiat ut poenas se meruisse graves.
Sors sat digna sui, digitis qui semper aduncis
Era sibi cumulat, nilque rependit ali.
(...).
(...)
(...).
(...),
(...).
(...),
(...).
(...)
(...).
(...),
(...).
(...),
(...).
(...),
(...).
(...),
(...).
(...),
(...).
(...)
(...).
Books formerly set forth by this Author.
1. POpular Errors in Physic: or a Translation of Dr. Primrose De Vulgi
Erroribus in Medicina. Printed for Mr Bourn at the South-entrance into the
Royal Exchange. price 2 s. 6 d..

2. Scarbrough Spaw. The First Edition Printed at London for Mr Passenger at
the Three Bibles on London Bridge, 1660. The Second Edition Printed at York,
1667. price 1 s.

3. An Answer to Dr Sympson about Scarbrough Spaw: with a Vindication of the
Galenical Practice of Physic from the Cavils of some little Chemists, and a
Reconciliation betwixt that and the Chemical. Printed at London for Mr Martyn
at the Bell in St Paul's Churchyard, and there sold, 1669. pr. 1 s. 6 d.

4. An Answer to Dr Tonstal about Scarbrough Spaw: wherein is reported the rise
and growth of the Art of Physic, etc. Sold at the Angel in Cornhil, 1672.
price 1 s.

5. Gout-Raptures:(...). The First Edition Printed at Cambridge, 1677.

6. Fons Scarburgensis. Sive Tractatus de omnis Aquarum generis Origin ac Usu.
Item dissertationes variae tam Philosophicae quam Medicinales. 1678. Sold by Mr
Simmons at the Princes Arms in Ludgate Street. price 1 s. 6 d..


