THE Woman turned Bully. A COMEDY. Acted at the Duke's Theater.

Hanc veniam petimus Damusque. Licensed, July the 5th 1675. Roger L'Estrange.

LONDON: Printed by I. C. for T. Dring, at the Harrow at the corner of
Chancery Lane in Fleet Street. 1675.

The Persons represented.
TRUMAN, A young Gentleman of the Temple, possessed of an Estate, and lives
handsomely. GOODFEILD, His Friend, newly come to Town. DOCKET, An ancient
Attorney, a very Lawdriver. TRUPENNY, Madam Goodfeilds Country-Steward, an old
formal Coxcomb. DASHWEL, Docket's Clerk, like his Master. SPRUCE, Another Clerk
to Docket, a lively fellow. Madam GOODFEILD, A rich Country-Widow, who drinks
and takes Tobacco, and cannot speak a word out of the Country-Element: she hates
the Town; but comes up about an immergent Law-affair. BFTTY GOODFEILD, An aerie
young Lady her Daughter, come up to London after her Mother, in man's Apparel.
She personates a Town-Gallant, and discourses out of Plays. FRANK, Her Maid, in
the like Disguize. LOVEAL, The Widows woman, a stale Maid, who longs for a
Husband: very fond. LUCIA, A young Lady, Niece and Ward to Docket, Her MAID.
TWO BOYS.
SCENE, London.

PROLOGUE.
So ill success have Poets now adays,
That shortly none will dare to write you Plays.
Dramatick Wit is ominous of late;
The little Flash does still prognosticate
A Paper-war, or a more scurvie Fate.
And (like a graceless Child) Heroic Rattle
Is realliz'd, and turned the Poets Battle.
To Avoid such fears, we shall present to day
An innocent and unprovoking Play:
And that is his comfort, The Author bid me say.
It Is plain, well meant; hardly a Song or Dance,
Scene, nor Machine, its Credit to advance.
Yo've nothing here of such prodigious strains,
To swell your Envy greater than his Pains.
But being of English growth, we have cause to fear,
Against homebred Wit their censure too severe,
Who still usurp a Power to disapprove
What the sick Fancy cannot digest, or Love.
Persist -- But Letchers thus, when they decline,
Borrow both Heat and Love from sparkling Wine.
And though poor Chloris thinks their Love's her Prize,
It Is Burgundy becomes her Sacrifice.
While healthful Lovers vigorously improve
With Native Food and heat th'Entrigues of Love.
The WOMAN turned BULLY.
ACT I.
SCENE I.
The Temple.
Truman, Goodfeild, Boy. True. HOnest Ned Goodfeild, in faith I Am as glad to see
thee as any man living. Once more thou art welcome to London. But, what good
Star directed thee to my Chamber?


Good. Marry, that did the good Porter: he showed me the Staircase; and when I
mounted, the first I happened to meet was your Boy. Gad, Jack, thou live here
a delicate life; these are better Lodgings than thou had at the College.


True. Aye, faith, and somewhat better Company. But what a Devil makes thee
tarry thus long at Cambridge? Sure thou art graduated up to the Ears by this
time. Do thou intend for the Pulpit, or by the way of Physic, will thou cure
thy friends of all Diseases? --


Good. No more of that, good Jack; I have a Mother alive, who till I come to
age (of which I lack not many weeks) is also my Guardian. She is a good Soul
(as Sancho said of his Wife) but of a downright Country-principle. She hates
your City here, and all that belongs to it. Look ye, Jack; when you left the
College, I would have followed you with all my heart, but my Mother very
gravely, and like a Mother, writ me her Commands, and I think, sent one of her
servants to acquaint me, that I must still continue my Studies where I was: for
to come into the Country, and enter into Commission of the Peace, I was yet too
young; and to go to the Inns a Court she would never think on it, for that was
the ready way to be undone, London being the very sink of all Debauchery.


True. Hold there: Let me view thee well. Do thou come from the University,
and charge us with Debauchery? O tempora! O mores! Belike then you made this
Voyage without your Mothers knowledge?


Good. Aye.


True. Why there is a dutiful Son. Art not thou ashamed, Ned?


Good. For what? for coming to Town without her leave?


True. No, Ned, for blaming the poor Town, for a lewd ill-manner'd Town, or as
your Mother thinks it, a sink of Perdition. I tell thee, Ned, thou art quite
beside the Cushion. Mind what I say: Your University-men no sooner come
hither, but they forget their dear Art of Drinking. And for a Clap, or so, many
are so far from getting it here, that they bring it with em. -- Boy, see who
knocks.


(Knocking. Boy. Sir, here is Mr. Docket's Clerk has a Message from his Master,
he says, and desires you would please to dispatch him.


True. Dispatch him? why how long has he waited?


Boy. Not at all, Sir; but you know he is so full of his Lawterms, he cannot
speak without 'em.


True. Bid him enter.


Boy. (at the door) Mr. Dashwel, you may enter.


Enter Dashwel. Dash. Sir, I humbly thank ye. May it please you, Mr. Truman, my
Master desires to speak with you some time this afternoon.


True. How does he do?


Dash. Very well, and in good practice, I thank God, Sir.


True. I Am glad on it. Tell your Master, Sir, I will not fail to wait on him
about three a clock.


Dash. By no means, Sir, for then he will be very busy in examining a special
Plea in Trover, which will hold him at least half an hour.


True. Why then I Will be with him at five.


Dash. That cannot be, Sir, for then he will be gone out to the Walks to meet his
Brother Nuper, and sign Judgment betwixt Wiseman and Spendal: It Is a 2000 l.
Action, and cannot be put off.


True. No? What a Devil -- why then tell him I Will not fail to come as soon as
I Have dined, 'twixt one and two a clock.


Dash. Aye, Sir, I think that will do very well. Fare you well, Sir.


True. Godb'w'ye Mr. Dashwel.


( Dashwel turns again. Dash. Oh Lord! Sir, I had almost forgot; you must not
come then, for then there will be with him a certain Country-Lady, one Madam
Goodfeild, who comes about business; and you must not come then by any means.


Good. Madam Goodfeild, say you friend?


Dash. Yes, Sir, of Darbyshire.


Good. Do You know her business?


Dash. To that, Sir, I answer Ignoramus: I can say little --


True. To the purpose, I Am sure. --


Dash. Her Servant, one Mr. Trupenny, was with my Master this morning, to
desire an Imparlance after Dinner, and then she will open her Case. --


True. Mr. Dashwel, when shall I come to your Master? be brief.


Dash. Even when you please, Sir.


True. Well then, I Will come a little before three, e're he goes upon his Plea;
and that will be a good time.


Dash. Aye, Sir, a very good time: Your Servant Sir, your Servant Gentlemen.

Turning Dashwel to the door, and thrusting him forwards. Exit Dashwel.
Good. My Mother in Town! this amazes me.


True. Suspend thy wonder a little, Ned; I Will know all if possible, when I go to
Dockets.


Good. In the mean time, what a Devil is this Docket, and this formal Coxcomb
his man, that comes with such a damned Message?


True. It Is worth your enquiry indeed, for they are two as notable Creatures as
e're were showed at Bartholomew-Fair. The man you have seen already, and should
you see him a year together, you would see neither more nor less in him; yet
people of his Tribe say he is a good Clerk (as they phrase it.) He Is one that
manages his Masters Practice so assiduously, that he can do nothing else -- But
a pox on him, what do I spend so many words of such an Owl?


Good. Then for the Master.


True. Aye, the Master. There Is a rare plece of flesh for ye -- never was Master
and Man so proportioned to one another. You have heard part of the man's
Character already; and, If the man such dullness have -- you know the old Rhyme
in the Arcadia. To be brief, (for I hate to discourse of such unpleasant
subjects) He is a pure downright Attorney, with as little mixture of Gentleman
or Scholar as possible can be imagined to one who lives in London, the Staple
of refined converse. To this I must add, he is Old and Rich.


Good. In The name of Wonder, how came you acquainted with such things as these?
Is this the refined Converse, you talk of?


True. Oh, Ned! thereby hangs a tale. You must know then, in an evil hour, I owe
him 6000 l. which my Father heretofore borrowed, partly to marry a Daughter,
and partly on other occasions: For this Debt he mortgaged five hundred a year,
which Mortgage has been now forfeited about four year, and he in the Devils
name, has entered. Since my Father's death, Ned, I have been very sensible of
this loss, it being (betwixt you and I) the best half of my Estate. In fine, I
have been several times with him to take in this Mortgage, and get him to
release the Estate. I have offered him, to that end, to pay down 3000 l. with
the Interest due, and a Judgment from my self and two substantial Citizens, for
the other three.


Good. And so he replies that you offer him to his loss, and that he has eleven
Points of the Law against ye; does he not?


True. Much to that purpose; but in his Gibberish, he tells me, Null tort null
disseisin, I must not complain of wrong, he has but what the Law gives him, and
Executio Iuris non habet Injuriam: And this is all I could ever get from him,
till yesterday, and then we were in somewhat more complaisant terms. He sends
for me now, I am confident, about this business.


Good. Well, is this all you can tell me of him?


True. No.


Good. Proceed.


True. He has a pretty Niece, that I must bring you acquainted with.


Good. Me! Gad Jack, you have made such a fine Character of him, I have no
ambition to know any of the Breed.


True. You mistake me, Ned Goodfeild; she is no ways a kin to the dis-ingenuity
of her Uncle. Believe me, Friend, she is both Young, Pretty, of a good Humor,
and besides a Fortune.


Good. And with all these good Qualities, why do not you strike her up, and by
that means pay off your Mortgage?


True. Not so fast: The Affair is less feazable to me than any man, for several
reasons that I know. Her Father dying, left this his only Daughter, and 6000
l. to the management of his Wives Brother, this Docket, who he appointed her
Guardian, with this Proviso in his Will, that if she married without her said
Guardian's consent, then to forfeit the said sum intended for her Portion, and
that her Uncle might dispose of it as he thought fit. Her Uncle, a covetous
Jew, has swallowed all this Estate already in imagination, intending never to
marry her with his consent: To that end, confines her (while with him in
London) constantly to her Chamber, never suffering her to see the open air,
unless once or twice a fortnight in the Temple or Lincolns-Inn-Gardens; and
that too, with himself or some such trusty Governor.


Good. These are Impediments, I confess Jack, especially to a Debtor.


True. This is not all. The damned dull course of life her Uncle has imposed
upon her, has rendered both her discourse and behavior very reserved, or to say
true, a little heavy; which suits not at all with my fancy; for I must have my
Mistress, Ned, full of Air and Gayety to the utmost extent.


Good. Faith, then I Have a Sister will fit thee to a hair.


True. Where is she, Ned?


Good. Ah Pox, she is in Darby-shire.


True. That Is a great way off. But how do you know she is not come up with your
Mother?


Good. Oh, it can never enter into my thoughts: She Will sooner send her to the
Nunnery at Ghent, than bring her hither. She believes this Town spoils all
young men that come to it; but for women, she is confident the very air of
London meets 'em, and debauches 'em at Highate. Hang me if I can comprehend
what a Devil brings my Mother her self up: it must be some extraordinary
occasion. She has not made such a Voyage, to my knowledge, this twenty years.


True. Well, we shall know all when I have been at Dockets. In the mean time,
Ned, thou shall dine with me: I Will acquaint thee with the humor of the
Eating-houses. Boy, give me my Sword, and follow me.


Exeunt. SCENE II.
The Street.
Enter Betty Goodfeild, and Franck her Maid, both in man's Apparel. B. Good.
NOw, Franck, that we are arrived at London, and have luckily taken Lodgings
near my Mother, our first care must be, to conceal our Disguize; to that end,
be sure you never speak to me otherwise than by the name of Sir: 'ware tripping.


Fran. Leave that to me, Sir; I was the first that thought of this Adventure,
and if I cannot manage it, may I never live to be married, and that is no small
Curse. I Will be so far from betraying the secret in public, that even in
private, when we are alone, you shall pass with me for what you seem.


B. Good. My next endeavors must be, how to suit my own behavior to what I
intend, a Town-Gallant. In this, Franck, you must instruct me, for you have
known the Town before you came to my service.


Fran. True. First then, have you seen any of our new Plays?


B. Good. Yes, I have read 'em all as they came out in Print.


Fran. Good: that will be a great help. For look ye, Sir, just as some raw
Poets borrow their Scenes from the Fop-company they frequent, in the same
manner, many raw Gallants square their behavior to their Fop-scenes. What else
makes these sort of Phrases so common, Dear heart -- You understand me -- Let
me die -- And all that --


B. Good. For my own part, I don't know whether people in London talk thus or
no; but if you would have me discourse out of Plays, let me alone.


Fran. Besides this, you must be sure to be very confident, or if you please,
impudent in all your actions: That Is the prime Rule of Converse.


B. Good. Gad take me, I cannot promise very much in that particular, but I Will
endeavor.


Fran. Gad take me! Oh, fie, fie, I Am ashamed to hear ye; why that is an Oath
for a Country-Schoolmaster: You must learn to swear more like a Gentleman, or
you will spoil a Gallant.


B. Good. Why prithee, how swears a Gentleman? does not a Cobbler swear as well?


Fran. No, Sir, a Cobbler swears at the second hand. To swear like a Gentleman,
is to swear in a new Phrase, and with a full mouth. I know a Lady near the
place where I was born, that never encouraged her Children with Apples or
Sugar-plums, but when they had invented some handsome new Oath, as, By my
Mothers Maidenhead, or, By my Fathers dapple Mare; or rather than none at all,
a Rapper would content her, so that it came in, in a right place, and had a
good Emphasis. I have seen her little Imps of four or five years old swear as
heartily for a Breakfast, as e're I heard our Chaplain pray.


B. Good. But may not a man hope for an indifferent good Behavior without such
blunt downright Profaneness?


Fran. If you converse only with Ladies, indeed, why you may do pretty well if
you have often, Gad Madam, and, As I hope to live Madam, and the like. But
e'faith Sir, if you have to do with a Coachman or a Mechanic, you must be at
it with, Damn me ye Son of a Tinker, or you will do no good.


B. Good. Why Son of a Tinker?


Fran. Oh Sir, that is a new Phrase, and much more significant, than Son of a
Whore: Alas, that is grown so common, as it is become a term of indearment, only
to be used to Friends and Familiars; as what is more usual, than Dear Son of a
Whore, how I love thee! No body's ashamed of Son of a Whore, but a Son of a
Tinker is not company for a Footboy. -- Then young Gentleman, can you Curse
well?


B. Good. Faith, Franck, I doubt, not.


Fran. Why there is it; yet you may perhaps when you're moved. But above all,
have a care when any one offends you, not to cry A Pox take him, or The Devil
take him, for these are (as I said before) Terms of Friendship. Is there any
thing more ready, than A Pox take thee Jack, where have thou been all this
while? and for the other business, it is so innocent, we use it of our selves;
as, The Devil take me, Sir, that is a good Jest.


B. Good. It Is very true.


Fran. Therefore I think a more terrible way of Execration would be to say of
your Enemy, May he never see his Mistriss's Eyes again; or May his Tailor never
trust him: But this, Sir, I leave to your Discretion.


B. Good. These are general Rules fit for all Companies and places. Now for my
particular daily Exercise.


Fran. That, Sir, must be divided betwixt Drinking --


B. Good. I Am naught at that Weapon --


Fran. Not so good as your Mother, I confess; -- but I say you must spend the
day in Drinking, Gaming, and Wenching: but in this last affair, you must not
enter too far, for a reason that I know.


B. Good. If I do, the Devil's in me. But prithee Frank, how must I spend the
morning, which some call the sober part of the day?


Fran. Why there is your mistake: The morning is part of the night. A true
Gallant should never wake 'till eleven, nor be dressed 'till twelve at soonest.


B. Good. Then what is to be done in the night?


Fran. For the night, Sir, you must be sure never to go home 'till toward one;
then in your way as you go, you must take occasion to beat two or three
Watchmen, and break all the Windows that dare oppose ye.


B. Good. This is something harsh, methinks, for a Learner: then to break
windows shows too much like Confederacy with the Glasiers: and for a Gentleman
to correspond with Mechanics, is, I fancy, very odious.


Fran. No matter what you fancy. There is, I confess, a milder way of
Night-adventures; and that is, to pass the Watch, give 'em a shilling, abuse
the Constable in clean Language, for which he will thank ye: and instead of
breaking windows, to serenade your Mistress. --


B. Good. No more. I Will serenade my Mother, this very night. Let it be your
care to provide Music; and for a Song or so, you can perform it as well as any
Shepherdess in London.


Fran. Leave that to me, Sir: In the mean time look ye who comes yonder, to
exercise your Courtship. 'Foregad, Mrs. Loveal, my old Lady's Woman, the
easiest Quarry in the world to enter a young beginner. Go pick her up, and when
you have tired that humor pretty well, I Will cross the way and meet you full
in the mouth, and so give you occasion to drop her.


( Fran. retires to a distance. Enter Loveal. B. Good. Sweet Lady, your humble
Servant.


Lov. O Lord, Sir, I Am in great haste.


B. Good. Nay, if you are in haste, I can be as hasty as you, and keep pace with
ye, I warrant ye. I cannot in Conscience see such a Delicate, Little, Plump,
Pretty, Young thing, and of such a Ravishing Air, walk the streets alone, as if
disconsolate and forsaken of all mankind: In Faith, Madam, you must not
therefore refuse me both the Honor and Satisfaction to wait on ye.


Lov. Oh, Sir, excuse me for that: I am but a Servant my self, and have been
but now at the New Exchange to buy my Ladies things, who is new come to Town. I
know, Sir, a Gentleman of your Quality cannot abase your self so much, to love
such a one as I am.


B. Good. Love, my Dear? never talk of that; for I must tell thee, my friend,
and so forth, (as my Cousen Wildbloud has it) I am an exceeding Honourer of
course Linen; it is as proper sometimes in an under Garment, as a course Towel
to rub and scrub me.


Lov. Pardon me, Sir, I vow you are such an obliging Gentleman -- but I know my
Lady expects me.


B. Good. Never trouble your self; she has other affairs to think on. Look you,
sweet Lady, here is a Tavern hard by, where we may have a very convenient Room,
and be private. And I protest now, I Am so taken with your Discourse and Person,
we cannot part with dry Lips, as they say.


Lov. Aye, Sir, but if my Lady should think me long. --


B. Good. (aside) Defend me! she is more willing than I: do they call this
Picking up? -- This way, dear heart.


Lov. Sir, the next Tavern is downwards.


B. Good. (aside) Now do I tremble all over, when I think what I want to
satisfy her expectations. 'Slid, if I stay with her but three minutes longer,
she will find where I Am defective, and then I Am ruined. -- Aye, Madam, but
there is a house this way that has better Accommodation: At some Taverns the
Drawers are such Rascals, they will peep, and be troublesome.


Lov. Well, Sir, I am a Stranger in Town, and therefore submit to your better
experience.


B. Good. (aside) Now this damned Frank, where is she?


Enter Frank. Fran. Sir Thomas Whimsey, your most humble Servant.


B. Good. Honest Rogue, how do thou? come along with me; I Will tell thee the
best Jest.


Exeunt B. Goodfeild and Frank. Lov. (Looking after them) Now, may I never live
to see Darby-shire, and the well-meaning Country-Gentlemen again, if this be
not a pitiful trick: The first man that ever made Love to me in London, serve
me thus; offer me the Wine-tavern, and then run away, without taking his leave
too? Now out upon him: I have been often deceived in my life, but never in so
few words before. Sir Thomas Whimsey quoth a? well, my comfort is, I know no
such Whimseys in the Country. There, if a young man offers Kindness to a young
maid, he will go thorough-stich with it; which does the poor Soul good at
heart. And -- Oh me! it strikes two a clock. Madam I come, I come Madam, I
come, I come.

Exit running.
SCENE III.
Enter Docket and Spruce. Dock. Where Is Dashwel?


Spr. At the Office, Sir.


Dock. It Is well: Go bid my Niece come hither.


Spr. Yes, Sir.

Exit.
Dock. This Niece of mine is much offended at her confinement; but it is no
matter: she is young and handsome, and I am old and wary. If she be known broad,
she will quickly get a Husband, and that will be no small Nuisance to my Estate:
For though her Father devised her and 6000 l. to my tuition, with proviso, that
if she marries without my consent, then to forfeit the said sum; Yet if she
happens to be well married, and without disparagement, what the Chancery may
decree in this Case, I know not.


Enter Lucia, Spruce. Dock. Niece, I have considered of your grievances, which
you moved at Dinner; but I perceive you are young, and do not weigh things with
discretion. Should I suffer ye to go abroad, or let people come to ye, some
vain idle fellow with a white Perriwig and a long Sword, would marry ye, Niece,
do you mind me? would marry ye; and then you're undone. -- Look ye, Niece,
Abundans cautela non nocet, pray observe that.


Luc. In the mean time, Sir, the continual imprisonment of my Chamber is
insufferable: I Am sure it is very prejudicial to my health; and I Am troubled
with such a Headache, flesh and blood is not able to endure it.


Dock. Nay, good Lucy, never talk of that, but consider the Maxim; A private
damage is to be suffered, rather than a public inconveniencie. Your distemper
concerns only your self, Niece: But should I see you married to one of those
Fops I told you of but now, it would break my heart. --


Spr. (aside) Yes, no doubt, to part with her Portion. --


Dock. Yet because you shall not say I Am made of Marble, and have no
consideration of your Infirmities, look ye, Niece, you and your Maid shall have
a turn in the Temple-Garden this Evening, and there taste the sweet air of the
Thames. What would thou have more, poor thing?


Luc. Besides, Sir, by reason of this strict life you impose upon me, I have
forgot all the Education my Friends had heretofore given me.


Dock. You would say, you have lost your Dancing; I understand ye: It Is no
matter, a modest woman should not Dance well. You have not lost your Singing,
I Am sure; yo'are often practicing: yet it were better if you could only sing
Psalms.


Luc. What to do, Sir? you seldom let me go to Church.


Dock. It is not necessary: You have good Books at home, read them: There Is The
whole duty of man; think of that, Niece, think of that.


Luc. So I do, Sir, as much as possible I can; but --


Dock. It Is enough. I understand what you would say; but you would have some of
these naughty Plays. Niece, I must tell ye, they are not good for ye, and let
that suffice: Yet ye shall have variety, Niece. Look ye, I Will buy ye the Seven
Champions, and I think, Dashwel has Clark's lives of Famous men; I Will borrow
that of him, and you shall read that too: And for Education, you shall have
enough, Lucy. I scorn it should be said that any of my Blood should want
Education. Dashwel shall teach ye French, he understands Littleton perfectly
well: And if you please, I Will have a Master come and teach ye to cast Account,
and write Shorthand. --


Spr. Sir, here is Madam Goodfeild newly light out of her Coach, and coming up
stairs.


Dock. Away, Niece, here is a Client of Quality coming, and I would not have you
seen in this dress for the world.


Exit Lucia. Enter Goodfeild and Loveal. Good. Is that your Master?


Spr. Yes, Madam.


Good. Mr. Docket, I am come now, only to tell you I cannot stay; I must only
acquaint you with my business, and be gone again.


Dock. First, Madam, let me bid you welcome. (Salutes her.) Now, Madam, if you
please to sit by me, here in this Chair, I am for you. -- Spruce, reach me Pen,
Ink, and Paper, to take instructions.


Good. You must know then, good Mr. Docket, that I come to you with
Commendations from my Lady Simple of Darbyshire.


Dock. Yes, Madam, I know her very well: her Husband, old Sir Simon, late
deceased, was the very first Client I ever had.


Good. God bless her good Ladyship, say I, for she is my good Neighbor; but let
that pass: I love few words, Mr. Docket, and those to the purpose. --


Dock. My own humor directly. --


Good. You must know then, Mr. Docket, that I have a one and only Daughter in
the Country, her name is Elizabeth Goodfeild, (you may set her down, if you
please) a wild Wench she is, and therefore it is high time to marry her, (but
you need not set that down.) Now, Sir, my good Lady Simple has but one Son, who
since his Fathers death, is Sir Alexander Simple, (pray set him down;) and my
Lady Simple and I considering that it is better to wed over the Mixon, than over
the Moor, as they say in our parts, (but you need not set that down.)
Therefore, Mr. Docket, we two Mothers, like loving Neighbors, have concluded
to marry together.


Dock. You mean your Children, but I understand ye: Very good.


Good. My Lady Simple, Sir, is very badly handled with the Gout, that is the
plain truth on it; and therefore she cannot travel: And for Sir Alexander, he
being the only Sprig of the Family of the Simples remaining, we were not
willing to venture him to such a naughty Town; he might not only have been
spoiled himself, but done my Daughter no good too. For you know, Mr. Docket,
Husband and Wife are but one flesh.


Dock. It Is very true, Madam, there is a scurvy Disease here in Town, which many
a man gets, besides the Simples.


Good. To conclude, Sir, I am entrusted of all hands, to come to you, as my
Lady Simples Lawyer, to take care with you that my Daughter be well feofft in
something: For the truth is, Mr. Docket, her Father, honest Justice Goodfeild,
before he died, set her a very good Portion, namely 5000 l. which you know
requires a good Jointure.


Dock. For that, Madam, let me alone; but will you have it by way of Uses,
Feoffment, Bargain and Sale, Lease and Release, Fine and Recovery, or how? The
usual way, is by way of settlement to certain Uses; but then I must know the
names of your Feoffees in trust: And here Madam, there needs no Livery nor
Attornment.


Good. For my part, I understand not a word you say: but here is your Fee, Mr.
Docket; and I Will send Steven Trupenny --


Spr. Sir, here is Mr. Truman, without.


Dock. Let him attend, and do you bear him company.


Exit Spr. Good. And as I was saying, Sir, I ll send my Steward Stephen
Truepenny to ye; he can draw Bonds and Conditions, and he will acquaint you with
the very inside of this business. In the mean time you see I cannot stay now: I
go hence to visit a Nephew, a Turkey Merchant in the City, with whom I sup; but
I shall not fail to be at my Lodgings within an hour after Sunset, at furthest.


Dock. Then, Madam, give me leave to wait upon you at your Return, and at the
same time I Will consult with your Steward about this Affair.


Good. Sir, you shall be heartily welcome. I have two or three Bottles of Darby
there, which I brought up in my Coach, (for I hate your London-Drink) you will
say when you taste it, it is the best you ever drank. Till then, God be with
you, good Mr. Docket, I shall not fail to be at home.


Dock. I Will wait on ye to your Coach, Madam.


Exeunt. Enter Truman, and Spruce. True. To one Sir Alexander Simple, say thou?


Spr. Yes, Sir.


True. But is her Daughter in Town?


Spr. No; the two young people remain with the old Gouty Lady in the Country.


True. There Is the Devil. --


Spr. But I have better news for you, Sir; Madam Lucia and her Maid have leave
to be in the Temple-Garden this Evening.


True. That Is well.


Spr. And her Maid bid me take care to let you know it.


True. That Is better: I will not fail to meet her.


Spr. Whist; not a word more, as you hope to be Knighted.


Enter Docket. Dock. Mr. Truman, I sent for you, this morning, by my man.


True. You did Sir, and you see I Am come according to the Summons.


Dock. Yo'are welcome. Look ye, Mr. Truman, you and I have often treated about
this Mortgage. I have now considered of it; and you shall know my resolution in
few words. Look ye, Mr. Truman, I will not have you say that Summum jus est
Summa injuria. Therefore mind me, Sir: you know you owe me 6000 l. Principal.


True. Well, Sir.


Dock. Besides this, there is above 300 l. due for Interest, and about 200 l.
farily reckoned for Costs which I have been at in outing your Tenants, and
recovering quiet Possession of your Estate; that is 500 l. Now observe me, Mr.
Truman, I ll pay you down 500 l. more upon the Nail; all which Sums amount to
7000 l. And for this, you shall confirm the Estate to me and my Heirs for ever,
with a General Warranty contra omnes gentes, and pass a Fine of the said
Estate, Come ceo que il ad de son done. And so you and I will continue good
friends, Mr. Truman.


True. So in effect, you will have an Estate of 500 l. a year in the best Lands
in Hartfordshire, all improvable, with 100 Acres of Timber, and all this for
7000 l. And so you and I shall continue good Friends.


Dock. As any live, I protest.


True. Never upon these Conditions, I assure ye. Look ye, Mr. Docket, you would
have me confirm the Estate abovesaid, upon the Conditions aforesaid.


Dock. Aye.


True. Nay mind me, Sir; you would have me pass a Fine upon the said Estate,
with Warranty to you and your Heirs for ever.


Dock. Aye.


True. First the Devil shall have you and your Heirs for ever; observe me, Mr.
Docket. And besides this, I would have ye take notice, and if you think fit, ye
may put down the Memorandum in your Almanac; I will take in my Mortgage within
two days, and that malgre your damned Worship, and all your Confederates in
Hell, do you mind me? And so farewell, Mr. Attorney Docket.

Exit.
Dock. Oh, farewell Huff, if you are so impatient.

Go, spend your grease, vain Fop, fret, swell, and vex:
I laugh at idle words, with Currat Lex.
Exit.
ACT II.
SCENE I.
The Temple Garden.
Enter Truman, and Ned Goodfeild. N. Good. Here Is no appearance of the Game you
expect.


True. No matter: It is yet too early. I confide in my intelligence; my Lawyer's
Clerk never failed me.


N. Good. Is your Correspondent that dull Beast that brought you the Message
from his Master this morning? --


True. Oh Plague on him, no: Mine is a brisk fellow that has Sense and Ingenuity
in him. All of the Tribe are not like Dashwel and Docket; if they were, here
would be no living among 'em: They would infect the Town worse than the
Sickness, or Pox. -- In the mean time, Ned, you little think what your good
Mother comes up about.


N. Good. Have thou learnt that? prithee tell me --


True. Not so hasty; the News is not so welcome. You must know then, Mr. Edward,
that your old woman has agreed with another old woman in the Country, to match
your Sister to her Son; and she has now made this Journey to dispatch the
settlements of Marriage, and so forth: So that my Interest in the party
aforesaid, is dwindled to nothing.


N. Good. Do You know the Son's name?


True. Yes; Sir Alexander Simple --


N. Good. It Is enough. Remember that I tell ye, Jack, it lies not in the power
of Fate to make up the Match. The old people may please themselves in talking,
but it is the young ones must do in these cases. I know Simple well enough; he
has a large Estate indeed, but is the veriest Coxcomb in ten Counties. And for
my Sister, I am sufficiently assured, she would rather come to London and sell
Oranges, than marry him, of all the Cullies in England. -- But who are these?


Enter Lucia, and her Maid. True. This is the Lady, Ned, into whose good Graces
I must introdue thee. What think thou of her?


Good. She seems a delicate Creature, and full of Sweetness. Let us engage 'em.


True. I thought I should not stave ye off. Allons. -- Madam Lucia! I know not
to what kind Star I owe this happiness; but to see you here, compleats my joys.


Luc. Mr. Truman, your Servant. You are always in this strain -- What Gentleman
is that?


True. My very particular Friend. Let me beg you, Madam, to gratify his
ambition with the favor to kiss your fair hand.


Luc. Being your friend, Sir, he has sufficient merit to commend him to the
most noted Beauty of the Town. You pass too great a Complement on me, I assure
ye, Mr. Truman.


Good. Your pardon, Madam. As to be noted, is not always to be a Beauty, so I
find, to be the most noted Beauty, is not to be the Greatest or the best.
Witness your self: it is in your example, Madam, I perceive, that Fame neither
speaks always truth, nor all truths.


Luc. Nay, Gentlemen, never railly me in this manner: I Would rather you would call
me ugly in plain intelligible expressions, than laugh at my ill face in you
fine Language. My Glass tells me what I am, better than all the Courting
Monsieurs 'twixt Ludgate and the Abbey.


True. Oh, Madam, Ladies are no Competent Judges of their own Beauty.


Good. They always value it too much, or too little.


Luc. On the other side, Gallants that are always praising their Mistrisses
Beauty, at the same time dispraise their own Wit. It Is to be presumed, their
Commonplace runs all on that Subject and they have no other matter to
discourse of. -- Therefore, if you please, Gentlemen, we'll talk of something
else.


Good. ( aside to Truman) Oh how I love her for this! her Wit is equal to her
Face.


True. Faith, Madam, let us improve the time as well for action as discourse;
let us all to the Park this inviting Evening: My Coach will be ready in three
minutes.


Luc. Mr. Truman, you speak like a stranger to my condition. I am but a
Prisoner at large, and my Fetters reach not farther than this. Garden.


True. All Curses on the damned Geaolor, your Uncle.


Luc. Mr. Truman, I have always looked upon you as my friend. -- Alas, I have
but few. -- (weeps) My Consinement is a Disease* and I fear will prove my death.


Good. Madam, this Gentleman and I, have but one heart: Either direct us how to
serve you, or be pleased to submit* to our advice, and I Will secure your Liberty
before to morrow-night, that Devil of an Uncle shall no longer abuse such
Innocence.


Enter B. Goodfeild, and Frank. B. Good. Observe, Frank; is not that my
Brother, so busy with yonder Lady?


Fran. Yes I vow, or my eyes are the veriest Liars in London.


B. Good. What a Devil makes he in Town? he is as great a stranger here as I am.
When we left the Country, was not he at Cambridge?


Fran. We all thought so: As sure as can be, this is some Mistress. But what is
he that stands with him?


B. Good. He seems much a Gentleman. I Am resolved to make one of the Company:
My Brother can never know me in this Disguise. Have among'e, e'faith. --
Gallants, are ye for Love alone, Conversation alone, or Love and Conversation
together?


True. Why, young Bully?


B. Good. If ye are for Love alone, I Will leave the Lady to ye, and Bien proface
Messieurs. If ye are for Conversation alone, why then Gentlemen, pray learn to
be civil, and you two go together by your selves; it is rude to stay here, and
over-hear our discourse, when the Lady and I would be private. --


Good. This is the maddest young Raskal I ever saw in my life.


B. Good. But if ye are for Love and Conversation together, why then, faith,
let us share the blessed Community; here are four men to two women: A good
proportion for Town-Ladies; two to two is only fit for Nuns that have vowed
Chastity: But I hope, Madam, you are not so vain to think of that. --


(Offers at her hand. Luc. Away, rude fellow. --


Good. Belike you think your self a man then. Alas, poor thing, thou art below
a kicking; -- but be gone, or --


B. Good. Not so fast, Sir; be I man or boy, or whatever I am, I would have
thee know, Bully-hec, I am able to give satisfaction to any man in the Bed of
Honor. -- No more huffing. If you are minded to speak to me By the way of
Bilbo (as the Play has it) I Will answer ye by the way of Dangerfeild. Hark ye --


(They whisper. Maid. Nay, never urge me, I swear I will not: it is not
handsome to tell Names.


Fran. Alas poor Creature, thou do not understand what belongs to a
Waiting-Damsel; it is part of her office to discover her Lady's Secrets. I
perceive by this, thou art but a Callow-maid -- and of my Conscience a Virigin.


Maid. A Virgin? Aye, a pure one.


Fran. Fie, fie, Sweetheart, learn more behavior; though perhaps, you are
such, you should not acknowledge it. Should you talk thus before Company, you would
be laughed at for being so out of the Mode. A Maidenhead of this bigness? out
upon it!


Maid. Now, fie upon you; you are the strangest man, I ever talked with.


B. Good. -- And without Seconds; if you fail, I Will post ye for a Coward: I
know your name; Goodfeild.


Good. Spare your provocations. I Will meet thee, though thou were the Devil in
the shape of a Boy: as thou may be for ought I know, by thy intelligence.


B. Good. Well, Sir, now you and I have agreed, I am your very humble Servant.
In the next place, I must borrow a few words of your friend that stands yonder,
so like a civil Gentleman, and has not a word to say for himself.


B. Good* and Truman come forward, the rest walk farther off. True. With me?
What would the Child have with me? Come, speak thy mind quickly, little fellow,
thou feast I am engaged.


B. Good. You would say, with Monsieur Palamede, that T'are a man of business:
Yes, no doubt on it. I suppose; sweet Sir, you are one of those hard Students,
whose delight is continually to affront Littleton and the Law, by writing
Farce, to be laughed at by the Player-women en Chivalier; or else en Debauche to
hussah for a Wench, be perpetually drunk, and break your friends windows that
go to bed before ye.


True. So: And this you suppose my Character?


B. Good. Yes: with only this Addition: Yo'are a man of a very excellent
temper, you are not easily provoked neither to Anger nor Raillery. Come, shall
I answer for you? As sure as can be, you either would or should say, Sweet
young Gentleman, or Sweet Sir, or Plain Sir, or something to that purpose; You
see I have been lately discoursing with a Lady, and as I hope to breathe now,
she has drawn me so dry, and all that -- I have not Language enough left me to
say, Your Servant, Sir. -- Come, Sir, confess ingenuously, would you not have
said thus, if you could?


True. Said thus; quoth a? why thou say so fast, thou wou't not let me say a
word in thy presence. -- What a Devil art thou? whence come thou? thou art
the pertest little thing I ever met with.


B. Good. Perhaps, Sir, I have wronged ye, and ye are a Wit. For (as the Play
says) All Wits have their failings, and have the fortune to be thought Fools
one in their lives; and who knows but this is your critical minute?


True. So, so; thou art a very forward stripling, and do begin betimes to be
bolder than welcome. Thou may thank thy Childhood for this Liberty: If thou
were a man, I should talk to thee in another Dialect.


B. Good. Then it seems, Sir, you can talk to a man, though not to a boy: but
can you talk to a woman? Suppose me a woman a little, though As arrant a
Fruit-woman as any is in Rome; de grace Monsieur, how would you behave your
self?


True. Away, Boy; if thou have any business with me, dispatch it: Time's
precious, and I can waste no more.


B. Good. Nay, never mince the matter. If I were a woman, I know what you would do.
First of all, you would pelt me with two or three little pretty deux yeux: Then off
goes the Hat, thus, and out comes the Comb, thus; and after having friskt over
the bottom of your Perriwig a little, and exalted the foretop thus, you would
make Love according to the latest (...), thus -- Sweet Lady, you have here a
man to your mind: For to confess the truth to you, I can but counterfeit Love
to try you. Gad, Madam, I never yet could love any woman: and since I have seen
you, and I do not, I am certain now I shall escape for ever.


True. Why thou art a very impudent fellow to talk of things so much above thee.
Alas, poor child! thou do not understand what belongs to Love, nor will not
these seven years.


B. Good. Forbear such frightful words; I am not so young, wise Sir, (...) I
understand what Love is. It Is the seducer of Virtue, the disturber of Quiet,
the madness of Youth, the dotage of old Age, the enemy to good Humor, and, as
the Play says very well, The reason of all unreasonable Actions.


True. And is this all you know of Love?


B. Good. No: Love was thus from the beginning; our Grandfathers know as much
as this. In our Age the face of Love is very much altered. Our Gallants have
wisely considered Love has been made so common, trite, and out of fashion,
that, though there is something belonging to the thing that is very useful and
much affected, yet the damned Name is hateful; and both Sexes have agreed,
though their designs be never so sensual, to disown the scandal of Love, and
call it Gallantry, Mirth; and Raillery. Love, out upon it! it is got into all
places, though never so improper and abusrd. Have ye not Love in a Maze, Love
in a Tub, Love in a Wood, nay, Love in a Nunnery and Love in a Pipkin?


True. Hold a little, I thou everlasting Talker; I think I must stop thy mouth:
Let me view thee well; things of thy age, are not usually thus witty. I begin
to love thy humor. --


B. Good. Then, Woe. woe to poor Benito, I sinde my abundance of Wit has ruined
me. Dare you name Love, when yo've heard me declare so much against it?
Farewell, Sir -- ( Is going, but turns again. Yet if you have Courage enough to
be Loves Champion, I desie you upon it; and will attend you to morrow-morning at
five, near Lambs-Conduit, if you dare meet me.


True. I dare.


B. Good. Adieu then, Iusque a revoir.


True. Nay, but one word more; stay a little --


B. Good. Not a moment: I never talk with Enemies. Your are engaged: Look, your
company expects you. -- Come Frank.


Exeunt B. Good. and Fran. Good. What have thou been doing all this while,
Jack, with that Boy?


True. It Is a witty Impertinent, and Raillies well. -- But how go affairs with
you? what have you resolved on?


Good. Faith, we are not come to Resolutions, but so far from that point, that
this Lady is pleased to refuse whatever I propose. She is too much her own
enemy, and too great a friend to something that looks like Honor, to admit us
to serve her.


Luc. Excuse me, Sir, you have obliged me much in such generous offers, but I
have many Reasons not to use 'em. Mr. Truman, you are best acquainted with my
condition, and therefore can best judge of what I tell ye. Should I leave my
Uncle, (though his usage is both unhandsome, and unnatural) I shall not only
loose my Fortune, for my Father has committed both me and it to his
Arbitration. --


Good. Madam, I value not your Fortune, I am already Master of so liberal an
Estate, I care not to increase it. If you please to make me happy in your
person, I Will venture loosing, what your Uncle covets.


Luc. That, Sir, is the least of all my thoughts: And had I not, that to think
on, yet I can never consent to leave so near a Relation, to whose Government my
dying Father gave me, without, not only his Consent, but Knowledge: And that
too, with two young men. This, Gentlemen, (although I do not question in the
least your Honor) is so very scandalous, I never can admit it.


True. Your Uncle has justly forfeited his Trust, abusing it: and, Madam, you
may well be confident your Father never fancied him for such a Guardian, when
he first named him yours.


Luc. Sir, I not doubt it. And though I sigh for death or a more pleasing life,
-- yet I had rather ever continue thus wretched as I am, than be made happy, by
any means that gives the least offense or prejudice to the spotless Fame of an
innocent Maid.


Good. In the mean time, Madam, will you make me so happy as to let me hope I
may hereafter be admitted to your service when you shall be a more absolute
Mistress of your self, and free from the constraint of such a Guardian?


Luc. Provided, Sir, you use no violent means to accomplish such a freedom. I
am not so ungrateful to forget a friendship, nor yet so dull as not to
apprehend who has obliged me. -- But Gentlemen, no more. -- You must not know
me: This is one of my Uncle's Spies.


Enter Dashwel. Dash. Mistress Lucia, my Master desires to be recommended to
you, and has sent me to conduct you home; he and I are just going forth about
business, and he desires to see your Ingress before our Egress.


Luc. So: Have ye any other Commendations from your Master?


Dash. Non sum Informatus: That is to say, in English, He gave me no farther
Instructions.


Luc. Then come along.


Good. Mr. Dashwel, your humble Servant: Pray, Sir, quota cloka?


Dash. Sweet Sir, I think it is near octa hora: Your Servant Gentlemen.


Good. Farewell Cods-head.


Exeunt Dash. Luc. and Maid. True. Now, Ned, what do thou think of this Lady?


Good. I think so well of her, that I think the worse of thee for bringing me
acquainted with her to no purpose.


True. Why to no purpose?


Good. You see she admits not my Addresses.


True. Thou art a Fool, Ned; and though thou have studied so long at the
University, thou art very illiterate in Women. Why all her discourse was
nothing but I will and I will not: and when they are once arrived at that, they
need but little Courting.


Good. I perceive thou art very learned in this sort of Philosophy, Jack: I
think I had best get thee to read to me.


True. Read, quoth a? no faith it needs not, I have it all by heart. In the
first place, you must know, Friend mine, Women are not now so dull, and
unapprehensive, as in former Ages: For just as times and seasons change, so
Behavior grows more polite; of which, the particular we discourse of, is one
of the chief Examples. Anciently Girls had such a gross Education, that most of
them knew neither to read, Bawdry; nor write, Assignations; their Parents not
caring to improve their judgment to be more capable than to distinguish betwixt
their Husbands Doublet and Breeches; which not only made them ashamed to demand
what most they wanted, but also when they had occasion to do so, or so, -- Gad,
they durst not, though one and twenty years old, without their Mothers leave.


Good. But in this Age --


True. Aye, Ned, in this Age they begin to refine their Behavior, and have
found out the way of speaking, and yet not say a word.


Good. How Jack? to speak, and not say a word? that is a xsstrong Line.


True. No matter, Ned, you have used to such at the place from whence you come.
I say, they can speak their mind, and yet not say a word. And besides this,
when they speak, they have invented such a delicate Language, that they will
talk with you an hour together, and all the while discover a sense quite
different from their words. The advantages they have acquired from Habits and
Dress, to supply the defects of Nature in spite of mankind, I Will omit.


Good. Aye, prithee do: It Is a Subject only proper to Tailors and Tyre-women.


True. By the way, Ned, I must tell thee, I am of opinion, the Mystery of Dress
is now arrived to its utmost perfection; and must of necessity, like the Roman
Empire, decay in after-Ages.


Good. Thou talk high, Jack.


True. Not so high as the Ladies Toors. I tell thee, Ned Goodfeild, it is a
frightful thing to see some women, that pass for Beauties in due time and
place, undressed: I do not mean naked; but only their face without the Toor,
Shades, Locks, Hollows, Bullies, and some transitory Patches.


Good. But to let all this pass for this time. You observed the young fellow
was here but now?


True. Aye, what is the matter?


Good. Is he not some little Bully here about Fleetstreet?


True. No: I know 'em all, but never saw his eyes before: But why all these
inquiries?


Good. Nothing; but the little Wasp has challenged me, and I Am to meet him to
morrow-morning at four, in Redlyon-fields.


True. Why this is the maddest Rogue I e're heard of. He has challenged me too,
to be at five, near Lambs-Canduit. Belike, Ned, he makes nothing of thee; he
has done thy business in imagination, and has chosen me for a second course to
Breakfast. Two Duels in a morning are pretty fair, for such a young beginner.


Good. I rather think he will meet neither on's. I fancy he neither looked nor
spoke like a Fighter. However, I Will not venture the disgrace of failing in such
an occasion. I Am resolved to observe the place and time appointed.


True. And I. It Is possible the Encounter may be pleasanter than we imagine. I
am much of thy opinion, Ned: He did not at all behave himself like a Killer of
men. --


Good. But hark ye, Jack, you must not be seen with me, for I Am to meet without
Seconds.


True. No fear of that: I have another field appointed, at sufficient distance.


Good. Come, let us go find out some Company and be merry. This Garden is
unpleasant, now the Lady's gone.


Exeunt. SCENE II.
Enter a Boy conducting Docket and Dashwel. Boy. BE pleased, Sir, to repose a
while in the Dining Room: I expect my Lady's Return every minute.


Dock. Well said: But hark ye, Youth, is Mr. Trupenny about the house?


Boy. Yes, Sir, he is a writing above in his Chamber.


Dock. Prithee, Sweetheart, tell him here is one Docket desires to see him.


Boy. Yes, Sir.


Dash. Do You hear, Young man? Mr. Docket of Cliffords-Inn: You must ever give
things their due Addition.


Boy. Well, Sir.

Exit Boy.
Dock. Have thou brought thy Inkhorn with thee, Tom?


Dash. Yes, yes, Sir, vouz avez the Inkhorn, look ye, Sir, but -- alas, I Have
forgot my Almanac.


(Shows a great Inkhorn. Dock. No matter, man, if thou have any Paper about
thee?


Dash. O Lord, Sir, I put a whole Quire of Copying-paper in my Pocket, and
here is two Quills --


Dock. Nay, perhaps we may have no occasion to use 'em.


Dash. But you know, Sir, it is good to be sure. -- Look ye, Sir, here comes Mr.
Trupenny. I vow he looks like a very understanding man, and one that can do
business: I wonder whether he can write Court-hand.


Enter Trupenny. Dock. Mr. Trupenny, your Servant.


Trup. Your most humble Servant, good Mr. Docket; I am heartily glad to see ye
at our Quarters: And I vow you're very welcome, as I may say.


Dock. Sir, I thank you. Here Is I and my man Dashwel are come to wait upon your
Lady, about a little Concern of hers; I suppose, Sir, you're no stranger to it.


Trup. No, Sir; my Lady ordered me to draw up the particulars of Sir Alexander
Simple's Estate, which are to pass into my young Mistress Betty's Jointure. I
have been at it e're since she went out; and here it is in Writing: Look ye,
Sir, mine is but an indifferent Hand.


Dock. Good enough, Mr. Trupenny, good enough. Let me see; here is the Manor of
-- uh; and the Manor of -- uh; with the Advouson appurtenant -- Appendant you
mean; but I understand ye. Then here is 600 Acres of Pasture, and 400 Acres of
Meadow -- O fie, that must not be, you must always put Pratum before Pastura:
Remember the old Verse as long as you live, and you will never do amiss:
Messuagium, Toftum, etc. Dashwel shall gi't you in writing.


Dash. Yes, Sir, with all my heart.


Trup. I thank ye most kindly, good Sir; I Will do as much for you at any time.


Dock. Then here is -- All, and all manner of Commons thereunto belonging, In
quodam look vocate be peak juxta Podex Diaboli, anglice the Devil's Britch. --
Well, Sir I understand ye: I Will even take these parcels home with me, and put
'em into due order, and so we'll proceed. I suppose, Mr. Trupenny, you will
submit to me, as for Form and false Latin?


Trup. I Sir, and reason good. Form and false Latin, Mr. Docket? why, if it
had not been for that, we need not ha'come to London. Our Curate might a made
the Jointure well enough, but only for Form and false Latin.


Dock. Mr. Trupenny, pray will you instruct me in one thing?


Trup. With all my heart, Sir, if I can: But it is a likely matter that I should
instruct your Wordship in any thing, that have been bred all your lifetime at
the Inns of Chancery.


Dock. O Sir, you are pleased to say so. But pray, Mr. Trupenny, what was
Justice Goodfeilds Christen-name?


Trup. Anthony, Sir; and I vow to ye, Mr. Docket, it was great pity it was not
Sir Anthony: For though he was but a Justice of Peace and Coram, so that he
could a brought Rogues Coram nobis at any time, yet he might a been a Knight,
and a good one, both for his Estate and Wit.


Dock. Indeed?


Trup. Sir, Let me tell ye; There is my young Master Edward, who is now at
Cambridge, God bless him, and send him well at age, for he lacks not much now.
Mr. Docket, he will have about a three months hence, 800 a year, good Rents;
and after his Mothers death, 600 a year more, which is her Jointure.


Dock. (aside) Dashwel, what think ye, if I strike in with this Widow, ha, Tom?


Dash. Innuendo Widow Goodfeild, Sir? I protest that would be excellent.


Trup. I have the value of all their Estate to a penny, in my books at home.
Besides this, their Tenants are able men, and special Paymasters; and indeed,
my Lady does oblige 'em to it: For every Christmas she calls 'em all to dinner
at the Hall: Then have we the Bagpipes, and are so passing merry. -- But look
ye, Sir, here comes my Lady her self: I knew she could not tarry long out,
after Sunset.


Enter Goodfeild, Loveal. Good. O. Mr. Docket, you are welcome. I doubt I Have made
you expect me too long -- But I protest now, I Have had such a life since I saw
you; I Will go no more into the City an God 'ill.


Dock. Why, I pray, Madam?


Good. Aw Lord, Sir, there is such doings -- Here Loveal, take my Scarf -- And
then, Sir, there are such Cruel noises, all along the streets as you go, I dare
say, it would make ones heart ache to hear'em. There was a woman, and she cried
old Stockins, and ends a Gold and Silver; and a little further I met a fellow
crying old Shoos and Brooms. For my part, I could not ha'thought that old thing
had been worth whistling for in this Town, where there is so much Pride and
Ranting. -- Come, Mr. Docket, pray take a feat by me here. -- But that which
will never out of my head, no I shall carry it to my grave wi'me, was somebody
that stood just behind my Coach, and cried -- what was it Loveal?


Lov. Mackerel, Madam.


Good. Aye, Mackerel. Mr. Docket, if you will believe me, it made so hideous a
Din, it frighted me out of my place full upon Loveal that fate over against me;
and had it not been a great mercy, I had broke her face.


Dock. Pray, Madam, were you never in Town before?


Good. Yes, Sir, once; but I was very young then. It was when I was new married
to Squire Goodfeild: he brought me up to see the Fashion, and have a new Gown
made, and so we went down again. But to proceed, Sir, beside the noises, here
are such ugly smells in every corner -- O, Loveal, did you observe the fine
Gentlewoman that light out of the Coach with the Gentleman at the end of the
long street, as we turned down the narrow lane by the new Church?


Lov. Do You mean her, Madam, with the great black Toor, and face all spotted,
with the Flowr'd-sattin Petticoat laced up almost as high as --


Good. Aye, aye, she: I warrant she is naught -- But as I was saying, Mr.
Docket, your smells, here in London, are most wickedly bad: I have been told,
the occasion is your Sea-coal; but I rather think it is the sins of your naughty
City, that makes it stink above ground. Had not you Londoners better come down
to Darbyshire and fetch of our Coal from the Pits, which is (though I say it) a
delicate Fuel, and almost as sweet as green Ash?


Dock. Indeed, Madam, the Town is offensive to most strangers, in these cases;
but if you were to be demorant here a while, that is, to live among us, you
would quickly be familiar with these things, which otherwise are troublesome to
one that Discontinues the Visinage.


Good. Oh, Mr. Docket, never talk of that; I would not live in London, to be
Lady Mayoress, -- But now I think on it, ha'you done any thing in my Daughters
business yet?


Dock. Yes, Madam, Mr. Trupenny has gi'n me sufficient Instructions for the
Conveyance, before your Ladyship made your Entry.


Good. I Am glad on it with all my heart; there is so much time saved. Now have we
nothing to do, but to be merry -- Steven -- She whispers. Exit Trupenny. Enter
Trup. and Boy with Bottles and Glasses. Mr. Docket, gi'me your hand: I vow
yo'are heartily welcome. Come, Sir, you shall taste a glass of our Country-ale,
famous all over England -- Come, Boy, fill out -- observe how it flowers and
sparkles: They talk of Canary, but there is no Canary in England like it. Well,
I say nothing: the proof of the Pudding's in the eating -- Sir, my Service to
ye, remembering my good Lady Simple, and all our Friends in Darbyshire.


(Drinks. Dock. With all my heart, Madam.


Lov. Come, Sir, You and I Will go into the next Room, where I can entertain ye
with more liberty.


Dash. Aye, with all my heart; I vow I Am under Coverture, as 'twere, while in
my Masters presence.


Exeunt Lov. and Dash. Good. Here, Boy, fill -- I protest I had all sorts of
your London-Wine at Supper to night, and it has lain something heavy at my
stomach; but this glass of Ale has done me as much good as a cup of Aqua
Mirabilis. -- Give it Mr. Docket.


Dock. Mr. Trupenny, here is to ye -- My Lady Simple's good Health.


(Drinks. Good. Come, Steven, sit down and drink with us. -- Mr. Docket, I hate
to keep overmuch state with my Steward: There is a time when Ladies may be
familiar with their Servants, an they were never so high and haughty.


Dock. It Is very true, Madam.


Good. Aye, Aye, haughty looks must be humbled sometimes, as well as others. --
Mr. Docket, do you take any Tobacco?


Dock. Yes, Madam; but I fear the smell may be a Nocument to you.


Good. What do you mean by that, Sir?


Dock. Madam, I mean, it may be a Nuisance to ye; that is, it may offend ye.


Good. Oh, not at all, Sir: nay, you shall see I can bear you company. Boy,
fetch some Pipes and a Light; I have my Box about me. Exit Boy, and Enter again
with Lights and Pipes. For my part, Mr. Docket, I Will tell ye truly, I was
advised to it three or four years ago, for a certain infirmity; and indeed I
have continued it ever since, and find a great deal of good by it. It comforts
the Stomach, warms the Heart, and cheers the Brain: And then for Rheum, it is an
excellent drier.


Dock. Nay, Madam, here are women in Town that take Tobacco.


Good. I but they run into a corner to do it, as if they were a going to be
naught -- Steven, fill me a Pipe -- For my part, I am downright honest: I hate
dissimulation. Come, come, there is no shame to take it: it is neither sinful,
nor unlawful. I say, let your women in London be ashamed to take other things,
and 'twould be better for 'em -- But, Mr. Docket, you don't tell me how you
like my Ale.


Dock. It Is excellent Drink indeed, Madam.


Good. Has it not a rare Farewell with it? Nay, it is brewed in my own house, and
I see to the working it my self: I put nine Strike to the Hogshead, I prorest
--


Trup. And as good Malt as any in the Country; though I say it: and that is a
bold word.


Good. Come, the other Glass, and then we'll taste our Tobacco -- pray, Sir, make
use of my Box -- Where stands the Ale? Fie, Steven, do you let your Drink die in
your hands? put it about, man, put it about.


Trup. Madam, my Service to ye.


(Drinks. Good. Well said. Mr. Docket, have at ye: Whose Health shall this be?


Dock. Madam, I seldom use to drink Healths.


Good. O, Sir, two or three will do ye no harm, in a civil way, I Will secure ye
-- Come, God bless his Majesty -- ( drinks) here, boy, fill.


Dock. Gently, good Youth. -- Mr. Trupenny, his Majesty's Health to ye.
(drinks) Madam, I Have done ye right.


Good. You have, Sir: Now gi't Trupenny, and reach the Candle. -- Come, Sir --
light your Pipe -- (she lights, and speaks as she takes.) Let me tell ye -- Mr.
Docket -- this is a Pipe of -- good -- Tobacco -- It Is. the very best sort of
-- Virginia -- and that is better -- than Spanish -- ( Trupenny, lend me your
stopper) -- what think ye, Mr. Docket?


Dock. Indeed, Madam -- I think it -- is very -- excellent -- To -- bacco --
and has no -- fault -- unless it be -- a little too -- hot in the -- mouth.


Good. The better for that, Sir -- but I pray, Mr. -- Docket -- are you -- a
married man? --


Dock. (bowing) No, Madam -- I am a -- Batchelour -- at your Service. --


Good. Aw Lord, Sir, -- here Truepenny, pick this Pipe; it don't come worth a
Rush. -- I vow, Mr. Docket, you are a very staid Batchelour, and have lived a
single man a long time: but I doubt you have not been honest all this while. --
Boy, fill a glass of Ale. Come Sir, you shall give me leave to begin your
Mistriss's Health.


Dock. Ah, Madam!


(Bowing and shaking his head. Good. Here, Trupenny. -- (drinks) I am
confident, Mr. Docket, she must be very deserving Lady for whom you have waited
thus long: And no doubt but you will meet with some virtuous body that will
reward all your patience at the long run, never fear it, Sir. For my part, I
have been a Widow now these eight years and upwards, and yet it is possible I
may marry again before I die: The truth is, I have made no vow against it.


Dock. Ah, Madam! --


(Bowing and shaking his head, again. Trup. Mr. Docket, your Lady's good
health, Sir. (drinks) Look ye, Super Naculum.


Dock. Sir, I thank ye. -- Now, young man, give it me, and fill it lustily. So;
Mr. Trupenny, with my Lady's leave here, I Will begin to you --


Good. Nay, Mr. Docket, first pledge your Mistriss's Health, before ye begin a
new one. I love fair drinking, and fair dealing with all my heart: For my part,
I cannot dissemble.


Dock. Why then, Madam, there it is. -- (drinks) Now, Madam, after all this,
suppose a man should --


Good. Take the other Pipe?


Dock. No, Madam; make a motion to your Ladyship.


Good. To me, Sir? pray what is it?


Dock. Why, Madam, nothing but -- Sweetheart, prithee gi'me the other Glass;
I Will have one Health more, and then I Will tell ye. Methinks I begin to be very
cheerful. Ha, ha, ha, I cannot choose but laugh at the Jest: this is called in
our Law, Idemptitate nominis. Ha, ha, ha, -- Madam, here is your Ladyships good
Health, and I with it were a Sea to the bottom; Mr. Trupenny, here is to ye.


(Drinks. Good. Sir, you oblige me.


Dock. Now, Madam, I Will tell ye. You see, Madam, I Am a Bachelor, and you see
withal that your self are a Widow. Faith, Madam, what think ye, if we two, to
save charges, and the like, should make but one Match on it? You see, Madam, I
am plain.


Good. I like ye the better for that, Sir; plain dealing's a Jewel: But alas,
alas, you can never pass this upon me.


Dock. Why, pray Madam? do you think I don't know what belongs to a Widow?


Good. Do You think I can imagine, Sir, that a man of your practice would ever
think of marrying such a one as I am?


Dock. Nay, never talk of that: but gi'me your hand on it, Widow. You see the
worst of me. Come, shall it be, I Daniel take thee Mary?


Good. Soft Sir, Two words to a Bargain.


Dock. Then consult thy Pillow upon it, Widow: You shall find me reasonable.


Good. Indeed, Sir, that is the fittest place where to think of Marriage: But
here is my hand, you shall know more of my mind to morrow. In the mean time,
good night, Sir. Trupenny, wait upon Mr. Docket. Loveal.


Enter Loveal and Dashwel. Dock. Nay, nay, here is my man: and besides that,
look ye, I am not so drunk, but I can find the way home: therefore, Mr.
Trupenny, you may stay, look ye.


Trup. O pardon me for that, Sir; indeed I Will wait on ye home: I know what
belongs to breeding.


Dock. Well then, Widow farewell 'till to morrow. Be sure ye think of me to
night, and think well. If I imagined, do you see, you would think amiss, I Would stay
all night, look ye, and correct your thoughts.


Good. No, no, Sir, no fear of that. Good night, good night.


Exeunt Dock. Dash. Trup. Lov. The Lawyer's drunk.


Good. No, not so; only a little fuddled. But this is for the honor of our
Country, wench. An my Lord Mayor were here, and all his Aldermen, I Would serve 'em
all so: It Is for the honor of Darbyshire.


Lov. Aye, Madam, and for the honor of our Sex too.


Good. True, Wench; what is a clock?


Lov. Past eleven, Madam.


Good. O me! it is late: let us hye to bed; I am not used to these late hours.


Exeunt. SCENE III.
Enter B. Goodfeild, Frank, and Musicians. B. Good. HEre, Gentlemen, this is
the Window. Range your selves here, and strike a sprightly Air. (Music of
Violins and Flageolets. So, enough -- Now, Frank, the Song I gave ye.


A SONG, Which ended, Loveal appears in the Balconey. Lov. Gentlemen, my Lady
is but just laid down in her naked Bed; but she remembers her Respects to ye,
and has sent ye here half a Crown. She says, she knows Mr. Docket has sent ye
on to welcome her to Town; and she acknowledges the Civility. Then, Gentlemen,
here is a Shilling more of my good will: My Name's Loveal, and I am my Lady's
Woman. I vow, it is the finest Music I e're heard in my life, and much better
than our Country Harp and Bagpipe: And then the Song was such a pretty thing,
I Would give any thing for a Copy. -- But it is late, and I cannot stay. Farewell,
Gentlemen, and hye ye to bed. Good night to ye all; I wish ye well home.

Exit.
B. Good. Nay, but hark ye, Damsel.


Fran. She Is gone. -- Ah, Plague! This Widow don't know what belongs to
Serenading.


B. Good. She should ha'come to the Balconey in her Nightgown, and cried,
Who Is that comes at this unseasonable hour to disturb my Quiet? Then I should
have answered in a dying Tone, It Is I, forsooth; and have laid all the blame
upon Love. Then raising my voice, I should a huft, Allons, Widow; let me come
in to ye, hand to fist. Then she thinking I had been drunk, should have replied,
(as another Play has it very well) No, Sir, no, -- I wonder you have the
confidence to ask me, when you were so rude to me the last time. --


Fran. But instead of this, she shows her Breeding, to keep her Bed, and never
speak to a Gentleman at all. This is, A-la-mode de pais, Ierny.


B. Good. Did not the Chambriere name one Docket, to whom her Lady ascribes
this Civility?


Fran. Yes. What a Devil should he be?


B. Good. I cannot imagine. It Is no matter: Content the Music,

Exit.
Frank, and follow me to my Lodging.


Fran. Here, my Masters, here is that will satisfy ye all. Go --

March boldly home, Sirs, without longer staying.
Fear not the Watch, they will spare ye for your playing.

Exeunt severally. The Song.
1.
O the little delights that a Lover takes
To tell his dear Phillis how much he despairs;
How great are his Cares,
And how his heart aches!
Now praising, now blaming, now flattering Miss,
While all the fine story not stgnifies this.
2.
Sure Love cannot consist in ill Language and Railing?
To term Miss a Monster for Beauty and Parts,
The thief of men's hearts;
Nay, call her for failing
A Tyrant with all sorts of mischievous Arms,
And make us believe she is a Witch for her Charms.
3.
Much better in my mind, though less like a Poet,
Is plainly to show her, when in a Love-fit,
The meaning of it;
And let her to know it
In such Terms as Nature shall dictate and tell us,
And not like your scribbling Fop-amorous fellows.
ACT III.
SCENE I.
A Field.
Enter Truman, and Goodfeild. True. LOok ye, Ned; this is the Champain where you
are to do Feats: Mine lies a little lower. But still I see no appearance of our
little Duellist. I Will stay a while with thee, 'till he begins to appear; and
then I Will retire, and leave thee to his mercy.


Good. Aye, aye, there is no great danger.


True. Have thou got a Fighting sword on? 'Sbud, Ned, thou art not mad, to
venture thy life with this?


Good. Come, waive this Raillery, and let us talk of something else. -- Did
thou observe yesterday, what havoc the little Rogue made among the Plays?


True. Aye, like Don Quixot among the Romances, for all the world.


Good. Why, his discourse was almost all Dramatick.


True. True: but I perceived withal, he did it a purpose; and not through any
want of Invention, or defect in his own Genius, as your Country-Squire uses
Wit's Common Wealth, and the Academy of Complements. For, sometimes you should
have him speak his own Sense, and that in very witty Terms too. -- But, e'faith
yonder he comes. I vanish: Farewell, Ned, take heed he hits you not in Tierce,
when it should be in Quart.

Exit.
Good. So, now for my Gamester.


Enter B. Goodfeild. B. Good. Oh, Sir, are ye here already? Well, I perceive
you ride the Fore-horse: Yet methinks, ye don't look like one prepared for
Fighting -- Come, 'faith, what satisfaction will you give me to take up the
Duel?


Good. Satisfaction, quoth a? thou talk as if I were in a posture to beg my
life. Soft, Sir, it is not come to that yet.


B. Good. No? why then belike you are resolved to fight? Come, Sir, unbutton.


Good. Stay a little. --


B. Good. Nay, then I perceive you are one of those that will not rend the
Buttons from your Doublet for any man's pleasure; and with good Sir Nicholas,
Your Conscience will not let you fight in a wrong Cause. I thought so at first.


Good. I tell thee, young Sir, thou art much mistaken: Thou shall have fighting
enough -- but first you shall hear me --


B. Good. Ad autre, ad autre, this Whedle will not pass. I see, you are minded to
reverse the laudable course of the world; and instead of falling from Disputing
to Fighting, you would drill me from Fighting to Disputing; but this must not
be among friends: Therefore, resolve, sweet Sir, either to give me Amend
honorable, or fight. Choose which you please: you see I am reasonable.


Good. Oh, very reasonable! -- I protest, it is a shame for a man to engage with
such a little young Thing: and yet, I vow, I think I must be forced to chastize
him when all is done. -- Hark ye, Child, do you know what Amend honorable
signifies?


B. Good. Yes, very well. It Is only to confess your offense on your knees, and
ask me pardon, in certain forms proper to that purpose. It Is a French Mode of
satisfaction, and of great use among men of Honor. -- Well then, you are
willing to perform it?


Good. Not yet: Hold a little. First let me know how I Have offended ye, and for
what I must ask your pardon?


B. Good. Uds bud, Sir, do you come here only to ask Questions? -- This is not
to be endured: You have wasted my whole stock of Patience; and now you shall
find me as arrant a Lion, as if ye had called my Mistress Son of a Whore. --
Come, Sir, draw.


(Draws. Good. Must not we uncase then?


B. Good. It Is no matter; I Will fight you with your Coat on. Of My Conscience,
there is no foul play under it.


Allons. Good. Nay then, if ye are desperate, have at ye.


(Draws. B. Good. So, Sir, to your Guard -- Good. -- I use always, before I
begin a Duel, to throw off my Perriwig. It Is troublesome in fighting.
(Discovers her self. Come, Sir, advance. Why don't ye come on? ye see I lie
open.


Good. -- Sister --


(Runs to embrace her. B. Good. -- Brother --


Good. I the name of wonder, what make you at London?


B. Good. Nay, rather, what make you at London?


Good. And why in this Disguize?


B. Good. You shall first answer me; By my Virginity you shall. You know what
the Play says, For Decency, the man should offer first.


Good. My Tale is quickly told. I grew weary of Cambridge, and came hither to
give my self the Divertisements of the Town. I have been here but three days,
and yesterday my very good friend helped me to a Mistress, with whom I am
desperately in Love. You saw both the parties last night in the Temple-garden.


B. Good. They seem both of much worth. -- But well, Sir, you have, I suppose,
discovered to her de ver great Affecshoon vid which your heart does boil over,
and all that?


Good. Yes.


B. Good. And, She takes it to the death?


Good. Not so: Nor much to the life. I am in the middle Class of Lovers.


B. Good. So much the better; Extremes are dangerous.


Good. But, to observe the method of Romances, now you have had my Adventure,
pray let us know yours.


B. Good. You shall. But first -- hem.


Good. What Is the matter?


B. Good. Nothing, nothing.


Good. More tricks still? who is this?


Enter Frank. B. Good. One, out of whose company I never venture my self, as
much a man as I am. -- You need not be so strange, Brother, it is my Maid.


Good. Old Acquaintance! how do thou? Let Us kiss a little. How do thy
Breeches fit thee? Ha, Wench!


(Is familiar. Fran. Out upon ye, Mr. Goodfeild, you are the strangest man;
will ye never leave your old tricks?


Good. Now, Sister, your story.


B. Good. It Is briefly this: My Mother (like a very dutiful Mother in the mean
time) has lately concluded, without my consent or knowledge, to marry me to Sir
Alexander Simple. (you know the fool.) And now she is come up to perfect the
Match here, as to the Law-part --


Good. All this I know already.


B. Good. That breeds my wonder. -- But to proceed: You may well suppose I
abhorred to marry such a Coxcomb: 'twas therefore by my Maid's advice, here, I
resolved to follow the old woman, Incognito; I performed it, and by good
fortune have got Lodgings near hers: Here I have means to observe her progress
in this Affair, and take all opportunities to interrupt it. And before I left
the Country, I resolved, if I found the business desperate on my part, I would
never see her again, nor leave London. Then in few days I had acquainted you at
Cambridge, where I was, and the occasion, and submitted my self to your conduct.


Good. Well said, my Girl! thou shall loose nothing by my conduct, unless it be
thy Maidenhead, to a good Husband. -- Have not you appointed another Duel this
morning?


B. Good. Something of that nature. Your friend that I saw with you last night,
appeared so much a Gentleman, and I liked his presence so well, I could not
forbear quarrelling with him; or if you had rather have it Stilo recitativo --
E're since his bright Eyes, my heart did surprise, I could not extinguish the
flame.


Good. Nay, nay, your Champion expects you yonder at the place appointed; and
let me tell ye, you cannot be more taken with his person, than he is with your
Wit and Raillery. But when he knows you are my Sister, he will be over head and
ears in Love, for he has often heard me speak of ye, and received your
Character with much pleasure. -- Well; you and I have met this morning to
fight, and parted without breathing a vein, or so; but in all probability your
second Duel will have a more bloody conclusion than the first.


Fran. Madam, Madam, fear nothing; your Brother talks thus only to fright ye.


B. Good. Fright me? that is a good one, e'faith! no, Frank, I am more a woman
than to fear any thing of that nature.


Good. Well, a propos; to loose no more time, and keep neither of ye any longer
in suspense, shall I conduct ye to him?


B. Good. Stay -- were it not better, and more to the honor of our Sex, for
you to fetch him hither?


Good. Away, away; are you a man, and stand upon such Effeminate Punctilio's?
You see he has met you half way; and you cannot in honor, but observe the
appointed place of Combat.


B. Good. So, in effect, the Challenge will prove no better than an Assignation.


Good. No matter: it is the pleasanter Encounter; and that sort of single Combat
has less of danger in it.


B. Good. As it may happen, Brother. -- But let that pass. A Sudden thought is
sprung within my breast (as the new Play has it) -- you say he fancies me
extremely, as I am a Boy?


Good. Yes.


B. Good. And withal, he has a very great love for my Name, as I am your Sister
in Darbyshire: I mean, Love by hearsay.


Good. It Is very true. --


B. Good. Enough. Come along; we'll to him immediately: But observe that you do
and say exactly what I tell ye, as we go.


Good. Well! thou art so full o'thy Tricks!


Exeunt. Enter Truman. True. Methinks my little Monsieur makes me wait too long:
I am almost a weary with walking for him. Hum. Susppose he has fought Ned
Goodfeild in earnest, and so the Constables have apprehended them in the Fact,
and thereupon conveyed'em both to a certain place. -- Yet it cannot be so, I Am
confident; that little fellow cannot be a Fighter -- and yet what a Devil makes
him so tedious? they might have dispatched it one way or other before this time.
I long to see my young opposite; it is a very witty Rogue; and I know the Duel
will prove but a Wit combat at most -- But these delays are naught for Wit, as
well as Love and Fighting -- Pox on it, the humour's gone over before we draw
our Weapons. -- Well, l'll take the other Turn, and then --


(Walks. Enter Goodfeild, B. Goodfeild, and Frank. B. Good. Look where he walks
yonder, as dull as a Platonic Lover: Is it the thought of Fighting makes him
thus pensive?


Good. No, I assure you: he is none of those. -- Jack Truman.


True. (turning) Oh, Ned! art thou alive still? -- What! my little Bully too?
Now I perceive thou art a Boy of thy word. I thought thou would ha'proved
Recreant.


B. Good. Who, I fall back from my own Challenge? Gad, Sir, you have nothing
about ye, that I Am afraid of.


Good. Hark ye, Jack; a word in private. -- Do You observe this little Raskal?


True. Aye, what is the matter?


Good. Little do you think what was his Affair with me this morning -- he had
no design of fighting.


True. Why, I always thought so. -- He a fighter? who a Devil can fancy, that
Smock-face to look like a Hector?


Good. In brief, Jack, he is a young fellow of a good Estate in our Country; I
have often heard of him, but never saw him till now: When he challenged me
yesterday, 'twas only to procure a more private opportunity of discourse; and
now he tells me, he is much a Servant to my Sister, and loves her to the last
point: my Mother knows nothing, but he has made several addresses to her, and
finds she is wholly at my disposal, and will never fancy any one, but who I
commend: And now he comes to open himself to me, and get my good will, as they
say. --


Fran. He seems moved at this. I warrant him a thorough-paced-Lover.


B. Good. This is the way to try him, Wench. --

(Aside.)
True. And so; you have consented?


Good. What a question is there! Have not I engaged my self to thee? -- Thou
have obliged me with a Mistress, Jack Truman; and e'faith I Will fit thy humor
with an other. -- As for the Squire there --


True. Damn him; does he come hither to disturb my Amors? -- Hark ye,
Country-Gentleman.


B. Good. 'Say ye, Sir?


True. Nay, nay, leave your Grimace, and be serious: I am not disposed to
railly. -- I understand you pretend to a young Lady in the Country that is my
Mistress. Look ye, Mister -- you must quit your claim to her, and that quickly
too, or I shall give your little Worship much Correction; do you mind me? much
Correction: for I hate a Rival, and love her extremely.


B. Good. And never saw her in your life? I perceive you are a good Catholic
lover, and have a strong implicit faith. It were a happy time for crooked
Virgins, and the like, if all Matches might be made thus, without Demonstration.


True. These are but idle words: Come, Sir, to the matter. Will ye surrender
your Mistress?


B. Good. How, Sir, surrender? Morblew! do you talk of surrendering, when I come
here to bid you battle? -- Look ye, Sir, there is Mr. Goodfeild on your side,
if he please, and I have here my friend to oppose him; so that we are provided
of Seconds: But I confess I had rather fight ye single.


True. Aye, aye, let it be so. -- But I could wish --


B. Good. That I would surrender without fighting --


True. No: that thou were more a man, and then I need not blush at such a little
Conquest.


B. Good. For my part, I Will be ingenious. I confess I have been a servant to
your Mistress; and to tell ye true, I have been very familiar with her:
therefore, look ye, I care not two pins if I do quit her to ye, for once; but I
must tell ye, you will have no such Prize of her. She Is damnably Crooked, and all
that: then she paints like the Devil: she has a Mouth like a Monster: and is
blind of one Eye: her Nose, I confess, is a rich one; but (to be brief) she
has the poorest Presence that e're ye saw in a woman. Then for her Wit and
Genius, it is as defective as her Beauty. -- With such a Match as this is, give
ye Joy, Sir.


True. Why, this is not to be endured! I Would rather he had continued still to be
my Rival, than thus blaspheme my Mistress. -- Come, Sir, draw --


(He draws. Good. Hold, Jack; be thine own Judge whether she lies, or no.


(Takes off her Perriwig.) B. Good. Nay, nay, let him run his Mistress through,
and see who will repent it.


True. Mock me not, friend: can I be so happy to find a Mistress in a Rival? --
Oh, Madam!


B. Good. Where was now your good Genius to prompt ye? (as you know who says)
-- Perhaps you will say my Brother played that part. -- Come, put up, put up your
Weapon, Sir; you are a little too forward: it is not the Mode to quarrel 'till
after Marriage.


True. Well, Madam, by this fair hand -- (Takes her hand and kisses it. I vow, I
can never forgive the injury you have done your self and truth, in such a
Character: and I am resolved, e're long, to be revenged on ye for it, to some
purpose.


B. Good. No threatenings, I beseech you, Sir. Your great Threatners are ever
the least performers.


Good. Are you not much surprised, Jack, at this discovery?


True. Extremely; but more pleased.


Good. Nay, I my self was as great a stranger to the Intrigue, till this
morning. -- Come, you shall know all, as we go.


B. Good. Aye, aye, let us return: Now my Duels are over, I have no more
occasion for the open field.


Good. True, Sister: A private apartment is much more proper for what is like to
follow.


True. But as we walk, Madam, how are you pleased I shall treat ye in this
disguize? as a Mistress, or a friend?


B. Good. As a friend, Sir, for life. If you appear too servile while I am in
Breeches, you will encourage me to wear 'em always. --


True. Here Is my boy -- Honnow, Sirrah, what is the matter?


Enter Boy. Boy. Sir, this Letter was brought to your Chamber this morning. I
have been in quest of ye at several places, and at last imagined you might be
here a walking.


True. Look here, Ned Goodfeild, this comes to me from Spruce, Docket's Clerk;
no doubt it contains intelligence of your Mistress -- read it.


Good. (reads) Sir, my Master, the Venerable Attorney Mr. Docket, sallies forth
this morning to one Madam Goodfeild, a rich Country-Widow, I mean a Wooing, or
perhaps something more; for if I can apprehend any thing from what I hear, it is
possible it may succeed. He began with her last night in no ill hour, and
(according to a Widows expedition in these affairs) he may meet with his match
this morning. -- But this is not the business of my Letter. If you have any
affairs with Mistress Lucia, you may use your discretion. Be at your Chamber,
and within these few hours you shall receive further assistance from

Your Servant I. S.




B. Good. Frank, do thou hear? why, this is he that Loveal mentioned at the
window.


Fran. Assuredly.


B. Good. Then have I obliged a poor Lover, and never knew it. No doubt but I
have had a great hand in making this Match.


Good. How Is that?


B. Good. Being minded last night to Gallant my Mother, not dreaming that she
had a Servant, I gave her a Song, and the Fiddles, about twelve: to be short,
her Maid came to the window, and from her Mistress told us, she knew we were
Mr. Docket's Music, and very honestly confessed he had much engaged her; or
words to that purpose.


Good. Gad, ye have done well. Did you but know the nature of the beast, you
would not fancy him for a Father-in-Law, of all men living.


B. Good. Oh! what a Coup d'etourdy have I committed?


True. No more of that: It Is a very happy accident, and will conduce much to our
advantage, for a Reason that I know. -- In the mean time, Ned, we must be
active: It Is a shame that young people should be outstrip'd in their Amors, by
two such old Creatures, that have not known what Love is, and the true ends of
Marriage, these twenty years. Let Us see who shall be married first of all us,
and the Devil take the hindmost. -- I am for this morning.


Good. And I.


B. Good. Nay, nay, though the old folks dote, and are hasty, it would not
become us to do so. Marriage is a serious thing, and should be thought of. Pray
let us look a little before we leap into Wedlock.


Good. How now, Sister! did not you commit your self to my conduct this
morning? Gad, I Will not have my Amors put off one minute for ye, an you were my
flesh and blood a thousand times more than ye are.


B. Good. Nay, be not furious, Brother. Ha, ha, ha, I know what is what as well
as all the Brothers in England. For my part, look ye, if it must be so, ye
shall find me civil.


True. Well, Ned, I Will go now about thy Affair: In the mean time I commit my
dear Mistress to thy charge. As we go, I Will appoint where to meet thee with
thine, before the Canonical hour be over.


Good. Come, Sister, now I Am at your service, to wait upon you to your
Lodgings, and help to shift ye.


B. Good. Sweet Sir, I have a Maid.


Good. Then I Will shift her.


Fran. That you shall not I assure you, Sir; for to shift a Maid, is to make her a
woman.


Exeunt. SCENE II.
A Dressing-Chamber.
A Table, with a Glass and Boxes, etc. Enter Madam Goodfeild and Loveal. Good.
Loveal, what is a clock?


Lov. It Is near Eight, Madam.


Good. Come, dress me quickly; for I Am resolved to make a day on it. I protest,
Mr. Docket's Music run in my head all night.


Lov. They call it Serenading here in London, as the people of the house tell
me: Without doubt it was a sign of great kindness to your Ladyship. Well; I
vow, Madam, I dreamt of him to night, and me thought he was such a fine man;
and performed things so well. -- Oh, Jupiter, that I had but such a Husband, I
could be contented to stay a whole half year longer on that condition.


Good. Nay, Wench, I confess he is a well-made man: But methinks I could wish
he were a little younger.


Lov. O, Madam, never fear that: I warrant he is tough; and though his hair
looks now a little grisled, yet one may easily perceive 'twas black; and that is
a hardy color, and holds out well. -- But did you observe his Nose, Madam?


Good. Aye, aye, it is a promising Member. But that which likes me best, was to
see how loving he appeared in his drink last night: He must needs be good
conditioned. -- Well, Loveal, how say thou, had I best encourage his Wooing,
or send him a flat denial? what is thy advice?


Lov. Advice, Madam? I hope there needs no advice in the matter: if your own
flesh and blood cannot advise ye, you are in a sad condition. For my part,
Madam, I Will tell ye true, if I were under your Ladyships Coats, I Would make no
more ado but send him a comfortable Message, and marry him this very morning.


Good. Nay, I know there is seldom any good comes of delaying.


Lov. I Am sure, Madam, if you had lost so many Suitors as I have by that means,
and been so often Bob'd as I have been, you would hate a put-off as you hate the
Devil.


Good. Well said, Wench; nay, nay, I am not much averse to the business: I only
felt you a little, how you were inclined; and since I find you are of my
opinion, I perceive two heads are better than one. -- Prithee, Loveal, call the
Boy.


Lov. (going to the door) -- Jack -- he is a coming, Madam.


Enter Boy. Good. Come hither, Sirrah. Can you go to Mr. Dockets? and come
again presently; and not play at Chuck-farthing by the way?


Boy. Yes forsooth, Madam.


(Bowing. Good. Yet it is no matter, neither. -- Is Trupenny about the house?


Boy. Yes, Madam.


(Bowing. Good. Go, send him to me quickly.


Boy. Yes, Madam.


(Bowing. Exit. Lov. I vow, Madam, our Boy is become very mannerly of late.


Good. Aye, aye, Wench; I hope to get credit by him: and your proud Citizens
Wives shall see that we in the Country can tell how to breed other peoples
children, too, if we are minded. -- But here comes Trupenny. Enter Trupenny.
Come hither, Steven. What, you went home with Mr. Docket last night?


Trup. Yes, Madam: And I protest, he kept me with him above an hour, to toss
your Ladyships Health over and over in a quart of Mum.


Good. Well, Steven, in my mind your Mum is not comparable to our
Darbyshire-Ale: it has a good Body, indeed, but is nothing so palletable.


Trup. Kuds niggers, Madam, you say true: it tastes so strong of Beans, of my
conscience they Malt Beans in that Country where they make it, and so put in a
double quantity of Hops, and that is all.


Good, Nay, nay, I believe I could tell how to brew Mum, an I had a mind. --
But let that pass: Come hither, Steven, and mind what I say. I would have ye
go presently to Mr. Dockets -- do you observe?


Trup. Yes, Madam.


Good. Well: tell him, I sent you to see how he does this morning -- would not
that be best, Loveal?


Lov. No, Madam, I think 'twou'd be better thus -- tell him, my Lady and I --
do you observe me, Steven? -- present our Service to him, and would desire him
of all Love --


Good. Aw, Loveal, I doubt that would not be handsome, neither. Therefore,
do you mind me, Steven? only tell him this, I would have him make haste, and
put on a clean Band, and --


Lov. Oh, Madam, never talk of a clean Band; he will wear a Cravat to day, sure,
though he never wore one in his life before. Look ye, Steven, mind me; Tell
him thus; First of all knock at the door, and ask if he be within, then ask if
he be stirring; then he will send for you up to his Bedside -- I protest, Madam,
I think ye had better let me go, foro'my Conscience, he will never do the
business handsomely.


Trup. I war'nt ye, Madam. -- Lord, Mrs. Loveal, do you think your self such a
woman for the business? I hold a Crown, I do it as well as you can for your
heart and blood, or your Mother before ye. --


Good. Well, good Steven, no more words, but make haste; and tell him only
this, I would have him come and speak with me presently, and I shall satisfy
him in the business which he mentioned last night. This is all at present, but
run, good Steven, for fear he be gone out.


Trup. I shall, Madam.

Exit.
Lov. Hark ye, Steven, tell him, my Lady desires he would bring his man with
him that was here last night.


Good. He don't hear. -- But it is no matter; leave that to me; I Will provide
thee a Husband, I warrant thee, Wench.


Lov. Aye, Madam, you have often said so; but words are wind, and I want
something that is more substantial.


Good. Nay, if I say I will, I will; though it cost me a hundred pound. --
Come, put on my shoos.


Lov. I Will fetch'em, Madam; they are in the next Room.


Good. No matter: I Will go thither my self, and take one Pipe, and by that time,
perhaps, the party will be come.


Exeunt. SCENE III.
Enter Docket, Dashwel, Spruce. Dash. Sir, what are you pleased shall be done
in Mr. Richman's business? the Sheriff of Essex has returned nulla Bona on the
sifa; and to take out a Casa, would be to little purpose; for I am told, the
Defendant cannot be found in rerum naturum, and some say he is gone to Sea.


Dock. No matter; let that rest. The Plaintiff han't fee'd me for Expedition
this Term. -- But have you delivered the Declarations in Ejectment yet?


Dash. What, those in Holborn, Sir?


Dock. Yes, in Com. Middlesex.


Dash. No, I protest, Sir, not yet.


Dock. O fie, Thomas, don't you know the Tenants in Possession are to appear
and defend Crastino Trin? and you no forwarder? -- Away, man, and about it
presently; and as ye go, take the Devonshire Latitats, and seal 'em. But do you
hear, Thomas, be sure ye return within this hour, for I intend then to go
forth; and we must not be both out.


Dash. It shall be done, Sir.

Exit.
Dock. This Dashwel, is a rare fellow for business: I protest, I have had many
Clerks, but never had the like. Spruce, come hither: Do you observe the
Tallents of your fellow Dashwel?


Spr. Yes, Sir; they are something long. He cuts his Nails but once a
fortnight, and then observes the Moon precisely.


Dock. Ye Fool; I mean his gifts, and Qualifications.


Spr. Cry ye mercy, Sir, I understand ye now. Indeed, Sir, he writes an
excellent Hand; but his Court is beyond comparison.


Dock. That Is not all, Spruce, that is not all: He Is one that loves the Law,
nay, doats upon the Law; I mean, the Practick part: and of my conscience he was
cut out for a Practiser in his Mothers belly. He Is one that has found out the
amorous Beauties, and the ravishing Graces of Practice; things that none can
perceive, but such a one as he is. In comparison to these, he hates your Plays,
your Masquerades, your Serenades, your Revellings (except only at Christmas,
and then the good Soul is ravished in the Temple-hall where he drinks small
Beer, and sees'em dance till his belly aches again) but above all things, he
abhors, like a child of the Law, your damned Poetry; with which, Spruce, I
fear you are a little infected.


Spr. Who I, Sir? God forbid. I vow, I have so great an aversion to Meeter, and
all that, that if you will believe me, I dare not sing Psalms for fear of the
worst.


Dock. Nay, Spruce, there you are again a the other side: I would not have ye
think there is any harm in Robert Wiseman's Psalms, nor in the old Song of
Chevie Chase, but that they may be both used, and very innocently. And more
than so, I believe there are some Volumes of Meeter that are very convenient,
and of great use in a Lawyer's Study, as The Garland of Good will, The furious
fight of Floddon-field, and all Mr. Wither's his Works; all these I believe
Dashwel has, and need not be ashamed of 'em. Nay, I can very well remember,
when I first learnt Court-hand I had all the Ballat of the Two little Children
by heart, and me thought it was so comfortable. But that which ought to be
odious to the understanding of all true Clerks, is your modern Poetry, your new
fashion or modish Poetry, your Play-Poetry, or Dramatick Meeter, your ranting
and tearing Poetry, your Poetry that breaks windows, or, as they themselves
call it, your Heroic Poetry. -- (Knocking without. Spruce, see who is at door.


Spruce goes to the door, and enters with Trupenny. Spruce. (entering) Sir,
here is Mr. Trupenny, with urgent business from his Lady.


Dock. Oh, Sweet Mr. Trupenny! Let me embrace my dear friend: And how does thy
good Lady, ha? I protest, Mr. Trupenny, I was resolved to wait upon her within
this half hour, to know her resolutions in the business aforesaid: You
understand me?


Trup. Lord, Sir! how you and my Lady jump together. Let me never stir now, if
she has not sent me to you for the very same end and purpose; namely, that ye
should hye ye to her, and she would give your Worship all the satisfaction
imaginable.


Dock. Say thou so, old boy? hold, here is six Fees I protest, a whole Guiny
for thy good news: Ten groats is below such a Message -- Spruce, here, take my
Hat, run, fetch my new Beaver, my Cane and my Gloves, quickly: I Will not demur a
minute. Oh, Sweet Mr. Trupenny!


Trup. I vow to God, Sir, you are such an obliging man. -- Pray, Sir, have ye
done any thing in Mrs. Betty's business? I make bold to ask, because my Lady
has ordered me to slit that cause, as they say.


Dock. Not yet, Sir; I protest, I have been so busy: But it shall be dispatched
in good time.


Trup. Nay, nay, let it rest: it is fit the old one should be served first.


Spr. Sir, here are your things.


Dock. Well said: Give 'em me. So; now, Mr. Trupenny, I am ready to wait upon
ye. Come, Sir --


Trup. After you, Sir --


Dock. Lord, Mr. Trupenny, you are so Complemental! I vow, you shall go first
--


Trup. Well, if it must be so --


(Is going. Dock. O Lord, what had I forgot! Now if my life lay on it I cannot
go till Dashwel returns.


Trup. I hope not so, Mr. Docket. God knows what occasion my Lady has of ye.


Dock. Ah, Mr. Trupenny, ye say true; and I would go with all my heart; but if
you did but know what occasion I have to stay at home at this time, you would
not blame me -- Hark ye, Sir, a word in private. You must know, Mr. Trupenny, I
have here in the house a very pretty young Niece, a great fortune she is: her
Father and Mother are both dead, but that is all one, for I am her Guardian.


Trup. How Is this? a pretty woman in the house, and I never set eye on her as
often as I have been here? Time has been, that I have smelt out a pretty Wench at
a streets length: it is a sign I grow old.


Dock. Nay, never wonder, Mr. Trupenny: She always keeps her Chamber, or to say
true, I keep her there. For I protest, here are so many idle fellows about the
Town, that I dare not let her be seen, as little as possibly. And besides that,
I have a constant eye upon her my self; but in my absence, I commit that trust
generally to Dashwel. As for this Spruce, he is a sly fellow, and I dare not
leave her to him.


Trup. What, you are afraid they would be naught together while you are out?
not unlikely.


Dock. No; but he is a cunning Raskal in these affairs: and who knows but he may
let her out to some young fellow, or else help some young fellow in to her?
Therefore I dare not trust him; and yet I would sain go to your Lady. --


Trup. What an unluckie thing is this! Is there no way? --


Dock. O Lord, Mr. Trupenny, now I think on it -- are you engaged in any urgent
business, at this time?


Trup. All my business was only to you, Sir, with this Message -- But since you
cannot come, I must return, and let my Lady know it.


Dock. No, no, that shall not be. I Will go my self: But in the mean time, sweet Mr.
Trupenny, let me conjure you, as you are my friend, and the like, to stay
behind and supply my place, as it were. You understand me? It Is but only till
Dashwel comes, which will be within this half hour.


Trup. Nay, nay, if that be all, let me alone to watch her water; I Am old dog
at that office. I dare swear, I have occupied the place above twenty times in
the Country.


Dock. O, Sir, how you oblige me? Well, I Will leave ye. Say nothing, but fall
into discourse with Spruce, and all is, well. I have tarri'd too long from your
Lady, I confess, but I Will redeem the time, and run all the way.

Exit.
Spr. What, is he gone, and does this fellow stay? O the Devil! (aside) now
cannot I perform to Mr. Truman; and then I Have lost my Credit for ever. Some
trick must be thought of. -- Dear Sir, how glad am I my Master has left us
together? I have often wished this happy opportunity, to be better acquainted
with good Mr. Trupenny. I vow, Sir, you are the goodest Gentleman I ever met
with.


Trup. O, Sir, your humble Servant. No great Gentleman neither: My Father was a
High-constable, and I am my Lady's Steward, in default of a better -- But I
pray, Mr. Spruce, if a man may be so bold -- what a clock is it?


Spr. Not bolder than welcome, I assure ye, Sir. Why truly, Sir, I think it is
betwixt nine and ten.


Trup. Aye, Sir; but I meant to have craved a glass of your small Beer, but I
protest I was almost ashamed.


Spr. Indeed, Sir, it is none of the best, being very thin, and something sour:
and (as you say very well) it is a shame to drink it.


Trup. Not so neither, Sir; I do not mean so, Sir; but I vow to Gad, Sir, your
Master pli'd me so with Mum last night, that I Am as dry this morning, as a Post
horse; and my stomach is a little -- as it were.


Spr. Shall we go to the next Apothecaries, and drink a Gill of Stomach-water?


Spr. No, Sir, no, that needs not; my Lady has an excellent water in the
Country that she makes her self: but that is nothing, you will say, we are here,
and that is there.


Spr. When all is done, I say, after a nights drinking, there is no settler like
a Dose of the same next morning. Come, Sir, you shall go with me to a place
hard by, where there is excellent Mum; faith, we'll have one pint together. Nay,
it shall not cost ye a farthing.


Trup. (aside) Now would this cunning Rogue whedle me from my charge: but soft,
old birds are not caught with chaff. -- I tell ye, Sir, I do not love Mum; it
has no pleasurable taste: therefore if you please, I Will take a seat. -- Hark,
what Musick's this?


(A Lute. Spr. (aside) A pox on him for me; now shall I never be rid of him. --
Music? what Music?


Trup. Why don't ye hear, man?


Spr. Oh, cry ye mercy; I hear it now: It Is a young Lady of my acquaintance
that would be private.


Trup. Nay, nay, I w'ont disturb her.


Spr. To tell ye true, it is my Masters Niece, whom he has, for faults best
known to himself, confined to her Chamber. I perceive she is preparing for a
Song; and then you will hear the best Voice in London, Mr. Trupenny.


Trup. Aye marry Sir, I love singing with all my heart; and time was, when I
could a --


Spr. Whist, whist.


(Within. Song.
Ah! how charming is the shade,
How sweet the calm delight,
That in this amorous Grove is made;
How cool the shade, and yet the day how bright!
Hark! the little Philomel
On yonder Bough complains,
And while she her sad tale does tell,
Echo replies in the same mournful strains.
Thus, thus, is both the eye and ear
Ravished with what they see and hear.
Does not all this
Invite us to soft Love, and mutual Bliss?
See my Clymene, see,
How that enamored pair of Doves
With melting Sympathy,
Enjoy their ever equal Loves.
They know no ears, nor feel they ought
To trouble the more pleasing thought.
Full of the same
Soft fire they burn, and cherish the kind flame.
Ah! happy, happy they!
We two may full as happy be,
If you but smile, and say,
Content, Amyntas, I agree.
Content, Amyntas, I agree.
Trup. By that sigh, with which the Lady concludes her Song, I presume, Mr.
Spruce, she is in Love.


Spr. Truly, Mr. Trupenny, it is not impossible; for our Ladies here in London
are apt, once in their lives at least, to love something or other: what they do
in the Country I know not. -- But a fig for your women, and all that belongs to
'em: Let us behave our selves like men. Methinks it is the unseemliest thing in
the world for us two to sit here like sots, when we have so excellent an
opportunity for a Voyage to the next Tavern or Alehouse, and taste a merry
Glass.


Trup. (aside) O'ho, are ye there? He Is at it again to drill me off, but all
this w'ont do.


Spr. I perceive ye are all very sober men, in your Country.


Trup. Nay, nay, no more Sobriety than will do us good; but that is all one.
Look ye, Mr. Spruce, for your Wine I don't love it, and for your Ale, ye have
not a drop in London worth drinking; that is the short on it.


Spr. How, Mr. Trupenny, not a drop worth drinking? Did you ever taste our
Cock-ale?


Trup. Cock-ale, no; what is that?


Spr. Why, there you show your ignorance. Look ye, Sir, I lay ye five pound you
shall say, ye never tasted the like in the Country.


Trup. Nay, nay, nay, nay, five pound is a wager not to be laid among friends;
and besides that, I have not so much about me; but I hold a Crown, let it be
what it will, we have Ale in Darbyshire worth ten on it. --


Spr. Ye make me mad. I hold an Angel to your Crown, that after the first
Bottle, you your self shall confess, that for Color, Taste, Farewell, Body, and
all that, it excels your Darbyshire, as far as your Darbyshire excels your
Dashwood.


Trup. How, I confess it? Sir, here is the Guiny your Master gave me even now, I
wager this to your Angel, I Will be hanged first. Come, lead away; this wager
shall be tried presently. -- I Will stand up for my Country while I breathe.


Spr. But perhaps you are otherways engaged at present; or perhaps you have
made a vow not to he seen in an Alehouse.


Trup. No matter for that, Sir, I Will not suffer my Country to be run down, by
never a pitiful Londoner in England. Come along, Sir.


Spr. Nay, then prepare to say, we have better drink.


Trup. Which if I do, I Will hang; that is fair I think.


Exeunt. ACT IV.
SCENE I.
Fleet Street.
Enter Spruce, Truman, Lucia, Maid. Spr. WEll, now I have brought ye together,
ye know best your own Affairs, and how to husband time with most advantage. I
must return to my Steward, that was so lately, Madam, your trusty Overlooker.


True. Prithee, what have thou done with him?


Spr. Why, faith, Sir, after I had drawn him from his Post, by the means I told
ye, I very soberly conveyed my Gentleman to the Cock-ale-house, where in
conclusion he will be very drunk: for, as good luck would have it, I was no
sooner entered, but I met there a certain true Trojan (indeed a Brother Clerk
of my acquaintance) I left him, after a charming glass or two gone round --


True. But missing you, may he not make an escape, suspecting --


Spr. His Companion's more trusty Keeper. No, Sir, no, he is as fast as if he
were in the Stocks for three lives; I mean, for parting Compos mentis. If he
have not a better opinion of London-Liquor ever after, let 'em spare their
Cocks, and boil me in the next Brewing: And that shall be called Spruce-ale --
Oh, how your City-wives will flock to it!


Enter Boy. Boy. Sir, your Coach is ready, and waits where you appointed:


True. Enough. Come, Madam, give me the honor to conduct you to your Servant;
whom when you have known but half as well as I do, you will confess to be the
worthiest Lover, as I the best of Friends.


Luc. You see, Sir, what a confidence I give to what you tell me, and how I
trust your Conduct. I must confess, with many Blushes, I have no Aversion to
his love or person: But still I tremble when I think my Uncle (whose severe
nature I too well know) may dash my happiness with many sorrows.


True. Think not of that, dear Madam, Fortune is more indulgent. Your Uncle is
this morning with my Friend's Mother, a rich Widow, in the height of his
Wooing: And you may easily conclude, Madam, he dares not show displeasure at
her Sons Match, since so advantageous, for that is the way to disoblige his
Mistress.


Luc. Then, Sir, why may not he know it beforehand?


True. By no means. If so, he will undoubtedly by some sinister means prevent
it, and that purely for lucre of your Portion, Madam: But when it is done, he
cannot disapprove it, for the former Reason. Besides, an opportunity or
advantage once neglected, is in Love, as in a Battle, never to be recovered.
--


Maid. Oh, Madam! we are all defeated: Yonder comes Dashwel, your old spy; if
he sees us here, or finds us not at home, he will raise the Hue and Cry, and we
are lost for ever.


Spr. Fear nothing; but you three cross over there, and away: Leave me to him,
and if I don't prevent his doing mischief, think me a duller sot than he is.


Enter Dashwel at one door, and at the other Exeunt Truman, Lucia, Maid. Spr.
Oh! you are a rare one, to stay thus long.


Dash. I could not help it for my heart and blood, I vow now. A Countryman, an
old acquaintance, met me in Holborn, and would needs give me a Pint. -- But is
my Master gone out?


Spr. No.


Dash. Then omnia been. I Will make haste to him, for I know he sits upon thorns.
--


(Is going. Spr. Hold. You must not go in: there is Madam Goodfeild with him,
and they are private. But should you know all, you would cut your throat, that is
certain, for being out of the way.


Dash. What, Felo de se? I Will be hanged first. -- But prithee, good Spruce,
what is the matter?


Spr. Of My Conscience, you deal with the Devil, or else you were wrapped in your
Mothers Smock; one of the two, I Am confident. Come, come, I know you make use of
Philters, Amulets, and Lovepotions, or something of that nature. --


Dash. If I do, the Dews take me. You know there is the Statute of Primo against
it.


Spr. Aye, aye, but that is nothing: for here was Mrs. Loveal came with her
Lady; but now she is gone. --


Dash. Ah, what a Rogue was I to be away. -- Ah, sweet Mrs. Loveal! and how
much she made of me last night!


Spr. Look ye; I knew you would run mad at this, and never hear me out.


Dash. Yes, yes, I will hear thee: Dear Spruce, say on.


Spr. With Mrs. Loveal came a delicate young thing about Eighteen, whom she
called Couzin; but I vow, she was the finest woman, I e're saw in my life --


Dash. Oh! --


Spr. Such a pretty Mouth, and such a little plump Lip, --


Dash. Oh! --


Spr. A little nimble Hand and Foot; and then withal so slender, you might span
her. --


Dash. Oh! --


Spr. Round amorous Breasts, that heave and pant with Love: white and soft as
Down of Swans --


Dash. Oh! --


Spr. Then to crown all, an Eye like any Basilick -- you know, Tom, a Basilick
has a delicate Eye.


Dash. Aye, aye, -- Oh! that I had been at home. Oh! that cursed Countryman,
and that damned Tavern.


Spr. Mrs. Loveal had not been entered so long as you might tell one hundred,
but that she asked me for ye -- and smiled like any thing.


Dash. Did she e'faith? I vow, I am beholding to her.


Spr. I told her you were abroad. At this she seemed as sad as if she would had her
purse cut.


Dash. Alack, alack, Poor heart!


Spr. After this she staid but little; and parting, with a low Courtesy,
desired me to remember her Love to ye, and tell ye, she and her Couzin were
going directly to the Folly, where they should both be very glad to see ye.


Dash. Edad, I Will go put on a clean pair of Sleeves, and follow 'em
immediately. --


Spr. Ye ben't mad? If ye loose time ye loose 'em. They are hardly got to the'
Temple-stairs yet: Away directly, it is ten to one you overtake 'em.


Dash. Ye say true; farewell. If my Master ask for me, make some Lie or other,
and all is well.


Spr. Let me alone for lying -- But do you hear? She bid me tell you, that if
you find 'em not at the Folly, you will not fail to have 'em in the long Walk
at the New-spring-garden.


Dash. Enough --


Spr. One word more. -- But, says she, If we should chance to be gone from
thence, he will be sure to meet me at my Couzins Lodgings --


Dash. Dear Spruce, where is that?


Spr. At the sign of the Windmil in the Old-pell-mell.


Dash. Enough, enough; I Will not delay my joys one minute longer.

Exit.
Spr. So; thou art secure for one three hours. This Dashwel is the easiest
Gudgion! he gulps a Lie as readily as Juglers swallow Knives. Now to my
Steward; if he has swallowed Glasses with equal haste and pleasure, he is in his
altitudes by this time.

Exit.
SCENE II.
Enter Ned Goodfeild, B. Goodfeild, and Frank, in their own Apparel. Good. NOW
I can call you Sister again, with a safe Conscience. Methinks, before ye looked
like a Brother of the Blade, or a kind of little Huff. -- Come, bear up, the
Rendezvous is not far off.


B. Good. Methinks you are grown very Heroic, Brother? you think of nothing
but close fighting. For my part, since I am returned to Petticoats again, my
mind is not so masculine as lately. And I consider, more distance would more
become this Habit.


Good. Cunning Hypocrite! Now should not I proceed in this Assignation, you
your self would be my chief Tormentor; and my own flesh and blood, like another
Brutus, would give me the first Bodkin. --


B. Good. As sure as can be.


Good. Fie, fie, Sister, be more ingenious: This backward dissimulation of a
longing Female, is odious in a Person of Quality, and a Town-Lady, and shows
the coursest breeding in the world. I shall be ashamed to keep you company,
unless you converse with more Integrity and Candor.


B. Good. Faith, Brother, I cannot help it. Since I shifted my Apparel, I am
infected with what belongs to a Petticoat and Wastecoat: it is the humor of the
Garment, and therefore you must pardon me.


Good. I do; but Jack Truman shall prescribe your Penance, which if it be more
pleasant than the fault deserves, you ought to thank your too indulgent
Confessor.


B. Good. A propos: Let us make haste then to the place of Exccution. But by
the way, Brother, let me tell you, I think it would be better if --


Good. Away with your impertinent Propositions. I think there is nothing in
nature so Capricious as a she-wit. Is this a time for advice, when it is now
near eleven a clock, and you know what we are to do effectually before twelve?


B. Good. Yet do but hear my Reasons.


Enter Docket, Widow, Loveal. Dock. Well, Madam, since we are agreed on the
main point in Issue, and you are pleased once more to lie under Covert-Baron,
there is now no more to be done, but to turn down this lane, and we shall
quickly arrive at an honest Parson's, my intimate acquaintance, indeed the
Ordinary of Newgate, who will give us the Book of Matrimony as compendiously as
if he were to teach the Neckverse.


Wid. Soft, Mr. Docket, though we have a Country-proverb, that Marriage and
Hanging go by Destiny, yet methinks, for lucksake, I would not be married by
one that deals so near the Gallows.


Dock. The truth is, Madam, he has often promised to marry me for nothing: but
that is all one; rather than displease my dear Widow, I am content to loose his
Assumpsit. How like ye, Madam, to be married by a Reader of an Inns a Court? I
know 'em all.


Wid. By no means, Sir: Do your Readers at the Inns a Court marry fokes? Never
stir, now that is as bad as to be married by a Justice of Peace, out upon it!


Dock. Nay, my Dear, you mistake me clearly. I mean, a Chappel-Reader.


Wid. Cry ye mercy, Mr. Docket, I understand ye now. Well, Sir, what you
please. -- O my heart! Come hither, Loveal; do ye know those two that stand
talking yonder?


Lov. As I hope to live and do well, Madam, I dare say it is Mr. Edward
Goodfeild, and Mrs. Betty, your Ladyships only Son and Daughter. Nay, I Will be
sworn yonder is Frank too.


Wid. I vow, I think so. But how come they together, and in London? I left my
Daughter in the Country, and sure an God'll my Son's at Cambridge.


Lov. I fear me, Madam, there is some naughty design in hand; for I dare
swearupon a Book it is they.


Dock. Never trouble your self, Madam, London's a large place, and here is one
body or other like every body in the Nation. For my part; I have sometimes met
somebody as I have been going along the street, as like somebody as I know,
as e're you saw; and yet when all came to all I have been deceived.


B. Good. Now let me die, and all that, Brother, but yonder is my Mother and her
new Servant, a't'other side the way; and as the Devil would have it, she has
spied us. What shall we do in this case? this is no time to take notice of
Mothers.


Wid. Well, to be sure, Loveal, we'll walk softly before. Do you step over the
way, and see if it be they for certain, and then follow us.


Exeunt Dock. Wid. B. Good. Brother, we are all undone: This wicked Mother of
ours has sent her woman over to make further discovery. Look where she comes*


Eran. Madam, you spoil all: Be not surprised, but you two stand aside as
unconcerned, and leave me to her; if I don't send her off with less
satisfaction than she came on, say I Am not worth your Service.


(Good. and B. Good. retire a little. Fran. ( meeting Loveal) Oh! me cher
Maitress, Madam Belamy! Ah, how bless am I to see me good Friend a Londres!
Merdugues, I am de happy woman in de varlde.


Speaking, and Acting like a French woman all this Scene. Lov. What means this
Gibbrish? I understand not a word she says.


Fran. Ah, Madame, you cunno I speak no good Englesh. I have been but two day
in dis City. Mais Ie Scais bien que vous parlez bon Francois.


Lov. Now, for ought I know, she bids the Devil take me, in French. Lord, to
see how I was mistaken, to think this was Frank. Well, I Will e'ne back again,
and say nothing, lest I appear as much beside the Cushion as she is


(Is going. Fran. (staying her) Ah, Maistress Belamy, verfore are you so
estrange? Ma foy, have you oblie how ver merry we were ensemble last soomer, vid
Messieurs de Cour Dauphnie, at de little Caberet, Au test noir, in de Ru'e St.
Jasques a Paris? Look you, Madame, dear stand me ver good friend Monsieur le
Marquis de Montausiere, vid his Sister Madame de Fountain-amante. Give me de
honor, Je vous supply, to introduce you into his cunnisance: you will find him
de ver noble Gentlemane, and he will make ver mush of your body, begar.


Lov. Pray let me go, Mistress. -- Fie upon her, for a naughty woman! I shall
be undone if I stay.

(aside.
Fran. You need no be affear, sweet Madam Belamy, he was ver well cure a Roan,
before he came in Engleterre, begar.


Lov. Let me go, I say. I know ye not, not I. And you are mistaken in me, that
you are; I am none of those you take me for: my name's Loveal, and not Bellany
-- How I hate the looks of these French people! It Is no wonder we cannot abide
em. For my part, I never saw any of 'em before, and I hope, never shall again
-- Let me go, I say.


Fran. Ma foy, Madame; me ask your pardon tres-humblement, if you be not dat
good English Lady Maistress Belamy, in whose company I have had the great
honor to be garanted a Paris and Fountainbleau. Yet for that you are so ver
like the good graces of me dear friend, if you do please to go along vid
Monsieur, Madame, and your Servante, to a little Frigate below de bridge, we
have dear one two tree glasses of ver excellent Frontiniack, and de little
Collation, to which you will do very great honor, Si vous plaist.


Lov. O Lord, a Spirit, a Spiritd a French Spirit! I shall be carried to
Barbado's. Away, Spirit, farewell, Satan; I have heard of your tricks. But
soft, older and wiser.

Exit.
Fran. Well* how like ye my dispatch?


B. Good. Oh, most cleverly done, Wench! 'Twas a neat Conveyance; there is never
a Lawyer of 'em in Town can draw a better. Take my best French Point, tomorrow,
for thy witty French Wheedle.


Good. 'Faith 'twas a most important Service, my Girl: and Monsieur the
Marquess de Montausere is your very humble Servant for it. Without doubt, had
Loveal been confirmed in her untimely knowledge of us, it would have been no
small obstruction to our Designs.


B. Good. Yet was the pleasure of the action greater than the profit. I vow,
Madam de Fountain-amante had much ado to keep the due Grimace proper to a
person of her Quality, and not laugh outright. -- But, I Will stay here no
longer, Brothers, not only to avoid such another Rancounter, but chiefly,
because I long to be at my Journeys end.


Good. That is, you think it long to night. I understand ye, Sister.


B. Good. It Is well you do: walk you before, while my Maid ties my shoo-string
-- I Will follow immediately --


N. Good. Prithee make haste --

Exit.
B. Good. So, he is gone (to Frank stooping) away, Wench, let us turn down this
lane; I am resolved to have one frollick more in the open field of this world,
before I enter into the enclosures of Matrimony --


Fran. 'Slife, Madam, what will your Brother and Servant apprehend from such
delays? --


B. Good. No matter for my Brother; as for my Servant, this is my last effort
to exercise his patience, and try how much he loves me -- Come away, away --


Exeunt. SCENE III.
The Scene opens, and discovers Trupenny and Clarke, in play. Trup. WEll, all
this cannot be helped. But the Devil's in the Cards, that is plain. Uds bud, I Have
played at Put a thousand times, and a thousand to that, but I never had such
cursed luck before -- Come, Sir, shuffle: But first let us draw the Table more
to the light; Gad I have drunk so much, I can scarcely see.


They bring the Table forward upon the Stage. Clar. Sha, sha! this is nothing:
Give me a man that can sit at it from twelve at noon, to twelve at night, then
go to bed sober, and swear there is no strong drink in London: there is your true
English heart of Oak.


Trup. As I live Mr. Clarke, you say finely. -- But let us to our Books again
--


Clar. Ten such as these would overrun the Low Countries, and drown all
Germany in a Rummer. Come, Sir, before we go any further, here is one brimmer to
your better fortune. ( drinks) Faith, Sir, you have the worst luck of any man
living. Loose Eleven games together and never turn Stake? why, you don't drink
well, man. Unless you plie the Glass with better Courage, you will never win a
game at One and thirty.


Trup. Say ye so? Nay, then fill it up; I Will do ye right, e'faith, Boy. If you
provoke me once at this Weapon, you will find me a mad Boy; I Will tell you that.


(Drinks. Clar. Sa, sa. That Is he, that is he.


True. Now, Sir, deal. -- (Clark deals. Gad, Sir, I Will see ye. If I loose with
these Cards, I Will never play at Put more.


Clar. Why then I Am gone. You know, Sir, I Am bound and cannot refuse: Play away
-- that is mine; and there is a Tray, e'faith.


Trup. That Is tied. --


Clar. Gad, there is another Tray, win it and wear it.


Trup. Uds, I Have lost. Was ever such damned luck? -- Well, I will not leave ye yet
-- Drawer, bring a fresh pack o'Cards -- Come, Sir, I Will double the Stakes;
what a Devil, I cannot loose always -- Let me see -- [feels in his pockets] --
(aside) Uds bud, I have lost all my Money; here is but one poor Nine pence, a
Groat and five Farthings -- (stamps) Was ever such a cursed hand seen? three
Trays at once? What man alive could have thought it? -- Sir, can you lend me
Five shillings?


Clar. How, Sir, lend? Sbud, Sir, you are not in earnest? what butter me with
my own money? this is worse than to play upon tick: You must know, Mr.
Trupenny, there is a Statute against it; and besides that, it is not the custom
of London, I assure ye.


Trup. No? why then -- hark ye, Drawer, a word with ye: thou seem an honest
fellow. (strokes him upon the head) Look ye, Drawer, yon Gentleman has won all
my money at Put; prithee lend me half a Crown, to win as much back again as may
pay the Reckoning.


Draw. Faith, Sir, I cannot, and it were to save my life. -- By and by, by and
by, I come, I come, Sir.

Exit Drawer.
Trup. Why there is the Devil. Oh, here comes Mr. Spruce: nay; then I care not.


Enter Spruce. Spr. Gentlemen, I must seriously beg your pardon: I have been
diverted by so many unluckie accidents, that I protest, my stay has been almost
an hour longer than I intended.


Clar. There needs no Apology, sweet Mr. Spruce; we have been so seriously
engaged since you went, that we scarce ever thought o'you.


Spr. Well, then I hope you like the Ale, Mr. Trupenny. Come, where stands the
Glass? we'll whisk it about, e'faith, boys.


Trup. Nay, nay, nay, Mr. Spruce, never talk of that. Whisk quoth a? I have had
enough of Put, one would think; but that is all one. Hark ye, Mr. Spruce, one
word in private: Mr. Spruce, as I hope to live now -- yet first I should have
told ye -- but that is no matter neither -- then as I was saying, Sir, your
friend yonder has won Thirty shillings of me at half-Crown-put; and nothing
vexes me, but he has not left me money enough for another stake. Now, worthy
Mr. Spruce, as the saying is, I take you for my friend, and I hope to sinde ye
so: Can ye do a man the favor, Sir, as to lend a Crown, or an Angel? As I Am an
honest man, you shall have it again.


Spr. What to do, Mr. Trupenny?


Trup. Only to win my Thirty shillings back again: nothing else, I protest.


Spr. How, Mr. Trupenny, win it back? I perceive you don't know Mr. Clark: why
he is the only Put-man in Town. I hold ye six to four, an ye play with him till
midnight, ye shall never win two pence of him. He knows ye all the Cards as
well as he that made 'em; and then for the sleek, the nip, the double, and all
that, he is the Devil of a Gamster.


Trup. Nay, Guds sooks, if he be the Devil of a Gamster, I have nothing to say
to him. 'Sbud I always thought some such thing. -- But now, how shall we do to
pass the time? methinks now I Am in, I Am loath to leave good company.


Spr. What think ye of a Wench, Mr. Trupenny? I know a Miss hard by, that is
excellent company, Gad: What say ye?


Trup. Not a word more of that, if you love me, Mr. Spruce. For ought I know,
she may be the Devil of a Gamester too. And then, look ye, I had rather loose
Thirty shillings at Cards, than give a Surgeon Forty shillings for a cure, and
Three pound for seeresie. I must confess, look ye, Mr. Spruce, I love the sport
well enough; but pox on it, there is no doing in this noughty Town of London, (as
my Lady calls it.) Besides, Sir, should I get it, you understand me; Uds bud,
Sir, it were enough to spoil a whole Country. -- Come, come, without further
ceremony, let us all sit down, and drink while we can stand. Mr. Spruce, my
Service to ye.


(Drinks. Spr. Sir, your humble Servant --


Clar. But pray, Mr. Trupenny, why are you such an enemy to London?


Trup. Fough, I hate it. -- Why, did you never hear the Song?


Clar. The Song, what Song?


Trup. Why this it is to be an ignorant Londoner. -- I Will tell ye, Mr. Spruce,
for you are my friend, and an understanding person. It was made by a very
honest fellow in our Country that chanced to be at Bartholomew-fair once, and
had his pocket picked.


Clar. Aye, aye, I knew him very well; his name was Bartholomew Cokes.


Trup. No, Sir, he was none of your Cokes, I assure ye, but a Kinsman of mine
at Mansfield. To see how your'e mistaken with your Cokes 's. --


Spr. Nay, nay, never mind him, man, but on with your Song.


Trup. Cuds bud, it is the finest Song you e're heard in your life. The Clerk of
our Parish sings it rarely to the tune of the Sixteenth Psalm, and it will go
to Green sleeves, but that is all one -- I Will sing it as well as I can.


Spr. Aye, sweet Mr. Trupenny, let us have it.


Trup. Hem, hem. -- Faith, Gentlemen, my voice is but so, so. But that is no
matter. Time was when I could have done well; but --


Trupenny Sings. To be sung al* yvronge, in a drunken humor. SONG.
1.
O London, wicked London-Town!
Whose Spots so many and so brown,
Deform thy face in such a fashion,
Thou do appear the one black Patch --
Yea, of the Nation.
2.
Ye Ladies that wear powdered Toors:
Ye honest Women eek, and Whores,
Reform your lives, and by degrees
Leave the Back-fall, and rather fall --
Yea, on your knees.
3.
Ye Gallants that wear Sword and Scabbard;
Ye Coopers eek, that deal in Clapboard,
Repent for shame: and do ye hear?
Drink no more Sack, but rather Ale --
Yea, drink small Beer.
4.
Ye men of Trade that deal in Lying,
I mean, in Selling and in Buying,
Look to your Wives, for it is spoken,
They are as cracked as you your selves --
Yea, full as broken --
Boy, bring another Chamber Pot. Plague on ye, you Rogue, you never empty.

Spr. Did thou ever hear a foolish Song worse sung in thy life, Dick Clark?


Clar. It Is beyond expectation ridiculous. -- But hang him; this Country-Fop
begins to be cursed drunk, and his humor will quickly become tedious: Let Us
dispatch him, and away.


Spr. Withal my heart. The Other Glass does the work.


Clar. Or else the Devil's in him. Let me die, I am consident the Sot has drunk
at least Eight or ten bottles for his own share in less than an hour. While he
was busy in play, I used to fill the Glass and set it by him, and he would
never mind, but take off Three or Four together in that manner. As for
example, you shall see -- (Clark fills and sets it to Trupenny. Methinks you
droop, Mr. Trupenny?


Trup. No, Sir, not droop; there is nothing of drooping in the case, I assure
you; but only I was thinking of a thing which I had quite forgot; that is, Mr.
Spruce, how I should have staid at your Master's Chamber, about a thing that I
know -- But hanged let it pass, here is a Health in a Rummer.


(Drinks. Spr. I protest, Mr. Trupenny, you are the merriest man -- Ha, ha, he
-- But all this while I must not forget to be civil. Look you, Mr. Trupenny,
here is one Glass I Will put about to your best Concern; I mean, the good health
of your good Lady Madam Goodfeild -- Mr. Clark, my Service to you.


Trup. Hold, Sir -- you shall excuse me, efeckins.


Spr. What, not your Ladies health?


Trup. Not so, Sir; I do not mean so, Sir, I assure you: But only I Will begin it
my self -- well, I say nothing; but she is as good a Lady as any in England, and
has as able a Servant as any in the world -- but that is all one. I defy your
pimping Glasses (throws away the Glass.) Drawer, bring a whole Bottle, I say, a
whole Bottle. Look you, do you see, I will begin my Ladies health in a whole
Bottle, an it were as deep as a -- Churm. And as I Am an honest man, I Will see my
self pledged -- Mr. Clark, here is to ye, with all my heart --


[Drinks at a Bottle. Clar. Ah, pure Country-frolick *


Spr. The Rogue's mad.


Clar. How he stares --


Spr. And blows --


Clar. And sweats at it. --


Spr. How now, Mr. Trupenny?


[Trupenny falls back. Trup. (down) Gentlemen, I drink fair. -- This damned
Rogue Drawer has gi'n me a Chair that wants a -- wants a -- one leg --


Spr. Rather, you want two -- Come, Clark, here is no more to be done. Now,
which way are you bound?


Clar. Here, Drawer, here is the Reckoning -- Faith, Jack, now I have recruited
my Pockets indifferently well; I must directly into Holborn: I have a certain
Intrigue there, with a Cutler's Wife, that must not be neglected. Farewell.

Exit.
Spr. Drawer, run and fetch a Porter with a great Basket; and do hear --
[whispers] -- you understand me?


Draw. A little below Fetter-lane, say you, Sir?


Spr. Yes. I leave this to thy manage: Do it ingeniously, and here is shilling
for thy pains.

Exit.
Draw. Thank ye, noble Master. Let me alone for Roguery -- [ to Trupenny] --
Sir, Sir, will ye please to rise, and walk into the next Room? there is Company
a coming hither that have bespoke a Dinner.


Trup. E'faith, now, it is all off -- and -- e -- gad I can drink no more.


Draw. Let me help ye up, Sir, -- methinks you're something heavy -- [searches
his Pockets] -- what a Devil, nothing but a few greasy Papers? --


Trup. Nay, nay, nay -- take off your Bottle, Mr. Spruce; Uds bud, I Will not
bate ye an Ace, look ye. -- Ho'now, what are you? the Drawer? Ah, poor little
Drawer, let me kiss thee -- where is Mr. Spruce, ye Rogue Drawer?


Draw. Sir, the Gentlemen are stepped into the next Room, only to --


Trup. As I hope to live, I Will follow them, and see my self pledged, and then,
-- call a Coach, ye Rogue -- for I can drink no more, ye Rogue -- but will go
home like a Prince, ye Son of a Nine-eyes.


Draw. This way, Sir.


Exeunt. Enter Loveal sola, and after a while enter to her, Spruce. Lov. Lord!
what a wide Town is this London; I have been, I believe, in Forty several
places, but cannot find my Mistress out -- nor in all my Jaunt I have not met
with Trupenny: Pray Heaven he be not spirited away by that strange French
creature -- Well, I dare swear she had the foul Disease, she spoke so
strangely; for I have heard folk say, it alters the speech much: Out upon her
for a filthy beast; I warrant it is so.


Enter Spruce. Spr. Mrs. Loveal! most happily met --


Lov. Mr. Spruce! I profess, I am glad I have met with somebody I know; I had
like to have been spirited away, which so scared me, that I was forced to run
for it; if I had not, I vow, I do believe I should never have seen Darbyshire
more. But pray, Mr. Spruce, may I be so bold to ask where people use to be
married in London? for my Mistress is gone with Mr. Docket on that design, but
I cannot find 'em --


Spr. If you will permit me the honor of waiting on you, I will show you the
place --


Lov. Indeed, Sir, I would not trouble you; but if you can tell me where our
Steward Trupenny is, he shall go with me -- I protest to you, he has not seen
home since he went this morning to your Master's Chamber: I wonder where a
murrain he should be! --


Spr. I left him just now drinking a Glass at the Cock-ale-house, with a
Countryman of his, whom he met with by chance --


Lov. The Devil take him; he will get drunk, and then there will be no ho with
him: He is as mad as a Buck in Rutting-time, when he is in his Beer, as they
say --


Spr. But, Mrs. Loveal, I have a Request to you, in behalf of a poor despairing
Lover: good Soul, loosing his heart in your company, he is wandering about the
Town to find you out -- for they are your Eyes have conquered him --


Lov. Nay, good Mr. Spruce, no more, if you love me; you act the flattering
Courtier now -- but I confess, I have had some languishing looks in my time; I
will assure you, they have been called the Sun, Moon, and seven Stars too: Nay,
I believe I can look killingly still; see, Mr. Spruce, do I not? --


Spr. Such looks would kill a Basilisk --


Lov. Nay, nay, I could have done, but alas, alas, I grow old, yet not so old,
but I have seen my Elders doated on, aye, and by young men too -- I vow by my
Virginity, I am but forty odd --


Spr. (aside) Virginity quoth a? -- Aye marry, that is an age fit for a Lady
Mayoress: women, especially Maids about Forty, are in their prime, being past
the wanton years; but so fond and vain are young Virgins at thirty, that I have
seen 'um hang about men's necks and kiss 'um, and dote on all they met.


Lov. Ha, ha, he, that is true; Trupenny knows it of me; but (though with much
ado, I must tell you) I am honest, I can assure you -- but not to appear
uncivil, May I, without offense, desire to know who this poor creature is? for
I pity him heartily; and I vow to you, I am so charitable, I would not have
him cast himself away for me, poor Soul, for the world --


Spr. To say true, it is Dashwel, my fellow-clerk --


Lov. Loving Mr. Dashwel -- now, Mr. Spruce, I dare swear Marriages are made in
Heaven; for I must confess -- yet, ha, ha, he, you will perhaps wonder at my
confidence, I have had a great kindness for him from the first time I saw him
-- but I vow, I mean honestly --


Spr. But you have not only vanquished him, but another too that has seen you,
is become your Admirer; and he being jealous of Dashwel, has on purpose sent
him out of the way, that he might have the freer converse with you -- and now
--


Lov. Mr. Spruce, speak not for him -- if you do, I must deny you; for I vow to
you, I can like none but Mr. Dashwel --


Spr. Then woe to unfortunate Spruce, that must die with despair -- the
wretchedest creature on the earth --


Lov. Lord, Mr. Spruce, is it you? hold, hold, Sir, and take some of my Spirit
to comfort you -- but I fear you do but play the rogue.


Spr. I swear --


Lov. Nay, nay, I vow I believe you do not -- and tell you true, you are the
only man I wished to be my Husband; and to show my good nature -- see, I am
ready to sacrifice my self to your will: But ha! bless me, what is here?


Enter Porter with Trupenny in a basket: boys following. Trup. Why, you young
Sons of Whores, what ado is here? did you never see a man ride in a Coach
before? -- Ha, Mr. Spruce, and my old Mother Midnight Loveal -- So ho, Mr.
Spruce. Mrs. Loveal, will you ride? hold Coachman, hold you Rogue -- Yfeck
it is fine riding.

Exit.
Lov. Now, out upon him for a beast, and a shame take all ill-luck, say I, for
making me loose your good company: Now must I go put him to bed, or my Mistress
will lead me such a life -- for he is my charge when he is in this condition --
a filthy beast -- farewell, sweet Mr. Spruce, till an hour hence, and then I
will steal out to finish the business you wot of, if you think fit.

Exit.
Spr. Farewell, Fondling.
Now to my Lovers
Whose serious Passion merits more success:
This is but Love-burlesque, or something less.
Exit.
ACT V.
SCENE I.
Enter Truman, Ned Goodfeild, and Lucia. Luc. YOu see, Mr. Truman, I have
performed what you desired; but know, had I not been well assured that that was
true you told me, I should not have so soon, or easily consented: and I hope,
Sir, you will not impute it either to folly or fondness, but to an Uncle's
rigor, that made me act what now I have done.


N. Good. Far be it from me, Madam, to harbor such base thoughts of one so
Virtuous -- but I shall ever acknowledge the favor my best of Friends has
done me. -- And Friend, suspect not my Sisters fidelity, for I know she has so
just a sense of Honor, that what she promises she will perform: Yet, I must
confess, her long stay somewhat startles me.


True. Use no farther motives, for they will rather induce me to cherish, than
dissipate my breeding Jealousies: Her Country-innocence is an argument more
prevailing than all your Rhetoric. Were she indeed one of the gay Ladies of
the Town, whose words and actions never agree, I should have known how to have
managed my Amor.


Luc. Your Boy, Mr. Truman, perhaps brings some news of the Lady --


Enter Boy. True. Sirrah, have you met with Madam Goodfeild?


Boy. Yes, Sir; and she is just now going to be married to a Gentleman that is
with her.


True. How, to another? Now, Ned, I begin to suspect thy fidelity.


N. Good. It is impossible she should be false: the boy mistakes.


Boy. I am sure, Sir, that what I say is truth; for I sifted it out of their
boy; who told me, his Lady Mrs. Goodfeild and Mr. Docket were going to be
married.


True. Docket! blessed mistake! it is thy Mother, Ned -- now my hopes revive
again.


N. Good. Did not I tell thee, Jack, it was a mistake? but, Sirrah, are they
not married yet?


Boy. No, Sir, for one Parson denied them, the Canonical hour being past, and
they having no License neither, so that now they are coming to Lincoln's Inn, in
hopes to find the Reader within, who is Mr. Docket's friend.


N. Good. Better than I could have wished. Jack, as thou love me or my Sister,
contrive some way to hinder this match; I hate the thoughts of being controled
or allied to such an impertinent Ignoramus -- besides, who knows but he may
wheedle her out of what would be our due, when she dies?


True. They come; therefore retire, Ned, with thy Mistress, and something I will
do to manifest my Love for thy Sister -- I have it --


N. Good. Good luck attend thee.


N. Good. Lucia, Exeunt. Enter Docket, Widow, Goodfeild, and Boy. True. Oh, Mr.
Docket, I am glad I have met you --


Dock. To see me married, you would say, -- Why, look you, Mr. Truman, you must
excuse me, that I did not invite you. Widows use to go to it with secrecy; and
for my part, I love not to blazon to the world what I am going about.


W. Good. Pray, Mr. Docket, what Gentleman is that? he seems to be a person of
Worth --


Dock. Why, lovely Bride, it is a worthy friend of mine, a man of a fair State,
and sober Conversation -- therefore for my sake salute him.


True. Madam, your humble Servant -- but, Mr. Docket -- your Niece --


Dock. My Niece? what of her? -- Oh you like her -- and would, with my consent,
marry her, and by that means relieve your Mortgage -- Why look you, Mr.
Truman, I want money -- and you know --


True. Right, I do know, Mr. Docket, that unless you make haste, your Niece will
be stole away and married.


Dock. How, stole away, and married? undone -- undone -- but now I think on it,
let um if they dare, I Will bring my Writ of Ravishment de Guard against them: But
for fear of the worst, good Friend, keep my Widow company till I step home, and
I Will return immediately -- Oh Heavens, my Niece stole! I Will firk un e'faith.

Exit.
True. Now, Widow, since the old Goat is shifted off, let us make the best use
of our time we can --


W. Good. As how? I pray -- (I hope he will not be uncivil --

[aside.
True. Why in chousing the old fool, by taking me into his place --


W. Good. What, marry you? that would be fine --


True. Certain, Widow, there is some difference between me and the Lawyer
Docket: First, I am younger, and consequently fitter for a Widow's service: In
the next place, I am richer, to please her A varice: and lastly, not to flatter
my self, I think I am handsomer to beget Christian-like Children; for, Agad, if
this fellow get any, it must be with his Inkhorn, and what they will prove,
judge you --


W. Good. I vow, Sir, you are a pleasant Gentleman -- but --


True. No buts, good Widow, but along, for I am all-over in Love; and till I
overwhelm thee with kindness, I shall not be my self --


W. Good. But may I trust to you, that you are inearnest? -- I swear, a comely
person, and so like Squire Goodfeild, that was! I warrant an able person --
[aside] But, Sir, pray put none of your London* tricks on me: I fear you do but
exercise your Wit upon me; for you Town-Gallants love to flout poor
Countrie-Gentlewomen to make you sport --


True. If thou delayest one minute longer, Widow, I Will vow to blast thy
Reputation, kill all that dare pretend to you, and at last, in spite of thy
self, enjoy thee, and then Jilt thee --


W. Good. Goodness! what prittie words you Gentlemen have; Jilt me? well, that
must be some fine thing, it sounds so well; Jilt -- I might have lived in
Darbyshire to Methusabem's age, and not have heard such fine things.


True. Uds precious, Widow, what mean you? -- swear instantly to be mine, or I
vow, I will prosecute what I told you --


W. Good. Hold, hold, Sir, I will swear or do any thing -- but is this the
London-way of Courtship? -- It is somewhat boisterous, methinks, to force a
woman to have a man whether she will or no -- but Lord, what will Mr. Docket
say, if I should cousin him? -- I vow, now I think on it, I cannot, for my
honor is engaged, and he has my word to be none but his --


True. What an unmannerly old-fashioned Widow art thou to talk thus (in London
too) of thy honor and word -- when the most Heroic act an A-la-mode Lady can
do, is to break promise, shake hands with Honor, and banish Reputation from
her Dwelling. -- Honor quoth a? Well, this is the last time of asking; and if
denied, expect to see thy name in to morrow's Gazet, as an Advertisement to all
young Gentlemen to beware of keeping thee company, for fear of being infected
with ten thousand Diseases more than e're were named in a Mountebanks Bill.


W. Good. No more, good Sir, and here is my hand, I will be none but yours --
but what shall we do about Mr. Docket? I would be loath, now he is set agog, as
they say; he should be disappointed: were it my own case, I should not be
pleased --


True. Hang him -- but however, I will contrive some means how to bestow him,
now he is agog, as you say --


[Studies. Enter Loveal -- Lov. So, I have put Trupenny to sleep, and now I
will steal to Mr. Spruce, who longs for my coming: I dare say, poor Soul --
well, he is as loving good conditioned sweet natured young man as lives, though
I say it. -- Ha! my Lady here? if she sees me, I am ruined --


W. Good. Oh, Loveal! were they my Son and Daughter we met an hour ago? --


Lov. No, Madam, we were both mistaken; they were your Beyond Sea French folk,
Papists I warrant they were, they had such hard names; and they jabber'd so, it
would have frightened you to have heard them speak.


W. Good. I durst to have sworn it had been them --


True. Is this your Maid, Madam? --


W. Good. Yes, Sir, for want of a better --


True. Fortune is kinder to us than we could have expected -- What should hinder
your Maid supplying your place, and marry Mr. Docket?


W. Good. Why nothing, Sir, sure; for now I shall oblige her, and keep my word
too; for she to sadly longs for a Husband, that I was forced to promise to help
her to one; and I must have bought one, rather than have failed, or I should
have led a tedious life with her --


True. Well, Madam, if you will give her a little instructions how to personate
your self, I will step to the Temple in the interim, and find out a Parson
there to complete our business, and in the Cloisters I will expect you -- till
then, dear Widow, your Servant. In the mean time let my Boy attend you.

Exit.
W. Good. Your humble Servant, Sir -- Loveal, I remembering my promise to you,
have accordingly found out a Husband for you. This Gentleman that is gone --


Lov. Well, this London is a brave place for Husbands; I wonder not now what
makes the Countrie-maids flock up so fast to it -- had I known so much before,
I would not have stayed so long in Darbyshire -- and I vow, this Gentleman is
as handsome a man as ever a Darbyshire-blade of 'um all.


W. Good. Hold, you are too fast, Loveal, this is not the man, but he and I
have found out one for you.


Lov. How, is not he the man? nay, then, Madam, know, I have not been so long
in Town, but that my good fortune has provided for me; and had not your
Ladyship seen me, within an hour I had altered my condition.


W. Good. What, were you going to be married? to whom I pray?


Lov. Either to Mr. Dashwel, or Mr. Spruce, I know not which; for both, poor
things, are so much in love with me, that I was resolved to marry the first of
'um I met.


W. Good. Dashwel and Spruce? Come, come, you are a fool; but be ruled by me,
and you shall marry their Master.


Lov. Mr. Docket! now, Madam, you jeer me; for I cannot believe you will give
him away from your self.


W. Good. Thou may be sure, Wench, I have provided otherways for my self,
or I should hardly have parted with him.


Lov. Well, Madam, do with me as you please: for since I have had Love made to
me, my mind so runs on Matrimony, that I shall not be my self till I have
entered into that delicious kind of life.


W. Good. See, Mr. Docket comes; here, put on my great Scarf and Vail, and be
sure not to show your face till you come home, but pretend an unusual Modesty,
and play no old Ape's tricks of Fondness, but behave your self decently, and
counterfeit my Speech, for he must take you for me; and when he comes, ask him
if he has found his Niece. -- Do you think you can do all this? I much doubt
your Ability.


Lov. I Will warrant you, Madam -- what not remember how to wheedle a man, and of
this Age? it has been my practice this twenty years: But I must confess, my
over-forwardness was the cause of my ill success; but I Will have more wit
hereafter; and if I carry it not swimmingly, may I die before I taste the
sweets of Matrimony, which is a most insupportable Curse.


W. Good. Be sure you take heed; my Honor will suffer if you prove too coming,
as they phrase it. -- And now for my smug handsome young Gentleman. -- Well,
Mr. Docket, you may thank your self for this deceit; for by your own confession
he is richer, and my own eyes tell me he is both handsomer and younger, and
consequently fitter to satisfy a Widows love.

Exit.
Enter Docket hastily. Dock. Certainly there is more in it than I can
apprehend, that Mr. Truman should tell me such a story! for I met Dashwel, and
he protestando said, my Niece was safe at home. Ha! well thought on, if he
should be stolen away with my Widow? -- How, how, no Truman! Docket, Docket,
where is thy Widow, man?


Lov. [ counterfeiting W. Good.] Oh, Mr. Docket, that unmannerly clownish
friend of yours left me alone so soon as you was gone; but I was resolved to
stay, were it till midnight: But pray now, have you found your Niece?


Dock. It is her voice -- Sing O be joyful -- Widow mine, my Niece is safe --
and now I have thee once more, I am resolved not to let thee go till we have
joined Issue -- But why this Vail? A Widow and bashful? for shame turn up -- in
troth I will bring a Levari facias.


Lov. Hold, hold, Mr. Docket, let me hide my blushes; when we are fast to one
another, as they say, then you shall turn up what you please.


Dock. Say thou so, Widow? along, along then, for fear of another Demurrer.


Exeunt. SCENE II.
Enter Dashwel hastily: After him, B. Goodfeild, and Frank, in Vizards. Dash.
WHat would she have? I know her not. Has she not picked my pocket?


B. Good. This is the rarest Mortal I ever met with: see how the Rogue shakes!
But Mr. Anthony --


Dash. I say once more, Gentlewoman, you are mistaken; my name is neither John,
Humphery, Dick, Rowland, Ieossery, Stephen, Anthony, nor Mark Anthony neither,
but plain Thomas Dashwel, senior Clerk to Mr. Docket.


Fran. Your Father-in-law's Clerk, on my life, Madam. A word, Sir; is not your
Master an Attorney of Cliffords-Inn?


Dash. Yes, and Gentleman too.


B. Good. He is about marrying a Darbyshire-widow --


Dash. Yes, yes, they are Legitimo Matrimonio copulat' by this time.


Fran. Her name, Goodfeild --


Dash. Right -- If this should be the Devil I have been talking with all this
while?

[Aside.
B. Good. Friend, haste to thy Master, tell him if he marries the Widow, this
night will prove his last: I have decreed it, I his fate have said it.


Dash. It is a Devil, of my conscience; would I were rid of her company. Nay,
nay, nay, pray forsooth keep more distance -- Look, look, her Eyes are all of a
flame, and I shall be damned before my time!


Enter Truman. True. What a Rogue am I to disappoint a longing Widow? but when
she shall know it was for younger flesh, she will not certainly be so
unreasonable to blame me. -- Well, her Daughter is a witty wild frollicking
Raskal, and I love her to excess; but her absence sets my patience on the Rack.


Dash. Oh, Mr. Truman, I am glad you are come.


True. What Is the matter, man? thou look as if thou were scared out of thy
little Wits.


Dash. Wits quoth I? here stands, I fear, the Ruins of one who once was a
hopeful Pleader. See, see, Mr. Truman, this Petticoat-Sathan has made diverse
and sundry assaults manus graviter imposuit, and cetera, insultum fecit vi and
armis verbis opprobriis and minis -- I have a good mind to swear the Peace
against her -- But oh, good sweet Mr. Truman -- she approaches; as I hope to
draw a Plea again, I will be gone, and so the Devil take the hindmost.


[Runs out. True. Some well-meaning Punck, on my life, following her Calling. It
is easier to see a Court-Lady in her natural Complexion, than Fleet Street and
the Temples without this kind of Cattle.


B. Good. Have at my Temple-lover once more; if he proves according to my wish,
he is my own. I Will try if he is one of the Fashionable Town-Gallants, who,
good-natured Souls, keep Wenches for others as well as for themselves.


Fran. If he proves constant after all these trials, with my consent he should
be Chronicled.


B. Good. Your name is Truman, as I take it.


True. You take it right.


Fran. And for want of wit, your dull sottish Worship is entering into the
bonds of Matrimony.


True. How the Devil came you to know it? it is neither in Gazet, nor Banes yet
askti'th' Church.


B. Good. Gad sa' me, you are a base perfidious fellow.


Fran. Dam me! a Raskal.


True. Hie day, Petticoat-hectors?


Fran. To use a Lady thus?


True. Use her? how? what Lady? which of ye?


B. Good. Me, ungrateful man? but I Will have your throat cut, Mister --


Fran. Or nose slit, look ye.


True. Dashwel's words prove true; these are a couple of Devils: Nothing but
Blood and Wounds! 'Sbud who are ye? and why this anger to me, Damsels?


B. Good. Treacherous perjured Villain, who was not only content to debauch me,
a poor innocent Country-girl -- but notwithstanding thousands of protestations
of keeping me with a gilt Coach, and set of Horses for three lives, or one and
twenty years, at last to Jilt me. But hang you, Renegado, your promises,
performances, and treats, prove all too sligh tfor a Ladies service. -- Follow
me, if you dare.


True. Villain? perjured? debaucht? gilt Coach? Jilt me? treats? What a Pox is
the meaning of all this? Hold, hold, Madam Mystery, Gad e're you and I part,
you must explain your self a little better.


B. Good. Unworthy man, how often did you treat me at Plays, the Park, and
Mulberry-garden, before I yielded? Have you forgot that too -- and how you
carried me to Tunbridge?


Fran. Yes, Madam; by the same token he had not money enough to pay the
lodging, so that you were forced to pledge your little Dog for Nine and six
pence, to save his honor -- It Is true, when we came to London he sent his
Tailor to redeem him, which he put to his account for this Suit he has on; but
I suppose you do not remember this?


True. Thou -- I know not what! a Puppie save my Honor? thou riddleing lying
Satan, vanish, or --


Fran. I warrant you have forgot too, how last Winter you presented me a Gennet
Muff of a Noble, and at the same time promised me a Ring worth five Guinies, on
condition I would praise your Dancing to my Lady: which I did, but from that
hour to this, I never saw or Ring or Gold.


True. Oh, impudent Jilt!


B. Good, Faithless man! consider who it is that courts you to be constant.


Fran. Think of her Beauty and Behavior.


B. Good. Her Faith in violate.


True. Her singular Modesty!


Fran. Aye, her Modesty; but above all, her Blood and Affinity: Think of her
Relations at Court, able to promote you to what Pitch she pleases: Half a word
from her, can make you a Justice of Quorum, and send you into the Country with
a Commission to domineer over your Betters. I Will tell you as a secret, there is
my Lord -- hum -- and Sir Thomus -- hum -- have been her Couzins any time this
six years, off and on.


B. Good. In fine, tell me, as you are a Gentleman and no Soldier, how can you
find in your heart to forsake a Lady thus, and undo your self by marrying?


Fran. To forsake one that loves you, to be tied to one for life, who without
question, if she has any wit, as you are Husband, will hate and Cuckold you --
Ha, ha, he.


B. Good. Aye, one that loves and doats upon you -- Ha, ha, he.


True. Was ever man thus baited by a couple of Vizard-masks?


Fran. Faith I think not.


B. Good. Oh that I were but a man, for thy sake! I have been too much a woman,
I Am sure.


Fran. Nay, nay, Madam, rather than fail, I Will hire a pair of Breeches at the
next Broakers, and then break his pate, for all this.


True. Why, thou, thou, what shall I call thee? thou unheard of Jilt, and thou
other Spirit of impudence, what Devil set you on to abuse me thus? Follow me no
further, but tremble at the Neighborhood of Bridewel, and be silent.


Enter Ned Goodfeild. N. Good. How now, Sister! what do you here?


True. How? his Sister! 'Slife I am ruined.

[Aside.
N. Good. Oh, Jack here too! -- then I perceive the business is done betwixt my
Sister and you. -- Methinks you walk at distance like man and wife already.


True. No, Ned, it is undone, and I so too, if you stand not my friend to her:
thy Sister, whom I had never seen in her own Habit before, has provoked me to
do that I fear will blast that good opinion she before had entertained of me.


B. Good. Fear not, Sir, I like you never the worse for what has past,
especially considering who was the cause of your passion, and of whom the
discourse was supposed to be. Like a wise Physician who has made a Patient sick
by trying Experiments, I now will apply that remedy which will, I suppose,
reduce you to your Wits again. Here -- how say you?


(Offering her hand. True. Gad, now I have you, Madam, hang me if I quit my hold
till we are made Yoak-fellows: and if I trust you more out of my sight --


N. Good. So; away, and I will follow presently.

Exit.
B. Good. Do you know what a dreadful thing it is you go about?


True. Think not to scare me, Madam; for so long as every couple hitherto, both
good and bad, have had at least a month of pleasure, I am resolved to try what
it is. Madam, it is decreed, and so forth -- Dear Rogue, let us to it. --


Exeunt. SCENE III.
Enter on one side, Docket, Loveal: On the other, Ned Goodfeild, Lucia. Dock.
HOw, how is this? my Niece with a stranger? undone, undone. Now I begin to
suspect Dashwel is false, and all was true which Mr. Truman told me.

[Aside.
Luc. My Uncle, Sir! what shall I do?


N. Good. Fear. nothing, Madam, I will be your shield against his anger.


Dock. Niece, Niece, Niece, Baggage, a word I pray -- What Gentleman is that?
what, what have ye been doing together? why don't you answer me? what is he?
from whence? whither would he? with whom would he speak? -- ha --


N. Good. Why, faith Sir, I am a Cantabrigian, a Gentleman, and my business was
with this Lady; and we have dispatched the very same Affair as you and my
Mother have been about, To have and to hold, for better for worse, and so
forth; and now in hopes you will pardon a wandering Son, Madam, I beg a blessing
on this Lady and my self.


Dock. How? married, married! Cuds lid married?


Lov. Now I am sure this is my young Master Edward; and because he takes me for
my Lady, for once I will act the part of a Mother [aside.] Son Edward, you have
it; but how came it to pass you left Cambridge? who gave you leave, pray, to
come up to this lewd Town? go to, it is not well done of you.


Dock. Widow that was, is this your Son?


Lov. Yes, Mr. Docket, and a witty child he is, but much of his Father's
resolute humor, Peace be with him: for if at any time I desired him not to do
so, or so, be sure he would do it; therefore I cannot blame him. But Son, are
you married to that Gentlewoman?


N. Good. As sure as you are to Mr. Docket, Madam.


Dock. But not with my consent. However, Sir, for your Mothers sake, who is now
my bride, this likewise being our Weddingday, I pardon you: But do you hear?
expect nothing from me.


N. Good. Lass, Sir, I should be too unreasonable to expect anything from you
besides the Portion her Father left her; Six thousand pounds will satisfy me
well enough.


Dock. But let me tell you, Sir, she has not Six thousand groats, marrying
without my consent, as by her Father's Will may and does more fully appear.


Lov. -- Now I have it -- Then, Sir, I hope you will not desire or expect to
intermeddle with my Concerns: I have but Six hundred pounds a year Jointure,
besides Four or Five thousand pounds in Money, Plate, and Goods; but these are
not worth speaking of.


Dock. How, so wealthy? nay, then I am friends -- It is but three or four years
forbearance, and I shall cheat her of as much as the Portion comes to;
therefore 'twill be policy to comply [ Aside] -- Well, Sir, for your Mothers
sake I am reconciled to you, and must confess --


Enter Truman, B. Goodfeild, Frank. Six thousand pounds is my Nieces Portion,
which in truth I cannot keep from her, it being by the Will due upon her day of
marriage; and my design in giving out the Penalty, was in hopes that no one
would have ventured on her; and she dying single, her Portion then would have
been my own.

True. To which we are Witnesses.


Dock. Oh, Mr. Truman! with all my heart.


B. Good. Brother, give you joy -- Mother, your Blessing


[Offers to kneel. Lov. I can hold no longer -- [discovers her self] Oh, Mrs.
Betty, I am over-joyed to see you in London --


All, Loveal! Dock. How, how is this? what cheated of my Widow too? Wretched
miserable Docket, thou art undone, undone --


True. Fear not that, man; she is a thrifty Soul I warrant you. But Docket,
could thou in thy Conscience think it reasonable to swallow Widows as fast as
Mortgages? No, Sir, no; and you see now, that by my own contrivance, without
the help of the Chancery, I have superseded your desires: ha, ha, he --


Dock. Look ye, I will instantly draw up an Indictment against ye all for
Cheats.


N. Good. And I will immediately take out a Writ against you for my wifes
Portion; you understand me?


True. But provided you give an Appearance, and put in good Bayl, you shall not
be arrested; for you know Six thousand pounds requires special Bayl, Mr.
Docket. But to prevent such extremity, I will make a bold proposal. -- Deliver
up my Mortgage, and I will become responsible to my friend for your Nieces
Portion.


Dock. Hum! Deliver up your Mortgage, Sir? Curia advisare unit: let me consider
on it.


N. Good. Do it, and I agree to it with all my heart.


Dock. [aside] Here is no parting with Money, for it is the same sum; and
should I be stubborn, they will have me up in Chancery, and that will soak my
Purse. -- And I have now what I have longed for many a day; a Wife, though none
of the best, yet she will serve. -- Mr. Truman, I Will do it; and let all bear
witness, I here promise to deliver up Mr. Truman's Mortgage, provided that upon
receipt thereof he enters into Bond to my Nephew and Niece for the payment of
her Portion. In the mean time, Nephew, I give it you -- And now, Sir, I give
you Joy with all my heart.


N. Good. Your Servant, Sir. -- And now, friend, before these, I give you back
your Mortgage in lieu of my Sisters Portion.


Dock. Well done, in faith, Nephew -- how luckily it falls out! Two Portions
paid, and a Mortgage satisfied, without handling one farthing of Money.


Enter Spruce, Dashwel. Spr. Advance, man, and see thy Mistress in earnest, for
she is my Master's Wife now.


Dash. Married to my Master? I will instantly have him up in the Ecclesiastical
Court de Matrimonio preloquut', for that will amount to a Contract.


Spr. Spare thy pains, man, he will be too hard for thee at that weapon; and
since he has her, we must submit to our hard fortune.


Dash. Well, patience per force, et cetera -- but what a Raskal was you to make
me run the Gauntlet about the Town?


Enter Widow Goodfeild, and Boy. W. Good. Hist, hist, Mr. Truman, Mr. Truman --


[Runs to him. True. Your Blessing, Madam.


[Kneels. W. Good. My Pardon you mean, for making me wait so long.


True. this Lady, Madam, was pleased to forbid the Banes, and take me her self.


W. Good. How Is this? my Daughter? Lord, Betty, what make you in London?


B. Good. Madam, understanding your desire of having me married, I thought
London the likeliest place to meet with a good Husband in, which since I have
found true; and I thank my Stars I am better matched than I should ha'been with
Sir Alexander --


W. Good. My Son Edward in Town too?


N. Good. Yes, Madam, and begs both Pardon and blessing; for Mr. Docket's Niece
and I have been at the same sport my Sister and Friend have been at.


W. Good. What a day of Accidents has this been! my Journey made fruitless, my
Children married, and my self disappointed -- But Mr. Truman.


[Takes Truman aside. True. I understand you, Madam -- but enough of that --
could you in reason, expect to have two Husbands before your Daughter had one?


W. Good. This vexes me a little: however, I Will carry it off (...)moothly [
aside.] I swear, Mr. Truman, you have had singular good fortune, to meet with a
Wife; for could you think I was in (...)arnest? that so Grave and Sober a
person as my self would marry (...)o light a young London gallant as you are? I
thought only to (...)ave made sport with you, and to let you know that Country-
Gentlewomen can carry on designs, and have wit upon occasion, (...)s well as
your fine flanting Londoners, an they list.


True. That I suspected; besides, Madam, I had not the ambition on to be your
Husband; your Son, was the greatest happiness I aimed at -- which, by my
Friends assistance, and this Ladies kind consent, I am according to my wish.


W. Good. I cannot be angry with you; for your marrying my Daughter, shows you
have a Respect for me -- therefore Heaven bless you together; and here I
publicly promise not to marry again -- but be good Children, and when I die,
share what I leave behind me.


All. We are obliged to you.


B. Good. Frank, suspect me not; thy service shall be rewarded: I hate
Ingratitude. -- Find out the man you can like for a Husband, and I promise
thee a Portion, Wench.


Fran. With your pardon, Madam -- I am of too modish a nature, to comply with
so ungentile a thing as Matrimony: my Request is only this, that you will be
pleased to accept of my service, while I am serviceable; but when I grow old
and past my labor, as they say, a small allowance for Pap, Butter-milk, and
roasted Chestnuts is all I desire.


Spr. In the mean time, know me for your Gallant; for when that dreadful Winter
of Age comes, you will be good for nothing but to make Touchwood.


N. Good. Mr. Spruce, your Service has been so considerable, that when
opportunity offers, I never will appear ungrateful. --


Spr. Your Servant, Sir.


Dock. So, so, all is concluded, and I am very well satisfied with my Spouse
here, seeing the Widow has mist of her Aim -- and being my Wedding-night, my
Niece disposed of too -- Dashwel, come hither; run you before to the
Rose-Tavern, and bid 'um send the Supper I bespoke to Cliffords-Inn-Hall; and
then step to the Cock-ale-house and get Fiddles, for I am resolved, Gallants,
to dance the Measures e're I go to bed -- and then --


Dash. Aye, marry Sir; shall I see Argulius, and O basse Regis danced again? I
love those Temple-dances with all my heart.

Exit.
All. Agreed, agreed. --


True. This Generous Frolic of thine, old Lawyer, has quite reconciled me to
thee; and I am resolved to make Quarrels, but I Will be thy Client for this --
Lead thy way with thy Duck there --


Lov. Aye, aye, let us be going, I begin to grow very sleepy, my Dear.


True. Gray heads may dote, as their dull Passions move;
But only Heaven and Youth make perfect Love.

Exeunt omnes. ERRATA.
PAge 25. line 31. read le Peak. p. 47. l. 8. r. err. p. 53. l. 7. r. with
whom I left him. p. 70. l. 30. r. certainly.

EPILOGUE.
THe plague of Writing has infected all;
It Is a Disease grown epidemical,
And not confined to the bounds of this lewd Town,
But over the Nation the Infection's slown.
For Country-Squires now drunken Catches write,
Whilst Miss is here lampoon'd by Iilted Knight.
The brisk gay Fop, and modest Lover too,
With senseless Rimes coy Mistrisses pursue.
Nay, the great man, Heir to more Wealth than Wit,
From Authors steals, yet swears those lines he writ:
But he (suspecting you the cheat should find)
Both to himself, and world, will prove so kind
To let you know in Verse a piece of's mind.
Then blundring through the streams of Poetric
He knowingly displays Debaucherie,
Which proves to be his own Epitomie.
The Zealot too, (as I Am informed) through the Nose
Pronounced a fatal Sentence against Prose:
For being inspired with Brother Hopkins Rhyme,
He wooes a Sister in the like jangling Chime.
Nay, should w'enquire, no doubt there are but few
Amongst ye here, but what are Dablers too;
And Muse as well as Miss for kindness sue.
It is the worlds blind side -- then, Sirs, forbear
Your censures now, lest fondly ye appear,
Not to our Author, but t'your selves severe.
Though plain, it is new, your Rigor then suspend,
Since to divert you this he did intend.
If all should write alike, then where would be
Your blessed Diana, sweet Variety?
FINIS.

