THE HISTORY OF Independency.

The Fourth and last Part.

Continued from the Death of his late MAJESTY, King CHARLES the First of happy
Memory, till the deaths of the chief of that Juncto.

By T.M. Esquire, a Lover of his King and Country.

Cicero Epist. Lib. 2. Ep. 3. Civem mehercule non puto esse, quitemporibus his
ridere possit. Id. Lib. 5. Ep. 12. Habet autem praeteriti doloris secura
recordatio delectationem. LONDON, Printed for H. Brom at the Gun in Ivie-Lane;
and H. Marsh at the Princes Arms in Chancery Lane. 1660.

Most Dread Sovereign.
IT is neither arrogance nor ambition that makes me thus boldly to intrude into
your presence, for I know so great a Sun will quickly dazzle my weak eyes, but
because the former parts were honored with your royal Fathers name, this
therefore hopes to be sheltered under your Princely wing, this but concluding
what they begun, and making you the happy repayrer of those Breaches, which
that powerful and restless faction of Independency made on the Regalia of
England, that posterity may as well see, in this, their felicity, by you, in
the ruin of that faction, as formerly they read their own misery, in the
Treasonable actings thereof, against his late Majesty of ever glorious memory.

I have no more but only to pray, that you may in this World be blessed with
the wisdom, and happiness of Solomon, a peaceable, long and all glorious
Reign: the age of Methuselah, wherein you may enjoy the full contents of a most
happy life, and at last full of honor and days arrive to the perfect fruition
of a more glorious Kingdom, in Gods presence, before whom is fullness of joy,
and at his right hand pleasures for evermore.

This from his soul is the daily prayer of Your Majesty's most faithful
subject and Servant. T. M.
29 Oct. 1660.
TO THE SACRED MAJESTY OF Great BRITAINS MONARCH. ( The Triumphant Son of a
most Glorious Father, who was in all things More than Conqueror.) The
Illustrious offspring of a Royal Train of ANCIENT PRINCES CHARLES The Second of
that Name, Entitled PIOUS By the sole Providence of an Almighty hand, of
England, Scotland, France and Ireland, King, Defender of the Faith.

Restorer of the English Church unto its Pristine State and Glory.

Patron of Law and Liberty, Not to be Seconded by any but himself, Who is the
best of Kings.

And of all Virtue to the World THE GRAND EXEMPLAR

To the Nobility, Gentry, Clergy and Commons of ENGLAND.
IT is I think more out of custom than necessity, that I do at this time
premise any thing, the Subject whereof we treat, having been fatally felt by
most of the Nation in some way or other, yet is it necessary that the history
of such turgencies in the State should be communicated, that poste^ity may
hereafter see, in their rise and fall, the certain punishment of Treason,
though for a time guarded and upheld by armed violence, and the highest
policies of a subtle malice.

It is said of the Epicureans, that, though they acknowledged no providence,
nor any immortality of the soul, and proposed pleasure as the only end of their
lives, yet they maintained (most of them) that they that were lovers of
pleasure, must of necessity be lovers of Justice, and that without virtue it
was not possible for men to live intrue pleasure, So as it was said of the
Stoics (who were for the most part notable hypocrites) that they spoke good
things, and did foul actions, but that the Epicureans spoke and taught things
that seemed foul and shameful, but did that which was fair and honest.

Certainly these two sects of Philosophers might be the very parallel of our
date times, wherein our Stoicall Grandees could speak nothing but holiness,
where the practice of their lives was a continued series of horrid Treasons,
while a little innocent mirth and freeness of speech was the greatest that lay,
or indeed could be cast, upon integrity of their despised Antagonists: so that
we might see Cucullus non fecit Monarchum.

It had been well for England if the sad occasions of writing this history of
the times had never happened: but they have been: And, as our Savior says,
Offenses must come, but woe be to them by whom they come, so then to declare the
actings, and their method and manner, is but so to lay them open, that they may
for the future be the better avoided and prevented.

The knowledge of all persons, the meaning of all matters, Voss. de seri Agt.
and de art. histor.
and the depth of all secrets, is locked up in history according to that of
Vossius, alluding to that of the Roman Poet, Qui quid sit turpe, aut pulchrum,
quid utile, quid non
Before and melius Chrysyppo and Crantore dixit.


And this I dare promise you in the ensuing Manual; without too violent
reflections to widen differences: all the observations arising as naturally
from the relations, as suitable words do fitly supply the ready tongue of a
Learned Orator.

It is the general happiness at this present, that we can, read the downfall
of faction, and rejoice in the glory of restored Majesty with safety and
content; and I pray God, that all the mischiefs of the remaining Achitophel's,
Shimei's and Rabshakeh's, may sall upon their own heads: but peace, happiness
and prosperity, may wait on our Solomon, that he may be blessed, and his
throne be established, before the Lord forever.

To Conclude; As your Loyalty in the worst, oftentimes has been signal (if in
nothing else yet in sufferings) so despise not to read this tractate, wherein,
I dare presume, you will find something which before you knew not: the work,
'its true is short, but will not, I hope; want substance, inest enim sua gratia
parvis; and to remember these things certainly cannot be irksome -- -- Saepe
recordari medicamine melius omni. to see and escape danger causes, not only
admiration but pleasure: which that you may receive with content by the
perusal hereof is desired.

I shall only add one word in particular, first to the Nobility; You are Right
Honorable Princes in the Congregation of our Israel, Men of renown,
exemplarily both in your names and honors. Be as eminent in service for your
Prince, as obliged to him for favors, that it may be recorded of you as it is
of David's Worthies. These are the mighty men which David had, who strengthened
themselves with him in his Kingdom, according to the word of the Lord.

2. To the Gentry, You are they whom Jethro counseled Moses to provide out of
all the people to assist him, and be mediators between Prince and People;
approve your selves according to that counsel to be able men, such as fear God,
men of truth and hating covetousness, so shall the Lord give a blessing as he
has promised.

3. To the Clergy, God has made you as a Beacon upon an hill, that you might
forewarn Israel of her sins, ye are the salt of the Earth, while you preach to
others be not your selves cast away, but in season and out of season labor,
labor to declare Christ not of contention and strife, but sow the word to
effect that fruit may grow thereby.

And Lastly to the Commons, who are tumidum and instabile vulgus: I shall only
wish that they will labor for peace, and, according to their Royal Princes
dictate in his late Declaration concerning Ecclesiastical affairs, acquiesce
in his condescentions concerning the differences which have so much disquieted
the Sat: by which endeavor all good Subjects will by Gods blessing enjoy as
great a measure of felicity as this Nation has ever done; which is the earnest
prayer of

Your, etc. T. M.
No. 2. 1660.
THE HISTORY OF Independency.
The Fourth and Last part.
THE former parts of this Book having traced the prevalent and strong Factions
of Presbyterian and Independent, The Proeme.
through the several devious paths wherein they marched, and with what
devilish cunning they did, each, endeavor to be greatest, by surprising, or
at least undermining the other, until at last they unriveted the very
foundations of Government, by the execrable murder of their undoubtedly lawful
Sovereign, a crime so abhorred, that it is even inexpiable, not to be purged
with sacrifice for ever: I say, these things having received so lively a
delineation in the former parts, shall need no new recitalls. I shall then
begin at the end thereof, which was; when the sacred Relics of betrayed
Majesty, specie justitiae, received a fatal stroke from blood-thirsty hands,
neither able to protect it self, or be a shadow and Asylum for rejected Truth,
and unspotted Loyalty. Thus in an unsettled and confused posture stood poor
England, when the Scepter departed from Israel, and the Royal Lion was not only
robbed of, his prey, but his Life: which Barbarism once committed, what did the
Independent Faction, now grown chief, ever after stick at? Having tasted Royal
Blood, the Blood of Nobles seemed but a small thing: to which end, and to
heighten and perfect their begun villainies, they erect another High Court of
Justice, for the Trial of James Earl of Cambridge, Henry Earl of Holland, Lords
H H. C. tried.
George Lord Goring, Arthur Lord Capell, and Sir John Owen Knight: whereof that
Horslecch of Hell, John Bradshaw, was also President, who with sixty two more
(as honest men as himself) by a Warrant under the hands of Luke Robinson,
Nicholas Love, and J. Sarland, summoned for that purpose, did accordingly
appear upon Monday the fifth day of February, 1648. for the putting in
Execution an Act of Parliament (as they called it) for the erecting of an High
Court of Justice, for the trying and adjudging the Earls and Lords aforesaid;
with whom (according to their fore-settled resolution) making short work (for
they would admit of no plea) of the five they presently condemned three to lose
their heads on a scaffold in the Pallace-yard at Westminster, Lords condemned.
on Friday the ninth day of March: which day being come, about ten of the clock
that Morning, Lieutenant Colonel Beecher came with his Order to the several
Prisoners at S. James's, requiring them to come away; from whence they were
immediately hurried in Sedans, with a strong guard, to Sir Thomas Cottons house
at Westminster, where they continued about two hours, spending the whole time
in holy devotion and religious exercises. After which the Earl of Cambridge
preparing first for the Scaffold, after mutual embraces, and some short parting
expressions to, and for, his fellow sufferers, he took his leave, and went
along with the Officers, attended on by Dr. Sibbalds, whom he had chosen for
his Comforter in his sad condition. Being arrived at the Scaffold, and seeing
several Regiments both of horse and foot drawn up in the place: after he had
waited a little while with a fruitless hope and expectation of receiving some
comfortable news from the Earl of Denbigh who was his Brother; having sent for
his Servant, who being returned, and having delivered his Message to the Earl
of Cambridge privately, he said, So, It is done now: Hamiltons speech at his
death.
and turning to the front of the Scaffold he spoke to this effect. That he
desired not to speak much, but being by providence brought to that place, he
declared to the Sheriff, that the matter he suffered for, as being a Traitor to
the kingdom of England, he was not guilty of, having done what he did by the
command of the Parliament of his own Country, whom he durst not disobey, they
being satisfied with the justness of their procedure, and himself by the
commands by them laid upon him; and acknowledging that he had many ways
deserved a worldly punishment, yet he hoped through Christ to obtain remission
of his sins. That he had from his Infancy professed the same Religion
established by Law in the land. That, whereas he had been aspersed for evil
intents toward the King, all his actions being hypocritically disguised to
advance his own self-interest: hereto he protested his innocence; professing he
had reason to love the King, as he was his King, and had been his Master, with
other words to the same effect. That, as to the matter of invitation into the
kingdom, he referred himself to the Declaration then in Print; and setting
forth how ready and willing he was ever to serve the English, wishing
happiness and peace to them, and praying that his blood might be the last that
should be drawn, heartily forgiving all, saying, I carry no rancour along with
me to the grave. That his Religion was such as he spoke of before, whose Tenets
he needed not to express, as being known to all, and himself not of a rigid
opinion, being not troubled with other men's differing judgments; with which
words, and forgiving all that he might have even the greatest animosity
against, he kneeled down with Dr. Sibbald, and prayed with much earnestness
and devotion: which pious exercise performed, and some short ejaculations
passing between himself and the Doctor, the Earl turning to the Executioner,
said, Shall I put on another cap, and turn up my hair? Which way is it that you
would have me lie, Sir? The Executioner pointing to the front of the Scaffold,
the Earl replied, What, my head this way? Then the Undersheriffs son said, My
Lord, the Order is, that you lay your head toward the High Court of Justice.
Then the Earl, after some private discourse with his servants, kneeled down on
the side of the Scaffold, and prayed a while to himself; afterward with a
smiling and cheerful countenance he embraced the Doctor in his Arms, and then
his servants, saying to them, Ye have been very faithful to me, and the Lord
bless you: then turning to the Executioner, said: I shall say a very short
prayer while I lie down there, and when I stretch out my hand, (my right hand)
then, Sir, do your duty, and I do freely forgive you, and so I do all the
World. So lying down, and having fitted himself, Hamilton executed.
devoutly praying to himself a short space, he stretched out his right hand,
whereupon the Executioner, at one blow, severed his head from his body, which
was received by two of his Servants, then kneeling by him, into a Crimson
Taffeta scarf; and that with the body immediately put into the Coffin brought
thither for that purpose, and so carried to Sr. John Hambletons house at the
Mewes.

This Execution done, the Sheriffs guard went immediately to fetch the Earl of
Holland, whom they met in the midway, where the under Sheriffs son having
received him into his charge, conducted him to the Scaffold, Mr. Bolton passing
all the way hand in hand, with him. Being come upon the same, and observing he
could not spoke aloud enough to be heard by the People, by reason of the
numerousness of the Soldiery that encompassed him, he said. Hollands speech on
the Scaffold.
I think it is to no purpose to say any thing; then proceeded. That his
breeding had been in a good family, that had ever been faithful to the true
Protestant Religion, in which he had ever lived, and now resolved by Gods grace
to dye. That he hoped God would forgive him his sins, though he acknowledged
his Justice in bringing him thither for punishment of them in this World. He
observed, that he was looked on as one that had ill designs against the State.
Truly (says he) I look upon it as a judgment, not having offended the
Parliament in any thing, save an extreme vanity in serving them very
extraordinarily. That his affections had been ever known to be faithful, and
without wavering: where the Parliament wrought changes beyond and against
reason and Religion, there He left them. That he ever sought the peace of the
Kingdom, and that made him do what he did. That he knew not how to judge of
(the th^n) present affairs; but should pray, that the Kingdom might be again
governed by the King, by the Lords, by the Commons: and that the People may
look upon the Posterity of the King with that affection they owe: that they may
be called again without bloodshed, and admitted into that power and glory that
God in their birth intended to them.

That he wishes happiness even to the causers of his death, praying heartily
to God to forgive them. And as Chancellor of Cambridge really praying, that
that University might flourish, and be a continual Nursery both to Learning
and Religion. Then mentioning again his Religion and family, relating something
to his own behavior, and his being a great sinner, yet that he hoped God would
hear his prayers, and give him faith to trust in him, with his prayers for the
People, he ended. Then turning to the side, he prayed for a good space of time:
after which by the instigation of Mr. Bolton, he said. That he was the less
troubled with his violent death, when he remembered how his Savior suffered for
him; and again, when he considered the King his Master not long before passed
the same way; with others at this time with himself, with a serious and pithy
justification of his said Master the late Kings Majesty, a short recapitulation
of his first speech concerning his Actions, Religion, breeding and sufferings.
After all, wholly casting himself, on the merits and mercies of Jesus christ
forgiving his Enemies, praying for peace, and that their blood might be the
last, which was shed strangely, the trial being as extraordinary as any thing
in the Kingdom: but be owned it as Gods hand: then having, some divine
conference with Mr. Bolton for near a quarter of an hour, and spoken to a
Soldier that took him prisoner and others, he embraced Lieutenant Colonel
Beecher, and took his leave of him. After which he came to Mr. Bolton, and
having embraced him, and returned him many thanks for his great pains and
affection to his soul, he prepared himself to the block: whereupon turning to
the Executioner, he said; here my friend, let my Clothes and my body alone,
there is ten pounds for thee, that is better than my clothes, His behavior.
I am sure of it. And when you take up my head, do not take off my cap: then
taking his farewell of his Servants, he kneeled down and prayed, for a pretty
space, with much earnestness.

Then going to the front of the Scaffold, he said to the People, God bless you
all, God give all happiness, to this Kingdom, to this People, to this Nation.
Then laying himself down, he seemed to pray with much affection for a short
space, and then lifting up his head (seeing the Executioner by him) he said,
stay while I give the sign and presently after stretching out his hand, and
saying, now, now; just as the words were coming out of his mouth, E. of H^^^
death.
the Executioner at one blow severed his head from his body.

The Execution of the Earl of Holland being thus performed, the Lord Capell was
brought to the Scaffold as the former: and as he passed along, he put off his
hat to the People on both sides, looking about him with a very stern
countenance; when mounting on the Scaffold having before taken his leave of his
Chaplain, and bidding his Servants that were with him to refrain from weeping,
coming to the front of the Scaffold, Lo. Capell his speech before hi^ death.
he spoke to this purpose.

That he would pray for those that sent him thither, and were the cause of his
violent Death; it being an effect of the Religion he professed, being a
Protestant, with the profession whereof he was very much in love, after the
manner as it was established in England by the 39. Articles. That he abhorred
Papistry, relying only on Christ's merits. That he was condemned to dye contrary
to the Law that governs all the World, that is, by the Law of the Sword, the
Protection whereof he had for his Life: yet among Englishmen, he an Englishman
acknowledged Peer, condemned to dye contrary to all the laws of England. That
he dyed (as to the cause he fought in) for maintaining the fifth Commandment,
enjoined by God himself, the Father of the Country, the King, as well as the
natural Parent being to be obeyed thereby. That he was guilty of Voting against
the Earl of Strafford; but he hoped God had washed off the guilt of his blood
with the more precious blood of his Son. That his late Majesty was the most
virtuous, and sufficient known Prince in the World. God preserve the King that
now is, his Son. God send him more fortunate and longer days. God restore him
to this Kingdom, that that family may reign till thy Kingdom come; that is,
while all Temporal power is consummated. God give much happiness to this your
King; and to you that in it shall be his subjects. That he did again forgive
those that were the causers of his coming thither from his very soul: so
praying again for the King and his restoration, and for the peace of the
Kingdom, he finished his speech.

Then turning about to the Executioner, L. C. his carriage.
he pulled off his doublet; when the Heads-man kneeling down, Lord Capell said,
I forgive thee from my soul, and shall pray for thee; There is five pounds for
thee, and if any thing be due for my clothes, you shall be fully recompensed.
And when I ly down, give me a short time for a prayer: then again blessing the
People very earnestly, and desiring their prayers at the moment of death, he
said to the Executioner, you are ready when I am ready, are you not, then as he
stood putting up his hair, with hands and eyes lift up he said. O God, I do
with a perfect and a willing heart submit to thy will. O God, I do most
willingly humble my self, so kneeling down, and fitting his neck to the block,
as he lay with both his hands stretched out, he said, When I lift up my Right
hand, then strike. When after he had said a short prayer, L. Capell beheaded.
he lifted up his right hand, and the Executioner at one blow severed his head
from his body, which was taken up by his servants and put into a Coffin.

Having thus brought to pass their bloody purpose, shortly after they acquitted
the Lord Goring, and Sir John Owen as to their lives, but seized upon all they
had: according as they did upon most of the Estates of the Nobility and Gentry
throughout England; for such now was their unsatiable malice, The barbarousness
of the faction.
that they thought it not enough to ruin and destroy the heads of Families;
but, with divellish rancor, endeavor to blot out the name and memorial of
Posterity, by such unheard of cruelties, and barbarous actions, as would make a
Savage Scithian or Barbarian blush to think on, so that we may say with Cicero
in the like case; Rem vides, quomodo se habeat: orbem terrarum Imperiis
distributis ardere bello: urbem fine legibus, sine judiciis, sine jure, sine
fide relictam direptioni, and incendiis. Which indeed is the very present case.

Thus did they grow from bad to worse, acting rather like butchers then Men,
each one of them proving to all about him, a devouring wolf, whose insatiate
gorge was never filled with his pray, so that having in effect the mastery of
them (whom they called their Enemies) like true thieves they fall out about
parting the stakes: The Army and Independent close
the Presbyterian faction will brook no superior, the Independent no equal,
upon these terms stands the Kingdom divided, when the later grown now more
powerful by the additon of the Army, whose guilt in the murder of the King
had suggested to them, that the only way to save and raise themselves, was to
confound and reduce all things else to an Anarchy. In pursuance of which
Principle they at last proceed against the very root of Monarchy: and after
many uncouth debates resolved, that the Nation should be settled in the way of a
free State, Freestate appointed.
and Kingly government be utterly abolished. Now was the style in all
proceedings at the law altered, the seals changed, and the Kings arms and
statues in all places taken down, that so their seared consciences might not at
the sight thereof be terrified, with the sad remembrance of their committed
crimes. And that no spark or attendant of ancient Majesty might be left
remaining, soon after, they vote the house of Lords to be burdensome and
useless: Lords house voted useless.
and that the People might understand their meaning also, on the 21th. of
February they proclaim at Westminster, and send it to the City the next Day to
the like purpose, but the then Lord Mayor refusing to do it, as being contrary
to his honor, conscience and Oath, rather chose to suffer an unjust
imprisonment, which he did in the Tower: Any honest Man would have thought this
example would have put a stop to the attempt of any villain for the making that
proclamation, but so far were they from being deterred, that they rather grow
more implacable, and having found some hair brained, and half decayed,
Citizens, out of them, one is set up as a mock-Mayor, who being a fellow fit
for their turns, after a short complement or two with the Juncto: The
Proclamation against Kingship.
he enters the Stage and Proclaims, the abolishing of Kingship, and the House
of Lords. Having thus brought their design to some kind of maturity, they find
another invention to be as a Shibboleth, a mark of distinction, between
themselves and other men, The engagement a mark of distinction.
and that was the engagement forsooth, whereby every man should promise to be
true and faithful to the Commonwealth of England, without a King or house of
Lords, and he that would not subscribe to this, was forced either to fly, or
which was as bad, to stay at home, and have neither the benefit, nor the
protection, of the law of the land, nor any advantage either of his liberty or
Estate; Now might you have seen Vice regnand, and nothing but Schism and
faction Countenanced, now might you have beheld England, sometime the Glory of
the World, now become its by words, the name of English being among foreign
Nations esteemed as a crime sufficient, so did the Land mourn for oaths that
she was ready to vomit out her inhabitants, while the Juncto still endeavor to
palliate their villainy, and to get allies among neighbor Princes and States,
to many of whom they send Ambassadors (as they styled them) and were again
reciprocally courted and owned, and particularly by the Spanyard and the
French; but the Dutch did seem to be Men of a better mould and temper, The
dutch quarrel.
and therefore having no better ground they quarrel for superiority; denying
to vaill to the English, because they were the younger State, yet still owning
that respect to the Monarchy: hereat the English (though yet but an) Embrio
begin to startle, and weighing the unsetledness of their basis, and that all
they had hitherto done was only dawbed together with untempered mortar, St.
John's sent to treat, but returns without doing any thing.
they resolve to try all ways rather then fall out, and will seek to gain that
by Courtship, which they are unwilling to hazard by force; as a fit Man for
this work they pick out a pure Saint, Mr. Oliver, St. John's, and dispatch him
into Holland with, as large a train, as great State, and as full instructions
as they could possibly afford or invent, whether when he is come, he makes his
address to the Lords States, but with so little approbation and success, that
in a little time he began to grow weary of his business, especially, when the
multitude began to grow clamourous against him, insomuch that he durst hardly
stir abroad, so that being both outworded, and outwitted, after many debates,
brotherly expostulations, Declarations, and hearty desires to small (or rather
indeed to no) purpose, he gravely makes his Congee, takes his leave and
vanishes; The Juncto at his teturn, somewhat discontented at his fruitless
Embassy, yet finding no other remedy, and willing to make the best of a bad
market, prepare for war, (for by this time the Dutch had begun both to affront
them and seize on what they could catch as lawful prize) which so vexed the
English Puny State, that they presently fall to an open war, the various
successes of which, and the losses that accrewed thereby toeach party by means
of the same, I shall not make the work of my pen, having only designed to
delineate those black deeds of impiety acted within the narrow limits of our
England, by the horridest crew of bloody miscreants that were ever spared by
Divine vengeance from sudden destruction.

The English affairs and Government being thus wrested into the hands of a few
desperate persons, Ireland looked at.
the next thing aimed at is, the reducing of Ireland: for effecting whereof
they give a Commission to, Cromwell sent to Ireland and prove Victorious.
and raise an Army under the Command of, Cromwell, which he as suddenly
transports thither, Ormond and Inchequeen having at that time all the Country
in obedience to his Majesty, (save only Dublin kept by Col. Michael Jones, and
Londonderry by Sir Charles Coot) when lo, as it were to welcome Cromwell,
Jones, immediately before his arrival, had made way for him by the overthrow of
Ormonds forces about Dublin: And now, as if fortune had already designed him
the laurel, St. Charles Coot, in an other place at Londonderry, worsteth a
Second party, and the Earl of Ormond, and the Lord Inchequeen, having joined
their broken froces into a considerable strength, are again together overthrown
at Connaught.

The concatenation of these successes, together with the cruelty exercised by
Cromwell at the taking of Tredagh by storm, where his rage spared neither age
nor sex, a barbarism scarcely used by the very Turks, cast such a Panick fear
over the whole Nation, that the strong holds fell into his power, like
over-ripe fruit into the prepared hands of its ready gatherer.

So hidden and mystical is the series of Gods providence, that for a time, the
most enormous crimes are counted virtues, and the poor loosing honestfoul
constrained to stoop and bow under the heavy yoke of a prevailing tyrant; yea
Majesty it self enforced, (like the clouded Sun) compulsively to hide his
beams, and retire with his light for a while, as though it had been but
borrowed, but as the Sun, so Majesty can never be kept in perpetual darkness:
for by this time the Independent, who had for a space been chief, find a
Competitor of the Leveller, The Leveller begins to stir.
who resolves either to share in the whole, and so reduce and keep all in an
equality, whereby himself may be one of the greatest, or else to endeavor to
bring back all into its original channel, and to show they meant as they said,
with better hearts then success or strength they rise in three or four places,
for they are as soon quasht as seen, and themselves and their design end both
together: A garment of linen and woollen was forbidden to be worn by the
Leviticall law, and I suppose because the mixture would be improper either for
wearing, or handfomness of sight, in the same manner may I say of the Levelling
faction, that though they in intent were real for restoring the King, yet God
would not suffer it to be brought to pass by such hands, that had been so
deeply dyed before in royal blood. The royal party though under hatches, and
now suffering for their loyalty, having passed and been refined in the fire of
affliction must be the Men, whose unspotted fingers shall not only pull down
the Idolized Babel of the Peoples imagination, but repair the decayed ruins of
our broken Government, and reinstate exiled Majesty upon its throne adorned
with safety, and with beauty both, and guarded with the safest strength of
faithful hearts and hands, better then walls of brass or formed troops of
mercenary Soldiers.

But that time was not yet come, Scots send to the King.
although the Scots sent a peculiar messenger, the Lord Libberton to the King,
desiring him among other things, that he would please to appoint a place for a
Treaty to be between his Majesty and his Kingdom of Scotland, which offer of
theirs, was graciously accepted, and a Treaty appointed at Breda, on the 15th.
of March, whither the Scots Commissioners came the 16th. and on the 19th. fell
to their business, neither would by any means relinquish their Presbytery
though but in part, and as to the particular person of the King himself, whom
they strongly bound up to the Covenant, Directory and Catechismes, Treaty at
Bredah concluded.
where to his Majesty; after many long and seriuos debates, having unwillingly
consented. The Scots on their part did promise. 1. That his Majesty should be
admitted to the throne of Scotland. 2. That his Rights then should be by
Parliament, recovered from the hands of Usurpers, and 3. That they would assist
to bring the murderers of his Father of blessed memory, to condign
punishment, and to restore him to his Native Kingdom of England.

A happy, Omen, surely was this promise and undertaking hoped to be, and so
indeed it might have proved, if it had been gained from any but the worst of
Scotch-men, the Presbyterians, for, at the very same time as it were, when they
had concluded the Treaty, and thus highly promised the King as is before
mentioned, I say at the same time, having gotten the famous Marquess of
Montross into their hand, whose only fault was Loyalty to his Prince, having
brought him with as much ignominy as they could devise to Edinburgh, they there
charge him for keeping away the King (observe the King was now upon the point
of coming to them) from his subjects. 2. For the invading that Kingdom. 3. For
all the murders in the war, and for wast upon Argiles Estate, etc.

Mark, here I pray, Montross murdered and the reasons thereof.
Montross must be murdered (the best subject the King had in Scotland) and
just when the King is ready to come thither, (as if it were done in despite to
him) but why? for keeping away the King? No, he had promised to be with them
with all speed, which Montross in prison could not have hindered. Was it for
invasion? alas neither, for he had none but his own Countrymen, and of them but
a very few and they quickly, and easily defeated; what, was it for then, for
muder? alas neither, what then? O! here is the Devil that murdered the famous
Montross, for waste upon Argiles Estate; Argile, I say that underminer of his
Sovereign, who in a short time after, upon his arrival, was by the means and
instigation of him, upon pretense of nonperformance by the King, left
destitute either of friends (whom they banished from his Court,) The K. in
Scotland. h^ld to hard meat.
) means, (which they curtailed him of) and strength (allowing him neither a
Soldier nor a garrison, nay not a town where he might with safety repose his
head); things being at this pass, and his Majesty with much ado gotten into
Scotland as before said, which the Juncto at Westminster, having perfect
intelligence of, and weighing with themselves that promise of the Scots, to
bring the murderers of the Kings Father, to condign punishment, they begin to
think it high time, to provide for their own safety, in consulting whereof,
after much time spent, it is resolved the safest, wisest, and to them least
chargeable course to wait, on the Enemy in his own Country, whereby they
carried the war from home, and not to stay for him to bring it to their own
doors.

As a strong motive to this, just at the instant, they discover that many of
the Presbyterians of England, had by their agents agreed with the Scots at
Bredah, to re-establish his Majesty in all his Dominions: Whereupon many
eminent persons are seized on, and among them, Mr. Case, Mr. Jenkins, Mr.
Jackson, Mr. Love, etc. Which Mr. Love together with one Mr. Gibbons suffered
death together on Towerhill, Mr. Love and Gibbens beheaded.
at the earnest suit of Cromwell, protesting he would not march into Scotland,
unless they were cut off: Being moved hereby as well as by their own fear and
guilt, Cromwell invades Scotland.
his Majesty is scarce in Scotland, but Cromwell is at the borders with 16000.
Horse and Foot, on their behast; to whom Leslly, L.G. of the horse, which were
now raised, after some expostulations by Letters and Declarations, sends word
that he is in arms upon the account of the good old cause, and not upon the
account of the King, Scots divided among themselves.
whom he clearly disowned; Straughan and Ker, not only disown the King, but say
positively they will fight against him, so that now it was not Bellum Regale, a
war to maintain the Kings honor, and the points of the treaty, but bellum
Presbyteriale, a war for the Kirk of Scotland, against the Independent faction
of England (those two great parties being come now to a second contest for
superiority) for Leven commanded the Foot, and Leslly as I said before the
horse, and these two unaminously drew out against Cromwell, and fought him
within six miles of Edinburgh, though to little purpose, 1. Fight at Edinburgh.
for he immediately after became Master of the field, and took Garririsons, as
fast as he came to them, defeating them at Musselbourgh, and pursuing them to
Pentlan-hills, 2. Fight at Mus. selbourgh.
where the Scots had him in a straight, and might have destroyed him, but the
cerrainty as they thought of the victory, caused them to delay, by which, and
the fatal necessities of sickness, hunger and cold pressing upon Cromwells
Army, made them choose rather at one fight desperately to hazard all, then
timourously to become the scorn of an insulting foe, which they knew they
should find: following this resolve with diligence, they whisper about the word
to each other, in the midst of a dark and rainy night, they crept up the hill
and fell on the Scots so suddenly and beyond expectation, that they were
disordered by the first attempt, 3. Dunbar fight and total defeat.
yet by reason of, their multitudes, and a little courage, they held up a
while, till surrounded on the back by Cromwells horse, the Scots horse
affrighted, begin to retreat, and soon after to fly in good earnest, leaving
their foot to mercy, who were taken in greater numbers then the English Army
consisted of; the Independent power by this victory being absolute conqu^rors,
King in the North of Scotl. private.
and the Presbyterian pride laid grovelling in the dust.

During this quarrel between the said two factions, the King (as disowned so)
not interested therein, retires first to St. Johnstons, and after that,
privately into the North of Scotland, where he conti^ued, expecting what God
would do for him; assuring himself that this defeat at Dunbar (as things then
stood) could not be for his prejudice which indeed, King sent to and returns.
quickly fell out according to his expectation; for the Scots upon that
overthrow were somewhat humbled in Spirit, and now began again to think of their
late abused King, wishing in their hearts he were among them, (fearing to
speak the truth) least he would have joined with Northern and loyal
Highlanders, to prevent which they send M. G. Montgomery with forces to entreat
his Majesty's return, who finds him out, and affectionately delivers his
message: which the King received even with joyful tears, as minding the
justice of God upon those perfidious Scots, whose pride in success carried them
beyond all bounds of allegiance (and like a stubborn child must be soundly
whiptere they will kneell and the good manners they obtain must be beaten into
them): Yet he accepts of their request, and accordingly goes toward them. Who
but so good a King would have exposed himself to such men's trust, in so
dangerous a time? Innocentia est sibt munimentum, for he resolves to return.
King crowned.
Upon notice hereof and his arrival, the Parliament address themselves to him,
and appoint the time for his Coronation: which was accordingly with much State,
pomp and Ceremony, performed on the first of January following at Schone; the
particulars whereof I shall not enter upon, several relations thereof being
already extant.

His Majesty thus invested in his throne, undauntedly proceeds to secure both
his person and Kingdom: K. raises an army.
to which end he begins to raise and levy an Army, both of horse and foot,
which in short time, by the conflux of loyal hearts from all parts, became even
formidable to its Enemies, especially having their Prince engaged in person,
(whose every hair was valued at ten thousand lives) and an equal sharer with
them in all things. As they did encourage the hearts, and strengthen the hands
of all that were faithful, so they were a torment of Spirit to the insulting
Enemy, who for the present, seeing that force alone would not serve the turn,
politickly resolves, to undermine and weaken them by division among themselves,
knowing that rule to be true, Divide and impera, and indeed so it proved: Scors
divided.
for with so much divellish cunning did the English work, that they procured
Straughan with some sorces together with Ker to declare against the King,
Lastly with others, stand for Kirk and King. But Brown, Middleton, etc. with
the best and honest part of the Army, vow to sacrifice their Lives and Estates
in defense of the Kings person. In this tottering and unstable condition stood
affairs, when Cromwell always mindful to lay hold on the first advantage, and
being certainly informed of the height and heat of these divisions, he takes
time by the forelock, and striking while the Iron was hot, he sends to
Straughan and wins him over to him, to fight against his lawful Sovereign,
rejoicing to have debauched such a Soldier, whose infidelity must now make him
sure to Cromwell, not daring to rely on the good of those whom he had so
traitorously deceived; the remaining two parties, continuing yet in their
feuds, are at length, to prevent the destruction of both, The royalists and
Kirk recouciled.
by the care of the Parliament then sitting taken into consideration, and
reconciled by the equal distribution of commands, upon the most eminent persons
of both factions; under one only head and General commander, which was the
King himself. By this union being again become considerable, ^ea and indeed in
a posture of defense, the King deliberately sets forward toward the Enemy, who
hearing of it, with more, both fury and expedition marches to meet him. And
here you might have observed the different means used by two potent armies to
destroy each other, Cromwell would ruin the King by fighting, the King
endeavors to conquer Cromwell by delaying: never were Hanniball and Fabius so
truly patterned as at this time, for the King knowing it to be an invading
Army, took the best means to break it by delays, getting away all provision,
that the Enemy might have no forage, and as occasion served, giving ground,
till some notable advantage might be found, as might give an hopes if not an
assurance of a victory; and according to expectation so had it proved, for
being desirous to fight, Fight in life.
and hearing the King intended to pass at a certain narrow Island, thither he
commands two Regiments against whom Brown did march with five or six, fell on
them, and in probability had destroyed them utterly, had not relief come with
speed, and in the nick of time, whereby after a hot and eager fight for some
hours, both parties retreated with no small loss to either, yet such was the
fortune of that ambitious wretch Cromwell, that notwithstanding this, and that
his Majesty had still a good Army in the field, he overran the whole Country
and conquered with less difficulty than he marched; which his Majesty
perceiving, he resolves on new designs, and accordingly within a short time,
with his choysest friends and the remains of his Army amounting to 16000. he
privately, K. marches into England.
gives Cromwell the go-by, and marches by Carlisle into England: so have I seen
a bird decoy the greedy fowler from her loved nest, by a seeming neglect
thereof in the retiring from it.

It was generally believed that the Kings arrival in England would have been a
motive to all that loved him to stir and show themselves in arms for his
defense, but such was their hard fate and sad misery at that time, that they
durst not stir, the yoke lay so heavy, that it was imprisonment if not death,
but to look toward the King, yet maugre all devices against him, K. wins
Warrington bridge.
he came through all the North into Warrington in Lancashire, where at a bridge
the passage was disputed with the Enemy, who did endeavor to break it down,
but with such advantage, that the Rebels were forced to fly and leave the King
master of the place, Comes to Worcester.
from whence with his whole Army he marched toward Worcester, where contrary
to the rules, both of reason and war, and contrary to his own mind and
resolution, overswayed by the treacherous Counsel and persuasions of some too
near, and in too great command about him, he stayed. what might be the motives
to delude the King into such a trap the L. G. is better able to give account
off than my pen; but where treason lies in the heart, there must all things of
force be bad, no relations, ties, or duty can hold or convince him who has
sold his conscience. About this time, the whole Kingdom, having taken the
Alarm, run in troops and multitudes, some one way, some another, several of
the Gentry, particularly the Earls of Derby and Cleveland, the Lord Howards
Eldest Son, Colonel Howard, with many others bring what strengths, in such a
confusion of affairs and straight of time, they could gather together, but to
little purpose: for they are as it were besieged within the City of Worcester,
all the Counties of England having powered out their auxiliary forces against
that place, to heighten and increase whose malice Cromwell is sent to head
them. Now might you have seen Herod and Pontius Pilate reconciled, and both
against Christ: Those two restless and adverse factions, the Presbyterian and
Independent faction, could join together, both in their arms, and prayers
against his sacred Majesty, belching forth the scandalous language of their
ulcerous tongues to incense the People, and bring them into frenzy against
those few poor despised loyal ones, and so indeed they did; those very
pretended Ministers not only preaching, but largely contributing to the raising
of more forces from day to day, yea some of them going in person to assasinate
the poor enclosed Royalists, who yet resolved, that though they foresaw their
ruin, as not being able without a miracle to cope with such an innumerable
multitude, they would sell their lives at a dear rate, and make some of the
purchasers at least share in an equal fate with them, and so in truth they
did. For Cromwell now being very near, commands Lambert to take and secure
Hopton bridge, Worcester. fight.
in the defense of which passage Massey showed both much courage and
experience, though forced to retreat thence and leave the same unguarded, being
overpowered with Lamberts multitudes: after which, for a Day or two, there
happened diverse Skirmishes with as various fortune as is usual at such times;
but Cromwell not brooking such delays (as fearing they might prove dangerous,
if any part of his forces should bethink themselves) resolves upon one general
attempt: and to find work for all hands, himself falls on upon one side, and
Fleetwood on the other, so that now there is nothing but rage, slaughter, and
blood, the loyal Highlanders even standing to fight when they had lost their
legs, not at all daunted at the several horrid shapes-Death presented himself
to them in, but covering the ground with their slaughtered bodies, in death
made good that place, which in life they undertook to defend: while the
increasing Enemy by his numbers, rather killing then conquering, their fear and
guilt guiding them to exorbitances, which the other valiant, though dying souls
were not capable of, proving that maxim true, that fear is far more painful
to cowardice, than death to a true courage. But A^tum est, their end is
concluded, the decree is gone forth: so after several routs and rallies, a
general defeat succeeds with the death of between 4000. and 5000. and about
7000. or 8000. taken prisoners, the pursuit being both hotly and eagerly
pursued, each villain hoping to enrich himself by seizing on the Royal pray.
But Heaven had sent a Guardian Angel to protect him, that at length he may
once more come and be the restorer, both of our peace, Religion, and Liberty. I
shall not mention the means were used, or the Spirits which God raised up to be
isntrumental, in that miraculous deliverance, let it suffice they have their
honor and reward, and bless we God; who has made us worthy to be partakers of
the inestimable good that has accrewed thereby, invoking Heaven to crown his
life with length of days and health, and to settle his throne by a decree as
unalterable as that of the Earth which cannot be moved.

Thus once more we see Rebellion flourish and applauded; for after this, the
seeds of ambition begin to grow higher in Cromwell, it is not enough that his
faction is the strongest, and he the head of it, unless he may as well govern
as command: The military sword will not satisfy him, he must and will also
have the civil, but as he sees it must not be done rashly or suddenly, least
he should miscarry, so knowing that fair and softly goes far, and festinare
lent is the best have, he concludes in his heart either to have all at his own
beck, or dye in the attempt; and the better to moddell his design according to
his resolution, he comes to the Juncto, gives them account of all his
transactions, and so insinuates into them that he gets his Son Ireton to be
made Deputy of Ireland, Cromwels policy and power.
and intrusts Scotland into the hand of L. G. Moncke, a revolted Cavalier, by
which two persons in a short time he so roughly handled both those said
Nations, that they were reduced to as perfect a slavery as could be imagined.

Upon consideration of these successes on all hands, he begins now more
publicly to unmask himself; As General he places and displaces Officers in the
Army at his pleasure, until he have so fitted them to his own humor, that he
dares begin to take them into his Council, where the first thing resolved is,
still to hold up the mask of religion, there is no bait so catching to the
vulgar: religion therefore must be cried up, methinks I see Cromwell, like
Catiline at Rome, with all his crew of bankrupt and much worn Officers about
him, speaking to them thus. Surely I need not tell you the great things the
Lord has done for us, your selves are witnesses thereunto: I confess, our
actions seem not to agree to our professions, but it is no matter, let People say
what they will, so we be still gainers, let Governments totter and fall, the
whole World be made but one Enthusiasme, or reduced into its primitive Chaos,
rather than we shall now loose or hold, yet still the mask of zeal must be kept
on that we may not appear in our natural colors, villains ab origin; By
these and the like words is that vicious brood soon instigated to act what his
ambition dares command.

Now was he grown so lofty and imperious that he even grows weary of the
Juncto, and especially because they were at the present the main bar that
hindered his greatness: To remove therefore that obstacle, on the twentieth of
April 1653. Long Parliament turned out.
early in the morning he seazes the keys of the Parliament house, shuts up the
doors, and tells the Members that they must come no more there, having already
sat too long, meriting rather punishment than applause, being no other than an
assembly of Whoremasters, Drunkards, Hypocrites, Knaves and Oppressors; thus
was the pretense of the Parliament taken away, and no face of Government
visibly appearing: Never was the faults of Usurpers with more bitterness laid
open than now by him, whom we shall shortly, as transcendently, to outdo them
in all acts of Tyrauny and Usurpation, as the brightest beams of a midday sun
excel the glimmering light of a midnight candle. It Is true as Seneca says,
Nulla tam modesta est faelicitas ut malignitatis dentes vitare possit, Sen. ep.
3.
there ever was and ever will be some murmurers at present Governors, but so
far were either they, or he from being belyed, that unless a Man do speak all
that may be imagined evil, he must needs fall short of their wickedness,

The Government being thus altered, first by laying aside and murdering their
lawful Sovereign, then by sifting and purging the Parliament, till loosing its
original, it either became as nothing, or at the best but a Juncto, and when
it would no longer suit with Cromwells ambitious ends and soaring thoughts, by
turning it absolutely out of doors; At last after much pretended seeking of God
by days of humiliation, Cromwell forsooth is counseled to call together an
assembly of men, picked out and called as fit for his design. These he summons
together by a Letter under his hand and seal directed to each single Man;
Barchones Parlia meant.
who (in their way of canting) admiring at the great goodness of God, that had
put it into the Generals heart to select them to so great a work as the
settlement of the Kingdom, and to show their skill, and as an Essay of their
zeal, they first vote down all Tithes, discourage the Ministry, abuse the
Universities, and endeavor to abolish the law, and consequently to take away
all propriety. By which Acts the Nation beginning to be sensible of the Devil,
where with they were possessed, did frown upon them, which so disanimated our
Fanatic Enthusiasts, that at the very first blast they left the helm, and like
good boys and well-taught, having drawn up formally an instrument under their
hands and Seals, they repair to Cromwell, and (according as the design was
laid) together with the said instrument deliver and resign the Government to
him and his Council, They resign to Cromwell
who (though at first he seemingly denied) yet immediately after, with much
solemnity he accepts thereof, before the Mayor, some Aldermen, some Judges, and
the Officers of the Army. Having thus far perfected his devilish design, and
made all his own, by modelling the Army under the command, of his own
Creatures; settling the Government of Ireland, upon his Son Harry, and Scotland
reduced to obey and submit to him: Cromwels first Parliament do nothing.
It is now thought fit he should declare himself, which to please and gull the
people the better, he does by abasing himself, and calling (as he termed it) a
Parliament, to meet on the Third of September 1654. Which it did, but the poor
animalls not having well conned their lesson beforehand, were, suspected dull,
and turned a grazing to get more understanding, the very first instant he might
lay hold on to do it; By which means once more all pretense of Government being
utterly abolished, he himself plays Rex, and by an arbitrary power beyond,
without, Major Genesis set up.
and against, law, does what he list, by Mayor-Generals (a name in England
unknown) oppressing the Country, robbing the Gentry, spoiling all, and
murdering many, so that none durst say what do thou? A question was
converted into a plot, and to deny a tax merited decimation. It was not enough,
to have suffered all former rapines, imprisonment and plunderings, fines and
taxes, but at last we must all be decimated. We were tanquam Oves destined for
slaughter, and such was our misery there was none to redeem: sad testimonies
whereof were Gera^d, Grove and others about this time, whose blood only could
expiate a crime they never thought or were guilty off.

In this unlimited posture of arbitrary power did the the Kingdom stand, when
that Arch-Machiavilian Cromwell adding strength to the wings of his ambitious
mind soared an Eagle-height, and made all the circumference of his actions to
center at the royal State, thinking with a grasp of the Scepter to ennoble his
name and family, not minding either the danger of the passage or the
slipperriness of the station, when arrived at the top: And indeed such was his
fortune that he did ascend the throne, in which it was for the future, his
restless endeavor to settle himself and his posterity, and the better to cast
a seeming gloss of legality upon his usurpation, Cromwels second Parliament
confirm him as Protector.
he summons another Parliament, in the Year 1656. hoping thereby to work his
ends unseen, and so he did (as to the vulgar eye) for soon after their meeting
and first trial of their temper, he so moulds them to his own humor by a
recognition, that they are overhastily delivered of a strange abortion, by them
called the petition and advice, etc. in which with much solemnity, though
damnable hypocrifie, they desire him to be King, but in more general terms to
take upon him the government, and be chief Magistate, which he very gravely
considering of diverse days, returns his denial, in part, but withal
insinuates in part, his willingness to be settled Lord Protector, at which news
his faction rejoicing, (with many Eulogies for his humility in refusing the
Kingship) he is by the said Parliament, who adjourned for the same end,
solemnly installed Protector at Westminster by Widdrington, who was the Speaker
to that convention, by Whitlock, Lisle, Warwick, etc. And upon their resisting,
he is petitioned to accept of almost two millions, by the year for his support,
to maintain a crew of idle wenches his daughters, whose pampered lusts were
grown almost insatiable) 2. To erect a new house of Lords of his own Creatures,
who being indebted to him for their raising, durst do no other than by a
slavish submission, perform his tyrannous will, 3. To name his successor, that
so he might entail his yoke of tyrannical Usurpation and slavish oppression on
the Kigdom, and several other things: which with much ado, after many
persuasive entreaties and much unwillingness, God knows) he accepts of.

No sooner is this done, The said Parliament dissolved.
but the fox laughs in his sleeve to see how he has cheated the Parliament. And
therefore to make them know their rider, after a few words of exhortation to
them of the want of them in the Country, and the necessity of their retiring
thither for the peace of the Nation, with a friendly nod he dismisseth them and
sends them home.

Thus with much cunning and dissimulation having attained the perfection of his
desires, Cromwell seeks to strongthen himself.
knowing that such greatness must be upheld with allies, and every noble coat
of arms must have his supporters, he strengthens himself at home, by
intermixing with noble blood marrying own of his Daughters to the Lord
Faulconbridge, and an other to the heir apparent of the Earldom of Warwick, the
later of which though in the prime of his your^, finding the disagreement
between Noble and Rebel blood, was soon overheated and by the suddenness of
his death left his wife the widow of a loathed bed. In the next place he seeks
friendships and leagues abroad, and intending to close with France, He closes
with France.
he directly quarrels with the Spanyard, and affronts him in several places
near about one time, particularly he sends one part of the Fleet under the
command of Pen to Hispaniola, but with so little disadvantage that he was
enforced to retreat thence, with no small loss, falling soon after on Jamaica
with better success, winning a part thereof, though most inconsiderable, the
whole Island being not worth the tenth part of the blood and treasure it has
cost this Kingdom, being no way at all serviceable, either for the advance or
security of trade in those parts; Mazarine in France, finding the benefit of
these helps, upon the very first motion strikes with him a league offensive and
defensive, Cromwell promising to assist the French with 7000. Men to maintain
the war against the Flanders: which at this time he sent, they proving so
helpful by their valor, that in a short time they gain Mardike, Dunkirke
gained.
Gravelin, and Dunkirke, the last of them according to articles, being
delivered up to the English, in whose hand it yet remains. In the interim while
these things were transacting, Cromwell suspicious of every blast of wind, and
fearful of every motion, contrives in himself to take off two or three of the
most eminent of the Kings party in England to daunt the rest, among whom he
separates one layman, Sir Henry Slingsby, and one Churchman, Dr. Dr. Hewits
death.
Hewit, for the slaughter: and conscious to himself that they had done nothing
contrary to the law of the land, he durst not try them by a Jury, but re-erects
his monstrous high Court of Justice; before which being brought, they denied
the authority thereof as unwarrantable, which so wrought upon the patience of
Mr. Lisle their bloodily learned President and the rest of the gange, that they
(according as they were foreinstructed by their Master Devil Oliver) without
any great matter of circumstance condemn them both to be beheaded, which
sentence was accordingly executed, on them the 8th. Day of June at Towerhill,
notwithstanding all the means their friends could use of engagements,
persuasions and money, and the deep, earnest and continued entreaties,
solicitations and supplications of Mrs. Claypoole his best beloved daughter,
Mrs. Clapooles death.
for so inexorable he continued, that like the deaf adder he stopped his ears
to the charmer, charm he never so wisely: at which unheard of cruelty, and for
that Dr. Hewits Lady (as is said) was then with child, Mrs. Claypoole took such
excessive grief, that she suddenly fell sick, the increase of her sickness
making her rave in a most lamentable manner, calling out against her Father for
Hewits blood and the like, the violence of which extravagant passions working
upon the great weakness of her body, carried her into another World, even at
the heighest thereof.

No sooner did Cromwell receive the deplorable news of this sad death of his
Daughter, but himself falls into a desperate melancholy, Observe.
which never left him till his Death, which was not long after. Give me leave
here to relate a passage which I received from a Person of Quality, Viz. It was
believed, and that not without some good cause, that Cromwell the same morning
that he defeated the Kings Army at Worcester Fight, had conference personally
with the Devil, with whom he made a contract, that to have his will then, and
in all things else for seven years after from that time (being the Third of
September 1651.) he should at the expiration of the said years have him at his
command, to do at his pleasure, both with his soul and body. Now if any one
will please to reckon from the third of September, 1651. till the Third of
September, 1558. Cromwels death.
he shall find it to a Day just seven years and no more, at the end whereof he
dyed but with such extremity of tempestuous weather, that was, by all men
judged to be prodigious, neither indeed was his end more miserable, (for he
dyed mad and despairing) than he has left his name infamous; this was the end
of our English Nero, and thus having laid the best foundations, his short and
troublesome Reign would give leave to have continued his posterity in the same
unlimited Dominion, at his death, (si ullafides viris, qui castra sequuntur)
declaring his eldest Son Richard his successor in his Usurpation. Leaving his
Son Henry Lord Lieutenant of Ireland, and his Daughter Fleetwood, married to
the Commander in chief of the Army under himself, and the only Man suspected
for a Competitour in the Protectorship, for Lambert had been laid aside long
before as a person of too dangerous and aspiring principles to be trusted.

Richard Cromwell presently ascends the Throne, Richard Cromwell Protector.
being but a private Gentleman of Hampshire, invited thereunto and encouraged
by Flee wood, Deshorow, Sydenham, the two Jones, Thurloe, and others, the
relations and confidents of his Father: His first work is to take care for his
Fathers Funeral, his corpse being shortly after interred among the Kings and
Queens at Westminster, at a far 29000 l.
greater charge than had been used upon like occasions in the richest times,
death giving him that honor which he aspired to, but durst not embrace in his
life time, which solemity ast, by the contrivance of the now Courtiers,
congratulations are sent (prepared at Whitehall) from most of the Counties,
Cities and c^ief Towns of England. And from the Armies of England, Scotland,
and Ireland, with engagements to live and dye with him. Addresses from the
Independent Churches, by Mr. Goodwine and Nigh, their Metropo^itans, and was
indeed worshipped by many as the rising Sun in our Horizon.

This Introduction being made for transferring the Government of these Nations,
from the Royal family of the Stewarts to that upstart of the Cromwells: Di^ks
Parliament now modelled.
it was thought fit, that a general Convention, after the manner of a
Parliament wisely chosen by influences from Whitehall should be called, to meet
the twenty seventh of January, and (upon pretense of restoring the people to
their ancient way of Elections, but real) that the Court might command the
more votes, the Buroughs also had writs sent to them, and the Elections were
all made in the ancient way, only thirty members were called by writs from
Scotland, and as many from Ireland, according to the late combination of the
three Nations into one Commonwealth.

This new kind of Parliament being met at the time and place appointed, God who
had so well ordered the Elections, notwithstanding the practices of Men, that
their English Spirit quickly appeared against Impositions, both from Court and
Army, Act of Recognition.
which being discerned by the Protector and his Grandees, a Recognition is sent
to them to be drawn into a bill, the debate whereof taking up a whole
fourtnights time, and they still remaining in a great straight, till, by the
expedient of an honest Gentleman, they were extricated thence by passing these
votes on Monday the 14th. of February, 1658. without any division or negative.

Resolved, that it be part of this Bill to Recognize and declare his Highness
Richard Lord Protector, and chief Magistrate of the Commonwealth of England,
Scotland, and Ireland, and the Dominions and Territories thereunto belonging,

Resolved, that before this Bill be committed, the House do declare such
additionall clauses to be part of this Bill, as may, bound the power of the
chief Magistrate, and fully secure the Rights and Privileges of Parliament,
and the Liberties and Rights of the People, and that neither this nor any other
previous vote, that is, or shall be, passed in order to this Bill, shall be of
force, or binding to the People, till the whole Bill be passed.

This done, Committee of inspection.
a Committee of In spections is appointed to take a view of the accounts and
revenue of the Commonwealth, and twelve Members versed in matters of account,
were selected and fully empowered for that work, in order to the lessening the
charge of the Commonwealth.

On Saturday the 19th. of February, they reassumed the debate upon the Act of
Recognition and resolved. That it be part of the bill to declare the Parliament
to consist of two houses: Parl. to consist of two houses.
after which they fell upon the point of bounding the chief Magistrates power
and the bounds and powers of the other house, the Protectors party standing for
the powers, given by the Petition and advice, and the rest of the house
withstood it as of no value being obtained by force, by which force also
thirteen hundred thousand pounds a year was settled for ever upon the single
person: and the ruling members of the other house, being a hotch potch or
medley of Officers of the Army, and Protectorian Courtiers, contrary to the law
of the land, The other house debated.
and to the enslaving of the people. By this means nothing being done herein as
to the powers, the Cromwelians, that they might enforce something, propose the
question of transacting with the persons sitting in the other house as an house
of Parliament, urging both law and necessity for the same, yea threatening force
from the Army upon refusal; notwithstanding all which a whole fornight the
honest party of the House thought of nothing less, asserting the undoubted
Right of the ancient Peers, and denying all the rest, but seeing nothing could
be done till this was over, in a very full house they came at last to this well
qualified resolve.

Resolved.

That this House will transact with the Persons now sitting in the other house,
as an house of Parliament, during this present Parliament. And that it is not
hereby intended to exclude such Peers as have been faithful to the Parliament,
from their privilege of being duly summoned to be Members of that house.

Herein may be seen something of the old English gallantry, Not owned as Lords.
for in this vote those in the other House are not owned as Lords, (but called
the Persons now sitting in the other House as an house of Parliament) neither
would the Commons treat and confer with them in the usual way, as with the
house of Peers, but found ou^ a new word (to transact) and that neither but
upon trial, Viz. during this present Parliament. And the better and more
legally to curb them if they should begin to grow imperious, they inserted the
privilege of the ancient Peers as a good reserve, concluding also to receive
no message from them, but by some of their own number.

During this time, The intent of that Par^^ment.
they had under consideration several good Acts about the Militia, against
Excise, concerning Customs, etc. and questioned diverse illegal
imprisonments, calling some Jaylors to the Bar, and preparing a strict bill to
prevent the unlawful sending Freeborn Englishmen against their wills to be
slaves in foreign Plantations; They also examined several grievances, by the
Farmers of the Excise, Major Generals, and tyrannical, and exorbitant Courts
of Justice. The Committee of Inspections having by this time brought in their
report by which it did appear, that the yearly incomes of England, Scotland,
and Ireland, Committee of inspections report.
came to Eighteen hundred sixty eight thousand seven hundred and seventeen
pounds, and the yearly Issues to, Two Millions, two hundred and one thousand,
five hundred and forty pounds. So that, Three hundred, thirty two thousand
eight hundred twenty three pounds of debt incurred yearly by the ill management
of double the revenew that ever any King of England enjoyed: And to maintain
the unjust conquest of Scotland cost us yearly, One hundred sixty three
thousand six hundred and nineteen pounds more than the revenew of it yields.

At these proceedings the Protector and the Army, who were already jealous of
one another, Divisions between the Protector Praliament and Army.
grew both suspicious of the Parliament, because the people begin to speak as
if they expected great good from the issue of their Counsels, therefore the
Army, (least they should come too late) put in for to get the power into their
hands, and according to the method used by them in like cases, erect a General
Council of Officers who daily meet at Wallinford-house, which the Protector
hearing, endeavors to countermine at Whitehall; but they, better skilled in
their work than he was, conclude a representation, which is with speed both
drawn and presented to him about the seventh of April, a copy whereof the next
day after is sent enclosed by him in a Letter to the Speaker of the House: who
hereupon takes the Alarm, and while the Protector thinks to secure himself by
standing on his guard, they not fearing the menaces of the Soldiers, but
resolving to behave themselves like true Englishmen, on Monday the 18th. of
April passed these votes following.

Resolved,

That during the sitting of the Parliament, there should be no general Concill
or meeting of the Officers of the Army without direction, leave and Authority
of his Higness the Lord Protector, and both houses of Parliament.

Resolved,

That no person shall have and continue any command, or trust in any of the
Armies, or Navies of England, Scotland, or Ireland, or any the Dominions and
Territories thereto belonging, who shall refuse to subscribe. That he will not
disturb or interrupt the free meeting in Parliament, of any the members of
either house of Parliament, or their freedom in their debates and Counsels.

Now that this bitter pill might be the easier swallowed, knowing, or at least
believing that want of money was the thing that pinched in chief as to the
private Soldier, (without whom the Officer was worthless) they passed a vote
to take into consideration how to satisfy the Arrears of the Army, and provide
present pay for them, and also to prepare an Act of Indemnity for them. But
all this tended nothing to satisfaction, for the Soldier being through Levened
with the wicked designs of their Officers, did nothing but murmur, especially
since the Protector in pursuance of the votes of the house had forbidden the
meetings of the Officers; so that now the animosities grew so high, that guards
were kept night and day by one against the other, in which divided posture the
management of affairs, continued till Friday the 22. of April, on which day
early in the Morning, Fleetwood, Desborough, and the rest of the Mutinous
Officers, Dicks Parliament dissolved.
with the greatest part of the Army at their beck, the Cromwelian party not
daring to stir, got the supereminency, and forced young Richard to consent to a
commission and Proclamation ready preprepared, thereby giving power to certain
therein named to dissolve the Parliament, although he had with much serious
earnestness protested and promised, rather to dye than be guilty of so
pusillaminous an act, which he was well assured would work for his confusion.
But actum est, for the same day the black rod was sent twice to the house of
Commons to go to the other house, which they refused and scorned, but
understanding there were guards of horse and foot in the Palace yard, after
some ebullient motions, without resolving any question, they adjourned till
Monday morning, the five and twenty of April, and with much courage and
resolution attended the Speaker in order through Westminster Hall to his Coach,
even in the face of the Soldiery.

The Army having thus for the present missed their design, resolve no longer to
dally; whereupon they, lay aside their new Mr. Richard, and all the Officers,
great and small with one consent, take the Government into their own hands,
having shut up the house of Commons door, whither when the Members came on
Monday, entrance was denied them by the Soldiers, who had possessed themselves
of the Court of requests and all avenues in all places, giving no other account
to the Members than this, Viz. They must sit no more. The Army rue modelled.


The next meeting of Officers new modelleth themselves, some they casheire as
Whaly, Ingoldsby, Gosse, etc. others they re-admit, as Lambert, Haselrig, Okey,
and others, in which time not knowing how to behave themselves in such a
condition, and weary of the perpetual toil they foresaw, they must still with
ceasing undergo; they mean to cast the burden off from their own shoulders,
and to that purpose they send to some of their old hackney drudges of the long
Parliament, The Rump comes in.
(as they then did call it) at that time about London, whose consciences they
knew would digest any thing, and did not care how, per fas aut nefas, so they
might again be suffered to sit, with several of these, I say, upon the fifth
and sixth days of May they had conference, the last of which was at their
never failing Speakers, the Master of the Rowles house in Chancery Lane, where
both Officers of the Army, and pretended Members, to the number of twenty
solicited William Lenthall Esquire to sit Speaker again, but he objected
diverse scruples in judgment and conscience: (But O how soon had the sweet
ambition of domineering obliterated all such idle fancies?) yet nevertheless
instantly fifteen Articles being agreed upon among themselves, they conclude to
meet in the house on Saturday the 7th. day of May, and the better to compass
their ends by a base and clandestine surprise, they gave out that they would
not sit till Tuesday the tenth of May, yet surreptitiously, as I say, they met
early on Saturday in the painted Chamber at Westminster and wanting of their
number to make up a house, they sent for those two debauched lustful Devils,
the Lord Munson, and Harry Martin out of prison, where they were in Execution
for debt, with Whitelock, and Lisle of the Chancery Court, making in all forty
two, the Chancery Mace also for have being carried before them, William
Lenthall Esquire. their tender conscienc'd Speaker, together with the said L. Names
of the Rumpers.
Munson. Henry Martin. Mr. Whitlock. Mr. Lisle. Mr. Thomas Chaloner. Alderman
Atkins Alderman Penington. Thomas Scot. Cornelius Holland. Sir Henry Vane. Mr.
Prideaux At. Ge Sir James Harrington. L. G. Ludlow. Michael Oldsworth. Sir
Arthur Haselrig. Mr. Jones. Col. Purefoy. Col. White. Harry Nevill. Mr. Say.
Mr. Blagrave. Col. Bennet M. Brewster. Sergeant Wild. John Goodwin. Mr. Nich.
Lechmore. Augustine Skinner. Mr. Downs. Mr. Dove. Mr. John Lenthall. Mr.
Saloway. Mr. John Corbet. Mr. Walton. Gilbert Willington. Mr. Gold. Col.
Sydenham. Col. Bingham. Col. Air. Mr. Smith. Col. Ingoldsby. And Lieutenant
General Fleetwood.
Stole on a sudden into the house, the invitation of the Army for sitting of
the long Parliament being first published in Westminster Hall.

Upon notice of this surprise of the house by so few, there being more than
double the like number of members of the same Parliament there, and about town,
some of them at the same instant in the Hall, they to prevent future mischief,
(whereof this packing of Parliament men was an ill Omen) to the number of
fourteen, went immediately into the Lobby, and the persons that did so were
these, Viz.

Mr. Anslewy. Sr. George Booth. Mr. James Harbet. Mr. Prinne. Mr. George
Montague. Sir John Evelin. Mr. John Harbert. Mr. Gowen. Mr. Evelin. Secluded.
members.
Mr. Knightly. Mr. Clive. Mr. Hungerford. Mr. Harbey. Mr. Pecke.
But as soon as they came near the door, they were not suffered by the Officers
of the Army to go into the house, though they disputed their privilege of
sitting, (if the Parliament were not dissolved) but reason not prevailing,
after they had thus fairly made their claim they retired, resolving to acquaint
the Speaker by letter of their usage. And accordingly on Monday the 9th. of May
they went to Westminster, where the guards being not yet come, Mr. Ansley, Mr.
Prinne, and Mr. Hungerford, went freely into the house, receiving the
Declaration of the 7th. of May at the door, But Mr. Ansley walking down into
the Hall, (the house not being ready to sit) at his return was by one Capt.
Lewson of Goffes Regiment and other officers denied entrance, Mr. Prinne
continued within and resolved so to do, Vote against the secluded members.
since he saw there a new force upon the house, whose only staying (so guilty
were the rest of their evil actions) made them loose that morning, and adjourn
without the Speakers taking the chair. And to prevent his or any other honest
man's coming in among them, after that they barred the door by the following
Vote.

Ordered.
That such persons heretofore, Members of this Parliament, as have not sat in
this Parliament, since the year 1648. And have not subscribed the engagement in
the Roll of engagement of this House, shall not sit in this house till further
order of the Parliament,

Thus (to the grief of all honest and true hearted Christians) the same
pretended Parliament that was fitting in 1653. (till Oliver disseized them)
sitting again in 1659. upon a Declaration of the Army, with the same
resolutions they had before, minding nothing but prefering one another, The
good old cause what.
and their friends into good Offices and commands, and Counselors places, as
appears by their Vote of the 29th. of May, Viz.

The Parliament does declare, that all such as shall be employed in any place
of trust or power in the Commonwealth, be able for the discharge of such
trust, and that they be persons fearing God, and that have given testimony to
all the people of God, and of their faithfulness to this Commonwealth,
according to the Declaration of Parliament of the 7th. of May.

Now who they mean by persons fearing God in their canting language, by their
very next work you shall see, which is the nominating a Council of State,
Council of State nominated.
into whose hands is given the dispose of all places of trust and profit, yea
and the command of the wealth of the Kingdom; those of the house are as follow.

Sir Arthur Haselrig. Sir Henry Vane. Ludlow. Jo. Jones. Sydenham. Scot.
Saloway. Fleetwood. Sir James Harrington. Col. Walton. Nevill. Chaloner.
Downs. Whitlock. Harb. Morley. Sydney. Col. Thomson. Col. Dixwell. Mr.
Reignolds. Oliver St. John's. Mr. Wallop.
Of Persons without the house Ten. Viz. John. Bradshaw. Col. Lambert. Desborow.
Fairfax. Berry. Sir Anthony Ashley-Cooper. Sir Horatio Townsend. Sir Robert
H^^ywood. Sir Archibald Johnson. And Josia Berners.


Who under the mask of the good old cause began now to act as high villains as
ever before; having forgotten how justly they formerly had been laid aside, but
they are like the dog that returns to his vomit, and with the sow that is
washed, to her wallowing in the mire.

And the better to cast a seeming gloss over the foulness of their actions, The
good old cause what it is.
and their clandestine intrusion into the Government, they send forth a
Declaration in print, the particulars whereof might very well have been here
observable, if they had not already been so clearly demonstrated, by the
laborious pen of learned Mr. William Prinne, in his book entitled, The
Republicans good old cause stated; having therein so fully detected them,
Remainder of Crown ^ands to be fold.
that there remains nothing more to be said in the same matter.

And now, as if already they had not wasted enough, by exposing to sale the
Kings, Queens, Princes, Nobles and Gentries, Lands and Goods, being very quick
sighted, and of a long and large memory, whereby they knew all was not sold:
therefore about the beginning of June, to show us further what they meant by
the good old cause, they ordered the bill for public sales to be brought in; A
sweet act, to enrich the saints, as they in their canting language called
themselves; but their necessities (by the long deteining of the public purse
from them) being grown very pressing, and though they thought the money arising
from those sales would be sure, yet for their present urgencies (not being able
to stay till that could be raised) they appointed the same afternoon to
consider of a more speedy way for raising money, for that was all they ever
aimed at, or hoped for, and to this purpose a bill of Assessement is concluded
the most fitting: Quaerenda pecunia primum est.
And because they would leave no stone unturned, from which they might hope
gain, see how ingeniously they can project, making an order to the Committee of
inspection (a precious crew) to take special care that such persons who have
assumed the titles of Honor, Dignities and precedencies heretofore conferred
on them by the late King, since the same were taken away by act of this present
Parliament, Honors given by the late King or his Son to be null.
do pay the several sums of money by them forfeited, and that the said
Committee do also examine whether they have brought in their Patents, and to
report how the said moneys may be employed to the best advantage of the
Commonwealth, and to offer an act to take away all honors conferred by the
late Kings Son. Was there ever such a piece of unseemly inconsistency, that the
Fountain of honor should be debarred of its spring by a company of peasants,
whose Acts were no better than of an assembly of rogues at beggars bush; but
would you know why they were so much troubled; 'twas precedence that stuck in
their stomachs, those noble souls went before them both in honor and honesty
therefore seeing they could not hinder them from being called Lords by others,
yea the generality, they lay it as a crime of pride upon them, that they did
assume such titles, for which imaginary fault they must pay the sums
forfeited for such insolence against their Rumpships. O this Auri sacra fames,
quid non mortalia pectora cogit, what will it not make them do? They first must
pay, then bring in their Patents, otherwise pay again: thus the Devil rangeth,
fiercest, when his time is most short; for so generally was theirs hoped to be,
in regard they and their Masters of the Army could not cotton together, The
Army fright the Grandees.
being already alarumed from them by a petition and address, yet they grew a
little more confident upon the news of Harry Cromwells submission, and falling
down to worship the image which they had set up, Moncke also having about the
same time, sent them the resolutions of himself and his Army to adhere to them,
as a testimony whereof he informed them of a design of an Agent from the King
of Scots (as they called him) which his diligence and care in the Highlands had
prevented.

These news so animated our Juncto, that thinking all cocksure, Money matters
only taken notice of.
they fall to their old Trade of raising money. First by assessements, then by
continuing the Excise and Customs until the first of October, and lastly by
ordering the Trustees for sale of Crown Lands, forthwith to proceed to the sale
of all computed within the Act for sale thereof, and that they take care of the
profits arising from the same, for the use of the Commonwealth till sale
thereof be made.

Money being thus taken care for to be raised by all means, suddenly after by a
Vote they revive the Committee for plundered Ministers (or rather for
plundering Ministers) that so they may also provide them of hacknies who shall
infuse into the people strange Enthusiastic ways of Government. Plundered
Ministers and Tithes.
It was not enough with Jeroboam to cause a general rebellion, but with him
also to uphold it, they make of the lowest and basest of the people, Priests of
their high places, for whom the old way of tithes is not thought good enough,
it was consulted how a more equal and comfortable maintenance might be settled
on the ministry for satisfaction of the people, whom thus intending to lull
asleep: they resolve to advance their own safety by colloguing with the land
forces with promises of sudden pay, Seamen to be impressed.
and strengthening the Navy by impressing Seamen, which about this time, in
June they were about, And lest they should be wanting to themselves in any
thing, mercenary drudges of the Juncto begin to take upon them as may appear by
this order.

22. June. 1659 By the Contractors for sale of Crown Lands. Crown lands exposed.

These are to give you notice, that Somerset House with the Appertenances, and
Hampton Court with the parkes, etc. Thereunto belonging, are speedily to be
exposed to sale, and that the Contractors intend to sit on Wednesday next the
29. instant, to take in desires of such as intend the purchase of any part of
Somerset House, and on Wednesday the 6th. of July, the desires of any that
intend the purchase of any part of Hampton Court, the premises are to be sold
for ready money.

Will. Tailor Clark attending the said Contractors.

Indeed the last clause for ready money was very nenessary, as affairs then
stood, for the Grandees at Westminster, having only wasted and imbezelled the
rest by divisions and sharings among themselves and friends, with no advantage
to the public Exchequer, they would now seem to begin to amend, but it is
according to the Proverb like sour ale in Summer, for they intended nothing
less than increasing the public stock, but rather by augmenting and converting
it to their own use, make a hoped provision against an ensuing storm, which
they foresaw would ere long fall upon them without any means of prevention: yet
resolving to share the spoil as long as they could, at Midsummer, they re-made
their everlasting Speaker, Offices bestowed and on whom.
Custos rotulorum, of Oxford and Berkshires. And that worshipful Judas, Sir H.
Mildmay, Custos rotulorum for Essex, with several other the like places to
diverse of their leading members, as the Government of Jersey to Col. Mason,
and several Regiments in Ireland to Col. Cooper, Col. Zankey, Col. Sadler, H.
Cromwell leaves Ireland.
and Col. Laurence.

Having proceeded on thus far succesfully, they now begin to clap their wings
as invincible, Ireland being delivered up wholly and quietly into their power
by that pit^^ull cowardly Impe H. Cromwell who had already attended their
pleasure at the Commons bar, for which good service they stroaked him on the
head, told him he was a good boy, for which kindness he bussed his hand, made a
leg and Exit.

But leave we him to stupid folly, and let us see what rates Crown land bears,
the Contractors lately were very busy, and behold the product.

June. 29. 1669.
By the Trustees and Contractors appointed by Act of Parliament, for sale of
the Castles, parkes, etc. exempted from sale by a former Act.

These are to give notice, that there are Competitors for the purchase of
Somerset House, Sommerset-house set to sale etc.
with the Appurtenances in the Strand, Middlesex, which therefore is to be
exposed to sale for ready money, by the box to be opened on Friday, the eight
of July next. The annual value being 233. l. the gross value of materials,
etc. 5545. l. 1. s. 3. d. At which time such as desire to purchase the same may
put in their papers with their name subscribed into the box aforesaid at
VVorsester-House, containing how many years purchase, ( not under 13.) they
will give for the annual value, etc. and he that offers most is to have the
purchase.

Will. Tailor Clarke, etc.

At the same time they appointed to sell ten brace of Buckes, or more out of
Hampton Court Parkes, and so from time to time.

Thus did they strive to make havoc of whatever belonged to the King, which
indeed, and no other, was the good (or rather cursed) old cause that these
miscreants so lustily fought for, and so loudly cried up.

And now, lest they should seem ungrateful to Richard Cromwell, who had so
tamely left the chair of State to these Mountebanks to sit in: they vote him an
exemption from all arrests, for any debt whasoever, for six months, and
appoint a Committee to examine what was due, for mourning for the late Lord
General Cromwell, R. Cromwell protected.
and to consider how it may be paid for, without charge to the Commonwealth.

Kind Gentlemen surely they are, they take all he has from him, and then allow
him a pension; they rob him of a pound and give him a farthing, not a feather
of his own bird, and well so too: for his ambitious stepping into the royal
feat, deserved a greater punishment, which 'twas a wonder how he escaped, since
Usurpation and Tyranny in different hands are generally vehement scourges to
each other, and always torments to themselves; as will appear by the sequel.

For these godly great ones, being now newly warm in their seats, New plots and
jealousies.
begin (as of old) to dream of Jealousies and fears: Plots, Plots, nothing but
Cavaleer plots rings either in their ears or mouths: if two Gentlemen do but
meet accidentally in the Street, and talk together, straight there is a
confederacy, and they must be committed to prison for doing nothing, so that we
might say with that Noble Roman Cicero, Circumspice omnia membra Reipublicae,
quae nobilissima sunt: nullum reperitur profecto quod non fractum,
debilitatumve sit. O rem miseram! dominum far non potuimus, conservis vero
jam servimus. A sad cause of complaint, to live in such a slavery; but our
Taskmasters would fain seem merciful, witness their Act of Indemnity, Act of
indemnity pardons all but Cavaliers.
which came out in print about July, wherein they except none from pardon but
only such whose consciences are not large enough to approve of open Rebellion,
as the last clause of their said mock-Act will show, wherein all are debarred
the benefit of the same, even from sixteen years of age, unless they subscribe
against a single person, Kingship or house of Peers; all sins can be digested
by these fellows, except lawful obedience to magistracy, which they so
abominate that all persons that are tainted therewith must not only depart out
of London, but out of England, in either whereof if they be taken, they shall
be proceeded against as Traitors: and all persons are impouered to take and
apprehend them, for encouragement of which roguery every one that discovers, or
takes such a person was to have ten pounds from the Council of State; Surely
they are in a great fear, else what should they make all this noise, and bustle
so furiously on a sudden, to settle and raise a new militia, but latet anguis
in herba, for now (it being the Dog-dayes) the house grew so hot, that diverse
members withdrew, whereby the rest in regard of their fewness, being become
incapable to act, because not enough to make up a house, according to their own
fantastical model on Friday 22. of July did Resolve.

That the Members of Parliament, Members to attend.
who have had Letters to attend the service of the Parliament, or have actually
attended since the 7th. of May, 1659. be hereby enjoined to give their
attendance in Parliament every Morning at eight of the clock, for fourteen
days, and if employed by Parliament, within a fourtnight.

Alas, poor men, the harvest truly was great, but the laborers few; therefore
it was time to call for more help, for which now they are so put to it, that
they hardly know which way to turn themselves: they complain of designs, and
of buying up of Arms to disturb the peace, which made a great one among them
say, this restless Spirit of the common Enemy should excite the friends of the
Commonwealth to diligence and to study unity, that advantage may not be given
by divisions, but that we may be all of one Spirit to uphold and promote the
common cause that has been contended for. And the better to color their
villainies (according to their usual custom in like cases when they had
mischief to do) they set apart a day of fasting and humiliation; A fasting day
set a part for mischief.
and to show that they were the same men and of the same (if not worse) mind
than formerly for rapine and blood, they proclaim J. Mordant Esquire, with
several others traitors; and order the Lady Howard, Sr. E. Byron, and Mr.
Sumner, to be brought to a speedy trial, for dangerous and traiterous
designs, of bringing this Nation into blood and confusion again: that is for
endeavoring to restore his Sacred Majesty to his lawful birthright and
dominions, for which the whole current of the law is constant encourager,
although these men's effrontery is such, that they dare say any thing by an
infallible Spirit as they imagine, and the World is bound to believe them. But
their vizor being now ready to fall off, Commotions.
and the people not willing to be any longer blinded, begin to move in most
parts of England, which so mads the Phanatick faction, that they seize upon
persons, horses, and arms all about London, increase and double their guards,
stop passengers, even on the Road, the Council of State (so called) sits night
and day without intermission, whereby the City militia and all the forces
throughout England were drawn into a b^dy to prevent the danger. Yea so
general was the fear that they begin to court the people in their canting way.

And because you shall see their desperate fear of, and divellish malice to,
the King and his Friends, take the words of one of themselves as they pass, A
canting^ lie.
Viz. The Lord stir up the hearts of his people to prayer and sincere
humiliation, and fill them with unanimity and courage in this evil time, and
make the People to see, that whatever fair pretenses may be made use of by the
common Enemy, to get power into their hands, yet should they prevail, no man
that has been of a party against them heretofore, yea no man that has been a
mere Neuter, but must expect that his private Estate, as well as the public
Liberty, shall become a prey to a desperate crew of ravenous and unreasonable
men: for (says he) like an irreverent Villain) let but CHALES STUART get in,
and then to satisfy the rabble of followers, and the payment of forreyners to
enslave you, you shall soon see them entailed upon your selves and your
Posterity, to maintain the pomp and pride of a luxurious Court, and an
absolute Tyranny. Thus far he, which how much truth, yea or but probability
thereof is therein; I dare appeal to the greatest Enthusiast among their whole
gange: for if there were nothing in it else but the railing (besides all the
falsity and Scandal) it were sufficient to convince the Speaker to be a Son of
Beliall, as having so far forgotten grace, and laid a side all honesty, that he
durst rail against the Lords anointed, concerning whom the Scripture forbids
to have an evil thought, but it is the custom of rebels to go on from bad to
worse, and when they have once drawn the sword against their Prince, to throw
away the scabbard, and never entertain a thought of return or repentance, like
the bold Usurper in the Poet.

The more we are opposed the more we will spread,
And make our foes our fuel: To be head
We Will, cut off any member, and condemn
Virtue of folly for a Diadem.
Banish Religion, etc.
And such was their practice, The use of the Juncto's fasting.
though sometimes (especially when encompassed with dangers) they hang their
head like a bull rush, and even but mock God with a fast, while they only pray
to be prosperous in their villainy

About this time, the whole Nation of England began to grow sick of the
abhorred fag end of a Parliament, endeavoring to make head against them in
Kent, Sussex, Surrey, Hartford, Hereford, Gloucester, Bristoll, in Cheshire
especially, England sick of the Rump.
where many of the Gentry were actually engaged, correspondence maintained, a
rendevous appointed, and the ancient City of Chesier surprised: this indeed was
the most formidable appearance in all England, for the only appeasing whereof
most of the County forces in those parts, and several Regiments of the Army
from London, did speedily march under the command of a hot-spur zealot, Mr. G.
Lambert, whose ambition made old Nol lay him aside as dangerous, and that
dishonorable discarding, created him a desperate Enemy to the Cromwelian name
and family, which made the Juncto think him the fitter man for their service, A
rising in Cheshire by Sir G. B.
Sir G. B. appeared commander in chief in Cheshire, though many other Noble
Gentlemen, were present, so that this seemed to be the most likely place for
Action. Lambert according to Order being upon his march thither, with three
Regiments of horse, and three Regiments of Foot, and one Regiment of Dragoones,
besides a train of Artillery: and the Juncto for his encouragement shot a paper
gun (by them called a Proclamation) after him against Sir George Booth, Sir
Thomas Middleton, Randolph Egerton, proclaiming them and their adherents to be
Rebels and Traitors, and all else that should any way assist, abet or conceal
the carrying on of their design; backed thus he marches furiously, and in a
fourtnight or three weeks time draws near to Cheshire, in the mean and
during his absence, the congregated Churches of Schismatics and Sectaries in
and about London, raise three Regiments for the security of those parts, in the
intervalls of which time, Sir George Booths Declaration came out in print, the
contents whereof was setting forth how the Westminster Statesmen had violated
all laws of God and Men; that the defense of the laws and liberties was the
chief things he and his aimed at, which would never by these self seekers be
settled, and therefore desired a new free Parliament. This, as it carried
nothing in it but what was real true, so it gave very great satisfaction to
all understanding people, though by the Phanatick rout it was descanted upon
otherwise: but Gods time was not yet come, for Lambert no sooner arrived with
his Army near Sir George Booth, and his forces, Sir G. B. ^^^^^ed.
but he fell on them with valor and violence, which produced a very sharp
engagement, but the Country not being acquainted, nor used to such hot and
surious work quickly yielded ground: Sr. Georges whole body being afterward
drawn forth near Northwich, and possessed of the bridge, they drew up their
foot in the meadows, yet Lamberts Men being commanded to attempt the pass, did
it with such resolution that they soon beat the Enemy from them, and made way
for the whole Army, who having passed the river immediately gave them a total
rout.

The news of this victory so fleshed our bloodhounds, that they began to boast
above measure, vaunting the Lords mercy to them (his own people forsooth) but
Justice to their adversaries in so apparently blasting their Traiterous
undertakings in every corner of the land; like the turks, reckoning the
goodness of their cause by the keenness of their sword, Their maxim to make
good their cause.
and denying that any thing may properly be called Nefas, if it can but win the
Epithete of Prosperum.

The Juncto upon this, set forth a Declaration to invite all the people to
thanksgiving, for this great deliverance to the Parliament, and Commonwealth,
Lamberts policy.
(as they styled themselves): but Lambert intends to make use of his success
against the loyal party for himself, and to that end in a seeming, slighting
and neglect of himself, writes to the Parliament his Soldiers merits, with
whom (the sooner to endear them) he is more than usually familiar: and the
Parliament have no sooner voted him 1000 l. to buy him a Jewel, as a mark of
their favor, but he presently distributes it among his Soldiers, endeavoring
by that and all other means to engage them wholly to himself, so as to venture
in one bottom with him; he yet carried himself so, that his ambitious design
was not discovered, and that he might the better conceal: at this time Sir
George Booth, Sir G. B. taken.
who had fled from the battle, at Northwich in Cheshire, was taken at
Newport-Pannel in disguise; upon notice whereof, he is committed close prisoner
to the Tower of London. for high Treason, in levying war against the
Parliament, and Commonwealth, and that a Committee be appointed on purpose to
examine him, all which was done accordingly, and Sir Henry Vane, and Sir Arthur
Haselrig, (two Saints of the Devils last edition) went to him to take his
examination.

While things are thus in handling here, Lambert seeks cunningly to get all the
strength of those Counties into his own hands, which the Parliament at his
request grant him, by giving him power to seize all arms for their use (as he
pretended) in the same: of which piece of service they seemed to be very glad
as also of letters that came out of Scotland, assuring General Monks fidelity
to them against the interest of the Stuarts, or any other whatsoever, so that
now they began to descant on the late design, A trial of the royal family.
laying all the blame on the loyal party, whose game they said it was, though
he least appeared in it, taking occasion also from thence to blast the royal
family with hellish scandalls: the safety of which the divine providence has
always had a particular and peculiar care of, but as it were in despite of
Heaven, they are not content with all their former wickednesses of banishing,
exiling, and railing against their lawful Sovereign, but now they will enforce
all to renounce him, which in September they Resolved in these words.

J. A. B. Do hereby declare, Oath of abjurati. on.
that I renounce the pretended title of CHARLES STUART, and the whole line of
the late King James, and of every other person, as a single person, pretending
to the Government of these Nations, of England, Scotland, and Ireland, and the
Dominions and Territories thereunto belonging. And that I will by the grace and
assistance of Almighty God be true, faithful, and constant to this
Commonwealth against any King, single person, and house of Peers, and every of
them, and hereunto I subscribe my name.

Thus may every one see, that it was not to amend or reform any errors in the
State, but only their particular malice to the Royal line and covetousness
after their Estate, that made them run into such desperate designs, wherein
having so deeply engaged themselves, that there was no going back, they mean to
make all sure to their interest: and to that end take into debate in the
beginning of September, the matter of the Government, and referred it to a
Committee upon the votes in 1648. The blindness of the Juncto.
To prepare something in order to the settlement of the Government, on or
before the tenth of October.

See here the indiscretion of these men, after a ten years unsettlement and
bringing all into confusion, in all which time they have minded nothing but
their own private wealth, and till this last minute of time have not so much as
thought of resettling; and that they now have, is so weakly, that it tends no
further than to an offer: thus running willingly into one crime, they daily
perpetrate new ones without any sense of evil, or will of amending,
attributing the guilt of their faults to all that endeavor either to reform or
punish them.

The business of Cheshire thus blown over, and the great hopes that were
grounded thereon blasted; the Juncto fall to their old humor of raising money,
no less will serve their turn than 100000. l. a month, besides Excise and
Customs, Taxes and excise confirmed, new delinquents made and mi^itia arreas
collected.
together with the hoped benefit that would arise from the sequestered Estates
of new Delinquents; and least any thing should escape them, the 16th. of
September they vote.

That such persons as have been assessed to find horses and Arms, by virtue of
the Act of Parliament, for settling the Militia, and have not brought in their
horses and Arms, nor paid in lieu thereof the sum of money, appointed by the
said Act. That every such person and persons do under the penalty in the said
Act mentioned pay, after the rate of ten pounds for an horse and Arms for such
number of horses and Arms respectively as they have been charged to find.

Resolved.

That such person and persons as have been assessed to find Arms for a foot
Soldier, and have not sent in the same, or money in lieu thereof, do under the
penalties in the said Act mentioned pay, respectively for every such foot
Arms, such sum of money as the Commissioners shall appoint, not exceeding
twenty five Shillings for every such foot Arms.

It Is no matter, you see, by this, whether any Horse or Arms be brought in at
all, so that the money be paid, Oh! It Is the money that adds Life and Legs to a
decrepit and dying old cause: The Grandees would never take so much pains,
unless an extraordinary profit also waited thereon; which they resolve to
compass, though with the extremest hazards, whereof there began to be some
kind of an appearance, by the growing of heart-burnings, and multiplying fears
and jealousies between their late great Champion Lambert and themselves, The
Juncto grow suspicious o Lambert
the sparks of which animosities growing into a flame, quickly increased to
that height, that not daring to trust him any longer with the Army, they send a
seeming courteous Letter to invite him home; which he, taking no notice of any
thing further than the pretended outside fair show, acceps of; and on the 20th.
of September returns accordingly to London, but immediately before his
arrival there, the Juncto, He comes to London.
to show the great charity, wherewith they abounded, took into consideration
how to cozen the poor Knights of Windsor, and to ingross into their hands all
Hospitals and their reveneues, by these two following votes. Viz. Tuesday
September 20th. 1659.

Resolved,

That it be referred to a Committee, The Juncto intend to seize on all
Hospitalls and convert their rents.
to look into the revenue for maintenance of the poor Knights of Windsor, to
examine what the same at present is, and will be for the future, after Leases
expired, and to see that the charitable uses, to which the said revenue was
granted, be performed, and the residue to be answered, to the use of the
Commonwealth, (by all means pray take a care of that) and to examine the
Leases that have been made, and the fines that have been paid thereupon, and
how disposed, and by what authority; with power to give relief and allowance
to the said poor Knights, and other poor people not exceeding their former
allowance (Oh, take heed of too much charity!) and also to take a Catalogue of
all Hospitalls within this Commonwealth, and the revenewes of them (they are
sure to mind that.) And that the Masters and Governors do return to this
Committee, the constitution of the respective hospitalls, and how the profits
thereof have been, and are disposed of, and by what authority, before the first
of December, 1659. And to report the whole matter to the house.

Ordered,
That all Masters and Governors of hospitalls, be, and are hereby prohibited
to grant or renew any Leases of any Lands, Tenements and hereditaments
belonging unto any of the said respective hospitalls, until this house take
further Order. Notice of which is to be given to the respective concerned
persons, by the Council of State.

See here how greedy is the zeal of these devouring Statists, which yet is
clothed in the g^^be of a seeming Sanctimonious care, but this hypocrisy must
not go long unpunished, neither does it, for now begins to appear the result of
Lamberts designments abroad, in a remonstrative address from the Army: at the
very first news, whereof the Parliament is so startled, that, fearing to be
whipped with their own rod, they ordered, Col. Armies remonstrate the Juncto
send for some Officers.
Ashfield, Col. Cobbet, and Lieutenant Col. Duckenfield, (three of the chief
promoters of it) to bring to them the original paper, intended to be presented;
upon notice of which order given, immediately, a letter was delivered into the
house signed by many persons of the Army, superscribed to the said three
summoned persons, by whose hands they desired the enclosed paper might be
presented to the Lord Fleetwood, and after to the general Council, which
enclosed paper was entitled, to the supreme authority of these Nations, the
P^rliament of the Commonwealth of England, The humble Petition and proposalls
of the Officers under the Command of the Right Honorable the Lord Lambert in
the late Northern expedition, the manner and method of which paper the Juncto
so highly resented (as supposing it to strike at their very root) that they
presentely voted.

That this house does declare, Observe this crack.
that to have any more General Officers in the Army, than are already settled
by Parliament, is needless chargeable and dangerous to the Commonwealth.

Here was the first step to that division, which afterward grew into a flame
but the Army Officers finding their design, was not yet ripe enough, by a
dissembled acquiescency, seemed to lay aside their proposalls, by signifying to
the Parliament, that they would adhere to their authority in opposition to the
common Enemy, and that they would stand by them in the settlement of the
Commonwealth, against all disturbances whatsoever, which lulled the Juncto
into a kind of security, the City also at this time seeming to claw them by an
invitation to a Thanksgiving dinner, whereat the field Officers of the Army
were also to be present; Thanksgiving dinner in the City.
so that now being in a manner rid of their fear, they fall upon sequestring
the Gentry, about Sir George Booths business, settle the Excise, and revive the
Assessements for the Militia, using all their skill and power for amassing
together the wealth of the Nation into their private purses, concluding with
the Epicureans, ede, lude, bibe, post mortem nulla voluptas, so sottishly
stupid were they grown in their high flown ambition.

But now, least they should forget their duty, the Officers of the Army present
a new address requiring answer thereto, Armies new address.
which made them take it into the several pieces wherein it was proposed,
wherein among other things (to show you the harmony that was then between them)
they give to their third proposal this answer. Juncto angry there with.
Viz.

The Parliament declares, that every Member of the Army, as free Men of
England, have a right of petitioning the Parliament, but withal thinks fit to
let them know, that the Petitioners ought to be very careful, both in the
manner, and in the matter of what they desire, that the way of promoting and
presenting the same may be peaceable, and the things petitioned for, not
tending, to the disturbance of the Commonwealth, nor to the dishonor of the
Parliament. And that it is the duty of petitioners to submit their desires to
the Parliament, and acquiesce in the judgment thereof.

By this Declaration they intended to curb the Wallingford party, by teaching
them manners, and to know their distance; but they being Men of another spirit,
and knowing they had the power of the sword in their own hands, would not be so
put off: which the Juncto, perceiving, and beginning to grow jealous of their
own safety, and satisfied that the Army could not subsist without money (which
is the Nerve of War) to engage the People to themselves, and to dis-inable the
Officers from raising any money (in case they should (which they now much
doubted) interrupt them in their sitting) they passed an Act against raising of
moneys upon the people, without their consent in Parliament. Part whereof take
as follows.

Be it enacted, etc. That all Orders, Act against raising money without consent
Parliament makes the Soldiery mad.
Ordinances, and Acts, made by any single person and his Council, or both, or
either of them, or otherwise, or by any assembly or convention pretending to
have Authority of Parliament, from and after the 19th. Day of April, 1653. and
before the 7th. of May, 1659. And which have not been, or shall not be enacted,
allowed, or confirmed by this present Parliament be, and are hereby declared,
deemed, taken and adjudged to be of no force and effect from and after the said
seventh day of May 1659.

And be it further enacted, that no person or persons, shall after the eleventh
of October, 1659. Assess, Levy, Collect, gather or receive any Custom, Impost,
Excise, Assessment, contribution, Tax, Tallage, or any sum or sums of money
or other imposition whatsoever upon the people of this Commonwealth, without
their consent in Parliament, or as by law might have been done before the third
of November, 1640. And that every person offending contrary to this Act shall
be, and is hereby adjudged to be guilty of high Treason, and shall forfeit and
suffer as in case of high Treason.

When the Juncto had thrown abroad this killing thunderbolt, to show that they
durst own the power which they yet conceived themselves Masters off, they took
into consideration a Letter, dated October the 5th. and signed by diverse
Officers of the Army, and directed to Col. Okey, and also a printed paper,
called the humble representation and Petition of the Officers of the Army to
the Parliament, etc. Upon the reading of which two papers, the house was so
highly incensed and flew into such a sudden heat of passion, that without any
more ado they resolved.

That the several Commissions of, Col. 9. great Officers displaced and voted
out of commission.
John Lambert, Col. John Desborow, Col. James Berry, Col. Thomas Kelsey, Col.
Richard Ashfield, Col. Ralfe Cobbet, Major Richard Creed, Col. William Packer,
and Col. Rob. Barrow, were null and void, and every of them discharged from
military employment. And that the Army should be governed by seven
Commissioners, Viz. L. Commissioners to govern the Army.
G. Charles Fleetwood, L. G. Edm. Ludlow, General George Monck, Sir Arthur
Haslelrig Barronet, Col Valentine Walton, Col. Harb. Morley, and Col. Robert
Overton, or any three or more of them, which said Commissioners, were to give
notice to the said nine Officers of the discharge of their Commissions, which
being accordingly communicated, now might you have seen the smoking embers of
dissembled friendship, break out into an open flame of violent enmity, this
great and so long domineering faction, being divided in it self, and each side
prepairing for its own, The feud betwixt the rump and he Soldiery breaks out.
both defense, and elevation, for now a Quorum of the Commissioners which were
appointed to govern the army, being gotten together, and sitting all night in
the Speakers chamber, which was within the Parliament house, to issue forth
orders; part of the army with most of the discharged Principal Officers
presently drew down to Westminster in a warlike order, where they possessed
themselves of the great Hall, the Palace yard, and all avenues, and passages
leading thereunto, having before given out, that they found it absolutely
necessary for the good of the Nation, to break up this Parliament, for the
maintaining whereof another part of the army were as active in drawing
together, the same night also marching down to Westminster, and planting
themselves in Kingstreet, and in and about the Abbey Church and Yard: This
unusual assembly at such an unaccustomed hour caused a general terror in the
hearts and minds of the Inhabitants, who dreaded some greater mischief than
they were sensible of, but the night being past, in the morning the Speaker Mr.
W. Lenthall, at his usual time came along Kingstreet, and had passage through
the ranks of Soldiers, The Rump turned out of doors.
till he came to the new Palace gate, where his Coach was stopped, and himself
compelled to return home, as wise as he went, whereby the house was interrupted
from sitting; which was the chief thing that Lambert aimed at; yet though he
had thus wrought his purpose, he durst not withdraw, but make good his station
against the other faction, the greatest part of the day, each of the Phanatick
leaders (for so indeed they were both) expecting who should give the first
blow, of which meekness the then council of State taking notice, required both
to draw off to their quarters, which motion was willingly accepted on all
hands, and so both sides marched away.

Thus have we seen that rump of pretended authority, Observe.
which in May was, with much soliciting, many entreaties, and not a few
specious pretenses, courted to come into play, now again in October, with as
great scorn and malice laid a side and trampled on: Nec lex est justior ulla,
quam necis artifices art perire sua, It has been a general Observation, that
Treason is always the greatest punishment to it self, like the Viper, it
breeds young with her own destruction, and as the Poet speaks of envy, sit
licet injustus livor, so may I say of it, though it be unjust to others, yet is
it very just, to destroy them first that would destroy others.

The Council of Officers having thus seized the Government into their hands,
Officers meet.
played with it for certain days, till (with the old Philosopher, in the
question about God) finding, the more they studied, the less they understood,
and that they were led by an Ignis fatuus, which only trained them to the
sight, but would never bring them to the certenty, of a settlement, and
pondering their own many weaknesses, and infirmities, with the exigency of
affairs, they fell into consideration of what was fit to be done: In the debate
whereof, after many frivolous essays, they agreed at length among themselves
to nominate some persons to be a Council of State, which device being
applauded, and a new name devised for them (for they will be called forsooth
the Committee of safety) these following persons were pitched upon, They erect
a Committee of safety, their names and characters.
Viz. Fleetwood, whose folly would have exempted, but they were afraid he
would have cried. Knowing also that the beft play ever has a fool in it.

Lambert a seeming Saint, but chief Engenier of the model.

Desborow a drunken Clown, skilled in Harrassing the land steel, once a
sneaking petty fogger, now Lord Chancellor of Ireland, and a Traitor.

Whitlock a lump of ingratitude and deceit.

Sir Henry Vane, chief secretary to the seven deadly sins.

Ludlow, once a Gentleman, but since by himself Levelled into the plebeyan rank.

Sydenham, nothing good in him but his name.

Upstart Saloway Strickland, once a rumper, after a Lord of Nolls edition, then
a convert to the good old cause.

Berry, ped^m nequissimus, the wickedst villain among 10000.

Lawrence, once an upstart privy Counceller, now scarce a Gentleman.

Sir James Harrington, Per risum multum possis cognescere. --

Wareston, a mickle knave geud faw Sir.

Ireton, and Tichborn, two of the City Puckfoists, who lie ledger in the Common
Council, to discover plots for the getting of money.

Henry Brandrith, fit for mischief, else he had not been here.

Thompson, a dull fellow, but a soaking Committeeman.

Hewson, the Commonwealths upright setter.

Sniveling Col. Clarke Factious, Col. Lilburn, preaching, Col. Bennet, and
Cornelius Holland, a most damnable Apostate, both to God and his King.

To these fellows thus firly accoutred, Com^ safety their power.
is the Government committed, and not only so, but they have power to call
Delinquents to account, to oppose, and suppress all insurrections; to treat
with foreign States, and Princes, to raise the militia's in the several
Counties. To dispose of all places of trust, with many other things: by which
may be seen, what an unlimited arbitrary power they assumed to themselves over
the lives and estates of all Englishmen. And that all England might take notice
hereof, Armies decla ation.
they send out a Declaration in print, entitled a Declaration of the General
Council of the Officers of the Army, wherein they say they have lodged the
civil and executive part of Government, in the Committee of safety, whom they
have obliged to prepare such a form of Government, as may best suit with a
Free State, without a single person, Kingship or house of Peers: with many
equivocating, though Saint-like, expressions to the like effect, with which
they hoped to delude the World, and continnue their usurpation, but Sera venit
sed certa venit. All their hypocritical shows cannot cheat God, who raises
up the Spirit of one among themselves to chastise the errors of their pride,
and vain glorious attempts: for no sooner is that Infernal crew of Atheists
met intheir Committee, but they are alarumed with a letter from General Monck
out of Scotland, wherein he gives them notice that both himself and some
Officers of the Army in Scotland, Monck dissatisfied with their proceedings.
were much dissatisfied in reference to the transactions of affairs in England,
at the same time receiving intelligence that he had, seized several strong
holds, secured diverse of his dissenting Officers, Seizes Barwick.
and possessed himself of Barwick, which drove them for a time into a kind of
Phanatick stupidity, that they knew not which way to move in the management of
their affairs, but at last willing to preserve themselves, they order the
forces in the North into a posture, and command lambert with more Regiments out
of the Southerly parts to join with them, that so they might appear formidable
at least at a distance, and put a stay to the violence which they foresaw was
approaching to them; Lambert marches against him.
for the prevention of which storm Col. Cobbet is sent to General Monck with
insinuating relations, whom the General immediately upon his arrival commits
to custody, thereby, preserving his Army from the dangerous contrivances that
Person brought along with him, and depriving of the intelligence he might have
carried to England back with him: which being done by the power of his
Commission (as one of the seven) he straight new models his Army, according to
his own mind, and then declares his resolution to assert the authority of
Parliament, against all violence whatsoever. Upon news of this, our safe
Committeemen, knowing the pulse of the late Juncto to beat after the mode of a
free state, think they shall merit highly at the hands of the General, if they
promote that, though they disown the Parliament he pretended to declare for,
and to that purpose having nominated several Gallant fellows of their own
number, Viz. Fleetwood, Vane, Ludlow, Saloway, Tichburn, Lambert, Desborow,
Hewsen, Holland, and others, to consider of, and prepare, a form of Government
to be settled over the three Nations, Safe Committee for a freestate.
in the way of a Free State and Commonwealth, they send away Whalley, Goffe,
Caryl, and Barker, to show the same to General Monck, and thereupon to mediate
with him for avoiding the effusion of blood: the Officers at London writing
also to his Officers, and expostulating with them, touching the necessity of a
brotherly union, crying out of nothing but Liberty, while the Nation groaned
under their oppression; But Menck revolving with himself, both the greatness,
difficulty, and hazard, of his design, concludes not to be rash in a direct
quarrel, but rather by procrastinations to weaken the force of his enemies
(which he knew could not continue long without money) and so to gain the
victory without striking a blow, therefore to amuse them, and cast the more
seeming gloss upon his action he orders Col. Talbot, Monck desires a treaty.
and Dr. Clargies (who were the first messengers sent to him) to send Fleetwood
word that himself and his Officers had nominated Col. Wilkes L. C. Cloberry,
and Major Knight, to repair speedily to London, and treat with the like number
of Officers there, for a firm unity and peace, and the better to confirm it, he
sends another Letter from himself to the same purpose, with promise that his
forces should advance no further. But the Committee of safery, willing by
strength to hold what they had got, and not knowing what to think of the
General, issue out many several Commissions to raise forces throughout all
England, to anticipate him, and to settle Militia's to be ready in a moment,
Militia settled.
as it were to resist him: which he hearing, and that Lambert was coming
against him with thirteen thousand men, be according to his before mentioned
Letter, forthwith sends his three appointed messengers for peace, upon whose
arrival at York, in November, and speech with Lambert, he became so far
satisfied of their intentions toward an Accommodation, that thereupon he gave
order his forces should advance no further Northward in their march.

Things being brought now into this posture, The treary begun.
the Generals three Commissioners arrive at London, November the 12th. where
the Treaty is immediately begun: which lulled the Committee of safety into such
a security, that they begin to think of shareing great Offices and places of
trust and profit among themselves, to this end, appointing Fleetwood, Desborow,
Sydenham, Saloway, Cornelius Holland, Col. Clark, Col. John Blackwell, or any
two of them to be Commissioners for the Treasury, and to manage the affaris of
the public revenue, with power as large as could be desired: (And would it not
be well managed think you in the hands of such bankrupts) but while these men
mind their own wealth only, the Treaty must not be forgotten, which was now in
hand, and on a sudden brought to such an issue, that it startled the City, who
had by Col. Alured, and Colonel Markham received Letters from Scotland of
another purport, for at last the Commissioners on both sides agreed on these
heads ensuing, that is to say.

That the pretended Title of CHARLES STUART, The articles of the Treaty.
or any other claiming from that family should be utterly renounced. (O horrid
Treason, first murder the Father, and then abjure the Son!)

That the Government of these Nations, shall be by a free State or
Commonwealth, and not by a single person, King, or house of Lords. What must
the new settlement utterly abolish all the old fundamental Laws of England at
one breath? Your Precipitation bodes your ruin.

That a Godly and learned Ministry, shall be maintained and encouraged: It Is
well the Generals Men thought of it, for you may be assured it is against the
principle of Anabaptists, and fifth-Monarchy Men;

That the Universities shall be reformed and countenanced, so, as that they may
become Nurseries of Piety, and Learning. That the Officers and Soldiers, and
other persons on either side be indemnified for what is past, touching their
late difference, and that all unkindness betwixt them be buried in perpetual
Oblivion; pray take care of that: but it may be supposed you shall be the
furthest off when you think your self nearest.

That the Officers which were made prisoners in Scotland, be forthwith set at
liberty; How will the General like that?

That the Armies be presently disposed into quarters, and that there be a
committee of nineteen whereof nine to make the Quorum, who were to meet about
qualifications, for succeeding Parliaments.

This was the effect of part of the agreement, which was sent away with all
speed to General Monck; upon knowledge whereof, and by reason, the conclusions
of the said Treaty were so contrary to the Letters, by them formerly received,
the City was startled, The City startle.
having (as they supposed by order) been encouraged to stand fast in their
liberty for their Laws, Privileges, Properties, and lawful Government.

But the General in a wise foresight, and providentiall care, having cast in
his mind the danger he stood in (for he had a wolf by the ears) though he sent
his Commissioners aforesaid, yet reserved to himself the ratification, so that
nothing should be of force until it were confirmed with his own seal: But now
the articles of the Treaty being come to his hands, he commands the return of
his Commissioners, which they obeying, he presently commits Col. Monck commits
one of his Commissioners.
Wilks to custody for going beyond his Commission) declares the Treaty void,
and marches toward the borders: which the Committee of safety being advertised
off, fall to their old tricks to delude the people, endeavoring to make them
believe it was only a rumor grounded on a fained Letter pretended to be by him
sent to the City, whereas they seemed to be assured that he would acquiesce in
the former agreement, but truth who is filia temporis, the daughter of time,
quickly appeared to undeceive the people; for in this interim his excellency
(having as himself expressed it a call from God and Man, to march into England,
for resetling the Parliament) calls an assembly of the Nobles and Gentry of
Scotland at Edinburgh, He calls an adembly in Scotland.
to whom he proposed these three things.

1. That they would, during his absence, which would not be long, preserve and
secure the peace of that Nation.

2. That they would supply him with some men for his undertaking (which he
engaged upon his honor should be to their satisfaction) and that if any
troubles should arise, they would assist him in the suppressing thereof.

3. That they would advance and raise what money they could before hand.

To these Propositions the Earl of Glencarn, who was chaitman of that assembly,
returned these modest answers.

1. That they could not engage to preserve the peace of the Country in his
absence, wanting arms, and so in no condition to do it, but they should with
all faithfullness notwithstanding endeavor it.

2. They they were incapable to answer his desires for the reasons aforesaid,
neither did they think it prudent for them to engage in a war, which if it
should prove unsuccessfull on their part, would be a ruin to them: or if
successful, they did not understand, that it would be advantageous to them in
any measure. But as to the third.

3. That they were content to levy moneys, and advance a years tax aforehand.

General Monck highly satisfied with those civil returns, endeavors to
caresce and indear them by.



Hereupon he resolves now to dally no longer than his supplies of Men and money
come in, in the mean while holding correspondence and intelligence with his
friends all over England, He keeps intelligence.
from whom he a new received advertisement, that if he could yet for a little
time keep fairly at a distance, his work should be done even without any noise
of drum or trumpet except it were in exultation and triumph. This advise caused
him to make some seeming overtures of a second treaty with Lambert, yet all
along insisting upon the readmission of the Parliament, before they began it.

As a balk to which the Committee of safety declared, The Wallingford in
government.
(hoping thereby yet to lead the Nation into further error and mischief) that
they had transmitted a great part of a form of government for these Nations to
a Committee of the Officers of the Army ('it is like to be well done if it must
be hewn out by a dint of the sword) to be considered by them, (a mad crew of
Gotamists) who daily meet, and are gone through a great part of it with much
satisfaction, (to themselves possibly to think how finely they should Lord it,
but to no body else surely) they are very desirous to have such a Government,
as may preserve the Liberties of the Nation (this is the old cheat) and secure
the cause they have contended in (which is flat treason and rebellion) both
against CHARLES STVART, and any other that may disturb the peace: hoping in
time to make it appear, that their Enemies are Liers when they traduce them and
render them a people that seek only themselves. Then they conclude, that they
hope the faith of Gods people will hold out and not make have, and that good
men will help them in their prayers, that God the Lord would bring forth
righteousness and truth, and discover, and bring to naught the secret
contrivances of all his adversaries: And so no doubt, he will to the shame and
ruin of all such dissembling Hypocrites.

About this time being the later end of November, the People beginning to smell
their knavery, drew several Petitions, with an intent to deliver them, but
their crazie stomachs being not able to bear such strong Physic, belched forth
a Proclamation against all such Petitions, Proclaim against (...).
which they call undue and dangerous papers, and prohibit all persons to
subscribe any such papers, and if offered to suppress them, or cause the person
endeavoring to get subscriptions to be apprehended, upon penalty of being
accounted disturb^rs to, and enemies of, the peace.

But this not working its defired effect, but rather making men the more eager,
so as they began to fear tumultuous proceedings, therefore the Mayor is
commanded and he accordingly sent warrants to all City Officers to charge all
Masters of families to keep in their Sons and Servants: This enraged the youth
of the City to such a height, that the Committee of safety fearing their own
danger to arise from some disturbance there, gave order December the 5th. to
part of the Army, Hewson gees into London.
both horse and foot to march into the City, which they did early in the
morning, where being entered, great multitudes of all sorts of people gathered
together in the Streets, the shops were shut up, and the Soldiers in all
places affronted, which so madded them, that by command of their Col. Hewson,
they fell on the people with some violence, and killed two or three persons,
wherewith the multitude for the present dispersed, but began to bear a grudge,
whose revenge would not be satisfied but with the ruin of their oppressors.
This was the last help they had to rely on that they would rather reduce all to
a Chaos, than quit their hold, snatching at every the least opportunity that
did but flatteringly seem to offer them an advantage: for by this, though
unwillingly, foreseeing their Catastrophe at hand they are driven into more sad
thoughts of their dissolution, by the revolt of Portsmouth, which Hasterig,
Walton, and Morley, with the consent of Col. Whetham, the Governor had gained:
now might any man guess their time to be short by the violent extravagancy of
their actions, for nullum violentum diuturnum; the news of which arriving to
them, they sent some horse and foot either to reduce or block up that garrison
(here we see, now we see that great and divellish faction of Independency
strongly divided) but soft and fair, the game goes quite contrary, as will
appear afterward.

During this dealing at Portsmouth, the Army Officers finding that nothing
would satisfy the People, but either to re-admit the Rump Parliament or have
another, they to give them hopes of a glimmering of content, Ordered.

That a Parliament shall be called and appointed to sit down in or before
February next. Parliament proclaimed by Committee of safery.


That the Parliament to be called as aforesaid, shall be according to such
qualifications as are or shall be agreed upon, and may best secure the just
rights, liberties, and privileges of the people.

This must be solemnly proclaimed forsooth by their journey men of safety,
together with another edict of the same stamp, commanding all honest and loyal
souls out of the Cities of London, and Westminster, upon pain, of imprisonment,
and to be proceeded against as traitors, and executed: By this means, they
thought to walk in a mist without any supervisors, but alas they were much
mistaken, for though they thus cleared themselves, as they thought, from fear
of the Common Enemy (as they termed all loyalists) yet they could not free
themselves of their new gotten Enemies at Portsmouth, by whose policy they were
outwitted and casheired: yet nevertheless seven principles and unalterable
sundamentalls are agreed on, which were published to this effect, by these high
and mighty John's a Leyden.

1. That no Kingship shall be exercised in these Nations. Wallingford 7.
principles of Rule


2. That they will not have any single person to exercise the office of chief
Magistrate in these Nations.

3. That an Army may be continued and maintained, and be conducted, so as it
may secure the peace of these Nations, and not be disbanded, nor the conduct
thereof altered but by consent of the conservatours appointed.

4. That no imposition may be upon the consciences of them that fear God.

5. That there be no house of Peers.

6. That the Legislative and Executive power be distinct, and not in the same
hands.

7. That the assemblies of the Parliament shall be elected by the people of
this Commonwealth, duly qualified.

Here you see the scope of these Bedlamites, and what a fine hotch potch they
would have made, Lawson declares.
but their sport was quickly spoiled by a Declaration from Vice Admiral Lawson
giving several reasons of a necessity for the long Parliament to sit again,
neither would any thing else satisfy him, though Sir Henry Vane himself with
his Jesuited and poisonous breath sought to infect him.

Now also had Haslerig, Morley, and others so bestirred themselves, and by
their policy wrought upon the Soldiers that were sent by the Wallingfordians
against them that they all came over to them, and relinquished their preten^ed
Masters, whose want of money (if nothing else) would have made their cause seem
bad enough, especially since the rogue of all the Kingdom ran directly
encounter to their designs, their being motions almost in every County, some
for the Rump wholly, others for the joining of the secluded members to them, but
most, and they the wisest, moderatest, and not least considerable were for a
full and free Parliament, but Independency being not yet arrived at its full
period, Independencies first de^lining.
begins first to decline by the General advance, though in part seemingly
upheld by admitting the Rump-Parliament again into their full power, as when
they were interrupted the thirteenth of October before going, who accordingly,
on the four and twentyeth day of December, were owned by all the Soldiery,
both in England and Ireland, as the suprem authority with much solemnity, the
Speaker Lenthall going immediately to take care of the Tower of London, the
Government whereof he committed for the time present to Sir Anthony
Ashly-Cooper, Mr. Weever, and Mr. Berners, and on Monday the 26th. of December,
in the evening by twilight began to sit again, and were as peremptorily
imperious as before, commanding Lambert to London, Lamberts Army va^isheth.
whose forces were all, either revolted away to General M^nck, or piece meal
retired into quarters for want of pay, yet notwithstanding all this removal of
force from them, they thought not themselves secure, until he by his authority
came to awe the Soldiery, and people, who were now grown tumultuous, and as
ready to throw them out of the sadle, as they had done the Wallingford faction.

His excellency therefore, Mon^k marches to Enggland.
(who could never be persuaded out of Scotland, since he first went thither)
now lays hold on this opportunity, to do his Country service, having
therefore, as is before mentioned, secured Scotland, he likewise deals with Sir
Charles Coot, and others in Ireland, who striking a perfect harmony with him,
did surprise the most eminent Phanaticks in the midst of their designs in
Dublin Castle, and stop Ludlow, who was commander in chief in Ireland, at Sea,
by this means making all Ireland sure for the Parliament [for such yet was the
pretence] as it was in the 12th. of October, 1659. This wrought so effectually,
and even to such an excess of joy in the Parliament, that they not only
approved of all General Monks former actions, but ordered the hearty thanks
of the house to be given to him for his fidelity, and faithful service, and a
letter of thanks to be sent to him, signed by Mr. Speaker, a proper reward
surely, as if one word of their mouths were a sufficient recompense for all
labors, hazards, and travels.

While they are thus minding themselves and boasting of their own strength,
they receive a cooling card from some of the secluded members, who demanded to
be admitted to sit, if that Parliament were not broken, which put our mushromes
Juncto into such a dump, that they were fain to pass this following Resolve.

Tuesday 27. December. 1659.
Resolved, Note this.

That on the fifth of January next, this house will take into consideration the
case of all absent Members, and also how to supply the vacant places in order
to the filling up of the house; and that in the mean time it be referred to a
Committee, to consider of all proceedings, and all orders, and cases touching
absent members, and make their report at the same time.

But this did not prove satisfactory, as they expected it should, for the City
begins to grow discontent, preparing themselves for a posture of defense; In
the Country the casheired Officers, and the depressed Nobility and Gentry
bestir themselves, courting his Excellency all along in his march, and ecchoing
in his cars perpetually a free Parliament, to whom he generally gave no other
answers, but that he would use his utmost interest, to persuade them to reason
and Justice, in the mean time wishing them to acquiesce in what they should
order; thus he marches with his whole Army, modelling to his own mind all
Garrisons and forces in his way: This and his number of men that he brought with
him, being far beyond allowance, (for they ordered only three hundred) put our
Rumpers to a stand, and they could not be satisfied until they send the
subtilest couple in the house, Scot and Robinson are sent to Monck.
Scot and Robinson, to sound his intention, under pretense of congratulating
his coming to England, and complementing him, to whom he carried himself with
so much gravity and reservedness, that they could not catch one dropping
syllable that might betray him.

About this time the City by their Sword Bearer, The City (...) him.
send to him, to whom he returns, that he is for the Parliament as aforesaid,
yet assures them that, when he came to the City, he would satisfy their
desires and hopes conceived of him, thus owning the authority then in being, he
keeps close to his commission, notwitstanding all the addresses of the
Countries for a free Parliament, promising nothing more but that he would see
all force removed from the Parliament, 2. The House filled, and 3. That there
should be good provision made for future Parliaments. Thus with a slow and
orderly march, He comes to St. Albans.
attended by the prayers and wishes of the whole Nation, he comes at length to
St. Albans.

In this interval of time, the Rumpers minding to ingross the whole power, both
Legislative, and Executive into their own hands, and to share all places of
trust and profit among themselves: on the fifth of January pass this following
vote.

Resolved, (...).

Touching absent Members, that the Parliament does adjudge and declare, that
the Members who stand discharged from voting or fitting in the years 1648. and
1649. do stand duly discharged by judgment of Parliament from sitting as
Members of this Parliament, during this Parliament; and that writs do issue
forth for electing of new Members in their places.

Thus did they intend to have perpetuated themselves for their lives, and to
have bequeathed their villainy in succession, to such as were to be new chosen,
having already concluded, Cath of (...)
that the Oath of renunciation of the title of CHARLES STUART (as these
unmannerly mungrels were pleased to style their Sovereign) and the whole line
of the late King James should be taken by every member that hereafter shall sit
in Parliament, nay so high were they now grown, that they committed diverse for
but Petitioning for a free Parliament.

This made his Excellency have up to London, (...)
where his Lady and Family were come before him by Sea; into which City he
comes about the beginning of February, and takes up his lodging at White Hall,
as the Parliament had appointed him (contrary to the thoughts of many) and
after two or three days refreshment (taking no notice of his resentment of the
aforesaid insolences) he solemnly attends the house according to their order,
G^es to (...).
and with much modesty gives them an account of his undertakings, refusing the
chair offered him for his ease and honor, but leaning on the back of it, he
delivered himself to this effect.

That he deserved not the thanks they gave him, H^s speech (...).
having done no more than his duty, but wished them rather to praise God for
his mercy: then he humbly desired them to satisfy the expectation of the
Nation in the establishment of their laws, liberties, properties, etc. God
having restored them, not so much that they should seek their own, as the
public, good. He desired them in particular to take away the jealousy, men
had of their perpetuity, by determining their own sessions, and providing for
future Parliaments, wishing them to use the Nobility and Gentry civilly,
intimating that it was their wisdom rather to enlarge, than contract their
interest, he told them, that the fewer qualifications they put upon succeeding
Parliaments, the better, and desired them to be tender in imposing new oaths
(for he had heard of the eath of abrenunciation) alleging there was more
reason to repent of those already taken, than to take new ones, so warning them
to take heed of Cavaliers, and Phanaticks, he concluded, commending Scotland to
their care, and assuring them of Ireland, and hinting at a Free State.

This done, and he retired laden with thanks, How the P^^emp^^^ him.
he withdrawes to his place in the Council of State, where the first that he
finds under consideration is the reducing of the City, (which to make a short
digression was now grown unruly, being stiffly resolved to own no power, but
that of a full and Free Parliament, whereto they had been encouraged by the
Country in several Declarations, but especially that of Devonshire, which in
regard it gives the sense of all in one, and was that chiefly stuck to by the
City: I shall give it you at large, as Mr. Bamfield, the Recorder of Exon, sent
it to the Speaker, January the 14th.

The Declaration.
We the Gentry of Devon, finding ourselves without a Regular Government, after
your last interruption, designed a public meeting to consult remedies, which
we could not so conveniently effect till this week at our general quarter
Sessions, at Exon; where we found diverse of the Inhabitants groaning under
high oppressions, and a general defect of trade, to the utter ruin of many,
and fear of the like to others, (which is so visible in the whole Country) that
it occasioned such disorders, as were no small trouble and disturbance to us,
which (by Gods blessing upon our endeavors) were soon suppressed without blood:
And though we find, since our last purposes, an alteration in the State of
affairs, by the re-assembling you at the helm of Government, yet we conceive
that we are but in part redrest of our grievances, and that the chief expedient
to amend the whole, will be the recalling all those Members that were secluded
in 1648. And sat before the first force upon the Parliament, and also by
filling up vacant places, and all to be admitted without any Oath and
engagement previous to their entrance, for which things if you please to take a
speedy course, we shall defend you against all opposers, and future
interrupters, with our Lives and fortunes: for the accomplishment whereof we
shall use all lawful means, which we humbly conceive may best conduce to the
peace and safety of this Nation.

This was signed by most of the chief gentry of the Country.

Now the City, owning the purport of this Declation by one of their own, and
refusing to pay taxes, had drawn the Council of State to that violent
ebulliency, of reducing it to a submission, which was, as I said before, the
point, upon which they fell, when first General Monck, came first among them;
Mo. goes into the City and demands taxes.
for they had rather bring the whole World into a combustion than their usurped
power either to equals or superiors, they were so in love with power, that
they would not have left pilling, as long as there had remained any matter
either to satisfy their ambition or covetousness; wherefore they resolve to
drive on furiously, and therefore give order to the General to march into the
City, with so many horse and foot, as should reduce them to an obedience, and
compel them to pay the Assessment. His excellency according to their command
being then their servant, went to the City, and at Guildhall peremptorily
demands, by order from the Parliament and Council of State, the payment of
their taxes: this so sudden demand, coming from him (from whom they hoped
better things) and quite contrary to their expectation, drove the Citizens to
such a nonplus, that for a time they were as extasied not knowing what to say,
but at last, recollecting somewhat of an English temper, they return this
answer. That in Magna Charta confirmed by the Petition of right, and renewed by
the present Parliament, a day before their forceable dissolution upon the 11 of
October, they were to pay no taxes, etc. but by their consent in Parliament,
which now they had not: yet to avoid giving any offense, they desire time to
consider of it, which the General grants, but in the mean time writes to the
house to know their pleasure, to which they presently answer, that 1. he should
imprison Col. Bromfield, Alderman Bludworth, L. C. Jackson, Major Cox, Col.
Vincent, etc. Some of which had waited upon him from the City but a little
before; 2. that he should remove their chains, dig up their posts, and break
their gates.

These strange orders being brought to him, M^his carriage in that exigent of
affairs.
did a little startle him, knowing they were sent as well to try his patience
and obedience; as to breed an open enmity between him and the City, thereby to
compel him to serve them perpetually, by being assured that they were mortal
enemies; yet not willing, since he had gone so far with success, to loose all
now by passion, he with silence obeyes them readily, and thereby clearly finds
the temper of the City to be positively resolute for Liberty and right, so that
being sensible they might be trusted, he hopes shortly to make them an amends,
which he had an occasion offered to do soon^e than he expected, Is ungene^all'd.
for the Parliament had a double design upon him, first to weaken him in his
interest and credit, by an employment which they knew would so incense the
City, and then while he is acting their unreasonable commands, they are busy
in undermining him in his power; for when he had done their design as they
thought, to the enraging of the Citizens, and breeding in their hearts
revengefull thoughts, He joins with the City.
he returns to White Hall upon Friday the 10th. Day of February, upon which
day his Commission did expire, instead of the renewing whereof, which he might
with much justice have expected, as the reward of his merit, he is made a
Colonel again, and only made equal in command with six men more, as short of
him in desert, as in honesty, wherewith when he had acquainted the Officers of
his Army, who were much unsatisfied with such a reward for their late
abominated employment, agreed unanimously among themselves, that the Parliament
intended to lay them aside, notwithstanding their former faithful service to
them, and to perpetuate the Nations slavery, by their datelesness: and
therefore they resolved to march with their General into the City to join with
them, and declare for a free Parliament: to this purpose a conference is had at
the Three Tons near Guild Hall, where the City and Army strike hands, at
which time his Excellencies Officers remonstrate the resent they had of the
violence they were commanded to offer that famous City, which was of a stamp
unparalleled in the most horrid rage of former ages, whose barbarousness even
spared that, when they harassed the whole Nation beside, then give warning of
several persons, both within and without the City, whose tyrannous minds they
feared, abhorring in an especial manner a late petition delivered in the house
by one Praise-God Barebone, being a treasonous libell, subversive of all order
and Government, dangerous to religion, both in discipline and worship, and
destructive to all Laws, Statutes and Customs, even in fundamentalls, wishing
at last the Parliament to think of determining their Session, and provide for
future Parliaments.

This being, by his Officers I say, presented to his Excellency, and by him in
a letter communicated to the Speaker, he marches into London, and takes
quarters, Free P. promised
declaring for a free Parliament; and this blow was it, made Independency
stagger, for so highly were both City and Country pleased with this
Declaration, that they did hardly know in what manner to express their joy,
ringing their bells, making bonfires, the air resounding nothing but the name
and praises of Monck, and the Streets filled with grateful hearts, who on
bended knees prayed for blessings on the head of the hoped restorer, both of
the Church and Commonwealth, and in this relolution he persisted,
notwithstanding all the flatteries, threatenings and snares of the house, who
now studied nothing more than his ruin, as in him foreseeing their own,
nevertheless he waits for the Parliaments answer to his last letters to them,
but finding they neither minded him nor them, and thought of nothing but
settling their own interest, and continuing themselves in power, he procures a
conference between some fitting members of the house, and some of the
honorable Gentlemen and worthy Patriots that were excluded from it, at which
himself being in person present, and weighing judiciously the reasons and
arguments formed on both fides, which he heard with a deep and reserved
silence, after all were withdrawn, he concluded with himself, upon result from
the whole, that the pretended settlement proposed by the house, was of compass
too narrow, and too weak of foundation to bear up the Nation, and repair its
breaches: Secluded members admitted.
he resolved therefore to withdraw all manner of force from the house, and to
admit men of more sober, moderate, and less biased judgments, whose Spirits
being more apt for public good, would establish the Kingdom, upon terms
comprehensive of every considerable interest therein: hereupon, on the one and
twentyeth day of February, meeting the secluded members at White Hall, and
expressing himself to them in a speech not delivered by himself, but by his
Secretary, wherein he commended to their care,

1. Religion, that great primum mobile and unum necessarium, without which to
live rather befits beasts than men, and this was proposed in the most sober and
moderate way imaginable, yet neither countenancing error nor allowing
libertinisme.

2. He commended to them the State, desiring them to be good Physicians to its
crazed body, by applying suitable Physic, which (he said) he supposed would be
a full and a free Parliament, upon whose resolves, as himself; so he doubted
not but the whole Nation would acquiesce, he told them the house was open for
them to enter, and prayed for their good success.

The secluded members being thus admitted, How they begin and wherein proceed.
fall immediately to work where they were abruptly forced to break of in
December. 1648. Confirming their Vote made then by another now, that the
concessions of the late King were a sufficient ground to proceed on for settling
the peace of the Kingdom, hereby not only vindicating themselves, but as it
were at once disanulling all that had been done as dissonant thereto, during
the whole time of their recess.

This began to infuse a new spirit of life into the Kingdom, in whom at this
springing season of the year, began a new to bud and peep out the bloomes of a
too long frost-nipped loyalty, so that one now might have seen what twenty
years before could never show, countenances, that lately were dejected through
the cruel tyranny of their Aegipitian task masters, now gather cheerful
looks, and like fresh blown roses yield a fragant savor.

The Parliament thus sitting, freely vote his Excellency Lord General of all
the forces in England, Scotland, and Ireland: by virtue of which Commission he
disarmes all the Phanatick party, both in City and Country, the Parliament in
the mean time providing to secure the Nation by two seasonable Acts, the one of
Assessment, and the other of the Militia; the last impowering and arming
Gentlemen, and Men of worth and power, to stand up for their Liberties, and
Privileges, and put the Country into a posture of defense, against all
encroaching pretenders whatsoever; and the former enabling them to raise
moneys (which are the sineues of war) for maintaining of the forces, so raised
to assert their and our rights.

Thus settling the ancient Government of the City, and vacating the Phanatick
power in the Country, they commend the establishment of the Nation to a full
and free Parliament, to be called the 25th. of April, 1660. Issuing out writs
to that purpose in the name of the keepers of the Liberty of England, by
authority of Parliament, and settling a Council of State of most discreet and
moderate men, to whom the affairs of the three Nations, in the intervall, and
until the meeting of the Parliament, on the aforesaid 25th. of April was
committed, who with much discretion managed their power, to the satisfaction of
all sober minded men, and so (saving to the house of Lords their rights,
notwithstanding the Commons were in this Juncture of time, put upon necessity
to act without them) commending the Soldiery once more to his Excellency upon
the sixteenth day of March, in the year of our Lord 1659. Lorg P. legally ended.
(a day worthy to be remembered) they dissolved themselves, and so at last put a
legal period to that fatal long-Parliament, which could not be dissolved by
any but by it self.

And thus we see Independency laid in the dust, and ready to give up the ghost,
and indeed not long after we shall see fully to expire the Prodromi, of whose
miserable end might be these and the like.

The Council of State in this intervall of power, The intervall.
with very great caution and wariness, manage their affairs, turning neither to
the right hand nor to the left, but keeping a direct course, as knowing in
medio ibunt tutissimi, they set out a Proclamation against all disturbers of
the peace, under what pretense or name soever, sparing none that in a time of
such hopes durst either move a hand or tongue to work a disturbance, taking
care also that the order of the last Parliament touching elections should be
duly and punctually observed, Elections for a new Parl.
as considering that the peace or ruin of the Nation would lie in their hands.

His Excellency the Lord General in this interregnum accepts of several
invitations and treatments in the City by several of the worthy companies, yet
still having an eye to the main, he keeps close to his Officers (who were not
yet fully resolved) and often confers with them in a more familiar manner than
ordinary, whereby he so wrought on them, that at last he brought them to
declare that they would acquiesce in the resolves of the approaching
Parliament; and indeed this was a shrewd forerunner of the fall of
Independency, as I said before, whose only hope was builded on the averseness
of these men to lawful power, which when they saw frustrated they might well
depair; yet endeavor once more to endeavor a confusion, which being observed
by the Council, and that a discontented Spirit possessed some of the old
Officers and Grandees, according to the power given them to that purpose, they
send for all suspected persons, confining them unless they subscribed an
engagement to demean themselves, quietly, and peaceably, under the present
Government, and acquiesce submissively in the determination of the Parliament
next ensuing, which reasonable engagement Lambert and some others re^using,
were carefully confined to several prisons, by which means the peace was
wonderfully preserved: but notwitstanding all this care, such were the restless
endeavors of that divellish faction, that (whether by the neglect or treachery
of his keepers is not yet known) Lambert gets out of prison cuningly, who being
a man of loose principles and desperate fortunes, so encouraged the Phanatick
party, and stirred up their drooping Spirits, that they began to threaten great
matters, and for perfecting their wicked design, begin to gather to an head
near Edg-hill, which they hoped would prove to them an auspicious Omen for the
beginning of a Second war, but Heaven would no longer wink at such intolerable
villainies, for the sins of these Amorites were fully ripe for judgment, so that
they were discovered and quickly nipped in the bud, Lambert and his accomplices
being so eagerly pursued by Col. R. Ingoldsby that they were suddenly forced to
scatter and shift for themselves by flight, Taken and sent to the Tower.
neither was that so swift or secure, but that Lambert was taken prisoner by
the said Col. Ingoldsby, and sent prisoner up to London, at which time passing
by Hide park, on the twenty fourth of Ayril, he saw all the City Regiments both
of horse and foot, Trained Band and Auxiliaries, completed, armed, and trained,
and ready to hazard their Lives and Fortunes against all seditious and factious
Traitors to their King and Country.

The news of this first appearance of armed loyalty being spread abroad into the
Countries, The first loyal muster.
did so animate and encourage the old oppressed, that casting off their fetters
and fears together, they begin to appear in their wonted guise, and because
they were by the Phanaticks traduced as men of blood and full of revenge, not
to be satisfied but with the utter ruin of their adversaries, thereupon to
undeceive the vulgar, who might possibly have been misled by such lies, if not
answered, did from their several and respective Counties, as also in the Cities
of London and Westminster declare, The Gentry declare.
that they were far from any thoughts of revenge, it belonging to God alone
(alluding to that text of Scripture, Vengeance is mine, I will repay says the
Lord) but as for Justice they would acquiesce in the judgment of the
approaching Parliament.

This being done, The Parliament begins.
and the whole Parliament at the appointed time, beginning first with their
duty to God (they follow that golden Pythagorean rule.) (...)
(...)) --
giving him hearty thanks for that their freedom of meeting, which when they
had cordially done, they fell in order to their Governor --

First, They fear God, then honor the King. As the same Pythagoras goes on; --
(...)
(...)
The very Heathen we see, by the mere light of Nature, could dictate that which
our Grand Enthusiasts of Religion would not for these many years, by the ignis
fatuus of their new lighted notion walk after. But the Parliament were better
principled, for after their devotions regularly paid to God, they in the very
next place own their duty to their Prince, upon the first day of May (a happy
day to be remembered to posterity) voting the Government to be by King, Kingly
government voted.
Lords, and Commons, a constitution so incomparably mixed, that it may rather
be admired then envied: neither were they satisfied to rest there but on the
Eighth day of the same May, caused his Majesty to be proclaimed King of
England, King proclaimed.
Scotland, France, and Ireland, which was performed with so much Solemnity and
Joy, as I presume England, I dare say hardly any Kingdom in the World, ever
saw or were sensible of the like, the shouts and acclamations of the pleased
people rending the very skies as a token of their extraordinary Thankfulness
to Heaven, and at night by the multitude of their bonfires, turning the
Darkness into a kind of lightsome day.

This hapy beginning thus owned by the general consent of all honest men, made
the Parliament resolute to cute their begun endeavors; which the more orderly
to do (for order befitteth men best both as Subjects and Christians) they
immediately prepared Commissioners, Commissioners sent to the King
who were persons choice for their integrity and wisdom, (like those heads of
the children of Issachar which were men that had understanding of the times to
know what Israel ought to do) being entrusted to wait on his Majesty, and to
desire him to come to his Parliament and People with all convenient speed.
Before whose arrival his Majesty had withdrawn himself from Bruxels, not upon
any account as was by the ignorant and malicious insinuated, but out of a
design of safe guard to his own sacred Person, as knowing those two principles
of the Romanists, (si violandum est jus, Regni causa violandum est; and nulla
fides servanda est haereticis) might prove dangerous, if not fatal to his
interest as affairs then stood. He well remembered Richard the first his case
surnamed Caeur-du-Lion, and what his detention once cost England, and therefore
had no reason to cast himself into the like hazard. Therefore having discharged
all Accounts whatsosoever at Bruxels, he as (I said) removes his Court to
Breda. As that first, he might hold the more certain and quick intelligence
with his friends in England, where there hardly wanted any thing to complete
his Restoration and the Kingdoms satisfaction, but his Personal presence; so
in the second place he there knew himself safe, being within the jurisdiction
of his beloved sister, King at Breda.
the Princess Royal Mary Princess of Orange, whose tender love and zeal to
him in his affliction deserves to be written in brass, and graven with the
point of a Diamond.

During the time of his residence there to show himself to be a second Solomon,
a Prince of Peace, and not only so, but the most pious and merciful of
Princes, who was wise as a Serpent, yet innocent as a Dove, by the Honorable
the Lord Viscount Mordant and Sir Richard Grenvile (since by his Majesty's
special grace created Earl of Bath) Gentleman of his Majesty's Bedchamber; He
sent a most gracious Declaration, with respective Letters to the Lords, to the
Commons, to the City, and to the Army:

Whetein,

His Majesty first offers a Pardon for all miscarriages and misdemeanors
against his Father, His Majesty's Declaration lays Independency dead.
or himself, to all persons (such only excepted as shall be excepted by the
Parliament,) promising likewise security to all, whose guilt might otherwise
endanger them, so as they laid hold on his Majesty's Pardon within 40. days
after the publication thereof.

2. He refers the purchasers of Kings, Queens, and Bishops Lands to Justice, to
the Law, and to the Parliament.

3. He assures the Soldiery of their Arrears for past services, although done
against him, and of encouragement and pay for the future under him.

This Declaration was received with no ordinary joy and solemnity, the
messenger Sr. John Greenvil being rewarded with 500. pounds to buy him a
Jewel, and upon reading thereof and a conference had with the Lords, (who had
now reassumed their Native right by taking their places in the higher House)
they agree unanimously each in their several house; That a Letter be sent in
answer to his Majesty's gracious Letter and Declaration, superscribed To his
most Excellent Majesty; which were since more immediately drawn up and sent by
Commissioners (before prepared as is already mentioned) six from each House,
who were in the name of both Houses,

1. To give his Majesty most humble and hearty thanks for his gracious Letter
and Declaration.

2. To desire his Majesty to return to the exercise of his Regal Office, and
come to his Parliament and people with all speed possible.

And thirdly, to that purpose to desire him to appoint a place for the Navy to
attend him: the Commissioners that went from the house of Peers were these.

The Earl of Oxford, Lord Brook, Commissioners names that went to the King.
Earl of Warwick, Lord Berckley, Earl of Middlesex, Lord Visc. Hereford.
Of the House of Commons were selected these following, Lord Charleton, Sir
George Booth, Lord Bruce, Sir John Holland, Lord Falkland, Sir Antho.
Ashly-Cooper, Lord Mandevile, Sir Horatio Townsend Lord Herbert, Sir Henry
Cholmly, Lord Fairefax. Mr. Hollis.


The City of London having also received the like Letters and Declarations, the
Lord Mayor, Aldermen and Common Council appoint a loyal and humble answer to be
returned, wherein they give his Majesty thanks for his tender care, grace and
favor to their ancient and renowned City, which was sent by these worthy
Gentlemen.

For the City of London.
Alderman Adams Recorder VVilde Alderman Robinson Alderman Bateman Theophilus
Biddolph Richard Ford Alderman Vincent Alderman Frederick Alderman VVale John
Lewis Esquire William Bateman Esquire. Alderman Bludworth Major Chamberlin Colonel
Bromfield Sir James Bunce Bar. Alderman Langham Alderman Reinoldson Alderman
Brown Sir Nicholas Crispe Alderman Tompson
All these Letters were sent away, but the first that arrived to his Majesty's
hand was from his Excellency the Lord General Monck, who by the leave of the
House sent the same by his brother in Law, Sir Thomas Clergies who was (as
being the first) beyond all expression welcome, and after some long but not
tedious conferences Knighted, and at length dismissed with as much kindness as
he was at first received with joy.

After whom arrived shortly all the forenamed Commissioners, Commissioners how
received by the King.
together with some of the Ministry, and were received by his sacred Majesty,
his two illustrious brothers of York and Gloucester, and his sister of Orange,
with demonstrations of affections on both sides such as are not capable of a
description by my rude pen, for they were such as may be imagined only not
defined, like the joys of a condemned soul now at point to die, when suddenly
and beyond expectation it is not only snatched out of the very jaws of death,
but mounted aloft into a seat of Honor, how it is even overpressed with the
overflux of such a sudden, yet joyful change, and stands extasied, not knowing,
or at le^st not well discerning the realities of those violent emotions under
the happiness whereof it at present labors; which surpassing joy grown over,
and they dismissed with abundance of satisfaction, with all speed his Majesty
according to the earnest request of his Parliament prepared for England, his
Royal brother, the most illustrious Duke of York, Lord high Admiral, taking
order for the Navy. And in the way to the Seaside his Majesty was honorably
entertained by the States General at the Hague, of whom having taken his leave,
and thanked them for their Treatment and Presents, he proceeded in his journey.

During this time, the Navy under the conduct of General Mountague, was come to
attend and wait on his Royal pleasure; upon notice of which, attended by the
Princess of Orange and her son, and the Queen of Bobemia, he comes aboard the
Naseby Frigot, The King comes aboard for England, and ^ands at Dever.
by him then named the Charles, and after a repast there, parting with high
satisfaction, pleasure and content on both sides, with his Royal and Princely
attendants, he lanched forth, and quickly with a prosperous and safe gale of
wind, anuuente Coelo, came within two leagues of Dover, Monck meets him.
(a place formerly not so infamous for receiving the Barons in their rebellious
wars against the King, and harboring Lewis of France, as now it was famous for
its loyalty in the joyful reception of its lawful Sovereign) when he was come
thither, he sends Post for the General (being resolved not to set foot on
English ground till he came thither) who upon the first hearing of that happy
news, presently took Post to meet him, having before taken care for Palaces to
entertain him, and left order for several Regiments of Horse to attend him, for
his Majesty's security; Providing with valor against open enemies, and with
prudence against pretended and basely false friends, which being performed
according to Order, His Excellency waits upon his Majesty at Dover.

He is no sooner come thirher, but upon knowledge thereof, the King Landed, at
whose Honored feet in the most humble posture of a Loyal Subject, on his Knees
Our Great General presents himself, and was received and embraced by his
Majesty in the open arms of an endeared mercy, with so much affection as might
well manifest the great respect the King bore to his high deserts; for to show
that his embrace was signal, and far from a mere complement, he went nearer and
kissed him. No endearment is ever thought too great, where there is grounded
Love, neither rested he there, but like a true friend and lover indeed, takes a
delight in his society; for the more clear demonstration whereof to all the
world, he took him with his two Brothers the Dukes of York and Gloucester into
his Coach with him to Dover a^oresaid, KINGS journey to London, and the manner
of it.
where after a dutiful acknowledgment from the Magistrates there, and solemn
though short entertainment he rid to the City of Canterbury (so famed for her
Archbishops Sea) his Majesty being in the middle between his two brothers; and
the Duke of Buckingham and the General riding bare before him.

In this Equipage with the whole Gentry and Nobility of England attending, and
thousands of the meaner rank; he arrived as I said at Canterbury, being met by
the Magistracy in their richest habiliments of Honor, and by the Ministry of
the place, who after a grave Speech and hearty Gratulation, presented him with
a rich Bible as He was Defender of the True Faith, and afterward with a Golden
Boul full of Gold, rendering it as a Tribute to him to whom Tribute was due.
From Canterbury, where he rested all Sunday, and gave thanks to God his Father
and mighty Deliverer. On Monday he came to Cobham-Hall in Kent, a House
belonging to the Duke of Richmond, but without any stay there passed on the
same night to Rochester, from whence on Tuesday, May the 29. (the day of the
week which was fatal for the murder of his Royal Father, but happy to himself,
not only for his Birth, but also for giving the first hopes of his long wished
and prayed for return by the Vote of the Parliament on Tuesday the 1. of May,
and his being proclaimed nemine contradicente on Tuesday the 8. of May.) I say
on that day, attended by the Duke of Buckingham, the Earl of North-hampton,
the Earl of Cleaveland, the Earl of Norwich, the Earl of Shrewesbury, and
many others with their several respective Troops of the choice Nobles and
Gentry of the Land, and his Excellency with many Regiments of his best Horse,
the Lord Gerard with the choice Lifeguard, and the whole Country flocking in,
and cutting down Palms, and strowing the ways with all sorts of Fragrant
Flowers and decking the Lanes and Passage, with the greatest variety of Country
Pomps, Garlands, beset with Rings, Ribands and the like, the Air ecchoing all
along and redoubling the perpetually iterated Hosanna's; He came to London (The
Metropolis of his Kingdom, whose preparations were no less sumptuous then
joyful,) making a short stay only at Black Heath; (a place many years since,
and more then once noted and remembered for the tumultuous assemblies of several
Rebels, but now much more famous for the united Congregation of the whole
Kingdoms Loyalty) from hence about n^on, order was given for a speedy march to
London, in which Major General Broun did lead the Van with a complete Troop of
Gentlemen, all in cloth of Silver Doublets: Alderman Robinson followed him with
an other select company, the several Lords came after with their respective
Troops, then came the Lifeguard: After the Marshals and Heralds, with some
ancient Lords, the Duke of Buckingham, and the Lord General bareheaded; and
then his Majesty rid between his two brothers, the Duke of York on the right
hand, and the Duke of Gloucester on the other; after whom followed his
Excellencies Lifeguard, and then the Regiments of the Army all completely
accoutred with back breast and Pot. In this order they came to Saint Georges
fields, in a part of which toward Newington was a Tent erected, in which the
Lord Mayor, King rides through the City.
and Aldermen in their most solemn Formalities, with their Officers, Servants,
Livery-men, and Lackeyes innumerable waited, to which place when his Majesty
came, the Lord Mayor presented him on his knees with all the Insignia of the
City, viz. Sword, Mace, Charter, etc. Which he immediately returned with
promise of Confirmation, and conferred the Honor of Knighthood on the Lord
Mayor in the place, whereafter a short refreshment, three hundred in Velvet
Coats and Chains representing the several Companies passing on before, the Lord
Mayor bearing the Sword before the King, they proceeded in an excellent order
and equipage into and through the City, which was all hung with Tapistry, and
the Streets lined on the one side with Livery men, on the other side with the
Trained Bands, both taking and giving great satisfaction, until at last even
tired with the tedious pleasure of his Welcome Journey, he came to the Gate of
his Palace of Whitehall, which struck such an impression of grief into his
sacred heart, by the Remembrance of his Fathers horrid Murder there, as had
almost burst forth, if not stopped or recalled by the Joy he received from the
acclamations of the people, and the thought that he was peaceably returned
after so many years unto His own House.

The King being come in, went presently to the Banqueting House, where the
Houses of Parliament attended for him, to whom the two Speakers severally made
an incomparable Speech, wherein, with great eloquence, they set forth the many
years misery under which the Nation labored, then repeated the Kingdoms Joys
at present, for their hoped happiness in the future by his Majesty's
Restoration, and so commended to his Princely care his three Kingdoms and
people, with their Laws and privileges, whereto the King in a Majestic style,
made this short, but full return.

That he was so disordered by his Journey, and the Acclamations of the people
still in his Ears, which yet pleased him as they were demonstrations of
Affectiou and Loyalty, that he could not express himself so full as he wished,
yet promised them, that looking first to Heaven with a Thank-ful heart for his
Restoration, he would have a careful Eye of especial grace and favor toward
his Three Kingdoms, protesting that he would as well be a Defendor of their
Laws, liberties, and properties, as of their faith.

Having thus received and taken several Congratulations and Entertaiments, and
dismissed his Noble, Honorable, Worshipful, and Reverend Guard of the
Nobility, Gentry, Citizens, and Ministry, he retired to Supper, and afterward
having devoutly offered the Sacrifice of Prayer and Praise to the most high,
for his safe return, he went to his Repose and Bed. The first Beam that darted
from our Royal Sun, infused such a sense of piety into the peoples Affection,
that it even made them break into an Excess of Joy, it was that happy Omen of a
virtuous Government, the admirable Proclamation against debauchednesse,
(wherein such is his Majesty's zeal) he takes no notice of his Enemies, but our
sin which had so long occasioned his exile, not sparing therein those who
pretended to be his friends, yet by their profaneness, disserved him. A happy
Prince and happy people sure! where the Extremity of Justice endeavors to
take nothing from the Subject but a Liberty to offend, which so highly pleased
the people, that their Joys rather increased then diminished according to that
of the Poet.

-- Littora cum plausu clamor, superasque Deorum
Implevere Domos, gaudent, generumque salutant
Auxiliumque Domus servatoremque fatentur.
The Shores ring with applause, the Heavens abound
With grateful Clamours which therein resound.
All men salute him, Father, Prince, and King;
That home again their banished peace does bring.
Which is further also expressed by the Poet in these words,

-- Largis satiantur odoribus ignes
Sertaque dependent tectis, and ubique lyraeque
Tibiaque and cantus animi felicia laeti
Argumenta sonant: reseratis aurea valvis
Atria tota patent, pulchroque instructa paratu
-- Proceres ineunt convivia Regis.
The Bonfires light the Sky, Garlands adorn
The Streets and Houses: Nothing is forborne
That might express full joy, while to his Court
The King by Nobles followed does resort,
And in their Feasts Gods wondrous Acts report.
So restless were the Nights of our pious King, that he began to account all
time spent in vain and amiss, wherein he did not do or offer some good to his
Kingdom: to this purpose, on the first of June, (the very next day but one
after his Arrival, accompanied with his two Brothers and Sir Edward Hide, Lord
Chancellor of England, with many other honorable persons, went by water to
the House of Lords, where having seated himself in his Royal seat, the Black
Rod was sent to the Commons to inform them of his being there: They immediately
adjourned, and with their Speaker, waited his Majesty's pleasure, who in a
short speech acquainted them with the Occasion and Cause of his present sending
for them, viz. To pass those Bills which he understood were prepared for him;
the said Bills being therefore read according to ancient form by the Clerk of
the Crown, were passed by his Majesty,

First, The Bill constituting the present Convention to be a Parliament.

Secondly, For authorizing the Act of Parliament for 70000. l. per men's. for 3
months.

Thirdly, For Continuance of Easter Term and all proceedings at Law, which done
the Lord Chancellor Hide in a pithy Speech, told both Houses with how much
readiness his Majesty had passed these Acts and how willing they should at all
times hereafter find him, to pass any other that might tend to the advantage
and benefit of the people, desiring in his Majesty's behalf, the Bill of
Oblivion to be speeded, that the people might see and know his Majesty's
extraordinary gracious care to ease and free them from their doubts and fears,
and that he had not forgotten his gracious Declaration made at Breda, but that
he would in all points make good the same.

Things being brought to that happy issue, the King wholly intends to settle
the Kingdom, and because that in the multitude of Counselors there is both
peace and safety, he nominates and elects to himself a Privy Council, whereof
were, The Duke of York The Duke of Gloucester. The Duke of Somerset. The Duke of
Albemarle. The Marquess of Ormond. The Earl of Manchester. The Earl of Oxford.
The Earl of Northampton. Lord Seymour. Lord Say. Lord Howard. Sir Atho. Ashly
Cooper. Sir William Morris. Mr. Hollis. Mr. Annesley.


On several such men he bestowed great offices, as Marquess of Ormond to be
Lord Steward of His Honorable Household. The Earl of Manchester Lord
Chamberlain. The Duke of Albemarle to be Master of the Horse, and Knight of the
Garter. Sir Will. Morris one of the Secretaries of State: which took up some
time, in which the Parliament according to the Kings desire proceeded in the
Act of Oblivion, which at last, after many tedious and strong debates passed
both Houses, and on the (...) day of (...) in the Twelfth year of his Majesty's
Reign, had his Royal assent and was confirmed, wherein were excepted from
pardon both as to Life and Estate, John Lisle William Say Sir Hardresse
Waller Valentine VVauton Thomas Harrison Edward Whalley John Hewson William
Goffe Cornelius Holland Thomas Chaloner John Carew John Jones Miles Corbet
Henry Smith Gregory Clement Thomas VVogan William Heveningham Isaac Pennington
Henry Martin John Barkstead Gilbert Millington Edmund Ludlow Edmund Harvey
Thomas Scot William Cauley John Downs Nicholas Love Vincent Potter Augustine
Garland John Dixwell George Fleetwood Simon Meyne Sir Michael Livesey Robert
Titchburn Owen Row Robert Lilburn Adrian Scroop John Okey James Temple Peter
Temple Daniel Blagrave Thomas Wait John Cook Andrew Broughton Edward Dendy
William Hewlet Hugh Peter's Francis Hacker, and Daniel Axtell.


Who had fate in judgment on, sentenced to death and did sign the instrument
for the horrid murder, and taking away the precious Life of our late Sovereign
Lord King Charles the First, of Glorious memory; several of whom have by diverse
means in sundry places been taken, and others have surrendered themselves
according to a Proclamation of summons set out by the King for that purpose,
the persons that surrendered themselves were these.

Owen Row Augustine Garland Edmund Harvey Henry Smith Henry Marten Simon Meyne
William Heveningham Isaac Pennington Sir Hardress Valler Robert Titchborn
George Fleetwood James Temple Thomas Wait Peter Temple Robert Lilburn Gilbert
Millingon. Vincent Potter, Thomas VVogan, and John Downs,
And therefore though they be all attainted and convicted of High Treason by
the Law of the Land at a fair and legal Trial by a special Commission of Oyer
and Terminer directed to several of the Judges learned in the Law, and to
diverse other worthy and honorable persons, yet they are not to suffer the
pains of death, but their executions are to be suspended until his Majesty by
the advice and assent of the Lords and Commons in Parliament shall order the
execution by Act of Parliament to be passed to that purpose.

The persons that have been taken were, Thomas Harrison Adrian Scroop John
Carew John Jones Francis Hacker Gregory Clement Thomas Scot John Cook Hugh
Peter's Daniel Axtel, and William Heulet.


Thomas Harrison having received his Trial, and being condemned to be hanged,
drawn and quartered, accordingly on Saturday betwixt nine and ten of the clock
in the morning the thirteenth of October 1660, he was drawn upon a hurdle from
Newgate, to the place that is rayled in by Charing Cross, where a Gibbet was
erected, and he hanged with his face looking toward the Banqueting House at
White Hall (the fatal place pitched upon by those infernal Regicides, for the
solemn murder of our late Sovereign Charles the first, of glorious memory)
when he was half dead, the common Hangman cut him down, cut off his privy
members before his eyes, then burned his bowels, severed his head from his
body, and divided his body into four quarters, which were sent back upon the
same sledge that carried it, to the prison of Newgate, from thence his head was
brought and set on a pole at the South end of Westminster Hall, looking toward
the City of London, but his Quarters are exposed to view, as a public example
upon some of the Gates of the same City.

His pleading at his arraignment were nothing but treasonable and seditious
speeches, rather justifying the crime he had committed, then any whit
relenting; and so he continued a desperate Schismatic to the Church of England
to the last moment of his breath.

2. John Carew was the next that followed, who at the time of his trial,
endeavored only to justify the late Rump and their actings, but that would
not serve his turn, for it was proved that he did consult and meet together
with others how to put the King to death, that he sat at the time of the
sentence, and signed the Warrant for execution, so that the Jury found him
guilty of compassing and imagining the Kings death; for which he was also
condemned to be hanged, drawn, and quartered, etc. which sentence on Monday the
fifteenth of October, in the morning, was put in execution on the body of the
said Carew, his Quarters being likewise carried back on the Hurdle to Newgate;
but such was the goodness of his Majesty, that upon the humble intercession of
his friends, he was graciously pleased to give them his body to be buried,
though his execrable treasons had merited the contrary.

3, 4. The next in order, were Mr. John Coke the Solicitor, and Mr. Hugh Peter's
that Carnal Prophet, and Jesuitical Chaplain to the traiterous High Court; upon
Cooke's Trial it was proved against him, that he examined witnesses against the
King, that he was at the drawing of the Charge, that he exhibited it in the
name of the Commons assembled in Parliament, and the good people of England,
that this Charge was of High Treason, that he complained of delays, prayed
that the Charge might be taken pro Confesso, and at last, that it was not so
much he as innocent blood that demanded Justice, and that notwithstanding all
this, he acknowledged the King to be a gracious and wise King, upon which the
Jury found him guilty.

2. Then Peter's was set to the Bar, against whom was proved, that he did at
five several places consult about the Kings death, at Windsor, at Ware, in
Coleman-street, in the Painted Chamber, and in Bradshaw's house, that he
compared the King to Barrabas, and preached to bind their Kings in chains,
etc. That he had been in New England, that he came thence to destroy the King
and foment war, that he had been in arms, and called the day of his Majesty's
Trial a glorious day, resembling the judging of the world by the Saints that he
prayed for it in the Painted Chamber, preached for it at White Hall, St.
James's Chapel, St. Sepulchers, and other places: upon which proofs the Jury
finding him guilty also, of compassing and imagining the Kings death, the Court
sentenced them, viz. ( Cook and Peter's both) to be led back to the place from
whence they came, and from thence to be drawn upon a Hurdle to the place of
execution, etc. On Tuesday following, being the sixteenth of October, they were
drawn upon two Hurles to the rayled place near Charing Cross, and executed in
the same manner as the former, and their Quarters returned to the place whence
they came: since which, the head of John Cook is set on a Pole on the
Northeast end of Westminster Hall (on the left of Mr. Harrisons) looking
toward London; And the head of Mr. Peter's is placed on London Bridge, their
Quarters also being exposed upon the tops of some of the Gates of the City.

5. The next brought to Trial, were Scot and Clement, Scroope, and Jones;
against Thomas Scot was proved, that he did sit and consult about the Kings
death, that he agreed to the sentence, and signed the Warrant, whereby the King
was murdered, that since he has owned the business of the Kings death, by
glorying in it, defending it, and saying he would have it engraven on his
Tombstone, that all the world might know it, which being high aggravations of
his crime, he was soon found Guilty by the Jury.

6. Then Gregory Clement was set to the Bar, who immediately confessed himself
Guilty, modo and forma, and so without troubling the Jury was set aside till
Judgment.

7. Next was brought Mr. John Jones against whom the proofs were short, that he
did sit upon the King in that monstrous Court, and that he signed the Sentence
and horrid Instrument whereby the King was ordered to be put to death, upon
which the Jury found him guilty.

8. Then Scroop was tried upon the like Indictment for compassing the Kings
death, and against him was proved that he sat in the Court, and did Sentence
the King, and sign the bloody Warrant, and after the coming in of his Majesty
that now is, justified the committing of that detestable murder, for which the
Jury finding him guilty, the Court gave sentence of death against them as the
former to suffer as Traitors, and accordingly on Wednesday the 17. of October,
about 9. of the clock in the morning. Mr. Thomas Scot, and Mr. Gregory Clement
were brought on several hurdles to the Gibbet erected near Charing Cross, and
were there hanged, bowelled and quartered, and about an hour after Mr. Adrian
Scroop, and Mr. John Jones together in one hurdle were carried to the same
place, and suffered the same pains of death, being afterward returned to
Newgate, and thence their quarters placed on several of the City Gates, and
their heads deservedly disposed on the top of London Bridge and other places.

These being thus dispatched, and having received the reward of their Treason,
Mr. Daniel Axtel, and Master Francis Hacker were brought before the Court to be
tried; Against the first of whom, viz. Axtell, was in proof, that is the
imagining and compassing the death of the King, that he bid his Soldiers cry
out Justice, Justice, and Execution, Execution; and beat them till they did it;
That he bid shoot the Lady that spoke and called Cromwell Traitor, saying, not a
quarter of the people of England consented to their wicked Charge; that he said
to Col. Huncks upon his refusal to sign the warrant for executing the King: I
am ashamed of you, the Ship is now coming into Harbor, and will you strike
sail before we come to Anchor; that he laughed at the Transactions, as
applauding them while others sighed; that after the King was murdered, he kept
Guards upon the dead body, and knew who cut off the Kings head, having sent one
Elisha Axtell for the Executioner; upon which proof the Jury found him guilty
of the said Treason whereof he stood indicted.

10. Francis Hacker was arraigned, and by diverse witnesses it was sworn
against him, that he was Commander of the Halbeteers, who kept the King
prisoner, and would not suffer any access to be unto him; that he guarded him
to their mock-Court, and after kept him sure till he was murdered; that he was
one of the persons to whom the Warrant for execution was directed, and that he
signed it, that he brought the King to the fatal block and was upon the
scaffold, being a principal agent about the Kings death; for which horrid
Treason the Jury found him guilty: after which the Court sentenced both him and
Axtell to suffer death as Traitors, according to which judgment they were on
Friday the 19. of October, about 9. of the clock in the morning, drawn upon one
hurdle from Newgate to the common place of execution, generally called Tyburn,
and there were hanged. Mr. Axtel was bowelled and quartered and so returned
back and disposed as the former, but the body of Mr. Hacker, by his Majesty's
great grace and favor, and at the humble suit and intercession of his friends
was given to them entire, and by them afterward buried.

The last of this crew that was for present execution was Will. Hulet, against
whom was proved that he was one of those which came with a Frock on his body,
and a Vizor on his face to perpetrate the horrid murder on the Person of the
King, and that being so disguised upon the Scaffold, he fell down before the
King and asked him forgiveness, being known by his voice; that himself said,
He was the man that beheaded K. Charles, and for that he had one 100 l. and
preferment. That Hewson said of him that he did the Kings business upon the
Scaffold; That he either did cut it off, or took it up and said, Behold the
head of a Traitor. That being questioned about the said words, he said,
whosoever said it matters not; I say now, it was the head of a Traitor, with
many other things to the like purpose; for which most abhorred Treason, the
Jury found him guilty, and he was condemned to be hanged drawn and quartered at
Tyburn.

This was the deserved Catastrophe that was set to these men, who without any
reason, nay contrary to reason, Laws both Divine and Humane, yea, even in
defiance of Heaven, dipped their hands in the sacred blood of their lawful
Sovereign, according to that of the Wiseman, The eye that mocketh his Father,
(Rex Pater Patriae) and despises his Mother, (Ecclesia est Matter) the Ravens
of the Valley shall pick it out; which which we see befallen them, their heads
in several places being become a spectacle both to Angels and Men, and a prey
to the Birds of the Air.

In the last place, it is provided by the said Act of Oblivion, that if
William Lenthal, Will. Burton. Oliver St. John, John Ireton Alderman, Col.
John Disborrow, Col. Will. Sydenham, John Blackwel of Moreclack. Christ. Pack
Alderman, Richard Keeble, Charles Fleetwood, John Pyne, Rich. Dean, Major
Richard Creed, Philip Nigh Clerk, John Goodwin Clerk, Sir Gilbert Pickering,
Col. Thom. Lister, and Col. Raph Cobbet, shall after the 1. of September 1660.
accept or exercise any Office Ecclesiastical, Civil or Military, or any other
public employment within the Kingdom of England, Dominion of Wales, or Town
of Barwick upon Tweed, that then such person or persons as do so accept or
execute as aforesaid, shall to all intents and purposes in Law stand, as if he,
or they had been totally excepted by name in the Act. The like penalty is
imposed on all such who did give sentence of Death upon any person or persons
in any of the late illegal or Tyrannical high Courts of Justice, or signed the
Warrant for execution of any person there condemned.

Thus by the blessing of God I have waded through the many intricate Meanders
and Revolutions, until at last I have as it were brought you by the hand to
see that desperate Faction of Indepencency (as one may say,) laid into its
Grave; all the heads thereof being so annihilated by the Justice of the known
Law of the Land, that I hope its memory shall be raked up in such an Eternal
forgetfulness, that posterity seeing no footsteps thereof, shall conceive it
to be a bare name, a mere notion, or aliquid non ens, of which in nature there
can be no subsistence.

An Appendix.
HOw far the Treasons of faction have reached, and how high they durst soar is
to be seen before, I shall only now in short give a hint how highly the Law of
England resents such impious acts: I say then, the wisdom and foresight of the
Laws of this Land in all cases of Treason makes this judgment: that the
Subject that rises or rebelleth in forcible, to overrule the royal will and
power of the King, intends to deprive the King both of Crown and Life, and
this is no mystery or quidity of the Common Law, but an infallible conclusion
drawn out of reason and experience; for the Crown is not a ceremony or Garland,
but as Imperial consists of pre-eminence and power. This made former Traitors
in all their quarrels against their Princes, not to strike downright, because
God unto Lawful Kings did ever impart such beams of his own glory, as Rebels
never durst look straight upon them, but ever turned their pretenses against
some about them; this caused the Judges sometime to deliver their opinions for
matter in Law upon two points.

The first, that in case where a subject attempteth

The second, that in every Rebellion, the Law intends this is not only the
wisdom of the Laws of our own Kingdom, but it is also the censure of foreign
Laws, the conclusion of common reason, (which is the ground of Law) and the
demonstrative assertion of experience, which is the warranty of all reason.

Crimen Laesae vel dimminutae Majestatis, making every offense which abridgeth
or hurts the power and authority of the Prince, as an insult or invading of
the Crown, and extorting the imperial Scepter.

And for common reason and experience, they cry, it is not possible that a
Subject should once come to that height, as to give law to his Sovereign, but
what with terror of his own guilt, and what with the insolency of the change he
will never permit the King if he can choose to recover his authority, nay or to
live Exper^ence further tells us, and it is confirmed by all stories and
examples; two notable ones we had formerly in our own Chronicles, the first of
Edw. the 2d. who when he kept himself close for danger, was summoned by
proclamation to come and take upon him the Government, but as soon as he
presented himself, was made prisoner, next forced to resign, and shortly after;
was tragically murdered in Berkly-Castle. The other is of K. Rich. the second,
before whom the Duke of Hereford (afterward K. Hen. the 4th) presented himself
with three seemingly humble, but indeed flattering reverences, yet in the end
both deposed him and put him to death: but our own experience outvies all else,
in the Horrid murder of our late dread Sovereign, which is related in the
former parts, the punishment whereof is fully related in this last part, and
therefore I shall no more thereof in this place.

You may have observed that the practice of our Regicides was after they had
ruined the Gentry, to advance their own kindred and allies, though never so
insufficiently unworthy, to the most profitable places of the Common wealth; by
which means all kind of exorbitances were committed without control, the Death
of the King being attended with infinite oppressions, as in such changes is
usual; which made Writers say, that the Death of Caesar was no benefit to the
Romans, but rather brought greater Calamities on them they underwent befere, as
may qe found in Aspian. The success was the like when Nero fell, for the next
year that followed after his Death, felt more oppression, and spilt more blood
then was shed in all those nine years wherein he had so tyrannically reigned.
So when the Athenians had expelled one Tyrant, they brought in thirty; and when
the Romans expelled their King, they did not put away the Tyranny but only
change the Tyrants.

But such and so tender is the hand of heaven over us, that he has not only
restored our Kings as at the first, and all our Counselors as at the
beginning; but brought us home our King so accomplished and pious, that we must
needs confess with the Children of Israel, because the Lord has a delight in
us, therefore has he made him King over us.

Oh then let us render without grudging unto Caesar the things that are
Caesar's, acknowledge him as Gods immediate Vicegerent, not prescribing him in
what manner we will be ruled, nor by what means: But in all things with
obedience and humility to submit to his command, like Julian the Apostata's
Soldiers who would not sacrifice at his words, sed timendo potestatem,
contemnebant potestatem, in fearing the power of God, they regarded not the
power of man; yet when he led them against his enemies, Subditi errant propter
Dominum eternum, etiam Domino Temporali.

I will conclude all with one word of Advice: Since God has so bettered our
condition, that our words are hardly able to express our happiness, to avoid
the danger of a relapse through a too careless security, let circumspection
and moderation take away all bitterness, rather reflecting on the offenses
then the persons of any offenders, so it may be those concerned will not be so
desperate to proceed on further in their wicked courses, but with speed retire,
and make some recompense to injured parties, by their future provident
endeavors for the Common good. And for these Loyal hearts who have borne the
brunt of the storm both at home and abroad; since God has rescued them as
brands out of the fire; it is hoped they will be nothing the more secure in
their vigilant care of future occurrences, having always a provident eye for
the timely prevention of such inconveniences, as might steal on them in their
own, or be intended against them from foreign parts. That so the Throne of our
Solomon may continue for ever, and peace be upon our Israel.

(...).

Sed and been velle meretur veniam. Cicero.
THE END.
There is now in the Press ready to come forth, that so much desired Book,
entitled, An Exact History of the Life and Actions of Hugh Peter's: As also his
Diary, Sold by H. Brom, and H. Marsh, etc.


