Altar Evangelicum. A SERMON Preached at Christ-Church IN DUBLIN, On the 27th
of April. Before his Excellency ARTHUR Earl of ESSEX, Lord Lieutenant General,
and General Governor of the Kingdom of IRELAND. By EDWARD Lord Bishop of
Clonfert and Kilmac-Duah.

Published by his Excellencies Order and Command.



DVBLIN, Printed by Benjamin Took, Printer to the KING's most Excellent
Majesty; And are to be Sold by Joseph Wild, Bookseller in Castle-street. 1673.

To his Excellency ARTHUR EARL of ESSEX, Viscount Malden, Baron CAPEL of
Hadbam, Lord Lieutenant General, and General Governor of His Majesty's Kingdom
of Ireland, Lord Lieutenant of the County of Hertford, and one of the Lords of
His Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council.
AS it is a high Degree of His Majesty's trust and confidence in your
Excellencies great abilities, to settle and establish You his Viceroy Chief
Governor in this his Kingdom of Ireland; so it is received as an act of Grace
and Kindness toward all loyal and good subjects in this Land, to be under the
Umbrage and Protection of your Virtues and Graces, which since your
Excellencies Arrival, have much refreshed and comforted many drooping hearts,
and raised them to future hopeful expectations: and as to discontents (if any)
such is your Piety, Wisdom, and Justice, that they all are calmed and allayed,
or so quieted, that they appear not at all. And it is a happy Juncture, when
the Church, the State, the Army, make no complaints or clamours, but, as the
members of the Body to the Head, yield obedience to their Chief Governor. As
this may be the ground and foundation of the universal Peace and Tranquillity
of this Kingdom at present, and great satisfaction to all, though of different
persuasion; so doubtless it will improve and unite all His MAJESTY'S Subjects
to more perfect and exact obedience, which has likewise bound me to
observancy, and (on this account) to publish and make legible, what was for a
short time only in your Excellencies, and the Christian Auditors ears. And no
censure is to be feared, where your Excellency will please to Command or
Patronize,

My Lord, Your Excellencies Devoted And most humble Servant Edvardus
Clonfertensis.

GENESIS 35.7. And he built there an Altar, and called the place El-Bethel,
because there God appeared unto him, when he fled from the face of his Brother.
IN the Text, Moses sets forth the Pious example of the Patriarch Jacob,
Erecting and Building an Altar to Almighty God, for his deliverance from the
rage and fury of his bloody Brother Esau. In which words Moses records, First,
that the Patriarch performed his duty: for aedificavit Altar, he built an
Altar, 1. Duty
Secondly, That God sent the Patriarch his deliverance, Officium Jacobi. 2.
Deliverance, Auxilium Dei. 3. Danger. Odium Esaui. Exercitium. Actus
Devotionis. vel Exemplum. 2. Opus Dedicationis.
employed in these words, That God appeared unto him. Thirdly, his danger is
discovered in the last words. Moses testifies that he was forced to fly from
the face and fury of his Brother Esau, or else, if you please, see another
Division and Paraphrase on the Text. First, here is Actus Devotionis, an Act of
High and holy Devotion, a blessed example of Piety, and a great Testimony of
thankfulness to Almighty God for wonderful and great deliverance. Aedificavit
Altar, and he built an Altar there. Secondly, here is Opus Dedicationis, the
Noble work of Dedication of an Altar Erected and Built. Jacob designs chiefly
Gods honor in this work, and dedicateth his Altar to his Deliverer, giving God
the glory of his safety, Vocavit locum El-Bethel, that is the God of Bethel, or
rather the God of Gods house before called Luz, but now Bethel.

Thirdly, here is Argumentum Resolutionis, the Reason, 3. Elenchus vel
Argument. Reso-
ground, and cause, of the Patriarchs Pious and holy Resolutions. Because,
says Moses, quia apparuit Deus, God appeared to him when he fled from the face
of his Brother Esau. Of these in Order. And first of the Patriarchs Acts of
Piety and Devotion in these words, Aedificavit Altar. In the Frontispiece of
the Text you may see First Opificem: the Artist, the founder or builder, of
this piece of Devotion set forth in the Demonstrative, Ille, he: 1. Opifiex
Genesis 35.6. Genesis 35.6. 2. Opus, Altar.
that is (as in the verse before the Text) Jacob came to Luz, which is in the
Land of Canaan, that is Bethel. Secondly, opus ipsum the work it self. And that
is Altar: an Altar or a holy place, to Sacrifice to Almighty God; which was
the most Ancient, Innocent, Primitive, 3. Locusvel seeds situtionis, Ibi. there
visible serving of God. Thirdly, here is locus or seeds Altaris, the place or
Situation where this Altar was seated; Ibi, in this Adverb of place, that is
in the Land of Canaan: and more particularly in the place called Bethel. I have
now opened the Text: I shall begin with the great exemplar of Piety, That is
Jacob: A person of whom I find, the holy Scripture make as honorable and
eminent mention, as of any of all the holy Patriarchs St. Bernard meditating on
this subject, Divus Bernard. in Sententijs Quater luctatus est Jacob, in utero
cum Esauo, in Adolescentia cum codem; in Mesopotamia cum Laban, in Bethel cum
Angelo.
says, That the Patriarch Jacob was for many trials and temptations, which did
set forth his Faith, Hope, Charity, Humility, Patience, Obedience, and all
eminent Virtues and Graces that might beautify his blessed soul. But St.
Bernard chiefly reduces them to four more remarkable Passages and
Re-encounters which the Patriarch suffered, Lucta in utero matris.
and succeeded with Victory out of them all. The First was, Lucta in Vtero
Matris, a fight or struggling in his Mother Rebecca's womb with his Brother
Esau, which caused Rebecca to complain, Genesis 25 22.23. Collide bantur in utero
Parvuli. Common Transla.
saying, The children struggle with me; and she said, Why am I thus? And she
went to enquire of the Lord, and the Lord said unto her, Two Nations are in thy
womb, and two manner of People shall be separated from thy bowels; and the one
People shall be stronger than the other People, and the elder shall serve the
younger. A strange Passage, that Twins could not be quiet in domo Naturae, in
Natures first House; but, being little more than Embryo's, did clash and fight
in their Mothers womb. This was certainly Pugna Prophetica, an early fight,
Pugna Prophetica.
that prophesied and foretold the world, That the Church, as Rebeccah, might
have Jacobs and Esaus, good men and bad in her womb, Esauites and Israelites,
profane persons and pious Votaries; proud Pharisees and penitent Publicans,
superstitious Papists, and seditious Phanaticks, as well as Orthodox Christians
at the same time in the Temple. Secondly, Secunda lucta in Domo Patris.
the Patriarch Jacob had luctam in domo Patris, a sad trouble and daily
grievous vexation in his Fathers house, where Esau his Elder Brother expressed
nothing, but mischief and malice, wrath and fury, death and destruction toward
his younger Brother Jacob, whom Esau first aspersed with contumely and dirty
language, Genesis 27.36. Genesis 27.41.
calling him a supplanter, and then having wounded his name with a venomous
tongue, designed his death with a malicious heart and hand against whose
unnatural rage and wrath Obadiah composed chiefly his Prophecy; saying,
Obadiah, v. 10.
For thy violence against thy Brother Jacob, shame shall cover thee, and thou
shall be cut off for ever. Thus by Gods blessing, and Rebeccahs Council, Jacob
escaped his Brothers fury, and preserved himself alive. Genesis 27.43.
It seems by Esau's malicious practice (being not only frater, a Brother,
but Bimulus a Twin, of the same Conception and Generation) no relation though
never so near; can protect an innocent plain person, from the rancor and malice
of a malicious, envious, wicked heart. This was Jacobs unhappy condition with
his unnatural out-ragious Brother Esau. The third Trial and trouble that this
Patriark had was Tertia lucta in Domo Servitutis.
in Domo Patrui Laban, in his Uncle Labans house, whither he fled for refuge
and Protection from his Brother; fury and malice. But his entertainment there
proved (as it appears) rather slavery then security, rather insupportable
duress and hardship, than the respects of a Kinsman. Hear Jacob s own words in
his sad complaints Genesis 31.38, 39, 41, 42.
saying, I what is my Trespass, what is my Sin, that thou so hotly pursuest
after me, Genesis 31.
(as if a Cheat, a Theif, a Robber), I have been Twenty years in thy house, and
thou changest my wages Ten times. The Drought consumed me in the day, and the
Frost by night; God has seen my Affliction and the labor of my hands. Thus
was Jacob used by his Uncle Laban; But God delivered him out of his hands, and
rescued his Innocence from Labans unmerciful usage: This was a third extremity
and slavery, that Jacob was delivered from by the God of Abraham, and the fear
of Isaac his Father. Genesis 31.42.
Hence observe, that kindred and Relations, are but tickle Tenures, and
uncertain Comforts, unless Grace and virtue, Piety and goodness, Sanctify and
govern the Affections and hearts of the nearest Relations. And now hear a word
of Jacobs fourth Contest and Agony, as St. Bernard says, non solum cum fratre:
not only, with his Brother Esau or Uncle Laban, but (which was a higher trial
than the other three) Luctatus cum Angelo in Bethel. 4. Lucta cum Angelo in
Bethel
So Moses Records the story: And Jacob was left alone, and there wrestled a man
Genesis 32.24.
with him until the break of the day, which happy meeting in the Field, was
ordained by God himself, who sent i. e. Deus, forma hominis.
his Angels first as Harbingers to meet Jacob, as his Comforters and
Conductors: and when Jacob saw them, he said, This is Gods host Genesis 32.1.
and he called the name of that place Mahanaim. Thus God protecteth his
servants by ministering spirits Mahanaim. i. e. Two hosts. Heb. 1.14.
as he promises; They shall give his Angels charge over thee to keep thee in
all thy ways. But this is not all, God has more honor, favor, and comfort,
for Jacob, than the presence or company of Angels. For the Patriarch returning
by God's command into his Psalm. 91.11.
own Country, after Twenty years exile, servitude, and slavery, and being to
re-encounter with the rage and fury of a malicious enemy, his unnatural brother
Esau, who was advancing with a party of Four hundred men, resolved to kill and
destroy the Patriarch with his Wives and Children, with all his innocent and
unarmed Company; Genesis 31.3, 13.
In this distress, Jacob was greatly afraid, Genesis 32.11.
his fears increased, and his heart did tremble. In this his sadness of his
soul, he has no hopes but in God, no means but Prayer, no shield but Faith.
And therefore in this great Trial, he makes his Addresses to the God of
Abraham, and to the God of Isaac, saying, Genesis 32.7.
Deliver me O God, I pray thee, from the hand of my brother, from the hand of
Esau, for I fear him, lest he will come and smite me, with the mother and the
children. In his Prayer, he likewise remembers God of his grace and promise;
Genesis 32.12.
Thou say, I will surely do thee good, and make thy seed as the sand of the
sea, which cannot be numbered for multitude. God heard his Prayer, and made good
his promise, by appeasing Esau's fury, and preserving his servant Jacob; and to
ascertain and evidence his Truth, God is pleased to wrestle with him, to try
his servant Jacob's strength by Faith, to keep company all night with his
devotion, to yield a Victory, by giving a Benediction, and to crown Jacob's
Conquest with a Title of Honor to all Ages: Transfertur Enoch, eligitur Noe,
vocatur Abraham, diligitur Isaac, Jacob Deum facie ad faciem contemplatur, D.
Bern. sermon. de sancto, Joh. Baptista page 1683.
God himself, as the Fountain of all Honor, saying, Genesis 32.28.
Thy Name shall be no more called Jacob, but Israel; for as a Prince have thou
power with God, and with men, and have prevailed. Thus was Jacob tried, thus
was Jacob honored, preserved, and Heb. 2.20.
blessed. This was the Fourth, and most solemn Touchstone and taste of Jacob's
patience and obedience; his faith and devotion, his humility and honor; by
which Meditation see and know, that dangers and distresses are the Trials of
Faith in Gods servants. Fear and troubles make good men fly to their Prayers,
and Prayers and fervent Devotion prevail with God for preservation and
deliverances. I have now done with Jacob's Four several Trials or Wrestlings,
and so quit any further Discourse of Opifex, Opifex, Fundator Jacob. 2. Part.
Opus.
the Founder or Builder, in the Text, and so shall lead you to take a View of
Opus, or Aedificium, his sacred Work or Edifice, He built an Altar. As
affliction and distress caused Jacob to fly to his Prayers, and Prayers and
Devotion procured deliverance from God: so in obedience and thankfulness,
deliverance from danger, accompanied with advancement to Honors, work on the
Patriarchs noble mind, to be visibly devout, and to evidence his Faith by good
works. The Patriarch is not only content to make Vows, Altar monumentum
gratitudinis.
but he falls a building a pious pillar, in monumentum gratitudinis, as a
lasting Monument of his devotion and gratitude. Struxit Altar, Struxit Altar.
He built an Altar, which was the first way and mode of Gods visible Worship on
earth since the world was created. Thus was Adam Rabbi Solomon.
as the Jews and Rabbis taught) directed with a Quire of Angels to serve God
in Paradise: And thus Adam, D. Ambros. de l Cain and Abe
as the Fathers say, instructed and enjoined his two sons, Cain and Abel, to
bring their Offerings, and to worship at the Altar. Genesis 4 3, 4.
According to this example, Noah built an altar, and offered Burnt-offerings on
the altar; and the Lord smelled a sweet savor from those oblations. Genesis 8.20,
21.
Thus Abraham built an Altar at Sichem, in the Plain of Moreh Genesis 12.7.
when in his Travels, and in a strange Country, he was delivered from the
Canaanite. Thus Isaac built an Altar in Beersheba, when he was delivered from
the Philistines, Genesis 26.17, 25.
and the contentious spirits of Gerar, And thus Jacob, that he might make out
Patrium coluisse Deum, that he did worship the God of his Fathers, and in
imitation of these pious Presidents, struxit Altar, he built an Altar, where
he might worship God, and offer up holy Oblations; which piece of structure you
may the better judge of, if you please to take a view of it in its matter, 1.
Materia Altaris. 2. forma Altaris. 3. usus, finis. Altaris.
, form, or figure; or else in its use and end. First for the matter, ex qua, of
which the Altar may be composed or made; I find it various and indifferent,
whether made of earth, of stone, of wood, of brass, or gold: The Scripture
mentions all these kinds, lest there should be exception at any, God looking
more exactly at the affections and heart of a devout Founder and Benefactor,
than at the work, though never so stately or costly. Thus God commanded Moses,
Exodus 20.24. 1. Altar Terreum. rum.
saying, Thou shall make me an Altar of earth, and sacrifice thy
Burnt-offerings thereon. In the service of the Tabernacle, God will have Moses
to make an Altar Exodus 27.1. 2. Altar ligneum. 3. Altar lapideum.
of Shittim wood, more proper and portable for that moving and traveling Tent
or Tabernacle. Josiah, who was Princeps militiae, chief Captain and Commander
over all the Forces in Israel, and succeeded Moses, in thankfulness for his
success and Victories, built an altar of stone, Josua 8.30.
and there they offered their Burnt-offerings to the Lord. When the Church was
advanced from a Tabernacle to a Temple in King Solomon's happy Reign, that
Princely Monarch made a stately Altar of Brass, 2 Chro. 41. 1 4. Altar Aeneum.
Twenty cubits in length, and Twenty cubits in breadth, a Royal Piece, suitable
to the State of that magnificent Temple.

Lastly, We read that this noble King in his pious affections, to Gods house
framed an Altar of pure Gold (n) to Offer sweet Incense, and perfumed odors, up
to God Almighty who had advanced him to His Royal Throne and Dignity Materia
Exqua.
Thus as to the matter, whether the Altars were made of Earth, of Wood, of
Stone, of brass, or Gold it was Indifferent and various. Forma and figura
Altaris.
Secondly, as to due form or figures some were of greater magnitude some of
less dimensions; Exodus 27.1. 2. Chro. 4.1. 1. King: 7.48.
Some of five, some of twenty Cubits; Some of one Cubit only: Some larger, Some
lesser, as God Commanded and Directed. And as God was pleased to give Rules in
General for Moses Tabernacle, and Solomon's Temples, so in Particular, God
ordered in what form and figure those Altars should be framed, that his service
might be the more exactly performed, and, as the Apostle says, 1. Cor. 14.40.
(...)
In Gods Church all things might be done decently and in Order. But there is
less Concern in the notion of the matter or form of Altars, But the use and end
thereof is more Considerable Vsus et Finis Altaris
And this Contemplation chiefly wrought in the Patriarchs Soul, who being
raised from a Low Condition to a Noble quality, Delivered from servitude,
rescued from his Brothers fury, and so many dangers, and being advanced from
being a Mean poor Shephard or servant to the eminent dignity of a Patriarch or
Prince; he builds an Altar, ut Deum coleret, that he might adore and worship
that Great and good God who had owned him with so many Signal Favors. The use
then of building an Th. Aquin. 1.2. Quaes. 102.
Altar is for Gods worship and adoration. Now to know how that may be
performed, the Schoolmen tell us that as in all other ceremonies of the Temple
or the Tabernacle, so in the building of an Altar, there is ratio or Status
Literalis and Figuralis: A literal and figurall sense or meaning. The literal
sense of the Altar was the visible work, Altar Significat Christum. 1.2.
Quaes. 102. Altar significat Crucem Christi 3 q. 83.1.2. Heb. 9.28. Heb. 10.10.
the figural or mystical was typified or signified by it. In the literal sense
the Altar was the Place where the sacrifice was burnt and the Incense offered.
In the figural or mystical sense, the Altar, the Incense, the sacrifice, did
foretell Christ on the Cross who was a Sacrifice, died for our Sins, and did
offer us the Incense of his Devotion for the salvation of our souls. Give me
leave to use another distinction to the use of Altars; which were either
Primitive and Patriarchal before the Law, Altar. 1. Patriarchale. 2. Legale.
3. Evangelicum.
or Legal and Levitical under the law, or else Spiritual and Evangelical under
the Gospel. By the first the Patriarchs, by the second the Jews or
Israelites, by the third the Christians were taught to adore and worship God.
This Altar in the Text was of the first kind, Altar Incensi. Altar
Thymiamatis. Exodus 30.10. Revel. 8.3, 4, 5. Revel. 7.14. Sacrificia laudis,
fidei, confessionis,
wherein Jacob, to evidence his Devotion, his thankfulness, his zeal, his
piety, builds his Altar, to adore and worship God. And as the Patriarchs and
Jews had their Altaria, holocausta, and oblationes: Altars, burnt-offerings,
and oblations: so the Christians have their Altars or holy Tables, and their
Sacrificia Spiritualia (nempe, laudis, fidei, confessionis, charitatis:
charitatis: August. Marlorat. de scriptura. Situs Ecclesiae versus Orientem.
) Spiritual Sacrifices are offered wherewith Christians adore and worship God.
And as Piety and Devotion first built Churches; so a Religious and holy
Prudence gave those Church their figure, their forms, and scituations,
directing those sacred buildings to be East and West, their Isles or Doors to
be North and South (in formam and memoriam Domini, extensis brachijs, in crucem
fixi) in some Resemblance presenting our blessed Savior nailed on the Cross,
and these Churches the Primitive Fathers took care should be furnished with
Fonts for Baptism; with Pulpits for Instruction; with Altars or Holy Tables for
the Blessed Eucharist and Holy Devotion. 1. Baptisterium.
The Baptisterium or Front was scited at the West end or Entrance of the
Church, where the Christians were baptized and matriculated into Christianity.
The Suggestum or Pulpit, 2. Suggestum.
was in medio Ecclesiae, where the Christians might be better instructed with
God's Will and Word. The Altar or Holy Table, 3. Altar.
was seated in the East End of the Church, for more eminent service in God's
Worship. Here the Church our Mother, teaches the Clergy to read God's
Commandments, 1. December Praecepta.
as Aaron and his sons at the Altar or Holy Table, to instruct the People in
their Obedience and Duty toward God, and toward man. Here the Priest is
obliged to read the glad tidings of salvation choicely wrapped up in the Epistles
and Gospels of the Day. 2. Epistola and Evangelium.
Here is said or sung the famous Nicene Creed, 3. Nicenum Symbolum, Anno
salutis 320. Magdeburgens. Cent. 4a folio 617. Rubric. The Prayer of
Consecrat. Lit. General Confession.
composed by the Three hundred and eighteen Bishops in that Council, called by
Constantine the Great, to vindicate the Truth of our Savior Eternal Godhead,
and to suppress the venom and poison of the Arian Heresy. Upon the Altar or
holy Table the Church commands the consecration of the Host and Blessed
Eucharist; Here the Priest and People make general Confession of their sins;
Here the Bishop, or Priest, pronounces the absolution of sins; Here the worthy
Receivers take and participate, by a lively Faith, Church Catechism.
the real Presence of the Body and Blood of Christ in the Blessed Sacrament, to
their eternal comfort; Here the Saints chant and sing the Angels Song, saying,
Gloria in excelsis, Glory be to God on high, on earth peace, Luke 2.14.
good will toward men; and hence in the Close, the Bishop and Priest
dismisseth the Holy Communicants with the Blessing of the Peace of God. Rubric
for the Blessing.
Thus the Church our Mother sets forth the use of The Altar or Holy Table. And
besides this Practice of Piety and Devotion, it is most observable that
Christian Emperors, Kings, and Sovereign Princes receive their Regalia ab
Altari.
Regalia, their Royal Diadems, their Imperial Crowns, their Swords, their
Scepters, from Gods Altars. Here they are anointed with Holy Oil, and invested
with Royal Robes. Here they receive the blessed Sacrament as a pledge of their
Piety, and take Sacred Oaths to defend Gods Church, and their Subjects,
according to Law and Justice. Spiritualia Cleri ab Altari.
And as Sovereign Christians Princes are thus honored, and thus honor Gods
Altars; so Christian Praelates, Bishops, Priests, and Deacons, here receive the
Imposition of Hands at their Consecration and Ordination, when they make those
Sacred Protestations and Promises before Gods Altar to perform the Duties of
their High and Holy Calling. And as Kings, and Priests, so the choicest of the
Peers and Nobles in the famous order of the Knights of the Garter, Insignia
Equitum Auratorum ab Altari.
entertain the honor of their installation from Gods Altar; whence they
receive their Insignia, those Royal marks of their Princes Trust and Favor,
Edvardus III. ut militarem virtatem honoribus decorar et nobilissimam
conscripsit Equitum Auratorum Societatem. Camden. Britannia.
and the undoubted evidences of their own worth, fidelity, and merits. Here the
married couple make their vows to keep that holy state and the bed undefiled,
and hence they have the blessing; and Lastly the holy Altar is adorned with the
book of God (as the Ark that kept the Oracles) Romans 9.4. Sacramentum super
Evangelium Opus Altar.
The blessed Evangels, on which Sacred piece the People are admitted to lay
their hands, to kiss with their mouths, as a Sacred obligation to utter truth,
and to decide all differences in Dispute or Controversy. Thus the Church our
Mother, and Religion her Daughter, has taught us the use of an Evangelical
Altar. I have done with Jacobs building an Altar; and come to speak of Locus,
the place, where the Patriarch made choice to build, Ibi, There, that is at
Bethel. 3. Part Locus. Bethel.
Now Bethel was a City of the Tribe of Benjamin Josua. 18.13.
on the Southward betwixt Jordan and Jericho, anciently called Luz; here Jacob
in his Travels, flying to save his life was benighted, and lighted on a certain
place, and tarried there all night. Genesis 28.11, 12. custodes Angeli. consolator
Deus.
He took the stones of the place, and put them for his pillows, and lay down in
the place to sleep, and he dreamed and behold a ladder set on the earth, and
the top of it reached Heaven, and behold the Angel of God ascending and
descending on it: And behold the Lord stood about it and said, I am the Lord
God of thy Father Abraham, and the God of Isaac: The land whereon thou lie to
thee will I give it and to thy seed. And in thy seed Genesis 12.3, 18, 18, 22, 18,
26, 4.
shall all the Nations of the Earth be blessed. Genesis 28.15.
Behold I am with thee, and will keep thee in all places whither thou go.
These were such solemn promises of grace and favor, as the like were never to
be Paralleled. And as God was infinitely gracious to Jacob, so the Patriarch to
his power will be dutiful, grateful and obsequious. For as soon as Jacob
awaketh out of sleep Genesis
he expresses his faith, his hope, his charity: his faith saying, surely the
Lord is in this place, and I knew it not. Secondly his hope, both admiring and
adoring, when he said, Genesis 28.17. Domus Dei Porta Caeli.
This is none other but the House of God, and gate of Heaven. Thirdly his
charity, love and zeal to Gods honor: Genesis 28.18, 19.
for he rose up early in the morning, and took the stone that he had put for
his pillow, and set it up for a pillar, and poured oil on the top of it, i.e.
Domus Dei.
and he called the name of that place Gen, 28.19.
Bethel when Jacob had erected his pillar he made his vow, saying, If God will
be with me and will keep me in this way that I go, and will give me bread to
eat and raiment to put on, so that I come again to my Fathers house in peace;
then shall the Lord be my God, Genesis 28.20.21, 22.
and this stone which I have set for a pillar shall be Gods house, and of all
that thou shall give me, surely I will give the tenth unto thee. Thus you have
seen the Patriarch's Devotion, and heard his own reasons why he made choice to
build his Altar at Bethel: yet here further it was not only a place of Jacobs
choice, but likewise the Altar was built there by Gods Command. Thus Moses
records the sacred story: God said unto Jacob, arise, go up to Bethel, Genesis
35.1.
and dwell there, and make there an Altar unto God, that appeared unto thee
when thou fleddest from the face of Esau thy Brother. It is then likely to be a
good work, a blessed piece, when Gods command, and Man's affection agree in Gods
worship and service, when God directs, and Man obeys in the building of an
Altar, a Tabernacle, a Table, a Church, a Synagogue. And except the Lord bless
the Psalm. 127.1.2.
house, the builders build in vain. Such a house may prove not the house of
God, but a Synagogue of Satan, not a Bethel, but a Bethaven. See then the
safest way for sacred structures, is, Domus Vanitatis.
when God commands, and man then obeys; And yet see the Patriarchs Wisdom,
and Pious pause; he will not build an Altar at Bethel, but with Counsel and
consultations. Holy Buildings, and sacred things, are not to be attempted by
rash heads, or rude hands. Psalm. 26.6.
This was King David's course, saying, I will wash my hands in innocence, so
will I go to thine altar, O Lord, as not fit for holy approaches, with either
hollow hearts, or polluted hands. And as innocence was the Patriarch's Cordial,
Psalm. 122. 1.
so holy Society was his comfort; and therefore King David, seems to rejoice
at the very hopes of building an Altar for Gods Service; and the good man will
have his whole Household share with him in the Blessing of his Devotion. And
therefore Jacob says unto his Household, Genesis 35.2.3.
and to all that were with him, Put away the strange gods that are amongst you,
and be clean, and change your garments, and let us arise and go up to Bethel,
and I will build there an altar unto God, Bethel.
who was with me in the day of my distress, Genesis 35.3.
and was mith me in the way that I went. Altars or Churches may have many
Benefactors, but Jacob will be the sole Founder of his Altar, built at Bethel;
yet see the blessed effects of a religious motion, one may build, but many may
have the Blessing in this case. See the Patriarch's hastiness, and Gods glory,
in this sacred progress; it was no sooner moved, that Gods Altar should be
built, but presently Jacob's Household, and all that were with him, Genesis 35.4.
gave unto Jacob all the strange gods that were in their hands, and all the
earrings that were in their ears, to manifest their bounty and delight
toward the Beauty of Holiness; and, if the Patriarch will build an altar at
Bethel, his Household resolve with their gold and silver, with their most
precious jewels, to adorn and beautify that holy structure. Thus Jacob's
altar, and Mose's Tabernacle, and Solomon's Temple, went up, and were made and
beautified with several Offerings. Exodus 25.2.
Thus without murmuring or repining, presentment or complaint, Exodus 35.5.
Jacob and his Neighbors, or Israel and his Household, built and beautified the
altar at Bethel. It is observable also, how the people proceeded with the
Patriarch; Genesis 35.3.4.
for he persuades, and they obey: he says, Let us arise, and go to Bethel,
and I will make there an Altar unto God, who answered me in the day of my
distress, and was with me in the way which I went. Inaures quae erant in
autibus eorum dicatas scilicet alicui fictitio numini Hu Grot. in loc.
And they gave unto Jacob all the strange Gods in their hands, and the
earrings which were in their ears, and the disposing of these Gods, and
jewels, gold and silver. which is observable of equal consequence. Genesis 35.4.
And Jacob hid them under the Oak, which was by Sichem. Under the Oak; God,
when he pleases, can order, that foolish things shall confound the wise; and
weak things shall confound the mighty; 1. Cor. 1.28.
and things which are not, shall bring to naught things that are. Thus God can
prepare a Cave at Adullam, 1. Sam. 22.1.
to secure his servant David from the fury of Saul; A cleft in the rock for his
Prophet Elijah, to preserve him from the rage and wrath of Ahab, 1. Kings 19.14.
and and cursed Jezabel. God can provide an Ark of wood for righteous Noah, and
a fish for his servant Jonah, to preserve them from the dangers of the deep,
Genesis 7.1.
and swelling of the waves. Jonah. 1.17.
And thus God can (when he pleases) make a Tree in the Woods, a Royal Dak, a
Court, a Castle to defend Sovereignty from death, disgrace, or danger, when
Navies have revolted, and Armies have been routed, and the arms of flesh have
failed and fainted. Thus Jacob showed both his resolution and reason, when he
erected his altar at Bethel; It is likewise of high concernment, that we take
notice of the Patriarchs Devotion or Dedication as well as of the Erection and
Building of his Altar, which he calls, El-Bethel, that is, the God of Bethel;
or rather, the God of Gods house. Genesis 28.19.
God did here appear to Jacob in his danger, and therefore Jacob will here more
remarkably appear before God in his Devotion and Dedication; and not only
build an Altar, but likewise give it a name and title of honor and
distinction, to Gods glory; he calls it El-Bethel, the God of Bethel: In
these early and primitive times the Patriarch would have the God of Heaven to
have an house on Earth, at least an Altar for his sacred worship and service.
God is the God of order, and not the Author of Confusion: and while Pride and
Carnal humors endeavor to build Towers toward Heaven; which prove a Babel:
Genesis 2.9.
the pious Patriarch will teach the World a lesson of more humble and clear
Devotion, and builds an Altar, and dedicates it to his Maker and Preserver, and
calls it El-Bethel, the God of Gods house. It was the sad complaint of Elijah,
1. King. 910
against the Sacrilegious Murderers of that Age: Romans 2.3.
That they had thrown down Gods Altars, and slain the Prophets with the sword;
but the Patriarch, in the Text gives the world a better example, he builds an
Altar at Bethel, and devotes it to Almighty God; and at Shalem where he pitched
his Tent, he erected there an Altar, Genesis 33.18.20.
and called it El-Elohe-Israel, That is, God the God of Israel; that is, Jacobs
God. Now as God is well pleased with holy and humble Devotion; Moneantur
interim miseri, ut si obtemperare nolint praeceptis salutaribus, saltem
Sacrilegis sua non defendant ne majori se scelere implicent. D. Aug. Epist. 53.
Isay 5.6.7. Jere: 7.11. Mat: 21 14. Mark: 11.17 Luk: 19 46.
so is he displease with no sins more than Sacriledg, or rude Profaneness, which
is calcitratio, a kind of kicking at Gods honor, and a Robbing of his glory,
Christ could not endure it at his Visitation, taunting the Prophaners in the
Temple with a sharp truth, and saying, It is written my house shall be called
the house of Prayer, but ye have made it a Den of Thieves. Thus the Patriarch,
as he devoutly builds an Altar, he will have it bear Gods name, El-Bethel. I
have now done with the Dedication of Jacobs Altars, and in the close come to
the occasion or cause why he built an Altar; why at Bethel; and why called Gods
house, Moses has summed up in brief the Patriarchs duty, as well as his
devotion; Because God there appeared to him, when he fled from the face of his
Brother Esau. In which words see couched, Genesis 35.7.
First, his danger; Secondly, his deliverance; Thirdly, his duty or
thankfulness: danger in Esau pursuing his Brother Jacob; deliverance from God;
who appeared when Jacob fled; Thankfulness in Jacob, who rescued from Esau's
fury, builds an Altar as a pledge of Piety and Thankfulness. Thus Noah delivered
from being drowned, offered up odor and sweet incense to his preserver, Genesis
8.31:
Moses and Israel redeemed from Captivity in Egypt, did observe the Passover,
and did compose his Song of Thanksgiving; Exodus 15.1.2.
Thus Israel, delivered from Amalech, built an altar, Exo. 17.15.
and called it Jehovah Nissi, that is, the Lord my Banner, or, Ensign. It was
King David's deliverance from dangers, and his advancement to a Throne, 2 Samuel
22.1. Psalm. 18.1.
that occasioned his Song of Thanksgiving, when the Lord had delivered him out
of the hands of Saul, and of all his Enemies. It was this Duty of Thankfulness,
that made this Royal Prophet to prepare Materials to build Gods Temple, and
made him the Pen of a ready Writer, to compose the Book of Psalms, Sicut Manna
habuit delectamentum and omnem saporem suavitatis; sie Carmen Psalmorum omne
spirituale documentum. Ludol. in Proaemio Psalmorum. Cum in choro canitur,
verba Ecclesiae Deum laudant is; cum a just is, verba Deum Iaudantis; cum a
peccatoribus, verba veniam deprecantis, Idem Ludo.
which, when they are sung in the Quire, are the Voice of the Church honoring
God; when by any righteous person, are the words of one praising God; and if a
sinner chaunt the holy Hymns, they are the voice of a poor Penitent, craving
mercy and pardon for their transgressions. From these pious Examples of the
Patriarchs and Prophets, many blessed Christians have taken great encouragement
to be Founders and Benefactors to the Christian Churches. Constantine the Great
was a Primitive and early Patron for the founding, endowing, and building, of
Churches for the Eusebius. Cambden. Brit. pa. 270.
Christian Religion. But if we look nearer home, we may find how God has
inclined the hearts of Gracious Princes, pious Prelates, and other good
Christians, to build Churches, to found Schools and Colleges, for the
encouragement of the Christian Faith, and advancement of Learning. Our own
Annals and Histories tell us, That Sebertus, King of the East Saxons, first
recovered the Church of Westminster, being then Delubrum Apollinis, to be a
Christian Temple, and dedicated to the honor, name, and memory, of the Apostle
St. Peter; and that of Diana's, to St. Paul. King Edward the Confessor improved
this Act of Christian Pietty, and made choice of that Church Eduardus Rex,
cognomento Confesior, sibi in sepulturam construxit, and ex decimis omnium
suorum redituum ex integro, and patrimoniis tota Anglia dispersis, ditavit.
Guil. Camden. Brit. p. 270.
for the Royal Sepulture of himself and Successors, endowing it yearly with the
Tenths of all his Royal Revenues, and with ample Patrimonies in many Parts of
England. This Church and Fabric was enlarged Hanc Eduardi fabricam subvertit
Henricus Tertius, novamque Ecclesiam speciosa structura exaedificavit. Came.
Brit. p. 271.
and beautified by King Henry the Third; and these Examples were so effectual,
that the Word of God grew and multiplied Act. 12.24.
exceedingly. Cathedralls, and Churches, and Chapels, were built, endowed, and
dedicated, not on the Doctrine and blind Delusions of Popish Merits, but out of
pure Devotion to Gods Honor; and out of Duty and Thankfulness for great
Deliverance out of imminent dangers. Thus our own Histories tell us of that
immortal Prince, Cum Galliam suis victoriis permensus esset. Camd. Brit. page
271.
King Edward the Third, (*) That he founded a Royal Chapel near Westminster,
and dedicated it to the name and honor of St. Stephen, in a devout and humble
thankfulness for so many Victories, and his liberation from so many dangers,
when he had Wars with France. This Noble Monarch having at the same time John
the French King, and David the Scotch King his Prisoners at Windsor, in honor
and thankfulness to Almighty God, built the Chapel at Windsor, and devoted
that sacred Structure to the Honor of Sr. George, and the blessed Virgin Mary,
for the better encouragement of Christian Piety, and truly Heroic Valor: Vt
virtutem militarem honoribus, praemiis, and splendore, decoraret. Idem page 198.
And as King David prepared rich Materials, and King Solomon built and finished
the stately Temple at Jerusalem: So King Edward the Third first built the
Royal Chapel; and King Edward the Fourth beautified and adorned that Princely
Piece. In the like Devotion, King Henry the Sixth founded Kings College in
Cambridge, and his Royal Consort Queens College. Henry the Seventh after his
Victory at Bosworth-field, marched up to London, and with the Usurpers Colors
taken in the Battle, and devoted them in St. Pauls-Church, in thankfulness to
God for his and the Kingdoms deliverance from Richard the Thirds Usurpation;
and his success, did not puff up his Princely Soul, but, increased his
Devotion, which occasioned him to build his Royal Chapel at Westminster,
dedicated to the name and memory of the blessed Virgin Mary, which Leland calls
Miraculum Mundi the wonder of the World. Henry the Eighth, manger the malice of
Popish mouths, founded and settled the four Bishoprics of Oxford, Chester,
Gloucester, and Peterborough; and Trinity Golledge in Cambridge, and
Christ-Church in Oxford, record the bounty of that famous Prince and Patron of
learning. King Edward the Sixth and Queen Elizabeth, were noble founders of
Schools and Hospitals. King James was the Restorer of the Bishoprics in
Scotland, the preserver of them in England, and a Benefactor to many in
Ireland. King Charles the First was not only a Patron in his prosperity, but
in his blacker days a Confessor, and in the end a Martyr, for his Crown, the
Church, and the Laws. His Majesty when he was restored to his Crown, God did
assist him to restore the Bishops to their Sees, and the Churchmen to their
Cures in England, Scotland and Ireland, and it was his piety and Royal bounty
to design Augmentations to poor Bishoprics, Impropriations and Glebe-lands to
poor Vicaridges, and a Kings College to the City of Dublin, for the better
Improvement of Learning and Religion. But his Majesty's Royal design was
disappointed by an unhappy event. And now sa Pious Princes have been Gracious
and kind to Gods Church; So Religious and holy Bishops have been happy examples
in their works of Piety, witness the first College in Cambridge founded and
built by Hugo Balsam Bishop of Ely, and dedicated to St. Peter Primum Collegium
Sancti petri Domus vocatur, quod Hugo Balsam Episcopus Eliensis extruxit, Anno
1280.
Merton College in Oxford, one of the most Ancient of all in that University,
founded by Gualter Merton then Bishop of Rochester. And, as Princes and
Praelates, so many others most noble and godly worthies have been Patrons,
founders, and Benefactors, to Learning and Gods Church; others as Pious
Christian Heroes, have in their prosperity been Professors, in their adversity
have been Confessors, and at their death Martyrs to assert and vindicate their
zeal and love to Gods Church, the Kings Crown, and the Kingdoms Laws. I have
thus opened the Text, and showed Jacobs danger, his deliverance and his duty,
or Thankfulness; Remember that those who brought Purple, blew, or linen, for
the Tabernacle were acceptable. The widows mite was entertained, and good
meaning toward Gods Church. Now to God the Father, etc. be all Honor and
Glory.

Amen, Amen.
FINIS.

