Changling Tue quoque Simpleton Clause French Dancing Mr Hosts Sr: I. Falstafe




THE WITS, OR, SPORT upon SPORT. IN Select Pieces of DROLLERY, Digested into
SCENES by way of DIALOGUE. Together with Variety of Humors of several Nations,
fitted for the pleasure and content of all Persons, either in Court, City,
Country, or Camp. The like never before Published.

PART I.

LONDON, Printed for Henry Marsh, at the Sign of the Princes Arms in
Chancery Lane. 1662.

To the READERS
The Stationer sends Greeting:
WHereas I have undertaken to collect a Miscellany of all Humors which our
Famed Comedies have exquisitely and aptly represented in the becoming dress of
the Stage: Now know ye that I think fit in compliance with the Design to usher
in this Body of Humors with a Preface, for no other reason, nor to other
purpose, then to humor and imitate the Mode of Writers; letting you see the
folly and impertinence of Epistolary Personations (never acted before) which
show their Books are chiefly written for their own sakes, and to adorn our
Stalls.

Now I must tell you, my Plot with my Humors is clearly for sale; for I intend
to raise no other reputation to my self then that of Ready Money; and that I
only be-speak in these preparatory lines: since it were besides the purpose,
and an unpardonable presumption, to commend these excellent Fancies, which do
command, and have Emerited universal applause.

All I am obliged to say therefore, is in justification of the Collection of
them into this entire consistencie, the making of a fluid a solid Body, which
even the Experiment it self, among the Ingenious, will fairly defend. But I
should think the easy accommodation of them to every Gusto of Delight in this
ready variety (saving the difficulty of purveying and hacking up and down)
should best invite and entertain you.

He that knows a Play, knows that Humors have no such fixedness and
indissoluble connection to the Design, but that without injury or forcible
revulsion they may be removed to an advantage; which is so demonstrable, that I
am sure nothing but a morose propriety will offer to deny it.

To be a little serious: I was told by people that know better then my self,
they would be in this Model more beneficial in sundry respects, then as they
lay dispersed before. There is no sort of Melancholy whose sullen dullness and
severe aversion to company, may not at one look be mocked out by one or other of
these merry attemperatures and resemblances, which will most efficaciously
manifest its Folly as in a Glass. Next, he who would make up a Treatment to his
Friends by any such diversion, cannot study a more compendious method, without
the help of Fiddlers and mercenary Mimicks, and the long labor of a Cue: one
Scene, which may almost be acted Extempore, will be abundantly satisfactory,
being chosen fit and suitable to the Company, as none can come amiss. 'Twill
make Physic work, 'twill cease the pains of more inveterate diseases, 'twill
allay the heat and distemper of Wine, and generally it is the Panacea, the
universal Cure, mighty Mirths Elixir.

Now you know all the Story, Gentlemen; pray remember the Rump Drolls, and for
their sakes,

Your old Servant H. MARSH.

I am loath to confess there are any Errors in the Book; but if you find any,
and they be not rude ones, pray use your Civility, and pass them over.

A Catalogue of the several Droll-Humours, from what Plays collected, and in
what page to be found in this Book.
Droll. 1. The Bouncing Knight out of Edw. IV. page 1. Droll. 2. Ienkins
Love-Course, out of the School of Complements. p. 13. Droll. 3. The false Heir,
out of the Scornful Lady. p. 19. Droll. 4. Lame Commonwealth, out of the Beg.
Bush. p. 28. Droll. 5. Sexton, or the Mock-Testator, out of the Spanish Curate.
p. 34. Droll. 6. A Prince in conceit, out of the Opportunity. p. 39. Droll. 7.
An equal Match, out of Rule a wife and have a wife. p. 45. Droll. 8. The
Stallion, out of the Custom of the Country. p. 50 Droll. 9. The Grave-makers,
out of Hamlet P. of Denm. p. 56 Droll. 10. Loyal Citizens, out of Philaster. p.
62. Droll. 11. Invisible Smirk, out of the Milk-maids. p. 65. Droll. 12. The
three Merry Boys, out of Rollo D. of Normandy. p. 73. Droll. 13. The Bubble,
out of Tu quoque. p. 78. Droll. 14. Club-men, out of Cupids Revenge. p. 83.
Droll. 15. Forced Valor, out of King and no King. p. 87. Droll. 16. Encounter,
out of the Humorous Lieuten. p. 93. Droll. 17. Simpleton the Smith. p. 98.
Droll. 18. Bumpkin. p. 108. Droll. 19. Simpkin. p. 112. Droll. 20. Hobbinal. p.
118. Droll. 21. Swabber. p. 121. Droll. 22. Monsieur the French Dancing Master,
out of the Varieties. p. 134. Droll. 23. The Landlady, out of the Chances. p.
140. Droll. 24. The testy Lord, out of the Maids Tragedy. p. 148. Droll. 25.
The Imperick, out of the Alchymist. p. 159. Droll. 26. The Surprise out of the
Maid in the Mill. p. 167. Droll. 27. The Doctors of Dulhead College, out of
Fathers own son. p. 182.
THE BOUNCING KNIGHT, OR, THE ROBERS ROBBED.
ARGUMENT.
A company of mad fellows resolve to take a Purse, and to that purpose
separate themselves, 4. in one company, 2. in the other, the four Rob and tame
true Men, the two Rob those four again. And then all meeting, the 4. exclame
against the absent two; and other Scenes of mirth follow.

ACTORS NAMES.
Prince, Hal, Knight, Jack, Poines, Peto, Roff, Hostess, Drawer.
Enter Several. HAL. How now Jack, where have thou been?


Jack. A plague of all Cowards I say and a vengeance too, marry and amen; give
me a Cup of Sack Boy, no virtue extant, you Rogue; there is lime in this Sack
too, there is nothing but Roguery to be found in villainous Man, yet a Coward is
worse then a Cup of Sack with lime in it, a villainous Coward, go thy ways old
Jack, dye when thou will: if Manhood, good Manhood, be not forgot upon the
face of the Earth, then am I a shotten hearing: there lives not three good men
unhang'd in England, and one of them is fat and grows old: a bad World I say,
and a plague of all Cowards I say still.


Hal. How now wool-sack, what mutter you?


Jack. A Kings Son? If I do not beat thee out of thy Kingdom with a Dagger of
lath, and drive all thy subjects before thee like a stock of wild-Geese, I Will
never wear hair on my face more, you Prince of Wales?


Hal. Why you horson round man what is the matter?


Jack. Are you not a Coward? answer me to that, and Poines there.


Hal. Why ye fat paunch, and ye call me, Coward by this light, I Will stab thee.


Jack. I call thee Coward? I Will see thee damned e're I call thee Coward; but I
would give a thousand pound I could run as fast as thou can. You are straight
enough in the shoulders, you care not who sees your back: call you that backing
of your friends? a plague upon such backing: give me them that will face me,
give me a cup of Sack, I am a Rogue if I drank to day.


Prince. Oh villain, thy lips are scarce wiped since thou drink'st last.


Jack. All Is one for that, a plague of all cowards still say I.


Prince. What Is the matter?


Jack. What Is the matter? here be four of us have taken a thousand pound this
morning.


Prince. Where is it, I ask where is it.


Jack. Where is it? taken from us it is; a hundred upon poor four of us.


Prince. What a hundred man?


Jack. I am a Rogue if I were not at half Sword with a dozen of them two
hours together; I have escaped by miracle; I am eight times thrust through the
doublet, four through the hose, my Buckler cut through and through, my sword
hackt like a hansaw, ecce signum, I never dealt better since I was a man, all
would not do, a plague of all Cowards, let them speak, if they speak more or
less then truth, they are villains, and the sons of darkness.


Poines. Speak Sirs, how was it.


Roff. We four set upon a douzen.


Jack. Sixteen at least my Lord.


Roff. And bound them.


Peto. No, no, they were not bound.


Jack. You rogue they were bound, every man of them, or I am a Jew else, an
Hebrew Jew.


Roff. And as we were sharing, some six or seven fresh men set upon us.


Jack. And unbound the rest, and then came in the others.


Prince. What fought ye with them all?


Jack. All? I know not what you call all: but if I fought not with fifty of
them, I am a bunch of raddish: if there were not two or three and fifty upon
poor old Jack, then I am no two-leg'd Creature.


Prince. Pray God you have not murdered some of them.


Jack. Nay that is past praying for, I have peppered two of them; two Rogues in
buckrom suites: I tell thee what, Hal, if I tell thee a lie spit in my face,
call me horse, thou know my old ward, here I lay, and thus I bore my point,
four Rogues in buckrom let drive at me.


Prince. What four? thou said but two even now.


Jack. Four Hal, I told thee four.


Poines. I, I, he said four.


Jack. These four came all afront, and mainly thrust at me; I made no more a
do but took all their seven points in my Target, thus. --


Prince. Seven? Why there were but four even now*


Jack. In Buckrum Hal, in Buckrum.


Poines. I four in Buckrum suits.


Jack. Seven by these Hilts, or I am a villain else.


Prince. Prithe let him alone, we shall have more anon*


Jack. Do thou hear me.


Hal. I, and mark thee too Jack.


Jack. Do so for it is worth the listening to. These nine in Buckrum that I told
thee off.


Prince. So, two more already.


Jack. Their points being broken.


Poynes. Down fell his Hose.


Jack Began to give me ground, but I followed me close, came in foot and hand;
and with a thought seven of the eleven I paid.


Prince. O Monstrous! eleven Buckrum men grown out of two.


Jack. But as the devil would have it, three mis-begotten knaves, in Kendal
green, came at my back and let drive at me, for it was so dark Hal that thou
could not see thy hand.


Prince. These lies are like the father that begets, gross as a Mountain,
open, palpable, why thou clay-brain'd guts thou knotty pated fool, thou horson
obscent greasy tallow catch.


Jack. What? art thou mad? art thou mad? is not the truth, the truth?


Prince. Why how could thou know these men in Kendall green, when it was so
dark thou could not see thy hand? what said thou to this?


Poines. Come, your reason Jack, your reason.


Jack. What upon compulsion? and I were at the strappado, or all the racks in
the World, I would not tell you on compulsion. Give you a reason on
compulsion? were reasons as plenty as Blackberries, I would give no Man a
reason upon compulsion, I.


Prince. I Will be no longer guilty of this sin, this sanguine Coward, this
Bed-presser, this horseback breaker, this huge ^ill of flesh.


Jack. You starvling, you Elf-skin, you dried Neats tongue, Bulls pizle, you
stock fish: O for breath to utter what is like thee? you Tailors yard, you
sheath, you Bow-case, you vile standing Turk.


Prince. Hear me sirrah bumbast --


Poynes. Mark Jack.


Prince. We two saw you four set upon four, bound them, and were Masters of
their wealth, then did we two set on you four, and with a word out-fac'd you
from the prize; what starting hole can thou now find out to hid thee from
this open and apparent shame?


Poynes. Come lets hear Jack, what trick have thou now?


Jack. By the Lord I knew ye as well as he that made ye, why hear you Masters,
was it for me to kill the heir apparent? should I turn up in the true Prince?
why thou know I am as valiant as Hercules: but beware instinct, the Lion
will not touch the true Prince. Instinct is a great matter, I was a Coward on
instinct; I shall think the better of my self, and thee during my life; I for
a valiant Lion, and thou for a true Prince: but by the Lord Lads, I am glad you
have the money, Hostess clap to the doors, watch to night, pray tomorrow,
what hearts of Gold shall we be merry? shall we have a Play ex tempore.


Prince. Content and the argument shall be thy running away.


Jack. O no more of that Hal if thou love me.


Prince. How longi'st ago Jack since thou saw thine own knee.


Jack. My own knee? when I was about thy years ( Hal) I was not an Eagles
tallant in the VVast: I could have crept into any Aldermans Thumb-Ring, a
plague of sighing and grief, it blows a man up like a Bladder; but to he Play
Hal.


Prince. I have a mind Jack that thou should stand for my father, and examine
me upon the perticulars of my life.


Jack. Content: this Chair shall be my State, this dagger my Scepter, and this
Cushion my Crown. Well if the fire of grace be not quite out of thee, now shall
thou be moved, give me a cup of Sack to make mine eyes look red, that it may be
thought I have wept: For I must speak in passion, and I will do it in King
Cambysis vein.


Prince. Well, here is my Leg.


Jack. And here is my speech: stand aside Nobility.


Hostess. O the Father, how he holds his countenance, he does it as like one
of these harlotry players as ever Isee.


Jack. Peace good pint Pot, peace good tickle branes. Harry I do not only
marvel where thou spendest thy time, but also how thou art accompanied, thou
art my Son, I have partly thy Mothers word, partly my opinion, but chiefly a
villainous trick of thine eye, and a foolish hanging of thy neither lip that
does warrant me. There is a thing Harry which thou have often heard off, and
known to many, in our Land, by the name of Pitch; this Pitch (as ancient
writers report) does defile, so does the company thou keep, yet there is one
virtuous Man whom I have noted in thy company, but I know not his name.


Prince. What manner of Man, and it like your Majesty:


Jack. A good portly man in faith, and a corpulent, of a cheerful look, a
pleasing eye, and a most noble carriage, and as I think his age some fifty, or
bir Lady, inclining to threescore, and now I remember me, his name is Falstaff:
if that man be lewdly given he deceives me, for Harry I see virtue in his
looks; If then the tree may be known by the fruit, as the fruit by the tree,
then peremptorily I speak it, there is virtue in that Falstaff, and now thou
noughty varlet, tell me where have thou been this month?


Prince. Do thou speak like a King? do thou stand for me, and I Will play my
father.


Jack. If thou do it so Majestically, ha^g me up by the heels for a
Rabbet-sucker or a Poulters Hare.


Prince. Well here I am set.


Jack. And here I stand judge my Masters.


Prince. Now Harry whence come you?


Jack. My noble Lord from Eastcheap.


Prince. The complaints I hear of thee are grievous.


Jack. Zlud my Lord they are false: nay I Will tickle you for a young Prince.


Prince. Swear'st thou, ungracious Boy? henceforth n'ere look on me, thou art
violently carried away from grace; there is a devil haunts thee in the
likeness of a fat old man, a Tun of man, is thy companion, why do thou
converse with that trunck of humors, that boulting-Butch of beastliness? that
swollen parcel of dropsies, that huge bombard of Sack, that stuff cloak bag of
guts, that roasted manning-tree Ox, with the pudding in his belly, that
reverend vice, that gray iniquity, wherein is he good but to taste Sack, and
drink it? wherein neat and cleanly, but to carve a Capon and eat it? wherein
cunning but in craft? wherein crafty but in villainy? wherein vallan^us but in
all things? wherein Worthy but in nothing?


Jack. I would your grace would take me with you: who means your grace?


Prince. That villainous abominable misleader of youth, Falstaff, that old white
bearded satan.


Jack. My Lord the man I know.


Prince. I know thou do.


Jack. But to say I know more harm in him then in my self, were to say more
then I know; that he is old, (the more the pity;) his white hairs do witness
it: but that he is (saving your reverence) a whoremaster, that I utter ly deny;
if Sack and Sugar be a fault, Heaven help the wicked: if to be old and merry be
a sin, then many an old Host that I know is damned; if to be fat, be to be
hated, then Pharaoh's lean Kine are to be beloved my good Lord: Banish Peto,
banish Bardol, banish Poynes; but for sweet Jack Falstaff, kind Jack Falstaff,
true Jack Falstaff, valiant Jack Falstaff; and therefore more valiant, being as
he is old Jack Falstaff, banish not him thy Harry's company; banish plump Jack,
and banish all the World.


Prince. I do. I will.


Enter Bardol. Bardol. Oh my Lord the Sheriff with a monstrous watch is at the
door.


Jack. Out you Rogue, play out the play, I have much to say in the behalf of
that Falstaff.


Exeunt. Enter Jack and Bardol. Jack. Am I not fallen away vilely, do I not
bate? do I not diminish? my skin hangs about me like an old Ladies loose Gown,
I am withered like an old apple John: well I Will repent, and that suddenly I
shall be out of heart shortly and then I shall have no strength to repent, and
I have not forgotten what the inside of a Church is made of, I am a pepper-corn,
villainous company has been the spoil of me.


Bardol. Sir John you are so fretfull you cannot live long.


Jack. Why there is it, come sing me a bawdy song, make me merry, well I have
been as virtuously given as a Gentleman need to be, lived well and in good
compass, and now I live out of all order, out of all compass.


Bardol. Why you are so fat Sir John, that you must needs be out of all
compass, all reasonable compass Sir John.


Jack. O mend thou thy face, and I Will mend my life: thou art our Admiral, thou
bear the Lanthorn in the poop, but it is in the Nose of thee, thou art the
King of the burning Lamp, when thou run'st up Gads Hill in the night to catch
my Horse if I did not think thou had been an Ignis fatuus or a ball of
wildfire, there is no purchase in money, O thou art a perpetual triumph, an
everlasting Bon-fire, by night.


Bardol. I would my face were in your belly.


Jack. God a mercy, so I should be heart-burnt. Now dame partlet the Hen, have
you inquired yet who picked my pocket.


Enter Hostess. Hostess. Why, Sir John do you think I keep thieves in my
House Sir John.


Jack. I Will besworne my pocket was picked; go, you are a woman, go.


Hostess. Who I? I defy thee: 'ods light I never was called so in my own
House before, you owe me money Sir John, I bought you a douzen shirts to your
back.


Jack. Dowlis, filthy Dowlis, I have given them away to Bakers Wives, they
have made boulters of them; I say my pocket was picked, I have lost a Seal-Ring
of my Grandfathers worth forty marks.


Hostess. Oh Lord I have heard the Prince tell him I know how often that Ring
was Copper.


Jack. The Prince is a Jack, a sneak-cap, and he were here I would cudgel him
like a dog, if he would say so.


Enter Prince. Hostess. Good my Lord hear me.


Jack. Prithee let her alone and list to me, this house is turned bawdy house,
my pocket has been picked here.


Prince. And what did thou lose Jack?


Jack. If thou will believe me Hal, three or four Bonds of forty pounds a
piece, and a Seal-Ring of my Grandfathers.


Prince. A trifle, some eight penny matter.


Hostess. I told him you said so, and he said he would cudgel you.


Prince. What a' did not.


Hostess. As I am a true woman he did.


Jack. Go you thing, go.


Hostess. Say, what thing, what thing?


Jack. Why, a thing to thank God on.


Hostess. I am nothing to thank God on, I would thou should know it.


Prince. Thou slander est her most grosely.


Hostess. So he does you my Lord, he said the other day you ought him a
thousand pound.


Prince. Sirrah do I owe you a thousand pound?


Jack. A thousand pound Hal? a million: thy love is worth a million: thou ow'st
me thy love.


Hostess. Nay, my Lord he called you Jack, and said he would cudgel you.


Jack. Did I Bardol?


Bardol. Indeed Sir John, you said so.


Jack. Yea if he said my Ring was Copper.


Prince. I say it is Copper: dare thou be as good as thy word now?


Jack. Why Hal? thou know, as thou art but a man I dare: but as thou art
Prince I fear thee as I fear the roaring of the Lions Whelp.


Prince. And why not as the Lion?


Jack. The King himself is to be feared as the Lion: do thou think I Will fear
thee, as I fear thy Father? nay, and I do, I pray my Girdle may break.


Prince. If it should, how would thy Guts fall about thy knees.


Exeunt. Enter Jack as to the Wars. Jack. Well I have misused the Kings press
damnably, I have got in exchang of 150. Soldiers 300. And od pound, I press
none but warm slaves that had as lieve hear the devil as a Drum, with hearts
in their bellies no bigger then pins heads, and they have bought out their
services, and now my whole charge consists of Ancients, Corporals, and the
like: A mad fellow met me on the way, and told me I had unloaded all the
Gibbets, and pressed the dead bodies, there is not a shirt and an half in all my
company, and the half shirt is two napkins tuckt together, and thrown over the
shoulders like a Heralds coat without sleeves; and the shirt, to speak truth
on it, is stolen from my host at St. Albanes, but that is all one, they*l find
linen enough on every hedge.


Enter Prince. Prince. How now Q^ilt? tell me whose fellows are these that
come after?


Jack. Mine Hal, mine.


Prince. I did never see such pittyfull Rascals.


Jack. Tut, tut, good enough to toss; food for powder, food for powder, they will
fill a pit as well as better: mortal men; mortal men, but I would all were
well Hal.


Prince. Why, thou ow'st a death.


Jack. It Is not due yet, and I would be loath to pay before the day, what need
I be so forward till I am called upon, well it is no matter, Honor pricks me
on, yea but how if Honor pricks me off when I come on? how then? can Honor
set to a leg? or an arm? no: or take away the grief of a wound? no: Honor
has no skill in surgery then? no: what is Honor? a word: what is that word?
Air: a trym reckoning: who has it? he that dyed a wednesday: does he feel it?
no: does he hear it? No: it is insensible then? yea to the dead: but will it not
live with the living? No: why? detraction will not suffer it: therefore I Will
have none of it, Honor is a mere scutchion, and so ends my Catechism.


Exit. Jack in fight falls down as he were dead, the Prince espying him on the
ground, speaks. Prince. What old acquaintance, could not all this flesh keep in
a little life? poor Jack farewell; imbowel'd will I see thee by and by, till
then, in blood by noble Percy lie.


Exit. Jack. Imbowel'd? if thou imbowell me to day, I Will give you leave to
powder me, and eat me to morrow, Z'Bloud 'twas time to counterfeit, or the
Termagant Scot had paid me scot and lot too. Counterfeit? I am no counterfeit:
to die is to be a counterfeit, for he is but the counterfeit of a man, who has
not the life of a man; but to counterfeit dying when a man thereby lives, is
to be no counterfeit, but the true and perfect image of life indeed, the better
part of valor is destruction; in the which better part I have saved my life.
-- I am afraid of this Gunpowder Percy, though he be dead; how if he should
counterfeit too, and rise? by my faith I am afraid he would prove the better
counterfeit: therefore I Will make him sure; yea and I Will swear I slew him, why
may not he rise as well as I? nothing confutes me but eyes, and no body sees
me! therefore sirrah with a new wound in your thigh, come you a long with me.


Ent. Pr. again. Prince. What Is here? art thou alive? thou art not what thou
seem sure.


Jack. No, that is certain, I am not a double man: but if I be not Jack
Falstaff, then I am a Jack: there is Percy, if your Father will do me any
Honor, So: if not, let him slay the next Percy himself: I look to be either
Earl or Duke, I can assure you.


Prince. Why, Percy I slew my self, and saw thee dead.


Jack. Did thou? Lord, Lord, how the World is given to lying! I grant you I
was down, and out of breath, and so was he, but we rose at an instant, and
fought a long hour by Shrews busy Clock, if I may be believed, So: if not, let
them that should reward valor, bear the sin upon their own heads, I Will take it
upon my death I gave him this wound in the thigh, if the man were alive and
would deny it i would make him eat a piece of my sword.


Prince. Come bring your luggage nobly on your back, for my part, if a lie will
do thee grace, I Will guild it with the happiest terms I have.


Jack. I Will follow, as they say, for a reward: He that rewards me, God reward
him, if I do grow great, I Will grow less: for I Will purge and leave Sack, and
live cleanly, as a Noble man should do.


Exit. JENKINS Love-course, and Perambulation.
ARGUMENT.
He finds his defect in Courtship, goes to School to learn it, where he meets
with some affronts; Then he wanders to the Woods to seek his Mistress, and is
encountered by an Echo, etc.

ACTORS NAMES.
Ienkins, Iocarello, Page, Mistress, Infortunio, Gaspero, Echo, Bubulons,
Antonio.
Enter Ienkins, Page, and Mistress. Ienk. LOok you Pages where our sweet Heart
and pigs-mies be; Sentlewoman if her know not her name, was Ienkin born in
Wales, came of Pighouse, and pritish bloods, was have great hills and Mountains
awle her owns, when was get um again, any was her Confins and her Countryman
was never conquered, but always have the victories pravely, have her arms and
scushrins, to know that say you, was give in her crests great deal of monsters
and Dragons, kill 'um with their hooks very valiantly, as any Sentleman in the
whole World: was please you place her affections and good wills upon her in ways
of make money, mark you; teal plainly, Ienkin was love her very honestly, else
pox upon her, and her will fight in her cause and quarrels long as have any
plood in bellies and backs too, mark you* Pray you was her love Ienkin.


Mistress. In what I may serve you, you shall command me Sir.


Ienkin. Shall her? was make her means and satisfactions warrant her, or say
Senkin was no Sentleman of Wales, say you Pages was have her matrimonies and
wedlocks very fast, and when was get her awle her, her cousins was make joys
and gratulations, for her good fortunes upon her Welsh Harpes, know you dat
very well Pages? her fear, her shall be Knighted one days, and have great
cumulations of Uships, Honors and dignities too, agreat while ago.


Iork. And great Castles in the Air.


Ienkin. Was give awle our Lands and craggy Tenements in Wales away to our
Cousin ap Shon, and live her self here upon very good fashions with our moneys
and mighty riches, when her can get 'um.


To him Infortunio. Infortunio. Whether so fast; thou must get to hell by
night, and thou go but Aldermans pace.


Ienkin. By cots plood her will go to the devil and her list, what is that to
her?


Infortunio. Your name is Mr. Ienkin.


Ienkin. And what have her to say to Mr. Shenkin, Shenkin was as good names as
her own, pray you, was good Shentleman as her self, know very well, say you
now?


Infortunio. God boy, Sir:


Ienkin. Poyes, does her call her boys? hark you? her name is Shenkin, her be
no poyes no shildren, was knock as tall a man as herself, an her Welsh plood
be up, look you.


Infortunio. It Is impossible.


Ienkin. Piple papels, it is very possible.


Infortunio. An hunger starved Rascal.


Ienkin. Rascals? she shu? was never such names and appellations put upon her
awle her days, begar her will make you eat up all her urds and ignominies, and
her plade shall make holes in her pellies diggon.


Inf. I could curse.


Ien. Her can curse and swear too look you now.


Infortunio. Pardon divinest Creature I submit.


Ienkin. Nay and her crave pardons and make submissions, Shenkin was put up
awle her anger and indignations farewell.


Exit. Ienkin from his study. Ienkin. Ienkin has risen very early this mornings
and been in studies and contemplations to make dities and ferces upon her
Mistress. Beauties and pulchritudes, but the tevill sure is in these Poetries,
Pages have her seem treames and apparitions? hark you, Was Selina turned
sheapheardess, pray you?


To him his Page, the Lady coming by. Page. We dream else Sir, the case is
altered.


Ienkin. What a tevill is in the matters and businesses pray you? cases! never
was knawn such cases and alterations in awle her life, woman's never wear
preeches in Wales, it is not possible we are awle in treames and visions, very
treames and visions.


Exeunt. Ienkin as at the School. Ienkin. Bless you Shentlemen awle, and your
studies and contemplations: is here a School of complements pray you.


Gaspero. A place of generous Breeding.


Ienkin. Shenerous preeding, hark you her name was Ienkin, a good Shentleman
it is knawn, he take no pleasures and delectations in urds, Welshmen have awle
hearts and fidelities mark you, yet if your Urships has any madrigals look
you, for in truth was going now to the voods and forests, her will give you
good payments of awle your inventions and muses pray you, here is moneys and
considerations look you.


Infortunio. Hey? how came you all thus damned?


Ienkin. Damned, whose damned? is Shinkin damned?


Gaspero. Humor him a little.


Ienkin. Will you have her be damned? when hear you pray a Welshman was damned?
of all things in the Urld her cannot abid to be damned.


Infortunio. What are you.


Ienkin. Her have no mind at all to be damned, be gar her will fight with her,
and kill awle the devils in hell: diggon.


Gaspero. Sir it is but in jest.


Ienkin. In jests, is it in jests? well, look you her will be content to be
damned in jests and merriments for you.


Infortunio. You will tell me what you are damned for?


Ienkin. And her be so hot, was get some body else to be damned for Ienkin: her
will tell her in patiences, look you, her was damned for her valor, and riding
the Urld of monsters, look you Dragons with seven heads, and serpents with
tails a mile long pray you.


Infortunio. Oh! let me hug thee Owen Glendower.


Ienkin. Owen Glendower was her Cousin pray, so farewell Shentlemen, now her
mean to make travails and peregrinations to the voes and plains, look you very
fast.


Exit. Ienkin in the Woods. Ienkin. Has almost lost her self in these vods and
Wildernesses, was very weary of these journeys and travels in foot-backs: have
not since her coming beheld any my reasonable creatures: bless us awle,
Iocarello is lost too, cannot tell where, in these mazes and labourinths:


Iocarello. So ho.


Echo. So ho.


Jenkin Ha, there is some podies yet, hark you t'ere, here is a Shentleman of
Wales, look you, desires very much to have speeches and confabulations with
you: where is her:


Echo: here is her.


Jenkin. Here is her? know not which ways to come to her: pray you tell Jenkin
where you be?


Echo. Boobie.


Jenkin. Poobies was her call her poobies? it is very saw^y travels, her will
teach her better manners, and moralities; mark you now, if her get her in
reaches and circumferences of her Welsh plaids, truly.


Echo. You lie.


Ienkin. How lies, and poobies too? hark you, Jenkin was give you mawles and
knocks for your poobies, and lies, and indignities, look for your pates now.

Exit with his Sword drawn. Enter again Here is no poodies but Bushes and
Briars, look you awle is very quiet: so ho, ho.


Echo. So ho, ho.


Jenkin. Her am very much deceived, now it comes into our minds, if these
voices be not Ecchos,


Echo. Echo.


Jenkin. It Is very true, but her marvel much, have her Ecchos in these
Countries, pray you?


Echo. Yes pray you.


Jenkin. Warrant her it is a Welsh Echo was follow Jenkin in love out of Wales.


Echo. Out of Wales.


Jenkin. It Is very true, bless us awle now, her to remembrances and memories,
her had communications and talkings with this very Echo in Glamorgan-Shire, in
de Valleys and Talles there look you, her am very glad her has met with Ecchos
was born in her own Countries, hark you, Jenkin was travel hither out of
loves and affections to Selina.


Echo. Nay.


Jenkin. Nay, Yes very true, pray you tell her, be Selina in these Woods, or no?


Echo. No.


Jenkin. No, where is her then? have her taken awle these labors and
ambulations in vanities? say you, shall Jenkin then go back as he came?


Echo. As he came,


Jenkin. Gone? it is not possible, hit may be Selina was turned spirits and be
invissible rather, she is not gone verily.


Echo. There you lie.


Jenkin. Lie, very well, you have privileges to give lies and awle things in
the Urld, but her will not leave these Vods for awle dat; her will be pilgrims
awle tayes of her life's er'e her go without her.


Echo. Go without her.


Jenkin. How, not love Jenkin? then there is a tevill in awle female sexes:
know very well she promise loves and good wills in times, great while ago, pray
you now, her will talk no longer with you, pray you if you meet her Pages, bid
her make hasts and expeditions after her, fare you well.


Echo. Fare you well.


Exit. Jenkin and Jocarello. Jocarello. So ho, ho, master Jenkin.


Jenkin. It is our Pages again. Jocarello where have you been? you are very
tilligent poyes to loose your master thus.


Jocarello. I was lost my self.


Jenkin. Ha pages, here is Selina, awle was very true as our Country-woman
Ecchos was make reports. Mrs. Selina call you to memories your promised loves
to Jenkin in matrimonies creat while ago.


Antonio. I am married to Ruffaldo.


Jenkin. Hit is not possible, Jenkin was never awle her days have such
injuries and contumelies have her made repetitions and Genealogies of her plood
for no Matrimonies: hum, Jenkin could fight with any podies in the whole Urld
now, look you Master Blew-potles have you any stomachs or appetites to have any
plowes or knocks upon your custard; look you now?


Bubulons. No good stomach at this time.


Omnes. Come we will all be friends.


Jenkin. Here is very good honest urds, yes look you Shenkin is in all amities
and friendship, but --


Antonio. Oh, no more shooting at that But.


Exeunt. The false Heir, and formal Curate.
ARGUMENT.
The younger Brother conceiving himself entitled to his elder Brothers
estate, sells it, the Curate a long lover of a Ladies worn out Gentlewoman
claps up a match with her.

ACTORS NAMES.
Younger Brother, Captain, Poet, Steward, Usurer, Widow, and Comrades, etc.
Curate and his Mistress, etc.
Captain. SAve thy brave shoulder, my young puissant Knight, and may thy
Backsword bite Them to the bone, that love thee not, thou art an errant Man, go
on, the circumcised shall fall by thee. Let land and labor fill the Man that
tills, thy Sword must be thy Plow, and Jove it speed, Mecha shall sweat, and
Mahomet shall fall, and thy dear name fill up his Monument.


Young Loveless. It shall Captain, I mean to be a worthy.


Captain. One worthy is too little, thou shall be all.


Morecraft. Captain I shall deserve some of your love too.


Captain. Thou shall have heart and hand too, noble Morecraft, if thou will
lend me Money, I am a man of Garrison, be ruled, and open to me those infernal
gates, whence none of thy evil Angels pass again, and I will style thee noble,
nay Don Diego I Will woo thy Infaunta for thee, and my Knight shall feast her
with high meats, and make her apt.


Morecraft. Pardone me Captain, you are beside my meaning.


Young Loveless. No Mr. Morecraft it is the Captains meaning I should prepare
her for ye.


Captain. Or provoke her. Speak my modern Man, I say provoke her.


Poet. Captain I say-so too, or stir her to it, so says the Critics.


Young Loveless. However you expound it, she is welcome, come sit down, some
wine here, there is a scurvy banquet, if we had it. All this fair house is
yours Sir; Savil?


Savil. Yes Sir.


Young Loveless. Are your keys ready, I must ease your burden.


Savil. I am ready to be undone Sir when you shall call me to it.


Young Loveless. Come, come, thou shall live better.


Savil. I shall have less to do* that is all; there is half a dozen of my
friends in the fields Su^ning against a bank, with half a breech among 'um, I
shall be with 'um shortly, the care and continual vexation of being rich, eat
up this raskal; what shall become of my poor family, they are no sheep, and
they must keep themselves.


Young Loveless. Drink Mr. Morecraft. Captain, speak loud and drink: Widow a
word.


Captain. Expound her thoroughly Knight.

He courts the widow for himself. Here God a gold? here is to thy fair
Possessions: Be a Baron, and a bold one; leave off your tickling of young heirs
like trouts, and let thy Chimnies smoke, feed men O'war, live and be honest,
and be saved yet.


Morecraft. I thank you worthy Captain for your council, you keep your Chimnies
smoking there, your nostrils; and when you can, you feed a man of war, this
makes you not a Baron, but a bare one, and how or when you shall be saved, let
the Clerk o'th company (you have commanded) have a just care of.


Poet. The man is much moved, Be not angry Sir, but as the Poet sings, let your
displeasure be a short fury, and go out. You have spoke hom^ and bitterly to me
Sir? Captain take truce, the Mi^er is a tart, and a witty whoreson.


Captain. Poet, you fain perdie; the wit of this man lies in his fingers ends,
he must tell all; his tongue fills his mouth like a Neats tongue, and only
serves to lick his hungry chaps after a purchase: his Brains and brimstone are
the Devils diet to a fat Usurers head: to her Knight, to her: clap her aboard,
and stow her, where is the brave Steward.


Savil. Here Is you poor friend, and Savil Sir.


Captain. Away thou art rich in Ornaments of nature, first in thy face, thou have
a serious face; a^etting, bargaining, and saving face, a rich face, pawn it to
the Usurer; a face to kindle the compassion of the most ignorant and frozen
Justice.


Savil. It Is such I dare not show it shortly Sir.


Captain. Be blithe, and bo^ny Steward; Mr. Morecraft drink to this Man of
reckoning?


Morecraft. Here Is even to him.


Savil. The devil guide it downward, would there were in it an acre of the great
Broomfeild, he bought; to sweep his durty conscience, or to choke you.


Young Loveless. Do but look on him, there is nothing in that hid-bound Usurer;
that man of mat, that al decayed but Arches: for you to love, unless his
perished Lungs, his dry Cough, or his scurvy; this is truth, and he has yet past
cure of Physic, spaw, or any diet, a primitive pox in his bones; and a' my
knowledge he has been ten times rowel'd; he had a bastard, his own towardly
issue, whipped, and then cropped for washing out the Roses, in three farthings to
make 'um pence.


Wid. I do not like these morals*


Young Loveless. You must not like him then. By my troth Sir you are welcome.


Savil. I dare say he is glad at heart to see you.


To them, Elder Loveless. Morecraft. This money must be paid again.


Young Loveless. No Sir, pray keep the sale, 'twill make good Tailors measures:


Savil. I know not where I am, I am so glad; your worship is the welcom'st man
alive; upon my knees I bid you welcome home: here have been such a hurry, such
a din, such dismal drinking, swearing and whoreing, 'thas almost made me mad:
We have lived in a continual Turneball-street; Sir, blessed be Heaven, that sent
you safe again; now shall I eat, and go to bed again.


Elder Loveless. What does that fellow tarry for?


Young Loveless. Sir, to be Landlord of your House and state: I was bold to
make a little sale Sir:


Morecraft. Am I over reached? if there be Law I Will hamper you.


Elder Loveless. Prithee be gone, eat redish till you raise your sums again,
you are a stale Cozener, leave my house: no more. --


Morecraft. A pox upon your house. Come Widow, I shall yet hamper this young
Gamster.


Widow, Good twelve in the hundred, keep your way I am not for your diet,
marry in your own tribe Jew, and get a Broker.


Exit Morecraft. Elder Lov. To you good Mr. Savil, and your office; thus much I
have to say, you are from my Steward become, first your own drunkard, then his
Baud: they say you are excellent grown in both, and perfect: give me your keys
sir Savil. where is the best drink now? where is the soundest Whores? Ye old he
Goat, ye dried ape, ye lame stallion, must you be leading in my House your
Whores, like Fairies dancing their night rounds, without fear either of King
or Constable? Are all my Hangings safe, my sheep unsold yet? I hope my Plate is
Current, I ha'too much on it. What say you to three hundred pounds in drink now?


Savil. Good Sir for give me, and but hear me speak?


Elder Loveless. Methinks thou should be drunk still, and not speak, it is
the more pardonable.


Savil. I will Sir, if you will have it so.


Elder Lovel. I thank ye. Yes, 'ene pursue it Sir; de'ye hear? Get you a Whore
soon for your recreation: go look out Captain broken-breech your fellow, and
quarrel if you dare; I shall deliver these keys to one shall have more
honesty, though not so much fine wit Sir; you may walk and gather cresses Sir,
to cool your liver; there is something for you to begin a diet, you will have the
pox else; speed you well Sir Savil: you may eat at my house to preserve life,
but keep no Fornication in the stables.


Exeunt. Savil. Now must I hang my self, my friends will look for it. Eating
and sleeping I do despise you both now; I will run mad first, and if that get
not pity, I Will drown my self to a most dismal ditty.


Exit. Abigal solus for her loss of time. Abigal. Alas poor Gentlewoman, to
what a misery has age brought thee: to what a scurvy fortune? Thou that have
been a companion of Noblemen, and at the worst of those times for Gentlemen:
now like a broken Servingman, must beg for favor to those that would have
craul'd like pilgrims to thy chamber, but for an apparition of me; you that be
coming on, make much of fifteen, and so till five and twenty, use your time
with reverence that your profit may arise; it will not tarry with you, Ecce
signum: here was a face! but time, that like a surfeit, eats our youth, plague
of his Iron teeth, and draw 'um for it, has been a little bolder here the^
welcome? and now to say the truth, I am fit for no man, old men in the house of
fifty call me Grannam; and when they are drunk, e'ne then, when Ioane and my
Lady are all one, not one will do me reason; my little Levite has forsaken me,
his silver sound of Cittern quite abollisht, his doleful Hymns under my
Chamber window, digested into tedious learning; well fool, you leapt a haddock
when you left him; he is a clean man, and a good edifier, and twenty nobles in's
estate de claro, besides his Pigs in posse, to this good Homili^ I have been
ever stubborn, which God forgive me for, and mend my manners: and love if ever
thou had care of forty, of such a piece of lapland ground, hear my prayer,
and fire his zeal so far forth, that my faults in this renewed impression of my
love, may show corrected to our Gentle Reader.

To her Roger. See how negligently he passes by me? With what an Equipage
canonical? As though he had broken the heart of Bellarmine, or added something
to the singing brethren. It Is scorn, I know it and deserve it. -- Master Roger.


Roger. Fair Gentlewoman, my name is Roger.


Abigal. Then Gentle Roger.


Roger. Ungentle Abigal.


Abigal. Why Mr. Roger, will you set your wit to a weak Woman's.


Roger. You are weak indeed, for so the Poet sings,


Abigal. I confess my weakness sweet Sir Roger.


Roger. Good my Ladies Gentlewoman, or my good Ladies Gentlewoman (this trope
is lost to you now) leave your prating, you have a season of your first Mother
in you; and surely had the Devil been in love, he had been abused too: go
Dalida, you make men fools and wear fig Breeches.


Abigal. Well, well, hard hearted man; dilate upon the weak infirmities of
Women; these are fit Texts, but once there was a time; would I had never seen
those eyes, those eyes, those Orient eyes.


Roger. I, they were pearls once with you.


Abigal. Saving your reverence Sir, so they are still.


Roger. Nay, nay, I do beseech you leave your cogging, what they are, they are,
they serve me without spectacles I thank'um.


Abigal. O will you kill me?


Roger. I do not think I can, you are like a copy hold with nine lives in it.


Abigal. You were wont to bear a Christian fear about you; For your own
worships sake?


Roger. I was a Christian fool then: do you remember what a dance you led me?
How I grew qualm'd in love, and was a Dunce? Could expound but once a quarter,
and then was out too: and then out of the stinking stir you put me in, I prayed
for my own Royal issue, you do remember all this?


Abigal. O be as then you were.


Roger. I thank you for it, sure I will be wise Abigal; and as the Ethnic Poet
sings, I will not loose my Oil and labor too, you are for the Worshipful I
take it Abigal.


Abigal. O take it so, and then I am for you.


Roger. I like these tears well, and this humbling also; they are symptoms of
contrition; if I should fall into my fit again, would you not shake me into a
Quotidian Coxcombe; would you not use me scurvily again, and give me Possets
with purging comfits in it? I tell thee Gentlewoman, thou have been harder to me
then a long Pedigree.


Abigal. Oh Curate cure me; I will love thee better, dearer, longer; I will do
any thing, betray the secrets of the whole household to thy reformation, my
Lady shall look lovingly on thy learning, and when true time shall point thee
for a Parson, I will convert thy Eggs to penny Custards, and thy tithe Goose
shall grase and multiply.


Roger. I am molifi'd, as well shall testify this faithful kiss, and have a
great care Mistress Abigall how you depress the spirit any more with your
rebukes and mocks: for certainly the edge of such a folly cuts its self.


Abigal. O Sir, you have peirst me through; here I vow a recantation to those
malicious faults I ever did against you, never more will I despise your
learning, never more pin Cards and Cunny tails upon your Cassock, never again
reproach your reverend Nightcap, and call it by the mangy name of murrin,
never abuse your reverend person more, and say you look like one of Baals
Priests in the hangings, never again when you say grace, laugh at you, nor put
you out at prayers, never cramp you more, nor when you ride get Soap and
Thisles for you, no my Roger, these faults shall be corrected and amended, as
by the tenor of my tears appears.


Roger. Now cannot I hold if I should be hanged, I must cry too, come to thine
own beloved, and do even what thou will with me sweet, sweet Abigal. I am thi^e
own for ever, here is my hand, when Roger proves a recreant hang him in the
Bell-ropes.


Lady, How now Roger, will no prayers go down with you. Here they are
interrupted by the Lady, upon which Roger breaks forth to Abigal.



Roger. Do but stay a little, I Will chop up prayers and be with you again.


The Character the Younger Loveless gives of his Comrades to the Widow.
Widow. But how these Sir, should live upon so little as Corn and Water, I am
unbeleiving.


Young Loveless. Why prithe sweet heart, what is your Ale? is not that corn and
water, my sweet Widow.


Widow. I but my sweet Knight where is the meat to this, and clothes that they
must look for?


Young Loveless. In this short sentence Ale, is all included; meat, drink, and
clothes; these are no ravening Footmen, no fellows, that at Ordinaries dare eat
their eighteen pence thrice out before they rise, and yet go hungry to a play,
and crack more nuts then would suffice a dozen Squirils; besides the dinne,
which is damnable: These are people of such a clean discretion in their diet,
of such a moderate sustenance, that they sweat, if they but smell hot meat;
pottage is poison, they hate a Kitchen as they hate a Counter, and shew'um but
a Feather-bed they sound; Ale is their eating and their drinking surely, which
keeps their bodies clear, and soluble: Bread is a binder, and for that
abolisht, 'ene in their Ale, whose lost room fills an Apple, which is more air,
and of a subtler nature. The rest they take is little, and that little, is
little ease, for like strict men of Order, they correct their bodies with a
Bench, or a poor stubborn Table; if a Chimny offers it self with some few
broken Rushes they are in Down; when they are sick, that is drunk, if they may
have fresh straw, else they do despise these Worldly pamperings, for their poor
apparel it is worn out to the diet; new they seek none; and if a man should
offer, they are angry; scarce to be reconciled again with him: you shall not
heare'um ask one cast Doublet once in a year: which is modesty befitting my
poor friends: you see their Wardrope, though slender, competent: for shirts I
take it, they are things worn out of their remembrance, lowzy they will be when
they list, and mangie, which shows a fine variety; and then to cure'um a
Tanners Lime-pit which is little charge, to Dogs and these, these two may be
cured for three pence.


Widow. Use your pleasure Sir. Since I know your Diet Gentlemen, I Will take
care that meat shall not offend you, you shall have Ale.


Captain. We ask no more, let it be mighty Lady; and if we perish, then our own
sins on us.


The Lame Commonwealth.
ARGUMENT.
A sort of Beggars meet at their Randevouze, and contend about choosing them a
King, but are silenced by a Passenger, whose casting voice ends the controversy.

ACTORS NAMES.
Higgen, Ferret, Prig, Clause, Snap, Ginkes, Iaculine, Goswin a Merchant, and
Hubert a Gentleman.
Higgen. COme Princes of the ragged Regiment, you of the blood, Prig my most
upright Lord, and these (what name or title e're they bear) Iarkman or
Patrico, Cranke, or Clapperdudgeon, Frater, or Abram-man; I speak to all that
stand in fair election for the title of King of Beggars, with the command
adjoining, Higgen your Orator, in this inter-Regnum, that Whilom was your
Dommerer, does beseech you all to stand fair, and put your selves in rank,
that the first comer may at his first view make a free choice to say up the
question.


Fer. Prig. It Is done Lord Higgen.


Enter Clause. Higgen. Thanks to Prince Prig, Prince Ferret. But where is
Clause.


Ferret. Behold the man. But pray my Masters all, Ferret be chosen, you are like
to have a merciful mild Prince of me.


Prig. A very Tyrant, I, an arrant Tyrant. If e're I come to reign; therefore
look to it, except you do provide me Hum enough, and Lour to bouze with: I must
have my Capons and Turkies brought me in, with my green Geese, and Ducklings
in the season: fine fat Chickens, Or if you chance where an eye of tame Phesants
or Partridges are kept, see they be mine, or straight I seize on all your
privileges, places, revenues, offices, as forfeit, call in your crutches,
wooden legs, false bellies, forced eyes, and teeth, with your dead arms; nor
leave you a durty clout to beg with on your heads, or an old rag with butter,
frankinsense, brimstone and rozen, birdlime, blood, and cream to make you an
old sore: not so much soap as you may some with in the falling sickness; the very
bag you bear, and the brown dish shall be escheated, all your daintiest dells
too I will deflowre, and take your dearest Doxies from your warm sides; and
then some one cold night I Will watch you what old Barn you go to roust in, and
there I Will smother you all in the musty Hay.


Higgen. This is Tyrant like indeed: but what would Ginkes or Clause be here,
if either of them should reign?


Clause. Best ask an Ass, if he were made a Camel, what he would be; or a Dog
and he were a Lion.


Ginkes. I care not what you are, Sirs, I shall be a Beggar still, I am sure,
find my self there.


Enter Goswin. Snap. O here a Judge comes.


Higgen. Cry a Judge, a Judge.


Goswin. What ayleyou ^irs? what means this outcry?


Higgen. Master, a sort of poor souls met: Gods-fools, good Master, have had
some little variance amongst our selves who should be honestest of us; and
which uprightest in his call: now cause me thought we never should gree on it
our selves, because indeed it is hard to say; we all dissolved, to put it to
whom that should come next, and that is your Mastership, who I hope, will
termine it as your mind serves you, right, and no otherwise we ask it: which?
which does your worship think is he? sweet Master look over us all, and tell
us; we are seven of us, like to the seven wise Masters, or the Planets.


Goswin. I should judge this the man with the grave beard, and if he be not, --


Clause. Bless you good Master, bless you.


Goswin. I would he were: there is something too amongst you to keep you all
honest.


Snap. King of Heaven go with you.


Omnes. Now God reward him, may he never want it* to comfort still the poor in
a good hour.


Ferret. What is it? see; Snap has got it.


Snap. A good Crown marry:


Prig. A crown of Gold.


Ferret. For our new King; good luck.


Ginkes. To the common treasury with it; if it be Gold thither it must.


Prig. Spoke like a Patriot, Ferret --

King Clause, I bid God save the first, first, Clause, after this golden token
of a Crown; where is Orator Higgen with his gratuling speech now in all our
names?


Ferret. Here he is pumping for it.


Ginkes. H'has cough'd the second time, it is but once more and then it comes.


Ferret. So, out withal; expect now --


Higgen. That thou art chosen venerable Clause, our King and Sovereign; Monarch
o'th Maunders, thus we throw up our Nab-cheats, first for joy, and then our
filches; last we clap our fambles, three subject signs, we do it without envy:
for who is he here did not wish thee chosen, now thou art chosen? ask 'um: all
will say so, nay swear't, it is for the King, but let that pass; when last in
conference at the bouzing Ken this other day we sat about our dead Prince of
famous memory: (rest, go with his rags:) and that I saw thee at the Tables end,
rise moved, and gravely leaning on one Crutch, lift the other like a Scepter at
my head, I then presaged thou shortly would be King, and now thou art so:
but what needs presage to us, that might have read it in thy beard: Oh happy
beard: but happier Prince whose beard was so remarked, as marked out our
Prince, not baiting us a hair. Long may it grow, and thick and fair, that who
lives under it, may live as safe, as under Beggars-Bush, of which this is the
thing, that but the Type.


Omnes. Excellent, excellent Orator, forward good Higgen, give him leave to
spit: the fine, well spoken Higgen.


Higgen. This is the beard, the bush, or bushy-beard under whose Gold and
Silver reign 'twas said so many ages since, we all should smile on impositions,
taxes, grievances, knots in a State, and whips unto a subject, lie lurking in
his beard, but all kem'd out: if now the Beard be such, what is the Prince that
owes the Beard? a father; no, a Grandfather; nay the great Grandfather of you
his people. He will not force away your Hens, your Bacon, when you have
ventured hard for it, nor take from you the fattest of your puddings: under him
each Man shall eat his own stolen Eggs and Butter, in his own shade, or Sun
shine, and enjoy his own dear Dell, Doxy, or Mort, at night in his own straw,
with his own shirt, or sheet, that he has filtch'd that day, I, and possess
what he can purchase, back, or belly-cheats, to his own prop: he will have no
purveyors for Pigs, and Poultry.


Clause. That we must have, my Learned Orator, it is our will, and every man
to keep in his own Path and Circuit.


Higgen. Do you hear.

You must hereafter maundon your own pads he says.


Clause. And what they get there, is their own, besides to give good words.


Higgen. Do you mark? to cut Bene-whids, that is the second Law.


Clause. And keep a foot the humble, and the common phrase of begging, least
men discover us.


Higgen. Yes: and cry sometimes to move compassion; Sir, there is a Table, that
does command all these things, and enjoynes 'em; be perfect in their Crutches:
their feigned Plasters, and their true passe-bords, with the ways to stammer,
and to be dumb, and deaf, and blind, and lame, There, all the halting paces are
set down, in the learned Language.


Clause. Thither I refer them, those, you at leisure shall interpret to them,
we love no heaps of Laws, where few will serve.


Omnes. O gracious Prince, 'save the good King Clause.


Higgen. A song to Crown him.


Ferret. Set a Centinell out first.


Snap. The word?


Higgen. A cove comes. and fumbumbis to it -- strike Which ended.


A Song. Enter Snap, Hubert, and Hemskirke. Snap. A Cove; Fumbumbis.


Prig. To your postures; Arm.


Hubert. Yonder Is the Town; I see it.


Hemskirk. There Is our danger indeed before us, if our shadows save not.


Higgen. Bless your good worships.


Ferret. One small piece of money.


Prig. Amongst us all poor wretches.


Clause. Blind and lame.


Ginks. For his sake that gives all.


Hig. Pitiful worships.


Snap. One little doit.


Enter Iaculine. Iaculine. King, by your leave, where are you?


Clause. To buy a little bread.


Higgen. To feed so many mouths as will ever pray for you.


Prig. Here be seven of us.


Higgen. Seven, good Master, O remember seven, seven blessings.


Ferret. Remember, gentle Worshipful.


Higgen. Against seven deadly sins.


Prig. And seven sleepers.


Higgen. If they be hard of heart, and will give nothing -- alas we had not a
charity this three days.


Ferret. Heaven reward you.


Prig. Lord reward you.


Higgen. The Prince of pity bless thee.


Hub. Do I see? or is it my fancy that would have it so? ha? it is her face; come
hither Maid.


Iaculine. What have you Bells for ^y Squirrel? I have given Bun meat, you do not
love me do you? catch me a Butterfly, and I Will love you again; when? can you
tell? Peace, we go a birding; I shall have a fine thing.


Hub. Her voice too says the same; but for my head I would not that her
manners were so changed, hear me thou honest fellow; what is this Maiden that
lives amongst you here?


Ginks. Ao, ao, ao, ao.


Hub. How? nothing but signs?


Ginks. Ao, ao, ao, ao.


Hub. It Is strange, I would fain have it her, but not her thus.


Higgen. He is de -- de -- de -- de -- de -- de -- deaf, and du -- du -- du --
dude-dumb sir.


Hub. 'Slid they did al speak plain even now me thought, do thou know this
same Maid?


Snap. Why, why, why, why, which, gu, gu, gu, gu, Gods fool she was bo -- bo --
bo -- bo -- born at the Barn yonder by be -- be -- be -- be -- Beggars Bush, bo
-- bo -- Bush, her name is My -- my -- my -- my -- Match; so was her Mo -- Mo
-- Mothers too too.


Hub. I understand no word he says; how long has she been here?


Snap. lo -- lo -- long enough to be in -- in -- ingled; and she ha go -- go --
go -- good luck


Exeunt Beggars. Hub. I must be better informed, then by this way. here was
another face to that I marked, Oh the old man's but they are vanished all most
suddenly; I will come here again, Oh that I were so happy, as to find it, what
I yet hope? It is put on.


Exeunt Beggar Hubert. Enter Snap, and Ferret. Snap. The Coast is clear,
Ferret, I bo -- bo -- bo -- 'd hence.


Ferret. I, thou were at thy ba, be, by, bo, bu, which showed thou were a
Scholar.


Snap. He durst not hold discourse with me, so much for the credit of the
Snaps, as the word says, either Snap some, or Snap all. That is if you cannnot
Snap all, Snap some.


Ferret. But thy snaping too short makes thee so lean, I think I have ferreted
you there Snap.


Snap. We shall not get a snap if we prate longer, our King is served by this
time, Dish, and bit, the Feast waits no man, but the man waits it.


Ferret. That is an eager stomach Snap; here I Ferret you again.


Exeunt. The Sexton, or the Mock- Testator.
ARGUMENT.
A Covetous jealous Lawyer, that keeps too severe an eye over his Wife, is
drawn from home by a wild, to be made an Executor, and thereby enriched,
whilst some Gentlemen effect their desire at his House.

ACTORS NAMES.
Sexton, Parson, Lawyer, two Gentlemen.
Table, Stools, Standish and Paper. LAwyer. So rich, and I his sole Executor.


Parson. Very right Sir, I am to make his will, will you come near Sir.


Lawyer. I am sorry neighbor to find you in so weak a State.


Sexton. Ye are welcome, but I am fleeting, Sir.


Lawyer. Methinks he looks well, his color fresh and, strong, his eyes are
cheerful.


Parson. A glimering before death Sir, it is nothing else; do you see how he
fumbles with the sheets?


Sexton. My learned Sir pray ye sit, I am bold to send for you to take a care
of what I leave. --


Pars. Do you hear that?


Sexton. My honest neighbors weep not, I must leave ye, I cannot always bear
ye company, we must drop still, there is no remedy: pray ye Mr. Parson will ye
write my Testament, and write it largly, it may be remembered, and be witness to
my legacies good Gentlemen: your worship I do make my full Executor, you are a
man of wit and understanding: give me a cup of Wine to raise my spirits, for I
speak low: I would, before these neighbors, have you to swear, (Sir) that you
will see it executed; and what I give, let equally be rendered for my Souls
health.


Lawyer. I vow it truly neighbors, let not that trouble ye, before all these,
once more I give my Oath.


Sexton. Then set me higher, and pray you come near me all.


Parson. We are ready for you.


Sexton. First then, after I have given my Body to the Worms: (for they must
be served first, they are seldom cozened.)


Parson. Remember your parish Neighbor.


Sexton. You speak truly, I do remember it, a vile lewd Parish, and pray it may
be mended: To the poor of it (which is to all the Parish) I give nothing, for
nothing unto nothing is most natural, yet leave as much space as will build an
Hospital, their children may pray for me.


Lawyer. What do you give to it?


Sexton. Set down two thousand Ducats: To your Worship; (because you must take
pains to see all finished) I give two thousand more, it may be three Sir, a
poor gratuity for your paines-taking.


Lawyer. These are large sums?


Parson. Nothing to him that has 'em.


Sexton. To my old Master I give five hundred, (five hundred and five hundred
are too few Sir) but there are more to serve.


Lawyer. This fellow Coins sure.


Sexton. Give me some more drink, Pray ye buy Books, buy books, you have a
learned head stuff it with libraries, and understand 'em when ye have done,
it is justice, run not the parish mad with controversies, nor preach not as
abstinence to longing women, 'twill purdge the bottom of their consciences: I
would give the Church new Organs, but I prophecy the Churchwardens would
quickly pipe 'em out 'oth parish, two hundred Ducats more to mend the
Chancell, and to paint true Orthography as many, They write Sunt with a C which
is abominable, pray you set that down to poor maids Marriages.


Parson. I that is well thought of, what is your will in that point? A
merritorious thing.


Sexton. I give per annum two hundred Else of Lockram that there be no straight
dealings in their Linnens, but the sails cut according to their burdens; to
all Bell-ringers, I bequeath new Ropes, and let them use them at their own
discretions.


Gentlemen. You may remember us Sir.


Sexton. I do, good Gentlemen, and I bequeath you both good careful Surgeons a
legacy, you have need of more then Money, I know you want good dyets and good
lotions* and in your pleasures good take heed.


Parson. He raves now, but 'twill be quickly off.


Sexton. I do bequeath ye commodities of thy pins: brown papers: Pack-threads,
roast Porke and puddings: Ginger-bread and Jews trumps of penny pipes, and
moldy pepper: take 'um even where you please and be cozened with 'em, I should
bequeath my Executours also, but those I Will leave to the Law.


Parson. Now he grows temperate.


Lawyer. You Will give no more.


Sexton. I am loath to give more from ye, because I know you will have a care to
execute, only to pious uses, Sir a little.


Lawyer. If he be worth all these, I am made for ever.


Sexton. I give to fatal Dames that spin men's thredsout, and poor distressed
Damsells that are militant, as members of our own afflictions, a hundred crowns
to buy warm Tubs to work in, I give five hundred pounds to buy a Church yard,
a spacious Church yard, to lay thieves and knaves in, rich men and honest men
take all the room up.


Parson. Are you not weary?


Sexton. Never of well doing.


Lawyer. These are mad Legacies.


Sexton. They were got as madly, my sheep and oxen, and my movables, my Plate
and Jewels and five hundred acres; I have no heirs.


Lawyer. This cannot be, it is monstrous.


Sexton. Three Ships at Sea too.


Lawyer. You have made me full Executor?


Sexton. Full, full, and total, would I had more to give ye, but these may
serve an honest mind.


Lawyer. You say true, a very honest mind, and make him rich too; But where
shall I raise these moneys, where shall I find these sums?


Sexton. Even where ye please Sir, you are wise and provident, and know
business, even raise 'em where you shall think good, I am reasonable.


Lawyer. Think good? will that raise thousands?


Sexton. You have sworn to see it done that is all my comfort.


Lawyer. Where I please? this is packed sure to disgrace me.


Sexton. Ye are just and honest, and I know ye will do it, e'ne where you
please, for you know where the wealth is.


Lawyer. I am abused, ^baffl'd and boared it seems.


Gentlemen. No, ye are fooled.


Parson. Most finely fooled.


Sexton. Ha, ha, ha, some more drink, for my heart, Gentlemen this merry Lawyer
-- Ha, ha, ha this Scholar -- I think this fit will cure me: this Executor --
I shall laugh out my lungs.


Lawyer. This is dirision above sufferance.


Gentlemen. Did you think, had this Man been rich, he would have chosen a
Wolf, a Cancker, a Maggot-pate to be his whole Executor?


Parson. A Lawyer that intangles all men's honesties, and lives like a Spider in
a cob-web, lurking, and catching at all flies, that pass his Pit falls? Puts
powder to all States, to make 'em caper? would he trust you?


Sexton. Do you deserve? I find Gentlemen this Cataplasme of a well cozened
Lawyer laid to my Stomach lenifies my fever, Methink I could eat now and walk
a little.


Lawyer. I am ashamed to see how flat I am cheated, how grosely, and
maliciously made a May Game:


2. Gentleman. This it is to covet all the gains, to have a stirring Oar in
all men's actions.


Parson. We did this but to vex your fine officiousies.


Lawyer. I thank ye, I am fooled Gentlemen; the Lawyer is an Ass, I do confess
it, a weak, dull, shallow Ass, good even to your Worships: Vicar, remember
Vicar, Rascal remember, thou notable rich Rascal.


Sexton. I do remember Sir, pray ye stay a little, I have even two Legacies
more to make your mouth up, Sir.


Lawyer. Remember Varlets, quake and remember Rogues, I have brine for your
Buttocks.


Parson. Oh, how he frets and fumes now like a dunghill.


Exit. Sexton. His Gall contains fine stuff now to make poisons, rare damned
stuff.


Gentlemen. Go, let us us crucify him.


Exeunt. A PRINCE in Conceit.
ARGUMENT.
Two Gentlemen Travelers resolving to see the fashions of the Court, leave
their servants in an Inn with some Riches, they not returning at their
appointed time, makes him conclude they are -- and so run into extravagancies.

ACTORS NAMES.
Pimponio, the Prince in conceit, Host and his Son, Aurelio by the name of
Borgia, Pisauro, Duchess, and Courtiers.
Enter Prince in Contemplation. PRINCE. Dead, dead, they are no doubt on it, and
I Heir apparent to the port-ma^tue, an aglet hole or two in their hearts has
done the business, the port-mantue, I say bring forth the port-mantue.


Enter Boy and his Father. Boy. It Is here Sir.


Prince. And thy Father too Boy?


Father. What would you have, it is very late?


Prince. Never too late to tell Money, fetch me a brace of Gennets, I will
mount 'em, a Covey of Curtisans, do here?


Father. What does the fellow mean?


Prince. No fellows friend on thy allegiance, it is time to show our self,
where is thy Boy?


Boy. Here Seignior.


Prince. Kneel down, and ask me blessing.


Boy. This does look like a blessing, shall I ask another?


prince. Ask any thing but what I am, I must be still disguised, my Men are
absent.


Father. Your men? --


Prince. Thou art wise, thine ear, I am a Prince, the reason of my shape thou
shall know hereafter, thus Jove has been disguised.


Boy. Is not your name Pimponio.


Prince. It was my pleasure they should call me so, I have not found 'em
trusty, how fares the Duchess? Boy thou shall wait on me, I Will have you all.


Father. Whether?


Prince. To Spain, when thou have got a chapman for this tub thou liv'st in,
let me know it.


Enter Pisauro. Pisauro. Where Is Pimponio?


Prince. A pox pimp you, they are alive again, now am I a dead man.


Pisauro. There is a certain moveable, ecclip'd a portmantue.


Prince. Would your tongue had been clipped.


Father. With your pardon Sir, is not this Seignior a Prince disguised, and
came hither to Court the Duchess? he has promised us at his return from Spain
to make us grandees.


Pisauro. Has he betrayed himself? nay then my duty; if please your excellence.


Prince. Away, away.


Pisauro. A Prince cannot be hid* though under Mountains, but my dear Prince
the bags must go with me, while you keep State 'ith Inn.


Prince. Who shall maintain.


Pis. If I did think thou would carry it handsomely -- well I Will excuse thee
to thy Master, when thou have domineered away this Bag, thou may hear more,
and so I take leave of your excellence.


Exit. Prince. Hah, am not I a Prince indeed? Grutti, Boy, I entertain you both
my Groom, and Page, and say unto you, Snakes go cast your coats, here is
earnest for new skins, when things are ripe we will to Court.


Father. What thinks your Grace of going to bed.


Prince. I am too sober, let the whole house be drunk first, let me have fifty
Strumpets.


Father. Fifty Trumpets.


Prince. Strumpets I say, they will make the greater noise, this Roome's too
narrow, beat down the walls on both sides, advance your light, and call the
country in, if there be a Tailor amongst 'em, he shall first take measure of my
highness, for I must not longer walk in Querpo


Both. We attend your Highness.


Exeunt. Enter Father and Son again. Father. Why I shall hardly take thee for
my own natural child.


Boy. Let me alone with my Don, he is gone to fit himself with clothes, and if
I do not fit him, let me never find the way into my own breeches, see he has
had a nimble Tailor, some Suit prepared to his hand, I know my cue to enter,
and pursue his Princely humor out of breath.


Exit. Prince. And how, and how do things become? We were in clouds but now.


Enter Prince like a Don and servants. Father. Your Highness is broken out.


Prince. Broken out, where?


Father. Out of the clouds and please you.


Prince. There is no Infidel among you then, you all believe I am a Prince,
there are no Traitors I hope amongst ye.


Father. Traitors we will cut off any man's neck, that dares but think so.


Prince. Do and I will justify it, hang necks among friends, let us be merry,
reach me a Chair and a bottle of Wine, every one take his charge.


Father. Will not your Highness have the dance first.


Prince. They will dance the better when they are three quarters drunk, music
and give fire at once -- so, but methings it were necessary there were some
difference in our drinking; all are not Princes, reach me a bigger bottle, I
will preserve my state, This is a Princely draught -- so -- why have we not a
concubine?


Music. Sound a health. Servant. Brave Prince with what a Majesty he drinks.


Prince. Now let 'em friske the dance you have prepared, we are ready to accept
it.


Father. And it shall please your Grace there is a high German desires to speak
with you.


2. Serve. I fear you are betrayed Sir, and that the Duchess has sent for you.


Prince. For me, I won not come yet,


1. Servant. Do not affront him Sir for your own sake, this high German has
beaten all the Fencers in Europe.


Prince. Let him beat all the World, what is that to me? shall he make a Prize
of me?


Father. But if he come Ambassador from the Duchess.


Prince. That Is an other matter, give me the the other bottle -- now let all the
Cantons of Scorss come -- which is the high German? let me see him.


Enter Boy. Father. That Sir.


Prince. He Is one of the lowest high Germans that e're I looked on.


Boy. I kiss thy highness hand.


Prince. And we embrace thy Lownes: do you hear Sir, are you a high German?


Boy. I was so at the beginning of the wars, what we are beaten to you may
discern.


Prince. Are you beaten to this? you will be a very little Nation if the wars
continue.


Boy. I have a message to deliver you, the fair Duchess of Urbin, whom I wait
on, hearing a person of your blood and quality, so meanly lodged, by me,
desires you would accept an entertainment in her Court.


Prince. We give the Duchess thanks: But what High German in thy little
judgment, do think the Duchess will do with me there.


Boy. 'Twere sin to say she will honor you, for you are above all addition, but
her love, it is probable you may be affronted.


Prince. No matter, I have been affronted a hundred times, but by whom?


Boy. Questionless by some great ones, and perhaps beaten.


Prince. I have been beaten too upon good occasion, and will again to save my
Honor, beaten? I can take the strappado, beside in this part I am insensible,
a Kick is cast away.


Boy. If you be valient and endure, it will engage her love the more, go on
boldly, my council shall attend.


Prince. I will go on, and fear no beating; well I cannot Knight thee, yet
prove but a witch, I Will make thee one of my privy Counselors.


Exeunt. Enter Prince, and Boy with a Trumpet. Boy. Tara, Ra ra ra, room for
the Duke of Ferrara.


Exeunt. Enter Prince again, and two Courtiers. Prince. What Is the matter.


1. Courtier. You have fooled finely, you must be whipped, and stripped, my scurvy
Don.


Prince. Whip a Prince? what do you mean?


2. Courtier. You must be Duke of Ferrara*


Prince. Duke of a Fidle-stick, are you in earnest Gentlemen? do you intend I
shall catch an Ague Gentlemen?


1. Courtier. The lash, when the fit comes, will keep you warm, stay but a
little, and we will send you a whip to comfort you.


Prince. 'Twill be but cold comfort, make the best on it; how am I transformed?
where is my low high German now? Duke of Ferrara quoth a': -- would I were any
thing, I know not what I am, as they have handled me.


Enter Duchess and Courtier. Duchess. Is the Duke gone?


Courtier. Yes Madam.


Duchess. I Will have the fool hanged then.


Prince. That Is I.


Duchess. Alas poor fellow, Ha, ha, ha, what art thou?


Prince. Nothing, I hope she does not know me again, I must deny my self.


Duchess. Come hither sirrah, whose devise was it to bid you say you were Duke
of Ferrara?


Prince. Alas not I Madam, he is gone.


Duchess. Who is gone?


Prince. The insolent fellow that made a fool of your Highness.


Duchess. Whether is he gone?


Prince. To obey your Grace, and be whipped.


Dutch. Why do you shake so?


Prince. I Am very warm and please your Grace.


Dutch. Where Is your Clothiers.


Prince. My Clothes? I never wore any more in my life, I sweat with these.


Dutch. Alas poor fellow, he has punishment enough, who waits there.


Prin. Now to be sent to whipping cheer.


Enter a servant Dutch. Bid Borgia attend us.


Exit. Servant. I shall Madam.


Exit. Enter Borgia or Aurelio his Master. Borgia. How now sirrah, what are you?


Prince. A tumbler; do you not know me?


Borgia. I know thee?


Prince. What not Pimponio honest Pimponio.


Servant. Seignior Borgia her Grace calls for you.


Exit. Borgia. I attend.


Prince. How Seignior Borgia? then I am not I. And there is no staying here to
find my self, as I remember some back friends of mine did promise a clean
whipped, I Will rather endure the foulness of the weather then stay for it, I must
be dukifi'd, be persuaded into Kicks -- they will return I won not tempt my
desteny, she promised to hang me, and I can do that for my self when I have a
mind to it.


Enter Courtiers. 1. Courtier. Kick that fellow out of the Court.


Prince. You are mistaken Sir, he means some body else, I have been kicked
already,

Oh gentle fate rid me out of their clutches:
And then adue to our picked-dame Duchess.

Exeunt. Enter Aurelio and Pisauro. 2. Courtier. What Is the matter*


Pimponio within. Oh yes, Oh yes. Pisauro. A fool has lost his Master, and thus
cries him about the Court thy man Aurelio.


Enter Pimponio. Pimp. Oh Yes;

If any Man there be
In Town or in Country
Can tell me of a wight,
Was lost but yester Night:
His name was I know
Seignior Aurelio,
Bring word to the Crier
His desolate Squire,
By these marks, he is known
He had a bush of his own,
Two eyes in their place,
And a Nose on his face,
His Beard is very thin,
But no hair on his Chin,
And for this fine feat
Take what you can get;
And heaven bless Pimponio, for no body knows me and I know no body else to
pray for.


Pisauro. Here, here is thy Master.


Pimp. No, no, that is Seignior Borgia, not a word of whiping if you love me, do
not deceive your self.


Borgia. We have been both deceived, Pimponio I am thy master.


Pimponio. Why then I Will wander through an other World with you, a World that
has more charity in it, then to uncase a man for doing his master Honor.


Exeunt. An Equal Match.
ARGUMENT.
A loose Officer, and a wanton waiting Woman, marry in hope of eithers Riches,
and cozen one another.

ACTORS NAMES.
Perez, Estifania, an odl Woman and her Daughter, or Maid servant.
Enter Perez. PErez. Shall I never return to my own house again? we are lodged
here in the miserablest Doghole, a conjurers circle gives content above it, a
Hawks mew is a Princly palace to it we have a bed no bigger then a basket, and
there we lie like Butter clapped together, and sweat our selves to sauce
immediately, the fumes are infinite inhabit here too; and to that so thick they
cut like Marmalet, so various too, they will pose a Gold finder. Never return to
mine own paradise? why wife I say, why Estifania?


Estif. Within. I am coming presently.


Per. Make have good Jewel; I am like the people that live in the sweet
Islands: I dye, I dye, if I stay but one day more here, my lungs are rotten
with the damps that rise, and I cough nothing now but stinkes of all sorts; the
Inhabitants we have, are two starved Rats, for they are not able to maintain
a Cat here, and those appear as fearful as two Devils, they have eat a map of
the whole World up already, and if we stay a night longer we are gone for
company, There Is an old woman that is now grown to Marble, dried in this Brick
hill, she sits 'ith Chimnies, which is but three tyles raised like a house of
Cards, the true proportion of an old smok'd hovill, there is a young thing too,
that is nature meant for a Maid servant, but it is now a monster, she has a husk
about her like a Chestnut, with lasiness, and liveing under the line here, and
these two make a hollow sound together, like Frogs or winds between two Doors
that murmurs, mercy deliver me, O are you come wife! Shall we be free again?


Enter Estif. Estif. I am now going, and you shall presently to your own house
Sir, by that time you have said your Orisons, and broke your fast, I shall be
back and ready to usher you to your old content, your freedom.


Perez. Break my neck rather, is there any thing here to eat but one another
like a race of Canniballs, a piece of buttered wall you think is excellent,
let us have our house again, immediately, and pray ye take heed unto the
Furniture, none be imbezelled?


Estifania. Not a pin I warrant you.


Perez. And let 'em instantly depart.


Estif. They shall both, for by this time she has acquainted him, and will give
over gratefully unto you.


Perez. I Will walk 'ith churchyard, the dead cannot offend me more then these
living, an hour hence I Will expect you.


Estifania. I Will not fail Sir.


Perez. And do ye hear, lets have a handsome dinner, and let me have a strong
Bath to restore me, I stink lik a stall-fish-shambles, or an Oyle-shop.


Estifania. You shall have all; which some interpret nothing.


Exeunt. Enter again Perez, with an old Woman and Maid. Perez. Nay, pray ye
come out, and let me understand ye, and tune your Pipe a little higher Lady,
i will hold ye fast:


Old Woe. Ha, what would you have?


Perez. My goods again, how came my trunks all open.


Old Woe. Are your Trunks gone?


Perez. Yes, and clothes gone, and Chains, and Jewels, how she smells like
hung Beef, the palsy and picklocks, fie how she belches the spirit of Garlic.


Old Woe. Where Is your Gentlewoman? the young fair Woman?


Perez. What Is that to my question? she is my Wife, and gone about my business.


Old Woe. Is she your Wife Sir?


Perez. Yes Sir, Is that wonder, is the name of Wife unknown here.


Old Woe. Is she truly, truly your Wife?


Perez. I think so, for I married her, it was no vision sure.


Old Woe. If you be married to that Gentlewoman you are a wretched man, she has
twenty husbands.


Maid. She tells you true.


Old Woe. And she has cozened all Sir.


Perez. The devil she has, I had a fair house with her that stands hard by,
and furnished Royally.


Old Woe. You are cozened too, it is none of hers, good Gentleman, It is a
Ladies, what is the Ladies name wench?


Maid. The Lady Margarita, she was her servant, and kept the house, but going
from her Sir, for some lewd tricks she played.


Perez. Plague a'the devil, Am I 'ith Meridian of my wisdom cheated by a
stale Queen? what kind of Lady is that, that owes the house?


Old Woe. A young sweet Lady.


Perez. Of a low stature?


Old Woe. She is indeed of a low stature, but wondrous fair.


Perez. I feel I am cozened, sensible I am undone, was she her Mistress say
you?


Old Woe. Her own Mistress, her very Mistress Sir, and all you saw about that
house was hers.


Perez. No plate, no Jewels, nor no hangings? No Money?


Old Woe. She is a poor shifting thing, but for one Gown her Lady gave her.


Perez. I am mad now, I think I am as poor as she, I am wild else, one civil
suit I have left, and that is all, if she steal that she must flea me for it,
where does she use?


Old Woe. You may find truth as soon, alas a thousand concealed corners Sir she
lurkes in, and here she gets a fleese, and there another, and lives in mists
and smokes where none can find her.


Perez. Is she a whore too?


Old Woe. Little better Gentleman, I dare not say she is so, she is yours.


Perez. A Whore and a Theife too, two excellent moral virtue, in one she is
Saint, I hope to see her legend, well here is a Royal left yet, there is for
your lodging and your meat for this week; a Silk-worme lives at a more
plentyfull ordinary, and sleeps in a sweeter Box, Farewell great Grandmother,
if I do find you were an accessory, it is but cuting off two smoaky minutes,
I Will hang you presently.


Exeunt. Enter again at one end, and his Wife at the other. Estif. It Is he, I
am caught, I must stand to it stoutly.


Perez. It is my evil Angel, let me bless me; my worthy wife?


Estif. My most noble Husband.


Perez. I have been in bawdy houses.


Estif. I believe you, and very lately too.


Perez. To seek your Ladyship, in Cellers too, in private Cellers where the
thirsty bawds hear your confessions, I was among the Nuns because you sing
well, but they say yours are bawdy songs, they mourn for ye, and last I went
to Church to seek you out, it is so long since you were there, they have forgot
you.


Estif. You have had a merry progress, I Will tell nine now, I went to twenty
Taverns.


Perez. And are you sober.


Estif. Yes, I reel not yet sir, where I saw twenty drunk, most of them
Soldiers, from thence to the Diceing-house, there I found quarrels needless,
and senseless, Swords, and Pots, and Candlesticks, Tables, and Stools, and
all in one confusion; then to the Chyrurgions went, who learnedly told me, if
you tippl'd hard twenty to one you whor'd too, and then he should hear of you;
last to your Confessor I came who told me you were too proud to pray, and here
I have found ye.


Perez. She bears up bravely, and the Rogue is witty, why am I cozened, why
am I abused? Thou most vile, base, abominable.


Estif. Captain.


Perez. Thou stinking, overstew'd, poor, pocky.


Estif. Captain.


Perez. Do You echo me.


Estif. Yes sir, and go before you too, you had best now draw your Sword
Captain, draw it, upon a Woman, do brave Captain, upon your Wife, oh most
renowned Captain.


Perez. A plague upon thee, why did thou marry me?


Estif. To be my Husband.


Perez. Why did thou flatter me, and show me wonders, a House and riches?
when they are but shadows, shadows to me.


Estif. Why did you work on me with your strong Soldiers wit, and swore you
would bring me so much in Chains? so much in Jewels Husband, and here is your
Treasure, sell it to a Tinker to mend old ^ettles; is this noble usage?


Perez. A Fire subtle you, are ye so crafty?


Estif. Here Is a goodly Jewel, did not you win this at G^lletta Captain, or
took it in the Field from some brave Bashaw? how it sparkles like an old Ladies
eyes? and fills each Room with Light like a Dark-lanthorn, this would do rarely
in an Abbey Window, to cousen Pilgrims.


Perez. Prithe leave prating.


Estif. And here is a Chain of Whitings-eyes for Pearls, a Mussel-monger would
have made a better.


Perez. Nay, prithe Wife, my Clothes, my Clothes.


Estif. I Will tell ye, your Clothes are parallels to these all counterfeit, put
these and them on, you are a Man of Copper, a kind of Candlestick, these you
thought, my Husband to have cozened me withal, but I am quit with you.


Perez. Is there no House then, nor no ground about it, no Plate, nor Hangings.


Estif. There are none sweet Husband; shadow for shadow is an equal; justice,
can you rail now? pray put your fury up sir, and speak great words, you are a
Soldier, Thunder.


Perez. I will speak little, I have played the fool, and so I am rewarded.


Estif. You have spoken well sir.


Exeunt. The STALLION.
ARGUMENT.
A Gentleman falls into the hands of Officers, to whom be must either pay a
sum of money, or be constrained to serve in the Galleys for some years, a
Matrona to a Brothell, taking a likeing to him, pays the imposed sum, and
takes him to her House, where he serves the Women's unsa^iate importunities;
being dreyned and wearied, is by a happy accident released.

ACTORS NAMES.
Ruttillio, Officers, Baud, Pimp, three or four sick Persons belonging to the
Brothell, a Gentleman.
Enter Baud, and Pimp. BAud. Shall I never see a lusty Man again.


Pimp. Faith Mistress, you do so over-labour 'em, and so dryfounder 'em, they
cannot last.


Baud. Where Is the Frenchman?


Pimp. Alas, he is all to fitters, and lies taking the height of his fortune
with a Sirrenger, he is chin'd, he is chin'd good Man, he is a mourner.


Baud. What Is become of the Don?


Pimp. Who? gold Locks? he is foul in the Touchhole: and recoiles again, the
main Springs weakened that holds up his Cock, he lies at the sign of the Sun to
be new breech'd.


Baud. The Rutter too is gone.


Pimp. Oh, that was a brave Rascal, he would labor like a Thresher; but alas
what thing can ever last? he has been ill-mew'd, and drawn too soon; I have
seen him in the Hospital.


Baud. There was an Englishman. --


Pimp. I, there was an Englishman; you will scant find any now to make that name
good. There was those Englishmen, that were Men indeed, but they are vanished:
They are so taken up in their own Country, and so beaten off their speed by
their own Women, when they come here they draw their Legs like Hackneys,
drink, and their own devices have undone 'em.


Baud. I must have one that's strong, no life in Lisbon else, perfect and young;
my custom with young Ladies and high fed Citty-Dames will fall and break else,
I want my self too in my age to nourish me; They are all sunck I maintained,
now what is this business? what goodly fellows that?


Enter Ruttillio, and Officers. Ruttillio. Why do you drag me? Pox on your
Justice, let me loose, cannot a Man fall into one of your drunken Cellars, and
venture the breaking on's Neck, but he must be used thus rascally.


1 Officer. What made you wandering so late in the night? you know that is
imprisonment.


Ruttillio. May be I walk in my sleep.


Officer. What made you wandering sir, into that Vault where all the City store
and the Ammunition lay?


Ruttillio. I fell into it by chance, I broke my shins for it, your Worships feel
not that; I knocked my Head against a hundred Posts, would you had had it,
cannot I break my Neck in my own defense?


Officer. Your coming thither was to play the Villain, to fire the Powder and
blow up that part o'th City.


Ruttillio. Yes, with my Nose.


Officer. We have told you what is the Law, he that is taken there, unless a
Magistrate, and have command in that place, presently if there be nothing found
appa^ent, near him worthy his Torture, or his present death, must either pay
his Fine for his presumption, (which is six hundred Ducats) or for six years
tug at an Oa^e in the Galleys; may be you were drunk, you will be kept sober there.


Ruttillio. Tug at an Oar, you are not errant Rascals to catch me in a Pit
fall and betray me?


Baud. A lusty-minded Man.


Pimp. O, wondrous able.


Baud. Pray Gentlemen allow me but that liberty to speak a few words with your
Prisoner, and I shall thank you.


Officer. Take your pleasure Lady.


Baud. What would you give that Woman should redeem you, redeem you from this
slavery.


Ruttillio. Besides my service, I would give her my whole self, I would be her
Vassal.


Baud. She has great reason to expect as much, considering the great sum she
pays for it, yet take comfort, what you shall do to merit this, is easy, and I
will be the Woman shall befriend you, It Is but to entertain some handsome
Ladies, and young fair Gentlewomen; you guess the way; but -- giving of your
mind --


Ruttillio. I am excellent at it, you cannot pick out such another living; I
understand you, is it not thus? * --


Baud. Ye have it.


Rutt. Bring me a hundred of 'em, I Will dispatch 'em, I will be none but yours;
should another offer another way to redeem me, I should scorn it, what Women
you shall please; I am monstrous lusty, not to be taken down; would you have
Children? I Will get you those as ^ast, and thick as fly-blowes.


Baud. I admire him, wonder at him.


Ruttillio. Hark you Lady, you may require some times. --


Baud. I by my faith.


Ruttillio. And you have it by my faith and handsomely; this old Cat will suck
shrewdly; you have no Daughter? I fly at all; now I am in my Kingdom, Tug at an
Oar? no, tug in a Feather-bed with good warm Caudles; hang your bred and
water, I Will make you young again, believe that Lady; I will so frubbish you.


Baud. Come fellow Officers, this Gentleman is free; I Will pay the Ducats.


Ruttillio. And when you catch me in your Citty-powdering Tub again, boil me
with Cabbidge.


Officer. You are borh warned and armed Sir.


Exeunt. Enter Ruttillio with a Nightcap, as in the Brothell-house. Ruttillio.
Now do I look as if I were Crow-trodden, fie, how my hams shrink under me; O me,
I am brokenwinded too; Is this a life? Is this the recreation I have aimed at?
I had a body once, a handsome body, and wholesome too; now I appear like a
Rascal that had been hung a year or two in Gibbets, fie, how I faint; Women?
keep me from Women; Place me before a Cannon, it is a pleasure; stretch me upon
a Rack, a recreation; but Women? Women? O the Devil Women? courteous Gulf
was never half so dangerous; Is there no way to fall into the Cellar again,
and be taken? no lucky fortune to direct me that way? no Galleys to be got, nor
yet no Gallows? for I fear nothing now, no Earthly thing but these
unsatisfied Men-leeches, Women: how divelishly my bones ache: oh the old Lady! I
have a kind of waiting-VVoman lies cross my back too, oh how she stinks! no
treason to deliver me? now what are you? do you mock me?


Enter 3. or 4. with Night-caps very faintly. 1 No sir no, we were your
predecessors in this place.


2 And come to see how you bear up.


Ruttillio. Good Gentlemen, you seem to have a snuffing in your head sir, a
parlous snuffing, but this same dampish air --


2 A dampish air indeed.


Ruttillio. Blow your face tenderly, your nose will nere endure it; mercy on
me, what are men changed to here? is my nose fast yet? methinks it shakes in the
hilts; pray tell me Gentlemen, how long is it since you flourisht here?


3 Not long since.


Ruttillio. Move your self easily, I see you are tender, nor long endured.


2 The labor was so much sir, and so few to perform it --


Ruttillio. Must I come to this? and draw my legs after me like a lame dog? I
cannot run away, I am too feeble; will you sue for this place again Gentlemen?


1 No truly sir, the place has been too warm for our Complexions.


2 We have enough on it, rest you merry sir, we came but to congratulate your
fortune, you have abundance.


3 Bear your fortune soberly, and so we leave you to the next fair Lady.


Exit the three. Ruttillio. Stay but a little, and i will meet you Gentlemen, at
the next Hospital, there is no living thus, nor am I able to endure it longer,
with all the helps and heates that can be given me, I am at my trot already;
they are fair and young most of these Women that repair to me, but they stick
on like burres, shake me like feathers, more Women yet?

Enter Baud. Would I were honestly married, to any thing that had but half a
face, and not a great to keep her, nor a smock, that I might be civilly merry
when I pleased, rather then laboring in these fulling Mills.


Baud. I see you bear up bravely yet.


Ruttillio. Do ye hear Lady, do not make a Game-bear of me, to play me hourly,
and fling on all your Whelps; it will not hold; play me with some discretion,
to day one course, and two days hence another.


Baud. If you be angry, pay back the money I redeemed you at, and take your
course; I can have Men enough: you have cost me an hundred Crowns since you
came hither, in brothes and strengthening Caudles; till you do pay me, if you
will eat and live, you shall endeavor, i will chain you to it else.


Ruttillio. Make me a Dog-kennel, i will keep your House and bark, and feed on
bare bones, and be whipped out a' doors, do ye mark me Lady? whipped, i will eat old
shoes.


Enter a Gentleman. Baud. Your business sir, if it be for a Woman, ye are
cozened, I keep none here.


Gent. Certain this is the Gentleman, the very same.


Rutt. Death, if I had but money, or any friend to bring me from this bondage,
I would thrash, set up a Cobblers stall, keep Hogs, and feed with 'em, sell
Tinderboxes, and knights of Ginger-bread, that is for three half pence a day,
and think it Lordly, from this base Stallion trade: why does he eye me, eye me
so narrowly?


Gent. It seems you are troubled Sir, I heard you speak of want.


Rutt. It Is better hearing far then relieving Sir:


Gent. I do not think so, you know me not.


Rutt. Not yet that I remember.


Gent. You shall, and for your friend, be confident I love you, by this you
shall perceive it, it is Gold, and no small sum, a thousand ducats supply
your want.


Rutt. But do you do this faithfully.


Gent. If I mean ill, spit in my face, and kick me; in what else I may serve
you Sir, command.


Rutt. I thank you, this is as strange to me as Knights adventure? where are
you white broth? now lusty blood come in and tell your money: it is ready here,
no threats, nor no Orations, nor prayers now.


Baud. You do not mean to leave me.


Rutt. I Will live in Hell sooner then here, and cooler, come quickly come,
dispatch, this airs unwholesome: quickly good Lady quickly to it.


Baud. Well since it must be, the next I Will fetter faster sure, and closer.


Rutt. And pick his bones, as you have done mine, pox take ye.


Gentle. At my Lodging for a while, you shall be quartered, and there take
Physic for your health.


Rutt. I think I have found my good Angel now, if I can keep him.


Exeunt. The GRAVE-MAKERS.
ARGUMENT.
While* he is making the Grave, for a Lady that drowned her self, Hamlet and
his friend interrupt him with several Questions.

ACTORS NAMES.
Grave-maker, and his Man, Hamlet, and his Friend.
Enter two to dig the Grave. IS she to be buried in Christian burial, when she
wilfully seeks her own Salvation?

Man. I tell thee she is, therefore make her Grave straight; the Crowner has
sat on her, and finds it Christian burial.


Grav. How can that be, unless she drowned her self, in her* own defense?


Man. Why it is found so.


Grav. It must be so offended, it cannot be else; for here lies the point, if I
drown my self willingly it argues an act, and an act has three branches, it is
to act, to do, to perform, or all; she drowned her self wittingly.


Man. Nay, but hear you good man Delver.


Grav. Give me leave, here lies the water, good, here stands the man, good, if
the man go to this water and drown himself, it is nill he, will he; he goes,
mark you that: but if the water come to him and drowns him, he drowns not
himself; argall, he that is not guilty of his own death, shortens not his own
life.


Man. But is this Law?


Grav. I marry is it, Crowners quest law.


Man. Will you have the truth on it, if this had not been a Gentlewoman, she
should have been buried out a' Christian burial.


Grave. Why there thou say, and the more pity that great folk should have
countenance in this World to drown or hang themselves, more then meaner
christians: come my spade, there is no ancient Gentlemen but Gardeners,
ditchers and Grave-makers, they hold up Adams profession.


Man. Was he a Gentleman?


Grave. He was the first that ever bore Arms. I Will put another question to
thee, if thou answer'st me not to the purpose, confess thy self.


Man. Go to.


Grave. What is he that builds stronger then either the Mason, the Ship-wright
or the Carpenter?


Man The Gallowes-maker, for that out-lives a thousand Tenants.


Grave. I like thy wit well in good faith, the Gallows does well, but how does
it well? it does well to those that do ill, now thou dostill to say the
Gallows is built strongerthen the Church, Argall the Gallows may do well to
thee, to it again, come.


Man. Who builds stronger then a Mason, a Ship-wright or a Carpenter?


Grave. I, tell me that and unyoke.


Man. Marry now I can tell.


Grave. To It.


Man* Mass I cannot tell.


Grave. Cudgel thy brains no more about it, for your dull Ass will not mend
his pace with beating, and when you are asked this question next, say a
Grave-maker, the houses he makes last till Doomesday, go get thee in and fetch
me a soope of Liquor.

Sings. In youth when I did love, did love
Methought it was very sweet,
To contract, O the time for a my behove,
O methought there was nothing a meet.

Enter two Gentlemen. 1. Gent. Has this fellow no feeling of his business? a
sings in Grave-making.


Sings. 1. Grave. But age with his stealing steps
Has clawed me in his clutch,
And has shiped me into the Land,
As if I had never been such.

Ham. That skull had a tongue in it, and could sing once, how the knave jowles
it to the ground, as if 'twere Caines Jaw Bone, that did the first murder: this
might be the pate of a pollitician which this Ass now o'rereaches, one that
would circumvent God, might it not?


2. Gent. It might Sir.


Ham. Or of a Courtier, which could say, good morrow my Lord, how do thou
sweet Lord? this might be my Lord such a one, that praised my Lord such a ones
Horse when he meant to beg it, might it not?


2. Gent. I Sir.


Hamlet. Why even so, and now my Lady Worms choples, and knocks about the
mazer with a Sextons spade, here is fine revolution, and we had the trick to
see it, did these bones cost no more the breeding but to play at loggits with
'em? mine ache to think on it.


Grave. A Pickaxe and a Spade a spade,
For and a shrowding sheet,
O a pit of Clay for to be made
For such a Guest is meet.

Ham. There Is another, why may not that be the Scull of a Lawyer? where be his
quiddities now? his quillities, his cases, his terms, and his tricks? why does
he suffer this mad knave now to knock him about the sconce with a durty
shovell, and will not tell him of his actions of battery? hum: this fellow
might be in's time a great buyer of Land, with his statutes, his rogguizance,
his fines, his double vouchers, his recoveries, to have his fine pate full of
fine dirt; will vouchers vouch him no more of his purchases and doubles, then
the length and breadth of a pair of Indentures? the very conveyances of his
land will scarcely lie in this Box, and must the Inheritor himself have no
more? Ha?


Friend. Not a jot more Sir.


Ham. Is not parchment made of Sheep skins?


Friend. I Sir, and of Calves skins too.


Ham. They are Sheep and Calves which seek out assurance in that. I will speak
to this fellow: whose Grave's this firrah?


Gravemaker. Mine Sir, or a pit of Clay for to be made.


Ham. I think it is thine indeed, for thou lie in it.


Gravem. You lie out on it Sir, and therefore it is not yours: for my part I do
not lie in it, yet it is mine.


Ham. Thou do lie in it, to be in it and say it is thine, it is for the dead,
not for the quick, therefore thou lie.


Gravem. It Is a quick lie Sir, 'twill again from me to you.


Ham. What man do thou dig it for?


Gravem. For no man Sir.


Ham. What Woman then?


Gravem. For none neither.


Ham. Who is to be buried in it?


Gravem. One that was a Woman Sir, but rest her soul, she is dead.


Ham. How long have thou been a Grave-maker.


Gravem, Of the days 'ith year I came to it, that day that our last King Hamlet
overcame Fortinbrass.


Ham. How long is that since?


Gravem. Cannot you tell that? every fool can tell that; it was that very day
that young Hamlet was born, he that is mad, and sent into England.


Ham. I marry, why was he sent into England?


Gravem. Why, because he was mad, a shall recover his wits there, or if he do
not, it is no great matter there.


Friend. Why?


Gravem. 'T will not been seen in him there, there are Men as mad as he.


Friend. How came he mad?


Gravem. Very strangly they say.


Ham. How strangely?


Gravem. Faith even with loosing his wits.


Ham. Upon what ground?


Gravem. Why here in Denmark: I have been Sexton here man and boy thirty
years.


Ham. How long will a man lie 'ith earth e're he rot?


Gravem. Faith if he be not rotten before he dye, as we have many pocky courses
that will scarce hold the laying in, a will last you some eight year or nine
year; a Tanner will last you nine year.


Friend. Why he more then another?


Gravem. Why Sir his Hide is so tan'd with his Trade, that a will keep out
water a great while, and your water is a sore decayer of your whoreson dead
body: here is a scull now has layn you 'ith earth twenty three years.


Ham. Whose was it?


Gravem. A whoreson mad fellow it was, whose do ye think it was?


Ham. Nay I know not.


Gravem. A pest^ence on him for a mad Rogue, a powered a Flaggon of Rhenish on
my head once; this same scull Sir, was Sir Yoricks the Kings Jester.


Ham. This?


Gravem. 'Een that.


Ham. Alas poor Yorick, I knew him friend, a fellow of infinite jest, of most
excellent fancy, but where be your Gibes now* your Gamboles, your Songs of
merryment? quite chop fa^'n? prithee friend tell me one thing.


Friend. What Is that Sir?


Ham. Do thou think Alexander looked a this fashion 'ith earth?


Friend. 'Een so.


Ham. And smelt so? pah.


Friend. Even so Sir.


Ham. To what base uses may we return? why may not imagination trace the noble
dust of Alexander, till a find it stopping a Bung-hole.


Friend. 'Twere to consider, too curiously to consider so.


Ham. No faith not a jot, but to follow him thither with modesty enough, and
likelihood to lead it: Alexander dyed, Alexander was buried, Alexander returned
to dust, the dust is Earth, of Earth we make Lome, and why of that Lome whereto
he was converted, might they not stop a Beer-barrel?

Imperial Caesar dead, and turned to clay,
Might stop a hole to keep the wind away;
Oh that that Earth which kept the World in awe,
Should patch a Wall t'expell the Water flaw.

The Loyal Citizens.
ARGUMENT.
Who rescue their Prince condemned to dye, by the plots and designs of his
Stepmother.

ACTORS NAMES.
Four Citizens, and a Boy.
Enter Citizen, and his Boy. CItizen. Sirrah, go fetch my Fox from the Cutlers;
there is money for the scowring, tell him, I stop a groat since the last great
Muster he had in store pitch for the bruise he took with the recoyling of his
Gun.


Boy. Yes sir.


Citiz. And do you hear? when you come, take down my Buckler, and sweep the
Cobwebs off, and grind the Pick on it, and fetch a Nail or too, and tack on the
Bracers; your Mistress made a Potlet on it, I thank her, at her Maids wedding,
and burnt off the handle.


Boy. I will sir.


Citiz. Whose within here, ho, neighbor, not stirring yet?


Enter 2. Citizen. 2 Citizen. Oh good morrow, good morrow: what news, what
news?


1 Citiz. It holds, he dies this morning.


2 Citiz. Then happy Man be his fortune; I am resolved.


1 Citiz. And so am I, and forty more good fellows, that will not give their
heads for the washing, I take it.


2 Citiz. 'Sfoot Man, who would not hang in such good Company? and such a
Cause? A fire, a Wife, and Children, it is such a jest that Men should look
behind 'em to the World; and let their honors, their honors neighbourship. --


1 Citiz. I Will give thee a pint of Bastard, and a Role for that bare word.


2 Citiz. They say that we Tailors are things that lay one another, and our
Geese hatch us; I Will make some of 'em feel they are Geese 'oth Game then, Jack
take down my Bill, it is ten to one I use it; take a good heart Man, all the low
Ward is ours with a wet finger: and lay my cut-fingred Ganlet ready for me,
that, that I used to work in when the Gentlemen were up against us, and beaten
out of Town, and almost out of debt too; for a plague on 'em, they never paid
well since: and take heed sirrah, your Mistress hears not of this business,
she is near her time; yet if she do, I care not, she may long for Rebellion, for
she has a devilish spirit.


1 Citiz. Come lets call up the new Ironmunger, he is as tough as steel, and
has a fine wit in these resurrections, are you stiring Neighbor.


3 Citizen within. Oh good morrow

knocks. Neighbors, I Will come to you presently.


2 Citiz. Go to, this is his Mothers doing; she is a Ponlcat.


1 Citiz. As any is in the World.


2. Citiz. Then say I have hit it, and a vengeance on her Let he^ be what she
will.


1. Citiz. Amen say I, she has brought things to a fine pass with her wisdom:
do you mark it?


2. Citiz. One thing I am sure she has, the good old Duke she gives him Pap
again they say, and dandles him, and hangs a Currall and Bells about his Neck,
and makes him believe his teeth will come again, which if they did, and I he, I
would weary her as never Cur was wearyed: I would Neighbor, till my teeth
meet, I know where -- but that is council.


Enter the 3. Citizen. 3. Citiz. Good morrow neighbors: hear you the sad news?


1. Citiz. Yes, would we knew as well how to prevent it.


3. Citiz. I cannot tell, methinks 'twere no great matter, if men were men:
But. --


2. Citiz. You do not twit me with my calling neighbor?


3. Citiz. No surely: for I know your spirit to be tall, pray be not vexed.


2. Citiz. Pray forward with your council: I am what I am: And they that prove
me, shall find me to their cost: do you mark me neighbor? to their cost I say.


1. Citiz. Nay look how soon you are angry.


2. Citiz. They shall neighbor: Yes, I say they shall.


3. Citiz. I do believe they shall.


1. Citiz. I know they shall.


2. Citiz. Whether you do or no, I care not two pence, I am no beast, I know
mine own strength Neighbors; God bless the King, your companyes is fair.


1. Citiz. Nay now you err, Neighbor I must tell you so, were ye twenty
neighbors.


3. Citiz. You had best go Peach, do peach.


2. Citiz. Peach, I scorn the motion.


3. Citiz. Do and see what follows: I Will spend an hundred pounds, and it be
two I care not, but I Will undo thee.


2. Citiz. Peach, Oh disgrace! Peach in thy face, and do the worst thou can I
am a true man, and a free man, peach.


1. Citiz. Nay, look, you will spoil all.


2. Citiz. Peach.


1. Citiz. Whilst you two brawle together, the Prince will loose his life.


3. Citiz Come give me your Hand, I love you well, are you for the action?


2. Citiz. Yes, but Peach provokes me, it is a cold fruit, I feel it cold in my
stomach still.


3. Citiz. No more, I Will give you Cake to digest it.


Enter the 4th Citizen. 4. Citiz. Shut up my Shop, and be ready at a call boys,
and one of you run over my old Tuck with a few ashes, it is grown odious with
tosting Cheese! and burn a little Gunpowder in my murrin, the maid made it her
chamber pot, an hour hence I Will come again; and as you hear from me, send me a
clean Shirt.


3. Citiz. The chandler by the Wharfe, and it be thy will.


2. Citiz. Gossip, good morrow.


4. Citiz. O good morrow Gossip: good morrow all, I see you of one mind ye
cleave so close together: Come it is time, I have prepared a hundred if they
stand.


1. Citiz. It Is well done: shall we sever, and about it?


4. Citiz. If my Tuck hold, I Will spit the Guard like Larkes with Sage in
th'be^y o'um.


2. Citiz. I have a foolish Bill to reckon with 'um, will make some of their
hearts ache, and I Will lay it on: now shall I fight, 'twill do ye good to see me.


3. Citiz. Come I Will do something for the Town to talk of when I am rotten:
pray God there be enough to kill, that is all.


Invissible Smirk, or the Pen Combatants.
ARGUMENT.
A day of Iuble is appointed by the Duke, wherein every one to express his
duty endeavors something of Mirth, to Crown that day.

ACTORS NAMES.
Duke, Duchess, Frederick, Smirk, a Conjurer, a Spirit, a Page, and Lord
Shallow.
Enter Smirk. SMIRK. Thanks my dear Jem, I Have found thy virtue now, I had not
past 'em else, a man may have an invissible Ring I see and not know of it, what
is this all the divices sports and delights the Duke shall have for his money?
the Proclamation promises reward for him, shall show any varieties, and will
it all come to a dull Masque? I Will show his Grace some sport my self with help
of my good friend here, which now must off again, by your Majesty's leave.


Duke. How now what is he?


Smirk. What Is he? the wonder of your Kingdom.


Duke. How, the wonder*


Smirk. I, and can do the greatest, -- now you see me you know me.


Fred. Yes Sir, I do know you.


Smirk. And you all see me, you say.


Omnes. We do.


Smirk. And I do see all you, but what is that to the purpose?


Duke. Very little I confess.


Smirk. Shall I demonstrate matter of Art, and have nothing for my pains.


Omnes. No, no, the Proclamation speaks the contrary.


Smirk. Well, because Royalty shall have no wrong in suspecting your Bounty --
you see me you say.


Duke. Yes, we do.


Smirk. But who sees me now?


Puts it on his finger. Duke. Trust me he is invissible to me.


Omnes. And to us all.


Smirk. I should be very sorry else; for, and my invissible Ring should not keep
his old virtue, I would hang my self directly.


Fred. Prithee appear again.


Smirk. I will have Majesty call me first.


Fred. Why, the Duke does call you.


Smirk. Let me hear him Viva Voce, Smirk is my name, a welbeloved Subject, once
a Painter, but now Squire of the invissible Ring.


Duke. Smirk, and our welbeloved Subject, once a Painter, but now Esquire of
the invissible Ring I conjure thee to appear again.


Smirk. See here I am, what will thou mighty Monarch?


Duke. I do command thee let me see the Ring by which thou walk'st invissible.


Smirk. I do command thee not to command me that, for from my invissible Ring I
will not part.


Duke. Lay hands upon him for a Sorcerer.


Smirk. Assist me my dear Ring, no hands upon me, for being invissible I am a
Prince, no hands is to be laid on me, Treason does never prosper.


Conjurer. Nay, then, what hoh.


Enter Spirit. Spirit. Thy will?


Whisper. Conjurer. Seize it, and fly.


Smirk within Oh, Oh, Oh. Spirit. I am gone.


Fred. How? whose that exclaimes?


Enter Smirk. Smirk. The cramps in my Finger.


Conjurer. The cramp?


Smirk. I the Cramp; the Ring that cured it is gone, the devil go with it, for
on my conscience he fetched it.


Duke. What Is become of the Ring?


Conjurer. Pardone me my liege, the virtue that it held came from my Art, the
Duchess found the worth on it when time was.


Duke. Thy knowledge in good Arts is warranted by us, since all thy actions
have been just and loyal -- -what means this.


a Trumpet. Enter a Page. Page. Thus was I bidden to my Sovereign,
Fall on my face, now rise I up again,
To render to the Ladies fair salutes,
And give them all their worthy Attributes,
Wonder not that I resolutly come
Boldly, thus daring press into this room,
For from a Lord'tis said of eminent note,
I bring this challenge such as can read may know it.

Fred. Very succinct and peremptory.


Duke. What is it?


Fred. A Challenge.


Duke. Read it.


Conju. For this day I am Master of the Revels.

reads. Be it known unto all Men that I, Visconnt Shallew does Challenge all
Courtiers whatsoever at the true compendious form of compiling Epistles, Alias
love letters to Ladies, or Mistresses* either in prose or verse ex tempore or
not, ex tempore according as it shall please the challenged


Fred. Here Is unexped sport, Smirk thou shall take him up, I Will wager on thy
side.


Smirk. Say you so Sir, shall I be the man, 'twill recompense my loss of the
Ring for I know I shall beat him out o'th Pit with Oratry and Poetry.


Enter Shallow Shallow. Which is my Antagonist?


Smirk. Behold the Man with Pen and Ink provided.


Shallow. Poor fool thou will but make thy self derided.


Smirk. So nimble in rhyme, I Will first break your neck in prose, and afterward
whip you in verse, I Will I ambast you in couplets: you challenge all men to
compose.


Shallow. I do.


Smirk. With figures or without figures, with sentences or without sentences.


a Table set forth. Shallow. It Is right.


Smirk. Draw out your pen and Inkhorn I am for you.


Shallow. With expedition too, I put in that.


Smirk. No, expedition belongs to Clerks, and not to Secretaries.


Shallow. I Sir, celerity I mean.


Smirk. No more but so, a word's enough.


Fred. Smirk goes on smoothly without any rub.


Conjurer. Yet there he had one.


Fred. Hold byas, and a sentence then.


Shallow. Scripsi.


Smirk. Et Scripsi.


Fred. Now lordings lend your Ears.


Shallow. I will read it first my self.


Conjurer. Good reason


Shallow. Fairest in the World, and sweetest upon earth.


Smirk. So so, so.


Shallow. I remember my duty to you in black and white.


Smirk. I would it had been black and blew.


Conjurer. Peace.


Shallow. For all colors else, wave under the standard of your beauty; you a^e
the Mistress of beauty, all other Women a^e but your handmaids.


Smirk. Oh abominable ba^ren.


Conjurer. Nay, Smirk silence, you must not interrupt your adversary.


Shallow. I can say nothing, without saying too much, nor say too much without
saying nothing.


Smirk. I can say nothing, or else I would say something, but here it is shall
shame thee and thy Lordly botching.


Shallow. Methinks when thou stand in the Sun with thy feather on thy head,
and thy Fan in thy hand, thou look like the Phoenix of the East Indies,
burning in spices, for Cloves, Mace, and Nutmegs are in thy breath.


Smirk. She would make an excellent Wassell boale.


Conjurer. Again, fie, fie.


Smirk. I have done.


Shallow. The apples of thy breast are like the Lemons of Arabia which makes
the Vessel so sweet, it can never smell of the Caske.


Fred. If she should, it might prove the Brewers fault.


Shallow. Being come to your middle I must draw to an end, for my end is at the
middle, because of the Proverb, In Medio consistit vertus, and so I conclude:
yours while mine own, and afterward if it were possible.


Smirk. Well, now let me run on, judgment I crave. --


Fred. Which thou shall have.


Smirk. Illustrious, bright shining, wellspoken, an^ blood stirring Lady.


Fred. I marry Sir.


Smirk. If the Rope of my capacity could reach to the Belfry of your beauty,
these words of mine like Silver Bells might be worthy to ha^g in the ears of
your favor; but the Ladder of my invention is too low to climb up to the
Steeple of your understanding.


Omnes. Excellent Smirk.


Smirk. If it were not, I should ring out my mind to you in a sweet Peal of
most savory conceits. For your face it is like the Sun, no man is able to
endure it.


Omnes. Very good.


Smirk. Your forehead which I will neither compare to Alleblaster nor to the
Lilly, but it is, as it is, and so are both your Eyes; for your Nose, it is a
well arched bridge, which for brevity sake I pass over: Your cheeks are like a
good Comedy, worthy to be clapped: your lips and your teeth are incomparable;
your tongue like the Instrument of Orpheus, able to tame the furies: to handle
every part of you were too much, but some particular part, no man can sufficient.


Fred. Prithee let me give thee a box on the Ear, for that conceit.


Smirk. No my good Lord, pray keep your bounties; From top to toe you are a
sweet Vessel of delight, I dare not say a Barrel, for often times with much
joulting the Brewer beats out the bunghole, and so the good liquor runs out,
but you contain yours although not hoopt about with the old farthingall after
the newest fashion, and so I leave you fairest of a hundred, and wittyest of a
thousand, resting in little rest till I rest wholly yours in the Down bed of
affection, where ever standing to my utmost I rest all in all yours.


Fred. Could any man have said more?


Shallow. Spare your ce^sures a while Gentlemen; now Sir I challenge you in
verse, in praise of tall Women, and little Women, choose your subject, which
you refuse I Will take.


Smirk Why then I Will take your little Women.


Shallow. And I your lusty, proceed.


Conjurer. Some patience will be required from us, for their verse cannot come
off so roundly as their prose.


Smirk. As roundly as a Runlet of Sake Sir, I Will warrant ye.


Shallow. Scripsi.


Smirk. Sed non feci, stay a little here are a couple of lines, a Halter on
'em, they won not twist hansomely, go forward I have ended.


Fred. Attention.


Shallow. Listen you tall, and likewise you low man,
I sing the praises of a bouncing Woman:
A full, well set, big-bon'd, and fairly jointed.
Fit to bid welcome, Men, are best appointed.

Conjurer. Excellent.


Shall. To your tall Women, your little one is nothing,
No more then is a high thing, to a low-thing.

Omnes. That Is true.


Shall. For your small dandiprat, I hope there is no man,
That thinks her but a hobbyhorse to Woman,
A thing to be forgot, and never known,
But on a holy day, to the rout shown,
In Wars the Basilisco is preferred,
Before the Musket, and is louder heard.

Conjurer. There Is an Error, little, and loud (my friend.)


Shallow. In every Triumph where there is excess,
The greater always puteth down the less.
The Lyoness is more admired at,
Then her Epitome, which is a Cat.

Conjurer. The fool grows serious: He has stolen it certainly.


Shallow. But to weak understandings now I come,
Is your small Taber music to your Drum?

Smirk. Hum, drum, he has hit within an Inch of a conceit of mine.


Shallow. Or in an Instrument of peace, can there that cryal
Be made upon a Kit, as a base Violl?
Judge you my Masters, that on both have played,
It is but my opinion, and I Have said.

Fred. Come thou have said well, Smirk look to your self.


Smirk. I warrant you, give me Audience.


Conjurer. Silence.


Smirk. In praise of little Women I begin,
And will maintain what I have entered in:
Is not your Parochit, or Marmoset,
In more request then your Baboone or Parret?
Give but your little wench freely her Liquor,
And to bed send her, you will find her quicker;
Pearter, nimbler, both to kiss, and cog,
Then your great wench that will lie like a Log:
And he that all day at the Drum does labor,
Would at night gladly play upon a Taber.
I hope there is no man but of this belief,
That Veal's more sweet and nourishing then Beef:
Small meats are still preferred, for ask your Glutton,
He Will always say Lambs sweeter then your Mutton,
Your Smelt then whiting firmer is, and sounder,
Nor must your Place compare with your neat Flounder.

Fred. Well said, now thou art in good victuals thou wilt never out.


Smirk In fish or flesh I Will prove it to each wight
A Larkes leg, then the body of a Kite
Is better far; Our Bakers always make
The finest flour in the lesser Cake,
And I Will be judged by those that roots do eat,
That your small Turnip's better then your great.

Conjurer. I am of thy mind too.


Smirk. Who list to be resolved, let 'um both try,
In that belief I live, in that I Will die

Fred. Incomparable Smirk, thou'st my voice, judgment.


Omnes. A Smirk, a Smirk.


Exeunt. The three Merry Boys.
ARGUMENT.
The King a Tyrant, employes them to kill his Elder Brother, the Pantler
betrays it, but the business being done, they all suffer, etc.

ACTORS NAMES.
Yeoman of the Wine Cellar, Cook, Butler, Pantler, Guard, and Boys.
Enter the Master Cook, Butler, Pantler, Yeomen of the Cellar with a Jack of
Beer, etc. COok. A hot day, a hot day, vengeance hot day boys, give me some
drink, this fire's a plaguey fretter: body of me I am dry still, give me the
Jack boy, this wooden skiff holds nothing.


Pant. And faith Master, what brave new meats? for here will be old eating.


Cook. Old and young boy; let 'em all eat, I have it; I have ballasse for their
bellies, if they eat a Gods name, let them have ten tire of teeth a piece, I
care not.


Butler. But what new rare munition.


Cook. Pish, a thousand; I Will make your Pigges speak French at Table, and a fat
Swan come sailing out of England with a Challenge; I Will make you a Dish of
Calves-feet dance the Canaries, and a consort of crammed Capons fidle to 'em; a
Calves-head speak an Oracle, and a douzen of Larkes rise from the Dish and ^ing
all super time; it is nothing boys: I have framed a fortification out of Rye
past which is impregnable, and against that, for two long hours together, two
douzen of Marrow-bones shall play continually; for fish, I Will make you a
standing lake of white broth, and Pikes come plo^ghing up the plums before
them; Arion like a Dolphin, playing lachrymo, and brave King Herring with his
Oil and Onyon crowned with a Lem^n pill, his way prepared with his strong
Guard of Pilchers.


Pantl. I marry Master.


Cook. All these are nothing: I Will make you a stuble Goose turn o'th toe
thrice, do a cross point presently, and sit down again, and cry come eat me:
These are for mirth: now Sir, for matter of mourning, I Will bring you in the
Lady loyne of Veal, with the long love she bore the Prince of Orange.


All. Thou Boy, thou.


Cook. I have a trick for thee too, and a rare trick, and I have done it for
thee.


Yeoman. What Is that good Master?


Cook. It Is a Sacrifice: a full Vine bending like an Arch, and under the blown
God Bacchus, sitting on a Hogshead, his Alter-beer: before that plump Vintner
kneeling and offering incense to his deity, which shall be only red sprats and
pilchers.


Butler. This when the Tables drawn, to draw the Wine in.


Cook. Thou have it right, and then comes thy song Butler.


Pantl. This will be admirable.


Yeom. Oh Sir most admirable.


Cook. If you will have the Pasty speak, it is in my power, I have fire enough to
work it; what friends have thou to day? no Citizens?


Pantl. Yes father, the old crew.


Cook. By the Mass true Wenches: sirrah set by a Chine of Beef, and a hot
Pasty, and let the Joll of st^rgeon be corrected: and do you mark Sir, stalk
me to a Pheasant, and see if you can shout her in the Celler.


Pantl. God a mercy lad, send me thy roaring bottles, and with such Nectar I
will see 'em filled that all thou speak shall be pure helicon.


Butler. But what was it we did promise to Monsiure Latorch.


Yeoman. Do you ask that now?


Pantl. I Will tell you It is to be all villains, knaves and Traitors.


Cook. Fine wholesome titles.


Butler. But if you dare go forward.


Cook. May be hanged drawn and quartered.


Pantl. Very true Si^.


Cook. What a goodly swing I shall give the Gallows? yet I think too, this
may be do^e, and yet we may be rewarded, not with a Rope, but wit^ a Royal
Master: and yet we may be hanged too.


Yeoman. Say it were done; who is it done for? is it not for ^lio? and for his
right?


Cook. And yet we may be hanged too?


Butler. Or say he take it, say we be discovered? Is not the same mam found to
protect us? are we not his?


Yeom. Sure he will never fail us.


Cook. If he do, friends, we shall find that will hold us; and yet methinks,
this Prologue to our purpose, the Crowns were given, should promise more: It Is
easily done, as easy as a man would roast an Egg, if that be all; for look
you, Gentlemen, here stand my brothes, my finger slips a little, down drops a
Dosse, I stir him with my Ladle, and there is a Dish for a Duke: Ol^a podrida,
here stands a Baked meat, he wants a little seasoning, a foolish mistake; my
Spice-box, Gentlemen, and put in some of this, the matter's ended; dredge you a
dish of Plo^ers, there is the a^t on it.


Yeoman. Or as I fill my Wine.


Cook. It Is very true Sir, blessing it with your hand, thus quick and neatly
first, when it is past and done once, it is as easy for him to thank us for it,
and reward us.


Pantl. But it is a damned sin.


Cook. Oh never fear that, the fire's my playfellow, and now I am resolved
boys.


Butler. Why then have with you.


Yeoman. The same for me.


Pantl. For me too.


Cook. And now no more our worships, but our Lordships.


Pantl. Not this year on my knowledge, I Will un-Lord you.


Exeunt. Enter Guard. Guard. Make room before there, room for the Prisoners.


1* Boy. Are these the Youths?


Cook. These are the Youths you look for, and pray my honest friends be not
too hasty, there will be nothing done till we come I assure you.


2. Boy. Here Is a wise hanging, are there no more?


Butler. Do you hear, you may come in for your share, if you please.


3. Boy. Before, before, Boys here is enough to make us sport.


Yeoman. Pox take you, do you call this sport? are these your recreations? must
we be hanged to make you mirth.


Cook. Do you hear Sir? you custard pate, we go to it, for high treason, an
Honorable fault: thy foolish father was hanged for stealing sheep.


^. Boy. Away Boys, away.


Cook. Do you see how that sneaking Rogue looks now? you, chip, Pantler,
peaching Rogue, that provided us these Neck-laces: you poor Rogue, you costive
Rogue you.


Pantler. Pray, pray, fellows.


Cook. Pray for thy crusty Soul? where is your reward now goodman manchet for
your fine discovery? I do beseech you Sir, where are your dollers? draw with
your fellows and be hanged.


Yeoman. You must now, for now he shall be hanged first, that is his comfort, a
place too good for thee thou mealy-mouthed Rascal.


Cook. Hang hansomely, for shame come leave your praying, you peaking knave,
and be like a good Courtier; die daringly, and like a man; no preaching, with I
beseech you take example by me, I lived a lewd man, good people; pox on it: die
me as if thou had dined, say grace, and Heaven be with you.


Guard. Come will you forward?


Cook. Good Mr. Sheriff, your leave to, this hasty work was never done well,
give us so much time as but to Sing our own ballads for we will trust no man, nor
no time but our own, 'twas done in Ale too, your penny pot Poets, are such
pelting thieves, they ever hang men twice, we have it here Sir, and so must
every Merchant of our Voyage, he will make a sweet return else of his Credit.


Yeo. One fit of our mirth, and then we are for you.


Guard. Make have then, dispatch.


Yeo. There Is day enough Sir.


Cook. Come Boys, sing cheerfully, we shall never sing younger; we have
chosen a lewd tune too, because it should like well.


Song. Yeo. Come, fortune's a Whore I, care not who tells her,
Would offer to strangle a Page of the Celler,
That should by his Oath, to any man's thinking,
And place, have had a defense for his drinking;
But thus she does still, when she pleases to palter
Instead of his wages, she gives him a Halter.

Chorus. Three merry boys and three merry boys and three merry boys are we
As ever did sing in a bempen string, under the Gallow Tree.

2. Butler. But I that was so lusty,
And ever kept my Bottles,
That neither they were musty,
And seldom less then Pottles;
For me to be thus stopped now,
With 'hem instead of Cork Sir,
And from the Gallows topt now,
Shows that there is a Forke Sir,
In death, and this the token
Man may be two ways killed,
Or like the Bottle broken,
Or like the Wine, be spilled.

Chorus. And three merry Boys, etc.


3. Cook. Oh yet but look on the Master Cook, the glory of the Kitchen,
In sowing whose fate, at so loftly a rate, no Tailor e're had stitching,
For though he makes the man, the Cook he makes the Dishes;
The which no Tailor can, wherein I have my wishes,
That I who at so many a feast have pleased so many tasters
Should now my self come to be dressed a dish for you my Masters.

Chorus. And three merry Boys, etc.


Cook. There Is a few copies for you; now farewell friends: and good Mr.
Sheriff let me not be printed with a Brass pot on my head.


Butler. March fair, march fair, before good Captain Pantler.


Pantler. Oh man, or beast, or you at least
That were or brow or Autler,
Prick up your ears, unto the tears
Of me poor Paul the Pantler,
That thus am clipped, because I chipt
The cursed crust of Treason:
With loyal knife! Oh doleful strife
To hang thus without reason.

Exeunt The Bubble.
ARGUMENT.
The Master becomes a servant, the servant a Master, and the Master a servant
again.

ACTORS NAMES.
Gervase, Bubble, Sprinckle, Scattergood, Gentlewomen, Fathers, and two
Gentlemen.
Enter Master and Man. MAster. Have thou packt up all thy things? nay prithee
weep not.


Man. Affection Sir will burst out, but Master wherefore should we be parted?


Master. Because my fortunes are desperate.


Man. But whether do you mean to go Master?


Mast. Why to Sea man, to sea.


Man. Lord bless us methinks I hear of a tempest already.


Enter Messenger. Mess. Where dwells Mr. Bubble?


Man. What is your business with Mr. Bubble? I am the Man.


Messeng. May I be assured that your name is Mr Bubble?


Man. I tell thee honest friend my name is Mr Bubble, Mr Bartholomew Bubble.


Messeng. Why then Sir you are Heir to a million; your Uncle the rich Usurer is
dead.


Man. Hum, hum.


Mast. How my little Bubble is blown up with the news.


Enter another. The other. Where Is the Worshipful Mr. Bubble?


Man. The Worshipful, what you do with the Worshipful Mr. Bubble? I am the
Man.


Other Messeng. Mr. Thong the Beltmaker by me gives you notice that your Uncle
is dead, and you are his only Heir.


Bubble. Thy news is good and I have looked for it long,
Thanks unto thee my friend, and good man Thong:
Come Master now you shall not need to travel,
Nor feast your Toes with dirt and scurvy Gravel.

Exeunt. Enter in Mourning and a Gentleman. Bubble. I, I, he is gone, he is gone.


Gent. What then? it is not you can fetch him again, it must be your comfort that
he dyed well.


Bubble. Truly so it is, I would to God I had even another Uncle that would
dye no worse, the remembrance of death is sharp Gentlemen, therefore there is a
Banquet within to sweeten your conceits.


1. Gent. Well, Mr. Bubble we will go in and taste of your bounty, in the mean time
you must be of good cheer.


Bubble. If grief take not away my stomach, I will have good cheer.


Bubble. If grief take not away my stomach I will have good cheer: --
Sprinckle, Had the women puddens to their dole?


Sprinckle. Yes Sir.


Bubble. And how did they take them?


Sprinckle. With their hands Sir.


Bubble. O thou Hercules of ignorance, I mean how were they satisfied?


Sprinckle. By my troth Sir, but so so, and yet some of them had two.


Bubble. O insatiable Women! whom two puddins would not satisfy,

Off with my mourning Robes, grief to the grave,
For I have Gold and therefore will be brave: Pulls off his Mourning.
In Silks I Will rattle it of every color
And when I go by water, scorn a skullar:
In black cornation Velvet I will cloak me,
And when Men bid God save me, cry Tu Quoque:
It is needful a Gentleman should speak Latin some times, is it not Gervase?


Gervase. O very graceful, your most accomplished Gentlemen are known by it.


Bubble. Then I Will use that little I have upon all accasions.


Exeunt. Enter Bubble as to his Courtship* with Ladies and their father.
Bubble. Thanks, and Tu Quo is a word for all, but Gervase how shall I behave
my self to the Gentlewomen.


Stains. Why advance your self toward them, and for your discourse your Tu
Quoque will bear you out.


Bubble. Nay, and that be all I care not, I Will set a good face on it that is
flat, and here is a leg? if ever a Baker in England show me a better I Will give
him mine for nothing.


Gervase. Oh that is a special thing that I must caution you of, never whilst
you live commend your self, the more vilely you speak of your, -- the more the
Ladies will appla^d.


Bubble. Say thou so Gervase, then let me alone to dispraise my self, I Will
make my self the a^antest Coxcomb in a whole Country, is this the eldest sir


Gent. Yes marry is she sir.


Bubble. I Will kiss the youngest first, because she likes me ^est, by the mass
they kiss exceeding well, I do not think out they have been brought up to 't,
-- now to my speech Lady -- even a -- Drumer or a Pewterer --


Lady. Very good sir.


Bubble. Do, -- do, do. --


Lady. What do they do?


Bubble. By my troth I do not know; for to say truth I am a kind of an Ass.


Lady. How sir, an Ass?


Bubble. So God have me I am Lady, you never saw an erranter Ass in your life,
pray look upon me Lady.


Lady. So I do sir.


Bubble. But look upon me well, and tell me if ever you saw a Man look so
simply as I do, did you ever see a worse timber'd Leg, what say you, can you
find e're a good inch about me.


Lady. Yes that I can sir.


Bubble. Find it and take it Lady; there I think I bob'd her Iervase, -- come
Ladies will you lead the way.


Gervase. Ah while you live Men before Women, custom has played it so.


Bubble. Why then custom is not so mannerly as I would be.


Exeunt. Enter with his Mistress. Bubble. Pray let me see your hand, the line
of your Maidenhead is out, now for your fingers; upon which finger will you
wear your Wedding-ring.


Mistress. Upon no finger.


Bubble. Then I perceive you mean to wear it upon your Thumb, well the time is
come sweet Joyce, the time is come.


Joyce. What to do sir.


Bubble. For me to tickle thy Tu Quoque, therefore prepare, provide to morn to
meet me as a Bride.


Mistress. I Will meet thee like a Ghost first.


Exit. Enter Scattergood, and Bubble as to be married. Scattergood. Did I eat
my Lettice to Supper last night that I am so sleepy, thy eyes are close too
Brother Bubble.


Bubble. As fast as a Kentish Oyster, surely I was begot in a Plumb-Tree, I
have such a deal of Gum about my eyes, what is this about my shins?


Scat. We have metamorphosed our Stoacking for want of Splendour.


Bubble. Pray, what is that Splendour?


Scatt. Why, it is the Latin word for a Christmas candle.


Enter the Gentlewomen their Father and their Husband. Bubble. Tu Quoque to
all: What shall we go to Church? I long to be about this gear.


Father. You may take out the other nap now, for you are cozened, and made a
coxcombe.


Scatt. That word coxcombe goes against my Stomach.


Bubble. And against mine, a man might have digested a Woodcock better.


Father. Do you know that youth in Satin, he is the penner to that Inkhorn.


Bubble. Are not you my man Gervase? have you married her?


Gervase. The Priest has Sir.


Bubble. Then am worse then ten Coxcombes.


Gervase. And a beggarly one, your time of pageantry is over, sergeants take
him to ye.


Bubble. How Is this, is my Tu Quoque come to an Et cetera


Gervase. If you can put off your former pride and put on this with that
humility that you first wore it, I will pay your debts, free you of all
encumbrances, and take you again into my service.


Bubble. It Is, but faces about, and be as I was, Tenterhook let me go, I will
take his Worships offer, rather then be kept in you clutches, a man in a Blew
coat may have some color for his Knavery, when in the Counter he can have none.


Exeunt. The CLUB-MEN.
ARGUMENT.
An old Humorous Captain animates the rout to Rebellion on the behalf of
Philaster, they surprise Pharamond, a boasting lamish Prince, but are appeased
by Philaster, and Pharamond released.

ACTORS NAMES.
An old Captain, three or four Citizens, Pharamond, and Philaster.
Enter Captain. COme my brave mirmidons, lets fall on, let our Caps swa^me my
boys, and your nimble Tongues forget your Mother Gib-rish, of what do you
lack, and set your mouths up Children, till your Pallats fall frighted half a
fathom, past the cure of Bay Salt and gross Pepper, and then cry Philaster,
brave Philaster, let Philaster be deeper in request, my ding-dongs, my paires
of dear Indentures, King of Clubs, then your cold water chamblets, or your
paintings spitted with copper, let not your hasty silks or your branched cloth
of bodkin, or your tishnes, dearly beloved of spiced Cake and Custard, your
Robinhoods scarlet and John's, tie your affections in darkness to your shops,
no dainty Duckers, up with your three-pil'd spirits, your wrought valors, and
let your uncut collar make the King feel the measure of your mightiness
Philaster, cry my Rose-nobles cry.

All. Philaster, Philaster.


Captain. How do you like this my Lord Prince, these are mad boys* I tell you,
these are things that will not strike their Top-sailes to a foarst, and let a
Man of War an Argosy bull, and cry Cocks.


Phar. Why you rude slave, do you know what you do?


Capt. My pretty Prince of Puppets, we do know, and give your greatness
warning, that you talk no more such bug-words, or that soldred Crown shall be
scratched with a Musket; Dear Prince Pippin, down with your noble blood, or as
I live i will have you codled; let him lose my spirits, make as a round Ring with
your Bills my Hectors, and let us see what this trim Man dares do; now sir have
at ye, here I lie, and with this swashing blow, do you sweat Prince; I could
hack your Grace, and hang ye up crosse-leg'd, like a Hare at a Poulterers.


Phar. You will not see me murdered wicked Villains.


1 Citiz. Yes indeed we will sir, we have not seen one foe a great while.


Capt. He would have weapons, would he? give him a broadside my brave Boys
with your Pikes, branch me his skin in flowers like a Satin, and between every
flower a mortal cut, your Royalty shall ravell, jag him Gentlemen, i will have
him cut to the kell, then down the seames, oh for a whip to make him
Galoom-laces, i will have a Coach-whip.


Phar. O spare me Gentlemen.


Capt. Hold, hold, the Man begins to fear and know himself, he shall for this
time only be sealed up with a feather through his nose, that he may only see
Heaven, and think whether he is going, nay my beyond Sea sir, we will proclaim
you, you would be King; thou tender heir apparent to a Church-ale, thou
slight Prince of single scarce^et; thou Royal ring-taile fit to fly at
nothing but poor men's Poultrey, and every Boy beat thee from that too with his
bread and butter.


Phar. Gods keep me from these hell hounds.


2. Citiz. Shall's geld him Captain?


Capt. No, you shall ^pare his dowcets my dear Donsells, as you respect the
Ladies let them flourish; the curses of a longing woman kills as speedy as a
Plague Boys,


1. Citiz. I Will have a leg that is certain.


2. Citiz. I Will have an arm.


3. Citiz. I Will have his nose and at my own charge, build a College and clap't
upon the Gate.


4. Citiz. I Will have his little Gut to string a ^it with, for certainly a
royal Gut will sound like Silver.


Phira. Would they were in thy belly, and I past my pain once.


5. Citiz. Good Captain let me have his liver to feed Ferrets.


Capt. Who will have parcells else? speak.


Phar. Good Gods consider me I shall be tortured.


1. Citiz. Captain I Will give you the trimming of your Hand-sword; and let me
have his s^in to make false scabbards.


2. Citiz. He had no horns Sir had he?


Capt. No Sir, he is a palla^d, what would thou do with ho^nes?


2. Citiz. O if he had, I would have made rare Hafts and whistles of 'em, but
his vain bones if they be sound shall serve me.


Enter Philaster. All. Long long live Philaster, the brave Prince Philaster, I
thank ye Gentlemen, but why are these rude weapons brought abroad? to teach
your hands uncivil trades?


Capt. We are the royal Rosicleeze, we are thy mirmidons thy Guard, thy
rourers, and when the Noble body is in durance, thus do we clap our musty
murryons on, and trace the streets in terror, ^is it peace thou Mars of men?
is the King sociable, and bids thee i^e? Art thou above thy foemen and froe as
Phoebus? speak, of not, this stand of Royal Blood shall be broach, a tilt and
run even to the lees of Honor.


Philast. Hold and be satisfied, I am my self, free as my thoughts are: By the
Gods I am.


Capt. Art thou the dainty Darling of the King? art thou the hylas to our
Hercules? does the Lords bow, and the regarded Scarlets, kiss their gum'd gols
and cry we are your servants? Is the Court navigable, and the presence struck
with Flags of friendship? if not, we are thy Castle, and this man sleeps.


Philaster. I am what I do desire to be your friend; I am what I was born to be
your Prince.


Pharo. Sir there is some humanity in you, you have a noble Soul forget my
name, and know misery, set me safe aboard from these wild camballs, and as I
live, I Will quit this Land for ever.


Philast. I do pity you: friends discharge your fears, deliver me the Prince.


1. Citiz. Good Sir take heed he does not hurt you, he is a fierce man I can
tell you Sir.


Capt. Prince by your leave, I Will have a surfingle, and make you like a hawk.


Philast. Away, away, there is no danger in him, alas he had rather sleep to
shake his fit off, good my friends go to your houses and by me have your
pardons and my love and for an earnest drink this.


Exit Philast. and Pharomond. All. Long may thou live brave Prince, brave
Prince, brave Prince.


Capt. Thou art the King of Courtesies: fall off again my sweet youths, come,
and every ne^ce to his house again, and hang his pewter up, then to the Tavern
and bring your wives in muffs, we will have Music, and the red Grape shall
make us dance and rise boys.


Exeunt. Forced VALOR.
ARGUMENT.
A Fellow that will never fight but when he is in pains with some displease is
persuaded into one, and then do, Wonders.

ACTORS NAMES.
Demetrius the Prince* Leonttius a Colonel, a Leiutenant, two Gentlemen, 2.
Physicians.
Enter Leontius, and Leiutenant. LEontius. Go get the Drums, beat round
Leiutenant.


Leiute. Hark ye, Sir, I have a foolish business they call Marryage.


Leon. After the Wars are done.


Leiute. The Party stays Sir, I have given the Priest his money too: all my
friends Sir, my Father, and my Mother.


Leon. Will ye go forward.


Leiut. She brings a pretty matter with her.


Leon. Half a douzen Bastards.


Leiut. Some forty Sir.


Leon. A goodly competency.


Leiut. I mean Sir, pounds a year; I Will dispatch the matter, it is but a night
or two; I Will overtake ye Sir.


Leon. Where lies the horse quarter?


Leiut. And if it be a Boy, I Will even make bold Sir.


Leon. Away with your whore, a plague o'your whore, damned Rogue, now you are
cured and well; must ye be clicketing?


Leiut. I have broke my mind to my ancient, in my absence, he is a sufficient
Gentleman.


Leon. Get forward.


Leiut. Only receive her portion.


Leon. Get ye forward; else I Will bang ye forward.


Leiut. Strange Sir, a Gentleman and an Officer, cannot have the liberty to do
the Office of a man.


Leon. Shame light on thee, how came this whore into thy head?


Leiut. This w^ore Sir? it is strange, a very poor whore.


Leon. Do not answer me: Troop, troop away; Do not name this whore again, or
think there is a whore.


Leiut. That Is very hard Sir.


Exeunt. Enter Leontius, and Leiutenant again. Leon. Turn but thy face, and do
but make Mouths at 'em.


Leiut. And have my teeth knocked out; I thank you heartily.


Leon. what the devil ailes thee? d^st long to be hanged?


Leiut. Faith sir, I make no suit for it: but rather then I would live thus out
of charity, continually in brawling. --


Leon. And will thou never fight more?


Leiut. 'Ith mind I am in.


Leon. Nor never be sick again?


Leiut. I hope I shall not.


Leon. Prithee be sick again; prithee, I beseech thee, be just so sick again.


Leiut. I Will need'st be hanged first.


Leon. If all the arts that are can make a collique, therefore look to it; or if
imposthums mark me, as big as foot balls. --


Leiut. Deliver me.


Leon. O^ stones of ten Pound weight 'ith Kidneys, through ease and ugly dyets
may be gathered; I Will feed ye up my self, I Will prepare ye, you cannot fight,
unless the devil fears ye, you shall not want provocations, I Will scratch ye,
I Will have thee have the Toothache and the headache.


Leiut. Good Colonel, I Will do any thing.


Leon. No, no, nothing -- then will I have thee blown with a pair of Smiths
bellows, because you shall be sure to have a round Gale with ye, filled full of
Oil, o'devill, and aquafortis, and let these work, these may provoke.


Leiut. Good Colonel.


Leon. A coward in full blood prithee be plain with me, will roasting do thee
any good?


Leiut. Nor basting neither sir.


Leon. Marry that goes hard, -- do you see that thing there*


Enter two Gentlemen 1. Gent. What thing? I see the brave Leiutenant.


Leon. Rogue what a name have thou lost? be ruled yet, I Will beat thee on; go
winck and fight: a plague upon your sheep heart.


2. Gent. What Is all this matter?


1. Gent. Nay I cannot show ye.


Leon. There Is twenty Pound, go but smell to 'em.


Leiut. Alas sir, I have taken such a cold I can smell nothing.


Leon. I can smell a rascal, a rank rascal: fie how he stincks, stinks like
a tired jade.


2. Gent. What sir?


Leon. Why that sir, do not you smell him?


2. Gent. Smell him.


Leon. Stinks like a dead Dog, carrion -- there is no such damnable smell under
heaven as the faint sweat of a coward: will ye fight yet?


Leiut. Nay, now I defye ye; ye have spoke the worst ye can of me, and if every
man should take what you say to the heart --


Leon. God a mercy, God a mercy with all my heart; here I forgive thee; and
fight, or fight not, do but go along with us and keep my Dog.


Leiut. I love a good Dog naturally.


1. Gent. What Is all this stir Leiutenant?


Leiut. Nothing sir, but a slight matter of argument.


Leon. Pox take thee: sure I shall love this Rogue, he is so pretty a Coward;
come play fellow, come, prithee come up; come Chicken, I have a way shall fit
yet; a tame knave; come, look upon us.


Leiut. I Will tell you who does best boys.


Exeunt. Enter Leontius, and the two Gentlemen. 2. Gent. That he is sick again.


Leon. Extremely sick; his disease grown incurable, never yet found, nor
touched at.


2. Gent. Well we have it and here he comes.


Leon. The Prince has been upon him what a platter face he has now? it takes,
believe it; how like an Ass he looks?


Enter Leiutenant Leiut. I feel no great pain, at least I think I do not; yet I
feel sensibly I grow extremely faint: how cold I sweat now?


Leon. So, so, so.


Leiut. And now it is even too true, I feel a pricking, a pricking, a strange
pricking: how it tingles? and as it were a stitch too: the Prince told me, and
every one cried out I was a dead man; I had thought I had been as well.


Leon. Upon him now boys, and do it most demurely.


2. Gent. How now Leiutenant.


Leiut. I thank ye Gentlemen.


1. Gent. Life, how looks this man? how do thou good Leiutenant?


2. Gent. I ever told ye this man was never cured, I see it too plain now; how
do ye feel your self? you look not perfect, how dull his eye hangs?


1. Gent. That may be discontent.


2. Gent. Believe me friend I would not suffer now the tithe of those pains
this man feels; mark his forehead, what a cloud of cold dew hangs upon it?


Leiut. I have it, again I have it; how it grows upon me? a miserable man I am.


Leon. Ha, ha, ha, a miserable man thou shall be, this is the tamest trout I
ever tickled.


Enter two Physicians. Phis. This way he went.


2. Phis. Pray heaven we find him living, he is a brave fellow, it is pity he
should perish thus.


Phis. A strong hearted man, and of a noble sufferance.


Leiut. Ho, ho,


1. Gent. How now? how is it man.


Leiut. Oh Gentlemen, never so full of pain.


2. Gent. Did I not tell ye?


Leiut. Never so full of pain Gentlemen.


1. Phis. He is here; how do ye Sir.


2. Phis. Be of good comfort Soldier, the Prince has sent us to you.


Leiut. Do you think I may live.


1. Phis. Yes you may live; but. --


Leiut* Finely butted Doctor.


1. Gent. Do not discourage him.


2. Gent. Here comes the Prince.


Enter Demetrius. Them. How now Gentlemen?


2. Gent. bewailing Sir, a soldier, and one I Demetrius think your Grace will
greive to part with, but every living think. --


Them. It Is true, must perish, our lives are but our marches to our Graves, how
do thou now Leiutenant?


Leiut. Faith it is true Sir, we are but spans and candles ends.


Leon. He Is finely mortified.


Them. I see he alters strangely; and that a pace too, I saw it this morning in
him, when he poor man I dare ^wear. --


Leiut. No beleiv't sir, I never felt it.


Them. How he swells?


1. Phis. The imposthume fed with a new malignant humor now will grow to such a
bigness, it is incredible, the compass of a Bushel will not hold it, and with
such a hell of torture it will rise too. --


Them. Can you endure me touch it?


Leiut. Oh, I beseech you Sir? I feel you sensibly e're you come near me.


Them. He Is finely wrought, he must be cut, no cure else, and suddenly, you see
how fast he blows out.


Leiut. Good Mr. Doctor, let me be beholding to you, I feel I cannot last.


Phis. For what Leiutenant?


Leiut. But even for half a douzen cans of good Wine, that I may drink my Will
out; I faint hideously.


Them. Fetch him some Wine, and since ^e must go Gentlemen, why let him take his
journey merrily.


Leiut. That Is even the nearest way.


Them. Here off with that.


Leiut. These two I give your Grace, a poor remembrance of a dying man Sir, and
I beseech you wear 'em out.


Them. I will soldier, these are fi^e Legacies.


Leiut. Among the Gentlemen, even all I have left; I am a poor man, naked, yet
something for remembrance; four a piece Gentlemen, and lay my body where you
please.


Leon* It will work.


Leiut. I make your Grace my Executor, and I beseech you see my poor will
fulfilled; sure I shall walk else.


Them. As full as they can be filled, here is my hand soldier.


Leiut. I would hear a Drum beat but to see how I could endure it.


Them. Beat a Drum there.


A Drum is beat within. Leiut. Oh Heavenly music, I would hear one sing to it,
I am very full of pain.


Them. Sing? it is impossible.


Leiut. Why, then I would drink a Drum full; where lies the Enemy?


2. Gent. Why, here close by.


Leon. Now he begins to m^ster.


Leiut. And dare ye fight? dare ye fight Gentlemen?


1. Phis. You must not cut him: he is gone then in a moment, all the hope left,
is to work his weakness into sudden anger, and make him raise his passion
above his pain, and so dispose him on the Enemy; his body then being stirred
with violence, will purge it self and break the sore.


Them. It Is true sir.


1. Phis. And then my life for his.


Leiut. I will not die thus.


Them. But he is too weak to do. --


Leiut. Die like a Dog?


1. Phis. I he is weak but yet he is heart-hole.


Leiut. Hem.


Them. An excellent sign.


Leiut. Hem.


Them. Stronger still, and better.


Leiut. Hem, hem; Ran, tan, ran, tan, tan.


Exit Leiut. Phis. Now he is 'ith way on it.


Them. Well go thy ways, thou will do something certain.


Leon. And some brave thing, or let mine Ears be cut off.


Exeunt. Enter Leontius and Gentlemen. Leon. Fetch him off, fetch him off; I Am
sure he is clouted; did I not tell you how 'twould take?


1. Gent. It Is admirable


Enter Leiutenant with colors in his hand, persuing 3 or 4. soldiers. Leiut.
Follow that blow my friend, there is at your Coxcombs, I fight to save me from
the surgeons miseries.


Leon. How the knave curryes 'em?


Leiut. You cannot Rogues, till you have my diseases, fly my fury, ye bread and
butter Rogues, do you run from me? and my side would give me leave, I would so
hunt ye, ye porredg-gutted slaves, ye Veal-broth boobies.


Leon. Enough, enough Leiutenant, thou have done bravely.


Enter Demetrius and Physicians. Them. Mirror of man.


Leiut. There Is a Flag for ye Sir, I took it out o'th shop, and never paid
for it I Will to 'em again, I am not come to the text yet.


Them No more my soldier: beshrew my heart he is hurt sore.


Leon. Hang him he will lick all those whole.


1. Phis. Now will we take him, and cure him a trice.


Them. Be careful of him.


Leiut. Let me live but two years, and do what ye will with me: I never had
but two hours yet of happynes,; pray ye give me nothing to provoke my Valor,
for I am even as weary of this fighting* --


2. Phis. You shall have nothing; come to the Princes Tent, and there the
Surgeons presently shall search ye, then to your rest.


Leiut. Leiut. A little hansome Litter to lay me in, and I shall sleep.


Leon. Look to him.


Them. I do believe a horse begot this fellow, he never knew his strength yet.


Exeunt. The Encounter.
ARGUMENT.
A piece of M^ck-Knight errantry performed between Ralfe a Grocers Prentice and
Barbarossa a Barber.

ACTORS NAMES.
A Citizen and his Wife, Ralfe their Prentice, Knight of the Burning Pestle, a
Squire and Dwarffe attending upon the Knight, Barbarossa the Giant, several
Knights Errant, and distressed Damsells delivered by the Pussiant Knight of the
Burning Pestle.
Enter Rafe, Squire, and Dwarffe. RAFE. Oh faint not heart, Susan my Lady
dear: the Cobblers Maid in Milk-street for whose sake, I take these Arms, O let
the thought of thee, carry thy Knight through all the adventerous Deeds, and in
the honor of thy beauteous self, may I destroy this monster Barbarosso, knock
Squire upon the Basin, till it break with the shrill strokes, or till the Grant
speak.


Enter Barbarosso. Wife. O George the Giant, the Giant, now Rafe for thy life.


Barbar. What fond unknowing wight is this that dares, so rudely knock at
Barbarosso's cell, where no man comes, but leaves his fleece behind?


Rafe. I, Traiterous caitife, who am sent by fate to punish all the sad
enormities thou have committed against Ladies gentle, and errant Knights,
Traitor to heaven and men: prepare thyselfe, this is the dismal hour appointed
for thee, to give strict account of all thy beastly treacherous villainies.


Barbar. Fool hardy Knight, full soon thou shall aby this fond reproach thy
body will I bang, and lo upon that string shall hang: prepare thy self, for
dead soon shall thou be.


Takes down his Pole. Rafe. Saint George for me.


Barbar. Gargantua for me.


Wife. To him Rafe to him, hold up the Giant, set out thy leg before Rafe.


Fight. Citiz. Falsify a blow


Rafe. falsify a blow, the Giant lies open on the left side.


Wife. Bear't off, bear't off still; there boy, O Rafe's almost down, Rafe's
almost down.


Rafe. Susan inspire me, now have up again.


Wife. Up, up, up, so Rafe, down with him, down with him Rafe.


Citiz. Fetch him over the hip boy.


Wife. There boy, kill, kill, kill, kill, kill Rafe.


Citiz. No Rafe get all out of him first.


Rafe. Presumptious man, see to what desperate end thy treachery has brought
thee, the just Gods, who never prosper those that do despise them, for all the
villan^es which thou have done to Knights and Ladies, now have paid thee home
by my stiff Arm, a Knight adventurous; but say vile wretch before I send thy
soul to sad avernus, whether it must go, what captives holds't thou thy sable
Cave?


Barbar. Go in and free them all, thou have the day.


Rafe. Go Squire and Dwarffe, search in this dreadful Cave, and free the
wretched Prisoners from their bo^ds.


Barbar. I crave for mercy, thou art a Knight, and scorn'st to spill the blood
of those that beg.


Exit Squire and Dwarffe. Rafe. Thou show no mercy, nor shall thou have any,
prepare thy self for thou shall surely die.


Enter Squire leading one winking with a Basin under his Chine. Squire. Behold
brave Knight here is one prisoner, whom this wild man has used as you see.


Wife. This is the wisest word I heard the Squire speak.


Rafe. Speak what thou art, and how thou have been used, that I may give him
condign punishment.


1. Knight. I am a Knight that took my journey post northward from London, and
in courteous wise, this Giant trained me to his den, under pretense of killing
of the I^ch, and all my body with a powder strewn, that smarts and stings, and
cut away my beard, and my curled locks wherein were Ribands tied, and with a
water washed my tender eyes, whilst up and down about me still he skipt, whose
virtue is* that till my eyes be wipt with a dry cloth* for this my foul
disgrace, I shall not dare to look a Dog in the face.


Wife. Alas poor Knight releife him Rafe, releife poor Knights whilst you live.


Rafe. My trusty Squire convey him to the Town where he may find releife, adue
fair Knight.


Ex. Squire and Knight* Enter Dwarffe leading one with a Patch on his Nose.
Dwarffe. Pussiant Knight of the Burning Pestle hight, see here another wretch,
whom this foul beast has scorcht and scor'd in this unhumane wise.


Rafe. Speak me thy name, and eke thy place of birth, and what has been thy
usage in this Cave?


2. Knight. I am a Knight Sir Pock-hole is my name, and by my birth I am a
Londoner, free by my Copy, but my Ancestors were Frenchmen all, and riding hard
this way, upon a trotting horse my bones did ache, and I faint Knight to ea^e my
weary limbs, light at this Cave, when straight this furious fiend, with
sharpest Instrument of purest steel, did cut the Gristle of my Nose away, and
in the place this velvet plaster stands, relieve me gentle ^night out of his
hands.


Wife. Good Rafe relieve Sir Pock-hole, and send him away, for in truth his
breath stinks.


Rafe. Convey him st aight after the other Knight, Sir Pock-hole fa^e you well.


2. Knight. Kind Sir good night.


Exit. cries within deliver us women (...) us women deliver us: Wife. Hark
George, what a woeful ^ry there is I think some Women lies in there.


Rafe. What ghastly noise is this? speak Barbarossa, or by this blazing steel
thy head goes off.


Barbar. Prisoners of mine, whom I in diet keep, send lower down into the Cave,
and in a Tub that is heated smoking hot, there may they find them and deliver
them.


Rafe. Run Squire and Dwarffe, deliver them with speed.


Exit Scuire and Dwarffe. Wife. But will not Rafe kill this Giant, surely I am
afraid if he let him go he will do as much hurt, as ever he did.


Citiz. Not so mouse neither, if he could convert him. I George, if he could
convert him; but a Giant is not so soon converted as one of us ordinary people.
There Is a pretty tale of a Witch, that had the devils mark about her, God
bless us, that had a Giant to her son, that was called Lob -- ly -- by -- the
fire, did never hear it George. Citiz. Peace Nell here comes the prisoners.


Enter Squire leading a man with a glass of potion in his hand, and the Dwarffe
leading a woman with dyet-bread and drink. Dwarffe. Here be these pined
wretches manfull Knight, that for these six weeks have not seen a wight.


Rafe. Deliver what you are, and how you came
To this sad Cave, and what your usage was.

Man. I am an Errant-Knight that followed Arms,
With Spear and Shield; and in my tender years,
I stricken was with Cupid's fiery Shaft,
And fell in love with this my Lady dear,
And stole her from her Friends in Turnbal-street,
And bore her up and down from Town to Town,
Where we did eat and drink, and Music hear:
Till at the length, at this unhappy Town
We did arrive; and coming to this Cave,
This Beast us caught, and put us in a Tub;
Where we this two months sweat, and should have done
Another month, if you had not relieved us.

Woman. This Bread and Water has our Diet been;
Together with a Rib cut from a Neck
Of burned Mutton. Hard has been our Fare:
Release us from this ugly Giants Snare.

Man. This has been half the food we have received;
But only twice a day for novelty,
He gave a spoonful of his hearty Broth
To each of us, through this same tender Quill.

Pulls out a Siringe. Rafe. From this infernal Monster you shall go,
That uses Knights and Gentile-Ladies so.
Convey 'em hence

Exeunt. Barbar. Mercy, great Knight: I do recant my ill;
And henceforth never Gentile-Blood will spill.

Rafe. I give thee Mercy: but yet thou shall swea^
Upon my Burning Pestle, to perform
Thy promise uttered.

Barbar. I swear and kiss.


Rafe. Depart then, and amend.
Come, Squire and Dwarf, the Sun grows toward his set;
And we have many more Adventures yet.

Exeunt. The END.
The Humor of Simple.
Argument needless,
It being a Through Farce, and very well known.

Actors Names.
Simpleton the Old, Simpleton the Young, Doll a Wench, two Gentlemen-Braves,
Rivals in ^er Affection.
Enter Old Simpleton. Old Simpleton. SIrrah Simpleton, where are you?


Young Simpleton within. Here, here, Father.


O. Simpl. Where, where, Sirrah?


Y. Simpl. At the Cupboard, Father; at the Cupboard.


O. Simpl. I thought as much: but come you hither, Sirrah, or I shall make your
Ears sing Prick-song for you.


Enter Young Simpleton with a great piece of Bread and Butter. Y. Simpl. It Is a
miserable condition that a man cannot eat a little bit for his After-noons
Lunchin, but he must be disturbed in the best of his Stomach.


O. Simpl. A bit! do thou call it? OF my Conscience this devouring Rascal,
old as I am, would eat me if he found me in the Cupboard.


Y. Simpl. I do not think there is such a genteel Smith in the Town, that has
such an old niggardly Coxcomb to his Father as I: he knows I have no better a
stomach then a young Green Sickness Girl, and yet he grutches me every bit I
eat.


O. Simpl. Leave off your muttering, and lend me an Ear a while.


Y. Simpl. Truly I cannot spare one, Father: yet now I think on it, you have
great occasion for one ever since the last Pillory-day; but since you are my
Father, I will vouchsafe to listen a while.


O. Simpl. You know that I am old.


Y. Simpl. The more's the pity that you were not hanged while you were young.


O. Simpl. Thou have drunk most of my Means away.


Y. Simpl. IN ll eat out the rest.


O. Simpl. Leave your ill breeding, and give me sensibly a Reason why you will
not work.


Y. Simpl. Because I am lazy, Father.


O. Simpl. Nay, that is true.


Y. Simpl. True? why, do you think I would be so unmannerly to tell you a Lie,
Father?


O. Simp. How I shall maintain that coming stomach of yours, unless your self
endeavor for it, I know not: but if thou will be ruled, I 'll make thee a Man.


Y. Simpl. A Man! why what am I now, a Mouse? what would you make of me?


O. Simpl. An Ass, an Ass, a gross Ass.


Y. Simpl. You may well make me a gross Ass, you have so good a pattern.


O. Simpl. Listen to me: you know the Widows Daughter at the Corner, sweet
Mistress Dorothy; she is both young and handsome, and has money too.


Y. Simpl. I, and that will help to buy victuals.


O. Simpl. Go and woo her, and I dare lay my Life thou carriest her.


Y. Simpl. I carry her, Father? Alas! I have but a weak back, and besides I am
somewhat lazily given, as you say: it were a great deal better that she would
carry me.


O. Simpl. Thou have no more wit then my Hammers head has, and no more brains
then an Anvil, which every one may strike on, but never move it: Go, take your
Fiddle, at that they say you are excellent; and when she thanks thee from her
Chamber-window, say thou art my son, and that I sent thee about the thing she
wots of.


Y. Simpl. O must I bumfiddle her under her Chamberwindow? Well, I will go wash
my hands, and starch my face, because I may be sure to go cleanly about my
business.


Exeunt. Enter Young Simpleton with a Viol. Y. Simpl. Now must I go play an
Alampadoe under Mistress Dorothy's Chamber-window, and all that time perhaps
she is a snorting: for to say the truth, my Music will hardly have the virtue
to waken her; and if she should wake, I could not tell what to say to her,
unless it were to desire her to go to bed again. And because I will be sure to
be acceptable to her, I will join my Nightingale-Voyce thereunto.


Enter the first Gentleman. 1 Gent. What Slave is this presumes to court my
Mistress? Could I but see him, I would satisfy my anger with the ruin of his
limbs; but he is gone, and I loose time in seeking.


Exit. Y. Simpl. That was a roaring Rogue, he has made my Heart jump upright
into my Mouth; and if I had not held it fast with my Teeth, without doubt it
had forsaken my Body; but he is gone, and now I will venture forward.


Enter the second Gentleman. 2 Gent. I heard some Music at my Sweet-hearts
window: could I but find him, I would cut him, and slash him till his whole
body were anatomized: but he is gone, and it was his wisest course.


Exit. Y. Simpl. That roaring Rogue was far worse then the to other; he has
almost frighted my Song out of my head. Oh! we true and faithful Lovers, what
perils and dangers must we undergo, to gain the wills and affections of our
dearest Dears? But now to my Music; and because she shall take a great
pleasure to think on it, I will sing a song of a young Wench that had a great
mind to be married before her time.

Sings. Oh! Mother let me have a Husband kind, with toitre, loytre, loitre.
That day and night I may comfort find of a toitre, etc.
I care not whether honest Man or Knave, so that he keep me fine and brave,
And that none else but I may have his toitre, etc.
Oh Daughter you are not old enough for a toitre, etc.
And Husbands often do prove rough with a toitre, etc.
Your tender heart no grief can carry, as they must do sometimes that marry:
You yet may well a twelve-moneth tarry for a toitre, etc.
Oh! Mother I am in my teens, for a toitre, etc.
And younger Wives are often seen with a toitte, etc.
I pray let me not so idle stand, for I can do as well as any can,
I have had a proof with John our Man of his toitre, etc.
Well, if she does not run mad for me now, it is pity she should have Music
under her VVindow as long as she lives.


Doll. Oh is it you? I thought none but a Puppy like your self, would have
disturbed the Neighbors with your Gridiron-musick: a Saw were far more
pleasing.


Y. Simpl. Forsooth I am very sorry that you have no better skill in Music; in
my Opinion I sung most melodiously: but if you will be pleased to look with
Eyes of judgment upon me, you will express your love in a better manner to me.


Doll. I shall express my love, if you continue here, in a far worser manner
then you think for. Do you see this Chamber Pot? it longs to be acquainted with
that brainless head of yours: therefore be gone, and save your self a washing.


Y. Simpl. If you should wash me, I think it would be but labor in vain: yet
if you please to distill any of your sweet water upon me, I shall desire to be
smelt out by you.


Doll. You Ass, you Puppy; must you needs force a drowning?


Y. Simpl. Is this the beginning of love? It is almost as bad as the Proverb to
me: stay, it may be it is Rosewater. Voh, it is as rank Urine as ever any
Doctor cast. I Will call this same Old Simpleton my Father that set me about this
business. Oh, Father Simpleton, where are you?


O. Simpl. Oh my Son, how have thou sped, Boy?


Y. Simpl. O! I have sped most abominably, Father: I got a great deal more then
I expected.


O. Simpl. Oh my own natural Boy!


Y. Simpl. I, natural, to be sure, I had never come here else.


O. Simpl. But how did she relish thee?


Y. Simpl. Why she relished me with a whole Chamber Pot full of water.


O. Simpl. Why thou Ass, thou Puppy, thou Fool, thou Coxcomb.


Y. Simpl. Why? how can I help it? why did you get me so like a Fool?


O Simpl. Come, show me to her, and you shall see how I will handle her.


Y. Simpl. Nay, Father, I should be loath to marry her, after you have had the
handling of her.


O. Simpl. This is her Chamber, is it not?


Y. Simpl. Yes: I know it by a good token; for here she opened the Sluice, and
let the Floodgates out upon me.


O. Simpl. Mistress Dorothy, Mistress Dorothy, pray come to the window.


Y. Simpl. Pray to the window, Mistress Dorothy.


O. Simpl. Sirrah, hold your tongue.


Doll. What again? sure this whole morning is nothing but my trouble: what
VVise-aker is that now?


Y. Simpl. She calls you VVise-aker: speak now.


O. Simpl. I am your Neighbor, Old Simpleton the Smith.


Y. Simpl. And I Young Simpleton the Smith.


Doll. Oh Neighbor, is it you? Here was your Son but now, and he kept a worse
noise then a Bear-baiting: but you are civil, I will come down to you.


O. Simpl. Look you there, Sirrah; she will come down to me, she says.


Y. Simpl. I, by that time I have been a Courtier as long as you have been, one
woman or other may come down to me.


Enter Doll. Doll. Good morrow, Neighbor: what is your business, pray?


O. Simpl. Why it is this: this is my Son. Nay, it is my Son, I Will assure you.


Y. Simpl. Yes, forsooth, he is sure I am his Son; my Mother told him so.


Doll. Now I look better on him, he seems to me more handsome then before; your
company seasons him with discretion: but what is your business, pray Sir?


O. Simpl. Why, if you please, forsooth, I would fain join you two together in
the way of Matrimony.


Y. Simpl. Yes forsooth, to mock a marriage.


Doll. But hold, Sir, two words to a bargain: what profession is your Son of?


Y. Simpl. Forsooth I am a Blacksmith: and though I say it, I have as good
VVorking-gear as any Smith in the Parish; all my Neighbors Wives shall be my
witness.


O. Simpl. Sirrah, hold your tongue.


Y. Simpl. Why, shall I come a wooing, and say nothing for my self?


Doll. But what Estate, I pray, has your Son in posse?


Y. Simpl. Father, what Estate have I in a posset?


O. Simpl. Forsooth, two Cowes you shall have with him.


Y. Simpl. With a Calf, to my knowledge.


O. Simpl. Four Ewes and Lambs, and a Horse to ride to market on.


Y. Simpl. Yes, and an A -- No, now I think on it, you may keep your Ass your
self.


O. Simpl. Four Mark in money.


Y. Simpl. Do you mark that?


O. Simpl. With a Bed and Blankets.


Y. Simpl. And then we may dance the shaking of the sheets when we can.


Doll. These promises are fair; and if performed, I hope I shall not need
repent my bargain.


Y. Simpl. Nor I neither: Come, let us to bed presently, and afterward we'll
talk on it.


Doll. No, no; first to Church, and then to bed.


Y. Simpl. Oh! then you will not follow the fashion of our Country; we commonly go
to bed first, and to Church when we can: but come, I am contented.


Exeunt. 1 Gent. What should this mean? Doll has a Hat on: she did not use to
wear one.


Enter Doll. Doll. Oh Gentlemen! though I desire your company, yet now I could
heartily wish your absence.


1 Gent. Why? what is the matter, Doll?


Doll. I am married.


2 Gent. To whom?


Doll. Do you not know him? Young Simpleton the Smith.


1 Gent. That Fool, that Coxcomb: I Will break his Hammer with his own jolt-head.


Doll. Stand close, I hear him coming.


Enter Young Simpleton. Y. Simpl. Sweetheart, now we are married, things ought
to be well carried: and the first thing we should take care for, is, how to get
Victuals. What Is that?


They wistle. Doll. Nothing but the Rats and Mice.


Y. Simpl. As sure as I live, I Will lay a trap for those Rats. But what is the
matter now?


They hem. Doll. Nothing but the Neighbors Dogs.


Y. Simpl. It Is a thousand pities but such Curs were hanged up presently.


Exit Simpl. Doll. Oh Gentlemen, I would you were out of the House; for I am
afraid he will return again ere I can handsomely shut the door.


Y. Simpl. within. Why Doll, Doll!


Doll. Come ye behind me presently; I pray dispatch.


Enter Young Simpleton. Y. Simpl. Doll, I have considered, that to set up my
Trade is the way to get Victuals; and I want nothing of my Tools, but only a
pair of Bellows.


Doll. Fear not, Husband, I have a little money that you know not of; and if I
can but hear of a good bargain, I will not fail to buy a pair of Bellows.


Y. Simpl. Oh thou pretty loving kind Pigsnie! but what makes thee wear thy
Coats of that fashion?


She spreads her Coats. Doll. Do not you know, Husband, it is the fashion (...)
new-married Wives?


Y. Simpl. Is it so? it is an excellent fashion in the Summertime: but I Will go
out, and return presently.


Exit Y. Simpl. Doll. What will you do? it is ten to one he spies you, and then
my reputation runs a hazard.


1 Gent. Appoint what way you will, we are contented.


Doll. I see him coming back; and truth to say, the course I shall advise, will
seem a strange one, yet it must be: you know he did appoint that I should buy
for him a pair of Bellows; now if you two can beat it lustily, and blow it
strongly, this visit may be kept off from his knowledge.


1 Gent. Nay, any thing, good Doll; we cannot now be chusers.


Doll. So, lie down: I Will fetch a Chafingdish of Charcoal hither, and practice
you a while before he come.


Exit Doll. 1 Gent. I have played many a mad prank in my Life, yet never till
now acted a pair of Bellows.


Enter Doll. She practices them. Doll. So, so, blow lustily, and fear not.


Enter Young Simpleton. Y. Simpl. Wife, I have considered with my self, that
if we lay out all the money in a pair of Bellows, we should have little or
nothing left to buy Victuals.


Doll. Oh Husband, you are deceived; for I have bought you a pair of Bellows,
the whole Town shows not a neater.


Y. Simpl. Is this a pair of Bellows? let me see, this is an a-la-moda pair of
Bellows. But look you, Doll, when the Bellows-mender comes by, let him stop
this hole here; for the wind comes out abominably. I Will call my Father
Simpleton to see this pair of Bellows. Father, father, come hither.


Enter Old Simpleton. Y. Simpl. Did you ever see such a pair of Bellows as my
Wife has bought?


O. Simpl. A pair a Bellows, Son! Methinks this would serve better for an
Anvil: Let Us try how it will bear our strokes.


Y. Simpl. Well, a match.


Exeunt. The Humor of Bumpkin.
Argument needless,
It being a Through Farce, very well known.

Actors Names.
Actaeon, three Huntsmen, Bumpkin, three Country Wenches.
Enter first Huntsman and Bumkin. 1 Hunt. WHy, what is the matter?


Bumpkin. Nay, I know not: but every day my great Guts and my small Guts make
such a Combustion in my Belly as passes, and my Puddings (like Lances) run
a-tilt at my heart, and make me as queasie-stomacht as a young Green Sickness
Girl newly come to a Big-belly.


1 Hunt. Can thou not guess the reason of this trouble?


Bump. Yes, I think I can, and I Will be judged by thee, if my case be not
desperate; I have a horrible mind to be in love.


1 Hunt. With whom?


Bump. With any body; but I cannot find out the way how to be in Love.


1 Hunt. Why? I Will instruct thee: Can thou be melancholy?


Bump. Yes, as a Dog, or a Hog-louse: I could even find in my heart to cry
presently.


1 Hunt. Can thou sleep well?


Bump. I cannot tell, I never saw my self sleep.


1 Hunt. Is It possible, that thou who have so long been an attendant upon my
Lord Actaeon, should be to learn the way to be in love?


Bump. I would it were not possible, on the condition thou were hanged and
quartered.


1 Hunt. I thank you, Sir. But Bumpkin, list to me;
This day thou know the Maids and Young Men meet
To sport, and revel it about the May Pole;
Present thy self there; tell thy cause of grief;
And I dare warrant thee a Sweetheart presently.

Bump. If thou can do that, I Will marry her first, and learn to love her
afterward.


1 Hunt. Haste thither, Bumpkin; I Will go on before.


Exit. Bump. And I will follow thee a Dog-trot.

Is it not pity* that a Man of Authority as I am, having been chief Dog-keeper
to my Lord Actaeon this five years, being a Man so comely of person, and having
such a pure Complexion, that all fair Ladies may be ashamed to look on me, and
that I should be distressed for a Sweetheart? May Pole, I come;

And if the Wenches there increase my pains,
And scorn to love, I Will beat out all their brains.

Exit. Enter Huntsmen with three Country Wenches. 2 Co. Wench. Is it possible,
would Bumpkin be in love?


1 Hunt. Yes, if he knew but how; and for that sickness
I have undertaken to become his Doctor:
For, at the May-pole-meeting it is decreed,
A Sweetheart must be purchased, come what will on it.

3 Co. Wench. Nay, if he be distressed, twenty to one he may find charitable
Persons there.

Come, strike up a Farewell to Misfortune.


Enter Bumpkin. Bump. That is a Dance that I could never hit of: pray desist a
while, and hear my doleful Tale.


1 Co. Wench. He Will make us cry sure.


Bump. Be it known unto all men by these presents.


2 Co. Wench. An Obligation? we will be no witnesses.


Bump. Why then I Will hang my self.


3 Co. Wench. We will be witness then.


Bump. What, to my hanging? Of My Conscience, if I should woo my heart out, I
should never be the fatter for it. -- Where Is your promise now?


1 Hunt. You have not yet expressed your self; be plain; tell them your grief, a
remedy will follow.


Bump. If that be all, it is but an easy matter; pray take notice that I am in
love -- with some body.


2 Co. Wench. Would I were she!


Bump. Why? so you are, if you have a mind to it.


2 Co. Wench. Why then you are my own.


3 Co. Wench. Pardon me, Sister, I bespake him yesterday.


They all hang about him. Goes to her. Bump. Yes marry did she.


1 Co. Wench. But I was she that won him at the Maypole.


2 Co. Wench. Was that the cause you strove so for the Garland?


Bump. What Is that to you?

Goes to her. Would I had any one of them in quietness.


3 Co. VVench. But yet I must have share.


1 Co. VVench. So must I too.


All pull him. 2 Co. VVench. I will not part without the better half.


Bump. Then who shall have me whole? what, are you mad?


3 Co. VVench. There Is reason for a madness in this case.


1 Co. VVench. I will not loose my right: Let go, I say.


2 Co. VVench. He shall be mine, or else he shall be nothing.


Bumpkin. Away you Burrs, why do you stick thus on me?
Now by this hand, if nothing can persuade you,
I Will drown my self for spite, that you may perish.

(Horn.) 1 Hunt. Hark, hark, my Lord Actaeons warning-piece;
That Horn gives us intelligence he does intend
To spend this day in hunting: Bumpkin, why stay you?
The hounds will quarrel with you: we'll come after.

1 Co. VVench. Will you not stay, my Love?


Bump. I Will see you hanged first; and by this hand, ere I will be in love
again, I will feed my hounds with my own proper carcass.


Exit. 2 Co. VVench. Now he is gone, our dancing may go forward.


2 Hunt. My Lord Actaeon stays; be quick, I pray.


3 Co. VVench. Quick as you will; the doing of it quick, makes it show the
better.


A Country Dance, Then Exeunt. Enter Actaeon and Bumpkin. Actaeon. Be nimble,
Sirrah.


Bump. Nimble? yes, as a Bear that has been lug'd to purpose: if Love be such
a troublesome Companion, I will entreat him to keep out of my company.


Actaeon. We consume the day.


Bump. They have saved me a labor.


Actaeon. Fie, what mean you?
The glory of this day calls us to action.

1 Hunt. Sir, you may please to know, that yesternight I lodged a Boar within
the neighboring Forest.


Bump. Yes, Sir, and I lodged a Fox at a house hard by.


The Humors of Simpkin.
A continued Farce.

Actors Names.
Simpkin, a Clown: Bluster, a Roarer: an old Man: his Wife: a Servant.
Enter the Wife, Simpkin following. Wife. BLind Cupid has made my heart for to
bleed:
Fa la, la, la, la, la, la, la, la.

Simp. But I know a man can help you at need:
With a fa la, la, la, la, la, la, la, la, la, la.

Wife. My husband he often a hunting goes out:
Fa la, la, etc.

Simp. And brings home a great pair of horns, there is no doubt:
With a fa la, la, la, etc.

Wife. How is it, Monsieur Simpkin? why are you so sad?
Fa la, la, la, etc.

Simp. I am up to the ears in love, and it makes me stark mad:
With a fa la, la, la, etc.
I am vexed, I am tortured, and troubled at heart:
Fa la, la, etc.

Wife. But I Will try my skill to take off your smart:
With a fa la, la, etc.
And on that condition I give you a kiss:
Fa la, la, etc.

Simp. But what says your husband when he hears of this?
With a fa la, la, etc.

Wife. You know my affections, and no one knows more:
Fa, la, la, etc.

Knocks within. Simp. 'Uds niggers noggers who knocks at the door?
With a fa, la, la, etc.

Enter Servant. The Tune alters. Serve. There is a Royster at the Door,
he seems a Fellow stout.

Simp. I do beseech you, worthy Friend,
which is the back-way out?

Serve. He swears and tears he will come in,
and nothing shall him hinder.

Exit Servant* Simp. I fear he will strip me out my skin,
and burn it into Tinder.

Wife. I have considered of a way,
and 'twill be sure the best.

Simp. What may it be, my dearest Dear?


Wife. Creep into this same Chest. A Chest set out.
And though he roar, speak you no word,
if you will preserve my favor.

Simp. Shut to the Chest, I pray, with speed;
for something has some savor.

Enter Bluster. Blust. I never shall be quiet if
she use me in this fashion.

Wife. I am here to bid you welcome;
what mean you by this passion?

Blust. With some young sweet-fac'd Fellow,
I thought gone out you were.

Simp. in the Chest. No sooth, the sweet-fac'd Fellow
is kept a Prisoner here.

Blust. Where is the Fool thy Husband?
say, whither is he gone?

Wife. The Wittal is a hunting.


Blust. Then we two are alone.
But should he come, and find me here, what might the Cuckold think?
Perhaps he would call the Neighbors in.

Simp. And beat you till you stink.


Blust. Yet in the bloody War full often, my courage I did try.


Wife. I know you have killed many a man.


Simp. You lie, you Slut, you lie.


Blust. I never came before a Foe,
By night nor yet by day,
But that I stoutly roused my self.

Simp. And nimbly ran away.


Blust. Within this Chest I Will hide my self, if it chance he should come.


Wife. O no, my Love, that cannot be.


Simp. I have bespoke the room.


Wife. I have a place behind here, which yet is known to no man.


Simp. She has a place before too, but that is all too common.


Old Man within. Old Man. Wife, wherefore is the door thus barred? what mean
you, pray, by this?


Wife. Alas, it is my Husband.


Simp. I laugh now till I piss.


Blust. Open the Chest, I Will into it, my Life else it may cost.


Wife. Alas, I cannot open it.


Simp. I believe the Key is lost.


Wife. I have bethought my self upon a dainty trick.


Blust. What may it be, my dearest Love?
I prithee now be quick.

Wife. You must say that your Enemy into this house is fled;
And that your heart can take no rest until that he be dead.
Draw quickly out your furious Blade, and seem to make a strife:
Swear all the excuses can be made, shall not preserve his Life.
Say that the Rogue is fled in here, that stole away your Coin;
And if I Will not deliver him, you will have as much of mine.

Blust. Here Is no man but my self, on whom shall I complain?


Wife. This great fool does not understand, this thing you must but seign.
My husband thus must be deceived, and afterward we'll laugh.

Enter Old Man. Old Man. Wife, since you will not open the Door,
I Will break't open with my staff.

Blust. Good woman show me to the Slave, his limbs I strait will tear.


Wife. By all the honesty I have, there is no man came in here*


Blust. When I have fought to purchase wealth, and with my blood did win it,
This Rogue has got my purse by stealth.

Simp. But never a penny in it.


Old Man. She Is big with Child, therefore take heed you do not fright my wife.


Blust. But know you who the Father is?


Simp. The Roarer, on my Life.


Old Man. She knows not of your enemy, then get you gone you were best.


Wife. Peace, husband, peace; I tell you true*
I have hid him in the Chest.

Old Man. I am glad on it at my heart, but do not tell him so.


Wife. I would not for a thousand pound the Roarer should it know.


Blust. When next we meet, his life is gone, no other must he hope;
I Will kill him whatsoere comes on it.

Simp. Pray think upon a Rope.


Old Man. What kind of person is it then, that in the Chest does lie?


Wife. A goodly handsome sweet young man, as ere was seen with eye.


Old Man. Then let us both entreat of him --
Pray put us not in fear:
We do beseech you go from hence.

Blust. But tomorrow I Will be here.


Exit Blust. Old Man. Wife, run with all the speed you can, and quickly shut
the door;
I would not that the roaring Man should come in any more.
Mean time I will release the youth, and tell him how we have sped --
Be comforted my honest friend.

Simpkin comes forth. Simp. Alas, I Am almost dead.
My heart is tortured in my breast, with sorrow, fear and pain.

Old Man. I Will fetch some Aqua vitae, to comfort you again.


Simp. And 'cause I will require you, whose love does so excel,
I Will graft a pair of horns on your head* that may defend it well.

Wife. Good husband, let the man stay here, it is dangerous in the street.


Old Man. I would not for a Crown of Gold the Roarer should him meet.
For should he come by any harm, they would say the fault were mine.

Wife to Simp. There Is half a crown, pray send him out to fetch a quart of
wine.


Simp. There Is money for you, Sir, -- pray fetch a quart of Sack.


Old Man. It Is well, it is well, my honest friend,
I Will see you shall not lack.

Wife. But if he should dishonest me, for there are such slippery men.


Old Man. Then he gets not of his half crown, one penny back again.


Exit. Simp. Thy husband being gone, my Love, we'll sin^ we'll dance and laugh:
I am sure he is a good fellow, and takes delight to quaff.

Wife. I Will fold thee in my arms, my Love, no matter for his listening.


The old man and his servant listen. Simpl. Gentlemen, some forty weeks hence
you may come to a Christning.


Old Man. O Sirrah, have I caught you? now do the best you can;
Your Schoolmaster never taught you to wrong an honest man.

Simp. Good Sir, I never went to school, then why am I abused?
The truth is, I am but a Fool, and like a Fool am used.

Old Man. Yet Sirrah you had wit enough to think to Cuckold me.


Wife. I jested with him, husband, his knavery to see.


Simp. But now you talk of knavery,
I pray where is my sack?

Old Man. You shall want it in your belly, Sir, and have it on your back.


They beat him off. Exeunt. The Humor of Hobbinal.
Argument is needless,
Only the Drollery taken out.

Actors Names.
Hobbinal, Dorilas, Strephon, Oenone, and two or three Nymphs.
Enter Dorilas, Strephon spying Hobbinal reading. Dor. WHat Paper is that he
ruminates upon? Let us observe a little.


Hob. It Is a strange thing I find my self out every day more then other, to be
one of the understanding'st, sweetest, neatest, and compleatest Shepherds that
ever took hook in hand. The Other day I saw my face in a pail of water, and I had
much ado to forbear drowing of my self. It Is no wonder then, that the beauteous
Nymph Oenone makes much of me, and lets all the other Shepherds shake their
Ears like Asses: and the truth is, if I can find never a handsomer, she shall
serve the turn. This was her birthday, she being born in the year -- one
thousand six hundred, -- nay hold a little: but on this day of the month it
was, VVinter or Summer, in the honor of which we all keep holiday: and
therefore for the credit of her beauty, and the honor of my own Poetry, I have
made such a Copy of Verses on her, as will make her a thousand times handsomer
then ever she was in her Life.

I will peruse them now with the eyes of understanding.

He reads* OEnone fair, whose beauty does enrich us,
Tell me the cause why thou do so bewitch us.
On this day thou were born, though not begotten;
This day I Will think on when thou art dead and rotten.
And though thy coyness, and thy pretty scorn,
Makes many wish that thou had never been born;
Yet for my own part, this I Will swear and say,
I wish thy time of birth were every day.
If she do not run mad for love of me now, it is pity she should have Verses
made on her as long as she lives.


Streph. Let Us interrupt him. -- Hobbinal, well met.


Hob. It may be so.


Dor. But why so strange, man? I hope you will remember we are your
fellow-Shepherds.


Hob. You were once: but now I command you to know, I am a Master-Shepherd; for
the fair Nymph Oenone, that makes all your mouths run over with water, does
acknowledge me to be both Master and Mistress.


Streph. In part it is true: yet if you well consider, she makes you but her
sport; no otherwise.


Hob. If she make me her sport, it is more then ever she can make of thee: for
thou art one of the sowrest looked fellows that ever crept out of a
Vinegar-bottle.


Enter Oenone. Dor. Here comes the fairest Idae ever nourisht.


Hob. Now will I see who is the most deserving Shepherd in all the Vale of
Idae. -- Little Rogue, how do thou?


Oenone. O Hobbinal, you are welcome; I thought you had forgot me: you are my
sport, and should be ever near me.


Hob. Look you there, I am her sport, she says: when will she give any of you
such an honorable Title? but Sport, I do not think but thou art a Conjurer, or
a VVitch, or a Devil at least: for thou have insused such a combustion of
Poetry in my head, that I fear I shall never be my own Man again, nor my
Master's neither. -- There Is a Copy of Verses, read 'em: nay, they are my own,
as sure as my name 's Hobbinal.


Oenone. I thank you, Sport: I Will study a requital.


Dor. Honor me with your fair hand, Nymph, that I may lead the way to all
those pastimes which will follow.


Oenone. The honor is to me, and I accept it.


Hob. I Would laugh at that: no, Sport, I Will dance with thee my self.


Oenone. Some other time by chance I may be at leisure.


Hob. Will you not? Well, by this hand then I Will stand out, and laugh at
every thing you do, right or wrong.

A Dance. Pshaw waw, this dancing is like my Mothers Mares trot:
Sport, shall I show thee a Dance of my own fashion?

Oenone. It cannot but content.


Hob. Nay, I know that: hark hither, Lads.


Ex. Hob. Str. Hobbinal and the shepherds dance a Morris. Hob. How like you
this Sport?


Oenone. Beyond Expression, Sport: I see your Virtues were concealed too long.


Hob. I, so they were; but I mean to show them every day as fast as I can. But
Sirrah, Sport, yonder is god Pan with a company of the bravest Satyrs that ever
wore horns on their heads: come, Shepherds, let us go make them drunk, and saw
off all their horns.


Exeunt. The Humor of John Swabber.
Argument needless,
It being an ancient Farce, and generally known.

Actors Names.
Francisco and Gerard, John Swabber, Cutbeard a Barber, Parnel, Swabber's wife,
and two or three Neighbors wives.
Enter Francisco and Gerard. Fran. HEreabout I am to meet this Hercules; and
see, he is come.

Enter John Swabber armed with several ridiculous Weapons. Well, John, I see
you are prepared for murder: have mercy on the Barber, I say.


Swab. No, I scorn it; I will have no mercy: he has made a whore of a wondrous
honest woman; and a Cuckold of one, that for ought I know, might have been a
Courtier. For which abominable deed, I scorn to show my self a Christian; for I
do mean to use him worse then a Jew would.


Fran. Nay, but consider, he is a man however, and you can boast your self to be
no more, although you have the spirit of a Giant: you have brought weapons
here, as if you meant to kill him twenty times. Troth it is too much.


Swab. If I bate him an Ace of forty, call me Coxcomb: I will draw his teeth
one by one, with an instrument called a pair of Tongs, then let him blood in
the right vein, and bid the Devil take him at his own peril.


Fran. Let me prevail with thee to calm thy rage, and take acquaintance of this
Gentleman, a worthy friend of mine.


Swab. Do you long to be acquainted with me, Sir?


Ger. By any means, Sir.


Swab. It Is granted then: I Will toss a Can or a Pot with you as soon as I have
dispatched this bawdy Barber; would he were dead, that my business might be over.


Ger. What Is your profession, Sir? and how may I call you?


Swab. I am a Seaman, Sir; my name's John Swabber: -- an Officer of the Ship,
Sir.


Ger. I cry you mercy, Sir.


Swab. Nay, never cry for the matter. -- But I had forgot this Barber all this
while. Barber, come forth; or by the beard of my great Grandfather, I swear, I
will so shashado, mashado, pashado, and carbinado thee, that thou shall look
like a Gallimafry all the days of thy Life. Come forth, I say.


Cutbeard within. Why Neighbor Swabber, who provokes you thus? what do you
mean? who has offended you?


Swab. O Slave of all Slaves! who has offended me? why thou base, beastly,
boisterous, Babylonian, bawdy-fac'd Barber, thou have: thou have made me fit to
chew the cud with Oxen, climb the mountains with wild Goats, and keep company
with none but Ram-headed people: for which I will tie thee up on the next
Signepost, and there thou shall hang a twelvemoneth and a day alive, for an
example to all such notable shavers; but if thou come and submittest to my
mercy, I will do thee the favor to let thee hang till thou be dead.


Ger. Francisco, hark: -- I Will pawn my Life this fellow is a rank Coward: keep
you his fury up, and I Will persuade the Barber to a greater vein of roaring then
ere was practiced by a suburb-Blade: I Will make him at the least seem valiant;
fear not.


Exit. Fran. Do, if it be possible; I Will hold him in discourse. -- But, Mr.
Swabber, what think you if he does compound with you? will you be won to take
an arm or two, or both his legs, and save his other members?


Swab. Pish, tell not me, it is neither his arms nor his legs that I stand upon;
he has caused me to go in danger of my Life: for the other day I had an
occasion to pass by a worshipful Gentleman's pack of Hounds, they no sooner
looked upon my forehead, but they came at me in full cry; and I for fear left
such a sent behind me, that they came after me as perfectly by it, as if I had
been a Stagg; and if I had not got shelter of a house, without doubt I had been
presented to some great man for Venison, and my Hanches had been baked by this
time.


Fran. You were in danger there, I must confess.


Swab. And the Butchers Dogs still take me for a Bull, and fetch such courses
at me; and all this the Barber is the cause of.


Fran. I would revenge it: were I as you, he should not have a tool left him to
work with.


Swab. No, nor to play with neither: I will have an inch of every tool he has.
-- Barber, come forth, and let me kill thee upon fair terms; or else I mill
enter thy house by force, pitch thee down the stairs, and send thee of an
Errand headlong: and if thou do submit to my mercy, I will shave thee to
death with thy own Rasor: therefore take heed. -- So, now let him come if he
dare.


Enter Gerard. Ger. Well, now I see there is no hope to appease him: blood
must ensue, and death will take its course.


Swab. With whom? what is the matter?


Ger. The Barber is preparing for the combat: he has took his pole to serve him
for a lance, and one of his basins for a buckler, and vows to make you the
windmill, whilst he plays Don Quixot against you furiously.


Swab. A windmill! -- I Will be gone.


Fran. You will not offer that, sure. What afraid?


Swab. Would it not make any one tremble with the thought on it, first to be
made a Cuckold, then a windmill? No, I will be gone, and come again to kill him
when I can find him in a better humor.


Fran. Consider what you do; he will call you Coward, proclaim you Cuckold still
in every Alehouse; and what disgrace will that be?


Swab. I care not: it is better to be a Cuckold then a windmill. If he had
meant to make a Fool, a Puppy, or an Ass of me, or any such Christian-like
Creature, 'twere another matter: but to be made a windmill of, and never to be
respected but when the wind blows, is not to be endured: therefore let him make
wind-mills of my weapons, if he will; for my own part, I will defend my self
with my heels.


Throws down his weapons. Ger. Come, I have brought him to a better temper: he
will come armed with nothing but a Razor; with which if he does s^it your
wezand-pipe, it will not be amiss to take it patiently.


Swab. Let him not spoil my drinking, and I care not: but hark you, if you
should let him hurt me, I should be as angry as a Tygre.


Enter Cutbeard with a Razor. Cut. Where is this Slave that has provoked my
rage to his destruction? I will swinge this Boor, then hang him up for Bacon in
my chimney, and send him to be broyled for Pluto's breakfast.


Swab. Why this is worse then to be made a windmill. Do you hear, Sir? if ever
you had the fit of an Ague upon you, or ever knew the trembling of a Man
troubled in Conscience, that would be loath to die till he had made even with
all the world, consider me. Alas, Sir, I have my Rent to pay yet; and if I
should be sent to Hell of an Errand, they will like my company so well, I should
never come back again: pray persuade him to send me to Jerusalem, Jericho, or
any of those places nearer hand.


Fran. Why, can not thou excuse thy self? where is thy brains?


Swab. Alas, my brains are fallen into my breeches; but if you will stand between
me and harm, I Will venture to reconcile my self to him. -- Cut. -- honest
Cutbeard, did not thou think I was in earnest all this while?


Cut. VVhatere thou were, thou shall be nothing presently: Death waits for
thee: come quickly, I command thee.


Swab. Sir, pray persuade Mr. Death to have patience for a matter of 40 or 50
years more: for I have a great deal of business to do in this world yet.


Cut. Shall I be dallied with? let me approach him: for all the entreaties of
the world shall not preserve him past six minutes.


Swab. One minute is past already, -- and there is two.


Fran. Nay, prithee Cutbeard be more merciful.


Swab. Three -- four -- five.


Ger. Will no entreaty serve? Then take your course.


Swab. Six. O now I am gone.


Cut. If he submit, he may live: let him know it. -- Do thou acknowledge thy
own Cowardice, and my heroic Valor?


Swab. O mighty Hercules, I confess my self a Pigmy, and I will never think
otherwise while I live, these Gentlemen be my witnesses.


Ger. Why then all is well a genesis -- Remember, Cutbeard.


Cut. I Will spice him, fear not. -- Give me thy hand,


Jack: Thus do I grasp thy friendship.


Swab. He grasps my hand devilish hard tho.


Cut. I here pronounce thy wife to be a Venus.


Swab. O rare! is my wife a Venus? That Is more then ever I knew before: why
then I will be her husband Cupid.


Fran. No, Cupid was her Son.


Swab. It Is no matter for that, he shall be her husband for once; and we two
will get such abundance of young Cupids, that we'll make all the world in love
with one another.


Cut. Since we are reconciled, know, honest Swabber, that I will make the whole
world dote on thee: I Will wash thy face, and powder thee to the purpose, and
shave thee if thou will too.


Swab. No, by no means: I dare not venture my throat under thy Fingers: but for
washing and powdring, that all the world may be in love with me, I am content.


Cut. Sit down then in this Chair, look on this powder, the snow is nothing to
it; 'twill create such a complexion on thee, that no Art did ever set upon the
proudest Lady.


Swab. But hark you, Cutbeard, how shall I do to satisfy all the women that
will follow me for kisses? if you make me too beautiful, my lips will be worn
threadbare before I can get home; and then Parnel my own dear wife, will have
the least share of her own sweet husband.


Cut. For that we'll take a course -- wink, wink, good Jack; my Ball will
search your eyes else.


Swab. My eyes are honest, and fear no searching.


Changes the Powder, and blacks his face all over. Cut. Now I begin to
sprucifie thy phisnomy: -- This powder was extracted from the Phoenix, when she
last burnt her self, and is indeed the quintessence of odours.


Swab. Nay, it is as odious as ever I smelt, that is certain: good Cutbeard, let
me have enough, I prithee.


Cut. Nay, I will spare no cost: -- Judge, Gentlemen, is he not strangely
altered?


Ger. Past belief: I would not that my Mistress saw him now, my hopes would
soon be cooled then.


Swab. I think so: but I would have you to take notice, I will have nothing to
do but with great personages; for I must not make my self common.


Fran. What this fellow will come to, no man knows yet; his fame no doubt will
travel over all Countries, and I am fully resolved in my Opinion, the Queen of
Mauritania will run mad for him.


Swab. If she run as mad as a March-Hare, she gets not a bit: no, Parnel and my
Neighbors shall have all.


Cut. Now if the Painters will draw Adonis our, let them come here for Copies.
So, I have done.


Swab. Prithee Cutbeard, lend me a Looking-glass.


Cut. By no means: what, did you never hear of one Narcissus, how he pined away
for love of his own shadow? No, go home, your house is hard by; let Parnel see
you, and bless her self with wonder.


Swab. Honest Cutbeard, this Gentleman is a worthy friend of mine; prithee
bestow some of the same powder upon his face.


Fran. No, no, you shall be beautiful alone; it is best.


Swab. Parnel, I come; and if thou be not stupid,
Thou '^t say Jack Swabber is a kin to Cupid.

Exit. Ger. Well, Cutbeard, thou have dressed him handsomely: I would give a
Crown that I were by when first he finds what beauty he is adorned withal.


Cut. This day I am to meet with pretty Parnel; pray Heaven the Fool be absent
when I come: some two hours hence, if you will meet me, Gentlemen, I will tell
you how he takes his transmigration.


Fran. We will not fail. Farewell.


Exeunt. Enter Parnel. Parn. I wonder that my Barber stays thus long: can he
neglect me thus? Well, I will fit him; for if he use me once again thus basely,
I will cashier him, and bestow my love upon some one more constant: forty to
one but Swabber comes before him, and spoils all.

Enter Swabber very stately. Who Is this, in the name of blackness? the clothes
and walk of my dear husband, and I will lay my life he has got a Vizard on. --
Nay pray now, indeed you will fright me presently; take heed.


Swab. She does not know me, that is excellent. -- Parnel, believe it, I am
flesh and blood; I would not have thee take me for a Goddess.


Parn. A Goddess, quotha! a black one, if you be one: what have thou got upon
thy face, I prithee?


Swab. Do not look too wistfully upon me, Parnel; my beauty will put your eyes
out if you do, and then I must be at the charge of a Dog and a Bell for you.


Parn. A Dog and a fools head! pull off your Vizard.


Swab. Do not touch me, unless you make forty curtsies first. Come, kiss me,
and thou will be out of thy wits presently.


Parn. Nay, then I see it is a trick put upon him; I Will fetch you a glass, you
shall behold your beauty.


Exit. Swab. Do, and I will venture to be in love with my self for once. How
shall I require honest Cutbeard? By this hand he shall have the honor to be
Barber to all my Wenches.


Enter Parnel with a Glass. Parn. Are you not wondrous fair? Look and admire
your self.


Swab. O Parnel, Parnel, I am gulled most basely; I have not half so much
beauty as a Chimney-sweeper: I will kill the Barber the first thing I do.


Parn. Was it the Barber used thee thus?


Swab. I* Parnel, 'twas he: I Will go fetch a company of my Fellow-saylors, drag
him out, and hang him up at the main-Yard presently. Parnel, farewell: if I be
apprehended for the death of Cutbeard, whatever thou do, send me a clean
shirt; for I shall have need on it.


Exit. Parn. Well, Cutbeard, I commend thee for this project; thou have dressed
him handsomely: would thou were here, I would kiss thee for the Jests sake.

Enter Cutbeard. Oh are you come, Sir?


Cut. I watch^ the time, my Parnel, and have found it: how does the Gull become
his feathers? Ha!


Parn. As I would have him: Oh Cutbeard, this Kiss, and this, for the device.


Cut. Where is he, Parnel?


Parn. Why gone abroad in his new-fashion'd face, to fetch a gang of Saylors,
who he vows shall hang thee up at the main-Yard, and shall use thee worse then
the Prentices a Suburb-bawd on a Shrove-tuesday.


Cut. And those same Water-rats are devilish things: what a Slave was I to use
him so?


Parn. What can thou fear when I am in thy presence? Away, you Milk-sop,
hence from me, ^ayant.


Cut. Nay, gentle Parnel, by this hand I will fight with a whole Army, if thou
say the word: prithee be reconciled.


Swab. within. Why Parnel, Parnel! here is thy own sweet husband; open the door,
dear Wife.


Parn. O me, my husband's come; what shall I do?


Cut. Let me into the Well, if thou think good; or hang me in the Chimney
'stead of Bacon.


Parn. Alas, that is full of hazard: -- No device!


Swab. within. Why huswife, huswife, must I wait half a day?


Parn. My Peticoat's fallen off; but I come presently. -- Oh I have thought, come
hither, put on this Biggin, I made it for my Child that is at Nurse, and cram
thy self into this Cradle here: there is no other way, therefore dispatch.


Cut. O me! thou never think upon my beard; that will betray all presently.


A cradle set forth. Parn. Take you no care, I Will make him to believe you were
born with it; be quick, I say.


Cut. Necessity compels me: send me off of this brunt once, I Will hunt the smock
no more. -- Cover me close, good Parnel.


Parn. So, keep you close; and when he prattles to you, snee^e in his face, and
call him Dad; do you hear?


Parnel l^ts him in. Enter Swabber? Swab. Why you proud, peevish, petty, paltry
Parnel, why did you make me stay so long?


Parn. I made what haste I could, but the Child cried so.


Swab. The Child! what Child? Have you got Bastards here?


Parn. Bastards? they are your own then: Simon's come home, the Boy I had a
twelvemoneth since by you: he was born when you were at Sea.


Swab. Is he brought home? As I am an honest man I am glad on it. Let me see
him, Parnel.


Parn. Look here he is; the goodliest Boy, and even as like thee, John, as if
thou had begot him all thy self.


Swab. Whoop! here is a Boy of a twelvemoneth old: if he grow but thus much this
next year, he will be able to fight with a Giant presently. But Parnel, he has
got a great beard too, how comes that?


Parn. Why he was born with it: many children are so; and it is a sign he will
be a man betimes, a wise discreet one too.


Cut. Dad, dad, dad!


Swab. Nay, it is a wise Child, I perceive that; for he calls me Dad at first
sight. Good Parnel, fetch me some Milk for him; I will see him eat.


Parn. He had Milk but just now: prithee, John, be patient.


Swab. You are a Fool, he has been starved at Nurse, and we must make him fat.
Fetch some, I say.


Parn. I will not, truly John, you will spoil the Child.


Swab. I saw some stand in the next room, I will fetch it my self, so I will.


Exit. Parn. What will you do? you must endure with patience; I mingled batter
but just now for pancakes, and that he will bring, as certain as I live.


Cut. I shall be crammed to death: mercy upon me.


Parn. He comes, lie close again.


Enter Swabber with a great Bowl of Batter, and a Ladle. Cut. Dad, dad, dad!


Swab. I, mine own Boy, here is Milk for thee, Simon.

Throws it in by Ladles f^ll. Look, Parnel, look how greedily he eats it.


Parn. Now fie upon you, John, you will choke the Child.


Swab. I mean to make him grow as high as Paul's* and show him for a wonder in
Bartholomew Fair. Fetch me some Milk, this is all gone.


Parn. What, do you think I will murder the poor Infant?


Swab. By this hand I will go to the Milk-woman and fetch him a whole gallon.


Exit. Parn. Up quickly, and be gone; for when he comes, he will choke you
without fail.


Cut. A pox upon him, never was Child fed thus. But what will you do now?


Parn. Do not you fear; I Will fetch my own Child; it is at a Neighbors house,
and say the Fairies have exchanged it.


Cut. Send thee good luck: Farewell, sweet Parnel.


Exit. Parnel fetches a little child, and lays it in the cradle. Parn. So, if
this Child will serve him for a Simon, all will be well again.

Enter Swabber with more Milk. He comes. -- Oh John.


Swab. Come, give me Simon on my Lap; I will feed him till his Guts crack again.


Parn. Alas, I went but in the next room, and in the mean time the Fairies have
exchanged him; look what a little thing they have left in his place.


Swab. I will have none on it: go, fetch me Simon; and tell the Fairies I will
indi^e them at the Sessions for this. Oh Simon, Simon, what is become of thee?


Parn. Nay, prithee take not on so.


Swab. The goodliest Boy of his age that ever man saw. Pshaw, this has never a
beard: I will have none on it.


Enter Francisco, Gerard, Cutbeard, Neighbors Wives. Fran. Why how now, Jack?
what, in a passion? Ha, 'twas I that blackt thy face to day for mirth sake, and
thou did think it was Cutbeard.


Swab. I care not for my face; Simon is gone, that had a beard as big as
Cutbeard's here: the Fairies have exchanged him, and look what a Chitty-face
they have left in his room; a thing of nothing for him.


Ger. Come, you must use this they have left with courtesy, for they will whip
Simon every day in the week else: I know the nature of them.


Swab. Will they so? Nay, then I must make much on it.


Fran. And now you must be friends with Cutbeard too.


Swab. With all my heart; for I am angry with none but the Fairies now.


Ger. We have brought Music, and some Neighbors with us, and mean to have a
Dance. Come, John.


Swab. I can dance nothing but a melancholy Dance: for I am in a grievous dump
for Simon still.


Ger. I warrant thee. Strike up there.


A Dance. Fran. Why that is well done: no time is counted lost,

Where civil Mirth is gained with such small cost.


Exeunt. The Humors of Monsieur Galliard.
ARGUMENT.
He undertakes with the Foot, to correct State-matters, and teach the Subjects
Reverence and Obedience to their King.

Persons Names.
Galliard, Sir William, Mr. Newman, Manly, Lady, Mrs. Luce.
Enter Sir William, Mr. Newman, Monsieur Galliard. Gall. ME be content to have
de litel patience, and be my trot, me tell you, vat me have seen a to day, de
fine sport in de Varle: me come into de Great Man to day, me make de reverence
Alamode, come ill faut, and he make me de strange a Sir-reverence de tird time,
dat ever you saw.


Newm. Oh Monsieur, every Man has not the activity of your feet.


Gall. By my fat, it is very estrange a ding, dat dey vil suffer a des Men to be
near a de King, a de Queen, de Prince, or de Princess, dey vil marra de
understanding very mush.


Sir Will. Why Monsieur, that lies at the other end.


Gall. Be gar you shall excuse a me, for de Conrtier Alamode dear de vit lie in
de foot; be gar dear is no body can be Eiseman, dat does not make a de most
excellent reverence, dat is most certain, dat is de best ting in de hole Varle.


Newm. But do you think Caesar, or most of the Emperors or Worthies of the
world, studied the Liberal Science of the Foot, or puissant Toe?


Gar. No; but be gar dat make them die all unfortunate: for if dey had tink but
de reverence, dey might a live a great a vile.


Newm. I confess the wisdom of it, Sir; but for the wit, do you think that
lies there?


Gall. Dat be de best vit can be possible: for your vit, vat is your vit? Your
vit is to break a de jest; vel, look you now a me, me vil break a de jest:
Dat is like dat a me Lor, dat is like a de Knight, dat is like dat a de
Jentilman: Ha, ha, ha! dear is now one, two, tree very good jest datmake a me
sick wide laugh; and be gar me vil make a de Page, de Lacquey, and all de fool
in de Court, break ades very good jest, very quickly, dat is nothing.


Shows several mimical postures. Sir Will. To any purpose.


Gall. Be my trot me speak a to de King, and to de Queen to give me a Patten,
dat none shall teach a de Aldermen to make a de Reverence but my self; and me
vil undertake dat vit in one 12 a mont: but den dey must do noting else, dey
shall make a de Reverence, vit de Aldermen in de Paris, and dance a Coran, a
Cerebran, a Mountague, and dat vil be very brave.


Newm. But what shall business do in the mean time, Monsieur?


Gall. Is not dis very great a business? Nay be gar, me vil undertake to de
King, and to de Queen, to make a my Lor Maire, de Sheriff and de Aldermen
very fine a mask.


Sir Will. And to write it, Monsieur.


Gall. Aw, de write? dat is nothing alamode, your speesh two, tree yard long,
pshaw? Give a me de quick a Spirit, de Fancy, de brave Scene, de variety of
de Antimask, de nimble a Foot, no matter de sense, begar it vole be de brave
ting in de Christian varle.


Sir Will. There is no question to be made.


Gall. And be my trot, if me have anoder Patten for de Council learned in de
Law, for to teash them de reverence, dat vil be very great vark; but my
diligence and skill in dat matre, have no despair to effect in time dis great
benefit, and dat vil make a de Law flourish, and Englan a brave Englan begar.


Sir Will. But what will you look for now for your pains, Monsieur? that is
considerable.


Gall. Begar me look for very mush; for it is mush pain, and it is brave ting:
beside, me look for a Statur of de brass in de Palace-yard, ven me go out of
dis varle.


Sir Will. You will deserve it as a rare Patriot. But what manner of Reverence
would you have the Lawyers to imitate? you must consider their Gravity.


Gall. Observe a me.


Newman. Such a Reverence under your favor would not become.


Gall. Begar you no understand a de matre, vere is your brain? dear is noting
in de varle like a dat motion, for de Jentilman, and for de Jentilvoman.


Shows them the Reverence. Sir Will. Yes, by your leave, Sir, there is something
else that is as good for them.


Gall. I will tell you now, begar, here is a de Kinsman dat is a me, and he live
here very mush time, before he come, dey vent in vid deire Toes, and hold deire
Cloak in Stadere, and de Hat so. Fie, a la diable! and now dey valk vid deire
Toes out for brave Genty, you call dat a de splay-foot: but me vonder dat de
Lady no come, begar me no use to dis patience, and de vait: pray tell you Madam
dat me have autre business vid de Lor, and de autre Lady have de use of my foot
begar.


Newm. Oh Monsieur, by no means: Sir William, let us prevail.


Gall. It Is no good you hold a me begar: me no stay two minutes to save a your
soul, dat is de resolution of de Cavalier de France


Exit. Sir Will. Would any man believe there should be so much folly in this
Cubit-square?


Newm. Do you think he is a French Dancer? Let that answer you.


Exeunt. Enter Mris. Lucie, Galliard, and Simpleton. Mris. Lucie. Monsieur
Galliard, my Lady expects you.


Galliard. Begar me no lik adat reverence, me vill change a dat.


Luce. It Is the French Fashion, as you taught me, Monsieur.


Gall. Ouy, it is de French Fashion, but de French Fashion is always to change,
and dis reverence displease a me very mush, because you go back, back vid your
buttock, as if some vod take you by dat, to vat me vill give a no name.


Simpl. Sweet Mris. Lucy.


Gall. Dat de reverence is no good of de man, me must change dat too: be me
trot me doubt dat dis great business vill almost break a my brain, dis great
work, and before a Masque of de King and de Queen. Me can eat a no meat, no
drink, no sleep, and me grow so very a lean vid de Contemplation, a so much be
my trot de Privy Council is no so mush troubled as me be vid dis: Oh te
Diable! deirs is noting, dey fit all de vile dey do deir business: me bissey
bote head and de foot cap a pie, in de French tune, and dat is great matre
begar.


Mris. Lucy. You esteem it highly, Monsieur.


Gall. Me tell you, and me tell you no tale, It Is great matre to make a de Lor,
to make a de

Enter Sir William. Lady, to make a de Jentilman, to make a de Jentilwoman, and
de autre man to dance, and to make a de boon reverence, for begar dat vil make
a de King de great King in de Varle.


Sir Will. How can that be, Sir?


Gall. Me tell you, ven dey are so bissey to learn a de dance, dey vill never
tinke of de Rebellion, and den de reverence is obedience to Monarchy, and begar
obedience is ale de ting in de Varle.


Sir Will. But what Music would you govern the people by?


Gall. Begar by de best French Fiddles can be got.


Sir Will. What think you of an Irish Harp, a State-Organ, or a Passionate
voice to a Lovers Lute?


Gall. Des dull tings make a de men melancholique, and den dey tinke on de
Devil, and de Treason, and do any ting dat is no good; but begar des French
Fiddles do fiddle all des tings out of deit head, vid such a jerk as ma ^oy
make a them so fantastical, and make a them as good subject as any is in de
France, begar. Here be one of my Colliers, Monsieur Simpleton, Say you no dat
de French Fiddle make a de brave Government in a de Varle?


Simpleton. I say any thing becomes a Gentleman.


Gall. Observe you dat? he have been but two tree mont, and he say any ting dat
is brave. He have de grand understanding in de foot. Tell a me ven you hear a
de littel fiddel vat is your tink? is your head no free from de Treason, and de
plot of de Rebel as your leg? begar you no stand upon de ground for joy of de
Coran, de Cerebran, de Marquess, de Montague, ha! Me be your humble servant
Madam.

Enter Lady and Lucy. and stay one two tree hours.


Lady. I am now ready for you Monsieur. Come Lucy, the practice of the last he
taught us.


Gall. Wat Antique be dis?


Dance, Monsteur singing. Enter Manley. Simpleton. Monsieur, ask that May Pole
and he can dance.


Gall. Plait il Monsieur, a la Galliard de Coran, la Princess, le Buckingham,
heigh?


Manley. Put up your rosin and your Cats-guts presently, and be gone, or I
shall find a grave for you in the pocket of my sleeve, and this shall be your
winding sheet.


Gall. Me no play dat lesson: Pocket de sleeve? dat is no tune de France:
pocket, le grand pock -- Pardonne moy Monsieur: Me put up my offers to strike
him Fiddel and be gone. Adieu Madam, Serviteur jentilhommes. Pocket de sleeve?


Exit. The LANDLADY.
ARGUMENT.
A Gentleman by accident takes a child and brings it to his Lodging; his friend
afterward happens to meet with a Lady, the mother of the child (unknown) and
brings her to the Lodging, etc.

Persons names.
Don John, Anthony, Frederick, Duke, Peter, Landlady, the Lady.
Enter Don John and his Landlady with a child. Landl. NAy son,

If this be your regard.


Ioh. Good Mother.


Landl. Good me no goods; your Cousin and your self are welcome to me whilst
you bear your selves like honest and true Gentlemen. Bring hither to my house,
that has ever been reputed a Gentlewoman of a decent and fair carriage, and so
have behaved my self?


Ioh. I know ye have.


Landl. Bring hither, as I say, to make my house stink in my neighbors
nostrils, your devices, your Brats got out of Alligant and broken Oaths? your
linsey work, your hasty puddings? I foster up your filch'd iniquities? you are
deceived in me, for I am none of those receivers.


Ioh. Have I not sworn unto you it is none of mine, and showed you how I found
it?


Landl. Ye found an easy fool that let you get it: she had better have worn
Posterons.


Ioh. Will ye hear me?


Landl. Oaths? what do you care for oaths to gain your ends, when you are high
and pampered? what Saint know ye? or what Religion, but your purposed lewdness,
is to be looked for of ye? Nay, I will tell ye, ye will then swear like accused
Cut-purses? as far off truth too: and lie beyond all Faulconers. I Am sick to
see this dealing.


Ioh. Heaven forbid, Mother.


Landl. Nay, I am very sick.


Ioh. Who waits there?


Enter Anthony with wine. Anthony. Sir?


Ioh. Bring down the bottle of Canary wine.


Landl. Exceeding sick, Heaven help me.


Ioh. I must even make her drunk. Nay, gentle mother.


Landl. Now fie upon ye.


Ioh. Here mother, take a good round draught, 'twill purge spleen from your
spirits: deeper, mother.


Landl. I, I, son; you imagine this will mend all.


Ioh. All in faith, mother.


Landl. I confess this wine will do his part.


Ioh. I Will pledge you.


Landl. But son John, I know your meaning.


Ioh. Mother, touch it once more, alas you look not well; take a round draught,
it warms the blood well, and restores the color, and then we'll talk at large.


Landl. A civil Gentleman! a stranger! one that should weigh his fair name! Oh,
a stitch.


Ioh. There Is nothing better for a stitch: good mother make no spare of it, as
you love your health: Mince not the matter.


Landl. As I said, a Gentleman lodge in my house! now heaven's my comfort.


Ioh. I looked for this.


Landl. Where Is the infant? come, let us see your workmanship.


Ioh. None of mine, mother; but there it is, and a lusty one.


Landl. Heaven bless thee, thou had a hasty making; but the best is, it is
many a good man's fortune. As I live, your own eyes, Seignior, and the nether lip
as like ye, as if ye had spit it.


Ioh. I am glad on it.


Landl. Bless me, what things are these!


Ioh. I thought my labor was not all lost; it is gold, and these are jewels,
both rich, and right I hope.


Landl. Well, well, son John, I see you are a woodman, and can choose your Deer
though it be i'ch' dark; all your discretion is not yet loft, this was well
clapped aboard here: I am with you now, when, as they say, your pleasure comes
with profit, when you must needs do where ye may be done to; it is a wisdom
becomes a young man well. Be sure of one thing, loose not your labor and your
time together, it seasons of a fool. Son, time is precious, work wary whilst ye
have it. Since ye must traffic sometimes this slippery way, take sure hold,
Seignior, trade with no broken Merchants: make your lading as you would make
your rest, adventurously, and with advantage ever.


Ioh. All this time, mother, the child wants looking to, meat and Nurse.


Landl. Now blessing o'thy care, it shall have all, and instantly; I Will seek a
Nurse my self, son; it is a sweet child: Ah my young Spaniard, take you no
farther care sir.


Ioh. Yes, of these jewels I must, by your leave mother: these are yours, to
make your care the stronger; for the rest I Will find a master; the gold for
bringing up on it, I freely render to your charge.


Landl. No more words, nor no more children (good son) as you love me, this may
do well.


Ioh. I shall observe your Morals.


Exeunt. Enter Peter and Landlady. Landl. Come, ye do know --


Pet. I do not, by this hand Mistress, but I suspect.


Landl. What?


Pet. That if eggs continue at this price, women will never be saved by their
good works.


Landl. I will know.


Pet. Ye shall, any thing lies in my power. The Duke of Lorrain is now 7000
strong: I heard it of a Fish-wife, a woman of fine knowledge.


Landl. Sirrah, sirrah.


Pet. The Popes Bulls are broken loose too, and it is suspected they shall be
baited in England.


Landl. Very well, Sir.


Pet. No, it is not so well neither.


Landl. But I say to you, Who is it keeps your Master company?


Pet. I say to you, Don John.


Landl. I say to you, what woman?


Pet. I say so too.


Landl. I say again, I will know.


Pet. I say it is fit you should.


Landl. And I tell thee he has a woman here.


Pet. And I tell thee, it is then the better for him.


Landl. You are no Baud now?


Pet. Would I were able to be called unto it. A worshipful Vocation for my
Elders; for as I understand, i^ is a place fitting my betters far.


Landl. Was ever Gentlewoman so frumpt off with a Fool? Well, saucy sirrah, I
will know who it is, and for what purpose. I pay the rent, and I will know how
my house comes by these inflammations. If this geer hold, best hang a sign-post
up, to tell the Seigniors, here you may have Lewdness at liberty.


Pet. 'Twould be a great ease to your age.


Enter Frederick. Fred. How now? why what is the matter Landlady?


Landl. What Is the matter? ye use me decently among ye, Gentlemen.


Fred. Who has abused her? you sir?


Landl. Ods my witness, I will not be thus treated, that I will not.


Pet. I gave her no ill language.


Landl. Thou lie lewdly, thou tookst me up at every word I spoke, as I had
been a Mawkin, a Flutt-Gillian: And thou think, because tho^u can write and
read, our noses must be under thee.


Fred. Dare you, sirrah?


Pet. She raves of Wenches, and I know not what, Sir.


Landl. Go to, thou know too-well, thou wicked Varlet.


Pet. As I live Sir, she is ever thus till dinner.


Fred. Get you in.


Pet. By this hand I Will break your posset-pan.


Exit Pet. Landl. Then by this hood I Will lock the meat up.


Fred. Now your grief, what is it? for I can ghess.


Landl. Ye may with shame enough, if there were shame amongst ye; nothing
thought on but how you may abuse my house: not satisfied with bringing home
your Bastards to undo me, but you must drill your Whores here too? My patience
(because I beat and bear, and carry all, and as they say am willing to groan
under) must be your Make-sport now.


Fred. No more of these words, nor no more murmurings, Lady: for you know that
I know something. I did suspect your anger; but turn it presently, and
handsomely, and bear your self discreet to this woman, for such a one there is
indeed.


Landl. It Is well, son.


Fred. Leaving your Devils Matins, and your Melancholies, or we shall leave our
lodgings.


Landl. You have much need to use these vagrant ways, and to much profit: ye
had that might content you (at home, within your selves too) right good,
Gentlemen, wholesome, and ye said handsome. But you gallants, boast that I was to
believe you.


Fred. Leave your suspicion: for as I live, there is no such thing.


Landl. Mine honor; and 'twere not for mine honor.


Fred. Come, your honor, your house, and you too, if you dare believe me, are
well enough. Sleek up your self, leave crying.


Enter Don John. Don John. Worshipful Lady, how does thy velvet scabbard? by
this hand thou look most amiably; now could I willingly, and 'twere not for
abusing thy Geneva-Print there, venture my body with thee.


Landl. You will leave this roguery when you come to my years.


Don Ioh. By this light, thou art not above fifteen yet, a mere girl; thou have
not half thy teeth --


Fred. Prithee John let her alone, she has been vexed already: she will grow stark
mad.


Ioh. I would see her mad. An old mad woman is like a Millers Mare troubled
with toothache. She Will make the rarest faces!


Landl. Well Don John, there will be times again, when O good mother, what is
good for a Carnositie in the Bladder? O the green water, mother.


Ioh. Doting take ye, do you remember that?


Fred. She has paid you now, Sir.


Landl. Clarie, sweet mother, Clarie.


Fred. Are ye satisfied?


Landl. I Will never whore again, never give Petticoats and VVastcoats at five
pounds apiece; good mother, quickly mother. Now mock on, son.


Exit. Ioh. A devil grind your old chaps.


Fred. By this hand, VVench, I Will give thee a new hood for this. Has she met
with your Lordship?


Joh. Touch-wood take her, she is a rare costly mother.


Exeunt. Enter Landlady and Lady. Lady. I have told you all I can; to me you
seem a worthy woman, one of those are seldom found in our sex, Wise, and
Virtuous. Direct me, I beseech you.


Landl. Ye say well, Lady, and hold to that point; for in these businesses a
woman's counsel that conceives the matter, Do ye mark me, that conceives the
matter, Lady, is worth ten men's engagements: she knows something, and out of
that, can work like wax; when men are giddy-headed, either out of wine, or a
more drunkenness, vain ostentation, discovering all: there is no more keep in
'um, then hold upon an Eels tail; nay, it is held fashion to defame now all they
can.


Lady. I, but these Gentlemen --


Landl. Do not you trust to that: these Gentlemen are as all other Gentlemen,
of the same Barrel; I, and the self-same Pickle. Be it granted they have used
ye with respect and fair behavior yet since ye came: do you know what must
follow? They are Spaniards, Lady, Gennets of high mettle: Things that will
thrash the Devil or his Dam, let 'em appear but cloven.


Lady. Now Heaven bless me!


Landl. Mad Colts will court the VVind: I know 'em, Lady, to the least hair
they have; and I tell you, old as I am, let but the pint-pot bless'em, they will
offer to my years.


Lady. How! --


Landl. Such rude Gambols --


Lady. To you? --


Landl. I, and so handle me, that often I am forced to fight of all four for my
safety: There Is the younger, Don John, the arrantest Jack in all this City.
The other, Time has blasted, yet he will stoop, if not ore-flown, and freely on
the Quarrie: Has been a Dragon in his days. But Tarmont, Don Jenkin is the
Devil himself; the Dog Days the most incomprehensible VVhoremaster, twenty a
night is nothing; Beggars, Broom-women, and those so miserable, they look like
famine, are all sweet Ladies in his drink.


Lady. He Is a handsome Gentleman, pity he should be master of such follies.


Landl. He Is never without a noise of Syrrenges in's pocket, those proclaim him,
Birding-pills, Waters to cool his Conscience, in small Viols; with thousand
such sufficient emblems. The truth is, whose Chastity he chops upon, he cares
not. He flies at all; Bastards upon my Conscience he has in making, multitudes;
The last night he brought home one, I pity her that bore it, but we are all
weak Vessels: some rich woman, (for Wise I dare not call her) was the mother,
for it was hung with jewels, the bearing-cloth no less then crimson-Velvet.


Lady. How!


Landl. It Is true, Lady.


Lady. Was it a boy too?


Landl. A brave boy, deliberation and judgment showed in's begetting; as I Will
say for him, he is as well paced for that sport.


Lady. May I see it?


Landl. You shall see it: but what do ye think of these men now you know 'em,
and of the cause I told ye of? I but tell you for your own good, and as you
will find it, Lady.


Lady. I am advised.


Landl. No more words then; do that, and instantly.


Don Joh. I Will fit you for your frumps: she that is wise leaps at occasion
first; the rest pay for it.


Exeunt. The TESTY LORD.
ARGUMENT.
He is imployd near the King, in which office he exercises his Passion, and is
as crosly dealt withal by another Lord.

Persons Names.
Calianax, Melantius, Diagoras, Amintor, Aspatia, two Gentlewomen, the King,
Diphisus.
Enter Diagoras and Calianax. Call. DIagoras, look to the doors better for
shame, you let in all the world, and anon the King will rail at me: by Jove,
the King will have the Show i'^h' Court.


Diag. Why do you swear so, my Lord? you know he will have it here.


Call. By this light, if he be wise he will not.


Diag. And if he will not be wise, you are forsworn.


Call. One may sweat his heart out with swearing, and get thanks on no side;
I Will be gone, look to it who will.


Diag. My Lord, I will never keep 'em out: pray stay, your looks will terrify
'em.


Call. My looks terrify 'em, you Coxcombly Ass you? I Will be judged by all the
company whether thou have not a worse face then I. --


Diag. I mean, because they know you and your office.


Call. Office? I would I could put it off. I am sure I sweat quite through my
office: serve that will.


Exit. Diag. He Is so humorous, -- hark, hark; there, there, so, so, cuds, cuds,
what now?


Call. Let him not in.


Diag O my Lord, he must: is your

Enter Calianax, Melantius. Lady placed?


Melan. Yes Sir, I thank you. My Lord Calianax, well met; your causless hate to
me I hope is buried.


Call. Who placed the Lady there, so near the presence of the King?


Melan. I did.


Call. My Lord, she must not sit there.


Melan. Why?


Call. The place is kept for a woman of more worth.


Melan. More worth then she? it mis-becomes your age and place to be so
womanish; forbear: what you have spoke, I am content to think the Palsy shook
your tongue to.


Call. Why '^is well if I stand here to place men's Wenches?


Melan. I shall forget this place, thy age, and through all, cut that poor
sickly Week thou have to live, away from thee.


Call. Nay, I know you can fight for your Whore.


Mel. Bate the King, and he be flesh and blood, he lies that says it: thy
mother at fifteen was black and sinful to her.


Call. I, you may say your pleasure.


Enter Amintor. Am. What vild injury has stirred my worthy friend, who is as
slow to fight with words as he is quick of hand?


Mel. That heap of age which I should reverence if it were temperate; but
testie years are most contemptible.


Am. Good Sir forbear.


Call. There is just such another as your self.


Am. He will wrong you or me, or any man, and talk as if he had no life to lose.


Exeunt. Enter Calianax to Aspatia, and two Gentlewomen. Call. How now huswifes?
what, at your ease? is this a time to sit still? Up, you young lazy whores,
up, or I Will s^inge you.


1 Gent. Nay, good my Lord.


Call. You Will lie down shortly; Get you in and work: what, are you grown so
restie? you want ears; we shall have some of the Court-boys do that office.


2 Gent. My Lord, we do no more then we are charged; it is the Ladies pleasure
we be thus in grief: she is forsaken.


Call. There Is a rogue too, a young dissembling slave; well, get you in, I Will
have a bout with that boy, it is high time now to be valiant. I confess my youth
was never prone that way: what, made an Ass? a Court-Stale? Well, I will be
valiant, and beat some dozen of these whelps, I will: and there is another of
'em, a trim cheating Soldier, I Will mawl that Rascal; has out*brav'd me twice,
but now I thank the gods I am valiant: Go, get you in, I Will take a course with
all.


Exeunt. Enter Calianax to Melantius. Call. O Melantius, my daughter will die.


Mel. Trust me, I am sorry; would thou had ta'n her room.


Call. Thou art a Slave, a Cutthroat Slave, a bloody treacherous Slave.


Mel. Take heed, old Man, thou will be heard to rave, and lose thine offices.


Call. I am valiant grown at all these years, and thou art but a Slave.


Mel. Leave: some company will come, and I respect thy years, not thee so
much, that I could wish to laugh at thee alone.


Call. I Will spoil your mirth, I mean to fight with thee; there lie my Cloak,
this was my fathers sword, and he durst fight; are you prepared?


Mel. Why? will thou dote thy self out of thy life? hence, get thee to bed,
have careful looking to, and eat warm things, and trouble not me; my head is
full of thoughts more weighty then thy life or death can be.


Call. You have a name in War, when you stand safe amongst a multitude; but I
will try what you dare do unto a weak old Man in single fight; you will ground I
fear. Come, draw.


Mel. I will not draw, unless thou pull'st thy death upon thee with a stroke:
there is no one blow that thou can give, has strength enough to kill me.
Tempt me not so far then; the power of earth shall not redeem thee.


Call. I must let him alone, he is stout and able; and to say the truth, however
I may set a face and talk, I am not valiant. When I was a youth, I kept my
credit with a testie trick I had amongst Cowards, but durst never fight.


Mel. I will not promise you to preserve your life if you do stay.


Call. I would give half my land that I durst fight with that proud man a
little: if I had men to hold, I would beat him till he ask me mercy.


Mel. Sir, will you be gone?


Call. I dare not stay, but I will go home and beat my servants all over for
this.


Exit. Mel. This old Man haunts me; but the distracted carriage of mine Amintor
takes deeply on me, I will find the cause: I fear his Conscience cries, he
wronged Aspatia.


Exit. Enter Calianax, to him Melantius. Mel. Good my Lord, forget your spleen
to me; I never wronged you, but would have peace with every man.


Call. It Is well: if I durst fight, your tongue would lie at quiet.


Mel. You Are touchie without cause.


Call. Do, mock me.


Mel. By mine honor.


Call. Honor? where is it?


Mel. See what stairs you make into your hatred, to my love and freedom to
you. -- I come with resolution to obtain a suit of you.


Call. A suit of me? it is very like it should be granted, Sir.


Mel. Nay, go not hence: It Is this, You have the keeping of the Fort, and I
would wish you, by the love you ought to bear unto me, to deliver it into my
hands.


Call. I am in hope that thou art mad, to talk to me thus.


Mel. But there is a reason to move you to it. I would kill the King, that
wronged you and your daughter.


Call. Out Traitor!


Mel. Nay, but stay; I cannot escape, the deed once done, without I have this
Fort.


Call. And should I help thee? Now thy treacherous mind betraies it self.


Mel. Come, delay me not, give me a sudden answer, or already thy last is
spoke: refuse not offered love when it comes clad in secrets.


Call. If I say I will not, he will kill me; I do see it writ in his looks: and
should I say I will, he will run and tell the King. I do not shun your
friendship, dear Melantius, but this cause is weighty, give me but an hour to
think.


Mel. Take it, -- I know this goes unto the King, but I am armed.


Exit Mel. Call. Methinks I feel my self but twenty again, this fighting Fool
wants policy. I shall revenge my Girl, and make her red again. I pray my legs
will last that pace that I will carry, I shall want breath before I find the
King.


Exit. The King and Calianax. King. It sounds incredible.


Call. Yes, so does every thing I say, of late.


King. Not so, Calianax.


Call. Yes, I should sit mute, whilst a rogue with strong arms cuts your throat.


King. Well, I will try him.


Call. Why, if it be alie, mine ears are false, for I Will be sworn I heard it.
Old men are good for nothing; you were best to put me to death for hearing, and
free him for meaning of it; you would have trusted me once, but the time is
altered.


King. And will still, where I may do it with Justice to the world. You have no
witness?


Call. Yes, my self.


King. No more, I mean, there were that heard it.


Call. How, no more? why am not I enough to hang a thousand Rogues?


King. But so you may hang honest men too, if you please.


Call. I may, '^is like I will do so; there are a hundred will swear it for a
need too, if I say it.


King. Such witnesses we need not.


Call. And it is hard if my word cannot hang a boisterous Knave.


King. Enough: if he should desire the Combat of you, it is not in the power of
all our Laws to hinder it.


Call. Why, if you do think it is fit an old Man and a Counselor to fight for
what he says, then you may grant it.


Enter Melantius, Amintor, etc. King. Give me a bowl of wine: Melantius, I am
now considering how easy 'twere for any man to trust to poison one of us in
such a bowl.


Mel. I think it were not hard, Sir, for a Knave.


Call. Such as you are.


Mel. Have you thought of this, Calianax?


Call. Yes marry have I.


Mel. And what is your resolution?


Call. Ye shall have it soundly.


King. Yet I wonder much of the strange desperation of these men; he could not
escape that did it.


Mel. Were he known, unpossible.


King. It would be known, Melantius; I should think no man could kill me and
sc^pe clear, but that old Man.


Call. But I! Heaven bless me, I? should I, my Liege?


King. I do not think thou would, but yet thou might, for thou have in thy
hands the means to escape, by keeping of the Fort; he has, Melantius, and he has
kept it well.


Mel. From Cobwebs, Sir, it is clean swept.


Call. I shall be sure of your good word; but I have kept it safe from such as
you.


King. Melantius, to show you my ears are every where, You meant to kill me,
and get the Fort to escape.


Mel. You preserve a race of idle people here about you, Eaters, and Talkers,
to defame men's worths; Give me a pardon (for you ought to do it) to kill him
that spoke this.


Call. I, that will be the end of all; then I am fairly paid for all my care and
service.


Mel. That old Man that calls me enemy, and of whom I (thought I will never
match my hate so low) have no good thought, would yet I think excuse me, and
swear he thought me wronged in this.


Call. Who I? thou shameless fellow, did thou not speak to me of it thy self?


Mel. O, then it came from him.


Call. From me? who should it come from, but from me?


Mel. Nay, I believe your malice is enough, but I ha* lost my anger. Sir, I
hope you are well satisfied.


King. Melantius, I held it great injustice to believe thine enemy, and did
not; if I did, I do not: let that satisfy.


Call. A few fine words have overcome my truth. Ah, thou art a Villain.


Mel. Why thou will let me have the Fort, Dotard; I will disgrace thee thus for
ever: there shall no credit lie upon thy words: think better, and believe it.


Call. My Liege, he is at me now again to do it; speak, deny it if thou can?
Example him whilst he is hot, for he will cool again, he will forswear it.


King. This is Lunacy I hope, Melantius?


Mel. He has lost himself much: and though he call me Foe, I pity him; for it
becomes both you and me too, to forgive distraction: Pardon him as I do.


Call. I Will not speak for thee, for all thy cunning; if you will be safe, chop
off his head, for there was never known so impudent a Rascal.


King. Some that love him, get him to bed.


Mel. Calianax, the King believes you; come, you shall go home and rest, you
have done well; you will give it up when I have used you thus a Month I hope.


Call. Now, now, it is plain Sir, he does move me still; he says, he knows I
will give him up the Fort, when he has used me thus this Month; I am mad, am I
not still?


Omnes. Ha, ha, ha!


Call. I shall be mad indeed, if you do thus; why would you trust a sturdy
fellow there, (that has no virtue in him, all is in's sword) before me? do but
take his weapons away from him, and he is an Ass, and I am a very Fool, both
with him and without him, as you use me.


Omnes. Ha, ha, ha!


King. It Is well, Calianax; but if you use this once again, I shall entreat
some other to see your offices be well discharged. Good Calianax sleep soundly,
it will bring thee to thy self.


Exeunt omnes. Manent Mel. and Call. Call. Sleep soundly! I sleep soundly now, I
hope, I could not be thus else! How dare thou stay alone with me, knowing how
thou have used me?


Mel. You cannot blast me with your tongue, and that is the strongest part you
have about you.


Call. I do look for some great punishment for this, for I begin to forget all
my hate, and take it unkindly that mine enemy should use me so extraordinarily
scurvily.


Mel. I shall melt too, if you begin to take unkindness; I never meant you hurt.


Call. Thou Wilt anger me again; thou wretched rogue, meant me no hurt? disgrace
me with the King, lose all my offices? this is no hurt, is it? I prithee what
do thou call hurt?


Mel. To poison me because they love me not; to call the credit of Men's wives
in question, to murder children betwixt me and land; this is all hurt.


Call. All this thou think is sport, for mine is worse; but use thy will with
me, for betwixt grief and anger I could cry.


Mel. Be wise then, and be safe; thou may revenge.


Call. I of the King? I would revenge o'thee.


Mel. That you must plot your self.


Call. I am a fine Plotter.


Mel. The short is, I will hold thee with the King in this perplexity, till
peevishness, and thy disgrace has laid thee in the grave. But if thou will
deliver up the Fort, I Will take thy trembling body in my arms, and bear thee
over dangers; thou shall hold thy wonted state.


Call. If I should tell the King, can thou deny't again?


Mel. Try and believe.


Call. Nay, then thou can bring any thing about; thou shall have the Fort.


Mel. Why well, here let our hate be buried.


Call. Nay, I do not love thee yet; I cannot well endure to look on thee. And if
I thought it were a courtesy, thou should not have it; but I am disgraced, my
offices are to be ta'n away. And if I did but hold this Fort a day, I do
believe the King would take it from me, and give it thee, things are so
strangely carried; Never thank me for it: but yet the King shall know there was
some such thing in it I told him of, and that I was an honest man.


Mel. He Will buy that knowledge very dearly. What news with thee?


Enter Diphilus. Diph. This were a night indeed to do it in.


Mel. Go, Diphilus, and take from this good man, my worthy friend, the Fort,
he will give it thee.


Diph. Ha'you got that too?


Call. Art thou of the same breed? can thou deny this to the King too?


Diph. With a confidence as great as his.


Call. Faith like enough.


Mel. Away, and use him kindly.


Call. Touch not me, I hate the whole strain: if thon follow me a great way off,
I Will give thee up the Fort, and hang your selves.


Mel. Be gone.


Diphil. He Is finely wrought.


Exeunt. The IMPERICK.
ARGUMENT.
Under the notion of his knowledge in Chymistrie, he cheats a Grocer and a
Precisian.

Persons Names.
Subtle, Drugger, Face.
Subtle. COme in, What is your name, say you, Abel Drugger?


Drug. Yes Sir.


Subt. Umh. Free of the Grocers?


Drug. I, an't please you.


Subt. Well, -- Your business, Abel?


Drug. This, an't please your worship; I am a young beginner, and am building
of a new Shop, an't please your Worship, just at corner of a street, (here is
the plat on it) and I would know by Art, Sir, of your Worship, which way I
should make my door, by Necromancie, and where my Shelves, and which should be
for Boxes, and which for Pots. I would be glad to thrive, Sir: and I was wished
to your Worship, by a Gentleman, one Captain Face, that says you know men's
Planets, and their good Angels and their bad.


Subt. I do, if I do see 'em. --


Face. What! my honest Abel? thou art well met here.


Drug. Troth Sir, I was speaking just as your Worship came here, of your
Worship: I pray you speak for me to Master Doctor.


Face. He shall do any thing. Doctor, do you hear? this is my friend, Abel, an
honest fellow; he lets me have good Tobacco, and he does not sophisticate it
with Sack-lees, or Oil, nor washes it in Muscadel, and Grains, nor buries it in
Gravel, under ground, wrapped up in greasy leather, or pist clouts, but keeps it
in fine Lilie-pots, that opened, smell like Conserve of Roses, or French Beans.
He has his Maple block, his silver tongs, Winchester pipes, and fire of
Juniper. A neat, spruce-honest fellow, and no Goldsmith.


Subt. He is a fortunate fellow, that I am sure on.


Face. Already Sir, Ha you found it? Lo thee Abel.


Subt. And in right way toward riches. --


Face. Sir?


Subt. This Summer, he will be of the clothing of his Company: and next Spring
called to the Scarlet, spend what he can.


Face. What, and so little beard!


Subt. Sir, you must think he may have a receipt to make hair come: But he will be
wise, preserve his youth, and fine for it: his fortune looks for him another way.


Face. 'Slid Doctor, how can thou know this so soon? I am amused at that!


Subt. By a rule, Captain, in Metaposcopy, which I do work by, a certain Star
in the forehead, which you see not. Your Chest-nut, or your Olive-colour'd face
does never fail; and your long ear does promise. I knew't by certain spots too,
in his teeth, and on the nail of his Mercurial finger.


Face. Which finger's that?


Subt. This little finger. Look, you were born upon a Wednesday?


Drug. Yes indeed, Sir.


Subt. The thumb, in Chiromancie, we give Venus, the forefinger to Jove, the
midst to Saturn, the ring to Sol, the least to Mercury, who was the Lord, Sir,
of this Horoscope; his House of Life being Libra, which foreshew'd he should be
a Merchant, and should trade with balance.


Face. Why this is strange, is it not, honest Nab?


Subt. There is a Ship now coming from Ormus, that shall yield him such a
commodity of Drugs. -- This is the West, and this the South?


Drug. Yes, Sir.


Subt. And those are your two sides?


Looking upon the Plate. Drug. I, Sir.


Subt. Make me your Door then South, your broadside West. And on the East Side
of your Shop, aloft, write Mathlai, Tarmiel, and Baraborat; upon the North
part, Rael, Velel, Thiel: they are the names of those Mercurial Spirits that do
fright Flies from Boxes.


Drug. Yes, Sir.


Subt. And beneath your threshold, bury me a Loadstone to draw in Gallants that
wear Spurs: the rest they will seem to follow.


Face. That Is a Secret, Nab!


Subt. And on your Stall, a Puppet with a Vice, and a Court-fucus to call
Citie-Dames. You shall deal much with Minerals.


Drug. Sir, I have, at home, already --


Subt. I, I know you have Arsnike, Vitriol, Sal-tartre, Argaile, Alkaly,
Cinoper; I know all. This fellow, Captain, will come, in time, to be a great
Distiller, and give a say, ( I will not say directly, but very fair) at the
Philosophers Stone.


Face. Why how now, Abel? is this true?


Drug. Good Captain, what must I give him?


Face. Nay, I Will not counsel thee; thou hear'st what wealth (he says, Spend
what thou can) thou art like to come to.


Drug. I would give him a Crown.


Face. A Crown! and toward such a Fortune! Hear, thou shall rather give him thy
Shop. No gold about thee?


Drug. Yes, I have a Portague, I have kept this half year.


Face. Out on thee, Nab! 'Slight, there was such an offer -- Shall keep't no
longer, I Will giv't him for thee. Doctor, Nab prays your Worship to drink this,
and he will appear more grateful, as your skill does raise him in this World.


Drug. I would entreat another favor of his Worship.


Face. What is it, Nab?


Drug. But to look over, Sir, my Almanac, and cross out my ill days; that I
may neither bargain, nor trust upon them.


Face. That he shall, Nab.


Subt. And a direction for his Shelves.


Drug. And one thing more, Sir.


Face. What is it, Nab?


Drug. A Sign, Sir.


Face. I, a good luckie one, a thriving Sign, Doctor.


Subt. I was devising now.


Face. ('Slight, Do not say so, he must give you more.) What say you to his
Constellation, Doctor, the Balance?


Subt. No, that way is stale, and common. A Townsman born in Taurus, gives the
Bull, or the Bulls head; in Aries, the Ram. A poor device: No, I will have his
Name formed in some mystic Character; whose radii striking the senses of the
Passers-by, shall, by a vertual influence, breed affections that may result
upon the party owns it. As thus, --


Face. Nab, have no more gold?


Drug. Not here, Sir, I protest.


Subt. He first shall have A Bell, that is Abel; and one standing by, whose name
is Dee, in a rugg Gown; there is D and Rugg, that is Drugg; and right anenst him,
a Dog snarling Er, there is Drugger, Abel Drugger; that is his Sign. And here is
now Mystery and Hieroglyphick.


Face. Abel, thou art made.


Drug. Sir, I do thank his Worship.


Face. Six o'thy legs more will not do it, Nab. He has brought you a pipe of
Tobacco, Doctor.


Drug. Yes, Sir.


Subt. It seems to be good Tobacco; what is it an ounce?


Face. He Will send you a pound or two, Doctor.


Subt. O no!


Face. He will do it. It is the goodest soul! Abel, about it; thou shall know
more anon: away, be gone.


Subt. Keep aloof off, yonder is another Chapman: observe my call.

Exit Drug. Enter Ananias. Where is my drudge? --


Face. Sir.


Subt. Take away the Recipient, and rectify the Menstrue from the Phlegma;
then pour it of the Sol, in the Cucurbite, and let 'em macerate together.


Face. Yes Sir. And save the ground?


Subt. No, Terra damnata must not have entrance in the work. Who are you?


Ananias. A faithful Brother, if it please you.


Subt. What Is that? a Lullianist? a Ripley? filius artis? Can you sublime, and
dulcifie? calcine? Know you the Sapor pontick? Sapor styptick? or what is
homogene, or heterogene?


Anan. I understand no heathen language, truly.


Subt. Heathen, you Knipper-Doling? is ars sacra, or Chrysopoeia, or Spagyrica,
or the Pamphysick, or Panarchick knowledge, a Heathen language?


Anan. Heathen Greek, I take it.


Subt. How! Heathen Greek?


Anan. All Is Heathen but the Hebrew.


Sub. Sirrah, my Varlet, Stand you forth, and speak to him like a Philosopher:
Answer in the language: Name the Vexations, and the Martyrizations of Metals in
the Work.


Face. Sir, Putrefaction, Solution, Ablution, Sublimation, Cohobation,
Calcination, Ceration, and Fixation.


Sub. This is Heathen Greek to you now? And when comes Vivification?


Face. After Mortification.


Anan. What Is Cohobation?


Face. It Is the pouring on your aqua regis, and then drawing him off, to the
trine circle of the seven spears.


Subt. What Is the proper passion of Metals?


Face. Malleation.


Subt. What Is your Ultimum supplicium auri?


Face. Antimonium.


Subt. This is Heathen Greek to you? And what is your Mercury?


Face. A very fugitive, he will be gone, Sir.


Subt. How know you him?


Face. By his Viscositie, his Oleositie, and his Suscitabilitie.


Subt. How do you sublime him?


Face. With the Calce of Egg-shels, white Marble, halk.


Subt. Your Magisterium, now, what is that?


Face. Shifting, Sir, your elements, dry into cold, cold into moist, moist into
hot, hot into dry.


Subt. This is Heathen Greek to you still? Your Lapis Philosophicus?


Face. It Is a Stone, and not a Stone; a spirit, a soul, and body: which if you
do dissolve, it is dissolved; if you coagulate, it is coagulated; if you make
it to fly, it flies.


Subt. Enough: this is Heathen Greek to you? what are you, Sir?


Anan. Please you, a servant of the exile Brethren, that deal with Widows and
with Orphans goods, and make a just account unto the Saints; a Deacon.


Subt. O you are sent from Mr. Wholesome your Teacher?


Anan. From Tribulation Wholesome, our very zealous Pastor.


Subt. Good. I have some Orphans goods to come here.


Anan. Of what kind, Sir?


Subt. Pewter, and Brass, and Irons, and Kitchinware; Metals that we must use
ou^ Medicine on: wherein the Brethren may have a penn'orth for ready money.


Anan. Were the Orphans Parents sincere Professors?


Subt. Why do you ask?


Anan. Because we then are to deal justly, and give (in truth) their utmost
value.


Subt. 'Slid you would cousen else, and if their Parents were not of the
faithful? I will not trust you, now I think on it, till I have talked with your
Pastor. Have you brought money to buy more Coals?


Anan. No surely.


Subt. No? how so?


Anan. The Brethren bid me say unto you, Sir, Surely they, they will not
venture any more till they may see Projection.


Subt. How?


Anan. You Have had for the instruments, as Bricks, and Lome, and Glasses,
already, thirty pound; and for Materials, they say, some ninety more: and they
have heard since, that one at Heidelberg made it of an Egg, and a small paper
of Pin-dust.


Subt. What Is your name?


Anan. My name is Ananias.


Subt. Out, the Varlet that cozened the Apostles! Hence, away, fly Mischief.
Had your holy Consistory no name to send me of another sound, then wicked
Ananias? Send your Elders hither to make atonement for you, quickly, and give
me satisfaction, or out goes the fire, and down th'Alembecks, and the Furnace.
Piger Henricus, or what not? Thou wretch, both Senicon and Bufo shall be lost,
tell 'em. All hope of rooting out the Bishops, or th'Antichristian Hierarchy,
shall perish, if they stay threescore minutes. The Aqueitie, Terreitie, and
Sulphureitie, shall run together again, and all be anull'd, thou wicked Ananias.

Exit Ananias. This will fetch 'em, and make 'em haste toward their gulling
more.

A man must deal like a rough Nurse, and fright those that are froward, to an
appetite.


Exeunt. The SURPRISE.
ARGUMENT.
He prepares a Countrey-Interlude against the Julian Feast, at the Presentment
whereof, his foster-sister is stolen away, etc.

Number of Actors.
The Miller, his Wife, their Son, -their Foster-Daughter, a Lord, who steals
her away; Iulio, in whose house the Scene is presented; Orante, who marries the
Foster-Sister, found to be Iulio's Daughter: two Gentlemen, Friends, Philip the
King, etc.
Enter Iulio, and two or three Gentlemen, as to the Entertainment. Iulio. COme,
come, the Sports are coming on us;
Seat, seat your selves, Gentlemen.

Enter a Boy presenting Cupid. Boy. Love is little, and therefore I present him:
Love is a fire, therefore you may lament him.

2 Gent. Alas poor Love, who are they that can quench him?


Boy. Love shoots, therefore I bear his Bow about:
And Love is blind, therefore my eyes are ou^.

1 Gent. I never heard Love give reason for what he did, before.


Enter Millers son for Paris. Boy. Let such as can see, see such as cannot:
behold,
Our Goddesses all three strive for the Ball of Gold;
And here fair Paris comes, the hopeful youth of Troy,
Queen Hecubs darling-son, King Priams only joy.

2 Gent. Is this Paris? I should have taken him for Hector rather.


Son. Paris, at this time pray you hold your prating.


1 Gent. Paris can be angry, I see.


Iulio. At this time he comes as a Judge.


2 Gent. Mercy on all that looks upon him, say I.


Son. The thundering Seas whose watery fires
Washes the Whiting Mops.
The gentle Whale, whose feet so fell,
Flies over the Mountain tops.
No roars so fierce, no throats so deep,
No howls can bring such fears
As Paris can, if Garden from
He calls his Dogs and Bears.

2 Gent. I, those they were that I feared all this while.


Son. Yes, Jack-an-Apes.


2 Gent. I thank you, Sir Paris.


Son. You may hold your peace, and stand farther out
of the way then: the lines will fall where they light.
Yes, Jack-an-Apes, he has to sports,
And faces make like Mirth;
Whilst bellowing Bulls, the horned Beasts
Do toss from Ground to Earth.
Blood Bear there is, as Cupid blind.

2 Gent. That Bear would be whipped for loosing of his eyes.


Son. Be whipped man may see,
But we present no such content, but Nymphs such as they be.

Enter a Shepherd singing with three Nymphs, as Juno, Pallas, Venus; Venus
presented by his sister. Son. Go Cupid blind, conduct the dumb,
For Ladies must not speak here;
Let Shepherds sing with dancing feet,
And cords of Music break here.
Song ended. Now Ladies fight, with heels so light,
By lot your luck must fall,
Where Paris please, to do you ease,
And give the golden Ball.

A Dance. Boy. The Dance is ended; now to Judgment, Paris.


Son. Here, Juno, here: but stay, I do espy
A pretty glance coming from Pallas eye:
Here, Pallas, here; yet stay again, methinks
I see the eye of Love, by Venus winks.
Oh close them both! Shut in those golden Eyne,
And I will kiss those sweet blind cheeks of thine.
Juno is angry; yes, and Pallas frowns:
Would Paris now were gone from Ida's Downs.
They both are fair; but Venus has the Mole,
The fairest hair and sweetest dimple hole.
To her, or her, or her, or her, or neither;
Can one man please three Ladies altogether?
No, take it, Venus, toss it at thy pleasure,
Thou art the Lovers friend, beyond his measure.

1 Gent. Paris has done what Man can do, pleased me, who can do more?


Enter a Lord (as Mars.) 2 Gent. Stay, here is another person.


Lord. Come, lovely Venus, leave this lower Orb,
And mount with Mars up to his glorious sphere.

Millers son. How now! what is he?


Millers daughter. I Am ignorant what to do, Sir.


Lord. Thy silver yoke of Doves are in the Team,
And thou shall fly through Apollo's beam:
I Will see thee seated in thy golden Throne,
And hold with Mars a sweet Conjunction.

Takes her away. Mill. son. Ha! what fellow's this? he has carried away my
sister Venus: he never rehearsed his part with me before.


1 Gent. What follows now, Prince Paris?


She cries within, Help, help! Mill. son. Hue and cry: I think Sir, this is
Venus voice, my own and only sister.


2 Gent. What, is there some Tragick-Act behind?


Son. No, no, altogether Comical; Mars and Venus are in the old Conjunction, it
seems.


2 Gent. It Is very improper then; for Venus never cries out when she Conjoyns
with Mars.


Son. That Is true indeed, they are out of their parts sure. It may be it is the
Book-holders fault: I Will go see.


Exit. 1 Gent. How like you our Country-Revels, Gentlemen?


2 Gent. Oh, they commend themselves, Sir.


3 Gent. Methinks now Juno and Minerva should take revenge on Paris: it cannot
end without it.


1 Gent. It may follow; let us not premeditate the history.


Enter Mill. son crying. Mill. son. Oh, oh, oh, oh!


1 Gent. So, here is a Passion toward.


Mill. son. Help, help, if you be Gentlemen; my sister, my Venus is stolen away.


2 Gent. The Story changes from our expectation.


Mill. son. Help, my father the Miller will hang me else: God Mars is a bawdy
Villain; he said she should ride upon Doves: she is horsed, she is horsed whether
she will or no.


1 Gent. Sure I think he is serious.


Mill. son. She Is horsed upon a double Gelding, and a Stone-horse in the breech
of her: the poor Wench cries help, and I cry help, and none of you will help.


1 Gent. Speak, is it the Show, or do thou bawl?


Mill. son. A pox on the Ball; my sister bawls, and I bawl. Either bridle a
horse and follow me, or give me a halter to hang my self: I cannot run so fast
as a hog.


Iulio. I Will fill the Country with pursuit, but I will find the Thief. My house
thus abused?


Mill. son. It Is my house that is abused, the sister of my flesh and blood: oh,
oh, oh!


Exeunt. Enter two Gentlemen with the Millers son. 1 Gent. By all means
discharge your follower.


2 Gent. If we can gethim off. Sirrah, thou must needs run back.


Mill. son. But I must not, unless you send a Bier, or a Licter at my back. I
do not use to run from my friends.


2 Gent. Well, Go will serve turn: I have forgot.


Mill. son. What, Sir?


2 Gent. See if I can think on it now.


Son. I know what it is now.


2 Gent. A Pistolet of that.


Son. Done; you have forgot a device to send me away. You are going a smocking
perhaps.


1 Gent. His own, due, due in faith Antonio: the Pistolet's his own.


2 Gent. I confess it, there it is.

Now if you could afford out of it a reasonable excuse to my Uncle.


Mill. son. Yes, I can: but an excuse will not serve your turn: it must be a
lie, a full lie, a downright lie, 'twill do no good else: if you will go to the
price of that.


2 Gent. Is a lie dearer then an excuse?


Son. Oh, treble: this is the price of an Excuse; but a Lie is two more. Look
how many foils goes to a fair fall, so many Excuses go to a full Lie; and less
cannot serve your turn, let any Tailor in the Town make it.


1 Gent. It Is but reasonable; give him his price: let it be large enough now.


Mill. son. I Will warrant you cover him all over.


2 Gent. I would have proof of one now.


Mill. son. What? scale my Invention beforehand? you shall pardon me for that:
Well, I Will commend you to your Uncle, and tell him you will be at home at Supper
with him.


1 Gent. By no means, I cannot come to night (man.)


Mill. son. I know that too; you do not know a lie when you see it: remember it
must stretch for all night.


Mill. son. I shall want stuff; I doubt 'twill come to the other Pistolet.


2 Gent. Well, lay out, you shall be no loser, Sir.


Mill. son. It must be faced; you know there will be a yard of Dissimulation at
least, (City-measure) and cut upon an untroth or two, lined with fables, that
must needs be, cold weather coming; if it had a gallon of hypocrisy, 'twould
do well; and hooked together with a couple of Conceits, that is necessity:
Well, I Will bring in my Bill: I Will warrant you as fair a Lie, by that time I
have done with it, as any Gentleman in the Town can swear too, if he would
betray his Lord and Master.


Exit. 2 Gent. So, so, this necessary trouble's over.


1 Gent. I would you had bought an excuse of him before he went: you will want
one for your Lady.


Enter again. Mill. son. Oh Gentlemen, look to your selves, ye are men of
another world else; your enemies are upon you: the old house of the Bellides
will fall upon your heads: Seignior Lisauro!


2 Gent. Lisauro?


Mill. son. And Don what call you him? he is a Gentleman: yet he has but a
yeomans name, Don Tarse, Tarso, and a dozen at their heels.


2 Gent. Lisauro, Tarso, nor a dozen more, shall fright me from my ground, nor
shun my path, let 'em come on in their ablest fury.


1 Gent. It Is worthily resolved: I Will stand by you, Sir; this way I am thy true
friend.


Mill. son. I Will be gone, Sir, that one may live to tell what is become of you.
-- Put up, put up; will you never learn to know a Lie from an Aesops Fable?
there is a taste for you now.


Exit. 2 Gent. It Is very well, adieu Trojan.


Exeunt. Enter Iulio. Iulio. My mind's unquiet; while Antonio
My Nephew is abroad, my heart is not at home,
Only my fears stay with me; bad Company;
But I cannot shift 'em off. This hatred
Betwixt the house o'th Bellides and Us,
Is not fair War: it is civil, but uncivil.
It has lasted too many Sun-sets.
Man should not lose so many days of Peace,
To satisfy the Anger of one minute.
I could repent it heartily. I sent
The Knave to attend my Antonio too,
Yet he returns no comfort to me neither.

Enter Millers son. Mill. son. No, I must not.


Iulio. Hah! he is come.


Mill. son. I must not; '^will break his heart to hear it.


Iulio. How! he will not tell me for breaking of my heart: it is half split
already, I must obscure and hear it.


Mill. son. I have spied him: Now to knock down a Don with a Lie, a silly
harmless Lie; 'twill be valiantly done, and nobly perhaps.


Iulio. I cannot hear him now.


Mill. son. Oh the bloody days that we live in! the envious, malicious, deadly
days that we draw breath in!


Iulio. Now I hear too loud.


Mill. son. The children that ever shall be born, may rue it; for men that are
slain now, might have lived to have got children, that might have cursed their
fathers.


Iulio. Oh my posterity is ruined!


Mill. son. Oh sweet Antonio!


Iulio. Oh dear Antonio!


Mill. son. Yet it was nobly done on both parts, when he and Lisauro met.


Iulio. Oh, Death has parted'em.


Mill. son. VVelcome my mortal Foe (says one,) welcome my deadly Enemy (says
the other): off go their doublets, they in their shirts, and their swords,
stark naked; here lies Antonio, here lies Lisauro: he comes upon him with an
Embroccado, that he puts by with a puncta reversa: Lisauro recoils me two paces
and some six inches back, takes his Career, and then, oh!


Iulio. Oh!


Mill. son. Runs Antonio quite through.


Iulio. Oh Villain!


Mill. son. Quite through, between the arm and the body; so he had no hurt at
that bout.


Iulio. Goodness be praised.


Mill. son. But then at th'next Encounter, he fetches me up Lisauro* Lisauro
makes out a Long at him, which he thinking to be a Passada, Antonio's foot
sliping: down, oh, down.


Iulio. Oh now thou art lost.


Mill. son. Oh but the quality of the thing: both Gentlemen, both Spanish
Christians, yet one man to shed --


Iulio. Say his Enemies blood.


Mill. son. His hair may come by diverse Casualties, though he never go into the
Field with his Foe: but a man to lose nine ounces and two drams of blood at one
wound, thirteen and a scruple at another, and to live till he die in cold
blood: yet the Surgeon (that cured him) said, if Pia-mater had not been
perished, he had been a lives man to this day.


Iulio. There he concludes he is gone.


Mill. son. But all this is nothing: now I come to the point.


Iulio. I, the point, that is deadly: the ancient blow over the buckler never
went half so deep.


Mill. son. Yet Pity bids me keep in my Charity: for me to pull an old Man's
ears from his head with telling of a Tale: Oh foul Tale! Furthermore, there is
the charge of Burial; every one will cry blacks, blacks, that had but the least
finger in his blood, though ten degrees removed when 'twas done. Moreover, the
Surgeon (that made an end of him) will be paid: Sugar-plums, and
Sweet-breads; yet it may be the Man may recover again, and die in his bed.


Iulio. What motley stuff is this? Sirrah, speak truth what has befallen my
dear Antonio; what thou keep'it back from truth, thou shall speak in pain: do
not look to find a Limb in his right place, a Bone unbroke, nor so much flesh
unbroil'd of all that Mountain, as a Worm might sup on; dispatch, or be
dispatched.


Mill. son. Alas Sir, I know nothing, but that Antonio is a man of Gods making
to this hour; it is not two since I left him so.


Iulio. When did thou leave him?


Mill. son. In the same clothes he had on when he went from you.


Iulio. Does he live?


Mill. son. I saw him drink.


Iulio. Is he wounded?


Mill. son. He may have a cut in the leg by this time: for Don Martin and he
were at whole slashes.


Iulio. Met he not with Lysauro?


Mill. son. I do not know her.


Iulio. Her? Lysauro is a man as he is.


Mill. son. I saw never a man like him.


Iulio. Did not thou discourse a fight betwixt Antonio and Lysauro?


Mill. son. I, to my self: I hope a man may give himself the Lie, if it please
him?


Iulio. Did thou lie then?


Mill. son. As sure as you live now.


Julio. I live the happier by it: when will he return?


Mill. son. That he sent me to tell you, within these ten days, at farthest.


Julio. Ten days? he was not wont to be absent two.


Mill. son. Nor I think he will not.

He said he would be at home to morrow; but I love to speak within my compass.


Julio. You shall speak within mine, Sir, now. Within there: take this fellow
into custody:

Enter servants. keep him safe, I charge you.


Mill. son. Safe! do you hear? take notice what plight you find me in: if
there want but a Collop, or a Steak of me, look to it.


Julio. If my Nephew return not in his health to morrow, thou go to the Rack.


Mill. son. Let me go to th'Manger first;
I had rather eat Oats then Hay.

Exeunt. Enter Philip, Orante, Miller, Julio, Millers son, severally. Mill.
son. So-hoh, Miller, Miller,

Look out, Miller: Is there never a Miller amongst you here, Gentlemen?


Miller. Yes, here is a Miller amongst Gentlemen, a Gentleman-Miller.


Son. I should not be far off then; there went but a pair of Shears and a
Bodkin between us. Will you to work, Miller? here is a Maid has a Sack full of
News for you: Shall your Stones walk? will you grind, Miller?


Phil. This your son, Franio?


Mill. My ungratious, my disobedient, my unnatural, my Rebel-son, (my Lord.)


Son. Fie, your hopper runs over, Miller.


Mill. This Villain (of my own flesh and blood) was accessory to the stealing
of my daughter.


Son. Oh Mountain!

Shall thou call a Molehill a scab upon the face of the earth? though a Man be
a Thief, shall a Miller call him so? Oh egregious!


Julio. Remember, sirrah, who you speak before.


Son. I speak before a Miller, a Thief in grain; for he steals Corn. He that
steals a Wench, is a true Man, to him.


Phil. Can you prove that?


Son. I Will prove it strongly.

He that steals Corn, steals the Bread of the Commonwealth: he that steals a
Wench, steals but the flesh.


Phil. And how is their Bread-stealing more criminal then the flesh?


Son. He that steals bread, steals that which is lawful every day: he that
steals flesh, steals nothing from the fasting day: Ergo, to steal the bread is
the arranter Thief.


Phil. This is to some purpose.


Son. Again, he that steals flesh, steals for his own belly full: he that
steals bread, robs the Guts of others: Ergo, the arranter Thief the
Bread-stealer. Again, he that steals flesh, steals once and gives over; yes,
and often pays for it; the other steals every day without satisfaction. To
conclude, Bread-stealing is the more Capital Crime: for what he steals, he puts
it in at the head; he that steals flesh (as the Dutch Author says) puts it in
at the foot (the lower Member.) Will you go as you are now, Miller?


Enter Gillian the Millers wife. Mill. wife. I can no longer own
What is not mine with a free Conscience.
My Liege, your pardon.

Phil. For what? who knows this woman?


Miller. I, best (my Lord.)

I have been acquainted with her these forty Summers, and as many Winters, were
it Spring again; she is like the Gout, I --


Phil. Oh, your wife.


Mill. It Is oh my wife indeed (my Lord) a painful stitch to my side; would it
were picked out.


Phil. Well, Sir, your silence.


Son. Will you be older and older every day then other? the longer you live,
the older still? Must his Majesty command your silence, ere you will hold your
tongue?


Phil. Your reprehension runs into the same fault: Pray Sir, will you be silent.


Son. I have told him this before now (my Liege) but Age will have his course,
and his weaknesses.


Phil. Good Sir, your forbearance.


Son. And his frailties, and his follies (as I may say) that cannot hold his
tongue ere he be bidden.


Phil. Why sirrah, ha?


Son. But I believe your Majesty will not be long troubled with him: I hope
that woman has something to confess, will hang 'em both.


Phil. Sirrah, you will pull your Destiny upon you, If you cease not the sooner.


Son. Nay, I have done; yet it grieves me that I should call that man father,
that should be so shameless, that being commanded to hold his tongue --


Phil. To th'Porters Lodge with him.


Son. I thank your Grace, I have a friend there.


Julio. It hardly will get passage, it is a sorrow of that greatness grown,
'less it dissolve in tears, and come by parcels.


Millers wife. I Will help you, Sir, in the delivery, and bring you forth a joy:
you lost a daughter.


Iulio. 'Twas that recounted thought brought forth these sorrows.


Mill. wife. She Is found again; Know you this Mantle, Sir?


Julio. Hah!


Mill. wife This did enwrap your child, now the Counts wife, etc.


Julio. Oh thou have ta'n so many years from me, and made me young as was her
birthday to me.


Phil. You knew this before.


Son. Oh, oh; Item for you Miller.


Miller. I did, my Liege, I must confess I did; We poor ones love, and would
have comfort, Sir, as well as great.


Son. I beseech you, (my Liege) let this Woman be a little farther examined;
let the words of her Conscience be searched. I would know how she came by me; I
am a lost child, if I be theirs: though I have been brought up in a Mill, yet I
had ever a mind (methought) to be a greater man.


Mill. Wife. Thou art mine own flesh and blood, born of mine own body.


Son. It Is very unlikely that such a body should bear me; there is no trust in
these Millers. Woman, tell the truth, my father shall forgive thee, whatsoever
he was; were he Knight, Esquire, or Captain; less he could not be.


Mill. Wife. Thou art mine own child, Boy.


Son. And was the Miller my father?


Mill. Wife. Would thou make thy mother a whore, Knave?


Son. I, if she make me a Bastard. The Rack must make her confess, I shall
never come to know who I am else. I have a worshipful mind in me sure: methinks
I do scorn poor folks.


Julio. You both shall be rewarded bountifully. We'll be a kin too, Brother and
Sister shall be changed with us ever.


To the Miller and his wife. Son. Thank you (Uncle) my Sister is my Cousin yet
at the last cast: farewell Sister-foster. If I had known the Civil Law would
have allowed it, thou had had another manner of husband then thou have: but
much good do thee; I Will dance at thy Wedding, kiss the Bride, and so.


Julio. Why how now, Sirrah?


Mill. Son. It Is lawful now, she is none of my sister.

It was a Miller and a Lord
That had a Scabbard and a Sword,
He put it up in the Country word,
The Miller and his Daughter.
She has a face, and she can sing,
She has a grace, and she can spring;
She has a place, with another thing,
Tradoodle.
I would I were acquainted with your Tailor (noble Brother.)


Orante. You may, there he is.


Tailor. If you have any work for me, I can fit you. Sir, I fitted the Lady.


Son. My sister (Tailor)? What fits her, will hardly fit me: you have a true
Yard (Tailor)?


Tailor. Never a whit too long, I warrant you.


Son. Then (Tailor) march with me away;
I scorn these Robes, I must be gay,
My Noble Brother he shall pay
Tom Tailor.

Exeunt. The DOCTORS of Dull-head College.
ARGUMENT.
A Lovesick Gentleman, by the overcurious care of his kindred, is perplexed
with unnecessary Physicians, who are by some of his merry Visitants and
Companions baffled, and he released from their vexation.

Enter Doctors with an Urinal* 1 Ph. A Pleurisy, I see it.


2 Ph. I rather hold for tremor cordis.


3 Ph. Do you mark the Foeces?


2 Ph. It Is a most pestilent contagious Fever, a Surfeit, a plaguey Surfeit: he
must bleed.


1 Ph. By no means.


3 Ph. I say, bleed.


1 Ph. I say it is dangerous, the person being spent so much beforehand, and
nature drawn so low: Clysters, cool Clysters.


2 Ph. Now, with your favor, I should think a Vomit; for take away the Cause,
the Effect must follow: the stomack's foul and fur'd, the pot's inflamed yet.


Enter servant. Serve. Will it please you draw near? the sick Gentleman grows
worse and worse still.


1 Ph. We will attend him.


2 Ph. He shall do well, my friend.


Serve. My Masters love, Sir.


3 Ph. There Is no doubt in him, none at all, never fear him.


Exeunt. Enter Frank sick, Physicians, an Apothecary. 1 Ph. Clap on the
Cataplasm.


Fr. Good Gentlemen, good learned Gentlemen.


2 Ph. And see those broths there ready within this hour: pray keep your arms
in; the air is raw, and ministers much evil.


Fr. Pray leave me, I beseech you leave me, Gentlemen, I have no other sickness
but your presence; convey your Cataplasms to those that need 'em, your Vomits
and your Clysters.


3 Ph. Pray be ruled, Sir.


1 Ph. Bring in the Lettice Cap; you must be shaved, Sir, and then how suddenly
we'll make you sleep!


Fr. Till Doomsday: What unnecessary nothings are these about a wounded mind?


2 Ph. How do ye?


Fr. What questions they propound too! How do you, Sir? I am glad to see you
well.


3 Ph. A great distemper, it grows hotter still.


1 Ph. Open your mouth, I pray, Sir.


Fr. Can you tell me how old I am then? there is my hand, pray show me how many
broken shins within this two year. Who would be thus in fetters? Good Master
Doctor, and you dear Doctor, and the third sweet Doctor, and as precious Master
Apothecary, I do pray you to give me leave to live a little longer: ye stand
before me like my blacks.


Enter his Comrades. Thomas. How do thou Frank? bear up, boy; what, shrink
in the sinews for a little sickness?


Fr. Thou art a mad Companion, never staid, Tom?


Thom. Let Rogues be staid, that have no habitation, a Gentleman may wander:
sit thee down, Frank, and see what I have brought thee: Come, discover, open
the Scene, and let the work appear: a friend at need, you Rogue, is worth a
Million.


Fr. What have thou there, a Julip?


Hylas. He must not touch it, it is present death.


Tom. Ye are an *Ass, a Twir-pipe, a Jeffery-John-bopeep: thou minister? thou
mend a left handed pack-saddle; out Puppy. My friend Frank, but a very foolish
fellow: do thou see that bottle? view it well.


Fr. I do, Tom.


Thom. There be as many lives in it as a Cat carries, it is everlasting liquor.


Fr. What?


Thom. Old Sack, boy, old reverend Sack.


Fr. I see no harm, Tom, drink with moderation.


Tom. Drink't with Sugar, which I have ready here; and here is a glass, boy,
fill it: hang up your Julips, and your Portugal-possets, your Barley-broths,
and Sorrel sops; they are mangy, and breed the Scratches only: give me Sack:
have at thee.


Fr. Do: I Will pledge thee.


Tho. Take it off thrice, and then cry, Heigh! like a Huntsman, with a clear
heart, and no more fits I Will warrant thee; the only Cordial, Frank.


1 Ph. Are the things ready?


Serve. Long since, Sir.


1 Ph. Bring out the oils then.


Fr. Now or never, Gentlemen, do me a kindness, and deliver me.


Thom. From whom, boy?


Fr. From those things that talk there, Physicians, Tom, Physicians,
Scouring-sticks; they mean to read upon me.


Thom. And be thou confident we will deliver thee: for look ye, Doctors, say
the Devil were sick now, his horns sawed off, and his head bound with a biggin,
sick of a Calenture, taken by a surfeit of stinking souls, at his Nephews and S.
Dunstans, what would you minister upon the sudden? your Judgment, short and
sound.


1 Ph. A fools head.


Thom. No Sir, it must be a Physicians, for three causes; the first, because it
is a bald-head likely, which will down easily without apple-pap.


3 Ph. A main cause.


Thom. So it is, and well considered. The second, for it is filled with broken
Greek, Sir, which so tumbles in his stomach, Doctor, and works upon the
Crudities, conceive me, the fears and the fiddle-strings within it, that those
damned souls must disembogue again.


Hylas. Or meeting with the Stygian humor.


Thom. Right, Sir.


Hylas. Forced with a Cataplasm of Crackers.


Thom. Ever.


Hylas. Scowre all before him like a Sca^inger.


Thom. Satisfecisti Domine. My last cause, my last is, and not least, most
learned Doctors, because in most Physicians heads (I mean those that are most
excellent, and old withal, and angry, though a Patient say his prayers, and
Paracelsians that do trade with poisons, we have it by tradition of great
VVriters) there is a kind of Toadstone bred, whose virtue the Doctor, being
dried.


I Ph. We are abused, Sirs.


Hyl. I take it so, or shall be: for say, the Belly-ach caused by an inundation
of Pease-porridge, are we therefore to open the Port-vein, or the
Port-Esquiline?


Sam. A learned question: or grant the Diaphragma by a rupture, the Sign being
then in the head of Capricorn --


Thom. Meet with the passion Hypercondriaca, and so cause a Carnositie in the
Kidneys, must not the brains being buttered with this humor? answer me that.


Sam. Most excellently argued.


2 Ph. The next fit you will have, my most fine Scholar, Bedlam shall find a
salve for. Fare you well, Sir: we came to do you good, but these young Doctors,
it seems, have boar'd our Noses.


3 Ph. Drink hard, Gentlemen, and get unwholsom Drabs; it is ten to one then we
shall hear farther from ye, your Note altered.


Exit Phys. Sing. Thom. And will thou be gone, says one.


Hyl. And will thou be gone, says the other.


Thom. Then take, take the odd Crown,
To mend thy old Gown,

Sam. And we'll be gone all together.


Fr. My learned Tom, gramercy.


Exeunt. The End.
Courteous Reader, these Books following are sold by Henry Marsh at the Princes
Arms in Chancery Lane.
Who for your Pleasure has produced his Store;
And as you like, he will furnish you with more.
Various Histories, with curious Discourses in Humane Learning.
1. ACompendious Chronicle of Portugal, from Alfonso the first King, to Alfonso
the sixth now Reigning: together with a Cosmographical Description of the
Dominions of Portugal, by I. D. Gent. 8. 2. That useful Book for Gentlemen and
Travelers, being an Exact Description of the several Countries and Shires of
England: by Edw. Leigh Esquire. 8. 3. Sage Senator, or the qualifications of a
perfect Politician: by I. G. Gent. 8 4. Blood for Blood, or Murder revenged:
in 35 Tragical Histories: some whereof have been the sad Product of our Times.
8. 5. Venus undrest, or the Practical part of Love, extracted out of the
extravagant and lascivious Life of a fair but subtle Female. 8. 6. An
Historical and Geographical Description of the great County and River of the
Amazons in America. 8. 7. Royal History Completed, in the Life of his Sacred
Majesty Char^s ^. James Duke of York, and Henry Duke of Gloucester; with their
Restoration happily concluded by his Grace the Duke of Albemarle. 8. 8. The
most Notable Antiquity of Great Britain, vulgarly called Stone (...), on
Salisbu^y-Plain: by I. Jones Esquire. Architect-Gen. to the la^e King. Fol. 9. A
Compl^ at History of the Wars of the Greeks, Written by the learned (...), and
Translated by Edw. Grimstone Esquire, Serjean^ at Arms to his (...) Majesty. Fol.
10 Rumps Looking-Glass, or a Collection of such Pieces of Drollery as were
(...) by several Wits to purge the Rump. 4. 11. A New Discovery of Highway
Thieves: by a Gentleman lately converted. 4. 12. Blood washed away by the tears
of Repentance, or the Relation of Butlers murdering of Knight in Milk-street.
40. 13. The Faithful Lapidary, being a History of all precious Stones: very
useful for Gentlemen, Merchants and others. 40. 14. A short view of the Life
and Actions of the Illustrious Prince, James D. of York, with his Character. 4.
15. The Rogue, or the Life of Gusman de Alfarache the witty Spaniard: the fifth
and last Edition. 8. 16 The Statesman, or Modern Policy: the second Part. 8.
17. The Complete Attorney: fifth and last Edition. 8. 18. Advice to Balaam's
Ass, or Momus catechized, in answer to a certain Scribler I. H^yden, Author of
Advice to a Daughter. 8. 19. The Royal Buckler, or Salmasius in English. 8. 20.
The Devils Cabinet-Council discovered, or the Plots and Contrivances of O.
Cromwell and the Long*Parliament in order to the taking away the Life of his
Sacred Majesty of blessed memory. 8. 21. The Crafty Whore, or the Mystery and
Iniquity of Bawdyhouses: with Dehortations from Lust. Published for the benefit
of all; but especially for the younger sort: by R. H. Esquire. 8. 22. Montelions
Comical Almanacks for 1661, 1662, and 1663. 8. 23. Montelions Introduction to
Astrology, after a new but more easy way then ever yet published. 8. 24.
Whites Peripatetical Institutions: in the way of S. Kel. Digby. 12. 25.
Reynolds Word of Caution to the Atheists and Errouri^s of our Times. 12. 26.
Lucius Florus. 24. 27. Salust. 24. 28. Hanam's Exploits. 4. 29. Leonards
Reports. Fol. 30. Gusmans Comical Almanac for 1662. 31. The Sovereigns
Prerogative, and the Subjects Privilege: Comprised in several Speeches, Cases,
and Arguments of Law, discussed between the Kings most Sacred Majesty, and the
most eminent Persons of both Houses of Parliament: Collected by Dr. Tho.
Fuller. Fol. 32. I^dex Poeticus. 12. 33. Synonima. 12. 34. Fathers Blessing, or
a Legacy to his son, fitting him to carry himself through the various
Encounters of this world. 12. 35. Rebels no Saints. 8. 36. Letters of Monsieur
Balzac: translated into English, by Sir R. Baker and others. 1. 37. Monuments
of the Kirk. 4. 38. The Life of that reverend Divine and learned Historian Dr.
Tho. Fuller. 8. 39. The History of the affairs of Scotland, under the conduct
of the Illustrious and truly valiant James Marquess of Montross. 8. 40. A short
View of the Lives of those excellent Princes Henry D. of Gloucester, and Mary
Princess of Orange, deceased. 8. 41. Public Good without private Interest, or
a Relation of the present condition of Virginia. 4. 42. L^ssius of health, with
Cornaro's Treatise of Temperance. 24. 43. A new English Grammar, prescribing
certain Rules for Foreiners to learn English: with a Grammar of the Spanish or
Castilian Tongue, with special Remarks upon the Portugees Dialect, etc. to
which is annexed, a Perambulation of Spain and Portugal, which may serve for
Direction to travel through both Countries, for the Service of Her Majesty,
whom God preserve. 8. 44. Advice to a Son, by a Marquess lately deceased. 12.
45. The blood of the Grape: the second Edition, enlarged, by Dr. Tho. Whiker
Physician to His Majesty. 12. 46. The Learners Help, by which he may presently
find out the Root of any Hebrew word in the Bible. 8. 47. Man in Paradise: a
Philosophical Discourse. 48. The Differences of the Ages of Man's Life, together
with the Original Causes, Progress, and End thereof. 8. 49. The Rarities of
Turkey. 8. 50. Overbury Revived, or a Satirical Description of the Vices of our
late Times, in Essays and Characters, by L. G. 12. 51. Natures chief Rarities.
12. 52. Twelve Trea^ises of Mr. I. Howel Esquire. 8. 53. The true Portraiture of
Her most excellent Majesty Donna Catherino Queen of Great Britain. Fol. 54. The
Fanatic in his Colors, or the Rise, Height, and Fall of Faction and
Rebellion, from 1648, unto 1661. with an Appendix concerning Allegiance,
Government, and Order, by T. F. 8. 55. Summum Bonum, or a Plain Pathway to
Happiness, conducting the Soul to its Haven of Rest, through the stormy passage
of Worldly troubles: to which is added a short Dialogue of that excellent
Virtue of the Submission of Man's Will to the Will of God. 8 56. Mr. Shirley's
Rudiments of Grammar. 8. 57. A transparent Reet for the Catholic Planisphere.
4. 58. Tabulae ad Grammatica Graeca introductoriae. 4. 59. The Doctrine of the
Ass: whereunto is added, the Asses complaint, Balaams Reply, and the Authors
Apology, never before published, by Lewis Griffin. 4. 60. The History of
Independency complete; being the first, second, third, fourth and last Part,
which may be had single by such as have bought the other. 4.
Excellent Tracts in Divinity, Controversy, Sermons and Devotions, written by
eminent Divines.
61. Considerations upon the Act of Uniformity, with an Expedient for the
satisfaction of the Clergy in the Province of Canterbury: by a servant of the
God of Peace. 4. 62. Christian Diary, by N. Causin. 12. 63. The Doctrines
Trial, with a Present for Caesar: in three Sermons, by S. H. 12. 64. The
Society of the Saints, in 14 choice Sermons: by I. B. M. A. 4. 65. The
Christian Soldier his Combat, Conquest, and Crown; against the three
Arch-enemies of Mankind, the World, the Flesh, and the Devil. 12. 66. The
Subjects Sorrow, or Lamentations upon the Death of Britains Josiah, K Chapter
expressed in a Sermon upon Lam. 4. 20. 12. 67. The unspotted High-Court of
Justice erected and discovered: in three Sermons, by Th. Baker, a sequestered
Divine. 12. 68. Bishop Jewels Apology, Greek and Latin. 12. and 8. 69. The
pious Prentice, wherein is declared how they that intend to be Prentices may 1
Rightly enter into the Calling. 2 Faithfully abide in it. 3 Discreetly
accomplish it. 12.
70. Toward the Vindication of the second Commandment: by Edm. Gurn^y, B. D.
12. 71. The free and honorable Servant: wherein is showed, that to be a
Servant of the Lord, is a Title of the greatest honor, and a Place of the best
Preferment: by I Fowler, M. A. etc. 8. 72 Three excellent Sermons upon these
following Subjects: True Repentance the Safety of a Nation: upon Joel. 2. 14.
The Love of Christ to his Church: upon Luke 22. 31, 32. The Saints
Encouragement: upon Luke 11 13. 8.
73. The Fear of God and the King: pressed in a Sermon, by Matthew. Griffith, D.
D. 8. 74. Dr. Fullers triple Reconciler. 8. 75. The baptized Turk, or the
Conversion of a Native Turk to the Christian Religion: by Dr. Warmstrey, Dr.
Gunning, etc. 8. 76. Golden Remains of a Reverend Divine lately deceased. 8.
77. News from the Pulpit for the present Age and Posterity: by I. Jones, D. D.
12. 78. Dr. Warmestrey on the Sacrament. 24. 79. Hooks fatal Doom to the
Reprobate, or an Excellent Comment on the 1 Cor. 16. 22. 12. 80. The
Presbyterian Bramble, or a short Discourse of Church Government: by L. G. 4.
Choice Poems, by eminent Wits of this Age.
81. Poems enriched with Wit, Mirth, and Eloquence: Written by Sir A. C.
Knight. 80. 82. Select Poems on several occasions: by S. Pordage, Gent. 8. 83.
Mundorum Explicatio, or the explanation of an Hieroglyphical figure, wherein
are couched the Mysteries of the External, Internal, and Eternal World: being a
sacred Poem, written by S. P. Armig. 8. 84. Clevelands Poems. 8. 85. Regale
Lectum Miseriae, or a Kingly Bed of Misery: in which is contained a Dream,
with other Poems: by I. Quarles, the last Impression. 8. 86. Heroical Lover: by
Tho. Buncroft. 8. 87. Poems of Mr. I. Crouch, Gent. Fol. and 4.
Incomparable Comedies, and Tragedies, written by several Ingenious Authors.
88. The Worlds Idol- Plutus, a Comedy, written in Greek by Aristophanes,
translated by H. H. B. O. ^. 89. Am^nta; the famous Pastoral: Originally in
Italian, translated by I D. 8. 90. The Shepherds Paradise: a Comedy privately
acted before the late King Charles, by the Queens Majesty and Ladies of
Honor: written by ^. Montague, Esquire. 8. 91. Lusts Dominion, or the Lascivious
Queen: an excellent Tragedy; by Christ. Manlae, Gent. 12. 92. Loves Mistress,
or the Queens Masque: by F. Heywood. 4. 93. Spanish Gypsy: acted with general
applause: written by Tho. Middleton and W. Rowley, Gent. 4. 94. Thracian
Wonder; a Comical History: written by I. webster and W. Rowley, 4. 95. That
pleasant and merry Comedy, entitled, Gammar Gurtons Needle, acted 100 years
ago at C. C. Cambridge. 4. 96. A pleasant Comedy, called, The two merry
Milk-maids: by I. C. 4. 97. The Queen of Aragon: a Tragi-Comedy. Fol. 98. The
obstinate Lady: a new Comedy, the Scene London, by Sir A. Cockain. 4. 99. The
French Schoolmaster, a Comedy. 4. 100. A Cure for a Cuckold: a Comedy, by I.
Webster and W. Rowley. 4. 101. The Maids Revenge: a Tragedy, by I. Shirley.
102. Troades: a Tragedy, written in Latin by Seneca, Englished by S. P. Gent.
8. Three new Plays: viz. The 103. Noble Ingratitude: a Pastoral Tragi-Comedy.
12. 104. The enchanted Lovers: a Pastoral. 12. 105. The Amorous Fantasm: a
Tragi-Comedy, by Sir W. Lower Knight. 12. 106. The merry conceited Humors of
Bottom the Weaver. 4. 107. A pleasant Dialogue between Band, Cuff, and Ruff:
done by an excellent Wit. 4. 108. Hells Higher Court of Justice, or the Trial
of the three Politic Ghosts, viz. O. Cromwell, K. Sweden, and Card. Mazarine.
4. 109. The City Nightcap: a Tragy-Comedy, by R. Davenport. 4. 110. The Rump:
a Come^y, by I. T. Gent. 4. 111. Tom Tyler and his wife, an excellent old Play,
acted about 100 years ago. 4. 112. A true, perfect, and exact Catalogue of all
the Comedies Tragedies, Tragy-Comedies, Pastorals, Masks, and Interludes,
that were ever yet printed and published till this present year, 1662 All which
you may either buy of, or sell to the above said Henry Marsh.
Excellent and approved Treatises in Physic and Chyrurgerie.
113. Occult Physic, in three Books: The first of Beasts, Trees, Herbs, and
their Magical Virtues. 8. The second containing Rare Medicines for all diseases
happening to the bodies of both men and women, never till now made public. The
third showing how to cure all Diseases with ten medicament^. To which is added
a Tract how to judge of a Disease by the affliction of the Moon, upon the sight
of the Patients Urine, by W. W. etc. 8.
114. A Physical Discourse of the cure of Diseases by Signature, by R.
Bunworth. 12. 115. A new discovery of the French Disease, and Running of the
Reins, their causes, signs; with plain and easy directions for perfect curing
the same: the second Edition, by R. Bunworth Doctor in Physic. 8.
New and excellent Romances of the most eminent Wits.
116. Choice Novels, delightful and profitable: written originally by one of
the prime Wi^s of Spain; now made English by a person of quality. Fol. 117.
English Lovers, or a Girl worth Gold: both parts, so often acted with general
applause, now newly formed into a Romance, by the accurate pen of I. D. Gent.
8. 118. Amadis de Gaul, a Romance, sixth and last part, translated out of
French into English, by F. K. 4. 119. Clerio and Lozia their loves and
adventures: a Romance, rendered into English by F. K. 8. 120. Don Iuan Lamberto,
or a Comical History of the late times: in two parts, by Montelion Knight of
the Oracle, etc. 4.
Poetical, with several accurately-ingenious Treatises lately published.
121. The Rump, or an exact collection of the choicest Poems and Songs relating
to the late times, by the most eminent Wi^s, from Anno 1639. to Anno 1661. 8.
122. Fragmenta Aulica, or Court and State Jests, in noble Drollery, true and
real, ascertained to their times, places, and persons, by T. S. Gent. 12. 123.
Studii Legalis ratio, or directions for the Study of the Law, under these
following heads: The Qualifications for the Study. by W. P. The Nature of the
Study. by W. P. The Means of the Study. by W. P. The Method of the Study. by W.
P. The Time and of the Study. by W. P. The Place of the Study. by W. P.

Books newly Printed.
124. The glories and magnificent Triumphs of the blessed Restitution of his
Sacred Majesty K Charles II. from his arrival in Holland 1659/60 till this
present; comprizing all the Honors and Grandeurs done to, and conferred by
him; by I. Heath, Gent. 8. 125. The Wits, or Sport upon Sport. 8. 126. Four
choice Sermons preached in Oxford: 1 Christians excellency, upon Mat. 5. 47. 2
Truth begets Enmity, upon Gal. 4. 16. 3 A Nations happiness is a good King,
^ccles. 10. 17. 4 The praise of Charity, upon Heb. 13. 16. by I. Price. M. A.
etc. 8.
127. The Solicitor: exactly and plainly declaring, both as to Knowledge and
Practice, wherein such an Und^rtaker ought to be qualified: as also, his Parts,
Qualities, and fitting Endowments for such a weighty employment. Showing
further the particular of suing a person privileged, and how the same may by
course of Court sue any Forreiner. In a more special manner then has ever been
heretofore published by any hand whatsoever. Being truly useful for all sorts
of persons who have any important business in Law or Equity. By T. M. Esquire
twelve years a Practitioner, and now of the Middle*Temple* London.
Plays newly Printed.
128. The poor Scholar, a Comedy, by R. N. Fellow of K. C. C. 4. 129. The birth
of Merlin, or the Child has found his Father: written by W. Shakespeare and W.
Rowley. 130. Any thing for a quiet Life: a Comedy: by Tho. Middleton, Gent. 4.
Books I purpose to print very speedily.
131. A good Companion, or serious Meditations on the Miseries of man's Life,
and of Death, by W. Winstanly. 132. The unfortunate Usurper: a Tragedy, the
Scene Constantinople. 133. Profit and Pleasure for Gentlemen and Yeomen:
containing a Miscelany of R^creations and Experiments, etc. 134. Virgil in
Droll. by Scurron, Englished by Montelion Knight of the Oracle, etc. 135. A
Discourse concerning the preservation and prolongation of H^alth: written in
French, by F. de Monginot, Chancellor and Physician in Ordinary to the King,
and Doctor of Physic in the most famous and ancient University of
Mont-Pellier; now Englished by P. Belon, Chemist and Apoth* for the benefit of
his Countrymen.
FINIS.

