Imprimatur.

Guil. Jane, R. P. D. Hen. Episc. Land. a sacris domesticis.

Mar. 4. 1678 / 9,
Go show thy self to the Priest: SAFE ADVICE For a Sound PROTESTANT.

BY L. Womock, D. D. A. S.

Ecclus. 11. 7. Blame not before thou have examined the truth: Understand
first, and then rebuke.

LONDON: Printed for Robert Clavel, at the Peacock in St. Paul's Churchyard.
1679.

SAFE ADVICE FOR A Sound Protestant.
THE occasion of this Paper was a Discourse upon the cleansing of the Leper;
Mat. 8. 1, 2, 3, 4.
and particularly that head of Application which was managed as follows: [We
do steadfastly believe that every man must give an account of himself to God;
and is it not then, at least advisable, that he should show himself unto the
Priest; that he may be the better prepared for that account? I know the Law of
Moses does not bind us, in its Authority; but yet, it may direct us, by a
parity of reason. As that Law was a dispensation by the hand of Moses, so it
was peculiar to the Jewish Nation. But as the Moral part of that Law (being the
Law of Nature, in Print, and set forth for better information) is of perpetual
use and obligation; so the Ceremonial part, having a shadow of good things to
come, does invite us earnestly to look after the substance, wherein we may
possibly be concerned.

The Apostle tells us, that under the letter of a Carnal Ordinance, many times,
there lies hid a Spiritual signification. And this very Leprosy of the body
did represent another, much more malignant, noisome, and pernicious, the
Leprosy of Sin, that overspreads and defiles the soul. Now, was there a
Ministry of divine institution to take cognizance of that, to inspect the
person so infected, and to give judgment of his condition? And is there no
provision made in this case of spiritual Leprosy? Was God more careful (then)
of his peoples bodies, than he is (now) of their souls? No certainly: Christ
came a Physician for the soul, and applied himself to sinners, and their
Ghostly maladies. The whole have no need of the Physician Mat. 9. 12.
, but the sick; I came not to call the righteous, Mar. 2. 17. Luke 5. 31.
but sinners to repentance. Christ is a Priest for ever; and though (for that
reason) he can have no successor: Yet, because, in the execution of that
Office, he sits now in heaven, he was pleased to appoint his substitutes to
administer (here) in his Church on earth. As my Father has sent me, even so
send I you: Joh. 20. 21.
(And) he that receives you, receives me; and Mat. 10. 40.
he that hears you, hears me. And unless we Luke 10. 16.
value our health more than our salvation, we will, no doubt, be as forward to
show our selves unto the Priest, upon a Spiritual, as those Jews were, upon
their Carnal account. And this is especially requisite in three Cases.

(1.) To inform our Judgment. (2.) To assure our Conscience. And (3.) to credit
our Communion. [Conference with the Priest is requisite;

1. To inform the Judgment. Many times, doubtful cases do arise, and the
difficulties which do occur, in the conduct of a Christians life, are not few,
nor to be neglected. And what Oracle can we so prudently appeal unto, as that
Sacred faculty, whose skill and learning is designed on purpose to minister to
such as stand in need of their instruction and conduct? For the Priests lips
Mal. 2. 7.
should keep knowledge, and they should seek the Law at his mouth: for he is
the Messenger of the Lord of Hosts. If it were so in those days, much more
under the dispensation of the Gospel, wherein the Veil is taken from the face
of the Priest; and his Ministration does so far exceed in glory, 2 Cor. 3. 9,
and 13.

2. Conference with the Priest is very requisite to assure the Conscience. A
little guilt does afflict and trouble a tender Conscience; and a scruple, many
times (where, really, there is no such guilt at all, as in imagined) may much
disquiet it. Now, to have assurance from a better judgment than my own; or (if
not a better) from a judgment, clothed with a Sacred Office and Authority; to
have my doubts cleared by the discourses of a prudent pious person, and my
jealousy of guilt taken off by a solemn absolution; This, one would think,
should bring in a considerable satisfaction. He that duly weighs the
circumstances, with which the power of the Keys was delivered by our Savior,
cannot but be convinced, that there is more solid comfort in that Ministry than
is ordinarily imagined. You may read attentively the bequest, Joh. 20. 20, 21,
22, 23.

3. It is requisite to show our selves to the Priest, to credit our Communion.
The Apostle has laid down this Canon; If any man that is called a Brother (a
Christian by Profession) be a fornicator, or covetous, or an Idolator, or a
railer, or a drunkard, or an extortioner, 1 Cor. 5. 11.
I would not have you give so much scandal to the Church, or so much
countenance to such a person, as (out of design or choice) to eat with him. A
man known to be of a loose Conversation, (in any single, or more instances or
wickedness) though he has not been delated to his Superiors, not presented, or
accused before any Court of Judicature; yet being conscious to himself of
scandal given to the Church whereof he is a Member, it will very well become
him, as an humble, as an ingenuous, as a penitent and serious person, to show
himself to the Priest, as well to obtain his advice and prayers, as his
approbation and encouragement, and for the satisfaction of those with whom he
does communicate. He that denies the usefulness of such addresses upon this
threefold account, does evacuate the use of the Ministry, almost, to all
intents and purposes.

If he denies the first, to what purpose are our Catechisings, and our Sermons,
unless he makes it his business to frequent them, not to inform his judgment,
but to censure the discourse, and traduce the Preacher? If he denies the
second, what becomes of the benefit of Absolution, of good directions and
advice, with all Ghostly comfort, administered, toward the peace of afflicted
Consciences? If he denies the third, he takes away one of the best expedients
to prevent the scandal of an indiscriminate and free admission to the Lords
Supper.

But not to reflect upon the Sentiments or Censures of rash men (whose passions
are governed by their interest, and their judgments by their passions,) let us
learn, what were the sober thoughts of such as were most zealous of a prudent
and pious Reformation. We will begin with Hermannus Bonnae 1545. Cap. de
Conversione a peccatis, m. fol. 6.
Archbishop of Colen, in his worthy attempt to that effect. Where he says,
That private Confession and Absolution are to be retained in the Churches; not
that there is any necessity of the particular enumeration of sins: But because,
(that Catechizing) that Instruction and Consolation, which does accompany this
wholesome practice, is very profitable, and, to many, very necessary; that they
may testify their hearty sorrow for their sins past, and their firm purpose of
amendment for the future; and that they may not be left in the dark, and
doubtful of their pardon and forgiveness. Next we will observe the Augustan
Confession, tendered with all humility (in the year 1530.) to the Emperor
Charles De Confessione.
the Fifth, from which the very Name and Title of Protestants was derived,
their address ending with these words, [ De quo hic etiam solenniter and
public Protestamur.] In that Confession they do highly extol the power of the
Keys, and the benefit of private Absolution; that it does declare and apply the
Gospel to terrified Consciences: And this application it makes, not (only) to
all in general, but to every single person in particular, as our Savior Christ
affirms, [ Thou have gained thy Brother.] That this Absolution is therefore to
be retained in the Church; and that the voice of the Gospel in this Ministry is
to be believed as a voice from Heaven. And seeing Confession does make way for
the benefit of this Absolution, and forasmuch as the Rite and Custom thereof
does preserve, in the people, the understanding of power of the Keys, and of
the Remission of sins; and besides, seeing that Conference, there had, is of
great advantage for men's instruction and warning; Therefore (say they) we do
diligently retain the use of Confession in our Churches; yet teaching them
withal, that the particular enumeration of sins is not necessary of divine
right, nor as men's Consciences to be burdened with it, etc. To this Confession
subscribed, John Duke of Saxony Elector, George Marq. Brandenburgh, Ernest Duke
of Lunenburgh, Philip Lantgrave of Hess, John Frederick Duke of Saxony, Francis
Duke of Lunebergh, Wolfangus Prince of Anhalt, the Senate and Magistrates of
Nurenborgh, the Senate of Kentlingen.

In the Confession of Saxony offered to the Council of Trent, 1551. they
declared thus, Concerning private Confession to be made to the Pastors, we do
affirm that the Custom of private Absolution is to be retained in the Church:
And we do constantly retain it for many weighty causes; though we teach also,
that a particular recital of all sins, is neither of divine command, or
possible; but apt to make faith the more feeble, and pious minds the more
doubtful.

In the Confession of Wittenbergh (of The Translator into English refers it to
Auspurge, ut infra 1586.
1552.) they declare, Though they do not think the enumeration of their sins
before a Priest, of necessity to Salvation, nor of any merit toward the
remission of sins: Yet they take care, as far as may be, that Confession of
sins in general may be retained in their Churches for two reasons; The first,
that the more ignorant sort of people may, by that way of Conference, be the
better admonished and instructed in all things necessary: The other, That upon
this occasion, the Gospel of Christ, touching the remission of sins, may be
particularly applied, and the assurance of Absolution be either apprehended, or
confirmed.

In the Confession of Bohemia they declare, 1535.
That though they do not enjoin, nor require a particular enumeration of sins,
yet they teach that Penitents should have recourse to the Priest, (whom the
English Translation Edit. by Tho. Thamas at Cambridge, 1586.
calls, the Physician of their souls) to confess their sins to God before him,
and (as that Translator wordeth it) to declare their grief, trouble, and
remorse; to take advice and counsel, how they may avoid sin for the future, and
to seek for absolution and pardon by this Ministry of the Keys, which is
Christ's Institution. They teach men also to magnify this Absolution; and
undoubtedly to believe what this power of the Keys promises, seeing it is the
voice of Christ himself and expressed by his command, Receive Joh. 2.
ye the Holy Ghost: Whose sins ye remit, they are remitted, etc. and they would
have them know that by this power and Ministry of the Keys, and the authority
of Christ's Word, all their sins are pardoned. To leave Foreiners,

Let us see what the Advice and Practice of the Church of England is: (1.) She
is very positive in her Order, Rules, and Canons, that all persons should show
themselves unto the Priest, to be Catechized, and to hear Sermons, for the
Information of their Judgments. But (2.) as to such as find themselves
disquieted in mind and conscience, it is rather a matter of advice than of
command; for thus she does invite and persuade them to apply themselves for
their own benefit.

[And because it is requisite, that no The first Exhortation before the
Communion.
man should come to the holy Communion, but with a full trust in Gods mercy,
and with a quiet Conscience; therefore if there be any of you who cannot quiet
his own Conscience, but requires further comfort or counsel; let him come to
me, or to some other discreet and learned Minister of Gods Word, and open his
grief, that by the Ministry of Gods holy Word, he may receive the benefit of
Absolution, together with Ghostly counsel and advice, to the quieting of his
Conscience, and avoiding of all scruple and doubtfulness.] Nor is the Church of
England less tender or cautious in her advice and order at the Visitation of
the Sick; for the Rubric before the Absolution runs thus: [Here shall the sick
person be moved to make a special confession of his sins, if he feels his
Conscience troubled with any weighty matter. After which Confession the Priest
shall absolve him ( if he humbly and heartily desire it.)

I confess, that in the third case, that of Scandal, her Rules and Canons are
more strict; and it would be much for the honor of God, and of our Profession,
if the iniquity and looseness of these times would allow us to be no less
strict in the observation and practice of them. The Rubric is See the Rubric
before the second Service.
this, [If any one that offers to come to the holy Communion be an open and a
notorious evil liver, or have done wrong to his Neighbor, so that the
Congregation be thereby offended; the Curate having knowledge thereof, shall
advertise him, in no wise to presume to come to the Lords Table, till he has
openly declared his repentance, and given satisfaction to the offended
Congregation, and the party whom he has wronged. The like order the Curate is
to take with such as live in habitual hatred and malice. These are the terms
and ends, for and upon which the Church of England sends her Members for their
advantage and remedy to the Priests Office. And whether the Presbyterian Party
be more modest and gentle in their Requiries we shall now consider.

(Not to look so far back as their Directory, and their Humble Advice to the
Parliament,) In their Grand Debate by the Kings Commission, amongst their
Exceptions against Page 14. and 15.
some passages in the Liturgy, they desire the Ministers power both to admit
and keep from the Lords Table, may be in these words, [The Minister shall admit
none to the Lords Supper, till they have made a credible profession of their
Faith, and promised obedience to the Will of God, and that all possible
diligence be used, as is for the instruction and reformation of scandalous
offenders, whom the Minister shall not suffer to partake of the Lords Table,
until they have openly declared themselves to have truly repented and amended
their former Page 124.
naughty lives. And not satisfied with a weeks warning for the Sacrament, they
expostulate thus, [Is there leisure of self-examination, and restitution, and
satisfaction, and going to the Minister for counsel to quiet his Conscience? In
their Reformation of the Liturgy they say thus, [They only are to be Page 48.
f.
invited to the Lords Table, and to come, that truly repent and believe, and
unfeignedly consent to the terms of the Covenant: [Then follows an odd
Parenthesis] (though all are not to be invited thus to believe and repent, and
so to come.) But those are to be admitted, by the Pastors, if they come, who,
having the use of reason to understand what they do, and examine themselves,
have made a personal profession of Faith, Repentance, and Obedience.] And
treating of Catechizing, and the approbation of those that are to be admitted
to the Lords Supper: They give this order; [Let the Minister Page 66.
either go to their houses, or rather appoint the persons (of several Families)
in their courses, to come to him for personal instructions, where he may confer
with those, who are unmeet to be Catechized publicly, or unwilling to submit
to it, and there let him acquaint them with the substance of Christian faith
and duty.] And they add this caution, [But let him not in public or private
meddle with impertinences, nor sift people to know things unfit, or unnecessary
to be disclosed.] And a little after their order is very strict and positive,
in these (and many other words) [Let Page 67.
none be admitted by the Minister to the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, till,
being instructed in the Christian Religion, (they) do openly make a credible
profession of their own faith and promise to be obedient to the Will of God.
(And they add) A profession is credible when it is made understandingly,
seriously, voluntarily, deliberately, and not nullified by contradiction in
Word or Deed. (And a little after) [It is not private persons only, but the
Pastors of the Church, that must approve of this Profession. Therefore before
any are admitted to the Lords Supper, they shall give a good account of their
Knowledge, Faith, and Christian Conversation conformable thereunto, unto the
Pastors of their respective Congregations, or else shall produce a Certificate,
that they have been approved or admitted to the Lords Supper in another
Congregation, of which they were Members, and that by an allowed Minister upon
such approved profession as aforesaid.] And they close their charge with these
words, [Let no Minister be enforced to admit any himself to the Lords Supper,
who has been clancularly and irregularly approved. Those that after this
Approbation prove scandalous offenders, shall not by the Minister be suffered
to partake of the Lords Table, until they have openly declared themselves to
have truly repented and amended their former naughty lives.] Thus much for the
Presbyterian Brethren.

We see then, that this Lesson [ Go show thy self to the Priest] is a Doctrine,
which all Parties themselves more or less concerned in. The Church of Rome
imposes it with a very strict severity, to the overcharging and insnaring of
tender Consciences; and makes use of it to very wicked ends and purposes; to
fish out men's tempers and inclinations; that as occasion serves, they may
employ them to destroy Princes, and subvert States and Kingdoms. Examples
whereof we have in William Parry, and Edward Squire in the time of Queen
Elezabeth. The Presbyterians exact the same duty with no less zeal (I hope to
no ill intent) but with an imperious rigor.

The Church of England does advise and order the practice of it, to these
effects, i. e. To prevent Scandal, to promote Repentance, to advance
Instruction, and to administer both Caution and Comfort to the Penitent; or (to
use the words of our most excellent Litany,) To strengthen such as do stand, to
comfort and help the weak-hearted, to raise up them that fall, and finally to
beat down Satan under our feet.

And to make it (like the yoke of a meek and gracious Master) the more
practicable, light, and easy, she puts it on with as much moderation,
gentleness, and lenity as is imaginable. Whether the Discourse above recited be
not of this temper, and calculated for the very same Meridian, I leave the
judicious Reader to determine.

Some men perhaps may think it savours as much of the Presbyterian, as others
do of the Popish Doctrine; yet really it is neither the one nor the other: But
the genuine Doctrine of the Church of England, according to Antiquity, and the
best Reformed.

Nevertheless it has been suggested that the said Doctrine was Popery, or
wheeled apace toward it. This suggestion I shall not impute to design or want
of Charity: But to a mistaken zeal, or Godly jealousy, awakened in the
Insinuants, by the iniquity and bloody Practices of the Popish Party. And to
clear the Innocence of my own Doctrine, I shall only appeal to the Protestants
of Foreign Churches (forementioned) with the Requiries of the Presbyterian
Brethren, so strictly insisted on since his Majesty's happy Restoration; and
particularly I shall produce Mr. Richard Baxter (never taken for a friend to
Popery) to be my Compurgator. In his Nosegay presented to Mr. Joseph Caryl,
this Page 83.
is his positive and avowed Doctrine, [Let me be bold to tell my Brethren of
the Ministry, that though I deny them to have Credit or Authority against the
known Word of God, yet so great is their Credit and Authority, even as Teachers
and Guides of the Church, in Causes agreeable to the Word, and in Causes to the
People doubtful and unknown, and in Causes left by the Word to their
determination, (the Word determining them but generally) that I think the
ignorance of this Truth has been the main Cause of our sad Confusions and
Schisms in England, and that the Ministers have been guilty of it, partly by an
over-modest concealing their Authority, and partly by an indiscreet opposition
to the Papists Error of the Authority of the Church; And I think till we have
better taught, even our Godly people, what credit and obedience is due to their
Teachers and Spiritual Guides, the Churches of England shall never have peace,
or any good or established Order. I say again, we are broken for want of the
knowledge of this truth; and till this be known, we shall never be well bound
up and healed.]

The Reader will please to take notice, that this is so far from Popish
Tyranny, that it is our Presbyterian Moderation, and Mr. Baxters own Sober
Sadness; and he thought it a Truth of so great importance, that he set a hand
in the Margin to remark it, and point it out to every Reader, as most worthy of
his observation. And such as would see more of his thoughts in this point, he
refers them to what he has written on it, in his Method for peace of
Conscience, and in the Second Part of his Book of Rest, and in the Preface to
that Part.

The Premises well considered, I am apt to believe, the Judicious Reader will
conclude, that to adhere steadfastly to the sober and prudent establishment of
the Church of England, is very safe advice for all Sound Protestants.

FINIS.

