SPECULUM Matricis Hybernicum; OR, THE IRISH MIDWIVES HANDMAID. Catechistically
Composed, BY JAMES WOLVERIDGE, M. D. With a Copious Alphabetical Index.

WRITTEN IV Xta MagnaLIa DeI sCrIptor, Anno Domini, 1669. Chronogramma, 1669.


Damnosa quid non imminuit dies?
Aetas parentum, pejor avis, tulit
Nos nequiores, mox daturos
Progeniem vitiosiorem.
Horat. Lib. 3. Carminum, Ode 6. London, Printed by E. Oaks; and are to be sold
by Rowland Reynolds, at the Kings-Arms in the Poultrey, 1670.

THE AUTHOR TO THE READER.
IT may perhaps be wondered, why the Author should expose his Book, not only to
be tossed by the impetuous waves of the Irish Seas (e're it could set foot on
the English-shore) but more to be admired, that he should expose it to be
tumbled, and searched by the Accustomed, Ingenious Censure, and scrutiny, not
only of Learned Scholars, but of Grave Matrons, and Expert Midwives. Since also
it is manifest, that very many have not only bestowed their Oil, but their Ink
upon this Subject; It may not only be accounted Arrogance and Presumption, but
impertinent folly, and improfitable endeavors in the Author; either to think
to outdo former Writers; or in his own Conceit to be wiser than the present
Readers, so as to outdo the one, or out-wit the other. Assuring you,
therefore, that his aim is at neither, he hopes it will be heartily received by
all. Though the Title Page may arrive your view in an Irish Garb, Speculum
matricis; or the Irish Midwives Handmaid, etc.
with her Handmaid barefoot, and barelegg'd; or at the best, in Brogues and
Kerchers, (according to the Custom of the Country;) yet, be assured, It has
an English dress under an Irish mantle; it being never intended for the Irish,
(though I heartily wish it may be serviceable to them also, if occasion be,)
whose fruitfulness is such, that there is scarce one barren among them; and
whose hardiness, and facility in bringing forth, is generally such, as neither
requires the nice Attendance of diligent, vigilant Nurse-keepers, or the Art of
expert Anatomists, or the unwearied pains and skill of dexterous Midwives;
being, more like the Hebrew women, Exodus Cap. 1. Ver. 19.
than the native Egyptians; delivered before the Midwives can come to them.
And that this truth may gain the more Credit; mind a Story related by as Dr.
William Harvey, de Generatione Animalium, Chap. de Partu Page 276. An History.
Learned a Physician as our Age has known; who reports it (as he says) from
the mouth of the Lord Carew, Earl of Totness, and Lord President of Munster,
for many years together; who also wrote the Annals of those times. The Story is
this; There was an Irish Woman, wife to a Common Soldier, who, though big with
child, accompanied her Husband in the Camp; and whereas the Army daily was in
motion, marching from place to place; it happened, that by reason of a sudden
flood after a hasty rain, a small Brook began to swell so high, that it hindered
the Armies marching for one hour: In which time of the Armies halting, the
woman's pains of childbearing came upon her; insomuch, that she withdrawing her
self to the next thicket of shrubs (without the help of any Midwife, or any
other preparation of Baby-clouts) there, all alone, brings forth Twins; (whom
God surely seeing in their blood, Ezekiel, Cap. 16. Ver. 5.6.
said unto them, live, when no eye pityed them;) both which she brought down to
the River presently, and there washed both her self, and them; which done, she
wraps them up (not swadled at all) in a course Irish mantle, and carries them
at her back, marching with the Army the same day barefoot and barelegg'd (as
she was) twelve miles, and that without the least prejudice to her health, or
to the lives of her children. The next day after, it pleased the Lord Deputy
Montjoy, (who at that time commanded the Army against the Spaniard, who had
besieged Kinsale) and the Lord Carew, to be Godfathers to the Children, being
much Admirers of the novelty of the thing. Neither could the Author suppose, or
intend his Book useful to foreign parts, it being published in an English
Dialect (no Language being more current than the Latin.) It will therefore
consequently be concluded, that it was meant for the English, his
Countrey-folk, whether at home, or in foreign Plantations; and undertaken by
the Author, because, in all his Readings of Authors (and those not a few) he
had not seen any that had written in so plain and perspicuous a method (as may
appear by perusing it,) and suitable schemes in various figures, sufficient to
direct and inform Midwives in their office: As also, to contribute all things
necessary in such cases. The Author therefore commends this Book to the
Patronage of the most Grave and Serious Matrons of England and Ireland, the
first being the Kingdom of his Nativity, the latter his Country, whilst
obliged to it. Farewell.

James Wolveridge.
From my Study in Cork, Jan. 12 th. 1669/70.
To his deserving Friend, Dr. James Wolveridge, On his Speculum Matricis.
IF that Sicilian was admired, because He framed the Machin which disclosed the
Laws
And motions of the greater World, what fame
Shall equal be to eternize thy Name:
Who greater secrets in so little can
Unravel, in this lesser world of man?
Volumes that swell, like ore of Gold, have much
Of earth and dross, which never can pass the touch;
But in this little scheme, behold and see
The essence and extract of Midwivery.
Tredeskin's nut-shell, or that Germane fly,
Were never composed with greater industry.
What pangs and throws do others brains torment,
(Like Joves, which Pallas teemed who scarce can vent
What they contrive, who labor to ensure
That which Abortive proves, and not mature.
But thou had quick delivery, thy brain
Never wanted Midwife, neither felt it pain:
In this thy true Production, which from thee
Came like full-ripe fruit dropping from the tree:
The Ladies, sure, their glasses will neglect,
When on thy mirror they shall once reflect,
Which teaches to preserve their beauties more
Than all their Paints and Washes e're before.
Jonathan Ash, e Coll. Oriell, Oxon. A.M.

Author in Libellum, ejusque;picta Schemata.
QUaeritur ovata quare sit sculpta figura,
Demonstrans faetum pagina quaeque suum?
Omnia credibile est formari Animalia ab Ovo,
Posse sui generis tale refer genus.
Cernis ut ova trahit solers formica, labor
Parvula, quae in cumulos Irrequieta locat.
Ovorum ex numero sunt subventanea, (Inertis Molae instar) pullos non paritura
suos:
Hinc hominum, pecudumque genus, genus omne ferarum
Fit sterile, and sterilis dedecus arbor habet;
Edere sed foecunda mihi sperare licebit,
Ovaque Prolifica ponere fida manu.
Sin secus, Obstetricum nullos Quaesita Iabores
Gens hominum, cesset, vel labefacta Ruat.
Sic parere, aut calamus doceat parere, precamur:
Illud naturae est, hoc erit Artis opus.
Anser Ovans alas scriptoribus explicat, arts
Inde docens, variis pictaque; schematibus.
Ille meam pennis, si sit culpabilis, Artem
Delirare suis, and volitare dedit.
Ova traham Reliquos scriptores inter, Acervo
Pulchrum erit ex magno tollere delicias.
James Wolveridge.

On the Praise, and the happy delivery of James Wolveridge, Dr. of Physic, in
his labors on the Labor of Women, etc.
Delivered by Aquila Smyth, M. D.
HEre is the Key unlocks a Cabinet,
So quick, so safe, by art not known as yet:
More friendly than the gourd over Jonas head,
It breaks the Hymen, and the Maidenhead.
What shall I say! mysterious is thy art,
But so, that labor labors in no smart;
Thy clouded Genius 'mid'st the Curtain foggs,
Swallows thy worth in the Hybernian boggs;
Dismantle then thy self, appear to be
Happy to all in thy delivery.
So the production of thy brain shall make
Midwives themselves produce; and for thy sake
Sol teeming thus, man-Midwives out a birth,
That is the product to the globe, and earth:
But whilst thy brain does labor, we do too
Bring but an Embrion out, which though t'out-do
Mountains (full gravidated, but produce
A mouse) when thou do open natures sluice;
So riper seeds are sown on barren ground,
So th'Reaper has a sickly harvest found.
The pregnant pia matter of thy brain
Does settle in his place the womb again:
There is no Mola in thy wit, what is here,
Of truth is the effect and character.
Teeming this nine months, we did surely look
That thou should be delivered of thy Book;
Prodigious Birth! who e're the like did know
A child brought forth, straitt to a Midwife grow?
Cease nature now thy tyrannies in vain,
Here Is one does teach to mitigate a pain,
Sets open Natures Gate, so that the birth
Walks from the mother-womb to mother-earth:
No throws we have in this, no skreaks, no cries,
No Instruments, no Cupping of the thighs:
Here is an Art that after-age will boast,
And tell how Wolv'ridge has delivered most
With ease, producing forth what is safe we see,
To which whole Colleges thy Gossips be.
September. 9th. 1669. Cork. Your Devoted Friend and Servant, whilst Aquila
Smyth, M. D.

Ad Authorem, Encomiastichon.
ABdita dum teneri pandis mysteria foetus
Numina secretis quae posuere locis,
Diversis diversa paras medicamina morbis;
Picta refers variis schemata multa modis;
Signaque conceptus monstras, signantia sexum,
Sive puella siet, sit ve puella puer
Obstetricas; varias calamo monstrante figuras,
Qua methodo mulier sit paritura doces.
Nuribus, Infanti, Medicaris matribus aeque;
Dum te nec lactis cura vel ulla latet.
Nonjacet Aurato licet ulla puerpera lecto, manu.
Ipse struis facili mollia lecta manu:
Parturit ipse liber, dum pro sponsoribus astant
Zoilus aut Momus, parturit imo aliquid:
Quem Matrona gravis si qua lactaverit ulnis,
Et dederit Cunas, has vagus orbis agat.
Dabam Cork. 17 Calendas Octobris, 1669. Honoris and Amoris ergo dicavit,
Jonathan Ash e Coll. Oriel, Oxon. A.M.

In Authorem, Amicum suum Integerrimum.
PErlege (Lector;) opus, Wolv'rigii; quod tibi aperte
Ostendit docti pectora digna viri,
Hoc; secreta suis naturae vultibus ornat,
Ordine perspicuo conspicienda patent:
Codice nam clari Doctoris dicta Jacobi:
(Alter Galenus, Justinianus Item)
Qui quorum merito; studiis, satis acta duorum
Voluerat, and Tomos quoslibet ille suis.
Hic decus, hic lumen, hic fons sermon Latino
Orbis, en! Emeritus tempus in omne micans,
Cujus florebit studiosos inter utrosque
Perpetuo Juris, non minus Artis Amor.
Danielis Colman. J. V. D.
Ex Musaeolo meo in Suburbiis Borealibus Coreagiae, Idibus Septembris, 1669.
The Author to his Book.
GO little Book, I envy not thy hap,
May thou be dandled in the Ladies lap;
I hope the Ladies will not thee disdain,
Thou Art clean, though in a homespun dress, and plain:
Nor may thou to a gaudy Garb aspire,
Thy native Idiom is thy best attire;
Yet Phydias and Apelles do declare,
Such Schemes of Births in thee accounted rare;
Thou show no monstrous births that may affright,
(Though thou might do it) but such as may delight,
With admiration; then go kiss their hands,
Tell them thou art subject unto their commands;
Thy Country dress composed for their good,
Brooks no scurrilities, if understood
By Gravest Matrons, never penned, nor meant
To be the subject of a loose intent;
Nor yet to please lascivious, wanton eyes,
Whose thoughts to Venus are a sacrifice.
Go visit Nunneries, whose chaster fate
Perchance may pregnant be without a mate;
Except bald time, with his suspected pate
Teach th'Abbess Midwivery within her grate;
Be there probat'neer but a year, and then,
If useless, hope thou may come out again.
Perlustrate all the World, let women know
To help themselves, their children, nurses too.
Visit the Nurseries of Learnings fame,
Salute those fountains in thy Authors name;
Their pardon crave, whilst not from disrespect
They are accosted in a dialect
As uncouth to his pen as to their view,
which had been dressed up in another hiew,
Had he been sure to have been understood,
(As was his only scope) for public good;
Yet may thou be so wheresoever thou art brought,
May't not be said that thou art good for naught:
Beware the Press awhile, 'twere better tarry,
Lest being pressed too hard thou may miscarry.
If It must be so, those Medicines of thy own
Must cure thy sad Abortion, or else none:
Nor art thou smutty to set out thy feature,
But yet may show the curious works of nature.
Teach Ladies Nett-work then, and tell them plain
They have a wondrous nett-work 'bout their brain;
And yet thy fringed skirt adorned may be
With ornaments, and by Authority.
Here Is Vest and Tunick, Amnios, and Chorion,
And Jus de corae too, that thou be in fashion:
We admit no Allantoides in the least,
Because thou treat'st of man, and not of beast.
Thou Art furnished with a Royal Sash (withal,
Never out of fashion) Cord, Umbilical;
When all is done, then let thy schemes and fashions
Succesful prove to future Generations.
To my most Worthy Friend, Dr. James Wolveridge, upon his Book, Speculum
Matricis.
AN ACHROSTICK.
If I were skilled in Chaldaick, or in Syriack,
As others, who might well thy Praises show;
My muse would then compel a Panegyric
Even for the debt which to thy worth I owe;
S ith I to that could never yet attain,
Which makes thee famous in the Art of Physic,
Or imitate thy Great Heroic strain,
Lo, I begin to try in tones of Lyrick.
Let Grave Physicians greet thee with a kiss,
Unskillful Quacks may hence learn to amend,
Expel their poisons, which for want of this
Rent many a heart, and brought untimely end:
I mean, because they knew not man's first being,
Do still mistake; I say it cannot be fit
Giving Remedies which in no way are 'greeing
Express men's ruin by prescribing it.
Your Obliged Friend, Richard Sampson.

An INDEX containing the Contents Alphabetically.
A. ABortion what, with its causes and sings. Page 104, etc. How prevented, and
cured, page 112, etc.
Air ambient dangerous in childbed p. 111.116. After-pains what, their causes,
and cure p. 133, etc. After-burden what it is. p. 84, etc. Why so called. p.
90, 91, 92, etc. Must be brought away, and why. Its danger being left behind.
How it is hindered in its coming forth. How drawn out. ibid.
Aged women commonly bring forth females, and why. p. 101. They are subject to
the falling down of the womb p. 163
Age of the best nurse described p. 141 Allantois part of the secundine (in
beasts, but not to be found in men) and is as a girdle p. 90 Amnios the inward
membrane of the secundine p. 89, etc. Anger in nurses naught p. 143 Aorta what
artery, and how generated p. 8 Arterial vein what it is ibid. Astringent
powder useful for Midwives p. 30
B. BAgg described. Page 76. etc. In use. Behavior of nurses to be enquired
into p. 124, etc. Birth natural what, and how, described p. 24. How facilitated
110.130 Blood after conception distinguished three ways p. 14. Bones generated
from the seed p. 12. Botches in children, their causes p. 115.145 Brains, how
generated, and for what p. 9, etc. Breath stinking argues a child dead, and
putrified in the womb p. 79 Breasts sore to cure p. 101 Breeding women, what
forbidden them p. 101
C. CApsula of the heart generated p. 6 Cake of the womb what p. 88, 89, etc.
Cartilages whence generated p. 11 Cataplasms against a looseness in childbed.
137. Against miscarrying, to be applied to the navil p. 118 Cataplasme in case
of sore breasts p. 102
Caudles in after-pains, and in case any of the secundine be left behind p. 134
Causes of immoderate flowing of the Lochia in childbed, with their cure p.
119, 120. Cautions to Midwives in their business p. 28, 29 a Caution to the
Irish women in a looseness p. 105 Child, when so properly called p. 112
Childbearing women ought to be cheerful p. 110 Children how overlaid, with the
reasons. p. 141. Of their pining away 150
Chorion what, and why so called p. 88 Coats of the Arteries, whence p. 11 Cold
in childbed dangerous, with its cure p. 124 Cold dangerous in Childbearing
111 Calostrat, what children p. 144 Conception, with its signs 95, 96, etc.
Conception in Nurses make the child diseased p. 144 Conditions of Nurses to be
inquired into, with her complexion p. 143 Convulsion-fits in infants, whence,
and how cured 134, 135 Cordials against fainting fits, p 112. A general
excellent Cordial-water, p. 113. Against a nauseous stomach p. ibid.
Costiveness the cause of difficult birth p. 35 Costivenes in breeding women
naught, how it may be prevented p. 112 Cotyledons of the womb what p. 104
Courses, why stopped after conception, p. 14. How they are to be provoked p.
115, etc. They are stirred up by the use of Venery, and are destructive to milk
p. 144 Cranium what, and how generated p. 10 Critical Fevers in childbed,
their cure p. 123, etc. Crying in children discovers want of milk p. 151
Cupping-glasses how, and where to be applied p. 147
D. DAncing in the childbearing women, or running, naught for the child p. 110
Dancing of the child a good exercise for the Nurse p. 147 Danger from being not
well purged in childbed p. 115, etc. a Decoction against too much milk p. 148
Dead child, how delivered of p. 93, etc. signs of a dead child p. 102, etc.
108.131.
Diet prescribed for breeding women p. 111. For childbed women p. 120
Diarrhaea, see Looseness in p. 131.136 Different postures of infants in the
womb, why p. 78 Difficult births, their causes p. 34, etc. Distinction of
parts, when p. 12 Dreams in the infant discover want of milk p. 151 Dropsies,
how distinguished from a Mola, or false conception p. 82 Drunkenness not to be
endured in nurses, p. 140 The dura matter, how generated p. 10
E. EAting flesh in childbed the cause of Fevers p. 124 Eating and drinking to
be observed by nurses p. 143 Eight months birth not like to live. p. 19, etc.
The reasons ibid.
Emplaster against abortion p. 113.132 Against Convulsions in infants p. 135,
etc. Against the inconveniency of milk to be applied in the breasts p. 122.146
Embryon what p. 87 Epar uterinum, that is, the liver of the womb, what, its
use, and why so called p. 86, 88 Exercise attenuates milk. p. 146. In the nurse
good for the child p. 147
Experiments to know if a woman has conceived or no p. 98, etc. Experiments to
try milk p. 126 The Excrements are not voided by the fundament whilst the child
is in the womb p. 16, etc.
F. FAlse conception what. p. 79. How it differs from a true conception p. 81.
How distinguished from a Dropsy. p. 82. How delivered of p. 94
Falling out of the womb p. 162, etc. Fainting fits in breeding women, how
prevented p. 112 Fevers in childbed in general, and of a Fever of milk, what
it is, with the cures p. 121 Female when conceived, and how known p. 200 Fibers
in the first generation what p. 2 Figure of a child of 18 days old p. 12 Fume,
or suffumigation in fits of the mother p. 160
G. GAlea is part of that coat of the secundine called the Amnios p. 87 a
General cordial water against all fainting fits, at all times p. 128 a Gibbous
infant the cause of a difficult birth p. 35 Glysters for a looseness in
childbed. p. 136, etc. For the retention of the Lochia then p. 116
Gluttony in nurses condemned p. 143 Great breasts, and great nipples in nurses
not commendable, why p. 141 Grief in nurses naught for the child. p. 143 Naught
for childbearing women p. 110
Gripes in the belly of infants, whence p. 149
H. HAndsome children, why some so, and why others unhandsome p. 21 Hastiness
in the Midwife not good p. 27, 29 Hasty rising up of the mother naught for the
child in the womb p. 110 Hard breasts the signs of the infants thriving in the
womb p. 101 Haemorrhoids the cause of difficult birth p. 35 Heart generated,
when p. 6 Heat of the seed the cause of generation of males, they are generated
in the right side p. 21 Helmet called the Galea, part of the Amnios p. 87 Heavy
burdens carried by the mother are naught for the infant in the womb p. 111
Hysteric fits: see Strangulation of the womb, and mother-fits p. 155, etc.
I. INnate heat in infants requires constant aliment p. 150 Infant, when said
to be, p. 16 How it lies in the womb, p. 33, etc. How nourished in the womb,
p. 14 It attracts the purest blood, ibid. Has more from the mother then from
the father, ibid. Why like their Parents, p. 21 To know whether it thrive in
the womb, or not p. 101
Infants participate of the nurses food, and physic, p. 151 How to be received
by the Midwife p. 29
Impurities are communicated to them by the Qualities of the milk p. 151
Inflations the cause of after-pains p. 133 Inflammations of the womb the cause
of difficult birth p. 35 Intemperance in nurses the ruin of their nurseries p.
140 Immoderate flowing of the Lochia in childbed dangerous p. 118, etc. Juleps
in case of retention of the Lochia in childbed p. 118, etc. Against
Convulsion-sits in infants p. 135
K. KNots, as many as are to be observed in the navil-string, so many males p.
103
L. LAdies may nurse their own children with the greatest conveniences p. 135
Leprous infants, how so begoten p. 102 Liver first generated after the coats by
the Vena bifurca, p. 4, etc. Is a concrete blood ibid.
Lochia retained in childbirth, dangerous, p. 115 Flowing overmuch, dangerous
also p. 119
Loosnes in childbed dangerous, p. 131.135 Lungs, when, and how generated p. 8
M. MAle conceived, how known p. 99 Man, his dignity, and titles, vid. Pref.
Manner of generation p. 2, 3 Marrow of the bones what, with its use p. 11
Matrix to be anointed in difficult births p. 40 Meats to be avoided by nurses,
what p. 144 Medicines usual in Fevers of childbirth p. 124 Members
distinguished by the tenth day p. 7 Menstrua the cause of strangulation of the
womb, or fits of the mother p. 156 Midriff how made, p. 7. The best Midwife
described, p. 27 Her posture, p. 28, etc. Her office, Number of her assistants,
Her furniture ibid. Midwives are not to take more care of the infant then of
the mother p. 93, 94
Milk, how generated, p. 14.98 It is the cause of Fevers, p. 121 Driven back
too soon dangerus, with the reasons of it, p. 122 fried by its color and
quality, p. 145 Of milk too thick corrected, p. 146, etc. Too thin corrected,
ibid. How to cure the too great abundance, p. 147. The want of milk supplied,
ibid. No milk at all, the worst p. 150
Mirth good in breeding women, p. 110 In the nurse, best for the child p. 141
Mola, or false conception, what p. 79 Mother contributes more to the infant
then does the father p. 15 Motion too violent in the nurse, naught for the
child, and so in the mother p. 147 Mourning either in the mother, naught for
the infant in the womb, p. 43 Or for the nurse ibid.
Mothers, if able, fittest to nurse their own p. 152 Mother-fits, see
strangulation of the womb, p. 155. How cured, p. 159
Mucilage what p. 126
N. NAtural form of birth, what it is p. 24 Nauseousness prevented p. 113 Navil
how generated p. 3. How to be cut, ib. How it atracts blood for nourishment, p.
ib. Cords of the navil, so many twins 103
Needing what p. 108 Nerves of the back, their original, p. 11 How dispersed
through the whole body by a figure p. 13
Nipples, what are the best, p. 141, etc. Sore nipples to cure p. 137, etc.
Nurses the best, described, p. 140, etc. Not to be chosen in poverty, p. 150.
Nurses purged to cure the child, why p. 15^ Nurses not to rock the infant too
violently presently after suckling it, why p. 153

O. ORiginal of the nerves, p. 10 Of the spine of the back ibid.
Oxycrat what p. 129 Oils, what fit for Midwives, p. 26 Their use in difficult
births p. 41
Ointment in case of the Lochia suppressed, p. 118 in case of too immoderate
flux of them, p. 120 An excellent ointment in a difficult birth, p. 41.126 For
sore nipples, ibid. In Hysteric fits p. 160

P. Parsley an enemy to milk p. 144 Passions in the nurse hinder good milk p.
143 Pains in childbearing, whence they are p. 23.133 Pains after the
childbirth, what p. 52.116.124 Pericardium generated with the heart Piles in
hysteric fits p. 161 Planets, their aspect, the cause of good features and
forms in children, and of bad p. 21 Placenta uteri what, p. 86, 88. But one,
though there be never so many infants; Its use ibid.
Plenty of milk ever best, p. 142 Postures of the infant many, p. 37, etc.
Postures of the infant naturally, how, p. 33 Many praeternatural postures
described in sixteen several figures, from p. 37, to p. 72 Their helps resolved
by way of Dialogue ibid.
Potions useful in difficult births p. 134 Powders for sneezing in difficult
births, p. 127, etc. Against Abortion, p. 131 Against Convulsion-fits in
infants, p. 136 Against immoderate flowings of the Lochia in childbed, p. 119
Pulsatile veins from the great Artery of the heart p. 7 Purgation of women how
long, p. 115 Not being well purged, dangerous ibid. Purge not to be given till
seven days after the birth, in case the Lochia be stopped p. 117
Pustules and whelks in infants, their cause p. 149
Q. QUalities of milk pass into those that are suckled by that milk p. 152
Quarrelsomeness in nurses naught p. 143 Quicken, when women do p. 17
R. REmedies over-hot in difficult births, how inconvenient, p. 126, etc.
Retention of the Lochia in childbed dangerous, with its causes, and cure p.
116 Riding in the mother naught for the infant p. 110 Rocking of the infant too
vehemently presently after sucking naught p. 153 Running in the mother naught
for the infant p. 110
S. SColding in nurses not tolerable p. 142 a Scruple what p. 128 Scull, how
generated p. 10 Seventh month birth may live p. 19 Secundine what, p. 84
Described by figures p. 85
Sexes distinguished p. 99 Sixth month birth cannot live p. 19 Signs mortal by
the infants motion in the womb p. 20 Sleep in the mother good for the infant,
p. 11 Often sleep in nurses is good for the infant p. 141
Sluttish nurses make nasty children p. 140 Sneezing good in difficult births,
p. 127, etc. And in fits of the mother p. 159
Soul when infused p. 17 Spine of the back, how generated, p. 11 What it is,
ibid. Its use ibid.
Stature of the nurse p. 104 Stinking things and smells, how useful in
mother-fits p. 161 Stool for Midwives described p. 28 Stone in the bladder the
cause of difficult birth p. 35 Stopping of the terms no sure sign of conception
p. 95 Strangulation of the womb a fierce distemper, p. 155 Its definition. What
it is, ibid. Parts affected what, the causes, p. 156 Signs of the fit in its
augmentation, state, and declination, p. 157 How it differs from a Syncope, or
Swouning, 158, etc. How from an Apoplexy, ibid. How it differs from an
Epilepsie, p. 159 Its cure ibid.
Strength, how to be restored p. 123 a Suffumigation in fears of Abortion, p.
113 In hysteric fits 160
Superfoetation what 102 Suppositories,p. 124 For infants, p. 136 In the
strangulation of the womb p. 255
Sweet smells, how used in fits of the mother p. 161 Symptoms grievous in
breeding women, their danger, how corrected, p. 24 In childbed women not well
purged, dangerous p. 112

T. TArtness of milk, how corrected p. 146 Terms in childbearing to help p.
113 Timpany, how caused p. 82 Truncus phrenicus what, p. 7 The trunk of the
hollow vein, ascending and descending p. 5
Trial of milk p. 135 Twins have so many navil-cords as there are twins, and
yet but one Placenta p. 103
V. VEin hollow what, p. 9 Vein two forked what; Its ose, p. 3 The Venal
Artery, with its use p. 7
Venery, and its use, spoil the milk in the nurse p. 144 Venereous thoughts in
the nurse spoil the milk ibid. Ugly children, the reason why they are so p. 21
Vicious seed the cause of strangulation of the womb p. 156 Virtue of the milk
of a male child, if a female suck it; and of a female, if a male suck it p. 145
Unguent against Abortion, p. 41.126. See Ointment. Vomit of Oxymell good to
attenuate thick milk p. 146 Urine of the infant in the womb, by what passages
voided in the womb p. 16
W. WAnt of milk, the causes, and cure p. 147 Waterish humors flowing out of
the breasts of its own accord, is an argument of a weak child p. 105 Weakness
of the matrix is the cause of the secundine not coming forth p. 90 Whelps dye
with sucking women p. 142 Winds sharp and cold not good for the child in the
womb p. 106 Women meet helps for man, p. 27 Fit helps for women, by reason of
the modesty of their Sex, p. 27, etc. How delivered, ibid. How long to keep
their beds in childbed with safety p. 115 Women above 40 years old bring forth
with more difficulty, p. 30 They are to be dealt withal in childbed, as with
wounded persons p. 124

Womb, its natural property to receive seed, p. 1 The falling out of it, p. 162
The signs, ibid. The causes, p. 163. Prognostics, and cure p. 164

Y. A YEar sufficient for a child to be suckled p. 153 Young women bring forth
males most commonly, why p. 100, etc.

The end of the Table.
THE PREFACE.
SInce all Arts and Sciences tend to the use and benefit of Mankind, all things
by the Almighty Creator being subjected to him, who is no other than a little
World in himself: Man would not only be ungrateful to his Creator, but wanting
to his offspring, should he not endeavor to improve his whole industry,
Reason, and skill, to propagate his kind to all posterity. And therefore,
besides other helps, as Physical, Anatomical, and Diaetetical, etc. The art and
skill of Obstetricie (commonly called Midwivery) is none of the least: Non
minor est virtus quam quaerere parta tueri.
It being no less virtue and prudence to preserve a child when begotten, than
content and pleasure in begetting; in both which, both Sexes are, and ought
equally to be concerned; for where the womb proves the tomb, there is neither
room for Physic, Anatomy, Surgery, or diet, etc. or any thing like it.
This then being the first work in reference to man's future well-doing, laying
aside all other Argumentative circumlocutions, and deviations; let us, by way
of discourse, examine, and contrive, how that creature man may be preserved,
from the beginning of his Conception, to the hour of his birth, and that with
safety too to her that bare him. And truly, it may be worth the while, if we
consider the excellency of man, whom some call (as like unto God, The dignity
of man described. (...)
so) The Interpreter of the gods. Pythagoras calls him The Measure of all
things; And Plato calls him The Wonder of Wonders. Theophrastus styles him The
Great Pattern of the Universe. Aristotle terms him A Politic Animal, born for
society, whom God made with his face upright; whereas all other creatures look
with their faces downward.

Pronaque Ovid. Met am. Lib. 1.
cum spectant animalia caetera terram; Os homini sublime dedit, coelumque tueri
Jussit, and erectos ad sydera tollere vultus. Horizontem corporeorum and
incorporeorum. Divinum animal, plenum rationis and consilii. Mundi Epitomen,
and naturae delicias. (...) P. 8. ve. 4, 5, etc.
Synesius terms man the Horizon of all corporeal and incorporeals. Tully calls
him a Divine creature, full of Reason and counsel; whom Pliny also calls the
Epitomy of the World, and delight of Nature: And whom all with one consent,
call, a Microcosme, a little world in a bigger. Of whom, the Kingly Prophet
David, in Psalm the 8th. says, Thou have made him little lower than the
Angels; thou have crowned him with glory and honor, and have placed him over
all the works of thy hands. Now then, man being so excellent a Creature, who,
though the last in the Creation, yet not the least; God making him as after his
own Image and Likeness, Genesis the 1 Chap. ve^ 26, 27.
and instructing him with so large a Commission, (and a blessing annexed to it)
as to subdue the Creation, making all the creatures subject to the dominion of
man, whom God had or dained as his Viceroy on earth, with this blessing, viz.
be fruitful, and multiply, and replenish the earth: Let us make a nearer
indagation and scrutiny into the formation of man, as to the order of the
generation of the parts, and increase of the infant, according to the days and
times, from the first conception till the day of his birth: And then, the more
we seriously weigh it, and pry into it, Ps. 139. ver. 13.
the more, with the Psalmist, we shall admire our Creator by our creation, and
bless that God that has covered us in our Mothers womb, and praising him, say;
We are fearfully and wonderfully made, mavelous are thy works, Ver. 15.
Septuagint, (...). My bones (...). Verse. 16.
etc. My fubstance was not hid from thee when I was made in secret; and
curiously wrought in the lowest parts of the Earth. Thine eyes did see my
substance yet being unperfect, and in thy Book all my members were written,
which in continuance were fashioned, when as yet there was none of them. And if
God, who created male and female, thought it fit to provide the woman as a help
meet for him: Genesis 2.20.
Women being most fit to help women in their deliveries, by reason of the
modesty of their sex; It shall be the whole subject of this ensuing small
Tract, to describe a Midwife, and such a woman too that may be most apt for so
necessary an employment; and then (still aiming at a public good) declining
that Idiom best becoming the Pen of Doctors, The Latin Tongue.
shall shape my Quill to an English Dialect, and (avoiding intricate and
Bombastick words, and Acroamatical sentences, where they may be otherwise
expressed) afford such material directory assistance in the business of
Midwivery, as shall be suitable to the meanest capacity; not presuming to
instruct the Learned, (...). Noctuas Athenas.
lest I seem to bring Owls to Athens; but to inform the less knowing. And
ending this Preface, we will begin with Generation it self, and the rest in
Order.

SECT. I. Of the True generation of the Parts, and Increase of the Infant in
the Womb, according to the days and times, till the time of the Birth.
The property of the womb.
WHen the womb (whose property it is naturally to receive seed unto generation,
as a Loadstone attracts iron, or as Jeat straws or feathers) has received the
seed for generation, and by its virtue has shut up the seed for generation;
Presently, from the first day until the sixth or seventh, there grow and arise
very many and very small fibers or hairs, beginning with a hot motion, See the
figure marked.
by which vital heat the liver with his chiefest organs are generated by a
natural virtue; as this following Scheme may the more illustrate, marked as in
the margin.

The small first fibers.

depiction of an embryo

For the vital spirits, giving down seed toward conception, forms and
distinguishes the chiefest members by the tenth day, being let in by certain
veins of the secundine, The navil' how generated.
to which the matrix is fixed, and by which the blood is imported, and of which
the navil is generated.

But at the very same time three small spots (not unlike to curds of milk)
arise, where the liver, the heart, Nourishment of the Infant by the navil. Vena
bifurca.
and the brain have their places; and then presently a vein directed by the
navil, attracts the thicker blood confused with the seed, and makes it fit for
nourishment: from whence also there arises a vein with two forks, which is
generated according to the form of this figure.

depiction of the development of the navel in an embryo

In the one of which branches there is a collection of blood, of which first
the liver is generated by a natural faculty. The genetion of the Liver.
From whence it easily appears, the liver to be a congealed and concrete blood:
and also it may be manifest, how many and various veins it has prepared and
fitted, for the expulsive and attractive virtue. But in the other branch are
generated those textures, or rather web of veins, with the dilatation of other
veins, as of the stomach, spleen, and intestines, in the lower part of the
belly. And from hence immediately all veins are recollected together, as so
many branches into one trunk, in the upper texture of the liver toward the
hollow vein; Venae Cavae truncus ascendens, descendens Diaphragma. truncus
descendens.
and this trunk by and by sends down branches to make the midriff, and directs
not a few branches to the lower parts, even to the very thighs: and then the
heart, with his veins extended into seed from the navil, is generated by a
vital virtue, Spina dorsi.
and is directed toward the spine of the back, as is demonstrated in this
figure, 3.

depiction of the development of the liver and the branching of veins in an
embryo

But those do attract the hottest and more subtle blood, The generation of the
heart. Pericardium, vel Capsula Cordis.
of which the heart is generated, incased in a membrane, naturally fleshy and
thick, necessary upon the account of so hot a member. But the hollow vein
extending it self, and penetrating the inward concavity of the right side in
the heart, etc. derives thence blood for the nourishment of the heart. From the
same branch also of this his vein, and in the same part another vein arises,
called, by some, Truncus Phrenicus, vel Diaphragmatis.
by some, the immovable, or quiet vein; because, according to the account of
the pulsation of other veins it beats not at all, but lies quiet; ordained for
this end, Vena Coronaria.
that it should let go the purest blood to the lungs, being vested with a
double tunicle like an Artery, from whence it is called the Arterial vein.
Vena arteriosa, er Pulmonaria.
But in the left concavity of the heart there are two Arteries, that is to say,
the Venal Artery, and the Great Artery, which carries a great pulse with it,
and diffuseth the vital spirits by the blood of the heart into all the
pulsatile veins of the body. For, as the hollow vein is the original of all
veins, by which the body does attract its whole nourishment of blood; so,
Aorta. Venae p^satiles Aorta.
from the Aorta (or great Artery) all pulsatile veins are derived, diffusing
the vital spirits through the whole body. For the heart is the fountain and
original of vital heat, without which no creature or member can thrive.

Arteria Venosa.
Under the abovesaid Artery in the left concavity of the heart, another vein
arises called the Venal Artery: And, although that be really a pulsatile
vein, and does direct the vital spirits, yet according to the manner of all
pulsatile veins that have blood, It has but one coat, and therefore made for
that end, that it should derive the cold air from the lungs to refresh the
heart, as also to attemper its overmuch heat.

The generation of the lungs.
And, because veins issue out from both the concavities of the heart, and are
inserted into the lungs, and of which the lungs are formed; for the vein that
proceeds from the right concavity of the heart produces the most subtle
blood, which by small fibers dispersed here and there, is changed into the
fleshy substance of the lungs. But from the great vein of the heart ( viz. the
Aorta) and from the great vein of the liver ( viz. the Vena Cava, Vena Cava,
the great vein of the liver, whence the breast, arms, and thighs proceed.
or hollow vein) the whole breast is generated, and so successively the Arms and
Thighs.

depiction of the development of the heart and arterial veins in an embryo

Within the time aforesaid also is generated the highest and chiefest part of
this noble structure, The generation of the brain:
the Brain; in the third Region of this mass; for the whole mass of seed being
filled with the animal spirits, that contracts a great part of the genital
moisture, and concludes it in a certain concavity wherein the brain may be
formed: but, as to the outside, The Cranium, or the Dura matter. The Scull.
it is inveloped with a certain covering, which being toasted and dried with
heat, is brought into a boney substance, and becomes a scull, as appears by
this precedent figure.

But the brain is so formed, that it may conceive, retain, and change the
natures of all the vital spirits, from whence also proceed the beginnings of
all Reason, and of the Senses: For, as veins have their original from the
liver, The original of the nerves.
and as arteries have their rise from the heart; so also nerves being of a
softer and milder natural existence, arise from the brain, and are not hollow
as the veins are, but solid; for they are the first and chiefest instruments of
all the senses, by which the motions of all the senses, by which the motions of
all the senses, by reason of the vital spirit, are justly made.

After the nerves, The original of the pith of the backbone, called the Silver
cord, Eccles. cap. 12. ver. 6.
from the brain also is formed the pith of the backbone, not of an unlike
nature from the brain, so that it scarce can be called marrow, because it has
no likeness to marrow, either by sight, or in substance; for the marrow is a
kind of superfluous aliment, arising from the blood of the members, The marrow,
what, and how generated. The Spinalis medulla, what.
appointed to moisten and make the bones of the body grow; but the brain and
pith of the back have their original from the seed, not deputed for the
nourishment and growth of the other members, but that by themselves they might
make private parts of the body, The brain and Spinalis medulla ordained for the
use and motion of the senses.
for the use and motion of the senses, that from thence all the other nerves
may take their rise. For, from the pith of the back many nerves arise, from
which the body has sense and motion, as may appear by the difference betwixt
the vital and animal faculties, as has been before hinted.

Cartilages, bones, etc. generated from the seed.
Moreover, here it is to be observed, that from the seed it self cartilages,
bones, coats of the veins of the liver, and of the arteries of the heart, the
brain with the nerves, and again the tunicles, and as well other pannicles or
membranes as those that wrap up the infant, are generated; but from the proper
blood of the infant is the flesh it self engendered, and all those parts that
are of a fleshy substance; as the heart, the liver, and lungs: And then at
length all these grow together by the menstruous blood, attracted by the small
veins of the navil, which are observed to be directed with their orifices into
the womb. All parts distinct by 18 days.
All which are distinctly made by the eighteenth day of the first month, from
the very conception, at which time it may be called seed, but afterward it
becomes to be, and is called a child; When called a child.
which the Ancients have comprehended in these two verses,

Sex in lacte dies, ter sunt in sanguine trini,
Bisseni carnem, ter seni membra figurant.
depictions of an embryo in the womb and of the development of the nerves The
lesser figure denotes the Nerves derived from the Back and dispersed through
the whole.

The explanation of the larger figure see in the following page.

Cross sculpsit'



Englished thus,

Six days in milk, thrice three the seed's in blood;
Twice six makes flesh, thrice six makes members good.
FF Shows a young one of 18 days (though some hold it but 14 days in which
all the members may be discerned apart.) GG The four Umbilical Vessels meeting
in one. HH How the Umbilical Vessels become thick by degrees, that that doubt
amongst some may be resolved, whether they spring from the womb, or no. III
Shows how the Umbilical veins and arteries are spread throughout the Chorion
by infinite branches. KKK Shows the membrane called Amnios, in which sweat
and urine are gathered together, in which the infant swimmeth, and sits as safe
as in a Bath.


SECT. II. Of the Nutriment of the child in the womb, and by what nourishment
it is preserved, and when it grows up to be an Infant.
Infant, how nourished.
Whilst the young one is in the womb, it is nourished by blood attracted by the
navil; by which it is, that women after they have conceived have their terms
stopped; Why courses stopped after conception.
for then the infant begins to crave, and attracts much blood. For the blood
presently after conception is discerned by a threefold difference. A threefold
did nction of blood after conception.
The first and purest part of it the young one attracts for nourishment. The
second, less pure and thin, the matrix forces upwards by certain veins to the
breasts, Venae mammariae. The generation of milk.
where it becomes milk, by which the infant is nourished so soon as it is born.
The third, and more impure part of the blood, remains in the matrix, and
flows out with the secundine, both in the birth, and after the birth: Hence
it is that Hippocrates says, Hippocratis Aphor. lib. 5.39 and 52.
there is much affinity betwixt the flowers and the milk, since the one
happens to be made out of the other. And Galen also, by reason of this thing,
The infant has more from the mother than the father.
elegantly advises, that the infant has more from the mother than from the
father; for this reason, because the seeds are first increased by the
menstruous blood, and then by these the infant is presently nourished in the
womb; and again, being newly born, it is nourished with milk: And, as roots
have more nourishment from the earth than the plant that bare them; (that is,
from whence they came): so also infants receive more from the mother than from
the father. And hence he says that it comes to pass, that so much more is
attributed to the mother, by how much more she contributeth more toward
generation.

But the infant being now formed, and perfected in the womb, When an infant.
How the urine avoided.
in the first month the young one sends forth urine by the passages of the
navil; but that conduit being shut in the last depiction of a foetus in the
womb month, they vent it by the privities; (of which more when we come to
treat of the secundine (or after burden, with its coats.) Whilst the infant is
in the womb, it avoids nothing at the fundament, because hitherto it has
sucked in nothing by the mouth. After the 45th. day, as Hippocrates* advises,
The soul when infused. Animae creando infunditur and infundendo creatur.
it receives life, and together with that a soul (according to the opinion of
many) divinely infused, for that then it begins to be sensible, and from that
time it may no more be called a young one, but an infant, according to the
precedent figure. And, though at this time it may have sense, yet it wants
motion, being as yet very tender, but of the time of the motion, Hippocrates
gives this account, viz. If you account the days double from the time of
conception, you will find them quicken; and the time of quickening being
tripled, makes up the day of the birth. Quicken, when.
As for example,

A rule to know it.
If the infant be formed in 45 days, it will stir in 90 days, which is the
middle time that it lies hid in the womb; for in the ninth month it will come
forth, and make haste to the birth; although females are oftentimes born in the
tenth month. And so much for the formation, increase, and perfection of the
infant, according to the account of days and times.

SECT. III. How the infant does in the womb the fifth, the sixth, the seventh,
and eighth month; and also of the difference of sexes, and forms.
AFter the third and fourth month the infant uses a more plentiful
nourishment, by which it grows more and more until the time of birth shall
come: Therefore it is to be understood, that when it is born in the sixth
month, it cannot in nature live; because, though it be formed distinctly, yet
it is not of its just perfection. But if it be born in the seventh month, Why
an infant born in the seventh month may live.
it may easily live, because then it is sufficiently perfect. And, whereas
those that are born in the eighth month can rarely live; whereas, such as are
born in the seventh month are often times living, it is not without reason;
for on the seventh month the infant is ever moving toward the birth, at which
time, if it be strong enough, it comes to the birth, but if not, it remains
in the womb till it grows stronger, (viz.) the other two months. After the
motion at seven months end if it be not born, it removes it self into some
other place of the womb, and is so weakened by that motion, that should it come
to the birth in the following eighth month, Two mortal signs by the infants
moving.
it cannot live by reason of that motion; and neither is the infant endangered
by this only, but by a double motion. The first is, that when after the motion
of the seventh month, it is born the eighth month, (as aforesaid.) The next
is, because (by reason of the influence of the stars) every seventh month
produces a dangerous and hurtful motion to the infant; for the Sun is ever
standing in an opposite sign at that time, and because the 8th. month is ever
nearest unto Saturn, an enemy to all that receive life.

And it is to be conceived, The difference of the sex. Hippocrates Aphor. v.
Book, and 48.
that the males are generated in the right side of the matrix; but females in
the left, out of the left testicle; for the right side, by reason of the Liver
is hotter, but the left cooler; but principally the abundant heat of seed is
the cause of the generation of males.

Of infants being like their parents.
And, because males are sometimes like their parents, is from the virtue of the
seed, that the infant should most resemble those whose seed is most in virtue.
But it is believed that the motion of the stars can do somewhat, Stars have
influence. The reason of handsome and unhandsome children.
as when the seed is conceived under the aspect of some good Planets, this
makes an excellent form; but when under the aspect of some untoward Planet,
then it produces an ugly shape, and unbeautiful form.

CC Denotes the Kidneys of each side. DD The emulgent veins on the right side.
EE The emulgent Arteries on the right side. F The trunck of the hollow vein. HH
The emulgent Arteries on the left side. LL The spermatick veins on the right
side. K The spermatick Artery on the right side. M The spermatick veins on the
left side. aa The Ureters cut off. oo The feminine testicles. PP The broad
ligament like Batt wings. qq The trunk of the great Artery. BB Vessels like
Vine-branches. Y The shaft of the womb. R The bottom of the womb where the
infant lies.
depiction of a uterus with foetus This figure shows the Womb Anatomized and
how the Infant lies in it.

The parts are described in the following page.

C^oss sculpsit



SECT. IV. Of the due time and form of the Birth; and what are the causes of
pains in Childbearing.
THe ninth month being now at hand, the nourishment of the infant in the womb
begins to fail, by reason of that bigness to which the infant is grown; or
now being big, it requires much nourishment, which, because it cannot longer
attract by the small veins, and by the navil, it is moved with great struglings
and force in the womb, insomuch, as it breaks the ligaments, the veins and
coats in which the infant is involved (I mean the secundine) with the other
coats, of which hereafter, and according to this figure, fitteth it self toward
the birth.

What are the pains in Childbearing?
By this indication Midwives and other women which sometimes are assistant unto
pregnant women, may observe the true pains of a woman in travail, which in
truth are nothing else but the force of the infant now perfect, by which they
are enforced and tossed, and with which they contend downwards, that they may
go forth; for the membrane being broken by that force, and the womb open, the
humors begin to flow down, of which the infant being now freed, he presently is
sensible of the air, and being desirous of this life, is turned toward the
outlet of the matrix, with his head toward the orifice of the same: And this
(see the precedent figure) is the form of a natural birth; A natural birth, what
if the head tend forth to the out let, with the hands drawn down to the sides,
and placed on the hips, as in the last figure. An unnatural birth (of which
more at large, God willing, hereafter) may be said to be where any of these
conditions are wanting, or defective; therefore let the Midwife take care that
she be timely prepared for the reception of any birth, with all necessary
depiction of a uterus with foetus correctly presented for birth A Natural
Birth.

Cross sculy

conveniences, as with a fit stool, The Midwives furniture.
a sharp knife, astringent powder, a sponge, swathes, etc. warm oil of
Lillies, with which she may aptly anoint both the womb of the woman, and her
own hands: but of that also more particularly hereafter. Let us now, in the
next Section, make inquiry for the fittest and best Midwife, with whom we may
discourse. There is a good woman called Mrs. Eutrapelia, who promised to
undertake the office, and to be satisfied with directions. And see, here she
comes, and offers discourse.

SECT. V. A Dialogue between Eutrapelia the Midwife, and Philadelphos the
Doctor.
Eutrap. Sir, I understand you are inquiring after a woman that may make a fit
Midwife; the employment being such a necessary and public good; I should be
willing (if your Worship, and other Learned Physicians think me fit) to be
serviceable in my generation, and to take upon me that employment.

Dr. Philadelphos, Your name, I beseech you, Mistress.

Eutrap. Sir, my name is Eutrapelia; and I am she that last night promised to
wait on you this morning.

Philad. Are you she? Welcome Mrs. Eutrapelia, your name bespeaks you fit for
the work, as being a well-bred woman; therefore give me leave to tell you what
kind of person a Midwife ought to be, and that in the subsequent description:

A good Midwife described.
The best Midwife is she that is ingenuous, that knows letters, and having a
good memory, is studious, neat and cleanly over the whole body, healthful,
strong, and laborious, and well instructed in women's conditions, not soon
angry, not turbulent, or hasty, Exo. 1.15. Shiphrah Puah. Exodus 1.17. and ver.
20 and 21.
unsober, unchaste; but pleasant, quiet, prudent; not covetous, but like the
Hebrew Midwives, such as fear God, that God may deal with them, and that the
people may multiply and increase after their hands, and that the Lord may build
them houses.

By this description I tell you only how the best Midwife must be qualified;
let me hear from you somewhat of your experience and skill, that I may the
better judge of your abilities, and approve of them. First, then Mrs. let me
know how women are delivered?

How women are delivered.
Eutrap. Women are variously delivered, some on their bed, that is to say,
o'rethwart the hardest bed, with their faces upward, with their feet closed,
doubled, and covered. But if she be not so tired out that of necessity she must
be delivered on the bed, remove her to the stool: The stool described.
now the stool must be strong, and cut with a hole, in the shape of the moon,
as high as a Barbers chair, The Midwives pesture.
that the Midwife sitting upon a lower stool, may the better bring the infant
from the upper parts; the woman's infant from the upper parts; the woman's face
being still from her. Her office.
Then let her attend with her finger dipped in warm oil of sweet Almonds, or
Lillies, moved about the orifice of the matrix, that the secundine (called the
afterburden) may the easier fall out. The number of her assistants.
Then let those that are about her (which need not be above three at a time,
that is to say, on each side one, and one at her back) persuade her not to cry
out, Not (...).
but to keep in her breath what she may, that the spirits may descend, and be
exposed downwards, to depress the Diaphragma (or Midriff) especially when her
throws are upon her. If the follicle depiction of a birthing stool B. the Back
of the Stool o o o o. the feet a a. rests for the hands r r. the ring in
shape like the Moon c c c c. the Cloth round the ring to keep out the Air
etc:


Crofs sculpsit

be not broken after a long while, it may be broken, carefully, with the nail
of the finger, and thrusting the finger in by degrees to open it. But often
times the orifice opens naturally, by reason of the humors that flow out by
it. But always this caution must be observed by the Midwife, A Caution.
that the infant fall not suddenly out, lest that endanger too sudden a
quassation both of the head and shoulders. But the humors flowing, and the
orifice so open, the Midwife may take hold of it, and moving it to and fro,
bring it to the birth (according to the natural posture described before in the
fourth Section) which must be done at such a time when the orifice of the womb
opens it self, Against over-haftness.
and not otherwise, lest with hastiness the flux of blood (which always
attends the birth) be too immoderate, Falling out of the matrix.
and so the matrix it self come forth. When the infant beg^ns to come forth,
let the Midwife take and receive it in a cloth in her hands, Infant, how to be
received.
and let it come down together with the secundine. After the child has rested
a while, (...)
the navil must be cut four inches in length, with a sharp penknife, being
sufficiently tied with a strong double silk in two places, and cut betwixt the
knots, to prevent as well a flux of blood in the infant as in the mother. After
it is cut off, dry up the coagulated blood, with burnt silk, or some astringent
powder, of which, take this description;

An astringent powder.
. of Aloes, Frankincense, Dragons-blood, of each a dram; of burnt Hartshorn,
sealed earth (called Terra sigillata) fine flour, of each two drachms; of the
wool of Hares shread small, half an ounce; of these make a fine powder.

As to the washing of the child, and swathing, I need not give you any account,
I suppose you take it for granted, that most women understand that I only here
show you the shape of the stool I use, which, I hope, you will not disapprove
of, though all Midwives (nay few) have them, or use them.

Dr. Philadelphos, I like, Mrs. the use of your stool, as being most useful,
and especially by reason of the skirt of cloth that usually ought to be about
n="*" Of a black color.
it, to keep away the air, which gives me occasion to give you one necessary
admonition by the way. A Caution.
Therefore let all Midwives take heed that they expose not their women that are
in labor to the cold air, but rather that they cover the privities with the
secundine also whilst it is yet hot, or else with warm clothes presently after
the birth. For, believe me, (neither is it only my opinion, but also the
opinion of the most Learned Doctors) that there is nothing worse to
childbearing women than the cold air, Rodericus a Castro part, 2 lib. 4. Cap.
12.
because that entering into the womb, the womb it self is distended, waxes
cold, and swells, and its orifices are shut, from whence comes the
menstruous matter, and thence arise grievous symptoms, and often times death it
self. But as to the suppression of them, and their cure, we shall (by divine
assistance) treat more largely e're we leave this subject in hand.

This precedent figure is the form of a child lying in the womb (according as
cut in Tho. Bartholinus, in Page 197.) naked, and out of all its coats, both
proper and common. The description of it appears by the explanation of these
letters in it, viz.

AA Shows the parts of the Chorion diffected, and removed from their proper
place.

B A portion of the membrane Amnios.

CC The membrane of the womb diffected*

DD The placenta Uteri, or hepar uterinum, being a fleshy substance full of
many vessels, by which the infant receives its nourishment.

E The varication of the Vessels which makes up the navil string.

FF The navil string by which the Umbili or vessels are carried from the
placenta to the navil.

GG The infant, as it lies perfect in the womb near the time of travel.

H How the umbilical vessels are inserted into the navil of the infant.

SECT. VI. Of the site of the child in the womb.
The infant, how it lies in the womb.
THE infant in the womb lies altogether bowed and contracted together, his
knees to his belly, and head to his knees, the anckles being joined to the
buttocks, cross-legg'd, his hands lifted up toward his head, on which he so
leans his head, that his eyes seem to be fixed to the thumbs of his hands,
the one placed on the temples, the other on the cheeks; insomuch, that white
spots may be seen in the skin, as if they had been fretted the one against the
other. The former part of the body tends toward the lower part of the belly of
the mother (if it be a male) and the hinder part toward the back; but if it be
a female, the posture is clean contrary. But the usual posture is as in this
figure which goes before.

SECT. VII. Of difficult births, whether praeternatural, or whether they
proceed from Causes external or internal.
DIfficult births from external causes may be either, first, from excessive
heat, dissolving the strength of the women; or second, excessive cold,
condensing the womb; Their canses.
or third, from sweet things, often applied to the nostrils of the woman, that
by smelling to sweet things she may recover her strength and faintings; for
sweet smells do attract the womb upwards, and so render the birth more
difficult.

Difficult birth from internal causes may be either, first, from the woman;
second, from the womb; third, from the infant; fourth, from the membranes of
the womb. 1. From the woman, as when she is too angry, too fearful, or too
modest; or if she be in age above 40 years, Women of above 40 years bring forth
with difficulty.
from whence the muscles of the womb may be concluded to be dry, and so the
less extensible; or, when she is so thick and fat, that the passages be narrow:
Or, 2. From the womb it self, as, when it is so small, and nature so weak and
feeble that it cannot expel the birth: Or, if there be any inflammation,
Inflammation. The stone. Costiveness. Haemorrhoids.
or other preternatural affect in the privities, be it the stone, or
haemorrhoid's, or extraordinary costiveness; all which may so compress the womb
with their weight, that it cannot expel the birth. 3. Is from the infant it
self, as if it be of an unusual bigness, of a great head, or a monstrous birth,
hydropical, gibbous, (that is crook-back'd) full of wind, dead in the womb, or
lying there in a posture beyond nature; as when it comes overthwart, with the
feet forward, and not the head, or if the thigh before the head. 4 th. From the
membranes of the womb, as when they are so forcibly broken by the child in the
womb that the moisture flows thence, leaving the infant behind, that when the
child should come forth, that moisture fails, and so the membranes being
dryer, makes the birth the more difficult; or when it is so firm and sollid
that it is broken with much difficulty, and so makes the labor the harder.

SECT. VIII. Of the Schemes, Fashions, and Figures of the birth lying in the
womb, and how they are born, or may be born.
THE postures of the infant in the womb are generally four: First, they offer
to come with their heads forward (which is the natural birth.) Secondly, with
the feet forwards. Thirdly, overthwart. Fourthly, doubled; to all which the
Midwives care and skill is required, but especially in the three later. But
chiefly very many postures and schemes have been observed, and are to be found
by continuance of practice; for that child that comes with his head forward,
sometimes has his head right as to the orifice of the matrix, but the rest of
the body crooked, and sometimes overthwart: and sometimes the infant pitcheth
his head either in the former part from the orifice, or backward, or comes
crooked; and sometimes also these schemes are without any tie as to the bottom
of the matrix, and sometimes with it; sometimes also it puts forth one hand, or
both, so as that they are twisted above the head: sometimes it comes forward,
with its feet asunder, and those fixed in the parts of the womb; sometimes the
feet being doubled, it endeavors to come forth with the knees forward;
sometimes it is so doubled, that it shows forth its little buttocks like one
that is sitting; or contrarily may be so doubled, that you may find the soles
of the feet joined to the head in the orifice of the matrix; but those that lie
o'rethwart, sometimes lie on one side, and sometimes with the face upwards, and
sometimes downwards: But if there be twins, then that which presents it self
fairest, must be laid hold on, and the other put back. As to all which, the
next 15 or 16 Sections will not only furnish with schemes, but with directions.
Hitherto having described the Midwife and her office, together with the site of
the infant in the womb, as natural; together with difficult births in general,
and their causes. It is reasonable, (good Mrs. Eutrapelia) that we discourse of
praeternatural births because those bring the greatest danger with them, both
to the mother and infant.

SECT. IX. Scheme the first. Of praeternatural Births.
Philad. Courteous Mrs. Eutrapelia, If you perceive a child come with his feet
forwards, and the hands drawn downwards to the thighs, according to this next
ensuing form, How will you deliver the woman?

depiction of a uterus with foetus in an abnormal birth position

Eutrap. In this, I will take care to be furnished with Oils, Answer.
and convenient liniments, and only to help the coming forth of the infant, by
anointing and cherishing it, lest it go back again, but that it may come forth
the same way as it began. But first of all I shall take care, that both arms of
the infant so stretched downwards, be so secured by me, that the infant may not
have power to draw them back again, but that I may compel it to come forth,
after this very same manner: But if the infant breaking forth after this
manner, and by reason of its bigness as well as his arms drawn down, be so
straightened by the narrowness of the matrix, that of it self it cannot wholly
come to the birth; then the womb of the woman is to be anointed with oil of
Lillies, Oils. Opus est Elleboro.
or sweet Almonds, and some sneezing Powder of Hellebor, etc. blowed up into
her nose, to help the sending forth of the birth, and the womb gently to be
compressed with both hands, that it tend not upwards, but downwards, as it
ought, until it comes forth entirely.

SECT. X. Scheme the Second.
DR. Philadel. Eutrapelia; What if an infant come with the feet forward, and
the hands lifted up above the head, and not drawn downwards to the thighs, (as
in the following sigure) what course will you take with most safety?

depiction of a uterus with foetus in an abnormal birth position

Eutrap. Sir, I am not at all to receive it so lying, Answ.
except the infant be very small and little, and the matrix so extensive, and
open, that it may be hoped a safe delivery, both to the woman and to the child;
neither must I receive it before the matrix and the infant be diligently
anointed. But it were much better to thrust back the infant into the womb, and
to turn it to the right form, which may be done after this manner. Let the
woman lie on her back upon a bed, with her buttocks raised higher, and her head
lower; which done, I must swathe her belly toward the midriff gently, that I
may drive back the infant again into the womb, by which means it may give an
occasion of coming forth in another form; but above all, I must take care to
turn the face of the infant toward the back of the mother, and then I must lift
up the buttocks and thighs of the infant toward the navil of the mother, that
it may hasten toward a lawful birth: and there cannot be a safer experiment in
this case, (as I conceive) which is also most useful in such births as come
praeternaturally.

SECT. XI. Scheme the Third.
PHiladelphos;

Eutrap. Answer.
In this case, Sir, I must not trouble the woman, but must bring her to her bed
again, and so by the assistance of other women, bend her, and turn her after
the same manner as was formerly proposed, putting back also the other foot into
the womb; which done, she must often tumble her self upon her bed, till I find
the infant in some measure turned, and the woman brought fitly to her labor,
and helped with all means possibly to be used. And this kind of tossing and
tumbling may be used in all births, where the infant depiction of a uterus with
foetus in an abnormal birth position appears after an unapt manner: In the mean
time, when there is need, she ought to be refreshed with such Physical means as
may be proper. But if it shall happen that either by the rolling to and fro of
the woman, or my industry, that the foot so bent back come right to the birth;
then I must take care that (laying hold of the arms otherwise drawn downwards
toward the sides) I bring the infant handsomely out, so as is answered in the
first Chapter.

SECT. XII. Scheme the Fourth.
PHiladelphos;

Eutrapelia; Answer.
Sir, In this case and condition, I must not trouble the woman, nor expect the
infant to be born so lying, which without some way of turning is impossible.
Therefore I am to take care that I reduce it to the true form of a natural
birth, by lifting up depiction of a uterus with foetus in an abnormal birth
position the buttocks, and directing the head to the birth; and if this course
succeed not, to see that by often rolling upon the bed, as aforesaid, the
infant return to its right form of lying.

depiction of a uterus with foetus

SECT. XIII. Scheme the Fifth.
PHiladel. Tell me, Mrs. Eutrapelia,

depiction of a uterus with foetus in an abnormal birth position

Eutrap. Answer.
As things so stand, Sir, I must not endeavor the birth of the child, but must
bring her from the stool to the bed, where I must press back the womb as
before-said, or must desire her to roll her self about, till the infant
depiction of a uterus with foetus in an abnormal birth position is turned to a
more commodious posture: And if this course prevail not, I must endeavor to
join both feet together, and, if possible, must bring down the hands so to the
sides, that I may direct it to the birth. But the safest way is, that it be
converted, in the womb, to its right posture.

SECT. XIV. Scheme the Sixth.
DR. Philadel. Tell me, Midwife,

Eutrap. Here, Doctor, Arswer.
I must with my right hand lift up both knees upward, till the feet happen to
come forth foremost, then with my left hand I must lay hold on the feet, and
with my right hand keep the hands to the sides, and encourage the infant toward
the birth. But if this way be not thought safe enough, I must bring the woman
to the bed, where lying in such a posture as before, she shall so roll her self
up and down, till the infant come to a better and more commodious posture.

SECT. XV. Scheme the Seventh.
DR. Philadel. Eutrapelia, What if the infant come out hastily with one hand,
and the other hand down toward the side, and the feet stretched out straight
into the womb, according to this figure; How will you receive it?

depiction of a uterus with foetus in an abnormal birth position

Eutrap. May it please you, Sir, Answer.
I am not at all to receive it so, nor to suffer it to proceed farther toward
the birth; but must bring her to the bed, where her head must lie lower than
her buttocks; then I must swath her belly gently, that the infant may fall back
again into the womb: but if it fall not back of its own accord, I must put in
my hand, and press back the shoulders, and must reduce the arm that hanged out
to the side, that it may be disposed of to a natural form in the womb, and so
may come forth easily.

SECT. XVI. Scheme the Eighth.
DR. Philadel.

depiction of a uterus with foetus in an abnormal birth position

Eutrap. It Is true, Sir, Answer.
this posture is much more dangerous than the former; but I shall take all the
care I can to bring back again this birth into the womb wholly. And first of
all, I shall anoint my hands, and the womb of the woman, with oils for this
purpose, (for this requires no small labor) then, if possible, with my other
hand shall drive it back so by the shoulders, that it may wholly fall back into
the womb: And again, lest the infant should return to the same form of birth, I
must put in my hands, and bring down the arms of the infant to the sides, and
by that means bring it to the form of a natural birth. If this course take not,
I must bring the woman to the bed, where, after she has lain quiet a while, I
must proceed after the same manner as I have before delivered: and if this also
be to no purpose, and that it neither be changed to another form, she must be
brought to the stool; and the womb, by the help of the women that are
assistants, must be depressed on both sides, and downwards: And (my hands being
anointed as before-said, together with the womb, and both the arms as they
come) I must do what I can to join them together, and so receive it as it comes
forth. And in this birth, there is the less danger, if that I or any other
Midwife do our duties with all possible diligence, and in case the infant be
not too weak.

SECT. XVII. Scheme the ninth.
PHiladel. But I beseech you, Eutrap. How will you deliver a woman of a child
that falls down with its buttocks forward, and the hands spread over the head,
according to this figure?

depiction of a uterus with foetus in an abnormal birth position

Eutrap. Here, Answer.
Sir, I must anoint my hand as abovesaid, and putting it up, must lift up the
fundament of the child, and turn the head to the Birth. But, in this case I
must not make too much haste, lest it fall into some worser form; neither is it
possible that a child should be so born, without great loss to the mother and
the infant; therefore, if it cannot be turned with the hand, she must be
brought to the bed, where, if she be very weak, she may be refreshed with
convenient meats and cordials, and then often proceeded with as is said before,
until the infant shall come to a more commodious form of birth.

SECT. XVIII. Scheme the tenth.
DR. Philad.

depiction of a uterus with foetus in an abnormal birth position

Eutrap. In this case, Sir; I must in the first place move backward the
shoulders of the infant, that it may first appear with the head forward; and
this may easily be done, because the shoulders being but a little up, the head
of it self will fall down to the orifice of the womb, as being nearest to it.
But if there must be any other way attempted, she must be brought back to the
bed, and then so stirred and rouled, and used according to those directions
formerly hinted.

SECT. XIX. Scheme the Eleventh.
DR. Philadel. Mrs,

depiction of a uterus with foetus in an abnormal birth position

Eutrap. Here, Answer
Sir, I must take care, lest some danger happen from this difficult and
unshapely figure; therefore I must do thus. I must so move up the feet of the
infant, that I may handle the head, and do what I can to direct that first to
the birth: I must also move up the arms, lest of their own accord they fall
down to the sides of the womb. And if this way succeed not, she must be brought
back to the bed, and the same means used for the turning of the infant as has
been formerly described.

SECT. XX. Scheme the Twelfth.
PHiladel. Sometimes,

Answer.
depiction of a uterus with foetus in an abnormal birth position

Eutrap. Truly, Sir, this case is the most dangerous of all hitherto proposed.
First, therefore, I must carefully anoint both my hands, and also the womb of
the woman; which done, I must enquire after the arms of the infant, and lay
hold of them so, till I can lay hold of the head also, and with all care hold
it so fast, that I may direct the head first to the birth; next I must dispose
of them to the sides; for this being done, the birth will come forth the
sooner, and with less danger; but if this succeed not, it will be safest to
bring the woman to the bed, and to proceed as formerly showed; that, if
perhaps, by this kind of delay, the infant may accommodate it self to a more
fit posture for the birth.

SECT. XXI. Scheme the thirteenth.
DR. Philadel. There being the same reason in twins as in a single birth, and
all come fair with their heads toward the birth; What is to be done?

depiction of a uterus with twin foetuses in an abnormal birth position

Eutrap. Here, Answer.
Sir, I must observe that which lies readiest and fittest in the womb, and
first receive that, and not to let the other go till the first is born, lest it
turn into another shape by sliding back again into the womb; but the one being
born, I must presently lay hold on the other. Now, this birth will be easier,
and without danger, because the first birth has made the way for the second so
plain, that it may come forth without any difficulty at all. But in this birth
I must take care that I bring forth the after-burden timely enough,
After-burden.
lest that the womb, being freed from her infants, presently fall down, and so
keep in the secundine or after-burden with great danger.

SECT. XXII. Scheme the fourteenth.
DR. Philadel. But,

depiction of a uterus with twin foetuses in an abnormal birth position

Eutrap. This birth, Answer.
Sir, is dangerous enough, and yet it is to be mended by the prudence of a
discreet Midwife. Wherefore, I must anoint the womb of the woman, that the
passages may be the easier for the infant; which being done, I must take care
to lay hold of the arms of one of them, and bringing them down to the sides,
secure them so, that I may lightly promote the head to the birth; and the first
being born, I must presently proceed with the other after the same manner: but
if I can lay hold of neither of their arms, so that there is no good hopes of a
happy birth, I must have recourse to the former method; if at least the infants
may come into the world by that pains and conversion which is wrought upon the
bed.

SECT. XXIII. Scheme the fifteenth.
DR. Philadel. with the feet, what is to be done in this case?

depiction of a uterus with twin foetuses in an abnormal birth position

Eutrap. Answer.
Where infants offer themselves after this manner; I must first bring forth
that which presents it self with a natural form, and must move up the other,
that is with the feet forward, and if possible, cause it so to return into the
womb, that that birth also may be disposed of to a natural birth; but if it
cannot be converted to be in a better posture, I must lay hold presently on the
hands, and encourage it to the birth. But it were safer that this should be
brought to a natural form; to which end I must diligently endeavor it, by
anointing, directing, moving it, tumbling and rouling the woman, lest perhaps
the womb be hurt by the form of such an unnatural birth, and the privities
swell with n="*" See the page toward the later end of the fifth Section.
wind, from whence the birth cannot come forth without danger, or be hindered
too long: All which danger may with provident care be avoided, or at the least
very much corrected and amended.

SECT. XXIV. Scheme the sixteenth.
DR. Philadelphos; Courteous Mrs. Eutrapelia, I have hitherto troubled you with
many Questions, that I might not only be sure of your abilities, but also give
testimony of your sufficiency, if need require. I have now only one Question
more, and then I have done, as to these postures and schemes: And this, though
the last, surely is a miraculous posture. What if the infant be so involved in
the womb (the head and the neck being of such a length) that it is so bent
back, that the face lies betwixt the buttocks, the right hand to the left
region of the reins, but the left hand to the knee of the same side; the right
leg being across the left, in form of the letter X, and both legs bent up
toward the breast?

depiction of a uterus with foetus in an abnormal birth position

Eutrap. Answer.
Worthy Dr. This case is the hardest of any that hitherto you have propounded
to me; and though it may never fall out to be so in one amongst 5000, yet
(because, in your description of the best Midwife, you tell me that a Midwife
must have a good memory) I remember a learned Doctor, not long since acquainted
me with such a posture, which he told me he had from the hands of an expert
n="*" Gulielm^s Fabritius Hildanus, Century, the sixth; Observation, Lxiv.
Surgeon and Physician, whose wife also was an expert Midwife; and the
course the Midwife took in such a case, he told me was this, which must serve
also for my answer, because I think there cannot be a better. After the woman
had been eight days in labor, and given over by all Midwives as desperate,
being in a violent Fever, with no throws, but very weak, and (by reason of hot
medicines given to expel the birth, and strong wines given to support the
spirits) those humors that usually accompany the infant had so flown out, Blood
and water.
that the genitals were so dry and closed, that they would scarce admit the
probation of two fingers. This method was used: First, instead of wine, she
gave her good store of Almondmilk; and because her belly was very costive, she
gave her Clysters; and to keep up her spirits she gave her Cordials, (of which
in their order.) She laid plasters to her hand-wrists, and anointed the whole
region of the belly, hips, loins, the rump-bone, and privities, Os sacrum.
with anodyne Oils, with emollient and relaxing Unguents; and then she made a
triangular bagg stuffed with emollient and relaxing herbs, boiled in water,
according to this description, (and of which more hereafter.)

depiction of a triangular bag used as a hot compress during labor

It is of such a bigness, as that it might cover the lower part of the belly,
and the privities, and with tapes fitted to the corners was applied hot, and
continued on some hours; after which, though her hand were well anointed, she
could scarce thrust in the top of her finger into the orffice of the womb, the
womb was so closed, Called the Os pubis.
and the infant so depressed toward the share-bone, by reason of the precedent
throws and pangs. But at length, when with much labor and industry the
genitals were somewhat dilated, that she could get in her fingers farther, she
found the loins and the right hand of the child first offer it self to the
birth: that therefore she might correct this monstrous and so inverted posture
of the infant so doubled and twisted, and either persuade the head or the feet
to come forward, she uses the best of her skill, but to little purpose, the
genitals were so narrow and straight. But yet not giving off her endeavors,
she did deliver her within eight hours after she came to her assistance; but
the child was dead.

Dr. Phila. Mrs. You give a very good account of an expert Midwives practice,
which you may follow with safety, expecting the succcess from Heaven; but it is
no wonder the child should be still-born, (as you phrase it;) for being so
turned and doubled, the child must of necessity be strangled in the womb.

Having thus run through births, as well natural as praeternatural, I shall
give you the reason (and that in my own opinion) why these births are of so
various and different postures in the womb, observing not always the same
posture: and it is thus. The reason of these different postures.
Because the infant swimming in water, and moving it self, sometimes this way,
sometimes that way, and is bent and tumbled several wates; insomuch, that
sometimes it is strangely entangled with its own navil-cord, which I am
confident you have seen in your own experience oftentimes.

SECT. XXV. Of a Mola.
DR. Philadel. We have hitherto, Quest.
Mrs, discoursed of births natural and praeternatural; there is somewhat more
not like these, but often with them, and without them, which Physicians call a
Mola, but you call it a false Conception: I pray, Mrs, therefore, what is that
Mola, or false Conception?

Answers A Mola, or false Conception, what.
Eutrap. A Mola, (Mr. Doctor,) generally called a false conception, is a hard
inform tumor, full of pores, (like so many ugly eyes) scarce to be cut by a
knife, of a stony substance to touch, and round, appearing sometimes at the
entrance of the womb, sometimes over the whole womb, and is generally thought
(by the n="*" Fernelius, lib. vii, cap. de faeminarum semine.
Learned Doctors) to be begotten by the woman her self without the help of a
man. (Qualis and quanta ea sit vis declarant rudiores moloe quas faeminae
quandoque proprii duntaxat seminis vi, Fran. Valesii controversianum, lib. 11.
cap. 6. in fine. Ex pauco semine eaque impure.
nullo viri concubitu concipiunt;) And so another Dr. in these words (I beg
your pardon, Mrs. that I am enforced to use authorities in Latin) (some
affirming that it cannot be without the seed of the man.)

Valesius, as before quoted.
Hinc cognosces, quod faemina saepe ex se sola solet utero concipere; foetus
tamen ad perfectionem nunquam perducitur; ex his tamen imperfectis
conceptionibus quae dicuntur, molae matricis generantur and informia carnis
frusta. And therefore inanimate, because not generated by two, N^ ^et affectu
quod (...).
without the help of a man (I say) by the force of her own seed, mixing it self
with much menstruous blood, retained in the womb, which by immoderate heat it
changes into the shape of flesh, and that altogether praeternatural, as is the
stone in the bladder, and in the fingers of gouty persons, etc.

Dr. Philadel. Well, Mrs. since it is so (as in truth it is; tell me, I pray,
wherein it differs from a true Conception? The difference betwixt a true and
false conception.


Eutrap. It may, Sir, be like a true Conception in three respects, yet differ
in six. As first, It Is true that a false conception stops the monthly terms
as does the true.

Secondly, The belly also does swell, and the breasts grow big.

Thirdly, There is an alteration both in the color and appetite; but yet they
differ in these six ensuing following ways; as,

First, A false conception has no ordinary nor periodical motion, neither does
it stir from side to side, except it be pressed.

Secondly, In a false conception the belly is harder, and the feet are much
more swelled.

Thirdly, The woman is more heavy and unweeldy, and not so nimble as with a
true conception.

Fourthly, The breasts swell not so much as in a true conception.

Fifthly, The whole body grows soft, and consumes away in a false conception,
but not so in a true.

Sixthly, a false conception may be moved in three months, but the child
stirs not till after three months, or usually in the fourth month: And
again, the birth of an infant never exceeds the eleventh month, whereas a
false conception may continue for fourteen years, A Mola may lie 14 years.
or as long as they live.

Moreover, there may be a Tympanie caused by air included in the womb. Tympany,
what. Hydrops uterinus.
Or else there may be a Dropsy, by reason of the many humors contained in the
womb, both which may give a false supposition of being with child; but these
also are easily distinguished from a false conception. A Tympanie may be moved
from place to place, but not the other: A Tympanie will sound, if lightly
stricken, but not the other; and a Dropsy, caused by those many humors as
aforesaid, will show some marks, being depressed with the fingers, whereas a
Mola is hard, and yields not to the pulsation or depression of the fingers.
And lastly, in both these most commonly the thighs swell, but in a false
conception or mola the thighs wither, and are lesser. Now having discoursed of
these things, Sir; if you please, in the next place, let us discourse of the
secundine, or after-burden.

Dr. Philadel. I shall, Mrs. very willingly.

SECT. XXVI. Of the Secundine, or After-burden.
DR. Philadelphos, Come then, Mrs. if you please, tell me what the Secundine is.

After-burden, what.
Eutrap. The Secundine is that in which the infant lies in the womb, and may
be called a second house, or covering, made by the womb for a receptacle of the
infant; and it has with it three membranes; but how Physicians name them, I
know not.

Dr. I will inform you then, if you please, with their names and uses; and
describe them to you in these two figures following, which are explained by
letters also, as may appear.

The explanation of the first Figure.
BBB Signifies that part of the Secundine called the Chorion, which is the
depiction of the placenta prop of all the vessels of the young one. CCC Denotes
the branches of the Umbilical veins and arteries dispersed through the Chorion.
EEE The membrane called Amnios, and is the thinnest of all the membranes, and
is white, soft, and shining, with few (and those very small) veins and arteries
dispersed among the folds; and this is the very next coat to the infant, and is
the receptacle for sweat and urine; that membrane called Allantois not to be
found in men, though an Urachus be to be found. DD Denotes all the vessels
meeting about the navil, by which the infant is nourished.


P. Q Denotes the membrane called Amnios, and is the first that involveth the
infant. RRRR The Liver, RRRR. Epar uterinum, or, Placenta uteri.
or cake of the womb, or after-burden, by which the infant receives
nourishment, and this is fastened to the womb. SS The inward and outward veins.
m.m.m. The Umbilical vein, with its branches dispersed into the after-burden,
by which the child is nourished, and upon which it lies, as upon a pillow,
though in the Amnios it swimmeth as in a bath. VV How all the vessels meet
about the navil. b.b.b Denotes the infant newly born, annexed to the secundine,
the navil-string not cut.


Dr. Philad. You see, Mrs. these Schemes, with their uses and explanation; I
shall now discourse more particularly of the membranes themselves. The
after-burden, Of the secundine.
commonly called the secundine, so called, either because depiction of a
newborn infant attached to the placenta Chorion

Amnios

it is as it were a second place, mansion, and receptacle of the infant from
the womb; The Secundine what, and why so called.
or else, because this membrane is called the afterbirth, or second birth, as
coming forth after the infant, which, if it stay behind, brings great mischief,
as shall be spoken to at the later end of this Treatise and Section.

A^v (...), The first Galea.
The first membrane is called Amnios, and this membrane covers the infant from
the head to foot; insomuch, that part of it sticks to the head of the infant
when it is born, which they call a helmet, though this is not always, being
left behind with the secundine in difficult labors: this is so called from its
softness and thinness; others resemble it to white paper, or a shirt, and is
the thinnest of all, in which is found great plenty of humors, caused of urine
and sweat, in which the infant swimmeth as in a bath, and lies so easy and
secure, lest it should fall foul against those neighboring parts that are
harder; and besides that, when the membrane is broken in the birth, this water
breaking out, may make the passages by the neck of the womb more plain and
slippery for the infant; and this membrane also is every where concluded within
the second, (...), The second.
which is called Chorion, because it wraps the infant like a ring; and this
immediately compasses the former, to which it is joined as it were in a round
figure, like to a cake, whose inward and hollow part it covers and involves,
and does extend it self to its dimensions, and can scarce be separated from it,
but does firmly knit and bear up the vessels of the afterburden, Epar Uterinum.
which immediately sticks to the womb by a certain fleshy mass that is formed,
being round, and of somewhat a ruddy color, not compassing the whole infant,
by reason of innumerous springs of veins and arteries by which the blood is
inter-woven, as if it were poured in, and by which the infant is nourished.
This toward the infant is smooth, but that part which is toward that fleshy
round mass, is rougher.

Of the Placenta Uteri, or Epar Uterinum.
This round fleshy substance is called the liver of the womb, or the cake of the
womb; which, having (a parenchyma) such a substance as the liver has, no
wonder if it should make and prepare blood for the nourishment of the infant.
On that side toward the womb it is rough, and unequal, like clefts in a baked
cake; and being cut in this part, it shows an infinite company of fibers,
which, if you trace, they will bring you to the orifice of the veins
themselves. And, although there be twins, or more, yet there is but one
placenta; for into one placenta so many navil-strings are inserted (in diverse
places) as there are young ones; Embryones.
though it may differ as to the bigness, according to the body and condition of
the infant, yet the ground is still the same in the diameter. The use of the
Placenta. (...) The third. (...).
The use serves as a support of the unibilical vessels, for which it serves as
a pillar; it is also called (secundae) the secundine. The third is called
Allantoides; it is a coat betwixt the Chorion and Amnios; it is (...) difficulty.
Be it as it will, wheresoever these make but the least stay, I must endeavor,
all that I can, to bring them forth: for when they are detained longer than
their due time, they cause bad symptoms, Symptoms.
as a horrible stench, which fumes up to the stomach, heart, liver, midriff,
and so consequently to the brain; from whence arises great pains in the head,
at the heart, decay of spirits, faintings, swounings, often Convulsions, cold
Sweats, Apoplexies, Epilepsies, sometimes Gangrenes, and often death it self:
but of this Cure, hereafter, Sir, I shall beg your advice.

Philadel. Quest.
Mrs. you shall have it at your pleasure; you answer expertly; tell me now how
they must be persuaded out?

Eutrap. Answer.
I shall, Sir; I must first anoint my left hand with convenient oils, and
after I have laid hold of it, must not violently draw it away, Secundine, how
to be brought away.
nor yet force it directly downward, lest I draw down the womb and all
together; but I must shake it lightly and gently to and fro, till I persuade it
to follow my intention; and whilst they are thus retained, I must refresh her
with Caudles, A Caudlebroth.
or Panatells, wherein the yelks of Eggs in Wine, with some Saffron and
Cinnamon strewed; or broth of a Hen or Capon, with mace, saffron, and cinnamon
boiled in it. As to other means, where the danger is more, I think it ever best
and safest to consult with learned Physicians, or with experienced Ladies,
whose Closets are furnished with choice praescriptions which they have had from
Doctors, in such cafes.

Philadel. But, Quest.
Mrs. we have formerly discoursed of Births, natural, and praeternatural, with
their respective schemes. Tell me now, A dead child, how delivered, and how of
a Mola.
how you will deliver a woman of a dead child? and how of a false Conception,
or Mola? Especially, where no pains or throws are, which are most commonly
occasioned by the motion and force of the child only alive (as has been showed
in the 21th. Page, and 4th. Section?)

Eutrap. Answer.
Here, Sir, is great danger and difficulty. I have, by Gods blessing, with
safety to the women, delivered them of many a dead child, and of a Mola, or
false Conception, also; and believe the method of curing one of them, will
serve to cure the other; as I have been informed by learned Physicians; but
where Chirurgical Instruments, or other Physical means must be used, I ever
recommend such a case to learned Physicians, and Surgeons, expert in
Anatomy, both for assistance and direction.

SECT. XXVII. Of the signs of Conception in general, and the different Sexes in
particular.
DR. Philadelphos. Good Mrs. Eutrapelia, Quest.
vouchsafe me your observations about Conceptions, Signs of Conception.
and let me understand what are the signs of Conception in general; and what
signs distinguish the Sexes?

Eutrap. Although, Sir, Answer.
it is hard to know whether a woman has conceived yea or no, yet it may be
conjectured by many experienced Arguments; as, for instance,

First, it is thought a credible sign of Conception, if a woman either the
tenth day after coition, or sooner, perceive, by reason of any humors, any of
her terms, be they whites, or reds. Stopping of the courses no sure sign.
And, though the stopping of those be accounted for a sign, yet that fails
often, because it may be as well before conception as after. But, waving this,
let us find out other marks and prognostics of a true conception, gathered
from the state and condition of the woman her self, being seriously examined
from head to foot.

Secondly; pains and giddiness in in the head, and a mist over the sight, if
they meet together, these portend conception.

Thirdly, the apples of the eyes are lessened, the eyes swell, and become
swarthy; the veins of the eyes grow red, and are full with blood; the eyes
fink, the eyelids are remiss; diverse colors are seen in the eyes, and are
observed in a looking-glass; the veins betwixt the eyes and the nose are turgid
with blood, and are seen clearer; the veins under the tongue are somewhat
greenish.

Fourthly, the chest is warm, and the back cold.

Fifthly, the veins and arteries are turgid, and the pulse easier; the veins in
the breast are first black, then either yellow or blew.

Sixthly, The breasts grow big, and hard with pain; the nipple grows red; if
she drinks that which is cold, she feels cold in her breast.

Seventhly, there is a great loathing of meat and drink, and destruction of the
natural appetite, with longings after various meats, with an absurd appetite, a
continual vomiting, and weakness of stomach, sower belchings, loathing of wine,
an inordinate pulsation of the heart, sudden joy, and after that, as sudden
grief; pains about the navil, Invicem cedunt dolor and voluptas.
heaviness about the loins, swelling toward the bottom of the belly; inward
pricking in the body; chilness of the outward parts, after coition; retention
of the seed seven days after copulation; about the beginning of conception a
shooting pain about the back and belly. The courses are stopped; for those veins
from which they flow carry the blood (through certain holes that are at the end
of them) for the nourishment Acetabule,
of the infant by the navil; and part of it is conveyed upwards into the
breasts, Milk, how generated.
and there is prepared for milk.

Eighthly, the thighs swell with pains, but the body is weaker, and the face
pale.

Ninthly, the belly is costive, by reason of the compressure of the intestines.
The urine is white, with a cloud swimming at the top, wherein are to be seen
many atoms, like those observable in the beams of the sun: but, when in the
first month many of these sink to the bottom, and the vessel in which it is,
being shaken, it seems to be drawn out like to wool. In the later months the
urine is reddish, or yellow, it becomes blackish, with a red cloud at the top.
I will here-with relate to you two experiments, Experiments.
by which it may be known whether or no a woman has conceived. First.
And the first is this; Stop up a woman's urine three days in a urinal, at the
end of which strain it (or, rather drop it through fine linen) and if she has
conceived, you shall see little creatures like to lice; if these be red, it is a
token of a male; Signs of a Male.
but if white, they portend a female. But this is said to be sure; Experiments.
If a woman's urine be put in a brass Basin, and stand there one night; if you
put into it a bright needle, if she has conceived, that needle will be
bespeckled with red spots; but, if otherwise, it will be rusty all over.

Dr. Philadel. These, it is true, Quest.
may be promiscuous signs of Conception. But, Mrs. how know you the Sex,
whether male, or female?

Eutrapelia. By these signs, Sir, Answer. First
usually; as First, If she has conceived a male, the right eye moves oftener,
and is better, as to its native color, than the left. The belly is sharper
about the navil. Second
The right breast grows turgid before the left, and the nipple is sooner
changed. Thirdly.
The milk increases sooner, and if it be milked out, and set in a glass in the
sun, it will grow into a clear mass, not unlike to an oriental pearl; as also,
if the courses appear about the 40th. day after the Conception. The right cheek
is redder, Fourthly.
and the whole color of the face better, neither is she so heavy as otherwise;
and the first stirring on the right side is the sixtieth day, and that strongly
too; and the right foot moves first in walking; and in arising from a seat, the
right foot is first apt to bear up the body. The pulse is more frequent on the
right side than on the left. Fifthly.


Signs of a Female.
Now, the signs of a female are contrary; and these are most commonly the signs.
The first motion after conception is selt the 90th. day, The 90th. day.
and that first in the left side.

Secondly, Females are born with more sickness; the thighs and privities swell,
the color is paler, the appetite stronger, and yet apt to loath that which is
contrary to it.

Thirdly, the Courses appear about the 30th. day after conception.

Youth bring males.
Fourthly, the age of the woman is very considerable; for the younger women most
commonly bring males, by reason of their greater heat in the womb: And the more
aged, females, Aged, females.
by reason of the defect of heat contracted in the matrix, by their age; and
females are more often generated by such Patents that are more cold and moist
by nature, and of seed that is too moist, cold, and liquid.

Dr. Philadel. Since you have given such a character of the signs of
Conception, Quest.
and the distinction of Sexes; let me know by what signs you apprehend the
infant to be well, and thrive in the womb, or not.

Answer: Sign of the infants thriving
Eutrapelia, I shall, Sir. And first, if it be well, the breasts will be hard;
but if otherwise, they will be flaccid, and a waterish humor will flow out of
them (like to milk) of its own accord.

Secondly, if the courses flow too often out of the womb in the time of
childbearing, it is an argument of an unhealthy child. And, moreover, the
fattest women commonly bring forth the weakest insants.

Thirdly, if a woman bring twins, the one a male, the other a female, there is
great danger of the female, because they are nourished by a different aliment
in the womb: but if they be both females, there is the less danger.

Fourthly, if the child be gotten in the time of the monthly terms, they are
mixed with untoward humors; from whence it is experienced that many leprous
infants are begotten.

Superfaetation, what. Aristot. Hist. Animal. Lib. 7. C. 4.
Fifthly, if there be superfaetation, the last conception seldom lives. Now,
superfaetation is, when a woman having once conceived, conceives again after a
certain time, which sometimes happens. Hence the Poets feign Iphicles and
Hercules to be twins by Alcmaena the wife of Amphitrio; the first, begotten by
Amphitrio; but the last, viz. Hercules, begotten by Jupiter. But this by the
way, although more instances might be alleged nearer home.

Signs of a dead child.
Sixthly, if a Dropsy overtake the praegnant woman, and that her nose, cars,
and lips look red; it is a sign of a dead child.

Seventhly, if the infant come forth after the ninth month, it is oftentimes
very weak.

Eighthly, if a virgin conceive before her first flowers, it proves a lusty and
perfect child.

Lastly, all these things praemised, Note.
Midwives also usually observe, that as many knots as they find in the
navilstring of an infant, so many males, they say, she will have. But, so much
for Conception. Tell me now somewhat of Abortion, with its Causes and Signs.

SECT. XXVIII. Of Abortion.
DR. Philadel. Tell me, Quest.
Mrs. Eutrapelia, what is that which you call Abortion, or miscarrying?

Eutrap. Answer.
It is, to bring forth an untimely birth; which may proceed from diverse causes,
and those either internal or external.

First, from internal causes, as, from the infant it self; Internal Co^yledons,
what.
as, when the Cotyledons (that is, the mouths of the vessels ending in the womb
through which the blood is conveyed into the womb from all parts of the body)
are so infirm, that those vessels, by reason of their rarity and weakness, are
sooner broken; and so of consequence, and Abortion.

Secondly, if the tunicles (that is, the secundine) wherein the infant is
vvrapped, be so vveak, that it break, and the humor contained therein flow
out, by which the matrix is slippery and vveak, and the infant being destitute
of those humors, fails. And also, when virulent moistures flow forth, and
provoke the expulsive faculty of the womb.

Thirdly, the third cause is, when the Woman is so vveak and consuming in her
self, that she vvithdravvs the nourishment from the infant; insomuch, that it
has neither matter to grow by, nor to generate the parts and members of it.

Fourthly; the fourth cause may be the wideness of the orifice of the womb, and
its overmuch moisture, and an evil temperature of qualities and ventosities
included in the womb; as also Ulcers and Apostemations in the womb, besides
other distempers; As are, too many Courses, too great a Flux of blood, A
caution to the Irish, where these distempers are Epidemical, and Sporadical.
too great a Looseness of the belly, or, too great Costiveness; a Tenasmus,
(called commonly a Needing,) a Cough, a constant Sneezing, and all things that
shake the body too much; and lastly, any acute sickness, which does so afflict
the woman's body, that, by them, the infant is deprived of its nourishment.

Quest. The external causes of Abortion. Answer.
Philadel. Now then, Mrs. pray inform me what are the external causes of
Abortion.

Eutrap. Sir, the external causes are many. As, first, to fall, to run, to
leap, to ride, to exercise too immoderately, and to be smitten with strokes.

Again, too much cold, and too great heat; for overmuch cold kills the
child, and too great heat intercepts the air from the infant, and so
suffocateth it in the womb; and this may be done by hot baths, if women use
them in the first months after their conception.

Thirdly, Stinking smells, as the snuff of a candle, or lamp, newly
extinguished.

Fourthly, an absurd appetite, and manner of eating and drinking; as, to cat
salt, coals, dirt, etc. by which, either ill humors, or a dangerous thirst are
procured.

Fifthly, too great hunger; for by overmuch fullness the infant is sooner
suffocated, the passages appointed for nourishment being the sooner obstructed.

Sixthly, immoderate exercise and labors, overmuch sleep, and a continual
laziness, unseasonable and unreasonable watchings; besides other accidents: As,
sudden fury, great wrath, overmuch fear and sorrow, sudden joy, and a dull
appetite, longing for that which is not to be had, unsatiable copulation and
lust.

Dr. Philadel. Quest.
You have now discovered the causes of Abortion. What, I pray, (Mrs.
Eutrapelia) are the signs of Abortion?

Eutrap. Answer. Sings.
The signs of Abortion are twofold. First, before conception in those that use
to miscarry; as, superfluous moisture, sudden and unusual fatness against
nature, which was wont to be of slender and lean constitution, or, which are
ever pained about the loins and kidneys, or fall suddenly into other dangerous
diseases.

Signs of Abortion.
Secondly, the signs of Abortion after conception are these, viz. when the
breasts that at first were turgid and hard, are observed to grow flaccid and
soft of a sudden; if there be too great a flux, and a continual flowing, of the
terms. Moreover, if there be horrors, colds, pains in the head, or a swimming
there be in the eyes; these be sure signs of Abortion.

Dr. But, Quest.
what are the signs of a dead child?

Answer. Of a dead child.
Eutrap. Where the child is dead, Sir, there is no motion perceived; when the
eyes of the woman sink, when her color is turned into a tawny whiteness, when
there are great pains about the navil and loins, when, by reason of the lower
parts being compressed, there happens a Strangury, a A Needing.
^enesmus. Again, when the ears, the lips, the top of the nostrils are taken
with a pale coldness, and the face swells, and the belly (though it sinketh not
yet) grows soft; so that lying to either side by the touch there may be
perceived a hard mass; Stinking breath a sign that the child begins to
putrify.
as also stinking breath, an argument that the infant does begin to putrify.
These are manifest signs of a dead child. The cure whereof I leave to the care
of the expert Physicians and Surgeons.

SECT. XXIX. Rules for Childbearing Women.
EUtrap. According to your promise, I beseech you, Doctor, lay me down some
Rules to be observed by Childbearing women.

Dr. Philadel. Good Midwife, I shall, and that very necessary ones too, that
she may know how to go on safely through (by Gods blessing) to the last hour,
or by neglecting them, may make her delivery the harder: and I shall reduce
them under ten heads.

First, let her be cheerful; (not breaking her self with mourning, and careful
anxiety) for this does exhilarate the infant, Res sex non naturales.
and stirs up all the faculties, and confirms it in its parts and members.

Secondly, let her avoid all violent motion, and abstain from all hard labors,
not rising up too hastily, not leaping, running, dancing, riding; not lacing
her self too straight, or carrying too heavy a burden; but surely sleep is very
fit for her.

Thirdly, let her beware of sharp and cold winds, of excessive hear, anger,
perturbations of the mind, affrights and terrors, overmuch venery, and of
intemperancy of eating and drinking.

Fourthly, let the diet of breeding women be frugal, and moderate, abstaining
from gross meats hard of digestion; let her eat eggs, chickens, landfowl, birds
of the mountains, etc. variety of broths, grewels, panadoes, mutton, veal,
lamb, kid, rabbets; she may use in her meats nutmeg and cinnamon; she may drink
wine moderately.

Fifthly, in the first four months let her open no vein, use no cupping or
scarrifications, fontanells, nor use any pills, or other Physic, without the
advice of a prudent Physician; for in these months the ligaments of the child
are very tender, soft, and feeble; and therefore the easier destroyed, and the
nourishment kept from him.

Sixthly, if it shall happen that the woman be too costive (by which many
miscarry) let her boil spinach, Against Costiveness.
and lettuce, well buttered, with salt and vinegar, or wine; which, if they
will not move the belly, Suppositories.
let her use suppositories, with honey, and the yelk of an egg, or of
Castile-soap: and if these common things will not do, let her advise with an
expert Physician.

Seventhly, if it happen that she conceive with grievous symptoms, Symptoms.
and after conception is troubled with faintings, let her take this Cordial
following. Take of Sorrel-water, and red-Rose-water, of each one ounce; of
Cinamon-water one ounce; Against fainting.
of Manus Christi pearled, (called in the Shops Saccharum tabulatum and
perlatum simplex) half an ounce, or as much Diamargariton: this may be taken as
need requires.

Eighthly, if she fear that she may come too soon (that is, before her time) as
in the seventh month, or some other unscasonable time, and feels throws, as of
childbearing, occasioned by immoderate exercise; too great costiveness, from a
Fever, or some other disease; A suffumigation.
Let her sit over a suffumigation of Frankincense; for that contributes no
small strength both to the matrix, and to the infant also.

Ninthly, if she nauseate her meat, she may use a plaster of Mastich to her
stomach, and take this following Cordial every morning, fasting, to strengthen
her stomach.

The Cordial.
Take syrup of Pomegranates one ounce and half; of Mosch and Ambergris, of
each two grains; of Lignum Aloes finely powdered, one scruple; of Cinnamon half
a scruple; the water of Sorrel three ounces; let these be mingled, and drank
off blood-warm. Against terms it Childbearing.


Lastly, if, whilst she goes with child, she perceives her terms, let her eat
milk made boil with red-hot steel, and in that let Plantain and Comfrey be
boiled. But, in all these cases, let her advise with learned Physicians, which
will direct them with medicines, and advice from time to time. I shall now
treat of some few distempers incident to childbed; and leave you some choice
Remedies in the following Sections; and then wind up all.

SECT. XXX. Of the Retention of the Lochia, (in Childbed) known by the name of
Courses (though improperly so called) and of their immoderate Flux.
THE retention or suppression of the Lochia in Childbed, Hippoc. lib. de
natura pueri.
by the consent of Hippocrates, as well as other Learned Doctors; (to which
daily experience may be added;) brings the greatest inconveniences to women,
Purgations of women in Childbed, Hippo. ibid.
and often death it self. I shall therefore in this Section treat of the
purgations of women in Childbed, which Hippocrates determines to be at the
most but 40 days, By the Levitical Law 33 days was in case of a male, Levit.
cha. 12. verse 4. and for a female, 66 days, ve. 5.
if the women bring forth a female; and 30 days to a male. But withal says,
that a woman is passed all danger after 20 days purgation: Now, if women be
not sufficiently purged in Childbed, either it causes a great A swelling, hot
and red.
Phlegmon in the womb, by reason of the inflammation of the blood; or else those
lochia being carried to some higher part, bring dangerous affects to the part
that receives them; as, Squinancies, Pleurisies, Fevers, Frenzy,
Nauseousness, Unquietness, Dropsies, and what not? Cause.
The cause of their retention is (generally) cold, by reason of the ambient air
which the woman receives in her delivery; Ambient air.
(perhaps through the improvidency of Midwives; who, most commonly, take more
care of the child than of the woman;) or else, by reason that the woman may be
delivered in some cold, moist room; which cold suddenly rushing into the inward
parts of the womb, suddenly stops them. See Sect. the fifth.
Therefore Midwives must not only be very wary in this case, as has been
already hinted in the latter end of the fifth Section, (to which I refer you)
but also proceed to the Cure. The Cure. A Glyster.
First then, this Clyster may be given: Take of the roots of Marshmallows,
Aristolchia ^ga and (...).
long and round Birthwort, of white Lillies, of each half an ounce; of the
leaves of Mallows, Pellitory of the wall, Mercury, and Violets, of each half a
handful; of Chamomel flowers, Melilot flowers, Elder flowers, each two A pugill
is as much as may be held betwixt the thumb and two fingers.
pugills; of the seeds of Dill, Foenugreek, and Seseli, of each two drachms;
let these be boiled in spring water, till a third part be consumed; strain it,
and to ten ounces of the straining, dissolve the yelk of two eggs; of Sal-Gemm,
and unguent de Arthanita, each one dram; oil of Dill, and of Bays, each
half an ounce; of these make a Glyster.

A bagg.
You may also make a bagg triangular, (whereof you see a description, with its
use, in the xxvth. Section) in which you may quilt these herbs following, being
grossly bruised and pounded.

Take of the roots of long and round Birth-wort, of Gentian, Angelica, Bryonie,
Cyclamine.
Sowbread, of the herbs of Mugwort, Balm, Savin, Orgamint, and Calamint, of
each one handful; of the flowers of Chamemile, Ingredients for the bagg.
Tansy, and Elder, each half a handful; of the seeds of Dill, Caraway,
Anniseeds, and Seseleos, each one dram: These being mash'd, and pounded, and
quilted into a bagg big enough to cover the lower part of her belly and
privities, and well secured with strings, must be boiled in spring water, and
applied warm; Two baggs best to be applied, the one hot, whilst the other
grows cold.
but it were better to have two bags, to apply as they grow cold. The belly,
hips, and thighs, which, by reason of the consent of parts, must consequently
sympathize with great pains, may be anointed with this ointment: Take of the
oil of Chamomile, The ointment. Lumbricorum Catellorum. Hipericonis.
Dill, and of the oil of Eggs, oil of Worms whelps, St. John's-wort; with
these mixed anoint the parts abovesaid warm. At night you may let this Julep be
given: take of the waters of Balm, A Julep.
and Mugwort, of each one ounce; of the water of Cinnamon distilled without
wine, one ounce; Confection of Alkermes, half a dram; of Laudanum, two
grains; of syrup of Poppy, half an ounce: the bagg may be renewed as need shall
require, warming it in the liquor in which it was first boiled; the next day
you may repeat both the Glyster and the bagg, and expect good success: After
which, if the woman be plethorick, A Purge.
you may purge her with Manna, and syrup of Roses, in broth, and this may be
given after seven days lying in. I come now to speak somewhat of the
immoderate flowing of them, Immoderate flowing of the Lochia.
which must be considered as well as being stopped, there being danger in
either: for it is well observed by Hippocrates, (...) Hipp. Aph. 51. Lib. 2.
Omne nimium vertitur in vitium. The Causes.
that every thing wherein is excess, is an enemy to nature: Therefore let us
endeavor to stop them in their overmuch flowing, with a very great caution,
lest by stopping them all together, there follow worse effects. It happens many
times, that both after the birth, and miscarrying, that there flows out such
a quantity of blood, by reason of the eruption or apertion of the vessels,
immoderately, or, by reason of the great fervor of the blood proceeding from
the use of over-hot Remedies in laborious births. To remedy them; Then,

First, use such alimentary food, as may incrassate and thicken the blood; Cure
by Diet.
as, Panadoes, Gellies, Rice, in the broth of Calves-feet, Pears, boiled
Quince, and Roast-meats whereon the juice of Pomegranates have been sprinkled,
yelks of eggs. Drink.
Their drink may be red Wine mixed with water, wherein steel has been
quenched; then the blood may be drawn by revulsion to the upper parts, either
by Phlebotomy, or Cupping-glasses under the papps, etc.

Stupps dipped in [vinegar and water,] applied to the loins with an ointment.
The whole belly must be swathed; there may be stupps dipped in Oxycrat, and
applied to the loins; after which, take of Unguentum Comitissae two ounces; of
juice of Plantane one ounce, beaten well together: these things being not hard
to be gotten, I tender to you; but when they will not be stopped by these means,
'twere best to have recourse to Learned Physicians for advice.

SECT. XXXI. Of the Fever of Milk.
EUtrap. Quest.
You have already discoursed of the danger of the secundine being left behind,
and the Lochia stopped: now, Sir, be pleased to let me know what may be the
reason why women fall into Fevers, although neither the Lochia be stopped, nor
any part of the secundine left behind?

I shall, good Mrs. Eutrapelia; Answer.
for those Fevers that accompany women in Childbed are never without danger;
of which I shall give you an account; some of them being critical, others
putrid, others symptomatical. I call that a Fever critical, which I call a
Fever of milk; so called, Fever of milk, what, and when.
because about the third or fourth day after childbearing, the milk begins to
have a more plentyful recourse to the breasts, whither it is carried with some
force, by reason of the motion and agitation of the blood converted into milk
for the nourishment of the infant: although this kind of Fever does not happen
unto all women, neither does it usually continue above three or four days,
Febris Ephemera.
being dissolved by sweating, and needs little other remedies (most commonly,)
if the Lochia be not stopped. The causes. Cautions in driving back milk to soon.
The causes may be, the driving back of the milk too soon (which ought not to
be) which does overrun the blood, and settle there; or else, because that the
breasts being filled with milk, and distended very big and full, the vessels for
blood are so compressed, that they will not admit of that blood that flows
thither; insomuch, that the blood being hindered in its circulation, begins
to rage over the whole mass of blood, whose spirits being inordinately stirred
up, and confounded, take heat, and begin to boil, and leaving the womb,
possesses the whole mass of blood, and so perhaps turn into putrid and malign
Fevers; Putrid.
amongst which, many happen to be symptomatical; Symptomatical.
as, a Squinancy, a Pleurisy, Peripneumonia.
an inflammation of the lungs, a Dysenterie, and the Smallpox or Measels: but
these symptomatical Fevers being from the same fountain of A Bloody Flux. Blood
out of its vessels.
extravasat blood, (which most times turns into Apostemations, Tumors, and
Inflammations, if not prevented) will bear the same Analogy of cure, with
respect to the parts they invade: but to begin with critical Fevers. The cure
of which consists, first, Cure of critical Fevers.
in an exact observation of diet, that the impurities of the blood, and the due
purgation of the humors, the evil affections of the womb may be corrected, and
the strength impaired may be restored. Strength, how restored. Diet.
Wherefore, let her diet be Oatmeal-caudles, with White Wind, and all mixed,
wherein a top of Baulm, Speremints, Mugwort, or Orgamint may be boiled; as
also, Panadoes, and Water-grewels, etc. with these she must be fed for a week
at the least, by often supping; forbearing nourishments that are stronger and
solid; as also all manner of flesh, which are usually the cause of those
Fevers; Eating flesh in Childbed the cause of Fevers.
for women in Childbed must be dealt with not only like those that are
grievously wounded, but like those whose mass of blood is disturbed, and so apt
to be incensed with the least flame.

The next care conducing to the cure is, Cold.
to prevent outward colds, (as has been formerly observed, Section 5th. and
31th.
in the 5th. and 31th. Sections.)

Wherefore, I would advise, that women be kept in their beds for five days at
the least after their delivery. I know it is usual for them to rise at three
days end; but this to be sure, the longer women contein themselves in their
bed, the more secure they are from danger. The third observation is, that by a
gentle proritation of the blood, the Lochia be continued; and to this end
Midwives usually give Sperma Ceti, Usual medicines.
Irish slatt poudered, or Saffron tinged in White Wind, or Marrigold-flowers in
posset drink. If the belly be costive, it may be moved either with a Violet
confect made for a suppository, Suppos toty.
or some gentle emollient Glyster, (avoiding stronger Glysters.) Where there
has been vomitings, thirst, and want of sleep, occasioned by the great
perturbations of the blood, and stopping of the Lochia.
Lochia; I have known Laudanum mixed with Saffron, each two grains, and given
in posset with good success. Instead of cooling Juleps, Julep.
you may use this rather, of which you may give three or four spoonfuls often
times in a day: take Pennyroyal-water, Balm-water, each three ounces; Aqua
Bryoniae composita.
Hysterical-water, two ounces; Tincture of Saffron, two drachms; a 20 grains
Scruple of Castoreum tied in a fine rag, and hanged in the glass. Here also
may be used Bezoardical medicines, such as provoke sweat; but these, as also
the cure of those symptomatical Fevers before hinted, I leave to be considered
of by Learned Physicians, to whom it is safest to have recourse in such cases
of danger.

SECT. XXXII. Dr. Philadelphos. I shall, Mrs. Eutrapelia, in this Section,
afford you a Miscellany of Medicines, such as are most useful for you to have
with you; and conclude all.
DR. Philadel. Mrs. Eutrapelia, Oils.
you may remember, in the latter end of the 4th. Section, I gave you an account
of those things that a Midwife ought to be furnished withal, wherein mention
was made of oils, which usually are, Difficult Births.
oil of Lillies, of sweet Almonds, or Chamomile, mixed. I shall offer you one
ointment, in hard and difficult Births: take of new butter not salted, and
washed in Mugwort-water, two ounces; the The mucilage is the quintessence of
seeds and fruits boiled to gelly, and streined.
Mucilages of Lineseeds, Figs, and the seeds of Marshmallows, extracted out in
the water of Savine, of each half an ounce; oil of Lillies, half an ounce;
make a liniment, with which frequently anoint the neck of the womb; you may use
also sneezing-powder, made thus: Errhine, or Sneezing-powder.
Take long Pepper, Castoreum, Betony, white Hellebore, sweet Marjoram, Cloves,
each a dram, made into very small powder, and kept for use; which may be
snuff'd up into the nostrils, to cause sneezing; or, of white Hellebore, An
other.
and Castoreum, powdered; this potion also may be given. Take of Cinnamon, A
Potion.
of the bark of Cassia fistula, of Dittany, of each one dram and half; of
white Sugar, as much as all; let all these be made into a fine powder, and of
it drink two drachms, in that posset wherein Lineseed has been boiled, or else
in White Wind. Or this, An other.
Take of Cassia fistula powdered, two drachms; Red A sort of red Pease, Ciceri
rubri.
Cicers, half a handful, let them boil in White Wind and water, of each as much
as will suffice, adding at the length two drachms of Savine, strein it, and
add to it half a dram of Cinnamon, and six grains of Saffron, and make a
potion. Or this,

Take Aegrimony, Another.
Betony, Vervain, each a handful; Confection of Alkermes, A scruple is twenty
grains.
a scruple and half; Sugar and Cinnamon as much as will suffice to aromatize it,
the herbs being first boiled in posset-brink. I shall give one general Cordial
water, which I shall not only commend to Midwives to have ever by them, but
also to other Gentlewomen; it being a general Cordial water against most
distempers. Thus then; Take Baulm, Betony, Pellitory of the wall, A general
Cordialwater.
sweet Marjoram, Cowslip flowers, of the flowers of Rosemary and Sage, each a
great handful; of the seed of Annis, sweet Fennel, and Coriander, Caraway and
Gromel, of each half an ounce; of Cinnamon, Licoras, and Nutmeg, all bruised,
each one ounce; of Juniper Berries, one ounce and half; let the herbs be shred,
and infused in a gallon of Brandy in an earthen pot well leaded, for the space
of a fortnight; afterward strein it, and put in twelve ounces of Loaf-sugar,
Note, that a gallon of Brandy added to the ingredients after streining, makes
as good water as the former, if ordered so.
and of Musk and Ambergreece, each two grains, tied up in silk, and hanged in
the glass: you may put in another gallon of Brandy, after the first is streined.

Against immoderate flux of the Courses.
Take of the roots of Tormentill, two drachms; Bole-armeniack the best, one
dram; the species of Hyacinth, Powder.
half a dram, all made into fine powder: of which, take half a dram once in
three hours, in this following Julep.

The Julep.
Take of the Res. Aq. Scordii composit.
compound water of Scordium, Dracontii.
Dragon-water, and Ulmariae.
Meadsweet, of each three ounces; of Aceti Theriacalis.
Treacle-vinegar, an ounce; syrup of Coral, two ounces; burnt Hartshorn, half
a dram; make a Julep.

To facilitate the Birth, drive out the Secundine, false Conception, and dead
Child.
Take of the Trochischs of Myrrh, one scruple; of Borax half a scruple; of
Saffron three grains; make a powder of these, and take them in White Wind, or
the decoction of Mugwort in Posset-ale; after which, drink a draught of the
same Posset, with some few drops of oil of Amber, or oil of Juniper Berries
infused in it. Or this,

A Posset.
Take Mother of Time, one handful; of Pellitory of the wall, and
Chamomel-flowers, of each half a handful; of Fennel-seeds, and Licoras, each
half an ounce; Figs slit no. six; boil these in three pints of Posset-ale, till
one pint be consumed; then sttein it, and of this drink a good draught thrice
in a day. The next Receipt shall be directed to the false Conception, and dead
Child. As thus; Take Styrax Calamita, Myrrh, Cinnamon, Cassia lignea, From the
Apothecaries. To provoke the flowers, expel a dead child, and false Conception.
of each half an ounce; Mummy, two drachms; Saffron, half a dram; make all
these into fine powder: this may be taken in White Wind, a dram at a time,
for a week together, or more.

To prevent Abortion.
Take Sanguis Draconis, Red Coral, both made into powder, A powder to be taken
in broth, etc.
of each one dram; of Ambergreece, three grains; of Bezoar stone, four
grains; of this powder, a scruple at a time may be taken, either in Mace-ale,
or Broth, or Posset Drink, wherein Plantane, Comfrey, Knot-grass,
Bramble-leaves, Periwinckle, with some Cinnamon, have boiled. Or this,

A second powder,
Take Kermes-berries, two drachms; red Coral, and white, of each one dram and
half; of Amber, one scruple; make these into powder, and put them into a
Poch'd-egg, and sup it up; do so till all be done. Or this,

A third powder.
Take Mastich, Frankincense, Sang. Dracon. Myrtill-berries, Kermes-berries,
Bole-armeniack, each half a scruple; and take a dram of the powder, and fill
the hole, whence the stone is taken out in a Date; moysten it in sack, and wrap
it up in a paper, and put it under hot embers to be warmed; and, let those that
fear Abortion, eat it often.

A Caraplasme to the navil.
Take a hot manchet out of the oven, cutting off the crust, dip it in Muscadine,
and strew it with the powder of Nutmegs and Cinnamon, each as much as will
suffice; and apply this hot to the navil of the woman.

A plaster from the Apothecaries.
Take of Emplaster ad Herniam, Caesaris, each half an ounce; Cocci Baphici, one
dram, made into powder; Emplaster of Diacalcythios, one ounce; and with as
much oil of Myrtles as will suffice, make a Plaster to be spread on leather,
and applied between the hips. Here may be used Unguentum Comitissae to the
loins. Unguent.


Of After-pains.
Causes of Afterpains.
After-pains may proceed from the acrimony of the blood, being thinn and sharp;
or, from the grumous part of it, being thick, and clotted; which nature
endeavoring to discharge it self of, as to the settling of the womb, causes
these pains: Inflations. Ambient air.
As also Inflations, by reason of the ambient air, seems to imitate those
pains, with the Childbearing, which are not only Sympathetical, but
Symptomatical; this being so usual, few women are free from it: And, Cure.
because they often cease within two or three days, they seldom require a
Physicians help. Nevertheless, that Julep beforementioned in the 32th.
Section, is very useful. Or else, The Julep in the 32th. Section, marked with
this * Asterisk.


Take the inward bark of an Elmtree, and burn it to ashes; to which, add
Cinnamon made into powder, some 10 grains of Cinnamon to one dram of the ashes,
and drink it with White Wind. Or else,

Take of oil of sweet Almonds, two ounces; syrup of Violets, one ounce; water
of Penniroyal, half an ounce, for a draught.

Potion. Afterpains from windiness.
If the cause be from wind, you may give a dram of Barberries in powder, in
the water of Vervain, or Baulm.

But, most usually, these pains are eased by Caudles made with half White Wind,
Caudles.
and half water, wherein Spermints, Baulm, Penniroyal, or Mugwort have been
boiled.

I will give you the form of a Caudle, which is not only of great use in the
sending forth of the secundine (in case any piece of it should be left behind,
as sometimes it may happen) but also to help nature in its work of throwing out
this grumous blood; (which is the cause of the After-pains) And this is it;

A Caudle, in case any part of the Secundine be behind.
Take Oatmeal, and Hempseed, of each a sufficient quantity, with a top of Baulm;
boil these in a sufficient quantity of White Wind and water, of each a-like,
and with the yelk of one egg, make a Caudle.

Of Convulsion-fits in infants newly born.
Take the best Sack and Sugar mull'd, and give it the first thing it takes;
this will discharge the stomach of that viscuous phlegm that ever accompanyeth
infants; Convulsions, from viscuous phlegm possessing the stomach and nerves.
and not only warm the stomach and nerves, (for all Spasms and Epilepsies
proceed from the nerves being oppressed with cold, or gross, phlegmatic
humors) but prepare it for future nutriment. If these prevail not, use this
ensuing Julep and Plaster.

The Julep.
Take Black-cherry water, red-Rosewater, and Dragon-water, of each two ounces;
one top of Rosemary, of Licoras, a dram; of the flowers of Flores Tiliae.
Linden-tree, of the Lilly of Lilia Convallia.
Convall, of each a pugill; boil them till a third part be consumed, and
sweeten it with Sugar Candy; give the infant often of this, together with this
Plaster.

The Plaster.
Take Mithridate, two drachms; Saffron, one scruple poudred; spirit of Wine,
some few drops; Capons-grease, as much as a small nut; make a plaster to be
spread upon a small piece of scarlet, and applied to the pit of the Stomach.
And, if the child be costive, Suppositories.
put up a Mallow-stalk buttered, or a Violet Confect, as Suppositories; this
powder is good. Take Rad. Paeoniae.
Piony-roots and seeds; Dictamni albi.
Diptany; Misleto of an Oak, of each half an ounce; of the seed of Seminis
Atriplicis.
Orach; of the scull of a man, p Visci Quercini.
each two drachms; red Coral and Hyacinth prepared, of each a dram and a
half; of Elks-hoof prepared, half an ounce; Musk, fix grains; Leaf-gold, half a
dram; make a powder of this; give ten grains, or twenty grains in the Julep
aforesaid, in a spoon.

Of a Diarrhaea, or a Looseness in Childbed.
Philad l.
A violent looseness in childbed is not without danger; to prevent which,
these Glysters may be given safely.

n="1" Two Glysters.
1. Take Rice, one dram and half; of Cork finely grated, two drachms;
Red-rose-leaves, half a handful; strein these, and make a Glyster, after they
have been boiled in a pint and half of milk to a pint; the things that remain
may be applied to the navil in form of a plaster.

n="2" Cataplasm.
2. Take milk a quart, boiled to a pint; of Diascordium, half an ounce; the
yelks of two eggs in form of a Caudle; make a Glyster: Caution.
but here care must be had, that by too astringent means the Lochia be not
suppressed.

Of sore breasts in Women.
To preserve breasts against the inconvenience of milk. An Emplaister.
To preserve the breasts, that if they nurse not their children, the milk offend
not, or, being extravasate, cause Apostemations;

Take Virgins wax white, four ounces; Spermaceti, two ounces; of Galbanum
dissolved in strong vinegar, one ounce: Make an Emplaister, to be laid on the
breasts, and continued for many days; let it be spread upon linen: if the
breasts should tend to break, then, A Cataplasm, if the breasts should break,
to be spread upon the wool.
Take a Sheeps head, wool and all, bruise it, and boil it in water enough,
till it be all to mash. In the top of the streined liquor of which, boil Rice
enough to make it to the consistence of a Pultiss; to which, add some Saffron,
and apply it, and the wool over it. Clefts in the nipples.
If the nipples be sore with fissures and clefts; First, wash the furr and
stuff off from the nipples, as clean as may be; with red-Rose-water, as hot as
may be endured; Then use of white wax, one ounce; of Spermaceti, half an ounce;
1 Ointment.
the marrow of Staggs-bones, two ounces; oil of St. John's-wort, one ounce:
apply this. Or, 2 Ointment.
Take Goats-suet, one ounce; oil of the yelks of Eggs; oil of sweet Almonds;
oil of Henbane, and Poppy, by expression, of each half an ounce; the fat of
Geese, Capons, and Ducks, of each three drachms; of Litharge; of Silver; white
Lead washed; Groundsel stamped, and applied, drives back milk, preventeth
Inflammations.
Tutia prepared; of red Lead, of each one dram and a half; of Pompholyx;
burnt Allom; white Sugar Candy powdered; of Olibanum, of each one dram; of
Saffron, one Scruple; of Camphire, and Opium prepared, Flax carded, and smoaked
over Frankincense, with which cover the breast.
of each half a scruple: mingle these, and with as much white wax as will
suffice, make of these an Unguent.

SECT. XXXIII. Of Nurses, and the best Milk.
SInce the choice of a Nurse is of so great a concernment; Philadel.
(as upon which, the future being of the infant consists) surely this, Nurses
not sluttish.
then, requires many serious considerations. For, though she may have milk
enough, yet perhaps not good enough; or the woman either sluttish, or unhandy,
or careless in the swathing and dressing of the child; by which many children
(like new vessels, Quo semel est imbuta recens servabit oderem Testadiu.
which will keep the savor of that liquor they are first seasoned withal) are
sluttish or slovenly so long as they live; or else (being abused at nurse, are
distort and Ricketty; full of botches, nasty, and nauseous to their own
parents. And many, through the intemperancy of their nurses, who, by drinking,
to increase their milk (and perhaps make it bad enough) sleep so securely and
profoundly, that they overlay their nurseries in the night, Children, how
overlaid. Often sleep good.
and the children dead by their sides in the morning. Therefore let Nurses
sleep so often, that they may hear the least cry of the infant. But this as
introductory to a larger discourse and description. Let the Nurse, then, be of
a middle stature, The Nurse described; with her Complexion, her Age.
and good complexion; active, not fat, (and of a sanguine complexion, if
possible) and not in poverty; not under twenty years of age, nor above forty,
but rather of twenty five, or thirty years of age, as a Medio tutissimus ibis.
mean bewixt both. Let not her nipples be great, lest it make the child of a
wide mouth, Her nipples not too big.
because it cannot suck without the contraction of the lips together; and, lest
by forcing the tongue into too narrow a compass, it hinders the swallowing of
the milk.

Next, if the nipple be too small, Not too small.
the child is apt to let it slip out of the mouth, and cannot handsomely hold
it, so that the infant being frustrated of suck, and yet still exercising
sucking, hurts the cheek, and attracts some kind of humors thither, which
oftentimes become praeternatural tumors; and oftentimes the cheeks of the
infant seem as if they were stirred out of their places. Thirdly, by the
consent of all, the Nurse must have a large breast (though some think that not
so material, Pectorae late jacens mammis Virgil. moretum. Great breasts not
good.
and others are of opinion that she ought to have large breasts) because there
is more milk collected together in great breasts than ought; and being there,
is corrupted, to the prejudice of the Nurse. Wherefore, lest the milk should
continue there too long, it is best to have a lusty young child to suck it
away, or else to use some other way; (as, Young whelps killed with sucking of
women.
by the use of young whelps; whom I have oftentimes seen dye with sucking
women's milk; surely the reason must be, because the milk was Of another nature.
heterogeneous; or else, because grumous, and corrupted) or milked out some
other way; especially, when the Nurse perceives her self prejudiced by it. But
it is ever best, Plenty of milk ever best.
that she abound, rather than want milk; and then in this case it is best they
be big, though all Nurses need not have big breasts; for there may be as much
milk, if not more, in a lesser breast, than in a great one. Our next enquiry
will be into the manners and behavior of a Nurse. The best Nurse then is, she
that is mild, chaste, The Nurses Conditions.
sober, courteous, cheerful, lively, neat, cleanly, and handy; because bad
conditions, as well as good, are sucked in with the milk, and so radicated,
that it is a hard matter to pull out the bad conditions, and leave the good
behind, but that there will be a remainder of the bad conditions, perhaps so
long as they live: wherefore, let not the Nurse be of an angry, malepert, and
saucy disposition, shameless, scolding, or quarrelsome; not gluttonous, but so
careful of her nursery, that she neither eat or drink that which may be hurtful
to the infant: Her care in eating and drinking.
That she do nothing to anger her self, to grieve, or sad her self; Passion
hinders the good milk. Mirth.
for such passions will presently distribute themselves, to the prejudice of
the infant; than which there is nothing of more efficacy to destroy the
goodness of the milk. Neither is it sufficient that they abstain from the use
of their husbands; Abstinence from Venery not sufficient.
but when they have wanton thoughts, and lascivious minds, wholly upon Luxury
and Venery, they cast off all care of their nurseries, and dreaming at night of
that which their minds run on in the day, Somnians dixit quae vigilans voluit.
Terent. Comaed.
and by other filthy pollutions they infect the milk. So also, by the use of
their husbands the Courses are stirred up, by which both the plenty and
goodness of milk is derived another way; and so the child robbed of its
nutriment; or else the Nurse conceives with child, and so the infant becomes
Colostrati.
diseased and Ricketty, by sucking grumous, curdy, and unwholesome milk, and is
the worse for it during life. Therefore let all those things be avoided, Meats
to be avoided by Nurses.
that either do, or are supposed to provoke lust; as, junkets made with spices;
also onions, leeks, garlic, and all salt meats are to be avoided: persly,
Persly, an enemy to milk.
and smallage, some say, have a peculiar malice to the increase of milk:
besides that, it does increase lust, and is an enemy to the growth of infants.
Again, that Nurse were best, that has lately been brought to bed of a boy if
to nurse a boy, the milk of such a Nurse being better tempered. The virtues of
the milk of a male, and of a female.
For the milk of a male child will make a female nursery more spritely, and a
manlike Virago; and the milk of a girl will make a boy the more effeminate. As
to the milk, let it be a mean, The conditions of the milk.
betwixt thick and thinn; which you may perceive, by dropping it upon the
thumbnails; for if it be too thinn, it will run off the sooner; but if thicker,
Trial of the milk.
it will stay the longer: let it be sweet, and pleasant, both to the smell and
taste; not offending the palate with rancidness, sourness, sharpness, or
saltness; or the nostrils with any strange quality. Let it be can did to the
sight, By its Quality.
in it self equal in each particles, not infested with brown, yellow, green,
blue, Color.
or any other evil color; or, as sometimes, with various colors and
substance; as, with lines, and streaks upon it: but let that milk be most
praiseworthy, that makes as much curd as whey; which may be tried by this
Experiment, Experiment.
viz, Put some of this milk into a glass, and put in some Myrrh, or Rennet;
which being stirred together, will curd, and then may the contents be
separated: the trial is, that if there be most whey, then is the milk thinner
in its substance; but if most of curd, it is thicker: yet all these may be
corrected and amended; for that which is too thick may be mended by an
extenuating diet, Correctives of milk too thick. Vomit.
and the phlegmatic matter may be avoided by a vomit of Oxymel, and Exercise
before meat, the better to consume and attenuate the thickness of it.

Of milk too thinn. Di^. Alica.
The thinness of milk is amended by contrary food, such as does incrassate it:
as Formenty of Wheat, and Rice; Hogs-feet, Calves-feet, Trotters, and sweet
Wine, unless somewhat else be in the way to hinder it. Sometimes it happens
that the milk is more tart than it ought to be: Sharpness, etc.
wherefore then, all diligence must be had to feed upon such meats as are of
the best juice, till that acrimony at least be attempered.

Want of milk, the Causes.
Sometimes there is little or no milk in the breasts; as after some sickness, or
notable distemper, now turned into a chacochymical habit, or any other of what
kind soever, that possesses those parts, or is the morbifick cause: but that
shall not be our business to consider of now. Now, if these be not the causes,
let the Nurse use supping meats, as Broths, Possets, etc. and eat plentifully,
and use frictions to her breasts and duggs, Exercise, and dancing of the child,
good for the Nurse. Cupping-glasses. Fomentations.
exercising her hands and her arms by domestic Employments; or instead
thereof, let her dance the child, by which the aliment may be recalled into
those parts. Sometimes cupping-glasses to the breasts, with a fomentation of
emollient herbs boiled in water, and applied warm, either sponges, or
wollen-clothes; after which, Embrocation.
embrocating them with oil of Lillies. The seeds of Fennel, and the roots of
Parsnips boiled in Barley-water, What food is best.
and buttered. The broth of Hens, or Capons, with Cinnamon and Mace. Or
Poch'd-eggs, with the seeds of Annis, and Dill; and all things else that are
hot in the first and second degree, are good. Earthworms.
Worms, such as come out of the earth, (not out of a dunghill,) six or seven
of them dried, and powdered, and drank in Barley-water sugared, for a fortnight
together: All these may be of good use in the defect of milk. But now let us
see to the inconveniency (if there be any) in too much milk. If the milk abound
too much, Milk in too great abundance. A Decoction.
which sometimes is (though seldom) blameable; Then use the decoction of
Myrtleberries, and red Roses, and with clothes dipped in it, lay them on the
breasts. Or else clothes imbibed in Vinegar, wherein Cummin-seeds bruised have
been infused with Myrrh and Camphire.

The inconveniency of too thick milk.
By reason of the thickness of the milk, all those excrements that the child
should send forth, are intercepted; as by Stool, by Urine, etc. The passages
for transpiration are stuffed up, so that the progress of the aliment being
stopped, of necessity the milk must be regurgitated, and vomited up; after which
will follow much phlegmatic matter, a sure argument of crudities. Cause of
Botches, etc.
Sometimes there will arise botches, and apostemations about the body; much
matter, and snot, and quittor will come out of the nose, and corners of the
eyes, and eyelids; and the appetite will be lost.

Of too thin milk, the cause of gripings
Contrarily, from the thinner and sharper sort of milk, the belly is looser than
it ought, being troubled with pinches and gripes in the belly of the infant:
Also, very angry pustules and whelks will arise about the body, like the small
Pox; and the body grows weak by little and little, Cause of pustules.
the infant not caring for food; for the strength of the appetite will be more
remiss, by reason of the acrimony of that which the infant desires; so that it
is not much sensible of that aliment which it has; and that aliment of which
it is sensible is naught, and vicious.

Of overmuch milk
Now, from the over-abundance of milk, the infant oftentimes, when it sucks, is
overwhelmed, being so puffed up, and the belly distended, as if it would
break; until by much pissing, or breaking wind, it is slacker. But where there
is too much scarcity of milk, Of too little milk.
here the infant being altogether destitute of its nourishment, will pine away;
Marasmus.
and all the parts of the body being starved, in those years when it most wants
nourishment, by reason of the vehemence of the innate heat, Vehemence of the
innate heat.
and that habit of body (that the least blast will puff down) which requires
much, and constant aliment. By all which, women ought to be the more provident,
lest all these mischiefs happen, (especially, not to make choice of such a
Nurse, A good caution, not to choose a Nurse in poverty. Another Nurse to be
chosen.
whose poverty must needs starve her self, and her nursery; and if they should
so happen, to amend them, as has been said before) e're they grow incurable,
and require the help of another Artificer that may cure it. Or, if the fault in
the milk cannot be cured and amended in the Nurse, (which she has contracted,)
Then you have no more to do, but presently to look for another Nurse, that has
none of these inconveniences; that so the infant may have suck enough, which
is all it requires; for want of which, you may hear sad ejulations, crying, and
weeping. And this may be discovered by their dreams, Dreams.
as by the often motion of the lips in the cradle, as if they were sucking when
they are a sleep.

The infant participates of that food which the Nurse eats or drinks.
Neither is it strange, that the infant should be sensible of, and participate
of whatsoever food (as meat, drink, and physic,) that the Nurse takes: which
makes our modern Physicians purge the Nurse, to cure the child. And this also
is concluded on by Hippocrates; (...) Hippoc. Epidem, vi.
That if a woman take any purging Physic, she purges her child also. So,
Galen reports of Goats, feeding in Asia, where Scammony did grow, did
communicate a purging faculty to their milk. And so the milk of Asses,
generally accounted the best in Consumptions, is counted better, if the Ass be
fed with Capillary herbs, such as are Maidenhair, etc. And again, when young
Goats suck Sheeps-milk, the rough hair shall lose its coursness, and become
like a fleece of wool: and so contrarily, when lambs are brought up by Goats,
their wool grows the more hairy. If then the qualities of the milk pass into
those that suck them, Qualities of the milk pass into those that suck them, and
so impurities.
(as without doubt they do) it is easy to gather, that other impurities follow
thither also, neither is it improbable. Surely then, we ought to take no less
care of the Nurse than of the child; as in her diet, exercise, physic, etc.
since, whatsoever conduces to the benefit of the Nurse, tends to the good and
welfare of the infant.

I have been the larger in this Section of Nurses, and Milk, because tender
infants can neither make choice of their Nurses themselves; nor discover, or
plead for their wants: Their own mothers, surely, (if they are able) both by
duty, and nature, being the most fit to nurse their own children; The greatest
Ladies, and all Mothers, fittest to nurse their own children.
which the greatest Ladies may do, with the greatest conveniences; by reason of
their plenty of all things; besides, their attendance of servants, who can
bring their nurseries to them at all hours, be it by night or day, and take it
from them again, not to disturb their rest: which also, they may intend at
their own pleasures. The time of sucking not above twelve months.
The longest time that a child need be suckled, is not to be above one year. I
shall leave only one caution for Nurses, and wind up this Section: and it is
this. Let Nurses ever milk out some milk e're they suckle the child; and after
it is suckled, Nurses not to rock the infant too violently after sucking.
that they rock it not too much presently after, lest violent rocking disturb
the meat in the stomach; or the other parts draw away the milk in the stomach,
as yet unconcocted.

SECT. XXXIV.
EUtrap. Sir, I was unwilling to interrupt you in your discourse, (it being so
profitable) till you had done: and truly, Sir, I must beg your pardon, if I
mind you of some distempers incident to women, and are peculiar to the womb;
and though there may be more, yet I shall trouble you but with two: And the
first is, concerning your judgment of Fits of the Mother; and the second, of
the Falling out of the womb; which sometimes happens after hard Labors, or an
unskilful Midwife.

Philadel. Mrs. Eutrapelia, I shall readily do both, as well to satisfy You,
as other Ladies, whom I am willing to gratify.

Of Suffocation of the womb, commonly called, Fits of the Mother. Section, 34.

AMongst all the fierce distempers that women are affected with, the
strangulation of the womb is accounted none of the least. This, by the Latins,
Uteri suffocatio.
is called the Suffocation of the womb, and so by the (...).
Greeks; which we render, Hysterical Fits, from a (...).
word which signifies, The womb: It is called by most women, The Mother Fits,
and that from another Greek (...) from (...).
word, which signifies, the Matrix; which is from another word, which
signifies, a Mother; because women, after they have brought forth, are
Mothers; and hence, Fits of the Mother. Which is, What is the suffocation of
the womb.
a retraction of the womb to the upper parts, making the principal parts
fellow sufferers of the distemper. For although the womb may be concluded to be
moved out of its place, yet, except it be carried downwards, it never causes a
suffocation: for a suffocation is nothing else but a defect in breathing:
Therefore it is necessary, that the upper parts that serve for Respiration be
affected, The parts affected, what, and how.
and carried upwards, by reason of that suffocation; and amongst all, the
chiefest are, the heart, lungs, the midriff, and the brain, to which the force
of the affection comes, viz. to the heart, by the veins and arteries, and so
to the lungs; to the brain and midriff, by the nerves and membranes of the
spine of the back: The cause is from the womb, The causes.
which being full of some naughty humor, as menstuous blood; Menstruous blood,
Vicious seed.
or vicious and putrid seed offends the noble parts, with some stinking,
malignant, sharp, griping, cold vapors. The symptoms.
The symptoms that follow are various, either according to the greatness of the
efficient cause, or the variety of some qualities, or natures; for some women
are without any sense or motion, and seem to have no pulse at all, or at least,
that very small and weak; and sometimes lie without any manner of breathing at
all that can be perceived. Others there are, that neither want sense nor
motion, and seem not to be troubled with any passion of the mind; but they
faint, and very hardly fetch breath: some also seem to have Convulsions in
their joints, as in their hands, arms, feet; but these generally are the signs
of the fit at hand, viz. Signs of the Fit coming in augmente.
A dullness of the mind, a laziness, weakness of the thighs, paleness, and
clamminess about the face: Signs of the Fit present.
but when the fit is come, then there comes a (...)
profound sleep, like those in an Apoplexy, or Lethargy; the mind is dotish,
the senses are intercepted, the voice cease, the thighs are contracted, the
cheeks look red, and the face is swelled. Signs of the declination of the
distemper.
But when the suffocation declineth, a certain moisture distilleth from the
privities, with great rumbling and murmuring of the belly; and the womb by
little and little is relaxed, and so the sense returns. This disease is moved
also by Suppose of the moon.
course; as is the Falling Sickness, and does most of all infest young women
desirous of husbands; and that about Autumn, and the Winter: as also, those
that are childless, or unfruitful, or such whose womb is chilled upon any
account. This differs from How it differs from a Syncope, or swouring.
fainting Fits, in this, (viz.) In a Syncope there is no pulse, but in the
strangulation of the womb, there is ever a pulse, though small, rare, weak. In
fainting Fits, or swounings, there are cold sweats, and paleness of the face;
but in this the countenance is plump, How from an Apoplexy.
and ruddy. It differs also from an Apoplexy; for women that have these Fits
have not their parts deprived of sense and motion; and, although their senses
be benumbed, yet, if they are pinched, or pricked, they are sensibly disturbed,
and will make signs with their hands, that they are strangled; now it is clean
contrary in an Apoplexy: And again, those in an Apoplexy do snore, which is
never seen in these hysteric Fits.

How they differ from an Epilepsie, or Falling Sickness. Spasmus Cinicus. A
distortion of the mouth.
Lastly, these Fits differ from an Epilepsie, or Falling Sickness, in this; that
these parts affected are not contracted with Spasmes, or Convulsions; neither
do they foam at mouth, except the woman be vehemently suffocated; and
especially, when an Epilepsie is not stirred up out of the womb it self, as
oftentimes it does happen. Having thus discoursed of the causes, symptoms, and
signs, we now come to the Cure. The Cure.
First then, let the lower parts be strongly rubbed with clothes, and tied with
strong ligatures; as also, let Cupping-glasses, Cuppingglasses, how to be used.
be applied to the hips, groynes, Os pubis, or Pectinis. Beware the navil.
share-bone, (but not to the navil.) Next, sneezing is commended, (to which
Hippocrates agrees.) (...). Aphor. lib. 5. and 35.
And, though I have given you one Receipt for a sneezing-powder, in the
beginning of the 31th. Section, which is proper not only in difficult births,
but here also; I now will leave with you the Receipt of another powder, A
sneezing powder.
which shall be this; Take white Pepper, Mustard Seed, Pellitory of Spain,
Castoreum, of each a scruple; Euphorbium, and white Hellebore, of each one
scruple; Twenty grains make a scruple.
and make a subtle powder, which may be used so long as there is no redundance
of humors perceived in the head. Suppositories.
Suppositories are good: as, Take of Agarick Troschisc. of the species of Hiera
logodii, of each a dram; 60 Grains make a dram.
of Rats-dung, Figs, Rue-leaves, and Cummin-seeds, all made into powder, and
with honey made up into a Suppository.

An Ointment.
Take oil of St. Iohn's-wort, of Orange-flowers, of Rue, of each one ounce;
oil of Mace by expression, half an ounce; of a Beasts gall dried and powdered,
six drachms; Venice-Treacle, half an ounce; Spiders alive, in number forty;
infuse all these for ten hours in a vessel well stopped on the embers, that it
neither boil too fast, not evaporate too much; of this make an Ointment, with
which anoint the back, and loins, and the navil, avoiding all cold.

A fume to sit over.
A Suffumigation of Nutmegs powdered, and set in a close-stool to burn,
receiving the smoke by sitting over it, is excellent.

Stinking things to smell to.
Stinking things are ever best to smell to, such as are Partridge-feathers, old
Leather, Brimstone, burnt all; Assafoetida, Castoreum, Galbanum, Rue, malaxed
with Vinegar: Contrarily, all sweet things are proper to be tied to the thighs
in a bag, but not smelled to. Sweet things best to be tied to the thighs.
The scrapings of Goats-horns, and Assafoetida, mixed, and burnt, is excellent.

Take Assafoetida dissolved in distilled vinegar, of Castor prepared into
powder, Pills.
of each a scruple; Laudanum two grains, made into six Pills, and taken just
before the Fit.

Lastly, if these Fits proceed from the stoppage of the flowers, those
medicines must be given proper to provoke them; but if from the retention of
the seed, Quod si ex retento semine affectio proveniat, nullum proponerem
nffectae mulieri praestnntius auxilium quam viri sui frequeates amplexus.
Hieronymus Pulverinus, Cap. XCI. de Strangulatione Uteri.
then let nature here be their best director; except they could construe the
authority of * Learned Physicians, with whom, let them advis.

SECT. XXXV. Of the coming forth of the womb.
IN the last Section, Mistress, I described how the womb might be moveable
upwards, yea, and from side to side. I now come to speak of its motion
downwards, which sometimes is so low, that it comes forth, and is to be seen
outwardly; and that which hangs out does appear like a soft, The signs. Scrotum.
and round tumor, and like the Testicles of a man; but the pain and the heat
possess the privities, and bottom of the belly; and the urine, distilling by
some and some, vexes the privities. The causes may be many; as,

The causes.
First, when a woman, from on high, falls upon her hips, those skins and
membranes which support the womb, and tie it to the neighboring parts, being
broken.

The second cause is, by extraction of the Secundine, as has been formerly set
forth, in the 26th. Section and that through the unskilfulness of the Midwife.

The third Cause is, by a sudden and immoderate flux of blood; as is usually in
Abortions, as has been showed in the 5th. Section.

The fourth Cause is, by an artificial extraction of a dead child, or overmuch
holding the breath, to blow; or carrying of too great a weight.

The fifth is, oftentimes, through overmuch humors, and the defluxions of them;
and often bearing of children; which makes those Appendices, to which the womb
depends, relaxed, and loosed.

The sixth and last is, through some vehement passion of the mind, being
affrighted with the sudden tidings of the loss of children, incursions of
enemies, dangerous Sea voyages; and sometimes from neither of these, Old age.
but from old age it self, or much weakness. But now, as to the Cure; in which,
observe these Prognostics by the way; Prognostics.
That when this affection is new, the womb is easily reduced to its proper
place; and being right put up, it continues there, especially in the prime of
age; and may both conceive, and bring forth again; but in riper years, it
becomes contracted; it may be put up truly, but upon the least occasion slips
out again. And in short, this; All fallings down of the womb, which are not,
and cannot be cured by proper means, show that the Appendices (as aforesaid)
are either laxed, or broken.

The Cure.
The Cure is, First, to provide Glysters to be administered, by which the strait
gut may be discharged of gross and hard excrements, and the bladder of its
urine, by some pipe fitted for the purpose; for sometimes it happens, that the
womb being in a straight betwixt those two, Nascim^ inte^stercus and Urinam.
cannot be reduced into its proper place. The first may be done by Glysters,
the latter with a pipe put up in the neck of the bladder; Fistula urinaria.
which done, the womb may be put up by this following method. Let the Patient
lie with her face upwards, her hamms bent backwards, and thighs spread abroad;
after which, foment it with the decoction; of Beets, Mallows, Marshmallows,
Lineseed, and Foenugreek, A fomentation.
made in spring water. Then make a pledget of wool wrapped up in a linnenrag,
to the proportion of the privypart; which being dipped in the juice of Acatia
and Hypocistis, dissolved in red Wine, apply it to the womb; To be bought at
the Apothecaries.
and so without violence press up all that which is come forth: After which,
foment the whole The share-bone. Another fomentation.
Pecten with this fomentation. Take red Wine a quart, red Rose-leaves,
Bramble-leaves, Plantain, Myrtle-berries, Shepherds-purse, Hagtaper,
Horse-tail, and Comfreyroots, applied with sponges; using afterward the oils
of Mastich and Myrtles to the place, and Unguentum Comitissae to anoint the
Reins. Now, because the main of our drift is to cure the falling out of the
womb upon difficult births; add this method to the former. First, purge her
with one dram of Pulvis sennae compositus major, A Purge to be bought at the
Apothecaries.
given in broth, or Mace-ale, twice or thrice: then, Take the leaves of
Plantain, of Withy, of Medlars, of the Oak, of Sloes, of red Brambles, of red
Roses, of each a handful; of the roots of Tormentill, Comfrey, and Bistort, of
Balaustia.
Pomegranat-flowers, of Cypress-nuts, of each an ounce; of the seeds of Annise,
two ounces: let these be grossly bruised, and sewed up in a bag; A bag used.
(of which you have a description in the 24th. Section of this Book.) Boil
these in Smiths water, such as they use to quench iron, and apply it warm four
times a day, wearing it continually, well trust up.

-- Si quid novisti rectius istis, Horat.

Candidus imperti; si non, his utere mecum.
(...). FINIS.
Imprimatur,

Tho. Tomkyns.
Ex Aed. Lamb. Maii ult. 1671.

