THE COOKS GUIDE: OR, RARE RECEIPTS FOR COOKERY.

PUBLISHED and set forth particularly for Ladies and Gentlewomen; being very
beneficial for all those that desire the true way of dressing of all sorts of
Flesh, Fowls, and Fish; the best Directions for all manner of Kickshaws, and
the most Ho-good Sawces: Whereby Noble Persons and others in their
Hospitalities may be gratified in their Gusto's. Never before Printed.

By HANNAH WOLLEY.

LONDON, ^rinted for Peter Dring at the Sun in the Poultry, next door to the
Rose-Tavern. 1664.

To the Honorable and truly virtuous Lady ANNE WROTH, Wife to the Right
Worshipful Sir HENRY WROTH.
MADAM,
THe Duty I owe to your Ladyship and the rest of your Noble Family commands
more than this Book is able to express; but since ill fate has made me
altogether incapable of any worthy Return of your Love and bounty, be pleased
to accept this as a Signal of what I am obliged to. I would not willingly dye
while I live, nor be quite forgotten when I am dead; therefore have I sent forth
This book, to testify to the ^candalous World that I do not al^ogether spend
my Time idly; somewhat of benefit it may be to the young Ladies and
Gen^lewomen; and such I wish it; (however) it may serve to pass away their
youthful time, which otherways might be worse employed.

The Honor your Ladyship does me in accepting the Dedication of it, will, I
hope, cherish their belief, and encourage their Practice, and assuredly it does
add very much to the Obligati^n of,

Madam, Your Honors most Faithful, Real, and most Humble Servant, Hannah
Wolley.

To the Virtuous and truly Ingenuous young Gentlewoman Mistress Mary Wroth,
Daughter to the Right Worship^ul Sir HENRY WROTH.
Dear Mistress,
THe sublimity of yo^^ Lady Mothers affairs I fear will not permit her very
often to view this book; besides, her Ladyship needs it not; her acceptance
and approbation hereof is my honor only, not her benefit; your practice will
be my content, and I doubt ^ot your own. It is a mise^^ble thing for any Wo^^n,
though never so great, (...) to be able to teach her ^^^^ants; there is no fear
of it in you, since you begin so soon to delight in those Sciences as may and
will accomplish you; this Book I hope will afford you something; and whatever
else you know in me to serve you, be pleased freely to command; I shall always
be ready to express my self

Dear Mistress, Your ^n^eigned Real Se^vant in all Humility and affection
Hannah Wolley.

To all Ladies and Gentlewomen in general, who love the Art of Preserving and
Cookery.
Ladies and Gentlewomen,
IT is now about two years since I sent forth a little Book entitled, The
Ladies Directory, or The true way of Preserving, with a Promise, that if that
found Acceptance, I would then present you with some of my Choicest Cookery;
which now I have done; also some few Receipes more o^ Preserving. The reason
why I sent it amongst you without the Protection of some Noble Person, was,
because I would not seem to force a Favor altogether undeserved; but sinct it
is so generally accepted on, as ^ find it is, I hope you will rather Commend
than Blame my Modesty; and if you please to look back a Leaf or two, you will
find it has now a Protection. I have joined both the Books in one that they
may pass as one: All you that have made trial of my first, will I hope b^
encouraged to the Cookery also. I heartily wish it may give you the Benefit you
desire, and then I shall have my Desire.

Thus beseeching your diligent Practice herein, I doubt not then but to gain
the esteem of being,

Ladies, Your unfeigned Friend and Servant HANNAH WOLLEY.

An Alphabetical Table of all the Heads contained in this Book.
A
ARtichokes pickled 23 Almond pudding 26 Anchoves made of Sprats 25 Angelets 29
An Amalet 32 Apricock pudding 52 Almond tart 53 Artichoke pie 54 Artichokes
with cream 58 Artichoke broth 59 Almond custard. 66
B
BRoth of a Lambs head 1^ Beans fried 1^ Blanched Manchet 2^ Beef dried 23
Balls of Veal or Mutton 63 Bartlemas Beef 64 Biscuit pudding 69 Barley broth 70
Breast of Veal boiled 78 Brown Metheglin ibid.
C
CUcumbers pickled 1 Cake with Almonds. 5 Chicken pie 6 Cawdle for a sick body
7 Cheese-cakes 10 Chickens in White broth 12 Chickens or Pigeons boiled. 13
Carp pie. 14 Cambrige pudding 17 Capon boiled with Rice 18 Capon boiled with
Pippins 19 Cucumbers pickled 24 Clouted cream 27 Cheese-cakes 29 Clouted cream
30 Cheese very good ibid. Crystal Jelly 38 Calves foot pie 39 Cream tart 44
Calves lights boiled 46 Calves ^ead pie 50 Chickens stewed 57 Capon boiled
ibid. Cows udder stewed 58 Calves foot pudding 60 Colored beef 67 Carp pie 74
Calves head stewed 75 Carp stewed 76 Cheese 80 Calves head roasted 81 Calves
head sowsed 83 Cheese-loaves ibid Cabbage cream 87 Creams of pastes or jellyes
89 Cake without plumbs ibid. Codling tart 91 Cherries dried 99 Cherry wine 100
Custard ibid.
D
DUtch sawsages. 25 Devonshire Whitepot 27 Dumplin 34
E
EEles sowsed 49 Egg pyes. 70
F
FRench bread 4 Flounders boiled. 6 Fritters 16 Florentine 18 Florentine 33
Fresh cheese 34 Fritters 44 Fish stewed 65 Fresh cheese 80 Frycasie of chickens
76 French bread 84 French biscuit 95
G
GUrnets stewed 6 Gurnets boiled 11 Grand sallet 21 Gooseberry fool 31 Goose
pickled 50 Green pudding 71 Gooseberries preserved green 90 Ginger bread 95
H
HErb pie 6 Hare pie 7 Hare pie 16 Haggis puddings 42 Hypocrist 55 Hedge-hogg
pudding 62 Hash of Veal 79 Hasty pudding 80 Hare roasted in the skin 84
I
JElly 37 Jelly red ibid. Jelly amber color 38 Isings 42
L
LObsters roasted 8 Lamb pie 9 Leg of Mutton roasted 12 Leg of Mutton
stewed 35 Lemmon sallet 40 Liver puddings 42 Lamprey pie 64 Lumber pie 68 Lamb
fried 74 Loyn of Mutton stewed 75 Lark pie 77 Lemmon sillabub 92 Lemmons
preserved white ibid. Lemmon cream 93
M
MAde dish 5 Made dish with Sweetbread 13 Minced meat to keep 24 Made dish for
Fish days 39 Mutton baked like Venison. 40 Mutton dressed the French way 51
N
NEats tongues dried 76 Neats tongue pie 86
O
OYsters pickled 85 Orange pudding 4 Oyster pie 55 Oysters fried 69 O^tmeal
pudding 71 Ostyers stewed 72 Oranges candied 97 Oranges preserved ibid.
P
PUrslane pickled 2 Penado 3 Pie of eeles and oysters 7 Pike roasted 8 Pumpion
pie 9 Pudding of a loaf 10 Pigge pie 15 Pudding to bake 22 Puff-paste 33
Pancakes 4^ Pancakes ibid^ Puddings 2^ ^ickeril boiled 45 Pickled Quinces 46
Polonia Sawsages 47 Pigge sowsed 48 Phrase of Apples 56 Pudding to bake ibid^
Pippins stewed with cream 58 Pasties to fry 61 Pigge sowsed whole ibid. Pigeons
stewed 78 Puffs fried ibid. Potato pie 86 Pork roasted without the skin 87
Pigge eat like Lamb ibid. Pretty fancies 94
R
REd Deer pie 15 Rice milk 26 Rabbet boiled 43 Rice pudding 71 Rump of Beef
stewed 72
S
SHeeps guts stretched 2 Sack posset 3 ^allet of sorrel 11 ^teak pie 14
^^wsages boiled 20 ^owsed Veal ibid. ^teaks stewed 35 ^pinage sallet 36 ^upper
dish ibid. ^awsages 43 ^heeps feet dressed 46 ^houlder of Mutton hashed 53
^houlder o^ Mutton with Oysters. 54 ^oles stewed 65 ^co^ch collops 66 ^awce for
Fish 79 ^awce for Snipes 74 ^houlder of Mutton roasted 73 ^almon boiled 81
^aw^e for any Foul 82 ^pinage tart 85 ^ack posset without milk 90 ^illabub 91
^illabub whipped 93 ^^gar plate in colors 94 Spices candied 96
T
TAnsie 3^ Tart of Cheese-curds 4^ Turkey sowsed 5^ Toast fried 5^ Trifle 8^
Thick cream 89
V
VEnison kept long sweet 27 Usquebath 98
W
VVIlde duck boiled 19 White pudding 28 White Metheglin 62 White broth 8^
Wafers. 98
Rare Receipts for Cookery.
To pickle Cucumbers to look very green.
TAke those that you mean to pickle, and lay them in water and salt three or
four days; then take a good many great Cucumbers and cut the outsides of them
into water, for the insides will be too pappy, then boil them in that water
with Dill seeds and Fennel seeds, and when it is cold put to it some salt and
as much vinegar as will make it a strong pickle, then take them out of that
water and salt and pour that over them in your vessel, then let them stand
close covered for a fortnight or three weeks, then Pour the liquor from them
and new boil it, putting in some whole pepper, cloves and mace, and when it is
cold add to it some more vinegar, and a little salt, then pour it on them
again, and let them stand a month longer, then boil it again, and when it is
cold put some more vinegar, and pour it on them again, then let them stand a
longer time, and as you see occasion boil it over again, and always put your
seeds and pieces of Cucumber on the top; be sure your pickle be cold when you
pour it over.

To pickle Pursla^e to keep all the year.
TAke the biggest stalks picked clean, the^ strew bay salt first into your pot,
and then the stalks of Purslane, and then salt again, so do ti^l your pot be
full, then tie it up close and keep it cool.

To stre^ch Sheeps guts.
AFter they are clean scoured, lay them in water nine days, shifting them
once^ day, and they will be very easy to fill; and when they are filled they
will return to their wonted bigness.

To make a Sack posset.
TAke a quart of thick cream, boil it with whole spice, then take sixteen
eggs, yolks and whites beaten very well, then heat about three quarters of a
pint of sack, and mingle well with your eggs, then stir them into your cream,
and sweeten it, then cover it up close for half an hour or more over a seething
pot of water or over very slow embers, in a basin, and it will become like a
cheese.

To make Penado.
TAke oatmeal clean picked, steep it in water all night, then strain the water
clean from it, and boil that water in a pipkin, with a blade of mace and some
currants; when it is well boiled put in the yolks of two or three eggs beaten
with sack, a little salt and as much sugar as you shall think fi^, then stir it
over a soft fire that it curd not till you think it be enough.

To make the Orange pudding.
TAke the rind of a small Orange, paired very thin, and boiled in several
water^ till it be very tender, then beat it very fine in a mortar, then put to
it four ounces of fine sugar, four ounces of fresh butter, the yolks of six
eggs, and a spoonful or two of cream, with a very little salt; beat all these
together in a mortar while the oven heats, then bake it in puff paste.

To make French-bread.
TAke half a bushel of fine flower, ten eggs, yolks and white, one pound and an
half of fresh butter, then put in as much of yest as into the ordinary manchet;
temper it with new milk pretty hot, then let it lie half an hour to rise, then
make it into loaves or rowles, and wash them over with an egg beaten with
milk; let not your oven be too hot.

To make a Made dish.
TAke four ounces of blanched almonds beaten, and strain them into some cream;
then take artichoke bottoms tenderly boiled, and some marrow boiled, then boil
a quart of cream till it be thick, and sweeten it with rose water and sugar,
then lay your hartichokes into a dish, and the marrow on them, then mix your
almonds cream, and the other together and power it over them, and let it stand
upon embers till you serve ^it in.

To make a Cake with Almonds.
TAke one pound and an half of fine flower, of sugar twelve ounces beaten very
fine, mingle them well together, then take half a pound of almonds blanched and
beaten with a little rose water; mingle all these with as much sack as will
work it into a p^ste, and put in some spice, some yest and plumped currants,
with a pound of butter; so make it into a cake and bake it.

To season a Chicking pie.
SEason them with nutmegg and sugar, pepper and salt, raisons, currants and
butter^ when it is baked, put in clouted cream, sack and sugar.

To make an Herb pie.
TAke lettuce and spinach, a little time, winter savory and sweet marjorum,
chop them and put them into the pie, with butter, nutmegg, and sugar, a little
salt, when it is drawn and a little cooled, put in clouted cream, sack and
sugar.

To stew Gurnets.
STew them with white wine and salt, whole cloves, mace, nutmegg and cinnamon;
when you take them up, put in some butter and sugar.

To boil Place or Flounders.
Boil them in white wine, water and salt with some cloves, mace, lemon pill,
and some small onions.

A cawdle for a sick body.
TAke lemmon posset drink and thicken it with the yolks of eggs, and sweeten it
with sugar.

To make a Pie with eeles and oysters.
TAke the oysters from their liquor and put them to the eeles, and season them
with pepper, salt and mace, raisons and currants, then put them in a pie with
good store of butter and fruit on the top.

To make a very good Hare pie.
TAke out all the bones, then lay it on a grid-iron under which is fresh coals;
when it begins to dry tu^n it and sprinckle it with wine vinegar, wherein has
lien nutmegg, cloves and mace bruised, and as it dries sprinckle it with this
liquor; so do till you think it reasonable well broiled, then lay it in such
vinegar all night; the next day broile it a little, then lard it, and bake it
with good store of butter, and eat it cold; add a little salt.

To roast a Pike.
DRaw a large Pike at the gills; when he is well washed, fill the belly with
great oysters, and lard the back with herrings pickled; tie it on the spit, and
baste it with white wine and butter with two or three anchoves dissolved
therein; rub your dish with garlic, make sauce with capers, lemmon, butter,
and white wine, and some anchoves.

To roast Lobsters.
TAke two great Lobsters alive, wash them clean, and stop the holes as you
would to boil them, tie them fast to a spit, the insides together, baste them
with water and salt very often till they are ready, which you will find by the
redness of them, then have ready some oisters stewed and cut small, put them
into a dish with melted butter beaten thick, then take 3. or 4. spoonfulls of
the liquor the oisters were stewed in, and dissolve in it two anchoves, then
put the liquor into the melted butter, and put it into the dish where the
Lobsters shall lie; then take the Lobsters and cr^ck the shells that they may
be easy to open, and serve them in.

To make a Pumpion pie.
FRy it in ^hin slices with sweet herbs and eggs in butter till it be t^nder,
then put it into a pie with butter, raisons, cur^ants sugar and sack with some
sharp apples; when it is baked put in some beaten butter.

To make a rare Lamb pie.
TAke a leg of Lamb and take out all the meat clean out at the great end^ but
keep the skin whole, then press the meat in a cloth, then mince it small, and
put as much more be^f suet to it as the meat does weigh finely shred; then put
to it Naples biscuit finely gr^ted, season it with cloves, mace, nutmegg and
cinnamon, rosewater and a little salt, then spread some candied orange pill and
cittron, mix it together with some sug^r, then put part of the meat into the
skin, and lay it into the pie, then take the rest of the meat and make it up in
balls with egg^ and a little flower, ^hen l^y them into the pie to fill up the
odd corners, then take candied orange and cittron, cut in long narrow pieces
and strew over it; do not forget to put in some currants into the minced meat;
when you ^id the pie, leave a tunnel, and when it is b^ked put into it a c^wd^e
made wi^h sack, sugar, the yolks of egg^ and butter; you must put butter unto
the bottom of your pie, and on the top with some marrow and dates cut in long
pieces; ^his is a very fine pie for those that love such rice pyes.

To make a pudding of a loaf.
CHip a white loaf, and put it into a skillet a little big^er ^han will hold
it; put as much ^ream to it as will cover it, put in a blade of mace, and boil
it till it be ^ender, then take it up, and pour mel^ed butter and sack and
sug^r over it.

To make ra^e Chees-cakes.
SEt some cream over the fire, and turn it ^ith sack and eggs, then drain it
well, and season it well with rose water and sugar and eggs, spice, currants,
and a few spoonfulls of cre^m, so pu^ it into your crust, adding a little salt,
and so bake them.

To fry Garde^-beans.
BOil them well, then blanch them and fry them with sweet butter, whole
pursley, and shred onions, and melt butter for the ^^wce.

To make a Sorrel-sallet.
PIck it clean from the stalks, and boil it and butter it well, put in some
vinegar and sugar, then garnish it with hard eggs and raisons.

To boil a Gurnet.
DRaw your Gurnet and wash it clean, boil it with water and salt with a faggot
of sweet herbs, and a blade of mace; when it is boiled and well-drained pour
upon it verjuice, nutmegg, butter and pepper, thickened with the yolks of eggs;
garnish your dish with barberies and oringes.

To roast a leg of Mutton.
TAke a leg of mutton, pare off all the skin as thin as you can, lard it with
sweet lard, and stick about it about a dozen of cloves; when it is half roasted
cut off three or four ^hin pieces, and mince it small with a few sweet herbs
and a little beaten ginger, put in a ladle full of clare^ wine, a piece of
swe^t butter, two or three spoonful^s of verjuice, a little pepper and ^ ^ew
parboiled capers; when all this is boile^ together, then chop the yolk of an
hard egg into it, then dredge your leg with flower, and serve it upon the
sauce.

To boil Chickins in white broth.
TRu^s your Chickens fit to boil, and boil them in ^air water, or thin mutton
broth^ wi^h a little salt, a blade of mace, and two or three dates cut in
pieees; thicken you^ bro^h with beaten almonds, season it wi^^ sack, sugar, and
a little verjuice.

To boil Chickens or Pigeons with gooseberries or grapes.
Boil them with mutton broth, and white wine, with a blade of mace, and a
little salt, fill their bellies wi^h sweet herbs; when they are enough,
thicken the broth with a piece of manchet and the yolks of two or three hard
eggs strained wi^h some of the broth, then put some of the same broth into a
boiled meat dish with verjuice, butter and sugar; then put in your Grapes or
Gooseberries scalded tend^r, and pour it over the breast of your Chickens.

To make a Dish with the sweet bread of Veal.
Boil or roast your Sweetbread, put to it a few parboiled currants, a minced
date, ^he yolks of two new laid eggs, a little manchet grated fine; season it
with pepper, salt, nutmeg and sugar; wring in the juice of an orange or lemmon
and put it berween two sheets of puff paste, and bake it or fry it.

To make a Carp pie.
VVAsh your Carp well, and after you have scaled it, then draw it and wash it
again, then dry it well, then put it in a pie with good store of sweet butter,
a little mace, pepper and salt, with a few capers, and a little vinegar
sprinkle^ in.

To make a Steak-pye.
SEason your Steaks with pepper, salt and nutmegg, and let it lie one hour,
then take a piece of the leanest of a leg of mutton and mince it small with
ox suet and a few sweet herbs, then put in grated bread, the yolks of eggs,
sweet cream, raisons of the sun, work all together like a pudding with your
hand stiff and make it into balls^ putting in a little salt, then put them and
your steaks into a deep pie with good store of butter, sprinckle a little
verjuice on it and bake it, then cut it up and roll sage leaves in butter, and
fry them and stick them upright in your walls, and serve your pie without a
cover, with the juice of orange or lemmon.

To make a Pigg-pye.
SCalld it and slit in the middle, fley it and take out the bones, season it
with ^epper, salt, cloves and mace, and nutmegg, ^op sweet herbs fine, with the
yolks of two ^r three eggs, and some plumped currants, ^en lay the one half of
the pigg into your ^ye, and the herbs and currants and salt over ^t, and some
butter, then lay the other half ^f the pigg on the top of that, and the rest ^f
the herbs and currants on the top with ^ome butter, and so bake it; you may eat
it ^ot or cold.

To make a red Dear pie.
PArboile it and lay it all night in red wine and vinegar, then lard it thick,
and sea^on it with pepper, salt, cloves, mace, nu^^egg and ginger, bake it in a
deep pie o^ rie^aste with store of burter, let it soak well, ^eave a vent hole
in your pie, and when you ^raw it out of the oven, fit it up with butter and
vinegar, and so keep it and eat it cold.

To make a Hare pie.
PArboile two Hares and take the fles^ from the bones, mince it small, and be^
it in a mortar, then sauce it in wine and v^neger as you would do red Dear; lap
all the about the chine of one Hare, and so it w^ seem but one; lard it well
and pur it into your pie with good store of butter, season i^ with salt and
spice when you beat it; when i^ is b^ked, put in some melted butter to fi^ it
up.

To make Fritters.
TAke the curd of a sack posset, the yol^ of six eggs, the whites of two eggs,
an^ a little fine flower, put in a little nutmeg an^ some ale, and a little
salt, mingle them we^ together, then slice in some apples ve^^ thin, and so fry
them in lard boiling hot; i^ your b^tter be too thin, it will drink suet; if i^
be in good temper it will swim.

To make broth of a Lamb's heat.
Boil it with as much water as will cover it, and all sotrs of spice you like,
thicken ^t with strained oatmeal and cream^ put in ^ome ^aisons and currants
which has been plumbed first, and a little salt; when you take ^t up put in
sack and sugar.

To make a Cambridge pud^ing.
SEarce grated bread thorovv a c^llender, mix it with a little flower salt,
minced dates, currants, nutmegg and cinnamon, and suet shred, fine new milk,
fine sugar and eggs, leaving out some of their vvhittes, work all together
pretty stiff, then take half ^he pudding on the one side and half on the other
side, and make it round like a loaf, then take butter and put it in the middst
of the pudding, and clap the other half on the top of it; put it into boiling
liquor, and when it is boiled enough cut it in the middle and so serve it in.

To m^ke a Florentine of Veale, or ^ther cold meat.
MInce your mea^ fine, mix it with grated bread, currants, dates, nutmegg and
sugar, with a little rose-vvater, a little salt, and two or three eggs, warm
them together over a chafing dish of coals, and stir them all the while, bake
it in puff-paste; take some of this and lay it upon thin slices of white bread,
first washed with the yolks of eggs, and so fry them and serve them in with
beaten spice and sugar for the second course^

To boil a Capon with Rice.
Boil ^, Capon with water and salt, and a handful of small oatmeal, the^ take
quarter of a pound of Rice and steep it in w^ter, and so half boil it, then
strain the Rice through a cullender and boil it in a quart of milk, then put in
some large mace and sugar; put in a little rose water, then blanch half a pound
of almonds, and beat them with cream and rose water, and so strain them into a
pipkin by it self and warm them over the fire, then take up your Capon and pour
the rice over it, and then your almonds; garnish your dish and serve it in.

To boil a Capon with pippins.
PArboile your Capon in water and salt, then put the mar^ow of two or three
good bones into a pipkin with a quart of while wine, a little sliced nutmegg,
four or five dates, and some sugar; then pare some Pippins and cut them in
quarters, put them into a pipkin and cover them with sugar and water, then make
^^^pets of biskets, then ^ake the yolks of ^. hard eggs, and strain them with a
little ^e^juice and some of the broth wherein the capon is boiled, put them to
the pippins with a little sack, stir them together and serve the capon in with
them.

To boil a wild duck.
TR^uss and parboile it, then half roast it, ^hen ^arve it and save the gravy,
take store of onions, p^rsley and pepper, put the gravy into a pipkin with a
few currants, large mace and claret wine; boil them together ^ith the Duck;
when it is enough put in butter and sugar, and so serve it in.

To boil sawsages.
Boil them in clarer wine, large mace, and sweet herbs.

To sowce a breast of Veal.
BOne it and lay it in fair water till the blood be gone, then dry it, then
take all kind of sweet herbs, beaten nutmeg, cinnamon and ginger, lemmon pill
cut in fine pieces, mingle all together, and strew all ^hese on the inside of
your veal, then ^ye it up like a collar of br^wn; let your liquor boil being
water and salt, then put in your veal; so you may use r^cks unbound or breas^
unbound; let it be scimmed very clean, pu^ in a faggot of sweet herbs and cover
it, for that will make it look white; when it is almost boiled, throw in a
little sliced nutmeg^ large mace and a lemmon sliced^ so keep it in the sowce
drink and serve it with vinegar, and shred fennel in it, or alone.

To make a grand sallet.
TAke in the spring time the buds of all kind of sweet herbs and of violets,
and a handful of capers, seven or eight dates cut in slices, one handful of
raisons of the sun stoned, one handful of blanched almonds, a handful of
currants, five or six figgs sliced^ ^ preserved orange cut in slices; mingle
these together, then take a dish fit for a shoulder of mutton, set a standard
of paste in the middst of it, put these mixed things about the standard, set
upon your mixed ^allet four half lemmons with the flat end ^ownward right over
against one another; ^^lf way betwixt your standard and the ^ish side, prick in
every one of these a ^ranch of rosemary with preserved Cherries; ^et four hard
eggs without the shells betwixt ^our lemmons, the biggest ends down^ards;
prick upon your eggs sliced dates and almonds, then lay another garnish
be^ween the brim of the dish and the sallet, ^f quarters of hard eggs and
round sli^es of lemmons, then garnish the b^imme (...) your dish with preserved
orange in long slices, and betwixt every slice of orange a little heap of
capers.

To blanch Manchet in a frying pan.
TAke the yolks of nine eggs, and five whites, beat them with half a pint of
sweet cream, put to them half a penny manchet grated, some sugar, nutmeg, mace,
and rose water, fry it with sweet-butter as you would a tansie in a very small
frying-pan^ when it is fried wash it over with a little fack and the juice of a
lemon, scrape on some sugar and serve it in.

To make a good Pudding.
TAke the crump ^f a penny white loa^ and cut it like dice, then pour over it a
pint of sodden cream, and cover it till it be cold, then ta^e the yolks of four
eggs, and two whites, beat them very well, and put them to the rest; then put
in beaten spice and sugar with some sue^ shred small, then add a little salt;
put it into a dish well buttered having first put some thin slices of pippin in
the bottom, and some raisons of the sun, then stick on the top some good bigg
pieces of marrow and so bake it, scrape fine sugar into it and serve it to the
table.

To pickle Hartichokes.
GAther them with long stalks, then cut the stalks off close to the
Hartichokes, then take the pith out of the stalks and put it into your liquor
which must be water, with pears and apples sliced, and a quince or two; make
good store of liquor, boil your liquor a while, then put in your Hartichokes
till the pith be tender in the bottoms of them, then take them up and let the
liquor sees a good while after, then let it stand till it be cold, then cleanse
it, and put therewith into your barrel a little salt, then put in your
Hartichokes and stop them up close.

To dry Beef as they do in Holland.
TAke of the Buttock-beef of a fat ox, salt it well with bay salt four or five
days, then hang it a draining one day, then ^ew it up in a thin cloth, and
hang it up in a chimney to dry; when you would eat any of it, boil it very
tender, and slice it so thin that you may almost see through it and eat it with
a sallet.

To pickle Cucumbers.
Wipe them very clean, then sprinkle them with bay salt, and so let them lie
three o^ four hours, then take carrawa^ seeds, fennel seeds, dill seeds,
cloves, mace ginger, nutmeg and cinnamon beaten toge^^her, then wipe the salt
from your cucumbers and lay them into your pot, and betwixt every lair lay some
beaten spices, and let you^ last laire be spices, then ^ill up your pot wi^^
white wine vinegar and stop them close.

How to make minced mea^ to keep five or six months.
TAke a leg of beef and boil it very tender, then shred it very fine with
store of suet, then season it with spice and salt, then bake it in a pot, and
keep it in seveta^ pots filled up with melted butter; and when you would eat of
it, cut some apples in thin little pieces and stew them, and put in some
plumped cu^rans; when they are stewed well, put in some of your minced meat,
mix them well together and serve it in upon sippets.

To make Dutch sawsages.
TAke beef and shred it fine, then season it with salt and spice as you like
it, ^hen beat it in a morte^, then fill your guts being made very clean, then
put so much ^alt into water as that it may bea^ an egg, ^hen boil it; and
when it is cold put in your sawsages; you may keep them from Michael^as to May.

To make Anc^ovis of Sprats.
TAke a peck of the best Sprats, pluck off their heads, and salt them a little
over night, then take a little barrel and lay in it first a laire of bay salt,
then a laire of sprats, and so do till you ba^rel be full, putting in between
every laire a few bay leaves and a l^ttle lemmon pill, let your last laire be
salt, ^hen stop the barrel close that no air get in, then pitch it and keep it
in a cool celler, and once in every week turn it upside down, in two or three
months you may use of it.

To make Rice milk.
TAke half ^ pound of Rice, wash it well in wa^m water and dry it in an oven,
afte^ bread i^ drawn, then beat i^ to fine flower^ then ^^^e a pottle of cream
and blend a little of the flower therewith, then set it on the fire and thicken
it with the rest of the flower, put in such spice as you love, and swee^en it
with sugar.

To make the best Almond pudding.
TAke half a pound of sweet almond^ blanched and beaten with rose water very
well, then boil a quart of cream wi^h large mace and nutmegg; when it has
boiled ^ while put in the almonds, and boil both together till it will come
from the bottom o^ ^he skillet, then pour it out and sweeten i^ with rose water
and sugar; when it is almos^ cold break in twelve-egges, and leave ou^ half the
whites, then color them according to your fancy, and if you put in any
currans^ let them be first plumped, pu^ in marrow ^omething gross or beef suet
finely shred, ^hen fill your skins and boil them a little, ^hen take them out
again, and boil them ^gain when they have cooled a little.

To make a Devonshire whitepot.
TAke a quart of new milk, a penny white loaf sliced very thin, make the milk
^calding hot, then put it to the bread and break it, and strain it through a
cullender, put in two eggs, a little nutmegg, currants, ^ugar and salt, and then
bake it.

To make clout^d cream.
TAke the morning milk and scald it at noon, when it pimples slack the fire,
^hen let it stand and harden a little, then take ^t off and let it stand till
the next day; then ^ake it off wi^h a skimmer, and serve it to the ^able.

To keep Venison nin^ or ten months good and sweet.
TAk^ ^ ha^^ch of Venison and bore holes in it, then stop in seasoning into it
as you do parsley into beef in the inside of i^ if it be red Deer, take pepper,
nutmegg^ cloves, mace and salt; if it be fallow dee^^ ^hen only pepper and
salt; when it is thu^ seasoned dip it in white wine vinegar, and pu^ it in an
earthen pot with the salt side down^ and having first sprinkled good store of
spice into the pot; if it be fallow deer three pound^ of butter will serve, but
if red deer then four pounds; when you put it into the oven lay an earthen dish
over it, and paste it close up that no air can get out nor in, so let it stan^
six or seven hours in a very hot oven; when it is baked take off the cover and
put in ^ trencher and a stone upon it to keep the meat down in the liquor; fill
up the pot with melted butter and so keep it, serve i^ to the table in slices
with mustard and sugar.

To make good White puddings.
TAke three pints of cream, the crumb of two penny loaves, boil your cream
with a little mace, slice your bread into a basin, and put your cream into it,
then take a pound of sweet almonds blanched and beaten with rose water, half a
pound of rice-flower, the yolks of ten eggs, and as much ^ugar as you think
fit, a little salt, and a good deal of marrow, so fill your skins and boil
them.

To make Angellets.
TAke some new milk and stroakings together, then take some cream, sees it by
it self wi^h whole mace and a little rose water, then pour it into the milk and
the stroakings; when it is very cool put in a little runnet^ and when it is
come fill the fatts ^ith a skimmer, and break it as little as may ^e, and let
them sink gently of themselves, and as they sink fill them up again.

To make Cheese-cakes.
TAke three gallons of milk new from the cow, and set it with runnet as for a
cheese, then take a quatt of cream and slice a manchet into it very thin,
^oile it a reasonable while till it be thick, ^hen put it into a basin, and put
to it ^ quarter of a pound of sweet butter, and let it stand till it be cold,
when yout milk is come which you set, break it a^ for a cheese, and whey it
very well, then break it very fine with your hands, and when it is very small,
put in your boiled bread and milk, stir them well together, and put in a pound
and half of plumped cu^rans or more, two nutmeggs grated, six eggs, yolks and
whites, a little salt, almost hal^ a poun^ of sugar, as much raw cr^am and
ro^e-w^te^ as you think fit; do not make them too th^^ with the cream; nor bake
them too much.

To make clouted cream the best way.
TAke a pail full of ^^roakings and boil them a little, then put ^n ^ qua^^ of
^wee^ cream and boil them together, then po^^ into several panns and cover
them, and when it has stood all night it will be very thick, then take it off
with a skimmer and lay it all in one dish.

To make a very good Cheese.
TAke a pa^l full of st^oakings almost col^, and put to it one spoonful of
^unnet or more as you think fit; when it is come, ^rea^ it a little, let it lie
almost one hour, then put it into a cloth and whey it, do not break ^t any more
but cruse it gently; when it is wheyed, enough put it into the p^esse in a
^resh cloth, and tu^n i^ twice a day; put very little ^alt to it.

To make a Gooseberry fool.
TAke a pint of Gooseberries or thereabou^s ^ ^^^ll^ them very tender, then
pour the water from them, and wi^h the ^ack of a spoon bruise your Gooseberries
^ery fine, then take a pint and a half of ^weet cream, the ^olks and whites of
three ^gges well beaten, put them to your Goose^erries with one nu^megg
qua^t^red, and ^wo o^ th^e^ ^poonful^^ of rose water, with ^s much sugar as you
^hink fit; mingle all ^h^se, together and set them on a slow fire, keep it
stirring that it may not turn; when ^ou perceive it to be of a good thickness,
^our it out, and when it is cold serve it

To make a very good Tansie.
TAke ten eggs, leave out half the whites, beat them very well, and color them
with the juice of spinach according to your liking^ and put so much tansie
amongst your spi^nage as will give it a taste, then put in half a pint or
better of sweet cream, half a nut^megg grated, and as much sugar as will
sweeten it to your taste, then put in butter in your frying pan, and when it is
hot pour in your tansy and stir it till it thicken, then fl^t it with the back
of a spoon, and when one side is fried enough, turn the other, and when it is
enoug^, serve it in with the juice of an orange and butter and sugar.

To make an Amalet.
TAke ten eggs, and more then half the whites, beat them very well, and p^^ in
a spoonful or two of cream, then hea^ some butter in your frying pan, and when
it is hot put in your eggs and stir them ^ little, then fry them ^ill you find
they are enough; and a little before you put them ou^ of the pan, turn both the
sides over that the^ may meet in the middle, and lay it the bot^tome upward^ in
the dish^ serve it in wit^ verjuice, butter and sugar.

To mak^ puff-paste a very quick way.
TAke three pounds of fresh butter, break it in little bits into half a peck of
flower or little more; then put in one egg, and as much cold Cream as will work
it into a stiff paste, do not mould it too much, for that will melt the
butter, and then it is spoil^d, but so soon as you can, roll it abroad and make
it into what you would have i^; this will be extreme good if you observe to do
^t carefully.

To make a Florentine.
TAke a quart of Cream and eight eggs, yolks and whites, beat them well and
put them into the cold Cream, set it on the f^re and stir it till it run to
curds, then drain it in a Cullender, and break it well with a ^poon; then take
a little marrow and cut it ^^d ^owr Dates shred small, four bunches of
p^eserved Barberies picked from their stalks, h^lf a handful of grated bread,
season it with Rosewater and sugar, some Nutmegs and a little salt; then cover
it with some puff-paste, and so bake it.

To make a fresh Cheese.
TAke a quarter of a pint of Rosewater, steep in it all night one Nutmeg
bruised and a stick of Cinnamon grossly beaten; then take five pints of milk,
not so hot as it comes from the Cow, set it with a little Runnet, and when it
is come drein the curds very well from the whey; then put in the Rosewater
strained, and half a pint of thick Cream, sweeten it with sugar and break it
very well; then strain it through a cloth, and put it into a little Cullender
to shape it; then put it into a Dish with Cream, and Wine and sugar.

To make a Dumplin.
TAke a pint of Cream and boil it with a blade of Mace; then take twelve
spoonfuls of grated bread, five spoonfuls of flower; then take six yolks of
Eggs and five whites; beat them very well with two spoonfuls of Rosewater and
as much fair water, season it with sugar, Nutmeg and salt, mingle them
altogether with the Cream, tie it in a cloth, and when your water boyles, put
it in and boil it one hour and half, and when it is enough, serve it in with
Rosewater, butter and sugar.

To stew a Leg of Mutton.
TAke a Leg of Mutton and mince it small with a good quantity of suet, then put
it unto an earthen pot and set it on the coals with a quart of Claret Wine,
and a little thin Mutton broth; then put in Raisons, Prunes and Dates, Salt,
Cloves and Mace, and let them stew together till you think they be enough, then
serve it in upon Sippets.

To stew a dish of Steakes.
TAke a Coast of Mutton and cut it into small pieces, bones and all, wash them
clean and put them into an earthen pot with ^ quart of white Wine and a little
water, and ^o let it sees, skim it well, then put in a good handful of Parsley
with six Onions, both chopped very small with some whole Cloves, Mace and salt;
when it is enough, serve it upon Sippets.

A boiled sallad of Spinach.
TAke four or five handfuls of Spinach clean picked, boil it well in water and
salt; then drain it well from the water, and chop it well with the back of a
Knife; then let it boil in a Dish over a few coals with some butter and
vinegar, a few plumped Currants, and as much sugar as you think fit, garnish it
with hard Eggs, and so serve it in.

A good supper Dish.
TAke a leg of Mutton and cut it in thin pieces as long as you can, and three
o^ four fingers broad; then take Parsley, Onions, Pennyroyal and Time, and chop
them fine with Mutton suet; season it with Wine, Pepper, Cloves, Mace and salt,
so lay it up upon the slices of Mutton, and roll them up, and fasten every one
with a scure, then roll them in the yolks of Eggs and grated bread, so roast
them or bake them in a platter with butter. Thus you may do Veal; but then put
in some Currants. These do well baked in a Pie, or stewed with Wine and butter.

To make a very good Ielly.
TAke a shoulder of Veal, cut it in three several pieces, but break none of the
bones; pare all the fat away as clean as you can, then wash it in five or six
waters, and ^et it lie in water two or three hours, then boil it in fair water
till it be very clean, scim ^t very well, then take it from the fire and put it
into another pot, with a pottle of white Wine, and as much of the broth as
Wine, ^et it to the fire again, and ever as the scum arises take it off; then
set it over a soft ^ire six or eight hours close covered, then ^ake three or
four drops of the stuff, put it unto the palm of your hand, and close your
other hand to it, and when it is cold chafe your hands together, and if it
cl^ave it is enough; then take it from the fire and strain ^t when it is cold,
take away all the fat and ^etlings at the bottom.

To color it and season it.

For red Iellie.
TAke a pint of your Jellie stuff, a quarter of a pint of pure white Wine,
half a pound of Sugar, some Cinnamon, Nutmegs and Cloves bruised; then take a
Tornsel cloth or two, well dried by the fire, and beaten with a stick from the
dust; put them into the Jelly stuff, and set them to the fire till it be good
and warm; then wring the clothes well till you think it be colored enough;
then put in six or eight whites of Eggs well beaten, stir them well till it be
boiled, then take it from the fire, and let it run through a Jelly bag.

For Crystal Ielly.
TAke the same quantity of your Jelly stuff as before, and Sugar, but not so
much spice because of the color, so boil i^ with the whites of Eggs, and let
it run through a Jelly bag.

For Amber color Ielly.
TAke the same quantity of every thing as for the red Jelly, only instead o^
Tornsel you must put in a little Saffron.

To make a Calvesfoot Pie.
TAke your Calves feet tenderly boiled, and ^plit them in the middle; season
them with whole Pepper, salt, Sugar and Mace; then put them into your Pie with
good store of butter and Currants, and when it is baked, put in a Caudle made
with Verjuyce, the yolks of Eggs, butter and Sugar.

A Made dish for Fish-dayes.
TAke Time, Sage, Marjorum, of each a like quantity, chop them fine; then take
six or eight Eggs beaten, and strain them into the herbs, stir them well
together, and season them with salt, Sugar, Cinnamon and Ginger, and some Mace;
then put it into a Platter with some butter, and set it over a Pot-head of
seething water close covered, till it be hard enough to slice; then slice it,
and lay it in a Dish with some melted butter over it.

To bake Mutton like Venison.
MAke your paste course, and fashion it like a Pie; for Venison parboyl your
Mutton in Wine and Vinegar, and let it lie in the same three or four hours;
before you parboyl it, thrust your Knife often through that the liquor may soak
through it, make it sharp with vinegar; then take it out and lard it very
thick, and cast Pepper on every side of it; season it with Pepper and salt, and
lard in the holes, and put good store of butter into the Pie and bake it; make
a vent in the middle of the Pie, and when it is baked fill up the Pie with
melted butter, and when you serve it in, stick some Rosemary and Bays in the
vent hole, and eat it with mustard and sugar.

To make a sallad of Lemmons.
TAke the thickest rinds and cut them in halfes, and take out all their meat;
then boil the rinds in several waters till you can run a straw through them,
then pick and scrape them clean and wash them in cold water; then make a syrup
with white Wine vinegar, water and sugar, and when it is boiled and skim'd, put
in your pills cut in some pretty fancies, boil them till they are clear, and so
keep them.

To make good Pancakes.
TAke a quart of fine Flower, put thereto eight yolks of Eggs and two whites,
mix it with water and make it thin, then put in such spice as you think fit
with a little salt; then set over the fire some tried suet in a Posnet, and
when it is seething hot put it into the Frying pan, and pour it out clean
again; then pour in some batter as thin as you can and dry it on both sides,
and then put to it so much suet as will cover it, and fry it.

To make Pancakes.
TAke fair water lukewarm, make batter therewith with grated bread and a little
flower and salt, to the quantity of every Pancake, put one Egg, then season it
with spice and sugar, and fry them with butter.

To make a Haggis Pudding.
TAke your Haggis or Calves ginne clean scowred and watered, and parboyl it
well; then take out the Kernels, and chop it fine; season it with salt, Sugar
and beaten spice; then put to it a little Cream, and ten or twelve yolks of
Eggs, as much grated bread, a few minced Dates and plumped Currants, and so fill
your skins, and boil them carefully.

To make Isings.
TAke your great Oatmeal, and steep it in Cream one night; then season it with
salt, Cloves, Mace and Currants; put in some suet, or some marrow, and a few
sweet herbs, so fill you skins and boil them.

To make Liver Puddings.
TAke Hogs Liver well boiled, and stamp it well in a Mortar; then put to it
good store of suet minced fine, and the yolks of Eggs; season it with salt,
Pepper, Cloves and Mace, and a few Currants, and fill the skins and boil them.

To make good sansages.
TAke some Pork, not too fat, mince it fine, then st^mp it in a Mortar; season
it with Pepper, salt, Nutmegs, and a little S^ge; then beat it well together,
and when it is enough, keep it in Gally pots as long as you please; and when
you would eat any of them, roll them in your hand like a Sausage, and dip it in
the yolk of Eggs, and fry them in butter.

To boil a Rabbet.
TAke an old Rabbet, and cut her off by the hind loins, and in the belly of
her you must make a pudding with a sweetbread or Kidney of Veal, sweet herbs,
bread, suer, Currants and spice, Eggs and Sugar; boil it in sweet broth of
Mutton or the like, with some chopped Parsly^ and salt, and whole spice; when
it is almost boiled, put in two handfuls of Gooseberies, then thicken the broth
with the pap of Codlings, and put in some fresh butter, so serve it in with
your Dish finely garnished.

To make a Tart of Cream.
TAke a pint of Cream and twelve Eggs, yolks and whites; strain them with your
Cream, and season it with salt, sugar and spice, put to it a little sweet
butter, and a little Rosewater, set it over the fire and stir it that it do not
burn till it be thick; then let the whey run clean from it, then strain it from
the thin, and fill your Tart; bake it but a little, then cast over it several
sorts of sweet meats, and serve it to the Table.

To make a Tart of Cheescurds.
TAke your Curds and strain them with the yolks of Eggs, Rosewater and Sugar
and some spice; put to it some sweet butter, and set it over a Chaffing-dish of
coals till it be hot, then fill your Tart and bake it.

To make Fritters.
TAke eight or ten Eggs and half the whites, beat them well, then make a tender
Posset of Ale and Milk, and break the curd and the drink together; then take
the thickest of it for liquor to mingle your batter; then take a little Sack,
Nutmegs, Cloves and Ginger, a little grated bread, flower and salt, and apples
cut thin; let your batter be very thick, or else it will drink suet.

To make excellent Puddings.
TAke a pint of sweet cream, half a handful of Marjorum, as much Penne-royal,
as much of Wintersavory, stamp these, and strain them into the Cream; then put
in the yolks of Eggs and grated bread, suet, Cloves, Mace, Nutmeg and sugar,
with some Rosewater, and a little salt, so fill your skins and boil them.

To sees a Pickeril.
TAke a fair Pan, a little yest, and a good deal of white Wine and fair water;
then slice two-Onions very thin and put them to the broth; then put in a little
whole Mace, a little salt and half a pound of butter, let them boil together a
good while, then wash your Pike and put his tail in his mouth, and when he is
boiled enough, garnish your Dish and make sauce for him with some of the
liquor^ some fresh butter, and an Auchovis or two.

To boil Calves lights.
Boil them first in water; then take Parsley, Onions and sweet herbs, and chop
them small, and when the lights are boiled, put them into a little pot with the
herbs and Onions, with some of their own liquor, some butter and Verjuyce, and
spice, and salt, so let them boil a little while, and serve them on Sippets.

To dress Sheeps feet.
WHen they are boiled and blanched, cleave them in sunder; then take the yolks
of Eggs, with a little chopped Parsley, and a little salt, and fry them with
sweet butter: serve them in with Vercuyce and butter.

To pickle Quinces.
TAke as much small Ale as will cover your Quinces in the Vessel; then take
some of your refuse Quinces, and cut them small, core and all, put them into
the liquor with some Pears; cut in pieces a good quantity of either, let these
boil till the one half be consumed; then take it from the fire, and stain it,
and let it stand all night; then put your Quinces into a Vessel, either of wood
or stone, just as they came from the Tree, and to every score of Quinces put in
a quart of Perry: be sure you have liquor enough to cover them, then cover them
with the refuse Quinces, and put something that will keep them down close in
your Vessel that no air get in.

To make Polonia Sausages.
TAke Pork, and pick it clean from the bones and skin, let it not be too fat,
mince it well, and beat it in a Mortar very fine; then weigh it, and to every
pound of meat, take one ounce of salt; then take Pepper, Cloves, Mace, Ginger,
Nutmegs and Cinnamon, of each a like quantity, being mixed together, allow one
spoonful of this to a pound of meat; then take Anniseeds Carroway seeds,
Coriander seeds, of each a like quantity mixed together and beaten; allow half
a spoonful of the^e to one pound of meat; first season your meat with the salt,
kneading it in very well, and so let it lie one day and one night; then put in
your spices and knead them in very well with a little Muscadine, kneading it
morning and evening with a little more Muscadine two days together; your guts
must now be ready, having before lain in salt and water two days, then in sack
and musk two days more, then fill your guts with the meat, and smoke them one
night in the Chimney; then hang them where they may have the warmth of the
fire, when they are dry take them down and keep them in a barrel of Wood ashes
sifted to keep them as long as you please; if you would not have them dry, take
them down and put them into so much oil as will cover them; after they have
been smoaken a night or two (they will keep in oil seven years) when you would
eat of them, boil them very well, and slice then thin and eat them cold.

To sowce a Pig.
AFter it is scalded, chine it as you do a Hog, then take the sides and dry
them in a cloth, then bone it and lay it in water one day and one night, then
take sweet herbs and chop them very small, and slice a nutmeg, with a race of
ginger, mingle the spice and herbs well together with a little salt, then strew
the fleshy sides with them, and sprinkle some white wine vinegar on them, then
bind them up in collars, and tie them hard with pack thread, or rather tape;
then boil these collars in water and white wine vinegar, and a good deal of
falt; do not boil the head and the claws so much as the collars; when it is
well boiled strain the liquor and boil in it whole mace, and put in a sl^ced
lemmon; when you take it off the fire, when it is cold, put in your pigg, and
let it lie one week, then serve it in with mustard and suga^.

To sowse an Eele.
TAke a very large Eele and split it, then take out the bones, and strew it
with sweet marjorum, time, rosemary, mace, and some nutmeg; then roll it up,
and tie it hard, sew it up in a cloth, and boil it in water and ^ilt; then
make sowse drink for it with beer, water and salt.

To season a Calves head for a pie.
When you have boiled it pretty well, cut it very clean from the bones, season
it with mace, nutmegg and salt, put six hard eggs into the pie, and a little
above half a pound of butter; when it is almost baked, put in a cawdle made of
verjuice, butter, the yolks of eggs and sugar, then set it into the oven again.

To pickle a Goose.
TAke a Goose and powder her four days, then take lard seasoned very well with
nutmegg, salt and pepper, lard her with it very well; then take two quarts of
white wine, and a quart of white wine vinegar, and as much water to make it up
as will cover her; then put in half a handful of whole pepper, one handful of
sweet herbs, a handful of cloves and mace, a handful of bay leaves, six great
onions, six cloves of garlic; boil her till she be tender, and let her lie in
the liquor twelve or fourteen days; then garnish your dish with bay leaves,
and serve it in with mustard and sugar.

To sowse a Turkey.
TAke the fattest Turkey-cock you can get, pluck it dry, and split it down the
^ack bone, take out all the entrails and wash ^t clean, and sew up again, then
take two quarts of wine, and as much water; put into ^t large mace, cloves and
a han^full of salt; ^et these on the fire together, and when it ^egins to boil
put in the turkey; let it boil, and skim it well, then set it on a soft fire,
and let it stew until it be tender; then put it into an earthen pan, and let
it stand all night, then pour the clean liquor from the setlings into the pot
wherein you mean to sowse it, and put to it two quarts of white wine, a pint of
vineger^ and a handful of salt; then put the turkey in, and cover it close;
let it lie twelve or fourteen days.

To dress a neck of Mutton the French way.
TAke a large neck of Mutton, boil it and skim it well, then take two
handfulls of parsley, pick it, wash it and put it into a net, and boil it with
the mutton with a little fresh butter and a little salt; then take a pint of
oysters, and stew them in their own liquor with a little whole mace, and a
little white wine vinegar, then take half a pound of butter and set it on the
coals, keep it beating till it be ready to boil, then shred the parsley small,
and half a lemmon cut small, four or five spoonfulls of white wine vinegar,
stir them all together, then put in your oysters; garnish your dish with
olives, capers, samphire and lemmon; cover the dish with sippets, and lay your
meat on them, then pour over your sauce.

To make an Apricock pudding.
TAke a quart of sweet cream, and one manchet grated, the yolks of six eggs,
and three whites, season it with nutmeg, rose water and sugar; boil your cream
first with a little mace, then mingle all this together with some marrow; and
when it is ready to go into the oven, cut some preserved apricocks in quarters
and put in.

To hash a shoulder of Mutton.
When your mutton is half roasted, cut some of it in bits and mince it; then
set it a stewing with the gravy, and some claret wine, nutmeg, capers, samphire
and a little vinegar, with some sliced onion; when it is enough, put in some
lemmon minced, rind and all, then lay your mutton in^ the dish, and pour the
rest upon it.

To make an Almond tart.
TAke half a pound of sweet almonds blanched, and beaten with rosewater, then
boil a quart of cream; and when it is cold, take the yolks of eight eggs well
beaten and mix them with your cream and almonds, season it with rosewater,
nutmeg and sugar, cinnamon, cloves and mace, then bake it in a dish with puff
paste; this, if you add some grated bread, fruit and marrow, it is a very ^ine
pudding.

To make a make an Hartichoke pie.
TAke the bottoms of them tenderly boiled, season them with pepper; nutmegg,
cinnamon, salt and sugar; having your pie ready raised, put in first some
butter, then you^ Hartichoke bottoms, then whole mace^ marrow, dates and
cittron pill, then goo^ store of butter again, with a little white wine or
sack; when it is baked put in a cawdle made with verjuice, butter, sugar, and
the yolks of eggs.

To stuff a shoulder of Mutton with oysters.
SPit it, and cut it flaunting, and stuff it full with oysters, baste it with
claret wine an^ onions; and when it is roasted take all the gravy that comes
from it, and some oyster^ two anchoves, capers, samphire and a lemmon cut
small; heat them together, an^ when your mutton is enough, dish it an^ pour the
sauce over it.

To make an Oyster pie.
TAke them out of their shells, wash them and strain their liquor; lay first
into your pie good store of butter, whole mace and pepper; put your oysters to
their liquor, season them with pepper and nutmeg, then put in hard eggs, whole
mace and butter, wi^h a little salt, so close your pie and bake it; when it is
baked, put in some white wine, butter, vinegar and sugar, with the yolks of
eggs.

To make Hypochrist of Deal wine.
TAke four gallons of D^al wine, two gallons of sack, nine pounds of powder
sugar, twelve ounces of large cinnamon, none ounces of ginger, half an ounce of
cloves, one ounce of coriander seeds, one ounce of nutmegg; put^ the wine and
two parts of the sugar into a tubb, then put in the spice bruised; let it stand
close covered twenty four hour^, then put in the rest of the sugar and two wine
quarts of milk, stir them together and run them through an Hypocrist bagg;
keep it in stone bottles close stopped, it will keep a month.

To make a Phrase of apples.
TAke two pippins, pair them, and cut them in thin slices, then take three
eggs, yolks, and whites, beat them very well, then put to it some nutmeg
grated, some rose water, currants and sugar, with some grated bread, as much as
will make it as thick as batter, then fry your apples very well with sweet
butrer, and pour it away; then fry them in more butter till they are tender,
then lay them in order in the pan, and pour all your batter on them; and when
it is fried a little turn it; when it is enough dish it with the apples
downward, strew sugar on it and serve it in.

To make a P^dding to bake.
TAke boiled cream, put in some grated bread, yolks of eggs, marrow, dates,
blanched almonds beaten fine, salt, rosewater, ^ugar and spice, candied cittron
pill, hard eggs, and Iring^ roots; so bake it, and serve it in.

To stew chickens.
TAke two Chickens, pull them and quarter them, wash them clean from their
blood, season them with pepper, salt and parsley finely shred, then put them
into a pipkin with no more water than will cover them; when they are enough,
put in a quarter of a pound of sweet butter, then take up your Chickens, and
put in ten eggs well beaten, stir it till it be thick, then pour it over your
Chickens, and serve them in.

To boil a Capon.
TAke a fat Capon, boil it with water and salt, some large mace, and a bundle
of sweet herbs; and when it is almost boiled put in some capers, then cut a
manchet, bruise it, and scald it with some of the fatt which arises from the
Capon, then lay your Capon on those sops, and lay the mace on it, and then good
store of capers, butter and vinegar.

To stew a Cows udder.
TAke a Cows udder very tenderly boiled and slice it in thin long slices, put
them into a pipkin, with a little thin mutton broth, a piece of sweet butter,
and a little beaten ginger, a little sugar, and a few currants, with a little
salt; let it stew a while, and then serve it in, but first put in a little
verjuice.

To stew Hartichokes wi^h cream.
TAke the meat of the Hartichokes tenderly boiled, and let them stew softly
between two dishes, with cream, sack, sugar and grated nutmegg; so let it stew
till it be all alike; then dish it and serve it to the table.

To stew Pippins with cream.
TAke your Pippins, pare them and core them; if you would have them red, bake
them first, or else put to them as much water as will cover them, and some
cinnamon and cloves unbeaten; turn them sometimes, and cover them close; set
them over the fire till they begin to be tender, then sweeten them with ^ugar;
and boil them when the sugar is in till they are clear, then put sweet cream
to them, and let them stew together till you find they be enough; thus you may
do with baked pears.

To fry toasts.
TAke a manchet and cut off the crust, then cut it into thin round slices, soak
them well in cream, then take three eggs well beaten; and when your batter is
hot in the frying pan dip your slices of bread in the eggs and fry them; when
they are fried a little pour the rest of the eggs on them and turn them, and
when they are fried enough put some rose water, butter and sugar to them.

To make Hartichoke broth of chickens or veale.
TAkt two Chickens or a piece of Veal, and when it has boiled and in is
skimmed clean, then take as much of the broth, as you shall have occasion to
use; put into it a little whole mace, lertuce and spinach, and let it boil,
then take the bottoms of three hartichokes tenderly boiled, and scrape all that
is good from the leaves, mingle the scrapings with some of the broth, and put
it to the rest and stir it about, b^at the yolks o^ two or three eggs, wiih
some vinegar or white wine, and some sugar, and then put it into them, with
your hartichokes bottoms to heat; but before you put in the eggs, take up your
Chickens, and dish them with some of the herbs upon them, and some pieces of
the bo^toms, and let the rest swim by; forget not ^o put in salt into the water
you boil your meat in.

To make a Calves foot pudding.
TAke two Calves feet tenderly boiled and ^illed, mince them small, with the
crum of two manchets, that it cannot be discerned what it is, then take half a
pound of beef suet shred small, the yolks and whites of eggs, beat them well
together; then take one handful of plumped currants, mix all these with a
little salt and some grated nutmeg and sugar, and what other spice you please;
put it into the cawle of a veal, being first sewed up like a bag, and as you
put it in put in good store of marrow, then tie up in a napkin and throw it in
boiling water, and let it boil two hours; ^hen take it up and stick it with
blanched almonds, and pour on it verjuice, bu^ter and sugar.

To make little Apple pasties to fry.
TAke pared Apples and cut them into small pieces to stew, stew them to papp
with claret wine and spice, then put in a good piece of sweet butter, cinnamon,
ginger, rose water, sugar and plumped currants; then put them into the
^uff-paste and fry them, so serve them in with sugar.

To sowse a Pigge whole.
TAke fair water, Rhenish wine and salt, and when it boiles put in your Pigge,
with a branch of rosemary, some large mace, and a nutmeg grated and ginger
sliced; boil the Pigge till it be tender; then put in some verjuice and take
it up, then slice a lemmon into it, rind and all, and put in a few bayleaves;
when the liquor is cold put in your Pigge, and let it lie a fortnight, serve it
in with mustard and sugar.

To make a Hedge-hogg pudding.
TAke a two penny loaf with fair water, and a little milk, the yolks of five
eggs, and three whites, one grated nutmegge and a little salt, some sugar and
a little rose water, then butter a wooden dish and put it in, tie it up close
in a cloth that no water get in, put it into boiling water; and when i^ is
boiled slip it out into a dish, and prick it full of blanched almonds cut in
long slender pieces, and raisons of the sun cut in like manner; pour on it
rose water, butter and sugar.

To make white Metheglin.
TAke off sweetbryer, violets, sweet marjorum, large time, strawberry leaves,
violet leave^, egrimony, of each one handful; burrage and buglosse, of each
three leaves, four branches of rosemary, three or four red gilly flowers,
^nniseeds, coriander seeds, fennel seeds and c^rroway seeds, of e^ch half a
spoonful, some large mace; boil all these in a gallon of water for the space
of an hour, then strain it and let it stand till it be cold, ^^en put in as
much honey as will make it ^^^ong enough to bear an egg, then boil it well; and
when it is almost cold, skim it well, and ^o ^o in the boiling; then put in a
little ale yest about a pint, and beat it soundly with a stick, ^hen tun it up,
and hang a little bag in the ^essel with nutmeg, cinnamon, ginger, cloves and
mace, and lemmon pill; keep the bag ^own in the liquor; when it has been
^unn'd a while bottle it, and you will find it ^ery rare.

To make balls of veal or ^utton.
TAke a leg of mutton or fillet of veal, mince it small, with penyroial and
pars^ey, then mingle it with a little grated ^read and currants, and two eggs
well beaten; ^eason them with cloves, mace, pepper and ^alt; make them like
tennis balls, and crush them together with your hands; boil them in a deep
dish with some butter and mutton broth over a chafing dish of coals, and put in
a few currants; when they are enough serve them in upon sippet^.

To make a Lamprey pie.
TAke your Lampreys, pull all the pith that runs along the back, and all the
black, then wash them clean: season them with pepper and salt, make the crust
of your pie very thick, and put good store of butter in the bottom; then lay in
your Lampreys with some large mace, then more butter, and some white wine, so
bake it very well, then fill up the pie with melted butter, and keep it to eat
cold.

To make rare Bartlemas beef.
TAke a fat Brisket piece of beef and bone it, put it into so much water as
will cover it, shifting it three times a day for three days together, then put
it into as much white wine and vinegar as will cover it; and when it has lain
twenty four hours take it out and dry it in a cloth, then take nutmeg, ginger,
cinnamon, cloves and mace, of each a like quantity, beaten small and mingled
with a good handful of salt, strew both sides of the Beef with this, and roll
it up as you do Brawn, tie it as close as you can; then put it into an earthen
pot, and cover it with some paste; set it into the Oven with household bread,
and when it is cold, eat it with mustard and sugar.

To stew Fish.
TAke of white Wine and Vinegar an equal quantity, grated bread, two or three
Anchoves, a few Capers finely shred, and a little salt; put all these together,
having liquor enough to cover the Fish, set them into a hot Oven, covered with
a dish, and when they are enough, put in some butter and serve them in; if you
put in no Capers, then put in sweet Marjorum, Parsley and Onions.

To stew Soals.
TAke a pair of large Soales, fley them, wash them, and dry them in a ^loth;
^^ower them, and fry them with Beef suet, ^^en lay them in a dish, and take
some Anchoves well washed in white Wine; open your Soales, and put the Anchoves
into the middle of your Soles; then put in some white Wine or Claret, with a
good piece of butter, set it upon coals, and when they have stewed a while,
thicken the liquor with grated bread, and grate in a little Nutmeg, and a
little salt, and so serve them in.

To make Almond Custard.
TAke half a pint of Cream, slice into it half a penny white loaf, let it be
well steeped; then take half a pound of Almonds blanched and beaten with
Rosewater, eight yolks of Eggs, four whites, beat them well and mix them
together, put to them a quarter o^ a pound of sugar, a quarter of a pound of
butter, and bake it.

To make Scotch Collops, either of Beef, Veal, or Mutton.
CUt your meat very thin, ^hen beat it with a Rolling pin till it be very
tender; then salt it a little, and fry it in a pan without any liquor, and when
it is enough, take some butter and the gravy out of the Pan^ and a little
Vinegar, or the juice of a Lem^mon, and some Anchoves, set it on the coals
till the Anchoves be dissolved; ^hen put your meat into a dish, and pour the
sauce over it.

To make Collored Beef the best way.
TAke a flank of Beef, make brine for it with pump-water and bay salt, strong
enough to bea^ an Egg; then split your Beef in the middle, and it will make two
Collars: then take the skin off, and lay your Beef in the brine with four
pounds of suet, and let it lie all night; then take two handfuls of Sage
chopped small; one ounce of Pepper, two ounces of Cloves, two ounces of Mace,
six great Nutmegs, beat your spice, and mix it with your Sage, and a handful of
Taragon chopped small, and two handfuls of salt; then strew these things upon
your Beef, and roll it up in Collars, tie it hard, and put it in a pot: then
shred your suet and lay on it, put in a pint of Renish Wine, and a pint of
water, or better, set it into the Oven wi^h household bread close pasted up, and
let it stand all night, when you draw it, take it out of the pot, and turn it;
then tie your pot up close again, and let it stand till the next morning; then
hang it up in the Chimney not too hot; eat it with mustard and sugar.

To make a Lumber Pie.
TAke half a pound of Veal, parboyl it, and shred it small with a pound of
suet; then grate a penny loaf, and take six Eggs, yolks and whites, season
your meat with beaten Cinnamon, Cloves and Mace; then take a handful of
Spinach, and a few sweet he^bs, chop them very well and put them to the meat,
with a quarter of a pint of good Verjuyce, and half a pound of Currants, half a
pound of loaf sugar; work all these things together wit^ your hands, and put in
a little salt; having your Pie ready raised, take the marrow of two good bones,
roll the marrow in the yolks of Eggs: then take two ounces of Suckets, as
much of preserved Orange-pill, as much of Citron-pill, as much of Iringo roots:
fill your Pie as hard as you can thrust it with the minced meat, and then your
sweet meats, then your marrow, and a pound of butter, bake it, and serve it in
with a Caudle made with Sack, Rosewater, yolks of Eggs, butter and sugar,
pour it into the Pie, and scrape on sugar.

To make Biscuit Pudding.
TAke a pound of Naples biscuit sliced thin, and put it into a quart of boiled
Cream, let it stand to soak close covered; then take Pippins very small minced,
and the marrow of two or three bones crumbled very small, a little beaten
spice, Rosewater, Sugar, and a little salt with the yolks of four Eggs and two
whites; you may either boil these in Guts, or otherwise, or bake them.

To fry Oysters.
TAke of your greatest Oysters, washed well and dried in a cloth, fry them with
a little butter; then take three or four yolks of Eggs well beaten, and pour on
them when they are in the Pan, and fifth a little Flower over them; when they
are enough, ^erve them in with a little butter and white Wine.

To make Egg Pyes.
TAke six hard Eggs, pilled and chopped very small, with six Pippings, and a
pound of suet; season it with beaten spice, sugar, Currants, salt, Rosewater and
Sack: so fill your Pyes and bake them.

To make Barley broth.
TAke a Knuckle of Veal, set it on the fire with four quarts of water, and a
little salt; when it boyls and is skim'd, put in a pound of French Barley well
washed, and a bundle of sweet herbs, and when they have boiled half an hour,
put in as many Raisons of the Sun stoned, and as many Currants as you think fit,
and six sliced Dates; when they have boiled half an hour, put in some marrow in
little pieces, and let them boil softly till half be boiled away; then beat the
yolks of Eggs about four or five, and fill up the Porrenger with Sack, beat
them well together, and mingle them with some of the warm broth, and stir them
in over the fire; put in Rosewater and Sugar, and so serve it in.

To make a Rice Pudding.
Boil half a pound of Rice over night in Milk, the next morning put to it the
crumbs of two M^nchets, a little Cream, and a quarter of a pound of suet; put
in salt, spice, sugar and Currants, and the yolks of Eggs, boil it, and serve it
in with Rosewater, butter and sugar.

To make an Oatmeal Pudding.
STeep some Oatmeal in Milk all night, in the morning pour the Milk from it;
then put in some Cream, beaten spice, salt and Currants, wi^h as many Eggs as
you think fit; stir these together and boil them in a bag, made like a Jelly
bag, and so boil it for four hours, then serve it in with melted butter.

To make a green Pudding.
TAke a pint of boiled Cream, and while it is hot, slice in the crumbs of two
Manchets, cover it close and let it scald; then stir it well together, season
it with salt and beaten spice, Rosewater, Sugar, and what Eggs you please, some
marrow, and some suet, with a little more Cream; them color it with the juice
of Spinach, and either boil it or bake it; then scrape on sugar and serve it in.

To s^ew Oysters.
TAke three pints of Oysters with their liquor, stew them with a blade of Mace
and a sprig of Time; when they are enough, take the liquor from them, and lay
them before the fire to dry; then take the yolks of Eggs well beaten, put to
them a piece of butter, some juice of Lemmon and Sugar; thicken it over the
fire, and pour it over the Oysters, and so serve them in.

To stew a Rump of Beef.
TAke a Rump of Beef, and when it is half boiled, put it into an earthen pot,
put to it a quart of its own liquor, and a quart of Claret Wine, half a handful
of Capers, as much Samphire, as much pickled Cucumber sliced, two Onions
sliced, with some Mace, Nutmeg and salt; cover it close and bake it, and serve
it in with Sippets.

To make a good fresh Cheese.
TAke the whites of ten Eggs, and beat them very well; then take a pint of
Cream, set it on the fire, and stir your whites of Eggs in it till it be thick;
then put it in a course cloth two or three hours, then open your cloth and
sweeten it, and put in a little Sack and Rosewater; then put it into a little
Cul^ender fit for that use, and thrust it hard with the back of a spoon; when
you serve it, slip it into a dish, and eat it with Cream, Wine and Sugar.

To make sauce for a Cods head, or any other fresh fish.
Boil your Fish in salt and water, and a bundle of sweet herbs, and when it is
boiled, take six or eight spoonfuls of the liquor, put to it half a pint of
white Wine and three Anchoves, and two Nutmegs sliced, set it on the fire and
stew it; then strain it through a hair sieve, and put in some sweet butter, and
bent it together, and pour it upon your Fish.

To fry a Coast of Lamb.
PArboyl it, and take it clean from the bones; then take the yolks of five or
six Eggs beaten, and a little sweet Marjorum and Parsley chopped small; beat
them with your Eggs, and cut the Lamb in little pieces, wrap it in the Eggs,
and fry it with water and salt, make sauce for it with white Wine, butter and
sugar.

To make sauce for Snipes, or for any small Birds.
TAke Claret Wine, salt, and the gravy of any kind of meat, the crumbs of
bread, and some Sage leaves or Bay-leavs, boil them together; then cruse the
juice of a Lemmon, take out the leav^s, and put in some butter.

To m^ke a Carp Pie.
TAke a great Carp and scale it, gut it and wash it very clean, season it with
spice and salt; then put butter into your Pie, then the Carp, then some whole
spice, and some sweet herbs with some Capers, then some more butter, so close
it and bake it.

To stew a line of Mutton.
BOne it, and slice it, then stew it with as much white Wine as will cover it;
then put in salt, and store of Sives shred small, with some grated Nutmegs;
when it is well stewed, put in Verjuyce, butter and sugar.

To stew a Calves head.
Boil it in white Wine, water and salt, and when it is tender, cut the one half
of the head into little pieces; then cut some Oysters and mingle them together
with a blade of Mace, and a little Pepper and salt, and a little liquor of the
Oysters; put in two or three Anchoves, put the other half head to them whole;
when it is enough, thicken the sauce with yolks of Eggs, and serve it in.

To make a fricasie of Chickens, or any meat else.
CUt your meat in little pieces, and put it in a frying Pan with water and a
little salt, and when it is almost stewed enough, put in some Oysters with
their liquor; put in sweet herbs, Nu^meg, and a little Orange-pill, and when
you think it is enough, take up the meat, and put some butter into the sauce;
then thicke^ it with the yolks of Eggs over the fire, and pour over it.

To dry Neats Tongues.
LEt them lie in brine made with Saltpeter and salt one week; then make new
b^ine, and let them lie a for^night in that; then hang them in the Chimney.

To stew Carpes.
TAke four Carpes, wash them clean, lay them in a dish, open their bellies, and
take out their guts, and let the blood run into the dish; then put to them a
quart of Claret Wine, and slash the Carpes over in several places with your
Knife; then put in some pickled Mushrooms, and somes Anchoves washed, half an
ounce of Mace, half an ounce of Nutmegs, some sweet herbs, and some Parsley;
when they have stewed a while, put in three pints of Oysters with their liquor,
two cloves of Garlic and a little salt, with some Capers, let them stew upon a
Charcoal fire softly for three hours or more; then put in some sweet butter,
and shake it well together; then garnish your dish with Barberies and Oysters,
Capers, Lemmon, and such like, and serve it in.

To make a Lark Pie.
TAke the Kidney of a roasted loin of Veal, shred it; then take two Eggs, one
Nutmeg grated, a little beaten Cinnamon, grated bread, Rosewater and Sugar,
with a few Currants, and a little salt, warm this together over a Chaffing dish
and coals; then take your Larks clean dressed, and fill their bellies with
this, and of the ^emainder make round balls, then put butter first into your
Pie, and then your Larks and balls, preserved Barberies, Dates, Marrow and
Sugar; when it is baked, hut in a Caudle made with white Wine, yolks of Eggs,
butter and sugar.

To boil a breast of Veal.
Boil it with water and salt, and a bundle of sweet herbs till it be tender;
then take some of the broth, and thicken it with hard Eggs; then dish your
Veal, then put in Verjuyce, butter and Capers into your sauce, and thicken it
with the yolks of raw Eggs beaten, and pour it over your meat, being laid upon
Sippets.

To stew Pigeons.
STew them in white Wine and water; put in whole Mace, whole Pepper and salt,
with some Artichoke bottoms tenderly boiled; when they are enough, put in some
butter and serve them in.

To fry Puffes.
TAke half a pint of Flower, a little Cream, and one Egg, a little good butter,
and a little Nutmeg; knead it into a paste, and roll it as thin as a Pye-lid;
cut them into what form you please, and fry them in lard or Beef suet; serve
them in with beaten Cinnamon and Sugar.

To make a Hash of Veal.
TAke half a leg of Veal and slice it thin, then with the back of a Knife hash
it well on both sides; then take sweet herbs chopped very small, and six Eggs,
yolks and whites beaten very well, put them into the dish with the meat and
herbs, with a little water and salt according to your taste; beat them
thoroughly with your hands, and put them into the frying Pan; then half fry it
with sweet butter, and put it betwixt two dishes with more butter and vinegar,
turn it now and then, and let it not stew too fast.

To roast a shoulder of Mutton.
TAke a shoulder of Mutton and cut off both the flaps, that it may look like a
shoulder of Veal; then take Pa^sly and Onions with a little Samphire shred
small, and stuff the shoulder of Mutton well with it, and into every place
where you stuff it, pour in with a little spoon some liquor of the Samphire;
then lay it to the fire, and set under a dish with Claret Wine and butter,
bas^e it with that; then take some other Claret Wine, and put into it a sliced
Onion, boil them together, and when your meat is enough, put it into the dish
to the Wine and Onions; then put in the juice of a Lemmon, and serve it in.

To make morning milk Cheese.
TAke morning milk and some stroakings while it is warm; then take two quarts
of fair water made somewhat hot, or rather seething hot, put it to your milk;
then take a good handful of Marigold flowers, stamp them in a wooden dish, with
the yolks of four or five new laid Eggs, then strain them into your milk, and
put Runnet to it, and when it is come, break it, and whey it, and put it in a
Cheese Moat.

To make a Hasty pudding that will butter it self.
TAke a quart of Cream and boil it with grated bread, and as many plumped
Currants as you shall think fit, with some spice and a little salt; when you
perceive it to be enough, put in the yolks of four Eggs well beaten, and a
litte Rosewater and sugar^ then let it boil a very little, and turn it out into
a dish, and serve it in.

To roast a Calves head whole.
TAke a Calves head, and make as little a hole in it as you can to take out the
brains; then lay the head in water one night, then dry it with a cloth, and
fill it with a Pudding, then roast it and baste it well with butter and a
little salt; when it is almost roasted, strew it with grated bread; when it is
quite roasted, pour over it Vinegar, Cinnamon, butter and sugar, but first
cleave it in sunder.

To boil a Salmon, or part of one.
Boil it with water and salt and a bundle of sweet herbs; to a tail of Salmon
take a quart of Oysters, and stew them in their own liquor with a blade of
Mace, and two or three Anchoves, and a few corns of Pepper; when your Salmon is
enough, dish it, then take your Oysters and some shrimps boiled, and the shells
taken off, with some butter and liquor of the Oysters; beat them together with
a spoon till it be thick, then pour it over your Salmon and serve it in:
garnish your dish with cru^ts of Manchet grated, and slices of Lemmon.

To make white broth with Capons.
TRuss your Capons and boil them with fair water, then put to it in three pints
of that liquor, and put to it a quart of Sack, and as much white Wine: slice in
two ounces of Dates, put in whole Mace, Cloves, Cinnamon and sliced Nutmegs,
boil this in a pipkin till the Dates begin to be tender; then put in the marrow
of two bones, and let it boil softly; when your Capons are ready, break twenty
Eggs, and take the yolks only, beat them well, and strain them with a little
cold broth; then mix them with some of the hot broth, then put into your broth
Raisons stoned, and Currants; when it is boiled enough, put in your Eggs and a
little Cream, and some Rosewater and Sugar.

To make sauce for any Fowl.
TAke the gravy of any Meat, Wine, Anchoves, Onion, Butter, and sliced Nutmegs.

To sowce a Calves head.
Boil it in as much water and salt as will cover it with a bundle of sweet
herbs, white Wine and white Wine vinegar, sliced Ginger, whole Mace and Lemmon
sliced, boil it till it be tender, then keep it in the sowce drink for about a
week; when you serve it in, set it upright in a dish, and stick a branch of
Rosemary in the mouth and in the eyes; garnish with Jelly and pickled
Cucumbers, saucers of vinegar with Jelly and Lemmon mixed with it.

To make Cheese loaves.
TAke the tender curds of new Milk Cheese, press them very well from the whey,
break them as small as you can possible; then take the crumbs of a Cheat loaf,
and as much curd as bread, the yolks of eight Eggs and four whites beaten;
mingle them with some thick Cream, make them up with a little flower into
little loaves, and bake them upon buttered Plates; then cut them open at the
top, and put in Rosewater, butter and sugar, with some Nutmegs grated, and stir
the crumbs of them together.

To roast a Hare in the skin.
TAke a Hare, as soon as you have killed he^, paunch her and wash her clean;
then fill the belly full of butter, and ^ew it up close; then split it and
roast it, and when you think it is almost enough, pull off the skin and baste
it, and dredge it, and make Venison sauce for it, it will eat very moist.

To make French Bread.
TAke a peck of Flower, and a good pint of Ale yest; strain the yest into some
warm water, knead your past very light, put in but a very little salt, and
knead it a great while longer then any other bread; then lay it to rise in a
warm cloth before the fire, ^hen having your Oven very hot, make it into three
Loaves, wash them over wi^h the yolks of Eggs and Beer, and let them bake four
hours; if you would have your bread very excellent, you must add to this
quan^ity the yolke^ of twenty Eggs, and a little Milk, and a little Sack.

To make a Spinach or Let^ice Tart.
TAke Spinach or Cabbage Lettice, boil them in water and salt till ^hey be very
tender, then put them into a Cullender to drein the water from them ^ill they
be very dry; then lay in the bottom of your Tart thin slices of butter, then
stoned Prunes, then beaten Cinnamon and Sugar, then your herbs, then more spice
and sugar, then more Prunes and butter, and so close it.

To pickle Oysters.
TAke your great Oysters, and save the liquor that comes from them, strain it
i^to an earthen Pipkin, put to it some white Wine and white Wine vinegar, whole
Pepper, whole Mace, sliced Ginger, Cloves and Bay Leaves with a little salt^
when it has boiled a little put in your Oysters^ and let them boil two or
three walmes; then take them up and boil your liquor a little longer, and when
it is cold put in your Oysters and barrel them up, or keep them in Gally Pots
close stopped.

To m^ke a Potato Pie.
SCald them well and pill them; then put butter into your Pie, then whole Mace,
then Potatoes with Marrow, Cinnamon, Mace and Sugar, then butter, so close it,
and bake it, and when it is baked, put in some white Wine, butter and sugar,
with the yolks of Eggs.

To make a Neats-tongue Pie, to be eaten hot.
TAke fresh Neats tongues, boil them in water and salt till they be very
tender^ then case them, and when they are cold, cut them in thin slices; ^hen
put butter into your Pie, then your Neats tongue, then a little Pepper, whole
Mace, Raisons of ^he sun and sugar, with some salt, then but^er again, so close
it and bake it; and when you serve it in, put in white Wine, butter and sug^r,
and the yolks of Eggs.

T^ roast Pork without the skin.
TAke any small joint of Pork, and lay it ^o roast till it will pill; then pill
it and stick it with Rosemary and Cloves, ^hen baste it with butter and salt,
make sauce for it with bread, water, Claret wine, beaten Cinnamon boiled
together; then put in but^er, vinegar and sugar.

To make Pig eat like Lamb.
TAke a fat Pig, fley it, and cut it in quarters, and tr^ss it like Lamb; then
draw it with Parsley and roast it, baste it with butter and salt, and when it is
enough flower it, and make sauce for it wi^h butter, juice of Orange and Pepper.

To make Cabbag^ Cream.
TAke twenty five quarts of new Milk, set it on the fire ^ill it be ready to
boil, and stir it all the while that it cream not; then pour it into twenty
several Platters as fast as you can, and when it is cold take off the Cream
with a Scimmer and lay it on a Pye-plate in the fashion of a Cabbage ^^umpled
one upon another; do ^his three times, and between every laire, lay on with a
Fea^her Rosewater and Sugar made very ^h^^k.

You may take Cream boiled with spice and stirred all the while; then seasoned
with Rosewater and strained Almonds, and stir it till it be cold; then take
toasts of Manchets cut thin, not too hard, nor too brow^, lay them in the
bottom of the dish, and lay ^he Cream upon them; this is very good of it self;
but if you please you may add your Cabbage Cream to it; cover i^, and so serve
them in both together; if you please you may color some of the Cream, either
with red Sanders, Tornsel, Saffron or Spinach, and that will make it look very
like a Cabbage.

To make a Tri^te.
TAke sweet Cream, season it wi^h Rosewater and Sugar, and a little Mace, boil
it a little; then let it stand till i^ be lukewarm; then put it into such
little ^ishes or ^owls as you mean to serve it in; then put in a little Runnet
and stir it together; when you serve it in, cast on what Comfits you please.

To make thick Cream.
TAke sweet Cream, a little Flower finely searsed, large Mace and a stick of
Cinnamon, Rosewater and Sugar, let these boil together till it be somewhat
thick, then put to it thick Cream and the yolks of Eggs beaten, and let it
sees a very little time for fear of turning; then pour it out, and serve it in
cold.

To make Creames of Paste or Iellies.
Boil your Cream and put Eggs into it, as for a Fool, then slice the sweet
meats very ^hin, and boil them; then sweeten i^, and put it into a Dish.

To make Cakes without Plumbs.
TAke four pound of fine Flower, rub it into one pound of sweet butter very
well; ^hen wi^h warm Cream and Ale yest temper it into a p^ste, put in a little
Rosewater and several spices beaten; let it lie by the fire ^ill the Oven heat,
and when you make it up, knead into it half a pound of C^rraway Comfits, th^ee
quarters of a pound of biscuit Comfits; make it up as fast as you can, not thick
nor cut it too deep; put it in a Hoop well buttered, and wash it over with the
white o^ an Egg, Rosewater, Sugar; then strew it wi^h some Comfits.

A Sack Posset without Milk.
TAke thirteen Eggs, and while they are beating, take a quart of S^ck, half a
pound of fine sugar, a pint of strong Beer, let them boil together a while;
then take it off and put in the Eggs, stirring them very well; then put it into
a B^son, and cover it close with a dish; then set it over a very soft fire till
you see it arise wi^h a curd: then serve it in with beaten spice.

To pr^serve Goosebe^ries, green and whole.
PIck them clean, and put them into water as warm as Milk, so let them stand
close covered half an hour^ then put them into another warm water, and let them
stand as long; so do three times, then take their weight in fine sugar and make
a Syrup, ^hen put them in and let them boil sof^ly one hour; then set them by
till the next day, so do twice, then take them out of that Syrup, and make new
syrup, and keep them in it all the year.

To make a Codling Tart.
SCald them well and pill them, then rub them through a strainer, and put them
into a dish with some Rosewater and Sugar, and some whole Cinnamon, so let it
stand over a Chaffing dish and coals a good while close covered, stirring it
now and then; then take out the Cinnamon, and fill your Tart and bake it but a
little, and when it is enough, pour in a Custard, and let it stand a while in
the Oven.

To make a Sillibub.
TAke a Lemmon pared and sliced very thin, cover the bottom of your Sillibub
pot with it; then strew it thick with fine sugar, then take Sack or while Wine,
and make a curd with some Milk or Cream, and lay it on the Lemmon with a spoon,
then cover it up to the top of the pot with some Cream and whites of Eggs
whipped to a froth, and between every lay of curd you must put sugar.

To make a Lemmon Sillibub.
TAke a pint of new Milk, and half a pint of Cream^ stir them together with a
little Rosewater and sugar; then squeeze into it the juice of two Lemmons, stir
it very well together, and so let it stand an hour, and ^hen eat it.

To preserve Lemmons to look white.
TAke the palest Lemmons you can get, and chip them very thin; then put them
in^o a linen cloth, and boil them two hours in fair water, shifting the water
sometimes, ^hen cut them and t^ke out the meat; then put them in^o another
water, and let them boil about half an hour without a cloth til you find ^hey
are very tender; then take their weight and h^lf in sugar, and to a pound of
sugar a pint of water, make a Syrup thereof; then lay the Lemmons into a pot,
and when the Syrup is no hotter then Milk from a Cow, put it over them, and let
them stand a week; ^hen pour the syrup from them and boil it ^gain, and put it
to them as before, and let ^them stand another week; then boil it again and put
it to them; so do three or four times till you think they are thoroughly done,
but never boil the Lemmons in the syrup, for that spoils the color.

To make a whipped Sillubub.
TAke a pint of Cream, put to it half a pint of Sack, and the whites of four
Egg^ and some suga^^ beat it to a froth with a birchin Rod, and as the froth
arises, take it off and put it into your Sillubub pot till you have filled it
above the brim.

To make Lemmon Cream.
TAke a quart of Cream, keep it stirring on the fire till it be blood warm;
then take the meat of three Lemmons sweetened well with sugar, and a little
Orange flower water, sweeten them so well that they may not turn the Cream;
then stir them into the Cream over the fire, with the yolks of six Eggs; be
sure to keep it stirring, and as soon as you see it be thick, take it off, and
pour it into a dish, and serve it in cold.

To make several pretty fancies.
TAke sweet Amonds blanched and beaten with Rosewater; mix them with fine
sugar, the whites of Eggs, and Gum dragon steeped in Rosewater, and so make
them into what shape you please, and bake them.

To ^ake Musk Sugar.
TAke four grains of Musk, bruise it, and tie it up in a piece of fine Lawn,
lay it in ^^e bottom of a Gally pot; then fill your Pot with beaten sugar, and
cover it close, and in a few days it will both taste and smell of Musk; when
you have spent that sugar, lay on more, and s^ do as long as you find any
virtue.

To make Sugar-plate of the color and taste of any Flower.
BEat your Flowers very well in a Mortar with a little fair water, or Orange
flower water; then add some sugar to them, as much as you think fit, and beat
them well together; then make it up with Gum dragon steeped, into what shape
you please.

To make French Biscuit.
TAke a peck of fine Flower, two ounces of Coriander seeds, one ounce of
Aniseeds, the whites of four Eggs, half a pint of Ale yest, and as much water
as will make it up into a stiff paste, your water must be but blood warm; then
make it up in a long great Roll and bake it, and when it is a day old pare it,
and slice it overthwart, then ice it over with fine powder sugar and Rosewater,
and the white of an Egg, and put it into the Oven a while; then take it out,
and keep it in Boxes all the year.

To make fine Gingerbread.
TAke three stale Manchets, grate them, dry them, and beat them; then sif^ them
through a fine sieve; then put to them one ounce of Ginger beaten and searced
fine, as much Cinnamon, half an ounce of Aniseeds, and half an ounce of
Liquorice, half a pound of sugar; boyll all these together with a quart of
Claret Wine till it come to a stiff paste; then mould it on a Table with a
little Flower, and roll it very thin, and print it in moulds; dust your moulds
with some of your powdered spices.

To candy any Spices with a Rock Candy.
TAke a pound of fine Sugar, eight spoonfuls of Rosewater, and a six penny
weight of Gum Arabic; boil them together to a Candy height; then put it into
an earthen Pipkin; then put in your spices, having first been steeped in Wine
or Rosewater one night, and dried in a cloth; then cover it with a Sawcer, and
lute it with clay that no air may enter; then keep it in a hot place for three
weeks, and it will candy hard.

You must break your Pot with a Hammar, or else you cannot get them.

Thus you may candy Oranges and Lemmons that are preserved, or any other Fruit.

To candy Oranges or Lemmons after they are preserved.
TAke them out of the syrrop and drain them well, then boil some sugar to a
Candy height, and lay your pills in the bottom of a five, and pour your hot
sugar over them; then dry them in a stove or warm oven.

To p^eserve Oranges after the Portugal fashion.
OPen them at one end and take out all the meat, then boil them in several
waters till a straw may go through them; then take their weight and half of fine
sugar, and to every pound of sugar a pin^e of water, boil it and skim it, then
put in your Oranges and boil them a little; then set them by till the next
day, then boil them a little more; then take them up, and fill them with
preserved pippins, and boil them again till you think they are enough; and if
you will have them jelly, you must make a new syrrop with the water wherein
some sliced pippins have been boiled, and some ^^ne sugar, and that will be a
stiff jelly.

To make Wafers.
TAke a pint of flower, a little cream, the yolks of two eggs, a little
rosewater, with some searced cinnamon and sugar, work them together, and bake
them thin upon hot irons.

To make a good sort of Vsquebath.
TAke two gallons of good Aqua vitae, four ounces of the best liquorice
bruised, four ounces of aniseeds bruised, put them into a wooden, glass or
stone vessel, and cover them close, so let them stand a week, then draw off the
clearest and sweeten it with Malassoes, then keep it in another vessel, and put
in some dates and raisons stoned; be sure to keep it very close from the air.

To make the brown Metheglin.
TAke strong ale-wort, and put as much honey to it as will make it strong
enough to bea^ an egg, boil them very well together, then set it a cooling^
and when it is almost cold put in some ale yest, then put it into a strong
vessel; and when it has done working, put a bag of spice into the vessel,
and some lemmon pill, and stop it up close, and in a few days it will be fit
to drink; but the longer you keep it^ the better.

To dry Cherries.
TAke six pounds of Cherries, stone them, and take a pound of sugar and wet it
with the juice of the Cherries and boil it a little; then put in your
Cherries, and boil them till they are clear; then let them lie in the syrrop a
week, then drain them from the syrrop; then lay them on thin boards or sheets
of glass to dry in a stove, turn them twice a day; then when they are dry, wash
off the clamminess with warm water, and dry them a little longer.

To make good Cherry wine.
TAke the syrrop of these Cherries, and when it has stood a while, bottle it
up, and tie down the corks, and in short time it will be very good pleasant
wine.

To make a very fine Custard.
TAke a quart of cream, boil it with whole spice, then beat the yolks of ten
eggs, and five whites, mingle them with a little cream; and when your cream is
almost cold put your eggs into it, and stir them very well, then sweeten it;
and take out your Custard into a deep dish and bake it; then serve it in with
French comfits strewed on it.

LADIES,
I Hope you will say I am better than my word; for here are two hundred very
good Receipts added to what was before; I pray practice them carefully, and
then censure or esteem

Your Friend and Servant, Hannah Wolley.

FINIS.

