Shepherdy Spiritualized OR The Improvement of a SHEPHERD'S Life TO
SOUL-Advantage. By James Wood, an unworthy Follower of the Great Shepherd of
Souls.

Virgil lib. 3. Georg. -- Superat pars altera curae
Lanigeros agitare greges --
Hic labor, hinc laudem fortes sperate coloni.
Nec sum animi dubious, verbis ea vincere, magnum
Quam sit, et angu^^is hinc addere robus honorem.
LONDON, Printed by J. R. for Thomas Parkhurst, and are to be Sold by Joseph
How Bookseller in Castle-street in Dublin, 1680.

To his Honored and Beloved Friends, the Sheep-Masters, and Shepherds in the
County of Typerary in Ireland.
Honored and Beloved,
FOr you were these discourses first designed, and into your hands are they now
put, with an hearty looking up to Heaven for a Blessing upon them; that neither
I may write, nor ye read in vain. My circumstances are known to many of you;
and seeing I cannot be as Generally and Publicly useful to you as I would, I
was willing to be as serviceable to you as I can. It Is now some years since in
discourse with a Friend of mine, who has often been Sub-S^^^riff of your
County, I was told how many Thousand Sheep were found by computation in your
County: So that the Inhabitants of other Counties in this Kingdom did not stick
to say, that your Sheep did eat up, not only your Grass only, but your People
too: It is so thinly planted, in comparison of some other Parts of the Kingdom.
This put me upon thoughts how I might direct you to the Improvement of your
Flocks to higher advantage than some others. Especially the Providence of God
casting my lot to speak in a Country Auditory, to most who are some way or
other concerned with that sort of Cattle: And not having found among the many
Book made public, any thing of this Theme; I hoped it might be some way
useful to stir you up in your management of your stock, to raise your hearts
higher than their Wool, Flesh, etc.

I have been but a little while acquainted with this course of life, and
therefore if those of you, that are better skilled herein, find any mistakes or
defects in what is offered, besides the common Apology of Humane Error, I have
to plead a failure of judgment in the matter, not of Affection to you: Tho I
have been wanting neither in an endeavor inform my judgment the best way I
could.

One thing I foresee the Observant Reader will find deficient, viz. That no
place is here allotted to the Followers, or Under-Shepherds to Christ: Such
both Magistrates and Ministers hear in Sacred Writ. But I have this to answer
to it; None such heard me when I discoursed these things, nor do I know whether
any such will deign the reading them: And to others it would be vain to blot
Paper to no purpose. We have but too many who carp at Magistrates and Ministers
for the neglect of their Duties, who would better place their time in amending
their own.

I have purposely waved matters controversial, wherein I find the Genius of
this Age to over-bound. It Is practical Holiness will be the best Evidence to
our selves and others, that we are indeed the Sheep of the Holy Jesus. And what
ever apprehensions some, that are strangers to me, may have imbibed, I can in
the words of Truth and Soberness say, I had much rather be useful to bring one
poor Lamb into the Fold of the Blessed Jesus, than Proselyte ten to any opinion
wherein I differ from others.

God has blessed some of you, My Friends, with large Flocks: I beg they may all
bear Golden Fleeces to you, when you shall be much enriched by them Godward.
That we may say concerning you in our requests for you, what the Beloved
Disciple prayed for his welbeloved Gaius, 3 John 2. ver. That ye may prosper
and be in health, even as your Souls prosper. If this Essay (mean as it is, for
such it was designed for the general use) by the Blessing of Heaven may in any
measure promote this your Prosperity, it will abundantly compensate this Labor
of

Mooretown, 26th. December. 1679. Your Hearty-Soul-Servant, James Wood.

TO THE AUTHOR.
Reverend and dear Brother,
I Should over value my judgment (if indeed I have any at all) should I look
upon my self as a competent Censor of any thing that is the issue of your
Serious Thoughts. All that I can say of your Shepherdy Spiritualliz'd is, That
I have read it with much Pleasure and Profit to my self, and do hope (through
the blessing of God) that it may be of great use to the Edification of others
if it were made Public. There is in it Ingenuity, tempered with Solidity;
Critical Learning with an (...), A pleasing Acumen, with Nerves of Scripture
Reason. I may say of you as the Kingly Preacher does of himself, Eccles. 12.
10. The Preacher sought to find out acceptable Words, and that which was
written was upright, even words of Truth. Even so here are precious Truths
delivered in acceptable words. Your lips fed many in the Preaching of them, but
your Pen will feed many more in the publishing of them. The Lord in mercy bless
your Labors with the plentiful Harvest of many Souls brought home to God, that
ye may shine as the Stars for ever: My hearty Service to your self is all at
present from

Your Brother and Fellow Laborer in the Gospel T. T.
Dublin, November, 17th. 1679.
SHEPHERDY SPIRITUALIZED, OR, The Improvement of a Shepherd's Life to
Soul-advantage.
Psalm. 23. 1. The Lord is my Shepherd.
HAving lately read with some delight, Mr. John Flavel's Husbandry
spiritualized, and finding there little of Sheep, a Theme affording much matter
for spiritual contemplation; Upon Enquiry I found the place in which his abode
was, not stored with Cattle of that sort. Whereas Providence has cast my lot
in a Country abounding with these Creatures; and many of the Inhabitants
having some acquaintance with that course of life, I have thought it might not
be unprofitable to take up some remarks from the pleasant Flock, that whilst ye
are conversant among sheep, from them you may take occasion to mount your
hearts to some useful meditations, and may converse with God and your own
hearts, in your conversation among Sheep. And because a Shepherd is a Relative
to the Sheep, yea, an Adjunct proper, we will begin there. David, Psalm. 23.
asserts that God fed him like a Shepherd, which is also spoken of God in other
Scriptures. They that desire fuller satisfaction this way may consult, Psalm.
80. 1. Jsa. 40. 11. Ezeck. 34. 12, 13, 14, 15. Jo. 10. beginning. 1 Pet. 2. 25.
Though we find a Jewish Rabbi, saying the Non est Officium magis contemptibile
quam Opilionis, R. Jos. Bar Hamna.
Office of a Shepherd is most despicable: yet God disdaineth not to stoop to
take up that Relation and imploiment. Jehovah Essentially is the Shepherd of
his People; yet because the second Person in the Trinity, the Son as Mediator,
is He by whom matters are managed toward the Sons of Men; of him we will speak
particularly, as who appropriates to himself this Relation, Jo. 10, 11. (...),
I am that Shepherd that good one.

CHAP. I. Proeme.
Antiquity enobles Shepherdy:
It does so peace and sincere Piety.

E'Re we fall on this discourse, we have here Room enough (did it suit our
present purpose) to Rhetorize; and from the Antiquity and Honourableness of
Shepherdy to commend it to men. We hinted even now from one of the Rabbis, how
contemptibly some have thought and spoken of that Trade of Life: But it were
easy with the Pens of others, to dash out that Reproach, and reconcile
Authority and credit to it from days of old wherein, and Persons of esteem in
the world, by whom, it has been attended. We may not tarry long on these
things: briefly only to hint it, as in our passage: For the Antiquity of it, we
need give none other instance than that of Abel, Genesis 4. 2. The first Man's
employ was properly that of a Gardner, Chap. 2. 15. though before, and without,
Sin, it had been his Recreation, rather than an Occupation. His Sons, the Text
tells you, were Cain an Husbandman, to Till the Earth, and Abel a Keeper of
Sheep: thus to distinguish their dispositions, Describit quo pacto discernit
Deus pios a reprobis and ut formet vitam eorum. Cain attentus erat ad rem, et
lucrum: Abel De^ liberius vacare voluit (ad quod accommodatior erat vita
pastoralis.) and opiliones mitiori ingenio esse creduntur; and pascendi munere
vivacius admonentur Dei and beneficiorum illius. Fag.
also: Cain being of a more rough temper, and having greater respect to his
profit: Abel as of a meeker Spirit delighting to contemplate God and his
benefits. Thus early in the world was this innocent and useful employment. And
for the Dignity of it, the greatest have not esteemed it beneath them to feed
and keep Sheep, as both pleasant and profitable. It Is the first Article in the
Inventory, both of Abraham, Genesis 12. 16. ver. 24, 35. and of Job, Chap. 1. 3.
Great men were anciently much addicted to Husbandry and Shepherdy, as Vzziah
the King, 2 Chronicles. 26. 10. the Patriarcks and the Old Romans, who held it
commendation enough for a man to be called and counted a good Plough-man, etc.
and sent for Senators, yea, Generals from the Plough-tail, as Cincinnatus,
Senanus, and others. Pliny reports, Corn never so cheap in Rome, as when the
same Man ploughed the ground, and governed the Commonwealth, Quasi ganderet
terra laureato vomere, and aratro triumphali.
as if the Land brought forth the more, because thus honorably ripped up and
sowed by triumphant hands. But now the case is otherwise, as Beza complains on,
Job. 1. 3. that Husbandry and Shepherdy are left for the basest and simplest
men, and for such as all others might Prey upon. But from the beginning it was
not so. Mesha thought a King of Moab judged it not below his dignity to feed
and breed Sheep, 2 King. 3. 4. Erat pecuarius, Pastor, rei pecuariae studebat,
quod olim magni ^iri s^^ pers^na non indignum putabant, Osiand.
Some derive the word which we translate Sheep-master, from a root that
signifies to mark, because such Keepers, were and are wont to mark or brand
their Sheep to distinguish them from others. A King disdained not this
employment.

Application.
ANd is not the way of Holiness, of pure Religion, of heedful and holy walking,
an ancient and an Honorable way? Have not the People of God in all ages been
found walking in those paths? We find now indeed purity and strict conversation
reproached as Novelty; a Vizard which Satan in these last and worst days has
put on real Godliness, to scare men off from it. But whosoever will considerately
enquire shall find Holiness an ancient path. Though every ancient way be not
good. Sin and error were early in the world; yet the way of Truth and purity
will be found the most ancient way. The good way is the old way, Ier. 6. 16.
Antiquity disjoined from verity is but filthy hoariness: (remember the
Gibeonites, Ios. 9. 12, 13, 14.) and deserves no more reverence than an old
Fornicator, who is so much the more odious because old; yet we know what is
most ancient Quod Antiquissimum est verissimum.
is most true, truth and holiness were before falsehood and Sin.

First, it was the way in which the Saints of the most High in all ages have
walked, who have thence their Name, from their holy hearts and walks. This
Eliphaz hints to Job, Chap. 5. 1. and hence to us they are called a cloud, Heb.
12. 1. because of a directive or leading virtue in them, in allusion to the
Cloud that load the Children of Israel in the Wilderness. What the Scripture
speaks of each of these, ye know: briefly to hint one or two, David was a man
after God's own heart (such a one as he desired, and therefore was his
Corculum) and did fulfill all his Wills, Act. 13, 22. from 1 Samuel 13. 14. Jacob
was a plain man, Genesis 25. 27. Heb. (...) Persectus, nemp^ ^irtutibus, integer
operibus, Jun. Trem.
perfect in his heart, upright in his life: the same word that is used of Noah,
Chap. 6. 9. where Just respects his Faith, Heb. 11. 7. perfect his life.
Abraham was the Friend of God, and he walked with and before the Lord. So Enoch
Genesis 5. 22, 24. walked with God, i. e. holily; they that walk otherwise, walk
with the Devil.

Secondly, It was the way of Man before Sin: The constitution of man in his
Creation, was that he should walk holilywith his God. God made man upright,
Eccl. 7. 29. in the image of God, Genesis 1. which consisted in Wisdom,
Righteousness, and Holiness, Col. 3. 10. Ephesians. 4. 23, 24. Basil refers
image in Genesis 1. 26. to the reasonable Soul in man, likeness to, a conformity
to God in holy Actions. Before Sin then, and had it not been for Sin, Adam had
walked in perfect Holiness before God.

Thirdly, It was and is the way of the blessed Angels, who were made before
man, and whose Relation as Creatures keeps them in obedience to their Maker.
Hence they are said to do his Commandments, harkening to the voice of his word.
Psalm. 103. 20. The wicked Angels sinning, is called the leaving their first
estate, 2 Pet. 2. 4. with Jude 4. i. e. their original integrity and obedience
to their Lord and Maker in all things. The good Angels does will of God
readily, cheerfully, universally, and with delight, Dan. 9. 21.

Yea Fourthly, so ancient as the way of God himself. God is called the Ancient
of days, Dan. 7. 9, 13, 23. i. e. he that was before days, or time or any
other Creature: so the Psalmist excellently expounds it, Psalm. 90. 2. God's
Eternity and wisdom is set out by that Name Ancient of days: and what is his
way? The Scripture tells us, Psalm. 145. 17. The Lord is righteous in all his
ways, and holy in all his works. Not only are all the ways wherein the Lord
walks, righteous; and the works he does, holy: but he can go in no way, but a
righteous way, nor do any work, but a work of Holiness. Hence Holiness is
called the Life of God. Ephesians. 4. 18. becauseit is from God, as the Author;
unto God, as the End; and according to God, as the pattern. And shall we need
go any higher to prove the holy way the old way, than to say, it is the way of
the Eternal God? And for the Honor of it, the same hints may suffice. Let it
not therefore move any that a Vizard of novelty is put upon an aged Face to
make a Scarecrow to frighten weaker Judgments from closing with truth and
Holiness. The best of men from the first of time have walked thus.

Reflections.
Have not I been kept off from liking, and walking in the ways of For a
prejudiced Soul.
Truth and Holiness, by a suspicion of Novelty? How much like spirited have I
been to him, who with slight enough, was wont to say, that between the old
Mumsimus, and the new Sumpsimus, a great stir was kept? Foolish Soul! How
blockish have thou been, to condemn all as Novel, which has shone with any
more than common brightness? As if I should affirm the Sun new risen at Noon,
because then it brake out from under a Cloud. Was it not enough for profane
Romanists tauntingly to ask Protestants, where was your Religion before Luther?
But must carnal Protestants enveigh against all that endeavor any further
Reformation than at first appeared with Luther, as Schismatical and
pragmatically curious? We expect not the Sun at noon-height as soon as risen in
the morning; and after such a night of ignorance, even of the very letter of
the Scripture, and terrible persecution, to expect a meredian Sunshine as to
all truths of the Gospel, is to dream rather than reason. Even they that thus
speak presume in rituals to excuse themselves from humane inventions and
additions in Divine worship, by distinguishing between the infancy of the
Church and its grown estate; which how much place more it has here, they whose
reason is not quite prostituted to humor, will judge. Shake thy self
therefore, O my Soul! from these misapprehensions, and set Truth and Reason on
the Throne, not humor. Prejudices are dangerous especially in matters of
highest moment. Prejudice rooted in the heart even of an honest Nathaniel had
almost barred the door against the Messiah, Jo. 1. 46. Philip spoke ill enough,
verse. 45 Jesus of Nazareth, the Son of Joseph; few words, and scarce ever a
true one. Epidemical diseases are soon caught: Epidemical errors are very
catching: But Nathaniel speaks worse, Can any good, etc? The interrogation is
a vehement negation. Nazareth was a City of Galilee: the Galileans were hated
of the Jews, because they were for the most part sprung form them whom
Salmanasser had brought thither from Assyria, 2 Kin. 17. who had corrupted the
Israelites Religion with their Country rites. Take heed, my Soul! take heed,
lest what thou contemnest, yea condemnest as New, be found as Old as the Truth
of God. Paul through prejudice against Christ and his Truth, thought it Duty to
persecute the Professors of it, Act. 26. 9. and is it not so with thee, O my
Soul! is it not with thee as Tertullian reports of some in the Primitive times
against Christians, Nomen damnatur, non crimen, aut scelus. Solum nomen
innocuum hominibus innocuis est pro crimine, Tertul.
that their name was their crime, and this only was condemned in them? And
Tacitus not much unlike, when Nero had set Rome on Fire for his pleasure, and
then Fathered it upon the Christians, a great Company of them were presently
slaughtered not Haud perinde in cirmine incendij, quam odio humani generis
convicti. Tacit.
so much for their guilt in burning the City, says the Historian, as because
they were hated of Men. What if reproach and persecution be found the
Injunction or Institution of Jesus Christ? Were it not safer to kiss the Son,
than to take Counsel against him? Be wise yet at length, O my Soul? Lay
judgment to the line, and righteousness to the plummet. Judge righteous
Judgment, explode and rise against nothing as novel, which is found to have the
image and superscription of Christ. Truth and Holiness can never be antiquated,
nor yet an innovation.

Be not discouraged For the humble holy heart.
nor ashamed, O my Soul! to own the slighted and reproached Truths of thy Lord.
It Is not now a new thing for the ways fo God to lie under the slights of men.
In most Ages grey-headed Truth and Holiness have been disgusted as new and
fresh. The Sodomites check Lot's zeal against their Beastiality with such a
kind of argument, Genesis 19. 9. This one fellow came in to sojourn, and he will
be perpetuus est morum Censor. Malv.
Judge: q. d. Must we be controuled by such an Vpstart, such a Novellist as
this? The Idolatrous Jews could plead Antiquity, Nobility, Universality for
their service to the Queen of Heaven, Jer. 44. 17. which pleas are very
frequent in the Mouths of Romanists to this day. It is the old Religion, say
they, and has Potent Princes for its Patrons, and is practiced in Rome the
Mother Church, and has plenty and peace where it is professed, and where they
have nothing else but Mass and Matins. But alas, who sees not through these
coverings, they are so thin? Truth, O my Soul, is more ancient than a lie, and
Holiness than Sin. Be not therefore afrighted from the ways of God, because
reported but of Yesterday, or but a few years. It has been well observed by
our famous Jewel concerning the Men of Rome, that Nostra omnia ut peregrina and
nova condemnant: satis enim sciunt nihil is it is nominibus popularius esse, aut
in vulgus gratius. Juel. Apol. Eccles. Angl. p. 114, 115.
they condemn all that we hold, adding the reason, because they know this
pleases the multitude to decry things as novel. Follow thou, O my Soul, the
Old way that is good, and the good way, for thou may be sure it is Old. Let
my heart be upright, and my feet set straight in the ways of God, and I need
not fear Men's censures as a Novellist. Whilst I keep close to scripture-purity,
I need not fear to check with pure Antiquity.

CHAP. II.
Shepherds were they that own, as well as they that keep: Christ is the great
Proprietor of's Sheep.
Observation.
THough these latter days have appropriated the name of Shepherd to him that
keeps and feeds Sheep, though for another; Yet former ages gave this
appellation as well to those that owned, and whose propriety the Sheep were.
Thus of Mesha King of Moab forementioned. Other Instances are not wanting, Genesis
46. 32. of Joseph's Brethren, the men are Shepherds, Hebr. Viri pecoris i. e.
qui solent alere pecora. Vatabl.
(...) Men of Sheep, or Cattle, which they repeat, Chap. 47. 3. with this
addition, both we and our Fathers; not only keeping as Servants, but also
having interest in them as our great Estate. That which puts this beyond doubt,
is the Opposition by our Lord set between the Shepherd and the Hireling, John
10. 12. He that is an Hireling, and not the Shepherd, whose own the Sheep are
not: The Hireling is the Shepherd that attends the Sheep, but the Shepherd is
He, whose own the Sheep are. Now Men come to have Sheep several ways.

Either by
Donation, When Sheep are bestowed on any one by his Neighbors or Friends.
Thus would I understand Job 42. 11. we read it every man gave him a piece of
Money, the Hebr. word is (...) found only Genesis 33. 19. Josh. 24. 32. and here
in Job. The Interl. LXX. Vul. Sir. Arab. and Chald. Translate it Sheep or
Lambs: and this seems more honorable for them to give, and him to receive,
than a piece of money: especially if the Ad valorem nummi quod attinet, Ebraei
omnes quos vidi exponunt, Obolas. Drus.
Jews be credited, who value this piece at a small rate, viz an half penny,
others contend a piece of money to be intended having the Agnus erat nomen
pecuniae agnum valentis, and ob id agni habentis figuram, Grot. sic (...)
nummus bovis imagine signatus: and Corvus apud Basileenses, Drus. and Ludovici
in Gallia, and Jacobi in Anglia, a Regum effigy sic dicti, Bib. Max. sic
pecunia a pecu: and opes, olim oves; ut opilio pro ovilio. Grot.
form of a Lamb stamped on it. We have known some in our days, that have got
some store of Sheep thus by Gift. Or Secondly by Acquisition either by Purchase
1. Price: When Money is laid down for Sheep. Thus to buy scores or hundreds,
yea whole Flocks is no strange thing with us. 2. Exchange: when other Stock or
Cattle is given for sheep.
or Power. When taken from an Enemy; this, Soldiers understand under the name
of prey, 1 Samuel 15. 9.

Application.
CHrist is a Shepherd in this sense, as chief Proprietor of his: and he has
this propriety by a multifarious right. First, of Donation, God the Father,
whose are all things by right of Creation, Psalm. 100. 3. has given Christ's
Sheep unto him John 6. 37. and 17. 2. they are made over to Jesus Christ, by
him to be brought to life; hence in the language of the Prophet, Isa. 8. 18. he
says, I and the Children whom the Lord has given me; and Joh. 17. 6. -- unto
the men which thou gave me out of the world. God having separated them as his
peculiar portion in the eternal counsel of his will, gives them unto his Son to
take care of them, that they may be preserved and brought unto glory, that he
had designed for them. And this work he testifies that he undertook, so that
none of them shall be lost, but that what ever difficulties they may pass
through, he will raise them up at the last day, and give them an entrance into
life and immortality. Yea, they are given to Christ as his Children, Heb. 2.
13. to be provided for, and to have an inheritance purchased for them, that
they may become Heirs of God, and coheirs with himself. Adam was their first
Parent by nature, and in him they lost that inheritance which they might have
expected by the Law of their Creation: they are therefore given to the Second
Adam, as their Parent by Grace, to have an Inheritance provided for them, which
accordingly he has purchased with the price of his blood.

2dly, They are his by acquisition, hence called a (...)
purchased possession, Ephesians. 1. 14. (...): populus quem proprium vendicat, Bez.
populus acquisitionis, Vulg.
peculiar people, 1 Pet. 2. 9. i. e. a people of peculiar purchase, a people of
purchase by price: they are bought at a price, 1 Cor. 6. 20, and this not of
things corruptible, as of Silver and Gold, but the precious blood of Jesus
Christ, 1 Pet. 1. 18. he is said to give his life a (...), a ransom, and
himself (...), Quum alius solvit quod reus non poterat: ut in bello, cum caput
capite, vita unius alterius morte redimitur, Aret. Tale pretium in quo
liberator simile quiddam subit ei malo, quod ei imminebat qui liberatur. Scult.
which for want of a better, we translate also a ransom, 1 Timothy 2. 6. properly
that payment which is paid by another, because the Person liable could not pay:
as in war, when one is given in Exchange for another. God's Justice had taken
Sinners, and kept them prisoners, nothing but life would satisfy for the
Offense. Christ undertakes the ransom, and lays down his own life to redeem
the life of his Sheep, Joh. 10. 11. They are called Sheep of slaughter, Zech.
11. 4, 7. i. e. destined to slaughter and utter destruction, both for their own
merits, and unfaithful Shepherds, who rather flaied then fed them, yet Jesus
Christ took care of them, and preserved them.

Secondly, they are purchased by Exchange. These Sheep of Christ comprehend as
it were, all God's gettings, his whole stock, that he makes any great reckoning
of, and therefore seems to slight all others in comparison of them. Typified of
old in Israel, Quasi victimam piacularem a Senache ibo mactandam loco Judaeae.
Isa. 43. 3, 4. I gave Egypt for thy ransom, etc. LXX. (...), in Exchange for
thee. When Terkakah King of Egypt and Ethiopia was beaten bp Senacherib, (think
some) who was then making toward Jerusalem; which he had already devoured in
his hopes, Isa. 37. 9. Thus the righteous is delivered out of trouble and the
wicked comes in his stead, Pro. 11. 8. Saul and his People are afflicted by
the Philistines, that David might escape, 1 Samuel 23. the Canaanites rooted out
to make room for the Israelites. Charles the Fifth, Emperor, and Francis the
French King, after a mutual agreement to root out Lutheranism, fell together by
the Ears, and the Church the while had her Halcyon days: So the Turks and
Persians deadly feud is for the great saseguard of Christians. God esteems all
the rest of the world as nothing in comparison of Believers. Christ sets no
value on any else in respect to them: all else given for them: they are his
Segullah, Mal. 3. 17. the word is something on which a man for some excellency
in it, sets his affection, more than on others, and therefore lays it up,
as some bright and beautiful pieces of Gold, etc.

Lastly, (...) propriety in his by power; he has not only paid a price for
them to his Fathers Justice, but he has also recovered them out of the hands
of Satan, who held them Captives; he has wrested them out of his hands, Mat.
12. 29. with Luke 11. 22. The strong man keeps all, the stronger comes, and
brings deliverance. He forcibly delivers from the power of darkness, Col. 1.
13. i. e. from the power of the Devil, who is the Prince of darkness, and
endeavors to darken and blind those that are subjected to him. We are all
born under his Power and Rule, so that before we are delivered, he works in
us according to his pleasure, Ephesians. 2. 2. The understanding is darkened, the will
corrupted, which sets men in a state of darkness, both as to knowledge, and as
to practice spiritual and saving, Ephesians. 5. 8. But Jesus Christ by infusing the
light, of faith, and bestowing the spirit of Holiness, dissolves this power and
dominion of sin, according to Rom 6. 14. its body being enervated, ver. 3.
Deus. liberavit suos a potestate inferni, i. e. a miseriis and calamitatibus
quae dependent ex peccati dominantis reatu. Daven. in Col. 1.
We may understand the power of darkness also, of those miseries and
calamities which accompany or flow from the guilt of reigning sin. All Christ's
are taken as a prey out of the Lions mouth, 1. Sam. 17. 34, 35, 36. David, we
know, in many things was a type of Christ, in this the figure accords well.
Some apprehend David speaking not of one Non agitur de singulari eventu, sed de
re quae non semei acciderat. Bochart.
instance at one particular time, but of what had often happened to him: sure it
is, it is that which the Mighty Jesus does often in the rescue of his Satan is a
Lion (...), roaring, 1 Pet. 5. 8. Christ the Lion of the Tribe of Judah is
(...), he that delivers his from the (...) and from the wrath to come, 1
These. 1. 10.

Reflections.
Whose then am I, O my Soul? Whose propriety am I? It Is Propriety For an
enquiring Soul.
in Christ that interesteth in the Savior: my Lord, and my God, Joh. 20. 28.
He (...), Chrysostom.
True Faith individuates God, and appropriates Him to it self. Were it not for
this possessive Mine, the Devil might say the Creed to as good purpose as we.
He believes there is a God, and a Christ, etc. that which torments him is, he
cannot say (my) to any Article of the Faith. Not so David, my shepherd: not so
Paul, loved me, gave himself for me, Gal. 2. 20. So it is Christ's having a
propriety in his, that interesteth in the salvation of Christ, Mat. 1. 21. save
his people. He is the Savior of the body, Ephesians. 5. 23. Exclusively
understood, of none but those that appertain to the body, and are members
thereof, Job. 10. 15. Lays down his for his sheep, not for goats, wolves,
etc. Have I been given up by the Father unto Christ? I may know that by
Christ's being given to, and accepted by me. Have I closed with Christ as
Savior and Lord? All that the Father gives to Christ shall come unto him,
viz. believe in him, subject to him. Election is best known by calling,
effectual calling, 2 Pet. 1. 10. Have I been bought by Christ? Christ's Spirit
secondeth his merit, as this freeth from the guilt and damnation, so that from
the filth and domination of sin. It Is a vain thing to speak of being freed from
the wrath to come, whist lying under power of present corruption. Have thou not
considered, O my soul, that word of the Apostle, Romans 6. 16. Know ye not to
whom ye yield your selves to obey, his servants ye are to whom ye obey? Christ's
blood redeemeth from a vain, as well as vile conversation, 1 Pet. 1. 18. Am I
redeemed by power? snatched out of the power of darkness? Darkness makes
looseness. How can I pretend to redemption by Christ, whilst still under the
Dominion of sin and Satan? To a redeemed one Satan may shake his chain, but
cannot fasten his fangs. Soul, be much in self-enquiry: take not up with a
notion of Salvation, unless the Savior has propriety in thee. The Priests
whose Genealogy was not found, were rejected from the Priesthood, Ez. 2. 62. So
shall all that cannot clear their spiritual pedigree in relation to Christ:
that are not found written among the living in Jerusalem, Isa. 4. 3. not
registered in the Lambs book of Life, Revel. 21. 27.

Has Christ a Propriety in his sheep? have I professed my self one of For the
Profane pretending Christian.
the sheep of Christ, and yet deny the right of his propriety? Have not I, that
say a man should not steal, committed Sacrilege in robbing Jesus Christ of
what I have professedly acknowledged to be his due? Was not I, in my Baptism,
solemnly given up to Christ, and have I not often seemed to ratify and confirm
that engagement? and yet do I not give up my self to the service and drudgery
of sin and Satan? Should I prosessing Christ my Captain General, having taken
his press-money, being enlisted under him, and having his Badge on me, fight
the Devils battles? Have I not professed to have been bought by Christ with a
price, both body and soul, that I should glorify him in both? Have I not
professed my body to be the member of Christ? and shall I take members of Christ,
and make them the members of an harlot? 1 Cor. 6. 15? Shall I think it enough
to pretend that Christ has mine heart, though the Devil has my head, tongue,
hands, feet? Is not the body for the Lord, viz. the Lords use, and ought to be
employed for his Glory? and is not the Lord for the body, viz. to redeem and
sanctify it, and consequently to command and rule it, being Lord of both body
and soul? Is this to own Christ's propriety in me, to let World and lust have
head and heart, the faculties of Soul, and members of body, with the neglect of
the commands of Christ? Will not Christ condemn me out of mine own mouth? If
Christianity were not good, why did I profess it? If it were good, why did I
not practice it? Shall I possibly be able to give any answer hereto? If I like
not the Marriage Feast, why came I thither? If I come, why without a wedding
garment? Surely I must be speechless. Awakethen, O my soul! out of this sleep
of carnal security: rouse thee from this inconsistency: If thou will own thy
self a sheep of Christ, own his propriety in thee, and let that repel all
temptations to unrighteousness. As Scipio said, when an harlot was offered him
Vellem si non essem Imperator.
, I would if I were not a General, so say thou, I would if I were not a
Christian. Hierome reports of a woman who beat back all temptations thus,
Christiana sum, baptizata sum.
I am a Christian, I was baptized.

My Beloved is mine, and I am For the humble believing soul.
his: Oh what cause of joy and glorying is here? However vile in mine eyes, and
however vilified by men, yet Christ disdains not to own propriety in me. I was
given in by the Father from all Eternity, O blessed gift of me, for me!) and in
time, though my Lord had much ado to prevail with me, yet has he taken my
heart, and I have given over my self to him, choosing Him to be a Lord to me,
to protect and defend me, and a Lord also over me, to command and rule me.
Blessedhour, wherein I was persuaded to give up my self thus to the Lord! Being
His, I may be sure:

First, Of being owned by him in the worst of times and states. He will never
be ashamed of them, who have not been ashamed of Him. They shall be mine, says
the Lord, in the day that I make up my Jewels, Mal. 3. 17. They shall be to me
in the day which I make for a p^culiar, i. e. as that thing which is most
acceptable; of great price, and very dear, a peculiar people, and whom God does
specially claim and challenge as his own.

Secondly, Of being provided for: He that has commanded men should, will not
himself forget to provide for his own. The Father will lay up for the children;
the Shepherd will care and provide pasture for his sheep. If the Lord be my
Shepherd, I shall not want. (But hereof more hereafter.)

Thirdly, Of being saved and glorified by Him: I am thine, save me, was good
arguing with David, Psalm. 119. 94. Where I am, there shall my servant be also,
is the word of promise of him that cannot fail, Joh. 12. 26. and Chap. 17. 24.
Father, I will that they also whom thou have given me, be with me where I am,
that they may behold my glory; is the prayer of him that was heard always. O
my soul, the lines are fallen to thee in pleasantnesses, I am my beloved's, and
my Beloved is mine.

CHAP. III.
Good Leas for's sheep is Shepherd's one great care;
Christ for his sheep does budding grass prepare.

Observation
THe Shepherd's care is for food, suitable food for his Flock. The Etymon of
his name in the (...)ed Languages speaks this, Pastor is of pascere, (...)
(...) of (...), of the same signification. (...) of that, which comes to one
account,) which (...) Exercit. faith is (...), to abide in (...) grass. (...)
of (...), to give pasture; yea (...)hends all the Offices of a good Sheph^rd
(...) in his Reproof of the Shepherds of Israel, (...) thing granted by them,
Ezekiel. 34. 2. (...) Shepherd feed the Flock? He appeals to the^ (...)ences, by
an argument, a conjugatis (as Log(...) speak) Is it not the ossice or business
of Shepherds (...) Flocks? or by an argument a compara^^^^^ ^^^oris, Shepherds
that have to do with brute Creatures, feed them, how much more ought the
Shepherd^ of men to do so? It Is taken for granted, that whosoever takes the
Office of a Shepherd, takes care for the feeding of his Flock: And that

1. For the quality of it, and here first, that it be upland. Low, flat Lands
are not so good nor pleasing: Sheep walks are as rising Grounds, both for feed
and shelter. Hence you read Ezeck. 34. 13, 14. of God's feeding his Flocks on
the Mountains of Israel, etc. To this also is allusion, 1 KIng 22. 17. Ezeck.
34. 6. Mat. 18. 12. and that of the Poet. Mill meae siculis errant in montibus
agnae. Unto, which also the Holy Ghost alludes in those mystical Mountains and
Hills, in which the Spouse and her beloved are said to abide, Cant. 2. 8. and
4. 6, 8. and 8. 14. because Christ is brought in as a Shepherd feeding his
Flock. Chap. 1. 7. Which Mountains, yet you must not understand such fruitless
places as those we usually call mountains in this Country, which are useful
for very little: but only they were some higher or upper land, in which Sheep
delight: Such as Bashan, an high Hill, Psalm. 68. 15, 16. Yet fat pasture, Isa.
33. 9. Jer. 15. 19. Whence came Sheep famous for their breed and feed, Deuteronomy,
32. 14. Carmel also an high Hill, Amos. 3. 9. Yet good Sheep pasture, 1 Samuel
25. 7. Gilead too sufficiently known to be Hilly, yet abounding with fruitful
pastures, Number. 32. 1, 4. Fit for Sheep, the Reubenites choosing the bleating of
which, before the noise of Warlike Instruments is reproved by Deborah, Judge. 5.
16. See all these Mountains mentioned together as good feeding, Mic. 7. 14.

2. Free from disturbance; the Sheep is a fearful Creature (as ye will hear
hereafter) likes not much the converse of any save the Shepherds that are
constantly with them: Populous places and full of Inhabitants are not so
convenient for Sheep-leas: Hence mention of them in the Wilderness, 1 Samuel 17.
28. of which sort you read of many in the Tribe of Judah, Zin, Ziph, Maon, etc.
not such as we now understand by that term: for know, that the whole Land of
Palestine was dressed and kept like a Garden-Plot, and enclosed into Olive-yards,
Vine-yards, and Arable Fields, save some Extravagant places which lay common:
Such notwithstanding were full of fruitful pastures, Joel. 1. 19. yet more
thinly inhabited than other parts of the Country: and this the Hebr. name for
a Wilderness speaks, because Cattle were (...) ducendi significatione
usitatissimum est Syris and Chaldaeis, unde and (...) desertum dictum volunt
Hebraei, quod in illud ducantur pecora pasius causa. Dieu.
lead out into such places for feeding. And such Wildernesses ye make plenty in
this County, where the Sheep eat up the Inhabitants save a few Cottages here
and there for the Shepherds that attend them.

Thirdly, Dry Land, not wet, miry and boggy: Leviathan is for the Fens, Job 40.
21. not Sheep; moist Lands are apt to rott Sheep, and fill them with water.
That which will suit well enough with bigger Cattle, viz. Cows, Bullocks,
Horses, is not so beneficial for Sheep, which the more they are tainted, the
more they run to the Low-Lands: whence some prescribe as a cure to remove them
to heathy hills, to dry up that corrupting water. Hence what was first
observed, upper Land chosen for their pastures, because moisture is not wont to
settle there, but thence to flow down to the Valleys and lower-Lands.

Fourthly, Short, Fresh, and springing grass; not rank feeding: this though
pleasing to bigger Cattle, yet not so to sheep: if at any time, as in Snow and
Frost, ye may see them feed upon Foggs, yet it is out of necessity, not choice;
the fine, short, Sweet grass is their most delightful feeding. Thus the Word,
(...) herba tenera; Test Nachmanno, and R. D. K. proprie herbam teneriusculam
ac recentem adhuc significat: (...) vero ubi ad justam succrevit magnitudinem,
and ^am sit seminisera. Leigh. Crit. Sacr. R. Salon. notat (...) primam quasi
investituram terrae denotare, cum primum viror evestiri incipit, and ex ea
nescio quid tenellum, quod adhuc vix agnoscas quid aut quod genus herbae sit,
prodire. Cartw. in Genesis 1. 11.
Psalm. 23. 2. signifies tender grass, the first budding and springing grass;
your daily observation will confirm to you, how much Sheep delight to feed upon
fresh budding grass.

Yet Fifthly, somewhat large compass: where your Sheep feed, ye call it a walk,
because they feed walking: hence nothing equally damnifies them, as when they
are shut up in two narrow Room, where they have not scope to pass on feeding.
Hence the Hebr. word which properly signifies to feed is sometimes translated
to wander, Number. 14. 33. (...) pavit, aliquando erravit. Number. 14. 33. p^lantes,
more pecudum pascentium errantes. Mill meae Sicul serrant, i. e. pascuntur,
Drus.
To this is the allusion, Hos. 4. 16. The Lord will feed them as a Lamb in a
large place. Some take it thus; Lambs love to feed largely: God would disperse
Israel through the whole Kingdom of the Assyrians, in which they should wander
as a Lamb (that weak and fearful creature that loves Company and not to live
solitarily) which being brought into a large place, runs up and down, fears
whatsoever it sees, seeks Dam, Flock, Shepherd, fills all places with its
vain bleatings, and is exposed to greatest dangers and hardships. Though others
like not this sense, because as K. and A. E. sic Bochart.
Bochartus observes, to be fed in a large place is always taken in a good
sense, see Isa. 30. 23. hence therefore they interpret it, had it not been that
Israel had declined as a froward Heifer, the Lord had fed them in plenty; as
Lambs in a large Plain, where they feed at pleasure.

Secondly, for quantity, pasture might be enough for them, that they be not
stinted, and get the starve-rot: Many among us having dearly bought their
Experience, how ill it is to overstock and thereby starve their Sheep. This
fullness and plenty is hinted in those expressions, of feeding and lying down,
or causing to rest, Psalm. 23. 2. He makes me to lie down in green pastures.
Ezekiel. 34. 14, 15 Sheep whilst hungry are not wont to rest, but when full, then
they lie down. Sheep would be fed plenteously, as well as pleasantly; where
they shall not need to bite on the bare ground, but may go in and out, and find
pasture, Io. 10. 9. Greges and armenta (...), quibus quo pascantur non deest,
semper autem superest quod pluribus multisque satis est. Non liquidi gregibus
fontes, non gram na desunt: Et quantum longis carpunt armenta diebus, Exigua
tantum gelidus ros nocte reponit. Heins. in Joan. 10. 10.
such as will feed Life, and Life in more abundance, verse. 10. hence the good
Shepherd provides for them good and full pastures, Ezekiel. 34. 14.

Application.
Christ herein discovers himself to be the one and only, the true Shepherd of
his Sheep, by that sweet and full provision of feeding which he makes for
them. David's green pastures in which he was made to lie down, were the
powerful and flourishing Doctrines of the Scriptures in which he was sweetly
fed to much refreshing. Both things which we formerly considered, the quality
and quantity are fully here; Consider we the Scriptures in both.

For quality, First, they are up-land, Sweet Air and Pasturage. They are upper
ways in which the wise walk, and walk on heavenward; Life-giving and
preserving Walks. The Church of God, where sounds forth the Doctrine of the
Scriptures, is oftentimes called an hill or Mountain Psalm. 15. 1. and 24. 1.
Isa. 2. 2. both for its sublimity, coming from above, Gal. 4. 26. and also for
its firmness, Psalm. 125. 1. Wind and storms move it not, no more can all the
power and policy of Hell combined, prevail against the Church, Mat. 16. 18.
She is (...), a Kingdom that cannot be shaken, and may better than the City of
Venice take for her posie, Immota manet. The Scriptures also, although they
have been the hate of Enemies of all Ages, yet have been a Mountain
impregnable, all force and fury has not been able to prevail against them. The
invincible perennity and continuance of the Scriptures, maugre the injury and
iniquity of times and Tyrants who have sought to suppress them, is a good
argument to prove them Divinity Antiochus the vile, Dicclesian and Maximinian
caused all the Books of the Sacred Scriptures that could be found to be burnt:
The Papists often since in France, Bohemia, etc. yet still they remain.

Secondly, the Scriptures afford feeding free from disturbance and annoiance:
they call men off from the cumbers and encumbrances of the world, to refresh
themselves with and in the Lord. Worldly cares, as Thorns, choke the Word and
make it unfruitful and unsuccesful. Hence those hints in the sacred Oracles, of
laying aside all hindrances for communion with God in his Ordinances and
Appointments. Abraham leaves the Servants and Asses at the Foot of the Hill,
Genesis 22. 5. Jacob sent his Wives Children and all that he had over Iabbok, e're
he wrestled with the Lord, Genesis 32. 23. Moses comes alone to God, and leaves
the Flocks, Exodus 24. 3. The Church gets her into the clefts of the Rock, Cant.
2. 14. Isaac into the Field, Daniel to the River's side, Christ into the Mount,
Peter up to the Leads or housetop, that they might pour their prayers, and
solace themselves with God in secret. Secret Duties, especially of Prayer and
Meditation, is the bread eaten in secret which is sweet and fattening, Prove. 9.
17.

Thirdly, they are pure and dry feeding: free from Mire and Water of Men's
inventions, whereby they are soiled. God complains of those that had trod his
Sheep's leas, Ezekiel 34. 18. On which Text he was not far out of the way, who
said, here we have a lively Picture of the Popish Clergy, who eat up the best,
and tread down the rest; so that the poor missed and muzled People are glad to
eat such as they can catch: they are fed with traditions, legendary Fables,
indulgences, vowed pilgrimages, penances, etc. Had not Luther come in our way,
say they, we could have persuaded the People to have eaten grass. What cause
have we to bless God, that it is better with us? We run to the Law and to the
Testimony, where we have the pure word of God, which is clean and cleansing
feeding.

Fourthly, it is sweet: so sweet that David knows not how to express it, Psalm.
19. and 119. Philosophy says, de guistibus non disputandum, Men must not
dispute of Tastes. Divinity shows that God's feeding is pleasant beyond
expression. It Is ever springing and fresh budding. Though it boast not in
effeminate Phrases, yet is it full of Masculine eloquence, and of such
soul-refreshing sweetness that many have found strange operations by one word
applied to, and set home upon the heart. It is ever fresh-springing; Though
many in all Ages of the Christian Church have spent time and pains in opening
the excellency of those sacred Oracles, yet still is there room enough for all
succeeding ages. Yet attentively and diligently is it seldom read, but it
affords continually new matter of admiration.

Fifthly, for largness it is exceedingly surpassing. Psalm. 119. 96. reaching
all persons in all states and conditions: Omnem Ecclesiae and mundi statum
describit, omne officium: quicquid credendum vel faciendum est ad salutem: non
est e^go restrictum preceptum. C^c.
Every duty in every state, whatsoever is to be believed or done in order unto
leif, is here plainly to be found. As a Poet of our own lately sang.

-- Though I thirst, faint, hunger, pine,
Thy word me feeds
In these my needs,
Thy word it self is Bread, Milk, Wine. Clark' s Mirror, 1 Part. Chap. 121..
24.

It brings down the stout and proud heart of the Sinner, and raises it up when
in the most drooping state. It nips the younker bespeaking himself, Rejoice O
young man, in thy youth, etc. the Scripture, I say, nips him on the Crown with
that stinging But; But know that for all these things God will bring thee into
Judgment, Eccles. 11. 9. this is a cooler for the young man's courage, this
marrs all his mirth, is sour sauce to his sweet meats, lest he should surfeit.
And when the Soul is cast down and in heaviness, it speaks refreshing to it,
that lifts it up above all discouragements and fears whatsoever, Psalm. 119. 92,
93. see Trap in loc.

Lastly, for quantity; who ever found a penury, or any want here? Though all
Saints in all Ages since its pening, have fed on it, yet none in these days
find any lack, their mouths cleave not to the dust, because no biting for them
in this pasture: here is enough and enough for all Saints. They that are
straightned are not so in God, but in their own Spirits. Whilst men give heed
to lying vanities, they forsake their own mercies; they that go out of Gods
blessing into the warm Sun, as they speak proverbially, forsaking Divine
Revelations, and seeking Enthusiastical infusions, find it an evil and a bitter
thing: and therefore many of such by the goodness of God have been brought back
to an hearty acknowledgment, that it is good for them to draw near to God,
Psalm. 73. 28. Propingua cum Deo unio and communio, per verbi auditionem, fidem,
etc. confer Isa,. 58. 2, Gej.
viz. in his solemn Ordinances and Institutions, by faith in the Gospel, Ainsw.
Although every humble Soul may learn and receive from it, what is absolutely
sufficient for itself on all occasions, with respect to its own duty and
eternal welfare: yet the whole Church of God neither jointly nor severally,
from the beginning of the World to the end thereof, have been, are, or shall be
able to examine these stores to the bottom, and to find out perfectly all the
truths in all the dimensions, concerns and extent, that are contained herein,
says Dr. Owen on Hebr. 4. 6, page 244.
a Reverend worthy of our own.

Reflections.
How far have I been from that high esteem that David, and others For the
Scripture-Slighter.
of his Spirit have had of the Scripturesof Truth? How have they been to me
worse then the heathy Mountains or the Rockie clifts? Is it not because I have
too much of the Goat, too little of the Sheep in me? How have I, not only with
that Ancient, thought the Scriptures unworthy to be compared with the
Ciceronian Eloquence, but also, with profane Politian, preferred one of Pindar's
Odes, before David's Psalms? With Bishop Bonnet's Chaplain have I not in scorn
called it, your pretty little God's book? or with the Bohemian Blasphemer, who
for Biblia called it Vitlia, which in the Bohemian Language signifies (f) Visa
est mihi indigna quam Tullianae dignitati compararem, Aug. Confess. lib. 3. cap.
5.
Vomit? Julian the Apostate is infamous among other things for his contempts of
the sacred book, and am not I fair in that way to be notorious also? Shall
David account it sweeter than Honey, which I esteem as a dry Chip, and with the
Israelites of old, say my Soul is dried up with this light Manna? Did David
account it richer than Gold, than much fine Gold, and Solomon prefer it before
Rubies and precious Gems, and shall I account it as the dirt of the Street, and
that which is most vile? Shall Job prefer it before his daily food, the bread
of his daily allowance, and shall I prefer every base song, and every wordy
Romance before it? But consider, O my soul! are they not [magnalia Legis] the
great things of his Law, which God has written for thee, Hos. 8. 12. and
should thou account them as a strange thing? as not concerned at all in them,
or as if of no concernment at all to thee? Luther somewhere says he did
tremble to think of the former Age, wherein many Nicknamed Divines spent so
much time in readivg Aristotle and Averroes; and so little in reading the book
of God: and have not I much cause to tremble, who have spent more hours in
Machiavels Politician, or Hobs's Leviathan, than in the Bible, that Book of
Books? Know, O my Soul! that they shall have one day sad cause of mourning and
complaint, who are better read in St. Philip than in St. Peter; more acquainted
with Mounsier Balzac's Letters, than in St. Paul's Epistles: that spend more
time in the Academy of Complements, than in that in that book which teaches
Charity, which is the Complement of the Law, and the supplement of the Gospel.

And what may I think of my self, in whose esteem the written Word For the
Enthusiastical contemner of the Scripture.
runs low in comparison of the dictates of my Spirit, if not a worse? Fanatical
pretenders to great heights, First, cast off all other books as useless,
useless, save the Bible, and then at last, it also, under the notion of being a
dead Letter in comparison of their quickening Spirit. At best, it was but a
Revelation of God's will to them of old, and is nothing to these till thus
revealed. As though, O my Soul! that might not be a word against thee, which is
not a word to thee. Melancthon reports that he heard some preach, taking their
Texts out of Aristotle's Ethics: and we have lived to see days, in which men
take Texts, and discourses, and all out of the fancies of their own brains;
esteeming themselves by so much the more excellent and Divine Preachers, by how
much the more immethodically and rambling they are: Besides others who from the
Holy Gospel, read only Lectures of Morality, yea and would persuade the World
there is nothing in sanctifying Grace beyond this. Some have started up of late
days, who first have discharged Solomon's works from the said Canon, under
pretense of over-zeal against his Apostasies to Adulteries and Idolatries; and
at length are not far from casting off the whole Canon, as being but a
dispensation fit only for those times, and not comporting with our high
seize. The tertium Evangelium so long since but talked off in Germany is
now current in England and Ireland, and they branded as Sons of reason only (as
so of ruin) who subject not all to these Dictates. But O my Soul! that is a
safe word, believe not every Spirit, but try the Spirits. Now if ever, false
ones are abounding in these parts of the World. So much the more need is there
of heedfulness and care. That is good advice of the Apostle, Romans 12. 13. (...)
and that too 1 Cor. 4. 6. (...), not be wise upon what is written.

Are the Scriptures of truth such refreshing and strengthening For the
unprofitable hearer and reader of the Scriptures.
pastures? how little have they been such to me? have I not continued poor and
lean under all the means of growth and fattening which I have enjoyed? what
cause have I to cry out, my leanness my leanness?, Isa. 24. 16. yea, may I not
say in reference to my Soul, what Job spoke of his body? chap. 16. 8. my
leanness rising up in me, bears witness to my face, testifies against me my
rottenness, that I am not sound within, because of the non-improvement of the
means of thriving afforded me. How can I read or hear that story of Pharaoh's
dream: Genesis 41. 2, 3, 4. with verse. 21. and not to be confounded in my self?
The lean as well as fat kine came up out of the River, viz. Nile, which causes
the fruitfulness of Egypt, and they devoured the fat, and yet were still ill
favored, a fit Hieroglyphick of my sad state; others are fat, and grown in
knowledge, and in obedience by the same means, which to me are of none
advantage nor profit at all: yea, when I have devoured all, I continue in my
former state, ill favored still. It must sure be some more than ordinary
distemper interposing that must hinder my growth and profit thus. To hear the
word and not grow thereby, is a sad sign how little appetite I have to it: to
receive showers from Heaven in the Doctrines of the Gospel, and yet to bring
forth naught but Briars and Thorns; shows me near unto cursing. O my Soul,
awake out of this dead sleep, away with this spiritual sloth, labor to have
purged out these obstructions, that hinder thy profiting, lest that be to thee
the savor of death, which to others is of peace and life.

What cause of joy have I, can I but clear up my Relation to the For the humble
profiting hearer.
Lord? If the Lord be my Shepherd I shall not want: he will provide pastures of
budding grass for me. The Sheep care not for his leas, troubles not himself
where he shall get it, that is the Shepherds care; let me but secure and
continue my Relation, and mercy shall follow me all my days. Christ's Sheep
shall lack no good thing, they shall go in and out, and find pasture. He that
reckons meamong his gains, will see to it, that I have what may keep me up,
that I may be more useful and serviceable to him. Only, O my Soul, take this
hint with thee, thou must lie down in those pastures. What do the Sheep when
they lie down? they chew the cud, and thereby turn all they eat into
nourishment: so must thou do on the word heard or read, ruminate on it, this
will turn it into nourishment to thee. And if thy delight be in the Law of thy
Lord, Thou will meditate in it day and night.

CHAP. IV.
From Sun and storms the Shepherd saves his Sheep,
In persecution's storms Christ does his keep.

Observation.
THE Expression of making to lie down in green pastures speaks something more
than bare feeding, yea than feeding liberally and to the full. It Is an
expression suited to those Eastern hotter Countries, where the Sun having great
power, the Sheep were apt to be annoied with the fervency of the heat thereof,
especially about the middle of the day, wherefore one great piece of the
Shepherds care was to provide, at that time of the day, some suitable shelter
there against, and to drive together, and cause their Flocks to rest in some
shady place which might allay that heat of the Sun. Solent pastores in calidis
istis locis, meridie, iuxta fontes, rivos, aut dumeta suas oves continere in
umbra, donec sol deservescat. Menoch.
Unto which is an allusion, Ezekiel. 34. 14, 15. and plainly, Cant. 1. 7. we in
these our Northern Countries find how the Sheep in the heat of the day will lie
panting, seeking to cool themselves in paths, etc. and hiding themselves from
the scorching heat under Banks, Hedges and Bushes. But the Shelter in our cold
countries are mostly from the storms and winds, the driving of the Snow, and
beating of the Rain, against which the shelter of a good Hedge, or the lee of a
rising hill; we find of what singular use it is, under which the poor Cattle
will creep, and there preserve themselves from the fury of the weather.

Application.
Now of what are these scorching blasts and beating storms significative in
reference to our purpose, but the rage of persecution which the wrath of men is
apt to raise against, to destroy, if it were possible, the poor ones of God?
For the heat of the Sunshine, ye have Christ's interpretation, Mat. 13. 6,
with 21. and for the storms of wind and weather, the Scriptures, especially the
Prophets, are full; see Isa. 29. 6. Amos. 1. 14. hence tossed with Tempests,
Tempests, for much afflicted and persecuted, Isa. 54. 11. from or in these does
Christ preserve his Flock. Sometimes he keeps them from persecution. When the
rage of men has even swallowed them up, in their imaginations, when it flows
down upon them like a torrent, threatening to carry all before it, God by some
Providence or other, diverts the Enemy, and so creats peace for his. Thus when
David and his men were compassed round about by Saul, and were even as devoured
in their apprehensions, the Philistines invade the Land, which diverts Saul
from his pursuit, 1 Samuel 23. 26, 27, 28. The Vul. Lat. reads verse. 26. fully to
our sense, Porro David desperahat se posse evadere a facie Saul: itaque Saul
and viri ejus in modum coronae cingebant David and viros ejus ut caperent eos.
David despaired that he could escape from the face of Saul; therefore Saul and
his men in the form of a Crown compassed David and his men; that they might
take them. And that is a good note of Grotius on it, It a saepe hosi is
externus malis civilibus adfert spiramenti aliquid. Exempla apud Livium multa
many a time a foreign Enemy gives some respit to civil broils. Hence that
place where David was delivered, had its name, Sela Hammahlekoth, so called,
it is probable, by David to perpetuate the memory of that seasonable
deliverance, an Act not so much of Readiness pity, as of Gods Quod ibidem Domius,
quasi m^raculo Saulem a Davide divi^^^jet and abstraxisset, Os.
Providence. This was Deus ex Machina, God appearing seasonably. Where humane
help failed, Divine came in, unto which may be applied, Psalm. 57. 3. which
Psalm, it is thought, he penned in Engedi, whither he fled from this place. Thus
also God diverted Senacherib, or Rabshakeh, his General, from the siege of
Jerusalem, by a report of Tirhakah King of Ethiopia coming out to fight against
him, 2 King. 19. 7, 8, 9. Regnum Assyriorum invadit, says Sulpitius, he
invaded the Assyrian Kingdom, or he went to fight against Senacherib lying
against Libnah, or against Rabshakeh besieging Jerusalem, as Drusius. Thus he
diverted Jultan from his purposed persecution, by the Parthian war, and
Charles the Emperor the 5. of Germany from persecuting the Protestants by the
Turks breaking into Hungary. This Charles the fifth set at Liberty his Prisoner
Francis King of France, upon this condition (among others) that they should
join their Forces, and do their utmost to suppress and root out the Lutheran
Heresy (as they called it) out of both their Dominions; but soon after they
fell at variance again between themselves, (the Pope blowing the Bellows)
whereby the Church had her Halcyon days, Scult. Annal.
James the Fifth King of Scotland, by the instigation of the Bishops was a
great Persecutor of the Truth, which then brake forth in that Kingdom, giving
Commission to Sir James Hamilion, his Treasurer, to convene all persons
suspected of Heresy, and to inflict the punishment which after Trial they
should be found to deserve: but this lasted not long, for Sir James Hamilton
was accused of a practice against the King's Life, for which he was shortly
after executed, and the King by wars with England, together with some night
visions which he had, was withdrawn from those Extremities which the Clergy had
put him upon.

Sometimes he even tires the Enemy with his own cruelty, and seeing his
unsuccesfulness causes him to lay down his rage in a pet. Alas, how many even
weary themselves in these evil courses, in the greatness of their way, great
pains they take to small purpose, and then sit down in discontent Thus
Dioclesian the Emperor, Author, of the Tenth persecution, went both subtly
and cruelly to work, to root out Christianity; using all politic ways to make
the Christians in his army renounce their Faith: then by Proclamation commanded
their Churches to be beaten down, their Bibles to be burnt or torn in pieces:
that all Christians that bare office, should be deposed: that bondmen that
would forsake their profession should be made free: But when after all his
subtility and cruelty, he saw that the number of Christians still increased, he
gave up the Empire. Some also report some such thing to have influenced Charles
the fith in laying down his greatness, resigning the Empire to his Brother, and
Kingdoms to his Son. Ecclesiastical History will furnish with sundry instances
of those that have even tired themselves with their cruelties to the poor ones
of God.

Sometimes he wonderfully supports and carries his through the cruel torments
of Persecutors, as if they felt nothing of pain or trouble. Mr. Saunders
Martyr, told a person that lay in the same bed with him in Prison: That in the
time of his Examination before Stephen Gardner, he was wonderfully comforted,
not only in Spirit, but even in body, receiving a certain taste of the holy
communion of Saints, whilst a most pleasant refreshing did issue from every
part and member of the Body to the seat of the heart, and from thence did flow
to and fro unto all the parts again. Yea Lawrence a Deacon of the Chureh, was
first scourged, then buffeted, pinched with fiery Tongs, and at last cast on a
Grate of Iron red hot, upon which when he had been long pressed down with
Fire-Forks, in the mighty Spirit of God, he spoke thus to the Tyrant,

This side is now roasted enough,
Turn up O Tyrant great:
Essay whether roasted or raw
Thou think the better meat.
Thomas Tomkins had his hand by Bonner held directly over the flame of a wax
Taper, till the Veins shrunk, and the Sinews burst, and the water out of them
spurted into Harpsfields Face, as he stood by; yet Tomkins affirmed afterward
to some Friends, that during this cruel burning his Spirit was so rapt, that he
felt no pain. The like did Edmund Tyrell to a Daughter of Father Munts, holding
the Candle cross-wise under the back of her hand, continuing it so long, till
her Sinews cracked asunder, he still saying, why Whore, will thou not cry? The
said Maid told a Friend, that at first she felt some pain, but afterward little
or nothing at all. James Bainham at the stake, in the midst of the burning
Fire, his Legs and Arms being half consumed, said, Ye look for miracles, lo,
here ye may see one; for in this Fire I feel no more pain, than if I were in a
bed of down, and it is to me as a bed of Roses. Henry Voes, and John Esch, when
they came to be burnt for the Truth of the Gospel, joyfully embraced the stake,
continuing singing Psalms, and when the Fire was kindled at their feet, one of
them said, Methinks you do strew Roses under my feet.

Sometimes propagating the Truth by the sufferings of the Professors of it.
Blood is found the most enriching dressing for the truth of God, the Blood of
the Martyr the seed of the Church. Persecution at Jerusalem, and taking off
Stephen, spread the Disciples abroad preaching the Gospel. Act. 8. 1. Dorothous
reports, that when Stephen was stoned, there were 2000 other believers put to
death the same day. And our Martyrologist acquaints us, that after Mr. Rogers
had broke the Ice under Q. Mary, there suffered in likesort, one Archbishop, 4
Bishops, 21 Divines, 8 Gentlemen, 84 Artificers, 100 Husbandmen, Servants and
Laborers, 26 Wives, 20 Widows, 9 Virgins, 2 Boys, and two Infants, in all 277;
some say a great many more. Yea though though Truth be suppressed in one place,
it breaks out in another, to the Churches great advantage: which, like the Sea,
what ground it loses in one part, it gets in another. Thus at Melda in
France, (Ten Miles from Paris) the Bishop thereof desirous of a Reformation,
put away the Monks, and called in the help of diverse Godly Ministers; but he
being persecuted by the Sorbonists, soon fell off from the profession of the
Truth: and those good Ministers (Faber, Farrel, Ruffus and others) were driven
into diverse other places of France, where they planted several Churches, the
destruction of one being the edification of many. Trucidabantur and
multiplicabantur. Aug. Plures efficimur quoties metimur. Tertul. Ecclesia totum
mundum sanguine and oratione convertit. Luth. So true is that promise of the
Churches Lord and Husband, and fulfilled to her, Mat. 16. 18. The Gates etc.
that is, the power and policy, the craft and cruelty of Satan and his
Instruments shall not prevail to her utter ruin: if they lop the branches in
one place, they shall break forth in another.

Lastly, by all God both purges out the Corruptions, and exercises the Graces
of his People. Isa. 27. 9. by this, i. e. by their being carried Captive to
Babylon. As one Poison is antidotary to another, so is affliction to sin.
Crosses are Leeches to suck the noxious blood, flails to thresh off their
husks, etc. and they are files too, to brighten their Graces. When there was a
consulation held at Rome, whether Carthage should be demolished or no, Scipio
persuaded the Senators to let it stand, lest the People of Rome should want an
occasion or object whereon to exercise their valor. So God could soon destory
all the persecuting enemies of his Church: But he rather suffers them to live,
that they may be for the Exercise of his Peoples Wisdom, Faith, Zeal,
Constancy, Courage, Patience, and the whole panoply of Grace in them. The
Christians had enjoyed much rest and peace for many years, after the
Persecution of Aurelianus, with which rest and tranquillity the Discipline of
the Church came to be corrupted, and fervent Devotion began to wax cold, much
envy and contention rising up between the Bishops and Pastors; for which cause
God did justly suffer the Persecution under Dioclesian, in which the patience
and constancy of the persecuted was wonderful. In the days of King Edward the
6th. the Bishops, Ridley and Hooper, could not agree about some small matters
of forms, etc. but when in Q. Mary's days, they were clapped up together, they
could better accord. Christians lose nothing by their persecutions, but their
corruptions. David found it good for him, that he had been afflicted, to bring
him in from his stray-going, that he might keep more closely to, and walk more
closely with, his God. The Church has found her bitter Aloes useful to purge
her. Christ being a sign spoken against, discovers the thoughts of many hearts,
Luke 2. 35. as they are also now in these discriminating shedding times.
Affliction tries men, who are Crocodiles, Spunges, Camelions, etc. Before
these days came (said Mr. Bradford, Martyr) how many thought of themselves
that they had been in Gods bosom, and so were taken, and would be taken, in the
World? But now we see whose they are: for to whom we obey, his Servants, etc.
In the Palatinate upon the return of Popish cruelty, scarce one in twenty stood
out, but fell to Popery, as fast as leaves fall in Autumn. These days also
have discovered the falsness of some men's hearts: the Gold is no lesser by
parting with its dross, nor the body by being cured of Wens, Tetters, etc. nor
Christ's Churches to have their rotten boughs fall off.

Reflections.
If any shall read or hear these lines whose heart rises against For the
Persecutor
the ways, truths, or People of God; methinks he may bespeak himself in some
such Language as this: And what get I by all this rage and fury against these
poor ones? Why beat I my head in divising, and weary my self in executing
violence against them? Alas! all is but a vain thing; for a storm to beat
against a Flock that has excellent shelter, to what purpose? They are dearly
beloved of God, as Daniel; highly favored in Heaven, as Mary; darlings to the
Almighty, as David; fair to God, as Moses, Gods firstborn, his Heirs, Coheirs
with Christ; and were it the part of a wise man to fall out with the Kings
Favorite? To lowre upon his Son and Heirs, to deface his picture, to tread on
his Jewels, to spit upon his Royal robe, or imperial Diadem? How was Cain
Schooled, but for scowling on Abel? And Laban threatened but for following
Jacob? And Abimelech plagued but for an unwilling abuse to Abraham? How was
Balaam slain by the Lord, for but wishing evil to his Israel? Goliath for but
defying his Host? Nabal for reviling his David, etc. Consider O my Soul! (has
not truth it self said it?) Isa. 54. 17. Every such Weapon shall be as the
Poets seign of Ajax's Sword, which so long as he used against men, his Enemies,
served for help and defense: but after he began to abuse it to the hurt of
hurtless Creatures, it turned into his own bowels: The Tongue that rises up
against thee, will I condemn; God by his judgments has extorted confessions of
his Saints innocence, and condemnation of their own wickedness, from the Mouths
even of Enemies. Ralph Lardin, the betrayer of George Eagles, was himfelf
arraigned and hanged: as he stood at the Bar, he said publicly, This is
justly fallen upon me, for betraying the blood of that good and just man George
Eagles, who through my means was condemned, and I sold his Life for a little
money. One of the Sheriffs men at Bury, when Ja. Abbes was burned, bad the
People not to hearken to Abbes, for he was a Madman, and out of his wits:
As Soon as the Fire was kindled, to the Martyr, that wretch in all the Peoples
sight fell distracted, and in a furious manner pulling off his clothes, he
cried out, Ja. Abbes was the true Servant of God, and is saved, but I am
damned; and thus he continued till he died. Not to mention, or but to mention
the righteous judgment of God on Arundel Archbishop of Canterbury, who had
silenced many faithful Ministers of Christ, and by God's just Judgment had his
Tongue swollen so bigg in his Mouth, that he could neither Eat, Drink, nor Speak
for many days, and so died of hunger after he had starved many a poor
Christian Soul, and burned the Bodies of many to Ashes. Stephen Gardner's
Tongue also hung out of his Mouth, swollen and black, with which he had
reproached and blasphemed the Truths and Servants of the living God. Were it
not best therefore, O my Soul! to consider how thou do not prevail, and to
take Gamaliel's counsel? Act. 5. 35, 38. Take heed to your selves, etc. refrain
from these men, etc. Be wise now therefore, O my, Soul! and be instructed,
learn by the Example of others, to cast away thine enmity a against Christ and
his ways. Kiss the Son, lest he be angry, and thou perish. God is a Sun and a
shiled, a Sun for comfort, and a shield sor defense. Christ is prophesied of,
as the shadow of a great Rock. Isa. 32. 2. As he is piorum rupes, a Rock of
defense and shelter to his, so he is reorum scopulus, a Rock of Offense to his
Enemies, who shall dash themselves in pieces against him.

Think not strange, O my Soul! of the slights, scorns, For the poor persecuted
ones of God.
reproaches and indignities, which thou must meet with in the pursuit of the
Truths of God: It Is no more than what has formerly been experienced by others.
Mat. 5. 11, 12. Your betters have sped no better: strange not therefore at it,
start not from it. Persecution has ever been the Saints portion; 2 Timothy 3. 12.
How early did Martyrdom come into the World? The first man that dyed, dyed for
Religion: and although Cain be gone to his place, it were to be wished he were
not still alive in his Sons and Successors, who hate their Brethren, because
they are more righteous than themselves. But what though storms arise? What
though the scorching heat, the hail and rain beat violently? Can the Lord find
no shelter for his? Is his Arm shortened, that he cannot help, or his goodness
abated, that he will not hear? Will not God avenge his People? doubtless he
will avenge them speedily, though he bear long. God has an hiding place for
some of his poor ones, Isa. 26. 20. He shut up Noah in Ark, secured Lot in
Zoar, hid Jeremiah and Baruch when sought for to the slaughter, bad Daniel go
his way and rest, before those days of great trouble foretold, chap. 12. 13.
Augustine died a little before Hippo was taken, and Pareus before Heidelberg
was sacked: So died Luther before the bloody Wars of Germany: For Mr. Brightman
a pursuivant was sent a day or two after he was buried, laid in his Grave,
where the wicked cease from troubling, and where the weary be at rest. Thus
some others, besides Lyra, understand the Prophet, by Chambers to mean their
Graves. The burying place is not unfitly called (...), a resting Room to the
Saints, the Grave a Bed, Isa. 57. 2. the Bier that carries them to it, Matteh
i. e. a Pallet. 2 Samuel 3. 21. Others by Chambers will have meant the Closet of
Gods Providence and Protection, Psalm. 31. 20. and 143. 9. such as Pella was to
the Primitive Christians. Or, say the wind does blow on thee, 'twill but blow
off thy chaff and thy dust: if the fire kindle upon thee, 'twill consume only
thy dross, that when thou come forth, it may be as Gold. Mean while know,
that in all thine affliction he is afflicted, and therefore will he save thee.
Though trouble drive worldly Friends from thee, yet not the Lord: see, Isa 34.
2. the gracious presence of God in the burning Bush kept it from consuming, the
Israelites in the red Sea from drowning: this made the fiery furnace a pleasant
Gallery, the Lyon's Den an house of defense; the Leonine Prison a delectable
Orchard.

CHAP. V.
Shepherds seek for their Flocks water that is meet;
Christ feeds his Flock with Ordinances sweet.

Observation.
HE leads me beside the still waters: leads me gently, and by little and
little, accommodating himself to my strength, Isa. 40. 11. as a Shepherd is
wont to lead out his Sheep to water, Isa. 49. 10. by, or near, or beside, or
unto waters of refreshment, so the Septuagint; the Hebr. is, of rests, i. e.
pleasant and flowing slowly, which are without all danger: of such waters Sheep
love to drink: not unto rapid Torrents, which by their noise frighten, and by
their swiftness endanger the Sheep: Waters of rest, such, as were wont to be in
Guttors and Troughs, in which they watered their Sheep, Genesis 24. 20. and 29. 2.
and 30. 38. In these our Northern Countries we use little of this to prepare
water for our Sheep; but in those Eastern parts of the World they had more
scarcity of Rain, and need of water; especially the soil being for the most
part sandy and dry; hence a well of Water was such a choice commodity in those
parts, for themselves, Flocks and Herds to drink out of; so that we find a
contest about such a Well, Genesis 21. 25. and 26. 20. Rain also was seldom in
those parts. We Northern Nations are ready to suspect the Southern parts as
a-fire with a fever: Whilst Southern Countries may fear lest our Lands be
drowned with a Dropise; such is the superfluity of Rain and Rivers among us.
Judaea (besides Rivers) was usually watered only with the former and latter
rain, which, like trade winds on some Seas, came at set seasons, at seed time,
and before Harvest, the rest of the year dry: Heaven (as it were) keeping a
constant ordnary for them, as ingenious Mr. Fuller, in his Pisgah-sight, etc.
expresses it. Hence was their use of watering their Flocks, of which ye read
often, Genesis 29. begin. Ex. 2. 16. etc. little though in use among us: yet I
remember some where to have seen a Rams-park fenced in, with a small brook of
water running by it, for the Rams to drink of. Now the Waters which their Sheep
delighted to drink of, were

First, Sweet, fresh and clean Waters: larger Cattle like to drink of standing
and puddle water; not so Sheep: they are for what is clean and running, though
but slowly. Hence. Genesis 29. 2, 3. a Cautio necessaria erat, ut greges
salubrius, purius and copiosius potarentur: neque enim ^rant copiosi latices,
Men. ex A lap.
stone was kept on the Well's Mouth, and when the water was drawn, put on
again, that their Sheep might drink the more purely and cleanly, as well as
plentifully: and that it might run a little, they put it into Gutters, etc.

Secondly, not swift and fiercely running waters: an Horse will like to drink
where the water is a little stickle, not so Sheep: Waters of quietness, Itae
leniter fluentes, ut quiescere videantur. Piscat.
that is running so slowly, that they may seem to stand still; being a fearful
creature, it cares not to come near such waters as run with swiftness and a
noise: Hence have ye mention of watering in troughs; Genesis 30. 38. Streams with
any violent current will endanger to carry away the silly Sheep; as ye see by
your experience yearly in your washing, if through neglect of man in a River, a
Sheep shall get into the stream, how easily it is carried down, unless by care
recovered; quiet, pleasant, and silently gliding water they choose therefore to
water their Sheep at.

Thirdly, it may be called Water of rest, from the Effect, Quae potantibus
ovibus quietem asserunt dum sitim extinguunt, Id.
which gives rest to the Sheep, quenching their thirst, and so refreshing them.

Lastly, by mentioning Grass and Water, Meat and drink, he intends commemorat
hic sustentationem liberalem victu salubri and jucundo, tum cibo, tum pot^u. Id.
liberal and free and bountiful sustentation: not sparing, and short Commons,
but such as is plentiful, and affords abundant supplies.

Application.
Ad spiritualia saepius refertur haec Metaphora, atque it a hic accipi debet,
de Doctrina and institutione Dei in Ecclesia, etc. River. in Psalm. 23.
These things are but representative of things spiritual, and supply thoughts
to us of the full supplies which the Lord makes for his in his Church. The
Great Shepherd of his Sheep cares for his, and makes provision for them of
water, as well as grass. Whether by these matters we understand (as some) the
Doctrines of the Gospel, especially the promises of Grace and Life, which run
in and out in the Scriptures, as streams do in the earth, and these are sweet,
and exceedingly refreshing to poor Souls: these indeed (like the waters of
Siloah) run softly, gently, yet taste pleasantly. Isa. 8. 6. So Claudian speaks
of Nilus.

Lene fluit Nilus, sed cunctis amnibus extat
Vtilior; nullas confessus murmr vires.
The Divine Oracles come not with those loud sounding words, which make a great
noise in the ear; but with mighty power and unexpressil^e sweetness reach and
refresh the heart. Thus God appears in the still and sweet words of his
promises to his peoples solace, as to Elijah once in the still voice, 1 King.
19. 11, 12, 13. But because the Doctrines of the Gospel, even in the sweet
promises of it, were formerly hinted to, as understood by the sweet budding
grass with which Christ does feed his; I would rather here by waters understand
the special priviledging and refreshing ordinances of the Gospel, viz. Baptism
and the Lord's Supper, which like water, are

First, Cooling, when the Soul is parched with the sense of the wrath of God,
and is even dried up as a Potsherd, as David speaks Psalm. 22. 15. Vigor vel
viror meus, i. e. humor and succus vitalis sive radicalis, Mu. Sic dictus, quia
per eum vivimuus, Vat. Is autem moerore exhauriri and absumi solet, Pro. 17.
22. Mu. Internos animi aestus cutis rigens prodit, ut in Febribus, Riv. Aestus
irae Dei torruit me, Coc.
my strength i. e. my vital or radical moisture; so called, because by it we
live: this by grief is wont to be consumed: A rough skin speaks inward heat and
drought, as in fevers. Hence some render that Text, the heat of the wrath of
God does parch me, and judge that thirst of Christ to come hence, John. 19. 28.
The faithful address to, and application or improvement of those blessed
Institutions, how cooling and allaying the heat is it? Baptism is of perpetual
use to save, not only at the instant of its administration, but throughout the
whole life, by a faithful reflection upon it, and improvement of it: So the
Apostle says, Baptism does now save us, 1 Pet. 3. 21. even long after himself
and those to whom he wrote, were baptized. The blood of Christ, or the Spirit
of God, (whichsoever be the Antitype to the water in Baptism, the latter
probably) does remove that scorching heat of the Lords indignation, and gives
the Soul to lift up the head. The Lord's supper also, how useful is it this
way? When the Lord shall seal his love, yea shed it abroad in the heart,
whereby the wrath of God is removed from the Soul, by that flesh broken, by
that blood shed for Sin. Ah how often is Christ pleased in this Wine-cellar,
(Cant. 2. 4. Hebr. house of Wine; i. e. either where wine is kept, as some, or
rather where Wine is drunk, Ainsw. wine both quenches thirst, and cheers the
heart, Psalm. 104. 15. and drives away grief, Pro. 31. 6, 7.) to cast the banner
of his love over his poor ones? That which may preserve them from all scorching
flames of Divine indignation.

Secondly, cleansing, purifying. Hence water used in Baptism, to mind us of our
natural pollution, probably in allusion to the washing when come first out of
the Womb, Ezekiel. 16. 4. hence Saul is called upon, Act. 22. 16. to wash away his
sins: not that this gives any encouragement to that Popish Heresy, that
Sacraments give grace, ex opere operato; but the Holy Ghost ratifying thine
external Baptism by the inward Applicaon of the blood and satisfaction of
Christ, for the purification of thy Soul before God, and for regeneration to
newness of life; hence is added, calling on the name of the Lord, i. e. by
means of calling upon God in faith, to obtain from him his effectual
cooperation in the sacrament, Diod. in loc. Yea, it is called a washing of
Regeneration, Tit. 3. 5. viz. God using the means of Baptism, made effectual by
the inward operation of the Holy Ghost, applying the blood of Christ for the
expiation of sin, etc. Id. Luther reports of a Virgin in the Primitive days,
that was wont to repel all Temptations to Sin, with, I am a Christian, I have
been baptized, etc. And can Sin live in that Soul which sees the blood of the
Lord Jesus poured out for sin, and drinks of it in remembrance that Christ died
to do away sin, to undo the work of the Devil? Glad experience teaches many a
poor Christian, that nothing more effectually makes their hearts rise against
Sin, to hate it past, to fear and watch against it for the future, than to see
Christ crucified before their eyes, and to feed on him, who gave himself that
he might purify to himself a people, etc.

Thirdly, cheering and comforting water in those hot Countries especially, was
very refreshing; hence that promise, Isa. 44. 3. so is there Cordial virtue in
Christ's appointments, which revives the hearts of his Children, and that
abundantly. Though that false Jesuit did but belie himself, yea, and the Holy
Ghost too, who being sent over from one of their Colleges beyond Seas, to
divide the Christians in England, and coming to New Castle upon Tine, finding
the Anabaptistical party in great repute, joined in with Mr. Tilham of Hexam,
and when he was dipped by him, coming out of the water, being perceived to smile,
and being asked why he smiled, said he was so filled with the joy of the Holy
Ghost, that he could not forbear; though afterward upon his detection, he
acknowledged, he smiled only to consider their folly in crediting his pretended
turn to them, accounting that as no ordinance: Though this Villain, I say,
dealt treacherously, yet many a sincere heart finds much sweetness in a reflect
act upon his Baptism; considering his being thereby solemnly given up to the
Lord, to be His, as David, Psalm. 116. 16. Truly I am thy Servant, etc. (...) q.
d. meritissime te amo, Benignissime Domine, Gei, Est vox confitentis, and A. E.
in Mu. utique Jehova, Vat.
and how cheered many a drooping heart has come from the Lords Table, the
comfortable remembrance of many of his Dear Ones, speaks to his glorious
praise. When God has awakned them as out of sleep, how have they shouted like
a mighty man by reason of Wine, Psalm. 78. 65. and that love they find warming
and cheering their hearts much more than Wine. These Ordinances of Christ are,
and should be kept,

First, pure and clean; not defiled with the mud and dirt of men's inventions.
The poor people under the Papacy are forced to drink sad puddle, fouled with
the feet of those filthy Shepherds, who have defiled every thing they come
near. Especially since the second Angel poured out his Vial on the Sea that
Council of Trent, and it became as the blood of a dead man, and every living
Soul dyed in that Sea, Rev. 16. 2. Witness that Heathenish decree of the
Council, equalizing, if not preferring the Apocrypha to the Canonical
Scripture, the Vulgar Translation to the Original, Traditions to Holy
Scripture, and affirming that the holy Ghost himself is not to be though he
bring never so plain Scripture for himself, Nisi accedat meretricis purpurantae
effrons interpretatio. D^ Pride. lect. de Testis.
unless the Church so interpret. So before them the Council of Constance comes
in with a non obstante, against Christ's institution, to withhold the Cup from
their communicants. Lie^^ Christus post caenam instituerit, and ^^is discipulis
administraver it, etc. Caranza sum. Council. sess. 13.
Our endeavors should be to keep the Stone of Divine Institution upon the
Ordinances of Christ, that his Sheep may drink this water clean, and not
defiled. Paul has taught us, upon any encroachments on the Ordinances of
Christ to have recourse to their Institution, 1 Cor. 11.

Secondly, not despised, because not making a great noise, or having any
pompous show. It is the way of God, to choose things that are poor and weak and
despised by men, to effect great things, 1 Cor. 1. 27. 28. It Is a very unequal
return to God, that our eye is evil, because he is good. What is a little water
to the body of a Child? What a Morsel of bread, and a draught o^ Wine? True,
and might not men as well say, what was the sounding of Rams horns to batter a
City Walls? Yet so they fell down. 'Twas better reasoning which Naaman's
servants used to him, 2 Kin. 5. 10,-15. The simplicity of Christ is still much
mistaken by the mad World, ever besides it self in matters of Salvation. People
looking upon Gods Ordinances with Syrian Eyes, despise the foolishness of
preaching, the simplicity of Sacraments, the seeming inefficacy of censures,
etc. But it is the word, the Appointment of the Almighty which puts efficacy
in those means, which of themselves are both impotent and improbable.

Thirdly, Esteemed full and enough to refresh and keep up the Soul: they need
from the inventions of men. As the Scriptures of truth are able thoroughly to
furnish the man of God, i. e. the Preacher, unto every good work, that he need
not go down to the Philistines for Sword or Spear: so Christ's, Ordinances are
fully enough for Christian, or society.

Reflections.
How have thou, O my Soul! looked with a slighting eye on the Institutions For
the despiser of Gospel ordinances.
of Christ, as only fit for Babes, and beneath one of thy growth? Alas! that we
are cast upon days, wherein men pretend not only to be wiser than Paul (of
whom the Romanists have long time spoken very slightingly) but even than Jesus
Christ himself, the Wisdom of the Father; He that was faithful in all his
house, as was Moses, after his Resurrection, before his Ascension, (...):
Hellenismi ea vis esse videtur, ut intelligamus Christum Discipulis suis
universam Doctrinam Evangelicam copiose ac lucutenter exposuisse, Bez.
speaking to his Disciples of the things of his Kingdom, Act. 1. 3. Yet these
things are now low and mean, fit only for that dispensation of the Apostles,
and too carnal for these pretended spiritual ones. But who has given thee
knowledge above the Head and King of his Church? Who has given thee Commission
to abrogate his Institutions, and arrogate to thy self to appoint Laws in his
house? Would thou take it well that any one should thrust himself into thine
house, and take to himself such authority? (...) vir vacuus, velinanis, mente
sc. and judicio. ^xpers omnis cognitionis.
Vain man would be wise, Job. 11. 12. would be wiser than God, and prescribe to
him. It is a good Note of Peter Martyr's on, 2 King. 5. 11. I thought, He will
surely come out to me; Nota humani ing^nit perversitatem, quae dona Dei malit
assequi viis difficilibus a se ex cogitat^, quam facilioribas a Deo descriptis.
the perverseness, says he, of man's nature is here observable, that had
rather have the gifts of God in difficult ways of his own seeking, than in
more easy ones of Gods appointment. But thou will one day know, O my Soul, to
thy sorrow, that the foolishness of God is wiser than man, 1 Cor. 1. 25. The
Eagle and the Lion were not offered in sacrifice, as were the Dove and the
Lamb. Gods Institutions will be found to have power, because they are his
Institutions. Has Christ lead me these many years by these still, sweet, and
For the unprofit able receiver of Ordidinances.
pleasant waters, and yet am I parched, parched still? Have no growth, no
peace, no strength for God, but still a Babe in knowledge and understanding!
Alas, O my Soul! is it wont to be thus with Christ's Sheep? shall I hereupon
cast off Ordinances (as the manner of some is) and say God is departed from
them, because I have thriven no more, have found no more good in and by them?
Is not the fault in my soul rather than in the institutions of Christ? See Heb.
4. 2. Ill humors, obstructions within, hinders my getting good, shall I impute
this to what was designed for good unto me? Were it not wisdom rather to remove
hindrances, that so my profiting might appear unto all? Saints of old found
good in Christ's Ordinances, and were Men and Women Saints as of old, they would
still experience the profit in and by them. Christ's meat is for Christ's
Friends, his Drink for his beloved, Cant. 5. 1. what wonder then if such as
throng in among his without a Wedding Garment, be cast out speechless? Mat. 22.
12. Christus hoc in loco and sponsus est, and cibus, and vestis, etc. Gomar.


Wait thou, O my Soul! and be not weary of waiting upon God in For the humble
waiting Soul.
his ways. Remember and do the charge of David to Solomon his Son, 1 Kin. 2.
3. So shall thou be blessed. Pro. 8. 32. What though this fect be every where
spoken against? What though Christ's Ministers that are chiefly set up by him to
beat down the Kingdom of Satan, be the Butt of the malice of Devils and men?
And the Ordinances of Christ, which have no Grandeur in them, nor outside Glory
to take men,. be the slight of men? Yet after that way that these men call
Sect, Heresy, worship thou, O my Soul! the God of thy Fathers. Keep close to
Ordinances, use them conscientiously, not only customarily; and faithfully, not
slightly, and thou shall experience them the conveyances of great things:
Golden pipes to convey the Golden Oil of Grace from Christ to thy Soul. Tell me
therefore, O thou whom my soul loves, where thou feedest, where thou make
thy Flock to rest at noon! for why should I be as one that turns aside by the
Greges sociorum tuorum] Ad eorum coetus qui se falso socios Chri^ti venditant,
Men. Ad falsos Doctores, qui se iactant soci os tuos, Pisc. Innuit Ecclesia sg
non posse, nisi Christi beneficio sedem suam indicantis, pgriculum effugere
falsorum fratrum and cultuum, Men.
Flocks of thy companions? i. e. the Company of those that falsely boast
themselves the Companions of Christ; false Teachers, false Worshippers.

CHAP. VI.
To lead or drive the Shepherd' s Custom is,
Christ leads the van, brings up the rere of His.

Observation.
HE leads me in Paths of Righteousness. Shepherds, Loquitur hic Christus
seeundum morem Judaeae, in qua regione pastores oves praecedere solebant.
especially in that Country, were wont to go before the Flock, and lead them.
Psalm. 80. 1. that leadest Joseph like a Flock: see too Genesis 33. 14. Isa. 40.
11. The Hebrew uses three words to express this one thing by, though of near
writing and sound, and so of sense too, viz. (...), (...), and (...) which all
have a sense of leasurely and soft leading, as the Father his tender Child.
Unto which Moses alludes, Number. 27. 17. Which may lead them out, which may bring
them in, A metaphor from Shepherds leading out their Flocks, who go in and out
before them, and so feed and govern them. And this is plainly called a going
before the Flock. Jo. 10. 4. The reason and use of this going before the Flock
was to direct them in paths in which they should walk: Poor silly Sheep cannot
choose the way that is best for themselves, hence the Shepherds going before
them to direct them the path. Leads me; ignorant of the way, as heretotofore
Israel, Ex. 13. 21. and wandering too, Isa. 57. 17, 18. in plain and right
paths, not mountainous, apt to tire the poor Sheep; in a clear way, free from
offenses, not through rough, ragged, and cragged places, full of thorns and
briars, in which the Sheep is apt to be entangled, but in smooth and plain
ways are they wont to lead their Flocks; hence called (...), which properly
signifies paths beaten with Waggon-wheels, but used generally for all straight,
direct and beaten ways. This therefore is from love, to choose the way that
may be to them most pleasant and profitable. And though this be not so much in
use among us, to walk before our Sheep, yet I conceive a custom among us to
allude hither, the under Shepherd ye usually call a Follower, which implies
that the chief Shepherd should be a Leader.

Yet neither was leading their Flocks so much their practice, that we find
nothing else concerning them, yea, we read expressly that they followed them, 2 Samuel 7. 8. Psalm. 78. 71. The Shepherd must follow the steps of his Flock
slowly, not pressing them, nor overdriving, to which Jacob has reference, Genesis
33. 13, 14. a good Shepherd ever has an eye to the weak ones, and so regards
all in his Flock, as he over-drives not any: and this speaks care and custody;
that none be left to lagg behind, exposed to hazards and dangers.

Application.
Jesus Christ is the Great and good Shepherd in this regard also, he both
leads and brings up his. First, He leads them, goes before them, to
direct and guide them in paths in which they should go. In paths of
righteousness, faith the Psalmist, i. e. plain, smooth, easy paths, or
Sheep-tracks, wherein I may walk unweariably, unblameably without cessation, or
cespitation. The ways of sin are craggy, crooked, full of error and terror,
leading to those precipices that tend to destruction; from such stand off,
says Christ to his Sheep, who all are rational, and will be ruled by him, Jo.
10. He goes before his in every good way. It is storied of Caesar, that he was
not wont to say to his Soldiers ite, but venite, Christ calls his unto those
paths in which himself has walked, does walk. In practice of holiness he goes
before his, is an example and a pattern to them. Thus he became subject to his
Parents, Luke 2. 51. being an example of family subjection, and it is very
probable of industry and painstaking too in Joseph's calling, Mar. 6. 3.
neither Adam, the Son of God by creation, even in innocence, was to lead an
idle and unprofitable Life, but was to keep the Garden and to dress it; Nor
Jesus the Son of God by eternal generation, walk up and down unprofitably, but
until the Age of 30. when acording to the custom of that People, he was to
enter upon his public Ministry, he lived and wrought with his reputed Father.
Thus his whole imploiment whilst here among men, was to do good, Act. 10. 38.
so that even malice it self, when challenged, could urge nothing unrighteous or
irregular against him. Jo. 8. 46. Which of you convinces me of sin? q. d. have
ye any thing against my Life, that ye thus stiffly refuse to receive my
Doctrine? Of Christ's Life it may be most truly said what Chrysostom speaks of
Ministers in general, His Soul and Life was purer than the Sunbeams. Hence
Paul pressing to Love and Holiness, persuades to be followers of Jesus Christ,
Ephesians. 5. 1, 2. In way of worship also he became obedient to his Fathers
Institutions, and a pattern to all his; Although he had no sin, and so needed
no circumcision, yet was he subject unto it, Luke 2. 21. yea and to
purification too, according to the Law: For so most Greeks Copies, Origin, Sir.
and Ethiop. in Bibl. Polygl. read verse. 22. (...), of their purification, not
only of her purification, we read. For seeing the touch of an unclean unclean
Person rendered another unclean, as long as the Mother was unclean, the Child
must be accounted so too, which lay in her bosom, and sucked her Milk. And
Levit. 12. 6. it appears that the time of purification had respect to the
Infant, and was shorter or longer, as the child was either Male or Female. Our
Savior therefore being made under the Law, and subject to it, was until the
fortieth day esteemed unclean, until a Sacrifice offered. Wonderful
condescension! so his observation of the Feast of the Passover, etc. is
mentioned plainly: Thus to the Jews. Us Christians also he lead in the way in
which he would have us attend upon him. It Is not unobservable that at 12 years
of Age we find him among the Doctors, hearing them, and asking them questions,
Luke 2. 46. to teach his to wait at Wisdoms posts, and not to forsake the
assembling of themselves together, to attend and to learn of the Divine
Oracles. He went before them also in susception of water baptism, Mat. 3. 13,
15. He was circumcised and baptized, both which had respect unto sin, though
absolutely free from all sin in his own person; and that because he was free
from no obedience unto any command of God. He was to observe all Ordinances and
institutions of worship: not for any need he had, in his own person, of the
especial ends and significations of some of them: yet as he was our Sponsor,
surety and Mediator, standing in our stead in all that he so did, he was to
yield obedience unto them, that so he might fulfill all righteousness, i. e. do
all things that were suitable to his person, to his office. And the other great
Ordinance of the Gospel, as he instituted, so he administered it, as a token and
pledge of his greatest affection to them, as being sollicitous about the
consolation of his Disciples, even in the very night in which he was betrayed.
In Ordinances of instituted worship he went before them. He did so also, as in
doing, so in suffering his Father's will, being active in all his passions, as
well as passive in all his actions of the Mediatorship. He suffered also, and
that as a pattern to his, 1 Pet. 2. 21. (...), the word is a Metaphor taken
from Scriveners or Painters, and signifies properly a copy or pattern, to be
taken out and imitated. Cruae pendentis Cathedra docentis.
Christ on the Cross is a Doctor in the chair, where he reads unto us all a
Lecture of patience; wherefore he is so propounded by the Apostle to the
Christian Hebrews, as an encouragement and a provocation, Heb. 12. 1, 2.

Lastly, He is gone before them into Glory, Heb. 6. 20. (...)
Whether the forerunner is for us entered. The word signifies such an one as we
are wont to send before us, to prepare something: what that is, he told his
Disciples, and in them those that should believe in his name, Jo. 14. 1, 2, 3.
he has entered the most holy in their names, and taken possession of Glory;
that he may receive his into it. Hence they are said to be raised together with
Christ, and made sit together with him in heavenly places, Ephesians. 2. 6. So that
he that has the Son, has Life, 1 Jo. 5. 12. he will not leave till he has
brought all his to the fruition of his glory. For he is the way, the truth and
the life. Jo. 14. 6. the way, wherein, the truth, whereby, and the Life,
whereunto, his walk, or the only true way leading unto life; the way without
error, the truth without falsehood, and the Life without Death. Via in exemple,
veritas in promisso, vita in praemio, Bern.
The way by example, the truth by promise, the life by reward, as Bernard well.
So that holy hearts may with him breath out, we will follow Sequemur, Domine,
te, per te, ad te: Te, quia veritas; per te, quia, via; ad te, quia vita. Id.
thee, O Lord, by thee, unto thee: thee, because thou art the truth; by thee,
because thou art the way; unto thee, because thou art the Life. Thus will he
come, and take all his to himself, that where he is, they may be also, and may
see, i. e. partake of his glory; for he looks on himself as not complete, until
his be all brought to him: whence his Church is called his fullness, Ephesians. 1.
23. Is est Christi in Ecclesiam amor, ut quum omnia omnibus ad plenum praestet,
tamen sese veluti mancum and membris mutilum caput existimet nisi Ecclesiam
habeat sibi instar corporis adjunctam, Bez. in loc.
not only because filled by him, the fullness which the body has being from
him; but also actively, considering Christ not personally, but mystically, as
an head, and having the Church for his body: He having voluntarily subjected
himself to be our head, accounts not himself complete without his members; in
which respect believers have the honor of making Christ perfect, as the
members do the body

Christ not only leads his Sheep by way of Example, and going before them; but
he follows them also, brings up their rereward, Isa. 52. 12. he shall not
leave you straggling, and so exposed to danger, but he shall drive you together,
and carry you as a compact and well marching army; yea the glory of the Lord is
promised to be this to them Isa. 58. 8. i. e. his goodness, which is very
glorious; or the glory of the Lord, is the Glorious Lord, the Lord of glory,
Chap. 33. 21. Act. 7. 2. Thine happiness, which arises from the goodness and
power of Jehovah, who shows his glory, shall free thee from dangers, and thee
in safety: an allusion to the Lords leading Israel through the Wilderness, Ex.
13. 21. and 14. 19. of this David speaks, as having some particular experience,
Psalm. 27. 10. when all relations were unable to help him, yea he was forced to
make provision for them in their age, 1 Samuel 22. 3, 4. then God took care of,
and preserved him. The Hebrew word translated [take me up] is used also of
taking up or home a stray Ox or Sheep, Deuteronomy. 22. 2. and it is from this root
that the Hebrews call a (...) Hebraeis dicitur puer exposititius, qui tollitur
de platea neque patrem suum, aut matrem suam, Drus. Vid. Lexic. Heptagl.
child that is found, being cast out, knowing neither Father nor Mother: When
David was in such a woeful plight, God took him into his care and keeping. In
the Israelites marching through the Wilderness, at the fourth alarm arose the
Standard of Dan, Asher and Nepthali, and to these was committed the care of
gathering together the lame, feeble, sick, etc. and look that nothing was left
behind; whence they are called the Gathering host, Josh. 6. 9. Numb. 10. 25.
(where we translate rere-ward also) and to this some think David alludes here.
Jesus Christ comes after his, to see that no danger shall seize them at
unawares, or surprise them from their backs: that none of them be left
wandering, and so perishing, but he drives them up that they may be preserved.
Unto this probably may we apply, [Isa. 40. 11. gather the Lambs carry them in
his arms or bosom when not able to keep up pace with bigger and stronger sheep,
see to Isa. 43. 5, 6. Jer. 23. 3. Psalm. 147. 2. not one shall be lost that was
committed to his charge and care, Jo. 17. 12. he will gather them up one by
one, and bring them into his Fold.

Reflections.
How do I worry those Sheep which Christ has shown such care of? How often have
I made it my design and business to scatter and disperse those whom Christ
leads and brings up? So unlike a Shepherd have I been herein, that I have more
resembled the Wolf, Jo. 10. 12. snatch the Sheep, that I may scatter the Flock,
take some to devour and spoil them, that I may disperse the rest: which I have
bragged of as some noble exploit, when I have in my measure reached my design.
How has Readiness Spirit possessed and acted me? Act. 8. 3. That I may make
havoc of the Churches, i. e. destroy, consume, and bring them to naught, how
do I break into Houses, with force and violence, with Nimirum ut solent qui
jussa Magistratuum exequuntur.
authority and commission from the High Priests, as he expounds himself, Chap.
26. 12. halling out Men and Women, (...), we translate the word dragging, Jo.
21. 8. it properly signifies a drawing down to, and upon the ground, or
pavement, whence the Greeks call those (...) vest is caudatamatronarum
nobilium, cuius cauda per solum trahetur, Pisc. in Jo. 21. 8.
Garments that sweep the ground, by a name from this verb. Thus he showed the
accomplishment in him of that prophecy given of his Tribe, Genesis 49. 27. Not
content to consent to the death of Stephen (though it be all one to hold the
Sack, and to fill it, to do evil and to consent to it) he made havoc of the
Church like a ravening Wolf; yea, Act. 9. 1. he lies breathing out threatening
and slaughter, panting and windless as a tired Wolf; and having recovered
himself, is marching toward Damascus for more prey. And has not this been my
case? If in the latter part also I might be like him, desirable is it? For in
that his journey being met by the chief Shepherd, of a Wolf he is made a Lamb,
Isa. 11. 6. not once opening his mouth unless to crave direction, Lord what
will thou have me to do? After which time he never persecuted the Saints so
fast, as now he pursues and presses hard toward the high-prize: herein also
verifying the latter part of that foregoing prophecy, A Lap. and Bonfrerex
Patribus.
in the morning, the first part of his days, ravening as a Wolf, but in the
Evening the latter part of his days, distributing the food of wholesome
Doctrine. Thou will one day, O my Soul! say, O that my latter end be like his.

What cause of joy and gladness have I, and of making my boast of God? Who For
the poor Sheep of Christ.
leads, directs and preserves me in all his ways, that I may walk pleasantly
and safely. What need I fear the craggy Rocks the thorny Paths? My Shepherd
will lead me in a plain and an even way. However crooked and troublesome they
seem to carnal and worldly hearts, yet by good experience can I say, all his
ways are ways of pleasantness, and all his paths peace. Yea, he will lead me
in plain paths because of mine Enemies, mine Observers. Silly though I am, he
has promised to make the path so plain, that very I diots shall not err
therein, Isa. 35. 8. and no wonder, having so good a guide, if they but eye and
follow him. Only, O sweet Jesus, draw me and we will run after thee, leave me
not to lagg behind, let me feel the attractives of thy love, the drawings and
refreshings of thy Spirit. Suffer me not above all things, to turn aside from
thee, to go out of thy sight, but to abide with thee, for there, and there only
can I be in safeguard, as David said to Abiathar, 1 Samuel 22. 23. And if, O
Lord, through the violence of Temptation, or impetuousness of corruption my
heart should at any time depart from thee into any false way, deign but to turn
about and look upon me, as thou once did to Peter, Luke 22. 61. and this
bring me in again, thought it be by weeping cross.

CHAP. VII.
Sheep sick and weak, the Shepherd cures and heals.
Christ to his fainting ones his love reveals.

Observation.
HE restores my Soul: The Phrase is variously rendered and as variously
understood. Briefly it seems to hint one Me languentem refocillat
promissionibus, Pisc. Me errantem a ^ecta vivendi and credendi ratione reduxit.
Genesis
of these two senses here. Either when my Soul is even gone out of my body, (as
in a swoon) he returns or brings it back by powerful refreshings: thus the
words are used, Lament. 1. 11. 16. or he seth me to return, viz. into the good
right way, when I wander and go astray, Psalm. 119. 176. we may make issue both
ways, and first of the first.

The Shepherds care is not only for the strong and healthy Sheep, to provide
food for them; but also for the sick and distempered ones, that Physic may be
prepared for them. The variety of diseases to which Sheep are incident, will be
our consideration hereafter, when we discourse to the nature of the Sheep. Our
present work is to consider the care which every faithful Shepherd has of the
weak and distempered Sheep; not to let them lie in the ditch and perish: but to
study the distemper, and a suitable remedy, and make speedy and careful
application of it. They that are healthy and strong can better shift, than they
that are weak and infirm, and therefore the greater care is expected of such,
that they faint not, droop not, dye not. The neglect of this care it is that God
reproves his naughty Shepherds for, Ezekiel. 34. 4. where the omission of their
care is noted by their neglect toward those that were not in a good condition,
for if these be neglected how are the rest cared for? He reckons up also five
distinct male-affections wherewith he mentions the Sheep to be troubled:
diseased, sick, broken, driven away, lost, under which all other like troubles
are comprehended It Is not much worth our time to enquire what may be the
difference between one and the other of these: probably he calls those
diseased, whose pain or grief lay in one member or limb: and those sick, whose
whole body was distempered and diseased: that which was broken intends either
wounds received from some beast of prey, or casual slip, etc. that which was
driven away is that which was pusht, or had fallen into some ditch, hole, etc.
This speaks how much it is the duty of Shepherds to have regard to, and care of
such as are thus distressed. Ye have somewhat a like complaint of the like
falsehood, Zech. 11. 16. where the Prophet hints that the broken and diseased
have as much need of cure, as those that are strong and well of care for food.
There are in a Flock the hidden or cut off, lost and gone out of the way, whom
it is a fault not to visit and seek out: there are young ones more apt to
wander than others, whom it is the Shepherds duty in a special way to seek, and
have an eye to: There are the broken with afflictions or any Casualties, who
are to be healed, not crushed; and there are that stand still for weakness, not
being able to go on, and these are to be fed, and born (as the word is) with
tenderness and compassion, if need be. The good Shepherd therefore in pera
gestat unguentum, has his Medicine ready in his scrip to apply as need
requires: he not only not breaks the sound, but also he binds up the broken.
The neglect of this care Virgil reproves Alitur vitium, vivitque tegendo, Dum
medicas adhibere manus ad vulnera pastor Abnegat and meliora Deos sedet omnia
poscens, lib. 3. Bucol. (...) omnim^oda rei perditio.
as in the margent, the Flock is spoild, whilst the Shepherd neglects his care
and cries God help.

Application.
Herein also Jesus Christ manifests himself the great and good Shepherd,
according to the word of promise, Ezekiel. 34. 16. however others neglect or
slubber over their work, he will do it carefully, faithfully, and diligently.
We may follow the particulars in the text, and see the truth.

First, he seeks that which was lost, lost with an utter destruction as to it
self. The Hebrew word * signifies a total ruin, such as reduces a thing to
not being, for it is opposed to the generation; such a destruction as is joined
with Hell, Pro. 15. 11. and 27. 20. whence the Devil has his name Abaddon,
Revel. 9. 11. translated there into Greek of a like signification, Apollyon, in
both the Destroyer or Destruction. This is the state of all the Children of
Adam by rebellion against God, Children of wrath Ephesians. 2. 2. because of
disobedience; so actively, full of wrath and hatred against God, God-haters in
our corrupt natural state; so passively, lying under the consuming and utterly
destroying indignation and wrath of God. Now the chief Shepherd has a name
directly opposite to that of the Angel of the bottomless pit; his name is
JESUS, in Hebr. a Savior, whose work and imploiment he himself tells you what
it was, Luke 19. 10. to seek, and to save what was lost; so indeed, and so in
their own apprehension Hence his care of Israel, in sending his Disciples to
them, Mat. 10. 6. as being himself peculiarly sent to them, Chap. 15. 24. These
this Shepherd (...) Studiose quaero, summo conatu, ambulatione and pedib^^.
seeks: The Hebr. word has the signification of sedulous diligence, to seek
with a great deal of care and diligence, to walk up and down that we may find.
Christ came from Heaven to Earth, from the glory of the Father, to the form of
a Servant, and being among men, he went up and down to seek and save Him that
knows himself not a wandering Sheep only, but quite lost, even in the Lions
paw, his jaws, ready to be devoured, such does Christ take upon his neck, and
like a good Shepherd bring home. Thus has he dealt by all that have been
brought to life by him, he has snatched them out of the mouth of the Lion and
Bear, as David did the Lamb; snatch them out of the power of darkness, Col. 1.
13. He turns them srom darkness to light, and from the power of Satan unto God,
Act. 26. 18.

Secondly, He brings again that which was driven away, pusht away with force,
(or as some render the word) thrust into a ditch or pit. Sheep wandering from
the Flock and the Shepherds eye, are apt to fall into holes, where they will
perish, if not found, taken out, and brought back. Whether we understand it of
such as are fallen into some ditch of sin, or wandering from the way of truth
and holiness, it comes to near one sense. Such Christ takes out and brings
home. He had given a law for this to the Jews, Ex. 23. 4. Deuteronomy. 22. 1. that
they might learn pity to beasts, much more to men, which therefore himself
extends chiefly to their Souls; and justifies his doing good to the body of a
man on the sabbath day, by this acknowledged practice of their own, Mat. 12.
11. Thus he brought again David after many slips and that shameful fall in the
matter of Vriah: Solomon also after his wallowing in Adultery and Idolatry, in
his Ecclesiastes to acknowledge the vanity he had found in all Sins paths, and
to manifest his return to the Lord, by his rejoyning himself to the Church.
Peter too after his woeful denial of his Master, he left not, till he had by a
look of grace broken his heart, and by a flood of Tears brought him home: who
therefore can affectionately by experience speak of going astray like Sheep,
and of returning to the Shepherd and Bishop of Souls. 1 Epist. 2. 25. Christ
sealed up his love to him, in particularly acquainting him with his
resurrection, Mar. 16. 7. and extracted a Aequum erot, ut^ triplici abnegationi
triplex confessio app^n^retur; ne de tanti peccati remissione, and restitutione
muneris Aposlolici dubitaret Pet. us. Bez.
threefold confession of love from him, to answer his threefold denial. And it
is very observable (as Jansenius notes) that our Savior after his
resurrection, for the comfort of true Penitents, appeared first to Mary
Magdalene (not to the Virgin Mary, as Papists say) and Peter who had been
grievous sinners; yea, we may put in all his disciples into this number of
wandering Sheep brought home, who so shamefully had forsaken him, and yet he
returned them to his Fold: and the many revolters and wanderers whom he every
day returns to himself, healing their backsliding because he loves them freely.

Thirdly, he binds up that which is broken, broken and even shivered to pieces,
with the sense of Sin, and fear of wrath: so broken, as if all their bones were
rattling in their skin. This was David's case, Psalm. 51. 8. by mentioning bones
he notes the great grief of his mind for fear of the wrath of God, that it went
even to his bones, [Which thou have broken] viz. with fear of thy vengeance: It
hints most exquisite pain, like him whose bones are broken, ye have something
like from him, Psalm. 38. 3. by leaping over the pale of Gods Commands, he had
broken his bones, and they pained him sorely, i. e. by his great Sin he had
wounded his Soul, which wrought him no small disquiet. Now the great Shepherd
binds up these broken bones. For this was he anointed, Isa. 61. 1. All three
offices of Christ are by some found hinted in that verse: He preaches glad
tidings, as a Prophet; binds up the brokenhearted, as a Priest; opens the
Prison-door to those that are bound, as a King. We may put them together, as
good Chirurgions bind up wounds with swaths, etc. so Christ allays the grief of
his people, for God's wrath provoked by their sin, with the tenders of his
grace. He has manum medicam: He is the true Samaritan, Luke 10. 33, 34. not
the Physician only, (Exodus 15. 26.) but the Surgeon also of his People.
cataplasmans and obligans, plastring and binding up their wounds, given them by
the Devil (that wicked Thief) then when the Priest and Levite, the Law both
moral and ceremonial, have passed them by, and yielded them no help at all. He
has splinters for broken Legs, and Cataplasms for green wounds: Wine and Oil
to pour in, to cleanse and heal the Wounds of Sin-sick-souls. He that has
advised his spiritual ones to have a tender Ladies hand with a Lions-heart in
restoring a fallen Brother, Gal. 6. 1. ((...), set him in joint again; The
Phrase is borrowed from Chirurgions, who being to deal with a broken bone will
handle the same very tenderly;) will not but show much tenderness himself to
such: He will restore comfort to such mourners, Isa. 57. 18. they that mourn in
Sion, and they that mourn for Sion, have special regard from God, and for them
he creates the fruit of the lips, peace, peace, i. e. full and perfect peace.

Fourthly, He strengthens that which is sick; turns Physician too as well as
Surgeon: gives something inwardly to cure the Distempers that are within. Ah
how sick does sin make the Soul! Sin and Wrath, like a Disease and Physic in
the Stomach, make sad work, till it be vomited up. Christ has both purging and
cordial Physic for his: He works upon their corruptions to drive them out, by
the bitter Aloes of affliction he kills the Worms, which sweet meats have
caused; he purges their filthiness out, by giving them bitter things to drink,
Isa. 27. 9. the taking away of noxious humors, is the ready way to add
strength to the body. It was good for David that he had been afflicted, Psalm.
119. 71. it rid him of those two evil humors, high-mindedness and
earthly-mindedness, Psalm. 131. 1. And when he has well cleansed them, he gives
dainty restoratives, whereby their strength is renewed. He adds strength to
his in their way, Job. 17. 9. Heb. shall add strength, i. e. shall be fortified
more and more; shall strengthen himself more in his piety and good ways. When
I am weak, then am I strong, said Paul, 2 Cor. 12. 10. strongest through hope
in Christ, when weakest through sense in my self, not only by an intrinsecal
disposition, that we are more inclined to seek help and strength; but indeed by
a spiritual capacity, Jesus Christ is more ready to bestow strength, when we
are sensible of our own weakness.

Reflections.
Have I many Infirmities? Am I sensible of many wounds and distempers, For the
poor weak and sickly Believer.
inward, outward, that attend me? And am I sometimes afraid, lest I may be born
down, and carried away by such weaknesses? Lo, here! what matter of
refreshment? My Shepherd is for curing the sick and weak, as well as for
feeding the strong and lively. He not only has care to provide and drive his
to pastures that may be sweet and refreshing to them; but he also is tender to
find out relief for those that are weak and under any debility. David knew this
by experience, and therefore under the sense of his weaknesses he addresses to
God, Psalm. 41. Heal my Soul, Di^it animam, non corpus, quod sciret peccata
causam esse morbi, nec dubitabat, quin convalescente anima per expiationem
peccatorum, corpori quoque rectius esse futurum, Mu. ex K.
for I have sinned against thee. He mentions his Soul, not his body, because he
knew sin was the cause of all his bodily ails, and doubted not but if his Soul
were recovered through the pardon of sin, it would be well enough with his
Body. Or, he may intend properly, his Soul, Animam proprie intelligit cum and
alibi David in oerumnis etiam externis fundamenti loco praerequirat
integritatem animae, Gei.
for it is usual with David even in outwardtroubles, to beg integrity of Soul,
as his support. Thus, to be healed, Isa. 6. 10. is to have their sins forgiven,
Mar. 4. 12. O Lord, heal my Soul of sin, and then my body of sickness, or else
if thou please to keep me sickly still, I shall bear it better, and improve it
to more advantage. Why should I despond, and say, I shall one day perish
through this or that sickness? What though it be dangerous, and this dangerous
disease be inveterate? Yet, to an Omnipotenti Medico nullus insanabilis
occurrit morbus, Isidor.
Omnipotent Physician no disease is incurable. I am, it is true, bent to
backsliding, it is my great evil, and I do lament it, but that is high
encouragement, Hos. 14. 4. I will heal their backslidings, I Non dicit
delicta, errores, sed ponit atrox nomen, defectionem a Deo; ut ostendat se vel
atrocissima peccata sanaturum. Calv.
will love them freely. The Lord calls not their sin by an easy and soft term,
but by the most heinous, backsliding, disobedience, rebellion, that he might
show how he heals, pardons the worst that men commit; because the Physician is
great, and the Physic fit, the Blessed Jesus Sanabo] nempe per Christum; qui
est medicus animarum, Dru^.


Bless the Lord, O my Soul, and all that is within me, bless his Holy For the
healed and refreshed Believer.
Name. Bless the Lord, O my Soul, and forget not all (no not any of all) his
benefits. Who forgiveth all thine iniquities, who heals all thy diseases.
Psalm. 103. 1, 2, 3. O my soul! how should thou be carried out of thy self,
even as far as Heaven, to admire the Lords goodness, and to render thanks to
his Majesty? How has he set the bones, which Sin had once broken, that thy
broken bones may rejoice in him? Can thou not look back, O my Soul! and
consider the time when thou were full of Distempers, from head to foot little
soundness in thee: yet, how has He restored health and strength to thee? Well
may thou cry out, Jehovah Rophe Exodus 15. 26. the Lord, the Physician, is he
that heals me. As he teaches, none like him, so he heals none like;
inside, outside, corporal, spiritual diseases, he does all away; he cures his
People on both sides, and makes them whole every whit. He smites and he
heals, Isa. 19. 22. Blessed be the Lord, that has given me to experience
this Grace; that has given me in any measure to know what holiness is, that my
Soul may desire and embrace it. Surely it is health to the navel, and Quod
sanitas i^ corpore id sanctitas in cord.
marrow to the Bones: May my Soul grow and thrive, that my youth may be renewed
as the Eagles, Psalm. 103. 5. Blessed be the Lord, that when I was going astray
as a lost Sheep, (ready to perish) did seek his Servant, Psalm. 119. 176. and
has caused me to return unto the Shepherd and Bishop of my Soul* 1 Pet. 2. 25.

CHAP. VIII.
Shepherds their Strayers many ways bring in:
Christ many ways reduces his from sin.

Observation.
SHepherds find how apt their S^eep are to stray and wander from the Flock,
whereby they are exposed to many Casualties and dangers: though they want
nothing, yet are wont to straggle, and lay themselves open to ravneous Beasts,
and to worse leas many times than with the Flock they might have. Hence a
wandering Sheep is said to be in a perishing state, Psalm. 119. 176. a Ut ovis
quae it perditum. Tigur.
lost Sheep. The Shepherds care therefore is to fetch in such stray-going
Sheep, to keep them together and under his eye, that those dangers may be
avoided. And this he does several ways; sometimes he only calls them back
with a pleasant known voice. Shepherds have their peculiar words, which the
Sheep through custom are inured to, and being acquainted with, obey them.
Grotius on Jo. 10. 3, 4. from Theocritus notes the word (...) (Sitta) to be
usual with Shepherds to call in, or drive on their Sheep. They have Whistles
also, and other notes by which they command them. If they obey not this his
call, he then commands them in with a louder and shriller voice, rates them,
and requires them back from their straying: not only with calling back, back,
or come in, come in; but ye have observed how Sheep will run together from
their wanderings, upon the Shepherds whistle, by which he commands them in from
afar; and it is observable how they will hear and obey their Shepherds whistle,
whilst yet they will scarce budge for the same from another. If neither this
will prevail, they have a rod or staff, which they show the Sheep, and shake it
to them, thereby afrightning them from their runnings abroad, Psalm. 23. 4 Some
^o. 10. 4. Vocem ejus] Sibilos it sonos qu^b^s uti consuevit, Br^g.
understand he same thing meant by both words, Rod and Staff; Shepherds by
their pastoral Rod or Staff direct into the way, yea and correct too their
straying Sheep: Some P^sc. Mu. Riv. * Trap.
distinguish Rod and Staff: Shepherds in driving their Flocks have a Rod or
Wand in their hand, wherewith they now and then strike them; and a Staff or
Sheepcrook on their necks, wherewith they catch and rule them. To this also is
the allusion Mi^. 7. 14. feed thy people with thy Rod; and Zech. 11. 7. where
are two ^^aves mentioned to note (says Duos assumpsit, ut significaret Dominus
se non vulgari modo in^^buisse in officium pas^oris, sed ma^ore cum
solicitudine: nam quisque ^astor uno pedo contentus est. Calv.
Calvin) Gods extraordinary care in governing his, seeing other Shepherds carry
but every one one Rod or Staff, God two* If this neither prevail, but that
notwithstanding Word and Rod they will be running abroad, the last way of
reducing is by sending out the Dog, worrying them home, by his barking, and
sometimes too gentle biting. Omuia secum Armentarius Afe^ agit, tectumque
laremque, Armaque, Amyclaeumque canem, i. e. la^onicum and po^tea. Nec tibi
cura canu^ fuerit postrema --
Virgil puts the Dog amongst the Shepherds furniture; The Scriptures once (and
I think but once) mention something this way, Job. 30. 1, the Dogs of my Flo^k;
it speaks the appropriation of that Creature to the use of the Flock: of which
two are principal among us, viz. to drive away Foxes, and other Beasts of prey
that might raven upon the Flock; to afrighten the Thief, a Creature almost as
bad as the most ravenous; and what we are now upon, viz. to hunt in, and drive
together straggling Sheep, commanding them for his Master: and it is pretty to
behold what ^agerness they will use in this matter, go out with open mouth, as
if they would tear and eat up, and yet how they will drive them without biting,
or but touch them lightly, to keep them in rule and order.

Application.
A Sheep (though by the Philosopher called a foolish and sluggish Creature, the
most stupid of four footed Creatures, aptest of any thing to wander, though it
feel no want, and unablest to return) is not more apt to stray, than God's poor
ones are to go astray, and to turn aside from God, and run away from duty: It Is
one particular wherein the Analogy between Saints and Sheep consists, that
both are so apt to stray, and being once out, to go aside more and more.
Christ's great care therefore toward his, is to fetch them in from their
stray-going. 'Twas for this David prayed, Psalm. 119. ult. though a sheep still,
yet wander, and therefore need seeking, q. d. I go astray, running hither and
thither, like a silly Sheep to my own loss, unless sought and brought back by
thee. Now Christ has many ways by which, like a good Shepherd, he reduces
his stray-going Sheep.

First, Sometimes he calls them unto him, when they are turning aside from him:
he calls his in the first conversion out of darkness into his mavelous
light; from the broad way that leads to destruction, to the way of holiness
and peace: not to uncleanness, but to holiness, 1 These. 4. 7. and when they
return to folly, after peace first spoken to them, his voice is heard to call
them to return by repentance.* Thus Jer. 3. 1. yet return again to me, says
the Lord. Every sin is a going away from God, and therefore is Repentance
expressed so often by a returning; and this upon Gods call, Isa. 55. 6, 7. there
is a natural Novatianism in the timorous consciences of convinced sinners, to
doubt and question pardon for sins of Apostasy and falling after repentance;
Christ therefore calls his hereto: come, return, turn even to the Lord, yea,
he follows after those that run from him, as the Sunbeams do the Passenger
that goes from them; and as is sweetly set out by our Lord in those three
parables of the lost Groat, lost Sheep, and lost Son, Luke 15. Contrition is
Repentance for sin, 2 Cor. 12. 21. Rev 9. 20. conversion is repentance from
sin, Act. 8. 22. Heb. 6. 1. to this is Gods call; and this men do upon
consideration, Lam. 3. 40. Psalm. 119. 59. see that call also, Hos. 14. 1. Sin
is a turning the back upon God, i. e. a going away from the chief Good, who is
not willing that his should leave Him, and therefore calls upon them to return
to Him.

Secondly, if Calls prevail not, he reproves, charge their sin upon them,
and commands their returns; he does not only advise to it by an Evangelical
counsel (as the Romanists distinguish) but requires it as their expected duty.
How he rates his People many times to bring them to better carriage? Will you
bring evil upon your selves by your Rebellion? Thus dealt he with David after
his foul fall: no doubt but he had many a time heard Gods call to Repentance in
his attendance upon the Law and Worship of God for those Ten or Twelve Months,
wherein he lay under his Sin without Repentance, but these prevailing little
with him hereto, God sends a particular charge against him by the Prophet, by a
parable, and the plain explication and application of it, 2 Samuel 12. 1,-12. he
tells him of what he had done for him, and charge on him what in return he
had done against God, and threatens him for his unrighteous carriage, and all
to break his heart, and bring him back from his evil ways; and he no sooner
comes in, but he is received; no sooner confesses, but has a declaration of
pardon. I have sinned, said he, God has taken away thy Sin, said the Prophet
God deals plainly and openly with him, and the Prophet from God, thou art the
man, and by such checks, brings him home again to the Lord, Prove. 6. 23. as the
Commandment is a Lamp, and the Law a light, so such reproofs or corrections are
the way of Life. God charge it upon their Souls to return to him, if they
intend to live.

Thirdly, when this also will not do, the Lord shakes his Rod, yea, and
sometimes lays it on too. By Rod, understand corrections, so termed in
Scripture often: He often whips his in from their irregularities. And this
sometimes by giving them to meet with disappointments in sin; though they range
thinking to meet with sweeter food, yet they find not the sweetness they
expected, yea, God crosses them in their evil courses and this in kindness to
bring them in. 'Twas none of the least of Israel's mercies, that which God
speaks, Hos. 2. 6, 7. I will hedge up thy way with Thorns, etc. Thorns, i. e.
difficulties and distresses: so that though sinners follow their sins with the
greatest eagerness, yet shall they not obtain their desires. Ah! this is a
sweet way of mercy, when God fetches in His from their pursuits of sin, by
their not over-taking their sin. Sometimes he whips them for their sin, and
gives them to read their sin in their punishment. To go on in sin without
punishment is a dreadful judgment, threatened against Rebellious Israel. Hos. 4.
14, 17. which words Origin quoting in a certain Homily, says, Vis indignantis
Dei terribil^^m vocem audire? etc.
It is the terrible voice of an angry God. Ye shall be without punishment,
says God, for an argument that ye are Bastards and not Sons: I will not once
foul my fingers with you, or be at pains to correct you; take your swinge in
sin for me, etc. Never was Jerusalems condition so desperate, as when God said
unto her, my jealousy shall depart from thee, and I will be quiet, and I will
be no more angry, Ezekiel* 16 42. Not a greater plague can befall a man, than to
prosper in sinful practices: Bernard calls it Misericordiam omni indignatione
crudeliorem, etc.
a pity more cruel than all wrath, a killing courtesy. See Ezekiel. 3. 20. I will
lay a stumbling block before him, viz. of prosperity, I will not recall him by
calamities; I will prosper him in all things, and not by affiiction restrain
him from sin. His own therefore God will not leave thus alone, but let them
feel that sin is an evil and a bitter thing, and scourges them off from it.
David found this by glad experience, Psalm. 119. 67. Before I was afflicted I
went astray, but now have I kept thy word, now that I have been lashed to it,
and paid for my learning. Vexatio dat intellectum. Quae nocent docent. (...).
Smart makes wit. As the beating of a Garment with a stick, beats out the
Moths and dust; so do afflictions, corruptions from the heart and life. David's
lying, his Adultery and Murder, were set home upon him, and he brought in from
them, by Gods scourging him, so that he could say as, verse. 71. It is good for
me that I have been afflicted, that I might learn thy statutes. The
Lacedaemonians of old, (and the same is said of the Hollanders alate) grew rich
by War, and were bettered, when all other Kingdoms were undone by it. Christ's
Sheep make benefit of their crosses, which to others are destructive; so that
they can set to their seal for confirmation of that word, Psalm. 94. 12. Blessed
is the man whom thou chastnest, O Lord, and teach him out of thy Law; whom
God lashes, and withal lessos, not which end afflictions sanctified are of
singular use. Many may gladly say with him of old, I had been undone, Periissem
nisi periissem.
if I had not been undone; the ruin of their estates, the removing their
relations, the sickness of their bodies have fetched them in from their
unrighteous courses, and given them to know God and themselves, whereas before
they were ignorant and careless enough (see Job. 33, 14, 15, and to the 24.)
which made King Alfred beseech God to send him ever and anon some ^it of
sickness; for that (says he) I ever find my self best, when worst; best in
Soul, when worst in body, the sickness of this is a medicine to that.

Fourthly, If neither this bring the sinner in, God has his Dogs, which he
sends out after him, and sets at him to worry him in by sincere repentance.
These barking Currs (which would bite too, if not rated by the Lord) are the
wicked malevolent ones of the world, who by persecution of Tongue or Hand many
a time bring Gods people to repentance and reformation; The Spear thrust into
them to kill them, does but launch the Impostume and preserve life. Such a Curr
God sent out after David in Shimei, 2 Samuel 16. 5, 6, etc. David had caused the
name of God to be blasphemed among the Heathen, Chap. 12. and now he is
blasphemed and cursed by a Subject of his. And was not David rightly punished
by Shimei's railing, for his harkening so readily to Ziba's flattering? Was he
not justly spoiled of honors, who so unjustly spoiled Mephibosheth of his
goods? Does not his calling him bloody man, think ye, mind him of that crimson
sin, for the pardon of which he prayed so hard, Psalm. 51. 14. Men rail and
reproach thee, casting that in thy Teeth, which it may be, thou art not guilty
of; consider, is there not a cause? Have thou not in some thing or otl er run
away from God, that he thus barks thee in?

Reflections.
Much talk is there from Preachers concerning such as go on in a For the
prospering sinner.
sinful course, that they shall not prosper and thrive; that anger from the
Lord shall go out against them, etc. whereas I find not but things prosper with
me as well as with the most precise of them all: my body is sound, my estate
increasing, and my credit and reputation, save with such nice ones, stanch and
good; and is not all well with me? May not I bless my self for all that men cry
out against my covetousness, my pride, my drunkenness and uncleanness? What
though men talk at such a rate to discourage, can I not feel ground under me?
And may not I live as blithe and comfortably as others? But stay, O my Soul!
consider yet a little; may not this be thy misery that thou art left thus alone
to walk in thine own ways, that in a moment thou may go down to Hell?
Fatted Beasts are but fitted for the slaughter: and by this prosperity may I
not be hastening to destruction? Have thou considered, O my Soul! that dismal
word, Pro. 1. 32. the prosperity of fools shall destroy them. That by simple
and fools, are meant such in morals, not in naturals, in this book, they that
are but a little conversant therein may perceive. [The turning away] many
Expositours render that word Rest, q. d. fools are wont to be destroyed by
prosperity; and so the former and latter clause of the verse speak one and the
same thing. Or Rest, i. e. constant and stubborn continuance in evil, in which
they please themselves, and promise themselves all prosperity. See, Jer. 48.
11. Moab has been at ease from his youth, and he has settled on his l^^s, and
has not been emptied from Vessel to Vessel, neither has he gone into
captivity: therefore his taste remained in him, and his sent is not changed.
[His tast] i. e. Vina non transfusa vim nativam constantius retinet; ita and
M^^^itae suum fastum, Isa. 16. 6. Gro^.
his pride and cruelty, see to Zephan. 1. 12 I will punish the men that are
settled on their lees: Whether it be understood of sins, or of wealth. Were it
not better to be preserved and kept sweet though in brine, than to be let rott
and stink in honey? As I may be the occasion of ruin to others, who seeing me
thrive in a course of wickedness, may be induced into, or encouraged in a like
sinful course; (so Aben Ezra understands the latter clause of Pro. 1. 32.) So
shall I not hereby hasten the destroying indignation of the Lord on my self,
which will come with the greater violence, and cast me down with the more
severe ruin? Read, O my Soul, and ponder and tremble at that word, Deuteronomy. 29.
18, 19, 20. do not please thy self, and cast off all fear of God, because thou
have no changes in thy condition, Psalm. 55. 19. for thou shall not escape by
(or in) thine iniquity, Psalm. 56. 7. What good is it to have a fine Suit with
the Plague in it? a rich Estate and a poor Soul? a lively body and a dead
heart? It were better have a sore, than a ^ear'd conscience, as a burning
Fever is more hopeful than a Lethargy. 'Twas a sad word was spoken to the
rich man in the parable, Luke 16. 25. In thy Life time thou receivedst] the
word signifies fully to receive; thy good things] i. e. those good things which
thou accountest the true, yea, the chiefest good things, which thou have used
as thine own proper goods; in which also thou have placed all thy confidence.
It is said of Gregory the Great, that he never read those words without
horror, lest himself having such honors here, should be shut out of Heaven.
They that live in pleasures on Earth and are wonton; Jam. 5. 5. may find their
misery come upon them, etc. verse. 1.

Blessed be God that leaves me not to go away from him in a For the poor
afflicted Saint.
course of sin, but fetches me back again to himself, though it be by weeping
cross. Alas! whether should I not run, did not God hedge, yea, wall up my way?
To be called, yea, to be chidden in from a way of wandering from God, is a great
deal of mercy. Leave off therefore, O my Soul! complaining either of God or
men, under the checks and rebukes of God, and improve them rather to draw
nearer to God. Consider from whence thou art fallen, and repent, etc. The
unkindness which Job met with, from Foes and Friends, made him get closer to
God, chap. 23. 3. and so David, Psalm. 142. 4, 5. Take it as a token of good
from the Lord when he raps off thy fingers, that thou may not pluck
forbidden fruit. Account it fatherly kindness, that he shakes and uses the Rod,
when thou art running away from him: He deals with thee as with a Child, not as
a bastard; as a child of hope, not given up as desperate. Yea, though thy
afflictions are many, complicated, coming one on the neck of another, yet, is
there not need? 1 Pet. 1. 6. Some bodies need a continued course of Physic,
and some Souls continued purgings. Only look up to the Lord, and say, the
fruit, Lord, the fruit. Sanctified afflictions are high promotions, said Mr.
Dod.

CHAP. IX.
The Shepherd sets great value on his Sheep,
Christ prizeth his, and therefore does them keep.

Observation.
THE Shepherd, that is, the Owner, prizes his Sheep, as being great part of his
gains. The first of Abraham's wealth is Flocks, Genesis 24. 35. and of Job's
Sheep, Job. 1. 3. [His substance] In genere (...) possession em signific.
indeq: pecus, quod opes veterum in pecore sitae, Pis.
the word signifies any possession, but specially of Cattle, because therein
consisted much of the wealth of the Ancients. Hence such care is used about
them. Discovered

First in marking them; the Owner sets his mark upon his Sheep. Hence is Mesha
the King of Moab called a Sheep-master, by a (...), Heb. erat punctans, sic
pastor vocatur a signis, vel punctis quae pecudibus imprime^antur, Mart.
Antiqui pecora sua signabant, iisque notam inur^^ant, quo sic a^ aliis discerni
atque dignosci possent, Drus in Amos, 1.
word which properly signifies a marker, 2 King. 3. 4. This marking is for
propriety, and for distinction from others, that one man's Sheep may be known
from another. And so for security and preservation. Sheep-marks also are
various: Some mark in the Ear, many by coloring; the most among us by
branding; Where also though some use their Coat-armor (as I have seen) and some
others some other device of theirs, yet the general use is the first letter of
one or both a man's Name.

Secondly, In reckoning and keeping an account of them. Shepherds count their
Sheep often, that they may see whether they have all their store or no. Though
the Poet say, Pauperis est numerare pecus.
It Is the sign of a poor man that he can reckon his Sheep, he intends not as
though wealthy men cared not to have theirs reckoned, and brought to account:
but only esteems it a mean and and poor thing to have Sheep that might (easily)
be reckoned. Job's Sheep were brought to account, Seven Thousand, Chap. 1. 3.

Thirdly, watching them, that neither Thief, nor ravenous Beast, devour them.
Palestine had many Lions, Bears, Wolves, Foxes, etc. in it, which all were
Enemies to the poor harmless and helpless Sheep; care therefore was the more
had to watch them. Of this ye have express mention, Luk 2. 8. abiding in the
Field, keeping watch over their Flock by night. Beza renders it, excubantes,
Vulg* vigilantes, neither fitly: (...) is (...), sub dio agere, to lie without
Except excubare be extra cubare, i. e. f^ris, atque ad^o sub dio pernoctare,
Bez. Nam vigilat etiam qui in lecto insomnem ducit noctem, Scult.
doors, under the open Heavens: He may wake who yet lies on his bed, and within
doors: but these were in the Field watching to preserve their Flocks: This
apparition of the Angel to the Shepherds was at the Tower of Edar, if credit be
to be given to Menoch. Hierom, and Tostat. A place of fruitful pastures, where
Jacob fed his Flocks, Genesis 35. 21. but one mile distant from Bethlehem, says
the same Menoch. Of this mention also. Mic. 4. 8.

Fourthly, in folding them in some places and seasons. This is one Reason urged
Vid. Scal. and Ligh^f. Harm.
by some against Christ's birth on December. 25. because then they were not wont
to watch their Sheep by night in the Field, but rather housed or solded them,
and fed them with Hay cut for that use in its season, of which see Pro. 27. 25.
Folds for preservation ye have often mention of, Isa. 13. 20. and 65. 10. Mic.
2. 12, etc.

Application.
Christ in all respects manifests himself the great Shepherd of his people, by
that value and esteem that he puts upon them; he values them at an exceeding
high rate, he looks not on them, as men do with contempt or slight; but
accounts them as his choice goods. Hence in the O. T. they are so often called
by an Hebrew word so full, that we are forced variously to render it in
English, Exodus 19. 5. peculiar treasure. 1 Chronicles. 29. 3. mine own proper good.
Eccle. 2. 8. the peculiar treasure of Kings. Mal. 3. 17. jewels; in all which
places the (...) Olim omnis substantia veterum erat in pecore, indeque ductum
est pe^ulium; peculium ergo est peculiaris and propria haereditas. A Lap.
same Hebr. word is used, though thus diversely translated. The Hebrew
Philosophers call their Predicable (proprium) by this name. The Lord looks on
these People as the choicest of the world, the excellent ones, as David calls
them, Psalm. 16. 3. his own proper good, which he loves and keeps in store
for himself, and for special use: a rare exquisite treasure: a people desired,
dear and singular, or proper to himself. The Greek translate that word a
peculiar people, which phrase Paul uses, Tit. 2. 14. More especially as to
what lies particularly before us now: he manifests his choice esteem of his
Sheep by

First, Marking them; he culls them forth from the rest of the world, and to
manifest their discrimination from all others, and his propriety in them, he
sets his mark upon them. For distinction, I say, to note his propriety in them,
and for preservation, that they may not be overrun together with others. Ezekiel.
9. 4. We use to seal or mark those things which we would difference from others
things. Things in the Earth seem to be huddled up together, to be tossed hither
and thither as if there were no difference: but God does so temper his
Judgments, that he distinguishes his from others, and preserves them. In the
Revelations ye have a double mention of Gods sealed or marked ones, Chap. 7.
when the Trumpets begin, as they that were to be preserved under the ruins of
the Trumpets* and Chap. 14. when the Beast had great power, as they that were
faithful in that Apostasy, continuing Virgins even in Babylon. Christ's mark
for his Sheep is various: He has his Ear mark, he cuts, he opens their Ear to
instruction. The Philosopher advised his Countrymen to get their Ears healed:
Christ does so by all his. As his Father dealt with him, Psalm. 40. 6. Aures
fecisti cavas, ut te audirem, and tibi obediens forem, Mu. Vat. M^rt. Riv.
A^^sw.
bored his Ear, that he might hear and obey him; so deals he by his. As with
the Prophet, Isa. 50. 4, 5. Christ uncovereth the Ear of his, so the Hebr.
reads what we render to show a thing, 1 Samuel 20. 2, 12, 13. and 22. 8. takes
(as it were) away the covering, or that which being over, stops the Ear; so
that all his Sheep hear his voice, Jo. 10. 3, 4, 5. This is God's Ear-mark, Jo.
8. 47. He that is of God, hears Gods word, etc hears with attention of
body, intention of mind, and retention of memory; others hear not, stop the
Ear, Psalm. 58. 5. either refuse to hear, or rage at what they hear, as Tigers
do at the sound of a Drum; and this is a sore sign of a reprobate Goat.

Christ has also his brand-mark, by which his are distinguished from Satan's
and Christ's propriety in them owned. The Beasts followers have his mark on
them, Rev. 13. ^6. and Christ's have his also, which is his Name, and his
Fathers Name, Rev. 14. 1. for so the Complut. Copy, the Vulg. Lat. Primasius,
Andreas, Aretas and Cyprian read it; so also the Sir. Translation, the Arab and
Ethiop. in Bibl. Polyglot. Mr. Mede tells us, it is an allusion unto an ancient
rite, whereby Servants were marked with the name of their Master, and Soldiers
of their General; Servants for the most part in their foreheads, Soldiers in
their hands. The Ancients generally understood this of Baptism, by which we
solemnly profess Faith in the Lamb, and his Father, and by which we take up his
Name, and are called Christians. Hence they called it Dominicum signaculum.
Augustine often mentions it under the Name of the Character or mark of the
King, the Emperor and the Redeemer. And suitably enough may it be so
understood; for they, who in a time of Idolatry or falling from the Truth of
the Gospel, keep up to the profession of Christ and his Truth; and in a day of
profaneness, or Apostasy from the purity of the Gospel, keep up to the
Holiness required by Jesus Christ in all that own him (this is the chief
obligation we lie under by Baptism) may very well be said to carry Christ's Name
and his Fathers in their forehead; i. e. openly professing adherence to him,
even when others revolt and turn aside. So did Daniel and the three Worthies of
old, and all those still who are kept in their integrity with God.

There is also the Seal of the Spirit, which the Apostle mentions, and by which
Christ claims his propriety in his, as distinct from all the rest of the World.
Ephesians. 1. 13. and 4. 30. Of this Seal we may say it implief our things.

1. A work of real and visible distinction of the called of God from other Men.

2. A work of confirmation, whereby they abide so.

3. Of transformation or daily renewing the Soul.

4. The Evidence of all this to the conscience of him; Or if ye will, more
briefly ye may say this seal or mark is twofold, inward to the Soul and
conscience of the Believer, bringing abundance of peace and joy; and outward
and apparent unto others, whereby the Elect after calling are evidently to be
discerned by others, the fruits of the Spirit manifesting themselves to every
observer. For as the works of the Flesh, so the fruits of the Spirit, are
manifest to every intelligent eye, that real change that true conversion makes
upon the heart, so apparently breaks forth into the Life, that we may even say
of it, as the Apostle of his Corinthians, 2 Epist. 3. 2, 3. Their good works
shining proclaim whose propriety they are, and so cause glory to their Great
Master and Owner.

Secondly, Christ reckons his, has their number for preservation. As Christ
kept all that were delivered him by his Father, Jo. 17. 12. On which text the
learned De Dieu observes the Syriack Interpreter to have understood (...) not
to be exceptive, as if Judas were excepted out of the number of those whom the
Father had given to the Son, but adversative, by which he is opposed to them:
q. d. I have lost none of them which thou gave me: but Judas is lost, because
he was the Son of perdition. So Jo. 10. 3. He calls his own sheep by name, he
takes special and particular knowledge and care of his; So that that
discriminating privilege of Moses, Exodus 33. 17. that God knew him by name, is
in this sense common to all Christ's Sheep: Not only their number, but their
very Persons and Names also. The Lord knows who are his, 2 Timothy 2. 19. not
only how many are Elected, but Numerus certus, nonsolum quoad numerum
numerantem, ut suggerunt Arminiani; sed quoad numerum numeratum, ^^t Orthodoxi
tenent.
who they are, who be the very numerical Persons. Hence their Names are said to
be written in the book of Life, Phil, 4. 3. Rev. 20. 12. and 21. 27. Mordecai's
name was registered in the Chronicles of Persia. Tamerlane had always by him a
Catalogue of his best Servants, and their good deserts, which he daily perused.
Christ does not only book his Sheep, how many he has, but their particular
names also, taking cogniscance of them particularly; assuring them that their
Hominum meminit, ut significet distinctissimam Dei de singulis providentiam; q.
d. Singuli vestrum nominatim, Brug.
names are written in Heaven, Luke 10. 20. the Library in which this book of
Life is laid up. Hence the assembly of the first born written in Heaven, Heb.
12. 23. and that they shall never be blotted out thence, Rev. 3. 5. once
enrolled in Christ's book, and none shall blot him out.

Obj. Against this some object Moses's wish, Ex. 32. 32, 33. If thou will not
forgive their sin, blot me, I pray thee, out of thy book which thou have
written. And Paul's Romans 9. 3. I could wish my self accursed from Christ, for
my Brethren, etc.

Ans. The Answer to this may be of some use, not only to oppose gainsayers, but
also to establish the consolation of the weak. Let it be in the words of Dr.
Tact. Sacr. l. 3. c. 2.. 10.
Arrowsmith, who distinguishes of a threefold Life, viz. Natural, Spiritual,
and Eternal; and suitably of a threefold book of Life, viz. Physical,
Ecclesiastical and that of the Lamb. The Physical Book of Life is that in which
is contained the Catalogue of them who enjoy a temporal Life; and out of it are
they blotted, who are taken away or cut off by a violent or immature death. Of
this is mention, Psalm. 139. 15, 16. In thy book were all these written. In
libro tuo haec omnia scribebantur. Pisc.
The Ecclesiastical Book, in which are written and registered the members of
the visible Church, who live a spiritual Life, either in reality, or in
appearance at least. Of this the Prophets make mention, Isa. 4. 3. Ezekiel. 13. 9.
Psalm. 69. 28. The Catalogue of them that profess faith in Christ (says the
learned De nature. Dei, C. 5. c. 3. col. 583.
Zanchy is called the book of Life, and of the living, because by the Church
they are accounted in the number of them, who are called and chosen unto
Eternal Life. [Let them be blotted out, etc.] i. e. says he, discover, O Lord,
their Hypocrisies, and cause them to be seen and known such as indeed they are,
and let them be blotted out of the roll of the Saints, which are in the Church:
thus he. The Third is the Book of Life of the Lamb, mentioned Rev. 3. 5. and
elsewhere; after the manner of men given to God, in which the names of his
Elect are said to be written. A book, in allusion to the custom of registring
or enrolling of those that are chosen to any dignity or office. Hence the Roman
Senators were vulgarly called Patres conscripti, and Soldiers are said to be
enrolled. A Book of Life it is called, because it is to this they are elected,
viz. Eternal Life to be enjoyed in Heaven; and the book of Life of the Lamb,
because Christ is the Head of the Elect, though he be not the Head of Election;
and the Elect are not brought to Life, but by his Blood, as of a Lamb without
blemish or spot. Hence then we answer the objection, when any are said to be
blotted out of the Book of Life, understand it of the Book either Physical or
Ecclesiastical, never of the Lambs book of Life. Judas, Arius, Julian, others
were blotted out of both the former; out of the last never any was or shall be
blotted. As for the Instances in the objection; Surely Moses's Wish never
tended to this, that he might be deprived of Eternal Life for the Salvation of
that people: but rather (in the first sense) that he might undergo the most
bitter and untimely death, than that they all might be cut off and destroyed.
And this the very context manifests. The People of Israel, Aaron himself too
much furthering them, had committed most grievous Idolatry; this the Lord had
avenged the day before Moses puts up this request to God, by sending in the
sword, by which there died in one day three thousand men, Ex. 32. 28, 29. That
the whole People might not perish with a like destruction, their General
interposeth himself, and offers himself rather to be slain, to be devoted to
death, though an ignominious one, saying, blot me out of thy book, viz. that
Physical one of natural Life; no, says God, those that have sinned will I blot
out, and not thee, who art free from the guilt of that Idolatry. Compare Numb.
11. 15. C^ns^lat cui silet and vacat, Poli Synops. in Ex. 32. 33.
And thus was the Scripture understood by the Ancients, by Hierom, and Greg.
lib. 10. Mor. c. 7. by Menoch. too, and Est. etc. which may further be evinced
by this absurdity consequent to the other interpretation. Truth it self has
said, Jo. 15. 13. Greater love has no man than this, that a man lay down his
Life for his Friends, viz. to suffer a temporal death for them; but if it be
granted that Moses offered himself to Eternal destruction, that he might obtain
Salvation, or safety to the Jews, it would follow, that there were found in him
love greater than the greatest, which is absurd. I close this particular with
that note of Mr. Ainsworth on the place. Herein Moses dealt as a Mediator
betwixt God and men, and was a figure of our Mediator Christ, who laid down his
life for the Sheep, Jo. 10. 15. and redeemed us from the Curse of the Law, when
he was made a Curse for us, Gal. 3. 13, etc.

As to the other instance of Paul; it appear^ that he kept himself within the
bounds of temporal punishment, and intended only to be an Anathema, to be
excommunicated rather than the people of Israel should perish for Eternity.
Thus Hieron. comparing the desires of Moses and Paul together, says, the good
Shepherd lays down his life for the Sheep. Paul would perish, not for ever,
but for the present -- the Apostle would perish in the Flesh, that others might
be saved in the Spirit; pour out his own blood, that the Souls of many might be
saved. And that Anathema (says he) sometimes signifies cutting off by death,
might be proved by many Testimonies of the Old Testament. Waving those, I will
only subjoyn one of our own, deservedly famous for his skill in critical
Learning, viz. Dr. Hammond on Romans 9. who after that he had interpreted
accursed from Christ, to be excommunicated from the body of the Church, (as the
Church is called Christ, 1 Cor. 12. 12. Gal. 3. 27. according to the custom
among the Jews, as among us, to call the Wives after the Husbands name, Isa. 4.
1.) and having asserted that in the beginnings of the Christian Churches, a
delivery over to Satan was an attendant upon excommunication, which the
destruction of the Flesh did accompany, i. (...). grievous torments of the
body; confirms this exposition of this place of Paul, by comparing it with a
saying of Ignatius the Martyr, in his Epist. ad Romans which in English sounds
thus, (...).
let the punishment of the Devil come upon me so that I may only enjoy Christ:
where, says the Dr. the punishment of the Devil cannot be understood of Hell
punishments, as which are not at all ordinable to the enjoyment of Christ: but
whatsoever temporal punishments might be inflicted even by the Devil himself,
though unto death. However these things are, yet, out of the Lambs book of Life
there is no blotting. I conclude this long digression with that of Augustine on
Psalm. 69. 28. Fratres, non sic concipere debemus, qu^d quemquam Deus scribat in
libro vitae, and deleat eum; si homo dixit, quod scripsi scripsi -- Deus
quenquam scribit and delet? Aug. in P al. 68.
We are not so to understaand it, Brethren, as if God did write down any man in
his book of Life, and blot him out again. If a man could say, what I have
written, I have written, does God write down any and blot him out?

Thirdly, Christ watches his; he sets a guard on them, and has his Eyes over
them continually. Jacob's care by day and night over Laban's Flock, Genesis 31.
39, 40. is nothing if compared with Christ's over his. Christ neither sleeps
nor slumbers, Psalm. 121. 3, 4. And if King Philip could say, he could sleep
securely, because his Friend Antipater watched by him, may not Christ's Sheep
be much more confident, who have Christ to keep them? His seven eyes, Zech. 3.
9. are ever open, yea ever run to and fro through the whole Earth, Chap. 4. 10.
which by Mr. Mede are said to be Seven created Spirits, even Archangels, the
Ministers of God in caring for his: who are hence called Watchers, Dan. 4. 13,
17, 23. not only because of their spiritual nature and life, they needed not,
as meat or drink, so neither sleep; but also from their office, being the
Ministers of the Divine Providence and watchfulness over his, always attending
to do his pleasure, for the preservation of his Sheep, and destruction of
Wolves.

Fourthly, Christ folds his, brings them together, into his holy Mountains,
viz. into Gospel-Churches, where they are preserved and kept in the midst of
dangers, with which many straglers are taken away. The preservation and
abundant feeding of Gospel-Churches is the proper intendment of that promise,
Isa. 65. 10. Si aut^m arment a servorum Dei been habebunt, quanto^ magis ipsi?
Calv.
so of that, Mic. 2. 12. as sheep for fear of the Wolf gather themselves
together, and get up together in the Fold: So Christians by errors, heresies
and heretics are driven together in Churches, over which Christ watches
according to the promise, Isa. 4. 5. (...) Super totum ipsum montem, a radice
ad verticem, For.
[every dwelling place of Mount Sion] i. e. the Church in general; upon her
assemblies] i. e. particular Churches or congregations; shall be a defence]
(...)
the word here rendered defense, is elsewhere found only, Psalm. 19. 5. and Joel
2. 16. in both which places we translate it the Bride-chamber: the Jews
understand by it that vail cast over the Bridegroom and his Bride whilst the
Marriage is consummating. This place was secret and safe, and fitted for
pleasure, fitly therefore representing both the defense and comfort which God
affords his People, married to the Lord, and to one another by the will of God.
Glad experience in these latter days has attested how the Lord has preserved
his People in their keeping close to him and to one another; whereas they that
have lived scattered, and have withdrawn from the Assemblies of his People,
have become a prey to Wolves and Foxes.

Reflections.
Alas! of what advantage is it that I prosper in the World, whilst I am For the
Worldling.
none of the Sheep of Christ? What though I prize and value my self, and others
do esteem me for my worldly greatness, whilst the Lord Jesus sets no value nor
price upon me? May I not fear lest that word be accomplished in me, Luk* 16.
15. That which is highly esteemed amongst men is abomination in the sight of
God? Whatever I may please and pride my self in, what will it profit me, whilst
I am not in value with the Lord? Is it my wealth that I boast my self of? This
is that indeed which too many rate themselves by, and think themselves by so
much the more simply happy and valuable, by how much their riches increase more
than others; they strut themselves on their Dunghills, because a little higher
than their Neighbors. It Is not for nothing that the Scriptures have warned
against this, Psalm. 62. 10. If Riches increase, set not your heart upon them,
if they grow like Herbs or Fruits, insensibly and abundantly; yea, and by
lawful and laudable means, though they come in at the Street door, and not at a
Postern: Whether left you by Parents, or rising from the provenue of the Field,
or any other way without wrong or injury to another, yet set not the heart upon
them; place not your ^elicity in them, think not your selves simply the better
or safer for them. Be not puffed up with outward things, as a bubble with a
Child's breath in a Walnutshell, when he has in it a little Soap. The Apostle
also cautions against this, 1 Timothy 6. 17. Should the A^^ think herself some
great business, because gotten upon her hillock? Or the Sumpter-horse because
laden with treasure? Should the Egyptian Ass think himself worshipful for
bearing the Golden Isis upon his back? And yet alas! thus we see it to often.
Many men's good and blood rise together; their Hearts are lifted up with their
Estates, as a boat that rises with the rising of the water. But, O my Soul!
what are these to be trusted to? They are not Entities, Pro. 23. 5. Will thou
cause thine eyes to fly after that which is not? Riches have no solid
subsistence, though the foolish world call it Substance: There is no firmness
or solid consistence in the Creature; 1 Cor. 7. 31. and they that rejoice in
them, rejoice in a thing of naught, Amos. 6. 6, 13. have they not, do they not
make to themselves wings, Eagle's wings, to flee away? How many, O my Soul;
have thou not only heard or read of, but even in thine own experience observed,
who from great Wealth have been brought to a Morsel of bread? Some that have
fared deliciously, it may be riotously every day, that thou have known to want
a draught of Drink to quench their thirst? And will thou glory in these things
that pass away, like a Torrent, like a Bird, like a swift winged Eagle? But put
case, my Soul! that they should abide with me, and continue all my days,
though my Bellyshould be filled with these hid treasures, viz. with Gold,
Silver, Jewels, which lie in the bowels of the Earth; yea, though I should have
enough to fill not my self only, but my Children too, though I should have many
of them, and lay up enough, and choice for my Babes, Psalm. 17. 15. yet, after
all, these are not evidences of choice love from God. 1 Timothy 6. 17. not trust
(...).
in uncertain Riches, not hope in the inevidence of Riches; they are no sure
evidence that God has more respect to thee, than to others, they are blessings
but of the left hand, of the Footstool. Luther could call the whole Turkish
Empire but a crum which God cast to that Curr. Love or hatred is not known by
what is before a man, Eccles. 9. 1. these external things show neither the love
nor the hatred of God to any man; neither is prosperity a certain sign of love,
nor adversity of hatred from God, seeing these things are given promiscuously
according to pleasure, not favor. The Sun of prosperity shines as well upon
the brambles of the Wilderness, as Fruit Trees of the Orchard; the Snow and
Hail of adversity light upon the best Gardens, as well as upon the Wilderness.
Ahab's and Josiah's ends concur in the very circumstances. Saul and Jonathan,
though different in their deportments in their Life time, yet in their deaths
were not divided. The rich man fared deliciously every day, and was as richly
clad, whilst Lazarus lies at his door in rags, and begs for crumbs. Sweet
smelling Smyrna, the poorest of the seven Churches, yet has the richest price
set upon Nudus opum, sed cui c^lum terraeque patebant, de Archimede Silius.
it, Rev. 2. 9. Consider therefore, O my Soul! it speaks thee not happy for
another world, that thou prosperest in this. Glory not therefore, O my Soul, in
thy riches, Jer. 9 23. for neither thy Silver nor thy Gold shall be able to
deliver thee in the day of the Lord's Wrath, Zeph. 1. 18. money has drowned
many a Soul, delivered none: Money can neither pacifi^ God, nor still thy
conscience, nor stop the Enemies mouth: Not Riches but Righteousness,
delivers from death; thou may be never the more in Gods favor for the
Coin in thy Coffers, yea thou may be cursed, though, yea, because thou art
thus proud, Psalm. 119. 21.

Or is it my Power, Glory or Greatness in the World that I please my self in;
and say, it is well with me because I am renowned and set on high in the World?
This some elate themselves with, and think themselves by so much the more dear
to God, by how much they are the more feared by men; and esteem themselves out
Major sum quam cu^ (...) Fortun^ noc^^^.
of gunshot from men, and thence conclude they are safe. This was Edom's case,
Obad. 3. and 4. verse. his Country was Rocky and Mountainous, and hence he
concluded himself above danger; yet God threatened to bring him down, and
performed it. Let not the mighty man glory in his might, Jer. 9. 23. A bulging
wall is not far from a downfall. While the word [Is not this great Babylon,
etc,] was yet in Nebuchadnezzars mouth, he was deprived of his Kingdom and
driven from men, etc Dan. 4. 1. Not all the Worlds Grandees are God's
Favorites: May I not be vile in Gods eyes, whilst great in men's? Is not
Antiochus the Great, that called himself Ep^phanes (illustrious) by the Holy
Ghost called a vile Person, Da^^^. 2^? And has not the Most High branded many
(...)d Great Ones, with either changing, or detracting ^^^m their names, to
manifest his contempt of them? As to show his regard to faithful T^^dun. Hebr^^
quod ^r nomin^ suo Tetragr^mato Deus litero (...) Abrahae and Sarae ^^diderit.
Bith. ^liv. page (...).
Abram, he add (...) ^^tter of his own name to his, and called him. Abrah^m.
Jacob was dubbed, Israel (a Prince with God) in the Field. S^lomon called
Jedidiah (beloved of the Lo^d) (...) S^m 12. 25. So to evidence his contempt of
wicked ones, how great soever, as to external pomp, he takes away the letters
Abraham is the first man i^ the world* whose name is changed of God; a^^ it
signifies a change of sta^e, and a renewing with increase of Grace from God,
Airsw. on Genesis 17. 5.
of his Name from them. Th^s E^liakim was called Jehojakim, which some write
Joakim, and some Greeks Copies Mat. 1. ^1. read Jakim: So his Son J^hojakin, is
called Jechoniah, and in disgrace Coniah, Jer. 22. 24. not only the first part
of his name being cut off, a sad presage that e're long God would c^t him off;
but also that letter which appertained to Gods name being taken away; God will
not have his name defiled with such a vile one. Worldly greatness, O my Soul!
may be a burden, back and heart burden, no mark of Christ's Sheep: They that
work wickedness are set up, Mal. 3. 15. they are increased, adorned, they
flourish and are lively, enjoy the greatest felicity in this world, even till
they are weary of them again. Charles the Fifth (whom of all men the World
judged most happy) cursed his Honors a little before his death, his victories,
trophies, and riches, saying abite hinc, abite long, get ye hence, get ye far
hence, so inevidential of Divine love are worldly honors, as well as Riches.

Or is it my wisdom and policy that I plead as an evidence of Gods love? that I
am wary in matters of Religion and State, having an eye at mine own safety in
all? Is it because men cry me up as the grand Politician? that I have a glove
for every hand, a Conscience that can stretch to any thing? a Religion, or
Profession for every day that changes? And was not Achitophel such a sage? the
Oracle of his days? and yet proved the notation of his name to an hair, Cosen
German to a fool. Let not therefore the wise man glory in his Wisdom. Not many
wise men after the flesh -- are called, 1 Cor. 1. 26. Vlpian the chief Lawyer,
Galen the chief Physician, Porphyrie the chief Aristotelian, and Plotinus the
chief Platonist were all professed Enemies to Christ and his Truth. None miscarry
oftener than men of great parts: none so deep in Hell as the most knowing. Trust
not therefore, O my Soul! to any or all th^se things which trusted to, will
drive thee farther from, not endear thee to Christ.

Does Jesus prize and show such For the Hypocritical Professor.
regard to all his? what then may I think of my self, whose Soul is not upright
with God? Will formal services, and outside performances appear to be Gods
mark, that I may thence conclude his owning me? Were not the Pharisees of old
as much Christ's Sheep as I? Who made clean the outside of the Cup and Platter,
whilst within they were full of extortion and excess, Mat. 23. 25. and were it
not much more wisdom to wash my heart, Jer. 4. 14. and not my hands only, with
Pilate? Grace and Nature both begin at the heart, at the center, and from
thence go to the circumference. It Is but art and Hypocrisy that begins with
the face and outward lineaments. What can I plead as Christ's mark, that I may
hope for any care and acceptance of him?

Is it that I perform duties of worship? that I hear, pray, confer with others
of the truths of God? Will this be found to be Christ's brand? Have not others,
not of his Sheep, gone thus far? see Ezekiel. 33. 30, 31, 32. [they come unto
thee] very godly, and in great Troops; [and they sit before thee] very
demurely, and (to see to) devoutly, but all this without any heart: they were
like the Athenians, of whom it was of old said, that they knew what was good
and right, but would do neither: their ears were at a Sermon, their Hearts in
worldly matters. It should be sur sum corda, hearts in Heaven; but when many
men's bodies are in sacellis, about holy duties, their hearts are in sacculis,
in and about their Money-bags, as Augustine complained in his days. It Is
presumed that many hear who mind little of what they hear; of such the Apostle
speaks, Ja. 1. 22. that hereby put paralogisms, false reasonings, upon
themselves, to their ruin.

Or that I pray? So did the Jews of old, Isa. 1. 15. yet, were rejected of God,
because filthiness was within: See there, from verse. 11, downward. Multitude of
Sacrifices without Faith and Heart-Devotion, is no better than mere hypocrisi^
and illusion. They came to appear before God, verse. 12. Heb. to be seen, that
was all they designed in their approaches to God, that they might be seen, and
taken notice of to be there, else all had been lost, if they had not been noted
and noticed. Thus the Pharisees, Mat. 6. 5. were it not for this gale, the
Windmill would not about; were it not for this poise the Clock would stand
still. The Nightingale, say Naturalists, sings best when men be by and observe
her; such Hypocrites are, but true devotion desires not to be seen of any,
save Him who sees in secret. etc. Consider, O my Soul, that stinging
Scripture, Pro. 21. 27. The sacrifice of the wicked, and that is, all
ceremonies and external Rites, which without inward affection God regards not;
how much more then when he brings it with an evil mind? What is that evil mind,
but performing duties of worship to God, with a design to impose upon men; that
they may be accounted good men, while yet they live in a trade of sin? De Dieu
translates that latter clause, even when they diligently offer it, and gives
this the sense, wicked men in offering sacrifices, are wont to use that
diligence, that they may make a show of some eminent piece of piety, and yet
neither so can they bring it about, but that they and their offerings are an
abomination to the Lord. To appear to men to be something, may be man's
Ear-mark, not Christ's. To be cried up by men as some great Professor may be a
brand for and from men, but not Christ's. See Luke 16. 15. A thing may shine in
the dark, and that shining proceed from nothing but rottenness. May it not be
so with thee? O my Soul! Two things make a good Christian, good Actions and
good Aims, and though a good aim does not make a bad action good, (as in
Vzzah's case) yet a bad aim makes a good action bad, as in Jehu, whose Justice
was approved, but his policy punished. Search thee, O my Soul, for Christ's
ear-mark, which is hearing and obeying Gods Commandments, Psalm. 119. 5, 6. Jo.
8. 47. the Ears of the Soul drawn up to the Ears of the body, that one sound
may pierce both at once. And for Christ's brand-mark, which is two fold, the one
to which God and thy own heart alone are privy, viz. sincerity, uprightness of
aims and ends, Psalm. 51. 6. the other are more evident, because more outward,
viz. Love to God and those that are his, Jo. 5. 1, 2, 3. Jo. 13. 34, and 14.
15. how can I say I love God, when my heart is not with him, as she said. Judge.
16. 15. The Swan in the Law was rejected for sacrifice, because of her black
skin, under white Feathers. Fear O my Soul!

Infinite refreshment and abundance The poor upright hearted ones.
of encouragement may this be to upright hearted ones. What though I am the
contempt and scorn of the World, who account me not worthy to be set with the
Dogs of their Flocks? yet has Christ put his mark upon me, making other
account of me, taking me as his, and preferring me before those that thus
slight me; I am one of Christ's Sheep. What though Joseph were sold by his
Brethren for 20 pieces of Silver, not all out the price of a slave, Ex. 21. 32.
herein doing what was afterward charged on some of his merciless issue, Amos.
2. 6. selling the j^st for Silver, and the poor for a pair of Shoes: Especially
if that be true which some of the Hebrews tell us, that of those twenty pieces,
each of the ten Brethren had two, to buy Shoes for their feet? Yet little knew
those Merchants what a price they had in their hands, even the Jewel of the
World, and him that should one day be Lord of Egypt. Such honor have Gods
Saints in the Lords esteem, however vili pended by men. For their worth, and
Gods prizing them, they are called Princes in all Lands, Psalm. 45. 16. Kings in
Righteousness, though somewhat obscure ones, as Melchisedek, Heb. 7. Many
Righteous men, Mat. 13. 17. are many Kings, Luke 10. 24. they are Gods portion,
Deuteronomy. 32. 9. the dearly beloved of his Soul, Jer. 12. 7. his Inheritance, Isa.
19. 25. peculiar ones, Ex. 19. 5. the people of his purchase that comprehend
all his gettings, 1 Pet. 2. 9. his glory, Isa. 46. 13. his Ornament, Ezekiel. 7.
20. his Throne, Jer. 14. 21. a Royal Diadem in the hands of Jehovah, Isa. 62.
3. poor of this World, rich in Faith, Heirs of the Kingdom. Ja. 2. 5. this the
Cock on the Dunghill, the Midianitish muckworms take no notice of. In Christ
their head they could see no comeliness, though he were the chiefest of Ten
Thousand; God had hid him (in whom all the Treasure of Wisdom and Worth were
hidden) under the Carpenters Son; so are all Gods precious ones, for the most
part, abjects in the worlds eye; their Glory is within, their Life hid; they
are great Heirs, but as yet in their nonage: Kings, but in a strange Country;
Heads destinated to a Diadem, but this the World knows not, 1 Jo. 3. 1. Let it
suffice thee, O my Soul that God, and all that can spiritually discern, know
it, and so shall others, as Joseph's Brethren did him, in his bravery. Take
this abroad into some particulars, it may yet smell sweeter.

First, Their persons are precious; they esteem Christ so, and so does he them:
He disregards all the rest of the world in comparison of them; were it not for
them, God would not so much as look to the world in a way of mercy. Though men
being mad, think they shall never rid them soon enough out of their parts, yet
were these once gone, they would find the misery of it. No sooner is Lot out of
Sodom, but Fire and Brimstone from Heaven is about their ears. When Augustine
was dead, Hippo was taken: When Luther gone, Germany spoiled: When Pareus laid
in his Grave, Heidelberg taken. The Plague swept away many Ten Thousands in
London, after the casting out of the Ministers. Absque stationibus non staret
mundus, was in use among the Jews. God accounts his precious, Isa. 43. 4.

Secondly, Their blood is precious, Psalm. 72. 14. which their Enemies spill as
water on the Ground. Their death precious, Psalm. 116. 15. which he will not
easily permit their Enemies to please themselves in. He will not easily suffer
any to do them wrong. See Ga^aker' s sense of Number. 33. 21. in Cin. page 216.
and in Poli Synops. in loc.
Take heed that thou speak not to Jacob good or bad, Genesis 31. 24. God carefully
preserves their Life, their blood. Or Secondly if spilt, he will dearly avenge
it. Abels blood has many voices, and cries loudly in Gods Ears. He puts up the
drops of their blood like precious balsom. Yea,

Thirdly, So are their Tears, Psalm. 56. 8. In which Text are many Elegancies;
besides, a (...) fuga, and (...) uter.
paronomasie in the Hebr. which cannot be Englished. Observe, God has a bottle
for his peoples Tears, which the opprobries and persecutions of their
adversaries force from them; He bottles them up as so much sweet water; yea
every one of them, for Tear is singular in the Hebr. every Tear of mine, not
one of them shall be lost; and then he has a book too, where they are
registered, whence not blotted out.

Fourthly, their prayers are precious and delightful to him, Pro. 15. 8. their
Prayers Cant. 4. 11. Psalm. 141. 2. Hos. 14. 2.
are set in opposition to all sacrifices; they are his delight, his music, his
honey drops sweetest perfume, his calves of the lips, with which when they
cover his Altar, he is abundantly well pleased. This enters into his (...).
Ears, Psalm. 18. 6. yea, his Ears to their prayers, 1 Pet. 3. 12. q. d, though
their prayers are so faint that they cannot come up to God, God will come down
to them. He can feel breath, when no voice heard, Lam. 3. 56. and these
strangely charm him, Isa. 26. 16. (Prayer there is in Hebr. a charm) that he
breaks forth into those words, Isa. 45. 11 Ask of me, etc. concerning the works
of my hands command ye me. O that thou understoodest, O my Soul, the latitude
of this Royal Charter; then would thou pray always with all prayer and
supplication, etc. Ephesians. 6. 18. Yea.

Lastly, their meek and quiet Spirit, which some may fear the ready way to
expose them to the contempt and injuries of men, yet is of great price with
God, 1 Pet. 3. 4. God makes much reckoning of it, because like himself. Be
cheerful therefore, O my Soul! rejoice and work righteousness, though men speak
slightly and despightfully: The Moon stops not its course, though Currs bark at
it; Who would much value the slights of a poor Lacquie, who knows he has the
Ear and Heart of his Sovereign Prince:

CHAP. X.
The Sheep is known a meek and harmless Creature;
Saints are, or should be, of a quiet nature.

Observation.
PAss we from the Shepherd to the Sheep; of which Creatures we find many
properties, peculiar to them, which the Holy Ghost has an eye to, in calling
Saints by the name of Sheep, We begin with that of Meekness; for which the
Sheep is much famed, to be a mild, quiet harmless creature; In so much as it is
become a proverb, (...).
to live like a Sheep, i. e. meekly, quietly, harmlesly; and (...) Agno mitior,
in Stob. Ag^inis moribus, in Aristoph and Hesych. ^um* fervet maxim tam
placidum quam Ovem reddo, Terent.
the manner or want of Sheep. viz. to be inoffensive and harmless. Hence Fabius
Maximus was called a Sheep, from his me^kness and the pleasantness of his
carriage. We have a Proverb among us, not altogether unlike those mentioned,
when we say, as meek as a Fabium Maximum refert Plutarchus, propter
mansuetudinem, and morum placiditatem, suisse oviculam vocatum.
Lamb. Now this meekness in a Sheep may be considered several ways; as opposed

First to pride, The Sheep is not subject to Elation; though it be of the
choice and top breed of a Country, yet, is it not there by lifted up to
contemn others; though laden with a thick and choice Fleece, yet is not
thereof proud, nor struts it. The Horse is a proud Creature, ye may perceive it
in the carriage of his head, yea, in the very lifting up his Feet: Not so the
Sheep: Observe what difference ye can find in the Gait; etc. of the poor Irish
sheep twice the year shorn, and your ^eicester-shire or Northamptonshire
Sheep, with their deepest coats on their backs, if any thing, these last seem
to give a skip, when disburdened of the load of their Eleece.

Secondly, to clamor and noise; it is silent and makes no stir, does not lay
open its mouth. Hence the Scripture uses the instance to set out Christ's
patient quietness in bearing indignities from his Enemies, Isa. 53. 7. where
mention is both of the Sheeps shearing and slaughter; it is much tossing and
tumbling, wrying the body etc. that the Sheep suffers when in the Shearers
hands, and yet seldom bleats or complains; no, nor when led or drawn to be
slaughtered: whether it be understood of the B^tchers killing for ordinary
food, or the Priests of old killing for sacrifice. Well might Phedrus call a
sheep patientem injuriae, patient and quiet under injury and wrong suffered.

Thirdly, To offense and injury done to others: Nature has not armed the Sheep
with what may be offensive, as other Creatures. Though in some places sheep
have Horns most of them, yet are they not wont to wound and gore with their
Horns, as does the Bullock, nor strike with the Heels, as the Horse; nor bite
with the Teeth, as Dogs, and Hogs; nor sting with the Tail, as the Serpent,
etc. the poor sheep has no such Weapon to offend; ut as it bears wrong so it
does none.

Fourthly, to Wrath or remembrance of injuries received; The Sheep is no
wrathful Creature, retains not the memory of wrong done; when worried by Dogs,
etc. is soon appeased and stilled again, so as to be placid, not fretting nor
fuming afterward. Of some Creatures it is observable how long they will remember
wrong done them; as an Horse, a Dog, etc. but the meek sheep not so.

Fifthly, To peevishness and frowardness; it is no ^ullen Creature: the Shepherd
may gently lead or drive it, and find it obeying, readily complying with his
Commands not apt to take p^t, like a resty Horse, or an untamed Bullock.

Application.
In all the forementioned particulars, Saints, the Followers of Jesus, are, or
should be like a Sheep, whose meekness is often commended, and they pressed to it
often. See it in the severals.

First, not high-minded, not haughty spirited, not standing on, or priding
themselves in, their disparisons, like the proud Pharisee, Luke 18. 11. though
they are of higher extraction than the rest of the World: Yea, because they
are, being born again of God, they contemn not others with a self-elation; but
rather in humble abasement lay themselves low, whilst they admire that Grace
which has made them to differ from the worst of men. That they who were
Dunghil-born, as others, should be set amongst Gods Princes, is that which many
times causes them to say with highest admirations, What am I? and what is my
Fathers-House? That they who by nature were the Children of Wrath even as the
rest of mankind, should have that enmity slain, and be made partakers of the
Divine nature, made the Sons of God by regeneration, makes them a wonder to
themselves. And the higher Grace has advanced them, the more they avile
themselves. Paul considering what a persecuter he had been, not only says he is
unworthy to be called an Apostle; but speaks also his self-abasing frame, in
Ephesians. 3. 8. Unto me, who am less than the least of all Saints, is this Grace
given, that I should preach among the Gentiles the unsearchable Riches of
Christ. In the Greek there is a (...), Minimissimo, Est.
comparative made of a superlative: our English cannot reach the excellency in
a word. Great Paul is the least of Saints, the last of Apostles, the greatest
of Sinners. Paulus quasi palluulus (say some) because little in his own eyes.
The more Grace, the less in self-esteem; the sight of God is humbling, his
Majesty and Glory is such, that the Soul necessarily falls at his Feet. Thus
the best Balsoms fall to the bottom; the goodliest Buildings have lowest
Opulentissima metalla quorum in alto latent (...), Sen. Epist.
Foundations; the heaviest Ears of Corn hang downward; so do the Boughs of
Trees that are best laden. Abraham is but dust and Ashes, Genesis 18. 27. Jacob
less than all the mercies of God. Genesis 32. 10. I am a Worm, and no man, said
David. More brutish than any man, says Agur. A man a Sinner, says Peter. Not
worthy to be called thy Son, says the Prodigal. Ignatius in one of his
Epistles says, I salute you who am ultimus, the last and least of all others;
he also uses a rare expression in one of his Epistles Tantillitas nostra, our
meanness. None so humble as they who have nearest communion with God. The
Angels, that stand before him, cover their faces with two wings, as with a
double scarf, Isa. 6. 2. Neither gifts nor graces can puff up those that are
truly Christ's: The more they receive from him, the lower in their own esteem.
Now I have seen thee, and abhor my self in dust and ashes, Job. 42. 5, 6. It Is
the proud Pharisee that sets forth not his wants, but his worth; God, I thank
thee, that I am not as other men, etc. Christ does plough and sow altogether in
low grounds, these prove very fertile. Mountains be cursed, if proud men be
drawn out, and set high, it is to be hanged by their preferment, as Haman.

Secondly, Not clamorours, make no great noise of what they do, of what they
suffer for Christ: Some suffer so grumblingly, with so much stir, that it were
better they bare nothing; every load on them makes them crack and complain so
much: Saints are not so, they make not Mountains of Mole-hills; Yea, account
the sufferings of this present Life light, and not worthy to be brought into
reckoning with the Glory reserved for them. Hence it is not strange to them
though difficulties do betide, yea, surround them, they expected no less: The
first lesson they learn in Christianity is Christ's Cross; take him and his
Cross together, not accounting it as a strange thing, 1 Pet. 4. 12. i. e. be
not so afrighted, as they that fall upon some new thing, and which they never
thought of before. The Syriack renders it by a word which sometimes signifies
to murmur, to be displeased, and that sense may have place here, do not murmur,
be not offended at God, because of troubles that may arise for the Gospel. As
Christ did, so Christians should suffer silently and without noise, Isa. 53. 7.
As a sheep before her shearer is dumb] the Heb. word [Rachel] there used,
signifies an Ewe, this Ewe has brought forth many Lambs: Such as was Lambert
and the rest of the Martyrs, who to words of scorn and petulanci^, returned
Isaak's apology to his Brother Ishmael, patience and silence, in so much that
the Persecutors said, that they were possessed with a dumb Devil. Whereas
others in their sufferings rave and rage against God. Cluverus (an Author of
good credit) reports from eyewitnesses this sad story. That in the year 1632.
there lived in the borders of Muscovia, a Nobleman, a gatherer of Tribute, by
Name Albertus Pericoscius; whose manner was, when poor men could not presently
pay their Taxes, to distrain upon their Cattle, and drive them to his own home.
It happened that this man lost all, or most of what he had in one night; which
when the wretch heard, he S^e this Example in Clark' s Exampl. Part. I. Chap.
II. 29. page 49.
raged, and discharged his Gun against Heaven, breaking forth into these
blasphemous speeches. Let him that killed my Cattle, devour them: If thou
would not let me eat them, eat them thy self. Upon these furious barkings
against God, there fell some drops of Blood: and this wretched man was turned
into a black Dog, and howling, he ran to the dead Cattle, and began to feed
upon them.

Thirdly, not offensive or injurious to others, though they learn to suffer
evil, yet not to do evil; no not to their Persecutors, rendering evil for evil,
nor reviling for reviling, but contrariwise blessing. The new nature has armed
them with defensive, not with offensive armor. Saints are not Bears, nor
Lions, nor Bulls, but Sheep; who take much, do no wrong. They have taken out
that lesson from their Master, Mat. 5. 44. Love Enemies; bless, do good, pray
for them. Thus Christ melted over Jerusalem, the slaughterhouse of himself and
his Saints. He called Judas Friend and not Devil and prayed, Father forgive
them, etc. And for deeds, he healed Malchus's Ear washed, Judas's Feet, etc. His
people in all ages have in some sort resembled him in this property. Abraham
rescueth his Nephew Lot, that had dealt so discourteously with him. Isaak
expostulateth the wrong done him by Abimelech and his Servants, and forgiveth
and feasteth them: Jacob was faithful to Laban, who changed his ways ten
times, and ever for the worse: Joseph entertained his malicious Brethren at his
house; and whereas their malicious hearts misgave them, that he rolled himself
upon them thereby: Genesis 43. 18. i. e. took the advantage against them to crush
them; he feasted them on purpose to be reconciled to them. Moses stands up in
the gap for those that had so soon forgotten him. Joshuah marches all night,
and fights all day, for the Gibeonites, who had deceived him. Samuel prays
(and God forbid he should do otherwise) for an ungrateful people, that had
rejected him. David put on Sackcloth, he wept and fasted, when his Enemies
were afflicted: he spared Saul's Life, and afterward Shimei's, when Abishai's
^inger even itched to be taking off their heads. Elisha set bread and Water
before the Syrians that came to surprise him: and provided a Table for them
that had provided a Grave for him. The Disciples were sollicitous of the
Salvation of the Pharisees, that had accused them to their Master: Stephen
prayed heartily for his Persecutors, and prevailed, as Augustine thinks for
Paul's conversion.

Fourthly, Not wrathful, or revengeful. Peter must put up his Sword, if he mean
to be Christ's Disciple. Christians must not so much as grudge one against
another, Ja. 5. 9. (...), is to groan, as they that have a great burden (so
rendered, 2 Cor. 5. 4.) unless they will be condemned, for the Judge stands
at the door as ready to right them; as if they retaliate, they leave him
nothing to do unless it be to turn his wrath from their Enemies, on whom they
have been avenged already, upon themselves for their sin of self-revenge Romans
12. 19. is full. Avenge not your selves, but rather keep the Kings peace, and
so give place to wrath, i. e. to the wrath of God, ready to seize upon thine
adversaries, if thou prevent not by an overhasty revenge of the wrongs done
thee; for it is written, [vengeance is mine] mine Office and Royalty. Is it safe
to invade his part? to justle the Chief Justice out of his seat? Nothing less.
Valentinian the Emperor, on his Deathbed, said, of all his victories one
comforted him, that he had overcome his worst Enemy, his naughty and passionate
heart. Joseph accused by his lewd Mistress either pleads not, or is not heard:
He knew that though he suffered for a Season, God would find a time to clear
his innocence, and he was not deceived. Moses complained not, but was silent,
when wronged by Aaron and Miriam, God therefore struck in for him, and struck
Miriam with Leprosy; Aaron escaped by his Repentance. They have Christ an
Ensample, 1 Pet. 2. 23. when he suffered, he threatened not, etc. to give
Convitium convitio regerere. quid aliud est quam lutum lu^^o purgar^? Cart.
reviling for reviling, what is it but to wash away dirt with dirt? In revenge
of injuries, he is the loser, that gets the better. Hence the Apostle
disgraceth it, 1 Cor. 6. 7. with a (...)
word that signifies disgrace or loss. When any one provokes us, we use to say,
we will be even with him: There is a way whereby we may not only be even with
him, but above him, viz. forgive him, feed him, Romans 12. 20. the (...).
word is feed indulgently, as Birds their young, or the Nurse her little Child,
or as a man his Friend at Table, carving to him of the best. Ah this is a noble
way of revenge indeed.

Fifthly, Not peevish and fretful, but of a mild and placid temper. A morose
frame is unsuitable to a Christian, who is commanded to be kind and courteous;
following his Master, who was affable in his carriage and deportment. 1 Pet. 3.
8. [courteous] (...) quasi (...) qui sapit amica.
the word signifies affable, easy to be entreated, and fit for converse, who
studies to do things friendly and acceptable unto others. This the Apostle
says, is true Heavenly wisdom, Ja. 3. 17. tractable, docile, not as an Horse
and Mule, that must be ruled with rigor, not with reason. Christianity is no
Enemy to courtesy (as some would persuade us) but includes it, see the
practice of holy ones this way in Abraham and the Hittites, Genesis 23. Boaz and
his reapers, Ruth. 2. the Angels, and the Apostles salutations; the Primitive
Christians in their sweet and engaging carriage, by which they drew the
Observation and admiration even of their Enemies. A pleasant, open and free
Conversation is much more winning and prevailing, than a morose, reserved,
froward frame.

Reflections.
Many Professors may here see their spots, so as to be convinced For the proud
Professor.
of and humbled for them. How unlike a meek Sheep am I, may the proud Professor
say? Who strut, and pride my self in the conceit of mine excellences reached
above and beyond other men? The Apostles advice is, be not highminded, but
fear; and that is very plain, though highly Elegant, to cause proud plumes to
fall, Romans 12. 3. (...)
not to think more highly than he ought to think, etc. And that was no
unseasonable caution of Isidore, he that begins to grow better, let him beware
le^t he grow proud, le^t vainglory give him a greater overthrow than his
former vices. Much cause have thou, O my Soul! to beware: Swelling sores will
break e're long; the bulging wall will fall: Sad experience in our days has
attested the truth of the Apostle's assertion, 1 Cor. 8. 1. Knowledge puffs
up, a Metaphor from a pair of bellows, blown up and filled with wind; and that
knowledge that puffs up, will puff down to. But O my Soul, his Soul which is
lifted up, which swells like a Bubble, and breaks through its own
weaknesses, is not upright in him, Habak. 2. 4. i. e. is very corrupt and
crooked, stark naught, and Gods Soul can take no pleasure in him, but will
surely punish him. Alas! why should I be lifted up at what I have of free-gift?
He that considers what he is by Sin, and what he shall be in the Grave, will
find little cause of being lifted up with any thing.

And how unlike one of Christ's For the complaining Christian.
Sheep, am I, may the querulous, murmuring, complaining Christian say, who make
a great noise at every akeing Finger, and a great deal of complaint for every
penny-loss? As Jehu in a vain glory cried out, See my zeal for the Lord of
Hosts, do not I say, see my sufferings for the Gospels sake? This is not in my
patience to possess my Soul, Luke 21. 19. When one is comfortable and
cheerful, we say, he enjoys himself: So when one keeps himself quiet in
crosses he possesses himself in patience. Could Paul and Silas sing and give
Glory unto God in the stocks, and do I repine and murmur at every abridgment of
Liberty? etc. Did the Apostles glorify God that they were so Martyr etiam in
catena gaudet, Aug.
graced, as to be disgraced for his sake, Act. 5. 41. Did Mr. Glover, Martyr,
weep for joy of his imprisonment, and shall I weep and fret for grief? It Is not
being in tribulation, but continuing patient in tribulation, that answers the
Apostles exhortations, Romans 12. 12. Was Christ's suffering as a Sheep before the
Shearer or Slayer? And is it seemly for me to be like a wild Bull in a Net,
cha^ing and raging?

How little of a Sheep-like frame do I show, when I design and pursue For the
injurious Christian.
evil with evil? When I kick against every one that kicks at me? and not only
snarle at the stone, but also fly at the hand that flings it? Christians (...)
are advised to give none offense, to be without offense to all, 1 Cor. 10. 32.
2 Cor. 6. 3. to be (...)
without complaint, Phil. 2. 15. both such as do not complain of others, and on
whom others do not complain: To be harmless too, though some render the (...);
ex (...) private. and (...) mis^^o. ve^ ex (...) private. and (...) cor^u.
Greek word sincere, without mixture, yet others rather understand it without
Horns, i. e. having no power to harm. Christ would not have his pushers, with
the Horn, and so doing hurt: and shall I smite with the Tongue, smite with the
First, and yet call my self a Christian, as if one of Christ's Sheep? To do good
for good, has something of humanity in it; to do evil for evil, is but mere
bestial: to do evil for good, is devilish: but to do good for evil is
Christlike, and this alone is Christian.

The wrathful and revengeful Christian also may here see how far short For the
revengeful Christian.
he comes of the duty and glory of a Christian; whose heart is full of rancour
and malice most diametrically opposite to a Christian Spirit. Our passions are
short madnesses; how unadvisedly do they make us speak with the Tongue, and how
unrulily to act? How ill a Counselor, What a worse Commander have I often
found my Wrath? Do I pretend to be a Follower of Christ, and yet have got no
more power over those unruly passions? How am I outdone by Heathens. Socrates,
when one gave him a box on the ear, said only, What an ill thing is it, that
men cannot foresee, when they should put on an Helmet before they go abroad?
Another time being kicked by another, If an Ass should kick me, said he, should
I spurn him again? The sense of Isa. 42. 2. is by some made to be, that Christ
should be a pleasant Judge, offering violence to none; but by meek carriage and
mild words, seeking to draw all to him. Christians also must put away all
bitterness, and wrath, and anger, and clamor, and be kind, etc. Ephesians. 4. 31,
32. how unlike which am I, whilst I prejudice others against the truths and
ways of God by my wrathful carriage?

The morose Christian also may hence learn to check the peevishness and
unsociableness For the morose Christian.
of his temper, which makes him so unlike Christ's Sheep, far from that
Gentleness which the Scripture so often presses to; which uses two words
which both we translate Gentle: the (...), ab (...) and (...), cedo.
one signifying an yielding of our right, rather than pressing utmost
extremity: the H' (...), ab (...) delecto: vel ab (...) ver^um.
other such a placidness, as to please and persuade all with his word his good
Language.

Lastly, Let all see how far Christ and the World differ; the World looks on a
Sheepish Spirit as a great disgrace, which Christ calls for, and delights in.
Believe it, Christ likes better, that his be Sheep than shrews, though the
Worlds proverb be contrary. The World also calls revenge manhood, which Christ
esteems dog-hood rather; much contrary to the temper which he requires and
accepts.

CHAP. XI.
The harmless Sheep's exposed to dangers many,
Saints open lie to troubles more than any.

Observation.
SO inoffensive and harmless as the poor Sheep is, yet few Creatures are so
watched against, and preyed upon as it is: from above and below; from the
Heavens and the Earth dangers await it. Beasts and Birds of prey, glut
themselves on these silly creatures. Waving Lions and Bears, unto which our
Countries are strangers, and of which we find what Enemies they are to Flocks;
as may be seen in that one story from David (to multiply no other quotations) 1 Samuel 17. 34. where he speaks not of one singular event, but of a matter that
fell out often; which appears by the twofold manner of fight mentioned:
Sometimes he followed those Beasts of prey, and smote them with his Shepherd's
crook, etc. at other times if they rose up against him, he laid hold on them
with one hand, and slew them with the other. But not to insist on these
Creatures with which we are unacquainted; we have more than a few ravening
creatures among us, which lie in wait for, and endeavor to destroy the poor
Sheep. As

First, The Wolf, plentiful more than enough were these in the country some
years since, though where inhabited they now grow thin, and appear seldom to
view: these are bitter Enemies to Flocks: Such an Antipathie is observed by
Naturalists between the Sheep and Wolf, that it lasts even after death; for
that Sheeps skin which a Wolf has bitten, is said to become louzie, and
strings in a Musical Instrument made, some of the Guts of Sheep, some of the
Wolf, are said always to jarr, never to concord. Franzi^s Animal. Hi^t. Sac.
in Lu^o, par. 1. cap. 2^. page 145.
Wolfs skins mixed with Sheep skins are said to corrupt them, and cause their
Wool to fall off: Yea, some report that two Drum^ having their heads covered
the one with a Wolf-skin, the other with a Sheeps skin; that which has the
Sheep skins-heads, shall not sound whilst the other is by, yea, shall bear
with the bare bating of the other: Nor is it much wonder, considering what
havoc the Wolf alive makes of a Flock; unto which the Scriptures allude, Jer.
5. 6. Ezekiel. 22. 27. Habak. 1. 8. Zeph. 3. 3. yea, such is noted the vocracity
and cruelty of the Wolf, that coming among Sheep, he no^ only kills so much as
will satisfy his hunger in eating, and fill his paunch, but he tears and slays
till he lay heaps even threatening destruction to the whole Flock; which if he
kills not, yet he frightens and scatters; which our Lord observes, Jo. 10. 12.
when the Wolf comes to the Flock, he catches some which he kills and devours,
and scatters others, driving them far away for fear. Let me add one
observation more of this creature e're we leave him; he is observed to mix his
cruelty with craft; (l) for some observe of him that when he goes forth by
night toward the Flock for prey, he comes toward them against the wind, lest
if he should go with the wind, the Dogs should get the scent of him, and so by
their barking give notice of his coming to his disappointment.

Secondly, The Fox, which as he is known a crafty, so is sound also an hurtful
Creature to the Sheep, falling upon and killing them, especially the younger,
the little Lamb, sucking their blood, with which he fills and gluts himself.
Unto this cruelty as well as craft of this Creature does Christ allude, where
he calls Herod a Fox, Luke 13. 31, 32. they tell him Herod would kill him, in
which errand (as Grotius thinks) happily he himself had sent them to frighten him
farther from him, whom he feared to lay hands on, to put him to death: Christ
knows both his subtilty and his cruelty, therefore fitly calls him Fox, Go tell
that Fox.

Thirdly, The Dog, though a tamed and household Creature, yet will sometimes
turn not only a Sheepbiter, but a Sheep-killer also; Ye shall have a Curr slily
steal out sometimes in a night, and fall upon and eat up a Sheep, and sometimes
more. Sometimes what is lest suspected, is ^ound ravenous here. Franz. ubi
supra, page 141.


Fourthly, Even the little Weesel lies in wait for, and prevails to the murder
of the poor weak Lamb; gets to the Throat, and there at a very small orifice
sucks out its blood.

From above also, the Ravens, Crows, etc. not only sit upon the Sheeps back,
and pluck off the Wool from his sides; but fall upon it, when weak especially,
and first endeavor to pick out its eyes; which also those Creatures do by
Lambs when first fallen. The Raven will strike his beak even into the very
heart. Not to mention the Eagle that carries a Lamb in his talons, etc.

The storms and winds too, are to the Sheep bitter Enemies, especially the Hail
and Snow, which force it to shelter, glad to get under the lee of an Hedge,
etc. where sometimes they are many of them overwhelmed with the Snow-drift, and
buried under it. And many times whilst the poor Creature runs to a bush for
shelter and defense, either it is entangled and kept hung by the brambles, or
if it gets off, is sure to leave some of its Fleece behind it. Thus is this
harmless Creature lying open to many difficulties.

Application.
And is it not thus with the poor ones of Christ? Are they not Sheep as much in
this, as in any thing? Are not their distresses many? Psalm. 34. 19. are they
not hunted on every side by sundry Adversaries? All the malignities of other
Creatures meet in the Churches Enemies. It Is well there is a delivering God,
else ^twere enough to sink one to consider how surrounded. But as no Nation had
more poisons than Egypt, none more Antidotes: So nothing exposes more to
troubles than true piety, nothing carries through more and better than it. But
see the particulars.

Not to stay upon the Lions and Bears of Heathenish Persecutors, which have
cast out a whole Sea of blood, to drown and swallow up the Churches of Christ:
such as the Emperors persecutions of old, and the Turk since them: though some
of the poor ones of Christ have these last years felt the insolences and
cruelties of those savage Heathens in the Americane world. We will mention

First, The Wolves of more dissembling and more kindly pretending Persecutors;
such as persecute under a show or pretense of Religion and Zeal to God. It
would be almost incredible to mention what Authors report of the Primitive
Persecutors. Under Dioclesian, the Genesis 49. 27. By some applied to Paul a
Benj^mite; in the beginning, making havoc of the Church, in the latter part of
his time dividing the meat of the Gospel.
Author of the tenth persecution 1700 Christians are said to have been slain in
one Month, among whom was Serena the Empress. Those Ten Persecutions were so
cruel, that Hierome writes in one of his Epistles, that for every day in the
year were murdered 5000, excepting only the first day of January. But consider
the Arian Heretics, when once they had got head and power, how extremely raged
they? What havoc made they of Christ's Lambs? Save that this also is almost
forgotten, because of the outrageous fury of the Romish Crew. In that horrible
Parisian Butchery, Thirty Thousand Protestants were basely murdered in one
Month, Three Hundred Thousand in one year. Stokesly Bishop of London, boasted
upon his Deathbed, that he had been the death of Fifty Heretics (so he called
them) in his time. His Successor Lion, T^ger, Wolf, Bear; Yea, a whole Forest
of wild Beasts met in Bonner, killing two Hundred in the space of three years,
Fuller's Church-Hist. b. 8.
Bonner was called the common Cutthroat and Slaughterslave General to all the
Bishops in England. That is cruel beyond parallel, which is reported of the
Christians in Calabria, Anno. 1560. about Eighty Eight of them shut up
together, as in a Fold, the Executioner comes and takes one, blindfolds him
with a Muffler before his eyes, and so leads him forth to a larger place, where
he commands him to kneel down, and that being done, he cuts his Throat, and so
he leaves him half dead, and with his bloody knife and muffler comes to the
rest, with his Arms bloody up to the Elbows, etc. till he had thus murdered
them all. The kindnesses of these Catholics in Germany, Ireland, Piedmont,
etc. are still fresh in many men's memories. They have indeed used all subtilty
also with their Cruelty, but yet their rage has appeared violent.

Secondly, The Foxes of Heretics and Schismatics, whereby the Churches of
Christ have not a little suffered in all ages. The Schisms among the Jews,
whereby they were divided into Pharisees, Sadducees and Essens tended little to
the furtherance of their Religson, much to the trouble of each party from the
other. In the Primitive times how soon did Heresiarchs rise up to impede the
progress of the Gospel? It is the opinion of some that Christ called Herod Fox,
Luke 13. 32. partly on this account, because he was a Sect-Master, that had
forged some novelty in Religion, or added some new article to be believed.
Conferr Mat. 22. 16. and Chap. 16. 6. with Mar. 8. 15. But to return to the
Primitive Gospel Times. 'Twas an excellent saying of Tertullian Faciunt savos
and vespae, faciunt Ecclesias Marcionitae.
Wasps make combs, but they are empty ones; and so Heretics make Churches, but
they are void of Truth. In all ages Satan has stirred up such to hinder the
progress of Truth, and create trouble to the Professors and especially
Preachers thereof. Thus Ebion and Cerinthus in the beginning, and the Gnostics
even in the Apostles days. Luther found no small stir from the Anabaptists, in
the beginning of the Reformation in Germany; Calvin at Geneva found much
opposition from Servetus, Gentiles, etc. And it was none of the least cause of
our disappointment of what was honestly designed of Reformation in our days,
that we so soon crumbled into divisions, and subdivisions, to the no small
scandal both of the weak and of the wilful opposers also. These are they who
most Expositors understand by the Wolves mentioned, Act. 20. 28. not so much
bloody Persecutors, as pernicious deceivers and Heretics. Some there in stead
of grievous, translate fat Wolves, a fit Epithet for deceivers, who fat
themselves with the Blood of Souls. These, as Wolves, are dul-sighted by day,
but quick-sighted in the night; are sharp-witted for error, but dull to
apprehend the Truth of sound Divinity; and as the Wolf deals gently with the
Sheep at first, so Seducers first draw their proselytes into smaller errors,
and then into blasphemous and damnable Heresies; and as Wolves are of a
ravenous disposition, and unsatiable; so Seducers hunger after gain, Romans 16.
18. and thirst after the blood of Souls.

Yea, Thirdly, From among themselves often rise up those that trouble the
Saints of the Most High God; Some sly Currs, who come indeed in
Sheep-cloathing, ^eigning friendship, and making a show of your great
kindnesses, but within are ravening Wolves, who not only worry, but also seek
to devour the Sheep. It is often the lot of the Churches of Christ, with Joseph
to be sold by his Brethren; like Sampson betrayed by his own Especially
Apostates that return to their vomit, as Julian. Abduxit a fide plures Juliani
versutia, quam ant^o^dentium omnium Eth^icorum praeceps saevitia. Dr. Prideaux.
Wife, and as Christ their Lord, delivered up to his Enemies by his own
Disciple. And this also he has foretold his People, Mat. 10. 21, 35. fully
accomplished in the year 1546 in one John Diazius a Spaniard, by the great
goodness of God converted by reading the Scriptures to the Protestant
Profession, and therefore basely murdered by the procurement of his own Brother
Alphonsus at Neoburg in Germany. Of one Filmer witnessed against by his own
Brother at the instigation of Dr. London, ye may read in Fox's Act. and Monum.
as also of one Woodman delivered by his own Brother into his Enemies hands.
[And the Father the Child] Exemplified in Philip the second, King of Spain, who
said he had rather have no Subjects than Heretics as he called the
Protestants; and out of a bloody zeal, suffered his Eldest Son, Charles, to be
murdered by the cruel Inquisition, because he seemed to favor the
Protestants-side. Add but one more, Mr. Julius Palmer, in Q. Mary her Reign,
went to Evesham in Glocestershire to his own Mother, hoping to obtain a Legacy
left him by his Father; when he came kneeling down to crave her blessing, She
said, Thou shall have Christ's curse and mine wherever thou go, for thou do
not believe as thy Father and I, nor as thy Forefathers, but art an Heretic;
and therefore get thee out of my House, and out of my sight, and never take me
for thy Mother more. Fagots I have to burn thee, but no Money for thee, etc.

Yea, Fourthly, Poor, Little, Small, Vile and Unworthy Fellows, that are
accounted good and fit for nothing else, can yet take a liberty to rage against
the poor Lambs of Christ. How does every days experience verefie in our eyes,
what David found in his days, Psalm. 35. 15. the abjects gathered themselves
together against me; (...)
[abjects] the Hebr. word is variously rendered there; the Greek and Vulg. Lat.
transsate it the Scourges, alluding (as Ainsw. thinks) to the scourge of the
Tongue, Job. 5. 21. or those that are worthy of the lash, thinks Dr. Hammond;
the Chald. and Arab. read it wicked, because these are worthy of stripes, Deuteronomy.
25. 2. we ^itly translate it abjects, base fellows, men of no name or repute,
Job. 30. 8. whose Fathers were scarcely fit to be Dog-keepers, Job. 30 1. or
scarce as useful as a Dog could be; yet now their Sons can scorn and contemn
me; they tear me, says David, my name, my credit, all that is dear to me. The
basest can mock, as Tobiah the Servant, Neh. 2. 10. Usually none more malapert
and saucy than such base ones, who will say what they dare, and dare say what
they will; and these are sit instruments to be set a work and employed in what
they that have any dram of modesty left, dare not be seen or heard in. Thus the
idle Persons that have nothing to do, but to sit in the Streets, if they can
but get a Cup in their heads, are fit to reproach the Servants of God, Psalm.
69. 12. see Lament. 3. 14, 63.

Shall we need speak any thing of the Eagles, Ravens and Crows, whose great
design is, if not with the Eagle to carry them quite away at a stroke; yet to
pick out their Eyes, that then they may devour them at pleasure; take away the
means of knowledge, slay or silence, or banish their Ministers, and then make
sport with the people. The greatest rage of Enemies in all ages has been
against the Ministers of Christ; whoever escape be sure let them suffer; the
troublers of Israel, the Trumpets of Sedition, etc.

The storms also of penal Laws have mostly fallen upon the Saints of God. If
any danger befall the Romans, presently away with the Christians to the Lions.
Si Tyberis ascendet ad moenia, si Nilus non ascendit ad arva: si caelum s^etit,
si terra movit; si fomes, si lues, s^atim Christianos ad Leones, Tertul. Apol.
ad. Geutes.
Acts of Church and State were against Christ, are against those that are
Christ's, People, and Princes. Thus Dr. Boot understands, Isa. 53. 8. which we
translate, he was taken from Prison, and from Judgment, he understands, he was
taken away (i. e. put to death) by the People, and by the Judgment or
Magistrate, as speaking the importunity of the People in pressing the powers to
condemn him, and take him out of the way. Let those that can, consult him;
Bootii animadvers. sacr. lib. 4 cap. 10.
And when they flee to the Law for shelter, often are they there held, and
there pilled. Paul's appeal to Caesar, though it lengthened his Life a while,
yet exposed him to Death by his cruel Edicts.

The sum of this is, that it is bad fetching the marks of the true Church, from
the Market, as the Romanists do; who make the peace and prosperity of their
Professors great arguments to bring over converts to them; the contrary
whereunto is true; and that picture of the Church given by Luther (in the place
Loc. Com. tit. de persecut. ver. Eccles.
quoted in the margin) is drawn to the Life, and aptly fits our present
discourse. If any one, says he, would take the Churches picture, let him take
a silly poor Maid, sitting in a Wood or Wilderness, compassed about with hungry
Lions, Wolves, Boars and Bears, with all manner of cruel and hurtful Beasts,
and in the midst of a great great many furious men assaulting her every moment
and minute: for this is her condition in the world.

Reflections.
Why then, O my Soul, should I be prejudiced at the Cross of For the prejudiced
Professor.
Christ? Why should I be offended if persecution arise for the Gospel? as ten
to one but it will; for the Church is Heir of the Cross, and opposition the
hagg that follows the Gospel. Shall I, with that King of France, so far only
engage for truth, as that I may draw back again when I please? And say,
Farewell Christ and his Gospel: Let Christ keep his Heaven to himself, if it
can be had upon no other terms? Poor Soul! What is this but to dream of being a
Sheep, and yet suffer nothing Sheep-like? I now see it was not for nothing that
Christ gave that caution even to John's Disciples, Mat. 11. 6. Blessed is he
that is not offended in (or at) me, my poverty and afflictions, that
tribulation which betides him for me. Uteunque vincula aliave incommoda
patiatur. Lightf.
Shall I be offended at Christ, because his Cross lies in my way, which he so
often had told me of, must be taken up? Shall I stumble at the Cross and not be
broken? Do I profess to be a Christian, and yet shall I carry it like an
unbelieving Jew or Gentile, to whom a crucified Christ, and consequently his
Cross is, to the one a 1 Cor. 1. 23.
stumbling block, and to the other a laughing stock? What though truth under
the notion of Sect or Heresy be every where spoken against? Act. 28. 22.
Should I therefore desert it? Will it not be found able to defend it self
against all that rise up against it? Consider, O my Soul, and be not offended,
as if some new thing befell thee, when as this has been the lot of Christ's
Sheep throughout all ages: it is not new to see truth go with a scracht face,
nor the Professors of it the Butt of the wrath and fury of men; only be thou
faithful to do the death, and the Lord shall give thee a Crown of Life.

Dream not of a delicacy, O my Soul! in the ways of Christ, though For the
Delicate Professor.
his Sheep be his care, yet, lie they exposed to the Wolves, Foxes and Dogs of
the World, who will be sure to worry, if not wound them. It Is strange that
People should pretend to rejoice in being put into the Will of Christ, and yet
reject his Legacy, Jo. 16. 33. In the world ye shall have tribulation: this
world is not a Paradise but a Purgatory to Christ's Saints; it may fitly be
compared to the Straits of Magellan; which by Doct. Heylin is said to be a
place of that Geogr. p. 802.
nature, that which way soever a man bend his course, he shall be sure to have
the world against him. If a man indeed will be Religious but according to the
times, (as some understand Naaman 2 Kin. 5. 18.) he may escape pretty well; but
if he be resolved to live Godly in Christ Jesus, 2 Timothy 3. 12. he shall suffer
persecution, carry he the matter never so discreetly. Think not to gather a
Rose without pricks.

Hold out Faith and Patience, these things shall have an end; Christ's
Encouragement to persecuted ones.
Sheep shall be safe in his Fold, maugre all the wrath and rage of Wolves and
Bears. Peace here in Christ, whilst tribulation in the world. Remember, O my
Soul! Josiah died in peace, according to the promise, 2 Kin. 22. 20. though
slain in War, Chap. 23. 29. Christ's burning bush shall not be consumed; his
Sheep not destroyed. It Is not without a remarkable Providence of God, that
though those Beasts of prey bring forth many young ones at a Litter, and the
Sheep generally but one; and though many more Sheep are slaughtered for
Provision, than we hear of those Creatures slain, yet there are more Sheep than
beasts of prey in every part of the Country. Christ has overcome the world,
he will one day set the feet of his Saints on the necks of their Enemies
already overcome by him: Josh. 10. 24, 25. He shall have a Church in which to
have Glory throughout all ages, Ephesians. 3. 21. and at length shall the Saints be
conquerours. The Thousand years Kingdom seems to be a great Truth, though the
low apprehensions and unfit expressions of some concerning it, have prejudiced
others against it. What else mean those Scriptures? Dan. 7. 14, 18, 22, 27. 2 Timothy 4. 1. Rev. 5. 10. and Chap. 20. besides many others? Which also has been
attested to by the most pure Antiquity. See our Famous Mr. Mede in his works
passim of the Millennium.

CHAP. XII.
Dangers without, diseases from within
Torment the Sheep: No less to Saints does sin.

Observation.
IT is by Naturalists reported that no Creature is more subject to diseases
than man, an Horse, and a Sheep; and this last has many Male-affections, by
which it is much damnified. Though we may not enumerate them all. Yet the most
general and usually infesting the Sheep may be reduced to these Heads.

First, Sheep are much subject to the rott: We shall not trouble our selves
with the particular species of this disease; some speak of the hunger, or
starve-rott; some of the water-rott, etc. This we know that England has been
wont to be much subject to the Sheeprott; wherein in the space of seven or ten
years, commonly a very general rott happens to their Sheep: And though Ireland
be not so usually afflicted herewith, yet here also we have had very generally
rotting years, by which whole Flocks has been swept Nec singula morbi Corpora
corripiunt, sed tota aestiva repent, Spemque gregemque simul cunctamque ab
origin^ Gentem, Virg. Georg. lib. 3.
away and has run through a Country, extending to most men's considerable
Flocks, and to all ages of Sheep: though I think our last taint this way seized
more especially the younger Sheep, year-old, and thereabout. Whether the cause
be in the feeding, or in the Hic quondam morbo caeli miseranda coorta est
Tempestas -- Et genus omne neci pecudum dedit, omne ferarum, Corripuitque
lacus, infecit pabula tabo, Id. Ibid.
air men are not fully agreed; though the latter seems more probable, because
of its spreading, and to it the Poet agrees.

Secondly, Sheep are very subject to the scab; next kin to the rott, being of a
running and infectious nature; spreading it self from one part of the Sheep to
another, and from one Sheep to another running over the Flock. That this Turpis
oves tentat scabies. Morbida facta pecus totum corrumpit ovile.
also is a taint of the blood with heat appears, breaking outward into itching
scabs; whence the Sheep lie rubbing, and beating themselves with their Feet, or
against the ground. Virgil for the Cure prescribes washing with clean water
after shearing; where his Commentator says, that Salt Water does rather
increase the itch, or he directs to the use of the lees of Oil, etc. Our use is
generally whilst the wool is short, tarr, though others use other things to
cure the scab, and take off the itching.

Thirdly, Sheep are very apt to be troubled with Fevers, seizing the Marrow
and Bones, very much disquieting and endangering them, with which ye shall have
many taken off to no small damage: Virgils care for this is to open a vein
between Inter Ima ferire pedis salentem sanguine venam.
the Claws of the Feet, so cooling the body, by taking off the extreme heat.

Fourthly, Sheep generally are observed to have infirm heads, whence many
infirmities vex and disease them; especially the Giddy and Blindness. Ye have
often seen how they turn round, and go staggering like a Drunken-man,
occasioned by the overflowing of blood, rising up with fumes to the
disquieting of the Brain; and often their eyesight quite taken away, that they
find not their way, but by guess. The cure generally is blood-letting in the
Eye-vein, whereby their brains are eased of those fumes; and their sight
recovered. Ye have the shaking also, which often seizes your Lambs, and takes
them off, even while Fat.

Fifthly, Sheep also are troubled with diseases in their Feet; sometimes their
Claws so overgrow, that they afflict them much, and make them go unwillingly,
yea, graze on their knees. Worms also by taint are wont to breed in their Feet,
if not well looked to: which distemper in their Feet will cause them to pine
away, fall in their Flesh, and unfit them for driving. Glacies ne frigida
laedat Molle pecus, scabiemque ferat turpesque podagras
Add that Virgil mentions the Gout as afflicting Sheep.

Application.
In this also are Saints aptly called Sheep, being subject to many infirmities
and weaknesses. The fairest Pomegranate has at least one rotten kernel. God's
choice People have much within them to humble them. It Is triste mor^^alitatis
privilegium sometimes to offend. To enumerate their infirmities would be a task
too large, seeing the (...)
Apostle James says, chap. 3. 2. in many things we offend all. or stumble; a
Metaphor from Travelers walking on stony or slippery ground. The Apostle
speaks not of singular individual acts, but of the diverse sorts of sins; and he
speaks of those that were sanctified, at least in his esteem, and in the
judgment of charity, and he puts himself into the number, though he were
worthily called James the just. But see we some particulars. And here

First, How subject are Christians to the rott of Heresy, which is a
spreading, an infectious and a killing disease? It spreads over the whole man,
and over the whole Congregation quickly. Heresies spread like a Gangrene, Vim
sui veneni inter fidiles longius. diffundet, donec universum ecclesiae corpus
contagio pervaserit. Est.
2 Timothy 2. 17. Diodate says the learned call it Estiomene, which is so
contagious that it suddenly spreads it self into the next member, and so by
degrees destroys the whole body; so does false Doctrine and Heresy, being
once admitted into the Soul, presently overruns the parts, and takes the brain,
and endangers the whole; and having possessed it self of one of the members of
a Church, will spread over all the body, if it be not withstood in time. Error
is exceedingly infectious, and for the most part deadly, as the Leprosy in the
Head was held to be. Jealousy, Frenzy and Heresy can hardly be cured, says
the Italian Proverb. It is certain that error is of an encroaching nature; let
the Serpent but wind in his head, and he will quickly bring in his whole body.
He that says yea to the Devil in a little, shall not say him nay when he
pleases; He that tumbleth down the Hill of Errors, will scarcely leave
tumbling till he come to the bottom, and will endeavor to draw others with
him. How soon were the Galatians unsettled by Seducers and Sect-masters, chap.
1. 6. What ill work made those deceitful workers at Corinth in Paul's absence?
The Heretics in the Primitive Churches, how spreading were they? The whole
world wondered after the Beast, Rev. 13. 3. And of the Arrians, in the days of
Athanasius, it is said, He was against all, and all against him, and the world
groaned, wondering at it self that it was wholly become Arrian. The catching
nature of error is wonderful, how men run from one Error to another, and how
this spark of fire kindles all that it comes near. How many in our days having
first sucked in Antinomian tenets, have thence become Socinians, then
Anti-Trinitarians, Anti-Scripturists, and at last sta^^k Atheists? And how
catching do we find it, through the righteous judgment of God, not stopping the
malice of Satan which promotes men's corruptions to the carrying an end of
error? One wicked man spoileth much good, Eccless. 9. ult. he may be as an
Achan in an army, as a Jonah in a Ship, a trouble-town, a common mischief, a
Traitor to the state; especially if he be an eminent man, as Jeroboam that made
Israel to sin, and Manasseh filling Jerusalem with blood, and causing Judah
also to sin, 2 King. 21. 11. and bringing on them that evil threatened, verse.
12. A little leaven leaveneth the whole lump, 1 Cor. 5. 6. spreading the
infection of his wickedness, that is more catching than the Plague. Compared to
leven in regard both of the Persons self, in that it does more and more sour
and pollute the Soul, till at last it has left no place free, if seasonable
Repentance prevent it not; and in regard of the whole Congregation, in that it
spreads further and further in the body of the Church, if timely and
effectual opposition be not made.

Secondly, As to the rott of Heresy, so the Scab of unrighteous practices, are
Christians much subject to, which also is of a spreading and a dangerous
nature. Hitherto may we apply that of Levit. 19. 29. As error, so
unrighteousness is catching; especially if it be of any in some eminency. Peter
cannot dissemble alone, but carries away Barnabas and others with him, Gal. 2.
12. 13. The sins of Teachers, are the Teachers of sins; the sins of men in
Authority seem to give Authority to sin. Great men's sins go as seldom
unaccompanied as their persons: Yea, such men's example is a kind of compulsion,
Why compellest thou, etc? 'Twas of the incestuous Corinthian that the Apostle
uses that Proverb, 1 Cor. 5. 6. practical unrighteousnness is apt to creep
from one part to another: David's sloth to gazing, to lusting, to adultery in
the act, to flattery, making Vriah drunk, and staid not till it came to
downright murder. So Peter's fear to denying his Master with cursing and
swearing.

But, Thirdly, Above all, how apt are even Saints themselves to be heated in
their blood, and so lifted up, above themselves with the fever of pride? Ah!
how apt are men to swell, and think highly of themselves, even because by Grace
they have received more than others? Good food and good feeding makes much
blood, and hence Fevers and Pleurisies many times ensue. I knew a man whose
many, and those dangerous, Distempers Physicians said were occasioned This was
according to the old notion, that the Liver is officina sanguinis.
by the goodness of his Liver, which did sanguifie much, and he being a free
Eater, often fell into Fevers, etc. Pride, like the thistle, grows in the best
Soil. Not only those that knew not God, but such also as he had done much for,
too often forget him and themselves too. Isreal's pride testified to his face,
Hos. 5. 5. it is the great master-pock of the Soul. Though the Apostle says
knowledge puffs up, 1 Cor. 8. 1. Yet, Pride usually flows from ignorance. --
They have not known the Lord, The Pride of Israel testifies, etc. The
Laodiceans were therefore proud, because ignorant, thou know not that thou
art wretched, etc so those question-sick Phantasticks were proud, knowing
nothing, 1 Timothy 6. 4. And the Apostle would have his Romans not be ignorant,
lest they should be puffed up, Romans 11. 25. Miriam's pride was great, Numb. 12.
2. and it testified to her face, verse. 10. and Hezekiah's too, 2 Chronicles. 32. 25,
26, 31. As there be white teeth in the blackest Blackmore, so there is a black
bill in the whitest Swan; but Hezekiah's Submissior factus est a superbia
cordis sui. Vatabl.
pride humbled him the more, verse. 26. as God gives his People to be gainers by
their sins; whence that paradox of Augustin's, My sins in some sense do me more
good than my graces; for they make me afterward more humble, careful, more
thankful for a Savior, more merciful to others, more desirous of the state of
Perfection, etc. Pride did early bud in the World. The first act of the first
Creatures, Angels, of them that fell, was pride, say some. And there are that
probably not unfitly think, that it had much influence on Eve, Genesis 3. 6. Even
in Christ's Family it too much prevailed, Mat. 18. 1. Mar. 9. 34. Paul speaks
his own danger, 2 Cor. 12. 7. That Revelations of Divine Mysteries should be
puffing up, is sad; Yet, as Ezekiel, lest he should be lifted up with his many
rare visions, is frequently called Son of Man, to put him in mind of his
mortality and miserable condition; so had Paul a Thorn in the Flesh, a
corruption edged with some temptation, left he should be exalted. If Paul had
not been buffeted, who knows whither he would have swollen? He might have been
carried higher in conceit, than before he had been in his ecstasy. This Thorn
in his Flesh was a mean to let out the Impostumated matter of pride out of his
heart. And he that had found the evil of it in himself, forewarnes others of
it, Romans 12. 3. 1 Timothy 6. 17. not to think, not to conceit highly of
themselves. Even Church Officers may be in danger hereof, 1 Timothy 3. 6. and
Churchmembers too; to be proud of the gift of God, the Blessings of God, the
helps afforded us by God, Health, Wealth, Credit, Authority, etc. is bad; but
O! to be proud of the Graces of God, how sad?

And O! that, Fourthly, We could not say, that the Sheep of Christare very
subject to the Giddy, to turn round, to be unsettled, and unconstant; But alas!
sad experience too much attests it. How Childish are many Professors, ever
learning, never able to come to the knowledge of the Truth. It Is much to be
lamented that what Paul speaks of the effect of the Ministry, is no more
evident in too many, Ephesians. 4. 14. The craft and cogging of men, how does it
carry too many about with every wind of Doctrine? Many men's heads are so big,
that they are too heavy for their bodies: so much wind in them that it carries
them about like wind-mills, which way soever the Wind sits. They are like a
feather or froth upon the water, wherried about with every puff of wind;
unstable Souls, as Peter calls them, 2 Pet. 2. 14. simple that believe every
thing, like Solomon's simpleton, Pro. 14. 1. Giddy hearers that have no mould,
but what the next Teacher casts them into; being blown like glasses into this
or that shape, at the pleasure of his breath. God's Temple had two Pillars,
Jachin and 1 Kin. 7. 21.
Boaz; so should the Saints of the Most High, who are his spiritual Temple, in
him is strength, that is Boaz, and therefore, he will establish his, that is
Jachin. For the present, (says Trap in loc.) they have strength in themselves,
(i. e. put into them by God,) and for the future, God will so direct and
stablish them with his Grace, that they shall never wholly depart from him. See
Rev. 3. 12. this should persuade them to be steadfast now, 1 Cor. 15. ult. (...)
that they be established in the present truth, 2 Pet. 1. 12.

Lastly, Christians are too apt to be diseased in their feet; not to (...)
foot it right as Paul speaks of Peter and the rest with him, Gal. 2. 14. As
the way of the Lord is straight, Psalm. 5. 8. so should Christians walk straight
in that way, Heb. 12. 13. and not halt, nor be weary running the race of his
Commandments. It is far ea^^ier to find high talking, than close-walking
Christians. Too many alas! soon tire, hot at hand, and soon give out; faint,
contrary to the Apostle's advice, Gal. 6. 9. (...), give not in as tired jades;
not slack our pace in Religion. Ambrose observes of the Fig Tree, Poma
decidunt, ut folia succedant.
that the Fruit falls, to give way to the leaves: Such are they that begin in
fruit and end in leaves; weary of well-doing, and so lose the things which they
have wrought, Jo. 2. 8. It Is a shame for Christians to faint in ways of truth
and holiness, seeing even the Quaerendi defatigatio t^^rpis (...), cum id quod
quaeritur sit pulcherrimum. Cicer. de fin.
Orator says, it is dishonorable to faint in the search of that, which being
found will more than pay for the pains of searching. Caleb was not discouraged
by the Giants, therefore he had Hebron the place of Giants, Josh. 14. 12. 13.
so they that faint not in the way to Heaven, shall inherit Heaven.

Reflections.
What need have thou, O my Soul! of care, diligence and endeavor that For the
vaunting Professor.
thou be kept up in a good way, and not fall from it? It Is not every one that
gets into the good way, that keeps on in it. The Galatians did begin well, yet
were hindered by those deceitful workers, false Teachers, which turned them from
the simplicity of the Gospel. Thou think thon stand, O my Soul, take heed
lest thou fall; have thou not heard of some, who have been turned out of the
way of Truth and Holiness by the deceitfulness of their own hearts, their
deceitful lusts, or the subtilty of others? Thou were best therefore take the
advice of the Apostle, 2 Pet. 3. 17. fear a snake under every flower, a snare
under every new Truth, as men speak. Ah try the Spirits, whether they be of God
or no, because many false Prophets are abroad, who deceive the hearts of the
simple. None are veryer Fools than they that trust in their own hearts, after
so much experience of their treachery. That story is famous of Saunders and
Pendleton in the beginning of Q. Mary her Reign. Be not high-minded, but fear.
The common rott may take thee if not preserved.

Much cause of sticking and cleaving close to the Lord, have thou, For the poor
believing Christian
O my Soul! In such a declining, backsliding loose day as this is. There are
many assaults and temptations from without, and many weaknesses have I within,
exposing me to the deceit of Error and prevalency of unrighteousness even as
others. My pride, my ignorance, my wantonness is great: O let me keep close to
the Lord. It Is an evil day wherein I live. It is an ingenuous thing indeed to
be a Christian, as one said of the Primitive times. One says, lo here, and
another, lo there is Christ; Lord, lead me, and keep me in the right way, in
the way of Truth and Holiness. Many stars are fallen from Heaven, many that
seemed some years since to have their faces set for Canaan, are returned to the
Fleshpots of Egypt, and others have been in the Wilderness so long, that they
have lost themselves, and are become a mere nothing in Religion. O that I may
be kept waiting upon God in his own ways! That I may be so,

First, O my Soul, trust not in thine own heart, Prove. 3. 5, 7. and 23. 4. and
28. 26. God loves to confute men in their own confidences, as he did the
Philistines in their Champion Goliath. Trust not, no, not Trust it self, but God
alone on whom it rests, who is therefore called our Trust. He is two Fools that
is wise in his own eyes. Consilii satis est in me mihi --
I have wisdom enough in me for my self, is the proud man Motto. Hoc scio, quod
nihil scio.
This I know that I know nothing, got Socrates the Name of the wisest man in
the World.

Secondly, Entrust thy self to the Lord to be kept; say with David, 1 Chro. 29.
18. pray that God would keep thine heart in an holy way, and keep up thine
heart in an holy temper. That he will fix thy Quicksilver; that he would give
thee with full purpose of heart to cleave to him, Act. 11. 23. for the strength
in which any of his stand, is from above, 2. Cor. 1. 21.

Thirdly, Humbly give up thy self to be led by God: In this sense only is blind
obedience good. Go with Abraham, whithersoever the Lord calls. God loves not
quaeristas, but curristas, said Luther, not those that dispute, but those that
dispatch what he commands. When the Lord speaks, say, thy Servant hears, i. e.
to obey and do. The humble lowly Soul will he led and keep in the way, Psalm.
25. 9.

Faint not, O my Soul! in the way! take courage, go on, though with some For
the weak Christian.
difficulty; the end will sweeten the means. Consider, sore though thou be, it
will not be long e're thou be laid up in a place of rest. As that Noble that
traveling to Jerusalem in Pilgrimage on foot, when galled and tired, would
encourage himself, with I am going to Jerusalem; so do thou, that thou art
going toward Jerusalem that is above.

CHAP. XIII.
For profit Sheep most Creatures do excel,
Saints others should exceed in doing well.

Observation.
SHeep of all Creatures among us are most universally profitable. No wonder
that the Ancients placed great part of their wealth in Sheep, seeing they are
such enriching Creatures. Whatsoever comes from them is some way or other
useful. They have not only flesh for food, and fleece for raiment; but for
Physic also for man and beast, is it a very useful Creature. Some Creatures
are useful only whilst alive as the Horse, Dog, etc. of which we have emolument
only whilst living; but being dead are only Carrion, offensive, and therefore
to be thrown out of sight. Some Creatures are useful only when dead, whilst
alive rather offensive and hurtful, if not duly watched, and care taken of
them; such are Swine, whose grunting noise and unsavory smell trouble us;
besides the spoil they make wherever they come, if great heed and care be not
taken to them; Hence we say, Swine are never good till they are hung up by the
heels. But now the Cow, the Bullock, and the Sheep especially, are of great use
both living and dead: The Cow for the pail, the Bullock for drought while
alive, and when slaughtered for the trencher. The Sheep herein excells, for the
revenue she yearly affords in fleece and lamb, it is hard if it defraies not the
charge of it is keeping; its dung, ye know how it manures your Land; the little
charge ye are at in improving your Lands by any compost for tillage, where your
Sheep have walked, especially have lodged, is sufficient evidence how enriching
they are to your Country. And whereas ye may observe how the Urine of Con^es
will scorch up your grass; and make the places where they haunt not only bare,
without grass, but red also and much discolored: contrary wise the water of
Sheep, what a verdure will it cause in the furrows into which it sinks, and
where it leaves its strength? Its Wool, its Lamb, its Pelt, its Flesh, its
Entrails, its very Excrements speak it a very profitable Creature. And these
things are better known, than that they should be much spoken to.

Application.
And ought not Saints, the Sheep of Christ, be very useful in their generation?
They are, or ought to be a public good; what they have, and what they are
through Grace, they are and have to be there withal doing good. (...).
A good man is a common good. They are useful to God, to men.

First, to God. Not that the Lord has any need of their service, who can exalt
his own Glory, both in his power and in his greatness, by what Creatures soever
he pleases; and therefore can make small flies ve^ the Egyptians, and lice
devour a proud King; and even greedy ravens to feed an hungry Prophet, 1 King.
17. 4. 6. God hereby showing not only what care he takes of his, to supply
their wants in their greatest difficulties and streights: but also that to that
end, he can alter and change the nature of Creatures: and make those Birds that
are cruel to their own young, and mind feeding only themselves, Caterers for
his when he appoints them to that office. Tho, Isay, God has no need of any
service from any of his, yet is he pleased to make use of their service, and he
expects service from them. To this end are they new-made, Ephesians. 2. 10. When he
brought Israel out of Egypts Bondage, he had a ser-vice for them to observe and
keep, Exodus 12. 25. so when he saves his out of the hands of his Enemies, it
is, that they may serve him, Luke 1. 74. Hence Saints and Servants of God, are
as terms convertible in Scripture; he expects that His being called out of
darkness into his mavelous light, should show forth his Glory, 1 Pet. 2. 9. a
people purchased on purpose to show forth his virtues. The Greek (...).
word signifies publicly to set forth, and so to excite others to glorify
God. Saints must preach forth the virtues of God by their suitable practices.
The picture of a dear friend should be hung up in a conspicious place of the
house, to be seen of all; So should Gods holy Image and Grace in our hearts and
lives. Se diligere Coristum habitantem in Augustino.
Hierome says he did love Christ dwelling in Augustine: So ought Saints to
walk, that others may see and love Christ dwelling in them. It Is true, man by
all he does can add nothing to God. Eliphaz's question strongly asserts this,
Job. 22. 2. God was God as much before there was any Creature as ever since the
Creatures were; therefore Creatures can add nothing to him. Psalm. 90. 2. Even
our Worship he has no such need of, Act. 7. 25. he that gives all things to
all men, needs nothing of any man; not only our gifts and parts, but even our
holiness and graces, do not make us necessary unto God. God may say to the
Great ones of the Earth, I have no need of you; so to the rich: Yea, to the
Godly and the holy, I have no need of you neither. Wherefore whatsoever God
requires of us, he aims at our profit or good, not his own. Yet is he
pleased to esteem as if he received a revenue of Glory from his people, Psalm.
50. 23. Though he be the God of Glory, Act. 7. 2. though his Glory be as
himself, Infinite and Eternal, and therefore not capable of our addition or
detraction, (the Sun would shine, if all the world were blind) yet to try how
we prize his glory, and what we will do for him, he has declared, that he
accounts himself made glorious by his, when they conceive of him above all
Creatures, and show forth his praises. Though the poor ones of God, best of
any, apprehend Him as El-Shaddai, the selfsufficient, and all-sufficient God,
as having need of nothing besides or without himself: Yet they, that in their
measure are like spirited with David, after Gods own heart, will do all his
wills, Act. 13. 22. i. e. serve out the will of God in their generation, verse.
36. viz. as Beza opens that expression, Consilium Dei sibi pro vitae scopo
proponunt. Bez.
make God's will their mark to aim at in all they do.

Secondly, to men are Saints useful; To others, to themselves. To others, and
that to good, to bad men. To good men, First, by their prayers, by which they
many times advantage one another; when at a distance, can thus reach each
other; Herein the weakest Saints in parts may be useful to the highest and most
richly furnished. Hence Paul so often and so earnestly recommends himself to
the prayers of the Saints, Ephesians. 6. 18, 19. Col. 4. 3. 2 Thessalonians. 3. 1.
especially see Romans 15. 30. which is one of those passages in Paul, Haec una
est ex illis Pauli Phrasibus, quibus nihil gravius, excellentius, divinius
cogitari potest. Bez. in loc.
than which there can nothing possibly be imagined more grave, divine,
excellent, says Beza. Strive even to an agony. Pray for me, I say, pray for
me, said Father Latimer. Pray for me, pray for me, for Gods sake pray for me,
said blessed Bradford. Paul speaks of the Spirits supply to come in this way,
for the furtherance of Salvation, Phil. 1. 19. Luther in the year 1540 prayed
for Melancthon well, falling sick at Vinaria, as he was going to the meeting of
the Ministers of Haganaw upon the Rhine, and Melancthon confessed that if
Luther had not come, he had dyed. Myconius also was wont to say, that Luther
obtained this for him by Prayer, that he should outlive him, as he did six
years. Indeed of him it became a Proverb, Iste vir potuit apud Deum quod
voluit, that he could do what he would with God. Hence it is a dreadful thing
to be shut out of the Prayers of the People of God, especially his Prophets,
Jer. 7. 16. and 11. 14. and 14. 11. and a signal mercy to be interessed in
their prayers, Genesis 20. 7. Job. 42. 8. Hence it is that the Saints of the Most
High can in their measure still say, as David, Psalm. 109. 4. (...) Et ego
oration; vel, in oratione eram; vel vir orationis eram. Sic, ego pax, Psalm. 120.
7. vel^intentus s^m precationi. Tig.
word for word, but I prayer, as if he had been made up of it, or minded little
else.

Secondly, by their exhortations. These are as Spurs in one another sides, by
which they drive forward in the ways of God. Exhort one another daily, Heb. 3.
13. The same word [(...)] signifies to exhort and to comfort; hereby they
comfort one another by their mutual exhortations; this way the feeble knees are
strengthened, and the hands that hang down. What refreshings have many of the
poor ones of God found from the advice and counsel they have had from one
another? Hence they ought to consider one another, etc. Heb. 10. 24. study one
another's case, the causes and cure of their spiritual maladies and distempers,
being sollicitous of one another welfare: to whet, Sharpen, and ex(...)late,
to set an edge on one another, as boars whet their tusks one against another,
says Nazianzen. It Is no easy matter indeed to give or receive counsel,
advice, reproof especially, as they should be given and taken; the more heed
should be taken therein. David knew such faithful dealing would be far from
injuring him, Psalm. 141. 5. He thought the better of Nathan for so roundly
reproving of him, 2 Samuel 12. and made him of his Council, 1 King. 1. Peter
thought the better of Paul for dealing with him so plainly at Antioch, Gal. 2.
and makes honorable mention of him and his writings, 2 Pet. 3. Though the
Truth is, this is not every ones case to be able to take kindly a rebuke,
though given in tenderness. It were to be wished that that Character given of
Gerson (that great Chancellor of Paris) were to be given of many others, that
have more clear discoveries of Gospel Light and truth than he had, viz. Nulla
re alia tantopere delectaretur, quam si ab aliquo fraterne et charitative
redargueretur.
that he rejoiced in nothing so much as in a friendly reprehension. In that 141
Psalm. we read it shall be an excellent Oil, Hebr. an Head Oil, such as they
poured on their friends heads, when they would speak them most welcome, which
was wont to be of the best. [It shall not break my head] or, let him not let it
fail my head, let him not cease to do me this good office daily; I shall count
it a courtesy, and requite it with my best prayers Dr. Tailor Martyr told his
Friends, that God had provided graciously for him, to send him to that Prison,
where he found such an Angel of God as Mr. Bradford, to be in his Company to
comfort him.
for him in his greatest necessity, yet my prayer shall be, etc.

Thirdly, By their Example, being patterns and provocations to good, one to the
other. They kindle each other into a flame, and add strength and encouragement
to each other. Jer. 50. 8. [As He-Goats before the Flock] i. e. Praeite aliis
bono exemplo. Pisc.
go before others by your good example. Sheep are fearful, and therefore go
behind; Goats are not so, and therefore go before. They that have received most
strength from the Lord, should encourage others by their forwardness. I cannot
here but hint that note of one of our own on that Text. There is good hopes,
says he, that we are going out of Babylon, when the He-Goats go before the
Flock, when men of public place and authority are active for Reformation. And
is not the contrary true also? It Is not the duty of Ministers alone (though
much theirs because of that place they stand in to the Lord and his People) but
of all else that are Christians indeed, especially as they are entrusted with
any excellency, whether of gifts; graces, or authority in Family, etc. in all
things to show themselves a pattern of good works, Tit. 2. 7. The word is
observable; (...), Archetypum Sanctae conversationis. Est. Non verbis tantum
praeire debes, sed and exemplo. (...) pro exemplari quod imitandum propo^itur,
habemus. Phil. 3. 17. etc. Gro.
it signifies a form made by engraving, impression, or any kind of beating,
such as we see in stamps, seals or signets. Christians must be such a thing as
makes the stamp on the Coin; their carriage should be ensamples, so is the word
rendered, 1 Thessalonians. 1. 7. 1 Pet. 5. 3.

To evil men Saints are, or should be profitable. They are a general good, and
that even to those that are not good, neither before God, nor to them. They
avert Judgments from them, they procure blessings for them, Job. 22. ult. read
it either as we, he shall deliver the Island of the innocent, or as others, the
innocent shall deliver the Island; or as others, Quinetiam liberabet noxium, q.
d. non solum ad prices tuas liberabit Deus innocentem, sed (quod magis mirum
est) etiam nocentem, ut Genesis 18. 32. Pisc.
he shall deliver him that is not innocent, him that is guilty. They are useful
to the wicked,

First, By their presence; it is for their sakes that many a vile person enjoys
the good things of the Earth and the Heavens. Their presence staves off
Judgments, which come storming down upon the ungodly, as soon as these are
removed. Lot's presence kept Sodom from burning, no sooner is he out of it, but
it is on a flame. One man that was a man indeed, i. e. in favor with God, etc.
might have saved Jerusalem, Jer. 5. 1. Diogenes is said to have sought for a
man in Homines per^ulti, viri perpauci, Herod.
Athens with a Lanthorn and Candle at noonday; so might the Prophet in
Jerusalem, and not have found one; despised Godliness had been Jerusalem's
preservation. Judgment comes in like a Land-flood, when these Floodgates are
removed. When Augustine was taken to Heaven, Hippo was taken by the Goths and
Vandals. When Luther dead, Germany was overrun with Idolatry and villainy: as
Heidleberg was plundered by the Spaniards when once Pareus was laid asleep. God
would not so much as look on the wicked in a way of mercy, but for his Peoples
sake among them; 2 King. 3. 14.

Secondly, By their Counsels and instructions, by which they are often the
means of Conversion to them; turning them from sin, and bringing them to
Repentance; an happy way of profiting, by saving them. This is much of a
Ministers work, 1 Timothy 4. 16. yet ought it to be the care and endeavor of
other Saints too. This will be much their honor as well as comfort that they
bring any to Righteousness, and so shall shine as Stars in the Firmament.

Thirdly, By their prayers and intercessions for them; Job. 22. ult. pureness
of hands] Quia tu pro illo (nempe noxio) in precibus puras sustulisti manus,
Scult. ut saepe justi consilio aut precibus etiam nocentibus prosunt. Merc.
the sign for the thing signified, the gesture for what is done in that
gesture. The lifting up of hands is a gesture in prayer, and the lifting up of
pure hands notes the purity of prayer, 1 Timothy 2. 8. this the sense in Job, it
shall be delivered by holy prayer, or when thou prayest holily: yet this must
not be taken without a caution: It Is not the Privilege of Saints always to
deliver those that are not innocent; though often such dignity is afforded his
people by the Lord, and which none are afforded but Saints, to be Saviors and
Deliverers of a people among whom they dwell. God gave Zoar to Lot, and all the
Souls in the Ship to Paul, Act. 27. 23, 24. God has given thee [Tibi dat] i.
e. Tui causa eos servat. unus int erdum navim perdit, unus interdum navim
servat. Idem contingit in Republica. Grot.
etc. they owe their safety to thee, to thy prayers, to thy Company. So God
gave the guilty Israelites to Moses. But it is not Universally true; the Lord
has given express exceptions to this rule, Jer. 15. 1. Though Moses and Samuel
stood before me, yet my mind could not be toward this people. Moses that
Chancellor of Heaven, who not only ruled with God, but overruled, Exodus 32.
11-14. Numb. 14. 19, 20. and Samuel mighty in prayer, 1 Samuel 7. 9. called
therefore Pethuel, Joel. 1. 1. says R. Solomon, that is a Godperswader. See to
Ezekiel 14. 14. Yet often Saints do thus; Moses, Psalm. 106. 23. for want of such
an one God complains, Ezekiel. 22. 30.

To themselves chiefly are the Saints of the Most High profitable or
serviceable. Job. 22. 2. He that is wise may be profitable to himself. The Heb.
word signifies to understand, to be prudent; and, by a Metonymie, to be happy,
or to prosper, because usually affairs succeed well and prosper in the hands of
wise men, happiness usually follows true wisdom. All wisdom is not profitable
unto men, for there is a wisdom of which the Scripture says, that God will
destroy it, 1 Cor. 1. 19. and there is a wisdom that is earthly, sensual and
devilish, Ja. 3. 15. there are a sort of wise men whom the Lord will take in
their craftiness, 1 Cor. 3. 19, and there are wise men whose thoughts the Lord
knows to be but vain, verse. 20. none of these can men profit themselves by,
but there is a spiritual Wisdom, and that will bring in profit indeed. He that
is guided by Holy and Godly Wisdom, shall reap the benefit and eat the Fruit of
it. This the Scripture attests largely, and glad experience too evinces it. See
Pro. 9. 12. Tibi aras, tibi occas, tibi seris, tibi eidem metis, Tibi denique
iste pariet laetitiam labor, Plaut. in Market.
Men profit not God but themselves by their holiness, they labor not in vain:
so false and injurious to God is the evil report of those worse men, Mal. 3.
14. We read in Scripture of some good men as rich as, yea, more rich than many
others; though God will not have it always so, that holiness may be beloved
for it self, and that his may appear not to love him for gain: Yet God had but
a little before appealed to their own experience that he was not wanting to
them for any thing they did for him, Chap. 1. 10. And the Apostle assures us, 1 Timothy 4. 8. that Godliness is profitable unto all things. Nunquam non, and
nusquam non est ut^lis* Est haec sententia opposita dicto impiorum, Job. 34* 9.
Gro^.
Whatsoever drops out of any promise of the Gospel, falls into the lap of a
Godly man. The promises are his, and therefore the good of the promise is his.
The truly Godly lay up a good foundation for themselves, 1 Timothy 6. 19.

Reflections.
What cause of moan, fear and shame For the selfish unprofitable Christian.
have such as live unprofitably in the World? who call themselves Christians,
and yet mind nothing save themselves; seek themselves, and serve themselves in
all, their own profits, Pleasures, interests, yea, humors too, and will not
let go any of these for the profit of others, no nor for the credit of the
Gospel it self. How contrary (may such say) do I walk unto the Apostle of our
Lord, both in his advice, Romans 15. 1. [to bear] as Porters do their burdens, as
Pillars do the poise of the house, or rather as Parents do their Children in
their arms. verse. 2. [to please his neighbour] though he cross himself; this is
indeed true Christian love, but is driven almost out of the World by sinful
self-love, which causes men to dislike those things in others, that they
favor and flatter in themselves: And in his example also, 1 Cor. 10. ult. who
pleased all men in all things lawful and laudable, not seeking his own profit,
etc. It should shame Christians for their contrary walking, even to their great
pattern, the Lord Jesus, Romans 15. 3. Ah where is the Christian, when the man is
contentious, quarrelsome, self-pleasing, and self-seeking? I bring up an evil
report upon the Gospel, and the Profession thereof, (may such say) and will the
Lord take it well at my hands? How few Christians are so convictive by their
usefulness and serviceableness to others, to make men say as Laban to Jacob,
Genesis 30. 27. The Lord has blessed me for thy sake? It Is the excellency of
Christianity to cast abroad good wherever men come, to credit the Gospel by a
being as generally useful as may be. Their discourses should be savoury, ^phes.
4. 29. Col. 4. 6. their all useful. Of a (...)ain Scotch Divine, it is said
that he did eat and drink and sleep the Kingdom of Heaven.


May ungodly Sinners, haters of goodness and good men, say within For the
Foolish and ungrateful World.
themselves, what folly and madness is this of ours, that can hardly afford
them a good word, by and from whom we receive so much good? or scarcely think
them worthy of a room to live in the World, for whose sakes it is that we our
selves live? How often do we wish and seek their destruction; for whose sakes
it is that our selves are not destroyed? How often accuse we the Godly as
troublers of States and Nations, who are indeed the 1 King. 18. 17. 2 King. 2.
12.
Chariots and Horsemen of them, their protection and defense, their Salvation
and deliverance? The breaches we make by sinning, they make up by praying, and
yet shall we still defy and persecute them? The holy seed is the substance of
a Nation or People, Semen Sanctum statumen terrae. Absque stationibus non
stare^ mundus.
Isa. 6. 13. The primum mobile, say Astronomers, turns about with such
swiftness, that, but for the counter-motion of the Planetes and other Spheres,
all would be^ired: So would the wicked World, but for the Saints, who keep a
constant counter-motion to the corrupt practices thereof. An Heathen could say,
that a People were never safe by the standing of their Walls, while themselves
were falling in their virtues. O that men would at last be convinced, that
Godliness is the Sampson's lock wherein the strength of a Nation lies. On this
account therefore (if there were nothing else in it) it is good policy to
encourage piety, and to endeavor the Caryl on Job. 22. ult*
increase of an holy seed, in a nation. It is not safe to have them discouraged
by whom our safety is established; much less is it safe to let them fall, by
whom in their capacity Kingdoms stand: least of all is it safe to cast them
down, who (by the rule of Divine politics) are State-up-holders. Let men
therefore take heed they destroy not them that are such common goods; yea, take
heed of deadning or straitning their Spirits in prayer for you. O men of the
world, above all take heed of turning their prayers against you; do not provoke
your own Horsemen to fight against you, and your own Chariot-Wheels to run over
you! 'Twere better have many outwardly oppose you, than one such (upon just
grounds) secretly praying, or but complaining to God against you. They are your
Pillars that uphold you, do not cut them, and make all tumble down about your
ears. Mary Queen of Scots feared John Knox's prayers more than an Army of Ten
Thousand men. Make much of Christ's Flock by whom ye receive so much good.

CHAP. XIV.
By fruitfulness Sheep do their owners raise;
Saints would bring others in, their God to praise.

Observation.
NO small way and means by which the Sheep enrich their Owne^s is their
fruitfulness, whereby they run a man up to a stock presently. Thus was Laban
from a little come to great wealth, Genesis 30. 30. his stock was little when
Jacob came, and now it was broken out, and increased to a multitude. Jacob also
from nothing but a staff, in few years was owner of great Flocks, Genesis 30. ult.
in so much, as that Labans Sons begrutched him his increase, Chap. 31. 1. Fecit
hanc gloriam] i. e. divitias, has enim sequitur gloria, Vatab. Alii vertunt
gravitatem, substantiam, possessionem, etc.
But these things are so obvious to experience, that there is no need of
farther mention. Three ways of multiplying have these Creatures above other
useful and enriching stock, which speaks them fruitful, and thereby of great
advantage.

First, They will receive the Ram whilst young; by that time they are Twelve or
Thirteen Months old, ye may see them with Lambs by their sides. Though I know
Sheep-Masters with us endeavor carefully to prevent such a thing, because of
the spoil of the breed, such usually being not so large, nor bringing forth
their young so large and strong, as those that are kept from the Ram till
elder, yet in the beginning of their breed in Ireland, after the war ceased,
men were more desirous of growing up in number, knowing that they could better
their breed by culling, as they would. Whereas we see the Hei^er is two or
three years old before she has a Calf at her Foot; it is otherwise with the
Sheep, or may be, if ye list.

Secondly, Sheep will frequently bring twins, couples, and thereby grow and
increase much in multitude. This also I know is now against our Sheepmasters,
who say one good Lamb is better than two small ones: yet, we sometimes find an
Ewe with a Lamb at each side, and they kindly and bravely thriving, and the Dam
feeding them up well enough. And this in Palestine seems to be accounted a
special advantage, of which we read in Solomon's Song once and again, Chap. 4.
2. and 6. 6. Foecundae oves gemellos pariunt magnitudine aequales.
[none barren] not only singly, but bringing forth couples too; and this will
easily grow to a great stock.

Thirdly, Some Sheep in some Countries bring forth twice in one and the same
year, and so are fruitful that way. Thus many understand and interpret, Genesis
30. 41, 42. of Sheep bringing forth at two several times in the year Bonfrerius
Notum est in regionibus calidioribus and fertilioribus pecudes ^is in anno
concipere and parere: Hinc Virgil de Italia, ^is gravidae pecudes.
speaks of this as a known thing in hotter Countries; those that conceived in
September or October, and brought forth in March; or conceived in the Spring,
and brought forth in September. It is not our business at present to enquire
whether of these were the stronger; Men are diversified in their judgments
concerning it, and much is said on this side, and on that: our present search
is whether such a twofold bringing forth be or no. Many of the Translations in
Bibl. Polygl. read the forementioned Text to his sense: Bonfrerius also, Rivet,
Ainsworth, and Diodate with others so understand it. And that ye may know that
this, though unusual with us, yet has not been unheard of, I remember when I
was a Schoolboy, to have seen in Devonshire about a score of Ewes in one man's
possession, which they said, did bring forth twice in the year. Such as these,
ye will easily think will soon raise a stock to great numbers: Especially if
you take with you Ainsworth's note on Cant. 4. 2. the last clause he reads,
none among them is bereaved of the young, and notes, that barren is that which
bears not, Isa. 54. 1. but the word here used [Shacal] signifies (...)
either miscarrying in the birth, or loss of that which is brought forth, by
robbery, death, or the like. Such twin-bearers or double bearers in the year,
not lessened by any casualty, will soon multiply into great Flocks.

Application.
In this also are the Saints of the living God like Sheep, who by bringing
forth, and bringing up others into the Fold of Christ, enlarge his Flock, and
thereby his revenue of Glory and Praise. They that are barren, or have a
miscarrying Womb, appear little to be of Christ's Flock; no more than Israel was
Gods vine, when it brought forth grapes to it self, and is therefore called an
empty vine; Hos. 10. 1. so men that draw Disciples after them, Act. 20. 30. not
that they might win them to Christ, but tie them to themselves, are deceivers,
and speak perverse things. But they that have the Spirit of Jesus Christ indeed
in them, O how would they endeavor to bring over others to the obedience of
Christ? It is said of the Pharisees, Mat. 23. 15. Fuit autem consilium
Pharisaeorum non Deo Proselytos, sed sibi and sectae suae discipulos and
asseclas conciliare. Camer.
that they compassed Sea and Land to make one Proselyte, that is, they took
great pains, moved every stone, to bring over Disciples to themselves. But the
Disciples of Christ long and labor to bring over, not followers of themselves,
but Disciples of their Lord; or if followers of them, yet only as they are of
Christ, 1 Cor. 11, 1. The Spouse her Teeth, ye heard from Cant. 4. 2. are
compared to a Flock of new shorn, washed, and fruitful Sheep: Now what are
these Teeth? Interpreters, especially understand by them, the Pastors and
Ministers of the Churches: which are compared to eyes, verse. 1. as being Seers,
(so called of old) and here set out by Teeth; so the Chaldee Paraphrase plainly
mentions the Priests and the Levites which offered their oblations, and did eat
of the Flesh of the Sacrifices, the Tithes and Firstfruits. And truly the
Ministers of the Gospel are as much concerned, whose care it must be to bring
many to God, whom they may one day present with here am I, and the Children
whom the Lord God has given me. Paul shows himself a worthy instrument of God
this way, 1 Cor. 9. 19, 20, 21, 22, 23. ye find him there all for gaining, but
it is them, not theirs. The Greek word [(...)] there so often used and rendered
[gain] has two Etymons given it by learned men; it is, say some, quasi (...),
because it delights the hearts: Paul's heart was much taken up with, and
delighted in this work: Hence in those verses he harps so much on that string,
out of a strong desire of winning Souls to Christ. Others observe that (...)
(from whence this verb) signifies guile and craft as well as gain, even such
craft as is that of the Fox, which is hence called (...); of which Creature it
is storied, that when he is very hungry after prey, and can find none, he lies
down, and feigneth himself to be a dead carcass, and so the fowls fall upon
him, and then he catches them: Even so say these, must Ministers deny
themselves, that they may gain their hearers. They turn themselves into all
Shapes and Fashions, both of Spirit and Speech, that they may gain Souls to
God, striving to be (...), as the Athenian Orators were called, i. e.
people-leaders. Thus Paul shows his zeal also for God toward the Galatians,
Chap. 4. 19. when he puts on the Person of a most affectionate Mother; calling
them little Children, embryos, new formed in the Womb, of whom he did (...),
which word signifies not only that pain that is in bringing forth a Child into
the world, but also all that loathsomness, and sickness that Women endure
whilst they go with Child. Never did any sick Mother more desire to see the
Man-child, that sticks in the place of breaking forth of Children, than Paul
did to see Christ formed in these Galatians, viz. that they might seek for
Salvation by him alone. And as here he personates the Mother, so elsewhere the
Father, 1 Cor. 4. 15. Philem. 10. he will be any thing, Father, Mother, Nurse,
and what not? that their Souls might thrive. Thus Cyprian called Caecilius
(that converted him) novae vitae parentem, the Father of his new Life. And
Latimer says as much of his blessed Saint Bilny, as he called him. It Is to
this sense that most understand, Numb. 3. 1. Aaron's Sons by Nature, Moses's by
education and instruction, because Moses Quod eos Moses Legem docuisset, R. R.
in Muis. Eosque velut sibi adoptaverat, and instituer at Grot. Solent discipuli
filii vocari, Mu.
taught them the Law, say the Rabbis, and adopted them as his, and so
instructed them. It Is usual in Scripture for Disciples to be called Children,
see 2 King. 2. 5, 12.

But not only Ministers as such Design the begetting and bringing forth of
others to Christ, but even private Christians too would feign be at this work;
in their station and place speaking of the good things of God, and what they
have found of sins sinfulness, and God's grace and tenderness. David would tell
what God had done for his Soul; Psalm. 66. 16. Vide gratorum hominum ingenium,
qui alios secum trahunt ad Dei venerationem, etc. Gei.
Christianity is no churl; loves not to eat its morsels alone; would that
others should have experience of the same Grace. Aquila and Priscilla take
Apollos aside, and open the way of the Lord more plainly and more fully unto
him, Act. 18. 26. true grace is diffusive; hence compared to fire, water,
light, wind, etc. to spices and Aromatic Trees, that sweat out their precious
and sovereign Oils for the good of others. Apollos being helped by others,
helps others, verse. 27. he was not of those that had rather praeesse than
prodesse; nor of those that choose proficere rather than prodesse, to inform
themselves rather than to instruct others, to know than to teach; yea, he had
rather be an Angel for Ministry, than a Seraphim for illumination. Paul could
have been content, yea, and desirous too, that not only King Agrippa, but all
that heard him, were as he, those his bonds excepted, Act. 26. 29. Saints
endeavor to bring in others to Christ,

First, By their seasonable and well-tempered reproofs; showing them their sin,
and the greatness of that sin whereof they are guiltly. Reproofs must be well
timed, or else there is danger they may lose their effect; sometimes presently,
which at other times will rather incense than break the heart. Opportunities
should be watched for this work; Men are wisely to consider whether it may be
better done presently, and in hot blood, or more conveniently and profitably at
another time; Pro. 29. 11. Eccles. 3. 7. usually when men are in their drink, 1 Samuel 25. 36. or in the heat of passion, Pro. 18. 19. it is no time to reprove.
Though we have read of some that even then have spoken reproofs to good
purpose. Mr. White reports of a Knight not many years since, playing at Tables,
his Chaplain standing by, the Knight being angry, swore, the Chaplain reproved
him; the Knight swearing again, he reproved him again: whereupon the Knight in
much anger turning toward him, said, Who art thou that dare reprove me? The
Chaplain answered, Nay, but who are thou that thou dare thus blaspheme thy
Maker? The Knight being convinced by this just reproof, retired into his
Chamber, and gave his Chaplain Twenty pieces for his faithfulness to him.
Reproofs also must be well tempered, as well as seasonable; done in meekness.
Though sometimes some warmth be needful, yet should it not be scalding, lest
persons think it more out of wrath then kindness. Reproof is, though a
wholesome, yet a bitter Pill; there is need of gilding and sugaring it for the
best. As Eliphaz. to Job, if we essay to commune with thee, will thou be
grieved? Some reproach rather than reprove, little hopes that that will do any
good. The Apostles advice is the Spirit of meekness, Gal. 6. 1. no oratory so
powerful as that of mildness. Reproofs of instruction, Pro 6. 23 Reproofs
qualified as they ought have mighty force in them to bring People over to the
acknowledgment of their sin. Mr. Calamy speaks of Mr. Deering an eminent
Minister in Q. Elizabeth's time, being at a great feast, had a young Gallant
that sat over against him, who among other vain discourses brake out into
swearing: Whereupon Mr. Deering gravely and sharply reproved him; the Gallant
being impatient of reproof, flung a glass of Beer into his Face: Mr. Deering
took no notice of the abuse, but wiped his Face, and fell to his meat as
before, the young Gallant fell to his old discourse and swo^e again, and Mr.
Deering reproved him as before; upon which with more violence and rage he flung
another glass of Beer into his Face, but he again showed his zeal for Gods
glory to be right, by his meekness and silent bearing this injury also; at
which the young Gallant being astonished, rose up from the Table, fell down at
his knees, and asked him forgiveness, professing that if any one had offered
him such affronts, he should have stabbed him to the heart.

Secondly, By communicating their experiences, giving others to know what they
have found of sins sinfulness and misery, with the mercies of God surpassing
great. Come and I will tell you, etc. Psalm. 66. 16. I was thus and thus, says
Paul, and I obtained mercy. Real Christians would not eat their morsels alone,
but participate unto others, what God has freely communicated unto them. This,
no doubt was what Latimer says of Bilney, that he desired him to hear his
confession, it was not surely his barely repeating Credo in Deum, etc which
Latimer knew well enough, but it was what he had found God doing to; and upon
his heart; for of it Latimer acknowledges, that he thereby learnt more than he
had learnt in many ^^ars before. Thus the Apostle 2 Co^* 5.

Thirdly, By their holy and shining conversations. There is much conviction in
the regular life of those that profess God. Though men should beware not to
live holily, for this end that they may be seen of men; yet should they take
heed that men may see their good works, for this will engage them to glorify
their Father which is in Heaven, Mat. 5. 16. It Is a vain thing to reprove
others of what our selves are guilty; to show others the danger of sin* while
our selves venture on it. Quid verba audiam cum videam facta? One desired a
Minister to show him a nearer way to Heaven than he preached to them, for
himself went not that way. But the holy lives of Gods servants have mighty
force in them, either to convince, as were Nebuchadnezar, Darius, Dioclesian,
etc. or (which is better) to convert them that observe them. Justin Martyr
confesses of himself, that by beholding the Christians piety in life, and
patience in death, he gathered their Doctrine to be the Truth, and glorified
God in the day of his visitation. Of one Cecilia a Virgin it is reported, that
by her piety, constancy and exhortations before and after Martyrdom 400 were
converted. Chrysostom calls good works unanswerable syllogisms, invincible
demonstrations to confute and convert Pagans. Even Julian the Apostate could
not but acknowledge, that the Christian Religion spread by the holiness of the
lives of those that professed it. Bid (Hist. Angl. l. 1. c. 7.) mentions one
Albane, who receiving a poor persecuted Christian into his house, and seeing
his holy and devout carriage, was so much affected therewith, that he became an
earnest Professor of the Faith, and in the end a Glorious Martyr.

Fourthly, By their cheerful walking: There Is little hope to bring men off from
their carnality, wherein they consult their pleasures, by showing them the
severities only of Religion; as if real Godliness were a mere marr-mirth, and
had nothing pleasant or sweet in it. The probable and easy way to convince
men, is to let them see that Christianity has the most real sweets; that joy
in the Lord is worth that name indeed; whereas all carnal and sinful joy is but
a mere mock and counterfeit of it; in the midst of which the heart is sad:
whereas true Godliness rejoices in tribulation, is consistent with troubles in
the Flesh. The three Worthies could walk in the midst of the fiery furnace as
in some pleasant place, when the Son of God was with them. Any place is a
Paradise where God is present. What therefore he said flatteringly to his
Friend, 2 Samuel 13. 4. may be much more said to thee, O Christian, why art thou
lean from day to day, seeing thou art the Kings Son? How often does the Apostle
press to spiritual joy, and that in all states and conditions? Hardly any duty
more pressed in Old and New Testament, or less practiced. Fitly is Psalm. 33.
subjoyned to Psalm. 32. for as this ends, Be glad in the Lord, etc. so that
begins, Rejoice in the Lord, etc. Plato could tell the Musicians, that
Philosophers knew how to be merry without Music: much more may Gods People. As
a Traveller rides on merrily, and wears out the tediousness of the way, by
singing sweet songs unto himself: so should Saints, see Psalm. 119. 54.

Reflections
Have I indeed a name of For the loose Professor.
Christ's Sheep? But where is my being like his? where is my enriching my Lord,
by bringing forth, by bringing in others to him? have I been useful for the
conviction, for the conversion of any unto God? rather have I not cause to fear
lest others have been deterred and kept off from closing with the truths of God
through my pofaneness? has not the name of God been blasphemed among Atheists
and Worldlings because of me? have I not, with Judas, delivered the Lord Christ
to the scoffs and buffetings of his Enemies? May not Epiphanius's complaint be
taken up of me, that for the looseness of my life, and the baseness of my
carriage many shun the Company of Christians, and will not be drawn to converse
with them? Goes there not an ill report of Christians, because of mine
unchristian conversation? What say men even now adays? Such a man pretends to
be religious that is not morally honest. ^s it enough, think thou, O my
Soul! to pretend Religion in a way of worship, it may be, in some
discrimination from others, and yet prejudice others by thine uneven walking?
Will not the rating of the Jews of old by the Lord, Jer. 7, 8, 9, 10. ^ustly
fall upon me? Shall I be like the Scribes and Pharisees, to shut up the Kingdom
of Heaven against men, Mat. 23. 13. neither go in my self, nor suffer those
that are entering to go in? What advantage will it be to me one day, that I have
had a name in the house of God, a name to live, and yet have been found dead,
and my conversation deadly. It is indeed a great privilege to (a) be a
Christian, not only to seem to be so. An empty Title will yield but an empty
comfort at last. What though I seem to be something before men? fishing for
esteem and credit that way, shall I not be accounted by the Lord an empty vine
if I bring forth fruit only to my self? Up therefore, O my Soul! and bring
forth to the Lord.

How unlike Christ's Sheep am I, whose morose and froward carriage For the
peevish passionate Professor.
even frightens others from converse with me? Am I probable to allure and draw
others over to Christ, Esse Christianum grande est, non videri, Hieron.
who rather scare them away by my sullen and dogged carriage? Men formerly took
knowledge of Christ's disciples that they had been with Jesus? does any such
thing appear in me? was not he meek and lowly? Calls not he upon his followers
to learn of him? and shall I still be froward, and of a passionate hasty
Spirit? What though this be my natural constitution, that sin unto which my
natural temper most inclines me? Is this an excuse? Shall Socrates say that
Philosophy had made him who was most choleric by nature, patient and sweet
tempered? And shall my professing the Christian Philosophy do nothing with me?
Ah how amiable would meekness and kindness render me to men? Remember, said Mr.
Tindal to Mr. Frith, that as lowliness of mind shall make you high with God,
even so meekness shall make you sink into the hearts of men. Nothing is more
overcoming and constraining than a sweet, patient, pleasant conversation; it
attracts and draws others to us, as the lodestone does iron. Is it not a
shame, O my Soul! that after so many years professing Christ, I should lay such
a stumbling block in the way of others by my unconquered lust? that any should
have cause to say of me as Nabal's young men of him, 1 Samuel 25. 17. he is such
a Son of Belial, that a man cannot speak to him; so extreme froward, that there
is no talking to him? That I should be such an one as Caelius the Roman
Orator, who was said to be the Mortalium ille iracundissimus.
most passionate of men, the most froppish of any living? If nothing else will
cure thy pettish and froward Spirit, yet try for the Gospel's credit. Earl
Eleazar told his wife, that though passionate naturally, yet, when he found
wrath boiling up in him, he never left meditating on what Christ suffered, till
he had thereby wrought his heart into such a frame, that if his Servants had
plucked him by the beard, he could not be provoked. The study of the Scriptures
should do some thing this way, Pro. 16. 23. He that is slow to anger is better
than the mighty: and he that rules his Spirit, than he that takes a City. It
were well if the Character which Tertullian gives of the Christians in his
days, might be my characteristick, Nec aliund^ noscibiles quam de emendatione
vitiorum pristinorum.
to be most known by emending former evils, that others might be allured and
drawn over to the Lord, by seeing what energie the Gospel has upon my heart
and life.

How unserviceable am I unto my great and good God, through the For the dumpish
melancholy disconsolate Christian.
disconsolation of my Spirit? How many are prejudiced against all the ways of
strict Religion when they behold me walking heavily and disconsolately all the
day long? Say not men, Is this to be Religious? Is this the wages God gives his
most careful Servants? must a man bid adieu to all joy, peace, comfort, when he
gives up himself to profess Religion? Is God good only to those that defy him
day by day, that they can sing and be merry? And have none cause of
disconsolation and walking heavily but those that give themselves to be serious
in matters of Religion? It is true, Godliness shows the vanity and emptiness of
all terrene pleasures and delights, the madness of worldly mirth; but is there
no joy of the Holy Ghost, no consolation in Christ, no comfort of love, Phil.
2. 1? Is there no pleasantness in wisdoms ways, no peace in her paths? O my
Soul! how much have thou to answer before the Lord for thine obstructing the
way of Life to many, by beholding thy disquiet and dis-rest? Hear thou not
men say, that when people grow bookish, they grow blockish? When they turn
Religious, they must look for no more merry days? whereas did thou lift up
thine head, and walk cheerfully, would it not let the word see that the breasts
of Christ's consolation afford more refreshings than the worlds botches? Away
therefore with those false conclusions which thou art wont to make to thy
disquiet with Manoah, Judge. 13. 22. never think you shall die before you see the
Lord: rather conclude God would never have shown thee such things, if he would
have destroyed thee. Rouse up thy Soul, as the Psalmist, Psalm. 42. ult. chide
thy self out of thine unseasonable discouragements and dumps; lift up thine
head, let the World know thou have meat to eat which it knows not of, that thou
have such delights as it can neither give nor take away. Shall a Philosopher
say, that a good man keeps holy day every day, and will thou, O my Soul! walk
drooping, as if all thy feasts were turned into fasts? The advice that
Tertullian gave Scapula may conclude this to thee: Si nobis no^ parcis, tibi
parce; si non tibi, Carthagini.
If thou have no pity on us, (said he) yet have some on thy self, and if not on
thy self, yet on the City. So would I say to thee, if not for thine own sake;
yet for Sions sake, for Christ's sake, whom thou do profess, yea, for poor
sinners sakes, that they may not be prejudiced against the ways of God, stir
up thy self, and walk more cheerfully.

CHAP. XV.
The Sheep's for holy use in every part;
Saints holy are to God in Head, Life, Heart.

Observation.
THE Sheep is all holy, says Rab. Solomon. Every part of it used for something
or other about the Worship of God: Whereas the Dog and Hog were both abhorred,
and nothing of them had any place in Divine Worship; Hence both declared as the
most abominable things, Isa. 66. 3. a Dog Canis pro re execrabili and foeda,
Sanct.
used to express any thing most filthy and abominable. See Deuteronomy. 23. 18. which
Text, though some interpret Metaphorically, of impudent Cynicks, or of
Sodomites, buggerers that have cast off all manhood, and are become Dogs, worse
than Dogs, yet the Hebrews understand it literally, and so Bochart and others.
And as the Dog, so the Hog also, whose use civil as well as sacred was
forbidden, it might not be eaten by them, nor touched, Levit. 11. 7, 8. hence
God's loathing the wicked's sacrifice is expressed in that fore-quoted Isa. 66.
3. [as if he offered Swines-blood] which was doubly unlawful, because the Swine
was unclean by the Law; as because all blood was to be poured out, not offered.
Other Creatures which were of some use in service, yet were not of such general
use, as this Creature, the Sheep: most of his parts being serviceable in some
way or other. Thus besides his Flesh, which was offered up in Sacri^^ Canis ita
vile Hebraeis animal, ut ne pretium quidem ejus in Templo recipi posset, Grot.
fice, two every day, Exodus 29. 38. for 2000 years and more, till the ceasing
of that service by the destruction of the Temple by the Romans, we must
particularly consider his other parts as used in Religious service.

Of the Wool dyed Blew, Purple, and Scarlet was much use made for the vails of
the Tabernacle, the Curtains of the Tabernacle, Exodus 26. for the Priests
Garments, Ex. 28. for though (as Ainsworth observes) the Blew, Purple, and
scarlet are colors only, and Moses expresses not the stuff colored, yet Paul
affirming that scarlet wool was used in sprinkling the blood, Heb. 9. 19.
seems to teach that the scarlet spoken of in those places was Wool so dyed;
and so of the other colors. And thus the Heb. Doctors explain them. The Blew
spoken of in any place (say they) was Wool dyed like the body of the Heavens
(i. e. Sky-colour;) the Purple was Wool dyed Red, and the Scarlet, Wool dyed in
Scarlet, Maim. Treat. of the implements of the Sanctuary.

Of their skins, or pelts were made Timbrels, Musical instruments much in use
among the Jews, especially their Women, having its name in (...) manum pulsavit.
Hebr. from its being beaten with the hand; or as Esono ficta vox, per
Onomatopoeiam, instrumentum utrinque mambrana clausum, intus vacuum, quod
bacillo perc^tit^r, Geneb. in Psalm. 150. 4.
Genebr. on Psalm. 150. 4. from the sound which it yielded when beaten; not
unlike our Drum; mentioned Exodus 15. 20. Judge. 11. 34. and in the Psalms often.
Besides the Ram-skins, which dyed Red, made the second or middle covering for
the Tabernacle, Exodus 26. 14.

Of the Horns were made Trumpets for the Priests, Josh. 6. 4, 5, 6, 8. and
hence the most received opinion is, that the year of Jubilee had its name from
the sound of the Rams Horns wherewith it was proclaimed, Levit. 25. 9, 10. in
which Servants returned to their freedom, and Proprietors to their Lands and
houses morgaged.

Of their Legs, or Shank-bone were made pipes, used also in a way of praising
and blessing God, 1 Samuel 10. 5. where they are called Prophetae hic dicuntur
qui laudib ^s Divinis celebrandis vacabant -- hymnos and lands Deo
concinebant, tum voce tum instrumentis musicis, Lap.
Prophets, who did celebrate God's praises either with voice, or instrument, or
both. Being filled with the Spirit, did sing songs of praise to God. So the
Chald. explains the last word, [they shall prophesie] i. e. shall sing Psalms
and Hymns to the praise of God. These Pipes were made of those Shank-bones, and
have their name in (...) a (...)
Hebr. from their being pierced or made hollow.

Of their Guts were made Harps, and such like stringed Instruments; a musical
instrument invented by Jubal. Genesis 4. 21. used for mirth or joy, Psalm. 137. 1,
2. Genesis 31. 27. in praising God, Psalm. 33. 2. hence called the pleasant harp,
Psalm. 81. 2. opposed to mourning, Job. 30. 31. with these they were wont to
celebrate the Lords praise, as ye read often in the Chronicles, also in Neh.
12. 27. Thus far the observation of Rab. Solomon.

Let me add that of all Creatures sacrificed to the Lord, the peace offering of
a Sheep or Lamb has a special command concerning it, that the whole Rump be
offered, taken off at the backbone, Levit. 3. 9. the reason given by most is,
because of the largness as well as fatness and sweetness of that part in the
Syrian and Arabian Sheep; being a Cubit long, as is attested by Aristot. Hist.
Animal. 8. 28. Plin. 8. 48. Herodot. and from him Aelian. Besides many others
Ludovic Roman. in his (...) cithara. est (...) et (...).
Travels, says, that in Arabia he saw Wethers having Tails which were forty
four pounds weight, each; others speak of twenty eight pounds, and the most of
eleven pounds: So that nature which has tied the Tails to other Creatures, may
seem to have tied the Syrian Sheep to their Tails, which with great difficulty
they drag after them, says ingenious Pisgah-sight, etc. in Reuben,. 14. page
60. lib. 2.
Fuller, And this is the reason, why of this Creature the whole rump or tail is
expressly commanded to be offered, not observed in Kine or Goats: that part
being for bulk and value considerable in their Sheep, which is contemptible in
other Creatures.

Application.
The People of the most High should in this also be like Sheep; universally
holy, holy in every part, all that is in them, all that is of them, all that
comes from them, should be consecrate to the Lord's glory. Zech. 14. 20, 21.
Calvin translates stalls of the Horses, what we read Bells; these are wont to
be none of the cleanest places, and blood though shed in a just war, pollutes a
man; the Prophet by these expressions signifying, that nothing should be so
common or profane in the World, but should be sanctified to God, when he shall
reign in the world. Or by the Horses-bells, or collars, and the pots understand
the various states of Christians, who all ought to be equally holy: All the
Furniture of the Kitchen, whatsoever had been defiled with the intemperance of
men, should be turned to the Worship of God. In war and peace, in meat and
drink, etc. men shall be holy to God, and shall follow after holiness. It is
the manifest testimony of a Godly mind, when Godliness runs through a man's
whole Life, as the woof does through the web; when ordinary actions Quicquid
agas propter Deum agas.
are done from a right principle, and to a right purpose. All the Paths of our
line of Life must be straight before God. An universality God requires in his
service, Psalm. 119. 5, 6. Aug. says, the whole Life of a Christian is a holy
desire, and this is always seconded with endeavor; without which affection is
like Rachel, beautiful, but barren. Yea, a double universality God calls for,
of the Subject, the whole heart, and of the object, all thy commandments, all
that God requires. A base heart is funambulus virtutum, as Tertul. phraseth it;
he has a dispensatory conscience; his obedience is partial, as such as goes
in a narrow tract, it extends not to the whole Law, and is therefore lost
labor. There must be in every true Christian, tom, integrity, that there be
nothing wanting, no defect of parts, and Josher, Recta ratio morum, sermonum,
etc. congruens cum norma verbi Divini, Gei. in Psalm. 25. 21.
a correspondency in words, works, to the rule of Gods word. But to
particularize,

First, All the parts must be for God, Heart, Head, Hand, Foot, etc. Heart must
be holy and wholly for God, or nothing will be as it ought: this God calls for
in the first and chief place, Pro. 23. 26. Even among the Heathens when a beast
was cut up for Sacrifice, the first thing the Priest looked upon, was the heart,
and if the heart were naught, the Sacrifice was rejected: As the Heart is by
nature corrupt and polluted, the Lord will have none of it; yet, till the heart
be renewed and given to the Lord, he will accept nothing can come from man,
Isa. 29. 13. of the Heart God says to us, as Joseph to his Brethren concerning
Benjamin, Genesis 43. 3. Ye shall not see my face, except he be with you. For this
God wishes, Deuteronomy. 5. 29. without truth in the inward parts, Psalm. 51. 6. all
is nothing worth in Gods esteem. The inwards and the fat thereof was to be
offered to the Lord, Mysticus sensus est interimendas in Dei honorem cupidines,
quarum instrumenta adeps, renes, jecur, Grot.
Levit. 3. 15, 16. signifying our slaying our lusts through affection to God.
It Is the hidden man of the heart, that God looks after and calls for: Yet not
only this, but the head too. When the heart is called for, Pro. 23. 26, yet the
eyes also must direct the Paths, that they be such as are God's ways. Men must
not plot iniquity, devise mischief, and do the thing that is naught, and yet
pretend the heart for God still; this is vain and wicked. The heart must be for
God, and so must the mouth, the tongue too, Romans 10. 9. Confess with the Mouth,
as well as believe in the Heart. In Pope Gregory 13th. his time, in Q.
Elizabeth's Reign, it was a watch word among the Papists, give me the Heart; be
in heart a Papist, and then go to Church; dissemble, do what ye will; not so
God, he requires to speak for him, and to work for him too; to work the works
of God, in a good sense. The head must be for God, and the hand too; action is
the best evidence of Life. The primitive Christians were wont, if not Nos non
eloquimur magna sed vivimus. Dei verba non legenda, sed vivenda.
to speak, yet to live great things, because they knew the words of God were
words not to be read only, but also to be lived. The foot likewise must be for
God, to run the ways of his Commandments, Psalm. 119. 32. take long strides
toward Heaven. Luther said well, God loves not Quaeristas, but curristas. Apud
Hebraeos cedebant sacerdoti, de capite, maxilla; de pedibus, arms dexter; de
corpore stomachus: Ea redimere non licebat. Signi ficatur Sacrandos Deo
sermones, actus, appetitus. Grot.
Among the Jews of each Sacrifice some parts were for the Priests, which the
People might not redeem; of the head, the check; of the Legs, the right
shoulder; of the body, the breast, to teach them to dedicate to the Lord, their
words, actions. and desires.

Secondly, Holiness in every act or action, not only in religious, but also
common acts of Life. Some are worldly even in religious exercises, Ezekiel. 33.
31. they came to the Prophets Sermons, and sit there very demurely, as though
they would remember and practice whatsoever he said Dum tu loqueris, illi de
quaeste parts iniquas faciundo, cogitant, Grot.
but their heart was on their halfpenny all the while, nor can the Lodestone
of Gods word hale them one jot from the earth. It should be sursum corda,
hearts in Heaven; but when many men's bodies are in sacellis, about religious
exercises, their hearts are in sacculis, about their gain, as Augustine
complained long ago. As those Gergesites, more Haram domesticam arae dominicae
praeferunt.
mind a Swines-sty than a Sanctuary. And as an unequal pulse shows a
distempered body, so does such uneven walking an unsound Soul. But these are
too too bad: It Is not enough to be religious in religious duties, but in the
whole course of ones life, 1 Pet. 1. 15. In all manner of conversation: our
very civilities should savor of sanctity and our common conversation relish of
Religion. 2 Pet. 3. 11. What manner of Persons even to admiration, so much the
[(...)] Non simpliciter qualitatem significant rei vel personae, sed cum
emphasi quadam admirationis, ut Mat. 8. 27. Mar. 13. 1. Est.
Greek word used in that Text implies. [In all holy Conversation.] When the
Scripture would express a thing exactly, it uses the Numerus pluralis
excellentiam and magnitudinem rei de notat.
plural number thus, Cant. 1. 4. Psalm. 68. 20. Genesis 19. 11. so here, holy
conversations and Godlinesses, that is, the most exact and perfect holiness in
the whole conversation. So 1 Cor. 10. 31. Whatsoever ye do, etc. receive every
Creature with thanksgiving. Servants must serve Christ in serving their
Masters;, Ephesians. 6. 6, 7. must not Masters so command and rule also? and so
other relations. The general calling should be exercised in the particular.
Earthly businesses done with Heavenly minds. [Acknowledge God in all thy waies]
Pro. 3. 6. [thy waies] i. e. businesses, private and public, sacred and
profane. [Acknowledge God] i. e. set him always before thine eyes; always
call on him; take him into Counsel with thee, whatever thou attemptest; direct
all things to his pleasure and praise; and then return all things to him by
giving him thanks: this is to acknowledge God in all our ways.

Thirdly, Holy in every place and Company; Always under the eye of God, and
therefore every where as in his presence. Psalm. 139. 7. Whither shall I flee
from thy presence? God is every where, and where ever he is, he is the holy
Lord, therefore must his People be every where holy. His Saints are round about
him, and like good Angels, they stand always in the presence of their heavenly
Father: all holy conversation therefore and exact walking is required of them,
even an excellency above ordinary. Ephesians. 5. 15. (...).
to walk circumspectly, precisely, exactly. This makes the place whereon they
stand, be it where it will, holy; therefore must they loose their shoe from
their foot, Exodus 3. 5. Josh. 5. 15. [Holy ground] Solent plerique calceamentis
significatas esse dicere pravas corporis cupiditates, quae exuendae sunt iis
qu^ Divinas res contemplari meditarique volunt. Mas.
consecrate by the presence of God; all evil desires, and fleshly lusts must be
cast away, laid aside, if we will converse with God: [Or put off thy Shoe] Ut
totus in Dei jus and obsequium transeas, Q. in Lap.
acknowledge thy self wholly the Lords. Or understand putting off the Shoe as a
sign of mourning, and humiliation, 2 Samuel 15. 30. Isa. 20. 2. 4. Ezekiel. 24. 17.
23. and consequently of Sanctification before God, putting of uncleanness.
Moses in all humility and holiness should now resign up himself unto God, and
unto the service of him, so Ainsw. understands it. For the His ritus descendit
a mancipiis, qui nudis pedibus incedebant, in signum subjectionis, Lap. Docet
and carnales omnes curas and cogitationes seponere, cum ad Deum acoedamus. Ti^.
expression seems to be borrowed from the custom of Servants, who were wont to
go barefoot, in token of subjection. And to teach us to lay aside whatever is
filthy and defiled (as Shoes are wont to be) when we approach, to converse with
God. And as in all places, so in all Companies also. Some have a Glove for
every hand, as our Proverb says, i. e. can suit themselves to all Companies
with whom they are, can seem to be religious with those that are religious and
be as profane with the profane. Joash was zealous for Religion all the days of
Jehojada, 2 Chro. 24. 2. but when he was dead, and the profane Princes courted
him, they left the house of the Lord, and served groves, verse. 17. 18, But its
much to the honor of Noah, that he was found righteous in that generation,
Genesis 7. 1. called by Peter a world of ungodly ones, 2 Pet. 2. 5. Noah by an
holy Antiperistasis kindled from their coldness, and became nothing the worse,
but much the better (such is the nature of true Godliness) by their opposition.
The like may be said of those Godfearers, Mal. 3. 16. when others were so bad,
as verse. 14, 15.

Fourthly, Holy in all times, not upon starts, now for God, and anon for Baal,
but the constant bent of the heart to be for God. This the Lord desires in
Israel, Deuteronomy. 5. 29. keep all my Commandments always; and so Chap. 11. 1. An
Hypocrite may sometimes put up a prayer to God, but will he pray always? Job.
27. 10. Hebr. is, in every time; no, he will ^aint, (...), Luke 18. 1. shrink
back, as sluggards do in work, as cowards do in war. It Is the true honest heart
that does as Romans 12. 12. continue instant in prayer; the Hypocrite cannot do
so for want of an inward principle. If God come not at a call, he is out of
patience, and ready to say with that pro^ane Prince, 2 King. 6. 33. Not so
David, Psalm. 27. 4. If his Suit had not been honest, he would never have began
it; but being so, he will never give it over, till he has prevailed. At all
times he has God in his eye, Psalm. 16. 8. as one that observes all his ways
and works, therefore dares he not go out of the right way, because he still
Eyes God. Hence such do righteously always, Psalm. 119. 112. see to Pro. 28. 14.
[feareth alwaies] i. e. in every article of his life, without weariness,
without intermission: not only in adversity, but in prosperity also. Augustine
would not for the gain of a million of worlds be an Atheist for half an hour,
because he knew not, but God might in that time put an end to his life. It Is
for want of this constancy in good, that the Lord complains of Israel, Hos. 6.
4. All your goodness and righteousness is infirm, unstable, vanishing, ye
persist not in your Repentance; it soon fades and falls away, there seems to be
in the words an opposition between the bounty of God, of which in the foregoing
verse, and the piety of that People; that, viz. Gods goodness did ever endure;
but this, viz. their piety did not long continue or abide. To what the Prophet
had formerly said, the People might object, but we have repented, etc. The Lord
answers, I, but your goodness is but perishing and soon gone, like a morning
Cloud, blown off with the wind, or the dew that passes early away, when the
Sun gets any strength. The best cure for which disease is that advice of the
Apostle; 1 Cor. 15. ult. always to abound, etc.

Reflections.
Woe is me! that I have been found partial in the law of my God. I have For the
partial Christian.
been in some things for God, and in many more for World and Sin. In some
meaner, lower matters, how forward and zealous? But in things of greatest
concernment, how careless, and indifferent spirited, if not neglective? Like
the Pharisees of old, Mat. 23. 23. so, have not I been nice in the minutula,
the smaller matters, whilst I have been negligent in the magnalia legis, the
great things of the Law? Much noise, stir and quarrel, about a ceremony,
whether for the using or omitting of it, whilst in the mean while, walking
holily before God, and profitably unto men, has been slightly past by. Does
not my zeal with the many, run out, either to press as a thing indispensible,
an institution of men, with the negligent use of the appointments of Christ? or
on the other side, making it my great business and study to decry such an
observance as an humane invention, not regarding by a strict universal
obedience to testify a conscience void of offense both to God and Man? To
which the Apostle did exercise himself, Act. 24. 16. (...), I use diligence,
skill, and conscience. I lay my policy, and bend my wit; I discipline and inure
my self. Alas what folly is it to make no bones (as we say) of a foul fault,
when matters of less moment are much scrupled? To make more ado about putting
on a Surplice, than putting off filthiness both of Flesh and Spirit? What is to
strain at a Gnat, and swallow a Camel, Mat. 23. 24. if this be not? A
Proverbialis locutio in eos competens, qui (...) videri volunt in rebus
minutis, cum praecipua officiorum secure negligant, Grot.
proverbial Speech used to those who will seem to be very strict in small
matters, whilst they carelessly neglect their chief duties. Saul kept a great
stir about eating of flesh with the blood, 1 Samuel 14 32, 33, 34. and yet made
light of shedding innocent blood, verse. 44. Hoc plane est humanum ingenium, ut
hodie videmus; quod sua decreta magni faciant, Dei aut^m leges and mandata
contemnant, Mart.
as though that had any thing in it in comparison of this. The Priests make
conscience (forsooth) of putting the price of blood into the Treasury, Mat. 27.
6. who yet made no conscience of imbruing their hands in the innocent blood of
the Lamb of God, they would not suffer the price of blood to lie in a chest;
but the blood it self they could well enough bear to lie on their consciences.
To eat Flesh, or but an egg on Friday, is a great evil, and to be confessed to
the Priest, and satisfied for by penance; but to swear, steal, etc. any day, is
but a peccadillo, and not worth minding. Is this, O my Soul! to be upright and
sincere with God? Is this to deal faithfully with him in his Covenant? And so,
am I not sometimes eager and hot for the things of God, as if all of a flame;
and ere long as cold as a stone in the same matters? halting between two
opinions like the Israelites, 1 King. 18. 21. being as soon of this, and as soon
of that, uncertain of either, unconstant to either, flying like a bird off one
bough, on to another; (as the Hebr. word (...) properly signifies) waving as a
top-branch, and wavering like a wave of the Sea, driven with the wind and
tossed, Ja. 1. 6. a double minded man (says the Apostle, verse. 8.) is unstable
in all his ways: Like Henry the Fourth of France, whom Ravillae stabbed (as
himself confessed) because he was of two Religions, i. e. of none. Such an
unstable one, O my Soul, cannot excel; whatsoever thou seem to thy self to
be, thou are nothing with God. See Psalm. 78. 8, 37.

Behold, O my Soul! and consider, it is some singular thing that God requires
For the sincere real Christian.
of his Servants; What do I more than others? God will take that from
Philistines, which he will not bear from Israelites, who thought they might
carry Gods Ark in a Cart, as those Pagans had done before them, but they paid
for their presumption, 1 Samuel 6. 7. with 2 Samuel 6. 7, 8. Greatest states afford
least liberty. Every calling has a (...) a comeliness appertaining to it; the
Scholar behaveth himself otherwise than the Clown, the Courtier than the
Carter, the Prince than the peasant: so should a Christian otherwise than an
unbeliever, than a profligate professor, than a carnal Gospeller, Ephesians. 4. 1.
Before thou attemptest any thing, O my Soul, ask that question that Alexander
the Great did his Courtiers, when they would have him run at the Olympic
games, do Kings, said he, use to run at the Olympicks? So say thou? Do the
Heirs of God, Coheirs of Christ, use to do so or so? Take the Counsel of
Menedemus to Antigonus, remember thou art a Kings Son, and O see thou do
dothing unwortny thy state and dignity; stain not thy blood, defile not thy
self. Will thou part with thy patrimony? Naboth would not. Will thou leave thy
fat and thy sweet? The Vine in Jotham's parable would not: Will thou look back
with Lot's Wife, when thou have put thine hand In maxima liberate min^ma
licentia.
to Christ's plow? Flinch from his colors, having received his press-money;
disgrace his house, being received into his retinue? Great things are bestowed
upon thee, O my Soul! great things are professed by thee, and great things are
expected from thee; thou must walk circumspectly, precisely, exactly, to the
very top of the duties required and enjoined. God has elected me for a Vessel
of honor; shall I defile my self with the kitchin-stuff of uncleanness? He
has bought me with a price, shall I not be his? He has adopted me for a
Child, shall I not carry it as a Child? Phil 2. 15. He has called me to
holiness, 1 These. 4. 7. He which has called me is holy, 1. Pet. 1. 15. and
has called me with an holy calling, 2 Timothy 1. 9. O then, what manner of person
ought I to be in all holy conversation and Godliness? Being like his Sheep, in
every part given up to an holy use? (...).


CHAP. XVI.
The Sheep's content with pastures mean: Should not
Christ's be content with what he makes their lot?

Observation.
SHeep, specially for store, fare hard; those that are for the slaughter shall
happily be allowed better feeding; fresher, and more grown feeding; but the
Sheep that are for breed are kept bare, not wast grass and enclosures for them,
but short commons; it may be turned off to the Mountains; Ezekiel. 34. 13, 14.
Such often turned to the commons, where grass is short and bare: Yea, and they
will do well so: Sheep, it is observed, will not only live, but thrive also,
yea, and grow fat, in places one would think all a rock; where the blades of
grass spire up between great stones. Bigger beast, black stock require high and
rank grass, where they may fill their mouths at a bite; nasty goats trample on,
and soil the grass, the harmless Sheep do well on hard fare. High feeding is in
order to fatting and killing. Thus some understand, Hos. 4. 16. the Lord will
feed them as a Lamb in a large place, In campo lato] ad caedem and supplicium
ut illuc cito pinguescat, and mactetur, Vatab. Nunc Israelites copiose pascet,
ut mox saginati hostibus dedantur trucidandi, Merc.
feeding him for punishment and slaughter, that being fatted they may be given
over to the Enemy to be slain. But a store Lamb can pick up the grass of the
Wilderness, and pick a living out of it.

Application.
Saints can be content with short commons in the World. Nature is content with
little, grace with less. Our Lord has taught us to pray for Bread, not Biscuit
manchet, but Panis nomine in oratione Dominica principaliter and praecipue
significatur ordinarius ille cibus corpori nostro alendo destinatus; and quidem
non ille tenerior a similagine, sed crassior and domesticus, Scult. Exerc.
Evang.
down right household Bread; Panis is a pascendo, that which will feed, though
not delicately. Psalm. 127. 2. bread of carefulness, Heb. of sorrows, may mean
course bread or meat, (as bread of pleasures, Dan. 10. 3. is dainty fine meat)
and therefore our common singing Psalms read it brown bread Jesus gave thanks
for barley bread, Jo. 6. 9, 11. not that Palestine had not wheat good and
enough, but to show his humility See 2. Cor. 8. 9. So his Disciples made a
Sabbath days Dinner on a few Ears of Corn rubbed between their fingers, Mat.
12. 1. A Philosopher to one that said to him, would thou please Dionysius,
thou need not eat Herbs and roots, could answer, could thou feed on Herbs
and roots, thou need not please Dionysius. Even Epicurus (whom yet some note
for a voluptuist) is reported to have said, that if he had but a morsel of
bread, and a draught of water, Se paratum esse cum Jove etiam de selicitate
certare, si aquam haberet and offam. Elian.
he might think himself as happy as the happiest. The Israelites in the
Wilderness could not be content with bread, though from Heaven, Manna, but they
must have Flesh too, they had Flesh but with a vengeance, with a curse, Psalm.
78. 29, 30, 31. and 106. 15. they did eat and were filled, but better it had
been they had fasted; see the story, Numb. 11. 18, etc. Cibus and potus sunt
divitiae Christianorum. Hieron.
Meat and Drink are a Christians riches, said Hierome, and said not Paul the
same, 1 Timothy 6. 8. (...). Isiod.
food not dainties; garments quasi Gardments, which will preserve us from the
violence of the Weather. Bred and Cheese with the Gospel is good cheer, said
Greenham. This for quality.

And for quantity our Lord has taught us to pray for daily Bread; bread from
day to day, the bread for the day in its day. Enough to bring us home, with
Jacob. Genesis 28. 20, 21. bread to eat, and raiment to put on till I come again
to my Fathers house. Insaniae damnandi Sunt qui tam multa tam a^exie congerunt,
cum sit tam paucis opus, Lud. Viv.
What need is there of much? Rather is it a cumber than an help. The Israelites
in the Wilderness had their Omer for a day, and what more they laid up, bred
worms and stank. (...), Clem. Alex.
A good man needs but little, said an Ancient. Agur desired but his portion,
Pro. 30. 8. (...), Pane demensi mei sufficienti mihi, Chald. (...), congrua and
sufficientia, LXX. in Mede. Qui mihi satis sit ut in de alar, Merc.
the bread of my portion, or allowance sufficient. This sufficiency says the
famous Mede) is two fold, the former of nature, wherewith a man may sustain
himself; the latter of state and condition, vocation, order in which God has
placed one: sufficiency to a private person is one thing, to an householder
another, another to a Prince, etc. that price which God has cut for me is
best. If God bring not up a man's estate to his desires, which is satisfaction,
yet if he bring down his desires to his estate, this is contentment and that is
by far the best and most comfortable condition; and so will Christians find it
reasonable for them to judge, if they consider.

First, Their betters have been but mean in the world before them; though some
good men we find rich, Abraham, Job, David, Solomon, etc. yet not all so; the
terms are by no means convertible, not all good men Rich, nor all Rich men
good. He had the example of our Lord before, who though heir of all things, yet
here was scarcely Owner of any thing. When it was disputed in the Senate at
Rome, whether Christ should be owned a God among them, because he had done many
wonderful works, it was resolved that he should not, because of his poverty,
which he chose and preached. The meanness also of his Mother is discernable in
the Clothes she wrapped her new born babe in, Luke 2. 7. which by the make of the
word seem to be rent or torn (...).
rags; his Cradle was a manger, non in aureo reclinatorio, says Ludolphus, as
the Porphyrogeniti in Constantinople; born in a Inn, a common house for all
comers; and in the Inn, the Stable, the most Propter hoc quod paupertatem
praedicarit and elegerit, quam mundus contemnit.
common and unclean place, etc. And from her offering also may this be
concluded, verse. 24. for the Law was that they should offer a Lamb with a
little Bird, but they whose poverty would not admit that, should bring two
little Birds, Levit. 12. 6. 8. When he was born, he was brought forth in
another man's house, and when dead, buried in another man's Tomb. Christ's
Disciples also might be given as an instance hereof, of which something
formerly.

Secondly, Christ slights none for their meanness in this World. Rev. 2. 9.
Smyrna the poorest Church has the highest commendation. I know thy poverty,
but that is no matter, thou art rich, Jam. 2. 5. The poor of this World rich in
Faith, Heirs of the Kingdom, etc. An heart filled with Grace, not Chests with
Coin, or thousands of acres with stock, God looks after, accounts of. Jacob
with his staff, on the Earth for his bed, and a stone for his pillow, had
visions of peace, as well as when he was become two bands.

Thirdly, Christ makes little to the Righteous better than much to others.
Psalm. 37. 16. as a Box of Pearls is more worth than many Loads of pibbles.
Melius ob benedictionem Dei, opum durationem, hilaremque fruitionem, bonam
conscientiam, etc. Ge^.
God's blessing on a good conscience how it multiplies all comforts? The Be is
as well (if not better) content, with feeding on the dew, or sucking from a
Flower, as Behemoth that grazeth on the Mountains. Etsiin diem victitent, (...)
caelo tamen non secus ac manna pascuntur, Vatabl.
They live well as being fed from Heaven with Manna. Se^ Daniel and his
Companions, Dan. 1. 8, 12, 13, 15, 16. pulse and water, poor fare for
Noble-men's Sons (and these were of the tribe Royal, verse. 6.) yet such as they
were well apaid of, and their countenances were fairer, etc. they had God's
blessing on their course fare, and this was the main matter that made the
difference.

Fourthly, God cuts out the portion (...) all his; this quiets, yea, sweetens
all to see God in all: what he knows meat for each of his, he allots to and for
them. Psalm. 23. God is David's Shepherd, then he shall not want, viz. what may
be necessary to his temporal, but especially to his spiritual and eternal good.
And if any should say, But do not the Godly sometimes want even necessaries, 1
Cor. 11. 22. (...)? We may answer, Iste temporalium defectus in spiritualibus
per aequivalens compensatur 20. Temporalia promittuntur piis cum exceptione
crucis, sive castigatoriae, sive probatoriae; quod etiam ad pastoralem Dei
curam pertinet, ne oves oberrent; etc. Riv. * Parva seges satis est.
The want of those temporal things is abundantly made up in the spiritual which
they enjoy; and that these things below are only promised to the Godly with the
exception of the Cross, whether in correction or trial, wherein also consists a
great part of the Lords Pastoral care. The wicked in the fullness of his
sufficiency is in straits, Job. 20. 22. Tantalus-like, he is ever wanting,
content he has none. Contrarily, true piety brings true plenty, and a Saint is
never to seek of a well-contenting sufficiency, 1 Timothy 6. 6. for to him a little
is enough. However it be, goodness and mercy shall follow me all my days, etc.
Agur desires to be fed by God. Pro. 30. 8. feed me with food convenient, (...),
discerpsit, dilaceravit dentibus, proprium ferarum; whence the Greek (...), and
the English tear in pieces.
the root properly signifies to tear, as wild Beasts their prey which they take
by hunting: thence the noune, properly such prey as Beasts feed on, generally
used for all food of men, some say, because of old they hunted for their meat,
or a metaphor from Beasts, who prey on so much only as will suffice them for
one day. Agur beggs God to feed him with his daily food, as Joseph is said to
have fed his Fathers family, Genesis 47. 12. we translate acc(...)ng to their
families: the (...) Cibo quasi in os parvulorum indito, Jun. and Tremel. q. d.
in fame non magis soliciti fuerunt de comparando victu quam pueri, qni ne manum
quidem ad cibum extendunt, Q. in Vat. Non minore studio aluit patrem, etc. quam
infantes ali solent, Vat. vel ^ic accipi potest q. d. Saturavit eos; tantum
dedit ut possent f^equenter comedere, ut solunt parvuli, Oleast.
Hebr. is to the mouth of the little one. i. e. putting their meat as it were
into their mouth; so that Jacob and his Family lived free from care, even as a
Child whose meat is put into his mouth; Joseph was no less careful of his
Father and his Family to feed them than men are wont to be of Infants. Or it
may be thus understood, he fed them to the full, so that they might eat often
as Children are wont.

Fifthly, God's choicest Servants have met with coursest fare in the world:
Israel must eat their Passover with bread of affliction. Deuteronomy. 16. 3. so
called either because it was to mind them of their affliction in Egypt; or
because it did afflict their stomach and body, being of no good taste, and
heavy. Others read it bread of poverty, such as poor folk are wont to eat; poor
peoples bread, ill-leavened, ill prepared. Micajah in prison is fed with bread
of affliction, 1 King. 22, 27. sparingly, Tremel. renders it,
Prisoners-pittance. Martyrs in Q. Mary her days were fed (many of them) with
bread made most of Saw-dust. Bonner allowed Will. Huntley only an half penny a
day (...) bread and drink. Martin ordered to Eliz. Young, one day bread and
another day water. The Bite-sheep of Norwich kept Rob. Samuel without meat and
drink, only daily two or three morsels of bread, and three Spoonfuls of water.
Yea, and without these necessities imposed by cruel Persecutors, we read that
Luther made many a meal of an Herring at a time, and Junius of an Egg.

Reflections.
Why am I thus disquieted within me, that naught that God For the discontented
murmuring Christian.
does can please me? Am I not like the Israelites of old? When hungry they
cried for Bread, and when God gave them bread, even the Corn of Heaven, that
man did eat Angels food, Psalm. 78, 24, 25. i. e. such delicate bread as might
be^eem Angels to eat, if they did eat any at all. Such as the Poets feign to be
their Nectar and Ambrosia; then they cry for water. When they have bread and
water (though both by miracle) can he furnish a table in the Wilderness, can he
provide Flesh for his people? verse. 19, 20. i. e. dainty and delicate Flesh,
such as is that of Quails, meat for a King; for they carried Trap in loc.
their Cattle out of Egypt with them, and so they could not be without ordinary
Flesh. Ever murmuring, always harping upon their wants. And is it not thus
with me? Do not God and Men hear me much oftener complaining of what I want,
than giving thanks for what I have? Alas! how little do I enjoy of what I do
possess, through the discontent of my peevish and froward Spirit? No more than
Haman did his honors, Esth. 5. 13. q. d. Cum haec omnia habeam, nihil me
habere puto.
I enjoy nothing of all this. No more did Ahab when sick of Naboths Vineyard, 1
King. 21. 4. the want of which set him off the hooks as we say, and in a great
discontent. His heart did more afflict and vex it self with greedy longings for
that ^it of ground, than the vast and spacious compass of a Kingdom could
counter-comfort: He lay down sick of the sullens, and would eat no meat, for
want of a Sallat out of Naboth's vineyard. The Devil of discontent whomsoever
it possesses, makes his heart a little (...), turbare, inde (...).
Hell. Yea, even not the worst of Men and Women, who ought to be better, are
too often vexing and discomposing themselves herewith. Rachel had a loving
Husband, a comfortable and plentiful Estate, yet wanted still something, and
this imbittered all she had, Give me Children, or I dye, Genesis 30. 1. and God
took her at her word, she had Children, and she dyed, Chap. 35. And Rebekkah
before her seems not wholly free from this disease. Genesis 25. 21. her being
barren was her burden, as well as her Husband's, though they took the best
course for the Cure. viz. address to God. I like that interpretation best, that
reads, in the presence of, or together with his wife, hinting it a solemn and
joint prayer, yet when she was heard and answered, she said, if it be so, why
am I thus? q^^d. better have no Children, then so troubled with them; though
like a good woman as she was, she bethought her self of the best course, she
got into a corner, and prayed down her passions, verse. 22. and got the
following Oracle, verse. 23. A good pattern for me, to cure me of the fret.
Alas! O my Soul, it is not the little I have, but the much I desire, that makes
me ^o discontented. Plato's advice was good; (let me who profess to be a
Christian, for shame learn of an Heathen) He that will be rich indeed, must not
so much increase his riches, as diminish his Covetousness. And that of
A^sonius, a French Poet of Bordeaux, is worth minding, He is not happy that
has not what he desires, but he that desires not, what he has not. There is
much danger, O my Soul! in a great estate, as well as in a poor condition.
Great Intrant majores portas majores cure.
Estates have great cares. A state too great, like a Shoe too big for the Foot,
is more troublesome than useful. It Is not the great cage that makes the Bird
sing. A Staff may help a Traveller in his way, but a bundle of Staves would be
a burden. Every grain of riches has a vermin of pride and ambition in it. Many
in their low estate could serve God, and be more than commonly Religious; but
now resemble the Moon, which never suffers an Eclipse, but at her full, and
that by the interposition of the Earth between the Sun and her self. O that
Ireland were not too full of instances of this kind^ Even an Agur full fed, may
grow wanton, and be dipping his fingers in the Devil's sauce. Pro. 30. 8. deny
the Lord, or belie him. Who more rich than Adam in Paradise? Who more poor than
Job on the Dunghill? Yet, in Paradise the Devil foiled Adam, and on the Dunghill
Job foiled the Devil. Seek not therefore great things for thy self, O my Soul!
Jer. 45. 5. and then the want of great things will be no great trouble to thee;
Especially in such a day as this is it very unseasonable. Vriah would not get
to his house to eat, and to drink, and to lie with his wife, when the Ark and
Israel and Judah abode in Tents, when the General and Soldiers were encamped
in the open Fields. Daniel would not accept of the Kings allowance of the Kings
dainties, when his Brethren were in distress and want; he would eat no delicate
meat, when his City and People lay under ruins. And art thou discontented, O
my Soul! because thou have not this thing and that according to thy wish? In
hard times, the life for a prey, is much mercy.

Has God enlarged his bounty to me, and given me even of the For the wealthy
Christian.
good things of this life richly to enjoy? Has he enlarged my border, and
caused me to break forth on every side? Has he blessed me in the Field, Barn,
Basket, Flock, etc. Let me hence learn, First not to ascribe it to my own
acquests, and so rob the Lord of his Glory, in what he has bestowed on me.
It Is too much like proud Tire, to say, by my Wisdom, and my Traffic have I
got all these Riches, Ezekiel. 28. 4, 5. That was a proud Pope, who upon the Gate
of his new-built College had this engraven, Vtrecht (where he was born)
planted me, Lovain (where he was bred) watered me; but Caesar (who had promoted
him to the Popedom) gave the increase; And he was as well checked by a witty
Passenger, who underwrit, Here God did nothing. David says, Riches and Honors
come from God, 1 Chro. 29. 12. and Jacob too, Genesis 31. 9. God has taken away
the Cattle of your Father, and given them to me. He is the true Proprietary;
and gives and takes away these outward things at pleasure. Israel in Palestine
were but Tenants and Farmers, the Land was the Lord's, Levit. 25. 23. hence
called the Lords Land, Hos. 9. 3. and therefore they might not sell it
outright, as if it had been their own. Sacrifice not, O my Soul! to thine own
net or drag, Hab. 1. 16, 17. Say not with the great Dragon, the King of Egypt,
Ezekiel. 29. 3. My River is my own, I have made it for myself. That was a proud
boast of Niobe, reported by the Sum foelix; quis enim neget hoc? foelixque
manebo; Hoc quoque quis dubitet? tutam me copia fecit. Major sum quam cui
possit Fortuna nocere.
Poet, and it proved accordingly she was brought low and emptied of all. Let
God have the glory of all he gives thee to possess.

Secondly, Learn not to grow proud because of trust in uncertain Riches. Many
men's good and blood rise together. If God highten thine Estate, O my Soul!
highten not thou thy mind, 1 Timothy 6. 17. let not my heart be lifted up with
mine Estate, as a Boat that rises with the rising of the water. If Riches
increase, set not thine heart upon them. They are not simply good in
themselves, nor the portion only of the good, nor make all that have them good
or better; besides that they are flitting, are not what men conceive them, such
substantial things, but take to themselves wings, etc. Who is so much a
stranger to the World, as not to know that it was never true to any that
trusted it? That they that have been born to, or have acquired great estates,
have yet been brought to a very low ebb, to great want? Riches are as Glass,
bright but brittle. They are inevidential of Gods love; they are, if blessings
(for to all that have them, they are not so) yet but of the left hand, or the
Footstool; there are more durable Riches, which are more worth the minding.

Thirdly, Learn not to withhold them from them to whom they are due. God has
made thee, O my Soul! not proprietor but Steward, of whom it is required that
he be found faithful; not purloining to his own use, what is committed to him
for his Lord's. Nabal calls all his, my bread and my flesh, etc. and therefore
would part with none. As every one has received, so minister, 1 Pet. 4. 10.
Something of a little, more of more. See Pro. 3. 27. Those things are not our
own, but the poors, which we can and ought to bestow upon them; wherefore these
benefits are called not only Charity, but Righteousness or Justice also, Pro.
11. 18. 2 Cor. 9. 9. whatever the Clergy has, is the poors, said Hierom. It is
true (in a sense) of others as well as Ministers: Gods poor are Owners of what
I have, I am but a Steward and dispenser of Gods bounty to his necessitous
Servants: Now if my receipts be found great, and my layings out small, will not
God cast back such Bills in my face, and turn me out of my Stewardship? The
Apostle quotes it from our Lord, Act. 20. 35. as a Eo modo quo (...)
Philosophorum, citatu^, non ut verba, sed ut placitum: ^ulgo (...) dicunt
quarum sola men's spectatur, Hi ens
Maxim taught and pressed by him. They are Fools that fear to lose their
Wealth by giving, but fear not to lose themselves by keeping it.

God affords me my portion, and For the mean contented Christian.
it is Good, because it is of God's appointment, Psalm. 16. 6. That which gives
quiet and contentment, refreshment in any portion, is first the favor and
pre^ence of God; Secondly, That it is from the hand of a Father: Thirdly, That
it comes to us in the Covenant of Grace: Fourthly, That it is the purchase of
Christ's blood: Fifthly, That it is an answer of Prayers, and a blessing from
above on honest endeavors. Ah, this makes my cottage and my small possessions
great enjoyments: mercy and goodness shall follow me all my days. Godliness
has contentment, and that is great gain. When Alexander the great had taken
the Kingdoms of Sidon, and bestowed it on Hephestion, to be disposed of
according to his pleasure, he finding out one Abdolinimus, of the Royal line,
sent him the Regal robes, and made him King; who before had gotten his living
by making, (as some) of watering (as others say) of Gardens; and when
Alexander, having sent for him, asked him with what mind, being of so noble a
race, he could bear his former poverty, he answered, I pray God I may bear the
Kingdom with the same mind, for these hands administered to my necessity, and as
I had nothing, so I wanted nothing. How much more may I say so, who have so
bountiful a God to supply all my need, Phil. 4. 19. Gr. shall fill up, as he
did the Widows vessels, 2 King. 4. 4. Esau, profane as he was, had much; but
Jacob, who had God in Covenant, had all; that is the difference in the Hebr.
Tongue, between Esau's enough, and Jacob's Genesis 33. 9, 11. He that has him
that has all, has all, Qui habet habentem omnia, habet omnia.
said Augustine. I am constant, and therefore have enough, 1 Timothy 6. 8. let us
be content, (...)
Gr. let us have enough, so we translate it, Mat. 25. 9. lest there be not
enough, etc. so we translate it sufficient; Job 6. 7. two hundred penny worth
of bread is not sufficient for them. So here, what God allots me is sufficient
for me, let it therefore suffice me. In a word, take O my Soul! the Apostle's
advice, Heb. 13. 5. let my Conversation be without Covetousness, and be I
content with such things as I have (or, are present) for he has said, I will
never leave thee, nor forsake thee. (...): the word for Conversation, signifies
either a custom or manner, and our means of getting our livelihood; both come
to one sense, both our manner and our means of getting our livelihood must be
free from covetousness, and be content with the things present. The Hebrews had
been plundered of all, when the Apostle wrote this, Chap. 10. 34. though they
had nothing, yet be content; So was he himself, Phil. 4, 11, 12, 13. he binds
not heavy burdens on others, which himself will not touch. Not to be content,
is to be covetous. A little will serve to bear my charges till I come home; and
then shall I have bread, and all things else enough; in the mean time let me
live on the promise; that seems to be taken from Deuteronomy. 31. 8. rather than from
Josh. 1. 5. as the most have thought, and it is observable to be five times
recorded in Scripture, that it may be pressed, till the sweetness of it be pressed
out. Put the promise in suit, put God's bond in suit, as that holy man said,
and God will accomplish it. Mean while may thou sit and sing

Haec alii cupiant, liceat mihi, paupere cultu
Securo, chara conjuge possefrui.
Let others Riches seek; without annoy
Whilst I, though mean, Relations may enjoy.
CHAP. XVII.
Sheep sociable are, hence Flocks they live in;
Saints find communion sweet and best to thrive in.

Observation.
SHeep love to be together. Birds and Beasts of prey are solitary Creatures,
walk and feed alone: Creatures useful are otherwise, love Company. Birds fly in
Flocks, Fishes swim in Shoals, Cattle for our use herd together, and so do
Sheep: It Is animal gregarium non solitarium, Riv. They fold best together, yea
and without the Fold they most quietly lie down together, and rest. They b^st
drive together, ye find some difficulty to drive one single Sheep, which so
will be apt to straggle, and run this way and that; whereas in Company how
easily are they commanded? They ^eed best together. Hence Hos. 5. 16. [as a
Lamb in a large place] It Is a fearful Creature, and being brought alone into
wast and large places, runs hither and thither, fears every thing it sees,
seeks Dam, Flock, Shepherd, fills every place with its bleatings, and is
exposed to greatest dangers from Wolves and other ravenous Creatures; so will
God feed, i. e. punish, Israel (see Psalm. 2. 9. Micah, 5. 4, 6. and chap. 7.
14. for the sense of the word feed,) as one single, succourless Lamb, that goes
bleating up and down in the wast Wilderness, having none to tend it, or take
care of it. How much better were it to be in Gods Fold, where (though pined and
pent up in a narrower room, yet) God's Lambs are sure to be fed daily and
daintily? As if the Prophet had said, they shall soon have enough of that wild
Liberty that they so much affected. Lastly, Sheep are better looked after and
cared for in the Flock, than when straggling singly, and loosely; when they are
in danger of falling into the ditch, of becoming a prey to Foxes, Dogs, Ravens,
etc.

Application.
And the poor ones of God have found by experience the communion of Saints to
be no empty, airy thing; but of singular use to them in their way heavenward.
Indeed the new Nature, whereby they become Saints, fits them for, and drives
them to communion and fellowship. Hence was the practice of Gospel Saints not
to live or walk alone, but to join themselves together, and jointly with mutual
consent to walk together in Gods ways. Thus the Prophecy, Jer, 5. 4, 5, 6. the
ten Tribes, and the two together, taught to cease their divisions, when in a
weeping condition together; as Hooper and Ridley could agree in Prison, who
before had clashed about matters small, and of light moment; misery bred unity:
(O that it did so with us) [going and weeping] tears of sorrow for their sins,
the cause, and the ruins of Jerusalem and the Temple, the effects of their
Captivity, and tears of joy for their deliverance by Cyrus, but especially by
Christ. [Let us join, etc.] by mutual consent and agreement, as man and wi^e
are joined, be so joined to the Lord; so glewed unto him, as to be one spirit
with him, and of one Spirit one with another in him, in a conjugal, perpetual
Covenant An Antithesis (says Calvin) between that Covenant which they had
broken, and the new Covenant, of which Jer. 31. 31. etc. whence (says he) it
appears that this prophecy cannot otherwise be interpreted than of the Kingdom
of Christ; for in the return of the People from Babylon, they were but few, and
they also vexed with their Enemies, etc. Thus the accomplishment in the
History, Act. 2. 41, 42. being baptized, and thereby acknowledging the
Mediatourship of Christ, they were added to the Disciples, etc. to the Church,
so Beza reads, by a supplement from verse the last. [They continued in the
Apostles Doctrine] attending their Sermons, to be further instructed in their
duty [and fellowship] giving up themselves to duties of love and mutual care,
etc. Many others heard them, and seemed to be taken with their Doctrine, who
yet did not dare to give up their names to them, to walk together with them;
Act. 5. 13. That punishment on Ananias and Sapphira was so dreadful, that none
durst to fellowship with them, who were not upright. Fear indeed fell on the
whole Church, verse. 11. yet these kept close to their communion; they were all
with one accord in Solomon' s porch, verse. 12. others durst not so. It was
enough for the common people, as more simple and single (for the chief-Priests
and the Pharisees reproached and reviled) to commend them, but durst not give
up themselves to their fellowship. Nor is there any contradiction, verse. 14.
that Believers were the more added, etc. who must needs therefore be the
Apostle's hearers, for they might be hearers, who were not (...), close joined
to the Apostles. Saul also being converted, upon his return to Jerusalem,
whence he had gone forth a Persecutor, seeks to join himself to the fellowship
of the Christians, Act. 9. 26. though through their fear of him, he was some
time a probationer, e're he was admitted. He commends this also in his
Philippians, chap. 1. 5. No sooner had these received the Gospel, but they were
in fellowship to a day. The Communion of Saints was with them a point of
practice, as well as an Article of belief. The Creed is called Symbolum, as a
sign or badge to difference Christians from Infidels and wicked people, and
therefore was there little reason to leave out the communion of Saints (as some
say it sometimes was not in the Creed) this being a main distinctive character,
there being no such fellowship as among the Saints, Cant. 6. 9. -- is but one;
she is the only one of her Mother, etc. Una Ecclesia, quia ex una ^ide, per
unum spiritum, nascitur. Epiphan.
one Church, because from one Faith, by one Spirit. The Primitive Christians
were famous for their fellowship, animo, animaque inter se miscebantur, Tertul.
The very Heathens acknowledged, that no people in the World, did hold together,
and love one another, so as Christians did. As the Curtains of the Tabernacle
were joined by loops, so were they by love. The more is our sin and shame in
these days, that following the devices of our own hearts: We are cut in
minutula frustula, (as Augustine said of the Donatists) into little pieces, and
sucking Congregations.

Great is the advantage of fellowship and communion. For our more easy
remembering and improving what appertains hereto, we may reduce all to that of
the Preacher, Eccles. 4. 9, 10, 11, 12. [Two are better than one] more happy,
have a better condition; it is better for two to live together united, than one
alone. The Jews refer this to marriage; but it is more general, as appears,
verse. 12. [a threefold cord.] It is a famous saying among the Hebrews, aut
societas, aut mors, either society, or death: Man is (...), a sociable
Creature, he is natures good fellow, and holds this for a rule, optimum
solatium sodalitium, that Company is the great comfort of life. God said of
old, it is not good for man to be alone, Genesis 2. 18. neither for his profit nor
comfort: And he that loves to be alone, is either a Beast or a God, says the
Philosopher. Arist. po^^t. 1.
Much more is it thus in Christianity; Next to communion with God, is the
communion of Saints. Christ sent out his Disciples by two and two, Mar. 6. 7.
The evil Spirit is for solitariness; God and good men for society. God dwells
in the Assembly of his Saints; yea, there he has a delight to dwell; calling
his Church Chephsiba, Isa. 62. 4. and the Saints were David's Chephsibam, Psalm.
16. 2. It Is an observation of Origin on Genesis, that God made most things
double, as Heaven and Earth, Sun and Moon, Male, and Female, etc. to teach man
to delight in society. Thus in general, this general is particularized, wherein
the good of society does consist. Eccles. 4. 9. As

First, if they fall, that is, one of them; a plural for a singular partitive:
as Jonah 1. 5. the sides of the ship, i. e. one of the sides, Mat. 21. 7. set
him on them, i. e. one of them. If one falls, the other shall lift him up,
whether the fall be into sin or suffering; q. d. if a Traveller goes alone,
and fall into a ditch, where there is none to draw him out, he must perish, but
if he has one with him, he that is the stronger shoreth up the weaker. While
Latimer and Ridley lived, they kept up Cranmer by intercourse of letters, and
otherwise, from entertaining counsels of revolt. Ridly being Prisoner had the
Liberty of the Tower, to prove likely whether he would go to Mass or no, which
once he did; but Bradford being there prisoner also, and hearing of it, wrote
such an effectual letter to dissuade him, that did him much good, for never
after could he be persuaded thereto. The same Bradford also was instrumental to
keep Bishop Farrar from receiving the Sacrament at Easter in one kind, which he
had promised to do. Dr. Tailor for like cause rejoiced that ever he came into
Prison, there to be acquainted with that Angel of God, John Bradford, so he
called him for the good he received from him. O the mighty advantage that
Christian society well employed, and improved, brings in this way. It Is
dangerous, ye know, to let a bone broken, be long ere splinter'd; or out of
joint, e're set right: So in Soul matters to be without Soulmonitors, Gal. 6.
1. Satan is readiest to assault, when none is nigh to assist. Solitariness
therefore is not to be affected, because it is the hour of temptation.

Secondly, If two lie together they have heat. The letter of this we have
accomplished, 2 King. 1. 1, 2. and the Metaphorical sense is as plainly
evident, conference warmes, Luke 24. 32. a certain divine efficacy warmed their
hearts, whilst he spoke to them. Like unto which Senardaeus speaks something
concerning the Martyr Ego vero illius oratione sic incendebar, ut cum eum
disserentem audirem spiritus Sancti verba me audire evistimarem.
that he heard his words, as the words of the Holy Ghost. Hence the exhortation
of the Apostle, Heb. 10. 24. to consider one another, to provoke unto love and
good works; to whet one the other, Deuteronomy. 6. 7. to sharpen and extimulate, Pro.
27. 17. to rouse and raise up their dead Spirits, 2 Pet. 2. 13. to set an edge
on one another, as Boars whet their tusks one against another, says Nazianzen.
Heat and Zeal and good affections proceed from mutual knitting together. When
Silas and Timothy came from Macedonia, Paul was pressed in Spirit, Act. 18. 5.
Intus and apud se aestuabat prae zeli ardore, Bez.
warm he was before, but now all of a light fire, as it were. Those dull
Daughters of Jerusalem by hearing the Spouse describe her beloved, as she does,
from top to toe, Cant. 5. were fired up with desire to join with her in seeking
Him whom her Soul loved. The lying together of the dead body of one with the
bones of Elisha gave life to it; so does good Company give life to those that
are dead, etc. Strike two cold flints together, and fire will come from them:
So let two dull Christians confer and communicate their Soul-secrets and
experiences, and it shall not repent them, they shall find the benefit of it.
Job. 38. 31. Can thou bind the sweet influences of Pleiades? Those Pleiades
be the seven Stars, that have all one name, because they help one another in
their work, viz. to bring in the Spring; like seven Sisters, (as the Poets have
feigned them) joined together in one constellation, and one Company. We see God
will have the sweetest works in nature to be performed with mutual help. The
best time of the year, the sweetest warmth comes with these Pleiades, and the
best time of our life comes, when we live together in Christian love and
fellowship. Sincerity is the life of Religion, and society the life of
sincerity.

Thirdly, Mutual help and assistance, as well as warmth and heat. Vis unita
fortiar. God bad Gideon to go down to the Camp of the Midianites, and if he
feared to go, to take with him his servant Phurah, Judge. 7. 10. Jonathan will
not go without his armor-bearer, 1 Samuel 14. 6, 7. nor David without Abishai.
Christ when he sent out his Disciples, sent them by two and two; and when he
begins his passion in the Garden, took Peter James and John with him, for the
benefit of their prayers and company, though they served him but sorrily: Unity
has victory, but division has dissolution, as it did once in England, when
Caesar first entered it, Dum singuli pugnant, universi vincuntur, when they
fought in small parties, they were all by degrees overcome, as Tacitus reports
of the Ancient Britanes.

Reflections.
^^^ed largely, but do I feed safely and sweetly? I am not brought For the
alone walking Christian.
within Folds and Pens, but walk at liberty; under no bonds, accountable to
none for my conversation, etc. but is this the manner of the Sheep of Christ?
Do not his Lambs when they are from the Flock run up and down bleating and
crying out till they have found out whom to join themselves to? Is it not the
voice of Christ's Spouse, Cant. 1. 7. Tell me -- where thou feedest, where thou
make thy Flock to rest, etc. Why should I be as one that turns aside by the
Flocks, etc. left by Christ, or leaving Christ, are in danger of walking in
by-waies and paths; [of turning aside] some read that word, Why should I be
like to her that wanders? others, one veiled, lest I be accounted, as one
veiled among the Flocks of thy companions, i. e. an harlot, Cast. as an harlot
wandering hither and thither, Merc. being alone, and in the Fields, or withdrawn
places, as the manner of such is, Sanct. Consider O my Soul, what too much
cause of suspicion they too justly give, that walk at random, and not in
communion with the Saints. And consider withal, Christ's advice in his answer,
verse. 8. go forth by the footsteps of the Flock; not get into some Wilderness,
and keep close to thy self, have nothing to do with them that profess
themselves mine; but join thou thy self to them that have joined themselves to
me, by my will. Follow the practice of the primitive Saints, as they followed
my precept and president. [And feed, -- by the Shepherds Tents] keep close to
those my under Shepherds, whom I have set over my Flocks, to lead them out to,
and bring them in from pasture; consult them, and be directed by them. Is it
thus with me, O my Soul! who live alone, and esteem my self free, because thus
at liberty? Add I any where any thing to that order which the Apostle with so
much joy b(...)ld in his Colossians, Ordinis noming tam consensum, quam mores
rit e compositos, et totam disciplinam intellige. Calv. sic Dav. Ham.
Chap. 2. 5. the order wherein every one is set in his proper place, to fill up
what is his duty. An allusion to a Company of Soldiers, every one in his
place, in rank and file. Though thy Faith should be as firm as the Firmament it
self ((...)) yet if no order, where is the beauty? Surely Christ has appointed
some Discipline, as well as Doctrine; else it will be a confused house, a
lawless Kingdom, a rude and wild Army; but Faith and Order, Doctrine and
Discipline together, these two render the Church, fair as the Moon, clear as
the Sun, terrible as an Army with banners, Cant. 6. 10. Is it not; O my Soul!
that I may take a liberty to walk loosely, that I walk thus solely; that I may
say, as Psalm. 12. 4. The Apostle gives caution of, and bids beware of those
that did walk disorderly i. e. under no order or rule; may I not fear it may
reach me? But besides am I not the loser, whilst I walk thus alone? My joys
are but single, my troubles doubled, for want of those that might sympathize
and bear a part with me. How easily born would my ^urden be, had I many
Shoulders to lay it on? And how would my mercies be abundantly multiplied, did
many partake of them with me? This is the benefit of having hearts, as well as
persons united in the fellowship of the Gospel, that they may mutually rejoice
and mourn together, as members indeed of the same body. Am I not the more
exposed to temptation, and to be overborn by it, being without help of any to
foresee it for me, and shore me up against and under it? Woe be to him that is
alone! Am I not in more danger of becoming a prey to wild Beasts, while I am
thus apart from all Christ's Flocks? What Shepherd have I to look to, and take
care of me? What Companions to feed and fold with, that I may be preserved?
Turn thee, O my Soul turn thee to the Most High, by the Flocks, and the
Undershepherds to the chief Shepherd of Souls.

Bless the Lord, O my Soul! that has given me a Name in his house; For the
enchurched Believer.
that has taken thee into his Flock, and keeps thee among his Sheep. Time was
thou were also running at random, bleating up and down without Company and
care: Let God have the glory that has brought thee over to a professed
subjection to the Gospel; that thou have found the glorious presence of the
Lord in the slighted assemblies of his despised Saints; that in his Temple thou
have spoken of his Glory, Psalm. 29. 9. that thou have seen the goings of the
Lord in his Sanctuary, Psalm. 68. 24. that he has given thee an interest in the
hearts, affections, cares, prayers of his people; that they participate with
thee in thy joys and sorrows. It Is mercy indeed to enjoy God, any thing of his
presence, and spiritual teachings and refreshings in privacy, in a corner, with
Isaac in the Fields, with Daniel by the Rivers side, with Peter on the house
top; But O the glorious outgoings of the Wisdom, Power, Mercy, etc. of God in
the Assemblies of his People! to have interest in the affections, gifts,
graces, counsels, comforts, admonitions, exhortations, etc. of his beloved!
'Twas one of the most severe threatenings against the false Prophets to be
denied this, Ezekiel. 13. 9. They shall not be in the assembly of my people; nor
shall they be written in the writing of the house of Israel. David no doubt
enjoyed God in his retirements, but when he was a little put by coming at the
Assemblies of God's people, how did it trouble and afflict him? See Psalm. 42.
1, -- 4. and Psalm. 84. 1, 3. [even thine Altars] oh thine altars! so some read
it by a passionate exclamation, importing strongest desires after them. Blessed
are they that dwell in thine house, etc. Let such as enjoy these mercies
improve them; O my Soul? Be not barren under the droppings of Heaven's dews; be
not lean and ill-favored still under fat and fattening means; not like
Pharaoh's lean kine, after thou have devoured much, feed little. Great eaters
are generally observed to be thin and lean Persons, their food as it were
passes through them, and they digest it not: Such are careless and forgetful
hearers. God has promised his blessing in Sion, Psalm. 133. 3. choice
blessings, Psalm. 134. 3. above any that came from Heaven or Earth, Psalm. 128.
5. O my Soul desire and endeavor to grow up as Calves of the Stall, Mal. 4. 2.

If ye have tasted that God is good in Sion, and are now driven thence, ah long
for his presence in his Assemblies; prefer Sion to your chiefest joy; long for
his blessing among his People; that thou may see the good of his chosen,
that thou may rejoice in the gladness of his Nation; that thou may glory
with his inheritance. Psalm. 106. 5. Now to him that is able to do exceeding
abundantly above all that we ask or think according to the power that works
in us. unto him be glory in the Church by Christ Jesus, throughout all ages,
world without end, Amen. Ephesians. 3. 20, 21.

FINIS.

