A Light to GRAMMAR, AND All other ARTS and SCIENCES.

OR, THE RULE OF PRACTICE Proceeding by the Clue of Nature, and Conduct of
right Reason, so opening the door thereunto.

The first Part CONCERNING GRAMMAR, the preparatories thereto; Rules of
Practice through the same; clearing the Method all along.

Intellectus meus est quicquid in me boni est. Scal. Exerc. 307. Sect. 6.
Printed at London by M. F. for John Bantlet, at the sign of the gilt Cup,
near S. Austins gate in Paul's Churchyard. 1641.

TO THE HIGH AND mighty Prince CHARLES.
SIR,
YOur Highness cannot want Presents, nor Presidents, nor Precepts; these all
wait upon you at every hand, and the choycest of these: You must have the
cream, the extract, the quintessence of all those Simples. Most fit you
should; For in the perfecting your Copy, every hand is taught: and in the
advancing your good, the whole land is promoted. God bless every hand, and
inspire every mouth, that is engaged upon this work, for great is the work.
Prosper the same good Lord, shine upon those endeavors, which would make you
excellently good, as you are great. Amen.

I am in some fear, that it will seem boldness to add to such a full heap;
and yet my fear will be over, if your Highness shall daigne to read unto the
bottom. There may come a mite to your treasury, and take up no roomth there:
And ever, the more Candles in a room, the more light: and the wider is the
gate, the more easy is the entrance. I took notice of a light (clear enough
as such materials could make it) set up before your Princely eye, A Light to
Lilly, dedicated to your Highness, Anno 1637.
thereafter to steer your course; A dim light before the luster of your Star.

I saw also a Port opened before you: Porta Ling: given to your Princely hand
by Ancho^an. 1633.
(the Author of the Dedication (he was Author of no more) had heard more
thereof, had he not some short time after taken Sanctuary at the grave) This
and that I have seen; And I assure your Highness upon as good security, as the
conclusion of experience, testimony of the gravest Authors, judgment truly
made, can give you; That here is a light not to Lilly only, but to all the
Grammars necessary in the world: And a gate opened here (that is the proper
word) whereat all Arts and Sciences must enter, else they enter like a Thief
by the wrong way, and will quickly out at the Back-doore; And it were a great
impeachment of judgment so to enter, for it were as if I should climb up a
Castle by the outside, when I can stand on the ground, and find no less then
five fair gates for entrance, and being entered, goodly stayres to ascend
thereby. With your Princely leave I take two things granted. 1. That at these
low points, your Highness has an unerring guide, who has given you good
conduct by this very light, and through these very gates; And yet he will not
despise, what a very low person holds out unto him, for the clearing of the
way, wherein (no dishonor to him, nor honor to my self) he may not be so
knowing, and experimental as I am: For, as a poor Musician once said to a
great King, God forbid Sir, that your fortune should be so bad, as to know
these things better then I.

2. Because one says (as he did Aene^s Silv.
wish) Princes do prize learning like Pearls; which Noblemen esteem but like
Gold; popular men, like silver; and more inferior persons yet but like lead: I
suppose also, that your Highness is well forward in your way, which must be
compendious, (to Princes) a very short cut. Then I presume your leading sense
was the best light to Grammar (a good Non debet qu squa^ ubi maxima reru^
mom^nta versantur, de verbis esse solicitus etc. Quint. 8. 3.
help to other learning, but in comparison a toy) where you stayed not
neither, but hasted to Authors most sensual, material, practical, the most
compendious and nearest cut to language, (setting use aside) in the world.

And yet what if your Highness speak with tongues? you are shown a more
excellent way. Things do (...) Cl. Alex. I. 1. p. 215.
most accomplish, for they are as the flesh and sinews; Words as they may
express things, for they are but as the garment of the body. To all, your
Highness finds an easy slide, and pass to a quick understanding of them,
by those lights, or great Intelligencers you always carry about with you.

From those lights I have kindled mine which shines dim; nay, being so low, it
is not possible it should shine at all: yet certain it is, your Highness has
not a truer light to go by, though greater, and brighter you may have. They
are the gates, (that is the other Metaphor) opened before you; I presume you
have no other way to enter, for through them, all the world of disciplines must
come in. And now that your Highness is entered with the Clue of Nature in your
Princely hand, it must needs be that in short time, many will press to follow
after the same way; nor any dishonor this, that in the best way you should
have the most company.

This is my ambition: and it is so, that our lower ranks may not run out good
part of their span, and then graspe but a shadow in the end. This is all I
seek after: for if your Highness should please to give me admittance, to
stoop at your foot, and to kiss your princely hand, I should do it, happily,
somewhat rudely, having never had so much honor here; (beyond the Sea I had,
where were some Branches from the same royal Stock) but yet certainly with all
the Reverence that could be: And when that were done, I should home again as
fast as I came forth, and with as good a will, having as little mind to stay
at Court, as worth to commend me thither. I can pray for your Highness at
home: by Gods grace so I will: God make your name precious, and your throne
great in His appointed time. Amen and Amen.

Your Highness most humbly devoted Woodward.

TO THE JUDICIOUS READER, His much honored Friend Mr. SAM: HARTLIB, by way of
Preface.
I Must (Sir) give you some account of my Work here; for though it be a public
business (therein we thank you, you are very active) yet it fell out to be Mine
by your more special motion and appointment. My resolution was settled, never
in this kind to put Pen to Paper again, such my discouragement, such also my
indisposition thereunto. But see, our itching humor! no sure it is not that; I
am scribbling again. You may thank your self, for your entreaty it was, which
brake the cords of a very strong resolution to the contrary, and one motive
more there was, you shall hear them hoth in order.

First, your entreaty; I say yours, and why should it not much prevail with
me? for you have broke through many discouragements, and yet you hold out
still. what cause then, that I should not put my hand to that work, whereto
you have put both your shoulders?

I have been tugging in my Mill these twenty years; and because not like a
Milhorse in the old beaten track still, I have found some counter-checks almost
every week, and this has been cast in my teeth by such, who should
understand better; Why not the old old-way, that is always the best way? No,
not always, nay never in those petty School points. We may be wiser then our
Elders, and see beyond them too, else we are blind: we have an advantage above
them, standing (though they no Giants, nor we Pigmies) on their shoulders. I
could ever well digest these discouragements, though it is but hard meat, for I
knew I was right, and should satisfy one day, for I had spent many days and
nights too, in finding out a Method: I am sure I have met with it, follow it as
well as I can, that is as I am able. All this while, I have not granted this to
be a New Method; It is as ancient, (so it will appear in due place) as is the
writing of the Old Testament.

Yet we must hear sometimes (it is good for us) This is not the way that I was
led, and that way was better, for I could con my Grammar from top to toe, every
word and letter. So Friarlike he could rhyme too as it happened: and so much
almost could the Parat do long before him; for that Animal could speak
Greek, which I am sure he understood not, no not a word, not a letter. We
might all well agree at this point, for our scope is the Child's good, but we
invert the order: we differ only in the handling of the bow, (that is a great
difference, it turns the upside down) or as the Painter framed the Picture of
a running Horse very well, but he took it by the wrong end, so the feet were
upward, a great defacing to the Picture, but quickly mended. Certain it is we
do just so, we begin with the Child at the wrong end, and we proceed (if we
may call it a proceeding) like a Wiardrawer, backward. Invert the order again,
as he the Picture, and we are right. But this some see not, therefore their
tongue walks more at random, For what we cannot easily Leviter judicahun,
praec pita^ter conden. na^unt. Brad: de Causa Dei. l. 3. cap. 53. (...)
understand, we can quickly censure a. But (I thank you again) since you came
into these parts, those discouragements about our School points began to wear
out; such has been your activenesse therein: And which is the greatest means
to make our way clearer, you have been a means to make Comenius known
amongst us, the greatest light to this Kind of Learning, that ever was set up
in the World. What though the most will not think so: no wonder that: for the
most judge all out of the way, who drudge not on, just in the old road and
beaten way. They will have all Novell, which seem strange to them, and which
they have neither skill to examine; or if skill, then no will: they wish well
to it, but will not be at the cost. Better things they would have done, (so
they do in the highest matters) but they must drop into the mouth, when they
will scarce take the pains to hold the mouth open. How you bear up at this
point (for you drudge on still heartily, leaving a more fair, I may say, and
more honorable employment to further this) how, I say you succeed, and what
provision you make for yours (for it is a maine point) I examine not, though I
should care: I suppose considering the Tempest, you have but an hard pull of it,
against wind and tide, and your encouragements, not as they should be; so
inwardly I know you: But press on and remember: As the Lord crosses such who
run counter winding their own way still, the way of the Serpent: Certainly it
is abominable in Gods fight: so remember also, The Lord shall be with 2 Chronicles.
19. 11.
the good; and that is enough I hope, nay more, enough and enough: I double it
for mighty reason, and I put an accent upon the last, that you might take
double care at this point; for if the Lord be with you, you have enough; not
Esaus enough only, though that was much, or a great deal; (...)
but Jacobs enough, and that is All, enough and enough, my God and All: you
have (...) See the second Part page 7.
my first motive, and your chief encouragement, pressed down running over.

2. You may remember you came upon me the second time, and then but to render a
translation touching precognitions put into your hand by M. Brooks 4. years
since. Certainly his Name was a great motive, being my old acquaintance,
familiar, and Bosom friend: Assuredly I would break a box of ointment, so
perfuming his name, if I could, and make his memory sweet about all our house,
that some of the ointment might be sold, and given toward the very poor, his
most helpless Children: I knew no man so active that way in his time, besides
his second M. Horn, very active now. But Sir, I must tell you, and you will
find it true; I could make his Latin which was but the contents of two
sheets, of no manner of use to the public, yet of use enough, for it was his,
speaking in its own Dialect. You know very well, it was Technologicall all
along, (he was curious that way) but that would not be for public use, for
being translated into English, it would be Latin still; so words of Art are,
being as proper names, much the same in all Languages. We cannot spell Logic
nor construe Law; but yet, if we follow Nature close as we should do Truth,
not fearing a check, or the loss of a tooth or so, we may find good reason
in both.

I have taken this very course, I have followed my own way, using my own
words, taking the Clue of Nature in my hand all along; what speed I have made,
and how near the White I have got, let another judge.

He may think I have spoken boldly enough, and so does a fool: but he may
remember, That I have stayed my full time before I spoke. Pythagoras his five
years silence has but this meaning; We must hear sufficiently, and
understand fully, before we speak boldly, and then we may speak; I have staid
that time four times told, and now I have spoke, That you may the better
judge, what it is, you are pleased to hear it first.

My task by your appointment is, To teach the Grammar by way of Precognition;
a way not tract before, and a very low way, but most sure, infallible, and
certain, it gives the clearest light, though seemingly to the common eye, as
in a dark lantern.

1. It was needful first, To remember Man, what he is, since he is so
forgetful, What is he? For it is a maine point; We will hear what others
say; A wild fellow he is, A Colt, an Ass Colt, a wild Ass Colt, yet vain
man, he would be wise, and somebody, so Job told Job 11. 12.
us; He is naturally as brutish as a Swine, so says another. (...). Cl. Alex.
protr. p. 44 Bas I Hex. Hom. 7.
In spiritual things as unteacheable as a Fish, so another. Are all so? No,
but yet he with his de meliore Luto, Juvenal.
was quite out; we are not all such, not altogether so rough, nor so
untractable some; and some more restrained; but we were all in the same lump,
and have all the same mould, the same mould of heart too, till the good Spirit
come to frame, mould, and fashion there. Job cuts the knot, we are all borne
so; Under this Consideration I deal with Man, that he may understand in the
first place, for it is the ground of all our proceedings, That all our helps
are too weak to shore him up, ever since he took his fall, which was before
he lay in his cradle, and will never outgrow it; so also, that all our lights
are few enough to clear up his understanding, so dark he is; so slow to
conceive, so hard to understand: And all this, ^ An et qu^d disci. non opus
sit, sid delecta i^: non necessitas sed voluntas. Hier. ad Gaudent.
but too little all, to make him vile in his own sight, To hide pride from his
eyes.

2. It must be known what we mean by precognition, and what accommodation we
have from our senses at that point, that the child may see his work before
him, and delight in it, then it goes on b.

3. Since all Sciences have them not; not the highest and most excellent, that
touching God and Christ; nor the lowest, that of Grammar: necessary it was I
should go a middle way, betwixt Nature, and Art, and when we could not find a
precognition (as we say of an occasion) then to make it.

4. Yet all this while I am not come to Grammar, for that comes in almost at
the fag-end of all. But for all that here is no just cause of exception, if it
be well weighed and considered; that I follow Nature all along, keeping pace
with her, which is constant, not Grashopper-like, hopping, and leaping, now up,
then down again presently: so must he not leap, but go, who follows her
gradually with good heed, and leisure, making good riddance all along, else he
does not go but dance, one step forward, and two backward: for one mistake or
error at the first entrance through a preposterous haste, will multiply upon us
in our proceeding, and puts back more then will be imagined. It is a sure rule,
and holds here, as in higher matters, The antidating a work, mars our
reckoning in the end. You have the sum of the first Part.

2. Ye do not expect, I should give a Precognition of every thing I speak
of; it had been a tedious labor, and the driest work in the world. My work
in this way, is to make the sense a leading hand, so making it a delight some
and speedy way, but to tell you on all particulars how I do it, had been
needless, and a vain way; Consilium resque locusque dabit. Only this, he
that can stoop lowest, and soonest fit his Precognition to the Child, he is
the best teacher, what ever his wants are otherwise. It is not what I
understand, but how I can fit my self to the Child's capacity, taking him out of
his rode, and so working upon his understanding.

I need say it but once, The Precognition is arbitrary, one uses this, and
another that, as his mind leads him, and his ingeny can suggest.

3. I have made reference to my own Scrible, nay I will call it a Book, by
allowance of a great Scholar, having two Patrons, which should be the only
Licensers of books, Truth, and Reason. I am sure it has both, else I durst
not have counted it a Sons Patrimony, or a Daughters Portion. I have, I say,
made reference to my own Book, more then once, or twice; there was a
necessity, because at these places, there is a want desideratum aliquid, which
must be supplied there if we will have it; for memory fails me, and my little
skill both, if here or elsewhere I have mentioned any one material thing
twice. You see my account, and how clear I am in it, you will judge of it as
you are well able, and account me still

Your servant in the Common service of love and otherwise Hezekiah Woodward.
Alderm: London. November: 20. 1640.
December. 3. 1640.
Imprimatur

T. WYKES.

The Contents of the first Part.
CHap. I. Serving for an Introduction: The difference in children: That the
strongest but weak; so are all the sons of Adam; in their best estate, vanity;
in their worst and in themselves considered, vile: How necessary the
consideration hereof, and how conducting to our scope. Chap. II. How to order
the child: order must be kept: what danger in inverting that order: Love
feels no weariness; fear tires presently, and works unnaturally: The candle
in the hand, how to walk by it. What we mean by Precognition. Chap. III. Of
what use our senses are, specially the leading sense; how bound to improve
them; how to discipline, and spiritualize them. Chap. IV. Every Science has
not precognitions or preparatories making way for the more easy understanding
thereof, grounded in Nature; yet Nature improved helps much toward the
knowledge of God; nothing at all to the knowledge o^ God in Christ, that high
and excellent Science: Notwithstanding we must not neglect the Aids, which
Nature affords, though, by our fall, all our Spirituals are lost, our Naturals
weakened. Chap. V. When to begin with the Child in the learning of languages:
the child will help us there: The English School how ill ordered; how it
should be: i and j with u and v to be noted: how fundamental the Mother tongue
is: what our care thereabout. Chap. VI. Necessary the child should be taught
to write. Objections against it answered. It helps the understanding very much;
but as it is commonly abused, hurts more then it helps. The Writing-Master
might hear a twofold lesson, but that his ear is stopped; His copy does the
greatest good, or the most hurt, though he thinks of none of all this. Chap.
VII. Of Grammar, the practice thereupon through the several parts thereof.
Chap. VIII. Of the Figures and Tropes. The childs eye, and natural Logic,
cleares all there. Chap. IX. Rules of practice, declaring the Method; the tenth
clearing the same. The fourth and ninth Rules of infinite use to the Catechist,
whether Master in Israel, or Doctor there. Chap. X. What esteem the Grammar
has; how little esteem the Grammarian. The Dignity of the understanding. The
conclusion of the first, a Tansition to the second part.
The Contents of the second Part.
CHap. I. The scope herein; the excellency of the understanding: preparatories
thereunto: of what use our senses are; what our care over them: to discourse of
Generals is to beat the wind. Chap. II. Singulars best fit a child's
understanding; how to supply their want. Pictures how useful: 'they will tell
the child great matters, what the f^rme of godliness, what the power; for they
increase not, nor do they change: In summer and winter, youth and age, still
the same. But where life is, there is power and growth, yet the countenance
sometimes more cleared, sometimes more clouded. They tell also, how empty a
thing the form is, if no more: it feeds the eye only, never fills the stomach,
no more then painted bread can: of such use are pictures, but that they may do
the child no disservice, (we fear not the man) we give two maine Cautions
touching them. Chap. III. To converse in Generalities is to keep a child upon
the Pinnacle; the word is familiar; what it teaches: what also the descent
therefrom: where we meet with the stairs. the bell, and the chilled fly;
mighty instructions from all these. The last cleares and sweetneth also our way
through the Churchyard by the chambers of death; so leading to singulars, and
the chiefest of them, the Man. Chap. IV. Man's body a curious Fabric, but
fallen much into decay, and, by all usage, more decays every day; yet as now
it is, venerable. In what considerations to be cherished, and had in honor:
In what cases to be neglected and despised; after their example, who lived in
the body as out of the body. Incorp^re sin corpore, Hier. Ep. ad Laet. and
Gaud. Read our Juels life: I rejoice that my flesh ^s worn and exhausted in the
Labon^s of my calling. His last words.
Chap V. The soul, how precious; yet how vile in Man's esteem while he is
himself: when he is changed, his judgment changes, and then he gives us
mighty lessons, and of universal use. Chap. VI. Two propositions cleared: 1.
All Creatures serve man; Mighty Conclusions therefrom: how we may serve our
selves of the Creatures, and their Creator in the use of them. 2. Art as well
as Nature serves man; he sets all Trades on work, which concludes he must have
a Trade also; What that must be; How he may prosper in it. Sincerity makes
mites to pass for, and to hold weight with Talents. Chap VII. Occasional
Instructions from observations of things within ^oores, and without. Chap.
VIII. The Millstone, a very precious stone; a precious instruction therefrom. A
few observations taken up first from the Creatures in our way thither, from the
Toad, the Serpent, the worm, the stones. Chap. IX. The Church sacred, in
reference to the great works done there: what they are. We must be at cost, if
we look to know them, for they are chargeable works. Joshuahs counsel
explained, cleares all this, and is of the same use unto us now, as to his
people of old; To inform Masters, and correct servants, that all may walk by
their rule, and know their duty. Chap. X. A child must escape for his fault: A
discreet Master that can judge there of always, and correct it thereafter.
Haste makes waste; we steer our right way by heaven, Eadem ^atione hant vi^ae
viam quaeri opor^et, qua in ^lto iter navibus. Lact. 6. 8.
we see it lighten first before we hear it thunder. Sloth, how corrupting:
The Father must do his office. Diligence must be both in the Teacher, and the
Learner. Nature teaches so, but the Midwife best of all. The Masters copy
must be most exact before the child, the only way to make them both fit, the
one to give, the other to receive instruction.
A LIGHT TO GRAMMAR.
CAP. 1.
Serving for an Introduction: The difference in children: That the strongest
are but weak; so are all the sons of Adam; in their best estate but vanity;
in their worst, and in themselves considered but vile: How necessary the
consideration hereof, and how conducting to our scope.

SOme have compared children to the Earth, their common Mother; different
moulds there: All must be tilled, which we would have fruitful, but
notwithstanding all our tillage, all are not alike fruitful.

Some have compared them to flowers, soon up, as soon down; quickly
flourishing, as quickly fading: This comparison runs well, and instructs us
in our short course; for the whole course of things under the Sun run from us,
as upon wheels, (...). James 3. 6.
(then children are not behind, nor are out of the number) and then good
reason why we should not set our hearts upon them.

Some have compared them to fruits of the earth, some early-ripe, some not yet,
some yet later: every thing is good in its season; we follow the last
comparison.

Some children (for their use this is intended) are, as Sophocles said, (...),
Men-boyes, like Summer fruits, quickly ripe, commonly as quickly rotten. 2.
Other some (they the most) not so quick for speed, but more sure for use. 3.
Some also, whom we miscall, (and misuse too, the more should be the pity)
dullards, hard-heads, etc. what not? many abusive words, and all for that they
cannot help. And yet if we could have patience (a chief virtue even at this
point also) and wait their full time and growth, we may taste them good, very
good in their season. Blossoms there be in children of future hopes; ripeness
not yet; nor tied to one time, no more then all com is ripe for one reaping.
Some be Hastings and will on; some Hardings and draw back. Some, etc. Mulc.
posit. p. 19.


Look we over again these forms or ranks of children, and observe them
every one; we shall find them all, even the quickest of all, like their age,
weak and tender: As the Vine, very fruitful, as the ground is, or the care
about it must be; but must have a strong prop, which it runs up by,
spreads it self upon, most lovingly embracing; take away that, you see where
it lies; such a thing is childhood and youth both. Trem.


Shall I stop here? No. And Enos Mortalis infestus aerumnis dolo^ibusque.
also, he that writes himself, as he thinks, a strong, and well grown man;
even he is but a poor, frail, weak man Genesis 4. 26. Psalm 9. 20.
; though he thinks none of all this, but is it not even thus? Amos 2. 11.
Hearken what one says, and no ordinary one; Man in his best state is but
altogether vanity Psalm. 39. 5
. Hear what another says, an excellent Penman also; Bernard Ochinus, Preface
to his 25. Ser. 2 Pet. 1. 9
His wits are drowned in the body, occupied of pbansies, weak of sight, (he
cannot see far off, seldom farther then the present) sick and impotent
through the fall of Adam, and his own sins; dead therein. What is this man now,
he that boasts great things? he will go hither, and thither, and there he
will do that and this, and all this to morrow. These are his proud thoughts.
Poor man! he may be in good readiness for his grave by to morrow. And this
day knows he not, he can do no not the easiest thing without an influence
from Him, in whose hands is his breath, and all his ways. Dan. 5. 23.
Nay, man must know more then so; He that has great gifts, yet wants the
great, and special gift, is but like a stately Ship ready rigged, and set out
for a Voyage, but wants a wind. I tremble rather then speak, (said the Greek
Father Chrysostom. de Spir. sanct. Tom. 6.
lest I should lanch forth into (any business) and want the gale of the good
Spirit. His comparison is; What though my Ship be ready fitted; Pilot good;
Mariners skillful; Cables strong; Anchors firm, and fast; all things in all
readiness, but no breath of wind stirring; that fits not, it does not blow;
What use now of all these preparations? you must wait the wind till that be,
stir you cannot: just so it is, though great provision of words, depth of
understanding, quick invention, ready expression; If all these, yet if the holy
Spirit be not there, Who is All, and Mat. 7. 11. Luke 11. 13.
does all in all; if the gale of this Spirit breath not, all is nothing, and to
no purpose: so weak and frail a thing is man, even when he is at the best.

But what is he at the worst, in himself considered, or as delivered over to
himself? I cannot well express that. Better it were, he were delivered over
to the Devil, for so he might be for his after good, 1 Cor. 5. 5.
his salvation; but to be delivered over to himself, to be left for ever in
his own lap, this is damnation sure, to perish for ever. O hold Psalm. 81. 11,
12. Acts 14. 16. Romans 1. 26.
us back, Lord, from that we most desire, To walk on in our own way; It tends
straight to the bottomless pit. We cannot but run thither-ward; All our
canning in good things is gone, we cannot serve the Lord, Josh. 24. 19.
but we can do wickedly as we can, Jer. 3. 5.
that is, with all our might, then we can rejoice too; Jer. 11. 15.
such a thing is man left to himself, to every good work reprobate. Tit. 1. 16
Such a thing is man, a very carcass, no life in him, (properly so called) for
dead he is, (as we truly call dead) 1 Timothy 5. 6. Rev. 3. 1.
and so he has been three days, yea four, (that is all his days) and then
we may more then suppose that he stinketh, having lien so long in his grave.
Have I said too much now, either for the vilifying my self, or any other? No
sure not enough. Lord make us more vile then this, more base yet in our own
sight, 2 Samuel 6. 22.
even as he whose resolution it was so to be, and these his words, 1 Samuel 24.
14 Facis quod est tanto Rege indignu^, cum me ^enuissimum, infimum et
infirmissinum, etc. Jun. ibid.
What is thy servant? What honor will thou have in pursuing or taking away my
life? A dog, (then fit to lie under the table, to pick the crummes there) A
dead dog? (then fittest for the ditch) so said he, who was afterward a King,
precious in Gods eyes: a likely man to be so, and to be raised high, who was
so vile in his own eyes, so base and low there.

The voice of the Tall men of the world (who are not raised to a life higher,
and out of themselves) sounds higher, Am I a dog 1 Samuel 17. 43.
? Is thy servant a dog 2 Kin. 13.
? Yes, thou art a dog, thou may be sure, though thou think not so; old
nature thou art, and nothing else; and thou art thy self still, and not in
another, and that will blaspheme the Living God; It will rend and tear more
then any dog can; such a thing our old nature is; such is man, so cruel, so
fierce, while he walks by himself, and has no b^^ter leader. But so vile
though he is, so as we have heard and read, yet so he is not in his own eye,
but of great and high account there, A man of name and renown; nay he that is
better then either of those two, may be wonderfully deceived in the thoughts
of himself, while he is but himself; he may think himself some great one,
when he is nothing; A^^s 8. 9.
he may have a name that he lives, and is dead; he may think himself rich,
and to have need of nothing, and Rev. 3. 1.
know not that he is wretched, and poor, and miserable, and blind, and naked.
Revel. 3. 17.


But when this man shall be able to bottom himself, to see clearly within
(the anointing will teach him:) when he can discern what a thing himself is,
what God is; Now hear him what he says, Surely I am more Proverbs.
brutish then any man, and have not the understanding of a man. There remained
no strength in me: for my comeliness was turned in me into corruption, Dan.
and I retained no strength. When I say, The man does clearly see how vile
himself is, and yet ^^w highly exalted by David his Prince, the^ hear him
what he says, What is 2 Samuel 9. 8.
thy servant, that thou should look upon such a dead dog, as I am? Making me
eat bread at thy Table always, so accounting me thy friend? It is not my
theme now to dilate upon man's weakness, or wickedness, or his misery from
both; when he is put in fear, when pains are upon him, when his words are
fighes, and his complaints tears, then he may know himself to be but a man
Ps. 9. 20.
, a poor frail man, a very nothing, yea worse then so, he would count it his
happiness he were reduced to his first principles and were as if he had never
been. Thus it will be with him, when he is put in fear, when he lies
languishing, and thinks the hours over long and cannot command his breath.

O that the Lords counsel might take hold of us now in the day of our peace!
Remember this, and show your Esaias 46. 8.
selves men; Bring it again to mind, o ye transgressors. And this is not from
our scope, but mightily advancing the same. My end is the child's good, his
instruction is at hand: We can make no work therein, unless we take down
his proud heart first; A proud child, (that is the fool all along the sacred
Scripture) will not hear instruction (...). Naz. Ep. 10.
: And such naturally we are all. It is our very Mother-sin, the first that
puts forth it self; (as has been said Child's Patrimony p. 36.
) our first care must be, how to keep down the working thereof, and to weed
it out what we can. It is a sure lesson, the best that can be taught, but the
hardest learnt. And I thought it fittest to begin with it, and to speak of it
in the man's ears, for in the child's it had been much of it lost. To contract
all; the sum, and purpose hereof is; we must look up to God in the use of
all means, whereby Job 34.
to hide pride from our eyes, else we cannot hide the Law of God in the heart;
instructions cannot find entertainment there, such an opposite or enemy this
mother-lust is to all good. It is the valley which is fruitful (...). Basil.
James 4. 6. 1 Pet. 5. 5. Psalm. 25. 9. Ps. 149. 4.
, for there the drops stay. He gives grace to the humble. The meek will he
teach his way. He will beautify them with salvation. They are the simple ones
of the world, the little ones (so in their own account, and so the world
accounts of them too) who wait at Wisdoms door, and shall be remembered. And
thus I thought most fit to dedicate my first entrance upon this high service,
in all points promoting the Child.

CHAP. II.
How to order the Child: order must be kept: what danger in inverting that
order: The candle in the hand, how to walk by it. What we mean by
Precognition.

ANd now we are turning toward the child, before we take him by the hand we
must seriously consider, how to order him, and where to begin, for this
requires our serious consideration, the very extract of our judgment and skill.

I do not mean now, what I must teach him in the first place. That is out of
question, the Mother Tongue: nor do I mean what Science first; Music say
some, and they give good reason: Arithmetic, says the noble Scholar, as the
Child may be, for that will fix his mind in case he be birdwitted Inge^ium
vol^^ile et desul o^u^.
; and to say the truth, I know nothing taught in good order but that: for the
weakest teacher may find a necessity. I should add the Mathematics also, a
general containing the other; for as that proceeds gradually, and there is
order; so these by Sense; and there is certainty.

I say again, we had need now of all our wits about us, and to have our
understanding part ready even at our fingers ends. I mean not that thereby we
may be taught where to begin our information; for every man well understands
this, that the informing the understanding is the maine point. And for this
great end and purpose we must look through, and through the child; we must
well understand him, before he can understand us. And this is not quickly done;
probabilities are our guides, and our conjectures great, yet not without
exception, where there is such uncertain motion as there is in Children. The
Quick-wit puts out apace, gives great appearance, so as we may prophecy, and
yet be deceived; for as there be fair blossoms, so there are nipping frosts:
The Dull-wit would offer fair, praise must help him; when he has it, he holds
fast, and may prove somebody. The Quick must not be held in all the hope, the
Dull in despair; we must not neglect the meanest wits, but do the work of the
day upon the Day, and leave the event to God, who has reserved His calling and
discovering hours to His own peculiar knowledge. We go on then, and take
the Child as he is, and so apply our selves to him as we can. He may be
like your Quicksilver, quick, and fleeting; we must labor to fix him, and
(if so we can) then to make him flee; yet so, that he make no more haste, then
good speed. Most likely he may be not so quick, but naturally more composed
and fixed; we like him the better. We must make him rid much way in a little
time.

He may be much of the nature of a log, not stir a whit, unless you lift him,
and move hard; This is the Child whom we should set upon his legs, lead
onward, so jogging on. The means that we should use will effect it, (if he be
not monstrously deficient) provided still we use no compulsion, but all
diligence, we must not put him out of his pace, for then he stands still, but
let him march on like a man that has all his armor about him; though it be a
Snayles pace, yet it gets ground, and by still improving and adding to the
heap, by constancy in moving, the Child may attain to the top of the Muses
Hill, as we read Guil: display of Herald: p. 217.
the Snayle did to the top of the Tower.

There are some, they say, who will be Scholars whether we will or no: I
cannot tell that, but very quick they are; as he was of old (commonly known)
his own Master, and Teacher all at once. Nay there was one, if we may believe
it, that was Tom of all Trades, for he could make every thing belonging to the
adorning of his body, yea though he went in complete armor; I do not mean
him, who was so good at every thing, that he was for all turns, at all hours
b: but it was Omnium horarum. Asinius Pol^io Quint. l. 6. cap 4.
to make himself and others merry, the very froth of wit, or a good wit ill
used. Let these wonder-workers go, and also those monsters in nature, so
deficient as are not one of a thousand; And let the midling Child stand still,
yea and the Harding too (as before) he whom the Parents have designed to the
Cart, and holding of the Plough; with the Parents leave, let him have some
instruction, (for he is too young yet for that employment) which may make him
drive the better, and when he comes to it, to hold the Plough steadily, not
looking back.

We told you before, that our scope is, (I include here all Teachers) to unfold
the understanding, to set up a light there; for the understanding is as is the
eye to the body, the candle thereof. The maine work (it cannot be said too
often) is the informing of the same, the making that clear. A main and chief
thing indeed, for till that be done, the child is in a wood, he does not go
but stumble; and has no more comfort in his way, then we have in ours, when
the night is darkest. Can he be diligent now? No, he cannot tell what to do,
then he hates the work: Diligence implies delight, and love; That great
Centurion, who commands eyes, and Diligo.
ears, and all, makes all diligent; Bids them come, and they come, do this,
and they do it. If you have won your child to the love of his book, you shall
have all at command, he will use all diligence. But if this love, this delight
be not, diligence cannot be; It is true fear may work out something, ever in
the book, but then mark we must the fearful, and unnatural workings
thereof, of fear I mean, it makes the child wish (as is feigned touching the
Ferry-man, who was ever merriest Lucian. Me^c: Charon.
when others were saddest) for some plague to come upon the earth. I remember a
truer story, for Chrysostom tells it, what fell out in the City where he lived;
The Lord had made the earth iron, and the Heavens brass, such a drought there
was and want of bread, Chrysostom. in 1. Cor. cap. 15.
and then of all things. It pleased the Lord in his own time, to cause the
Heaven to hear the earth, and the earth to hear man, and in the remembrance
of that mercy they rejoiced, and kept holy day. One man amongst the rest walked
heavily and discovered as much sadness as others did joy; and being demanded
why? concealed it not, but told them the very reason; I have, said he, ten
thousand measures of bread-corne, and what to do with it now I cannot tell.
Alas poor man! I mention it here that we may consider; if men will do so for
gain, what will children do for fear? I will tell you what: for I am sure
this generation is not better nor wiser then their Fathers, I will tell you
what we did, when we were led on in the dark; when our Master began at the
wrong end, as was said, when he should at the top, the understanding, the
crown of a man; I will tell, I say, what we did; Besides all our excuses, and
they were, for the most part, lies; we wished our Master no good, none at all,
neither going forth, nor returning home, nor lying down, nor rising up: we
wished it might rain pouring down, especially all the morning, though the
fruits of the earth lay in the suds, so we might stay at home what cared we
for that: we were content with sore eyes, and kybed heels, they were good
commodities with us, but that they hindered our play; we would wish our selves
dead too, when we had not learnt to live; and though we could not be sick when
we would, yet we would faigne it pretty well, and find a time to steal to
the Cupboard (not discerned) for provision of a crust against the next day,
(when we did forecast trouble.) To a boy play and a dry crust is good cheer.
It is not fit to tell all, and this could not be spared. But why all this? what
unhappy boys those! the blame was not ours, we were in the dark, and yet
spurred on as the Drunkard does his horse, when he minds not the danger, nor
sees one step of his way; we have cleared it then, that the understanding must
be unfolded.

How is that? as we do let in light into our house, by the doors and
windows. An ignorant man lives, we say, like one in a dark house: he is a
dark man: and dark let him be, if he will not take the pains to pluck down
the wooden window, thereby to let in so glorious a creature as light is, and so
delightful. God be thanked, the man's house has windows, let him set them
open; so much light will come in whether he will or no, as will leave him
without excuse, though he may be in the dark for all that.

But touching the Child, our purpose is that he shall not stir one inch farther,
then he carries his Torch or Lantern in his hand, that thereby the
understanding may do its office, and put to memory to do hers; and now we go
sure, because in order making no inversion thereof, for that is to turn the
picture.

Our endeavor shall be to put the Child in a good forwardness, before he
knows where he began; he shall be well entered, before he knows how he came
into the way; he shall do his work playing, and play working; he shall
seem idle and think he is in sport, when he is indeed serious, and best
employed. This is done, when the understanding is cleared by its own light;
when the Child's own door, which he thinks shut, is opened by a natural key,
of the child's own framing, and using. It is, I say (for I would be clear
herein) thus done, when things are so ordered and explained, as that the
consequence is made easy by receiving his light, and dependence from the
antecodent.

And this is a familiar way of teaching, when the School is otium, indeed a
profitable kind of play, for under that notion the work will be both more
pleasant, and then more profitable: but very different it is from those sports
and recreations (as we mis-call them) usual now amongst boys. Such a way
there is, that is certain; and we will grope after it anon, for so sensual
it is, that it may be felt. But I say again, an infallible way it is, and in
point of teaching, all in all, it being lex generalitatis as the Logicians
term it, an excellent help both to the judgment and memory, when a child can
see himself speak, and know what he does remember.

I cannot express the way in one word, and in our Tongue more plainly then in
the Latin it is, there we call it precognition, which in more words, thus may
be described. It is an anticipation of the understanding, that is, a stealing
upon it, and catching of it, unfolding unto it, that the child knows not, by
that medium or means he knew before; or, It is that whereby I slip into a
child's understanding before he be aware; so as a child shall have done his
task, before he shall suspect that any was imposed: this is done by
Precognition; for it conveyes a light into the understanding, which the child
has lighted at his own candle.

CHAP. III.
Of what use our senses are, specially the leading sense; how bound to improve
them; how to discipline, and spiritualize them.

THe way of working hereby is when the inward senses of the child are
instructed by the outward: And the more help I have of the outward, the surer
and firmer the instruction is within, that is certain.

Therefore praise we God, yea all within us praise His holy name, that the
child can see and hear both specially that it has, that great Organ or
instrument of knowledge, the ear, (though the eye helps most this way, but
without the ear we could do nothing) and that open to Instruction. It is
true, some there have been who have attained a great measure of knowledge, yet
never saw a letter; and one there was of full age, who plucked out his eyes,
and wished his ear like the deaf stone, that he might be the more free for
meditation. Heylin G^^g. p. 503.


But as I said before, I say again; Bless we God that our children see, and
hear, and labor we for grace, that we may use and improve these so useful,
so adorning faculties to the glory of the Giver. This is a main point, for too
many there are, to whom these excellent faculties are as useless as i^ they
were not at all. Nay, they are so far from using, from improving them, that
they abuse them altogether, turning them the clean contrary way. So many
members, so many weapons of righteousness unto holiness, so it should be; but
most ungrateful as we are! we fight against God with His own weapons, and
grieve Him with that, wherewith He has comforted us; we dishonor Him with
that, wherewith He has honored us.

If I should say, Those Talents spoken of in the Gospel are our senses, I
should All Abilities are Talents.
say but as some before me; but so I say not, yet this I say, God has given us
these to traffic, and gain withal, so to improve by use of them, that there
may be a good return made to his glory; for inquired it will be, What have thou
gained? and happy we, if we are found good and faithful servants; but if
wicked and slothful, (mark how these two Math. 25. 25. ver. 23. 26.
stand conjoined in the Text, close together, never parted) then shall we be
(as the expression is) silent in darkness. 1 Samuel 2. 9.


I said well, we are now upon a maine point; Be we circumspect, and careful
with all our care, to improve our senses, for the reason abovesaid; and for
this which follows.

Our method all along holds hands with our senses, The extract, the
Quintessence of all the Simples in the world, if they could be gathered, (we
shall pick up some in due place) is conveyed, is dropped into the understanding
through no other Limbeck but these Mark it once for all, Every Lesson must
(next to God) pay tribute to the senses.

God has imprinted the Vestigia of His power, and wisdom, of all His
attributes in the glorious Workmanship of the world. Why now this (...) that
which may be known of God, is manifest in us, for God has manifested it unto
us, by that we see and feel (...). Acts 17. 27.
of Him.

The chief work then is, To discipline the senses, and since they must teach
us, first to teach them. A main and prime work this is indeed, and very hard to
sublimate our senses (which needed not if we intended no other but Grammatical
learning, such trivial points, but we must make the world his book) to
snuff the light (for very dim it is to those great purposes it is intended
for) that it may be cleared of the scales, or filme there; And certainly the
Snuffers must be of gold.

Plato said well, The soul has broken her wings; It has indeed, and we may
see it so, by her hovering here below, though the treasure be above. The
inferior faculties thereof have lost much of their activity too, our nature
catched a fall, like Mephibosheth, in the cradle of our infancy, and could
never outgrow it; lame we are, and dimme-sighted too, we cannot see afar off,
no nor well the snares before us, so weaksighted are we. This is the comfort,
The Restorer of all things will restore even this also. We shall see clearly;
in the mean time there is an anointing, and that will do the thing; It will
clear nature so far, that she will be able to give us some light in the
search, even after hidden things. To them our Method will necessarily lead us
first. I have been too short here touching the disciplining the senses; but I
have prevented my self elsewhere, and I love not to make repetitions. Child's
Patrimony Chap. 7.


Thus we have scoured the way, and cleared the Text, for plain it is that the
senses are the only medium, the means, whereby to open the understanding, and
to let in thereby, there to leave the instruction sure and safe as under lock
and key.

We will give but one note by the way, which will be of great use to us all
along. We must think all our helps lost, which do not help us in our way to
heaven; which do not raise out minds thither-ward. We have our lanthorn in
our hand, it were a shame to stumble as in the dark. That is for the man.

Now we come to the child who has his light at his fingers ends, though he
thinks not so; and how universal the use thereof shall be unto him in his way
to Grammar, and higher things; how delightful also, we shall discern in our
passage anon, but we^ will well observe the child first.

We shall find him still in action, here and there, and every where with his
stick, or with his gun, or with his casting stones; perhaps i^ these be not at
hand, he is blowing up a feather; I cannot reckon up his Implements: I believe
he is as well stored for the driving his pleasant trade, as is the best
Merchant in the Town for his so gainful: we suppose him well sorted with
commodities, he has his Exchange and Warehouse too, both his box and his
pocket. And we shall see anon, that by his dealings in the world, he has
learned good part of his Grammar (that dull book, as it is taught) before he
came at it. But we observe for present that the child is all for action, and
very earnest therein, never quiet* except in motion. It is true, he should be
better employed, but we must take things as they are, and make use of them as
we can. We must observe too, or else we observe nothing; That the child is as
desiours after knowledge, very curious and enquiting that way, What is this?
what is that? All is news to him, and thereof our nature is greedy. It is as a
little Ape taken up by imitation: what he sees the Governor do, (he must
take heed what he does) the child will make offer to do the like, though he
has neither strength to do it, nor knows he the manner how; but such is his
defire, he thinks all possible to him, nor can you gratify him better, nor
please him more, then to suffer him to try his skill by putting his hand to the
work, which you must move altogether, but he will think he has done the deed,
and by his own strength: he must enjoy his conceit, and make himself merry
with it; all such encouragement does good Child's Patrimony P. 99.
every where: for when the child finds himself a party in the work, he speaks
of it willingly and with delight, remembers it accurately, and much good there
is in all that.

CHAP. IV.
Every Science has not precognitions or preparatories, making way for the more
easy understanding thereof, grounded in Nature; yet Nature improved helps much
toward the knowledge of God; nothing at all to the knowledge of God in Christ,
that high and excellent Science; Notwithstanding we must not neglect the Aides,
which Nature affords, though, by our fall, all our Spirituals are lost, our
Naturals weakened.

ALL this while the profit and delight is the Child's, the work the Masters,
and this the hardest piece of it, herein the greatest part of cunning how to
find out this precognition, (we will use this single word all along; for now
we have some understanding thereof, what it does note out unto us, how much it
does import) then how to use it or work by it. There is most difficulty in the
first, for if we can find out this preparatory; (as I may call it) our work
will be easy enough.

Aristotle a requires it in all Studies, (...). 1. Post. Text. 1.
but he must understand it of them, whose foundation is laid, either in the
light or in the law of Nature. But Languages have no ground in Nature: for
though to speak be natural, yet to speak this or that Language is merely
ex instituto, (as a man is taught) he being by Nature no more capable of his
Mother Tongue then of any other. Hence it is that Grammar learning, as it is
taught, is a matter of greater difficulty (a great wrong to children) then any
study that a man afterward undertakes. For here can be no such preparatory to
the understanding (I know not how to express it otherwise) which the
Philosopher requires in all studies. But here even in teaching Languages,
something must be done in way of preparation to, or anticipation of the
understanding; we must, I say, as a wise man does an occasion, either find a
prec^gnition or make it. But this we shall understand more fully in our
practicke part, in point of Grammar, which when I shall show, I shall resume
this again, and set down the Rules whereby we have proceeded, which shall hold
pace with nature and right reason all along.

There is a greater thing to be done first, we must begin with God, so the
very Heathen by their light could direct us; how shall we help our selves
here? this is a great Science indeed, and precognitions here we have none.
Indeed Divinity has its principles also, but how are they worked into the
understanding? By the Spirit of God, and that either of illumination, or
adoption; either of which far exceed nature, but have no foundation there.

In this we say right fure: no preparation from Nature, whereby to elevate the
understanding to that height, as to comprehend God, and the mysteries of Grace:
The natural body indeed, having his spirits, is lively, and with the thought
penetrateth the Heavens, but wanting the Spirit, (before mentioned) is private
of all these virtues, though it wants neither: so that when the thoughts are
as high as Heaven, they see no more there, then before on the earth, and all
for want of the special illumination, and Spirit of adoption; whereafter we
must breath and pant in our prayers before Him, who is not served with bodily
or worldly services, but of spiritual thoughts, which are the just and true
sacrifices unto God. These are Bernard Ochin. Preface to his 24. Sermons.
his words who was of great years, and wonderful reputation, the most notable
Preacher of all Italy, famous for the great example of his good life there. And
observe we should these two words, breath and pant: for though God accepts
weak performances, yet He expects strong desires; Though He accounts the
will for the deed, yet never but when the will is earnest after the deed. This
by the way; we will read onward, that we may take with us his following
words. God in His power and light, stands so hid in darkness from us, that
with blindness we see Him, with ignorance we know Him, with retiring or going
back we comprehend Him, with silence we praise Him. Nature cannot read this
riddle; grace can, for so it follows; It behooveth him who would know what God
is, to study in the School of simplicity, and rest vanquished of that
inestimable, inaccessible, and incomprehensible light.

What precognition now from nature, to open the understanding, for the letting
in this great light? Yes, from Nature, and so much light, and preparation
therefrom, as shall, being neglected, leave us without excuse. What though
sense cannot lead me exactly, yet I must not put out that light. Though nature
cannot do the thing, but leaves us in a Maze, (as we may see anon) yet I will
take her by the hand, and go by her clue as far as I can; that I will by Gods
help, for I am bound to it. God forbid that we should neglect the light of
nature, or conduct of right reason; for this were to cast away our lantern,
because we cannot go by the Sun. So some have done, and we must read, and
well observe their judgment Matthew. 9. 3, 4. 5. 6. and Cap. 12.
Principles laid in nature, and right reason, will carry us very far, here,
even from the footstool on earth, to the Throne in heaven: By these I proceed
a little with the child.

We conceive the earth hanging in midst of heaven, no Pillars bearing it up;
even that will lead us by the hand to an all-supporting hand. Child's Pat p. 100.
We have read often, and seen a creature exceeding strong; therefrom I can
raise up the mind to conclude an Almighty power: for mark how it is hinted out
unto us, Job 40. 19.
He that made him, can make his sword to approach unto him; That is, there is
a stronger then he, strong enough to pierce the head (that is the seat of
life) of the greatest Leviathan Psalm 74, 14. Quasi diceret annonam fuisse tunc
repositam. Calv. ibid.
(oppressor) upon earth, and to give his Church strong confidence therefrom
for ever. Give but the understanding a rise, it cannot cease climbing, till it
be at the Pinnacle: And yet though so high it be, it is but a natural
understanding still. My meaning then is, which I find fully expressed by
another. That the mind of man, tracing Learned Reinolds on the faculty of the
soul, p. 449.
the footsteps of natural things, must by the act of Logical Resolution, at
last arise to Him, who is the fountain of all Being, the first of all Causes,
the supreme of all Movers, in Whom all the rest have their beings, and motions
founded. To give an instance more;

We see a murdering engine before us. A brave work, says the child, Who
made that? A plain Fellow, he that blows the coals. Isay 54. 16, 17.
Who gave the Smith breath so to do? He that is Almighty, which yields a
mighty instruction now and always of the same use. We might be large here,
all would amount but to this, A man has a law of nature, and principles
answerable, which teaches him somewhat touching the Being of God: And that is
all: But God in Christ is all to the soul, and here natural law has not a
letter to teach us any thing They that will ground Christ upon Aristotle
(Reason) are as those, who will build a Tovver upon a vvheatstravv. Bern. O
c^in Se^m. 3.
God in Christ reconciling the world is a mystery, an heavenly riddle; nothing
can spel it, and find it out but faith alone, faith a learned Divine. And a
truth it is more fixed then the earth; more stable then the Heavens: for so
says the sacred Scripture, and so it does dispoyle Nature of her glory, giving
her neither part nor lot in this matter; The world by wisdom knew not God. 1
Cor. 1. 21.
Nature polished, Reason sublimated, may help somewhat for the elevation of
our thoughts: yet is it but Nature still, and must move no higher then in her
Sphere; and there she gives us her best help: but she cannot tell us with all
her Philosophy how our meat and drink do nourish; how our clothes do keep us
warm; nor whence the wind comes, nor whither it will. And if she cannot tell
us earthly things, we will not believe her in the Heavenly. It is said indeed;
Faith comes by hearing, yet between this act of sense, and the work of Faith,
there is as great a disproportion, nay far greater, then was between the
stroke of Moses, and the Rocks gushing out water; or has ever been between
the instrument, and the effect, in any work of this nature: God imprinting
that in the heart, which never was nor would be in the sense so much as
formaliter, much less eminenter: otherwise there was something to be ascribed
to the arm of flesh, which in this work has no more power, then Baal his
Priest had to cause fire to come down from Heaven, for the consuming of their
sacrifice.

This being premised and the way cleared, we go on with the Child, using such
helps we have at hand, and thus we would work up his understanding We must not
attempt to draw down or submit the mysteries of God to our reason: but
contrariwise to raise and advance our reason to the Divine Truth. Advanc. p.
133.
.

Darkness we are, what communion then with light? so soon as the Lord formed
the one, and created the other, He separated betwixt both, they cannot stand
together. Betwixt a mortal creature, and an immortal God, a finite creature,
an infinite GOD, what communion? And yet, The work of Thy hands, Lord, Thou will not forsake. Me thinks, here reason helps, points us toward a middle
thing, that must stand betwixt these and partake of both, so filling up the
gulf, and making both one. I said well, Helps, and we must account of it so,
as a help, for the Jews blundring against this very light, and stumbling it
out, Mat. 9. 12.
fell we know how irrecoverably. Reason helps, it concludes, that so it must
be: But how or which way, it cannot tell. It is in a Maze; now faith must help
her out, which break through all difficulties, and then the way is known, but
the wonder cease not, 2 These. 1. 10.
so wonderfully have thou contrived it, O Lord God Almighty.

We procceed then a little further in this Maze (so reason left to it self
will make it) taking the Clew of Nature in our hand, but following the track of
sacred Scripture all along.

We see misery here below, and man only capable thereof, of the greatest
misery; We must take good notice of it, and what we can, fadome that
bottomless pit: The height, and depth of mercy cannot be sounded, but by the
measuring line of misery Child's Portion. p. 27.
.

And now mark we must how the Lord, blessed for ever, has condescended for
our instruction if our desires be strong after Him. If we see the necessity,
the excellency, the preciousnesse of Him; ye that thirst; Thirst dries up the
soul, making it like the earth gaping, for, as was once said, but must be
remembered always, God acccepts weak performances, but expects strong desires,
(which he works also) ye that thirst. And then Job 20. 17
we hear of water, and wine, and milk, and oil, nay rivers, floods, brooks,
of honey and butter. All this to give in clear evidence to the soul, That all
good is in Christ; All from Him; all must be referred to Him. He is the
Christ, the anointed, the anointing: All healing (...).
. He heales all our infirmities; pardons all our sins; perfects all our
obedience; Is all to us; works all in us; does all for us. O, all ye that
hunger and thirst, come to Him, He is bread indeed, drink indeed. Taste, and see
how good this Lord is, for under these familiar things even Nature will make
report thereof unto the soul. And the very evidence of Nature given in against
us will make us silent in darkness, as the expression ^ Sam. 2. 9
is. The maid, who so often has laid her leaven, and seen the working
thereof, yet has not learnt by all that, the work of grace, and the contrary
working of corruption, even she will be reproved and left speechless. For
she cannot say, but that so much was plainly taught her thereby. If the bread
and drink we receive daily do not raise up our hearts to Him, who gives us
our daily bread; if we do not relish. Him in them; if these streams from Him
refreshing our fainted bodies, mind us not of our souls also (for they have a
meat too even their daily bread) carrying them to the fountain head, there to
be refreshed; if not so, then so it is, our Table will be our snare, our ease
will slay us, so foolish we are and ignorant, even as a Beast before the Lord,
and at our Tables. If the Salt wherewith we season our meat, teaches us not
the danger of our unsavory and unprofitable walking Luke 14. 34.
, nor learnes us to season our words with a grain thereof in a Metaphor; if
not so, we shall not have a word to say for our selves, why we went against
that rule Colos. 4. ^.
; He that sees filthy rags, and sees not himself in them, even at the best
no better Esaias 30. 21.
; or white, and clean linen, and learneth not thereby the glory of the Saints
Rev. 19. 8.
, (but in another) in whom he must be found, else he will be filthy still; if
he seeing these, makes not this use of what he sees, certain it is, he sees
but discernes not, he sees as an Ox does a painted gate, sees and no more.

Thus I think it is clear, that we have our preparatories from Nature to the
understanding of divine matters; and that by these low things (so the Lord has
condescended to our weakness) we may prepare our way to higher matters, and
get a good understanding even thereof: And then by such familiar ways, be
still dropping into our Children (for we may take up the Emblem of a watering
pot Nil mihi prae^erea, praeterea mihi nil.
) as we observe them able to receive. I must remember for the present, that I
must move in a very low orb, for so low my subject is, to whom I must stoop,
and, as I can, raise him and make him capable, I shall wind him up very
gently, and with much ease to the same height anon.

CHAP. V.
When to begin with the Child in the learning of languages: The Child will
help us there: The English school how ill ordered; how it should be: how
fundamental the Mother tongue is: what our care thereabout.

WE have not yet begun with the Child, but now setting upon it, if it be
thought a fitting time. When is that? So soon as the Child can exercise his
inward faculties, has any strength there, then we must begin and well husband
the time. Now the Child will take in fast enough, like a fair Table-book^,
wherein is nothing yet, but presently there will be something written, which we
cannot so easily blot out: It is the Masters wisdom, and for that he shall be
counted an understanding man, not to leave the child to his choice: For now
(and so we shall know the nick of time) the Child can distinctly observe that
which is before his eyes, and can call it by its name.

The Child has Arithmetic too, what a jolly fellow is this? (I must insert
words of encouragement, that promoteth greatly the little thing) he can skill
of Greek, he can tell you how many fingers he has upon the one hand, then he
can number I hope.

He can put the other five to them, and tell what all amounts to; then he can
add; he can take away the one hand, and tell you how many remains: The best
Accountant in the town cannot answer more punctually; then we will grant he
can substract: yes and more yet is his skill, for he can tell you what twice 5.
is, so he can multiply; And ten to one, if these ten were ten Apples, he would
divide them by 2. to each hand even parcels, and so keep all for himself:
otherwise, and in such cases, he cares not for division, though he
understands it for his use very well.

Poor Child! he has discovered himself too far: for now his skill is so
well known, he must to School to learn his Mother Tongue the very next
Monday; And there we suppose he is, where the Mistress helps to hold the book
with one hand, and (if it be as I have seen) a little twigge in the other,
which the child marks very earnestly, as we would have it do the lesson.

Here is a change now, and that will be pleasing for some hours. The next
week the child will tell you when is the next Holy Day, for that is all he
heard at Church, and all he looks for, he knows where, for he finds it to be
a red letter: And for the School he has no mind to it; by his going
thither, and returning thence, we perceive well enough, that no man loves a
prison worfe: never looks he to see a merry day, so long as he is pent up there.
Why? because the School indeed is but a prison to his body; and no way is
taken to enlarge his mind. What a coil is there to make him pronounce false?
and because he cannot readily do so, for very nature teaches otherwise,
perhaps he feels the twigge too, and his sense is so quick at that point,
that he cannot relish the School.

He hears also of Vowels and Consonants, What are they? Latin; poor little
Englishman, he cannot skill of that. Then he must put these together, and
spell, What is that? Greek; indeed so it is to the child, and to the Teacher
too.

Certain it is, the child understands more of his own tongue in one month
from his Nurse (after he can speak articulately) then he gains from a School
in three in any language; which clearly shows of what force nature is,
specially when a little helped by Art, and made mighty by use: The one and the
other, even all three gives us great accommodation here: Nature gives us the
precognition; Art, Skill to use it: Use makes it familiar.

It must not be expected here, that I should give the precognition to every
thing that I would have learnt thereby; that were a dead work; Time and place
will instruct much, and the very thing in hand. This I say again, we must make
it a preparatory to the understanding of every thing, so preventing the toil
of conceiving the same: And we must find a precognition, or make it, as the
great Commander said, when his way was blockt up before him. And this nature
shows, that a vowell makes a sound alone, perfect of it self; The Consonant
not without a Vowell, being indeed of it self, but the very essay, and offer
of the tongue, and no more.

And if c, g, and t, might but know their power once, and keep it ever, u, and
v, distinct in figure, but more in sound; if I say it were observed, it would
save us much trouble in afterproceeding; so also if the syllable were
distinctly framed according to the plain rules for spelling, so pronounced,
specially the last letter. For the pauses or stops, our breathing will help us
there, but the observation thereof, is the chiefest part in good reading.

I confess my thoughts are not ripened here; if they were, I would not blot
paper with them, though it is no disparagement to go even so low; for the
Mother Tongue is the foundation of all; nay indeed we have a necessity so to
do every day, else we cannot go forward orderly; the groundwork of the
child's entry being so rotten underneath. But I may spare my pains o^ writing
upon this Elementary point, for I find a short paper for direction this way,
from a man of long experience in higher matters, gained by travel, and and
otherwise M. Carew.
: And a large tractate there is also, treating on the very same subject, of
more large use. M. Hodges.


And surely great need of all this: for the matter of the elementary (the
Hornbook) though it be small in show, yet it is great for process: and for the
manner of handling the child, of great moment also, to hearten him on for
afterward. And therefore it would promote the common good not a little, if an
able man had the ordering the child at this first staire or step; for a firm
ground here, at this low point, raises the work mightily, and makes all stand
firm. But it is supposed the Master must have answerable pay: a good
encouragement to come down so low, when he shall perceive that reward shall rise
up. This will be thought upon when Praemia conatum extimulant. De Aug, li 2.
times mend, and the day cleares up, then our judgment, and foresight will
clear up too: In the mean time, I know what will not be done; a good Scholar
will not come down so low, as the first elementary, and to so low a recompense
also; it shall be left to the meanest, and therefore to the worst. And there I
leave it also even in the Mistress her hands, for there is no remedy; And so I
come to that work which more properly belongs unto the Master.

CHAP. VI.
Necessary the child should be taught to write. Objections against it
answered. It helps the understanding very much; but as it is commonly abused,
hurts more th^n it helps.

WE are making way now toward Grammar learning. And what if I set down the
accommodation of writing first? Nay, I will not consult about it, I am resolved
already so to do, and that for great reason; for thereby, I shall the better
work upon his senses. But what if the Parent will not have it so? (for he must
direct the Master, not the Master him) No matter; I am not now to question the
Fathers will, which commonly is the worst of his reason, but to show how it
will promote the child in the thing he is about, where, by one and the same
light, at one and the same time, the child shall see his work, understand it,
and remember it too, even all this, and altogether, by the use of his pen. And
it may promote him afterward, for ought we know, as the Harp did David. I
remember one says very well; To write and read well is a pretty stock for a
poor boy to begin the world withal, and to live comfortably too Mulc. p. 33.
. And we must be persuaded to ground that quickly in young years, which must
requite them with grace in after years: If we consider so much, we shall
relent at the voice of Reason, which commands us to begin with the pen.

But the child is too young yet, he is the custom is: But we are fully
concluded, That the child must be set straight to his work, and not sit long at
it, but while he is sitting there, he mu^^ make it his play. Observe him with
his little stick puddering in the ashes, drawing lines there, or upon the dirt
where he can make an impression; and almost as busy he is, as one was, who
would not be driven from it with the sword Archimedes.
. I will tell my observation; I have known some who were not taught to write,
yet could draw faces of all sorts, bodies in due proportion; frame several
buildings, Castles, Ships, and the like. I mention it, that Parents and Masters
might be persuaded to draw forth Nature (...). Arist. phys. 2. 2.
as you would do a piece of gold, it will spread and compass it self, (as
gold will Nihil auro ductilius, etc. Alst. phys. li. 13. par. 4. cap. 7.
) beyond an ordinary imagination. Let us follow nature here, for this drawing,
whether with stick, or pen, is but Cosen-Germane to writing, a precognition, or
training principle thereunto. These two, (and drawing, the most children do
naturally) are of one Parentage and pedigree, as is noted by the Philosopher
Arist. Polit. 8. 3.
, and others. We cannot doubt then, but the child will quickly gain so much,
now his hand is flexible, and fit for frame* as will serve very much for his
use.

But what use is of it?

This was implied before, we will add to it; The use of the pen is great,
almost universal; It helps the little thing to judge of artificial things;
what substance is, what forms or fashions are; and this helps not a little in
our practick part. It is the character of the speech, as the speech is of the
thought. Besides all this, It fixes the mind of the child, (who is
Squirrill-headed) confirms the understanding; Is the Assurance office, to it
and to the memory: For now all is safe; he may lay in, and carry out at
pleasure, and no hazard worth the thinking of. Then the use thereof is great.

But it will be said sure; That writing memory, that it weakens it, hurts it
altogether. And it is confessed of all, even of them that write for it; And the
experience of all, that have used their pen, will say as much too.

Nay, but they must not say so, for use the pen, making it subservient to
memory; but abusd it, employing it altogether, and trusting to it, so putting
the memory out of office, and making it quickly of no use Preface to Child's
Patrim. p. 13.
. This is the abuse of the pen, and as a great Scholar said long since, The
most certain corruption, yea death of the memory Scriptionem esse ^^rtissi^am
memory necem; ait Socrat. apud Plat.
. If we scribble, scribble, scribble, and then think we have done the deed (as
once I did, so wise I was) our memory will do us no more service shortly, then
a man can do to himself that is in a Lethargy. The memory must still be kept
waking; if we let it sleep, (as it has been in some diseases) it will die. At
this point we must remember the dark man, his memory is even to a wonder, but
no wonder at all, for he imployeth and exercises the same, and exercise is all.

We understand Platoes words now: Before Scripture was found, men were better
learned then since, because they were forced to write in their minds, that that
afterward they have written in paper. And having done so they think
themselves full of learning because full of books: But they are fully
mistaken, for their learning consisting in their writings, losing them, they
lose their Science. So we have seen the abuse of the thing, which can never
be a sufficient condemnation of the thing abused, for then gluttony will forbid
meat; Let it be noted, It is the ill in me and in thee, which corrupts the good
in the thing. But we have no need to fear this abuse of the pen from the
Child, for he is under them, that can direct better for present, and give him
a Caution for afterward.

I suppose now the Child is put to School there to learn the Art of writing,
which makes a wonderful riddance in the rest of learning.

I should say a word to the writing Master, and though I have little hope he
will make use thereof, yet he must hear it, for it is of much use to the
Child, and as much concerns the Parent.

The Master must look to the government in his School, which is so loose,
that though the Child thinks, now he is put thither, he is made, yet the great
fear is, and so experience tells us, he is in a way to be marred; There he
sees and hears Boys of all sizes, who know they have a patent there to prate
and to be rude, which corrupts the little Thing, we have now in hand, more
then is imagined.

Should not a Master look to the government above all? Yes, he cannot doubt of
it, nor of this which follows. He must consider well, what Copy he sets
before the Child; his own example in point of behavior must be straight and
exact, for the Child frames after that also, most of all, for there is life in
it. And the dead example, the copy in his book I mean, the Master must see to
also; and not so much to its form, I doubt not but there he is exact enough,
but to the matter thereof, that it savor of piety, and be a leading hand
thereunto, so fashioning the life, as well as the hand; For we must still
remember, because this Master thinks not of it, That the right manner of
handling the Child's wit in his reading and writing is of great moment for
afterward, and delivers the next Master from manifest toil, the child from
marvailous trouble, secureth the Parent also against his fears and sorrows; so
prevayling these beginnings are, of such consequence for afterward.

CHAP. VII.
Of Grammar, the practice thereupon through the several parts thereof.

ANd now I suppose this Art is attained, (for we must proceed gradually, making
clean riddance all along) and then we must grant also, that the Child cannot
complain of difficulty afterward, who can read and write perfectly (as may
serve his turn) now. For as Plato said of Arithmetic, and Geometry, they were
his two wings, whereby he could fly up to Heaven, so setting free the
imprisoned ignorant: The same may be said of reading and writing, if the child
has purchased these two, he has excellent fair wings, which (as his Master
is able to help him) will cause him to tower up to the top of all learning. And
yet for all our have we must not skip nor leap, we may attain to the top in
due season; but we must remember our season now, and begin at the bottom
staire; so we are upon the Grammar, where our practice shall be very easy,
and familiar to the Child, (for the labor is prevented already) and speedy
too, for we must remember he has two wings, therefore he can fly. But
withal we must grant this, that the Reader, if he have forgot his grammar, (as
certainly he has, though in his younger years he could say it over, and
over, as perfectly, as count his fingers: A short time and other employments
will quickly spoil the memory of all that; but what were conveyed to the
understanding by an orderly and natural way, so much remains and no more)
such an one I say, cannot go along with the Child one foot of the way worth
his labor: And the Scholar that does understand may think it a dull way, but
my little Judgment upon it. It is the only quick, and sure way; And let him
take my word yet further, That he shall read no more spoken here, but what is
really done: So we begin out practice, with have enough, and yet good speed,
for we have our Preparatories at our fingers ends: and stumble we cannot, for
the Lamp is in our hands. It appears thus (the rules will make it more
plain anon) not by explaining the Grammar to him, for it is already done; If I
were to do it now, and so begin, I should speak Greek to him, and what use
of that? I must recall what he already knows, and that will do the thing, and
then we have the use indeed, if we please to observe what follows.

Of Etymology: or the Accidents of simple words, all contained under eight
notions or parts of speech.
MOre then a year since the Child (Nomen)
could call unto his Mother, the maid and the man, John and Joane both; he
has set his Mother a stool, or some such thing: he has picked an Apple and a
Nut, Cherries also out of her lap and pocket; All this he has done; then he
told us what part of speech these are, how proper some, how common other some;
what Gender they are too, what Gender he, what she, and that the stool was
neither of both. We will observe his skill in his Adjective also.

Tell him of sharp, and sweet, he will not be satisfied, till he have the
thing, be it Grapes, Vinegar, Apples, Honey, Sugar, etc. Now he knows his
Adjective, no man better: he relishes it on his tongues end: his little
judgment is so steeped in his sense, that he can compare through all degrees
also; This is sharp, that sharper or more sharp; the other sharpest, or most
sharp of all; That sweet, this sweeter, etc. So he has the signs and
terminations, all these by the sense, which never fails when the child is
well. When he does ill, or amiss, if the Mother will reach him a rap, two, or
three, he will understand all these perhaps better by his feeling, a sense that
never fails till the man dies so easy is all this: And in the Latin it is as
easy: so is the Gender as easily found in his place as 1. 2. 3. if so many
endings: if but one ending, then one is 3. if two endings, then the first is
two; and the last still neither of both.

We go in order still; and have concluded, that the Child can add Numbers.
, and substract, can chop and change, then he can his numbers very well, and
distinguish them as well. Hand. Hands. Man Men.


He can find out a house by his sign, welfare all good tokens, there is the
Fathers house, for there-out hangs Cases as they fall in an Author.
such a sign: as easy it is to know his cases, the order of them too: as for
his Declensions they are pat at his fingers ends, just so many and as perfect
with him.

The Child can say now, he is come, Pronoun instead of a Noune.
and she also, for you (it is most proper to say thou) commanded, and I called
them, who are these? there are no such names in the world, they stand in stead
of others; then the Child will tell us what they are, Pronounes and how many
parsons there.

The child does play and nothing else; he did scratch his brother even now;
The Mother has heard of it, and he shall be smitten by and by; Then he can his
A Verb. Adverb. Participle.
verb, Active and Passive, and knows his Conjugations all four, and will
remember the times very well; feeling what is aching still; and put in mind,
That he was warned yesterday, and twice before; therefore he was justly to be
punished to day.

Now, I say, the child knows his Verbs, their Kinds, Tenses, Moods,
Conjugations, as easy as is the repetition of Vowels, a, e, i, or his
Horn-book, the as, avi, es, ui. is, ivi, um. bo, by. co, ci. do, di.
order of the letters there, so the forming of them: he has his Adverb also,
his Participles all three together, for they are very near of kin, true
friends, all is common betwixt them.

The Preposition he met with in the A Preposition.
sixth case, and it never left him since; for he has it in his hand, now he is
driving his top, before his Father, with his other brother.

The child has played many pranks, A Conjunction. An Interjection.
and made many complaints, so have his fellows with him: sometimes laughing,
sometimes crying out and alas. Then he can his Conjunction, and Interjections
both together; For such changes there are, and still will be amongst children.
So we have gone through the practice of Etymology. The Figures thereof (they
interveine through all the parts) the child understands very well: So much
skill he gained by his pen, for that taught him how to judge of forms,
figures, fashions; Besides, it is granted as an addition to his little skill,
That he can both Add, and Substract.

Of Construction, or Syntax.
And now what a brave fellow have we here? he could long since comprehend all
words which range such a large compass, within his little Horn-booke, if he
had them there. But see how he is improved now, for he has all things about
himself, his Fathers house; nay in the worlds, under eight notions; to one of
the eight he can reduce them all; But the Nownes, and Verbs, which have the
greatest range, and are most comprehensive, for they contain almost all the
Grammar, and in learning them we rid all, so making clear work, all these he
cons as easily, and are as familiar with him, as 4. and 5.

And now that he has these materials, what shall he do with them? Nohurt I
hope; he can, like a good builder, with his plummet and line, having his stone,
and timber already fitted, make his materials agree each thing with other, so
as he may see order, and rational dependence; good Concord, and the very frame
of Government in all.

It is with the child now, as it is with a man that has Timber and Stones
ready squared, and fitted every parcel to its place, but lies all about the
Court, that you cannot stir without circumspection, and not break your
shins. Come again the next morning, and all is clear; every thing in its
place, and the house reared: just so it is with the child, amongst this
variety of words: There is a seeming confusion, but he comes with his Rule, and
makes clean work; makes them all agree; or well to govern each other: And this
he learnes, by the framing of his Fathers house; or yet more fully by
observation of the creatures about it.

He sees in his Fathers house, stones upon stones; timber shut into timber,
etc. hence he learns Concord, or Agreement: so by observation of the creatures
about the house; he observes his Note, That the practice of the Mother Tongue,
is the best pr^cognition for concord; (and for Government too) The child will
not say him did read; no, be did read: we are; not, we art; not he whom
serves God, but who serves God: not the man who God loves, but whom God
loves.
Parents geese, ducks, sheep, in flocks together; boys sitting with boys,
girls with girls; birds of a feather; there is concord, or agreement too. And
if the old folk be in the Hall, the younger will be in the Kitchen, so natural
the agreement is: And now they are where they would be, (let them alone a
little, we shall never know them else) from under the Parents eye, they will
happily be scratching anon tooth and nail; then comes in the Parent, as there
is cause enough: what? not play but scratch and bite too? then they are taught
what discord is, what to disagree by the most intellectual sense with them,
for, poor ignorants! they must in such cases feel first before they learn,
they will be taught with pain. They must learn good by a bad Method.

And this falls out very well, and in season. Will must not have his will. By
this means children know what government means also, which is the best
lesson taught within doors, or without; else in a little Commonwealth, there
will be no little confusion: so graceful, and comely a thing Government is,
which makes the child gentle, maniable, pliant. Now that the child sees
indeed, that his Parents will be, and be acknowledged, the great Centurions in
their house, for it is no more, then the Cook will be in his Kitchen, he will
now observe the Parents rules for government also, the very same which are in
the School; for he has seen, and felt both, that order must be kept, as in
other things, so in going before, and following after. And now observe him what
he says at home very naturally, for use has made it so: Me pray you Mother?
No, I do pray you. I is in a fault? No, I am. Pardon I goo^ Mother? No, Pardon
me. Just so i^ the School: and so we are concluded that he understands
Government, for a^ the leaves thereof go along in the order of the parts of
Speech, and of the Cases.

CHAP. VIII.
Of the Figures and Tropes.

THE child will meet sometimes Figurala Syntaxis.
with a construction different in form and fashion from that he hitherto has
observed: To the understanding whereof, both in words and sentences, he has
good preparatories from the eye, and ear; from nature, and reason, to frame
true construction there, and his voice thereunto, for that is a chief thing.

There are some flowers of speech, (as the Rhetorician calls them) which will
stand the child in great stead as he goes along. He will find also in the
practice of the Syntaxe one word put for another, as where the word signifies
Suns, he must construe days: So where he reads the seed of the woman, and of
Tres incertos soles. Virgil.
Abraham, he must understand the son of the Virgin, and the children of
Abraham; and when the Poet says, He has an Horn in his hand, his meaning is,
it is a Lanthorn, etc.

The foundation of all this little Art, is grounded in nature; the child's
natural Logic will do it; which has been exercised ever since he saw his
The four Causes.
Mother make Apple-pies, for then he could discern who made them, of what
materials; The form and fashion, he is exact there, and knows for what end,
as well as the biggest fellow in the town. And because that follows, and we
suppose him in the dark, where the Lantern gives him light; he will
understand, that is not so, but the light in Subject. Adjunct.
the Lantern, that was it; and it was put into the Lantern, and is taken
out; the Lantern remains still; but so you cannot folly from a fool, that
sticks closer then so; Now he understands his Subject, and his Adjunct, and
something more belonging to it then so.

His Mother called him good boy, when by a lawful kind of mockery, she Ironia.
meant the contrary, that he was a very wag, and the Child knows it very well.
The child has heard often, that he has a stony heart; that is but a borrowed
Metapho^a.
word, the child knows where, and that the meaning must be, that he has a
hard heart; And yet the man knows not, that so hard his heart is, harder then
any kind of metal, for that will gain again in the fire, and melt, so will
not a stone. The Child can Synecdoche
take a part of an Apple for the whole, when the Mother will let him have no
more; and he can take the whole for a part, when he can be his own chooser:
And he can tell what whole this is, as well as he, who understands homogeneum,
for that is Greek; he can tell the whole Apple, is Apple, and so is every
part, as are Earth, Water, Air, Fire, Silver, Gold, etc.

The Child reads; Colos. 1. 23.
The Gospel was preached to every Creature; that is too general sure, for
Beasts could not hear it, it is more specially meant then so. He daily asks
his daily bread; our desire here must be moderate, yet not confined to our
loaf only (a word we find in our English, but in no other tongue:) we mean
thereby as we have good warrant, our meat too, our clothing also, all
necessaries: little does a child think, what a blessing he has in his hand
when Bread is there; For, as the word means, and our Lord also, having Bread,
he has All.

Thus the Child has this necessary additament to Grammar, for he can make no
way without it. And in all this we have not out-compassed his understanding nor
burdened it at all. For our precognitions have prepared way thereunto, and
prevented the labor. For that was our promise still, and we are sure we have
kept our word.

But I shall transgress presently, if I do not take leave, as all along I
have done, to go out of the Common-rode way, for there lies Prosodia next,
straight on in the rode, at the very bottom of the way. And there we have
Tone, a very acute and witty word; Spirit, as sublime: Time long and short, a
great part of a man's understanding to observe it, and yet for his Turn the
child shall do it, nay can do it well enough. But what shall we do with
those things here? Certainly they stand out of place. I said well a little
before; This part of Grammar lies at the very bottom. It does indeed even
there, therefore I took it in, when I was upon my bottom work, the
Declensions and Verbes, for they are the foundation of all. And we carried it
along with us, as the Master Builder does his measuring line, through the whole
structure, up to the very top, and this is the natural order. Nor do we go
alone here at this point: There is one who shows his Judgment here, as H.
Hayne in his Grammar lately printed.
he has his judgment, and learning both, in higher points; For he makes it no
distinct part of Grammar, but as that, which has its use every where, and so
it spreads it self through all, whereby it comes to pass, that the Child
well perceives its use in every word he speaks; attaines to a more perfect
understanding thereof in one week, then by a verbal repetition of it, he can
attain unto in a whole year. And so for the whole Grammar, though, happily he
cannot give you six lines in ryme, (which will never be required by any
understanding man) yet for every line and word, he can give you good reason,
and that we hope one day, will satisfy a reasonable man. And now our practice
is gone as far as we can, perhaps farther then needed; we will set down also
the Reasons of our practice, which may serve as rules for our after proceeding.

CHAP. IX.
Rules of practice, amongst which the Method of our proceeding is cleared to be
according to Nature, and right Reason.

1. HEre I must resume again what was said in the beginning of the fourth
Chapter, and enlarge it a little, for thereon depends very much. It was this,
That Grammar learning, as it is taught, is a matter of greater difficulty, then
any study that a man afterward undertakes: For here can be no such preparatory
to the understanding as the Philosopher requires in all studies. Here examples
and precepts are alike difficult, either being as strange, and as unknown as
the other: and therefore like to yield a poor illustration, where their
proceeding is ab ignoto ad ignotum. Whereas in other Studies, if the precepts
be difficult, yet such examples may be had for explication of them, as are
obvious to every man's experience. Hence it must needs follow, that seeing for
the study of Latin, and of other Languages, there is no (...) in Nature; there
is Reason good enough to leave the ordinary course, and to make a preparation
unto rule by experience, which may serve in stead of Nature. But this way of
experience, which is nothing else but the very method of Invention, being in it
self considered, and without the other, must needs be very confused, as being
exercised in singulars, which (as the Philosophers say) are infinite, and
mutable, and therefore not scientificall. Besides, it can give but little
satisfaction, as proposing only the (...), and leaving the (...) to the labor
of the learner. Nor can it but be long, before it attaines the end, which is
the making Analogy known. For if the rules of Grammar being already framed by
men of Heroic wits that were the first inventors of them, have yet suffered so
many alterations of after Ages, before they could be brought to their true
Generalities: and so many supplements of other rules, deseried by them afar
off, and more clearly seen, and found out of others by occasion of their
former labors, together with their own endeavors, before the discipline
could be sucked to a perfect and proportionable body; How long may we think it
will be before Children, who are led more by the sense then by the
understanding, and therefore can hardly use abstraction, will be able to frame
unto themselves general rules by induction out of particular examples.

On the other side, The Method of Doctrine must needs be too subtle for
Children; as taking his beginning from Vniversals and so necessarily requiring
substraction, which is not to be expected from that age. Besides it cannot but
be dry, tedious, and livelesse in this case, as being without all Principles.
So then there is a mid way to be taken, a Method mixed of both these, beginning
in experience, as the way to rule, preventing the difficulties of generalities;
and ending in rule, as the perfection of experience taking away the
tediousness of Induction. And this is the most Cardinal rule, the very hinge
whereon the whole frame does hang and turn it self; The most natural method,
setting use aside; whereby we gain the Language, which reduces all Grammars
to one, and teaches them all alike for the manner, Thus.

2. The Child must observe what eye-service he can do himself, when he is upon
Declension (there he begins, for by one example there, he sooner learnes what
part of speech, number, case, and gender, then by saying the rules thereto
belonging ten times over) Declension and Verb; and the service is this, he
observes that there are letters which stand in the one and other, as
substantially fixed, and unchangeable as a root, the same still in every Case,
Tense, and Person therein: Some letters again are very accidental, and
moveable, of a servile condition, serving only their turn, Time, and Place,
and then away giving place to some other. This must be distinctly observed, and
no subtilty at all, but with this direction; That he Mus: ^ Libr^i Lapi^^ is
shall find these Radical letters (now the word is easy) in the first or
second case of the Noune, (the second never fails, nor the first case in the
first, fourth, fifth Declension) and then the Laud: ^ Laudav: i Lauda^^: Iung:
o lunx: i lun^tu:
same all along; but in the Verb, three Cardinals, and the Radicals more or
less, and most times different in all. The same to be observed in the Greek,
but more Cardinals; we mean by a Cardinal such a Tense, which is, as it
were, the hinge on which the Verb is turned; or where-from all the Tenses are
framed or derived.

And this is as proper to the Latin and Greek, as to the Hebrew it is every
whit, only with this distinction; These servants, these servile letters, are
still at the end of the Latin and Greek word, (except in the Tense wherein the
first fyllable is doubled) in the Hebrew they are in the beginning, middle, and
end, but more stayed, not so fleeting.

3. All this service, the child's pen has made easy and familiar to him, and
more service it must do then this; for the English must be written anent the
Musa, A Song. A Song, Musa. So in the Verb.
Latin, after first, then before, and in the same manner he must be examined;
and hereof the child shall quickly see full use; full indeed, for hereby he
has attained, that which in the study of language we aim at, even these two
things, To understand others; and to express our selves; And this the child
must practice in simple words first, before he can effect it in sentences, that
being the order of nature to proceed a simplicibus ad composita, materials
first, and then composition, a putting them together. And so expressing one
language by the other in declining and examining of words, fair way is made
for Syntax, the formet for the construing, the later for the making of Latin:
For all words in any one language of the same Accidents always have the same
expressions in another language, in respect of those accidents. So that in
construing, having the signification, the child cannot fail in the
adsignification: and in making Latin, having the word, he will not fail in
the accident. Where we may note by the way, That the hardest matter, and
whereat we stick, is the supplying the child in words, what is Latin for this,
and that: for having the Accidents of five, and four, he has them in all. My
meaning is; The child in his way never sticks at the adsignification of his
word; as if ranarum be the word, he will say of, but he may not know that rana
is a frogge, so if the word be ambichant, he knows his Analogy, as audiebant,
they did, and there stops. Here use must help us, and that wherein we are so
wanting; labor. I know no other help where-from to supply us; But the child
goes on in true method, for by the same way he pronounces his word right also,
seeing the Analogy, and Agreement betwixt them, their Dorivation, Composition,
all three.

4. But here we go very leisurely as nature does, and will: if we leap and
skip now, we shall fall back again presently. The child must go very
gradually here, specially at the first steps, as up a pair of stairs: every
step gains a degree of light, which he puts out presently, if he hastens up,
and ascends but to ruin. My plain meaning is this; The child must make a
stand at his first word, till he well understands the Accidents thereof; for
there comes in the light, which cleares the way to all the rest. But if the
Master will hasten the child to the next step, before he sees his standing on
the first, the child does but step up and fall down, learn and unlearn all
along; for certain it is, there is a gradation in Grammar, so in all Arts, as
up a pair of stairs, a natural order, and ascent, which if we break, we are
sure to fall back: we may seemingly move onward, but promote the child never a
whit; our labor is rather in circle, then in progression; The child would on
apace, and that pleases the Parent; for it is not in their Philosophy, to
consider, that examples are rules, which is our Position all along: And that in
learning them by tale, we rather Multiply then Number; for though we seem in
our stand, but to make Ciphers here, yet we gain places now, more then two or
three, so making one word stand for more then a thousand. I will briefly set
down the manner how.

So soon as we are exact in three Declensions, (we must be exact all along,
for one mistake in the beginning, multiplies in our proceeding) so soon, I
say, as we have perfected the three Declensions, with all their Accidences,
wetake two Adjectives (indeed for some considerable differences to a Novice, we
take four, ater, albus, (not bonus being irregular) audax, dulcis, and in
these two we have declined all Adjectives, whether Noune, Pronoune, or
Participle, and compared them exactly well. The example makes the impression,
and from the particular the child is able to conclude the General rule, by the
help of his Master questioning the child, so workin up the understanding The
same is to be done in a Verb
. And this is to Catechize indeed, be it in high matters or in low: for hereby
knowledge is distilled, or dropped into the mind, by the greatest ease that
can be imagined, to the Teacher, and Learner both. I know full well, That
Custom, the Universal Monarch or King of the world (faith Herodot) would
bear down this with the impetuousnesse of its stream, but it shall be found
for all that, as firm as the earth, if so be that time (which makes all wise
that observe it) and experience may be suffered to give in their verdict Vere.
dictum. A true rcport. A report of the Truth ^ort,scue of the Law. Chap. 26.
. The child has spent some time in learning the Grammar without book, What
has he gained? Not the knowledge of the Vocative Case in the second
Declension, when the Nominative ends in us; nor how many Cases are alike when
the Gender is Neuter, though he has said the rule twenty times; nor knows he
from what Tense or Person the Praeterperfect Tense is framed, so experience
tells us, though As in presenti is as familiar with him, as his bread and
butter. But now let him fix upon the examples here, and work out the rule,
which by the help of his Master he will very quickly do, then he understands
it, and it is under safe lock and key, ready for his use always. I could
clear very well, how natural the progress is from the sense to the
understanding, thence to the memory; how unnatural and retrograde the other
way is. But I have said enough to him that will understand: I will add but
this here; It is the readiest way in the world to nuzzle up the child, or the
man (for he is a child in knowledge) in ignorance, if we keep him in his
rode, and content our selves that he says perfectly by rote. This comes to
nothing: we must parcel forth his lesson into questions, whereto, in his rode
way, it is not possible he should frame an answer.

And thus if we do, we shall make Grammars all alike to the child, let me say,
and Catechismes also; And now I have spoken that which is of infinite use, and
mighty concernment to the Catechist, whether he teaches men or boys.

There is an Objection: That the old method produced as good scholars
anciently, as any new can do now. I verily believe it, and better scholars
too; but no thanks to the method. I shall give a full reason for that in a few
words, but I refer it to the last both Part, and Chapter. I proceed now
onward in my rules directing our practice.

5. We observe the universal use of all in Analysis, commonly called
construing and parsing; and in Genesis termed Making Latin. In construing, the
first and principal care is to find out the Nominative Case, (by the rule of
Logic that Case must be sought first, being the theme or subject of the
Axiom, but the child will sooner find out the Verb, and let him take his way)
the Verb next, (this is the argument or predicat:) both together make the
Axiom. Where also we note by the way, that the second Concord is taught
presently after the Declension, and indeed it is the first in nature, being
most simple, and having a Topicall disposition, without affirmation or
negation, whereas the disposition of the other is axiomaticall; but no need of
this to the child. It is enough he can find out the Verb, and his Nominative
Case, (for that is easiest) and knows the rest are additaments, depending upon
one of the two.

6. The phrases are to be construed, first rendringword for word, for the
learners understanding; then rendering phrase for phrase for his use in
translation, that he may understand that all languages have their several
properties, which are by no means to be violated, nor the composition of the
Author neither; wherein Caesar is most exact, as he is the best History in the
world, (says a great Scholar) expressed in the greatest propriety of words,
and perspicuity of Narration that ever was.

7. His Authors must be such as are most sensual, I mean such as do best
instruct his understanding, and life together, whether Fables, Colloquies,
Comedies, or Epistles, familiar Histories. Poets also of the very best; for
though versifying supposes plenty of words, and freedom of speech, yet if a
child stay til then, for ought I know, (I know what their slacknesse is) he
will never read a Poet in the School. And then no small want, though I know
prose should be well perfected first. But if to a verse, then why not to Homer,
Virgil, Ovid, and Horace? we all are sure they are the best, and a child must
be acquainted with more kind of verses then one. But there the child may find
the worst too, and so he may also even in those Poets, which we account, and
indeed are most Christian. We never knew any garden weeded so clean, but
something there was which might offend there; our instruction was long since,
we know no better now: We must imitate the Be: and then we shall find
honey, or make it so (...) etc. Isoc. ad Them. w.
.

8. Concerning Translation, and Imitation, etc. what can be said after M.
Ascham, M. Horn, and many others? So also touching aids or helps to speech and
invention: Such are Apologues, Proverbs, Emblems, Histories, Causes, Effects,
Topics, the heads or places which assist us therein. So much has been said in
all this, as I know not what can be added. Besides, it is beyond my scope in
this place, which is no more then to show the way how the child must be taught
his Grammar, where all along the way, the Teacher must observe this, and it is
the chief of his duty at this part; he shall hear more, at the conclusion of
the next, but this now.

9. Now the Master must consider all along that the first impressions in
children are weak and waterish, no sooner made but gone, like lightning, at
once begun and ended. The first and second time their lesson is rather looked
on then learned; and the Master must have patience for all that, he must
compose himself to go as slowly as the child's conceit requires; if the Master
be quick when the child is slow (then there is much matter offered unto
passion, but then) passion goes on, and the child back. The Masters wisdom is
to stoop to the child, to see where he sticks. His pen is but a dead thing,
the Master must put life unto it; he must so speak that the child must see him
speak, he must (as some have done Child's Patrimony Preface, p. 19.
) hear with the eye, and learn to speak by his fingers; and this will not be
with some children, till the Master puts his words upon his fingers ends, a
thing very possible to be done, nay it must be done.

I may not forget the counsel that Nazianzen gives to his fellow- Pastors, and
Overseers; or rather what such should be: Not their words only, (...), etc.
Nazianz. Orat. 6.
but their apparel, their going, their sitting, their whole carriage, and
deportment must have a tongue, and speak forth, Holiness to the Lord; every
thing about them must be so regulated, so express agreeing to rule; so lively
a copy, as that it bid the lookers on, (and they are many; every ones eye is
upon the light, and a City set upon an hill) Mat. 5. 14.
) look on us, and as you see us do, so do ye. And this is of singular use
for them, who teach youth also. But that I specially noted for our purpose now,
when I read that Oration, (it is his sixth) was this expression; I have, said
he, set out before you, a Pictured speech. (...).
. What is that? I will express it as well as I can, for that is to our
purpose, I have made my words so plain, and visible, that your eyes may look
upon them, as you may the picture, which the cunning workman has set out: So
plain have I spoken. And so may ye all speak; and always speak ye servants
of the Lord! for this is to speak with tongues indeed, when every thing about
a Minister speaks; And this is to speak in the language of the most sacred
Scripture also, and in the Dialect of the people too; they understand it full
well.

But I seem to teach my Teachers: no, I do but recite the counsel of an
ancient father unto them, that they may learn how to speak with tongues, and
to the peoples understanding; They cannot be put in mind too often thereof,
that their words may not swim in the brain only, but sink into the heart
also; For us, who move in a lower sphere, answerably we must speak, stooping,
as low as is possible, to the capacity, or else we move in a round. or circle,
we do not go forward, we do not promote the Child; whether we would or no,
whether pleasing to us or not, we must, if we would do good, so speak to the
child, as if we painted our words, he must see us speak. He must read our
words upon our fingers ends, even so; and how I have said so, I had said all;
but that I must give further light hereunto, for at this point we Teachers
differ very much, and now it shall be cleared, who goes right, informing the
Child the right way.

10. There is a fond opinion abroad, and ever was since I could remember, and
will be when I am not, which is this, That every School has his Method, and
every Master his way; A great mistake that; As the Host said of Coena dabia.
his various dainties, and doubtful supper, though there seemed a variety, yet
all was but Swines flesh diversely cooked; and yet not very diversely neither,
for all was either sod or roasted; Just so here: we all dish in the Grammar to
the Child: there should be no doubt of that, though it is objected and
concluded against some, That they do not serve-up the Grammar to the Child:
Yes, they do, and account it, though not as the principal Dish, yet as
necessary almost as Bread and Salt to a feast: we all dish-in the Grammar to
the Child I said: What diversely cooked? every Teacher his way? No; there are
but two ways; They serve up the Grammar to the Understanding of a Child, but
through the wrong door, they begin with the memory first; We serve it up too,
but in very good order by the door of the Sense, as the man cooked his meat;
so proportioning it to the palate of the understanding; and now the Child can
taste or relish it, and well remember it altogether.

But it will be still said, This is a strange and novell way; No; The most
familiar way; for what more easy to a Child, then to enter by his own door,
set open by his own key. And most ancient too; for, thus it was of old, from
that, the Child saw or heard, he put a question to his Father; What is this?
What the meaning of that? Then the Father, improving the Child's senses,
answered, So and so; so informing the Child's understanding, in that he knew
not, by that he knew. So anciently it was. Child's Pat^imony p. 99.


We affirm then (and it cannot be reasonably contradicted) concerning our
handling the Grammar, and theirs, as of old was said of Rhetoric and Logic:
Compare them together, and the difference is no more, (though it makes a great
difference) but in contraction, and explication, obscurity, Fugnus, paln^a.
and perspicuity: So here; In teaching the Grammar, They begin with memory
first, that leaves the understanding in the dark: we with the sense, so
putting to the understanding; then to memory; this is explication, for it
unfolds the understanding, makes all light there, and so perspicuous, that the
Child can see through all even to his memory also. And this is as it should be.
For this is a conclusion of experience; That words of a thing not sensible
cannot be legible, then, nor intelligible to a Child. Therefore, That a Child
cannot be said to proceed, unless his understanding and memory keep mutual
correspondency in pace, like two parallels, running on in equal extent, as
beginning, so ending both together. And thus much, that my meaning might be
full, and fully explained; That the difference might be accorded, the true way
taken, which certainly will be by him, who shall think advisedly on the
matter. But yet I have not done; having two Rules more concerning our practice,
Two also touching the practice of the Child, wherein I shall be very brief,
reserving the fuller prosecution thereof to the last, the fittest place.

11. We must not neglect Gesture here, for as the tongue speaks to the ear,
so the gesture speaks to the eye: And they that understand not one the others
language, do understand their minds expressed in gestures, though not exactly,
yet to serve the turn.

12. We had almost forgot one Rule, which may seem strange and of little
worth, but yet a rule it shall be whereafter he will practice, who will
consider the matter. We make some faults willingly, as well as the Scholar will
ignorantly; and as many doubts as we can, and give good leave for enquiring
after resolution thereunto, which shall put the doubt out of all doubt,
clearing the understanding therein, and then putting it out of the calender,
and decarding it for afterward. It is notable, which the great Scholar has,
That the entry of doubts, are as so many suckers, or sponges, to draw use of
knowledge, insomuch as that, which, if doubts had not preceded, a man should
never have advised, but po^^ sed it over without note, by the suggestion, and
solicitation of doubts is made to be attended and applied. He that will begin
with Certainties, shall end in doubts; but if he be content to begin with
doubts, he shall end in certainties; so for our practice. Now to the Child.

13. Concerning whom, this we must needs note; That the more careful the
Master is, the more negligent will he be: And for this we shall talk with him
to good purpose in the closing of the second Part. For this we must observe
still all along, it will regulate our practice also; That we must not reckon
with the Child for his negligence, till his lesson be done: While we are
instructing, we must be as Calm every whit, as they say the sea is, when the
Halcyon is building there. Therefore this to the last, but it must not be
forgot, it is but deferred.

14. Lastly, we have not touched upon recreations all this while, yet they lie
direct in our way, and they are as necessary in season (and upon good choice of
the Master) as the meat is. But at this point I had two considerations. First,
that here the Child will carve liberally enough to himself, (labor est
inhibere) whatsoever he neglects, he will not neglect his play; and for his
neglects otherwise, he has more excuses in his little pate, then he has
books in his butchet. I will not plead for him at this point, only this I
must say; The Child sits too long, I do not say, at his book, for that
troubles him not; he can sit still and do nothing: but he sits keeping a
posture too long; and custom will have it so, though it makes against the
child's health, and custom of other Countries. Therefore I say; observe we the
old verse so much out of use, Puerum nil nisi pura: and spare not, let him take
as much play as he will, for then it is as we would have it, true recreation,
play and profit both; and this very thing was my after-consideration;

That, for the boys sake, I have gained of the intelligent Master, to excuse
the child, though he do not give him rhyme the very next morning saying his
part without book: For I remember well, that was a tedious work once to me,
and of no benefit then nor since: but account it reasonable enough, that he can
his Declensions, and Verbes exactly well, giving such an account of both every
day, as that it may appear he takes all the rules of English and Latin
Etymology (the Latin supplies what the English does want) along with him (for
they contain all) and will evidence, That the boy is not led one inch further
then his senses (those great intelligencers) shall give him through-passe to
the understanding of the same (a mighty help to memory, besides delight to
boot.) It is indeed the greatest ease to the Scholar, and the Master, that I
can think of, whereby to gratify both; and so will he say that shall take
leisure to consider thoroughly thereof. So much to the Rules, which may serve to
promote him that comes after, and thinks fit to Practice the same way.

CHAP. X.
What esteem the Grammar has; how little esteem, the Grammarian. The Dignity
of the understanding. The conclusion of the first, a Transition to the second
part.

AND now I had almost said, We have done with the Grammar; but indeed we
cannot tell when we have done. For though it be of small use in our
Mother Tongue, yet in foreign tongues of more use it is, of most use in such,
which cease to be vulgar, and are rightly called learned tongues; All these
three we would still perfect, as well for intercourse of speech, and
understanding of Authors, as also for examining the power, and nature of words,
as they are the footsteps, and prints of reason. And all this we cannot do by
any other Art, then by the Art of Grammar: The following words are to be noted.
Man still striveth to reintegrate himself in those benedictions, from which,
by his fault, he has been deprived; And as he has striven against the first
general curse, by the invention of all other Arts; so has he sought to come
forth of the second general curse, (which was the confusion of tongues) by the
Art of Grammar.

But though the Grammar is of so much and so general use, yet we must not
dwell upon it, nor must we make it our ambition to make our child a
Grammarian, and no more, for that were a very mean promotion. He may happily,
having knowledge therein, pick up a poor living, if his Salary be duly paid:
For Homer, they say, gives many a man his dinner; much good may it do him. But
he will be a despised man for all that. A Grammarian! anciently it was a word
of reproach; and it was well known, That a base Hypocr^te, a Stage Player, a
Fiddler, had their precedence a mile before him: And a Barber waighed down this
Wordy-man above ten thousand pounds in bad money, and as much more in good
Land. What his worth is now, I will not dispute; but if he be a Grammarian, and
no more, he is as a mere Logician, and he has esteem to the top of his worth,
and somewhat above it. He is in very deed a Babbler (...) Acts 17. 18.
, a man of rags, made up of words; Such a one as he was, who stood in the
Corne-Market gathering up the Corn, that fell besides the sack in emptying;
that is a Babbler indeed, of Casaubon.
no more worth in judgment, then in purse, of no worth in either.

Surely if our work be to promote the child, we must not set up our staff
here, here must not be our Pillars: we must not dwell upon words, as the
Sophister may do too long upon Genus and Species. The Grammar teaches no more
but words; it has indeed some jagges, centons, or old ends of things, nothing
of worth. It is the unfittest book to gain the knowledge of things by, that I
know in the world, I mean such books now which may properly be called so, for
all that pass under that name, are not Books, said the Noble Scholar Bockes,
such as are worthy the name of books, ought to have no Patrons, but Truth and
Reason, Adv. p. 32.
. Though Voces and Res should never be distinct, (in learning) yet we must take
a more distinct notice of things, and not of this, or that, or the third thing,
of three things, or of four, for this were to emprison the understanding, or
to keep the immortal soul in a Cloister, nay to seal it up in a dungeon. We
must inform the understanding, what we can concerning this totum scibile, this
(...) All that may be known of God; and we must take the very way, that God
Himself has revealed; for such His Grace, He has made it known unto us.

It was well answered by one, who was thought that he could live but in one
place; Yes, said he, in any place where it is possible to live, in any place of
the world, for I am a Citizen thereof. Certainly so is man, such a Citizen,
though he may be confined for many weighty reasons, to this or that place, yet
he is a Citizen of the world, for he is the very modle thereof, he is made
after the pattern, (I know my word is too low) and for his understanding, it
has for its Range, the whole world too: what a wrong then to consine
Asper^atur certorum finium pr^scriptionem. Sc: Exca. 307. sect. 11.
this so noble a faculty, and to impale it within a circle (which will not keep
in a mouse.) The understanding is quicker then any bird, more soaring then an
Eagle, nay it came from heaven, and thitherward it is pointed. It has appealed
thither in its right and straight motion, and therefore to heaven it shall go;
so we say, for it is our main scope, the white we aim at. We may like enough
fall short of it: But he that threatens a star, will shoot higher then he
that bends to a molehill Altius ibunt qu^ad summa nitentur quain qui, etc.
Quint. Orat. Prefat.
.

And so we leave the Grammar, that dull work, and set upon that which is more
noble, and besitting so noble a faculty. But it is the work of another day, a
second task.

FINIS.
A GATE TO SCIENCES, OPENED By a Natural Key: OR, A PRACTICAL Lecture upon
the great Book of Nature, whereby the child is enabled to read the Creatures
there.

(...). Clem. Alex. li. 6. p. 501. Deus ita est Artifex Magnus in magnis, ut
non minor fit in parvis, etc. Aug. de Civ. 1. 11. cap. 21. Quicquid essentia
dignum est, id etiam scientia. Nov. Org. 1. 120. Printed at London for John
Bartlet. 1641.

To His worthy Friend, Mr. SAM: HARTLIB, by way of Preface.
SIR,
It was not my purpose that this should follow at the heel of the other: But
since it must be so, it is as necessary I should give you some short account of
this part also, which promises more then the first: That setting forth a light
to Grammar only; this a greater, and brighter light; That opening a gate to
words or languages; this to a world of Disciplines. Libri titulus ingentis
cujusda^illecebre ad legendum. Ant. Cel. 18. 6. Melissus ibid.
There cannot be a fairer frontispice, for it seems to hold forth the great
Volume of Gods works; And this was but a good Lure to call every man to the
reading of the book, which was the policy of an old Grammarian before me, who
gave an high Title to a low Book; and it may be suspected to be my end also.
But I can speak clearly here, I had not a thought that way, nor could I ever
bend to a mercenary design.

I have well weighed Plinies Counsel Saepe respiciendum est ad litulum.
, He that writes, must still have an eye back to the Title; else it will
stand as some Portall I have seen, alone from the house, and holding no
correspondency thereunto. I cannot judge how close I have kept hereto, but it
was the White in my eye all along: I am sure I had a good respect thereunto. The
first promised to set open the natural Gate whereat Arts and Sciences must
enter, and Grammar is gone in first of all. you may say now, I should have
carried in other Arts and Sciences after Grammar, and by the same way, the way
of anticipation or precognition. But I have (so the objection may run on)
done, as if one, that professed the Art of Shoo-making, should not know how to
make up a Shoo, but only exhibit in a readiness a of Shoes of all fashious,
and sizes.

True it is, and so I could tell my self, That in a direct proceeding, I
should have made provision, or preparatory store,for the conveying of all the
Sciences into the understanding. But do we well consider what a work this had
been?

I must have set down General precognitions first, then the particular to
such and such Sciences, beginning in true method with the Mathematickes: for if
the wit be dull, they sharpen it; if too wandering they fix it; if too inherent
in the sense, they abstract it; so necessary they are. But what a work had
this been to him, who is so scanted of time and abilities too? Again, I must
not have stayed here, and then when should I have left off? for there are a
world of disciplines. I thought it not impossible, but tedious and useless to
tread such a maze with the Child. The Title tells us that all Sciences are
lighted into the understanding, through the doors of the Senses. And this is
true enough, so certain it is, that a child, yea a man also, does taste or
relish no knowledge, but what he finds drencht in flesh, and blood. Therefore
in reference to my Title, my aim was to steep the Child's little judgment, as
deep as I could in his senses, and from that gross substance to Light the
Candle, whereby to convey Grammar into his understanding, which without doubt I
have done. I hen can it not be doubted neither, but since Grammar is gone in,
all Sciences will, and must follow by the same light, and at the same doors.
Thereafter my practice here is, by the senses to enfranchise the understanding,
and to make it a free Denizon of the world, which I could not do in a readier
way, then by apprompting singulars, so helping not invention only, but
directing an inquiry also; for the faculty of wise interrogating is half Adv.
197.
a knowledge: As in going of a way, we do not only gain that part of the way
which is passed, but we gain the better sight of that part which remains.
So every degree of proceeding gives a light to somewhat more, which light, if
we strengthen by drawing it forth into questions or places of enquiry, we do
greatly advance our pursuit.

And so I should have done; I should have workt up the understanding by
degrees, beginning at the lowest step first, and so upward, whereas I run
uppresently. It could not be otherwise here, for I workt with the pen: To
proceed by question, and answer (the most natural way) is to go by the hand,
and by making experiments, and thence enquiries, thereby to steep the child's
judgment the deeper in his sense. And this I suppose was your scope when you
enjoined me this task, speaking to me of sensuals (the word is ill spoken of
as it does deserve, but not in this place: What ever the Logicians do, you
must take it in good part, or take an other) speaking to me of singulars (an
infinite circuit to our scant compass.) But where the way is so various, I
must take a compendious path: and where the plenty so copious, I had been
infinite, had I minced it into particulars by way of question. This is the
account I can give you here, you will not see what all amounts unto till you
come to the bottom. In the mean time, always think me your ready friend to
take part with you in the labor of love,

Hezekiah Woodward.

A GATE TO SCIENCES.
CHAP. I.
The Scope herein; the excellency of the understanding: preparatories
thereunto: of what use our senses are; what our care over them: To discourse of
Generals is to beat the wind.

WE left at the Grammar, the understanding whereof we gained by way of
precognition, whereto our sense gave us great acco^modation, so also to the
understanding of higher matters, as it will to the knowledge of all Learning:
For if Grammar be conveyed into the understanding by a natural Light, and
through its own Gates; much more easy it is to carry in all Arts and Sciences
by the same way; that is out of doubt, if we take the straight and natural
Method thereunto.

And this were a work fecible in length of time, and by such helps that are
at hand: But of no use at all to the Youth, wanting, we suppose, those Training
Principles, which are, as I may say, preparatories, even to those precognitions.

My undertaking was in the close of the first part, to ennoble the
understanding what I could; To sinde it work suitable to the dignity of so high
and excellent a faculty. Surely we may say of it; it is the great Peripatetick
of the World: So wide is its Range, and it has its Emissaries, its Scoutes,
and Spies, which it can send forth to the very corners of the earth, the depth
of the seas, and the highest of the Heavens also. So that we cannot fit it
with any book so genuine and natural, as is the book of Nature, which we
called the (...), for the worlds are its Book, and every creature there its
lesson: And very suitable to its capacity is all this, of so large an extent the
understanding is. It can contain Philologie, Philosophy, Theology, Law,
Physic, so the diverse Arts inferior to them. It can widen it self even to
all, for receiving the Universality, the Encyclopaedi^, a world of Disciplines.
And so quick, and expedite it is, that though we, having our pen, should fly
(as we purpose to do, though the more haste the least speed) yet we cannot for
all that hold pace with it; so fast will it run through all the Seminaries of
Arts, and Sciences, grasping, and catching at all, though all will not fill it
up, nor suffice, it can contain but its measure, which serves as a mirror,
only wherein to view our ignorance; or as a light, enough to discover that we
are in the dark.

We will take the advantage of the higher ground, and raise up the child to the
Pinnacle, as was said, and there look about us a little. It will learn us what
use there is of Generals to a child, little, or none at all, and then
afterward, happily, to lead the child more wisely. Therefore thither we will
rise first in our imaginations, so we may, for indeed In angissto Viveretur,
siquidquam esset cogitationibus occlusum. Sen
we should live pent up in a prison, (as the Philosopher says) if our mind
were confined as our body is.

Note this for the clearing the way; That we make use of the Pinnacle, and our
Imaginary there, as in a crowd, and press of people we use Lictores, and
Viatores, Sergeants, and Whifflers, ad summovendans turbam, to keep off the
thronging in of singulars. We must look upon things at the first, (though we
overlook them) as he did upon his Army, in one lump and mass, as they were
once altogether; For in a way so various, should I have minced out things into
particulars, they would have so crowded in upon us, that we should have found
our selves not in a way, but in a maze. So we will employ our imaginary in the
first place, which will quickly run over a large circuit, and let it take
scope, and range where it will, we shall the better see what account it will
give us at the last.

Yet that this travel of the mind may not be wholly fruitless, I will give
the child some general lessons, which may serve us in stend of precognitions,
of as great use as those were, which the old father gave his son, about to take
his flight.

1. We must take our mind with us, The mind sees withcut the eye; the eye
never without the mind.
we must make sure of that: A great commodity, yet oft-times left behind, or
quickly slipped away from under our command, when it should do us most service.
The mind does all, it is that which sees, which hears (...) Arist. de Intel.
c. 30.
, etc. It is the eye, ear, hand of the soul, and body both; for if the mind
be not present we do not see what we look upon; Indeed sometimes, the
sensible, that I hear, or see, may be so vehement, and exceeding, that it will
be heard or seen whether the mind will or no: but we need fear no such
matter now.

2. We cannot but remember we We do not hold as some do. that there is but one
sense and that is Tactus.
carry about us our five senses, so Organicall or Isntrumental are they to the
whole body, yea, and to the mind too. We must needs mind them, for else they
will mind us, especially that, which is at the tip of the tongue, and the
other which is dissused through the whole body, which is not the out-most skin
there, for that is as dead as: door nail, but that which is very near it, of
a glutenous and sinewy substance, most tender always where the sinews are
most, as Tormentors of old knew very well.

Take them all together, and according to the command we take over them, they
will evidence us to be either beasts or men. They give us the greatest
accommodation, so also, for there is no mean, they do us the greatest hurt.
Some there were who listed Alexander very high, they made a god of him, as the
manner is; sometime after, this Great one received a great wound, and outgushed
a great deal of blood; Say my flatterers what they will, said he, I see
plainly what I am, a frail man, and no other. The Philosopher reads us a good
Lecture upon this, we must not contemn what he says: We may be so far
gulled, and befooled, (for no man could be flattered, unless he flattered
himself first) as that we may think our selves wise; Alas! nothing less. We
see, and then we covet things, that will never profit: we see, and then we
take, that which will do us certain hurt. We wise? No not so wise as the
beasts, they know when they have enough, enough meat, enough water; so does not
man, because he has that about him, which still is craving, give, give, and
he gratisieth himself so far, and says, take, take: So sense is his
carver, not reason; And this is to walk by sense, and below a beast, for this
man never says, he has enough; But so a beast says: so says the
Philosopher, or to the like Sen. Ep. 59
purpose. Indeed we may now remember, that one man, and but one, who was led by
sense, said, He had enough; how enough? A great deal (...) Much, or a great
deal. Gen 33. 9. Esaus enough.
to glut him; it was not such an enough, (I may say) as his good brother had,
he had enough indeed, God was his portion, and there the soul (...) i. ^ All
things Genesis 33. 11. Iacobse enough.
for God is All. I am a very little diverted from my scope here, I return, and
say only, we have our five wits if we do not guard them, they will spoil us
even of our crown, and Princely dignity: such a necessity there is, if we
will be our own men, to keep a strict watch about them, a sure command over
them, specially when we are gadding and gazing abroad. This is our wisdom,
and for this we shall be counted understanding men.

3. There are(say some) three inward senses performing the offices of the
Animal spirit, which uses the body as an instrument. But these three upon the
matter are all one, for if we be attent upon a thing, we do imagine or
consider what it is, and then we can record, or remember it also. These are
indeed but three distinct operations, (common to us with beasts, but with some
advantage on man's side) of one and the same spirit, which the mind or soul
uses, and thereby does exercise those great powers of Under standing, Will,
Conscience: For from diligent attention there is conveyed to a man, the
understanding of things: from imagination, or dijudication, a choosing, or
refusing: from remembrance, conscience, that great and impartial Judge, for it
cannot be bribed, nor ever can it be alone.

4. And now, having these helps about us, the higher we soar, the better, for
the higher, the nearer we come to the highest; and the more discerning we have
there, the more we shall discern our selves, and our own vileness, which
will cause us to walk humbly below, and to avoid the snares there.

5. It must be considered for the closing up of the method, else there will be
a gaping; That I have led the child through the earth already, and over the
deep waters; upthrough this great gulf, the Air, to the Starry heaven, and
above them. I shall not do what is already done, but rather add thereunto.

In the last place, I suppose the child is still asking questions, (so he
should be Z (...),read Asch. School. p. 7. (...). Arist. Met. 3. 1.
) and my self giving hints thereof, or making answer thereunto. So these
premised, we suppose where we are, upon the Pinnacle of the Temple, for there
our prospect has the largest compass, and best fits so capacious a subject.
And here we would behold all the works of God, and operations of His Hand; All
He has created, and all that Man has made; All the works of Nature and of
Art upon dry land: We would to Sea also; to behold the wonders there; specially
the Ship, the oldest house of the new world; and then to the remotest regions
of the earth, or air, to behold all the works there. And if all this in our
Imaginary we could do, yet the understanding would not be satisfied with all
this. One world is not enough, nor, had we such another, could it be
sufficient. But where abouts are we now in the world, for where the mind is,
there are we? In a Maze sure enough: And by grasping all, we have lost the
benefit of all, that is certain.

It puts me in mind of a very merry fellow and me thinks I have done
somewhat like him; He would spend a whole day in fetching a round about Europe,
thence stepping into Asia, so striding into Africa, thence leaping into
America; then home again to supper and to bed; In good time all this, but we
hope his benefit was not much, which he made of his travel. This is the way
to let the under standing remain confused, without fruit, as lies the field,
where they cast over much seed. He that goes with a child in his hand, must
go as the child can go; and he must drop-in instructions, as the Nurse fed
him, by little spoonefuls, and even that little, by little degrees too; for of
that little, much goes beside, in and out, as Nurses know best: But this we see
very well, as the Nurse feeds the body, so we the understanding; We must be
dropping drop after drop, and many a drop falls by too. He that poures
altogether upon a child, or gives it him in a lump, loses all his labor, and
choaketh the understanding.

CHAP. II.
Singulars best fit a Child's underftanding: how to supply their want. Pictures
how useful: two maine Cautions touching them.

What way then with the Youth? to insist upon Generals is to leave him in a
maze without any thread in his hand, and to give him singulars is impossible,
for they are infinite unto us. That is true, yet we must give him as many as
we can, though those many will be but a few. We must lead him from the
Schools to the Colleges, Innes of Court, Monasteries, yea Shops too, etc. he
must go through them all.

But this is impossible also, unless we could carty the Child from place to
place, as fast as Fame can fly; which was (if she be not belied her self,
that has told so many lies of others) 2500. miles in one day Live. 25. Hist. of
the world. B. 3. 6. 10.
. This cannot be, how then may we help the Child?

I know no better way, then to furnish him with Emblemes; To let him observe
the Egyptian manner (that Nation was one of the most ancient Schools in the
World) by Hieroglyphics; They have the darkest interpretation, I will unfold
one or two, that the Child may the better conceive the use of them.

The Persian manner was, when they expected a full surrender of all into their
hands, To demand a quantity of earth, and water to be sent unto them, which
should be a sign that all was yielded, and such a message he sent to the
Scythian.

But the Scythian teturned an Hieroglyphicall answer, sending instead of Earth,
and Water, a Bird, a Frog, a Mouse, and five Arrows: which dumb show the
Persian interpreted according to his wish; and thought, That the Scythian had
yielded all the elements, where these Creatures live, and his weapons withal;
The Scythians meaning was quite contrary, as the event proved; That unless the
Persian could get wings like a Bird, or dive under water like a Frog, or creep
into holes like a Mouse, he should not escape their Arrows.

By this example we make judgment, how significant this manner of teaching
is. So also to verse the Child in Muthologie; To let him hear Parables; and
see Maps, Travel upon the Globes; To read some lectures there; To give him as
many Images, or Representations of things as possible can be. A sure way of
teaching, said the Philosopher.

I remember Sextius my old friend, a quick-sighted man taught me very much by
an Image or representation, he set before me, which was this; of an Army so
quartered, that it was prepared for the enemy, though he should march on as in
a cloud, in so dark a path, as is the way of the wind: so prepared should
every man be, still having his succors about him, and doing their office,
keeping their watch, and ready to take the Word, present at the Captains Sen.
Ep. 59
command, and this is right reason. The Philospopher closes this with a very
useful speech. That man's standing is ever safest, who is less secure about
it. So much the Philosopher has touching the use of Images, (as he calls them)
or representations. Certainly the use of this is great; If we could make our
words as legible (which was said) to Children as Pictures are, their
information therefrom would be quickened, and surer. But so we cannot do,
though we must do what we can: And if we had such books, wherein are the
pictures of all Creatures, Herbs, Beasts, Fish, Fowls, they would stand us in
great stead. For Pictures are the most intelligible books, that Children can
look upon. They come closest to Nature, nay, says Scaliger, Art exceeds her.
A strange speech, Nat^ram s^perat Ars. Exer. 207. Ser. 11.
but he will have it so; I verily believe, said he, That Nature never framed
any humane body, (I except only two, the one of the first Man, the other of
Him, who was God and Man) so artificially, so exactly well, as has the cunning
Limner, or curious Arts-man.

A strange speech, I say again, and exceeding. But indeed if our eyes may be
Jedges, which see not the body, but the Accident thereof, color, etc. there
may be some truth in the thing, for the eyes Non accipit^r in sensum
substantia: sol^m^do accidentia recipiuntur. Seal. Exer. 30. 7.
seeing but the surface, and accidents thereof, may report unto us, that there
is more beauty in an Artificial, then a Natural body.

Certain it is, and that is to our purpose, That Art is very curious, and
though it cannot give this aliquid intus, yet will it frame a thing very lively
Plin. 35. 10. Mart. Ep. 1.
, therefore takes the eye very much, and helps the understanding not a little
(...). Arist. Rhet. 1. cap. 10.
. Let it be considered, how much this one piece of cunning Art may gain upon
a Child's understanding; when the Child's eye observes the eye of the Picture
upon him wheresoever he stands, so upon every one in the same room. How shall
I avoid GODS eye? He that made the eye, shall He not see? It is our
Conclusion then, or rather not ours, but the conclusion of experience, that
Pictures are easy and legible Books, children understand them quickly: But
we have two Cautions touching these, both bid us beware of Pictures.

1. Take we heed, they be not such, as I have seen in some neighbor
Countries; naked Pictures of both Sexes, and these very ordinary. I observed
also much brutishness in the inhabitants there; And he that will tell his
observation, must say as much now. For their conversation is as it was, and
will be till such Pictures, so insnaring, be cast out to the Bats, and Moth, or
rather stamped to pieces, as the Idol was. I could say much at this point, and I
think much to purpose, I will say but this: Pictures are Childrens books,
their scope, and tendency must be to promote good manners, and the soul of
the child, they must not look toward immodesty; if so, I will say but as one
did long ago: It is too Nimiu^ est quod intelligit. Quint.
much, which children do understand.

2. There is another danger yet. They are very bewitching things; a man may be
exceedingly taken with the work of his own fingers. I have read the pedigree
of Pictures, and I have stood, and wondered till I could in some measure bottom
my own heart; That from so low a bottom, they should rise to so high a Top;
from so base, and beggarly a beginning, they should grow so rich, and be of
such account in the world. It had its rise from a stock; (a wooden beginning)
then it was set up in the Court; then crept into the Common House, thence into
GODS House. There they began Error min^mus in principio fit maximus in f^^e.
Not. Com. lib. 11. cap. 18. Quod minimum est minimu^ est, sed in minime magnu
est et in mi^imo fidele esse maximum est.
to gaze upon it, then to bend before it, after that (for they must not serve
the Devil with nothing) to offer unto it, and but a grain of Incense at
first, a very little thing: but mark how that little did increase, more then
did a grain of Mustard Seed; for at last the Father offered his Child, the
Son of his body, for the sin of his soul. That Little little did so
increase, at length that it opened the mouth of their Molech (it was an Image)
Like as Lucians feigned Fish Luc. de vera Hist. lib. 2.
, (which swallowed up a great Ship smooth) for it devoured many at once, flesh
and bones and all together. I mention this, that we may take heed of a little
in point of Gods worship, for a little is not a little. The least deviation
from the Rule, the least swerving (...). ^c. If the body be a little divided
from the head, it dies: If the branch be a little divided from the root, it
wi^hers; therefore this little is not a little, nay it is all. Chrysostom in 1
Cor. Hom. 8.
therefrom, is like a little separation of the building from its foundation,
which quickly causes a ruin. Therefore says the Father well, in such cases,
A little is not a little. I must not delate here, though so I could do to good
purpose.

But is it not strange (yet nothing is so, to him that knows his own heart,
which has its Idols too many) that a Esaias 44. 1, 10, 7. Hist. of the world.
Lact. 2. 2. Foelix in Fol. p. 16.
reasonable creature should fall down before a calfe, and say, Thou art my
God; Or before a stock, and say, Awake, Arise, Hab. 2. 18, 19.
and save us; Yet so brutish have some been, as we read more then once. And
though the Story be old, so may our hearts be too, and then such practice will
be new; for a fear there is, That which should be the childs Book, may be the
old-mans Baby; so we have known it also; O abomination! What, adore the work of
the fingers ends! Yes, and then in the sacred Scriptures language, thus it is,
He that makes the stock his fear, will feel it his sharpest sorrow Hos. 8. 4.
(...)
for in propriety of speech, and in the sacred tongue, so Idol signifies.

I would not have the child want these Books, not would I he should be
endangered by them, as they may soon be; For as the learned Knight says; The
Devil long since crept into these wooden, and brazen carcasses; and has
nezled himself there by a wooden distinction; as foolish and weak as that of
the Physicians wife, touching pepper; It was hot in working, but cold in
operation: By such a like distinction as this. They make a great difference,
betwixt the Image they bend before, and an Idol: a wide distinction also
betwixt (...) and (...), though the sacred Scripture and truth it self knows
none such. Juel. Ap. Art. 14.
the Devil has, I say, held his habitation, so as ever since, these
carcasses, though they would seem to promise much in guiding the sense, do
produce intolerable inconveniences by misguiding the heart, drawing it from the
truth, which is a matter of power, being the immediate work of God, not of man,
and fixing it upon a form or resemblance, which is as far from the thing, as
is the Image from the life of that, which it does represent to the soul.

I will tell the child here, for I would have him well informed at this point;
How these Pictures, or Images, (I know not what to call them in the childs
ears, the sacred Scripture calls them Dunghill-gods) how I say these Images
(the best and the most contemptible have all the same Ancestors, descending
from the same common stock) have scoffed at, and played upon their Carvers, and
thus by the allowance of their Masters, very Heathens too; An Image is thus
brought in debating the matter before his Carver, in this manner; Here I lie
before thee an unprofitable piece of wood; I am at an indifferency, what will thou make of me? a bench to sit upon, or a God to look Hor. 1. Ser. 8.
upon? I am at thy service, consider the matter, and resolve. The Carver
bethought himself, so it came in his cap, to show his skill, and (I little
thank him) a God he made me. Now see how I am abused, The dust covers me, I
cannot wipe it off from mine eyes, The worm consumes me, The mice and the rats
defile me, and I stand the while stock still, not able so much as to hold my
nose. What think we? is not this a notable jeere cast upon the Image-maker? He
was served well enough, he conceived that he could a (...) Chrysostom. in Esaias 2. d
(...). Chr. Tom. 1. Hom. 37.
make his God, b and frame a work more noble then the workman, who is more
precious then the whole world d. What a fool is that? how like the stock he
made, or that he sits upon? He shall hear one jeere more, though we hate the
practice, and the Heathen shall cast it into What Religion is that, which
cannot mention without suspicion ofscoffing. B^luel Apo!. Art. 7. p. 375.
his teeth, because he has wrought such a silly sorry work, and yet accounts
it something; for thus the Heathen man jeeres at the stock: The Carver has
made a God of thee, thou art a great one; thou must do a great deal of
service, and look thou do it, see well to thy charge, else I promise thee
thou shall to thine own place the fire, where if thou can do nothing else,
thou shall warm my shins, for though thou art carved, and cost is put upon
thee above thy worth, yet thou art but wood, and to Lignumes, etc. Mart. 8. 40
the fire thou shall go. Let the man think of this as he pleases, I am sure
it is to the child's understanding, and may make him both think, and practice
like a man, if adding thereto we remember him of this which follows.

They who made a god like a four-footed beast, God gave up to a sin, which did
abase them into a worse condition then of beasts. And so it is at this day,
such, and so just the judgment upon them, amongst whom these pictures are in
such request, as says Sr. Ed. Sands, and a great deal more. What I make my
Idol will be my shame, my torment also. Little children think on this, and keep
your selves from dumb Idols. Amen.

CHAP. III.
To converse in Generalities is to keep a child upon the Pinnacle; the word
is familiar; what it teaches: what also the descent therefrom: so leading to
singulars, and the chiefest of them, the Man.

THus we learn to stoop what we may, to the low capacity of children, by
making singulars, what we can, plain and visible before them. To verse them in
Generalities, is to carry them in a cloud, or to keep them upon the pinnacle,
yet because so high we are, and it is a word we read much of, we will get some
informations from it, and some instructions also, by the descent therefrom,
which may lead us to singulars, and to the chief amongst them, which is man,
the Compendium or Abridgement of the great world; we shall teach the child to
read that book first, I mean himself: there we will begin, but in order, we
suppose we are upon the pinnacle yet, and our hope is to gain something there.

1. What a prospect have we here? yet not enough, no not enough to satisfy the
eye, much less the soul, so capacious that nothing but heaven can fill it,
the good things there: Jacobs enough only fills the soul, (as was said) the
four quarters of the world, the regions of the Air too, cannot afford us
enough to fill up the eye, and ear, notwithstanding all, there would be a
desire after, and a capacity of more. Alas! what a poor thin is all this,
which we can reach with our eye? much like the point where the compass stands,
where with you draw the circumference: and that is but an atome, like a mote in
the Sun, or a grain of mustard seed; such a thing is earth, and Sea too, in
reference to heaven.

Lord give us to see into, and through these things, and then the vanity of
them all will appear: And we shall know where rest is to be found, and
enough, that we may say; Soul enter into thy rest, for thou have enough laid
up for many years; even to all eternity; for God is yours, and Christ yours,
and then all yours; that was Jacobs enough, to satisfy even in Genesis 33. 11 as
before.
famine, in the greatest wordly wants or straights enough.

2. What beauty do we observe here! All this did the Lord bring out of
confusion, as He did light out of the womb of darkness, and with no labor, by
His word only. When the Lord is the doer, when He works, all wonder cease.
We are persuaded now nothing is hard to the Lord, He can make it dark at
noone, and midnight as midday; If that Spirit will, dead bones shall live; A
full Sea shall be as dry land; Prisoners shall go forth: They who are in
darkness shall show themselves: The Captives of the mighty shall be taken
away, and the prey of the terrible shall be Esaias 49. Amos 5.
delivered; for this is He, that brought this beauty out of confusion, and by
His Word, He spoke, and it was done.

3. See how insnaring this glory is! The tempter thought he could have taken
his Lord with it. But blessed be God the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, He
has overcome this Tempter, and broke this snare to His children. They can see
through this beacuty, and account the glory, and pomp thereof to be no better
then a fancy Acts 25. 23. (...).
. And indeed the wonder is, That so many should still be taken with this glory,
since it is the confession of all persons in all ages downward to this day, who
greedily pursued, and hunted after that we call the Glory of the world, That
the same thought deceived them, they wearied themselves catching at, they
thought, a substance, but when they came better to see into it, it was but a
shadow, like some Apples we read of, which seem fair to the the eye, the
least touch turns them into smoke, or ashes, into which the Cities were
turned, whereabouts they grow. A wonderful deceit this is, That a reasonable
creature should stretch out it self to catch a shadow: and open the mouth so
wide to let in the East wind, or to feed upon ashes.

4. We observe this place exposed to all the injuries of Heaven. O the pinnacle
of honor, how slippery, how troublesome that standing, how open to all winds,
and weather! pray for him who has his Seat there. Let all the Censers of the
Saints, and the odors there have an influence upon his precious soul; hold him
fast, Lord, by thy own right hand, establish him; Let him Deuteronomy. 33.
feel underneath the Everlasting Arms, inspire him also, be with his Spirit,
put holy desires into his heart, then give him his hearts desire.

5. There is no building Tabernacles here, a cloud would quickly overshadow
all: Though the beauty may please us, yet has it no continuance, it passes
away as does a fancy. The Stayres are before us, a sure way down by them, and
no other: It were a madness to cast a man's self down, when he may go down,
so every one will judge: yet so the proud spirit tempted his Lord to do, Cast
thy self down, the Angels shall bear thee up. The disciple is not above his
Master, nor the servant above his Lord: if the Prince of darkness tempted the
Master of the house, how much more them of his household? Mat. 10. 24, 25.


The great Tempters, Satan, and our own hearts, prevail mightily by very
temptation; (in a figure) thus they tempt; Cast, implunge your selves into sin,
the mercy of God shall bear you up: poison your souls with sin, there is a
Counter-poyson: wound your souls deep enough, the plaster is wide enough:
surfeit upon pleasures; it is but speaking a word, the Physician is at hand.
This is the deceit; nay, while we are looking upon the Stairs, we cannot
think it less then madness, yet thus it is every day. 1. In good things we
separate the means from the end; we may have glory, there is no doubt of
that, what ever becomes of grace, which is but the beginning or first fruits
thereof. Salvation is sure enough, though the means of reconciliation be
neglected, despised altogether. We are sure of Heaven, though on earth we
walk most contrary thereunto. 2. In evil things we separate the end fro the
means; we may walk in our own way, the way of death, and yet have life at the
last; no question of all this, but this is neglect neglect the Stairs.

6. We go down them now: for easy the descent is. So is the way of sin to
old nature: And so is the way of Omne in praecipiti vitiu^ stetit.
Gods Commandments to nature renewed, as natural as for fire to burn; for
sparks, those light things, to fly up. My yo^ke is easy, my burden light; my
Commandments not grievous; Truth has said so: New nature will seal unto it.
2. We go gently down the Stairs, and very circumspectly, a slip is
dangerous: So we must use the means, carefully, and this must ever be
remembered, his way is safest, which is least secure. Tutissimum ill^us iter,
quod suspectissimu^ suit Sen. Ep. 59
3. We step in to view the Bell, that artificial thing: Its sound is yet more
admirable: it may be heard down the water 20. miles, and more. Indeed sound
is the wonder in Nature, put the hand upon it, it checks the sound, every soft
substance will do it: if it receive a crack, it will never sound clear
again till it be new cast. Such a thing is man, made of such very mettle; he
has some flawes in him ever since his fall, and will never be perfect till the
day of his resurrection. He that expects a Man should walk like an Angel, is
much mistaken, you must weigh him as you do gold, give him his allowance; And
if he be yet too light, he may suspect, he will be found wanting at the
Sanctuary, to which balance he must come. Certain it is (I speak it,
because we are apt to take too much allowance here) He that walks by the
leading of the good Spirit, (which we should all do) walks little short of
an Angel, for his way is above on high, so he escapes many snares below. 4. We
should pass by nothing of use, and then if we step aside to some old corner of
the wall, we might, happily, find half a bushel of Flies there, for so I am
sure some have done. I do not think that Flies are more about the Temple now
(though so anciently when beasts were slain there, and thence the name
Beelzebub) then in some old unfrequented corner or cranie in the house or wall:
But no matter where they be: this is the little wonder, that they should
revive again: yet so experience tells us they do, nor they only, but Spiders,
Frogs, Swallows, etc. The wonder is yet a little more; how the spirits of
these Creatures should be maintained. It is somewhat stranger then that Bears
should live all the winter, yet lie as dead, for their spirits may be
maintained upon the old stock of Grease: but that these poor thin Creatures
should so live and be revived, is still some kind of wonder to me; though we
know very well; Flies choked in water, will revive again being put into hot
ashes. I will relate stranger things then these (it is a very ready way to make
the Child learn as was said (...)
) from a very good hand, but the Author does not desire we should believe all
we read Co^. Phys.
. A boy was starved with cold, not found till four days after, yet by the
hottest applications was revived. In Swounds and Traunces, some have been
taken for dead, laid out for the grave, nay brought thither, and there revived;
(it was high time to awake) this truth many will seal unto. That which is not
so credible is this: In the remotest parts of Muscovy, where it is extreme
cold, the men lie frozen all the winter, and then as the Sun beats toward
them, revive again, (like the Tortoise who goes to his bed about the 16. of
September, and comes out of his moldy Cabin the very same day of April
following.) We need not believe all this: But this is certain, That the
spirits are wonderful tenacious, we cannot drive them from the body, neither
with heat not could. As it is said of water, (the Wiseman notes a fool
thereby) beat it in a Mortar, it will be water (...) Luc. de Sexti.
still. So these spirits, do what you will, they will not away, as we see in
the Limbeck-distillations, etc. This animal Spirit, rather then it will
forsake its matter, though putrified, and rotting away, it will go and form
Other little Creatures of another kind, as experience shows us in all
Corruption. We intend the use in all this, else it had been vain; Does God
take care for Oxen? shall the poor fly be remembered in the appointed time?
or is this for our sakes altogether? for our sakes no doubt this is written;
That when we must to our earth, whence we were taken, we may go down to that
Chamber of death, and make our beds there, in hope, that dead bones shall live;
they that sleep in the dust, shall awake, for they are not dead there, but
sleeping. We cannot but remember a short controversy marvellously carried, in
a full contrariety of words, but meering in a Point of an eternal Truth; the
controversy was concerning the Rulers Daughter: The Lord Christ said of her,
She is not dead Mat. 9. 24.
. The standers by laughed him to scorn, (the words of Christ are to the wisest
of the World still foolishness) and they knew what they did well enough; for,
says Saint Luke Luke 8. 53.
, They knew she was dead. What dead, and not dead? Yes, and yet a truth in
both. She was dead to Nature, and Nature was Judge now: they knew it to be so,
being natural men altogether; they said true enough, though they should not
have laughed him to scorn. Our Lords words are true also, nay Truth it self,
and Spirit too: She is not dead, not dead to Christ, who is the resurrection
and the life; the body is not dead to Him. When He shall say to the Prisoners,
Go forth, to them that are in darkness, Show your selves, then presently
shall the prey be taken from the mighty, and the lawful Captive delivered
from the King of Terrors. It is no labor to Christ; if He speaks only, the
Land and the Sea shall give up their dead, Death shall be swallowed up in
victory. It shall be then, when the Lord Christ shall speak, as we know,
(and it is worth our knowledge) once it was, And the Lord spoke unto the fish,
and it vomited out Jonah upon the dry land.

We will take these sacted Scriptures along with us, and the sent of them which
is wonderful reviving. Now we may suppose, we are going by these dark
Chambers, where our beds are also, and we may be laid thereon, we know not
how soon: We must not forget any of this. And so we are come to our home,
where we should be most versed; I mean that great singular before spoke of;
over that I shall, by Gods grace, read the next Lecture.

CHAP. IV.
Man's body a curious Fabric, but fallen much into decay, and by ill usage,
more decays every day; yet as now it is, venerable. In what considerations to
be cherished, and had in honor. In what cases to be neglected, and despised.

THere is an itching humor in many, to gad and rome abroad like the Pilgrim in
other Countries: In the mean time they care not though known to be stark
blind in their own. Thus it is also nearer home; we are most strangers there;
though the best lesson in the world is for a man well to read himself; That
is an excellent book, and much variety therein. I shall but dip my pen in it
here and there, so as I may not do what is already done Child's Portion. Chap.
1.
.

I remember some have likened the great men of the world to the first letter of
a Patent or limmed book, which though it has large flourishings, yet it is but
a letter. That is true, and has its use.

But we think we may say, That man even at the lowest is more then a letter,
though we may suppose it to be of the most spreading, and largest size; he is
indeed a whole volume, and so many letters, so many lessons, I had almost said
wonders: for so have some said before me, who have glossed upon them, and
running over the whole Table, have left us many good instructions, which at
leisure we may gleane up by the way Zanch. de hom. creat. 1. 2. p. 680. D.
Bartas p. 158. Caussin. p. 504. Cic. denat. Deil. 2. P. 101. Lact. de Opif. ca.
7. etc. Fab. Thet. P. 216. Naz. Orat 34. Amb. Heic. 1. 6. cap. 8.
: For thy present use, look child upon thy self, from the top to the bottom;
look inward too, if thou can, the Anatomist will teach thee; spell every
letter, and then put all together, and thou must needs say, All is wonderful;
how curiously framed am I! And then, so low a thought as this cannot find
place in thee; That so Lord-like a creature, such a curious piece of
workmanship, should be framed for low and base work, the service of ones self;
of men 1 Ccr. 7. 23.
; of the world; the lusts of these or any of these; no, ever the more noble the
thing is, the more excellent its employment whereto it is designed; if the
sunffers be of gold, it does imply some honorable service. It is good in some
cases, that man should know his dignity, his house, his pedigree, being the
offspring of God; that his deportment may be answerable, with honor, and
majesty. The Father has a full Bonum habes pi^^orem no^i dep^e picturam. Ambr.
speech, we will give the full purpose of it; Thou have, O man, a perfect
Artist, He has curiously framed or limmed thee, excellently engraven thee; He
has made thee the very Image, and picture of Himself, He has drawn thee
according to that pattern, as near as could be. Now learn thy duty, deal
reverently with thy picture, do not defile it, nor debase it, but looking upon
the Ingravery, workmanship, the superscription thereon, give unto God that
which is Gods, answerably honoring thy body, as the work of His hands, who is
wonderful in working: How reasonable a request is this? How many creatures
they say, so many tongues in in the world, all setting forth the praise of the
Creator, so it should be in the great world, and in the little world too; so
many members, so many tongues, all to join in that great service of praise,
which is the uncessant work of the spirits of just men glorified. In every
creature the Lord does sparkle out unto us love, said a great Divine Ochinus.
; So has He done in every member of the body, love, bounty, mercy, and upon
all the superscription is, Holiness to the Lord.

We have a world of matter here, for it is a little world we are upon, but
thus I have abridged it.

He that would hear a full Lecture upon this subject, let him read our second
Reinolds Chap. 35.
. Had I been Scholasticall at this point. and showed a little of a little,
Learning I mean, I had showed my self altogether, and neglected the child.
But my scope is his information, and to make my words so many hints, thereby to
gain upon his understanding, which is indeed perfected by the worthiest
contemplations, but enabled thereto by the lowest enquiry. In this method we
pass on a little further.

Thou have, child, heard the best touching thy body, what it was once, what it
should be now in its proper use, and after its primitive Dedication. The worst
is in sight, we cannot be mistaken, for we can see, and feel both, how weak,
and frail the body is, so sensible are we. Nay thou can see that little
infant before thee; what a body is there? how underlayed and underpropt? what
cares about it? how necessary all, if not inordinate, for how infirm and
helpless is that little thing Quint. Caducum circa initia animal homus, etc.
Declam. 306.
! But he will outgrow his infirmity: No never, no more then Mephibosheth did
his lamenesse, which he caught by a fall in the cradle of his infancy; we never
outgrow our hereditary evils: they rather grow upon us, and get strength by
time. Infirmity, (we would include all under that general word, that we may be
the shorter) Infirmity grows up with him, it is that squire of the body, which
in all its stages, attends the same, We see it so, we feel it so; I would we
might stop here, but indeed we must not. Infirmity might be born with, and well
passed over, for it is not properly evil, but there is that we may properly
call wickedness, and that is truly evil, and nothing in the world but that.
We usually say, The body is like a goodly Instrument. It is indeed, but quite
out of tune, every string thereof; what a jarring there is? or more plainly,
what a deordination in all the members, and faculties of the same? how cross
to that end, wherefore they were framed? So many members, so many tongues to
give praise to their Creator; so it should be, but thus it is; So many members,
so many weapons, whereby we daily maintain a war against God, and our
selves. Such a thing is the body now, we hear, see, feel it even so, an
infirm, sick, corrupt, base body; Nay yet more, A very beast, a rebel. And
yet from the beginning it was not so: It was as we heard, but now its dignity
is gone, its Dominion, and Lordship is much impaired: so sin has enfeebled it,
weakened, nay indeed, left it as a carcass to the sowles of prey: But yet not
without hope, That the time will come when both weakness and wickedness shall
be done away; when it shall be restored to its former dignity, and raised much
above the honor it once had, when it shall hunger no more, thirst no more,
faint no more, wax pale no more, for it shall be as the Angels in heaven.

Here now I should have carried the child back to his first original, and
there bid him view himself well, how unclean and filthy. And then have pointed
him to the fountain set open, wherein to wash, and be clean; but this is done
in a fitter place Child's Portion. Chap. z. and 3. etc.
Indeed I should not here have spoken of the body first, yet purposely so I
did, because it is so full in the child's eye: Nor should I have spoken so much
touching it, for in comparison, the body will be nothing anon. And yet so much
I have spoken, that I might gain these things of the child, which in reason he
cannot deny me.

1. When proud thoughts shall arise, as every moment they will, then, that he
smite them down with the breath of his mouth; there is no such sword in the
world, wherewith to smite the proud thought at once to the ground; he has an
infirm, weak, frail body, subject, or obnoxious to all, that we call evil
in the world: And so much it can endure, pain I mean, as, God for bid, (so
one said, who suffered a great deal, yet not passing strength) so much should
be laid upon it, as it can bear. But suppose it in its full strength, yet is
its glory but like a flower, and how soon does his breath go forth, and
returns no more, then where is he? we may speak big, and have high thoughts,
but our breath is in our nostrills, therewith we must smite them down, for
there is room enough to let it out, before the next morning.

2. Because the body is a venerable Monument, though worn and desaced with
time, yet I say venerable: We must use it reverently as we do the Temple, for
that name the Spirit gives 1 Cor. 3. 16
unto it: It is dedicated unto God, nay, we may say properly touching these
living Temples, they are consecrated unto Him. We are careful that the Temple
has no out ward pollution, no defilement at all; so careful we must be of
our bodies, such an honorable respect must they have. They are mighty words
which follow. He that defiles the Temple, him will I destroy. If we pollute and
defile our bodies, God will pollute (...).
us, He will make us vile, contemptible, as is a louse, or like rottenness, so
much the word implies.

3. We must cherish our bodies, they must be served that may be serviceable:
We must eat, though not to pamper Nature, yet to repair it, and if need
require, we may take a little Wine for our stomachs sake, and our manifold
infirmities. We need not be long upon this, our ear is open to this counsel;
we will not be indebted to our bodies. But let this be noted, how sparing
good people have been toward their bodies, I may say, how niggardly
religious. It would seem strange, if I should relate what Clem: Alex: tells us
concerning the Lord Christ in point of Abstinency; but let that pass, certain
it is, though one prattles be-speaking liberty on the Lords (...). Ioh. 3. 10.
day in the afternoon, from our Lords example, telling us, Statim a Synagoga,
from Church presently to dinner Mark 1. 29.
; yet when we are sober, we shall read of healing first, etc. and that His
meat was to do the will of His Father; for other meat, and drink, though He
came eating, and drinking, Mat. 11. 19.
yet such was His moderation as we read, as much as we need to imagine; and
prattle what they will, Wisdom is justified of her children; Observe we S.
Paul's example, for he followed Christ, he was in hunger often; that is, he
would have eat, but had it not: And in fasting often, when he might have
eaten, he would not. But that I most observed, (the place is not at hand) is
concerning Chrysostom, I see other men taking their fill of meat, and of
wine: I marvel what they mean; doubtless there will be a great fire, where
we cast on a great deal of wood We must withdraw the wood if we would put
out the fire. One told his friend, His Ague would not away; no I warrant you,
answered he, it lies too soft, and fares too daintily, to leave his lodging.
Mart. 12. 17. Epig. G^^^^. 2. ^.
. For my part, I dare not take my fill of bread. Why? that he knew best;
certain it is, he durst not at some times gratify his body so far, as to give
it its fill of bread. Such was the abstinence of Gods people, so they denied
themselves, and so used their bodies, as if they had been enemies there unto,
beating them down, and keeping them Durius tractandum ne animo male pareat.
Sen.
under, as servants, nay as slaves; For it is with our bodies, as with fire,
and water, very good servants, but very bad Lords. Nay indeed they cannot be
Kings, but they will be Tyrants, and then behold the most unseemely sight in
the world, the Prince goes on foot, and the servant rides on horseback, and
has all the honor done unto him, whereas he should have none at all, by
Scripture allowance.

Lastly then, now we have given the body its due, and a full portion, we may
remember in the shutting up of all, That there is very little account made of
the body, all along the sacred Writ. It is scarce named there, or if so,
seldom with much honor; we read there of a vile body, and dead bodies, and
bodies of Beasts, but when the Scripture speaks of Men, then the body is left
out, and the Soul is mentioned still. The body (we mean by that all a man
calls himself) is in the Scripture a very disregarded thing, and accounted of
by the servants of the Lord, as a Beast, or as a carcass, in some cases, not
worthy the casting of an eye upon it. It is most worthy our consideration, how
sharply the Lord Christ reproved Peter, when out of an inordinate (...). Mat.
16. 22.
affection, he did bespeake pity and commiseration toward his Master, Get thee
behind me Satan, The salvation of souls is before Me, and thou do bid Me
to entreat My self kindly, to be gentle, kind, pitiful to my body; I tell
thee, I took this body, it was prepared for this very end of old, that I might
not spare it: therefore in that thou do chide, and rebuke (...).
thy Master, and would cross Him in that highest design, the salvation of
Souls, thou art a great block in my way, and savourest of nothing in so
saying, but of self, which as it is crucified in the head, so must it in all
the members. We will observe Paul's example once more; His good friends almost
broke his heart with their love, Acts21. 13
and pity toward him, weeping and blub bering about him, and all their lay
was, Go not up to Jerusalem, if thou do, thy carcass will smart for it:
What tell ye me of my Cracasse? I know full well, that bounds and afflictions
do abide me. I know my body must smart, but what care I for that? let them
bind it, beat it, kill it, do with it what they can, I have cast up my
reckoning, and counted the cost, and am bound in my spirit faster then they can
bind me. Gods will be don't, mine is so meekned that it can submit. So God may
have glory, I am well content to be abased, for that is indeed to honor the
body: so His Kingdom be advanced, whether by life or by death, I am
careless; The will of the Lord be done. Here would come in now a cloud of
witnesses all speaking out, That their bodies, they esteemed them not, beat
them, bind them, starve them, burn them, what cared they; It was well observed
touching them; They lived, and died, as if not at home in their bodies, so
mortified where they; we have whole volumes filled with such, what shall I
say, Heroic? rather Christian-like resolutions. I will single out one amongst
those Worthies, it being freshest in my memory, and read his answer to a
friends letter, which was to this purpose, (I never tie my self to words) Sir,
matters Bishop Rid'ey to Mr. ^rest. p. 1569.
are fully debared, Arguments heard, and things brought to an issue now, you
may see the stake before you: An argument, you will never answer with all your
Logic, we are too hard for you there, you must turn or burn; agree or dye.
I pray you, Sir, consider now, you are going toward a scorching element: pity
your self, show more love to your body then so, It has done you much good
service, do not let it now fry in the fire, after all this. So he bespeaks
his friend, and pity to his body, the saving a temporal life.

The good man answers to this purpose. You write plainly, Sir, I thank you for
that, and I like it well, you tell me what I must trust to; now the Lord be
praised, I know whom I have trusted to. But I pray you, do you consider? I
have considered very well, you speak of turning or burning, the Stake, and the
Faggot: I tell you one grain of Gods truth is more, and ministers more joy to
me, then all that you call torment, can cause pain: Again you tell me, I must
dye, so much I can tell my self, I must dye whether I agree or no, sure
enough. But not in the fire, you will say, perhaps yes, in some fiery disease,
which may scorch the body more then fire can: or God may (to a revolter) kindle
a flame within him, pierce him through, and through with fiery darts (that is a
burning indeed worse, then that in Taberah.) Alas Sir, you are quite out, Numb.
11. 3.
you speak but of a Faggot fire I am sure; the pain that the body endures
there, is but like the mirth of fools: Not so much, compared to that pain,
which is properly so called, as the least drop to the widest Ocean. What is
that? Nothing. Again, you speak but of a bodily death, we know that. Alas, I
pray you remember your self, The death of the body! had I a body, and a body,
many bodies, I could surrender them all, sacrifice them all to fire for Him,
who gave his body, and blood both for me: he has a hard heart that does not
believe this. God forbid, that I should save my body, and destroy my soul: God
forbid, that I should make an agreement with the adversary, and so cause a
divorce, an eternal separation betwixt my God and me; God forbid, that I
should, to escape this death, which is common, incur the guilt of eternal
damnation. Now I have said all, and it is no more then the words of these
Worthies, if we please to look a little further, then upon one letter, for
though I cannot tie my self to the same words still, yet I must be a faithful
relater.

And now it does fully appear what esteem the Saints of old have had of their
bodies, and how far they went in mortification there. Of great use to the
child and man both, for if we would be as they are, we must do as they did.

Here ends our Lecture upon this carcass; we have viewed it, and seen what
it was, what it is, what it should be; In what considerations it must be
honored, cherished, etc. In what cases also it is to be despised, neglected;
we leave it now in expectation of what it shall be, and pass on to behold the
treasure, the All of a man, his soul. And here we shall go on stooping still,
as low as we can, in so high a matter, to the low capacity of a child, as I
may think to gain upon him. No matter though the words sound not well in a
Scholars ear; so the child relish them, I have my end.
CHAP. V.
The soul, how precious; yet how vile in Man's esteem, while he is himself:
when he is changed, his judgment changes, and then he gives us mighty
lessons, and of universal use.

WE have heard that the body is like a stately house, something ruined, but
stately still; though it be the receptacle of all diseases, and the center
where all kinds of miseries do meet, yet is it proud enough, because it has
a specious outside. What kind of thing is the soul then? It is beyond our
expression or imagination; but thus we reason:

If this outside be so glorious, which is but as the back, the out-house, or
the like, what is the inmate, the dweller there? If we see a goodly Palace, we
can conclude, That it was not built for the Shepherd and his dog: It is true,
we read of specious, and goodly Temples, and within an ugly beast, but that
beast was acounted a god by them; such beasts they were Clem. Alex. paed. 3. 2.
(...), etc. Basil. p. 244.
. But still if the house be specious and rich, so we presume is the dweller
there too. What an house have we, how beautified, how adorned, what is the
inmate then, how glorious, how excellent, how precious is that, which we call
the Causs. de Elog. li. 3. cap. 1.
soul! I will not gaze upon that wonder, so wonderful it is yet this, how
wonderful a thing the soul is, the operations therefrom do show. We may
speak the language of the Spirit, and say thereof, This invisible thing is
made visible, and legible, by that we see it do, for thereby its power, and
excellency is made so plain, that he who runs may read it. And for its
preciousnesse, we must remember the price was paid for it, for that will
declare it. But we need not go so high yet. The child happily marks this
rather: If we do not count our souls precious, the Devil will reprove us,;
Job 2. 4.
Skin for skin, all that a man has will he give for his soul; so Iunius reads
it, and from thence Salvian Quis fu-to est vi'es ^ zobis ani-mas vestras
haheri, quas etiam diabo-lus putat esse preciosas. Eccl. cap. 3. p. 437.
gives us an easy lesson; What madness is this, That a man should have a base
esteem of his soul, which the Devil accounts precious?

Again the child reads, That so many souls went down into Egypt, he knows the
meaning is, so many persons: He reads also, Josh. 10. 34.
That all the souls there were smote with the edge of the sword; that could
not be; for the edge of a man's sword cannot reach the soul. We must beware of
men, but we will not fear them: some injury they may do to the body; but the
soul is out of their reach; it is to be understood then, as before, every
person there was slain: And because the soul is the excellency of a man, the
very all of a man, therefore it is put ordinarily for the whole man, for if I
say his soul, I have said all. Therefore it is, we are bid to take no care for
the body (in comparison) to make no provision for the flesh: The soul is all,
that must take up all the care: The Apostles salutation is notable; I wish 3 John 2.
thou may prosper, and be in health, as thy soul prospers; Yes, that is
prosperity indeed, for what is the gain of the whole world, if the soul be
lost? what is the bodies prosperity, if the soul wither? we know we bestow but
ordinary care upon ordinary matters, but for our jewels, they have our eyes,
and heart too: And if danger come, fire, or the like, let the lumber alone, out
go the jewels, all the precious things. This practice argues clearly to the
weakest understanding, what we should do touching our souls, look to them
with all our care: For a man to intend his mind about low, and poor things of
the world, is to do as we read a great Emperor did, who busied himself
about flies, when he should have attended the great affairs of the State, or
Empire; or to do as another did, who mustring a great Army, then commanded
them to gather cockle-shels along the Seashore.

And now change but the person, and we do the same as they did: Man, that
Lord-like creature, is not wiser at that point of practice; He lets the
substance go. The All of a man, that is altogether neglected, as a worthless
thing; And he catches at flies, gathers shells, poor empty things, and yet,
inferior to those before mentioned, is lifted up with conceit of some great
purchase. This puts me in mind of a strange story, concerning a man whose
mind changed as his shadow did: In the morning his shadow was stretched Dion
Orat. 67.
forth, then his mind was lifted up, he had high thoughts of himself, that he
was a very tall man, some great one. Toward noone he shortened again, and at
high noone (for then his shadow was shortest) he was ashamed to be seen
abroad, such a dwarse he seemed to be: Toward night he lengthned again, and
about Sunset he thought himself as tall as he was in the morning, for such
was his shadow. The child will say, this was a fool sure, he was indeed: And
such another is he, no wiser, and as full of changes, and more unconstant then
the Moon, who is taken with any worldly thing; for at the best it is but a
shadow, sometimes longer, sometimes shorter, and the mind being fixed on it,
so variable, and changeable, must the mind be too; it must ebb, and flow,
rise, and fall, being carried with the stream, and current of humane things.
This is not distinct enough.

Suppose we then, that thou should see a man, his house being in a flame,
carrying out the old lumber, baggage, stuff, some contemptible trash, but
having a Chest of silver and gold in his Chamber, should take no care about
that; would we not judge such a man to be very weak, and simple; such another
is he, who minds every thing more then his soul. Suppose again, that we
should see a Captain, or Commander gratifying his enemy what he can,
victualling his Camp, sending him provision every way, doing all that could be
done, to help his enemy to make him strong; In the mean time, should starve up
himself, and those about him, exposing himself and them to the very fury of
the Adversary. We must needs think, such a man has a crackd brain, he is not
his own man sure. Such another is he, who pampers his body, is all for that,
for in so doing he weakens himself, and fights against his own soul.

Now look abroad in the world, see whether men, for the most part, do not just
so. But thy observation is slight; entreat thy father ^o help thee to make
enquiries into this matter. Certainly, if thy Father does not find himself
caring and providing for every thing in his house, or about him, more then for
the souls there, his own or theirs, yet so he will observe it to be, noting
the practice of the most in the world: For thus it is, they hate a precious
jewel in their keeping, more worth then a world, yet they esteem their Ox
and their Ass before it, nay, lower and baser things then those, far before
their precious soul: Right Gaderens they preferred their swine before Christ;
so do these much the same; they provide better for them, their swine I mean,
they better look unto them, then to the soul.

I dare not cast the first stone here, it is more proper to examine my self at
this great point. But certain it is, Augustus his tannting proverb will reach
most of us, as well as it did Herod, (who, more then probable, killed his own
Son, when he slew the Beth: Macrob. Sat. 2. 4.
Children) It is better (said Augustus, so he taunted him,) to be Herod's hog,
then his Son. It is no jesting matter, but a very sad thing, for the
Application is easy.

We must be more particular yet; for we say, that Physic does not cure Man in
specie; but this or that Man in individuo: So then from these premises we have
concluded this Man, who is so careless of his Jewel, to be one of Solomon's
fools. Nor is it possible for him to evade here. For he has a Treasure in his
hand, that is granted, and he has no heart unto it, that is as certain.

Then he is a fool past all question; and till he knows it, he will never be
wiser; till he can say, heartily with David, I was as a Beast before thee, I
had not the understanding of a Man in me; Till he knows himself to be void
of knowledge, so simple, till then, he will never cry for wisdom, nor lift up
his voice for understanding; he must know first before he will understand; he
must prise Wisdom first, accounting her precious, before he will seek her as
silver, and dig, etc. But certain it is, for the present he is the fool, for
he neglects the Treasure, and follows after trifles, things that will not
help. His care is not for the soul, as the Scripture counts a care, a well
ordered and diligent care, but all is for the body, the things thereof, things
that are not, and are of no account Pro. 23. 5.
: These shadows, shells, empty things, poor, and beggarly, though they are,
take up the strength of his soul, and drink in his spirits: Such a fool is
he. But whence this folly? this deordination? this confusion in the soul?
whence this darkness in the mind? Child's Portion. Chap. 2.


This leads him by the hand to the rock whence he was hewn; where he lost his
strength, his dignity, himself, and whatever he was, he is now most
miserable, and as weak as water.

And here I leave this man ever to contemplate on the face of this deep, and
we shall wait till the Spirit shall move thereon, where by one deep may call
upon another deep, the depth of misery to the depth of Mercy. We know this
wind blows where it lists, the gifts of this Spirit are free God does
blind men when He withdraws His light. He spreads a veil of ignorance,
when He hides his face. He hardens by withdrawing His grace: He chaseth away
the sinner, when He does not call him, and draw him before. B. O^h. Ser. 22.
. I mean then, we shall here wait, till He who commanded the light to shine
out of darkness, shall shine in his heart, to give the light of the knowledge
of the glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ. And when this great work is
done, when this Arm of the Lord is revealed; when this Salvation is made
known to the soul, we are sure of these things, everlasting Truths, streaming
forth from this full fountain, this sea of mercy.

1. Now this Man can put a right esteem upon things, he can esteem them as
they are; trifles, as trifles; Low, earthly, beggarly things, as such indeed;
and no better: He is all for Heaven, the good things there. The substance, that
is it; for shadows, let them go. One grain of grace, though but as a Mustard
seed, he esteems more then the richest earthly pearl; and he can part with
all, the dearest affections of his heart, and buy the field, knowing well, That
Heaven did never cost dear. He is all now for the soul, soule-blessings,
soule-mercies: for the body, it shall be respected in due place, and to its
worth, but, if it does require more then its share, it shall fare the worse for
that; It shall be kept as a servant, nay as a slave. But the soul, and the
prosperity thereof, shall be advanced, next to Christ Himself: and if any
thing shall come betwixt Christ and it, and stand in competition there, away it
shall, it shall be thrust away, whether goods, good name, life, all shall go,
shall be sacrificed, as we heard before.

2. When things of Heaven shall be He puts no other esteem up on his learning
and wisdom the^ that he has something of worth to esteem as Nothing to
Christ. so Naz.
clearly revealed, the things of the earth will be of little or no account
with him, only to accomodate him in his way, and no more: they have no more
luster in his eye, then a star has in ours, when the Sun shines forth in his
strength. The good things of Christ made known to the soul make a prey of all
things here below. If swallows up all our natural knowledge, all that we call
flesh. It makes all new, as if it were not the same, we are sure of that. All
that before was lovely, and is so still in its proper place and sphere, is
now, (in comparison) but as dung, or, if you will, as that you cast forth to
the dog (...). Phil. 3. 8.


3. When Christ shall manifest this great redemption, the soul will never
seek to other saviors; He is a mighty Redeemer; He will redeem out of all
adversity. Sins are multiplied, pardons shall be multiplied; The sea (...);
Exodus 37. 29. Chap. 30. 38.
of misery is large, and wide, such is the sea of this mercy, what need we
eekeout that which is infinite? Nay though the Lord should hide Himself, and
the Spirit should faint, yet he will not run out after other Comforters; He
knows that the odor but of one only Name, is as an ointment poured forth over
all the Churches; The holy anointing Oil, and the pure Incense, is made up
already according to the work of the Apothecary. Cursed is he that makes like
unto that, he shall be cut off from his people. I remember a pretty story, fit
enough for a child even in so great a business. Aelian (...), etc. Aelian de
Var. bist. 1. 4. c. 39.
tells us, a great person sent to his great Lord, a present of Roses, perfumed
with the best Spices. I should have thanked you for the present, said the Lord,
if you had not marred it with making it; The Rose was sweet enough, the
composition spoiled it. Certainly the odor of Christ His death is of power
enough to revive the most fainting spirit; and to perfume that sweet smelling
odor with any thing else, is deadly, we are fure of that too.

4. When such a deliverance as this is made known to him; even that through
Christ, he has obtained an eternal redemption; he is quick swallowed 1 Cor.
6. 20.
up in this Ocean of mercy, and is no more now himself, being bought with such
a price; What he is, He is for Him, Who bought him; And if any thing there be,
which shall seek to turn him away from this Lord his God, though it be as
dear as his right arm or eye, nay as his own soul, he Deuteronomy. 13. 6.
will not consent nor hearken thereto; his eye will not pity that lust, nor
spare; he will thrust it from him, for it would thrust him from the service of
that Lord, Who redeemed his soul from all adversity.

It is deeply charged upon the ancient people the Jews, and it lies as a
reproach upon them to this day, That they suffered themselves to be thrust
away from the Lord their God, who brought them out of Egypt, from the house of
bondage. This, I say is charged upon them often, I know not how often, but it
is worth our inquiry. So unthankful, so abominable were they, They provoked
Him at the Sea, even at the Ps. xc 6. 7.
red Sea: When the deliverance was fresh, and such a deliverance as that, yet
even then they provoked Him, at the Sea, even at the red Sea. And may not then
such a delivered person as this, we speak of, suffer himself to be thrust
away from the Lord, that bought him, so provoking his Lord, even as they did,
may it not be so? No, not possible; for we do suppose, This man understands
the wonderfulnesse of his redemption, the freeness of that mercy; then he
cannot hearken to that lust, which would thrust him away from the Lord, That
bought him; he will say, How can I do this, and sin against the kindness of
my Lord? which is understood, and remembered, for so it is suppofed.

Now for these people before mentioned, Pf. 106. 7.
It is said of them; They understood not the wonders in Egypt; they remembered
not the multitude of mercies. What follows then? that which ever follows the
want of observing Gods works; and forgetting His mercies; They turned away from
their Rock, their Redeemer, they provoked Him at the Sea, even at the red Sea.

The understanding this wonderful salvation; the recording such a mercy, keeps
up the soul, even to its height, to walk still with God below: If we could
but understand; and mark common mercies, we should find our selves mightily
engaged unto duty thereby: we should not easily give way to that lust, which
would thrust us away from that Lord, who feeds us, clothes us, makes His
mercies new every morning, renews our strength every moment: The very
thoughts of these are great engagements; But the understanding such a
deliverance as this, recording such an unspeakeable mercy, binds the soul to
God in bonds, as strong as iron, and brass; If there be atumult, and disorder
in the soul, as there will be sure enough; thus the man reasons, and
overcomes; How should I do this, and sin against the Lord that bought me?
How should I be as those who provoked him at the Sea, even at the Red Sea? Let
the redeemed of the Lord say so, nay we are sure so they will say after such a
deliverance as this, fully understood, and recorded.

5. This person is now a secure person, his spirit is now at rest, he knows
God has dealt bountifully with him. Now his fears, and troubles, and sorrows
are under his feet; Let the rain fall, and the winds rise from all quarters,
and the Sea of this world rage, he stands for all that like a rock, all these
may Lavant, non laedunt. Riv. Praef. in Exodus
wash him, they cannot wast him; they may threaten, they cannot destroy, no not
hurt him: If the Ship save him not, a plank shall; and if the extremity be
such, that the Sea Monster swallows him up quick, it is but to do his Lord
and him service, for now he shall be conveyed to the Haven where he would
be, and no hurt in all that. We cannot be mistaken here: We mean all this
while, God does manifest the riches of His mercy to him; this is not always.

The Lord does hide his face, even from his dearest, and then if but a little,
no little trouble, as when the Sun withdrawes, there follows darkness; But
even then when God absents Himself, there is more praise, and stronger
prayets. And this is the courage and comfort to his soul; That as the Lord
has made him put his feet upon the necks of his enemies: So through God, that
makes strong, and gives power, (...) phil. 4. 13.
he shall do to all his enemies, against whom he fights, he shall feel them
no more again for ever. So it shall be, but he is yet as a Soldier in the
field, he may have some fainting sits; he is not yet attained to that height of
security, that his face shall wax pale no more: But he knows whom he has
trusted, and though youths shall faint, for they are confident of their own
strength, yet he shall mount up with wings as Eagles, etc. Esaias 40.

6. This man is one of the humblest persons in the world: what should he be
proud of? what has he, he has not received? He was vile in his own eyes, ever
since God accounted him precious: ever since God regarded the low estate of his
servant, he walked allow by the ground humbly with his God. He keeps Court in
his own breast, there he judges himself, no man else. He censures no man;
He prays for every man, the love of Christ is spread abroad in his heart; now
he can spread out himself for others; what he is, what he has, is for them in
reference to Christ; His heart is enlarged. O that all were as he is, excepting
his bands, if any about him! O that the bounds of Christ's Kingdom were
enlarged, His glory advanced, Jesus Christ exalted every where; in all His
Attributes, in all His Excellencies! whether by life or by death, therein he is
careless, so the thing be done, that is his ambition, there in he labors
(...). 2. Cor. 5. 9.
, we are certain of all this.

Lastly, for we will break off; This man thirsting to see Gods glory, and
having the joy of his life in immortality, (so we suppose) in respect of which
he accounts all dung, as was said; This man, I say, is not taken with
favors, nor troubled with frowns: But as Letter 13.
M. Deering said long since, seeing the goodness of God such toward him, he
waighs not all the world (except sin) a feather, and with as glad a mind he can
(...). Basil. p. 210.
spit blood, as clear spittle; Nay though God should beat him every morning,
and correct him every night, yet he is silent, and can rejoice in his portion,
pressing down, running over. His heart is fixed now, his heart is fixed; now
his ear is prepared, let me say, and his back too; In patience he can possess
his soul; Now he can say, Speak Lord, for thy servant hears; Nay, Smite
Lord, for thy servant bears: He is fitted now to do the whole pleasure of
the Lord, and to suffer the same too. His Fathers will is his will: Speak Lord,
smite Lord, do what thou will, thou do all things well; he can now hear, he
can now bear, all things readily, patiently, silently, nay and rejoice in all:
for he sees love in all, and eternal love: he sees pleasures at the foot of
the account, and all shall further the giving up his account with joy.

In the mean time, though the Sea of his conflicts rise high, and the floods
of great waters make a noise, yet is he quiet, secure, at peace round about;
how so? God is friends with him, and then all is peace; he has spoken
supplications to his God; his God in Christ has spoken peace to his soul; He
has commanded him to come under the shadow of his wing, where he is secure and
at peace; he can mock Job 39. 22. Job 5. 22. Child's Portion. p. 171. Prove. 31.
17. explained.
at danger, and laugh at famine, and the sword, for God is his rock, the mighty
God of Jacob is his defense; he will not be afraid, not he; though the floods
rise, yet there will be a standard set up against them: Nay though his God
strikes him, it is but to correct him, to sweeten his after-comforts; he knows
his God will do him no hurt (...). etc. Chrysostom. in cap. 18. Matthew.
, for the Father will not hurt his child, we are sure of that; These are
mighty words, I know it well, yet no other but what a mighty servant of the
Lord, Luther, said long since, for the comfort of all those, whose God is the
Lord, who can stay themselves upon God Almighty: Strike Lord, where Thou will,
when Thou will, how Thou will, it will be a merciful stroke, and I bear it; I
bear any thing now my sins are pardoned. Mel. Ad. vit. Luth. p. 168. w. c
Spiritus Domini gubernet te totum, and rapiat ex Tuis in Sua, ex buman is in
Divine. Nostra snnt caro, foenum, et stipu'a, Dei omnia sunt, verbum veritus et
vi^a, quite custodiat, et gubernet. Mel. Ad.
I said I would break of. And yet we will read a short prayer first, it is the
same in effect which one c M. Merlinus put up for his friend O siander. Now the
Spirit of the Lord fall down upon thee, make a seizure on thy whole man; be
Lord and King there, ruling thee wholly. The Lord pluck thee from under the
power of thy self, from out that rubbish, and bring thee to Himself, to behold
His beauty, strength, glory there; for all is there. Alas, what we call ours,
we must call nothing, yea worse then nothing, an abomination. Cease not then
to cry mightily, till God shall answer, He is thine, for then all things are
yours; And then thou art fitted to do and to suffer; to teach, and to be
taught. The Lord keep thy soul as under watch and ward, guide thee by His
counsel, afterward bring thee into His Kingdom. Amen.

And so much to the whole Compositum, the body, and the soul put together; The
excellency of the one, and of the other, but lost in both; How repaired; The
exceeding mercy in that work of mercy; The Conclusions therefrom.

CHAP. VI
All Creatures serve man; Mighty Conclusions therefrom. Art as well as Nature
serves, man; he sets all trades a work, which concludes he must have ^ Trade
also; What that must be; How he may prosper in it.

WE have viewed Natures great work, rather the work of God actuating Nature:
Now we must take a view also of some inferior works of Nature, and Art both,
employed all about man's body: Take good notice then, run over the body again,
and not with a careless eye; observe well every thing about thee, from that
which honors thy head, to that which covers thy heel. Thou will consider
then, what creatures, and how many, have and do continually contribute toward
thy accommodation. That is the first Consideration.

2. Then again, How many like thy self, but perhaps much better, have been,
and are employed daily about the adorning thy poor carcass. Thus observe the
works of Art about thee. A child cannot consider this: yet we must inform
him what we can. Where is the man, who thinks hereof as he should,
considerately? yet do these things require our serious thoughts and we shall
very much gain upon a child's understanding hereby.

First, what a retinue, how great a company has this poor man, always ready
pressed to do him service? The Sun, the common servant of the world, see with
what speed he comes, observing his appointed time, that he may not fail man
of a minute. This is confiderable, and demonstrable too. I have been curious
(said a great Scholar Bellar. de asc. mentis p 111.
in his time, too great to think himself nothing) in searching into this
secret, how many miles, the Suns race is in a minute, and thus I found it
demonstrable. I observed the first pearing of the Sun to my eye in its
rising, then presently I began to read the 37. Psalm, before I had read the
Psalm the second time, the Sun was up, so quick, and speedy is the morion of
that mighty body, and so for man's service altogether, which reads him a great
lecture, but of that anon. Come we lower; The Moon does him service too, who
knows how much, every man knows a great deal. Lower yet, The Winds, and the
rain,fulfilling His word, hearing the earth, that the earth may hear man. The
Birds of the air they are at man's service: The Beasts of the earth they groan
under the hard usage of their Lord. Some sweat and toil at his work, other
yield him cloth and meat both. The wide Sea also, the Creatures there they are
not behind to do him homage; what a thing is Man! All above, below, and about
him, all to do him service. What an honor is this, how great an engagement
too? that must be considered also. And who is so weak that cannot reason thus,
If all these be for my service, how reasonable is it, that I should serve my
Creator, Him only, and according to his rule, with reverence and godly fear?

But a soft pace goes far, we are too quick for the Child; if we are so curt,
and short, we shall do him little service; I will then briefly clear the
first proposition, That all Creatures have, and do continually contribute
toward man's accommodation; then, I will help him to make Conclusions thence
serving much for our use.

First, the Sun-beame is not more clear upon the wall, then, That all
Creatures are for man's use, All serve him: So God their great Lord has
appointed, I cannot express it more fully and briefly, then in the Fathers
words; O man, what has God given unto Chrysostom. Tom. 1. Hom. 57.
thee? nay rather say, what has He not given thee? He has given the Sun,
the Moon, all the Quire of Stars: He has diffused the Air which
encompasseth thee; He has stretched the earth under us, the heaven above us,
the Sea about us, He has given Mountains, Hills, Valleys, Rivers, fruitful
lands, fruitful seasons, All green things, all good things. In a word, All
we behold with the eye, all we reach unto with the hand, all we tread on with
the foot. We have all, so bountiful a Lord have we; It is cleared to our
sense, that we live upon mercy, doles of mercy, every moment of time; now the
Conclusions will be as clear.

And first, (though it is no good order, but fittest for the Child) let us give
the Creatures their due, then their Creator. We have them to use, we must
take heed we abuse them not: if so we do, they will abuse us, they will Lord
it over their Lords, and make their Lords slaves, so revenging theit Creators
quarrel. This appears in the abuse of meat, and drink, which being surfeited
upon, will cast their Lord sometimes into the water, sometimes into the fire;
And (to pass over greater Holy war B. 3. c. 16. p. 135.
mischiefs, which our eye have seen, and our ear have heard) sometimes lays
him along in the streets, to be gazed upon as a base slave to that Creature,
over which a little before he was Lord. If we think hereon, we have enough
to conclude therefrom, the sober use of the Creatures; That we use them as not
abusing the same.

And now we are upon a great and nice point, but I must break from it, yet
not so abruptly. I say it is a nice and ticklish point, to know the just bounds
and limits how far we may go in the use of lawful Child's Patrim. p. 80.
things, (for there is all the danger In lici^ is perimus omnes. More dye of
Surfets the of poison.
.) I remember Hierome Ciborum largitatc ebriae 1. 2. ep. 17.
says (the most temperate man that ever I read off) You shall have some sober
at their wine, (yet he would have young folk drink none at all, and old folk,
to use it as a Cordial) but drunk with good cheer. And Augustine tells us, it
was an abominatio^ to him to be drunk: God for bid (says he Ebrietas long est
a me, crapula out subrepit nonnunquam etc. Co^fes. 1. 10. He must be very
wakefull, that will keep his heart from being overcharged with meat and
drink, yet that is our charge ((...)) Luke 21. 34. It is very hard to stand
firm upon the ^idge of our liberty.
) that swinish sin should be objected to me, that I should swallow Wine, till I
have swallowed my reason, and given my self up into the power of the Creature;
God for bid. But Lord, Intemperance steals upon me; my meat and drink, not
withstanding all my watchfulness, is my snare; I eat and I drink sometimes
so as I feel I have strengthened my enemy and weakened my best friend, Lord
forgive me, Lord fortify me at this point. I said it is a great point and a
ticklish one. An easy passage it is from the use to the abuse of a thing;
there is but a step, nay scarce an inch betweeene; and hence it is, that we
fall foul by companies. I cannot say a little to it. I will only put a period
to Augustins prayer, for it should be ours, when the meat is before us, and
knise in our hand, (the same in the use of all lawful things) Lord make us
watchful now that we use the Creatures, to repair, not to pamper Nature; that
we use them, not abusing the same. Amen.

2. We must use the Creatures mercifully; They are commanded to serve us, we
must not make them serve in rigor; we must use them as Men that have bowels,
we must show pity to our beast. There is no doubt of this. We are by special
indulgence Lords over the Creatures, a great honor; we must not be Tyrants
over them, an high point of injustice, and sometime sevenged by the Creature it
self; we have heard, and known, when a man has beat his horse so long,
till the horse beat out his Masters brains. Then learn we to use the poor
beast mercifully, for if we do not make him wild, a Child may lead him.

3. And use it reverently too, even the least bit of bread or drop of drink:
what, use a bit of bread reverently? A Papist I believe. No, I do not mean
you should adore a bit of bread; I hold it the greatest presumption in the
World (and so our Juel said before me) to adore that which Longs wife can
make. I said we must use the bread reverently, and so I say again, and it is
concluded by the strongest reason that can be: for it comes out of Gods hand
into mine, and it is mine by free gift, and made a staff of bread to me by a
free mercy: but that is not all: The bread (I include all there) is not mine,
for I am not mine own, I am bought with a price, I must glorify God with ail,
and in all, then whether I eat or drink, so I must glorify God, but so I do
not, unless I use the Creatures reverently. But the chiese reason is this;
These Creatures are a purchase too, nay the purchase of blood; we had had no
comfortable right to them, but in and through Christ. We were lost, and we
lost the Creature too, He redeemed us, and gave us Title, and claim unto them;
and all by blood. What? a purchase, and a purchase of blood? then we must use
them reverently sure enough, we are in the strongest bonds that can be imagined.

4. And man must endeavor to be very good, so we have concluded too, All is
good about him, very good, surely he does not give the Creatures their right,
unless he strives to be good, very good; even better then they, for man is the
very best, the most excellent of all. He must strive to be excellent. For all
his servants are good round about him; What a shame, what indignity this, that
their Lord should be naught amidst all good things?

5. Nor ought man to diminish any thing from the works of God, the creatures I
mean, those that we think the least of all, are very good all: they may differ
in bulk and quantity, not in this prime quality. We must not speak meanly,
and below the dignity which belongs to the works of Gods hands, for this were
to derogate from God Himself. I think of Melancton now, his sayings, and
doings both were very exemplary. He bade one that sat next him, to taste the
wine as himself had done, and tell how he liked it, which his friend did, then
told him; It was no bad wine. At which words Est illnd haud malum, pene cum
indigna^ione, etc. Cama. vita Mes. p. 62.
Melancton was very angry, (in him passion quickly to showed it self, but he
was more quick to show his command over it) S. said he, Good wine must have
better commendations then so, you should have said, It is very good. And now it
is very easy to apply. And I hope from henceforward, the child will say, Dry
bread is good, and hard cheese, and meat very good, though there be no other
sauce, but what he carries with him in the tip of his tongue.

6. One thing more while I think of it, for I am in such a throng that I cannot
get out; He that has all good from Gods hands, we will conclude him to be a
merciful man, a man that does much good to others. What? has God bestowed
richly upon any man? has he filled his hand and his mouth, and his coffers.
and his barns with good things? And is this man a niggard? is he close handed?
like a fountain sealed up? does he no good with all this good? The child will
cry shame upon him; For he has concluded that such a man's practice is against
the voice of the Creatures, and the Law of heaven.

The child shall hear again his example, which is so fresh, being mentioned
but now. Melancton had plenty, as he called plenty; a house full of good
things, and see how good he was to every one that needed. It is observed of him
that he never denied a poor man's request, if he spoke supplications, then did
Melanotons lips, and fingers ends drop mercy, like the first drops from a full
hony-combe, that is the sweetest Me quod per se fluit maxine lauda lie. Plin.
lib. 11. c. 15. Vxor, liberi. etc. Came. vit. Mel. p. 38.
. Nay this is reported of him too; He gave alms, his wife gave alms, and by
allowance from both, so did the children and servants also. Now it was as it
should be. He by Gods favor had many good things, he did good to many, nay to
all, or such was his desire; and Vniversos inquit cupio. i old. p. 41.
this is our duty. Now we have given the Creatures their due, man his due, we
will labor to give God His due also, for by this time the child sees better
how he stands engaged.

God has given all these as servants to man, all minister to him; nay the
Angels also, for so I should have said; how should this engage his heart to
serve his Lord? what, all for him, poor little creature! there is not such
adiminutive in the world: For the Nations are but as a drop of the bucket, or
small dust of the balance Esaias 40. 15.
. What is man then, who bears out himself? So little. comparatively) that you
cannot see him, for he is nothing. For this nothing has God, created all
things, even to serve this little little Master, whom they call Lord, and they
say well, But this does wonderfully engage to duty. Has God so honored him?
The Sun for him, Moon for him, Air for him, etc. for so I should go over
all; All for him, how reasonable a thing is it, that he should be all for his
God, that he should serve Him, fear Him? so it should be, nay so it must be;
if man looks, that the creatures should serve him, He must serve his Lord, else
very likely, the Creatures will rebel, and rise up against their Lord: they
will obey and awe him, while he keeps himself as an obedient servant to his
great Master: for so we know, the Viper, the Lion, the fire did, those
hurtful, those devouring Creatures.

But if this Man be a Rebel against his God, the weakest, and most
contemptible creatures may do, as they have done, rise up against man, and he
shall fall before them, because he is fallen from the service of his God. For
thus it has been; A gnat, a fly, an hair, a crum have choked him; frogs,
mice have annoyed him; toads, rats have eat him up; so have lice also; so weak
a Child's Patrimony Preface, p. 41.
thing is man, when he forsakes the God of his strength, the rock of his
salvation.

Man must serve his Creator; no doubt of that; so he does I hope, for who does
not serve God? I am persuaded; nay no matter what I am persuaded of, we know,
That the Heathen did serve God, they glorified Him too; The sacred Writ gives
clear intimation hereof, They knew God, and they glorified Him, but here they
fell short, as we do by thousands in the manner, and that is all in Gods
service: They glorisied Him, but not as God That but, Romans 1. 21.
and not as corrupted all their service; so now we must have a reasonable
service, such a service as reason tells us is suitable to God our Master in
heaven, Who created all things, to serve His Glory as the chiese end, and man
in subordination thereto; we must serve Him as God. That service which will
pass as current money betwixt me, and my Governor, (yet I will address my
self with care, and reverence in my service before him) will be too light in
the balance, when we come before God. Bring thou such a service to Me?
Go offer it to thy Governor, who has his breath in his nostrils, as thou
have, see whether he will accept of thy person, or thy service: for blind, and
lame it is: and if he will not, a man as thou art, then venture not to come
before Me with such a service, for in My hand is thy breath, and all thy ways;
I am God, as a God I must be served, and then thou glorifiest me. We have
this more then intimated in the first of Malachi Ve^se 8.
. I have often thought of the Text, and this I will say, There is not any in
all the sacred Writ, which has a better edge, or sharper point to pierce the
side of him, or her, so to awaken them, when they are addressing themselves in
their service before God: we must serve Him as God, not as we serve our
Governor; we leave the weight of this service upon that Chapter, and the
first to the Ramanes, verse 21. All the Creatures serve man; he must serve God,
but as God, as the great Monarch, our Master in Heaven, King of Kings, and Lord
of Lords. In that manner, man must serve God, as God.

2. He must be thankful to Him also: Has he all things to use? Is his Lord so
bountiful to him? does he provide for his necessity, for his delight also?
(this moved a Heathen Vsque ad de^^^ias amamur. S. n. le Benef. lib. ^. L^p 5.
.)

Man must be thankful, and cheerful in thanksgiving, for so it is expected,
else he may read what follows. Deuteronomy. 28. 47, 48.
.

I debated upon this large Theme in a fitting place, I shall be the shorter
here, and borrow nothing thence. Child's Patrimony. p. 68.


The learned Knight has a feeling speech; It is a note of much unthankfulness
to entertain the blessings of God with a sullen, and unfeeling disposition:
What full of blessings within Hist. 3. 1. 11.
and without, made up as it were thereof? the fuller of praise should his mouth
be, and his heart, as if filled with thanks, pressed down, running over; Oh
how unworthy a Christian, a Man, that lives continually upon the doles of
mercy, to have his mouth wide opened to receive blessings, and closed up, as
mute as a fish, when he should return praise and thanks! how unbeseeming a
sight, to see a man under the continual droppings, (shall I say rather) streams
of blessings, and yet as dry as a Pumicestone, as the parched places of the
Wilderness! Better had it been for him, that he had seen no good all his
days; better he had been as the King prayed the Mountain of Gilboa might be,
upon whom neither dew nor rain had fallen, for then his condemnation had been
light, and easy to be born; but now it will be very heavy, because he is
compassed about with blessings; mercies distill upon him from above, like the
de^v, and rain upon the grass, and yet behold barrenness, the heart is shut
up, and the tongue filent. I profess heartily now, I have here penned my own
condemnation, and have stopped my own mouth: for my self, with thousand
thousands, fall short, infinitely short here. Certain it is, for it is the
conclusion of experience, we are then most apt to forget God, when He remembers
us most, and most graciously: When His sootsteps drop fatness, then we are
leanest; when our Table is fullest, then we are more likely to lift up the
heel in rebellion, rather then the voice in thanksgiving. Therefore it is,
That the Spirit of God bids us beware, take heed, look well to your selves,
these are the Caveats, the Cautions, theremembrances, the Spirit gives all
along, specially then, when our portion is satlest. All this I must pass over,
though it were very good to build Tabernacles here, that our thoughts might
fix upon Gods mercies, that so our hearts might be inclined to a
proportionable thanksgiving Read M. wards note out of Bradward: in his
fruitful Sermon; A Peace Offering.
. I shall only remember Melancthon at this point also; he was invited to a
great feast, and thither he came, and all the words from the Master of the
seast were, Eat, eat, eat, I pray you eat, that is the manner. If he should
say as fast, Drink, drink, drink, pray you drink, we might think he were
not Master of himself, and were resolved to do us the greatest dishonor, to
make us, not our own men neither; this by the way, but so it was. In the very
midst of the feast, up rises the Master to address a City complement to his
honored friend Miclancthon, and this it was; I am sorry Sir, I am not better
provided for you. Better provided! out uponthee, (astrange return for his good
cheer, but very sitting; he was never known to he more angry, not his
spirit more stirred, for indeed he saw God quite forgot, and his grace
slighted, yeatrod under) out upon thee, what a wretch art thou! Better for me!
the worst Camer. in vita Mel. p. 68.
bit here is too good for thee, and for me. I expected to hear from thee
nothing else but praises; thanksgiving had been comely, and but according to
the Rule. Deuteronomy. 8. 10. and law of mercies. Certainly thou do but complement
with thy God too, for were thou thankful, thou durst not have spoken so
slightly of His mercies before men. God forgive thee, and let it be thy hearty
prayer also, for thy provision here is too much, and too good, unless thy
heart were better; here is no thanksgiving at all; but that was thy proper
service, being the Master here; So he reproved his Host. Indeed it is a
custom (it was not so of old) The greater the seast, and the Master thereof,
the more out of custom in his own person to bespeake a blessing. Let custom
carry it: but I am persuaded, I could conclude against it, and give reasons
strong enough to break this custom, especially amongst the Churchmen, though
no man is too high to give thanks to the Highest: We will think on
Melancthons words, when we make a feast or partake of it: we must be
thankful to God; we see how we stand bound to it, though we cannot tell the
obligations, but so many mercies, so many bonds. But see how we have forgot
our selves; we must be thankful! who does not give God thanks? The Heathen
did, we are sure, and we do no more then they if we be not thank to Him, as
to God, who gives all things Romans 1. 21.
richly to enjoy. As to God, the manner is all, we heard so before, in that
manner we must be thankful.

3. And patient too, under this asfliction, and under that, under three
crosses, and also under four. The reason is plain, and therefore we will be
short here: Suppose the man has four crosses: he has four hundred
Blessings. He receives good things every moment. His houre-glasse has not
more sands, then he receives blessings; he must then take in good part the
evils he feels so, and yet his sense may be mistaken, for chat which he calls
evil, and grievous to the flesh, God can turn to good, so as thereout shall
grow (if he can be quiet, and patient) a sweet fruit of righteousness; for it
is no riddle now, Out of the strong came sweetness. Judge. 14. ^4.
How ever, greater reason yet, that the man should be patient; for though his
evils be many and grievous, God can lay on more, and make them more smart and
grievous yet, there is no contending with Him. He is stronger then we, but He
will do us good in the end, if we can be patient now.

4. And depend on Him in silence; great reason He should have the glory of our
dependence, for we are at his finding. And though the man finds his provision
short, yet he must remember, that He that created all things, and works
hitherto is not weary, He can and will create comforts too: And let not the man
fear, for He that holds Esaias 40.
up the earth, will sustain him in his fainting sits, if he can hold his heart
in a dependence upon Him.

And now though we have not given God his due, for we shall still fall short at
that high point, yet we pass on to the next proposition; which we shall
clear first, and conclude from thence after. And although all along. I speak
to the Child, and to his capacity; yet we shall see the wild Gallant shall be
hampered anon, and bound to his good behavior; I mean him, who makes play his
work, turns night into day, and day into night, eats and drinks and rises
up to play. We will hold him fast enough, or if we cannot, for I bethink my
self, and I see by his gate and action, he is a wild Colt, that is not our
fault, we will easily make the cord strong enough, and he shall be held fast
with it one day.

The Proposition is;

The Artificials about him, whom we call man, sets all men on work: that is
the point.

It is cleared to the Child thus.

Behold, Child, the Artificials about thee, what Art, and skill has sitted to
thy body; what variety have thou there? what a deal of good service is done
unto thee? Begin with thy head, the hoirie scalpe, and observe well how many
that sets on work; now the Felt-maker comes in for thy service, rather the
Beaver-maker, so fine we are, and a hundred more that are their Masters. Anon
the Barber comes, and to work he goes, Snip snip, as nimble as an Eele.
Perhaps the Currier has foam work here too, for we wear his leather on our
heads; we allow the head most service, for it is a principal part, and does
the most service to us: we cannot be so large in all, but we will look over
every part; then go we lower by degrees, and by that time we are come to the
heel, we shall well understand, That Man sindes work for all the Tradesmen in
the City and Country both. And this will sussice for explication. Now we have
gained these Co^clusions, which cannot be denied us.

1. Since Man does set all on work, every part about him yields matter of
employment, we must find employment for him too, that we must: How
unreasonable a thing were it, that all in the family should be as busy as
Bees, or Ants in the Summer, and one amongst the rest, as able as any of the
rest, should like a Lord-Dane, anciently, or some Abbey-lubber, lie along in
the chimeny corner? No, so it must not be: He that has set so many Trades on
work, must have his Trade too, his Calling we mean: it is our conclusion,
but made in Heaven, and ever since there was a man upon earth: there is no
slipping the collar,be he high, be he low, (the more high he is, the more
servants he has, and the more servant is he) this Conclusion shuts him in,
and will hold him, he must have some trade also, some employment, some calling,
no matter what word we use, our meaning is, be he what he may be, how high
soever, he must have his work. Here now the Gentleman, the Idle-man, the
Idolif you will (for as an Idol is nothing in the world, so he does no good in
the world) is hampered: and the Cord will hold him fast, though he be loose.
For if to every man his work, then to him also, unless he chooses rather to
be a Beast.

It is true, as in the natural body, some parts there, are placed rather for
ornament, command, oversight, and direction of the body, rather then for toil,
and labor about it: so also in the civil body, but full, To every man Mark
13. 34.
his work. My Father ^^rketh hi^he^^, and I work loh. 5. 17
. So the Lord speaks to man's capacity; The Father, and the Son do preserve
that in being, which is already made, which to us seems a kind of work as
indeed it is, but without labor; But it teaches us, that we must labor every
one, as the Master of the house has given authority, and to every man his
work Mark 13. 34.
Who dares contradict this?

2. But now we must work in order, every one in his place, according to his
calling, and that must be ever according to his gift: He that made the hat,
did not busy himself with the shane, nor does the foot guide, but is guided.
It is a great point of discretion now for a man well to measure himself, not
(...) Cor. 10. 14.
to stretch himself beyond his Last, nor to move above his sphere. A man
moving out of his place, is like a member out of joint, he vexes the body
rather then furthereth it.

We would have such a calling, which is most honorable, but we must choose
such a calling as is fittest, most suitable, to our strength and parts, I Child's
Patrim Chap. 10.
have been upon this point of discretion before; I will only add to it, what
I find supplied to my hand, it is full to our purpose, and of the same use.
Wits misplaced are most unquiet, and seditious, as any thing else strained
against nature; light things press upward, and will ye force fire down?
Heavy things bear downward, and will ye have Lead to leap up? If that wit
fall to Preach, which were fitter for the Plough, and he to clime a Pulpit,
which is made to scale a wall, is not a good Carrer ill lost, and a good
Soldier ill placed? If he will needs Law it, which cares for no Law; and
profess Justice, that proseffeth no Right; Has not right an ill Carver, and
justice a worse Master? If he will deal with Physic, M^jcast. page 137.
whose brains cannot bear the infinite circumstances which belong thereunto,
whether to maintain health, or to restore it; Does he any thing else but seek
to hasten death, for helping the disease?

I could spare none of all this, so well it fitted our purpose, to every one
his work; but such it must be, as may assure us of the fitness, and right
placing of our strength, and wits thereunto: for then there will be an
agreement, and ease betwixt the work, and the workman, whereas unfitness, and
misplacing have the contrary companions, disagreement, and disease. It is not
what a Parent would do, but what the child can do; I would put my child
into such a calling as has more grace and esteem in the world, and so
ambitious I may be: But if I see no fitness of parts, if he be rather for the
field and plough, I will not cross nature; God speed him well, so he holds the
plough, not looking back; does his work diligently, and faithfully, I have
enough; so shall he have too. Nay if his parts be so low, that he must serve
lower yet, as some Scullion in a Kitchen, lying amongst the ranges, and every
ones man; yet if he be his own man, not serving his own lusts, nor others
neither; I mean, if he be diligent there, serving his Master in heaven, I have
enough even there, so shall the child have also; for this is a standing rule,
It is not the greatness of place, but my fitness for the place, and
faithfulness in the place, which commends me, now before God, and will honor
me at the last before Angels and Men. Sincerity is an excellent kind of
Alchymy, says one, it turns iron into gold, and as once our Savior, water
into wine. We mean thus: Sincerity sets a gloss, puts a luster upon the
meanest parts, the lowest employment, Holding the plough, Keeping sheep,
Sweeping the house, whereas Hypocrisy and unfaithfulness Child's Patrim. Chap.
10. ^
casts a spewing upon all the glory of all the most glorious works, Alms,
Prayer, Preaching.

S. Augustines words are very significant. Tu^ior ^st in corpore digitus sanus,
^^ ^^ lippiens oculus, etc. In Psalm. 130.
The finger is but a little thing, cannot do such service as the eye that is
admirable for its nimblenesse, and quickness, and can guide, and direct the
whole body, so cannot the finger: And yet it is better to be a finger: and to
be sound, then ^o be an eye, and to be dim, and dark, ready to fall out of
the head. We have made then our second Conclusion: as, To every one his work,
so to every one his fitting work.

3. I know every one has made this conclusion, He will thrive if he can. If he
must work, he would not work in the fire; he would prosper, that he would. Then
he must know God does all in the world, therefore God must be looked up unto in
all, for in Him we live, and have our being; our breath is in His hands, so are
our ways. The child knows how he ends his prayers, just so we must begin our
employments, Through Jesus Christ our Lord. Nay we must end there too, our work
as well as our prayers. For in Him, and through Child's Patrim. p. 75.
Him, and to Him, be praise and glory for ever. Amen.

Thus much, that man may know, That he stands betwixt God and the Creatures,
receiving all the comfort and profit of them with the one hand, and returning
all the praise for them with the other hand unto the hands of the Lord. 2. That
man must work the thing that is good, and be fitted for his work, and if he
looks to have praise from the Lord, he must do his work faithfully, and look
up humbly. Then at the conclusion of his work, and day, he may speak in good
assurance, I have glorified Thee on earth, I have done the work Thou gave me
to do, now glorify thy servant, with the glory that Christ has purchased for
me, even so, Amen.

CHAP. VII.
Occasional Inftr^ctions from obsorvations of things within doors, and
without.

WE have well observed the body, and the things, that serve, and adorn the
same; how Nature has supplied Man, and what supply from Art; We will look
about the house now. I have already given the child some lessons, which may
serve him in some stead, 1. when he rises up; 2. when he sits at meat; 3.
when he lies down, 4. when he walks abroad: so I shall be the quicker here,
but running over, or skimming of things, first what is done in the house, some
mean services there, then the Creatures abroad, we will glean there.

1. We will not then neglect the Maid scumming the pot, there to the Spirit
does allude: A happy thing when Ezekiel. 2. 4.
affliction is to us as fire to the pot, seething out our scum; but if our scum
will not out, then what can we expect, but going out of one fire, another fire
shall devour us Ezekiel. 5. 15.
?

2. I would gain but this here, That the most homely places, and services in a
house may yield us wholesome, and savoury instructions. The most stinking
kennell may be a means to purge us, that our throat be not like an open
Sepulcher Romans 3. 13.
, nor our communication corrupt Ephesians. 4. 29.
, like that we stop our nose at.

3. We observe the Maid scraping her trenchers, and washing her dishes; where
the child does learn, what small account the world has of their best servants
1 Cor. 4. 13.(...)
, for they have, and still do, bear up the Pillars thereof, yet are they
accounted of as we know and read: we will see the dish wiped also; That tells
us from Gods own mouth, what shall be done to that City or person wherein such
and such abominations are found, God will wipe him as a man wipeth a dish,
turning it upside down 2 Kings 21. 13.
.

2. We look abroad now, and behold the hen gathering her chickens: so the Lord
will gather His outcasts. Men may cast them out, He gathers them in; It is
said, He made His servants houses, for they feared Him Ex. 1. 21.
. And touching those two so faithful servants, it is said, But the Lord hid
them Jer. 36. 26
, that is, He spread the great wing of His protection over them, then they
were safe enough. S. John was observed still leaning on Jesus bosom Joh. 13.
23.
; no such pillow in the world, there is secure rest. All his Disciples do so,
the whole Church is observed, Leaning upon her Beloved. They run thither, they
commit all to Him, and under the shadow of His wing, they have sure confidence.
Our eye is not yet off from the hen, and her chickens, see how they wait upon
the hand that feeds them, then they put their bills to the water, and look up,
it is more then every man will do.

3. We observe the swine, the most brutish creature that is, see how they run
when the paile calls, that is their bell. We do not look carelessly upon the
Sow in the mire, a very great means to keep the man clean.

We will suppose now as we may, That the Sheep is with the Sow in the same
mire; and if so, we will divide the whole world betwixt them two, and
distinguish clearly thus; The one is where the would be, well content with its
portion; The other not so, In the mire she is, but it is death to her to be
where she is.

The maintaining of these creatures before mentioned, put us to no expense. For
three things there are, which seem of no use to man, the one for their
littleness, the other for their slutrishnesse; crummes, outshaken eorn, and
wash: see the wise providence of our God now: That nothing may be lost, He has
provided creatures for the receiving of these, Poultry, and Swine; if we suffer
any thing to be lost, we have no excuse, ir might have been put to the wash,
or given to the Hen and her Chickens.

4. We go to the stable, and observe the Horse there, higher then a Lion, and
though not so strong, yet too strong for the tallest man in the Parish, but
that the good Providence is such, that he knows not his strength, and so a
Child may lead him.

5. See how acquainted the Ox is with his Master, we know whom that upbraideth
Esaias 1. 3.
even me and thee.

6. Go we to the barn, observe the least grain there, so little, you can but
see it, yet has it spread it self, and become a great tree Mat. 3. 31. Tremel.
Truth of grace will quickly spread, labor we after sincerity, after an
honest heart; a little grace there will increase mightily, for it is with the
increase of God. 2. Wheat, the chiefest grain, none so common for use, none
whose flower is purer, none so carefully laid up. The Child must mark his
Parents now, (servants may be negligent) see how they pick it up, not a grain
shall be lost. This shows the happy peace, and security of all them who truly
fear God: Though the be sisted with temptations etc. as wheat with a sieve,
yet shall not the least grain fall upon the ground. 3. We Amos 9. 9.
must observe the Sieve also; The Fool thought he could make it hold water, so
he set about the stopping up the holes, but when he viewed it well, he spoke
out plainly, he could not tell where to begin. To such a confusion the Church
may be brought, they that bear good will to her, and would mend her breaches,
may not know where to begin. It was the state of the Germane Church an hundred
years ago, says Melancthon, using the very Came. in vita Mel. p. 29.
comparison; so confused they were in Doctrines and in Manners both. And then
he with others prophesied, of those after desolations, that very deluge of
wrath, under which those Churches lie now quite covered, waiting when the Lord
will withdraw His hand, and call in those waters, that the face of that land
may again appear.

But let us note herewith, That he was a Fool, who could discern nothing but
confusion. Indeed the face of things may be so overcasted, as that a natural
eye can discern nothing but (...) and (...) all things like a desolate and
empty wilderness. But a cleared eye sees a spirit moving there all that while:
and he knows Light will come anon, the clearer, the thicker the darkness
was, and then he can track the prints of a Providence, which he cannot do
less then adore: For it is His way, whose manner is, To carry His Church into
Babel, there to give Deliverance; To give her into the enemies hands, thence to
work Redemption; Mic. 41.
To bring her into the wilderness, there to speak comfortably to her; that she
Hos 2. 14.
may speak out to His praise; How, etc. Job 26. 2, 3.


7. To the garden now, we would observe there, what might be observed, so in
the Orchard too, but this cannot be, such variety there is, Seeds, Herbs,
Flowers, Plants, Trees, we can observe but this; and it is a great observation;
What ever evil comes upon the earth, yet the tree which brings forth fruit
shall be spared. But if barren Deuteronomy. 20.
there, better it had never been there, for we know its doom. There may be a
Snake there, the best places are not privileged from such Creatures, but if
the Swine come thither, they make havoc. The Bees are commonly thereabouts,
but we cannot stand to look upon them, nor is it safe, for if they be Ira
modum supra est, Virg. Georg. 4.
stirred, they be very angry. There are books written of them, and yet all
fearce enough to satisfy touching the beauty of their commonwealth. A certain
Philosopher giving himself 30. years to study the knowledge of B. Och. Ser. 3.
all the properties in the Be, could never perfectly attain his design. And
very likely, for if a man will be too curious in his inquiries, he may lose
himself in the search. We must read the book of the Creatures, but not dwell
upon them. We leave the Garden, and will go no farther then the Fathers
Windmill.

CHAP. VIII.
The Millstone, a very precious stone; a precious instruction therefrom.

IT shall not be said, that the Child has lived in a Tub, and never was so
far as his Fathers Windmill, Thither I will carry him, from thence to
Church, then I shall make toward a Conclusion.

If in our way now, we chance to see or hear a Toad, let it instruct us; it
does better service then we, and is less poysonfull, if we are as we were,
in our blood Eze. 22. 16.
, and in our own way, the way of sin, and death: which consideration is enough
to smite to the earth the wisdom of man, and to make him all humble, and
subject to God. The sight thereof remember us also of that person, who being at
the last point of time, which he had thrown away, and feeling his heart ready
to break, his eye-strings also, then said, Oh that I had been made a Toud,
even such a Creature! for then I had glorisied my Maker in such a being; but I
have dishonored him altogether, and so making my self vile. Sam. 3. 13.
, I must look now to be lightly esteemed 1 Samuel 2. 30.
.

If the little Worm be at our foot, it teaches us, That so low the Lord
brings even His Church, His own people, so as they have bowed down, and
laid their body as the ground, or as the street to them, that went over Esaias
51. 23.
. And when her estate is so low, she is called Jacob, a poor Worm, one that
saw very much evil in a few days, but it never hurt him: therefore he must
not fear Esaias 41. 14.
for all that, nor doubt, but that, small though he be, yet he shall rise
again and be exalted, he shall, like a Prince, have his Charrets and Horsemen,
so he shall prevail with God, and shall be called Israel. So much the Worm
in our way may teach us. The stones yield us a good lesson also; if we look
upon them we see our hearts, as face in water answers face. Iron will melt in
the fire, so will brass, so will not a stone. Neither mercy nor misery can
melt the heart; If the premises are true, then say what they will, the
conclusion is clear, That in point of conversion we are us dead as a door
nail. The voice of the Son of God. that only makes us hear and live. And
now we are come as far as the Windmill, where, against all expectation, we
shall find a very precious stone, nor shall the Millar doubt thereof, by that
time we have viewed it well. There Guilliam disp. of Herald. p. 136.
is a stone, says the Herald, more precious then that we wear upon our
finger, though it be too heavy to be appendant at the ear; And this is the
Millstone: he gives good reason for what he says, and better Scripture. The
Millstone, says he, brings in many a man his living. It was noted long ago,
Advanc. ^. 1. 86.
that Homer has given more men their livings, then either Sylla, or Caesar, or
Augustus ever did, not withstanding their great largesses, and donatives, and
distributions of lands to so many legions: so we may say of this stone, it
has done more this way then all the precious stones in the World; for it
maintains that precious thing, which we call life, therefore the Mil-stone is
put for any thing that brings in a man's livelihood Quicquid ^^ni^^is ^itam
ex^e^essita^e ^^erat. lu^^us. Dcut. 24. 6.
. What lesson learn we hence? for therefore came weehither. A mighty lesson;
fitter for men of more account, and higher place in the World, but for every
man a very fit lesson.

It teaches us to beware we meddle not with that, which is a man's living,
which brings him in his bread, though it seem never so mean, and contemptible
in our eyes as the Millstone does, so contemptible though it be, yet, it is
dangerous to heave at it, it may prove a burdensome stone: For if I take it
away from the man, (we Deuteronomy. 24. 6.
know what it does import, for it is his living) I take away his life with it
also, that I do. The words are express; No man shall take the nether, or the
upper Millstone to pledge, for he takes life to pledge. Life is a precious
thing; then so is that, which maintains life. If I take away lively hood, life
is taken away too. Nay it is the highest degree of cruelty against the body,
that we read of.

I will relate a story touching as bloody a person, as any our modern Histories
make mention of. D. Alva was his name. employed by Philip the second for the
regaining the Low Councries to the Crown of Spain; In prosecution of which
great design, he spent as the King spoke, or rather sighed on his deathbed, a
great treasure, a mass of money, but made no other return thereof to his
great Master, but in Barrells, Grimston. Hist. p. 413
or Tuns of blood. Amongst other his nororious, and bloody practices, this is
scored up in the reddest letters. He had besieged the town of Harlem, and
shortly after parling with the poor people there, it was compounded, they
should yield the Town, and have their lives: The peeled people were well apaid,
life is well bought at any reasoble rate. One day passed, and a second came,
all that while they were pent up from livelihood. They call out for bread,
bread, for they thought that was included in the bargain; if life, then means
to support life; No, said the General, ye were mistaken, I gave you your
lives, I told ye not you should have bread too. This I say is scored up in red
letters amidst a thousand more his bloody executions, but exceeding all in
bloody cruelty. Indeed with our good God, life is more the food, but with man,
food is more then life. It more then seems then, if I take away life, I am a
murderer; but if I take away the Millstone, that is bread, I am such an one, a
murderer I mean, but in an higher degree, and more notorious. Deliver us from
blood, good Lord; for though life is very precious, yet to man, that which
maintains life, is yet more precious.

And now we have so touched this stone, that we find it to be a very precious
stone. The finest rubie is not to be compared to it, for God accounts it as
precious as life, and man accounts it more precious; so we leave the Millstone,
for we have seen into it, and through it. We go now toward the Church, for
that is the way to make the lessons we have heard profitable.

CHAP. IX.
The Church sacred, in reference to the great works done there: what they are.
We must be at cost, if we look to know them, for they are chargeable works.
Joshuahs counsel explained, cleares all this, and is of the same use unto us
now, as to his people of old, for Direction of Masters, and Correction of
Servants.

I Should now lead the child from thence into the field: but we have been
there already to my cost, and we have been very circumspect there, for we have
viewed above, below, and round about us. No more remains now, but that we
return to the Temple again, for there we were first; and there we will be
last, for after we have viewed that sacred place a little, we shall make
toward a sitting Conclution.

To the Church then we go, but we will not go in. Thou shall peep into it,
thrusting in thy head or so, but no further, then as thou may discern how
neat, and costly all things are there, (so we suppose) no further shall thou
go.

For me to present my self there, or to present thee there, is a matter of
eost, a chargeable work, and properly the Parents. We must remember how it it
was under the Law; The poorest came not to the Temple, but something he brought
according as his estate was, but the meanest something.

That is true, for that was a very

It is indeed; God blessed for every, cost, remaining still, what it is we
shall know presently: Cursed is he still, that serves the Lord with that which
costs him nothing; we cannot go to a Playhouse, but it will cost something,
and as the place is higher or lower, so must the cost be: And think we then,
the presenting our selves before the Lord in His house, shall cost us nothing?
Who made us so familiar? as a great person said to one, who was too bold with
him. Look child; behold the place well, go round about it, look in, see the
beauty of it. Why all this beauty? It is the house that God has builded for
the honor of His great Name, that it is. We must carry our selves reverently
there. If thou do hear any laughing, talking, brawling there, or see any
more irreverent carriage, know, that so it should not be, but a Christian like
deportment every where. Of two extremes we say not which is better, being both
extreme naught: But certainly it is a more seemly, a more becoming sight, even
a devout and humble superslition, then a profane and bold rudeness, not
tolerable in a common house. This, as we said, is Gods house. And yet thou must
not conceive, that the earth, or stones, or wood there, such materials have
any holiness in them, any at all: No, take heed of that vain thought. But in
relation, and reference to the great things done there, the place is an holy
place; Gods Name is called on there, Holy and Reverend is His Name. Tidings of
great joy are heard there, the everlasting Gospel, that, by which we must be
judged; by which we stand or fall at the last day; This is published there, and
made known to the children of men. There the reproach of Egypt is rolled away
Josn. 5. 9.
: There the Lord Christ does even now at this day, as great things as He did in
the days of His flesh; He healed the withered arm; opened the eyes that were
shut; made the lame to go; great things these: He does the same things now: He
by the ministry of His faithful servants (He is the great Prophet) does open
men's eyes, does turn them from darkness to light, and from Acts 26. 13.
, etc. Wonders no doubt! works for which the Lord Jesus Christ shall be
admired. 2 These. 1. 10.
. And can we think, we may come to Church (we may bring our bodies thither, so
the beast does too) present our selves there, see all these things done upon
our souls, and be at no cost? A bewitching, a befooling thought this. Certain
it is, we must remember the Sabbath, we must prepare for it, (as the ancient
and laudable custom amongst us did teach) we must retire our selves the night
before, and they with us under our charge, we must sanctify our selves this
night, using the means, the Lord has appointed, and sanctified: we must take
pains with our heart, so awkward and untoward, (this is to be at cost) if we
look to see such great things on the morrow; We must never forget, what Joshuah
spoke, (we will fix upon that Text a little, the Lord fix it upon our hearts
for ever: it will clear unto us, that to morrow, if we do any good at the
Temple, we must be at some cost to day) we must not, I say, forget what Joshuah
said; we read the context first. The Lord was about to do great things before
their eyes: His mighty Arm would make the waters of Jordan stand upon heaps:
the Priests to stand in the midst thereof upon firm ground, as dry as the
stone in the street, and some good while they should stand (while the people
passed over apace) with a wall of waters at their back, like valiant men; this
great work the people should see the very next day; but yet see they might, and
not see; see, and not perceive; see, and yet not lay it to heart, unless they
would be at cost with themselves, in all the means, and ways of grace, and
sanctification: Therefore Joshuah said unto the people, Sanctify your selves,
for to morrow the Lord will do wonders among you. This is the Text so notable.
And the Lord write it in the tables of our hearts, and keep it as a sure word
there for ever; That we may ever remember it, and do according, when we expect
the Lord shall do great things in us, for us, before us, as the turning Jordan
back: The turning our hearts to Him, which is in its own way like Jordan when
the banks were full: The making our feet Josh 3. 5.
stand firm in the Covenant, when the waters of affliction are at the back,
and threaten they will run over all; yet to stand like men of war; yet to
stand fast, not yielding an inch. When we expect these great cures; these
wonderful deliverances; these mighty works; these unspeakable mercies, (call
them what we will, so we have them) wrought for or upon our souls, in
expectation thereof we should come to Church) which are the opening our eyes,
The turning us from darkness to light, from the power of Satan to God: The
rolling away the reproach of Egypt from off us: when I say we expect all this,
we must remember Ioshuahs Counsel, and practice thereafter; Sanctify your
selves, for to morrow the Lord will do wonders among you. This concerns us as
much as it did the people of old; if we are not sanctified for the work, it
is extraordinary, if we receive good from the work; certainly we must be at
cost with our selves, as the Scripture counts cost, we must take pains with
our hearts, so plowing up our fallow ground: else to go to Church is not worth
our labor, for the seed there will fall amongst thorns.

There was an old Ceremony in use amongst us, I will not compare it with the
new, but I will say it was as harmless, as that we call most harmless. The
Ceremony was, To salt the Child at the Church door. I hope I shall never dare
to add or take away, to or from Gods Will, or Word, so much as one jot. But let
me say, the Moral is good, and concerns all together. Every one shall be
salted with fire, and every Sacrifice shall be salted with salt: Have salt in
your selves Mark 9 49, 50.
What is the meaning of this? For surely we cannot salt with fire. The Child
can tell us in a word; It is no more but this; burn out your corruptions,
purge out your blood, cleanse your selves from your silth, else your persons
will be no fit Sacrifice, not your prayers, nor your praises. Your speech must
be seasoned with salt, then so all your services, sure enough. The sum is, we
must Purge, cleanse, sanctify our selves It means, then He does, in effect
bid us, as we read often; Circumcise your hearts, sanctify your selves,
purge, cleanse; here are the means sanctified for this high service, use them,
and look up to Me, this is to circumcise our hearts, to sanctify our selves,
as when we have salt, (Metaphots teach Children very much) we must rub, it
into our meat.

And now my fingers are upon a great sore, a Plague Sore. I will lay it open,
that we may see the blood, but all the salt in the parish will not cleanse it
out, but, had we salt in our selves, that would do it. The Reader may wonder
now what I mean, a little patience, he shall know presently, and the wonder
will cease, I shall tell him no more but what he knows, and every one will
grant: I shall set down the common observation, the same which he has made,
and which I have made ever since I was able to look abroad, and make any
observation, which I could do 34. years ago. I say I will set down the
observation of every man, who has his eyes in his head, and can observe to
purpose. Then we shall hear some complaints, which the Reader shall believe
too, if he will believe his own ears. When this is done, the foundations of
all our woe, and misery will be discerned in point of manners, then let them
come in for help, that will, and can. The observation is, That at your great
Assemblies, where the people meet to serve their God, and expect to see those
great wonders (we speak of) wrought there: the Servingmen for the most part,
those wicked and slothful servants (do not pardon me, I offend not, nor have I
a low esteem of the meanest officer in a house, no, I honor him if he be
faithful) these Servingmen, fruitless Creatures, very Cretians, come not to
Church, or if they come they stay not: They come many of them, as Whifflers, to
make room for their Lords, and their Ladies, when that is done, their work is
done: out they go, you may take them napping on their Coachboxe, or sitting
close in a warmer place, with their cup at their nose. This observation is
common, is it not thus, even thus? Now we must hear the complaint, there is
no remedy. The Lord, and Lady both tell us, their Coachman is a drunken, that
is their English; he brought them to their great friends house; In they went
to the Parlour, the servant into the Cellar; when they were to return, there
was no man, he was gone they found a Beast in his room, for he was not his
own man, he could not be theirs, being swallowed up of Wine, and strong drink.

Do we wonder now? no sure. It were a wonder if it be not so; a wonder if
they are not as plague soars in a house, firebrands there. For the servant
went in with his Lord, and Lady, to the great man's house, and there he sat by
it, till he could not well stand. But so he does not do, when he goes to Gods
house, if he goes in, he goes out presently; or suppose he stays there; the
polluted himself even then, or a lirde before in the Cellar we spoke of, and
now if we find him at Church, you find him asleep there. Now he that has an
ear, let him hear; or an hand, let him come unto help; or bowels, let him
make lamentations. And for us Governors (high and low, rich and poor, all fall
foul here) are our complaints right? can we expect a reasonable service, from
unreasonable men? Tit. 1. 12.
Can we look that these Cretians should serve their Masters, who rebel
against their great Master in Heaven? Can we hope, that they should be within
command, and walk according to rule, who come not within the verge of the
Spirits walk? That they should be wetted with the drops of Heavens rain, who
came not to the place where the heavenly dew fell? or if they come, then place,
and service to be performed there, then the horse has which he drives.
Remember this, and show we our selves men, bring it to mind o we transgressors:
And pity souls, our own, and theirs, committed to our charge. Shall our
servants be at a loss for serving us? or can we recompense to them that loss
with the greatest wages? We must, we must, we are bound to it, being sworn
servants to our great Master, we must look (to our selves first) we must
govern our own house, walking exactly there: and then a vile person will be
contemned, and he that has spued so often there, shall be spued out. A well
governed man, a good Governor, who answers his name, can no more endure such a
carcass in his house, then the Sea can a dead corpse, it is not quient till it
work the dead out.

This is of infinite concernment, let us consider better of it. Can we think,
he can give us a reasonable service, who swallows Wine and strong drink till
he be swallowed up of the same? That he can be faithful to man, who robbes
God of His Day, and of His service every day? That he should walk in a way of
obedience toward his Master on earth, who carries himself presumptuously in
a way of rebellion against his Master in Heaven? To think thus, is not to
consult with Reason. We must then according to our pattern Psalm. 101.
and rule keep Sessions in our own hearts and families every day, so ordering
our selves and them, as those that walk under that engagement and bond of
duty, if we look that Children and servants shall walk decently and in
order. We must sanctify our selves and ours as we heard, and then present
our selves, and them before Him, who is all to us, does all for us; we must
sanctify our selves to day, if we look for great things to morrow. And so I
have prepared the way to Church, which was as much as I intended, and if it be
done it is enough, and it may prepare the way to our Conclusion.

CHAP. X.
A child must not escape for his fault: A discreet Master that can judge
thereof always, and correct it thereafter, Sloth, how corrupting. Diligence
must be both in the Teacher, and the Learner. What way must be taken to make
them both sit, the one to give, the other to receave Instruction.

IN very good time, now we have 1 Part page 90. sect. 13.
read our Lecture, and done with our lessons, a we will keep Sessions, but in
our own Court. We will take the child to task for his negligence. I said well
negligence. Let the Master look to him, and the Parent by all means, he must
not escape for his negligence, nor for his wilfulness neither. But the Master
must be careful, and the Parent also, very circumspect must they both be, that
they may discern well, that, we spoke of, from weakness, from frailty of
nature, and invincible ignorance. A very hard matter it is to go even there,
turning no where, neither to the right hand, nor to the left.

The Master had need to carry his understanding always in his hand, (so the
wisest Master cannot always do, he must do what he can) that would punish a
child always for his fault. A fault it is not to miss again, and again, and
yet a third time, nay a fourth, as the child may be taught; for he may be in a
Maze, and no clue in his hand to lead him out. I am persuaded in my conscience,
That if justice were done at this petty point, (so it is adjudged to be, but it
is no small point) the Master might suffer thrice for the child's once; for
either he informs not the child at all; or if he do, it is the wrong way,
and by the wrong end; or if any way, then be knocks him first, his hand going
before his tongue; or if together, (which should never be) the hand is the
quicker; a great wrong to the weak child. Certainly, we should do at this
point, as the Judge of all the world does, and He does right: For speaking
after the manner of men, and to instruct our ignorance, He came down to see
first, whether the sins were according to the cry: A gracious God! and then, if
after long patience, He will thunder in His judgments, as certainly He will,
yet behold Grace still! He will lighten first, He will give warning, that
certainly the clap is coming: He did so, if we mark the Context, even to
those Cities, I made reference to. But we look too high at so low a point,
this is too high for us! No, I remember Chrysostom In Genesis 18. 21. (...),etc.
says, This concerns all, even every Mothers child; we must all hearken to
this, and do thereafter. Indeed it concerns men in Judicature more specially,
that they proceed leisurely, not like that speedy Judge Primunt ligant, deinde
cousas in eam quaerunt. Lid-ford Law. B. Lue! Art. 13. P. 48^.
Ireade of in Bishop Iuell, who hanged ^ man in the fore-noone, and sat upon
him, examining his fact in the afternoon. That other, but an hasty Judge too,
for so learned Fortescue Commend. of the Laws o^ Engl. Chap. 53.
calls him, did better then so, for he proceeded Secuudum allegata and probata,
and so condemned the wife for killing her husband, and she was burnt for it;
but some months after the man servant confessing that his Mistress was
innocent, and himself was the man of bloods: the Judge now seeing his error,
and the waste which haste makes, weighing withal the forementioned Scripture,
sorrowed so much, that he never enjoyed himself after till his dying De morte
lominis nus ^^st con tla io conga.
day. So Fortescue reports also. This, I say, concerns more specially men in
high places, called Gods in Scripture oftener then Men, That, according to their
great example, they consider well before they determine, using all their eyes
and ears also, for it must ever be remembered which the learned Knight said; A
wicked sentence is infinitely Hist of the World. B.^. Ch 8. sect. 8.
worse then a wicked fact, as being held a president and pattern, whereby
oppression beginning upon one is extended as warrantable upon all.

Nor is this praeter casum, nor praeter causam. It concerns all, then us too,
we must in our low way, well see, and examine first, and punish after. Is it a
fault, sloth, stubbornness, etc. which we are about to punish? It is: Yet stay
the hand; not withstanding we must not thunder yet, The child should smart in
a less terrifying way. But if we must speak high, as if sons of thunder, and
clap hard too, for so the fault may require; yet we must be sure, that we have
lightened first, I mean, we have let a light into the child's understanding, and
so set it up there, that he is convinced clearly, that he might have seen his
way, and have walked by the light, but he would put it out, and the clap came,
he knows now, how deservedly. We must be very careful at this point, for our
pety actions now, teach for afterward, and make great impressions that way.
The child will tell you twenty years hence, I remember what my Master did, how
discreet he was, or the contrary; Our actions may be made presidents, when we
little think of it. Therefore I say again, we must not do, as that light Judge
did, command execution now, and call a Jury for examination anon; God forbid;
but it is as preposterous every whit to do as many times we do; Thunder
first, and lighten after; and most cross it is to the way of heaven.

I shall never forget, for I felt it, That I suffered once, as sometimes
children do, for my ingenuity. I mention it by way of caution, as there is
need, for I do not think that any one twigge fell in vain, so much I honor the
memory of my master: I had Iter in my way, and it was my lot to parse it: A
stammering boy I was, and making haste fell short a syllable; my Master was as
short with me, and up I went. Wise men have not always their wits about them,
nor their understanding at their fingers end. But this was the old Discipline;
my judgment is utterly against it, but I think withal, in this lazy age, it
would do most good: of that anon. To our purpose, instruction, and correction
must still go together; but in the same order still, when the child smarts he
must learn too; (as was said in due place Child's Patrimony Preface, p. 10.
Book p. 27.
) I learned nothing by all my smart, unless frowardness. A Master may teach
that quickly; with the froward the child will be froward; that we remember
well. I saw not my error, (a great hint to progress) nay to say the truth,
error there was none, for as the meanest Scholars know well, It argued more
ingenuity, to give the word an increase but of one syllable, then of two, for I
was never told, that the old word was Itiner.

I say then, and it is an Oracle, if we would in all cases let in the light
first, it would save us the trouble of thundering, and the poor child would
on apace, eased of that terror, for it is all the trouble he yet feels in the
flesh, as play is his chief joy.

Assuredly the Musick-master takes a good way; when he would make the child
sing, he will not make him cry, for then he knows the Music is marred. It is
so, if we would see it, in Grammar learning; when the child stands quaking,
and learnes crying; when he speaks prayers, and the Master threats, all this
time is lost, no good done, but hurt a great deal. Now the Proverb plucks the
Master by the ear; No man makes haste to the Market, where nothing is to be
bought, but blows. The sum is, we must go gently, and very calmly on, not
blowing at all, when we would set up a light in the understanding, which must
first be done. A little puff of wind blows out all presently. The light you
set up in a child's understanding is, at first, as the candle you have newly
lighted, and are gone with it, by that time you have gone three steps, the
candle is out, for you were too hasty, and you did not (as the manner is)
shelter it well from the wind, for the least breath does it. Now we have our
lesson, how to teach, and when to correct: we will take this one note with it.
Our natures, as well as our consciences, are more moved with leading, then
dragging, or drawing; and pety errors will be better reclaimed with gentle
means, rather then Catechized with hard words, and blows.

And now I hope, the Child and I are very good friends: all this while, I have
spoken to his heart, and to very good purpose. I have indeed, and I have spoken
heartily, as he that greatly tenders the Child's good. But yet for all this,
he, and I are not friends as he calls friendship. and accounts the shows
thereof. Certain it is, I am as great an enemy to his negligence; as any one
in the Town; and I have many reasons why I must be so; For, for the most part,
such the negligence is, that it checks the Masters pains every where: and it
is so fostered at home, for the most part, that the Parent cannot think, and
think with reason; that the Child will prove for afterward, either
serviceable to himself, or the place he lives in. The Parent must think so
as reason must accompany his thoughts, for by that level he must walk; and
then he takes the means along with him, conducting to the end. Then we make
judgment by the Parents practice in the breeding of the Child, That he looks
for no more from him, then that he eat and drink and rise up to play. We have
disciplined the Parents house already, but that labor is lost. And so is ours
too, I speak as all Teachers would speak, our pains with the Child, for the
most part, runs on, as some water does, to wafte, and all because the Child is
not quickened betimes, and rouzed out of his lazy disease. Some hurt also the
Master may do the Child, against his will; he may make the Child careless
by his overmuch care, yet he cannot abate an Ace of it. The diligent Master,
may make the Scholar negligent; nay, past all doubt, so it is.

It is the complaint of a learned Commentator on Isocrates, and certainly he
was right, If you shall labor to condescend to your Scholars Hier. Wolfius.
capacity, facilitating the way, making it very easy; if you do make all
clear before him, then will the boy prove a very slug, lazy as may be: His
master may do all, he will do nothing at all; or so carelessly, that nothing
comes of it In cllectio recta non ignavis, sed dil^gentibus, sese offert, at
que dat. Scal. Exer. 307. Sect.
. Doubtless the best Masters are troubled hereat, and it is the great arrest
of their endeavors, as sloth is the Canker of the parts.

I am upon the Irish disease, I know how well enough it is naturalized amongst
us. Idleness is the common disease of City and Country, as dangerous, and
destroying too. It makes Master, and Scholar all unprofitable, (...) etc.
Chrysostom. in Genesis 2.
gifts, parts, graces; It spoils all. Worse then a Moth it eats great holes
in the web of our life. Nay, more unhappy then an Ape or Iackdaw (I speak to
the Child's capacity) it steals from us our very jewels, and besides, it is
very mischievous also. Now that we have met with this block in our way, it
shall bear all the blame which is unjustly cast upon the Master; and besides,
it shall do us some little service, for it shall help us to clear an
objeetion: Some there are that call former times to their succors; and so make
a party against the present course, the most natural Method that can be
thought of; and thus they object.

Obj. The old Method in former times, has produced as good Scholars, nay
better, then that ye call the newest, (we do not call it so, we say, and
make good what we say, it is the oldest) and so exact a Method can do now.

Sol. We will gratify them so far now, as to grant this; There were as good
Scholars formerly as now, perhaps better too; for my part, I verily believe it.
There is an invincible reason for it. The old discipline is gone, nay that
which was but 36. years ago, we have it not now: The boy is grown idle and
lazy, the Parent likes it well. But if the old discipline, which so crossed
Nature, and a new method, which is (they will call it so, whether we will or
no, though) according to Nature, if these did meet, and close each with other;
then I know what would be, we should have very good Scholars now: (though we
love not comparisons) much good would be done in a little time, whereas little
is done now in much time. I am sure the Objection is answered.

Now the Parent may hear how he may be mistaken, though he has committed his
Child to an honest able man; (he must be both:) he expects now his Child will
thrive, and prove a good Scholar, and all very quickly, for he knows his
Child's abilities are good, and the Master faithful, (he hopes) what should
hinder, why his Child should not prove a good Man, and a good Scholar both
together? A happy proceeding, Amen, God grant it prove so, even so, Amen.

I must tell the Parent now, what blocks we find in the way, which hinder
progress mightily; and if he will not put to both his shoulders for the
removing of them, he will fall infinitely short of what he hopes to see. But if
he will join his hand to the work heartily, walking by the level of right
reason, and according to his rule, he may find his hopes, and reap comfort,
all in their season.

1. First then, he must catechize his child, drop instructions into him, whet
them upon him, morning, noone, and night; that is the Scriptures Method, Deuteronomy.
6. 7.
and Rule. These are the seasons for our precognitions spoke of and explained
before, let that be marked. Now if thus the Parent does not, what he possibly
can do; for, I say again, these are the seasons, and one more, when he walks
by the way, let him believe me this once, a man of some experience here: The
thing will not be done; when the time comes, it is more then a doubt, he will
not find his hope in his hand; If he abate so much as an inch of his proper
duty and endeavor touching his child, he must abate also, more then an ace of
his expectation.

2. The boy (and girl too) has naturally a lazy, sluggish humor; Let him do
what he will, he will do just nothing, or as good as nothing. or worse then
nothing; he will be idle all the day long; and idleness, we have heard what
that will do, rather what it will undo. The Parent must purge out this bad
humor what is possible, and the sooner the better. Let the child rather pick
sticks, or gather wool, then stand idle. If the Parent looks not to this, and
does as has been said, I can assure him, the Master cannot, for he knows it
is vain labor to countercheck that, which is countenanced and fostered at
home.

The Master does but his own task, and that has been compared long since to
the Mid-wives work. We understand that well enough for our use: Then we
understand the Masters work; The Master finds that in the child, which he
works upon, he does not put it there, he finds wit and abilities, and nature
forward to put all forth, and now the Master, as the Midwife, promotes
exceedingly. But if nature be in a Lethargy, (laziness is such a disease) then
the Masters may sleep too, and do as much good as talk to a lazy boy. I do
not say a dull boy, he never troubles me, he will do well enough, for he
minds what he does; I say a lazy boy; the boy must do his endeavor, else we
are at a stand. Why? it is the law of nature, man must put forth his
endeavors, if he means to live; God gives us corn, we must make it bread; the
grape, we must make it wine; wool, we must make it cloth; wood and stones, we
must build the house. Still God shows us by His works in nature, That man's
labor must concur, and meet with His of Providence. It is just so here
betwixt the Master and the Scholar. But I am of the same mind I was, The more
the Maser does, the less the Scholar will do, if after the common manner.
Nay, I cannot see with reason how it should be otherwise: For the easy gaining
of a thing makes us all slack. This extundere, the pursuit after a thing; which
difficulty in attaining the same, whets our endeavor, and sweetneth it when we
have it. That I cry after, and lift up my voice for; That I seek as silver, and
search for as hid Treasures, that, that is a treasure indeed, and so will be
accounted of.

They say the flesh of those Fowls is sweetest, which have no other meat
(...), etc. Cl: Alex. str. 2. p. 263.
but what they scrape out with their feet, and gain with their labor. So is
the water the sweeter, the deeper you dig for it. The easy attaining to any
thing takes off from our esteem we have of it, and as that falls in our
judgment, so do we in our endeavor.

The Commander said well, His men should gain their drink by sweat, and then it
would be wine; and win their bread from the roots of trees, and then it would
be dainties. Nor did the old Father dote, when he told his son, He left him a
treasure hid in a field; the young man fell to digging, etc. but no treasure
all that while; yet by his good husbandry, he made the field very fruitful,
and that was the treasure the Father meant. I say then, and such my judgment
is, I say not under correction That the child profits most, there where he
has less information, more exercise, and most punishment: And I thank God
that so it was with me; for thereby it comes to pass, God ordering it so, that
I have been the more industrious ever since; And what a man gets by his own
labor is sure, and best pleases as we heard. But yet, this I must say also;
It is a way I shall never allow, for it is to make the child to serve in
rigor, (fit enough for his lazy nature, which will be taught no good, but by a
bad method) exacting the full tale of bricks, and allowing no straw; requiring
the task, and not making it possible, by showing the way of performance. No;
that is pety tyranny, or oppression, no better. I would rather, if it might be,
the child were led on with delight, carrying his candle in his hand, and then
if he slumble as one in the dark, fetch him up as you do your horse, and let
him feel the spur in its place. And we should do pretty well here, and
discipline the child well enough, with the Parents leave also, if the child
were quickened at home: but there he is suffered to go on so slack and lazy a
pace, that he will not be put out of it by our spur. Yet for all that,
something we must do; else we shall undo the child quite, who is half
undone already. The child must know and feel too, (that is his knowledge)
that there is a double part in the School, nay in every place that is for
instruction, one the Masters, the other the Childs. And they must do each
their work mutually, else there will be a vain work. The Master must speak, the
child must hearken; The child must ask, as the Master must give him the hint
of a question; the Master must answer calmly. And thus the lesson goes on till
the Masters work be done. And now the child sets to his work presently, for it
is the opportunity of time, he must foreslow no time, to recollect, to fasten
that which was said, to make in it a sure word, his own for ever; The boy must
use all diligence, that does mighty things, else the Master labors in the
fire, and so will the child too, if he be not well instructed withal, that the
blessing is from heaven, a thing the child hears little of, but it is all in
all.

I said before, till the Masters work be done; It is never done. Something in
point of information, something in point of reformation, about the child or
himself, finds him work still. Let me say it once for all: The Master may
learn much by teaching the child; A great deal of good Divinity from that
little thing, which is old Natures right. I know no such looking glass in the
world, wherein to see the man's heart, as is the face of the child. Therefore I
said well, The Master has still something to do, either about himself or the
child, and when he cannot make the child better with all his care, then his
care must be to make himself better, then there is no lost labor. The longest
day is short enough for this work; In the winter he must take the night too,
and and all too little to do a great deal of good in. which should be his
ambition.

The Masters recreation must be with the child, (he will make him merry
sometimes, so must he the child, and then the work goes on) I have read and
seen an old Grand-sire sporting with his young child, so refreshing his own
spirits, and the child's both: Assuredly we may learn and teach both, no fitter
way; for as (so I told you) the boy must be serious in his play, (we allow no
time for calvish mirth) so must the Master what possibly he can, play in his
work: he must do it with all the delight that may be; then it is no burden.
But this is the point, He must use diligence, It is order, pursuit, sequence,
and interchange of applications, which is mighty in Nature, Adv. p 178.
, that he must: And what will that do? strange things, See the omnipotency of
industry Holy War. 2. 12. page 60. Industry in a^ion is like importunity in
speech. p. 154.
, said one very ingeniously as he does all; But then add too, he must be a man
of an unblamable conversation, that he must: he walks before boys, they mark;
where you would not have them mark; and they understand too much, where you
would have them understand nothing, like a sieve, they will let go an hundred
good instructions, when but one bad example will stick by them, while they
live. He must look to his conversation, he must walk reverently there, else he
is doing, and doing, and yet doing nothing, or which is worse, he does a great
deal of hurt. As examples in Grammar (for they are rules as was said) make the
quickest penetration into the understanding, so does the example of the Master
into the manners of the Disciple; nay a greater penetration into the life, for
the example is lively. It has been said, A bad man may be a good Citizen, but
that distinction was not subtle enough for the Devil, for taking away the bad
man, the good Citizen followed for company. Good and bad cannot stand so near
together: if a bad man, then no good Citizen, no, nor a good Teacher: he must
have the Character of a right Orator, as well a good Man, as a good Speaker;
else he may tickle the Quint. Orat. 12. 1.
ear, but never gain the heart, Like a fire of green wood, which is fed with
it as it is fuel, but quenched as it is green. The Master must be a pious man,
there is no remedy, for he is the child's Catechism, the child has it by rote.
He must be an exact copy; I pray you let us mark that, and the reason, why? The
Philosopher gives it; Men abandoned to vice, do not so much corrupt manners,
as those that are half good, and half evil. And it is no more but what the
Leper gives us Levit. 13.
clear intimation of, for if he was half whole, nay three parts whole, and
one part leprous, then he must be shut up most infectious; For putrefaction is
more contagious before Maturity, then after. The Master must set anexact copy;
his example must be so, even thus. He must pray with the child, he must pray
for the child; he must hear for the child, (the child must hear from him
again, all that is for his use) he must hear with the child; He must be
reverent in his carriage here and there and every where, then some hope there
is, the child will prove good, and grave also in his season, else none at all.

The Masters conversation is a mould, into the fashion of which the disciple is
cast; then I said very well a little before, (all the skill is to practice
there after) As the Master has much work about the child, so has he as much
and more about himself, and this lies betwixt his own heart, and God. I
profess heartily, I know not what we can do (no good sure) unless we have a
continual recourse to heaven, and an influence thence.

No creature so hardly governed as man, so it was anciently concluded. I say
also, it is the tenderest work in the world, to deal with a child. It is
tender, man is naturally rough; the child is like it self, slow, the man is
quick; the child is as weak as is imagined, very awkward to his business;
the man's passion is like himself, strong, and quickly breaks out at the mouth,
and fingers end, and then he begins at the wrong end. So then, if we have not
continall recourse to heaven, we shall be out, and (as the expression is very
full) heavenly wide. We must then be much with God, that He may be still with
us, specially then when we are setting upon instruction; for then we shall have
matter for passion to work on; therefore we must remember our selves, so
calming our spirits; for our work has an influence not into the child only,
but into the whole Comonwealth; great reason we should importune an influence
from heaven. So then we are at our conclusion still; A good Schoolmasters must
be as a good Bishop, (I am so charitable, that I do not think there is a bad
Bishop in the world, for I mean really, and allow the name heartily; and do
believe verily, there are degrees amongst men, as amongst Angels; else where
order should be, there confusion will be; and I know this as well as any thing
else, That he is but a man, like an earth vessel, frail, etc. weak) as a
Bishop, who oversees himself, there is the chief work, next his own house,
then Gods house; and then he must be as his Predecessors have been, a man of
another world, having his conversation in heaven: such a one a good
Schoolmasters must be, (how ever they stand in the circumference, they meet at
this point) his conversation must be in heaven, if he look to do much good
upon earth. Note the example of two famous men, excellent in their time, it is
written for our example.

It is said of Bradford, nay I think he speaks it of himself, you may take his
record; He studied for the most part on his knees. And it is an high expression
of Bernard Ochin Hedid not keep to his own rule, if it be true which is
written of him; (which we may question,) which is, That he fell fion bis God,
and spoke of Him without a light: When the rule is, N^n loquendum de Deosire
Lumine.
, For one hours study, thou ought to pray a thousand. It is certain this, he
hears most, he learns most, he teaches most, that prays most. As it was said
of the good hearer, he hears praying, and prays hearing; so it must be with
the good Teacher too; he must pray teaching, and teach praying. He that prays
most, teaches most: Certainly, certainly, he must'oe often upon his knees,
that will promote the child in good: His conversation must be on high, that
would carry the child thitherward. And so I am at a Conclusion, which I sinde
made to my hand, and concludes Master and Learner, even both these, for here
they must meet, or never meet in heaven. The Master must live well, and pray
hard; his life must be pious, and his prayer devout, for this effects more, and
makes better way, then all our diligence can. Pia vita et devola precot op'us
possunt in stud^orum rat. one, qu im dilicentia Alst. Ency. 1. 4. c. 14 Reg. 14.
It is a conclusion of universal use, and experience: It shall set a period
here.

Now we have gained our point; if we would keep within compass, and order our
conversation aright, we must with the Mariner Lact. 8. 6.
, fix our eye in heaven, and walk humbly with God on earth; the only means
to find out a right way for us and our little ones; a way which tends straight
to life, not like that we live now, for it shall never run out to death.

FINIS.
The Copy being somewhat scattered, these were omitted which are here inserted
to the second Part.
Page 70. Line 10. And that he is a thankful person too: If humble, then
thankful; humble he is as we heard, for God regarded the low, low estate (he
cannot go low enough) of his servant. God passed over Mountains and hills, and
shined upon his lowest valley, oh how thankful is he! He consulted with His
free mercy, so made him to differ, overlooked a multitude of sins, vouchsafed
to multiply pardons, soughthim out that was lost; the empty, hungry, thirsty
soul is satisfied; The wilderness is now as a watered garden; his parched
heath, a standing poole; his gates of brass are broken, the bars of iron are
cut asunder; he is delivered out of all his distresses. And now hear him call
upon his soul, sing praises, sing, sing, sing praises: so we road Psalm. 47.
103. 107. 116. 136.
in his songs of thanksgiving a. And what is wanting now to the tribute of
praises, it is the joy of his soul, he shall make up one day, when he shall be
for ever with the Lord, there to sing the Song of Moses Rev. 15. 3, 4.
and to join his voice with the heavenly quire, saying, Hallelu-jah,
Salvation, and glory, and honor, and power unto the Lord our God, Amen,
Hallelu-jah.

Page 91. Line 1. fattest. As B. Latimer said, The Devil gains more upon one
Holy Day, then upon ten working days; So we may say truly, The Lord loses
more of the tribute of praise at one feast, then He gains at two fasts. The
more we receive from Him, the more He loses from us. The larger His mercy,
the straiter our hearts. This it is for the most part. But all this, etc.

Page 104. Line 14. Again, we may discern in a seething pot, what our spirit
is, and what the pollution of the same. While the pot with the flesh in it is
cold, we see nothing but clear water; but let the pot boil, then the s^um
rises. An occasion to sin is as fire under the pot; now I can observe what
arises in my spirit. Concupiscence is always there a lusting after this, and
that, and more to this then to that, some predominant and master-lust, I mean.
Now when the occasion joins with it, there is heat put to heat, and a great
flame. Now our spirits boil apace, and there arises a great scum presently.
We must Ezech. 24.
be as quick and speedy in the casting the scum out, as a pollution to be
loathed: if we suffer the scum to boil in, we defile our spirits utterly, and
in the seething pot, we read our judgment. We will then note this by the way:
An occasion is as fire to the pot, it raises the scum; so this tries the man,
for such he is indeed, what he is in temptation. But let the man take heed, he
does nottry occasion, not tempt temptation, not run into temptations no more
then he will into the fire, for then he burns, and he is well pleased with his
scum which he should cast out with loathing. He that runs into snares, will fall
certainly (...), etc. Heleod. Ae^hiop. l. l. c. 24 Diabolus semper imminet
occasioni.
: for the Devil watches there, and if I put my foot in it, surely I shall be
taken by it.

Page 105. line 5. If we see a Serpent in our way, let us stand a little to
view that creeping thing. It was once a more pleasing Creature, and, perhaps,
its stature more erect and upwards, for it is reckned amongst the beasts of the
field, not amongst the creeping things there. Sure we are, because he was used
as the Devils instrument to tempt unto sin, therefore this burden is laid upon
him, Upon thy belly shall thou go, and dust shall thou eat; which teaches us
to be wiser then a Serpent, and as innocent as a Dove; to have no hand in sin
to help it forward; not to put forth so much as the least finger to be
isntrumental thereunto. If a brute creature was so cursed, how great will
their curse be, who employ their reason, and little judgment, as the Devils
instruments, to bring wicked designs to pass, and to put them in execution
Esaias 10. 1 Tum Aucto Tibus, tum eti^madmi slris. Junius ibid.
The authors and first inventers of wicked Decrees are cursed, and they that
help to put them forth, lie under the same woe. Our bodies, spirits also are
great examples hereof, so are the judgments that God has executed, not upon
beasts only, but upon creatures senseless. That Adco exo sumest peccatun and
instrumentum peccati, Junins in Josh. cap. 7. 25.
note is long, the lesson is short, Have no fellowship with the unfruitful
works of darkness, but reprove them rather Ephos. 5. 11.
.


