Suffragium Protestantium. Wherein Our GOVERNORS ARE Justified In Their
Impositions and Proceedings Against Dissenters.

Meisner also and the Verdict rescued from the Cavils and Seditious Sophistry
of the Protestant Reconciler.

By Dr. LAURENCE WOMOCK, Archdeacon of Suffolk.

Col. 2. 4. (...).

Hoc dico
Ne quis vobis imponat, Oratione speciosa,
Per falsas Ratiocinationes,
Sive ex malitia, sive ex Inscitia
Id Fiat.
London, Printed for Robert Clavel, at the Peacock in St. Paul's Churchyard,
1683.

A Special Verdict Against the PROTESTANT RECONCILER.
S. Paul foretold that after his departure grievous Wolves should enter in
(with a design and malice) not to spare but to devour the Flock: these were
Wolves in Sheeps clothing, whose business was to steal, to kill and to
destroy; but these were not all, and perhaps not the most pernicious of the
Churches Enemies: He foretells further, that also of your own selves shall men
arise, speaking perverse things to draw Disciples after them. And this Prophecy
is fulfilled in our Reconciler. For among others he is risen up, with his
perverse Principles, to make and engage a Party.

Had he intended the satisfaction or information of his Superiors, his Duty
would have prompted him to have presented his Papers humbly into their hands
and with a modest submission to have expected the result of their wise
Councils. But a Noverint Vniversi was fitter to carry on his popular Design,
and to caress his dear Vainglory.

He should have come in the Spirit of Elias, to turn the hearts of the Fathers
unto the Children, the Holy Fathers Mind and Principles, their Faith and
Affections into the Children: and the Disobedient to the Wisdom of the Just:
That what the Fathers have believed and practiced, ^ L. Brug. ad ^uc. 1. 17.
and Paul. de Palati^ in Mal. 4. 6.
the Children may also embrace and follow.

He could have told them, that Christ having assured his Disciples that God,
who hears the Addresses of His Church, he straightly commands them also to hear
Her, upon pain of forfeiting Her (which is the same with His) Blessing; being
deservedly (for their contumacy in their Disobedience) turned out of Her
Communion as Publicans and Heathens.

He might have been pleased to take notice, how Christ resolves the case of
Conscience about the Tithe of Mint and Cummin, and the weightier matters of the
Law, saying unto such as were concerned to be well informed, These things
Matthew. 23. 23.
ought ye to have done and not to have left the other undone. How Christ
observed not only the service solemnly established, but such Customs and
Festivals as had no divine Institution, laying down this for a Rule of
Conscience; Thus it behooves us to fulfill all Righteousness.

He might have put them in mind (as Matthew. 3. 15. Tit. 3. 1.
St. Paul exhorts) to be subject to Principalities and Powers, and to obey
their Spiritual Guides in their Conduct and to submit to their Orders; in
regard that Heb. 13. 7. 17. 1 Cor. 14.
the spirit of the very Prophets ought to be subject to the greater authority
of the Prophets.

He knows very well, that we ought not to be contentious about the Customs and
Practices of the Church, when they do not supersede the Commands of God, nor
interfere with them. That the Governors of the Church have a great Authority
from our Lord, and are entrusted in his stead to set things in Order for
Edification and Decency in Gods public Worship and Service. And when they have
done this with great prudence and deliberation, that the subjects are to do
their duty without murmuring or disputing, and to honor such their Governors
very highly for their work-sake.

If not, he could have informed his Readers, That Christ has furnished those
Governors with the power of the Keys to shut the door as well as to open it,
with a Rod for Discipline, Authority to mark and censure, to admonish and
rebuke sharply, to stop their mouths who speak preverse things, and to reject
them from the Communion of Christ's Church, if they will neither obey her
commands, nor regard her admonitions.

Are they not entrusted by our Lord to make Orders for Discipline, and to take
the measures of Decency by their own Judgment and Prudence? and when they have
estabished all things to God's Glory, the Peace and Edification of the Church,
is it our Duty to follow our Guides or to control them? to confront our
Governors or to obey them?

When a difference arose betwixt the Jews and Gentile Converts, 'twas thought
the most prudent and likely Way to compose it, to have recourse to Acts 15.
Acts 16. 4.
the Apostles and Elders about it, and the Holy Ghost did assist them in the
Decision; and S. Paul himself carried about the Decrees to be kept. But our
Reconciler takes another course to buoy up a sinking Cause and Faction; He
Censures all the Governors of Church and State; decrys their Impositions and
directly quarrels their Authority.

Yet 'twas the Resolution of the British Acta Synod. in jol. De aequitate
Decreti Synodici. page 139.
Divines at the Synod of Dort, In adiaphoris Supremus Magistratus vice Dei
ostendit quid expedit and decet: The Supreme Magistrate, declares in God's
stead what is decent and expedient, in things indifferent. This the whole Synod
assented to; and by this Rule they justified their Proceedings against the
Remonstrants.

And if the pretense of Christian Liberty be allowed to retrench the Kings
Prerogative in Church Matters; 'twill soon follow the Pope's Practice ( in
Ordine ad Spiritualia) and invade his Authority in Temporals. All times have
afforded examples of turbulent Spirits, who thought their Christian Liberty
could not consist without the downfall of the Civil Power. That their Religion
did exempt them from all the Laws and Ordinances of men, and gave them a
Privilege to oppose and banish the very Office of the Magistrate from among
Argument. Ep. ad Romans 6. Ad Romans 13.
them. This Calvin as well as Bullinger has observed. And Gualter tells us,
that the Jews elated with the conceit of their Ancient Dignity, took it in
great disdain, that the Posterity of Abraham, E^ ad Romans 13.
and the Elect people of God, should be in Subjection to the Romans; wherefore
they made frequent Insurrections to recover their Ancient Liberty; and (...)
had not quite cast off these Principles of Sedition, when they embraced the
(...) of the Gospel. Many also of the (...), did with no less impa^^^^e bear
the Yoke of such as were the Professed Enemies of Christ and (...) Gospel.

And (...) these, a sort of subtle (...) did insinuate themselves; and having
(...) the Grace of God into (...), that they might enjoy (...) c^rnal
satisfactions with the greater license and impunity, as St. Jude ob(...), they
made it their business to ^bolish Government.

By this means the Christian Religion (...) among such as were in Authority, as
the Parent and Breeder of Tumults and Seditions; as at this very day, says
Gualter, many render our Religion suspected and odious to Princes upon the very
same account.

For this reason the Apostle does so frequently extol Authority, and so
earnestly inculcate and press that Subjection and Obedience, which is justly
due to it:

Thus St. Peter commands the Jews 1 Pet. 2. 13. to 17. Tit. 3. 1. 1 Timothy 2. 1.
to obey Kings and such as Governed by their Commission. And St. Paul enjoins
Titus to admonish those under his charge to obey the higher Powers; And Timothy
to make public Prayers for them. And this he does with the greatest care and
concern, when he writes to the Christians at Rome; because their Animosities
and Disputes about their Christian Liberty were high, and nothing could be
acted by the Professors of the Gospel there that looked so like Sedition,
without the apparent hazard of the whole Church.

And this Doctrine, says he, is no less needful now than heretofore, to
repress the rage and madness of those turbulent Spirits, the Anabaptists and
Libertines, who abuse their Christian Liberty to overthrow the Power of the
Civil Magistrate.

For they presume, They are Abraham's Seed too, not Semen Carnis, but Semen
Foederis, The Spiritual Israel of God, and his peculiar People; and
consequently entitled to all the Prerogatives, which the Scripture attributes
to those under that Character. And being puffed up with the conceit of their
Spiritual Dignity, they look upon all Princes as Gods Enemies, and Usurpers of
a Spiritual Jurisdiction, which they think does not belong unto them. Hereupon
they are ever ready to mutiny, and raise Sedition to shake off that Yoke, which
they falsely conceive to be Tyrannical, and to assert that Lawless Liberty,
which they mistake for their Christian Privilege.

Does not the Reconciler too much favor such Factions, and encourage the like
Anabaptistical Outrages and run into the same excess of Riot, upon the like
unjust account of Christian Liberty? I am sure he has given the Alarm to awaken
the Jealousy of Princes, by abetting such peevish quarrels at their
commendable Impositions.

For what is his Practice and the business of this Book? He speaks faintly of
the Subjects Duty, but falls foul upon his Superiors; whom he condemns for
their care to keep out the Wolf and the little Foxes; and attempts to overthrow
their Authority by such weak and fallacious Arguments as have been baffled
twenty times over; or else they are nothing to the purpose; or may be retorted
with greater force upon the Party he takes upon him to plead for.

For (1.) He supposes men to be weak, and then he pleads stiffly for a
Toleration for them; yea, he supposes them to be such weak ones, and under such
circumstances, as those were in S. Paul's time, and then alleges S. Paul's
Arguments on their behalf. These are gratis dicta and false suppositions, which
he can find no ground for among all the Fathers he heaps together to
countenance his Hypothesis; for which of them did ever condemn the Customs and
Ceremonies of the Church in their times, upon the account of any thing
delivered to the contrary in St. Paul's Epistles?

Yet (2.) He supposes a Multitude of Rites and Ceremonies among us, and such as
have nothing in them of real goodness, or of positive Order, Decency and
Reverence; but such as are burdensome and scandalous, and these unjustly
imposed, (which would be true enough if he could prove them to be such) and
then as such he disputes against them. And indeed his design is to destroy all
Authority in matters of indifferency; and to extend this false and Seditious
Doctrine to the utmost, to blind and harden such as have rashly (I will not say
maliciously) kicked at their Governors, and taken a vain occasion to stumble
into Schism, He reckons not only the symbolical protestation of Christianity by
the sign of the Cross, but the external worship of God, by bowing and kneeling,
amongst things indifferent. p. 39. 76, iii.

We are therefore concerned to take into consideration, (1.) The Persons
supposed to be weak and (2.) the Things they take occasion to scruple at.

I. Men may be weak either in their Faith or in their Morals. These last come
not under our consideration in this Controversy.

Him that is weak in the Faith, says Romans 14. 1.
the Apostle; Faith is here taken for knowledge of Divine matters, especially
Romans 12. 3. 6.
of our Christian Liberty; that a man understands the difference of days and
meats established by the Ceremonial Law of Moses to be taken away by Christ
under the dispensation of the Gospel. ( Calixt. ad Romans 14. 1.) The Apostles
observation was that all men had not this Knowledge. And these were the 1 Cor.
8. 7.
Apostles weak ones.

For (1.) they had been bred under another dispensation, the Discipline of a
Ceremonial Law, which stood by Divine Right, and being of Gods own appointment,
it had the greater force and tie upon the Conscience, and prevailed the more by
bearing the Image of a venerable Antiquity, for Custom which had inured them to
the practice of it had a Prepossession and made it little less than Natural.

(2.) On the other side they were called off to another Dispensation which
totally evacuated the force of that Law, and rescinded all those Rites and
Ceremonies to which they had been so long accustomed.

Now, that an Institution established with so much Grandeur, Dread and Majesty
should quite lose its Authority; and that they should have a power to shake off
that Yoke which had been put upon the Necks of their Reverend and Holy Fathers
by God himself; this was the great stumbling block, and the Objection they
scrupled at.

They were but Novices in Christianity, but newly called to the Profession of
the Gospel; and they did not perfectly understand the Nature of the Christian
Liberty; this was their weakness; and their persons are recommended to us under
the title of little ones, of Babes in Christ, and of weak Brethren.

Such little ones, tho their judgments were weak, if their hearts were sound
and their Faith unfeigned, Christ had a great compassion for them. Take heed ye
offend not one of these little ones that believe in me: And so S. Paul for his
Babes in Christ; Him that is weak Romans 1^. 1.
in the Faith receive into your Communion: but not so as to encourage him in
his own prejudices, to quarrel with the course of other men's Conversation.

But did either St. Paul or Christ cocker them up in their childish weakness,
and indulge them to continue Babes always ( as our Reconciler does?) Did not
our Blessed Lord chide his Disciples Duncery in his School? O ye of little
Faith! How long shall I be with you? how long shall I suffer you? O fools and
slow of heart to believe! Luke 24. 25. And did not St. Paul check the dullness
and non-proficiency of his Disciples? And I, brethren, could not speak unto you
as unto Spiritual, but as unto Carnal (He leaves out the word men, and adds)
even as unto Babes in Christ. I have fed you with milk and not with meat. For
when 1 Cor. 3. 1, 2.
for the time ye ought to be teachers, ye have need that one teach you again
which he the first Principles of the Oracles of God; and are become such as
have need Heb. 5. 12.
of milk and not of strong meat. Did not he and the rest of the Apostles charge
us to be strong in the Lord and in the power of his might: to grow in grace,
and in the knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ; and to be always
building up our selves in our most holy Faith, and so Ephesians. 6. 10, 2. Pet. 3.
18. Jude v. 20. 21.
to keep our selves in the love of God.

But our Blessed Savior knew there were and ever would be Wolves in Sheeps
clothing, and a generation of men that would not be satisfied either full or
fasting: that would take offense at his own freedom as well as at the Mat. 11.
18, 19.
Baptists austerity. Does he dandle these upon his lap for little ones? No, for
such he has severer methods; an exprobration: O Generation of Vipers; and
Matthew. 12. 34. -- 23. 13.
an increpation; Woe unto you Scribes Pharisees Hypocrites. And does not S. Paul
also mark them which cause Divisions and Offenses? And does he not tell us such
Romans 16. 17.
are false Apostles, deceitful workers, transforming themselves into the
Apostles of Christ 2 Cor. 11. 13.
and to inhance the mischief we are told farther, that many shall follow their
pernicious ways. Does S. Paul flatter or connive at such as these? no, his
pious zeal breaks out into a just indignation against such disturbers of the
Churches peace and safety. I would they were even 2 Pet. 2. 2.
cut off which trouble you: and he tells them plainly, he that addicts himself
to such a practice, he shall bear his judgment, (and that a sad doom from the
mouth of an Apostle) whosoever he ibid. v. 10.
be.

It Is a very severe conclusion of Mr. Calvin, and he takes it from Christ's
example in curing the blind man which gave so great a scandal to the Pharisees.
By this example (says he) we are taught John 9. 14.
that such as are enemies to the truth of the Gospel, may be exasperated, ac
eos prorsus desipere, and those Reconcilers do but play the fool, who do
attempt to coaks the World into a fellow-ship with Christ, as to condemn all
emergent Offenses; when Christ himself does rather wittingly and willingly
nettle and provoke the wicked. Tenenda ergo, quam alibi praescribit, regula, we
must therefore observe that Rule which He prescribes in another place, that the
blind leaders Mat. 15. 14.
of the blind are to be neglected.

We must be very careful therefore to observe as Hemmingius does ( ad Romans 14.
1.) that in this point of tenderness, St. Paul speaks of such weak ones as had
not yet fully learned the nature and use of their Christian Liberty, and non de
praefractis: and speaks not of the refractory, who stubbornly set themselves in
opposition to the truth. And Bullinger observes that the Apostle speaks Ad Romans
15. ^. And Beza ad Romans 14. 2. ait, Non eos qui malitiose and praefracte
resistunt Evangelicae libertati, sed qui sola ignorantia peccanti hic infirmos
vocari.
remarkably of regarding the infirmities of the weak, nam malitiam nemo pius
tulerit aut non oderit etiam, for no good man will endure such a ones malice,
but rather hate it. Add yet that learned Protestant makes a further
observation, Porro placent sibi hoc loco, qui suo serviunt commodo, and quod
agunt, ad suum Hi scandalizantur quia veritatem nesciunt: illi quia veritatem
oderunt. Hemming. Syntag. de Scandalo.
trahunt compendium: That they who study to serve their own ends, and do
nothing but what they can draw to their own advantage, do wonderfully please
themselves in that piece of Scripture; and so does our Reconciler.

But (2.) willful and affected Ignorance does excommune us from the privilege
of a weak Brother as well as malice and stubbornness: We must not Chrysostom. ad
Romans 14. Homil. 26.
think (says St. Chrysostom) that ignorance will be sufficient for our
Defense: for there will come a time when we shall be punished for our
ignorance; that is to say, when ignorance it self shall find no pardon. For the
Jews were ignorant, but they were ignorant of those things, the ignorance
whereof deserves (or shall obtain) no pardon: the Greeks also were ignorant,
but they have no excuse. For if thou art ignorant of such things as cannot be
known, thy ignorance is not culpable: but if thou be'st ignorant of those
things which are both possible and easy to be known, thou do deservedly
suffer extreme punishment.

Let us take heed therefore that we be not imposed upon by the vizor or fraud
of pretended little ones. These Dissenters would (one while) be accounted weak
Brethren: but upon what account can we esteem them so? were they bred up (as
the Jews were under Moses) under another Dispensation? Were they taught another
Gospel than what S. Paul Preached? If they were; I am sure they have not so
learned Christ. If they were nursed up in false Principles from their
Childhood, is it not high time for them to put away those childish things? have
they not had time enough and means enough to be better informed? are they not
of age and of capacity to understand the doctrine and practice of the Christian
Liberty? what it is in it self, and the extent of its nature, and what it is in
its use, when it is limited and determined by Authority.

But they study to contend, and to build themselves up in Faction. They give
themselves up to vain jangling and perverse disputings, instead of an humble
and modest address unto their duty, Phil. 2. 13.
which they are obliged to perform without mumuring and disputing. If these be
S. Paul's Babes in Christ, I am sure they are very froward ones. But they
assume the title of weak Brethren for other ends, their weakness improves into
Faction, and therein they strengthen themselves, and boast of their might
against all Right and all Authority and Power, nothing will serve their turn
but Christ on his Throne, and that must be one of their own make, according to
their own imagination; and therefore it is no wonder, they think he can never
ascend it without the help of their Sedition.

Just such weak ones were those Fanatics which infested Germany in the infancy
of the Reformation, well esteemed they were at first for their presumptive
well-meaning, pitied for their simplicity and countenanced for their zeal and
fair pretensions unto Godliness: but when they began to set up themselves in
their taking Arms for Jesus Christ, and to oppose all established Order and
Government but their own; the Princes thought it high time (when they had
unmasq'd their hypocrisy) to lay aside their own compassion and kindness and
to deal with them according to their deserts, at the rate of headstrong and
sturdy Rebels.

But from the Persons he pleads for, under the feigned notion of weak Brethren
(whose pulse and temper we may be called upon to feel and examine a little more
precisely hereafter) let us pass on to consider the things he pleads against,
as things indifferent, whihc he thinks to be no less imprudently than
uncharitably imposed.

And here I must premise, that, this Reconciler, is as like to be an (...);
such a busie-body in matters which he has no concern to intermeddle in, as any
of those, whom the Apostle tells us do deservedly suffer (as 1 Pet. 3. 17.
chap. 4. 1^.
it is sit they should) amongst evil doers.

For has he any order from his Superiors to undertake the part of a
Reconciler? did they furnish him with instructions and give him his Rules and
Measures to guide him in a matter of this importance to Church and State? or
has he any Commission from the Dissenters to act and play the Advocate on their
behalf? have they made their last Will and Testament about things indifferent?
Does he know what they are content to bequeath to the Church, or what they are
resolved to take from it? Can he tell what will fully satisfy their
scrupulosity, and bring them into so hearty a compliance with us as may settle
a happy and a seasonable conformity amongst us? if he can produce no delegation
to this effect (the design he goes upon running Counter to the Laws and Customs
established) his attempt will be ridiculous, and appear to consist of as many
and as impertinent fooleries as those he has so civilly charged the Learned
Meisner with. But let us proceed.

When Moses the great Lawgiver was about to make the Tabernacle (a Type of the
Church) he was admonished thus of God, see that thou make Heb. 8. ^.
all things according to the Pattern showed to thee on the Mount. But I do not
find that ever he called the people to consult whether they approved of this or
that part of the pattern; nor do I find any attempt of theirs to question or
dispute the decency of any particular piece of that pattern. Now parallel to
the Pattern on the Mount, the Apostles had the mind of Christ after his
frequent Sermons and private discourses. And Acts 1. Gal. 1.
S. Paul had it also by a special revelation. And a prospect of this Pattern,
we have in those General Rules of the Apostles, let all things be done decently
and in order, to public edification and the Glory of God.

These were the Pattern on the Mount under the New Testament, the Ritual Law of
the Holy Gospel, by which alone the Authority of Governors is limited and
directed. And when matters of Ecclesiastical Discipline are established by
their Prudence according to this Rule, the subjects Duty is to submit and
follow their steps and practice. And if this were well observed it would
presently free them from all their doubts and scruples as well as from their
Schism; which can never be excused, unless they can prove, that their Governors
do act contrary to the divine Canon, in which case only, they may plead with S.
Peter whether it be right, etc. But Acts 4. 19.
the Reconciler can never make use of that Plea against our Governors in favor
of the Dissenters (if he reckons them amongst S. Paul's weak ones) because he
confesses (p. 73.) the Apostle has made as perfect and full a determination
against them as words can make.

And it is a little strange to observe the want of Ingenuity in this Reconciler:
(according to the wonted practice of the Party) he repeats their Cavils and
Objections, but never takes notice of the Answers that have been returned; it
seems they have been refuted with so much strength of reason, that he thought
himself not able enough to grapple with it. But this is not all, he makes a
great cry against the imposition of unnecessary Ceremonies, as if the
Constitution of this Church were over-burthened, and the good Seed of the
Gospel choked with the multitude of them, when in truth upon a strict
examination they will not amount unto a number. For we may observe

That he reckons some observances among things indifferent, which really are
not so. He does instance in bowing and kneeling, which are parts of Gods
external Worship, suggested by the light of nature, and enjoined by the second
precept of the Moral Law; which command binds always ( semper non ad semper)
but because this external Worship may be exhibited in several gestures of the
Body, which cannot be all performed at once, therefore it is left to the wisdom
of the Church to determine it ( pro hic and nunc) for place and season; for
which notwithstanding She wants not Her sufficient directions in holy Scripture.

2. We may observe that all things are not alike indifferent. As in those
Heavenly bodies, there is one Glory of the Sun, another of the Moon, and
another of the Stars and one Star differs from another Star in Glory: So a
great disparity there was betwixt the State and Magnificence of the first and
second Temple, for even that which was made glorious, had no glory in this
respect, by reason of the glory that excels. And to bring the discourse 2
Cor. 3. 10.
more close to our concern; a Surplice is generally a thing indifferent; and
yet, when we come to specialties, who sees not that there is a great difference
betwixt one of Cambrick and one of Canvas: and the richer it is in value
according to common estimation, the greater respect it shows to the person to
whom we do therein administer. And this is God's own account as well as mine;
when the people made the Table of the Lord contemptible by their lame and blind
Sacrifices, God upbraids them for their profane ingratitude; Offer it now unto
thy Governor: will he be pleased with Mal. 1. 7. 8.
thee, or accept thy person, says the Lord of Hosts? And we must remember that
it was the Poverty of the Offerer which God condescended to, when he accepted
of a pair of Turtle-doves or two young Pigeons for an Oblation; and this was
only in case of a private person, who was able to present no more; and so must
not be brought into example, when we are concerned for public Administrations.
And we may consider further that

The estimate of Veneration and Reverence is taken from the customs of several
Places and Countries: to put off our shoes in holy places among us would be
undecent; and so it would be thought to kiss the Kings hand upon our tails.
Whatever they do in other places, our Governors have adjudged the Gestures and
Observances in use among us to be the most Reverent; and it is left to their
judgment by Christ himself to determine it; and I know no Government of State or
Church in the World, that will lightly change their Country Customs to gratify
the designs or importunity of any impetuous Faction, that is crept in, or risen
up amongst them.

3. It Is to be considered that there are some things indifferent in the
General, and yet there is a necessity for their specification. And herein it is
left to the prudence of Governors to determine. This is so evident of it self,
that the Dissenters acknowledge it, in the instances of time and place. There
can be no public Administration, no solemn Assembly without them; herein
therefore they will allow Authority to determine.

And why not as well in the matter of Habit? For to go naked is against the Law
of natural decency; and to go in a Fools Coat is ridiculous: wherefore if
Modesty has virtue enough to make a thing necessary, some Habit ought to be
appointed for public Officers in their public and solemn Administrations; and
who should determine this but the Governors?

And the like we may plead for our Gesture, for some Gesture in the performance
of Gods Worship and Service is of absolute necessity (there can be nothing done
without it) Authority therefore must determine; and (as was hinted even now)
Holy Scripture does suggest enough for the direction of the Church herein, in
the Revelation made to the Holy Evangelist, we find the Saints and Elders in
three several postures; they were sitting, Rev. 4. 4. (2.) They were standing,
Rev. vii. 9, 3. they were falling down upon their knees or faces, Rev. iv. 10,
and 5, 8, 14. their sitting was a posture wherein they did attentively hear and
receive the Holy Oracle and Instructions of the Gospel (as Rev. iv. 4.) their
standing was, to profess their Faith in Christ and to sing Rev. 7. 9. 10. and
Rev. 5. 9, 10, 11, 12. compared with v. 8. and 14. Rev. 4. 10. 5. 8. 14. 7. 11.
God's Praises: their falling down (whether upon their knees or faces) was to
Adore and Worship.

No doubt their behavior was seemly and Reverent in all these several Postures
or Gestures: but sitting (as to hear) was not so Reverent as standing, and
standing (as to sing lauds and praises) was not so Reverent as prostration (or
falling upon their knees or faces) when they offered up their prayers ( Rev. v.
8.) or when they did adore and worship God and the Lamb, they performed it with
the profoundest Veneration and Reverence: and from this Pattern on the Mount,
the Church does take and prescribe Her practice.

For kneeling at the Sacrament, the penitent and devout soul must needs be
convinced that it is expedient Quia opus habemus stimulis, non parum valet
genuflexio. V. Calvin ad 6 Dan. 10. m. p. 73. in med. not that g^nuflexio
per^se necessaria in precibus.
for (1.) does not the profoundest adoration become us at the performing of our
greatest Duty and Service? And do we not here commemorate the most bitter
Passion and Death of our dearest Lord and Master; and shall not this humble us?
And (2.) upon what account did he suffer that shameful and accursed death? Was
it not for our guilt? Did not God lay on him the iniquity of us all? Was he not
wounded for our transgressions? And shall not this bring us upon our knees? 3.
Do we not here address our selves for Grace and Pardon? And shall we expect
such blessings upon our tails? Is it not a custom with us, and do we not think
it highly decent to kneel down when we kiss our Prince's hand to receive a
Temporal Benefaction? For my part, when I expect to receive the greatest
blessings of heaven from the ever blessed Jesus, by the hand of his Minister,
to sit then upon my tail (which may be decent enough in their conceit, who can
profane the holy Sacrament in lambs-wool) seems a most vile irreverence, and
to deal freely, I cannot find in my self the least inclination to communicate
at our Lords Table in such a posture of good-fellowship.

4. We are to consider, that where the Scripture is silent it is left to the
prudence of Governors to determine what things are most expedient; and without
this power there can be no Uniformity, nothing but Disorder and Confusion. The
very first Convention at Jerusalem, was to determine a Case of this nature; for
the things there specified Acts 15. 28, 29
were not necessary antecedently to the decree of that Council. The Apostle
commends highly such as observed Traditions and Ordinances of that kind, 1 Cor.
11. 2. 2 These. 3. 6.
and such as did not observe them, He censures as disorderly persons. Indeed
the scene of the Governors Legislative power lies chiefly in expedients. For as
to sin and moral virtue, therein they are but Executors to perform the will of
the Supreme Lawgiver.

And now, because our Protestant Reconciler upon all or no occasion lashes out
upon the Surplice and the sign of the Cross (taking no notice at all of what
has been offered elsewhere in their vindication) I shall add a word or two more
for the satisfaction of the ingenuous Reader. How did the Saints and Elders
appear before the Throne of God to the great Divine? It was in Rev. 4. 4, 7, 9
white Robes: if they had been clothed in Linsey-Woolsey, a Levitical
Conscience might have taken offense and bogled at it: but in representing the
state of the Church and Priesthood, in a Vision to his beloved Disciple and
Evangelist, we may assure our selves he would not make use of such a Habit as
were scandalous.

And for the sign of the Cross (tho they cry out of many) it is the only
Ceremony in all our practice of Religion; and it is but once applied to any
single person in his whole life, and that is done too, for the most part,
without his consent or knowledge (which therefore cannot be his sin) by the
hand of the public Minister. This is the only symbolical sign we have, that is
under no necessity and of no Divine Institution: yet this is a real
protestation of our Faith in Christ Crucified; which Faith we must not keep to
our selves as we may do some private opinion about matters of indifferency,
wherein the Church has made no determination. Romans 14. 21.
That this is innocent and justified by the practice of those Tribes in
building their symbolical Altar, and of Daniel in setting open his windows,
(which are approved by all Divines, and by God himself) and that these very
examples are written for our learning we are taught by Mr. Calvin ad Dan. 6.
10. in p. 73. princ.

Discamus itaque, etc. and Lavater. in Librum Josuae c. 22. p. 72. 2. m.
exemplum piae solicitudinis parentum pro filiis, etc. as has been sufficiently
declared elsewhere (tho the Reconciler thought fit to pass it over in silence.)

But the Presbyterians are highly obliged to own that proof if they will
maintain their own public Communion and protested Doctrine; for in their, Jus
Divinum Regiminis Ecclesiastici, page 16. they lay down this for a Rule in
Divinity, That the ordinary examples of the Godly approved in Scripture, being
against no general precept, have the force of a general Rule, and are to be
followed; and p. 22. they say, Those examples in Scripture are obligatory,
whose ground, reason, scope or end are obligatory, and of a Moral Nature, and
as much concern one Christian as another; whether they be the examples under
Old or New Testament.

Now I say that by a parity of Reason, the command and practice of the Church
for the use of the sign of the Cross in Baptism is obligatory; because the
ground, reason, scope or end of it, which is the confession of our Faith and
Protestation of our Christianity, is obligatory and of a moral nature, and as
much concern one Christian as another, one Church as another, one time as
another.

Having thus briefly showed the nature of those impositions, which this
Reconciler does condemn; and given a short account of the temper of those weak
Brethren on whose behalf he so earnestly solicites an indulgence; I cannot but
reflect upon his Preface; wherein he does little less than traduce many worthy
Persons by alleging their condescentions, as if they had been the yielding up
of a Right to those Dissenters against that Authority and Government, which
themselves did constantly assert and manage.

Indeed their Charity and Compassion carried many of them very far that way.
They saw us in a storm; and our condition to be much like to theirs in the
27th. of the Acts (15. 18, 19, 20.) When the Ship was caught (the Church
assaulted hy a violent Faction) and could not bear up into the Wind, we let her
drive. And being exceedinly tossed with a Tempest, the next day they lightened
the Ship: and the third day we cast out with our own hands the takling of the
Ship. And when neither Sun nor Stars, in many days appeared, and no small
tempest lay on us, all hope that we should be saved was then taken away. And
this, upon the matter, was the case of the Episcopal and Loyal Party, who were
Embarked in the Established Church of England; their crafty Adversaries to
raise a Storm against them, had put a conceit into the light heads of the
Rabble, that they were bound for Rome too, as S. Paul was in another sense;
Hereupon their Frantic Zeal pushed them with an impetuous fury into Tumults,
wherein the poor distressed Barque was so tossed, She was in danger to be sunk,
or split and dashed to pieces. In this forlorn condition no wonder their danger
should prompt them to cast Anchor upon the unsteady sands, or comply with any
course or method, that might be thought expedient for their present safety.
Sometimes empty Casks are thrown out by the skillful Mariner to make diversion
for the ungovernable Leviathan, when he threatens to overturn their Vessel. And
if a liberty of Prophesying be not sufficient to divert their rage and make
them at a loss, and stop their cry; then an Irenicum may be thought a pious
charm to allay their heats, to appease their animosities and to bring them to a
more calm composure.

Perhaps this Reconciler thinks we are in a Storm still; and it is no wonder if
he be of that opinion having taken so much pains to raise a blustering wind to
blow up his Euroclydon of Fanatic Zeal amongst us. But it is observable in
experience, that such well-meant attempts, at such a season, do for the most
part give advantage to the watchful Adversary, seldom answer their expectation,
and never take effect, to the obtaining that pious end, which their worthy and
learned Authors aimed at.

2. I find, that learned and good men may be mistaken; and it is an error of the
right hand when Charity leads them to it. We are told that Mr. Hales found
occasion to bid John Calvin good night: and whatever Essays of wit might come
to his Friends hands when his Fancy was brisk and sprightful, I doubt not, when
he came to a more mature judgment he took a solemn leave of many of those
unhappy hallucinations, which had been more to his honor, if they had been
buried in his ashes. I am sure his Tractate of Schism has been confuted no less
than three four times over. And for some others of a much higher rank than He,
to my knowledge, they retracted those opinions which had given so much
encouragement to the Factious Party, and bewailed their mistaken charity with
great remorse upon all occasions, to make amends for the Scandal their
well-meant tenderness had given to the Loyal and true Conformist.

3. There are none of them, I dare be bold to say, that ever intended such
dismal disapidations of the Church as the Dissenters had Projected, dreamed not
of the introduction of such confusions as were the necessary product of their
pernicious practices; and were so far from adhering to them in the prosecution
of their wicked Designs, that for the most part of them, they were sufferers
under that 11th. Persecution.

For (4.) Their constant Practice in the use of the Liturgy as it witnessed
their steadfast affection to the Church Established, so it betrayed them to the
Spite and Malice of the Faction, who were carrying on a design to overthrow
it. To say they acted herein against their Judgment, would bring their
sincerity into question, and make their Authority of no value, and consequenty
insignificant as to that purpose this Reconciler produces it for. We must
conclude therefore, that whatever their condescentions were, they were intended
merely to gratify the present weakness of such as they believed to be
conscientious; but not all to countenance their Nonconformity.

5. For Foreign Churches and Universities, we very well understand both their
Principles and their Practice. And we are well assured that the Doctrine and
the Discipline, the Customs and Observances of the present Church of England
are fully justified by them both; what esteem they had for us, before the late
times of Deformation we may learn from the pen of the learned and noble Deodate
in his Epistle to the late Assembly; wherein he gives us this Encomium, That
Flourishing England, the very eye and excellency of all the Churches, Christ's
own choice, purchase and peculiar, the Sanctuary of the afflicted, the Arcenal
of the faint-hearted, the Magazine of the needy, the Royal Standard of good
hope (p. 6, 7. and p. 17.) He does acknowledge and solemnly declare it, That on
the Theater of the Universal Church, the Kingdom and Church of England have
hitherto excelled and out-shined all the Churches upon Earth in Holiness and
Glory.

Such as well understand the happy constitution of this Church of England
cannot but have the like value for Her; and they that are of that persuasion,
can never with a sober judgment and deliberation, utter any thing in Derogation
to Her Dignity. If this Reconciler can produce any thing from their example to
our prejudice (tho it is far more fit that we should be a Pattern and Law to
them, than they to us) let him give us but one instance, wherein they destroyed
their own Establishment to gratify a discontented and Dissenting Faction: the
contrary whereof, has been sufficiently proved to be the obstinate resolution
of those Churches, as well of the Calvinian, as of the Lutheran Denomination.

6. I say, we have the Authority of many other excellent persons of another
Judgment, to name some few, Whitgift, Bancroft, Andrews, Laud, Sanderson,
Hooker, Heylin, Hammond; whose judgments we have greater reason to rely upon;
because they judged the case with a more deliberate diligence, and weighed the
importance and consequences of a Change with a better attention, and by a
clearer and exacter observation, discovered more fully the temper and design of
this Dissenting Party. And upon this account I shall only subjoyn the
Resolutions of a Wise and Learned Prince with a great and prudent Statesman.

King James concludes his Proclamaion (of March 5. in the first of his beign)
in these words;

We do admonish all men, that hereafter they shall not expect nor attempt any
further alteration in the Common and Public Form of Gods Service from this
which is now established; for that neither will we give way for any to presume,
that our own Judgment having determined in a matter of this weight, shall be
swayed to alteration by the frivolous suggestions of any light Spirit. Neither
are we ignorant of the inconveniences that do arise in Government, by
admitting innovation in things once settled by mature deliberation: and how
necessary it is to use constancy in the upholding the public determinatins of
States; for that such is the unquietness and unstedfastness of some
dispositions, affecting every year new Forms of things, as, if they should be
followed in their unconstancy, would make all actions of State ridiculous and
contemptible: whereas the steadfast maintaining of things by good advice
established, is the weal of all Commonwealths.

And his Grace the Lord Archbishop Juxton soon after his Majesty's happy
Restoration, discoursing with me about the Indulgence (which was then the
common talk of all the Town,) he was pleased to express himself after this
manner.

That if the yielding of some few small matters (of indifferency) would win
them to join cordially with us in the practice of the rest, he could very well
be content with it. But (his Grace added) you know Mr. W. I have sometimes sat
at the Helm, and truly I have studied the temper of these men, and could never
find them so ingenuous; Assure your self Mr. W. there is no way to Govern this
sort of People, but by a straight Rein. For gratify them in any thing, and you
but encourage them to ask more. Your condescension shall be their Argument that
their requiries were just, and your conviction that your own practice is
unwarrantable, nor will they ever rest satisfied till all matters of decency
and Order be laid aside, to make way for their own (as his Grace was pleased to
call them) newfangled Innovations.

After all this, methinks, so many Authentic Instruments, Proclamations and
Acts of Parliament, should be sufficient to supersede all that has been
alleged, as of a much inferior stamp and quality.

But before we proceed further I shall offer two or three things to the Readers
serious Consideration.

1. The first is this, That the Church on Earth is not in a state of Triumph;
and though this Reconciler may be a Trimmer in a modern Notion, yet if the
Bride of the Lamb wants trimming, the Dissenters (tho they take his advice
along with them) have no Authority to appoint Her Ornaments, nor are they
called to be Her Dressers. Christ has taken a course to present Her to Himself
a Glorious Church, not having wrinkle, Ephesians. 5. 27.
spot or blemish at the day of Marriage. In the interim She is as a heap of
Corn not clean winnowed from the chaff; as a field of Wheat with a mixture of
Tares or Darnel: And this the Church is concerned to Tolerate, lest She should
root up the Wheat for the Tares sake, or lest the good grain being separated
from the chaff before the time and so left naked, Aug. Ep.
instead of being carried into the Granary, should be cast out to be picked up
by the fouls of the Air. And according to another of our Lords Parables, we
suffer the bad Fishes amongst the good (till we come to the shore) Ne diruptis
per Schismata retibus, dum quasi malos pisces cavemus, in mare perniciosae
libertatis exeamus: Lest Schism tearing the nets of the Church in pieces, we
should lanch out into the Sea of a pernicious Liberty. But as the Father says
in another of his Epistles, tho the Church being set among much chaff and
tares, tolerates many things, tamen quae sunt contra fidem vel bonam vitam, non
approbat, nec tacet nec facit. And I dare be bold to say, that in these
respects, this Church of England is as innocent, and as eminently watchful as
ever any Church was since the days of the Apostle.

2. It Is observable that many well meaning Souls are strangely imposed upon by
the plea of a mistaken Charity. Charity I know has in many respects, the
sovereignty of all virtues, and ought to have a great command in the ^ Cor. 13.
last.
conduct of all our actions: but to transform her into a foolish pity would be
a huge degrading of her. A fond Mother will give the froward child the Apple as
often as he whines and whimpers for it: but the prudent Father thinks the Rod a
more useful instrument to cure him of his frowardness, and yet his affection is
never the less toward him. Correction is a work of mercy as well as alms; and
many times more seasonable and beneficial. St. Jude has given us an excellent
Rule. And of some have compassion making a difference: and others save with
fear pulling them out of Jude Ep. 22, 23
the fire. Such as cannot be won to do their duties by instruction and good
advice, with other wholesome instances of gentleness, must fall under the
correction of a severer discipline; and there is some kind that will not be
cast out otherwise. See Aretius ad 2 Cor. 13. 2. infra.
The stubborn Egyptian will not conform to Moses's Treaty, till he sees his
Rod turned into a Serpent. This is severe you will say, but it is no more than
what we learn as well from the Practice as the Doctrine of the Apostle? For
does he not threaten the Corinthians 2 Cor. 13. 2, 10.
with his Rod? And does he not tell them he will not spare, but will use
sharpness; and this he threatens against the Schismatics, no doubt, as well as
other impenitent sinners that he should find amongst them, 2 Cor. 13. 2. And
wherefore did he use or threaten this Severity? was it because he loved them
not? this he refers to the searcher of hearts 2 Cor. 11. 11.
to judge. This was sound Doctrine and wholesome Discipline without question in
the Apostles time.

But perhaps the case may be altered now; no, it was not we are sure in St.
Austins time. Quid igitur hic faciat Ecclesiae Ep. 167.
medicina salutem omnium materna Charitate conquirens, tanquam inter
phreneticos and Lethargicos aestuans? nunquid contemnere, nunquid desistere vel
debet vel potest? utriusque sit necesse est molesta, quia neutris est inimica.
Nam and Phrenetici nolunt ligari, and Lethargici nolunt excitari, sed
perseverat diligentia charitatis, Phreneticum castigare, Lethargicum stimulare,
ambos amare. Ambo offenduntur, sed ambo diliguntur: ambo molestati, quandiu
aegri sunt indignantur, sed ambo sanati gratulantur.

Now what remedy can the Church (which with the tenderness of a Mother seeks
the good of all her children) apply in this case, whilst she is embroiled in
the contentions of the Frantic on the one hand, and the Stupid and Sullen on
the other? She neither can well nor indeed ought she utterly to cast them off,
or cease admonishing them; which course soever she takes it must needs trouble
her, because she has a kindness for both. But so long as neither the Frantic
and unruly will be restrained by her Laws, nor will the sullen be provoked to
observe them, she in charity to them both proceeds to chastise the one and
rouse up the other, and yet retains a love for them both. Both take offense,
and yet what is done is in love to both; both are apt to fret and murmur, and
are angry in their sickness as if they were wronged, but upon recovery are glad
to find the wholesome effects of those means applied to them.

I shall trouble the Reader but with one praemonition more; which concerns the
Reconcilers dealing with Dr. Womock. The Body of his discourse this Champion of
Dissension found solid, and of too high proof for the little strength of his
Assault and Battery; and therefore with great wisdom and forecast he never
attempts it: but yet to show his good will to the cause, and because some sort
of men (out of their great zeal) must be meddling, he acts the part of the old
Serpent and falls a nibling at the Heels of it. But that verdict was drawn up
with so much evidence of truth, that the Dr. dares venture it before any Bench,
and present it to any that bears the Character and Title of a Judge, except the
Protestant Joyner or an Ignoramus Jury.

With the Readers Patience, we will try how this Reconciler does attaque it. He
begins, in reference to the fourteenth and fifteenth chapters of the Epistle to
the Romans, and at page 89. of the Verdict. Where the Dr. laid down this
Position; That the Rules of Advice in those Chapters were directions for common
use among private Christians: (and here I am afraid the Reconciler had no
honest meaning in changing the Drs. words, saying) and not Decrees; whereas the
Dr. goes on thus) but for Decrees and Orders of public use and practice, He
(the Apostle) gave out none to this Church; because as yet here was no
Jurisdiction settled, no Laws made, no Governors appointed to put them in
Execution. To prove this, the Dr. alleged four Arguments, tho the Reconciler
takes notice but of three.

1. The first of those Arguments was taken from Grotius, and it is built upon
the Apostles command to those Romans; which was only to mark such as caused
Divisions and Scandals, and not to excommunicate them: From whence that Learned
man collects, that there was not then at Rome any Presbytery or settled
Jurisdiction.

In answer to this Plea, the Reconciler page 69.
says, 1. That it is manifestly false. 2. That were it true, it alters not the
case, nor does it take off from the strength of the present Argument.

But to mollify the sharpness of his style, in saying, it is manifestly false,
he is pleased to be a little more civil (and that is much in him) and to say,
only 1. That it is not true; For (says he) can any man imagine (yes, he knows,
Grotius, and Aretius, and others as well as Dr. Womock, do imagine it) that in
such a Church, whose Faith was spoken of throughout the World, there should be
no Ministers to Baptize, to Preach the Word, to administer the Sacrament of the
Lords Supper to them? and if there were such, there must be a standing Order of
Presbyters licensed by the Apostles or their Bishop, or exercising their
Ministerial Function without license.

Before I return my Answer, I must in Charity deliver the Reconciler out of his
own snare, or at least preserve the unwary Reader from it: or exercising their
Ministerial Function without License: This is a fallacy, which the Logicians
call petitio principii: whether there were such a Ministerial Function settled
as yet at Rome, is the thing in question: but the Reconciler takes it for
granted, and so disputes upon it. He should have proved it first, and then he
might very fairly have made his Inference. In the mean while, I shall tell the
Reader for his satisfaction,

That Rome being the Imperial City, and having Commerce with all the World,
'twas no wonder that all the world should soon have intelligence that the
Gospel was brought and entertained amongst them.

But as a very learned and judicious person observes, the Church (or rather the
Christians) at Rome, when S. Paul wrote his Epistle thither, seems (as that
also at Antioch was) for the most part to be made up of Foreigners (both of
Jews and Gentiles) whom business Acts 28. 17. Romans 1. 15. 16.
drew thither from other converted Provinces) as appears both from the Apostles
salutations of former Acquaintance Anon. Paraphrase and Annot. on the Romans in
the preface.
(chap. 16.) and from his writing the Epistle in Greek.

Whether the Sacraments were as yet commonly administered there, is not asserted
in that Epistle, (for the mention of Baptism in the sixth Chapter, will not
evince it, that it was) but the Gospel of the Resurrection could not want
Apostles and Evangelists in a large sense, to publish it. The good women, who
brought the glad tidings of our Saviors return from the Grave with life and
glory, are somewhere styled Apostolorum Apostolae, the Apostles of the Apostles.

After the death of S. Stephen, the Disciples who were scattered abroad, Acts
8. 4.
went every where Preaching the Word. But were all Apostles properly so called?
Had all power to Plant and Establish and Govern Churches? This Reconciler Tit.
1. 5.
knows the Gospel was Preached in Creete before any Discipline or Government
was established.

The Schoolmen tell us, with great truth and reason that Potestas Ordinis, and
Potestas Jurisdictionis are too several things. There are several parts of the
holy Function; I will recite them as they are reckoned up by Dr. Sclater, There
is ad 2 These. 3. 6.
Potestas Ministerii (at large) Authority to Preach the Gospel and administer
the Holy Sacraments ( Mat. 28. 19.) (2.) there is Potestas Ordinis; a power to
Ordein Ministers, and make Laws for external Government, (1 Timothy 5. 22. Tit. 1.
5.) (3.) there is Potestas (...) or Censurae, to administer Censures, less or
greater, according to the quality of Offenses.

Every man's zeal and knowledge (where there is no Organical Church settled) was
license enough for him to report what had been done at Jerusalem, and what was
the present Faith and Practice there. If they had any Ministers to Preach with
Authority amongst them, no doubt they had their Holy Orders and a Divine
Mission, and were put in Office to that purpose; but it is most likely they had
none; because tho they had knowledge to admonish one another of the Doctrine
they had received, yet they had no Authority to teach as S. Ambrose has
observed, Romans 15. 14. non dixit, ut invicem se doceant, sed admoneant; and if
there had been any such spiritual guides, doubtless, in such a case of
difficulty and danger, the Apostle would have referred the Christians to their
Conduct as he did in other places.

And yet every man that has a license as well as ability to preach the Gospel,
has not presently the Authority of a Governor. Philip was an Evangelist, and
Preached Christ to the City of Samaria, Baptized Converts, and wrought Miracles
amongst them, yet he had no Jurisdiction there. The Apostles sent Peter and
John from Jerusalem to lay their hands upon them to Confirm them, Acts 8. 14.
to 17.

Secondly, says our Reconciler, The Apostle among many others, whom he calls
his Helpers in Christ, approved in Christ, laborers in Christ. Romans 16. 3, 9,
12. who may all rationally be deemed to be Church Officers (and as rationally
deemed to be none) Presbyters, Deacons, and Diaconesses, makes mention of
Andronicus and Junias, of note amongst Christ's Apostles, i. e. (says our
Reconciler) among the Preachers of the Gospel, the Teachers of the Christian
Faith. If these be his Church-Governors, then there was a woman got into the
Chair at Rome before Pope Joan was heard of; for Theophilact says that Junias
was the name of a woman, and Grotius thinks she was wife to Andronicus.

But what is all this to a settled Jurisdiction, to established Laws, and
Governors appointed to put them in execution; which was the thing he was
obliged to prove? and now to pay him back a little of his own coin (of the
finer metal,) who could imagine this Reconciler would have had the confidence
to oppose a deliberate Verdict upon a Melius inquirendum; and pretermitting all
the solid Grounds of Truth, Reason and Authority, upon which it is established,
think to quash it by his own vain Imaginations?

All the Ancients that write of the Church of Rome, do conclude that it was
founded by those two great Apostles S. Peter and S. Paul, and S. Paul being the
Apostle of the Incircumcision, and above all the rest adorned with the title of
a chosen vessel to bear the name and Gospel of Christ among the Gentiles, Acts
9. 15. in all reason we should allow him a good share in the establishment of
that Church which was the most considerable in his whole Province; but it is
evident when he wrote his Epistle he had never been at Rome to do it; and tho
he sent Phaebe with his Epistle, I hope no man will be so ill advised as to
think he gave her any Commission to Govern.

If there had been any such Governors there, where should we look for them, but
among those persons (of such excellent note) whom S. Paul salutes; and yet if
the Reconciler will needs have them to be Church-Governors, the first of the
Catalogue is a Woman, (Romans 16. 3.) Priscilla, so likewise, 2 Timothy 4. 19. She
is called Prisca, and set before Aquila, and it is thought (what e're the rest
were) that her Husband was her Convert. Priscillam quidem priori loco ponit,
cujus ratio certa vix reddi potest. Si tamen conjecturis locus est, illustrior
fortussis fuit uxor, and magis nota omnibus, vel prior ad fidem conversa
maritum postea instituit. Gualt. ad Romans Homil. 93. in p. 225. 2. in fine. He
sets down Priscilla in the first place, for which no certain Reason can be
given; but if we may conjecture, probably the Wife might be of the more
honorable extraction, and so more publicly known, or being first converted to
the Faith her self, afterward instructed her Husband in the same.

That S. Peter was there to plant a Church and settle Governors, so as to make
a Coalition of Jew and Gentile into one united body, before S. Paul wrote this
Epistle, if he can prove it solidly, the present Church of Rome shall thank him
for it: but the generality of Protestant Writers are against it. Take Gualterus
instead of all the rest, ad Rom, 16. 7, 16. Homil. 94. Non parum facit hic
locus ad confutandum impudens Papistarum figmentum, etc. This place (says he)
makes strongly for the confutation of that impudent Fiction of the Papists, who
dream of S. Peter's coming to Rome in the second year of Claudius, and that he
first constituted a Church there, over which he himself did preside for five
and twenty years together. Now if they say true in this, He must be at Rome
when S. Paul wrought this Epistle. Why then makes he no mention of him? or what
reason can be alleged why the name of Peter only should be left out of that
long and honorable catalogue of those men who were famous in that Church at
that time? was it because he was ignorant of his being there? But this cannot
well be, seeing that the Faith of Rome was published in most parts of the
World; and how could so great an Apostle escape S. Paul's knowledge, who was
acquainted with so many of far meaner quality? or shall we think that he
concealed S. Peter's name out of emulation? But far be such a thing from the
sincerity and uprightness of an Apostle; and why should he envy Peter his
honor who speaks so honorably of many others far inferior to him? Therefore
our Romanists will never be able to make good this fancy of theirs. For what
Answer will they give S. Luke, who says that Peter was present at the Council
of Jerusalem, which (as St. Paul witnesses in his second Chapter to the
Galathians) was held in the eighteenth year after his Conversion, which
(according to true computation) falls on the ninth year of Claudius? besides
these men are not aware how great mischief they do S. Peter, when they talk of
his sitting as Bishop of Rome for full five and twenty years, who (according to
Christ's command) ought to have traveled up and down and preached the Gospel in
several places. And truly if (with other Histories) we compare those places
which are found in sacred Scripture, we shall find that those later Writers who
questioned S. Peter's ever being at Rome at all, had some show of Reason for
their conjecture. But because this may seem somewhat difficult to prove by
reason of the general consent of Ancient Writers, who affirm that he suffered
Martyrdom at Rome in the last year of Nero, I shall easily assent unto that.
But, that he was the first founder of the Church of Rome, and performed the
Office of a Bishop there, this I positively affirm to be false. Thus far
Gualterus. And this is confirmed He lived more than eight hundred years ago.
by a very Ancient and Learned Writer, viz. Haymo in Epist. ad Romans Argum. A
Corintho Civitate Metropoli Achaiae Regionis Scripsit Apostolus Paulus Romany
hanc Epistolam, quos non ipse, non Petrus, non Quilibet Apostolorum duodecim
primum instruxit, sed quidam Judaeorum credentium, qui ab Hierosolymis Romam
venientes (ubi Princeps Orbis residebat, cui erant ipsi Subjecti) fidem, quam
apud Hierosolymam didicerunt, Romany Evangelizaverunt: From the City Corinth
the Metropolis of all Achaia the Apostle Paul writ this Epistle to the Romans,
who were instructed in the Principles of Christianity neither by Paul himself,
nor Peter, nor yet by any of the twelve Apostles, but some of the believing
Jews, who came from Jerusalem to Rome (which was the seat of the Emperor, whose
Subjects they were) and made known that Faith to the Romans which they had
learned at Jerusalem.

Soto is of opinion that when S. Paul sent his Epistle to Rome, They had not so
much as heard of S. Peter's Vision at Joppa, (Act. 10.) which is an argument
that he had not spent so much time there as some imagine. And truly I had
rather persuade my self that S. Peter had not been there at all, before that
time, than think he carried himself among them, as Calvin says he had done at
Antioch, Petrus ita Judaizabat, ut Gentes cogeret in servitutem: and simul hoc
quasi praejudicio derogaret Pauli Doctrinae. Non tenuit ergo modum; quia
gratificandi majorem curam quam aedificandi habuit, magisque respexit quid
Judaeis placeret, quam quid universo corpori expediret. Calv. ad Gal. 2. 11.
Peter did so far comply with the Jews, that he had almost brought the Gentiles
under the slavery of the Law: and likewise hereby gave so great offense to the
Gentiles that it took off very much from the force and efficacy of S. Paul's
Doctrine. So that herein he exceeded the bounds of his Commission, because he
applied his care more in gratifying some few than in edifying the whole Church,
and regarded more the pleasing of one part, the Jews, than the benefit and
expedience of the whole Body. And again, ad verse 14. Ideo claudicationis
arguitur quia nimis serviliter Judaeis obsequebatur, Calvin ad Gal. 2. 14.
therefore S. Paul reproves him of unsteadiness and wavering in his opinion
because he saw him so servilely complyant with the Jews. Paulo visus est
(Petrus) reprehensione dignissimus. Nam suo facto corrumpebatur synceritas
Evangelii, quasi opus haberet tutelis Mosaicis, Aret. ad Gal. 2. S. Paul
thought it very necessary to rebuke him, because through his means the Gospel
suffered very much in its credit and repute, as though it stood in need of the
Mosaical observances to sustain it.

At the best, when this Epistle was sent, we are sure there was not sufficient
Authority at Rome to quell the Faction, or suppress those Impostors and false
Teachers who were the Fomenters of it: But S Paul's own personal presence was
needful to this effect, with the fullness of his Apostolical Endowments and the
Gift of Miracles, as we shall show anon.

In the mean while it will appear those little Arguments (as the Reconciler is
pleased to undervalue them) collected out of Grotius and Catharinus are of so
great force to the purpose for which they were produced, that all his little
Cavils or Exceptions, upon examination will be of no moment to the contrary.
His exceptions are these.

1. That Exhortation. Mark them which cause Divisions and avoid them (Romans 16.
17.) he says, is parallel to that in 2 Thessalonians. 3. 6, 14. if any man obey not our
word, note that man, withdraw your selves from every Brother that walks
disorderly. If this be all he can say, we shall grant it to him, and so does
the learned Grotius; who makes the case exactly parallel; His words are these,
Si Presbyterium ibi fuisset, jussisset eos excommunicari, plane quia
Presbyterium non erat, jussit tales improbe viventes vitari, id est, familiarem
eorum consuetudinem defugi, quod jus singulis Christianis competit, (Grot. ad 2
These. 3. 6.) If there had been Governors and a Jurisdiction settled there, he
would have commanded to have been excommunicated (those who lived wickedly and
disorderly:) But because as yet there were no such Governors or Jurisdiction,
He only enjoins them to avoid familiar conversation with them, which is a right
that belongs to all Christians.

But, says our Reconciler, that there were then Church-Governors among the
Thessalonians, is evident from chap. 5. 12, 13. why he did not name the
Epistle, He knows best, but I can guess: perhaps he would have had us swallow
it, that it was in the very same Epistle: But it is in that which we call the
first Epistle, where the Apostle says, we beseech you Brethren to know them
which labor among you, and are over you in the Lord, and admonish you, and to
esteem them very highly for their work-sake. Here indeed it seems there was a
Jurisdiction and Governors settled to execute it. But this Reconciler knows very
well, that S. Paul's Epistles are not placed in our Bibles, in the same order
they were written in; The Epistle which we call the first, was written after
that, which goes, among us, for the second; The learned Grotius has given us
his reasons for it, as well in his Preface upon 2 These. 1. as in another
learned and judicious Treatise (in the first volume of his works) to which he
refers his Reader. And it is worth our observation, That, writing to them when
there were no Governors settled among them to oversee and correct emergent
miscarriages, He makes use of his Apostolical Authority to oblige them to do as
he should think fit to direct 2 These. 3. 12, 14.
and Order. We command and exhort by our Lord Jesus Christ, that if any man
obey not our word (of command) signify that Man by an Epistle, that according
to the Character you shall give of him, I may decree what is fit to be done to
him, (or what Discipline he ought to undergo:) In the interim (if his Offense
be Scandalous) have no familiar conversation with him, that he may (if
possible) be shamed into Reformation; But when there were Governors settled, the
Apostle alters his style to them: 1 These. 5. 12, 13. after he had admonished
the Disciples to have a special regard to those Spiritual Guides, and a high
value for them; He treats them with great respect, when he puts them in mind of
their Duty, Now we beseech you Brethren, warn them that are disorderly.

But the Reconciler goes on with his exceptions and tells us, The same Apostle
writing to Timothy concerning such who had a Form of Godliness but denied the
power of it, writes certainly of Persons, who did as much deserve the Churches
Censures as those he mentioned, Romans 16. 17. (This Reconciler always has a
reserve of kindness for such as make Divisions, and Dissentions in the Church)
and Timothy says he, to whom he writes, had power to inflict those Censures,
and yet he only says unto him, from such turn away, The place is 2 Timothy 3. 5.

But to this I reply. 1. That no doubt Timothy (after so long converse with
this great Apostle) very well understood the several parts of his Duty; and the
Apostle did not think fit to prescribe him particular Rules of Government,
having charged him, in the General, in his former Epistle, chap. 5. 21. To
proceed according to the merits of every cause that should be brought before
him, and to do nothing with Partiality. 2. He speaks there of a dangerous sort
of Impostors, which crept into Houses and had cunning enough to lead Captive
silly Women; and such false Apostles as take sanctuary in great Families, the
Church Censures cannot always reach them: Timothy had not then the assistance
of a Secular arm, and perhaps they were not to be restrained without it.

3. The Apostle forseaw the Reign of those Impostors would be but short; and
concluded it would be most prudent to let them alone to expose themselves to
contempt and scorn, to their own ruin, and this is the importance of those
words, (2 Timothy 3. 9.) They shall proceed no further: for their folly shall be
manifest unto all men, as perhaps our Reconcilers misadventure may be ere he be
few months older. But this shall suffice for the vindication of Grotius his
little Argument. The next Argument was that of Catharinus; it was but short
indeed; and the Reconciler was too short-sighted to discern the force of it,
'twas taken from the Apostles expostulation, who art thou that judge another
man's Servant? Cum non sis Pastor, aut Dominus ejus; as Catharinus very truly
and judiciously makes the sense of the Apostle; when thou art not his Lord or
Bishop and have no jurisdiction and command over him. This Argument says our
Reconciler is extremely frivolous; (which argues he does not understand it) for
(says he) if this be the import of the Apostles words, why do thou judge
another man's Servant, who art not his Pastor, then his own Master, to whom he
stands, or falls, must be his Pastor; and therefore he must have a Pastor. But
the Master there mentioned is so plainly God, that it is but lost time to prove
it. Thus our Reconciler argues.

But under favor he has ensnared himself in a Fallacy, which is called
Ignoratio Elenchi; For the Assertion was this, that those Rules were given to
private Persons; and the reason of that were because there was no Governors
then settled among the Christians at Rome, and the proof of this was taken from
a hint in Catharinus; why do thou judge thy Brother? cum non sis Pastor aut
Dominus ejus: He had no Bishop or Pastor to Govern him in Church Matters; and
therefore the Apostle refers him to God's Tribunal.

And now I hope the Argument will be clear to the understanding of our
Reconciler, for thus it is framed; They that were accountable to none but God
(in matters of Religion) They were under no Jurisdiction; they who were under
no Jurisdiction had no Governors, and consequently these directions could not
concern them, who were not then in Being, especially being a Provision for
quietness, designed for want of them.

And here it will not be impertinent to take notice of Aquinas his observation
(in Prol.) That S. Paul wrote fourteen Epistles, whereof nine were to instruct
the Church of the Gentiles, four to direct the Prelates and Governors of the
Church, and one for the Instruction of the People of Israel. For the whole
Doctrine concerns the Grace of Christ, which falls under a threefold
consideration. One way, as it is in Christ the Head, and so it is commended to
us in the Epistle to the Hebrews. Another way as it is in the Principal Members
of the Body Mystical; and so it is commended in those Epistles which are
directed to the Prelates. A third way as it is in the Mystical Body it self,
which is the Church; and so it is commended in those Epistles, which were sent
to the Gentiles, amongst which this to the Romans was one, and not directed to
the Prelates of the Church, as Aquinas well observes.

And it is further observable, That here are Rules given (and particularly in
the 14th and 15th Chapters) which are inconsistent with the Governors Duty; For
(1.) He passes by the Bishops Office, and applies himself to the Disciples;
and instead of giving order to the first to excommunicate the scandalous
offenders, He requires the other to avoid them. (2.) He forbids judging, which
had been an obstruction of Justice and Discipline, if there had been any
Officers to execute and perform it. (3.) As he had done by the Women in another
sense, so here he injoyns the Men silence, to keep their Faith, their Opinion
and Knowledge to themselves; which in Bishops and Pastors was an obstructing of
Edification.

It Is clear S. Paul sends them a Prohibition against Judging: but this we may
be sure S. Paul would not have done against such as had Authority to Judge;
whence it will follow, That he sent not this prohibition to Church-Governors,
and from hence it will follow that there were none such amongst them, which was
the thing undrtaken to be proved as was hinted by Catharinus.

The Argument may be put into Form thus: Such as have a Jurisdiction and Divine
Authority to Judge of Scandals, and Offenses, those Persons the Apostle did not
forbid to judge; the reason is because the holy Apostle doubtless would not
supersede a Divine Authority, and obstruct the course of Justice and
Reformation. But Governors (where they were duly settled) had a Jurisdiction and
Divine Authority to judge of Scandals and Offenses; Therefore the Apostle did
not forbid them to Judge.

Here are but two things to be made good, to clear the Argument from all
possible objection. (1.) That there were among those Christians at Rome, many
Misdemeanors, Scandals and Offenses, matters fit for Inquisition and Censure.
2. That Church-Governors had Authority (where they were duly settled) to inquire
into them and Censure them. The first is clearly proved from the Admonition of
the Apostle, Romans 16. 17. Mark them which cause Divisions and Offenses and
avoid, etc. Had there not been such Persons among them, they could neither have
been observed nor avoided, Non quod condemnatione digna non agat, ne ipsum
judices; he does not forbid judging upon this account, because he had done
nothing worthy of Condemnation, as Bruno, and Oecumenius, Theophylact
Infirmitas non ad corporis (imbecillitatem) sed ad animi superstitionem
referenda. Bullinger ad Romans 141. in margin; and so Hyperius and others.
and our Modern Commentators: And among the best of those weak ones the Apostle
was so tender of, there were faults enough to be blamed: (1.) Ignorance of that
Liberty wherewith Christ had made them free: (2.) Superstition in adhering so
stiffly to the Ritual Law of Moses, and (3.) Usurpation of Authority to Censure
and Condemn others who were better Christians than themselves.

Here was matter enough for the Cognizance of a Court of Judicature: but
Authority was wanting; there were no Governors established; for had there been
such they had had power to judge; which is the second thing that is to be
proved; And for this we can look no where but we may be furnished with
Evidence, for what was the Power of the Keys given by Christ to his Apostles,
but a Power to bind and loose, to Inquire and Judge. And having made Timothy
Bishop of Ephesus, and set him to Govern there; He instructs him what to do in
point of Judicature: 1 Timothy 5. 19, 20. Against an Elder receive not an
Accusation but before two or three witnesses; them that sin (notoriously)
rebuke before all, that others also may fear. He does the like by Titus whom he
ordained Bishop of Creet: A man that is an Heretic, after the first and second
Admonition reject. Tit. 3. 10. And was it not the Apostles own practice, 1 Cor.
5. 3, 4, 5. For I verily as absent in body, 1 Cor. 5. 3, 4, 5.
but present in spirit, have judged already, as tho I were present, concerning
him that has so done this (Incestuous) Deed; In the name of our Lord Jesus
Christ, when ye are gathered together, and my Spirit, with the power of our
Lord Jesus Christ, To deliver such a one to Satan, for the destruction of the
flesh, that his soul may be saved in the day of the Lord Jesus. -- Do not ye
judge them that are 1 Cor. 5. 12.
within the Pale of the Church and your particular jurisdiction.

C. Catharinus his Argument is not so Ipse Paulus contra mandatum facientes
j^dicavit, and aliis judicandi tribuit facultatem Hierom. Ad Romans 14. Tu quis,
etc.
extremely frivolous as our Reconciler very rashly and ignorantly makes it. For
he that has a Governor may give an account, and may be called to an account by
him; and must stand or fall by his sentence, when he is accused before him, 1 Timothy 5. 19, 20. 1 Cor. 5. 13. 2 Cor. 2. 6, 8.

But when there is no such Superior or Governor set over me by our Common
Master; then I may justly expostulate with my Rash Censurer: It Is his right to
Judge me who is Governor or Lord over me: Consider thy own business, for I am
not under thy Jurisdiction (as Aretius has it) Thou art a private Christian as
well as my self; and Par in Parem non habet imperium, thou have no command over
me, No Tribunal to cite me to, no Authority to Judge me, Who art thou that
judge, etc. where thou art neither certain of the badness of his action; nor,
of his intention: nor have any Authority or Jurisdiction over him, to meddle
with, or question any action of his whatsoever.

A Paraphrase and Annotations. Anonymus.

This was the very fault that was condemned here by this Apostle, that they
Judged without Authority, and so David Dicson understands it, Iniquum est
alienum servum sine vocatione a Deo judicare: It Is a wicked thing to judge
another man's servant without a Call and Authority from God to do it; How dare
thou challenge the right to thy self, when thou have no Law of the Lord for it?
Thou do presume too much in usurping that which does not belong to thee, as
our Synopsis has it out of Grotius and Tollet Aretius, a Learned Protestant
shall conclude this Argument, who says the same in effect with Grotius, upon
Romans 16. 17. Mark and avoid them; Because the Church then had no Ordinary
Magistrate (by which he means Ecclesiastical as well as Civil Governor)
Privatis ostendit viam quam sequantur: Therefore he shows private Persons what
course they should take, which is the thing that was asserted by Dr. Womock,
after Grotius.

But has not this Reconciler taken a great deal of pains to make himself a
transgressor, and does he not teach the People to arraign their Governors? And
to give a good example for it, he sets himself up a Tribunal, and treats his
Prince and Bishop as if they were his Servants and under his Jurisdiction. What
says S. James? He that speaks evil of his Brother, and judges his Brother,
speaks evil of the Law, and Judges the Law; (so he does by consequence) but
if thou judge the Law, thou art not a Doer of the Law, but a Judge. (Jam. 4.
11.) Now this Reconciler does directly speak evil of his Governors and the Law
too, and does freely Judge and Condemn them both, and consequently he is not a
Doer of the Law but a Judge. He should do well to learn what S. Paul says to
his weak Brothers Censure. (Romans 2. 21, 22.) Thou which teach another,
teach thou not thy self? Thou that Preachest a man should not steal do
thou steal? Thou that say a man should not commit Adultery, do thou commit
Adultery? Thou that say a man should not judge, do thou judge? Thou that
abhorrest Idols, do thou commit Sacrilege? He robs his Governors of their
Authority, which is Sacred, and usurps it to himself, for while he disputes so
fiercely against judging in his superiors, he does not stick to judge them, to
censure their Laws, and condemn their Innocent Impositions. If it be never
Lawful for the Christian, of what degree or rank soever he be, to judge the
Person whom God has received, to walk uncharitably toward his Brother (as he
says p. 72.) much less to carry himself thus toward his Superiors; why then
does he so rashly and insolently judge his Governors? either he thinks God has
not received them, and then he walks uncharitably toward them; or else he
believes God has received them; and then his judging of them (besides the
incivility and sawciness of it) is unlawful by his own Rule; and so he is (...)
like the Heretic ( Tit. 3. 10.) condemned at his own Tribunal.

But it is nothing with him to break his own Rules, we shall find him at it
again in handling the next Argument, which the Dr. confesses he had not the
least hint of from any Author, but took it upon trust from the words of the
Apostle. Have thou Faith? have it to thy self before God. Romans 14. 22. From
which words the Doctor would infer, That there were no Governers then settled
over the Christians who were at Rome; For had there been a Bishop there, it had
been the duty of those under his charge in any matter of Hesitation, to have
consulted him to resolve their Doubts and settle their persuasions. To this the
Reconciler is pleased to answer by a double quere.

1. Why may not he who has Faith have it to himself, that is, forbear acting
according to his full persuasion of his Liberty, or divulging his opinion to
his Brothers prejudice, as well if he had twenty Bishops over him, as if he had
none? (2.) Why might not S. Paul advise without consulting of his Bishop? I
shall answer to his last quere first, to which I say,

1. If S. Paul's advice might satisfy when they had it, yet it could not
satisfy (before) when they had it not. But (2.) among Dissenting Persons there
will be a thousand emergent Doubts and Scruples, which an Apostle can no more
prevent or answer than he can foresee them at such a distance; which S.
Chrysostom 1 Cor. 11. last.
thinks to be the Reason why the Apostle reserved the correcting of some things
among the Corinthians till his coming to them.

To the second quere the Dr. gave his resolution in the Verdict, p. 125. That
Christian Liberty is a Spiritual Privilege, and seated in the Soul, and may be
preserved there in silence.

But what the Reconciler has said to this Argument is nothing to the purpose:
He is again ensnared in the common Fallacy ( Ignoratio Elenchi) but while the
Dr. studied brevity he might be obscure (...) which the resolves to make amends.

(...) question is, whether there was (...) or Church-Governor a(...)
Christians; Dr. Wo^^ (...) none; and he (...) proved from that Text: for where
there is such a Governor in any matter of doubt, It Is the Subjects Duty to
apply himself to him for satisfaction; and it is equally the Bishops Duty to
give it him, Id not and um adversus eos, qui suo torpori hunc Apostoli Locum
obtendunt, quasi fidei professio non requiratur. Beza ad Locum.
For certainly he is not set over his Flock to keep his finger in his mouth, or
(which is all one) to keep his Faith to himself; his duty is to teach, 2 Timothy
2. 15. Study to show thy self approved unto God, a workman that needs not to
be ashamed, rightly dividing the word of truth, who then is that faithful and
wise Steward, whom his Lord shall make Ruler over his Household, to give them
their Portion of meat in due season? Luke 12. 42. and what is that Portion of
Meat but the which is most proper for the present concern and interest of their
souls? and does not he feed their hunger, in a Spiritual sense, who resolves
their Doubt? and who does this so much belong to as to the Bishop? No says our
Reconciler, These cautions, or advices are not only for private persons, but
for Bishops and Governors, and much more for them than for Private Persons;
Have thou Romans 14. 22.
Faith? have it to thy self before God: (i. e.) take heed lest ye instruct the
Ignorance of those under your Charge, or help their infirmities, or make them
to understand what they are to do in doubtful cases. This is our Reconcilers
Doctrine, but point blank against the Apostles Doctrine and Practice. (1.)
Against his Doctrine, 1 These. 5. 14. where his charge to the Church-Governors
is, Warn them that are disorderly, comfort the feeble minded, support the weak;
which certainly is no otherwise to be done, but by resolving and removing their
doubts and scruples. And this was the Apostles Practice two, if we may take his
own Protestation for it. Acts 20. 27. For I have not shunned to declare unto you
the whole Counsel of God; whereof doubtless the Truth and Privilege of
Christian Liberty was a part.

And now I hope the Reconciler will be able to understand the Drs. Argument
drawn from those words of the Apostle, which may be framed after this manner,

They who have a Divine Authority and command to resolve Doubts and settle
Conscience about things indifferent, They are not forbidden by the Apostle to
resolve and settle them; For then he should take them off from their Duty and
obstruct Edification.

But Church-Governors have a Divine Authority to resolve doubts, and settle
Conscience about things indifferent;

Therefore Church Governors are not forbidden by the Apostle to resolve and
settle them.

To argue the case a little further, let Si Episcopus taceat and alii per eos
seductores corrumpantur, ipse gravem redditurus est Corruptionis rationem, si
non possi os obturare, ne sis Episcopus. Theoph apud Joan. Crocium ad Tit. 1.
11.
us descant upon the expostulation and advice upon it; Have thou Faith? Keep it
to thy self. If this be a direction to Pastors and Teachers, who has any
Authority to reduce a Scismatick from the error of his ways, or reconcile a
Heretic to the Church?

This his interpretation of that Chap. and Text, takes off all obligation from
Bishops and Governors to attempt the Recovering of a Roman Catholic; Nay it
makes the attempt unlawful. For thus in Conscience according to our Reconcilers
Principles, he must argue with himself; There could have been no conversion of
the Jews from the Law of Moses to the Gospel of Christ; if it had been the Duty
of the Apostles, etc. to keep their Faith (of those matters) to themselves.
This man is under the jurisdiction of the Church of Rome, and he is persuaded
in his mind, that the Laws and Customs of that Church are in force against him,
and that he is under an obligation to observe them: For me to go about to teach
him otherwise, and reprove his practices, this would grieve him, and I should
walk uncharitably toward him in so doing; yea verily, I should put a
stumbling block in his way, and tempt him to forbear that practice against his
Conscience; and in so doing I should sin against Christ, and destroy a Brother
for whom Christ died. This I ought not to do, and tho I be otherwise persuaded
in my own Judgment, and ordained and put in trust to teach the Gospel, yet I
must herein follow the advice of the Apostle: Have thou Faith? have it to thy
self before God. I will therefore accordingly resolve to keep my Faith and
Opinion to my self and not disturb a weak Brother: and so the poor man must
perish (if God be not the more merciful unto him) in his Error and Superstition.

Whereas the good Pastor does otherwise; He tells him, Sir you live in a
dangerous Error; and tho the times you observe and the meats you eat be very
indifferent in themselves, yet your practice in the use of them is very
Superstitious, contrary to the Laws and Privileges of the Gospel, and the
practice of Christ and his Apostles. I pray Sir, be you better advised, and
harken to the Holy Scriptures, that you may recover your self out of the power
of Satan, who by the crafty insinuations of bad instruments has taken you
Captive in the snare of Superstition.

Thus a Conscientious Prelate would behave himself; but our Reconciler, has
taught himself a more saving Doctrine to serve his Interest in times of Danger.
And doubtless the man would make a very Prudential Governor in a juncture of
some difficulty; For if a Demure Faction should ferment in his Neighborhood,
and swell up into a Sedition for Conscience sake, if he did not understand,
comply, and cunningly encourage it, he would at least wisely shut his mouth,
and (to be sure) not utter a word to check the wicked practice; and he would
have the confidence to say, that he learned this Doctrine of Neutrality the
Apostle.

But, if he learnt it there, why did he not practice it? If he thought the sign
of the Cross, or the use of the Surplice, or kneeling at the Sacrament
inexpedient and burdensome, and the imposition of them more than the Authority
of his Superiors could justify, why did he not follow his own Rule and keep
his faith to himself? It Is a wise man's advice, ( Eccles. 19. 10.) If thou have
heard a word, let it die with thee, and be bold, it will not burst thee. The
advice is as wise for an Opinion as for a Word; and if his opinion had died
with him, the Funeral would not have been so chargeable to him as the
Christening of it. When he was fishing for Objections in Romans 14. If he had but
read to the end of the Chapter, he might have met with something that concerns
him (in verse 22.) Happy is he who condemns not himself in doing that thing
(to the Affront and Scandal of the Laws and his Superiors,) which he allows,
(lawful to be left undone.)

I have now, I hope, sufficiently made good, those little Arguments, which were
produced by Dr. Womock to prove that there was no settled jurisdiction at Rome
amongst the Christians, nor any Church-Governors to execute such a jurisdiction
when S. Paul wrought that Epistle.

But to follow the steps of our Reconciler, He says secondly, had there been
then no Church-Governors in the whole Church of Rome, had they been destitute
of any Ministers for public Worship this will not in the least abate the
strength of what we argue hence, unless the Dr. dares assert that the
Church-Governors were not as much concerned in the Reason here laid down, as
were the Common People; that is, that they were not obliged to receive the weak
in Faith, v. 1. and being strong to bear the infirmities of the weak, Chap. 15.
1. that they might judge another man's servant, v. 4. that they might put a
stumbling block, or an occasion to fall in their Brothers way, v. 13. That they
might walk uncharitably, might grieve, and even destroy him with their meat for
whom Christ died, v. 15. that they might let their good be evil spoken of, v.
16. and might for meat destroy the work of God. And that tho it is good for
private persons not to eat flesh, nor drink wine, nor to do any thing whereby
their Brother stumbleth, or is offended, or is made weak; yet may
Church-Governors impose such things, although God has declared that their
power is only for Edification, and not for Destruction, (2 Cor. 13. 10.) What
therefore do men gain by saying, These Precepts were directed to private
Persons, and not to Church-Governors; since it is certain that they do more
especially concern them, whose work it is to build up souls, and exercise the
greatest charity toward them, than any private Persons in the world. Add to
this lastly, That S. Paul was certainly a Church-Governor who had as much power
as any of his Successors in these matters; and yet he was so far from varying
from these Rules that chiefly he confirms them from his own example. Thus our
Reconciler.

In order to a full Answer of this plausible Harangue, I must take notice of
his Paralogisms, as the Logician calls them, Hi paralogismi Seductorum
nascuntur vel ex malitia, vel ex inscitia. Ex malitia, cum veritatem agnitam
oppugnant homines improbi, vel ut sibi gloriam and utilitatem quaerant vel ut
veris Doctoribus molestiam and invidiam creent. Alii, ex inscitia sua nam and
ipsorum animi irretiti sunt iisdem Laqueis, quibus ^liis irretire ^onantur,
Davenant ad Coloss. 24.
either he deceives himself by his false reasonings or else he studies to
impose upon the weakness of his Reader by them; and that is very frequent with
him. We have one Instance here; Dr. Womock concludes that those cautions in
Romans 14. Viz. Who art thou that judge another man's servant? have thou Faith?
have it to thy self: were not directed to the Church-Governors at Rome; because
there were (as yet) none settled there: Then says our Reconciler,
Church-Governors are not obliged to bear the infirmities of the weak, but may
walk uncharitably toward them, may put stumbling blocks in their way, and may
destroy them: which is a plain non-sequitur, and Fallacia consequentis; he may
as well infer from thence, that if I shall say the History of Bell and the
Dragon does not concern us, that then we are left at liberty to worship them.
The inference is just as good as the Reconcilers. What our Savior said to the
Jews, (John 7. 22.) Moses therefore gave you Circumcision, not because it is of
Moses but of the Fathers; so I may say S. Paul gave us those injunctions [not
to despise our Brother; not to put a stumbling block in his way, not to walk
uncharitably toward him] not because they were of S. Paul, but of the Fathers;
they were Duties in force long before S. Paul's time, and had obliged us tho
there had never been such an Epistle wrote to the Christians at Rome nor any
such feuds about things Indifferent, to occasion it.

And now I grant him, that it is the work of Church-Governors to build up
Souls, and to that end, They are to exercise the greatest Charity in the World
toward them. But withal I must take leave to re-mind him of the very true and
useful observation of my Lord Keepers in his Lordships excellent Speech to Mr.
Sergeant Saunders, etc.

Sometimes (says his Lordship) a Private man is commended for Qualities which
in a Magistrate would be faults. A private Man is praised for showing Humility
and Deference to others in his Conversation and passing by Indignities. But a
Judge must take greatness upon him; He must Consider he represents the Kings
Person in his seat of Justice; He must therefore be very careful to preserve
the Dignity that belongs to it. He must have Passions but not of a private Man,
that may Disturb his Judgment, but he must assume Passion to set off his
severity, when the greatness of the Crime requires it, but it must be done so,
as it may appear that his Judgment governs his Passion, and direct it against
the offense, and not against the Person.

Governors may set in order what they find Defective or Irregular in Gods
Church, and prescribe such things as make for Decency in Gods Public and
solemn Worship, and these things they may Impose; For that they should do so,
is the Apostles Injunction and Gods Command. And for such as will not obey,
they may use Sharpness, after S. Paul's Example to reduce them to obedience.

For this Power the Lord has given them to Edification (without the word [
only] which the Reconciler has foisted into the Text. 2 Cor. 13. 10. Indeed the
Apostle adds [and not unto Destruction] because the power of the Gospel
Ministry is properly, of it self, and its own nature for Edification; it is the
power of God unto salvation, (Romans 1. 16.) But we are to take notice, that
Church-Governors have a Rod too, a power to inflict punishment, for the
destruction of the flesh, (1 Cor. 5. 5.) and all the works of the flesh
likewise, amongst which are Heresy and 1 Cor. 33. and 4. Gal. 5. 19, 20.
Schism, and so is Pride and Self-conceit, which swell and puff men up against
their Governors and the Law of Christ; which the Apostolical Power was
therefore designed to take down. 2 Cor. 10. 4. and 5.


There is Destruction in Order to Edification. The rubbish of Error and false
Principles must be removed to make way, to lay in and build on better. And this
is the Bishops great business, to take care that the Enemy steals not in to sow
his Tares, that well-meaning souls be not seduced, by false Teachers, into ill
Principles: But diligently built up in their most holy Faith and the Doctrine
which is according to Godliness. And the exercise of this power, in the very
severest part of it, is designed for the Edification of the whole Church, and
ultimately tends to the salvation of the most profligate Delinquent that
suffers under it. Tanti sacit Apostolus aedificationem, 1 Cor. 5. 4, 5.
ut omnia, ad hanc tanquam scopum ad 2 Cor. 13. 10. verse 8. and Gal. 2. 14.
primarium dirigat, says Aretius, The primary scope of all his Dispensations
was Edification, for we can do nothing against the truth; but for the truth;
and the sincere truth of the Gospel, that is, the solid Edification.

But the Apostle had a twofold way to deal with sinners, as that learned man
observes; some he reformed by instruction, ( i. e.) he laid open to them the
Nature, the Guilt and hainousness of their sin, and reasoned them into a better
course of life which they followed upon his admonition. But others, who were
more obstinate, the Apostle handled with more severity; The incestuous person
he did Excommunicate, Elimas the Sorcerer he struck with blindness, some he
delivered up to Satan, and some he restrained by other means of Discipline. And
that was the Apostolical severity which he threatens to use among the
Corinthians, where he tells them he will not spare 2 Cor. 13. 2.
unless they correct their manners.

And this course of Discipline ought to continue still, says he, where the Ad
2 Cor. 13. 2.
Church of Christ is well established. For all the Members of the Church are
not sick of the same disease. Nor does a good Physician undertake to cure all
Persons with the same Medicine; but in some cases he uses more mild and gentle
Remedies, in others more sharp ones, searing, scarifying, amputation; because
the Diseases are grievous and the Bodies of such Patients cannot be cured
otherwise. And Hemmingius, upon Ad Cor. 13. 2.
those words of the Apostle, 2 Cor. 13. 2. [If I come I will not spare] makes
this Comment; Hoc severitatis exemplum Ministri verbi pie and prudenter in
aedificationem imitentur. Let the Ministers of the Gospel imitate this example
piously and prudently to edification. And let it be observed, says he, that
the severer Jurisdiction or Church Discipline concerns the Edification of the
whole Church, and of them who are particularly chastised. And the Governors of
the Church are armed with this Power, tum ad puniendum, tum ad salvandum, as
well to punish as to save; and for punishment in order to their salvation. And
if any destruction happens (besides that which ought to be destroyed in such as
unruly) est hoc ex accidente, This is but by accident as Sclater has ad 2 Cor,
13. 8. and 10.
observed. 2 Cor. 2. 16. And let us take this into consideration too, that it
is at the Governors discretion to use this Discipline, according as he shall
find the Temper and Disposition of the Subject, 1 Cor. 4. 21. What will ye,
shall I come unto you with a Rod, or in Love, and in the spirit of meekness?

But you will say, are not the Governors of the Church obliged to receive the
weak in the Faith? Romans 14. 1. yes very highly obliged, in S. Paul's sense, as
becomes their Place and Office. Receive him that is weak, that is, instituite,
and favete donec proficiat, says Bullinger, take him into your tuition,
instruct and cherish him, till he be a good proficicient in the School of
Christ, This is the Charity and Care of Church-Governors, and ours are ready to
perform it (I dare say for them) with all their heart, if our weak Brethren
would harken to it. And being pious as well as strong, They are willing also to
bear their Infirmities; and not only to bear with them, which is the part of
every private Christian; but to heal them, which is the part of every good
Physician: To bear them as our blessed Savior bare our sins; not so as to take
them upon his shoulders only, but to bear and carry them quite away; and this
is their Labor of Love and work of Charity: But they cannot do this in effect
(no more could our Lord himself) unless the People be willing to part with them.

But, who art thou that judge another man's Servant, says our Apostle? and
may a Church-Governor do this? Why not? He is in Authority, and doubtless he
may Judge, where God has called him to that Office, and given him a
jurisdiction for it. Nay, I say he must do it; for what says the Lord to his
Prophet? Jer. 15. 19. If thou take forth the precious from the vile, thou shall
be as my mouth. This is that the Lord requires of a good Governor, Nempe ut
condemnet libere quicquid vitiosum est, and fortiter defendat quod rectum est,
etiamsi totus mundus repugnet, says Calvin upon the place; That he freely
condemn whatsoever is vicious, and as stoutly defend what is right and just,
tho the whole World should oppose it. And what shall we say of S. Paul's Charge
to Timothy, (1 Timothy 5. 19, 20.) and to Titus, (Tit. 3. 9, 10.) and what shall
we say to his own practice, (1 Cor. 5. 3, 12, 13.) of which we have given
account already.

They may not despise or set at naught a Weak Brother; but I hope, being
invested with a just Authority, you will allow them to reprove and upbraid such
as are wilfully ignorant, upon a supine Carelessness or something worse. Upon
such an account sure they may say with the Royal Prophet, Psalm. 94. 8. O ye
fools, when will ye understand? and have they not our Lords example to say to
such, O fools and slow of heart to believe! and they have the great Apostles
practice I am sure to bear them out, if they should say to such as trouble and
disturb the Peace of the Church. O Gal. 3. 1.
foolish Dissenters, who has bewitched you, that ye should not obey the truth!

But so far are they from putting a stumbling block or an occasion to fall in
their Brothers way; that they endeavor to put him into the right way, wherein
(if he has eyes in his head, and will follow their Direction) he shall be sure
not to stumble. But when our Superiors they have made the way plain and
smooth, and easy, according to the truth of the Gospel. If such as this
Reconciler shall throw in their Rubbish and Stones of offense to obstruct it,
and then these Brethren will dash their foot willingly against it and stumble
at it, Their Fall is willful, and they must thank themselves for the hurt they
take by it.

I deny not but Governors in some sense, are concerned to please the Subjects:
But a man may please others both to his own, and to their destruction (as
Theod. ad Romans 15. 1.) I must not gratify him in his Schism and Sedition to
please him; for that would betray him to damnation. I must please him only to
his good, to his edification, in the obedience of the Gospel, that he may be
saved, to this end it may be a Governors Duty to grieve him. 2 Cor. 2. 2: for
there is a godly sorrow, which works repentance unto salvation not to be
repented of. (2 Cor. 7. 10.) And he that can bring a soul to this, tho his
methods may seem severe, yet among wise and sober Christians his Discipline as
well as his Liberty will be well spoken of.

When he tells us of destroying him with our meat for whom Christ died, that
(to return him some of those Givilities which he bestows on his Meisner) is but
one of his repeated fooleries; for it can concern no man but a Jew, or a Jews
fellow (in whose account some meats and drinks are still common and unclean;)
and this Reconciler does acknowledge (p. 74, 75.) that now the Apostles
instructions of forbearance are out of date as to them, their stubbornness
having cut them off from all Title to our Charity in that kind. And for the
Roman Catholics, tho they abstain sometimes from such and such meats, yet they
profess they do it, Non quod conscientiam polluant sua immunditie, sed
inobedientia. (Conte ad Romans 14. And therefore when we eat with them we see
they are in no more danger to be destroyed by our liberty than (we are upon the
account of their forbearance.) And thus it was among the Christians in
Theodorets He consuetudo in hunc usque diem mansit in Ecclesiis, and haec
quidem abstinentia amplectituri; ille vero omnibus esculentis absque ullo
scrupulo vescitur, and nec hic illum judicat, nec ille alterum reprehendit, sed
eos claros and insignes reddit Lex Concordiae. Theod. ad Romans 14. Lat. ver.
Parisiis 1608.
time. See the Margin.

If that would serve his turn, we readily grant, that S. Paul was most
certainly an excellent Church-Governor, and had as much power as any of his
Successors in Church Matters and we will allow him something more: but did he
never vary his Rules, and shift his Battery according to the condition of the
Persons whom he attempted to subdue to the obedience of the Gospel? He did
sometimes condescend, when it was Prudence and Charity so to do: but when out
of weakness he perceived men became Headstrong, when from tenderness they grew
restive and obstinate, then he became resolute and positive.

He was a notable Orator as S. Chrysostom. observes of him; and used all the
innocent Haec autem dicit ut eos anticipet blandiendo ut laudum Cupidine capti
tales praestare se studeant ut digni possint haberi quos and efferant omnes and
Laudibus prosequantur: Inter. ( Theophilact ad Romans 15. 29.)
Arts of Rhetoric to insinuate and gain upon the people; and many times he
used Hyperbolies vehemence and excesses of expression, that his persuasion
might be the more powerful and make the deeper impression;

Such is that to the Galathians, for I bear you record, that if it had been
possible; Gal. 4. 15.
ye would have plucked out your own eyes, and have given them to me. And such
is that to the Thessalonians, So being 1 These. 2. 8.
affectionately desirous of you, we were willing to have imparted unto you, not
the Gospel of God only but also our own souls, because ye were dear unto us.
Such is that 1 Cor. 8. 13.
to the Corinthians. Wherefore if meat make my Brother to offend, I will eat no
flesh while the world stands, lest I make my Brother to offend. And of the
same 1 Cor. 9. 19, 20, 21, 22.
kind is that. For though I be free from all men, yet have I made my self
servant to all, that I might gain the more. And unto the Jews, I became as a
Jew that I might gain the Jews; to them that are under the Law as under the
Law, that I might gain them that are under the Law: To them that are without
the Law as without Law (being not without Law to God, but under the Law to
Christ) that I might gain them that are without Law. To the weak became I as
weak, that I might gain the weak: I am made all things to all men, that I might
by all means save some.

Here was great truth and sincerity in these Condescentions, but we must
understand these pro hic and nunc. When he had to deal with a Jew apart he
treated him with all possible lenity and sweetness, and Christian compliance,
and so he did by the Gentile when he had him by himself, but this was by way of
Dispensation to draw them in to embrace the Gospel: But when the Jew and
Gentile came together, these methods of compliance were useless and
unpracticable; we have the very Case reported by S. Paul himself upon the
congress of the Jew and Gentil Christian at Antioch, where the Apostle was not,
nay he could not be so compleasant as to be all things to all men; He withstood
S. Peter to the face, etc. Gal. 2. 11, 12, 13, 14.

And thus a man may carry himself toward Dissenting Parties; he may privately
Coax and Flatter a Dissenter in his errors and comply with his weakness,
thinking by that means to endear him and win upon him; and on the other side he
may applaud the Practice of the Conformist, and encourage him in his Conformity
to confirm him and make him the more steadfast: But when the Dissenting Parties
come together, he is in the condition of a man that serves two Masters, Mat. 6.
24. he will hold to the one and despise the other, or Trimmer-like his
moderation will be taken for Neutrality and perhaps both practices will take
him for an Hypocrite, and he will be equally scandalous to them both.

And this is commonly the Fate of unadvised Reconcilers. For we must come to a
point before we can come to any settlement, whereupon (as was observed by Dr.
Womoch in his Verdict. p. 114.) Instead of a prudential expedient (which in
this case was impossible) S. Paul withstood S. Peter to the Face, etc.

But let us proceed with the Reconciler who calls upon us thus: secondly
observe, etc. p. 72.

That this as well as other Scriptures being written for our learning, in cases
of like nature, must oblige all other Pastors and Rulers of Christ's Church, as
well as those of Rome; for the arguments which the Apostle uses here, are of a
moral and perpetual obligation, it being never lawful for the Christian, of
what degree, or rank soever he may be, to judge, and to despise the Person Whom
God has received, to walk uncharitably toward his Brother, or to destroy him
with his meat for whom Christ died, or to put a stumbling block, or an occasion
to fall in his Brothers way. But on the other hand; it is the perpetual Duty of
the highest Christians to follow after the things which make for peace, and
whereby they may edify one another.

Here we observe a second part to the same Tune; judging and despising persons
whom God has received; (which we shall consider more fully presently) walking
uncharitably, destroying him with our meat for whom Christ died; as if he set
himself up to be an Advocate for a Sect of Superstitious Jews, who both killed
the Lord their King (of whom they have been both the betrayers and Murderers)
and their own Prophets, and have persecuted and chased out us; and they please
not God, and are contrary to all men, (1 These. 2. 15.) For his stumbling blocks
(which he is ever laying in our way) and his charitably walking and his things
that make for peace, we shall fully consider them before we part.

In the interim, we shall grant him, that this as well as other Scriptures
being written for our Leraning, in cases of like nature (if any such can
happen) must oblige all other Pastors and Rulers of Christ's Church, as well I
will add, yea and as much) as those at Rome (if there had been any such when S.
Paul wrote this Epistle.)

But if all Scriptures be written for our Learning, in cases of like nature;
why do you not practice them equally all alike? We have those two Tribes
building their Altar, a symbolical protestation of their Faith and Affiance in
God of their Communion with his Church, and their Interest in his public
Worship and Service; you have also in these Scriptures, the report of Daniels
opening his Windows upon the same account, and to the very same purpose; and we
find Lyserus, Lavator, Calvin, our Synopsis (and who not, that have considered
the thing among our Protestant Divines) do make the sign of the Cross (in use
among all Christians) a Parallel Case with those, a symbolical protestation of
our Christianity, of our Faith and Affiance in Christ Crucified, of Communion
with Gods Holy Catholic Church, and of our Interest in all the privileges of
his public Worship and Service: and this Symbolical Protestation, is grounded
upon the fundamental Article of Confession, which is of moral and perpetual
obligation; why then is not this Reconciler as zealous a Champion for the use
of that ancient Ceremony, as he is for matters of meat and drink, as he finds
them in this present Scripture?

But I must observe (2.) That the immediate Inference the Apostle makes from
those words, All Scripture is written for our Learning (which have relation to
Christ's Condescension to redeem and save us) Romans 15. 3, 4. is this ( ver. 7.)
wherefore receive ye one another, as Christ also received us, to the Glory of
God.

This (says Hemmingius) is the general conclusion of all the matters or
concernments, which the Apostle disputed of from the beginning of the
fourteenth Chapter. And that we may understand our own, and take some measure
of our Governors Duty (as far as modesty and scripture will allow us,) Let us
seriously Consider

1. That Christ, tho he dyed for all men, yet he received none into actual
Communion with him, but such as were willing to be received.

2. He received none, but upon terms of his own and not of their proposing.

3. He received none but upon condition of obedience to his Laws, and
Institutions; whereof Government in Church and State is undoubtedly one.

4. He received none but to the glory of God. Now to all such the Arms of our
Governors are opened, and they are most ready to receive them. But such as must
make their own Conditions, and come in only upon their own Terms, and those
terms of Division, Christ never received such, and we know the Jews were cut
off upon that account: and therefore the Church cannot receive them to the
glory of God, unless She should acknowledge him to be a God of Confusion and
not of Peace and Order; To this purpose Erasmus paraphraseth the Text. ( Romans
15. 7.) Receive Synopsis ad locum.
him, so as it may redound to Gods Glory, who is glorified among the
Unbelievers by your Concord.

This Reconciler, by the Scriptures written for our Learning understands the
14th. and 15th. Chapter to the Romans, which he makes the subject of his
discourse (page 67.) tho he takes no notice of several remarques, which the
Verdict has thereon, and he should have done well to have taught the people,
what bitter animosities, and sad confusions did arise amongst them, for want of
good Laws, and Rules to direct the Professors of Christianity, and of Authority
and Governors to awe them into a due obedience.

For the Convert-Jews would by all means observe Moses his Laws, and
Institutions, even such as were purely Ritual and Ceremonial; and not content
with an allowance to do it themselves, they would impose the practice upon all
others; and because the Gentiles would not observe them, tho reconciled to
Christianity, they would not admit them to their Communion. On the other side
the Gentil-Converts, being very well assured of the Liberty, which they had in
Christ, whereby they were exempted from the Yoke of Moses's Law, (which was
never designed to be put upon the Christians neck) they were no less earnest to
exclude from their Communion such Jews as still addicted themselves to the
Customs and Law of Moses. Hereupon arose a wretched Schism which wonderfully
obstructed the progress of the Gospel amongst them in the very infancy of it.
And wanting Church-Governors, with a secular Arm to assist them, nothing was
able to extinguish their dissentions and bring them to a quiet settlement, till
the fullness of Apostolical Authority with the power of Miracles should come
among them, as shall be declared hereafter.

But, our Reconciler tells us, it is the perpetual Duty of the highest
Christians to follow after the things which make for Peace, and whereby they
may edify one another. This we can easily grant him: but as Theodoret observes,
the Apostle Ad Romans 15. 4.
does not pray for their peace indefinitely and absolutely, but it is an honest
and pious Consent and Concord that he wishes them, according to the example of
Jesus Christ. Has not God given us Guides, and are not we bound to follow peace
after their direction and example? Have not they a command as well as a power
Heb. 13. 7, 17.
to set things in Order? to make Decrees and Ordinances for the establishment
of Peace and Unity? and are not these the means to promote Edification? Did not
S. Paul himself carry about such Decrees to be kept of the Churches where he
went? and were not those Churches established in the Faith thereupon, and
increased in their numbers as well as in their piety by that means? Acts 16. 4,
5.

These are truths that are evident of themselves, and owned by the Learned of
all Persuasions, the Ordering and Appointment of honest and decent Rites, See
the Verdict. p.
according to the word of God, makes much for the preservation of Discipline,
and to strengthen the bond of Peace, says David Rungius, and Calvin himself.

Hereupon we find that the great Apostle made Ordinances of the like nature
(which are called Traditions) and they were about things indifferent, of no
absolute necessity, but only for decency, such as the Woman's Vail in public 1
Cor. 11. 2.
Assemblies. And such as did observe those Ordinances he commends, but 2 These.
3. 6, 14.
such as did neglect them he does severely censure. And tho he was gentle as a
Nurse to cherish his children in the Faith, yet did he exercise the Authority
of a Father too, in charging and 1 These. 2. 7, 11.
commanding them to observe his Discipline. And let this Reconciler or any of
the Dissenters (whose Cause he Pleads) prove that ever the liberty of such
Children was allowed either by Christ or his Apostles, to overtop or check the
Authority of such a Father, and I will yield the Cause.

In the mean while Dr. Womock keeps his Ground; viz. That this was only a
Temporary provision to keep the Peace among private Christians: and hereupon
the Reconciler requires him to prove that the things abovementioned ( Romans
14.) were only Temporary; and that Church-Governors are now at liberty to walk
uncharitably toward the weak, and to destroy the work of God for meat and
drink, and we are satisfied.

Here we are called upon to prove two things; and I am afraid the last will
prove him to be a Sophister. But we shall attempt to prove the first: That
those things were only Temporary.

It Is the express affirmation of Aretius, Ad Romans 15.
that these Roman Christians having no Ordinary Governor, the Apostle shows
private men the way which they should walk in; as was observed formerly. And Ad
Romans 14. And Beza observes Apostolum non praecipere ut ejusmodl ignorantia
foveatur, sed duntaxat ut tuleretur. tantisper dum isti possint erudiri. Ad
Romans 14. 2. When they became stubborn and indocible, They were rejected.
that the provision was but for a time is the express Doctrine of Hemmingius,
Aliquid ad tempus Fratrum infirmitati largiendum est: Something is to be
allowed for a time, to the infirmity of our Brethren: secus de obstinatis and
pertinacibus judicandum est: but we must determine otherwise of the obstinate
and stubborn. He speaks of weak Christians which he supposes to be in every
particular Church in these days: but if care were duly taken to Catechize our
Youth, and to instruct them in the Principles of Acts 13. 46.
Christianity, touching Authority and Liberty, according to the truth of the
Gospel (as S. Paul calls it) this kind of Intellectual Rickets, and the
weakness that follows it, would be perfectly corrected in our Minority, and we
should never infest the Church with our frowardness upon that account. But my
task is to prove that the Directions which the Apostle gives to those
Christians at Rome, had a peculiar reference, (1.) To that present time. (2.)
To some special things, and (3.) To that Critical Dispensation.

(1.) To that present time; and he that will take the pains to consider the
Case, can never be persuaded, that such cautions and directions as were given
to Jews, or Gentil-Converts, in reference purely to those Federal Rites of the
respective Institutions, to which they had so lately been accustomed; He I say,
can never be convinced, that they do lay any obligation upon such as were bred
up in Christianity from their Cradles. But that these cautions were calculated
for that present time, we have reason to believe upon farther evidence.

1. The Apostle in his great prudence was wont to make such Temporary 1 Cor. 7.
26.
provisions; such was his advice about Virgins; I suppose, says he, this is
good for the present distress: not that Marriage was a more impure state of
Life: but to avoid the difficulties and molestations of it. Single persons were
in a better condition, more prompt and easy to grapple with Persecutions,
which in those days did more frequently afflict the Professors of the Gospel.

The Apostle has an eye to the like Romans 12. 11.
difficulties among the Romans, and therefore he enjoins them to be fervent in
Spirit, serving the season; For many Copies See Dr. Hammond his note on the
place, and Dr. Stearne Aphoris. de felicitate,. 2. Aphor. 22.
read the Text so, and therefore Dr. Hammond does thus Paraphrase the Text:
Doing those things, that in respect of the Circumstances of time and place,
wherein now you are, may most tend to the honor of God, and building up of the
Church. And S. Ambrose descants very well upon the place, lest they should
unseasonably press matters of Religion, in an evil time, whereby they might
raise up Scandal: therefore he subjoyns this caution, serving the time. The
great matters of Faith and Religion, Ambros. ad Romans 12.
he would have them discoursed of modestly, and discreetly, in a fit time, and
in a convenient place, and among fit Persons. For there are some, esaith he,
even among our selves, in times of Peace, The Epist. for the 2d. Sunday after
the Epiphany in the old Liturgy read it so.
who do so abhor the way of Christ, that they can no sooner hear, but they will
Blaspheme it. And S. Paul himself made it his practice, sometimes to apply
himself to the season, and to do that which otherwise he had no inclination to
do. For he Circumcised Timothy unwillingly; and shaving his head he purified
himself according to the Law, and went up to the Temple, Vt Judaeorum sopiret
insaniam, that he might appease the Rage of the Jews. And what have we been
doing these twenty years, but serving the time, by Clemency and Condescension
to gratify an unsteady Faction, whom nothing can oblige. And no doubt S. Paul
had an eye to the circumcumstance of time, and the difficulty as well as the
inconveniency, of making a peremptory Order for them in this Case, when he
wrote that Epistle, as shall be showed.

2. I am induced to believe this was but a Temporary provision; because it was
upon the account of Novices in the Faith, as all the Ancients do unanimously
observe. 'Twas in Favor of such as had newly embraced the Gospel; wherefore he
would not have the strong Christians (who understood the liberty of their
Christianity) to entangle the weak by intricate disputations, which might
provoke them unto Apostasy: but charitably to bear with them for a time: and
that as a condescension, which argues not a Law and steadfast Constitution, but
(as they call it) a Dispensation. Ita Chrysostomus simula^ionem Petri saepius
Dispensationem appellavit. ad Gal. 2. Theodoret. Theophilact. Ad Romans 14.
Whereupon even where he sollicits this Indulgence on their behalfs (to prevent
a Relapse) he blames their Ignorance (discovers the soft and tender part) and
lays open the Sore, and gently drops in his Medicinal Wine and Oil. The
observation is quick and very material, That while he seems to chide the strong
(in the Faith) under pretense of that freedom of Speech to them, He turns all
his Correption and Reproof upon the weak. For in calling them weak he declares
them to be valetudinary; and when he bids the stronger Christians to receive,
to help, and succor them, it argues he thought they stood in need of a Keeper
and good Remedies; which is a certain Indication of a Distemper and a Mental
Craziness: so far was the Apostle from encouraging them (as this Reconciler
does) to continue and become obstinate in their weakness; For tho he would have
them treated like Babes, while they were so: Yet he would not have them be
Babes always: but to be men in understanding, and to put away childish things.
1 Cor. 3. 1. Heb. 5. 11, 12.

3. If these directions given to the Christians at Rome, were not temporary;
the Apostle contradicted his own Doctrine; for in settled Churches afterward,
He was so far from prescribing forbearance of Meats, or the observation Gal. 4.
10, 11. Chap. 5. 4. Col. 2. 8, 16, 21.
of Jewish Festivals, that he severely condemns them (yea as Superstitious, and
destructive of Salvation) as this Reconciler does observe (when he finds
occasion page 80.
to forget his own hypothesis.)

4. That they were but Temporary is the Judgment of the Fathers, and the most
Learned Modern Writers; The Verdict has mentioned Matthisius, Estius, our
Synopsis, and Mr. Perkins, who says expressly, that Commandment ( Romans 14. 22.)
was given by Paul for those times when men were not fully persuaded of the use
of Gods Creatures, as meats and drinks, etc. But to these Cum enim perfectam
fidem (...) non haberet (infirmus) se e^ rum Esu pollcredebat. The Ad Re^.
times it is not (given).

(2.) I say the Apostles Directions had reference to some special things
forbidden by the Law of Moses. (1.) For the difference among those Christians
ad Romans 14.
grew upon the account of a distinction betwixt things Clean and Unclean: (as
the Apostle declares expressly ( Romans 14. 14,) and men's minds being framed to
practice according to that Notion, they still disputed the Custom, when the
distinction was taken away, not understanding fully the Privilege of the
Gospel.

2. The Ancients do restrain the matters in debate to the prohibitions of the
Law: so Theophilact, seeing God Theoph. ad Romans 14.
has bestowed his ineffable Grace upon the Gentiles, why do thou still
contend with them about the Law? It Is manifest, says S. Ambrose, that all
things are clean through the grace of Christ, who freeing us from the yoke of
the Law, has restored the former Ambros. ad Romans 14. Ca. 48. P. Martyr.
state of Liberty: So that we are now in a capacity to use all creatures as the
Saints of old were wont to do: But for such as are still in bondage under the
Law, it is not Lawful for them to eat (or to do) what the Law forbids: Quia
indulgentiam datam spernunt. Because they despise the privilege of the Gospel.
His multitude of quotations is to little purpose, in this case rightly stated.
For

4. I dare be bold to say, that not one of the Ancient Fathers ever applied
that discourse of the Apostle to the prejudice of Authority in ordaining Rites
and matters of Decency in Gods Service. Did not all the Fathers he alleges,
Bow, Kneel, wear a Surplice, sign with the Cross? Yes, and would have spit in
his face, that should have offered to dispute so general a practice of the
whole Church. His quoting their Authority in this case is therefore trifling,
and designed to impose upon the Reader, or else he is deluded himself by a
Fanatic Zeal, and vain Imagination; And if old Father Gregory were alive he
would make as sharp an Invective against him for this, as he did against Julian
upon another account.

And I have observed particularly Vide Epist. 119
that St. Austin, when he complains of the multitude and burden of Ceremonies,
which were crept into some particular Churches, yet he never dreamed that St.
Paul had condemned any of them by a Spirit of Prophecy in that Epistle to the
Romans: Nay he says plainly, that the forbidding of meats as unclean, was
Heretical, and so declared and condemned by the Apostle. (1 Timothy 4.) which is
directly contrary to the opinion and practice of those weak ones, whom the same
Apostle favors ( Romans 14.) and therefore the Rules he lays down in that
Chapter, can be no more than temporary, unless we will be so bold with the
great Apostle as to make him forget and contradict himself.

(4.) Let me put the Case home to our Reconciler and his beloved, the
Dissenters; if they claim a title to the Apostles Indulgence ( Romans 14.) in
their refusal, or forbearance of those things which are enjoined by Authority;
Then they must look upon those things as common and unclean; for that is the
very case the Apostle speaks to, ( Romans 14. 14.) If they esteem them unclean
(which signifies nothing but unlawful) that must be either according to Moses's
Law, or according to the Gospel: If they go according to Moses Law, they run
into Judaism and Superstition; and tempt God, as this Reconciler confesses (p.
75.) and in effect, deny that Judaism is abolished, and has given place to
Christianity; if they pretend to go by the Gospel, that very Gospel contradicts
their pretense, as we learn by a voice from Heaven to S. Peter, Acts 10. 15.
What God has cleansed, that call not thou common (for persons were so esteemed
by the Law as well as things) and by the resolution of S. Paul in this place,
Romans 14. 14. I know and am persuaded by the Lord Jesus, that there is nothing
unclean of it self.

(5.) And I would have it considered, that we have no Rites or Observances in
use among us, but what are taken up by the light of Nature, or purely upon the
account of Christianity. They never had any Relation to the Institutions of the
Heathen, as the meats offered to Idols, nor yet to the Levitical Covenant, as
Swines-flesh, Circumcision, the Jewish Sacrifices, and Festivals had. Show me
where St. Paul says, one man regards a Surplice, the sign of the Cross,
kneeling; another man regards them not: Do not Judge, do not grieve, do not
offend a Brother for these things. He did not, he could not say any thing to
this effect, of any of these 1 Cor. 14. 26, Ephesians. 3. 14.
things; not of kneeling or bowing; for they are suggested to all mankind by
the light of Nature, and were the Apostles 1 Cor. 11. 5, 11.
own intimation, charge, and practice. The Surplice he determined in the Woman's
Veil by a Parity of Reason; and for the sign of the Cross, it is so peculiarly
related to Christianity, that it can never tempt any man to turn either Jew or
Gentile (which was the great danger St. Paul so carefully provides against) and
he has given us a Reason for it; 1 Cor. 1. 22.
in telling us, that Christ Crucified was unto the Jews a stumbling block, and
to the Greeks foolishness. To this I may add

(6.) The general opinion of Commentators is, that the Apostle does not Anon.
ad Romans 14. not. 1.
speak here ( Romans 14.) of the weakness of a Brother in doing any thing
unlawful; or that he should be tolerated by the strong therein.

When the Apostle says, let every man Romans 14. 5.
abound in his own sense, (according to the vulgar Latin) or let him be fully
persuaded Theod. ad Romans 14. 5.
in his own mind, (as the English has it,) Theodoret observes, that the
Apostle did not speak this in general, nor may we be so free in our opinions or
persuasions of Gods Word and Ordinances, for he does anathematize or Gal. 1. 8,
9.
strike him with a Curse, who frames his mind to teach the things that are
contrary to Divine Truth. And Gualter, Gualter. ad Roman. Homil. 80.
to the same sense, Quae palam contra Dei voluntatem fiunt, ea in proximo
reprehendere, deque illis ex Dei verbo judicare licet: What is clearly contrary
to the will of God, it is Lawful for a man to judge of that by the word of God,
and to reprehend our Neighbor for it. Now certainly this is Gods Ordinance,
let every Soul be subject to the higher Powers; and this is the will of God,
even our Submission and Obedience to such as Romans 13. 1. Heb. 13. 7, 17.
God has set over us. Wherefore unless the Apostle contradicts his own
Doctrine, he cannot be supposed to deliver any thing in this case that may
derogate from the just power of our Superiors: And let it be once proved, that
the Apostle has set up Liberty above Authority, or in opposition to it, and I
shall yield the Cause: but this is a challenge, which I dare say none of our
Dissenters, No, nor the Reconciler himself, will have the hardiness to answer.

3. I say, Those Directions of the Apostle Romans 14.
had a special reference to that Critical Dispensation. I call it Critical;
because it was something like that juncture of circumstances, which happened in
St. Paul's Voyage to Rome; when they came to the place where two Seas met;
except the Mariners (the Guides of the Vessel) did abide in the Ship, and
submit to the Apostles prudent Steerage and Direction, They could not be saved.

For that this Indulgence of the Apostle was in favor of the Jews, cannot be
denied; and he had taken the advice of the College of Apostles and Elders in
it, who tell him thus, Acts 21. 20. Thou see Brother, how many thousands of
Jews there are which believe, and they are all zealous of the Law. Now Exodus
19.
the condition of the Jewish Church was this, The Religion established amongst
them was of Divine Institution, and the Rites and Ceremonies thereof imposed
with great severity, by a dreadful Majesty with an astonishing attendance; this
they had been bred in and lived under, and were prepossessed with an opinion of
the Sacredness and perpetual obligation of it. But out of this sprang a more
refined Religion, introduced by the Ministry of the Son of God.

Whether the introduction of this did abrogate or supersede the Authority of
the other, was the thing in question. The prejudice the Jews had against the
abrogation of it (for the Reasons now mentioned) was so great, that it was not
easy to be conquered. The Apostle was sensible hereof, (for he lost his own
Carnal eyes before he could discern Acts 9.
a Reason for it) and he was smitten down to the Earth, that he might there
bury those beggarly Elements of Judaism (wherein he had been Disciplined and
for which he was so fiercely Zealous) before he could learn humility enough to
submit to the Voice and Gospel of the Messiah; and this made him so
compassionate to his Brethren of Israel, whom he knew to lie under the like
prepossession and prejudice.

It Is true, Moses's Law was out of date, de jure, upon the publication of John
1. 31. Heb. 10. 1.
the Gospel, and as soon as our Lord was made manifest unto Israel. For the Law
was but a shadow of good things to come: the Body and the Sun was Christ, the
Col. 2. 17. Romans 10. 4.
end and the Accomplisher of the Law. De Jure therefore, the Law of Ceremonies
was abolished: But yet till there was a clear promulgation hereof, the old Law
retained its force and vigor among such as understood not that it was now void
and of no effect. For tho the Law ceases by a mere abrogation, yet the Subject
cannot be free from his former obligation, till it does some way appear, that
it is his Superiors will and that the former Law be presently revoked; which was
not yet made manifest convincingly to all the Community of the Jewish Nation.

And that which increased the difficulty, and confirmed, if not heightened the
prejudices on both sides was this: The Jews, they received the gifts of the
Holy Act. 2. Act. 10, 44, 45. and Chap. 11. 2. to 18.
Ghost under the observation of Moses's Law; the Gentiles did the like under the
omission and neglect of it. Hereupon, why should we abandon our old Law, seeing
God has received us All this the Reconciler does acknowledge page. 74.
into favor, and attested it by the effusions of his Spirit on us, say the
Jews? And why shall we abandon our Liberty and Privilege, say those Gentiles,
seeing God has done the like to us? This was the difference and dispute
between them; and nothing but the Ministry of a Divine Authority, assisted by
the extraordinary gifts of the Holy Ghost, (and agreeing in a Declaration to
the same effect) and the power of Miracles, was able to bring them to
Conformity, and unite them entirely into one Catholic Communion.

This I call a Critical dispensation; and it can never be the Case of the
Christian Church again, unless Elias should come a second time (as some do
vainly dream) to make a farther Reformation; and then perhaps, S. Paul's Rules
might be in season again, before the World could come to any settlement.

How far is the Case of Dissenters wide of this? were they bred under any other
Divine Law than that which we profess and practice? Have they any pretense to
some other divine Institutions? Have they any divine prohibition against any
thing the Church observes? Do we violate any Ordinance that is known to be
prae-establisht by Divine Authority? why then do they take up the perverse or
peevish practice of those Jews and run upon the same Rock of Judaism and
Superstition, as if they were called to it by a voice from Heaven, when they
have not the like pretense for it? For either the Law of Moses is in force, or
it is not: If they think it is in force, They may scruple at the eating of a
black Pudding or touching the Corpse of their dearest friend deceased, or
ploughing with an Ox and an Ass (which conjunction, in a Tropical sense, they
never scruple at): If that Law be not in force at all, in their opinion, why do
they plead, what S. Paul discourses upon the account of them who believed it
was? If it concerns us at all, it must be either directly, or indirectly and by
a parity of Reason. But (1.) not directly; because it relates to a Law, whereby
things were distinguished into clean and unclean. (2.) Not indirectly or by a
parity of Reason; because the like critical juncture of circumstances is never
like to happen.

Let them therefore set their hearts at rest. For those Rules of condescension
and forbearance which the Apostle prescribed as a temporary provision to keep
those private Christians quiet, under that Critical Dispensation, can never
serve to justify their Separation, upon such groundless doubts, empty
Scruples, and vain Imaginations.

And now having made it clear to all Romans 14. and 1^. Chapters.
impartial Readers, that the Apostle did not direct this his advice to
Governors: but prescribed it only as a Temporary provision to keep the peace
among private Christians: We must expect no Quarter from the Reconciler, but to
be severely laden with the reproach of an odious Inference. It Is not enough it
seems to prove that the things there mentioned were only Temporary, but we are
called to a fresh Task, to prove that Church-Governors are now at liberty to
walk uncharitably toward the weak, and to destroy the work of God for meat and
drink: Do this says he, very fairly, and we are satisfied.

This any man would think a fair offer at the first hearing: but upon second
thoughts, we find that by suppressing one of the premises he hides a sallacy:
and herein he is either caught himself, and deceived in his own captious way
of reasoning, and that betrays his want of Logic: or else he designs wittingly
to impose upon the weakness or credulity of his Reader; and then he shows his
want of honesty.

If we put his Argument into Form for him, it must run thus: He that says,
Those Rules abovementioned were but a Temporary Provision to keep the Peace
among private Christians, he leaves Church-Governors at liberty to walk
uncharitably toward the weak, and to destroy the work of God for meat and
drink.

But Dr. Womock says, Those Rules abovementioned, were but a Temporary
Provision to keep the Peace among private Christians, ergo Dr. Womock leaves
Church-Governors etc.

We must give him time to prove the major Proposition; and I believe he will
take till Doomsday, and then he may have something else to answer for; His
disturbing the peace of the Church, and encouraging an ungovernable Faction in
their Schism and Sedition. But let us follow him.

Dr. Womock says from Catharinus, They were Rules to be received till the
Apostles had made a perfect determination; and truly says the Reconciler, if
this were all, they were not to be observed at all. His Reason follows; For in
this very Chapter he plainly says, that the things scrupled by the weak were
pure and lawful in themselves; and that he knew, and was persuaded by the Lord
Jesus, that there was nothing unclean of it self; which is as perfect, and full
a determination of the Case, against the weak, as words can make.

Let us take notice (1.) that we have here the Key put into our hands, by the
Apostle himself, to open and unlock his meaning, and to give us the full
account of his design; which was to indulge the Jewish Christians, who had been
bred up under the Mosaical Dispensation; wherein days and meats were
distinguished into such as were clean or unclean, common or holy; which cannot
concern us who pretend to no such distinction in that Legal sense or of any
Divine Authority. Having observed thus much,

(2.) I answer. That the Apostle did declare his judgment in the Case, as to
the matters in question de jure: but as to the use and practice of them at
Rome, He did not as yet settle or determine them de facto, by his Apostolical
Authority. But with us the case is otherwise; we have a Determination and
Settlement against our pretended weak ones, both de jure and de facto too.

For they know there is nothing de jure unclean, or unlawful among us, and that
de Facto, Authority has settled what they dispute against.

That S. Paul has determined the Case de jure, we have his own concession; and
that (elsewhere) he did state and settle it, de facto, he is forced to confess;
and indeed his concessions are so full, when he comes to himself, that they are
a perfect confutation of his whole Book, if a man would give himself the
trouble or the leisure to collect them.

That the Apostle did determine the Case de facto as to other Churches, are so
full and clear, that we have no need of other evidence to prove it: The These
Epistles were written after that to the Romans.
Apostle, says he, does in the Epistles to the Galathians and Colossians,
speak severely against their observation of the Jewish Festivals. (p. 80.) And
does he not condemn them for their superstitious abstaining from certain meats
and drinks? Let no man judge you in meats and drinks: and let no man beguile
you of your Reward through their vain traditions; touch not, taste not, handle
Colos. 2. I^ridens and contemnens superstitiosam persuasionem in persona
pseudapostolorum ait, Ne tetigeris quasi dicat, si secus audeas, eris immundus
apud Deum, efficieris Damnationis reus. Hyper. ad Col. 2. Gal. 2.
not. And Gal. 4. 4. Ye observe days and months and times and years; I am
afraid of you lest I have bestowed upon you labor in vain. Was not the Apostle
so earnest and positive herein, that he threatened the Dissenters as Disturbers
of the Church, and tells them: That they should bear their judgment; and
wishes them cut off? Gal. 5. Did he not withstand St. Peter to the face;
because he was to be blamed; and why? was it not because he did not walk
uprightly according to the truth of the Gospel? and was not all this contest
upon the account of the difference betwixt the Jew and Gentile Christians? was
the Apostle thus positive, did he use such Menaces, did he give such warning in
his Epistle to the Romans? If not; why does this Reconciler say, that if those
Rules were but a provision till the Apostles had made a more perfect
determination, then they were not to be observed at all: was not Ignorance and
Superstition as dangerous to the Christians at Rome, as to those at Coloss and
Galatia? Are they at Rome indulged to live therein always, when these at Coloss
and Galatia are threatened, and in danger to fall from Grace, and be lost by it.

But for the present, as the Gentile Converts had great assurance of their
immunity from the Law of Moses, so those of the Jews were under great
prejudices through their veneration for it: And the Impostors and false
Teachers, (headed perhaps by Simon Magus who See Dr. Ham. Annotat. on the Title
of the Epistle to the Romans, toward the end.
had the reputation of a God among the Romans) were so subtle and powerful
with the Heathen Magistrate, that a peremptory order from the Apostle, (if such
a one had been sent,) especially having no Governor to enforce it, in all
probability, could have taken no effect. The Apostle therefore defers this
great work (as he did the settling of some such matters in other Churches, 1
Cor. 11. last.) till his own coming with the fullness of Apostolical Power and
the gift of Miracles, to encounter all the opposition of the Enemy.

In the mean while having felt in himself such an experiment of mercy, for the
things which he had done in his ignorance and unbelief, (1 Timothy 1. 13.) He was
well persuaded, that the same Divine Goodness, which for a time prefers a
mistaken Zeal before a deliberate Interea vero tamet si opinio quidem sit
superstitiosa tamen observatio Deo non displicet, quando infirmus sapienter
cavet, ne quid dubitante conscientia facere aggrediatur. Hyper. ad Romans 15. in
principio.
Profaneness, would be pleased to wink at that time of the Romans Ignorance and
Superstition, till he should vouchsafe to afford a Dispensation sufficient to
cure the Distempers which did afflict them. And to allay and be-calm their
Animosities, he forbids all uncharitable altercations; and to prevent Apostasy
from the Faith, he prescribes Lenitives, Condescension and gentle usage, lest
they should be tempted to forsake the Profession of Christianity, through the
asperity of severe Censures and spiteful provocations from their equals, and
such as had no Authority to Govern them.

This, I say, was a Temporary provisision: but he promises them a more perfect
redress and settlement in a short time, and then he would determine and settle
the Case and those differences de Facto, Romans 16. 20. The God of Peace shall
bruise Satan under your feet shortly. By Satan here he means the false Apostles
and Impostors (which were so great Instruments of Satan that he gives them his
name) with the Factious and Turbulent Dissenters which were led by them, so
Interpreters do generally unstand it: Non solum immittentes offendicula Oecum.
Theod. Theophilact. Lap. ex Chryso. Bullinger.
conteret, sed and ipsumillorum Ducem, Satanam, Insidiatorum magistrum;
Dissentiones vestras cum suo Principo: Nec eos modo qui dissidia moliuntur, sed
horum etiam Praefectum and Ducem commoliatur: per Satanam intelligit omnem vim
adversariam Christo and Evangelio ejus, sive sint Pseudapostoli; sive Tyranni:
Thus seveveral Expositors comment upon the words.

The History of those times tells us, that the Faction was so impetuous and
turbulent, that Claudius in the ninth Year of his Reign, was provoked to put
forth an Edict to banish them out of Rome, Claudius Judaeos impulsore Chresto
Acts 18. 2.
assidue tumultuantes Roma expulit, says Suetonius: and Josephus to the same
purpose: Anno ejusdem imperatoris nono expulsos per Claudium Judaeos refert,
and taking the Jews and Christians to be of the same Religion he banished them
all together.

There was little hopes therefore that the order of a Person at a distance, who
had never been amongst them should be of any force to quell such Heads of the
Faction or to remove their prejudices, so as to unite them in the same belief
and practice, aso t these matters; But the Apostle foretold and promised that
this should be done shortly; and how was that?

Shortly, Hoc de adventu suo dicit; He speaks this of his own coming to them,
says St. Ambrose: If a question should arise how this could be effected, when
it was thought that his Letters were more prevalent than his personal presence?
2 Cor. 10. 10. This is answered by Interpreters, That God Almighty would assist
him against the power of all Impostors, and Deceivers, (whom he calls Satan,)
for the opposition they made against Christ and his Gospel;) And that at the
Apostles coming among them, This Satan, this Adversary De la Cerda.
power should be conquered and laid prostrate under their feet.

And this the Apostle might very well promise without boasting, upon the
account of that power, which Christ did bestow upon his Apostles, a power to
tread upon Serpents, and Scorpions and all the power of the Enemy ( Luke 10.)
And so Aretius says (as the opinion of many Interpreters) Vbi ad vos venero,
per gratiam Dei efficietur, ut iste Satan Impostor prodatur and confundatur,
mea praesentia conculcabitur: When I come unto you, by the Grace of God, it
shall come to pass, that Satan that Impostor, shall be discovered and
confounded, he shall be trodden under foot by my presence.

For a proof of this, we have the Apostles own asseveration. Romans 15. 29. And I
am sure that when I come unto you, I shall come in the fullness of the blessing
of the Gospel of Christ. This is an intimation of the abundant gifts of the
Holy Ghost, whereby he should be enabled to confound the Ministers of
Dissension, and confirm the true Disciples. Benedictio Ambrose.
autem haec signorum virtus est: per quam confirmati sunt, This blessing was
the power of Miracles by which they were confirmed in the truth of the Gospel,
St. Ambrose. Origin refers it to the gift of Prophesying, whereby S. Paul
foretells his coming to Rome instructed with the most eminent gifts of the Holy
Ghost. Acts 19. 21. Audaciter autem promittere potuit se allaturum copiam
Spiritualium Pet. Martyr.
bonorum, qui certo sciret sibi concessam esse Gratiam Apostolatus: quam apud
eos non dubitabat fore frugiferam; says Peter Martyr: He might confidently
promise, that he should come attended with abundance of Spiritual Blessings:
because he knew certainly that the Grace of the Apostleship was bestowed upon
him: which he could not doubt but would be very fruitful and of great efficacy
amongst them.

And this he might very well be sure of, upon a double account; that is, both
by experience, and by Revelation. (1.) His experience might well assure him
hereof; For he was thus highly furnished in his administrations to other
Churches: Thus he tells the Corinthians: Truly the signs of an Apostle 2 Cor.
12. 12.
were wrought among you in all patience in signs, and wonders, and mighty
deeds. And thus he expostulates with the Galathians: He therefore that
Ministers to you the Spirit, and works Miracles among you, does he do it by
the works of the Law, or by the hearing of Faith, or the holy Gospel? and to go
no further than this very Epistle to the Romans, He tells them Romans 15. 18, 19.
thus, I will not dare to speak of any of those things which Christ has not
wrought by me, to make the Gentiles obedient by word and deed, through mighty
signs, and wonders; by the Power of the spirit of God, so that from Jerusalem
and round about to Illyricum, I have fully Preached the Gospel of Christ: After
so great experience of this Divine Assistance he could not doubt of the like as
long as he was engaged in the like service of the Gospel.

And (2.) we may very well conclude Acts 19. 21.
too, that he had this assurance by Revelation; for the Text says expressly.
That he purposed by the Spirit to go to visit Acts 23. 11.
Rome, and the Lord appeared to him to encourage him to that effect, and
hereupon he declares his power; and foretells the certain effect of it with so
much Romans 15. 29. Chap. 16. 20.
confidence: I am sure I shall come to you with the fullness of Evangelical
Blessings: and thereupon the Lord shall bruise Satan under your feet shortly.
By this means the Apostle was sure, that the Church at Rome would be shortly
rescued from those pestilent Impostors and Dissentions, which the event
witnessed accordingly. Haymo is most full in it: I Will transcribe his words.
Spiritu prophetico afflatus, talia cum securitate dicebat. Quum autem dicit, in
abundantia benedictionis Christi veniam, tale est, quale and illud quod in
exordio hujus Epistolae dixit, Desidero, (inquiens) venire ad vos, ut aliquid
gratiae Spiritalis impertiar vobis, ad confirmandos vos. In abundantia
benedictionis veniam plenitudine virtutum, ut mea praedicatione quod minus
habetis in fide, percipiatis ex virtute miraculorum, quae apud vos operabor,
roboremini in eadem fide, ut majorem gratiam Christi in meo adventu percipere
mereamini. Sic etenim fecit, quia veniens, quod illis deerat in fide, in
charitate, and in caeteris rebus spiritalibus, suo adventu supplevit. Haymo
above eight hundred years ago, does deliver this sense fully upon the Text, (
Romans 15.) Being inspired by a Prophetical Spirit, he delivered these things
with great confidence. When he says I shall come in the abundance of the
blessing of Christ. He repeats what he had said in the beginning of his Epistle
(chap. 1. 11.) for I long to see you, that I may impart unto you some spiritual
gift, to the end you may be established. I will come unto you in the abundance
of the benediction of the Gospel, that is, in the fullness of power and virtue,
that what you have wanting in the Faith, by my Preaching you may receive it by
the power of Miracles, which I will work among you, that ye may be confirmed in
that Faith; that you may receive a greater measure of the grace of Christ at my
coming. And this the Apostle did perform; for what was wanting in their Faith,
in their Charity, and in other Spiritual Graces, He supplied it at his coming
to them.

The short is, the Apostle does declare his sense concerning those Ritual
observances: but he sent no peremptory command, that they should presently walk
up to the truth and privilege of the Gospel in the practice or forbearance of
those things.

1. Because there was no Bishop or Governor settled to enforce the observation
of such a command, if it had been sent. And (2.) Because the opposition was so
stiff, and the opposers so subtle and prevalent, that there was no likelihood
that an order or command sent at a great distance from a person whom they had
never seen, should take effect amongst them.

Therefore he reserved the full determination and settlement of this difference
Romans 14. 1, 2, 3.
till his coming to them in the fullness of the Apostolical Authority, and the
power of Miracles, which he made use of in the settlement of other Churches. In
the mean while the most prudent provision he could make was (1.) To advise them
to a Romans 16. 17.
fair compliance with all Christian meekness and condescension; and to forbear
contempt and rash judgment; And (2.) To avoid the pestilent Infusions of
Impostors, by withdrawing from them. This justifies the sentiment of Grotius
and the Verdict.

The next place I find Dr. Womock concerned in, is at page 77. where the Romans
14. 14.
Reconciler observes, That the Apostle here declares, that the eating of those
things, which the weak Brother durst not eat, was a thing Lawful in it self,
and that he was persuaded thus to judge by the Lord Jesus, and so the scandal
which the weak Christian took at the freedom of the strong, who used his
Christian Liberty in eating of these things, was scandalum acceptum non datum,
scandal Received but not Given, the action being such as the weak Christian
could not justly be offended at: And yet the Apostle plainly does condemn both
here and in the first to the Corinthians, verse 8. the ministering occasion to
this scandal. And therefore tho this Scandal which the Dissenters take at
things indifferent enjoined by Superiors, be scandal received and not given,
this does not hinder but it may be the Duty of Superiors not to afford occasion
to it, by the imposing of these things, etc.

From which words of his, we see plainly, his quarrel is with his Superiors;
and if they will not come to School to him to learn their Duty, they shall hear
on it with both ears, and the people shall be acquainted with it to judge of
their gross neglect. But of this we shall have a more fit occasion to discourse
anon.

At present, we are to observe, That tho the Apostle did declare, that the
things which the strong did eat, and the weak were offended at were lawful in
themselves de jure; and that he was so persuaded by the Lord Jesus; yet he did
not, de facto, presently determine the general use of them; because the weak
ones were not as yet so well persuaded. This is the sense of all Commentators
as well Ancient as Modern.

The Gentil Christians lived with Ad Romans 14.
great freedom, says Pet. Martyr, as a People not tied to the Laws of Moses:
They understood those Ceremonies of Hellenisme (as he calls it) to be vain and
out of date: But the Jews, who knew the Law to be given by God himself, they
could not presently be persuaded that it was to be abolished. Wherefore they
demurred upon it, and would not easily suffer themselves to be drawn from the
observation of it. And therefore they abstained from meats forbidden by the Law
(among which were things Offered to Idols. Exodus 34. 15. which therefore does
not vary the Case at all) and observed the Jewish Festivals. All which
practices, showed them to be still weak in the Faith. For they are the weak in
Faith, who do not understand the use of things indifferent, says Conciliat.
Con. 885. Pusilli habend^ sunt illi, qui non sunt sufficienter instituti circa
libertatem ^ostram.
Joan. Thaddaeus.

Now, tho the Law of Moses was abrogated and consequently, the things
prohibited by that Law were purified from their uncleanness, that is, were
become lawful de jure, yet God had not Amesius Cas. Consc. l. 5. c. 11. an. 14.
then clearly and authentically promulged the Abrogation of it de facto, among
these Christians at Rome; and therefore the eating such meats and keeping such
Festivals, by them that knew their own Liberty was a scandal given to such as
Illorum infirmitatem tum acriter taxabant tum irridebant. P. Martyr.
knew it not, especially if they were sensible of their ignorance and yet did
wittingly and willingly deride and affront them for their weakness, as is
believed they did.

But admit that had been a scandal taken and not given; yet the Reconcilers
[and therefore tho] is perfect Non sequitur, unless his skill will serve him to
draw quidlibet ex quolibet, what he list out of every thing, or out of nothing,
and can make the Cart to drag the Horses after it. For there is a vast
disparity betwixt that Case of those Jews, and this of our Dissenters. And
Amesius himself Cas. Cons. l. 5. c. 11. n. 17.
does acknowledge it; Non est tale periculum scandali (says he) in humanis
inventis negligendis quale Apostolus fuisse olim tradit in ceremoniis legis
negligendis. Nulla enim conscientia talis potest haberi de inventis hominum,
qualem Judaei habebant de institutis Dei: There is no such danger in neglecting
Humane inventions, as the Apostle tells us there was of old in neglecting the
Ceremonies of the Law. For there can be no such Reckoning or Conscience made of
Human Inventions, as the Jews made of Divine Institutions.

Tho he would make the Ordinances of our Superiors odious by the name of humane
Inventions, yet he sufficiently declares the difference between the Case of the
Jews and our Dissenters. It Is well observed by Beza, De hac ignorantia hic agi,
quae tamen possit verbum Dei praetexere. Erat enim hic delectus ciborum and
dierum, de quo hic agitur, ex verbo Dei institutus, adeo ut iis, qui
Christianam Libertatem ignorabant, non esset res indifferens, sed observatu
necessaria ex Dei mandato. (ad Romans 14. v. 2.)

The Jews might very reasonably be offended, because the Divine Law (according
to their Present Opinion then in force) was broken; but here is no such Divine
Law pretended to be in force among us, and this the Dissenters know and are
very well assured of; and yet they are offended. To make the difference more
fully appear, I argue thus, either the Jews (who are supposed to be those weak
Christians) knew that the Ceremonial Law was abrogated or they knew it not; If
they knew it to be abrogated, then they were grossly Superstitious in their
adherence to it, and were not to be tolerated in it, but to be restrained from
it: if they knew it not to be abrogated, then they looked upon the freedom the
strong ones took, contrary to the prohibition, to be a breach of the Divine Law
in force; and that was Scandalum Datum as was said even now, a Scandal given.
But with us these Dissenters have no Divine Prohibition to rescue them from the
contempt of Authority; no negative Precept to allege to justify their refusal
of Conformity: but a Humane Constitution, made according to Gods Ordinance, is
presumptuously broken, contrary to a Divine Law in force, which commands
obedience to our Superiors for the Lords sake. Page 78.


But let the Reconciler go on, (if he can) to run down Dr. Womock, as he
endeavors in these words: When therefore Dr. Womock says, that the Scandal
mentioned here is to be understood of an Active Scandal designed as a
Mouse-trap set and baited on purpose to entice and catch the unwary Mouse;
Hemmingius has the very same notion of the word, Scandalum propriissime
significat tegillum in instrumentis, quibus capiuntur mures, etc. Hemming.
Syntag. de Scandalo.
This (says he) is indeed an Exposition well becoming Cajetan and Tirinus,
from whom he does confess he had it; but most unworthy of a Minister of God.
For, can any man of Reason think it lawful to do an unnecessary and uncommanded
action, which he knows will minister occasion to the Damnation of many thousand
souls, provided they by it be destroyed without his formal, or express
designation of their Ruin, especially when the souls ruined are as much ruined
by his action, as if he had performed it to that end? Does S. Paul say If meats
make my Brother to offend, I will not so eat as to design his ruin? No, but I
will never eat whilst the World stands, lest I make my Brother to offend.

Here the Reconciler quarrels at the critical Interpretation of a word; tho the
Learned and Pious Dr. Hammond does the same thing; He observes that Mat. 11. 6.
at note c.
the word for Scandal signifies a Trap; a Gin, a Snare. Let the Reader consult
him if he please. For Cajetan and Tirinus they are not such contemptible
writers with the Author of the Synopsis: And why may not such an Exposition
become Cajetan and Tirinus as well as Hemmingius, Beza, or any other Calvinist?
Certainly the expression of putting a stumbling block in our Brothers way does
denote a voluntary and deliberate action; and whereas he says, let us judge
this rather, that no man do so. Oblique malignos istos Censores perstringit,
says Beza, after Calvin, he does obliquely nip. (or has a back blow at) those
Malignant Censurers, who bend all their Will to Carp at their Brothers
Conversation.

However, I am well assured, it is not so unworthy of a Gospel Minister to
declare a necessary truth, tho it draws enemies upon him thereby, as to speak
perverse things to draw Disciples after him: This is like enough to be the
design of the Reconciler: but the other was the case of the Apostle, Gal. 4.
16. Hieronym. ad Gal. 4. 16.
Haec est conditio veritatis, ut eam semper inimicitiae sequantur, sicut per
adulationem perniciosam amicitiae conquiruntur; libenter enim quod delectat,
auditur: and offendit omne quod nolumus: This is the condition of sober truth,
says S. Hierome, Strife and Envy do always dog her, whilst a pernicious
Flattery shall purchase Friendship.

But can any man of Reason think it page 78.
lawful, says the Reconciler, to do an unnecessary and uncommanded action,
which he knows will minister occasion to the Damnation of many thousand souls,
etc.

To which we can reply, that we plead for nothing but what is commanded, either
by positive Laws or General Custom, (which among us is Common Law too,) and
therefore necessary and so determined in the first Council of the Church at
Jerulalem; and we are so far Acts 15. 28.
from knowing that those things will minister occasion to any man's Damnation,
that we hope they will, as well as intend they should, minister to their Duty
and eternal Happiness. He that has the Conduct of an Army in a just War, if all
that perish by his Sword should perish everlastingly, their blood and
destruction must be upon their own heads; he is under command and has done no
more than his bounden Duty; and if his own Soldiers mutiny, and in their
disorder the Enemy falls upon them to their ruin, they perish likewise upon
their own score; their General and Officers, (whom they would not obey) are
blameless. Christ himself says, Ye shall die in your sins, to John 8. 24.
such as would not obey his Conduct.

Let no man therefore fly in the face of Authority; it is not the Impositions of
their Governors that Damn them; but their singularity Quisquis Ecclesiae
Ministerium rejicit, and jugum, quod, ejus manu Deus vult suis omnibus imponi,
detrectat, nec ullam cum Christo Communionem habere, nec Dei filius esse
potest. Calvin. in Isa. 49. 23. Luke 10 16. 1 These. 4. 8.
and Faction, in choosing a Doctrine and way of Worship by themselves (which is
directly Heretical both in practice and notion) in opposition to the Ministry
of those persons (their Guides) whose Faith and Conduct they ought to follow,
For in despising them, They do (interpretative) despise their Lord and Master;
and it is warning enough to prevent their ruin, (if they would be pleased to
take it,) that he has solemnly told us so. And what other course has God
prescribed to prevent Rebellion, but to tell us, They that resist their Lawful
Governors, Romans 13. 2.
shall receive to themselves Damnation. If men will be so incredulous and
desperate as not to believe God herein, they must make out the experiment at
their own Cost and Peril.

But there are a sort of men, who weigh their Religion only by their Scruples,
and they think there is no Scandal but in a Cross or Surplice. It Is fit
therefore to consider what is meant by Scandal. It Is called a stumbling block
and to let us know what he means by that Metaphor, he does Interpret it by an
additional expression, calling it an Romans 14. 13.
occasion of falling, upon which Hyperius grounds this Description: Tunc enim
ad Romans 15. in principio.
offendiculum praebetur, ubi per nos committitur, vel in Doctrina, vel in
moribus, quo conscientia alterius moveri queat ad deficiendum a doctrina seu
Religione semel suscepta, vel certe ad eam minoris quam antea aestimandum: Then
is a stumbling block or scandal laid in the way, when we commit something in
Doctrine or manners, whereby the Conscience of another Person may be moved to
depart from the Religion he has once received, or to esteem it less than he did
formerly. Now he should be a man of a strange temper, that should think the
worse of my Religion for the decency of its address, and my reverence in the
performance of Gods public and solemn Worship.

We should consider, that as there is a woe denounced to those, who give
offense; so there is one belongs to them that capriciously take it, and there
is a blessing promised to them, who take it not: Blessed is he (says our
Sovereign Lord) Mat. 11. 6.
who is not offended in me, which (Me) reaches beyond his Person, to all his
Dispensations. Yet how many of his harmless actions were the Pharisees offended
at? He could not work a Cure or a Miracle, but they made a Scandal of it,
especially if it were performed on Their, which indeed they made more their
own, than Gods, Sabbath. It is not to be denied, there was an excellent man
once offended at Divine Providence, for I was Envious at the foolish, Psalm. 73.
3.
when I saw the Prosperity of the Wicked. But this was only by Surprise, he was
soon rectified in his judgment when he went into the House of the Lord; and if
our Dissenters (who are offended at matters of a far inferior nature,) would
find in their hearts, to go to Church, they might soon meet a happy cure of all
their fond and needless Scruples.

However, your Action (says this Reconciler) does minister occasion to their
Damnation, and tho they be destroyed without your formal or express designation
of their Ruin, yet they are as much ruined by your action as if you had
performed it to that end: This seems to be somewhat hard, that I should be
guilty of their ruin or blamed for it, when I never designed it, never
intended it, but always by my discourses, by my persuasions, by my prayers and
tears, endeavored to prevent it; yet so it is, says our Reconciler, you have
done an action, though lawful enough and harmless in it self; yet this weak
Brother has taken offense at it, and is gone to Hell for it; and you must
answer for your want of Charity.

But what if one of our Brother Dissenters, what if Amesius (after he is cast
Cas. Cons. l. 5. c. 11. n. 6.
in his fresh Suit against the Ceremonies) Resolves that the Mouse-Trap must be
ready set and baited, as well as Tirinus? What will you say, if, when he is
handling this very Case of Conscience, he requires a Formal Scandal, as well as
Cajetan, to make a man guilty of our Saviors Vae vobis of giving Scandal? This
is his Resolution, Potest esse Scandalum passivum, vel acceptum, sine peccato
agentis: ut cum factum unius est alteri occasio peccandi, praeter intentionem
facientis and conditionem facti: There may be a Passive Scandal or Scandal
taken without any sin or offense of the Agent: As for example, when the Fact of
one man is the occasion of sinning to another, contrary to the nature of the
Fact and the intention of him that does it.

Some capricious person may take offense at my very best performances, when I
aim at nothing but the Glory of God, and my own Salvation. The Superstitious
Pharisees were offended at the Disciples, for plucking and rubbing out the ears
of Corn, and some were offended at the anointing of our Saviors feet: These
Instances were neither necessary nor commanded; but actions indifferen^. (Let
no man say that was Judas; for others can kiss their Masters hand, and cry Hail
to their Mother the Church, and yet take offense and betray them both.) But did
Christ check Mary Magdalen, or his Disciples, and tell them they walked
uncharitably in so doing? no, he justified the practice as innocent and
laudable. Peter likewise was offended, that Christ should condescend to wash
his feet: Was not that an indifferent action, and had it not a Religious, and
Spiritual signification? Does Christ desist from the performance because a weak
Disciple took offense at it? no; tho it was a symbolical Ceremony, our blessed
Lord sticks not to assert it, and goes on with his own practice.

It Is my duty to give no offense; but having avoided the occasion on my part,,
it is not my duty that a weak or froward Brother takes none. If the woe belongs
to him by whom the offense comes, in this sense, let the Reconciler look to
himself; For, if he thinks he has not given offense to his Superiors and the
Church of God, by his incoherent Book, yet I am sure there is offense, and
great offense taken at it; and many think it was no less unnecessary than
unseasonable, and I dare be bold to say, 'twas uncommanded, unless the
persuasion of some Atheistical Physician has the force of a Command with him.

But he presses S. Paul upon us in these words: Does S. Paul say, If meats Page
79.
make my Brother to offend; I will not so eat as to design his ruin? no, but I
will never eat whilst the World stands, lest I make my Brother to offend. Here
I cannot but take notice of this Reconcilers want of Ingenuity: among the
grounds laid in the Verdict for securing the Authority and Peace of the Church
and for the Conviction of Gainsayers, he found such as he could neither answer
nor digest: hereupon his Zeal for the Cause, boiled up his passion into such an
intemperate heat; as makes him forget the holy Text as well as Humanity, and
the right way of Reasoning. Because he was transported himself he will needs
have S. Paul so too; for he represents him thus, saying, If meat make my
brother to offend, I will never eat whilst the World stands: If this were it;
then he resolved to starve himself; and that is against the Law of Nature; and
that must needs be against Charity. We see by this, what a great Casuist he is,
A negative precept does always bind, and we cannot quit the obligation though
the whole World were in danger to be subverted: Thou shall not commit Adultery,
thou shall not worship an Idol; thou shall not kill thy self; to avoid Scandal.

It Is a Common Rule from S. Bernard, Melius est, ut scandalum oriatur quam ut
veritas relinquatur: It Is better that Scandal should arise than the truth be
forsaken, or a divine precept broken. And it is one of the three exceptions
which S. Hierom makes in the Case of Scandal; Dimittendum est propter
Scandalum, omne quod potest praetermitti salva triplici veritate sc. vitae,
justitiae, and Disciplinae: A man is not bound to quit his Life, nor the course
of Justice and good Discipline, to avoid Scandal, unless it be in a Relaxation
of Penalty; when need requires. St. Paul says only that he would not eat flesh,
and perhaps he means such flesh as had been offered to Idols; or perhaps, his
meaning might be, that, tho Christ had ordained that they who Preach the Gospel
should live of the Gospel, and at the Charge of See v. 8. to the end of the
ninth Chapter
those, to whom they did Administer; yet that he resolved not to use this
Liberty amongst them, but to abstain from it, the more to oblige and endear
them to him, so St. Chrysostom and Oecumenius, who does connect the Verse to
the ninth Chapter.

2. I say, he writes here as a Rhetorician: It Is Hyperius his observation, that
the Apostle uses great Civility and Artifice in his Epistles to oblige them:
And Grotius says his expression is Hyperbolical, and Beza upon the place,
refers us to Mat. 5. 29. and his Note upon that Text is this, Hyperbolice haec
dicuntur: vide Chrysostom. Hom. 3. de laudibus Pauli.

3. And whether the expression may not be restrained to the Dispensation of
Moses and the duration of their Laws and Economy, ought to be considered; for
that the word signifies that state and the observances there in use is very
manifest. Per Elementa m^ndi intelligunt rudimenta illa paedagogica quibus Deus
erudivit Ecclesiam Judaicam. In hanc eo lubentius descendo sententiam, quod
ipse Paulus ad Gal. 4. 3. per elementa mundi designat illum cultum ceremonialem
qui viguit sub Vet. Test. Daven. ad Col. 2. 8.
Gal. 4. 3. Col. 2. 8, 20. for which see the Learned and Pious Dr. Hammond, on
the Text, and note 6. on Col. 2. 8. That St. Paul did never do what he there
intimated to be his inclination, is the affirmation of St. Chrysostom, and
that he did otherwise, when the Church was come to a point of settlement, and
the obstinacy of the Jews made him despair of their coming into her Communion,
is clear from his own Determination and Practice; Ye observe days. I am afraid
of you, Gal. 4. 10, 11. and Chapter 5. 1, 2, 4. Stand fast in the liberty,
wherewith Christ has made you free, if ye adhere to the Law for your
Justification, Christ is become of none effect to you: He shall profit Daven.
ad Col. 2. 8. p. 186.
you nothing: ye are fallen from Grace. He says as much to the Colossians, Chapter
2. 8. Beware lest any man spoil you through Philosophy and vain deceit, after
the tradition of men, after the rudiments of the World: This is that which the
Apostle says, they are to be avoided as Impostors, who obtrude upon Christians
the Ceremonies which God commanded under the old Testament, being abrogated in
Christ by the exhibition of the Gospel; says Davenant.

4. The sense of the Apostle (as Dr. Hammond sums up in his Paraphrase upon 1
Cor. 8. 13.) amounts to this, That the Apostle to prevent sin, (and especially
the sin of Apostasy) in others, was willing to deny himself that Liberty, which
by the Law of Christ did truly belong to him: and every good Christian will be
ready to do the same, where there is a just occasion for it. But we must
remember that our Liberty tho an excellent Privilege, yet is not such an
absolute good thing, but it may be abused and evil spoken of; and it is Romans 14.
16.
as justly evil spoken of, when it is abused to Schism and Sedition, as when
it is abused to gratify our fleshly Lusts, and turned into wantonness. But I am
sure no good man, no wise man, will speak evil of my Liberty, when it is
governed by a just Authority. For I am not bound Amesius ubi supra.
to disobey the just Impositions of my Superiors, i. e. I am not bound to omit
my necessary Duty, or to commit a sin, because I am not bound to go to Hell to
avoid Scandal: Charity begins at home, and there it obliges me to avoid sin in
my self, before I prevent it in another. The Truth is, the Reconciler is
ensnared in a Fallacy, and out of great kindness he would draw in his Brethren
for company. The Fallacy is a dicto secundum quid: and tho it be not so
perceivable in this, yet in the other instance, Romans 14. 5, 6. it would appear
too gross to be swallowed; for thus it would run: It is not good to regard a
day unto the Lord, whereby my brother stumbleth, or is offended, or is made
weak. Romans 14. 21. wherefore if a day make my Brother to offend, I will never
regard a day, never perform any solemn worship to God, lest I make my brother
to offend. In this parallel instance he must distinguish of the Apostles
meaning, or confess his own false reasoning.

But this Reconciler, whilst he allows nothing to be Lawful, but what is
necessary and commanded, he destroys Authority, he destroys Liberty, and (in
contradiction to his own Hypothesis) he imposes (a Duty I cannot call it but) a
Task which is impossible.

(1.) He destroys Authority; he sets up the fourteenth against the thirteenth
to the Romans: And the command of Subjection to the higher powers he controuls
by that expostulation: Who are thou that judge another man's Servant. In
favor of the Dissenters weakness, he brings a Writ of Error against the force
of Lawful Impositions; and to secure them in their Superstition, he makes a
Tender Conscience a Supersedeas to the Sacred Prerogative of Authority and the
Sovereignty of Governors; of which we shall deliver more hereafter.

(2.) If he allows nothing to be Lawful but what is necessary and commanded, he
destroys Liberty. For what is that Liberty, wherewith Christ has made us free?
(not to speak of our freedom from sin and Satan) was it not from the Ceremonial
Law of Moses? If we are delivered from the Law, then from the distinction of
things Common and Unclean, from things that were not accounted such; if from
that distinction, then from the superstitious Opinions and scruples of men
about things indifferent, which are grounded upon that distinction. But if we
be not set at Liberty from men's superstitious Opinions and Scruples about
things Indifferent, then are we still under that distinction of things Common
and Unclean, and that distinction brings us directly under the Jewish Yoke of
Bondage: And if so, we are in a much worse condition than the Jews were, our
burden and thraldom greater; for that which obliged them was only the
Institution of God; but we are inthral'd to the Caprichioes of men; and not to
the humor or squeamish Fancy of any single Person, but of a Multitude, who can
pretend no Authority over us, but their own will and pleasure, which is a
derogation to the Gospel, and a subjection of our Christian Liberty to the
Arbitrary whimseys of all weak and Fanatic Persons.

3. And this will destroy our peace too; For one man will think he may take up
Arms against his Prince, to defend his conceits and scruples, which he calls
his Religion; (for what has been done, may be done again, by men of the same
Principles,) another will think he may not: one man will think he may disobey
his Church-Governors, another will think he may not: if no man may be allowed
to judge in this case (as I do not see how they can, according to this
Reconcilers sense and principles,) what will be the end of our Peace, or what
will become of such Dissentions? One man thinks he may wear a Surplice: why?
because Authority has enjoined it: Another thinks he may not: why? he has no
reason for it, but his own will and humor. If he says, he refuses it,
because God has not commanded it; The other will reply, he does it, because God
has not forbidden it: And herein he follows the Apostles own Rule, He obeys
God rather than Man; For God commands him to obey those that are set over him:
but they tempt him to disobey our Guides and follow a Rabble, who have no stamp
at all of Authority to recommend them to our observance.

To go further; If this Doctrine of the Reconciler were in force, no man could
be sure that he is at peace with God, or his own Conscience. For let the
Apostle profess as he does, 2 Cor. 1. 2 Cor. 1. 12.
12. Our rejoicing is this, the testimony of our Conscience, that in simplicity
and godly sincerity, not with fleshly wisdom, but by the Grace of God, we have
had our Conversation in the World, and more abundantly to you-wards: The weak
Brother can tell him, his glorying is not good, for he has walked
uncharitably, he has done such things as were unnecessary and uncommanded,
whereby he stumbled and was offended, and grieved, and made weak: and that
hereby he had destroyed the work of God, and a person for whom Christ died, and
made his good evil spoken of, and tho there were neither any moral evil in the
nature of the things he did, nor any evil intention in his doing of them, yet
he had taken offense, and in the event he was actually ruined by his practice,
as much as if he had designed it; and therefore he must expect to bear his
Judgment for it. Can any man that understands his Interest in Christ and the
Privileges of the Gospel, think himself concerned in such Scruples, and
Objections; or disturb his inward peace upon that account?

4. For this Doctrine, that I must do nothing that is unnecessary and
uncommanded for fear of Scandal, puts a man upon a task which is impossible;
For suppose a Dissenter sees me (for example) wear a Surplice; he tells me he
is offended at it, he is grieved and stumbled, and made weak (which perhaps he
understands not the meaning of) to give him the better satisfaction I consult
the Reconciler (as the great Oracle of Conscience) in the case: he tells me I
must forbear the use of it in hopes to gain this weak Brother, Well, I obey him
and lay it by. But then a Conformist comes in and observes me to officiate
without it; hereat he is offended, and tells me it grieves him to see Authority
contemned, the Laws violated, Christian Liberty betrayed by the superstitious
forbearance of a thing indifferent, to gratify a Faction set up against the
Government: This he will say does weaken his faith, and makes him question the
sincerity of such as profess the Gospel, and the Religion established among us.
By this Instance, it is evident I cannot please them both; I must unavoidably
offend one of them. Can I prevent them both from taking offense? This affair is
attended with such perplexity, that the performance is impossible; Cas. Cons.
l. 5. c. 11. n. 18.
and therefore it cannot be a Christian Duty. And for this I have the suffrage
of Amesius, tho, in his time, a stiff Dissenter: Nulla datur talis perplexitas,
ut necessarium sit pio homini, sive hoc vel illud faciat, sive non faciat,
scandalum alicui dare: There can be no such case of perplexity, that it should
be necessary for a pious man to give any man scandal, whether he does this or
that, or does it not. But how to avoid such perplexity, we must find out some
better Rule, among the Casuists, than this Reconciler has yet prescribed or
found out for us.

To show his Ingenuity toward Dr. Womock (or his artifice of concealment) I
shall let the Reader see how this Argument page 114.
was managed in the Verdict: where he takes notice from the Apostle, that one
man will observe a day, another will not; one man will eat Swines-flesh,
another does abhor it. I Romans 14. 5.
cannot satisfy them both, for both are scrupulous, and both respectively
offended at one another practice. To eat and not to eat, to esteem a day and
not to esteem it; these are perfect contradictions; and it is impossible for any
Charity to reconcile man's practice to both their scruples. S. Paul himself (at
last) found this so perplexed a case that the difficulty was insuperable: This
he learnt by experience, upon the congress of the Jew and Gentile Converts at
Antioch, Gal. 2. (of which we have given some account already) wherefore
instead of a prudent, and charitable expedient (which in this case was
impossible to find out) He withstood S. Peter to the face, and with great
Integrity and Stoutness, asserted the truth of the Gospel and the extent of
Christian Liberty. And herein he left us his own practice for an Example to
maintain our Privilege; and not to govern our selves by the timorous
squeamishness, or pretended scruples of superstitious men, (which may be
contradictory and endless) but by the solid Rules of Truth, and the prudent
Resolutions of Pious and Careful Governors.

I shall conclude this with the words of Rollock: When we are conscious to our
Comment. In Joan. 5. 9.
selves in our actings, that we aim at Gods glory above all things, and do not
transgress the limits of our Office and Calling, we may act confidently, tho
all the World be offended at us, and after we have done what we ought and what
we were able to do, if the success does not answer our expectation so happily
as we could wish, yet let us not be dejected at it; but enjoy that good
Conscience, which the Apostle glories in. (2 Cor. 1. 12.) This will be of great
force and efficacy to our comfort and rejoicing in the time of adversity, and
this we cannot but obtain; if we keep within the bounds of our Profession and
Calling, and set the glory of God before our eyes in all our actions. Thus
says R. Rolloc; and herein he appears to be a better Casuist than our
Reconciler has expressed himself upon this occasion.

But let us hear what he has to say further against Dr. Womock which is as
follows: Secondly, whereas he adds, that the scandal here spoken of, is in a
matter of our own choice, and power, Page 79.
and it is to be understood in a matter wherein Authority has not interposed
her determination; This (he grants) is very true, and the natural Inference
from it is this, etc.

Here the Reconciler fully acquits Dr. Womocks Doctrine in this point of
scandal; who pleads only for those things wherein Authority has interposed her
Determination. Why then is he so peevish and froward toward the Dr. when he
seems to acquit? The reason is this, he would set up the Liberty of the
Subject, in matters of Religion, against the Authority of the Prince and
Bishop, which is established in the same Charter of the Gospel, by a divine
Grant, precedent to that Liberty; and because Dr. Womock has endeavored to
vindicate the Authority of our Superiors against his design, therefore he is
thus offended; for he finds he shall never be able to prove what he calls the
natural Inference from Dr. Womocks words; but let us see what it amounts to.

Since therefore (says this Reconciler) no Authority can be supposed to
interpose to determine our Superiors to the Imposition of these indifferent
things, or to hinder their abatement of them by the same power which imposed
them, in order to prevent the ruin of so many souls as are involved in a
wretched Schism by the continuance of that Imposition, since they declare, it is
in their own choice and power to command, or not to command them; this case
must by his own confession be good against the Imposition of them, tho it does
not hold good against obedience to them, when Imposed.

In which words of his there are very many things observable.

1. It Is a great truth, That the case he puts does not hold good against
obedience to the things in difference among us, when imposed.

2. That it is good against the Imposion of them, is not the Drs. Confession but
his own Inference; which the Doctor is confident he can never make good; being
but one of his usual Paralogisms and false Reasonings.

3. He confesses that this wretched Schism of the Dissenters is damnable;
otherwise, how could he object the ruin of so many souls as are involved in
it? But to save them harmless he lays their fault at the door of their
Governors, and to Commute for the Disobedience of the Dissenters, he would be
content to send our Governors to Hell in their stead.

4. He can propound no way to prevent the ruin of our Schismatics, but to
take down our Governors Authority by the abatement of their Impositions. But if
a Nation be addicted to Drunkenness, is there no way to cure them but to root
up their Vines, and burn up all their materials that will afford strong
Liquors? A wise man sure, will think it better and more rational, to teach them
temperance and the moderate use of those wholesome and comfortable Creatures. In
like manner, when there are any Impositions, which some men are led by their
own ill temper, or an ill example to take offense at; I should think it might
be sufficient, to discharge a good Conscience, to declare and teach the sober
and beneficial usefulness of such Impositions; whereas the abolishing or
changing of them upon any light suggestion, or Factious importunity, may breed
more mischief than it will prevent.

5. When he says, That no Authority can be supposed to interpose to determine
our Superiors to the Imposition of these indifferent things, what does he mean?
a new occasional and prophetical Authority? that needs not; for they have an
ordinary Apostolical Authority (such as is John 20. 21.
conferred upon Church-Governors) and that is derived from Christ; and they have
their own humane Judgment, with the advice of Common Council (wherein Acts 15.
28.
matters of such a general and public concern should be determined) and that
is assisted by the Holy Ghost; and this determines the case according to that 1
Cor. 14. last.
Apostolical Rule: Let all things be done decently and in order.

But because this Reconciler cannot tell well how to shake off obedience, he
attempts to pull down Authority; and his Superiors are much beholden to him for
his kindness; in giving them a Writ of Ease, to discharge them from the
troublesome task of Government. St. Peter was once willing to be quit of the
like trouble at Antioch, and to that end, he Gal. 2. 11, to 14.
dispensed with the profession of his own belief: but what came on it? Barnabas
was carried away with his dissimulation, and the faith of others began to
stagger, and the truth of the Gospel was like to be brought in question, through
his silence and gratification of their weakness.

But we know St. Paul did very boldly rebuke St. Peter upon that occasion;
Petrus coelesti visione edoctus, discrimen ciborum esse sublatum, reprehensione
meritus est; quia quae a Deo didicit and in publico Consilio docuit, non
observavit, scandalum Judaeis and Gentibus praebuit. Joan. T^addaeus Conciliat.
n. 885.
and in justification of him therein, Mr. Calvin well observes, this was not a
trifling business, neque vero hic agebatur hominum negotium: sed venerat in
discrimen Evangelii puritas, ne Judaico fermento inquinaretur: for it was not
the mere concern and business of men that was then and there acted: but the
purity of the Gospel was brought in danger, lest it should be corrupted by the
Leven of Judaism. And is it not so with us? Do not the Dissenters look upon the
things, they scruple at, as unclean, and refuse them upon that account; and so
run into a Jewish Superstition? This cannot in reason be denied.

But the Reconciler has prepared a P. 156. 157.
salve for this sore. Let our Superiors abate their Impositions, not as sinful
to be practiced, or with a protestation that they do not esteem them so, but
purely for the sake of peace and unity; -- This, says he, will be satisfactory
to those who scruple the use of them: and he conceives it may be the duty of
Superiors to condescend; nor will it be sufficient ^. 326.
to excuse them, when they neglect to cut P. 78.
off this occasion of their Brothers Scandal, to say, that their weak brother
acts unreasonably, if it be lawful for them to dispense with their Impositions,
etc.

Here the Reconciler shows himself an excellent contriver for the ease of
Government and a tender Conscience: but he plays the Mountebank, and teaches
the People to go upon their heads, with their heels upwards; for it is evident
his attempt and project is to set up Subjects above their Governors. And
whereas they pretend to be offended, he could not but take notice, at p. 58,
and 59. (which is a Confutation of the rest of his Book) That it is because they
may not have their own Will, not that they see any sin in the Impositions which
they quarrel at. For if they had any sense of weakness in themselves, or any
veneration for their Superiors, why should not they have so much deference to
their Judgment and Authority as to believe them, when they tell us, that the
practice they enjoin is very innocent, and the fears of them who think
otherwise, very superstitious, which is the Confession of this Reconciler.

But to prove that the Head must stoop to the Feet, and the Law bow down to its
trangressors, that all Parliaments must take their measures from the Rabble and
the wisest Shepherds from the silliest P. 3. 24.
of their straggling sheep, he pleads St. Paul's practice and Authority. For he
says; he never does enjoin the weak to be of the same Principles, and
Apprehensions with the strong; This goes beyond all the fooleries he has
observed in Meisner.
but always does command the strong to restrain his (own) liberty that he may
minister no scandal to the weak, and this (he says) the Apostle confirms by his
own practice in like cases. But what! does the Reconciler Burlesque the Apostle
to show his wit, and gratify the scoffing Atheist? I am sure he seems to be
profane, and to blaspheme as well the practice as the Doctrine of St. Paul.
What! would not the Apostle have these weak ones he conversed with be of the
same Principles and apprehensions with himself? who can believe it? What would
he make of them by his Ministry? What is the meaning of his passionate wish
before Agrippa; I would to God, that not only Acts 26. 29.
thou, but also all that hear me this day, were both almost, and altogether
such as I am except these bonds. What did he mean by that other wish in behalf
of his Brethren his Kinsmen according to the flesh: I could wish that my self
were accursed Romans 9. 3.
from Christ: Was this, that they might still continue Jews or turn Gentiles?
This is his exhortation to the Phil. 3. 17.
Philippians. Brethren be ye followers together of me, and mark them which walk
so, as ye have us for an Example. That he might prevent the suspicion of being
Ambitious, he cares not whom they propound to imitate, Modo se forment ad illam
puritatem, cujus ipse erat exemplar, Calvin.
provided they would frame themselves according to that purity, whereof he was
(so eminent) an example. Does he not pray for the unanimity of these Romans?
and does he not conjure Romans 15. 5, 6, 1 Cor. 1. 10.
the Corinthians, that they be perfectly Joined together in the same mind, and
in the same judgment, and that they speak the same thing to prevent Schism.
Vult autem cohaerere in una mente and una sententia, and consensum verbis
profiteri; says- Calixtus, he would have them agree together in the same mind
and in the same meaning, and to profess their consent in the same words. And
when, unto the Jews he became as a Jew, was it to confirm them in their
Judaism? no; but that he might gain them to Christianity.

But if he would not have the weak to be of the same Principles and
Apprehensions with the strong; he must enjoin the strong to be of the same
Principles and Apprehensions with the weak; or else he could never expect to
see a good effect of his prayers and obtestations.

But this Reconciler has made himself not the Subject's, but the Sovereign's
Remembrancer: He addresses himself to our Superiors and calls upon them to be
dutiful, to be subject to, and to obey their good people. This puts me in mind
of the character which Isaiah gives of a false Prophet. The Prophet that
teaches Isai. 9. 15.
Lies, he is the tail. But why is he the tail? because the tail follows the
body of the Beast, is carried about by it, and hangs upon it;; and so does the
false Prophet upon the Common People; and whether the Reconciler does not so,
let his Neighbors judge: But we see plainly he would have the Ancient and the
Honorable, who are the Head, to do so; that is the Reverence he has for them.

But I humbly conceive our Governors will find many Reasons not to rescind the
Laws established not to restrain, or abate the force of their Impositions as
this Reconciler would have them.

1. They should betray the Supreme power and Prerogative of Authority? It Is a
Rule laid down by a great Divine, De facto lex humana obligat, Humane Law does
bind de Facto, with a Non obstante to any danger whatsoever, when the
transgression of the Law would fall out to the ruin of the Community, to the
Contempt of Religion or the Christian Faith, or to the lessening and despising
of Authority or the Legislative Power. In such Cases no fear of danger can
excuse the transgression of the Law.

Upon this ground the General does expose the Sentinel to imminent danger of
death, to preserve the whole Camp, or City from destruction. The Prince
commands a Physician to attend a place that is visited with a raging
Pestilence. And the Bishop injoyns a Priest in the like case of danger, to
administer to the Ghostly welfare of such as are under a great Contagion.

Where, according to the judgment of wise men, the advantage and benefit does
preponderate and outweigh the danger or detriment that may ensue, there, it is
the Prerogative of Authority to interpose for the more public and common
safety.

But in such Cases, the obligation does not properly arise from the Humane Law,
but from the Natural Divine Law, which forbids that act, which tends to the
contempt of the Faith and the despising of Religion, or to the ruin of the
Community, or the undervaluing of Authority and the Legislative Power: For such
an Act, without doubt, is intrinsecally evil.

Authority and the Legislative Power is a Counterpart of Gods Sovereignty, a
Depositum, a sacred Trust, for the Government of the World, and to keep
distinct Communities in Peace and Order. As God allows no man to despise it, so
it ought much less, to despise it self. And nothing can make it more despicable
than to stoop to a Lure of Feathers, that is thrown out by a giddy Multitude.

To this purpose we have the judgment of the Learned and wise King James; who,
in his Proclamation, March 5. in the first year of his Reign, having given
Reasons, why he would not be swayed to alteration, in the Form of Gods Service,
by the frivolous suggestion of any light spirit; he adds this,

Neither are we ignorant of the Inconveniences that do arise in Government, by
admitting Innovation in things one settled by mature Deliberation: and how
necessary it is to use Constancy, in the upholding the public Determinations
of States; for that such is the unquietness and unstedfastness of some
Dispositions, affecting every year new Forms of things, as if they should be
followed in their inconstancy, would make all actions of State Ridiculous and
Contemptible: whereas the steadfast maintaining of things, by advice
established, is the weal of all Commonwealths. And that resolution of King
James was in the matter of Ceremonies, which we discourse of.

And the truth is, if the Prince be brought to those Terms, that he must strike
Sail to the humor of the People, and vary his Compass according to every wind
of Doctrine that blows from a Republican Coast, he must at last leave the fifth
Commandment out of the Catechism (as the Church of Rome has done the second) or
give them leave to do by it (as the Pharisees did of old) to make it of none
effect by their Traditions.

And how much the Prelates of the Church are concerned herein we may learn from
Joannes Crocius (for I will take in no Authority from the Jesuits or Church of
Rome in this Case, that the Reconciler may have no occasion to cavil upon that
account) Minister in omni muneris Part Auctoritatem divinitus concessam
tueatur viriliter and modeste: In every part of his Office, let the Minister
manfully, as well as modestly maintain, the Divine Authority which is given
him. He gives us St. Paul's Authority and example for it. His Authority is to
Titus Bishop of Crete, Tit. 2. 15. and for his example he refers us to Gal. 16.
7, etc. to 2 Cor. 10, 11, 12, Tertul. de Baptis. c. 17.
and 13. Chap. Dandi quidem habet jus Summus Sacerdos, qui est Episcopus;
dehinc Presbyteri and Diaconi, non tamen sine Episcopi authoritate propter
Ecclesiae honorem; Quo salvo, sata Pax est.

And if Princes and Governors should rescind and Chop and Change and Innovate
Laws and Constitutions upon the motion and Impulse of a turbulent People, this
will countenance their claim of a share For the Fly upon the Wheel thinks that
all the dust is raised by the force of her agitation.
in the legislative power; which is of too dangerous a Consequence to be
suffered in a Monarchy. I do solemnly therefore aver, that in all his Pleas for
Christian Liberty, S. Paul did never set it up above Authority, nor allow it to
control the power of Governors, or oppose them in things Indifferent.

2. In abating these Impositions; our Governors must needs act against their
own Judgment and Conscience, which is point blank against St. Paul's Rule, (
Romans 14. 5.) Let every man be fully persuaded in his own mind. Now if our
Governors be persuaded in their own mind, that the things established among us
are Decent, as well as Lawful, in the performance of Gods public Worship; The
Reconciler will tell them their Duty Vid. Protest. Reconciler. p. 157.
(as he calls it) for he says expressly they are more concerned in those,
whether advices or injunctions, of the Apostle than other men. And if in favor
of Dissenters (as the Reconciler would have it) they should abate their
Impositions, and enter their Protestations; they do not esteem them sinful to
be practiced, nor abate them upon that account. This would not at all Correct
the Judgment of the Dissenters: but it would tell all the World that such
Governors renounced their own Judgment, and it is probable many would say, they
went against their Conscience, to humor a froward and unsteady Faction.

How dangerous such a practice would be, we may learn from the experience and
complaint of the Royal Martyr, in an instance of a like nature; I never met
(says he) with a more unhappy conjuncture of affairs, than That concerned the
Destruction of an excellent man; and this of an excellent Church.
when between my own unsatisfiedness in Conscience, and a necessity (as some
told me) of satisfying the importunity of some people; I was persuaded by
those, that I think wished me well, to choose rather what was safe than what
seemed Just; preferring the outward Peace of my Kingdoms with (...) Meditat. on
the Earl of Straffords Death.
men, before that inward exactness of Conscience before God. He tells us, He
had confessed it with sorrow both to God and men, as an act of so sinful
frailty, that it discovered more a fear of man, than God, whose name and place
on Earth (says he) no man is worthy to bear, who will avoid inconveniences of
State by acts of so high injustice as no public convenience can expiate or
compensate. And then he goes on profoundly thus.

I see it a bad exchange to wound a man's own Conscience thereby to salve State
sores; to calm the Storms of Popular discontents, by stirring up a Tempest in a
man's own Bosom.

Wherefore our Governors being very well satisfied that in the present
settlement of Church affairs, they have acted within the proper sphere of their
own Office, and have had an eye all along, to Gods Glory therein, tho all the
Pharisees of the World should be offended, yet let them strenuously assert
their own Injunctions with alacrity under the attestation and comforts of a
good Conscience.

3. In abating those Impositions as this Reconciler requires, they should
betray the truth of the Gospel in things Indifferent, and depretiate the solemn
Worship of God, which among us is determined to be most Decently and Reverently
performed by our present establishment: we say (according to the sense of the
Apostle) He that has a jealousy he shall displease God, in doing such or such
a thing, and yet, will venture to do it, he sins in it; because he shows a want
of Reverence to the Authority and Majesty of God: In like manner should we
change that Form of Worship which we think better for that which we think
worse, a more decent way and manner of Address in our holy Duties for one that
is less decent in our own esteem; this would argue and declare a want of
Reverence toward the Majesty of God whom we pretend to Worship.

4. Taking away of those Impositions would cause a greater Mischief than it
would prevent; For (1.) instead of a Passive it would procure an Active
Scandal; to prevent a Scandal taken there would be a Scandal given: A Scandal
per se laid in our Neighbors way to remove a Scandal per Accidens. For a
Scandal by Accident does happen, Quando nec operantis intentio, nec operis
natura aut circumstantia eo tendit, ut alter ruat, sed prava peccantis
dispositione fit, ut occasionem peccandi inde hauriat, ubi non est: When
neither the intent of the Imposer, nor the nature of the Imposition, nor any
circumstance thereof tends to that end, that any man should fall by it, but it
comes to pass through the corrupt disposition of the Delinquent, that he draws
an occasion of sinning from thence, where really there is none, this is a
Scandal by accident and a Scandal taken; and this is all the Scandal that the
Dissenters have to complain of, in these Impositions.

Whereas the Repealing or ruffling of these Impositions, would unsettle a well
established Church, and rob her of that which is her Glory, her good Order
which keeps her steadfast in her Faith and Allegiance both to God and man. This
was so Conspicuous in the Church of Coloss, that all men observed it, and the
Apostle takes notice of it at a distance with great satisfaction; Tho I be
absent in the Col. 2. 5.
flesh, yet am I with you in the spirit, joying and beholding your Order and
the stedfastness of your Faith in Christ. Upon which words says the learned
Davenant, Seeing Pastors have so great a joy from that good Order that
flourishes among a People, it follows that they do unworthily afflict and vex
the Prelates of the Church, who do contemn and trample down the lawful
Ordinances of the Heb. 13. 17.
Church contrary to that of the Apostle. Obey them that have the Rule over you
and submit to them. For Ordo est tanquam vallus seductoribus oppositus, Order
is a Bulwark opposed to prevent the incursions of Seducers: They are therefore
seldom precipitated into Errors, who observe that order of Obedience which is
due to their Governors; but on the contrary, where the Order of Commanding and
Obeying is neglected, ibi tanquam per disjectam aciem facile perrumpitur, there
it is easy to break in upon them as upon a routed and scattered Army.

Hereupon Grynaeus (Professor at 1585. A Col. 2. 5. Lect. 18.
Heydelberge) among those Gifts, wherein a well constituted Church ought to
excel; he reckons these two, Order and the solidity of Faith. By Order he
understands the whole Liturgy and Discipline of the Church; where all things
are to be done Decently and in Order, 1 Cor. 14. 40. And such as walk
Disorderly, 2 These. 3. 6.
as far as is possible, in ordinem Disciplinae Ecclesiasticae severitate
adhibita redigendi sunt: They are to be reduced to Order by the severity of
Church Discipline.

(2.) A second Mischief that would arise from the Retrenching of those
Impositions would be the Offense given to the weak and tender Members of the
Church: For we must not deny but we have those that are weak and tender, and
are not the worse for it, and they may very well be jealous with a Godly
Jealousy, if they should see such a Change, such an abolition of our
established Ordinances, they might very well be Jealous of the truth of our
Doctrine about things indifferent, jealous of the lawfulness of our Practice
herein; or else Jealous of our sincerity in our profession of them both.

And this might prove so great a scandal that the Church of Rome might make a
greater Harvest of it, than they could of all the Plundering and Persecuting
times of the late Rebellion, when men of worth and honor did steadfastly adhere
to the King and Church out of Conscience, finding them so just and steadfast to
their own well settled Principles. And that of the Father is a known truth, Ipsa
mutatio consuetudinis, etiam quae adjuvat utilitate, novitate perturbat. The
Change of an old Custom gives more trouble and disturbance by the novelty, than
it can give advantage otherwise. And if it be Insolentissimae Insaniae, a part
of most insolent madness to dispute any of those Customs, which the Church
observes all the World over, as St, Augustine says it is; then certainly, no man
that is well in his wits, or has any veneration for Gods Church, can think it a
piece of Prudence or sobriety, to Cassate and make void all, and throw them
promiscuously out of doors, upon the srivolous suggestions of Fanatic Spirits
^^o ^^^^^ated with never so much blind Passion and Importunity.

(3.) There is a third Mischief as great as the former; by this means,
Governors should encourage and harden them in their Schism, whom, in Charity
they are obliged to correct; and not in their Schism only, but in their Judaism
and Superstition; which is against that Charity we owe to them as well as that
which we owe to our selves.

For that they are guilty of a wretched Schism the Reconciler does acknowledge;
and that they have a tincture of Judaism, or Jewish Superstition (if they do
really believe the Principles they insist upon in this dispute) cannot be
denied as long as they take Sanctuary at Rome, and entitle themselves to the
Indulgence of the Apostle (in this Epistle) to the Dissenting Christians, which
did then and there converse. For that such was their Distemper and Disease has
been sufficiently proved already.

Now to take off these Impositions (which the Party is thus upon the fret, and
in fermentation about them) may be against that Charity we owe to them; and it
may be in us the sin of scandal too, because we should not be sufficiently
careful to remove the occasion of sin from them. This was the sin of Eli, 1 Samuel 3. 13. and the sin of the Angel of the Church of Thyatira. Apoc. 2. 20.
It Is an authentic Rule, Qui non vetat peccare, cum possit, jubet; and that is
of the same importance; Facti culpam habet, qui quod potest, negligit emendare:
He that has power to correct a Fault, is guilty if he neglects to correct it.

I may add this also, that they, to whom we are so indulgent, lest they should
be offended, will certainly take occasion to be offended, and be actually
scandalized thereby; and so by our Indulgence we shall sin doubly; that is, as
well against that Charity which we owe to them, as against that which we owe to
our selves.

1. Against that which we owe unto our selves; for if we neglect our Duty, when
it is incumbent upon us, to correct them, that neglect is our sin, and that is
against the Charity which we owe unto our selves; to prevent which, our Savior
has given us this Charge, If thy right hand offend thee, cut it off and cast it
from thee.

2. It Is certainly against that Charity we owe to them; for we should hereby
encourage them in their Schism and Superstition by our Indulgence, whereas in
Charity we are obliged to endeavor their Correction.

If our Governors be obliged to root Superstition and Judaism out of the minds
and practice of their subjects, then they can find no better Remedy than these
Impositions, which, as their Application has discovered the Disease, so the
Continuance thereof, will be the best way to correct and cure it.

And for this our blessed Savior has afforded us an example; for, why did
Luke 13. 32. and 33.
he work so many Cures upon the Sabbath day, which he knew so highly to
Scandalize and offend the Jews? The day of it self was indifferent to him ( I
cast out Devils and do Cures to day and to morrow and the day following) He
could have done it the day before, or the day after; why then did he so
frequently and so designedly work his Cures upon the Sabbath day? Why, it was
to detect the Superstition they had for the Sabbath day and to cure them of it.
And herein the Reconciler and I are perfectly agreed: for he says, our blessed
Savior is supposed to have taken this Prot. Recotcil. page 318.
occasion, (viz.) to heal the diseased upon the Jewish Sabbath) to deliver the
poor People from those superstitions, and heavy burdens, which the Pharisees
had laid upon them in reference to that day. In like manner, the great Prudence
of our Governors thinks fit to continue these healing Impositions, to deliver
our poor people from those Superstitions and burdens, which our modern
Pharisees the Presbyterian Divines, have laid upon them in reference to these
very Impositions.

Governors do well remember their own office and know they have something else
to do, than to humor a Capricious or froward people. They are Ministers of
Gods Kingdom: They have Wis. 6.
a Master in Heaven who is King of Kings, to whom they must be accountable for
their administrations, he claims a Sovereignty over them as entitled to their
Thrones by the Commission which he gives them: By Me Kings Reign; and Romans 8.
as he allows them to Reign by him, so he requires they should Reign for him:
To this effect, he appoints them to be Nursing Fathers to his Church; and such
(God be blessed) have been all our Princes since the Reformation.

And the Charge is as strict upon the Bishops. Take heed therefore unto your
selves, and to all the Flock over the which Acts 20. 28.
the holy Ghost has made you Overseers, to feed the Church of God, which he
has purchased with his own Blood. The way to feed them is not to flatter, but
instruct them not to humor their petulancy but to reprove it: not to wink at
their superstition but to correct it: They can neither discharge their Duty nor
a good Conscience by following the People in their straggling; but by bringing
them home into the Fold; if they gratify them to their ruin, they cannot do
it but with certain peril of their own.

There is a great difference betwixt a Loose and unsettled State, and a State
that is regularly established: in the first every man does that which is right
in his own eyes ( and that perhaps he may call his conscience) So we find it,
Jud. 17, 6. In those days there was no King in Israel, but every man did that
which was right in his own eyes. And the meaning of that place, our Synopsis
has very well discovered: 'twas no wonder that Idolatry crept in amongst them,
when there was no Sovereign like that of Kings to hinder it, for the Judges
kept men to their Duty by advice and persuasion, rather than by an effectual
command and punishments.

But may we do so now, when we are under a well settled Government? It may seem
so to our Reconciler and his Dissenters, by the Apostles Concession, Romans 14.
5. according to the vulgar Latin unusquisque sensu suo abundet, let every man
abound in his own sense. But is this Gospel? Is this good practical Divinity?
No, it is a corruption of the Text says Hemmingius, it is wicked and
unchristian, for God has expressly forbidden it, Deuteronomy. 12. 8. Ye shall not do
that which is right in your own eyes. That is the common practice of such as
have no Coercive Government.

And this is the attempt of such as would have none: Will thou put out the eyes
of these men? Numb. 16. 14. We will not come up. They think they have lost
their own eyes, if they may not be allowed to do what they list. Such an one
was Corah; and we are foretold there would spring up a Race of pretended
Christians of the same stamp; and that their doom was already paradigmatized,
and set forth in Effigy, by his destruction: Woe unto them; for they have gone
in the way of Cain; ( who out Jude Ep. v. 1.
of Malice and Envy slew his Brother Abel, a figure of the true Church of God)
and ran greedily after the error of Balaam ( who Prophesied as ill things as he
could, Rev. 2. Hemmingius ad Ep. St. Jude.
and projected worse) for the reward of Lucre and applause: and perished in the
gainsaying of Corah. And in the description of Corah and his Company,
Hemmingius observes first, that he was not content with that degree of honor
to which he was advanced, and then that he did blaspheme the Magistrate, and
endeavored to take away all Degrees from among the Ministers of God. And to
effect this he made use of a specious Argument, viz. That it was a very
unworthy thing, that the holy people of God should be subject to any Head on
Earth. The Papists he says follow this Example, who will not suffer their
Priests to be subject to the Civil Magistrate to have any Authority in the
Church, and Joannes Agricola has the Annot. In Tit. 3. 1. He lived about 1530.
like charge against the Bishops of Rome; who pull down Magistracy (as if it
were an injurious encroachment, and not an Ordinance of God) that, upon the
ruin of this, they may establish their own Tyranny, similes his fuerunt
Prophetae Phanatici horum temporum: And such were the Phanatick Prophets of
these times, whose folly (says he) has been wonderfully discovered. And now
the fury of the Anabaptists wish and aim at nothing more than the common
destruction of all the Laws and honest Constitutions of the Magistrates. And
are not we leavened with this horrible Fanaticism.

To say that Church-Governors have not power to impose any thing for Decency
and Order, but what is necessary and commanded, is in effect, to charge the
Universal Church for 1500 years together, more or less, with Usurpation and
Tyranny; and contradicts the Judgment and Declarations of the most Learned
Protestants of any credible Denomination. See the Verdict, page 24, etc.

There can be no public Worship of See the Verdict, p. 24. p. 35. p. 223. and
the two Letters.
God solemnly performed unless some Rules be observed therein. If every man
were allowed to have his Psalm, his Revelation, his Interpretation, (to use the
Apostles own instance) if every 1 Cor. 14. 26.
one were suffered to pick and choose his own time, place, gesture, there could
be no Decency, no Order, nothing but Confusion. And the unlearned, Ibid. v. 2 3.
yea, and the learned too that should come into our Assemblies, would certainly
say, we were mad.

To prevent this, Governors are set up in the Church to determine what is fit to
be done, and to restrain our vagrant Liberty to the use and Practice of what is
so ordained, 1 Cor. 14. 40. Let all things be done decently and in order. This
is an Apostolical Injunction; and that is of great Authority; and so sacred,
that no humane Liberty is allowed to dispute, much less to affront it, for
indeed a greater that St. Paul is here; these Injunctions touching matters of
Decency and Order; they are the Commandments of God; and the Apostle would have
the greatest pretenders to the Spirit to know it, 1 Cor. 14. 34. so that we
have an Apostolical, we have a Divine Command for Governors, and that lays a
necessity upon them, to make such Ordinances and consequently the things
Ordained, are neither uncommanded nor unnecessary.

The evidence of truth is so strong in Page 340.
this Case, that the Dissenters are forced to allow, that there be many Cases,
where somewhat in genere is necessary to be determined; They also add, that in
all Cases truly such, the Magistrate Civil or Sacred not only may, but must
determine, and indeed (says the Reconciler) no man in his wits can doubt, that
what is necessary to be determined must be determined; and seeing Par in parem
non habet potestatem it follows that they cannot be determined by any other but
Superiors, (i. e.) they cannot be obligingly determined by others. Thus our
Reconciler.

But it is a great mistake to think that Authority in this Case is restrained
to things Necessary: All things are Lawful for me, says the Apostle, but all
things are not expedient. If he had restrained his (or our) Liberty to things
Necessary, he would have argued to that effect; All things are Lawful for me,
but all things are not necessary; and he would 1 Cor. 6. 12. and 10. 23.
have enjoined us to keep to things necessary: but he argues otherwise; All
things are Lawful but all things are not Expedient. Wherein he teaches us to
distinguish of things; whereof some (says he) are expedient, and some are
inexpedient. Which are expedient is not left to every man to judge; for then we
should run again into Madness and Confusion, as was observed even now.

When we speak of Necessary things Acts 15. 28, 29.
we had need be wary and speak with distinction; otherwise the word has so many
significations, we may easily be ensnared in a Fallacy upon that account. The
Decree of the Council at Jerusalem runs thus, It seemed good to the Holy Ghost,
and to us, to lay upon you no greater burden than these necessary things, That
ye abstain from meats offered to Idols, and from Blood, and from things
Strangled, and from Fornication. Some men I observe run into a great mistake in
making the necessity here mentioned, to be Antecedent to the Decree of the
Council in respect of the Nature of the things forbidden, (except Fornication
which is of doubtful interpretation too.) If those observed things were
Antecedently necessary, then they had some moral goodness in them, and were
commanded because they were good; which is not affirmed of the Ceremonial Law.
Besides Acts 15. 23.
this Decree was sent to the Gentiles and made for their use and observation;
and these things could not be necessary to them Antecedently to them, because
the Ceremonial Law of Moses did not oblige or concern them. The necessity
therefore which those things had, (I except Fornication in our common sense of
the word) was Consequent to that Decree of the Council. Nor could the
necessity, there mentioned, be absolute or simply such (for such necessity has
no Law, but is a Law to it self) but only a Hypothetical Necessity or a
necessity secundum quid; or, as some call it, a Necessity of expedience; of
which necessity or expedience, the Apostles and Elders, that is, the Governors
of the Church, were the sole and proper Judges.

But the Reconciler tells us, the Dissenters do universally deny that it is
necessary to determine any of these scrupled Ceremonies, and they have perfect
demonstration for the truth of that denial; for Necessarium est quod non potest
aliter se habere; that only is necessary to be done, which cannot be left
undone. But will the Reconciler say, that the things determined and imposed by
that Council were necessary in this sense? That implies a Physical necessity,
whereas here was no other necessity than a Moral one; which is only when
Prudence or the present reason of things does suggest, That I be willing to do
what I can, when I am not able to do what I would: In this sense the word
Necessity is taken, 1 Cor. 7. 37. He that stands steadfast in his heart,
having no Necessity, but has power over his own will; (i. e.) he has no Moral
consideration of force enough to draw him from his purpose. The necessity was
not absolute, 'twas not inevitable: The thing of it self might have been
otherwise; and therefore the Reconciler thought fit to mince the matter thus:

That only is necessary to be determined, in order to the performance of an
Ibid. p. 340.
Action, without which the Action cannot be done, or (N. B.) at the least not
well done; But Divine Service, says he, may be celebrated, Baptism may be
administered, the Sacrament may be received, yea, all these Actions may be
performed well, tho no determination should be made by our Superiors that all
who do Officiate should wear a Surplice, all that receive the Sacrament shall
kneel, and all that are Baptized shall receive the sign of the Cross upon their
foreheads.

Here the Reconciler mistakes the question or begs it, The question is
concerning these Administrations and performances, now our Superiors have made
their determination; And I say, if these Duties be not done according to
appointment they are not done decently according to the present Estimation of
our Governors; and it is their Estimate and Order, not our own Will or Fancy,
that God commands us to obey and follow; and the Reason is, because, according
to the common sense and experience of the whole World, They whose Prudence and
Authority is entrusted by God himself, to Rule and Govern in all Human Affairs,
are not only allowed, to be the most competent Judges The external Worship of
God is taken from that which is esteemed the highest reverence among men. See
Psalm. 2. 12. and 72. 9. Isa. 49. 23.
of what is Civil and Decent in their respective Countries; but the Duties also
appointed according to their Order at Gods Command, are the more likely to
obtain acceptance at Gods hands, for their very Office-sake, as Gods
Vicegerents. And hence it is that as we are required to obey them for the
Lords sake, so we are encouraged to 1 Pet. 2. 13.
hope that he will have respect unto us for theirs Nam cum Deus proponere
vellet exemplum orationis acceptissimae, non aliam in medium adduxit quam Mosis
and Samuelis Orationem, Greg. v. Psalm. 99. 6 Jer. 18. 1. 1 Samuel 12. 23.
.

And then God having prescribed his Vicegerents a General Rule, if he leaves
the particulars to their Discretion, Who art thou, O man, that disputes
against God? (Romans 9. 20.) Certainly it is our Duty to rely upon their Judgment,
where God himself is pleased to trust it. We have no reason to be offended at
the Laws of our Governors, when God is not offended at them, and we are sure
God is not offended at what they do, unless they do it against his will. What
they have done and established in his Church and Worship, let us see the Will
of God against it, and we will all forth with turn Protestant Joyners and
Reconcile our selves to the Dissenters upon the account Acts 4. 19, 5. 29.
of St. Peter's Aphorism, we must obey God rather than Man.

But where God has not put a check upon their power, we must obey him in his
Officers, rather than follow our own Fancy or the Suggestions of any private
Person, or Persons who have no Authority over us; and that is, to obey God
rather than man in a second and lower sense of that Rule. For Governors have
Authority to institute Rites and Observances for Order and Decency, which we
are bound to observe upon that account. For there is a command to Governors, 1
Cor. 14. 40.
Let all things be done decently and in order: And then there is a command to
Subjects, to perform what is established according to that Rule: Obey your
Prelates or those who have the Heb. 13. 7, 17.
Rule over you. And concerning such Rites and Traditions, St. Austins Rule is
commended in all the Church of God: In these things a prudent Christian
Davenant, ad Col. 2. 8. p. 185.
can observe no better Order than this, to do as the Church of God does,
wherever he comes: For whatsoever is enjoined that is neither against the
Faith, nor against good manners, is to be used indifferently according to the
custom of the place. All Ecclesiastical Laws concerning Fasts or Festivals,
concerning the difference of Habits, and the whole external Order, which is
observed, in the performance of all Sacred Offices, will come under this Rule.
Whosoever rejects this kind of Rites, and Traditions of men, not repugnant to
the word of God is a disturber of Public Order, and a Contemner of that Power
and Authority, which God has settled in his Church.

Thus the Learned Davenant.

2. If a weak Brother scruples and acts unreasonably, his weakness may call for
our help, and as S. Chrysostom says, he ought to have it. But what is the help
that can be afforded him in this case? The disease, it is in his Mind, and it is
^^t. Reconcil. (...) 78.
only Want of Knowledge and particularly want of the Knowledge of that Liberty
which was purchased to us by Christ Jesus; And hence it is, that the Apostle
requires the strong to bear with such a Weak Brother and to instruct him.
Tantisper dum de Liberate parta per Christum edoceatur, (as Hyperius,
Bullinger, Hemmingius, Beza, and all the Learned Commentators among the
Protestants, do unanimously expound it) till he has Learned, what that Liberty
is, which was purchased for us by our blessed Savior. Those are to be esteemed
little ones (says Amesius) qui non sunt sufficienter instituti circa
libertatem nostram. 1 Cor. 8. 7. who are not sufficiently instructed Case Consc
l. 5. c. 11. n. 14. 15.
about our Liberty. And he adds, That all they are not sufficiently instructed,
to whom a just account of the matter of Fact is rendered. For perhaps some are
not capable to understand the account that is given them; and therefore says
he, tho an account has been given them, they are still to be accounted weak and
little ones. But are Governors bound, as well to find them understanding as to
give them Laws? And must the Laws be suspended, because some men want a
Capacity to understand the Reason of them? See the Animadversions on the Prot.
Reconc. p. 44.


Gods patience, we know, was weary of waiting for the compliance of an
untractable Generation; and is the Patience of Man indefatigable? Forty years
long was I grieved with this Generation, and said, it is a People that do err
in their Psalm. 95. 10, 11
hearts: (they loved their Error, but their doom was sad at last) unto whom I
swear in my wrath that they should not enter into my Rest. St. Paul turned his
back at last upon the Jews, and they were totally cut off for their
stubbornness and unbelief. It is a very strange thing to me, that the whole
Church of God should be supposed to be in darkness as to the nature and
measures of Christian Liberty for 1500 years.

The Casuists tell us, that a Spiritual Good, if it be not absolutely necessary
to Salvation, but only a matter of Counsel, toward the accomplishing of it,
with more ease and advantage, is to be deferred Malder ad 22. q. 44. a. 7.
Dico. 5.
for a time to prevent Scandal. But the Scandal of the weak will hardly require
that such Spiritual good should be altogether omitted; for when that comes to
be required, it is degenerated into a Pharisaical Scandal.

I confess, says P. Mart. if a man contemns Ad Romans 14. in principio.
those truths which he hears out of the holy Writ, (he speaks of the weak Jews,
who would not believe the abrogation of the Ceremonial Law of Moses) and will
not admit them, but makes himself a Judge and an Arbitrator, how much of the
Scriptures he ought to believe, and attributes more to himself than to the word
of God: That, he says, is no true Faith. Nor does the Holy Spirit inspire such
a sense and conceit into any man; which makes him doubtful of the Justification
of such a person.

And tho his weakness may seem to need our help, yet if he scorns it, and
rejects our instruction, there is no reason that Authority, which comes from
God, should truckle under such as ought to be in subjection to her by Gods
appointment, or that Governors should stoop to break a good and decent Order to
gratify a perverse or wanton humor.

There was some difficulty in treating with those weak ones among the Jews;
They were to be brought off from Laws and Ceremonies of a Divine Institution,
under which they had been bred, and to which they and their Fathers had been
long addicted, as has been already observed. But there is Vnum Necessarium one
Principle (and it is of unquestionable truth (which well observed, is sufficient
to prevent or remove all the Scandal that is or can be
taken among us upon the account of Ceremonies or things Indifferent, and it is
this: That nothing can affect or defile Romans 14. 14.
the Conscience, but what is acted or omitted contrary to the Light of Nature
or the Laws and Institutions of the Gospel. Take an instance: The Surplice of
it self is a thing Indifferent: There is no sin in the use or dis-use of it,
but when Authority has enjoined the use of it, then to omit it with Offense and
in Contempt of Authority, is a sin; because it is against the Law and
Institution of the Gospel, which requires us to obey our Governors. I say the
same for the Sign of the Cross, and Kneeling at the Sacrament, and Kissing the
Book, or holding up the hand, at taking of a solemn Oath. Herein our Governors
have done nothing but what becomes Gods solemn Worship (which they are enjoined
to see performed decently,) nothing but what becomes the Trust, reposed in
them, and the Authority they are invested with for Edification; And they ought
not to suffer the People to be nursed up in Ignorance, much less in
Superstition and Judaism. And I say for men to refuse the Surplice, the Sign of
the Cross and Kneeling at the Sacrament, as Common and Unclean. (i. e.) as
things unlawful, this is contrary to the Apostle and smells rank 1 Cor. 6. 12.
c. 10. 23. Page 324.
of Superstition and Judaism, which are to be rooted out of their minds by a
due Instruction and Discipline.

But the Reconciler tells us (as was noted above) that St. Paul never does
enjoin the weak to be of the same Principles and Apprehensions with the strong,
but always does command the strong to bear with and restrain his Liberty, that
he may minister no Scandal, or Offense unto the weak, and does confirm his
exhortation by his own Practice in like Cases.

To this I answer, that St. Paul was a Precatur eos Apostolus, quos pro sua
Authoritate monere vel etiam praecepto urgere poterat. Sed ut hoc modestius
erat, ita prosundius animis piorum insidere poterat humilis illa petitio, quae
non obscure docebat, quam illi Cordi esset ipsorum salus, etc. Gualt. ad Romans
Homil. 9^. post princi.
Person of great Prudence and Civility, and he knew very well that to some
Persons, his very entreaties would have the force of a Command; Thus he chose
to treat Philemon, saying, Tho I might be much bold in Christ to enjoin that
which is convenient, yet for Love-sake I rather entreat thee.

2. I observed before, that he sent no Order nor Injunction to the Christians
at Rome because they were froward and indisposed for such Injunctions; and
there wanted Governors to see his Orders put in Execution.

3. There is a wretched insinuation in the Reconcilers words to encourage
Dissenters in their Schism; and he wraps it up in a kind of Fallacy. For what
does he mean by being of the same Principles and Apprehensions? the words are
ambiguous; the question is, whether the Apostle enjoins them to be of the same
Faith and Persuasion touching the Abrogation of the Ceremonial Law, touching
Christian Liberty, and things Indifferent; Gal. 5. 1.
and this He has enjoined, with a Witness; does he not say I stand fast in V.
12.
the Liberty wherewith Christ has made us free? Does he uot say of such as
disturbed the Peace of the Church with a contrary Doctrine, I would they were
even V. 10.
cut off, which trouble you? Does he not threaten him, that he shall bear his
Judgment, whosoever he be? But these suasory Topics of false Reasoning are
frequent with the Reconciler.

And this Practice is not only foul in it self, but of very ill Consequence
also to the Public? It Is Peter Martyrs Observation; That good men do sometimes
^d Romans 15. 31.
judge amiss, because they are not rightly instructed, or else because they are
imposed upon by the Fraud of Seducers. Et habent artificium Impostores quo
prius persuadeant quam edoceant. Impostors have an Artifice, whereby they do
persuade before they do instruct. The truth does persuade by teaching, not
teach by persuading, says Tertullian. And therefore Adversus Valentin. 1 Samuel
12. 23.
it is incumbent upon Governors, to teach their Subjects, the good and the right
way. To this effect they are obliged to speak and they must not hold their
peace: Be instant in season, out 2 Timothy 4. 2.
of season, rebuke, reprove, exhort. Some are so Ingenuous and quick of
Apprehension, that a word spoken in season shall prevail to that effect for
which it is designed: but the deadness of affection in some and the dullness of
Capacity in others 1 These. 5. 14.
may require the Spur, not only of a quickening Exhortation but of a pungent
Admonition and Reproof; and Tit. 2. 15.
sometimes there are such refractory Spirits as must be bridled by Authority.
These things speak, and exhort, and rebuke with all Authority. And when the
worthy Governor sets himself upon the great work of subduing Vice and Error, in
order to the advancement of Truth and Piety, no man ought to be so Prodigal of
his own Salvation, as to undervalue his Person or slight his Office: Let no
Churchman despise thee, says S. Paul to Titus. ^ Joan. Crocium (...) locum.


But this is not all the Duty of a Church-Governor, He must Watch and Ward, as
well as Instruct his Flock. Feed thy Flock with thy Rod, says the Lord to his
Prophet, and if their mouths must Mic. 7. 14.
be stopped who subvert whole houses, shall theirs be kept open who endeavor
to subvert whole Kingdoms? It belongs to the Pastors Office, says Bishop
Davenant Tit. 1. 11.
(who was a Pastor himself) Ad Colos. 24.
not only to instruct his Flock in sound Doctrine, but to arm them against the
wiles and treacheries of Seducers; For he is set as a Watchman; wherefore he
is bound to give notice of the approach of the Enemy, and to discover his
Snares and Stratagems; otherwise a Pastore exigetur, quicquid per inertiam non
custoditur, says Saint Cyprian after the Holy Prophet, Ezekiel. Ezekiel. 3. and 33.
Chapters.
33. 8.

Great attention and diligence is required to preserve our selves from the
Machinations of Seducers, that we be not surprised through the Cunning
Craftiness whereby they lie in wait Gualter. Ad Romans 16. Hom. 95.
to Deceive. The Apostle knew that Impostors were wont with admirable Artifice
to insinuate themselves into Families, to see who they could draw into their
Nets, and therefore we are to keep a strict Guard upon our selves against them.
And though this be every private man's Duty, yet it is much more incumbent upon
the Pastors of the Church, whom God has Ut supra Ezekiel. 3. and 33 chap.
made and appointed to be Watchmen for the common Salvation. The very Title of
Bishops under the New Testament does admonish them of their Duty. And they are
in Holy Scripture compared to those vigilant Sentinels of the night who by
their officious Alarms betray the approaching Thief and Robber, and admonish us
to avoid the ruin they would bring upon us.

There is another part of the Office of Church-Governors, and that is given in
charge to Titus, A man that Ti^^ 3. 10.
is an Heretic after a first and second Admonition reject: If he does
seriously and heartily love and favor Piety, he will not be an obstinate
Recusant; such good and wholesome Admonitions will prevail with him, says
Calixtus: but if he does Maliciously and Stubbornly oppose any fundamental
point of Faith or Practice, against the common consent of Church and Scripture,
Joan. Crocias.
and propagate the contrary, whether he remains in the Bosom of the Church, or
Schismatically depart from it, he is one of these Heretics, and it is as hard
for the Author and Broacher of such Heretical Pravity to return into the way of
truth, as it is for the Blackamore to change his skin, or the Leopard his
spots; It Is the observation Joan. Agric. ad locum.
of Joannes Agricola, The Magicians of Egypt, Etiam digito Dei confusi, non
resipiscunt: They repented not, though the finger of God himself had appeared
to their Confusion. For Impiety, as St. Chrysostom says, is many times
Confounded, but seldom Convinced. And this St. Paul intimates: After a
fruitless Admonition reject such a Person, Knowing that he is subverted, or
condemned of himself. And he concludes thus, Faxit Idem.
Deus ne idem nobis contingat in novarum Opinionum Authoribus qui novos errores
coeperunt in Ecclesia serere. God grant, the same happens not among us in the
Authors of Sects and Opinions, who began long ago to sow the seeds of new
Errors in the Church.

Satan has his Impostors, says Gualter, Ad Romans 16. Homil. 95.
Hypocrites, who, whether for private gain, or to get themselves a name do
circumvent men with their new Doctrines, and privately draw them from the way
of truth, and publicly raise up tumults and scandals in the Church. And the
higher the Persons station is, the more pernicious is his example; his Dignity
adds weight and aggravation to his scandal, which like the Dragons tail
Hemmingus de scand. n. 12. Ut enim quo ingentius fuerit saxum Cadens ab alta
rupe eo plura fragmenta facit, ita quo dignior fuerit persona, and in
sublimiori dignitatis culmine constituta, eo plures in lapsum secum trahit cum
cadit. quare majorem poenam meretur. Ad Romans 14. 14.
in the Apocalypse, sweeps the pendulous Meteors down from the firmament,
wherein for a time they seemed to be fixed.

Whether the Reconciler has been such an Instrument I leave the Reader to judge
by these few instances.

1. He undertakes to argue out of Romans 14. 15. but perverts the Apostles
meaning; And though he does acknowledge for his own part that those Rules laid
down by the Apostle, to govern the present practice of the Romans, do equally
bind himself; yet he does violate and break them all with great Study and
Deliberation. This is no small sin in it self: but the Guilt is greater in one
that makes himself an Advocate for a tender Conscience. Si re aliqua Deum
credamus offendi, and nihilominus ab illa non abstinemus, id magno indicio est,
nos pluris uostram voluntatem facere, quam Legem Dei, says Peter Martyr: if we
believe God to be offended in any thing, and yet do not abstain from it, that is
a great sign that we value our own will above the Law of God. This is in
general. Particularly,

1. The Apostle says, Him that is Ad Romans 14. 1.
weak in the Faith receive, but not to doubtful Disputations. Prohibet
Apostolus odiosas contentiones quae animos infirmorum alienant potius, quam
aedicant, says Peter Martyr. He forbids all odious wranglings which do rather
alienate, than edify the minds of the weak: He would have them careful, Ne
intricatiores efficiatis ipsorum Conscientias, says Bullinger. Our Reconciler
is so charitable as to receive the weak into his tuition; but he entertains him
with doubtful Disputations, and leaves his Conscience more intricate and
entangled by his false reasonings, than he found it.

2. Because the Apostle says, who art thou that judge another man's servant?
Therefore he will not allow Governors, to Judge, to Rebuke, to Admonish a weak,
( i. e.) an ignorant erring Brother; and yet he takes upon him to Judge his
Governors, to Censure their Laws, and to Condemn their Impositions. So it
seems, He is above St. Paul's advice as well as above his Superiors
Jurisdiction; and he can find favor and Indulgence for the meanest of the
People rather than for them.

3. So little esteem he has for Persons and things that relate to Gods Service,
that (contrary to the Apostles Rule) he despises them both, witness that
profane Scoff of his; He that will have a May Pole, let him have a May Pole;
and let the rest have none.

4. Instead of pleasing his Brethren to their Edification that they might be
saved, as St. Paul requires, he pleases them in their Schism, which he accounts
damnable, (if he believes, what he has Transcribed of the Fathers) In this he
walks uncharitably; for some he grieves, some he stumbleth, some he hardens in
their Dissension. And

5. To secure them in their wretched Schism (as he calls it) he flatters them
with the privilege of weak Brethren; and tells them Saint Paul never enjoined
Prot. Recanc. page 324.
them to change their Principles, or (which is all one) never to be of the same
Principles and Apprehensions with the strong, which must needs confirm them in
their Schism. And

6. Thus he encourages them to despise their Pastors and Teachers; tho Saint
Paul says, They that despise that 1 These. 4. 8.
Office despise not man but God.

7. Whereas Saint Paul enjoins us Romans 14. 19,
to follow after the things which make for Peace; his design is more and more
to break it; For Peace (as the Isa. 32. 17.
Prophet tells us) is the fruit of Justice, and, it is an undoubted part of
Justice to pay obedience to the Impositions of our Governors; and till that be
duly paid there are no hopes of Peace. But instead of pressing Subjects to
perform this Duty; He cries down his Sovereign's Impositions: and though Order
and Authority be the 1 Cor. 14. 33.
great Conservators of Peace; yet he teaches men to despise them both and (in
matters of Decency at least) to do Deuteronomy. 12. 8.
what is right in their own eyes. And thus

8. He directly puts a stumbling block Romans 14. 13.
in his Brothers way; and this he does for his Edification downwards, and
indangers Romans 14. 15.
his destruction for whom Christ died. And hereby

9. He causes his good (whether it be his Faith, or his Liberty) to be evil
spoken of.

10. The Apostle says, Let every man Romans 14. 5, 23.
be fully persuaded in his own mind. And he that doubts is damned, if he does
the thing he doubts of. Now (to assume upon this Reconciler) Does he Kneel,
wear the Surplice, sign with the Cross? If he doubts the Lawfulness thereof,
and does them notwithstanding, then he is damned, in acting against his own
Conscience. But if he doubts not, if he be fully persuaded in his own mind of
their Lawfulness, then he walks uncharitably; Neither like a Priest, for it is
his Duty to accommodate himself to the Infirmities of such as are ignorant and
out of the way. Heb. 5. 2. not to indulge them in their errors, much less to
lead them more astray; for then he should be obliged to say Amen to his own
Malediction: Cursed be he that makes the blind to wander D ut. 27. 18.
out of the way. Which Text Abulensis thinks may be understood of those, Apud
Bonfrer.
Qui rudes in fide sunt, who are raw and weak in the Faith, and the Curse
belongs to such as make them err through their perverse Counsel. In falsos
Doctores, Apud Synops.
and qui quomodo libet Causam dederint erroris, quadrat, says Paul Fagius. It
agrees exactly to our false Doctors, and such as by any means administer unto
error; Let the Reconciler well consider it; For he has not done like a tender
Priest.

Nor (2.) like a true Convert: After his shameful prevarication, our Savior
says to Peter, and tu aliquando Conversus, Luke 22. 32. Luc B^ug. ad locum.
etc. and thou, when thou art converted, strengthen thy Brethren; in bono
fidei, spei, Charitatis, in the grace and duty of Faith, Hope, and Charity.
Sometimes God suffers such as are Ordaired to conduct others, to take offense
and fall themselves: that by that accident they may come to think the more
meanly of themselves and to treat the frail Delinquent with the more
gentleness. And Christ does insinuate, that unless such persons be converted,
they are the less meet to Confirm others, especially if they have denied the
Faith (in any considerable Article of it) as Peter did.

11. Instead of Rational and Cogent Arguments he many times takes up such as
are but probable, plausible and suasory: And because these sway much with
himself, he thinks his Reader should be taken with them likewise; and if I had
a list to take that trouble on me, I could make a large Collection, out of his
Book of Instances to this purpose.

12. He does unworthily traduce the Spouse (which is the Church) of Christ, and
in effect accuse her of Disloyalty, in a Practice of Usurpation and Tyranny for
1600 years together; for so she is if there be nothing lawful to be imposed in
her Communion, but what is Necessary and Commanded by God himself. For proof of
this we need no other Argument but the Instances, which he has produced in his
Book, of the several things that have been observed, and afterward abolished in
the Church.

13. What the Ancient Fathers and others say by way of descant upon the
Apostles Text, in reference to the scandal of the weak Jews, that he applys to
the Customs and Ceremonies, which from time to time have been observed in the
Church of God. From whence the Reader may easily conclude that the Reconciler
designs to put a Fallacy upon him, or else is caught in one himself. The
Fallacy is A Dicto secundum quid, ad Dictum simpliciter: When the Predicate
agrees to the Subject, but in a certain respect, or in part, at such a time, or
place, yet he asserts it simply and absolutely as if the agreement were in
every respect, in every part, and time, and place without any limitation. And
this is the Fallacy that runs all along in the Reconcilers Discourse, when he
urges the Fathers and other Authors, against a Decent Habit, a Reverent
Gesture, or the Symbolical Sign of our Christianity, which is the sign of the
Cross; for we may be confident, those Holy Fathers and Authors (who are quoted
by him) would never make such sharp Invectives against the Church of God, and
their own Sense and constant Practice.

14. And with this Fallacy he urges as well the example as the sayings of the
great Apostle; as if that had bin his constant Practice and Doctrine, according
to some standing Rule, which was nothing else but his Condescension Pro hic and
Nunc, at some times, and in some places, and among some Persons, by special
Dispensation. And this Fallacy he repeats so often, that it becomes Nauseous.

After this needful and seasonable Advertisement, I think I may venture any man
of Reason, and a small stock of Artificial Logic, to read his Book.

This Reconciler p. 104. Verdict. 100. etc.
falls again upon Dr. Womock, who says in his Verdict (p. 100) That a Man may
lose the Title of a Weak Brother, and the benefits indulged by the Apostle to
such persons. The Argument reduced to due Form, runs thus, All Persons under
such and such Circumstances: Or, All Persons under such and such
Qualifications, do forfeit, or lose the Title of Weak Brethren, and the
benefits Indulged to such Persons: But some of the Dissenters are Persons under
such and such Circumstances, or such and such Qualifications: Therefore, some
of the Dissenters do forfeit or lose the Title of Weak Brethren.

What says our Reconciler to this Argument? School Divinity is a crabbed
Study, and there is little use of Logic to Rhetoricate; and the Man being to
seek in these Studies, He does confidently deny the Conclusion; which the
judicious Reader cannot but observe:

For the Major Proposition is drawn out of Holy Scripture, and speaks of
Persons so qualified, in such sort, that the Title of Weak Brethren cannot in
reason be allowed them: And that some of the Dissenters are such, the
Reconciler does not deny V. p. 108.
.

In the Verdict, there are mentioned three several Degrees of Men, who cannot,
according to the Rules of Reason and Scripture, be accounted among the number
of Weak Brethren.

The First are such as will be offended after sufficient means of Information:
For when their Ignorance is convinced, by the Light of clear Instruction, they
cannot plead such ignorance for an Excuse. This was the Case of the Pharisees,
of whose Conviction I hope the Reconciler makes no doubt. * Mat. 12. 15.
Yet when his Disciples told our Blessed Lord that they were offended; What did
he do? Did he retract his Doctrine? Did he cry Peccavi to take off their
scandal? He took not off the scandal, says St. Chrysostom, but reproved it;
Chrysostom. Hom. 52. in Mat. 15.
For he knew very well, when Scandals were to be contemned, and when they were
not to be contemned. And Calvin well observes, That the trite distinction
Calvin Harm ad locum.
of Scandal was taken from hence. That we give no Scandal to the Weak, we are
to be very careful, but if the stubborn and malicious take Scandal, we are not
to regard it; for Christ, who is the Rock of Offense, must be quite Buried, if
we would satisfy the frowardness of all Men. And therefore, says he, we must
needs put a difference, inter infirmos qui ignorantia offensi mox reddunt se
sanabiles, and superbos and morosos qui scandala sibi accersunt; betwixt the
morose and proud, who draw scandals upon themselves, and those, who being
offended through ignorance, do presently render themselves cureable, by good
instruction and advice, which are the proper Remedies of such Ignorance.

Certainly they are not Weak Brethren, whose Mouths the Apostle commands to be
stopped. And if we cannot actually Tit. 1. 11.
stop them, they are never the more Weak Brethren, for their prating against
John Ep. 3. verse. 10.
their Governors with Malicious Words, after the example of Diotrephes.

Johannes Crotius asks the Question, Com. in cap. 1. Ep. ad Titum, verse. 11.
How it is possible for a Bishop to stop the Mouths of the Refractory, whose
Petulancy does the more increase for the attempts that are made to suppress it?
The Church, says he, may enjoin silence to such as are manifestly vanquished
upon the account of the Scriptures; if they will not yet be quiet, She may
drive them from the Communion of the Faithful. But if none of this be done; yet
if the Bishop does solidly convince them of their Error, out of the Word of
God; He has then stopped their Mouths. Take notice, He that writes thus is no
Jesuit.

A Second Degree of such as have lost the Title of Weak Brethren, is, When a
Man, from a modest Enquirer, comes to be positive, and Dogmatical, and Will See
the Verdict, page 100. etc.
not endure sound Doctrine, but after his own Lusts heaps up to himself
Teachers, having itching Ears, he can no longer pass the muster for a weak
Brother, etc.

A Third Degree of this sort of Men, is, When a Man is puffed up with a Conceit
of his own Knowledge, when he becomes a fierce Disputant, grows Stubborn and
Censorious, despises Dominion, and takes the Scorners Chair; then he
commenceth Schismatic, and is not to be treated as a weak Brother, but as a
Seditious Mutineer; for it is now evident, That he dissents not out of Weakness,
but out of Pride, Stubbornness, and Animosity.

What says the Reconciler to this? Why the Characters here given of such
Persons are taken so to the Life, out of Holy Scripture, that he cannot deny
the Truth of them; which makes up the Major Proposition: And the Assumption or
Minor he confesses expressly; If any of these things (says he) Page 107. 108.
be offered to prove, that there be men of this Malicious, Proud, and Subborn
Temper among the body of Dissenters, we have cause to fear the thing is too
true.

He yields the Premises, but denies the Conclusiou, and that speaks him a great
Logician: Yet something else he finds to oppose; and to make as short work with
him as I can, He has reduced it to Three Heads. He says. Page 105.


First, This Plea will serve all Parties. Secondly, That it is a vain
Presumption. Thirdly, That it is against Scripture, Reason, Charity, and what
not, to pass this heavy Sentence upon Dissenters in the General, or without
limitation or exception, as the Dr. does.
Were the Reconciler's Wits a Woolgathering when he wrote his Book? Is it not
as clear as the Sun, that the Dr. distinguished the Dissenters into two sorts,
viz. Such as are Weak, and such as have forfeited or lost that Title? And Page
108.
does he not here make several Degrees of this last sort? The Man has a short
Memory, for in the very next Leaf, within less than Four Pages; He takes
notice, That the Apostle offers no Rules of Discrimination, as the Doctor does:
If the Doctor offers Rules of Discrimination, then he does noe pass Sentence
without exception.

And one Mistake, tho never so absurd, does commonly beget another; and so it
happens here; for, Where is the heavy Sentence which the Doctor passes? And,
What is it? Certainly it cannot be less than the Sentence of Damnation, which
he blames with so much noise in Dr. Womock: I find indeed at every turn, the
Reconciler is sending His Dissenters to Hell for their wretched Schism, not by
single Persons only, but by Sholes and Myriads; and then he rebukes Dr. Page 55.
Womock for so doing, when he does it not: Just as he shoots his Censures at
his Governors, in the very same Breath, wherein he inveighs against Judging.

But the Reconciler is Caught again in a sorry Fallacy, and I am almost
persuaded, he is not aware of it. If his Argument were put into Form, it must
run thus, Whosoever says, That the Dissenters have lost the Title of Weak
Brethren, and are under the Sentence of Damnation, he is rash, Presumptuous,
and Uncharitable.

But does Dr. Womock make any such Assumption? Then let the Reconciler (who
takes great freedom in that kind) tell him of his foolery; and that he wants
Logic as well as Charity. But Dr. Womock knows that here is Sophisma Plurium
Interrogationum; which perhaps is more then the Reconciler has considered. In
effect he puts the question thus, Have the Dissenters lost the Title of Weak
Brethren, and fallen under the Sentence of Damnation? If the Dr. affirms it,
then he concludes them under the Sentence of Damnation, and is rash and
Uncharitable in so doing: If he denies it, then he grants that they are Weak
Brethren, and are to have all the Indulgence and tenderness, that belongs to
Persons under those Circumstances.

But Dr. Womock is able to distinguish in this Case, and to separate such as
have lost the title of Weak Brethren from the present sentence of Damnation.
For the Dr. meddles with no man's Person, having so well considered the Advice
of Bishop Tailor.
that learned Prelate (whom the Reconciler pretends to admire, while he does
abuse him in his writings.) Be not hasty, says he, in pronouncing damnation
Adv. 52.
against any man or Party in a matter of Disputation. It is enough that you
reprove an error; but what shall be the sentence against it at the day of
Judgment, thou know not, and therefore pray for the erring Person and
reprove him, but leave the sentence to his Judge.

But touching those Weak ones among Ad Romans 14. in Principio.
the Romans, I shall acquaint the Reader with Peter Martyrs Opinion of them.
The question is, Whether the Weakness of their Faith were an impediment to
their Justification? He thinks not; because it is not the strength or
Excellency of our Faith, by which we are justified, but the Merit and Dignity
of the Object; and although Faith be weak, yet it is Faith still if it be true.
But it might be said, that they did not believe all things which were to be
believed: For they did not believe the Ceremonial Law of Moses to be abrogated:
And that Faith, which does not believe all the Articles of Faith, is no true
faith. Fateor equidem, says Peter Martyr, I do confess it, Si id accidat vitio
Credentis, if the fault be in the Believer; if he will not admit of those
Truths which he hears out of Holy Writ, but contemns them; and makes himself
the Judge and Arbitrator, how much of Scripture he ought to believe; and
attributes more to himself, then he does to the Word of God: Non est ista Fides
vera; that is not true Faith; nor is the Holy Spirit wont to inspire any such
Sense or Judgment. But if there be something which a man does not believe,
because it has not been clearly propounded to him, and he carries a mind
sufficiently prepared to receive the Truth, when it is made known to him; in
this case the Truth of his Faith may be a means to justify, while the Weakness
of it does excuse him.

I wish the Dissenters may consider this Judgment of Peter Martyr, that they
may not make matters of Decency and Order, (under the Gospel) to be Sin, as if
we were still under that Mosaical yoke of Bondage, the Law, and not under Grace.

But to follow the Reconciler, who justifies his Denial of the Conclusion by
several Arguments.

1. He says, what Dr. Womock does Page 105.
allege is a Plea that will serve all Parties, Papists, Dissenters, Arminians,
Calvinists, and almost all Disputers. Now what the true ground of the Dispute
is I cannot well imagine; I have reason to think he is offended with the Major
Proposition, which contains the Character of such as ought not to claim the
Right or Title of Weak Brethren; but that is so expressly the words of Holy
Scripture, that he cannot in modesty avow his dislike thereof; and therefore he
makes an Assumption (or Minor Proposition) in Dr. Womocks name, and then blames
him for it. That Dr. Womock did not assume upon the Dissenters, the Reader will
be convinced, v. Page 100. 101, 102.
if he please to consult the place in the Verdict.

However let us weigh the strength of his discourse which we have in this
Syllogism: All Arguments that may be used by other Parties, as Papists, etc.
they are ill Arguments: But Dr. Womocks Argument may be used by other Parties,
Papists, etc. Therefore it is an ill Argument.

Here I deny his Major Proposition: All Arguments used by other Parties, and
particularly by the Papists, are not ill Arguments; for their Arguments to
prove the Divinity of Christ are good Arguments, and many of them the very same
that are used by Protestants. And that of Bellarmine is celebrated for a great
Truth among all the Learned, even by Amesius himself: Propter incertitudinem
proprioe justitioe, and perticulum inanis gloriae, tutissimum est fiduciam
totam in sola Dei misericordia and benignitate reponere: that is, In regard of
the Uncertainty of our own Righteousness, and the danger of Vainglory, it is
the safest way to put our whole Trust and Confidence, in the sole Mercy and
Favor of God. This is a great Gospel Truth, and yet it fell from the Pen of
Bellarmine: And therefore he is out of the story, when he concludes all
Arguments to be ill, because they are used by Papists or other Parties.

That his Argument may conclude effectually against Dr. Womock it must be
framed thus: Those Arguments which will as well, and with equal Truth and Light
of evidence, maintain the Points of Popery, etc. as they do the Doctrine of the
Church of England, Those must needs be ill Arguments: But such are the
Arguments produced by Dr. Womock.

Here I utterly deny the Minor: The Argumens there used by Dr. Womock, have not
an equal Truth or Light of Evidence to prove the Points of Popery, as they have
to prove the Doctrine of the Church of England; For let me ask the Reconciler
these few Questions: Have the Popish Party as good Reason for their Aversion to
our Communion, as we have for our Aversion to theirs? Have they as great
Objections against us, as we have against them? Has the Pope any lawful
Jurisdiction over us? By what Scripture or Council was it settled? Did we break
off from their Communion? Or rather, Did not they leave and interdict Ours? Who
is now the Friend to Jesuits?

I would have the Reconciler to consider, That although the same Sentence for
Words and Syllables, may pass against an Innocent as well as against a
Malefactor, yet I hope he will not say, it is done with equal Truth and
Justice. But he is so ingenuous at last, as to confess the truth in these words:

It will be hard to show, why either Party may not almost with equal
plausibility Pr. Recon. p. 107.
make this pretense. Whence we must conclude, that this his Argument (like the
rest of his Book) is but almost to the purpose.

2. He Answers, Secondly (but to what Proposition of Dr. Womock's, I cannot
Divine; but thus he says,) If any of these things be offered, as I hope they
are, only to prove that there be men of this malicious, proud, stubborn temper
among the body of Dissenters, we have cause to fear the thing is too true.

This Fear of the Reconciler yields the Argument; for it runs thus; All that
are under such and such qualifications have lost the title of Weak Brethren;
But Some of the Dissenters are under such and such qualifications: Therefore
Some of the Dissenters have lost the title of Weak Brethren; which is all that
Dr. Womock is concerned to prove, and more than he did positively affirm in his
Verdict.

But then the Reconciler says, That the Arguments will hold good, for a
Dispensation toward all those, of whom we cannot Charitably pronounce this
Sentence. I say this does not follow, according to the Common Rules of
Government. Tho every Part be not alike Culpable, yet every part must follow
the common condition of the Whole; and if men will follow such Leaders, tho
they be not led with the same Pride, Malice or Design, as their Leaders are led
by; yet making themselves of the Party, and acting therein accordingly, they
are involved in the same guilt, and liable to the same Condemnation. I know (as
Bullinger says) There is a great difference betwixt one that errs In Epist. ad
Tit. 3. 10.
not out of malice, and one that to his error joins malice, and a study to do
mischief: But if he is to be punished (as no doubt he deserves it) Cum errandi
pervicacia ultro in Religionis Legumque eversionem manifest tendit, when the
stiff-neckedness and obstinacy of his erring manifestly tends to the Overthrow
of Religion and the Laws established; How can that man in Reason be dispensed
with, who joins and abetts him in * Idem enim omnes credimur operati, in quo
deprehendimur eadem omnes Censurae and Disciplinae consensione Sociati. Cler.
Roman. Cypriano Inter Epistol. 31.
it? It Is a Rule in Law, Ubi Lex non distinguit, nec nobis regulariter
distinguere Licet: Where the Law makes no distinction, there we cannot
regularly distinguish; what ever simplicity they may pretend, we cannot in
prudence give them a dispensation to contrive our ruin; which we have reason
to suspect, as long as they adhere to the Communion of those who design it.

Such as set up to make a Party against the Government, they have strange Arts
of Insinuation to work upon the flexible temper of the People, and some follow
their pernicious ways out of simplicity, some out of a love of Novelty, and
others out of an admiration or fondness for their Persons: Does God give a
Dispensation in this case, when he comes to visit for such things? The Prophet
tells us otherwise; For the Leaders of this People cause them to err, and Isa.
9. 16. Agreeably St. August. upon Christ's words If the Blind, lead the Blind,
says thus: Vae caecis ducentibus, Ve caecis Sequentibus.
they that are led of them are destroyed. It Is worth our observing; That the
Original has it, They that call them Blessed, which notes the Flattery of such
false Teachers: They bless them in their Sedition and errors; and they that
are called Blessed of them, are swallowed up; tho their simplicity is imposed
upon, that is no Dispensation, no Plea at all, to secure them against
destruction.

I cannot persuade my self, that Corah and all the Company that adhered to him,
were equally Proud, Stubborn and Malicious, yet I find no Dispensation in the
Case: They were all involved in the same Guilt, and fell under the same
Condemnation, Their Wives and their Numb. 16. 27.
Sons, and their little Children.

I allege this the rather, because as Bullinger has observed, by this
horrible In Ep. Jud. 11. v.
example of Corah, St. Jude does demonstrate to all the World, what they are to
expect, who being seduced by the Spirit of Pride and Arrogance, are not content
with their own Station in the Church, but raise up Tumults and Factions against
the Ministers of Truth.

To this Corah he compares the Seducers not of his own time only, but of all
ages, Qui sibi Functionem docendi vendicant repulsis Doctoribus veritatis, who
casting out the Ministers of Truth, do challenge the Function of Teaching to
themselves.

Woe unto them, for they have gone in the way of Cain, and ran greedily after
the error of Balaam, for reward, and perished in the gainsaying of Corah. Ep.
Jud. v. 11. Dr. Dicson has the like upon the place.
Calvin wonders that he should inveigh so sharply against these false Teachers,
when he had told us but a few lines before, that the Archangel was so modest he
would not reproach the Devil: But this shows (says he) that their Rage and
Fury is intolerable, who disturb the Well composed State of the Church.

To paint such seducing Teachers to the life, the Apostle makes use of three
notable examples; and then he illustrates their Character by several
similitudes. He begins with Cain, who was the first that made a Divorce from
the Church of God: In him we may observe Envy, Malice and Hypocrisy: The second
is Balaam, who turned his Prophetical Office into a Trade, and made himself a
wretched Hireling, for his Divination: and in him we have Covetousness, and the
liberty of Prophesying set up for filthy Bullinger.
Lucre. The third is Corah: In whom we have an example of Ambition and
Arrogance, of Disobedience and Sedition; He blasphemed the Magistracy, and
attempted to Level all degrees among the Ministers of God: and he Hemming.
used a very specious and plausible Argument to this effect: All the
Congregation are Holy; and 'twas an unworthy thing that so holy a People should
be subject to any Head on Earth. But the earth opened her mouth, and swallowed
them Numb. 26. 10.
up, and they became a sign: A dreadful example of the Divine vengeance against
Seditious Schismatics, to deterr Quem ipsi imitantur contradictione and
seditiosa ordinis ac status ecclesiae, perturbatione. Gomar. apud Synops.
others from the like sin; who are said to have perished in effigy in the
gainsaying of Corah, as in their representative.

We should have these Examples always before our eyes (says Hemmingius) to
admonish us of that Rule of Justice, by which God ever measures out his
Judgment against the like Transgressors. Let no man therefore think himself
secure by his simplicity, or good intention, or honest meaning as he may
pretend; there is so dangerous a Contagion in the Communion of such Persons,
that there is no way to escape, but to desert it. To this purpose The Lord
spoke unto Moses; and Moses gives the Caution to the Congregation. Numb. 16.
26. Depart I pray-you from the tents of these Wicked men, and touch nothing of
theirs, lest ye be consumed in all their sins. It Is Crotius his note upon the
place. Bonorum subditorum est Segregare se a Seditiosis: It Is the part of good
Subjects to separate themselves from the seditious; if they mind and value
their Duty to their Prince and their own safety.

This is a point of so great Concernment, and yet so little considered, that In
Epist. Jud. verse. 23.
I shall add further what Bullinger (no Jesuit I Will assure you) observes upon
the same Epistle: It Is not enough (says he) with grief of heart to avoid those
desperate Disturbers of the Churches Peace, unless we watch also with all
carefulness, to gain those to the Communion of Christ's Flock, whom we find
Curable; and especially we are to press them with the Fear and Threatenings of
Gods Judgment; that if possible we may pluck them out of the Danger, as out of
some Sodomitical Conflagration.

But because such as are yet sound, and out of danger, many times through Humane
Frailty, do perish together with such as they did intend to succor; that is,
because the better are sometimes perverted by the worse; Therefore St. Jude
adds; Hating even the Garment spotted by the Flesh; As if he had said, I would
not have you make your selves too familiar with them; hating not their Persons,
but the Works of the Flesh which are manifest in their outward Conversation,
their Pride and their Disobedience, their Schism and Sedition.

The next thing I observe in this Reconciler, is, That he is so unhappy a
Reprover, that when ever he undertakes to rebuke a fault in others, he is sure
to fall deeper into it himself. To the Instance of rash Judgment, we may add,
his severe, tho Groundless, charge of Uncharitableness.

He supposes Dr. Womock to have this opinion of the Dissenters, That they are
all, without exception, Proud, Froward, ^tubborn and Malicious; that they all
sin out of pure Willfulness, and Obstinacy, or prepensed Malice and Design.
Having laid down this Supposition (which is notoriously false, and betrays the
Reconcilers Rashness in his own Censures) He sets up a man of Clouts for his
Prowess to encounter (which he does in this manner) Now although such a charge
might suit well with the Casuistical Divinity Page 108.
of Soto, De La Cerda Ambiana, and such Jesuits as here the Doctor cites; yet
it is an amazing thing, that Dr. Womock should say any thing, which gives the
least occasion to suspect him so uncharitable.

Why should this Reconciler suggest a thing so utterly False? Without doubt his
Design was to bring an Odium upon Dr. Womock, as if he Converst with none but
Jesuits in his Study; and then, be the Discourse never so rational, if they
can find a Jesuit at the end of it, it is Answered presently with a Mentiris
Bellarmine: and the unthinking Mobile will look no more after it. But as good
Providence would have it, there is not One Jesuit of the Three he mentions;
and for the rest (which he perversely or maliciously insinuates) they are only
Ferus Perkins, and St. Paul, such are the Jesuits as the Doctor there See the
Verdict, page the 100, 101, 102.
Cites; and it is a common thing with them, to make all Jesuits that are not of
their Opinion: But this is not the first Falsehood the Reconciler has suggested
for his own advantage.

What he alleges out of Dr. Stillingfleet, Dr. Williams, and Mr.
Chillingworth, Page 109. etc.
concerns not Dr. Womock in the least. But we must consider, That the
Difference amongst Us is not in a matter of Philosophy or Theological
Speculations, wherein the Error is of no great consequence, having no
influence upon our practice: But besides the Deformity in the Omission (which
directly follows it) the weightyer matters of the Law lie at Stake: Authority
is struck at, Government is undermined and shaken, Superiors are despised,
Subjection disputed, Obedience denied, and every man under pretense of Weakness
and a tender Conscience, learns to claim a Liberty to do whatsoever is right in
his own eyes.

But the Reconciler, calls upon Dr. VVcmock afresh; (and it is pity a man of so
much Civility should be neglected Page 111.
tho he speaks but by the by in a Parenthesis:) What the Scripture has
determined touching the Wearing of a Surplice, the Cross in Baptism, or
Kneeling at the receiving of the Sacrament, I desire the Doctor to inform me. I
might very fitly return him the blind man's Answer to the Pharisees, and say, I
have told you ailready, and ye did not Joh. 9. 27.
hear, wherefore would ye hear it again? will ye also be his Disciples? But
what if our Lord has left it to be determined by our Governors? What is that
to the 1 Cor. 14. 40. 1 Tit. 1. 5.
Reconciler, who is obliged (if he be Christ's Disciple) to follow the Precepts
of our Master, and the Orders of his Church? Mat. 13. 17


1. These things (which he so often carps at) are not only found to be
expedient by the most Pious, Learned and Judicious, but so near allied to Holy
Scripture, that they may very well claim Kindred of some Practices and
Institutions therein mentioned. St. John saw the Elders attend in Surplices
before the Throne of God; and tho he was the Divine, and a Holy Evangelist,
Rev. 4. 4.
yet he was not offended at that sight.

2ly. It seems the Offense of the Cross is not yet ceased. Men are either so
much Jews to make it their stumblingblock, or such Heathen Greeks as to
ridicule it, for a Piece of foolery. And tho the old Prophecy told Us (as
Justin Martyr Psalm. 96 10.
and Tertullian have it) Dominus regnavit a Ligno, the Lord reigns from the
Tree, and calls upon Us to tell it unto the World for Gospel, and glad tidings;
yet as the Jews, out of Malice, turned the Wood of the Cross out of the Text,
so they would have Us turn the sign of it out of our Baptism, as well as all
other Administrations; least we should make our Weak Brother, be he Jew or
Gentile, to offend.

For Kneeling and bowing, whatever Mat. 4. 1.
mean Conceit the Reconciler has of it: The Devil was not so much an Ass, as to
offer all the Glory of the World for a trifle. He knew it to be God's due, and
a part of his External Worship; and so he valued it, and was desirous to
purchase it upon that account. And I am of Opinion, it cannot be totally taken
away from God's Service without Sacrilege. And if we can take the Confidence
to abolish this, let us never blame the Church of Rome, for taking away the Cup
from the Laity in the Lord's Supper: for the Sacrament in 'its integrity, is
but a part of External Worship, and the Cup but a part of that part. And the
taking away of Kneeling (utterly out of God's Worship) seems to be a greater
Offense, than taking away the Cup; because that is a Part of the Law of Nature;
whereas the Sacrament is but of positive Institution, and consequently not so
strictly binding. And being an undoubted part of God's External Worship, and a
piece of Natural Religion; we certainly do well to use it at the Sacrament, as
an Acknowledgement of Christ's Divinity, which now a-dayes is so professedly
impugned by the Socinians: And We shall allow our Governors very little to do
about matters of Religion, if they may neither Ordain a Ceremony, nor so much
as appoint a special time for the performance of an undoubted Part of God's
External Worship.

That some of the Dissenters act out of Pride, Malice, Obstinacy, the
Reconciler fears is too true: That all of them Page 108.
are of that Temper, Dr. womock is so far from affirming, that he thinks it is
very false. He does not pretend to set up a Tribunal in any Man's Heart, to
Judge the secret Operations of his Mind. But he is very well assured, That good
meanings can never Sanctify wicked Actions; and we need no Window in some Men's
Breasts, to read their inward Dispositions. Fides and Incredulitas cordium
sunt, fateor, ea nemo hominum judicare potest, says Bullinger; Faith Ad Titum
3. 10.
and Unbelief, I confess, are the Secrets of the Heart, which no Man can judge.
Ex Dictis vero and Factis, ijsque manifestis, debent fieri hominum judicia: We
must Judge of Men therefore by their Words and Actions, which are manifest and
apparent. Our Saviors Rule cannot fail Us, if we take it aright, and he tells
Us more than once, By their Mat. 7. 16. Deuteronomy. 32. 32, 33.
fruits ye shall know them. What Harvest have we had of these Thorns? What Figs
have we reapt from these Thistles? Have not their Grapes been Grapes of Gall,
and their Clusters bitter? Has not their wine been the poison of Dragons, and
the Crud venom of Aspes?

It Is Gualters Observation (and I desire Ad Romans Homil. 87. cap. 15. 5, 6.
the Reader to take Notice, that in this Discourse I make no use of Jesuits to
offend the Reconciler, or his weak Brethren, but such Protestants as are the
most likely to favor the Cause of the Dissenters, if there were any Reason or
Color for it) Hi ut Ecclesiam turbant, it a dei cultores esse non possunt, cum
Unitatem scindant qua ille imprimis delectatur: He speaks of the Sowers of
Dissentions, and Authors of Sects and Factions; who, as they disturb the Peace
of the Church, so they cannot be the Servants of God, seeing they rent that
Unity which he is chiefly delighted with.

We are told by the Apostle, That Schism it self is a Work of the Flesh, and
excludes the Schismatic from the Kingdom of God. But when the tender
Conscience Gal. 5. 20.
sets up for Reformation, we cannot easily forget the great Train of Mischiefs,
which follows it.

For, upon this Pretense, Did not that Party make an Insurrection against
Moses, and against Aaron, and conspire to destroy both Church and State? and we
know they kept their Wicked Covenant in nothing else. How malicious and eager
were they to Root out the Royal Family, and to anoint the Bramble to Reign over
them? Did not they affront the late KING of ever blessed Memory, by Clamours,
and Seditious Tumults? Did they not Persecute him by Votes and Propositions
against all the Rules of Honor and Conscience? Did they not Blaspheme his
Person, slander and defame his Actions? Did they not usurp his Power, and seize
upon his Militia, the only guard of it? Did they not make themselves Masters of
his Revenue, his Ships, his Forts, his Castles? Did they not pursue and fight
him? Drive him from house and home, and at last Arraign and Murder him?

If we can pass these Crimes upon the Account of Humane frailty; let us no
longer blame the Church of Rome for her Doctrine of Venial Sins. He that can
impute them (as the Reconciler is supposed to do) to the Prejudices of Page 113.
Education, Mis-conception, or Mis-interpretation of the sense of Scripture, to
the Want of better Information, or to unreasonable Fears and Scrupulosities,
and excuse those execrable practices upon that score; may easily be tempted to
make an Invective against Moses and Aaron, and a Panegyric upon Corah, and to
turn the 30th. of January (as too many of the Party does) into a Festival for
the honor of our Unrelenting Regicides.

But the truth is, All those gay Pretenses, viz. the Prejudices of Education,
the Want of better Information (which cannot reasonably be alleged among us)
Misconception, and the like, we know are inconsistent with the state of Grace
in Jews and Turks, and why not in Sectaries, in whom (after the contempt of
sufficient instruction) they do certainly degenerate into Pride, Malice, and
Stubbornness; and, if they be not finally Corrected and subdued by Repentance,
they are damning.

But were their Clergy wanting in point of Education? Were they ignorant of the
sense of Scripture? They would take it in great disdain to be thought so. And
yet were not they the most Vociferous Trumpeters of our late Rebellion? Did not
they study, invent and publish, the most desperate Principles of Sedition? Who
made the People the highest seat of Sovereignty; and placed a Coordinate Power
with that of the King in the House of Commons? Who entitled them, at least to
an equal Authority with His Majesty in making Laws, and in the command of the
Militia? And who animated all the Soldiers they could arm and Levy against the
King, and absolved them from their Oath of Allegiance, to Act and Practice
those Principles after their Doctrine and Example? These are some of the
Reconcilers Weak Brethren.

And for the Common sort, were they not consenting to the Deeds of their
Seditious Leaders? Did they not abett and encourage them by their Addresses and
Petitions? Did they not approve and applaud them in all their Villainies? And
as soon as they had destroyed the Church and Government, did they not swarm into
Sects and Factions, and hiv'd themselves apart in several Conventicles, as
their Fancy led them, without any regard to Gospel, Rule, or Government.

Tantum Religio potuit suadere malorum.
Such horrid mischiefs never can Commence;
But when Religion's made the grand Pretense.
He that is but of yesterday, and knows nothing of these things, let him read
the History of Independency. The Mystery of the two Junctoes. The short view of
the late troubles, with, Evangelium Armatum; and the Dissenters sayings.

And here I must put in my Apoligy in the Words of St. Austin upon a like
Occasion. Non praeterita Vendicando Epist. 202. ante finem.
pascere Iram nostram studemus, sed misericorditer in futurum consulendo
satagimus: We do not study to challenge things past to feed and gratify our
Anger, but we endeavor out of great compassion to consult the common Benefit
for the future.

And we have need enough to look forward, God knows; For Republicans, Hobbists,
Atheists, All Factions conspire in the Plea of tender Conscience, and shelter
themselves in the combination of Weak Brethren to undermine the Government; and
I am sorry they have gotten such an Engineer, as this Reconciler, into their
service.

Have we not still amongst the Party, such as will take upon them to make, not
only their own Prayers, but their own Creed, and their own Commandments? And
when we soberly consider, how obstinate they are in their Schism and Sedition
against the best of Kings and Churches, we have but too much reason to fear,
least they should be given up (as it has often happened in the like case of
disobedience) to their own delusions.

For do they not attempt to strengthen themselves in their Perversities, by
Solemn Leagues and Associations, without and against the leave and likeing of
their Sovereign? Have they not taken all advantages to stuff the Pillow of the
Crown with Thorns, and to make the Throne to totter and become uneasy to his
Majesty? These things, and the Particulars of them, are so fresh in memory, it
would be but loss of time to repeat them. In short, these are a Race of men of
such strange Machiavilian Principles, that when they do most solemnly Protest
and Vow to make their Princes Glorious; they have a Jesuitical Reservation in
it, Their meaning and projected Method, is to bring them (as they did our late
most Dear and Sacred Sovereign) to the Block of Martyrdom. It Is high time
therefore for us to show our selves men; and as Rational Isa. 46. 8.
Creatures, and Loyal Subjects, not to suffer our selves to be cheated any
longer, with the false Pretense of Tender Conscience, and the title of Weak
Brethren.

Whatever Men's Designs and Pretenses be, we are sure our Savior's Rule is
Infallible [ by their fruits ye shall know them.] By this I hope we may judge
concerning Men's Opinions, Whether they are like to be taken up, and maintained
out of Pride, Malice, Perverseness. But the Reconciler does sincerely profess,
That He knows not any such as can be certainly applied to the Case of the
Dissenters. And therefore

3ly. He entreats Dr. Womock to Page 114.
consider the falseness and absurdity of that Rule of Judging so severely of
his Brethren, which he has borrowed from our Roman Adversaries; for if this be
a true and certain Rule, which Soto has delivered, That he must be supposed to
err through malice, who has been so far admonished, that he cannot justly
pretend Ignorance; or who may easily be convinced of his ignorance: And we who
are Parties, are left to judge of both these things; What shall we say to all
the Papists in this Nation, or all the Learned Papists in the World? To all the
Reformed Churches, who retain Presbitery, and all their Pastors, who receive
Ordination only from their Hands? To all those Calvinists, who hold the
Prelapsarian Doctrines, and absolute Decrees of Reprobation? To all the
Lutherans, who hold the foolish Doctrine of Con-substantiation? Will Dr. Womock
say; That there has not been said Sufficient to convince them of their Errors;
so that they cannot justly pretend Ignorance? May he not put them all in the
same Form with our Dissenters, and judge as Charitably of the Dissenter, as of
an erring Papist? And if so, all these Persons must be a pack of Damned
Villains, that err out of pure Malice, Pride, Affection, and Animosity,
Stubborness, and Frowardness; or our Dissenters must escape that heavy Doom.

In Answer to this third Entreaty, I have many things to offer toward a
Satisfaction: But this I learn from the Reconciler in general.

That such as err out of pure Malice, Pride, Affection, Animosity, Stubborness,
and Frowardness, are a Pack of Damned Villains.

This the Reconciler makes a Major Proposition: And for a Minor, or Assumption,
he declares thus, We have cause to Page 107. and 108.
fear the thing is too true, that among the Body of Dissenters, there be Men of
this malicious, proud, stubborn Temper. The Conclusion then from thence should
be this; Therefore We have cause to fear, that amongst the Body of Dissenters
there is a pack of Damned Villains.

Whether Dr. Womock ever let fall any Expression against the Generality of the
Dissenters so rudely Censorious, he appeals to every Man that has read the
Verdict. But the Reconciler, to take off the Odium of such an Inference from
himself, has the Confidence to deny the Conclusion. But knowing this (as I
suppose) to be most grossly absurd in the Schools of Learning, He affixes an
Universal upon Page 108.
Dr. Womock, as if he had affirmed, That all the Dissenters (to a Man without
exception) are Proud, Froward, Stubborn, and Malicious; that they all Sin out
of pure Willfulness and Obstinacy, or prepensed Malice and Design.

Thus he plays with Dr. Womock's Reputation, to spring his own Game. For upon
that false Principle, he Argues for six Leaves together: But Dr. Womock
challenges it as a piece of Justice from him, either to make good his Universal
Proposition against him, or else to wear the Brand of a Notorious Slanderer.

Till the Reconciler has acquitted himself of this, Dr. Womock has reason
enough to neglect his Harangues, upon such false Suppositions, as impertinent;
but as well to entertain the Reader, as to take occasion to assert the Truth, I
shall make some other Remarks upon what he has here suggested.

1. Whereas he says, We, who are 2 Chronicles. 19. 6. 1 Cor. 5. 4. cap. 14. 37. 2
Cor. 2. 10.
Parties, are left to judge; He is in a great Mistake: The Governors of the
Church are in Christ's stead, in the Execution of their Ministerial Office, of
Legislation and Discipline; In this their Political Capacity, they judge not
for Man, but for the Lord; they act as Christ's Stewards, and not as Parties in
opposition to Sectaries: And for that Reason they are to be obeyed for the
Lord's sake; though in their Personal capacity, they are subject to the Laws of
the Church, as well as other Men.

2. The Reconciler jumbles Things together of so distant a Nature and
Consideration, that it is very reasonable to believe, his Design was to amuse,
and not to instruct and edify his Reader.

3. He seems to have a greater Kindness for the Papists, than the Lutherans: He
can afford them the Title of Learned Papists: But contemns the Lutherans all
along, as miserable and foolish Triflers: Nay, he has brought in St. Paul among
the Jesuits formerly, and here we shall find him again rankt among the Roman
Adversaries; so that in time he may possibly set up for a Papist Reconciler,
and I believe his common place Book is furnished with Materials for such a
Work, as well as for this, which he has put out under another Title.

4. In Reference to the several Parties he mentions, Dr. Womock would say,
there has not been sufficient said to convince them of their Errors; if others
had not said more to the purpose, to confute them, than this Reconciler.

5. If Con-substantiation be a foolish Doctrine, yet it is but a Metaphysical
Speculation, and so innocent of its own Nature, it never brake the Peace in
that Communion wherein it is entertained.

6. Tho this Reconciler would fain get into the Chair, and pass his Sentence,
we pretend not to judge such as are not within our own Jurisdiction. Let them
Stand or Fall to their own respective Masters; it is enough when we have
occasion to consider their Tenants, to evince their Falsehood, if we can; and
to discover their dangerous Consequence, if they have any.

7. Our Discourse relates to such as attempt to Subvert that Order and
Government, under which they have been bred, and to which they owe Subjection.
It Is true, Contenders are ever stiff Judge. 8. 1. cap. 12. 1. 1 Samuel 19. 43.
and confident, and many times they are most fierce, who have the worst Title.
But we know the Truth cannot lie on both sides, nor can the Light of Evidence
be equal to their Advantage. Yet the Parties will not yield, unless they be
determined by Authority; which is a clear Demonstration of the Necessity of
Governors; without whom, now a days especially, instead of being a Law unto
himself, every Man would be a Gospel to himself, and take what Liberty he list.
To prevent the Mischief of such Licentiousness, we have these Commands upon us:
Obey them that Heb. 13. 17. Mat. 18. 17.
have the Rule over you: and he that will not hear the Church, let him be unto
thee as a Heathen Man, and as a Publican. And it is Calvin's own Doctrine, That
Men, who are Contentious against the Custom and Practice of the Church, in the
Ad 1 Cor. 11. 16.
use of Decent Rites, are not to be treated with Disputations (to gratify their
itch of contending) but to be bridled by Authority; otherwise there could be no
end of Strife; and consequently no bounds set to the Exorb^tances of wicked
Men: For Jam. 3. ver. 16.
where envying and strife is, there is confusion and every evil work.

But Authority should have some Rule to proceed by; and, Who shall give it? Dr.
Womock, he says, has borrowed a Rule from our Roman Adversaries. Why, Did Soto
ever write against the Church of England? He presented his Book de Natura and
Gratia, to the Council of Trent, whereof he was a Member; and it is like he
writes something therein against the Lutherans; whose Doctrines this Reconciler
contemns as foolish and trifling; and so as for as we can see, he is as much an
Advocate for the Roman Party, as their Adversary.

But, What is his Quarrel to the Rule? Will no Rule serve his turn, but such a
one as is without Exception? Where shall we find it? But let us give Soto's
Rule fair Play, and let it speak for it self. He is supposed to Err through
Malice, who has been so far admonished, that he cannot justly pretend
Ignorance; or may easily be convinced of it. Can there be any thing said more
rational? If he cannot pretend ignorance, or may easily be convinced of it, and
yet will persist in his error: Then his Fault proceeds not from the weakness
of his Understanding, but from the Pravity or corrupt Inclination of his Will,
which the Schoolmen call Malice. For Passion and Surprise can have no place or
pretense here, where things are done with so much Deliberation, and continued
in against a Known Law, and a just Authority, as well as against frequent and
public Admonitions; and when stubborness is added to the Opinion and Practice,
then, of a matter of Choice and Knowledge, it becomes Heresy.

But, Why did the Reconciler single out Soto to the Combat, when Perkins and
St. Paul were in the same File on the Front, and on the Rear of him, and
Verdict, 100 and 101.
no less concerned in the Dispute than he?

Such Transgressions as our Reconciler undertakes to Excuse, or Vindicate, are
hardly consistent with Mr. Perkins definition of weak Ones. For these, he
says, are such as have turned to God, and carry in their Hearts a Purpose in
all things to please God; and if they do amiss, it is out of simple Ignorance,
or bad Custom; and 'twill last no longer than till they be better informed: but
if, after a sufficient Information, they hold and practice bad things; it is
then of willful Ignorance, and of Malice; and in that case, He calls them
Obstinate.

And for St. Paul his decretory Sentence is this, A man that is an Heretic,
after Tit. 3. 10, 11.
the first and second admonition, reject: Knowing that he that is such, is
subverted, and sins being condemned of himself. This is a General Rule laid
down by Apostolical Authority, and prescribed to the Governors of the Church,
(who are to take their measures from the Epistles to Timothy and Titus, which
were wrote on purpose for their Directions, and not from the Epistles to the
Romans, where it does not appear that Church Governors are concerned at all,
much less directed in their Office.)

And because that Rule of St. Paul is of so great importance, I shall be the
more large in giving the sense of it, according to the exposition of the most
learned Protestants.

By a Heretic the Apostle means, Sectarium Hominem, says Aretius, Sectarum
Authorem, the Author of Sects, or a Sectary, as Bullinger, and Hyperius, and
others have it. Calvin makes no distinction betwixt the Heretic and
Schismatic in this place; for he says, Ambitiosos omnes, praefractos,
contentiosos, qui Libidine impulsi turbant Ecclesiae pacem, ac dissidia
concitant, hoc nomine comprehendit. He comprehends under this Title all
Ambitious, Stubborn and Contentious Men, who upon the impulse of their own lust
stir up Discord, and disturb the Peace of the Church. In summa quisquis sua
protervia unitatem ecclesiae abrumpit, is Haereticus vocatura Paulo: Whosoever
breaks the Peace of the Church by his frowardness, St. Paul calls him an
Heretic. And yet further (to reach such as set up Conventicles among us)
Quoties eo usque procedit pervicacia, ut quispiam sibi addictus, vel
discessionem faciat a Corpore vel a grege quosdam subtrahat, vel impediat sanae
Doctrinae cursum: hic strenue obviandum est. When the Obstinacy proceeds so
far, that a man enamored of himself, departs from the Body of the Church, or
draws others from it, or hinders the Course of sound Doctrine; in this case a
strenuous Opposition is to be made against him. In summa, In short, says
Calvin, Haeresis vel secta, and ecclesiae unitas, res sunt inter se oppositae:
Heresy or Schism, and the Unity of the Church, are things opposite: and this
Unity being so precious in the sight of God, it ought also to be in the highest
esteem with us, and those Sects and Heresies ought to be no less detested. Thus
Calvin

He that contemns all Admonitions, says Hyperius, He that is distempered in
his mind, and incurabili laborat contagio, and when he is sick of an incurable
Contagion, refuses and derides the Remedy that is charitably offered to him;
This is the Party affected.

And how is he to be treated? Must the Bishop flatter him? Or is the Bishop
alone obliged to avoid him? No, says Hyperius, the Bishop is to admonish
Hyperius.
others to beware of him as a pernicious Wolf.

But what is the Civil Magistrate concerned herein? Why, says Aretius, the
Charge is here given to Titus, who wanted a faithful Magistrate, to assist
Aretius.
him. But doubtless St. Paul would have wrote otherwise to the Magistrate, or
to Titus, if he had had such a faithful Magistrate to take care of Gods Church.
He speaks here of the Bishops Office, how far he may; how far in Duty he ought
to proceed.

We now understand, says Mr. Calvin whom the Apostle means by a Heretic; but
we are not to determine, who is such a Heretic, or to reject him till we have
first endeavored to reduce him to a sound Judgment. He must have a first and
second Admonition, not from Private Persons, but from the Public Authority and
Ministry of the Church; for the Words of the Apostle do import thus much,
Graviter quasi censoria correctione reprimendos esse. That such Persons are
sharply to be restrained by the Rod of Discipline; for he is condemned of
himself, because being so Hyperius.
carefully instructed and so frequently admonished, He has no body to impute
his condemnation to, but to himself and his own Malice.

But may we proceed no further against such Sectaries and Disturbers of the
Churches Peace and Settlement? They that think so, do not argue to the purpose,
says Mr. Calvin; For the Bishop and the Magistrate have their several parts
assigned them in this Work. And St. Paul writing to Titus, does not discourse
of the Magistrates Duty, but what is incumbent upon the Bishop.

What the Judgment of the most Learned and Pious Protestants was a Hundred
years ago, I shall give you Ad Titum. 3. 10, 11.
the account from Bullinger, to whom Hyperius also refers his Reader. That
Bullinger was a man of so great Esteem, that his Decades were translated into
English, and thought fit to be read in the Public Congregations, where they
wanted able Preachers; and this Doctrine of his passed for Current, till the
Socinian Heresy (which does so much impreach the Satisfaction, Merits and
Divinity of our Savior) prevailed so much among us: And this has happened;
because the Canons of 1640. were not duly enforced to prevent the growth of
it. But to return to the business in hand.

I shall give the sense of Bullinger in Hen. Bullinger Commentar. in omnes
Pauli Epistolas
a clear Translation of his own Commentary upon the Text which begins thus.

Quaerat aliquis quid agam cum eo, etc. Some perhaps may ask, what I would do
with Him that obeyes not Tiguri. 1582. Hic Ad Titum. 3. 10, 11.
the Truth, but continues to be contentious, and to stir up Faction? The
Apostle answers, after the first and second Admonition, if he will not obey
your advice, take heed, and separate your self from such an hopeless Deplorato.

But adding the Reason, why he commands Us to abbor the Communion and
Fellowship of such an Heretic, He says, He that is such a one as will not
admit of good Advice, is rather exasperated by continual Admonitions, and can
never be brought to embrace the Truth: For a simple Error is quickly healed,
but Stubborness is uncurable. But such a Man is subverted by Prejudice, and
therefore swerves from the true Faith, and being entangled in Perplexity, he
remains in invincible Ignorance.

Hereupon Theophylact, explaining these words, says, The Apostle understands
by an Heretic, an incorrigible Fellow, and one that is on every side so
entangled with Difficulties, that He knows not which way to free himself.
Therefore, such a One will never be persuaded to embrace the Truth, but rather
attempt to draw his Charitable Adviser into his own Opinion. Wherefore here is
a great deal of Danger, but little Hope.

For when Heretics are so wicked, and hardened in those Things which are
manifestly False; there is none, or very small Hopes of their recovering; nay,
on the contrary, it oftentimes happens, That they impose upon him, who advises
them, if weak, though otherwise a good honest Man: Therefore, He advisedly
commands, that they should be avoided.

But some perhaps will Object, That it is a sad thing, if we should thus
neglect the Sheep that is gone astray, our Lord did not so; it is to be feared,
his Destruction will be required at our Hands: The Apostle answers, If such a
Man Perish, he perishes not by your Fault, but by his own; for, Why did he not
obey his Teacher?

Moreover, they that gather from hence, That it is against the Scriptures for
the Civil Magistrate to restrain Heretics; that is to say, not only such as
are perverted from the Faith, but such as Study to pervert others: They do not
consider, That the Apostle here does not Dispute about the Offices of a Lawful
Magistrate, but what the Bishop should do. For in these, and other of the
Apostle's Prescriptions, the Occasion is to be considered. But they will say, The
Apostle's Command is, Not Compel, or Kill, but avoid an Heretic: It Is very
true: For no Man is rashly to be Condemned or Rejected, but rather to be
Endeared and Instructed. This is the peculiar Work of Bishops. But if after
such an amicable and endearing Treatment and Admonition, he refuses to Repent,
and endeavors still to draw whole Multitudes into the same Sedition and Ruin
with himself; Here again it is the Bishops concern, not only to Oppose that
setitious Doctrine and Practice, but also to lay down his Life for the Sheep,
against the assaults and incursions of such Wolves; to defend and preserve his
Flock with the Sword of Truth, and manfully to Repel and Subdue them.

If the Apostle had written an Epistle to Cornelius, or Sergius, and had
informed them of their Duties, without doubt, He would have enjoined them to
defend the Congregation of the Faithful, and to restrain those incroaching
Wolves. For we see St. Paul himself smote the false-Prophet Barjesus with
Blindness, because he endeavored obstinately to maintain a Falsehood, and to
reject the Truth. And if an Heretic is only to be avoided, and not also to be
punished; Why did the Apostle smite Elymas with Blindness? Why did our Lord
Command to take the false-Prophet from among the Living? But you will say He
Commanded these things under the Law? True; But Magistracy was not Abrogated
with the Law; for now as well as then it is the Gift of God. Besides, the
Liberty of the Law belongs Tim. 1. 9, 10.
only to them that walk after the Law. Wherefore seeing we are obliged to
receive the Law in all things which are not Repugnant to the Gospel, or to
sound Doctrine, no Man whatsoever under any pretense of the Gospel, shall ever
obtain of us to suffer false-Doctrine, to increase in the Church of God without
restraint.

These are very true and plausible Sayings (to wit) That Faith is the Gift of
God: That Faith is not wrought in any Man by the Power of the Sword; but these
signify nothing to the present purpose. For we do not speak concerning Internal
Faith as the Gift of God; but concerning the Doctrine of Faith, as the
Profession of our Religion, which we desire to promote, not so much by
restraining their Incredulity, nor their Opinions as false, but as they become
infectious. I confess, Faith and Unbelief are of the Heart, no Man can judge of
them; but by Men's Words and overt Actions, we may judge of them.

St. Augustine was sometime of that August. advincent Epist. Ordine 48.
Opinion, That Heretics were to be dealt with, only by the Word of God; but he
afterward confessed, That many Reasons and Examples had prevailed with him, to
be of another Persuasion. But, What need so many Words? The Church, and
Christian Truth, must necessarily be asserted and defended from Errors;
Blasphemies are to be punished; and we must take care of the Sound Members of
the Church, that they be not infected by the Rotten. But the Manner of
performing this, Godly Zeal, the judgment of Faith, and Christian Charity must
prescribe; that herein we do nothing, either too much, or too little.

It Is the Bishop's Duty to warn, to restrain, and to use all Opportunity and
Importunity to gain him that is out of the Way: But if in contempt of the
Truth, he shall still go on in the Error of his Ways; and also strive to draw
others with him into the same Error; then his Stubbornness and Error is to be
refuted by the Word of Truth, in the Face of the Church; and care to be taken,
lest any one should give credit to the Impostor.

Besides, the Magistrate also is to be put in mind (if he be remiss, and the
Wolf proceeds more and more to infest the People of God) to have a greater care
of God's Flock, that the Wolves may not set upon them. For such Mischiefs are
to be removed from the People of God, who, as much as is possible, are to be
Preserved.

Lastly, The Punishment is to be inflicted upon Offenders, not for their Ruin,
but Salvation, (to wit) that they may repent.

Nor are we presently to proceed to a Capital Punishment against those that are
in Error, or infected with Heretical Pravity, but when their Blasphemies are
so Execrable, that they cannot be born with, without reproach to God; Or when
the obstinacy of Erring, does manifestly tend to the Subversion of Religion,
and the Laws Established, and they are openly and truly convicted hereof. For
there is a great Difference between him that does not Err out of Malice, and
him who Errs wilfully, and out of a design to do Mischief.

Nor are all Offenses to be Capitally Punished; for sometimes the Punishment is
Corporal, sometime Pecuniary, as the Quality of the Offense, and the Equity of
the Law shall require.

This Learned Protestant was of Opinion, That in certain Cases, the Magistrate
should Assist the Bishop to suppress Sectaries. And such a one he accounts him
that is a Broacher of Execrable Blasphemies, to the high Dishonor of Almighty
God, and whose stubborn and seditious Practices, do manifestly tend to the
Subversion of Religion, and Piety, good Order, and the Laws Established; and
yet even in this Case, he does not approve of such a Procedure, as savours of
Wrath, and Bitterness. Pius enim Magistratus inquit, etc.

A Pious Magistrate, says he, would rather argue thus; What cannot the Truth
prevail with you? Cannot the the Authority of the Scriptures, Cannot the
undoubted Faith and Religion of all Ages, Cannot the Care and Diligence of all
Pious Men, Cannot an Holy Oath, and taken in a good Matter move you? Cannot the
Fear of God, Cannot the Charity you owe to your Neighbor, Cannot the public
Peace and Tranquillity persuade you? Cannot you Perish alone, but you must draw
others with you into Perdition? Morere igitur, tua culpa, tuoque vitio, si
salutem quam vivus excludis, invenias Moriens; You must Dye therefore by your
own Willfulness, and Stubbornness, if you think you can find that Salvation
when you are Dead, which you now refuse while you are alive.

And this Learned Protestant tells us, He Disputed the more copiously in this
Point, against such as thought they did the Church great Service, if they left
it free for every Man, to revive the Heresy of the Donatists, Arrians,
Pelagians, Novatians, and others; Disputare libere, Factionesque nectere; To
Dispute freely about these things, and to make Factions.

To Bullinger, I shall add the Judgment Ad Tit. 3. 8, 9. 10, 11. in locis
Communib. De Processu cum Haeret. n. 17. p. m. 571.
of a later Protestant Professor, Joannes Crocius: He moves the Question,
Whether it be Lawful for the Christian Magistrate to restrain Heretics? (and
we must remember what Calvin has observed, viz. That Schismatics are
comprehended under the same title.) Faith as a thing that pertains to
Conscience, is to be persuaded, not compelled. As Stephen King of Poland said
very fitly; God has reserved three things to himself; To make something of
nothing To foretell future Contingencies, and to rule over Conscience. For
Compulsion, for the most part, does not make Believers but Hypocrites. But, for
all this, says he, the Magistrate may compel his Subjects, both by Laws and
Penalties, to the Means of Faith, that is, to hear the Word. And being obliged
to secure his Subjects in the true Religion, He is concerned to keep out such
as would Advance and Propagate Sects and Errors; to remove them if they be
entered in, to divest them of their Dignities, and (if the Peace of the Church
cannot be preserved otherwise) to proscribe or imprison them, according to the
Quality of their Offense, that by such means they may (if possible) be brought
unto Repentance.

And thus much of St. Paul's Rule, which the Reconciler would make his Reader
believe, was only a Rule borrowed by Dr. Womock from our Roman Adversaries.

But 2ly. This Rule, says the Reconciler, condemns all Christ's Apostles, and
all the Primitive Weak Christians, mentioned in Holy Scripture, and in
Church History. I can proceed no further till I have taken notice of the
Reconcilers gross mistake.

1st. The Rule makes only the Major Proposition; Authority must judge of the
Matter of fact, and so make the Minor, without which no Conclusion can be
inferred, no sentence of Condemnation passed.

2ly. Here is Ignoratio Elenchi; if they be Weak Christians, they are not
within this Rule; which concerns only such as have forfeited that Title, and
the Privilege which belongs to it. But let us hear his Reason, such as it is.

For when the Apostles questioned the Power of our Lord, (as Christ assures us
they did in many places,) does not our Saviors Reproof of this their Unbelief,
inform us, That they had sufficient Reason from what he had already done before
their eyes, to be convinced of it? When they doubted of his Resurrection, or
rather disbelieved it, had they not had sufficient Cause both from Scriptures,
and their Masters frequent words, to lay aside that Doubt? When that after our
Lords Commission to Go and Preach the Gospel to all Nations, and the Descent of
the Holy Ghost, not only they, but the whole Church held it unlawful to Preach
the Gospel to any but the Jews, or to the Circumcised, could they justly
pretend Ignorance after so plain an Admonition? Were not the Judaizing
Christians sufficiently admonished, by the Holy Ghosts falling on Cornelius,
and his Friends, and the Discourses at the Synod at Jerusalem, That there was
no necessity of Circumcising the Gentile Christians, or of refusing to Converse
with the Uncircumcised? And must not only they but Peter also and Barnabas, be
Stubborn and Malicious for acting contrary to it? I shall repeat no more of
this Harangue to spare my self as well as the Reader.

Here we have Fallacy again; so many things of different kinds jumbled
together, that no single Answer can comprehend them. And this is a certain sign
of Imposture; Dolus versatur in Universalibus. But I hope we shall give such a
general Solution as will satisfy the Judicious.

1. We are to consider, That the Dispensation of the Gospel was stupendous,
and all Mystery: The Incarnation of the Son of 1 Timothy 3. 16.
God was a Mystery: The Resurrection of Christ from the Dead was a Mystery; The
calling of the Gentiles was a Mystery; which St. Paul sets forth in these
words: Even the Mystery which has been hid from Ages, and from Generations,
but Col. 1. 26, 27. See also Ephesians. 3. 1. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6.
now is made manifest to the Saints, to whom God would make known, what is the
riches of the Glory of this Mystery among the Gentiles, which is Christ in you
the hope of Glory. Of the whole Dispensation the Prophet cries out. Who has
Isa. 53. 1.
believed our report? or to whom has the arm of the Lord been revealed? And
again. Behold ye among the Heathen and regard, Habak. 1. 5:
and wonder marvellously: for I will work a Work in your days, which ye will
not believe tho it be told you.

2. We are to consider that Christ's Disciples were but poor Ignorant and
Unlearned Fishermen. They had not bin bred in the Schools of the Prophets; nor
does it appear that their Apprehensions Luke 24. 25.
were very quick, or their Memories very strong or retentive; Their old Bottles
needed a great Reformation, before they were fit for the New Wine of the
Gospel, the Effusions of the Holy Ghost. Christ was fain to open their
Understanding after his Resurrection, to help them to understand the Scripture,
and v. 45. Acts 1. 3. v. 8. Acts 2. 17. 18. John 16. 13. John 14. 26.
to teach them the concerns of his Kingdom by Conference, and to send down the
Holy Spirit, as well to enlighten them with further measure of Divine
Knowledge, as to bring former instructions into their Remembrance.

3. As long as our Blessed Savior does not charge them with Malice or
Stubborness, we have no reason to do it. Nay, tho they were dull and slow of
heart to believe, some Articles of great difficulty, and not formerly
propounded, or with very Little Evidence: Yet they Stubbornly rejected none,
but were willing from time to time, to comply with such Notices as they clearly
received from him; and were glad to be convinced of any Error. They did not
finally deny his Godhead, or his Resurrection, or the Dispensation of the
Gospel John 20. 20. 28. Acts 11. 18.
to the Gentiles, nor yet dispute any needful or useful Article.

4. There is a great difference betwixt a Church in Fieri, and a Church in
Facto: A Church that is a making and one that is established: The Church that
traveled in the wilderness, was not under such fair Circumstances, as that
which was afterward settled in the Land of Canaan.

The case of the Dissenters can never be justified by any thing, that can be
alleged under those circumstances; For we are now under a Settled Church, with
Laws, Discipline and Government, and all established by mature and good Advice,
and a just Authority. And the point in difference is drawn into so narrow a
compass, that he who unfeignedly desires to know his Duty, (if he will take St.
Paul for his Tutor, and Study to be quiet, and to do his own business,) He may
learn it out of half a Text of Scripture, I mean Romans 14. 14. and we Page 73.
have the Reconcilers own word for it, who tells us, That in this Very Chapter,
the Apostles plainly says, that the things Scrupled by the weak, were pure and
lawful in themselves, and that he knew, and was persuaded by the Lord Jesus
that there was nothing unclean of it self; which says the Reconciler, is as
perfect and full determination of the case against the Weak, as words can make.
Granting this to be true, I demand what is the Reason, if they be not Jews,
that the Dissenters are not satisfied? I say, if they be not Jews? And let not
the Reconciler conclude me Uncharitable for this Supposition; For the Doctrine
and Practice of this Phanatick Party, has been so long corrupted with such a
Jewish Leaven, that they have layn under that Suspicion at least, these hundred
years; insomuch as Hyperius Ad. Tit. 1. 11.
wished so long ago, utinam hodie nulli sint inter nos praeputiati Judaei: I
would to God, there were no Uncircumcised Jews amongst us at this day. 3ly.
Says the Reconciler, were we hereafter to be judged according to the Tenor of
this Rule, how sad would be our Doom! For have not most Christians had
sufficient Admonitions of those Duties they neglect, and of those sins they do
commit? Might they not easily be convinced of these things, by serious
Reflections on their Actions: yea, does not Conscience often do that Office in
them? And if in all these Cases they must offend of Malicious Wickedness, and
so be such concerning whom the Psalmist prays, that God would not be merciful
unto them; May we not ask the Apostles Question, who then can be saved? In a
word, does Peter say even of the People of the Jews, that they through
ignorance renounced and Crucified their Savior? And Paul, that he through
Ignorance did persecute the Church of Christ? Could they (I say) do this
through Ignorance in such a a Cloud of Miracles, which Christ and his Apostles
wrought? And may not our Dissenters in such a Conflict, as there is betwixt the
Learned of our Nations touching Ceremonies, be thought to to err, not out of
Pride and Malice, but out of Ignorance and Prejudice, not out of want of Will,
but Judgment?

Before I return an Answer, I must enter a Caveat. The Reconciler argues here
as he did formerly, ex falsis suppositis, Upon false suppositions: That Dr.
Womock affirms, that all the Dissenters to a man without exception, are v. pa.
108.
Proud, Froward, Stubborn, Malicious, etc. This Dr. Womock does utterly deny,
and takes it for a foul Slander. And he cannot but observe what Montaltius
says in his Provincial Letters, Whoever makes use of Lying, acts by let. 11.
the Spirit of Satan. There Is no directions of the intention can rectify
Calumny; and were it to Convert the whole World, it were not lawful to traduce
the innocent; because we must not commit the least Evil to promote the greatest
Good, and that the Truth of God does not stand in need of our lying.

And now I must tell this Reconciler, that be the Doom of such persons never so
sad, they are sure to be judged according to this Rule; for do not they sin
Wilfully and Maliciously, who sin frequently, by Omission and Commission,
against Knowledge, against Conscience, against Admonitions?

That the Schoolmen call a Sin of Malice, when neither Ignorance, nor Passion
is the cause of Sinning, but the Will depraved by Pride, by Envy, by Hatred, or
any the like Habit or Evil Custom; and generally, says Estius, In Sent. l. 2.
Did. 22. Sect. 17. John 16.
He that sins out of certain knowledge. And men may think they do well, and that
they do God Service when they Sin out of malice: These things they imagined and
were deceived; Excaecavit enim eos Malitia eorum; For Malice blinded Sap. 2. 21.
them.

I must add, that Concupiscence does sometime make a Sin the more Voluntary,
and consequently the more Malicious, according to the Notion of the Schoolmen,
which the Reconciler seems not clearly to understand; (being I suppose better
versed in the Homilies of St. Chrysostom then in the Writers upon the
Sentences, which makes him so indistinct and laxe in his discoursing.) When a
man is determined by any sort of Concupiscence unto Evil, so that he has no
Reluctance, no inclination to the contrary, in this Case his Concupiscence
makes his Sin the more Voluntary. And the Reason is clear, because the Will is
carried with more fervor and Vehemence into that Object, unto which it is
determined by Concupiscence, then otherwise it would be, as is manifest by
experience; and hence is that of St. James. Chap. 1. 14, 15. Every man is
tempted when he is drawn away of his own Lust and enticed. Then when Lust has
conceived (by the consent or conjunction of the Will with it) it brings
forth Sin: and sin, when it is finished, brings forth Death.

As to the Question, Who then can be See Dr. Hamonds Discourse of sins of
Weakness and VVilfulness.
Saved? The Wise man shall answer it: He that confesses and forsakes his Sins
shall have Mercy; there is Tabula post Naufragium; and Christ came to call
sinners to Repentance. If the Reconciler has a mind to reconcile Schism and
Sedition, or any other wilful gross sin, to the State of Salvation, without a
particular Repentance (in the Ordinary course of our Ministry) I am no Casuist
for his turn: The Moral I have learnt and taught is that of the Prophet, Wash
ye, make ye clean: put away the Evil of your doings from before mine eyes;
cease to do Evil, learn to do Well, etc. Isa. 1. 16. 17.


For David's imprecation: Be not merciful Psalm. 59. 5.
unto them, who offend of Malicious wickedness. The Case is Extraordinary: and
no man that understands how to discourse pertinently and distinctly, would
jumble it in a dispute of this Nature. Here we are to distinguish the Cause
from the Persons; for all Sins are not equally Criminal; This is evident from
that of Ely: If one man sins against 1 Samuel 2. 25.
another, the Judge shall judge him: but if a man sins against the Lord, who
shall entreat for him?

And then among Persons there are Degrees; Some do sin Wittingly and Willingly,
and yet they are Curable by the means of Grace, by Instruction and Good Advice.
But others run into Blasphemy and such a malicious Opposition of known Truth,
that they sin themselves into an Execration, as St Paul declares to the
Corinthians, If any man Love not v. Moller. in Psalm. 59. 6.
the Lord Jesus, let him be accursed. And that Explication of St. Austin is
very fit to be taken into Consideration, That these Imprecations are the
Dictates of the Holy Ghost in the mouth of the Prophet, pronouncing as it were
the Last Sentence upon Blasphemers, and the treacherous and implacable Enemies
of the Church.

I cannot give you a fitter Character of these Persons than what is done by the
Reverend Dean of Peterburgh, in his Paraphrase upon the Text, which is this,
Appear now for my relief, and punish all those Wicked men, who call themselves
thy People, but are as barbarous and- cruel, as false and perfideous as the
Heathen: Do not spare them therefore, nor show any favor to such as violate
all the Laws of Justice and Charity, and keep no Faith with their Neighbors.

The Instances are but few, wherein Prophets and Governors do make
Imprecations against their Subjects or Inferiors: But we must conclude the
Case is very Sad, when a Moses, the Meakest Prince that ever was; when a Paul,
a man so Charitable, that he wished himself accursed from Christ, to win Romans 9.
3.
others to Salvation: When such men as these shall take up the most dreadful
Imprecations that can be imagined, against any Party that relate to them; this
must proceed from some Extraordinary Provocation. The text says, Moses was
Numb. 16. 15.
very wroth, and said unto the Lord, Respect not thou their Offering. And St.
Paul said, I would they were even cut Gal. 5. 12.
off that trouble you. Why, what was the matter? Here was nothing but a Party
of Holy men, that divided themselves from the Public Congregation, to Numb.
16. 3.
Worship God in their own way, which indeed was not approved of by their
Governors.

But the Sin is Sedition and Schism, and strikes at the Government both of
Church and State; it is destructive to that Authority and Legislative Power,
which the Supreme Lord and Lawgiver, has ordained to keep the World in Peace
and Order; and because God is pleased to Govern the World by such a Civil
Magistracy, in reference to Temporals, and by such an Ecclesiastical Ministry,
in reference to Spirituals, therefore the Insurrection that is made against
these his Officers, he interprets, as made against himself: Hence it is, that
those Seditious Schisinaticks, (who are set forth for a Sign and Example to
them Number. 26. 10. Ep. Jude. v. 10.
that should follow their steps afterward) are said to be gathered together
against the Lord, and to have provoked Number. 16. 11, 30.
the Lord.

This is a sin of no Ordinary dye, of no Ordinary Malice; So point blank
against Authority and the Ordinance of God, (for the Seditious Schismatic
falls into Apostasy from the Communion of the Church, and many times into an
hostile Hatred of it) that it seems to be like the sin unto Death, mentioned by
St. John; and what mercy soever God may have in store for such a sin, the Sea
Dr. Ham Note on 1 John 5. 16. Hebr. 10. 25, to 29.
Church seems to have no Warrant to pray for it.

Therefore the Church with great Prudence and Charity has thought fit to put
such sins into her Litany, by way of solemn Deprecation,

From all Sedition, Privy Conspiracy and Rebellion; From all false Doctrine,
Heresy, and Schism; From Hardness of Heart, and Contempt of thy Word and
Comandment, Good Lord Deliver us. But St. Peter tells us, that The Jews
Renounced and Crucified our Savior out of Ignorance, etc. What a pitiful
Reconciler have we here? Sure the man would strain his Wit and Conscience, to
make an Apology for Judas and Pontius Pilate, rather then his Dissenters should
fall under a just and deserved Condemnation. What if St. Peter Wot that they
did it Ignorantly, will the Reconciler infer from thence, that they did it
Innocently? Has He embraced the Doctrine of Abaitardus: Non Peccaverunt, qui
Christum ignoranter Crucifixerunt: They sinned not, who Crucified Christ
Ignorantly: This Proposition was condemned as Haeretical by Innocent the Second.

There is scarce a sin committed without Ignorance, but it is one thing to sin
Ignorantly, and another to sin out of Ignorance: In that Case Ignorance does
attend the sin, in this it is the Cause of it: For Knowledge to the contrary
would have prevented it.

This Ignorance, if it be involuntary both in it Self and in its Cause, that
is, De Conscient. l. 3. c. 19. q. 3.
Non affectata, nec procurata, nec tollerata aut neglecta, tum actum reddit
mere fortuitum, and involuntarium, atque adeo excusat a peccato, says Amesius;
If it be not affected, nor procured, nor tolerated or neglected, then it
renders the action merely fortuitous and involuntary, and so excuses a man from
sin.

Will the Reconciler say, that the Ignorance of the Jews was of this Nature?
Then he falls under the same Condemnation with Abaitardus, and seems to be of
F. Baunius his opinion: Nunquam peccatur nisi praevia peccati Cognitione animus
illustretur, eiusque vitandi desiderio extimi letur: That a man can never sin,
unless his Mind be enlightened with a previous knowledge of the sin, and be
stirred up with a desire to avoid it. This Doctrine has been Censured by the
Theological Faculty of Paris, and Lovain, as false, and against the Common
Principles of Christian Theology; and as that which excuses innumerable of
the most heinous sins to the destruction of Souls.

To make a man guilty of Sin, it is not requisite, that he has an express or
actual Consideration of the Moral Atrceity, Malice or Danger of it, or any
express doubt or Scruple about it.

Otherwise it would follow, that such as are blinded in their minds, Athiests,
and those that know neither God nor Sin, should be in such a state, in which
they should be free from sin: For then, without any knowledge or doubt of the
Malice of the act, they would let loose the Reins of their corrupt and depraved
Nature, to follow the lust of their own hearts: And so the blinding of their
minds, (their Excaecation) which the Scripture represents as the greatest
punishment of Sin, should be no punishment at all, but a privilege, and render
them as it were impeccable

According to the Common Principles of Divinity, when the Cause is Voluntary,
the Effect is also Voluntary, that follows from the Position of such a Cause;
and he that may and ought to to foresee the Malice of the act that is to
follow, and neglects to advert to it, His actual Inconsideration is Voluntary,
and may as well aggravate the fault as extenuate it.

As gross and affected Ignorance is never without sin, so it can never be
altogether involuntary, says Argentina, gent. l. 2. d. 40. 41. q. 1. or 4.
because a man may prevent such ignorance, if he will. And, if the Ignorance be
affected, it is a Sin in it self, says Amesius, and therefore does not lessen,
but ubi Supra.
rather increase the guilt of other sins, 2 Pet. 3. 5.

Whether the ignorance of the Jews in this Case, were alleged as an
extenuating or an aggravating Circumstance, is disputed among Divines. That it
was affected in some of them, and so an aggravation of their Malice, will
easily appear from these Considerations.

1. Our Saviors own Affirmation, John 15. 22, 23, 24. If I had not come and
spoken unto them, they had not had sin: but now they have no cloak for their
sin. He that hates me, hates my Father also. If I had not done among them the
works which none other man did, they had not had sin: but now have they both
seen, and hated both me and my Father. His Doctrine declared him to be a
Teacher sent from God, and his Miracles did confirm it. But we have more
pregnant Evidence against their Elders, Luke 20. 14. When the Husbandmen saw
him, they reasoned among themselves, saying, This is the heir: come, let us
kill him, that the inheritance may be ours. And St. Peter charges them home
with a guilt of at least affected Ignorance and Malice: Act. 2, 22, 23. Ye men
of Israel hear these words, Jesus of Nazareth, a man approved of God among you,
by miracles, wonders, and signs, which God did by him in the midst of you, as
ye your selves also know: Him being delivered by the determinate Counsel, and
foreknowledge of God, ye have taken, and by wicked hands have crucified and
slain. Here he charge them, that they imbrued their hands in Christ's blood,
and that they did it Wittingly and Willingly. And St. Stephen tells them
plainly, that they had been the Betrayers and Murderers of Him. Act. 7. 52. For
did they not hire Judas to betray him, and Suborn false witness to give
evidence against him? If this Ignorance did did excuse or extenuate their
fault, the Apostle would 1 These. 2. 16.
not have told us, that the wrath was come upon them to the uttermost, for
their Continuance in it.

By the Circumstances of his Life and Miracles, their Princes and Rulers might
have known him to be the Son of the living God: But Malice blinded their Wisd.
2. 21.
eyes. Their Ignorance was not only gross and supine, but also affected,
procured by their Voluntary and frequent acts of envy and hatred. There was not
so much as the least Congruity toward a Pardon, Luc. Brug. Estius.
the Condition they had plunged themselves into was desperate, and that was the
only motive for a singular Mercy to step in to Succor them. I would fain
know, what Comfort the Reconciler can extract for his Dissenters out of such an
Ignorance.

But Joannes Malcolme tells us, St. Peter Comert in Act. 3. 17.
was preparing the Way for their Repentance, and that he might not plunge them
actually into desperation, He gives them hope of Salvation to be obtained by
Christ upon their true Conversion: When he says through Ignorance, he does not
go about to excuse or extenuate their sin by the Fucus or pretense of
Ignorance, but the Apostle speaks Comparatively, Comparing these with those who
knowingly and willingly, and of set purpose, Crucified the Lord of life. And a
little after,

There is a twofold Ignorance, says he. First, One has Rebellion joined with
it; from hence follows Obduration, and it is incurable; And this is Contracted,
says he, partly by acting obstinatly and contemptuously against the Will of
God, and partly by suffering the Threatenings and Judgments of God inflicted on
us, to pass by without Amendment. This was in Pharaoh and the People of Israel,
Jer. 44. and it is seen in many of our time, who do so harden their hearts, that
they reject the Grace that is offered to them in the Preaching of the Gospel:
St. Peter speaks not of such an Ignorance. But there is Another which pretends
to the Glory of God, and such is that he speaks of. This is Curable, and yet
it is a Sin in it self, and deserves no Pardon; nevertheless by Grace it may
find Remission, if it will suffer it self to be corrected; but if it
degenerates into that incurable Ignorance, then it lies under the same
Condemnation and Punishment.

S. Paul's Case is much like that of other Jew's: Estius says, he could never
observe, that ever Unbelief was pleaded to extenuate a Guilt: He obtained Mercy
because his sin was Great, and his condition Desperate, and so he was fit for a
Superabundant Grace to strike in to rescue him, and make him a Pattern for time
to come. But let us take notice, 1 Timothy 1. 15, 16.
that he stood in need of an extraordinary Grace, and a Miraculous Conversion,
and Corporal Affliction with great Severity, to compel him to come in. But then
we must do him right too; For having this powerful Call from Heaven He was not
disobedient to the Heavenly Vision, He did not confer with Flesh and Gal. 1.
16. Act. 9. 3.
Blood. Nor did he value his Interest in the High Priest, from whom he had
received his Commission: But upon the first Conviction, I am Jesus whom thou
persecutest, he resigned himself up to his Command, Lord, what will thou have
me to do? When the Dissenters do change their Principles, and abandon their
Carnal and Factious Interests, and bring forth Fruit meet for their Repentance,
let them, a Gods Name, apply such examples to their Comfort.

4thly. (says the Reconciler) let me entreat him to consider, how opposite
this judging and Censorious Humor seems to the Christian Rules and Precepts.
It Is flatly opposite.

1st. To that Precept of our Lord, Judge not, that ye be not Judged, Condemn
not, that you be not Condemned; And that of Paul, Let not him that Eats,
despise him that Eats not, neither let him that Eats not, Judge him that
Eats. Let us not therefore Judge one another. To that of James, There is one
Lawgiver, who is able to destroy and to save, who art thou that Judge thy
Brother? In all which places, the Scripture justly may be supposed, to forbid
the Judging and Condemning of our Brother, without sufficient Cause. Now thus
we evidently do, when we conclude that Action to be done upon corrupt and
wicked Principles, which happily was well intended, and free from any ill
design; and when we Judge that Person Obstinate and Malicious, who perhaps errs
through Weakness and Infirmity, through want of Information, or Prejudice; when
we do aggravate the Actions of our Brother, beyond their just Demerit, and pass
upon him a more heavy Censure, than he has deserved; for so far is our
Judgment false and without ground, as it exceeds the Nature, and the Demerit of
the Fact; when we judge them, whom God receives, as may be gathered from that
passage of St. Paul, Let not him that Eats not, judge him that Eats, for
God has received him; when we pass such a Judgment upon our Brother, as does
dispose us to contemn and vilify him, as may be gathered from that Question of
St. Paul, Why do thou judge, why do thou set at naught thy Brother, who
differs only from thee about Meats, or Festivals? or Things indifferent, in
which God's Kingdom by no means does Consist? And Lastly, when we so judge, as
to pronounce, without clear Scripture-Warrant of the Damnation or Salvation of
our Brother; for seeing there is one Lawgiver, says St. James, who is able to
Save and to Destroy, who art thou that judge thy Brother? that is, do pass
the Deretory Sentence, concerning his Damnation or Salvation? I pray the Doctor
may be unconcerned in these things, that in passing this Censure on his
Brethren, he be not found usurping of the Office of the Judge of all men or
judging another man's Servant, who must Stand or Fall to his own Master; that
he so Judge, as that he be not Judged, and so Condemn, as that he be not
Condemned.

1st. I observe that this Reconciler follows the steps of the fiercest
Presbiterians, who were ever wont to Libel their Prince in their Prayers: For
thus he deals with Dr. Womock. He insinuates, That he usurps the Office of the
Supreme Judge, that he Judges his Brothers Person, and passes the Decretory
Sentence concerning his Damnation (for to say Salvation is impertinence:) That
he does this without sufficient Evidence, or Scripture-Warrant: That he Judges
to Damnation such as God has received, such as differ from him only about
Meats and Festivals, or Things indifferent, in which God's Kingdom, by no means
does consist: That he aggravates their Actions beyond their just Demerit, and
judges them so, as to contemn and despise them.

Let the Reconciler consider, how ill this Censorious humor appears in him, as
well as how groundless false and scandalous, it is in it self. If there be any
Truth in it, let him name the Persons, that are so censured, let him repeat the
Words, and cite the Page, or Pages, where this Censure is to be found. If he
can produce none of these things, I have Commission in Dr. Womock's Name, to
proclaim him a malicious and shameless Libeller.

But it is a small matter with him, to Judge and Libel Dr. Womock; he has the
forehead to do as much by his Prince, and all that are in Authority in Church
and State, and is it possible for the Dissenters to escape his Lash? Indeed (
P. 114.) he concludes them a Pack of damned Villains, who go astray out of
Pride, Malice, Stubbornness; and he says ( p. 108) We have cause to fear the
thing is too true, that there be men of this Malicious, Proud, Stubborn Temper,
among the Body of Dissenters; But alas, Good man! he would not Censure them for
a World.

And yet at another time, he thinks p. 58. 59.
fit, but it is in the Spirit of Meekness to ask them these few Questions; Do
they prefer Mercy before Sacrifice, who will not submit to Rites or
Circumstances, or to the Use of things no where forbidden in the Word, to
prevent Schism, and all the dreadful Consequences of it; But rather will give
cause to their Superiors to Judge them scandalous Resisters of Authority, and
pertinacious Disturbers of the Churches Peace? Are they compassionate toward
the Sheep, according to our Lord's Example, who rather will refuse to become
Laborers in his Harvest, and Teachers of the Gospel of the Kingdom of God,
than submit to these little Things, in order to their regular Performance of
this Blessed Work? Do not they scandalize, offend, and contribute unto the Ruin
of Christ's Little Ones, who do involve them in a wretched Schism, on the
account of things which they may Lawfully submit to? Do not they shut up the
Kingdom of Heaven against Men, who forbid them to enter when they may? Do not
they impose heavy Burdens also, who say to their Disciples, Hear not the
Common Prayer, Receive not the Sacrament kneeling, Suffer not your Children to
be signed with the Cross, Communicate not with that Minister who wears a
Surplice, or with that Church who imposes any Ceremonies, or any
Constitutions; But concerning the Time and Place of performing public Worship?
If the Good Shepherd should lay down his Life for the Sheep, should not they
lay down their unnecessary Scruples for their sakes? If nothing does so
scandalize Christ's Followers, as to find their Teachers at Discord and
divided, can They act as becomes his Disciples, who are not willing to procure
Unity and Concord, and to avoid this Scandal by their Submission to things
indifferent in their own Nature, and not forbidden in the Law of God?

Now whether this be not much more Magisterial, and not a whit less Censorious,
than any thing that fell from the pen of Dr. Womock in his Verdict, let the
Reader Judge.

However Dr. Womock is not much concerned at the Reproaches of his Prayers, but
thinks fit to return his Charity in the Exprobration and Command of our Common
Judge, which may concern Luc. Brug. Significatur Curiositas intuendi in alienos
errores Studio reprelendendi.
the Reconciler no less then Dr. Womock, Mat. 7. 3. And why beholdest thou the
mote that is in thy Brothers Eye: but considerest not the beam that is in thine
own Eye? (ver. 5.) Thou hypocrite, first cast out beam out of thine own Eye,
and then shall thou see clearly to cast out the mote out of thy Brothers Eye.

And now we may take leave to reflect upon the other Mistakes and false
Suggestions in this Paragraph. (1.) What dormant Warrant he may have to pass
the Decretory or Final Sentence of Damnation upon any Person, I cannot tell;
but I am sure, there is no such Warrant to be found in Scripture, nor any such
Sentence to be pronounced by any man without the Spirit of Prophecy.

2dly. Whereas He says, the Dissenters differ only from us about Meats or
Festivals, or things Indifferent, in which God's Kingdom does by no means
consist, We say otherwise: The Difference is in matters of Obedience, under the
command of Righteousness, and in matter of Uniformity, under the command of
Peace, which, with Joy in the Holy Ghost, are the very Foundation and Pillars
of God's Kingdom: For he that in these things Romans 14. 17. 18.
serves Christ, is acceptable to God and approved of Men.

3dly. For our Saviors Prohibition, Judge not, Mr. Calvin says, His Verbis
praecise non prohibuit Christus a Judicando; (which is flatly opposite to the
Reconciler) Christ by these Words does not precisely forbid Judging, but would
cure a disease which is commonly bred of Curiosity, or Malevolence. Calvin.
But to condemn all Sin, is not only Lawful, but Necessary; unless we have a
mind to Bark against God, to abrogate his Laws, to rescind his Judgments, and
to overthrow his Tribunal. For he will have us be the Heralds of that
Sentence, which he has pronounced against the Wickedness of men; though withal
we are obliged to be so modest, as to acknowledge him the only Judge, and
Lawgiver, who is able to save and to destroy.

The Public Judgment of Prince, Praelates, Senates, (whose Office it is to
condemn the Guilty, and absolve the Innocent) being no less necessary, than
beneficial to Civil Societies, is by no means forbidden by our Savior; and why
should Divines study Cases of Conscience, but to Judge, and satisfy such as
are Scrupulous, and Doubtful; and a good man, that values his Soul, his
Conscience, his Interest in Christ, in Grace and Heaven, would be glad to
receive some Satisfaction therein; and, if he be wise he will apply himself to
some Ghostly Father to that Effect; but how can He do him good, if he does not
Judge for him?

The Judgment our Savior forbids is Private, and not all private Judgment
neither, but only what is Rash and Malicious. To condemn Crimes Manifest and
Notorious, that is not to Judge, but to follow God's Judgments, who has
expressly condemned Them already in his Word. We are forbidden to Judge of
Others, when their Actions are Doubtful, but not when their Works are Manifest,
and the matter of Fact clear and out of Question, as St. Augustine has
resolved it; and our Lord before him in that Direction, By their Fruits ye
shall know them; which is to be understood of such manifest Deeds, as cannot be
done of a Good mind, such as Theft, Whoredom, and all matters of Fraternal
Correction, which cannot Irenaeus. 2. 4. c. 49.
be performed without a Proevious Judgment, which therefore cannot be here
forbidden. They therefore abuse this Testimony, says Mr Calvin, who under In
Mat. 7. 1.
pretense of that Moderation which Christ commends, would take away all
distinction of Good and Evil.

4thly. But the Reconciler urges, That those places of Scripture may Justly be
supposed to forbid the Judging and Condemning of our Brother without sufficient
cause.

To this I answer (1.) When the Reasons are Light and Insufficient, upon which
the Judgment relies, then it is properly called Rash Judgment; but if it relies
upon Arguments that are Firm and Solid, and well known to Him that gives the
Judgment, then it is Just and Prudent.

I am perfectly of Amesius's Mind, Quisque jus habet ad Famam integram, De
Consci. Lbi. 5. cap. 15. Number. 8.
tanquam ad Bonum Depositum in Mentibus Aliorum, usque dum Ipsemet suis Factis
inde Eam abstulerit. Every man has a Right or Title to a clear Reputation as a
Good Treasure deposited in the Minds of others, until he plunders it away
thence by his own Wicked hands.

He that exposes his Good Name to Contempt, by manifest Impiety, he has
Adulterated and Debased it, He has made it Cheap and under Value, and taken it
out of my Custody.

A Good Name is resembled to Drecious Ointment, and every Good Man Eccles. 7.
8. Cant 1, 3,
will find a convenient Box to keep it in, and will find Discretion also, as
well as Charity, as Occasion serves, to open that Box to diffuse the Scent, and
Fragrancy of that Ointment, to the Advantage of such as are Praiseworthy. But
if any man puts a Dead-Fly into his Ointment, that does Corrupt it; if he makes
it Stink, and offensive to the Neighborhood, I am not obliged to find Incense,
to drown the Noisome Scent, especially when Artifice is used, to make it both
Grateful, and Infectious.

But let us leave Metaphors, and deal with our Reconciler and his Brethren in
plain English: Can we forget the Copy of their late Reformation, which like
Draco's Law's they wrote in Blood? Were not the Characters of Rebellion
therein, so Broad, so Plain, that He who runs may read them? If this Evidence
be not sufficient to proclaim their Guilt, there is nothing left, without
Repentance, but an Ite Maledicti for a full Conviction of it.

5ly. The Reconciler urges further, That p. 116.
we Judge and Condemn our Brother without sufficient cause, when we conclude
that Action to be done upon Corrupt and Wicked Principles, which happily was well
intended, and free from any ill Design.

For an Answer to this, Behold I show you a Mystery, the Mystery of Jesuitism,
one of the most Pestilent Principles, that is to be found among all the Morals
of that Society. I Will give it you from Montaltius, as He pretends, to have
taken it out of the mouth of a Supposed Provincial, who entertaining a
Gentleman with the Maxims of his Casuists, gives Him this account of one of
them.

Know then, says he, that this Miraculous Principle is nothing else but our
Grand Method of Directing the Intention; a thing of so great a consequence in
our Morality, that I durst almost compare it with the Doctrine of Probability.
He gives some slight Touches of it in explicating the manner, how Servants may
comply to gratify their Masters Lust with a good Conscience, In delivering
Letters and Presents, in opening Doors, or Windows, in helping their Masters to
get in at a Window, in holding the Ladder whilst he gets up; These seem to be
unhandsome things, but to perform them with Safety of Conscience, the
difficulty only lies, in the Diversion of the Intention, from the Evil whereof
they are the Abbettors, to direct it to the Advantage accrewing to Themselves
thereby. This is the Meaning of Directing the Intention.

But now, says the Provincial, I will Provin. Let. 6. and 7.
display this Grand Method in its full Luster upon the Subject Murder, which it
justifies upon a thousand Occasions, that by such an Effect, you may Judge what
it is able to Produce. But to satisfy you, says He to the Gentleman, that we
do not permit all things, know for Instance, that we never suffer a man should
have no other design in Sinning, than a formal Intention to Sin; and that if
any one be so obdurate, as in an Evil Action to Limit his desire by the Evil it
self, we have no more to do with him; This is Diabolical, and admits of no
exception, of Age, Sex, or Quality. But if a man be not sunk into that wretched
Condition, we endeavor to put in practice our Method of Directing the
Intention, which consists in a man's proposing to himself as the End of his
Actions, an allowable Object. Not but that we, as far as lies in our Power,
Divert Men from doing things forbidden: But when we cannot hinder the Action,
we at least purify the Intention, and so Correct the Vitiousness of the Means,
by the Purity of the End.

Thus, you see, have our Fathers found out a Means to permit the Violencies
men ordinarily Commit in maintaining their Honor. For there is no more to be
done, than to divert the Intention from the Desire of Revenge, which is sinful,
to incline it to a Desire of maintaining ones Honor, which, according to our
Fathers, is allowable. And thus they acquit themselves of all Obligations, both
toward God, and toward Men. For they satisfy the World, by permitting the
Actions, and satisfy the Gospel, by Purifying the Intention. This is a thing
the Ancients never knew; the world is engaged for it only to our Fathers.

1. This is a Principle of great use to men of Design and Action; for example;
If I be jealous of my Tenor or Title to the Estate I have acquired, and project
not only to secure my present Interest, but to purchase greater Advantages,
which I think can never be Accomplished without an Insurrestion, and the
Reacting of our late Bloody Tragedy, (wherein so many Fished, with such good
success in those Troubled Waters) we must set a broach our Fears and
Jealousyes, especially those of Popery and Arbitrary Power, we must Remonstrate
the Maladministration of our Superiors, and complain of Grievances; when the
People are startled, and in Commotion hereat, then we may take the Sword, and
usurp the Royal-Office, seize his Majesty's Ships, Castles, and Revenues, and
having wrested his Militia out of his Hands, we may then venture to exercise it
against Him, to Fight Him, and take Him Prisoner to Arrargn, Scaffold, and
Behead Him.

These are sad Emergencies you will say; but you must not conclude, that this is
done upon corrupt and Wicked Principles; take heed of that; be sure to divert
your Intention, from the spoil, and plunder, from the Sacrilege, and Murder,
from the Schism, Treason, and Rebellion, and Direct it to a plausible End or an
allowable Object, that is, To Advance God's Glory, to Reform the Church and
State, and to Associate and Unite all True Professors to this Effect. This they
must Confess is well intended, and free from any ill Design, and the Reconciler
will justify it. By this Miraculous Principle and Method, be the Villainy never
so Diabolilical, the Reconciler can put the Jesuit into the Dissenters Belly,
to Purify his Intention, and all is well.

6ly. The Reconciler says further, Perhaps our Brother errs through Weakness, and
Infirmity, or through want of Information.

If it be so, the Question is, Whether this be not Voluntary and Culpable? For
unless it be invincible, it cannot excuse them, it being a Rule amongst the
Best, and most Learned Moralists, Nullam in Gers. De. Vit. Spir. Lect. 4.
Coroll. 3.
his, quae Legis Divinae sunt, cadere Ignorantiam invincibilem: He to whom the
Divine Law is promulged, is under the Obligation of it; and therefore cannot be
invincibly, and inculpably Ignorant of any Precept thereof. By the Evangelical
Law, God has tied all Men in the same Community, to Concord, and Uniformity in
his Public Worship; and Men are obliged not only to know that Law, but to use
all Necessary Means to observe it. If we want such Knowledge, that Defect is
Voluntary to us, and proceeds from our own default, from a Voluntary and
Culpable Impediment of our own making. For (1.) Either we do not resist our own
Passions, which are apt to blind us: Or, (2.) We do not use sufficient
Diligence, to procure that Knowledge which should direct us: For either we do
not study to find out the Truth, by a careful Search; or we do not consult such
as are more skilful to inform us; or we do not pray earnestly to God for his
Grace of Illumination; or else, our Impenitence and Stubbornness, hinders Him
from opening our Hearts to attend to our right Instructors.

Now all these Impediments of our Knowledge being Clearly Voluntary, the Will,
(by Gods Grace) may remove them, and is obliged to do it; If she does not, the
Omission and Ignorance of the Duty, and the Malicious Act which steps up in the
room of it, are plainly Vincible, Voluntary and Culpable.

Truth and Knowledge are that Intellectual Light, which Corrects the Darkness
and Disorders of a Depraved Mind. But some Men are Wilfully Ignorant, and 2
Pet. 3. 5.
keep themselves in Darkness, that they may enjoy their Carnal Satisfactions
without Check, and Riot with the greater Freedom; They Love Darkness rather
than Light, because their Deeds are Evil, and they hate Knowledge, because they
hate to be reformed, John 3. 19.

But there are another sort of Men who are more wilfully Active toward their
own Seduction. They take Pains to be deceived, and bred up in error; they
Study Seditious Books, and Frequent Schismatical Conventicles, which they
should avoid as Infection.

Now their Attention to such Discourses being greedy, and perfectly Voluntary,
the Effect that follows it, I mean, the Errors, whether begotten, or bred up
by that means, are also Voluntary. And therefore unless those Sins and
Errors, (which are so fully Voluntary, and in Practice tends so directly to
Schism and Disobedience) are come to be counted Venial; it is not want of
Charity in me, but the Light and Force of Truth, that makes me call them
Damnable. Wherefore let not this Reconciler delude his Dissenting Brethren, in
attempting to excuse them by a Pretense of Weakness, and want of Information.

7ly. Prejudice I know is a great Obstruction to Truth, but it should not be
pleaded in Bar to a just Sentence, upon a froward Schismatic. Commonly when
men have entertained other Principles, and are prepossessed with a wrong
Conceit, instead of submitting to better Information, they add Stubbornness to
their Self-conceit, and harden themselves in their first Persuasion, against
all Sense and Reason. You may happily convince them, but they will hardly be
persuaded. Those great Disputants which opposed St. Stephen, when they were not
able to resist the Wisdom and the Spirit by which he spoke, yet could they
Suborn False-Witness to swear down both his Doctrine and Integrity, Act. 6.

Sometimes the Prejudice lies against Numb. 16.
the Persons; Ye take too much upon you, Ye Sons of Levi, was Corah's objection
against Moses, and against Aaron: They have an Unkindness for their Prince and
Prelate, therefore neither their Discipline nor Discourses will Relish with
them: This was Ahabs Obstruction, There is a Prophet of great Integrity, but I
hate him. The Apostle becomes the Peoples Enemy, because he tells them the
Truth. Gal. 4. 16.

The Prejudice sometimes lies against the Article, or Institution. This was
Naamans Obstruction; Are not Abanah, and Pharphar Rivers of Damascus, better
than all the Waters of Israel, may not I wash in them, and be clean? Factions,
Stubbornness, and Infidelity, in the suggestions of those Unbeleiving Jews,
made the minds of the Gentiles evil affected toward Barnabas and Paul, whose
Doctrine otherwise, in all Probability, they had embraced, Act. 14. 2.

Sometimes the Prejudice lies both against the Person, and Dispensation too,
and this was our Saviors own Case; He came to bring them Light, and to guide
their Feet into the way of Peace, but his State of Meekness and Humility,
deceived their Carnal expectations, and the Holiness of his Divine Maxims
crossed the Grain of their Avarice and Ambition, and They were offended at him.

Many times the Prejudice lies only in the Pride and Popularity of the Party;
when Men have made an interest to carry on some Design, and got a Name by
courting and Seducing the hearts of the Simple, and Headed Faction that Flocks
after them; For such Men to see their own Errors, is to them as the shadow of
Death, therefore if they cannot break the Glass, that shows them such an ugly
Spectacle, they will either lay it aside, or turn their Backs upon it. To retract
and Renounce their Beloved Error, is to deny themselves, and to lay their
Honor in the Dust; which is such a severe piece of Mortification, as they have
not yet Learned, and know not how to practice. What hinders Reformation in the
Church of Rome, so much as the Opinion of their Infallibility? For such as are
Infallible have no need of better Information, and such as are so persuaded,
whatever their Errors be, They are not in a present Capacity of being
corrected. And have we not many among our selves, who, tho they pretend not to
Infallibility, are no less stubborn in their own Opinion, than they that do,
and that is as ill; Their Self-conceit makes them Inflexible in their
Persuasion, and as long as this Impression of Pride and Sel-fconceit, of
Popularity and Vainglory, sticks upon them, their minds are not in a
Disposition to receive the Truth; and this was the case of many an Eminent
Person among the Jews, John 11. 42, 43.

When Hatred and Envy appear in the Contest, they heighten the Prejudice
exceedingly; and this was so notorious, in the Priests against our Savior,
that Pilate took special notice of it, He knew that for Envy they had delivered
Him. Mat. 27. 18.
In the Meanness of his Person and Equipage, they were disappointed of their
Worldly Pomp, and Carnal Hopes; yet such was the Innocence of his Life, the
Regularity and Holiness of his Conversation, that his Doctrine gained Credit,
no less from his Example, than the Excellency of his Precepts and Discourses.
His Miracles also were admirable to a great Conviction; but yet for all this
their hearts were not Won to embrace the Truth; so that his gracious
Dispensations served only, to set an Edge upon their Malice, to raise their
Spleen, to sharpen their Indignation, and whet their Wits to find our Arguments
to elude the Evidence of their Conviction.

The Priests and Pharisees held a Council against this Holy Jesus, and their
Debate resolved to a wicked Expostulation, What do we? For this man does many
Miracles. Here was a clear Conviction: but they preferred their Temporal
Interest, before the Truth, and their own Salvation: They resolve therefore, If
we let this man alone, all Men will believe on him, and the Romans shall come
and take away our Place and Nation. Here they take up a Liberty of Prophesying,
which tho it sentenced Him, but to a short Death, yet it brought upon
themselves a fatal Doom, which was no less sad, than irreversible. Joh. 11. 47.
etc.


I may add, that Avarice, and Filthy Lucre, do many times Inhaunce the
Prejudice, and when men come to this point of Belief (which is a desperate sign
of Atheism) that Gain is Godliness, they are men of such Corrupt Minds, that
the Apostle seems to give them over as hopeless and uncurable. He tells us of
men Who take Pleasure in unrighteousness, that are Lovers of their own selves,
and despisers of 2 Timothy 3. to the 8.
those which are Good; Covetous, Boasters, Proud, Fierce, and false Accusers,
Traitors, Heady, High-Minded, Lovers of Pleasures, more than Lovers of God,
having a Form of Godliness, but denying the Power thereof. These, for all their
fair Pretenses, and Diligence to seduce others, He call's them Men of Corrupt
Minds, that resist the Truth, and are Reprobates concerning the Faith. What is
it that makes the Schismatics so ungovernable, and so bold, in teaching
things, which they ought not? Is it not for filthy Lucres sake? Do Chrysostom. ad
Tit. Cap. 1. Hom. 2.
thou see, says St. Chrysostom, that every where the Love of Rule, and the
Appetite of Filthy Lucre is the cause that such men will not be subject to
their Superiors? These men are far from the Kingdom of Heaven, in no present
disposition to Embrace the Truth in the Love of it; A sharp Reproof which may
Melt others, and make them Sound in the Faith, (Tit. 1. 13.) will but
exasperate such as these to greater Attempts of mischief.

In short, when Prejudice and Self-conceit, are the best Talent of their
Knowledge; when Popularity is their Devotion, and Gain their Godliness; when
Hatred and Envy are the Zeal that whets them on, in their pretenses of Justice,
or Reformation; that is, in a word, when men make their Consciences truckle to
their Covetous or Ambitious Designs, and prefer their Interest in this World,
before the Institutions of Christ, and their Hopes of Heaven, their minds are
so Corrupt, from the Simplicities that is in Christ, that it is High time for
them to lay aside all such Prejudices, and seek for better Information, that
there be no Schisms amongst us, but that we be perfectly 1 Cor. 1. 10. Romans 15.
6. 1. Tim. 2. 2.
joined together in the same mind, and in the same Judgment; and that we all
speak the same thing, that we may with one mind, and one mouth, Glorify God;
and lead a quiet and peaceable life, in all Godliness and Honesty.

8. The last Remark I shall make upon this Paragraph is this, That generally
the Schismatic, is more confident of the State of his Party, and their
Interest in God's favor, than the most eminent Servants of God. Corah
pronounces without the least Hesitation, or any Doubt at all, saying, All the
Congregation are Holy, every one of Them; But Moses was astonished at his
Confidence, and said more modestly, The Lord will Number. 16. 3, 5,
show who are his, and who is Holy, and will cause him to come near unto him.

When St. Paul commends the Weak Romans 14. 3.
Jew, who had embraced the Gospel, to the care and kindness of those who are
better instructed, because God had received him; He speaks out of the Judgment
of Charity: But really God receives none upon their own Partial Terms, or
Factious Principles; He receives only such as Resign themselves up entirely to
his Will, that is, to the Conduct of his Church, according to his Laws and
Institutions. Thus he received Saul; when he said, Lord, what will thou have me
to do, the Lord received him; but committed Acts 9. 6.
him to the Care of his Church, and Ministry, saying, Arise and go into the
City, and it shall be told thee what thou must do. Thus, as I said, every true
Convert, in Preparation of Mind, and full Purpose of Heart, resigns himself up,
to the Conduct of Christ's Church according to his Holy Laws and Institutions.

But for the Sectary, who refuses the Conduct of the Church, we have no Warrant
to assure us that God has Acts 4. 7. John 10.
received Him; for such as he receives, he receives into his Church, All that
are his Sheep, he brings into this Fold. Tit 3. 10, 11
To this purpose upon those Words of the Apostle, A man that is a Sectary
reject; In Loc. Com. Ioc. 8. De 9 aeret. N. 6.
Joannes Crocius a Calvenist, writes thus, Etsi ex vera Ecclesia prodit
Haereticus non tamen est ex Deo: Although the Sectary comes out from the True
Church, yet he is not of God. The Reason is irrefragrable, because he is to be
rejected; For whatsoever is to be rejected, is not of God. God is Truth and the
Author of Truth, but not of Sects and Heresies. They went out from us, says 1
John 2. 19
St. John, but they were not of us.

And now I think it high time to speak Plainly; He that makes himself an Enemy
to his Prince, And so do such as are Seditious, and he that makes himself an
Enemy to the Church, And so do such as are Schismatical, they make themselves
unfit for any Trust, and in that respect. They are to be despised. And as to
the Schismatical part, we may observe it to be St. Paul's practice in all his
Epistles, wherein he takes notice of such Sectaries as did infest the Church,
Romans 16. 17, 18. 2 Cor. 10. 11. cap. Gal. 1. 7. chapter 4. 17 18. chapter 5. 10, 12.
Philip. 3. 2, 3. Coloss. 2. 8, 16, 18. etc. 1 Timothy 6. 3, 4, 5. Tit, 1. 10, 11.
St. Pet. also Epist. 2. c. 2. throughout, like wise St. John 1 Epist. c. 2. 18,
19. and St. Jude does the like the 11, 12, 13. ver. of his Epistle.

2dly, says the Reconciler, Thus to condemn and Judge our Brother, seems Page
118.
inconsistent with the Properties and Rules of Charity. For Charity, says the
Apostle, Hops all things, and Believes all things; and therefore must oblige
us to hope and to believe well of our Brother's Actions till we have
Demonstration of the contrary, and not condemn Him without certain grounds.
Charity thinks no evil, says the same Apostle; It is not Jealous or
Suspicious, and therefore will not suffer us to pass our Sentence on the
Intentions or inward Motions of our Brothers Actions. Because, although we may
suspect, we cannot be assured, that he does perform them with those Vile
Intentions, and upon those evil Motives, which we are Prone to charge him with.

But is Charity so severe a Lady? Will she not suffer me to call a Spade, a
Spade? If a man suggests a Lie in his Petition, does Charity oblige me to
esteem him Honest, and worthy of the Preferment he Petitions for? I know
Justice is Pictured Blind, but I never thought Charity was so in earnest. It Is
true, Charity Thinks no evil, She frames none, She suspects none, where She
finds no Reason for it. It Is her Office to make Men Harmless, but not to make
them Fools; leaving out their Sting and Venom, She can reconcile the Serpents
Wisdom to the Dove's Innocence: Neque enim Caecutire debent Fideles (says Mr.
Calvin) The faithful Servants of Christ, ought not to be so Blind as to discern
Nothing, Sed tantum seipsos fraenare, ne Cupidius Judicent quam parest; Tho it
be their Duty to Bridle Ad Mat. 7. 1.
themselves, lest they should be more lavish in judging than does become them.

When Things are put into the Balance, we must weigh and value them, as the
Moments or Grains of Reason shall incline us; But if we speak of Persons, when
any Doubt arises, that touches their Good, or Evil Reputation, we are
obsolutely concerned to give our Interpretation in the better Sense. Yet this
is not so to be understood, as if Speculatively and Positively, we were
certainly to Judge those Men Honest, of whose Honesty we have no certain Sign
or Indication; for so we should be bound to believe a Falsehood; But the
Meaning is, that Negatively, and Practically in Doubtful matters, we ought not
to judge ill of our Neighbor, but to carry our selves so toward Him in Common
Conversation, as if He were Honest, when we find nothing in Him to the Contrary.

This is the Judgment of Charity.

But this Judgment of Charity must not contradict that of Prudence, which
Teaches us to carry our selves with some Reservedness; whether in order to the
Amendment of any Evil, or to the putting in of Caution against it. It Is not
Prudence to trust those too far, of whom we have no Reason to be confident; for
we know there may be a Godly-jealousy, 2 Cor. 11. 2. Gal. 4. 11.

If the Reconciler says, that some plausible Motives, or a collateral
Good-meaning can hallow wicked Practices, he has the Jesuit for his Casuist,
and serves himself of his Moralls.

If He says, we ought not to be Shy, and keep Guard over our selves in
reference to matters of Conscience and Religion, he Cancells Christ's Caveat,
and makes his Sign of the false-Prophet as useless (if not as scandalous too)
as they would do the Sign of the Cross; Beware, says He, of false-Prophets, who
come to you in sheeps-Clothing -- by their Fruits ye shall know them.

Was it want of Charity in the Apostle, speaking of such as sought occasion to
traduce his Life and Doctrine, to say, such are False-Apostles, deceitful
Workers, transforming themselves into the Apostles of Christ. And no marvel,
for Satan himself is transformed into an Angel of Light. Therefore it is no
great thing, if his Ministers also be transformed as the Ministers of
Righteousness; whose End shall be according to their Works. Was St. Peter
without Charity? Yet he says, These are Wells without Water, Cloud's that are
carried with a Tempest, to whom the mist of Darkness is reserved for ever, 2
Pet. 2. 17. Was St. Jude Uncharitable? Yet He says, These are spots in your
Feasts of Charity, Clouds Jude Epist. v. 12, 13.
they are without Water, Trees whose Fruit withers, Raging Waves of the Sea,
Wandering Stars, to whom is reserved the Blackness of Darkness for Ever. Was
Christ uncharitable? Yet He says, Woe unto you Scribes, Pharisees, Hypocrites!
Mat. 5. 20.
and again, Except your Righteousness shall exceed the Righteousness of the
Scribes and Pharisees Ye shall in no case enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. I
thank God, I am not yet arrived at that height of Folly, as to pretend to be
more Wise and Charitable, than Christ or his Apostles.

St. Paul thought it not amiss to make an Argument, to awaken such as were
secure and careless, and he puts it home to their own Consideration; Know ye
not says he, that the Unrighteous shall not inherit 1 Cor. 6. 19. 20, 21.
the Kingdom of God? Does he mean none but Thieves, Drunkards and Extortioners,
none but Fornicators, Murderers and Idolaters? Yes he takes in the Contentious
and Seditious, and such as disturb the Peace of the Church by Sects, and
Schisms.

This was his Major Proposition, and he took the Boldness to Assume, (and
doubtless he thought it was without any Breach of Charity, which he had in so
eminent a Measure, that he could wish himself Accursed from Christ for his
Brethren Romans 9. 3. 2 Cor 12. 15.
according to the Flesh) yet to make up his Argument, he tells the Corinthians,
and such were some of you. And I would have the Reconciler know, that I should
be no less glad than St. Paul was, if I had the like Evidence for it, to say of
the most Stubborn and Froward of our Dissenters, But ye are Washed, but ye are
Sanctified, but ye are Justified, in the Name of the Lord Jesus, and by the
Spirit of our God.

If thy Brother shall trespass against thee, Rebuke him. This Injunction is
usherd in with a Caveat that looks inward, which implies, that it is of great
Concern unto us. Take heed to your selves. St. Luke 17. 3. Be sure ye do it by
word of Mouth or Writing; and, if occasion serves, Mat. 18. 17.
present his miscarriage to the Church. The Neglect of this Duty, the Law
interprets as an act of Hatred, Levit. 19. 17. Thou shall not hate thy Brother
in thy Heart. Thou shall in any wise Rebuke thy Neighbor, and not suffer sin
upon him. The Canon Law tell's us, Qui emendat verbere in quem Potestas datur
vel coercet aliqua Disciplina -- Eleemosynam Dat, quia Distinc. 45. c. 11.
Misericordiam proestat: Discipline is reckoned among Alms, and Correction is a
Work of Mercy. Fratrem, quo emendetur, corripere, id vel unice diligere est,
says Luc. Brug. to Reprove a Brother, that he may be amended, that is a
singular Act of Love and Kindness.

3ly. Says the Reconciler, This Practice seems Repugnant to that great Rule of
Equity, which does enjoin us to do to others as we would be dealt with; For we
would not have others Judge rashly of the Thoughts, and secret Purposes of our
Minds, which they know not, nor of the inward Principles of our Actions, which
they cannot discern; and would desire them to Judge, as favorably as they can,
of the Miscarriages which they know.

To this, the Answer will be very short: I know it is the Ambition of all
Hypocrites to be esteemed better than they are, and it is their Study and Care
as well as Artifice to seem so; but such a man is a great Fool for his Pains,
he may be deceived himself, but God is not mocked by such delusions. He has
laid down the Rule, and we must stand or fall by it, With what Measure ye mete,
it shall be Measured to you again. Matthew. 7. 2. In this Case I say, God's Will
be Done. If ever this Reconciler finds me either a Rebel to my Prince, or a
Schismatic to my Church, let him deal with me as I shall deserve, let him put
me into his Pack of Villains, and I will forgive him.

The Reconciler carries on his Argument thus; When it is not evidently
Protestatio contra Factum, we would have Men believe us, when we protest, that
it is purely out of Conscience toward God, that we refuse Obedience to the
Commands of men; and therefore we are by this Rule obliged so to Demean our
selves in passing of our Judgments upon others.

I perceive this Reconciler is young enough to become Wiser. If he had been of
Age at Forty one, he might have seen and taken a Solemn Protestation to
maintain His Majesty's Royal Person, Honor and Estate; and after that He might
have seen his Weak Brethren take a Solemn League and Covenant, wherein they did
Protest and Swear, with Hands and Eyes lifted up to Heaven, that their design
was to make His Majesty a Glorious King, to preserve His Royal Person, Crown
and Dignity, and that they had no Thoughts or Intentions to diminish any thing
of His Majesty's just Power, and Greatness. How they performed that
Protestation, Jan. the 30th. will be a lasting Commemoration. Have we not seen
Addresses to the late King from those Dissenting Brethren, under the Style of
Your Majesty's most Humble and Obedient Subjects, when they had their Swords in
their Hands ready to Cut His Throat? That I was not a Stranger to their
Proceedings, Pretenses and Designs, you may conclude from those Historical
Observations, Printed for, W. Webb at Oxford, 1643. under the Title of Sober
Sadness.

I Will vary the Apostle's Style while I apply my self to our Dissenters, I write
not these things to shame you, but as my deluded 1 Cor. 4. 14.
Countrymen, I warn you. And although the Spirit of Mildness and Charity may have
it is angry Sallies and Emotions, yet that you may be sure I do not stretch my
self beyond the Line of Justice, or Charity in this undertaking, I shall
acquaint you with the Marks which the Fathers of the Church have left us,
whereby to discern, whether Reprehensions proceed from a Spirit of Piety and
Charity, or from a Spirit of Impiety and Exasperation.

These Marks or Rules are Collected to my Hand by Montaltius, in his
Provincials; Letter. 11.
The first whereof is this.

1st. That the Spirit of Piety, inclines a man to speak always with Truth and
Sincerity, whereas Envy and Exasperation, spares neither Lies, nor Calumnies.
If we advance things which are untrue, I say with St. Hilary, let our
discourses he reputed Infamous; but if we plainly show, that what we do produce
is public and manifest, it is no Breach of Moderation, and Apostolical Liberty
to reprove them.

2ly. As the First Rule is to speak with Truth, so the Second is to speak with
Discretion; Wicked Men, says St. Augustine, persecuting the Good, are hurried
away with the blind Passion that animates them. Whereas the Good Prosecute the
Wicked with a Prudent Discretion, as Surgeons consider where they Cut, but
Murderers care not where they Strike.

3ly. The Third Rule is, That when a Man is obliged to fall into something of
Satyr, the Spirit of Piety inclines him to direct his wit against Errors, not
against Holy things; whereas the Spirit of Sycophancy, Impiety, and Heresy,
makes Sport with what is most Sacred. I wish the Reconciler to consider, how
Profane he has bin, in maing a May Game of the Observances of the Church.

4ly. I shall add but one Rule more, which is the Principle and End of all the
Rest; and that is This.

That the spirit of Charity inclines a man to make Hearty Wishes for their
Salvation against whom He speaks, and when He directs his Reproaches to men, at
the same time to address his Prayers to God. A man should always with St.
Augustine, preserve Charity in his Heart, even when he is obliged to do
outwardly things that to men seem very Harsh, and to smite them with a rough
but obliging Severity, their Advantage being preferred before their
Satisfaction.

This was the Practice of John the Baptist, who doubtless desired the Salvation
of such as applied themselves to his Ministry, yet how did He upbraid the
Pharisees and Saducees with their Viperous Temper? How did He undervalue their
Carnal Privilege of having Abraham to their Father, as if the conceit of that,
had bin Charm enough to secure them from approaching Vengeance? How does He
press them to a Worthy Repentance, threatening and even frightning them into it
with the keen Ax, and a consuming Fire; all this Mat. 3. 7, 9. etc.
we are told in the sacred Text; and 'twas no less an instance of his Love,
than the discharge of his Holy Office.

We are now drawing toward the end this Chapter, and that were some comfort if
were sure he would not entertain us, (as he has done too often already) with
Repetitions. but he gives us fair hopes of an End, for he says, Lastly, were
the Scandal which Dissenters take at the imposing of the Ceremonies Scandalum
Pharisaicum, or like to that, which by the Pharisees was taken against the
Doctrine of our Lord, I know not why we should not be concerned, to do all
which lawfully we may, for the Prevention or Removal of it; For when our
Savior paid Tribute, lest he should offend them, did he not then forgo his
Liberty to avoid the Scandal of the Pharisees? And when the False-Apostles in
the Church of Corinth were like to be offended at St. Paul's taking Wages, does
he not abstain to prevent that Offense?

The Reconciler is the only man I have met withal, that Loves to talk at
Random and without distinction; he knows not why we should not be concerned to
prevent or remove the Scandal of a Pharisee, how far concerned, whether in
Justice, or Charity, or upon what other account he does not tell us. However, I
am ready to do, what Lawfully may, to such a purpose, with all my Heart.

When I find a man who has turned his Back upon Jerusalem to go to Jericho, if
he has fallen into ill handling, and be wounded with Error and Superstition, I
will not flatter him, that he is in a safe condition, like a Levitical
Reconciler, but I Will endeavor to dress and bind up his Wounds, and deliver him
to the Ministry of the Church for a perfect Cure; that is, in plain English, I
will tell our Dissenters, that we are not under the Law, but under Grace; that
the Rites and Ceremonies of Moses's Institution are out of Date, and that under
the dispensation of the Gospel there is nothing Common or Unclean, and
Consequently nothing Scandalous but sin, or that which has some notable
Appearance of it.

That to such as have put themselves under Christ's Discipline, there is nothing
can affect or Defile the Conscience, but what is Acted or Omitted contrary to
his Holy Laws, and Institutions; that among the rest of his Institutions, he
has Ordained Ministers to Order and Conduct us in his stead, whose Faith and
Practice we are therefore obliged to follow, knowing that the End of their
Conversation is the Salvation of our Souls. Having thus instructed them with
all Meekness, and warned them to receive these things without Partiality, I
have discharged my Duty, and delivered my own Soul.

After this Christian Condescension, if a pretended Weak Brother will be
peevish and Disobedient, if He will be Singular, and forsake his
Lawful-Pastour, if he will take offense (which I have faithfully endeavored to
prevent) and go to Hell of his own Head, because I wear a Surplice, as the
Badge of my Office, in my Administration about Holy Things; I have done no more
than what becomes my Function, if he will Perish, his Blood must be upon his
own head.

Again, if he will be Peevish and Disobedient, if he will be singular and
forsake his Lawful Pastor, if he will take offense and go to Hell, because I
sign my Child with the Sign of the Cross, as the Badge of my own Christianity,
and as an Item to him of his Duty and Allegiance, to his Crucified Redeemer; I
have done nothing, but what does very well become my Christian Profession; If
he will perish in his Folly, his Blood must be upon his own head.

I shall speak but this once more; if he will be Peevish and Disobedient, if he
will be singular, and forsake his Lawful Guide or Pastor, if he will take
offense and go to Hell, because I fall upon my knees to say my Prayers, to
bewail my sins, to Receive a Benediction, and to adore my ever Blessed God and
Savior; I have done no more than what becomes me for such invalueable
Obligations; if he will dye in his wretched Schism, I am innocent, his Blood
will be upon his own head. This Fraternal Admonition and Advice, is what I
Lawfully may do; but if Men will make occasions to themselves in their own
Imaginations, and then take offense at them, who can help it.

But this will not satisfy our Reconciler. I know very well what he would be
at; The Governors must repeal their Laws, and abate their Impositions, or all
is nothing.

Amesius says, All things are to be done or omitted without sin. This, he
says, is the Obligation of Charity to avoid Scandal; But he means Scandalum
Pusillorum, the Scandal of the Weak, or Little Ones; Not such Scandal as is
taken by men of a Pharisaical temper.

When the Apostle was reported to affirm, that we might do Evil to a good End;
He took it for a foul slander, and says, Their Damnation is Just who practice
such a Principle. Works under Precept are not to be omitted to avoid scandal,
because every man as he is bound to love himself before another, so is he
obliged to avoid Sin in himself, rather than in Another.

Are not Governors under the Obligation of that Rule, Let all things be done
Decently, and in Order. It Is a part of the Governors Office doubtless, to
Establish Good Order; For this Cause left Tit. 1. 5.
I thee in Crete, says St. Paul, That thou should set in order the Things
that are wanting. This was the Burden and Charge the Apostle laid upon Titus,
Vt Ecclesiis nondum rite compositis formam daret; ut certam Politiciae rationem
una cum Disciplina constitueret; That he might Form and Fashion the Churches
which were not yet well Composed, and constitute a certain State and Manner of
Policy, with Discipline therein. To that end Titus was settled there, says
Calixtus, that he might supply whatsoever was wanting, that might conduce to
the Conservation, External Regiment, and Ornament of the Church.

This is one Command that lies upon the Person of the Governor, and there is
another that lies upon him too, not peculiarly as a Governor, but as a
Christian in General, Romans 4. 15, Let every Man be fully persuaded in his own
Mind. Is it not the Governors Duty to set things in Order in God's Church, as
the Apostle enjoynes, and to be fully persuaded in his own Mind that he does
well in it? Shall he break God's Commands? Shall he betray his Trust? Shall he
act against his own Practical Judgment and Conscience? He that can allow a
Governor to do this, may make a Ghostly Father for the Devil; But he that
says, the Governor ought not to neglect his Duty, or to betray his Trust, or
to go against his own Mind and Conscience, he must lay his hand upon his Mouth,
and never move, either for a Repeal, or for an Abatement of the Laws, in favor
of Dissenters.

It Is the Observation of Johannes Crocius, Ad Tit. 3. 9. Loc. Com. 7. De
Content. N. 6.
That they, who under a Pretense of avoiding Contention do Transact with the
Adverse Party unjustly contending to the Prejudice of Truth; Or, Disserting the
Good Cause, do comply too much with them; they understand not the mind of the
Apostle: Tho he would have us cut off Foolish and Vain Questions, yet he would
not have us to forsake or Betray the Truth to avoid Contention. In this case
the Public Benefit is to be considered; but when any sort of Peace is
purchased by the Loss of a Precious Truth, that is not to be accounted a Public
benefit; for as Peace gained by such unjust means, is Uncertain and Doubtful,
so there ever follows a certain Perturbation of Conscience, an offense of God,
a scandal of Good Men, the mourning of the Faithful, great sadness of the whole
Church, lastly, Multiplied Punishments in this, and the other World, inflicted
by Almighty God; who indeed is the God of Peace, and yet he is the Prime
Verity, and his Spirit the Spirit of Truth; who never said, Love Peace without
Truth, But Love the Truth and Zach. 8. 19.
Peace together.

For the Collectors of the Tribute (supposing he does not mistake the Story) I
Answer, (1.) They were not so apt to Cavil, as our Dissenters. They did not
question the Coin, or quarreled because it was taken out of the Fishes Mouth,
or that Peter had taken Pains to Angle for it. (2.) Christ, tho he wrought a
Miracle, did not break a Law to gratify their Demand, as the Reconciler would
have us do. (3.) Tho Christ had a Divine Prerogative, that might exempt him
from that Tribute, yet that was not Commonly known, nor suffered to be
divulged. He was made under the Law, and according to Common Estimation, he was
Mat. 16. 20. and 17. 9.
obliged to pay that Duty; which he therefore did, that he might not give a
Scandal, by the neglect of a General Law and Duty, either to the Collectors or
his own Disciples. But what is this to the Dissenters, who positively give a
Scandal, both to their Governors, and Fellow Subjects, by the Breach of a Law
in Force, and the neglect of a Common Duty, instead of yiedling up their
Liberty, after Christ's example to avoid Offense.

What he says of the False-Apostles at Corinth is a clear Mistake. They were
not like to be offended at the Apostles taking Wages, for he had never taken
any there, and was resolved he never would. They were rather offended that he
did not; yet he would not alter his Resolution to take off that offense. They
were deceitful Clam oblata Captabant. Vides quemadmodum Hos ipsos Apostolos
patefaciat, excipiendis muneribus esse intentos. Vid. Chris. Theod. Theoph.
Oecum.
Workers, as St. Paul calls them, hiding wicked Designs under fair pretenses;
they loved to be ot'h taking hand, and were ready enough to devour, (2 Cor. 11.
20.) for they aimed at Filthy Lucre, Tit. 1. 11. and Gain, to 1 Timothy 4. 6.
them, was Godliness; But they refused ordinary Stipends (as many Dissenters
do, and our Reconciler very well understands the knack of it) to gain greater
Allowances by private Contributions. In the mean while they wished the Apostle
would have taken a public Stipend, that they might have had the opportunity to
upbraid him for it, as he tell's them, 2 Cor. 11. 12. But what I do, that I
will Paraphras, Anonym.
[continue] to do, that I may cut off Occasion, [of reproaching me, or Boasting
of themselves] from them which desire occasion, that [for all those things, of
Nonself-interest, and gratuital service] wherein they Glory; they may be found
even as we.

Grant this Reconciler, that all Scandal is of a Soul-destroying Nature, and so
page 119.
a kind of Spiritual Murder; how then comes it to pass, that he does not
tremble at so great a Guilt? For does he not take off that Reverence, which is
due both to our Laws and Governors? Does he not Tempt, nay, does he not Teach
the People to despise them, when he so often, so openly, so boldly declares
their Impositions to be Destructive, to be Snares, and Gall-Traps, to be such
Laws of Burden, as make the Willing to be Slaves, and the Unwilling to Rebel?
And that they may learn, after his example, to Vilify and Despise their Rules,
He gives them the most Odious Characters of Unmerciful, Rigorous, and Cruel
Tyrants. See the Animadversions from page 103. to page the 107. How would this
Insolence been resented at Geneva? Would the Consistory have been satisfied
with his Deprivation? No; they would have hunted him by their Letters, from See
the Verdict, page 280.
place to place, as they did Rotarius, and he has Ten-times more deserved it.

After Lastly, He brings in Thirdly, without either First, or Second, and puts
his Question thus; Does not Charity oblige us to Love even our most Malicious,
and Persecuting Enemies? Mat. 5. 44. To Exercise Patience and Meekness toward
those who oppose themselves, and who by Satan are Led Captive at his Will? 2 Timothy 2. 24, 25. And whom then may we Scandalize?

Now I think the Reconciler has been ensnared in all the Real Falacies in
Logic. And here, to hold Himself and the Credulous Reader the faster, we have
a Complication of them; for, First, here is Petitio Principit, He supposes,
that our Governors give the Dissenters Scandal, which I deny.

2dly. Here Is Non Causa pro Causa, instead of a true Cause, and that which is
such of it Self, He obtrudes that which is not such, or but by Accident. It Is
just like this, Vinum inebriat, Ergo Exterminandum est ex Republica; Wine does
Intoxicate, therefore it must be banished or destroyed out of the
Commonwealth; whereas Wine is not the True and Proper Cause of Drunkenness,
but men's Intemperance in abusing it. After thy manner the Reconciler Argues:
The Impositions do offend the Brethren, therefore says he, they ought to be
Rescinded or abated: But I deny the Consequence, for the Impositions are not
the True and Proper Cause of Scandal; but the Ignorance and Superstition of
such as take offense at them. For this is observed by Gualter to be the
Disease, Quo Infirmi Fide et Superstitione aliqua adhuc Homil 80 in Ep ad Romans
detenti, plerumque; Laborant; which such as are weak in the Faith, and
declined by Superstition, are for the most part Sick of: Quod nimirum
praecipiti judicio Quidvis ut impium et illicitum damnant, cujus Rationem Ipsi
non intelligunt aut intelligere nolunt: Namely, that they rashly condemn every
thing as Unlawful and Wicked, which they themselves do not, or will not
understand; for as Knowledge does puff a Man up, and renders him the more
Confident, unless it be Governed by Charity; Ita nihil Arrogantius est Inscitia
says he, So nothing is more Arrogant than Ignorance. They therefore who are
Captivated thereby, do break out most Audaciously in condemning every Body;
Thus Gualter.

I grant we ought to Love our most Malicious and Persecuting Enemies; but I
would fain know, how that Love is to be Expressed? If they be addicted to Wine,
must we Administer to their Intemperance? If they be addicted to Women, must we
Administer to their Wantonness, and the like? Will you call this Charity, and a
Duty in us? Yet this is clearly as Lawful, as to gratify a Dissenter in his
Schism. How Governors are to Reconcile their Charity, to their Trust and Holy
Office, I have declared already.

I am no less satisfied, that Charity obliges us to Exercise Patience and
Meekness, toward those who oppose themselves; for it is Grotius his
Observation, In Epist. ad Curcel. in fin. Annot. ad Apocalypse.
and a very True one, Tempore Longo opus est, antequam plane Animis evellantur,
quoe sevit Factio aut aluit, It requires a long time before those Principles be
rooted out of Men's Minds, which have been sown or fed by Faction. But where
Stubbornness is added to Error, the Disease many times becomes incurable. St.
Augustine has a severe Epist. 167.
Observation upon the Donatists, Puto quod ipse Diabolus, si authoritate
Judicis, quem ultro elegerat, toties vinceretur, non esset tam impudens ut in
ea Causa persisteret, I think the Devil himself would not have been so
impudent, as to have persisted in that Cause, wherein he had been so often
overthrown, by the Authority of a Judge of his own choosing.

Patience and Meekness do very well to attend Instruction, where there is any
hope of Amendment; but to the Schismatic who has entangled himself in so many
and various Scruples, that he knows not how to disengage himself, those gentle
Methods are ineffectual: Sharpness and Severity, are much more useful for some
Tempers, which therefore the great Apostle does both Threaten and 2 Cor. 13. 2.
10. Tit. 1. 13.
Prescribe. This Distinction of Persons and Tempers, he might have Learned from
those Fathers whom he so often cites, Chrysostom, Theodoret, Oecumenius, who
have the same Distinction upon the words of the Apostle, Tit. 3. 10. Where he
enjoins the use of Severe Applications, when Gentle means will not prevail; A
Man that is a Sectary, after the First and Second Admonition, reject: Which
Words Calixtus does thus Paraphrase, Qui quoestiones agitant Frivolas et
inutiles, etiamsi Ad Tit. 3. 10.
extreme mali non sint, et tolerari aliquatenus possint, compescendi tamen sunt
et severe castigandi, ut curiosas atque otiosas istas Questiones missas
faciant: Neque ipsi, si pietatem serio and ex animo colant, necessariis monitis
obtemperare recusabunt. Such as set on foot frivolous and unprofitable
Questions (and such generally have been bandyed up and down by the Dissenters
to the Disturbance of the Church,) tho they be not extremely Bad, and might in
some sort be tolerated, yet they are to be restrained and Chastised severely,
that they may lay aside those curious and Idle Questions: and if they be
heartily devoted to Piety, they will not refuse to obey such necessary
Admonitions. But if any man be so addicted to Contention, that nothing will
serve his turn, but the Overthrow of all Rule and Order, that he may set up a
Religion and Way of his Own choosing, without doubt such a one is to be
avoided. The Church Doors have hitherto been kept open to the Dissenters; if
they will not regularly come in, to communicate with us, and be instructed, I
know no Reason why our Governors should give them leave, to make Ladders to
climb up otherwise to perpetuate our Schisms.

What the Reconciler adds, in Answer to an Objection, does serve very well to
confirm the Truth, which we undertake to Justify: The Objection is this; When
our Lords Disciples told Him, that the Pharisees were scandalized at his
Doctrine, He answered, Let them alone, they are Blind Leaders of the Blind; and
thereby seems to intimate, that we should not regard the Scandal of such
Persons.

For this, we have the Judgment of Amesius, the best Logician and School-Man De
Consc. Lib. 5. C. 11. Number. 12.
that ever set Pen to Paper, on the behalf of the Dissenters, he says thus;
Nihil Boni aut Liciti est omittendum, propter Scandalum acceptum Hominum
Pharisaico Ingenio praeditorum: Nothing Good or Lawful is to be omitted, for
the Scandal that is taken by men of a Pharisaical temper; and he cites that very
Text for it, Mat. 15. 14. Let them alone, etc.

The Reconciler says, this does not follow from our Saviors words; because
the Scandal, mentioned there, was taken at our Lord's Preaching true Doctrine,
and necessary to be taught; But I say, the Argument does follow from the words
of our Savior, because the Scandal of the Dissenters is taken at a Doctrine no
less True and Necessary, the Doctrine of Obedience, which our Savior did both
Teach and Practice, and wrought a Miracle on Purpose to enable him to do it,
and to justify his Performance of it; therefore when we call for Obedience to
the Impositions of Things Lawful and Decent in Gods Worship, (as the Rites and
Observances amongst us are proved to be) we Preach True Doctrine, and necessary
to be taught, both for Defense of our Governors, and their Subjects, and for
the Rescuing the People from those Superstitions, and Wicked Practices, which
have made them Worship God in Vain, and have made the Commandments of God of
none effect. Now in such Cases the Reconciler confesses, it is true, That we
must not desist from doing of our Duty, tho Wicked Persons should be
scandalized. Now because we are concerned among the Pharisees, 'twill not be
amiss to take Notice of some things, wherein the Dissenting Brethren have
resembled them.

And (1.) our Savior upbraids them, that they would Strain at a Gnat and
Swallow a Camel; and have not our Dissenters done so? I am ashamed to mention
the little things they Boggled at, while they Preached up Blood, Sacrilege and
Rebellion; they can strain at a Surplice, but swallow Schism, and yet if they
had St. John's Eyes, they might see Surplices Rev. 4. 4.
in Heaven; Whereas St. Paul tell's us, he could see no Schismatic Gal. 5. 20,
21.
there.

2ly. Our Savior upbraids them, that they were Blind Leaders of the Blind; and
have not some of our Dissenters declared themselves to be such? Go with me
says Mr. Case, to Heb. 11. 13. and ye shall find Abraham with his Staff in In
his Sermon before the Peers, March 25. 1646. P. 41.
his Hand, and his Sandals on his Feet, and his Loins girt: Please to let me
ask him two or three Questions by the way; see what he will Answer. Reverend
Patriarch whether are you going? Answer, I know not: When shall you return?
Answer, I know not: How will you Subsist? Answer, I know not: He is in haste as
well as we; and therefore I Will ask him but one Question more. Abraham, Why then
do you go at such Uncertainties? To this he will Answer, I go not upon
Uncertainties; I have a Call; I have a Command, and that will secure my Person,
and bear my Charges.

By Faith Abraham, when he was called Heb. 11. 8
to go into a Place, which he should after receive for an Inheritance, obeyed,
and went out, not knowing whether he went.

Christians (says he) observe, a Call is as good as a Promise: (and a little
after) we have not only a Call, but a Promise, not in General only, but in
Special. The whole Book of the Revelation is nothing else but one great Promise
of the Down-fal of Antichrist, and Gospel-Reformation; and that is the Work
Parliament and Kingdom have now in hand in these Three Nations: Thus Mr. Case.

But what they meant by that Gospel-Reformation, they could never agree to tell
us; witness Mr. Daniel Evance, in Entitled the Noble Order,
his Sermon before the Lords, Jan. 28. 1645. (on 1 Samuel 2. 30.) where he tells
them thus: I Profess my Lords, I am neither for Paul, nor Apollos, nor Cephas,
nor Christ, till I know what Paul and Apollos, and Cephas are for, and what
those, that say they are for Christ, can say for him.

But I could wish (my Lords) that we had the Pattern, that every man might
consult with the Mount, which of the two is Christ's Government. The Child is
Christened (for ought I see) before it is Born, and we have the Names before the
Things.

3ly. Our Savior charges the Pharisees, that they made the Commandment Mat.
15. 4, 5, 6.
of God of none effect by their Tradition. And he instances in the Fifth
Commandment; now this the Dissenters have done; first by their distinction,
that the King is Singulis Major, but Universis Minor. According to the last
Branch of this Distinction, who is the Father? Not the Prince, for he is Minor
to the Body of the People; Not the People, For (if they were above their
Prince,) then They must be their own Father.

But because this is so grossly absurd, and so perfectly contradicted, by the
writings of the Primitive Fathers, and Holy Scriptures, therefore, to gain a
Right and Liberty to Resist their Prince, John Goodwin has delivered it for a
great Mr. Joh. Goodwin's Anti-Caval. See Dr. Ham. of Resisting the lawful
Magistrate, etc. Page 22. etc.
Truth, that God did hide this Liberty [of Resisting] from the Primitive
Christians, lest the use of it should cause an Abortion in the Birth of
Antichrist. God caused a Dead sleep (says he) to fall upon these Truths, the
hiding of them being necessary to help Antichrist up to his Throne; Yea, he
says, that God by special Dispensation suffered him, the said Antichrist, to
make such Truths his footstool, till he had advanced himself to his highest
Pitch in the World.

But now, that this Antichrist, is to be destroyed and cast out, and the
Commonalty of Christians (as he pretended) being the Men that must have the
Principal hand in Executing God's Judgments upon the Whore; For bringing this
to pass, Now, says he, in These our times, God has given out this Revelation
to us, He has manifested the Doctrine of Resistance, and Christians may act
contrary to the will of their Superiors.

This was the Doctrine of John Goodwin, who tho he was a single Person, yet he
was a Leading-Man amongst the Party, who generally followed his steps, and
acted according to his Pernicious Principles. Thus have they made that
Commandment of God of Non-Effect through their Tradition.

How like these men were unto the Pharisees, we may Collect from the Character
which Josephus, tho himself a Pharisee, gives of them: He says, They were a
Crafty and Subtle Generation of men, and so perverse even to Princes
themselves, that they would not fear many times openly to affront and oppose
them. And so far had they insinuated themselves into the affections and
estimations of the Populacy, that their good or ill word was enough to make or
blast any one with the People, who would implicitly believe them, let their
Report be never so false or Malicious. Dr. Cave in the Life of St. Paul, Sect.
1. N. 6. Page 47.

I shall therefore conclude in contradiction to the Reconciler, That seeing
Obedience to the Impositions of our Superiors, is neither a thing indifferent,
nor unnecessary, we ought to practice it, tho the Dissenters take offense at
it. And herein the Doctrine of our Savior upon that occasion will bear us out,
which signifies, that their Scandal is not so much to be esteemed, that we
should therefore cease to Preach a needful Truth; and that how much soever they
may be offended, yet it is good to consult the welfare of the People, Seduced by
such blind Guides; as lead them into the Pit by their Traditions.

The next Assault the Reconciler makes at Page 155.
is upon a Pitiful Trifling Adversary, one Meisner, a Lutheran, whom he
slights with as much scorn and insolence, as if he had not been worthy to carry
his Books after him.

It was pleasantly said by Mr. Hales of a Friends Letter -- He sets up Tops,
and I must Whip them for Him. But indeed I am concerned for Meisner; I brought
him upon the Stage, and therefore am obliged in Justice to appear as a Second
in his Quarrel. 'Twas declared in the Verdict Page 272. that no Church of any
Creditable Denomination, would change their Established Orders, to gratify any
Emergent Faction. Instances were given both of the Lutherans and Calvinists;
How Rotarius was treated at Geneva, for the Breach of a Novel-practice there,
was specified at Page 280. But that Foolery, to say no worse, the Reconciler
passes over in deep silence, which is a conviction of his Partiality. For
Meisners Arguments if they be not good, yet they Evidence the Matter of Fact,
That the Lutherans would no more recede from their established Rules, than the
Calvinists; which is all that Dr. Womock alleged them for.

But perhaps Meisners Arguments are not so Weak as his Prejudice would make
them.

The first of which is drawn from the Nature of things Indifferent, which is
such, as that they may be freely used or disused, practiced or abrogated; But
when the Use or Disuse, the Practice or Abrogation is obtruded as of Necessity,
the nature of such Indifferent things is violated. If he inquires what Meisner
means by obtruding, he had occasion no doubt as well as we, to mean an
Insurrection of Dissenters to Reform by force of Arms: But the Reconciler has
made a Meaning for him, that is, when men through the weakness of their Judgment
do believe a thing Indifferent to be sinful; and having made this to be
Meisners meaning, he harrangues upon it with little Judgment and great
Bitterness; But that he may not run away, and think to carry the Cause, as he
uses to do, by his false Surmises, let him stop a little and tell me, how the
Dissenter believes a thing Indifferent to become finful; for it is no less then
Oppositum in Apposito?

Does he believe it either with a Divine or Humane Faith? If with a Divine
Faith, let him show us some Divine Revelation for the Ground of it; If with a
Humane Faith, that is only his Opinion, and that is to be Corrected by
Instruction, or some other course of Discipline, that it proceeds not to an
obstinate Superstition.

But were Meisner's meaning such as the Reconciler would have it, yet common
Civility should have taught him better manners, than to Charge him, that he
gave St. Paul the Lie: He had the Honor of a Learned Professor, when he was
alive at Wittengburge, and for that Reason the Reconciler should have a little
Veneration for his Ashes, now he is Dead; especially because being Dead he yet
speaks, in his Learned Writings.

Some body sure has ought this Reconciler a shame for his Factious Arrogance,
and has paid him home, in betraying him to such gross delusions and mistakes.

What! Meisner give St. Paul the lie? It Is impossible. He that gives another
man the Lie, must contradict him, He that contradicts another man must speak Ad
Idem in reference to the same Thing, the same Time, the same Place, the same
Persons, as also to the same Respect and Purpose. If there be any Variation in
these Circumstances, the Opposition will not amount to a Contradiction or a
Lie. It Is possible both Parties may speak the perfect Truth. For example, If I
say the King forbad all Concourse of People and Horse-Racing, meaning, at such
a Time, and in such a Place: And another man say, the King did not forbid the
Concourse of People or Horse-Raceing, meaning at another Time and Place. Again,
if I say the King forbids, that men should keep Greyhounds, to Ride with
Swords and Pistols, etc. meaning Persons of an Inferior Rank and Quality; and
another say, the King does not sorbid Men to keep Greyhounds, or to Ride with
Swords and Pistols, meaning Persons of a Higher Rank and Quality; here is no
Contradiction, no giving of the Lie to one another.

And thus it is between St. Paul and Meisner; for St. Paul speaks to private
Persons, whom he forbids to Usurp Power, to give Law, or to Judge and Censure,
where they have no Authority: But Meisner speaks to Governors who are invested
with Authority, and Obliged to keep out Schisms, and to preserve good Order
within their Jurisdiction.

2dly. St. Paul speaks of a Church which was Inorganical, that wanted a due
Settlement of Laws and Governors; but Meisner speaks of a Church that was
Organized in all its Parts and Members, having Rules of Decency and Order, and
a settled Discipline with Governors and Officers to execute the same. And this,
among such as have a little skill to apply it, will be sufficient to justify at
least Meisners first and second Arguments, without giving the Lie to the
Apostle.

In his second Answer, Page 156. and 157. the Reconciler would oblige our
Governors to betray their own Consciences out of Commiseration, and to betray
the Dissenters too by a pitiful Gratification; for he would have our Governors
quitt the steadfast Persuasions of their own Minds, in Favor to the Dissenters.
not to Correct the Error of their Judgments, but to Caresse them in their
Superstition.

At Meisners third Objection ( Page 158) the Reconciler grows very Froward, and
somewhat Ruder again than becomes him toward such an Adversary; but as 'twas
observed of the Cynick, that he checked the Pride of his great Visitant, but
with another Pride no less Insolent, so may we truly say, that this Reconciler
checks those things which He Is pleased to call Fooleries in Meisner.

He Loves to Rhetoricate, but is not very good at distinguishing, which makes
him at a Loss and Blunder in his Answers; he was told in the Verdict Page 125.
that a man has a Lock and Key in his own Bosom, and there he may keep his
Christian-Liberty safe enough from being plundered; and there also he may Lock
up his Private Opinion, when the Broaching of it may Offend, but cannot Edify.
But what is this to a Public Constitution? When See 2 Mac. 6. 24. etc. Multa
sunt quae de se, seu natura sua sunt Adiaphora: and licent quidem, sed
dedecent, quia viro probo indigna, quia viro sunt incongrua Christiano.
the Authority of Prudent and Careful Governors has established Rule and
Order, if it be in my Power, I hold it my Duty to defend them. In calling the
denial of this Gospel Truth, a Work of Darkness, Meisner says no more than
Calvin does, whose words are these: Necessitate servandae Legis obstringi
piorum conscientias, and silentio sepeliri Libertatis Doctrinam: haec erat
indigna merces Unitatis. Ad Galat. 2. 14.

He has no Patience at his own Suspicion of Meisners Sawciness, for here he
charges him, with giving the Lie unto the Fathers especially to St. Chrysostom,
who says, that St. Paul's advice to the Romans, was not Dissimulation, but
Condescension page 159.
and Dispensation.

Here Is Ignoratio Elenchi, the Reconciler snared in his own Fallacy; for we are
discoursing, what is fit to be done under the State of Christianity, where the
Church is daily settled by Authority, with Convenient Liturgy and Discipline;
but the Reconciler carries us back to reflect upon what was rather connived at
than Established, what was tolerated by Condescension and special
Dispensation, when the Church was in her Nonage.

This is just as if upon an Enquiry what Orders were given out to be observed,
and what the Custom and Practice was when the Temple was Erected, and God's
Solemn Worship fetled and performed in Jerusalem, I should run back, and give
him the History of what was Permitted in the Wilderness

But it may be a Question, whether the Rcconciler does perfectly understand
what St. Chrysostom means by Condescension Chrysostom. ad Gal. 2. apud Massut. in
Vit. St. Paul. Lib. ^. Cap. 7.
and Dispensation; for St Peter's dissembling at Antioch, He calls a
Dispensation, as Massutius has observed of him, Et duo, inquit, per
Dispensationem agebat Petrus: Alterum, ne offenderet eos qui erant ex
Circumcisione: Alterum, ut Paulo justam proeberet occasionem increpandi. Unde
et Paulus Objurgat, et Petrus sustinet, ut Dum Magister objurgatus obticescit,
facilius Discipuli mutarent Sententiam. Two things, says he, St. Peter did by
Dispensation: One, that he might not offend those of the Circumcision: The
other, that he might give St. Paul a just occasion to reprove him. Hereupon St.
Paul rebukes, and St. Peter bears it; that while the Master takes his chideing
with a meek and humble Silence, the Disciples may the more easily be brought to
change their Opinions.

By the Reconcilers Doctrine St Paul's Rebuke was a rash Affront, for St. Peter
was not Blameworthy, the Dissimulation of his Belief, was out of Condescension
to the Jews Weakness, his practice was a Dispensation, and fit for his
Successors, and all worthy Governors to imitate. And it would make good
Hierom's Argument, Cur damnasset in altero Paulus quod sibi laudi ducit? nam
gloriatur se Judaeis factum esse Judoeum, 1 Cor. 9. 20. But Mr. Calvin Answers,
Long aliud Petrum fecisse. Neque enim aliter se accommodabat Judaeis Paulus,
quam salva Libertatis Doctrina. Calvin ad Galat 2. 11.

But whether Commiseration should outweigh the peace of the Church and of a
good Conscience, (as the Reconciler would have it) whether the Bowels of
Compassion toward such as call themselves Weak-brethren, be sufficient to
supersede all the obligations that lie upon Christian Governors, to advance
God's Glory in the Settlement of his public Worship, I shall leave them to
consider, who are so highly concerned in it.

If we may believe the Assembly of Divines, the Civil Magistrate has
Authority, Confession of Faith, cap. 23. Number. 3.
and it is his Duty to take Order, that Unity and Peace be preserved in the
Church, that the Truth of God be kept pure and entire, that all Blasphemies and
Heresies (which include Schisms too) be suppressed, all Corruption and Abuses,
in Worship and Discipline, prevented or reformed, and all the Ordinances of God
duly Settled, Administered and Observed. This is the Magistrates Duty, according
to the Faith of the Presbyterians, and who shall acquit them from it? It is
Mercy, says Mr. Hales, to pardon Sermon. on Romans 14. 1. in Fine.
wrong done against our selves, but to deny the Course of Justice to him that
calls for it, Peccatum in Deum Vocatur, quod imediate in Contumeliam Dei redund
at. P. Martyr. in 1 Samuel 2. 25.
[and much more when God calls, by whom Kings Reign and Princes Decree Justice]
and to protect Offenders [against his Public and Solemn Worship] may
peradventure be some inconsiderate Pity, but Mercy it cannot be.

In His Answer to another Argument, (as he calls it) I must observe many
things; First the Distinction between Natural and Christian Liberty, He found
in the Verdict (page 125.) and I am apt to believe he took it upon Trust from
thence, because I have not observed him so skilful or ingenious, as to use
Distinctions, when there was just Cause for it; and because he takes it up here
Impertinently, for no Reason in the World, but to Cavil at it, and that he does
Twice for failing.

Secondly, Whereas he says, the Dissenters page 160.
would put no restraint upon others, as to the Ceremonies in Contest, but only
crave a Freedom or Indulgence to themselves; herein I believe (as we say) he
Reckons without his Host. No man that has read their Books, or observed their
Practice, or seen their Public Ordinances, can believe it; And I doubt whether
upon Second Thoughts, the Reconciler will believe it himself. In their
Ordinance of January, 1644, the Presbyterian Lords and Commons did declare,
That they judged it necessary, that the Book of Common Prayer be abolished, and
the Directory for the public Worship of God established and observed, in all
the Churches within this Kingdom; And, August the 29. 1648. They Ordained, that
all Parishes and Places whatsoever, within the Kingdom of England and Dominion
of Wales ( as well Priviledg'd Places and exempt Jurisdictions as others) be
brought under the Government of Congregational, Classical, Provincial, and
National Assemblies, Provided that the Chapel; or places in the House of the
King and his Children, and the Chapels, or place in the Houses of the Peers of
this Realm shall continue free for the Exercises, of Divine Duties according to
the Directory, and not otherwise.

Thirdly, His Answer is in Effect, no Answer at all; For he says, First the
Argument it self pleads strongly upon the Principles acknowledged in it,
against the Impositions of Superiors, and even against all Vows made by us
concerning any thing indifferent: For both these things do put a Necessary
Abstention and Restraint upon us, as to the use of these things: If therefore,
says he, by so doing they betray our Liberties, Dissenters ought not to yield
to them, nor should good Christians, by a Vow restrain themselves from the Free
use of things Indifferent; Secondly, He says the Argument is Evidently
Contradictor both to the Doctrine, and Practice, of St. Paul.

In Answer to which I must observe, that he still abuses his Reader-by his
Sophistry, how else could he bring in Personal Vows, etc. into his Answer?
Among Orthodox-Divines who has ever Questioned, whether a man that is Compos
Mentis, might not restrain his own Liberty, and that as well by a Solemn Vow,
as a Prudent Resolution? Or, who ever denied the Power of Governors, The not
useing of our Christian Liberty renders us not the worse, and therefore we may
Lawfully not use it, when by Superiors we are restrained from the use thereof.
Prot. Recon. p. 131.
to restrain the Liberty of such as are under their Jurisdiction? Tho he is
confident enough to give the Lie to any thing, yet I hope he will not charge
the Rechabites with Folly, nor their Father with Superstition; And if the Sons
did add their own Vow to their Fathers Command, I know no harm in it. I Am sure
God does highly approve of their strict Obedience to the Imposition of things
Indifferent.

But to return and show, that the Reconcilers. Answer is Trifling and
Impertinent, not contradicting Meisners Argument. This I prove by Argumentum ad
Hominem in this manner.

That Argument which Pleads strongly against the Impositions of Superiors,
that Argument the Reconciler does not contradict: But Meisners Argument pleads
strongly against the Impositions of Superiors. Ergo. The Major is evident,
because the Reconciler himself, pleads as strongly as he can, against the
Impositions of Superiors; therefore he does not contradict Meisners Argument,
which, he says, pleads so strongly against them; the Minor is the Recomilers
own Acknowledgment, as the Reader may observe in his Words, above mentioned.

2ly. The Reconciler contradicts himself, and yields the Cause to his
Adversary; this is Evident to the Indifferent Reader; for if Meisners Argument
is evidently contradictory both to the Doctrine and Practice of St. Paul, as he
says it is, Page 161. then the Argument which pleads strongly against the
Impositions of Superiors, is Contradictory both to the Doctrine and Practice
of St. Paul; and consequently, both the Doctrine and Practice of St. Paul, are
for the Impositions of Superiors, which is the thing we contend for.

Here he inculcates again the Necessity of abstaining from some Meats, and the
observing some Days, for fear of offending the Weak Brethren; Indeed the
Apostle's expression runs very high of not eating Flesh, (which is one of Romans
14. 21. 1 Cor. 8. 13.
his two Instances,) But does he say the same things of the Time of God's
Worship? Does he say it is good no^ to Regard a day to the Lord, whereby my
Brother Stumbleth, or is Offended, or made Weak? Wherefore if a day make my
Brother to Offend, I will never regard a day, never observe the Lords day,
never Perform any Solemn Worship, or Service to Almighty God, while the World
stands, least I make my Brother to offend To take up such a Resolution,
savour^^ of too much Profaneness to be Justified; and this I hope will
convince the Reconciler, that in the Parallel Instance of Meats, the Apostle
was a little Hyperbolical, as was formerly observed.

After a great deal of shuffling and trifling for two or three Pages together,
to no purpose, but to make a Noise, and show his Confidence, he owns the Page
163.
Truth at last, that the Apostle came to a Point, and Positively declared
against Circumcision, when the False-Teachers would have obtruded it as
Necessary to Salvation. And whatsoever his Practice was, out of Condescension
and special Dispensation, while) the Church was any where in Planting, yet its
evident, where ever the Church was Organized, and settled with Governors, Laws
and Discipline, There he gave severe Rules, as well against those Jewish
Dissenters, as the False Apostles which seduced them.

This is easy to be observed in his Epistles to the Corinthians, the Galatians
and Colossians: Nay he commands the Governors of the Church to stop their
Mouths, who attempted to corrupt the Hyperius and Calixtus ad Tit. 1. 11.
Simplicity of the Gospel, by joining their Traditions, Distinction of ^^eats,
and Legal Ceremonies with it. And St. Augustine says expressly, that the
Opinion Epist. 119.
that some Meats would render them Unclean that eat them, was against the Faith
and sound Doctrine; and he proves it to be wicked and Heretical, from the words
of St. Paul to Timothy. 1 Timothy 4. in Principio.


From these and sundry other Evidences it may appear, that although St. Paul in
matters of Indifferency, did sometimes both Advise and Practice, out of
Condescension, and special Dispensation, yet he came to a Standing-Rule at
last, and 'twas no less his Judgment than his Practice, that such things were
finally to be settled by Authority.

Lastly, the Reconciler having shuffled aside some other of Meisners Arguments,
he concludes with that drawn ab incommodo, which he endeavors to Baffle, by
putting it into the Mouth of a Strong Christian among the Romans; but that
Argument concerns the State of a settled Church, and is Pleadable only, by such
Persons as are Conformable to the Constitutions of it, and this the Reader that
has but half an eye, and a few grains of Discretion may observe: But if you
deny the Reconciler his groundless Suppositions, and what he vainly beggs, you
deflower the Beauty of his whole Harangue, which consists not so much in Truth
as Plausibility. To conclude this Rencontre in behalf of Meisner; I have proved
already, that the Christians at Rome were not yet Incorporated, that they had
no Establishment, by Laws, Discipline and Government; St. Paul for some weighty
Reasons no doubt, was pleased to Defer this Settlement, till his coming, which
they say, was the very next Year after the Writing of this Epistle to them.
Anonym. Paraphrase and Annotations on the 2 Cor. 11. 13. Note the second.

In the mean while, he directs them as Private Persons, how they should demean
themselves toward one another; This Mr. Hales himself was convinced of after
some Meditation upon Sermon on Romans 14. 1. in fine.
that Text, Him that is weak in the Faith, etc. Romans 14. 1. Wherefore having
laid down the Method of his Discourse, tho he resolved, after he had given an
Account; First, Who those weak ones are of whom the Apostles speaks; And
Secondly, Who those Persons are, to whom the Precept of entertaining is given,
having named two, the Private Man and the Public Magistrate, tho he had
promised some Instruction for the Public Magistrate, yet upon second Thoughts,
with the Pardon of his Audience, he takes Leave to break his Promise, and gives
this Reason for it, Because (says he) I suppose this Precept to Concern us,
especially, if not only as Private Men, and that in case of Public Proceeding
there is scarce room for it: Private Men may pass over offenses at their
Pleasure, and may be in not doing it, they will do worse: But thus to do, lies not
in the Power of the Magistrate, who goes by Laws, Prescribing him what he is to
do.

By this time Meisner, I hope, may be set at Liberty, and in a condition to
keep the Field. But being obliged to the Reconciler more than a little, for
some Civil Entreaties, Dr. Womock is loath to die in his Debt upon that account,
and commands me to pay that Score for him. Wherefore I beg of him to consider.

1. Whether in his Attempt to overthrow the Practice of Uniformity, he does not
contradict the Grammatical Sense of Scripture, and the Judgment of the most
Learned and Pious Protestants? For whereas it is alleged, that Unity of
Judgment, and Uniformity of Practice, are not only desirable in themselves,
but also required by those Scriptures, which Conjure us by the Name of our Lord
Jesus Christ, to be perfectly joined together in the same Mind, and in the same
Judgment, and that we may the Better prevent Schisms, to walk by the same Rule,
and to speak the same Thing; that we may with 1 Cor. 1. 10. Philip. 3. 16. Romans
15. 16.
one Mind, and one Mouth Glorify God, even the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ.

This Reconciler, to elude this Evidence, tells the Reader, if these Places
Page 320.
be considered seriously, they will be found not to exhort so much (which if he
had spoken Congruously, and made good Syntax, should have been not at all) to
Unity of Judgment, but of Affection, not to Uniformity, but to Unanimity. But
for the Primitive Christians we are well assured, that they were not only of
one Heart, and of one Soul, which implies their (...) that they continued
steadfastly in the Apostles Doctrine and Conduct, (which was the Fellowship of
Pastor and Flock) and in breaking of Bread, and in Prayers; which Acts 4. 32.
C. 2. 42.
implies their Uniformity in all Offices of Church Communion. ^


And Gualter upon the Apostles Prayer for the Romans, [Now the God of Patience
grant you to be like-minded -- that ye may with one Mind, and one Mouth Glorify
God] has this Observation, Servit-Locus iste jis confutandis, qui ut omnibus
Homines Commodi videantur, omnes Gualter. Ad Romans Hom. 87
quoque Religiones aut cultus Divini Formas probant. This Place, says he,
serves very fitly to confute them, who, that they may seem compliant to Men of
all Humors, do also approve of all Religions, or Forms of Divine Worship. And
by his Writings it appears, that Trimmers and Phanaticks are of the some
standing, and came early into the Church, after the Reformation; and he
observes another Practice of theirs, which may be no less worth our Notice, Ubi
Papatus regnat, says he, In those Places where the Papacy Reigns, these men do
searce ever appear, or at least, never set their hands to the purging of
Religion, and freeing it from Superstition, (...) as ever any Reformation is
begun, and the Liberty of the Gospel takes Footing, through the Care and Pains of
Pious Ministers, then they Creep in without delay, Give disturbance to the
Church while it is young and tender, Et Ministris adhuc Idem, Hom. 90.
cum Superstitione and Idolatria Pugnantibus nova Certamina excitant; And while
the Faithful Ministers of Christ are yet in Conflict with Superstition and
Idolatry, they step in also to contend, and make fresh assaults upon them. If
these Men think themselves obliged under Peril of Damnation, as they pretend
they are, to Exercise their Gifts, where Ignorant or Seduced Souls may stand in
need of their Ministry, I wish their Zeal would carry them into France or
Italy, to set up Conventicles there, and discharge that Duty.

2. Let me entreat this Reconciler to Consider, whether he does not Style
himself the Protestant-Reconciler by a Figure? For there seems to be an
Antiphrasis in the Title; because the Book speaks a Design, and looks like an
Attempt to set the Governors and People together by the Ears, in that it
represents the one Intractable, and the other it proclaims Rigorous.

3. Let (...) entreat him to (...) whether when he meditated to Compete his
Book, he did not walk upon the Borders of the False Prophets, and borrow Ezekiel.
13. 10.
some of their untempered Mortar; to Da^^e up the Dissenters Walls and Breaches
E^gebant Populum Falsa Doctrina ^^^m (...) Lenocinio verboram; says Lavater.
And has he not borrowed Lime and Sand from the Morals of In Ezekiel. Homil. 46.
the Jesuits, especially those two Miraculous Principles, as Montaltius calls
them, which enables them to work such Wonders, I mean, the Doctrine of
Probability, without which his Book would be utterly useless; and the Doctrine
of Directing the Intention; without which, he durst never Attempt either to
Justify or Excuse the Practices of his Party?

4. Let me entreat him to consider, whether he has not taken up the very
Methods, which St. Paul tell us were Romans 16. 17. 18.
used by the False Apostles, who caused Divisions and Offenses, Schisms and
Scandals, contrary to the Doctrine which had been taught; And by good Words and
Fair Speeches; deceived the Hearts of the Simple? In which last words, the
Apostle gives a double Character of the False Teacher or (...) postor, First He
is (...) who is one that (...) much in Words, but and end performer^^ (...)
thing; Again, he is one, whom if you Vide Bezam ad Locum.
heard him speak, you would by ready to say, that he (...) much more Solicitous
for (...) and your Interest, than for himself. The Apostle says also, that he
does, (...), Applaud, Commend, and Flarier, (...) and Divine happy things, to
delude easy and well meaning Souls, with a pre^^nce of Piety; He calls them,
Mentium ^^ductores, (...) Hi Summi Artifices s^^^ in Fallendo, qui nor (...)
etiam mentem ipsam a Vero alienare: These are excellent Artists in deceiving
and skilful to alienate the very mind it self from Truth, says Hyperius: They
have a double Art Hyperius ad Tit. cap. 1. 9. Mel. Ad. Rom 15.
to deceive, says Melanchthon, First, to apply themselves to the Lusts and
Humors of the People; and by this means they deceive the Vulgar; but they have
another Art to impose upon the Wiser sort, Quod adserunt Erudite Cogitata, quae
non abhorrent a judicio Rationis: When they craftily suggest such Sentiments as
seem not altogether unreasonable.

In short, the Reconciler has put himself upon the Stage to show his Tricks of
Activity, to play Hocus Pocus, or Handy Dandy with the Church of God. (...)
This Book he has Acted the part of (...) a ^^rr^ Filius to gratify Dissenters,
and men of that Lower Level In the next it is expected he should entertain, if
not Caresse, our Governors; what a Name will he purchase to himself by this
Achi^^ment? I know no such standing Officer as a Fraevaricater Theologir^^; but
if he comes off cleverly, for ought I know, he may gain the Title by a Popular
Creation: and so I leave him to the Honor of his New Conquests.

I had some hopes that my task had now been at an end: But while the Reconciler
was in pursuit of Meisners miserable Tristes and Fooleries, as he is pleased to
call them, it came into his mind to have another fling at Dr. Womock, and that
he might do it the more cleverly, he reserves a part of Meisners discourse, and
(concealing the true Author) entitles Dr. Womock to it, in his Margent, and
then falls in upon it, as we shall observe presently.

The Argument of Meisner, the Reconciler Prot. Recon. p. 335. and Verdict. 274.
turns into an Objection, and it runs thus: All change is dangerous in Church
and State, no man can see what disturbance may follow upon an inconsiderate
(...) such Christian Privileges and public Authority ought to be owned and
preserved in vi^^^lable, what doubts may arise upon such a change, and what
confusion may follow it, who will take upon him to determine?

To this the Reconciler returns a fourfold Answer. First he says so call the
Ceremonies inoffensive, the variation of Here the Reconciler is kind to leave
out Authority, but it is a Question whether he would have it preserved
inviolable.
them inconsiderate, to say that they are Christian Privileges, is to affirm
what never can be proved.

To this I Reply, 1. That our Christian Liberty, in the Use or Forbearance of
such things as were restrained by the Law of Moses, is no doubt a part of our
Christian Privilege. 2. The Verdict told the Reconciler three lines before: [
Good Order is not kept in tumultuous Alterations] and I hope he will allow such
to be called Inconsiderate. I shall now add, that whatever alteration is made,
upon such Motives, is no more Considerate then the Mariners ^asting his goods
into the Sea in a time of Storm and Tempest.

3. That the Ceremonies are Inoffensive, is no hard matter to prove (1.)
Inoffensive in their own Nature, and for this we have the Apostles Judgment and
Determination, and he quotes our Savio^r's Authority for it Romans 14. 14. I know
and am persuaded by the Lord Jesus, that there is nothing unclean of it self,
(i. e.) on lawful; therefore In^ffensive. (2.) They are Inoffensive to the
Juri^^^us and sound Christian: This is sufficiently Psalm. 119. 165.
asserted by the same Apostle. Romans 14. ^. One man ^e^^eveth (i. e.) Novit and
per^^^sus est: He knows and is persuaded, that he may eat, and use all
Indifferent things without sin. See also, 1 Cor. 8. 7, 11. Psalm. 119. 165.

When we call the Ceremonies Inoffensive, we mean that they give no just
Occasion of Offense to discreet and sober Persons. (4.) If the Reconciler will
needs understand it of Offense taken, so the Law of God is a Scandal, and
Offensive; because it is an Occasion of sin, and yet it is not Evil in it self
for all that, as the Apostle tells us, Romans 7. 7, to the 14. Scandal properly
is, Malae rei exemplum aedificans ad delictum, it is the example of an Evil
thing, which does encourage and build up to Sin: Bone ^^^^res, Develand. Virg.
c. 3.
(says Tertullian) Neminem Scandalizant, nisi malam mentem. Good things offend
none but an Evil mind.

Here I cannot but take notice, how fiereely Mr. Baxter argues against the Prot
Recon. p. 327. 328.
Laws of our Superiors, and the Reco^ciler applauds him for it, though it has
at least, an equal force against the Laws of God. When (says Mr. Baxter) they
first make their laws, they know that some will obey them, some will not; if
then they think that many will incur the gut it of sin unto ^^^^ation by their
Disobedience, they must have something of greater worth than the souls of those
men to encourage them to make those Laws; for had there been no such Laws,
there would have been none of that Transgression, and consequently no Damnation
for it. This is Mr. Baxters Argument.

In like manner I can argue thus, when God first gave the Law or Command, Let
every Soul be subject to the higher Powers: for they that resist shall receive
to themselves Damnation; and again, Romans 13. 1, 2.
when he tells us, that Strife, Seditions, Heresies, are the Works of the
Flesh, and they that do such things shall not inherit the Kingdom of God; and
therefore charges as to Obey them that have the Rule over us, and to submit our
selves upon peril of Damnation: I say, when God first made these Laws, he knew
some would obey, and some would not; if then he thought that many would incur
the Guilt of sin unto Damnation by their Disobedience, he must have something
of greater worth than the souls of those men to encourage him to make those
Laws; for had there been no such Laws, there would have been none of that
Transgression, and consequently no Damnation for it. This is Parallel to Mr.
Baxters way of arguing, and our Reconciler is much taken with such weak and
Popular Reasonings. Romans 9. 20.


I could Reply with the Apostle. Nay but, O man, who art thou, that disputest
with God? But I will tell these men, that God, though he gave his only begotten
Son to Redeem Souls, yet having set up a Ministry in his Church to guide their
feet into the way of Peace, He has something of greater worth, than such
Stubborn and Disobedient Souls as neglect so Luke 19. 27. Prove. 1. 20. to the
32.
great Salvation; that is, his own Glory, and the Authority which he has
delegated unto his Vicegerents and Stewards, and established for the more
regular Government of the World; and it is that Glory of God, which Governors
do and are obliged to aim at, and this Authority, which they are concerned to
maintain, to that effect.

The Reconciler goes on: The Question who can tell? may be answered by another
Question, which he puts thus. Who can tell what doubts may arise, and what
Confusion may follow upon the refusal to abate these Impositions?

But in the mean time this (he says) is certain, That whilst our Schisms and
Contentions about these Trifles do continue, Religion is Blasphemed, the
Atheist, and Sceptick, is gratified, the Jew, the Gentile, the Weak Christian
is offended, the Protestant Religion is Reproacht, and Popery gets great
advantage; the Church and State are endangered, the Peace, Unity, Charity,
Edification of the Church is much Obstructed, and what mischief, equal to all,
or any of these things, can follow from an inconsiderable Variation in a
Ceremony, or an Expression used in the Liturgy, it is not easy to conceive. To
which it is Answered.

1. That the Mischiefs which will ensue have been mentioned already; Reason may
suggest the rest, and Experience, has taught enough of it to very Idiots.

2. The Mischiefs, which he reckons up in this place, are wholly from the
(...). Dissenters Contention and Schism, not at all from our Governors
Impositions, which are the Churches Settlement: it is their Disobedience that is
Malae rei exemplum, as Tertullian calls it, the ill example; and that is the
Scandal to all the Parties mentioned.

3. And that, he confesses, is about trifles and an inconsiderable Variation in
a Ceremony, or an Expression used in the Liturgy; and are not they excellent
Christians, that will gratify the Atheist and the Sceptick, offend the Jew and
the Gentile and the Weak Christian, bring a reproach upon the Protestant
Religion, give advantage to Popery, endanger the Peace of Church and State,
Obstruct Unity, Charity, Edification, and what not, by contending with
Authority about these things, wherein doubtless it is their Duty to submit, and
conform?

4. His Question: Who can tell what doubts may arise, and what confusion may
follow upon the refusal to abate these Impositions? carries the face of a
threatening in the Mask or Vizor of a Question. I remember one of His Majesty's
Royal Ancestors had a very witty and significant Motto upon his Coin: The
Thistle incircled with this inscription, Nemo me impune Lacessit.

Tho the Roses of York and Lancaster, and Withred in their Old Stock, and have
lost their Scent and Prickles; yet the English Lion is not at all disarmed: If
he be roused up by Threats and Tumults, he may find Courage as well as Power to
crush all the force of Schism and Sedition.

His Second Answer (as he calls it) is in the words of the Judicious Lord
Verulam (who says) Surely every Medicine is an Innovation, and he that will
not apply new Remedies must expect new Evils; For time is the greatest
Innovator, and if time of Course alters things to the worse, and Wisdom and
Counsel shall not alter them to the better, what shall be the end? A froward
retention of Custom is as turbulent a thing as Innovation.

And here is, break my Head, and give me a Plaster: But [ He that will not
apply new Remedies, must expect new evils] is a little Preposterous; the new
evils should appear first, and then we should think of the Application of new
Remedies. Here Is a pretty Lepid Knack of fancy out of a great Magazine of
Reason: But they are not the Diseases of a Crazy Body, that we are to
Administer to; it is the Distemper of a profane mind, Irreverence in Gods
Public Worship and Service, which calls for our Care, if not our Cure. To talk
of Innovations upon this account, has been cried out of as an Abomination; And
for our parts, we are content with such Remedies as we find prescribed in Gods
own Dispensatory, Bowing, Kneeling, Prostration (or what are allied to such
Institutions and Practices as are Warranted by examples in Holy Scripture)
These are suggested by the Light of Nature, and were in use before the Law
(Micah 6. 6.) They were in use under the Law too ( Psalm. 95. 9. Dan. 6. 10.
Luke 22. 41.) they were still prescribed under the Gospel, Act. 7. 60. c. 9.
40. Ephesians. 3. 14. Apoc. 4. 6. 7. Chapters; and they will keep their force and
virtue to the Worlds end, Isa. 45. 23. Romans 14. 11. to what purpose therefore
should we seek for new Remedies in this case? Is Gods mind changed? Or has
Jesus Christ repealed his old and given us New Rules of Decency and Order?
There Is no ground or Color for such an Imagination. What shall we say then?

This Reconcilers Fantasy has been wandering in the New Atlantis, and the
Climate was so hot, it brought him into a Calenture, and that makes him Thirst
so much for the Julip of a New Remedy, and his Appetite will not be satisfied
till he takes a surfeit of Novelties.

His Third Answer is this: The Change here pleaded for (so he professes that he
pleads for a Change, and no doubt he has had his Fee for his pains; or if the
Party has not done it, his Governors, whom he endeavors to take down, are
indebted to him for it) This is his Plea; the Change does signify no more than
a change of Habits, and Fashions, and of some Old Custom which has been found
Irrational or Inconvenient, and if this be very dreadful to the State, all our
Laws concerning the alteration of them may be so: Or if for the advantage of
our Trade, or our Estates, or for the benefit of the Subject in reference to
his temporal Concerns, we doubt not to make alterations in those kinds, why
should we scruple to make alterations in some few Circumstances, respecting
Worship, for the preventing of the ruin of innumerable Souls?

Here the Reconciler talks at such a rate, as if he had an inclination to put
in to be the Master of the Ceremonies; but he must not take upon him to give
Laws in that Case He most be so modest and good in his Office (if he intends to
continue in it) as to leave it to the Wisdom of our Governors to observe when
the Habits and Fashions and Customs are either Irrational or Inconvenient, and
then no doubt they will do their own work, tho they take not him into the
Consult about it: But as he prefers his own and the Peoples Judgment, before
that of their Rulers, so he does in several places more than insinuate, that
it is the Governors duty to Comply ^ page 324. 327. 329.
with, and follow them, rather than they should submit to their Governors. 2.
By his Change of Habits, we may see he loves to follow the Fashion, when it is
taken up, at the wrong end of Civility, among the Common People; And by his
Alterations for Advantage of Trade, we may take Measure of his Religion, and
observe his gain is Godliness, and that the Sect of false Prophets is not quite
extinct, of which St. Peter gives the People fair Warning, when he tells them,
that through Covetousness with feigned words, they should make Merchandise 2
Pet. 2. 3.
of them. But I must tell him and them, That to prevent their ruin, they must
do as all good Christians have done and do to this very day, obey the Commands
and Impositions of God and his Vicegerents.

His Fourth Answer to Dr. Womock (which in Truth is to Meisner) is but an
Interrogation; and he is full of such kind of suggestions; Can any man Imagine?
Is another of the same Topics? and these go for Arguments; and indeed he
concludes as Positively from them, as if he were at Questions and Commands with
his Superiors: His present Question is this.

Is it not apparent from what has been discoursed, that there has been as
great an alteration, both as to Ceremonies, and other matters contained in the
Liturgy of Edward the Sixth, without the least Confusion; why therefore may not
the like alterations be now made without Confusion? This is a doughty Answer:
But,

It verifyes the Observation of that Wise and Learned Statesman above
mentioned, and confirms the Ground of our Governors Refusal to make any more
Alterations: For grant one thing, yet that shall never satisfy, but only give
the Party Encouragement to ask more; and they will never give over, till they
have turned the Liturgy and Government out of Doors, to bring in their New
Modeled Service and Discipline. This our Reconciler cannot choose but
acknowledge, if he has any Modesty or Love of Truth, or has taken notice of
what has been a doing this Forty Years last past in these Kingdoms.

I think Dr. Womock is no further concerned, either by Name or by any other
particular Reference to his Verdict, in this Protestant Reconciler: But because
I observe he makes very great use of the Reverend Dr. Jeremy Tailor, I think
fit to give one Caution to the Reader: He was a very Learned man for whom I had
a great esteem, not only because he had a particular kindness for me, but
because he was a rare Person; For he was a man of great Reason, and of as great
a Fantasy, and this being the Lightest part of him, 'twas no wonder, if
sometimes it got uppermost.

'Twas the Reverend Dr. Hammonds Observation of him; that whatever Argument he
undertook, he would drive it as far as was posible to make it go (we have an
Instance in his discourses about Original Sin) and when he wanted Strength of
Reason, he would endeavor to carry it on by strains of Wit and Rhetoric. And
indeed having taken up a Liberty of Prophesying, (which his Majesty of Blessed
Memory was not pleased with, tho his design therein was to baffle the
Presbyterians) he could never totally lay it down, till he came to be better
poys'd and more deliberate; and that was when he came to be made a Bishop. And
it had been much more seasonable and useful for our Reconciler, to have
commended those sober Advices which he gave to his Clergy, at his Visitation,
then to have taken so much pains in gleaning out of his Ductor Dubitantium,
such matters as (by his ordering of them) serve to pervert the hearts of
Subjects, and set them against the Laws and Impositions of their Governors,
contrary to the Sense, and constant Practice of that Excellent Person.

The Advices I shall offer are much more for the edification of the Reconciler
and his Clients, than all the Harangues of Rhetoric which he has propounded in
his Book, viz.

XIV. As it looks like flattery and design to preach nothing before the
Magistrates but the Duty of their People, and their own Eminency; so it is the
beginning of Mutiny to Preach to the People the Duty of their Superiors and
Supreme; it can neither come from a good Principle, nor tend to a good End.
Every Minister ought to preach to his Parish, and urge their Duty: St. John the
Baptist told the Soldiers what the Soldiers should do, but troubled not their
heads with what was the duty of the Scribes and Pharisees.

XIX. Let no Minister be governed by the Opinion of his People, and destroy his
Duty, by unreasonable Compliance with their humors, lest as the Bishop of
Granata told the Governors of Leria and Patti, like silly Animals they take
burdens upon their backs at the Pleasure of the multitude, which they neither
can retain with prudence, nor shake off with safety.

XLIII. Let not the Humors and Inclinations of the People be the measures of
your Doctrines, but let your Doctrines be the measure of their persuasions. Let
them know from you what they ought to do; but if you learn from them what you
ought to teach, you will give but a very ill account at the day of Judgment, of
the Souls committed to you. He that receives from the People what he shall
teach them, is like a Nurse that asks of her Child what Physic she shall give
him.

LVIII. Let not the Preacher make an We may say the same for matters of
necessary duty especially relating to the eighth Commandment.
Article of faith to be a matter of Dispute; but teach it with plaineness and
simplicity; and confirm it with easy Arguments and plain words of Scripture,
but without Objection; let them be taught to believe, but not to argue, lest if
the Arguments meet with a Scrupulous person; it rather shake the Foundation by
curious inquiry, then establish it by Arguments too hard.

XXXVIII. Never appeal to the Judgment of the People in matters of
Controversy, teach them Obedience, not Arrogance; teach them to be humble, not
Crafty For without the aid of false Guides you will find some of them of
themselves apt enough to be troublesome: and a Question put into their Heads,
and a power of Judging into their hands, is a putting it to their choice,
whether you shall be troubled by them this week or the next; for much longer
you cannot escape.

LVI. Every Minister ought to be careful that he never expound Scriptures in
Public, contrary to the known sense of the Catholic Church, and particularly
How far the Reconciler has praevaricated herein, let the Reader judge.
of the Churches of England and Ireland, nor introduce any Doctrine against any
of the four first General Councils; For these, as they are measures of Truth,
so also of Necessity.

LIVE. In your Sermons and Discourses Of whom speaks the Prophet this? Our
Reconciler pleads for a change of Gestures Habits and Expressions: and these
make up the Subject of his Plea.
of Religion, use Primitive, known, and accustomed words, and affect not new
Fantastical or Schismatical terms: Let the Sunday Festival be called the Lords
day; and pretend no fears from the Common use of words amongst Christians. For
they that make a business of the Words of Common use, and Reform Religion by
introducing a new Word, intend to make a Change, but no amendment; they spend
themselves in trifles, like the barren Turf that sends forth no Medicinable
herbs, but store of Mushrooms; and they give a demonstration, that they are
either impertinent people, or else of a querulous nature; and that they are
ready to disturb the Church, if they could find Occasion,

LXI. Let every Preacher in his Parish Does our Reconciler do, this?
take care to explicate to his People the Mysteries of the Great Festivals, as
of Christmas, Easter, Ascention-day, Whrt-Sunday, Trinity-Sunday, the
Annuntiation of the Blessed Virgin Mary; because these Feasts, containing in
them the great Fundamentals of our Faith, will with most advantage convey the
Mysteries to the People, and fix them in their Memories, by the solemnity and
circumstance of the day. And (Adv. 25.) he tells them, Men are to be permitted
to their own Liberty, to the Measures of the Laws, and Conduct Let the Recon.
note this. Dr. Jeremy Tailor Bishop of Down and Connor.
of their Governors.

To this let me add the Doctrine and Advice of that Plous and Learned Prelate
to the Right Honorable the Lords Spiritual and Temporal and Commons of Ireland
Assembled in Parliament May the 8th. 1661.

In his Epistle Dedicatory, he tells them thus [Men pretend Conscience against
They teach for Doctrine the Commands of men.
Obedience, expressly against St. Paul's Doctrine, teaching us to obey for
Conscience sake; but to disobey for Conscience in a thing Indifferent, is never
to be found in the Books of our Religion.

But Obedience is strong Meat and Nothing more easy then to obey.
will not down with weak Stomachs. As if in the World any thing were easier
than to obey: For we see that the food of Children is Milk and Laws; The
Breast-Milk of their Nurses and the Commands of their Parents is all that Food
and Government by which they are kept from Harm and Hunger, and conducted to
Life and Wisdom. And therefore they that are weak Brethren, of all things in
the World have the least reason to pretend an excuse for Disobedience. For
nothing can secure them but the Wisdom of the Laws: For they are like Children
in Minority; they cannot be trusted to their own conduct, and therefore must
live at the public Charge, and the wisdom of their Superiors is their Guide
and their Security.

But (says he) there are among us such tender Stomachs that cannot endure They
strain at a Gnat and swallow a Camel.
Milk, but can very well digest Iron; Consciences so tender that a Ceremony is
greatly offensive, but Rebellion is not; A Sarplice drives them away as a Bird
affrighted with a Man of Clouts; But their Consciences can suffer them to
despise Government, and speak evil of Dignities, and curse all that are not of
their Opinion, and disturb the peace of Kingdoms, and commit Sacrilege, and
account Schism the Tender Conscience the pretense of the vilest men.
Character of Saints. -- For tender conscience, I shall not need to say, that
every man can easily pretend it; for we have seen the Vilest part of mankind,
men that have done things so Horrid, worse than which the Sun never saw, yet
pretend tender Consciences against Ecclesiastical Laws: But I will suppose that
they are really such, that they in the simplicity of their hearts follow
Absalom, and in weakness hide If really weak yet not to be dispensed but
instructed.
their heads in little Conventicles, and places of separation for a trifle;
what would they have done for themselves?

If you make a Law of Order, and in the Sanction put a clause of Favor for
tender Consciences, do not you invite every Subject to disobedience by
Impunity, and teach him to make his own excuse? Is not such a Law, a Law
without an Obligation? May not every man choose whether he will obey or no? And
if he pretends to disobey out of Conscience, is not he that disobeys equally
innocent with the Obedient; altogether as just, as not having done any thing
without leave, and yet much more Religious and Conscientious? Quicunque vult is
but an ill Preface to a Law; and it is a strange Obligation that makes no
difference, between him that obeys, and him that refuses to obey.

But what course must be taken with tender Consciences; shall the Execution of
the Law be suspended as to all such Persons? that will be all one with the
Former: for if the Execution be commanded to be suspended, then the obligation
of the Law by Command is taken away, and then 'twere better there were no Law
made. And indeed that is the pretention, that is the secret of the business;
they suppose the best way to prevent Disobedience Where there are no Laws
there is no Government.
is to take away all Laws. It is a short way indeed: There shall then be no
disobedience, but at the same time there shall be no Government: But the Remedy
is worse than the Disease; and to take away all Wine and Strong Drink to
prevent Drunkness would not be half so great a folly. -- To think of removing
the Disease by feeding the humor, I confess it is a strange Cure to our
present distempers. -- I desire him (who is of No Church breaks her Orders to
gratify a Faction,
that Opinion) besides the calling to mind the late sad effects of Schism, to
remember that no Church in Christendom ever did it. It is neither the way of
Peace nor of Government, nor yet a proper Remedy for the Cure of a weak
Conscience.

For the matter of Giving Offenses, Governors are not to be offended whoever
be: and the Disobedient rather than the Dutiful.
what Scandal is greater than that which Scandalizes the Laws? And who is so
carefully to be observed, least he be offended, as the King? And if that which
offends the Weak Brother is to be avoided, much more that which offends the
Strong; for this is certainly really Criminal; but for the other it is much
odds, but it is mistaken. And when the case is so put, bebetween the Obedient
and Disobedient, which shall be offended, and one will, I suppose there is no
Question, but the Laws will take more care of Subjects than of Rebels, and not
weaken them in their Duty, in compliance with those that hate the Laws, and
will not endure the Government. -- But The weak not fit to Govern others, or to
be Guides.
they that will be always Learning, and never come to the Knowledge of the
Truth, they that will be children of a Hundred years old, and never come to
years of Discretion, they are very unfit to guide others, and to be Curates of
Souls: But they are most unfit to Reprove the Laws, and speak against the
Wisdom of a Nation, when it is confessed that they are so weak, that they
understand not the fundamental Liberty which Christ has purchased for them,
but are Servants to a Scruple, and affrighted at a Circumstance, and in Bondage
under an Indifferent thing, and so much Idolaters of their Sect or Opinion, as
to prefer it before all their own Nobler Interests, and the Charity of their
Brother, and the Peace of a whole Church and Nation. This is out of his
Epistle. In the Body of his Sermon his Doctrine and Advice is this.

You have no other way of Peace, no better way to appease and quiet the
quarrels in Religion which have been too long among us, but by reducing all men
to Obedience, and all Questions to the measures of the Laws. For they on both
sides pretend Scripture, but one side only can pretend to the Laws: And they
that do admit no Authority above their own to expound Scripture, cannot deny,
but Kings and Parliaments are the Makers and proper Expounders of our Laws; And
if ever you mean to have Truth and Peace kiss each other, let no man dispute
against your Laws. For did not our Blessed Savior say, That an Oath is the end
of all Questions, and after the Depositions are taken, all Judges go to
Sentence? What Oaths are to Private Questions, that Laws are to Public. And if
it be said that Laws may be mistaken, it is true; but may not an Oath also be a
Perjury? And yet because in Humane Affairs we have no greater Certainty, and
greater than God gives we may not seek for, let the Laws be the last
Determination, and in Wise and Religious Governments, no Disputation is to go
beyond them.

2. But this is not only true in Religious Prudence, and plain Necessity, but
this is the way that God has appointed, and that he has Blessed, and that he
has intended to be the Means of ending all Questions. This we learn from St.
Paul, I Exhort that first of 1 Timothy 2. 3.
all Prayers and Supplications, and Intercessions, and giving of thanks be made
for all men: for Kings and for all that are in Authority. For All; for
Parliaments, and for Councils, for Bishops, and for Magistrates: It is for All,
and for Kings above All. Well, to what purpose is all this? That we may lead a
quiet and Peaceable Life in all Godlyness and Honesty. Mark, that Kings and all
that are in Authority are by God appointed to be the Means of obtaining Unity,
and Peace, in Godliness, (...) in all the true and Godly Worshippings of God;
No Unity in Religion without Kings and Bishops, and those that are in Authority.

3. And indeed because this is God's way of ending our Controversies, the
matter of Authority is highly to be regarded. If you suffer the Authority of
the King to be Lessened, to be Scrupled, to be Denied in Ecclesiastical
Affairs, you have no way left to silence the Tongues and Hands of gainsaying
People. But so it is, the Kings Authority is appointed and enabled by God to
end our Questions of Religion: Divinatio in Labiis Regis (says Solomon) In
Judicio non errabit os Ejus, Prove. 16. 10.
Divination and a Wise Sentence is in the Lips of the King, and his mouth shall
not Err in Judgment. In all Scripture there is not so much for the Popes
Infallibility, but by this it appears there is Divinity in the Kings Sentence:
For God gives to Kings, who are his Vicegerents, a peculiar Spirit. And when
Justinian had out L. 8. Cod. de Ve^eri Jure Enucleando.
of the Sense of Julian the Lawyer observed, that there were many Cases for
which Law made no Provision, he adds, If any such shall happen, Augustum
imploretur Remedium, run to the King for Remedy; For therefore God has set the
Imperial Fortune over humane affairs, Vt possit omnia quae noviter contingunt
and emendare and Componere and Modis ac Regulis competentibus tradere, that the
King may amend and Rule, and Compose every New-arising Question. And it is not
to be despised, but is a great Indication of this truth, That the Answers of
the Roman Princes and Judges recorded in the Civil Law, are such that all
Nations of the World do approve of them, and are a great Testimony how the
Sentences of Kings ought to be valued, even in Matters of Religion, and
Questions of greatest doubt. Bona conscientia Scyphus est Josephi, said the old
Abbot of Petrus Cellensis Lib. de Conscientia.
Kells; a good Conscience is like Joseph's Cup, in which our Lord the King
Divines. And since God has blessed us with so Good, so Just, so Religious and
so Wise a Prince, let the Sentence of his Laws be our last Resort, and no
Questions be permitted after his Judgment and Legal Determination. For Wisdom
says, By me Princes Rule, by me They Decree Justice; and therefore the Spirit
of the King is a Divine Eminency, and is as the Spirit of the most High God.
This is the solid Doctrine of that Learned Prelate.

The Reconcilers dealing by his Writings does sufficiently acquaint us, what we
are to expect in the Use he makes of all the rest which he alleges. If they
speak against the Laws, or the Rites and Customs of the Church, let him produce
their Sayings out of such Discourses, as they have professedly made to that
effect; otherwise their Reproof of Scandal in the general does certainly
concern, not only Schism and Sedition, but all ill examples whatsoever; and
particularly Disobedience to the Impositions of Superiors, than which nothing
was looked upon more Scandalous; which our Blessed Savior therefore wrought a
Miracle to prevent; Mat. 17. 27. Lest we should offend them; This Pareus
understands of a Scandal given, and observes Scandala cavenda esse, etiam cum
cessione nostri Juris, in rebus mediis: That Scandal is to be avoided, tho we
depart from our own Right, in things Indifferent to that effect; and then
especially when Authority calls for our Obedience, which is the very Case
before us.

But the Reconciler is of another mind, and according to his Principles these
two things must follow.

1. That Governors are the only Persons that ought not to be fully persuaded
in their own minds.

2. That Governors are the only Persons that may Lawfully be offended.

The Address of the House of Commons To the KING, Feb. 28. 1663.
AFter they had declared their Resolutions for maintaining the Act of
Uniformity, and given five notable Reasons why the Kings Declaration from Breda
could not oblige Him, or Them, and why he must not be pressed with it any
further, They added as follows.

We have also considered the Nature of the Indulgence proposed, with reference
to those Consequences, which must necessarily attend it.

It will establish Schism by a Law, and I.
make the whole Government of the Church Precarious, and the Censures of it of
no Moment or Consideration at all.

It will no way become the Gravity or II.
Wisdom of a Parliament, to pass a Law at one Session for Uniformity, and at
the next Session, the Reason for Uniformity continuing still the same, to pass
another Law to frustrate or weaken the Exeeution of it.

It will expose your Majesty to the III.
restless Importunity of every Sect or Opinion, and of every single Person
also, that shall presume to dissent from the Church of England.

It will be a Cause of increasing Sects IV.
and Sectaryes, whose Numbers will weaken the true Protestant Profession so
far, that it will at last become difficult for it to defend it self against
them. And which is yet further considerable, those Numbers which by being
troublesome to the Government finding they can arrive to an Indulgence, will,
as their Numbers increase, be yet more troublesome, so at length they may arrive
to a General Toleration, which Your Majesty has declared against, and in time
some Prevalent Sect will at last contend for an Establishment, which for ought
can be foreseen, may end in Popery.

It is a thing altogether without Precedent, V.
and will take away all means of convicting Recusants, and be inconsistent with
the Methods and Proceedings of the Laws of England.

It is humbly conceived, that the Indulgence VI.
proposed will be so far from tending to the Peace of the Kingdom, that it is
rather likely to occasion Disturbance.

And on the Contrary, that the asserting VII.
of the Laws, and the Religion established according to the Act of Uniformity,
is the most probable means to Produce a settled Peace, and Obedience through the
Kingdom; Because, the Variety of Professions in Religion, when openly indulged,
does directly distinguish men into Parties, and withal gives them
Opportunityes to count their Numbers, which considering the Animosities that
out of a Religious Pride will be kept on Foot by the several Factions, does
tend directly and inevitably to open Disturbance. Nor can your Majesty have any
security, that the Doctrine or Worship of the several Factions, which are all
governed by a several Rule, shall be consistent with the peace of the Kingdom.

And if any Person shall Presume to disturb the Peace of the Kingdom, we do in
all Humility declare, That we will forever, and upon all occasions, be ready
with our Utmost Endeavors and Assistance, to Adhere to, and Serve Your
Majesty, according to our Bounden Duty and Allegiance.

Addenda Page 58. l. 8.
TO Gualter I might add Chemnitius and many others, who could not believe St.
Peter was so early at Rome to plant the Christian-Church. I shall name but one
more of our own, the Reverend Dr. Buckaridge Bishop of Rochester, who in a
Sermon at Hampton Court September 23. 1606. upon those words, Ye must needs be
subject, Romans 13. 5. says thus;

The Soul of the Priest and Ecclesiastical Person, as well as the Soul of a
Layman, must be subject to the higher Powers. For why? St. Paul in this Epistle
wrote as well to the Clerks and Priests or Bishops of Rome (if there were any
then Resident at Rome) as to the People. We see he doubts it, nay he seems to
deny it, tho he supposes them to be there, that he might bring them under the
Duty of the Text, the duty of Subjection.

And if St. Peter were literally in Babylon, I know not how he could be in
Rome to plant the Church there before St. Paul's coming thither. And there are
great Presumptions that he was there. Take the Judgment of the Learned Gerrard
upon 1 Pet. 5. 13. Amongst others of his Arguments I shall only select these
three.

1. In Babylone Caldaeae erant Multi Judaei, ideo Petrus eo sese contalit, and
Evangelium ipsis Praedicavit vi Conventionis cum Paulo initae, Gal. 2. v. 7.
Congruit ergo cum Apostolatu Petri statuere, Babylone Assyriorum hanc Epistolam
Scriptam. 2. Si Romae hanc Epistolam Petrus Scripsisset, non videtur, satis
justam and idoneam afferri causam, our Nomen illius voluit dissimulare, cum
Paulus in omnibus Epistolis nomen Urbis addat. 3. Petrus Marcum tunc habuit
Comitem, cum hanc Epistolam scriberet, ut patet ex hac ipsa salutatione. Ergo
tunc non fuit Romae. Marcum enim tradunt Octavo Neronis Anno Alexandriae
Mortuum, Petrum vero Sex Annis postea a Nerone Romae occisum. Quod si
Alexandrinam Ecclesiam Mareus constituit, diuque illic Episcopatu functus est,
non potuit Romae esse cum Petro.

To Gerrad I shall add the Judgment of Dr. John Lightfoot ad 1 Cor. Addend. ad
Cap. 14. 14. Cap. 4. page 117. 118. Where he has these Observations.

Cum celebrentur tres Apostoli Circumcisionis, Jacobus, Petrus, and Johannes,
Gal. 11. 9. hinc Diaecesin unicuique been distribuas. Palaestinam and quae ei
contigua and connumerata, Syriam Jacobo; Babyloniam and Assyriam Petro; and
Hellenistas Asianos praesertim, ulterioresque Johanni.

Babyloniam, inquam, and Assyriam Petro: quod and ipse firmat cum Epistolam
suam primam dictat a Babylone, and in secunda utitur Idiomate Babylonico.
Crederes vocem Bosor prolatam pro Beor vel Solaecismum Petri fuisse, vel
errorem Librariorum; 2 Pet. c. 2. 15.
sed Chaldaismum sapit, and plane docet quaenam ea Babylon foret ubi jam tum
Petrus.

Chaldaeis vulgar erat (...) in (...) immutare, and vice-versa; [and post
varia istiufmodi exempla pergit,] Quae observata palam testabuntur, inquit,
Petrum in Babylone Chaldaica fuisse, and Chaldaice loquutum fuisse, cum dicerit
Bosor pro Beor.

Nec erat in toto terrarum orb Regio ulla in qua Congruentius, and offieto suo
consonantius Evangelizare potuit magnus ille Circumcisionis Apostolus, quam in
Babylonia and locis adjacentibus, ubi Hebraei purissimi Sanguinis, and ubi
december Tribus, Circumcisio pleno nomine.

Upon these and many other weighty Considerations, I am induced to believe that
St. Paul was a Principal Instrument in settling the Government of the Church at
Rome, and do concur with the Learned and Ingenious Dr. Cave, who sums In the
Life of St. Peter Sect. 11. at the End.
up the Dispute of St. Peter's being at Rome thus.

Granting, says he, what none that have any Reverence for Antiquity will deny,
that St. Peter was at Rome, he probably came thither some few years before his
Death, joined with and assisted St. Paul in Preaching of the Gospel, (to which
I shall add, and in establishing the Government and Discipline of the Church,)
and then both sealed the Testimony of it with their Blood.

Addenda. Page 108. l. 11.
I am the rather induced to believe, that the Advice or Injunctions which St.
Paul gives in his Epistles were but Temporary, and had a peculiar respect to
the Jews, because they are restrained to the Rites and Observances of the
Ceremonial Law, viz. to Circumcision, to Meats and Drinks, and Festivals, Which
Law, tho Dead by the Introduction of another Law, that is, the Gospel, yet the
Authority and Reverence it had from God's own Institution, and the place it had
under his more Peculiar Economy, and Government, required that it should be
laid aside with some Decency, and buried with Honor.

Expediebat enim fieri Differentiam inter Vita S. Pauli Lib. 5. cap. 7. p. 255.
A Thom. Massut. expl.
Profanos idololatriae ritus, quos Gentiles, Evangelicam legem suscipientes,
statim prorsus relinquere tenebantur, tanquam impios, and abominabiles, and
Legem illam veterem, olim sanctam, a Deo ipso institutam, and sancte ab
antiquis Patribus observatam, a qua proinde Judei, quo magis pij eo minus
abhorrere subito potuissent, Christus Dominus, etiamsi non obligaretur, tamen
in pluribus observavit, ut in Circumcisione, Purificatione, Sacrificio Agni
Paschalis and aliis. Quanto vero tempore Funus illius veteris Legis Duraverit,
ita ut usus illarum ceremoniarum, and observantia, tanquam Lege illa iam
Mortua, and ad Sepulchrum honest deducenda, permitteretur, S. Augustinus non
explicavit. Communiter autem durasse existimatur a Christi Domini passione
usque ad excidium Jerosolymitanum, annis videlicet, quadraginta, quando
Judaeorum respublica est eversa, Templum Solo aequatum, Summum eorum
Sacerdotium, and Magistratus defecerunt. Imo valde credibile est, cum ante hoc
tempus Evangelium sufficienter fuisse promulgatum videatur, Apostolos Petrum
and Paulum ante ipsorum Martyrium fidelibus declarasse, observare in posterum
Legalia, non solum non esse necessarium, sed iam incipere esse perniciosum, ut
in Libro nono de Legibus Franciscus Suarius adnotavit.

And because it is evident that many of our Dissenters are prone to play the
Jews, especially in the Point of a Sabbath, and some instances of Negative
Superstition, [Touch not, Taste not, Handle not] I do therefore heartily commend
to their perusal.

A Speech Delivered in the Star Chamber against the two Judaical opinions of
Mr. Traske, by the R. R. Father in God Lancelot Lord Bishop of Winchester.

FINIS.
To the READER.
THo Dr. Womock has been persuaded to own this Book, he cannot but Disclaim the
Errors, whether committed by the Printer or Transcriber. Yet such as disturb
the Sense of the Discourse, are here Noted; the rest are left to the Judgment
and Charity of the Reader, to be Pardoned and Corrected.

ERRATA.
PAge 13. for 2 Pet. 2. 6. read Gal. 5. 12. p. 14. l. 16. r. so to. p. 15. l.
9. r. And. p. 17. l. 14. r. all Rule. p. 25. l. 5. r. In. p. 29. l. 21. r.
Common. p. 34. l. 23. r. at all. p. 62. l. 13. r. Was -- Were. p. 70. l. 3. r.
Brother Censurer. p. 73. l. 17. r. but that. l. 21. r. Doubts. p. 77. l. 13,
14. r. underhand. l. 19. r. from the. p. 78. l. 22. r. Wrote. p. 86. l. 3. r. as
are. p. 88. l. last, dele they. p. 90. l. 2. dele his. p. 93. l. 27. r. both
Parties. p. 122. l. 4. r. his acknowledgements are so full. p. 139. l. 13. r.
Wit, l. 18. dele thereby. p. 159. l. 16. r. whom he. p. 171. l. 14. r. Gal. 1.
6, 7. l. 19. r. Salva Pax. p. 175. l. 5. r. Mal. 1. 8. p. 179. l. 26. r. while.
p. 185. l. 23. r. And the Anabaptists do so too, who will not allow the Civil
Magistrate to have. p. 186. l. 18. r. Creditable. p. 187. l. 13. r. then St. p.
189. l. 19. dele observed. p. 200. l. 13. dele I. p. 247. l. 3. r. as to. p.
249. l. 24. r. Cruel p. 292. l. 2 and 27. r. Abailardus p. 301. l. 18. r.
impertinent p. 305. l. 1. r. out the p. 307. l. 10. r. Judgment p. 313. l. 25.
r. Protestants p. 317. l. 27. r. Faction p. 318. l. 19. r. a Faction p. 323.
Marg. r. Acts 2. 47. John. 10. 16. p. 336. l. 4. r. end of l. 5. r. if we p.
337 l. 4. r. I may p. 340. l. 24. r. Politiae, in Marg. Calvin p. 343. l. 2. r.
quarrel p. 344. in Marg. r. Apostolus p. 347. l. 4 and 5. r. detained p. 363 l.
27. r. duly.


