A Funeral Sermon, Occasioned by the DEATH OF Mrs. Jane Papillon, Late WIFE of
The Very Worthy Thomas Papillon, Esquire; First Preached July 24. School. and now
Published at his Request.

By JOHN WOODHOVSE.

LONDON, Printed by J. Astwood for John Lawrence, at the Angel in the Poultrey.
School.

TO THE Worthy and Ever Honored, Thomas Papillon, Esquire; One of the
Representatives of the Honorable City of LONDON, in the present Parliament:
AND The Deservedly Respected, Philip Papillon, His Only SON.

WHEN I had performed the Service which you were pleased to Call me to, in the
Preaching of this Sermon, I had no Grounds of Fear you would Importune me to
make it more Public.

THERE are few can be desired to send their Pulpit Discourses to the Press,
upon greater Disadvantage than my self; who have no written Hints to recollect
what I deliver, and must therefore be forced, when urged to it, to Desire Help
from some of my Hearers; and refresh my Memory with their Notes, which always
labor under considerable Imperfections. To this I was particularly forced in
the present Case, which I thought a sufficient Reason, for my desiring (as I
did) it might (when committed to Paper) be kept for your own Private Perusal.

THEY that know us, will not expect I should say much of you, when I write to
you: However, I am bold to be your Remembrancer of what was your Deceased
Consort' s Satisfaction, in her Languishing Hours, because it may on equal
Grounds be both yours: To have about Thirty descending from you, or nearly
United to them that do, and no One but what gives just Cause to all of us to
believe, the Root of the Matter is found, and Christ formed in them, is a
Comfort many want after all their Pious Counsels, Holy Examples, and Care of
their Disposal. And though this be but one of the many Distinguishing Marks God
has Honored you both with, yet this alone should raise our Thanks and Hopes
about them.

AND that God will continue them, and especially You, Sir, his Worthy Son, in
the Steps of such a Father, to fill up many of his Useful and Exemplary Posts,
both Religious and Civil, is the Desire, and shall be the Prayer of

Your Affectionate Honourer, and Faithful Servant, in Our Dear Lord, John
Woodhouse.
Upper Moorfields, October. 27. School.
REV. XIV. 13. And I heard a Voice from Heaven, saying unto me, Write, blessed
are the Dead which dye in the Lord, from henceforth: Yea, says the Spirit,
that they may rest from their Labors, and their Works do follow them.
I Need not tell you (Beloved) the sad Occasion of this Mournful Assembly. The
Design I shall mainly drive at, is not the Celebration of the Deserved Praises
of the Dead; or the Revival of the Grief, and Tender Sense the Living have of
so great a Loss.

But if it were possible, I would Endeavor to bring this Afflictive Providence
so near our Hearts, that we might not lose all; that we might get some good by
so great a loss; the loss of so Excellent a Person. I would render it as
Instructive as I can to this great Assembly.

And that I may the more successfully do it, will you lend me your Attentive
Thoughts to that Passage of Sacred Writ that you have upon Record but now named
to you: -- Blessed are the Dead, etc.

Scripture, and Experience, tell us, that the Inhabitants of this lower World
are Divided, under two great Lords, that have the Rule over them; Christ, and
Satan; the Flesh and Spirit; and it is true, it lies at every Man's Choice
whose he will be, and whom he will serve; the Devil cannot force Subjects, and
Christ will not; he will Deal with us according to the Free and Noble Natures
that he has given us; but has from the Divine Pleasure, and according to the
Nature of the thing, Purposed, that what Sinners Choose, that they shall have;
such as has been their first, such shall be their Final State; the Way and End
are inseparably Connected together.

The far greater part of Mankind Devote themselves to the Service of the World
and the Flesh; abandon themselves to a fleshly, animal Life; these they Choose
and Follow: And Verse 9.
the Context tells you, what will be the Dreadful Issue of this their Course,
They shall be filled with their own Verse 10.
Ways; for they shall be Tormented with Fire and Brimstone: A Dreadful
Entertainment shall Sinners find, when they come to Receive the Recompense of
the Pleasures of Sin, that they had for a short Season.

For they shall find the most Tormenting Element of Fire, with Brimstone to
give Heat and Horror to it; the Smoke of their Torment* (that is an Verse 11.
Awakening Word to them that feel, and to them that do not yet feel it) shall
ascend for ever and ever; and they shall have no Rest Day nor Night. Sinners,
let me tell you from the Lord, that there is not one of you, that is yet a
Slave to his Lust, that chooses and pursues a Carnal Worldly Interest, before
all that God and Christ have offered to you; but he is in a Case, that does
certainly entitle him to this Torment; though yet he is not in it.

I know Sinner, thou fondly hopest it will be better; but where is the Ground
for it? Either set thy self to Fear the Lord, and Follow the Lamb, or thou
can never escape; and therefore whoever thou art, that have never been
awakened to a Sense of thy Sin and Danger, art thou yet in an Impenitent,
Christless State? think, what! will the way I have taken bring me to this End?
God has told me so, and at my Peril I must believe it, that I may prevent it:
Oh that God would give thee a Heart to it! But as dark as that side of the
Cloud is, the Context has a light side also, and my Text leads me to a Better
Sort of Souls.

And O that God would lead it to the Souls of all of you that are in such a
State, as will entitle you to this Torment, that you may make your Escape, and
never know by feeling what it means.

There is a Generation, that (under the sweet Influences of Free and Powerful
Grace) follow the Lamb whithersoever Verse 4.
he goes: They had taken Christ, and become Imitators of him; and they would
follow him through Tribulation and Persecution to Glory; let it be how it would
with them here, they would follow Christ; they had embarked with him, and they
would adventure their all with him.

These are they that are devoted to God, set apart for God and Holiness in
their Hearts and Lives; They keep the Commandments of God, and the Verse 12.
Faith of Jesus; they follow Christ in a Life of Obedience, and maintain the
Faith of Jesus; cleaving to, abiding in, and walking with him; and these shall
have the Recompense of Reward: In the next Verse, I heard (...) Voice from
Heaven, saying unto me, Write, Blessed are the Dead: Surely Sirs, here is
somewhat in this Text of great Importance to your Souls and mine: O that I knew
how to ^ffect your Hearts and mine with it, that we might know how to give it
^ts Influence upon your Hearts and Lives! I say so, because of the Great
Solemnity with which these Words are introduced; here is such an Apparatus as
is verily very awful: I do not know three Passages in all Scripture, so
Solemnly introduced, I heard a Voice from Heaven; whether the Voice of the
Angel of God, the Angel of the Covenant: Or, whether a Voice from God more
immediately, the Text has not told us: And we may safely be ignorant about it:
But it is A Voice from Heaven; a Voice than cannot lie, a Voice that cannot
deceive us; a Voice that should be heard, and received with all suitble
Reverence and Acceptance, and who could have believed it, unless well
attested? and this Voice bids him Write; Write! why, is it worthy to be
Written? if it is a Voice from Heaven, on such an Important Occasion as appears
in the Context, John might well write it down fro the Comfort of the Followers
of Jesus; that poor, despised, reproached, persecuted Generation, whom the
World reckons not worthy to live.

And their God that knows them better than the World knows them, and is not
ashamed to be called their God, he knows that the World is not worthy of them:
q. d. Souls, bear up under all Discouragements, though yours is a Distressed,
Heart-stooping Day; here is a Word from Heaven, a Cordial for Fainting Seasons,
and I Will write it down for you, that you may have it ready, and may have
Recourse to it in your needful Hours; and that is, Blessed are the Dead that
dye in the Lord, from henceforth, etc.

The Words Logically considered, contain,

First, A Proposition: Blessed are the Dead, which dye in the Lord.

Secondly, A Limitation, or Determination of the Time and Season of verifying
it: From henceforth.

Thirdly, A Twofold Reason of the Truth of the Proposition.

First, That they may rest from their Labors:

Secondly, And their Works do follow them.

Which will be the Reasons of the ctrine; and waving to speak to them now, I
may hope for room for some Application, which is the thing I would aim at.

The Proposition in the Text then, that I may (for Brevity sake) make it serve
for the Doctrine, is this,

Doct. Blessed are the Dead, which dye in the Lord.

I call it a Proposition, and yet the accurate Logicians may quarrel at it,
because the Predicate is in the Place of the Subject: But it is a Logical
Proposition, (at least) with very little Variation: They that are dead, and dye
in the Lord, are Blessed.

And so I must endeavor to explain the Subject, and then the Predicate; and
though the Subject be last in the Text, it is to be reckoned first in the
Proposition, and must therefore fall first under our Consideration.

First, What are we to understand by The Dead, that dye in the Lord?

There are two Senses that put in very fairly, and both of them agreeable
enough to the Original:

Some, (and Men of Value) by Dying in the Lord, do understand as (...).
much as Dying For the Cause and Sake of the Lord; as Martyrs do, that seal
their Testimony with their Blood.

The Preposition, which we render In, after the manner of the Hebrews,
signifying (...)
as much as For, and I must not deny but this Preposition in other Places of
Scripture is so rendered, as in the Margin, and elsewhere; and the Proposition
Mat. 6. 7. Ephesians. 3. 13.
is true, take it in this Sense; That those that Dye For the Lord, are Blessed;
and it may be in a Degree above other Men, that Dye only in the Lord.

But I may not exclude the other Sense of it by this, (though there are great
Authorities to countenance me in it) because I think it is beyond Dispute; that
when the Apostle uses an Equivalent Phrase, Them that sleep in 1 These. 4. 14.
Jesus, Sleeping is allowed to be dying in Jesus: For after this he assures us,
The dead in Christ shall rise first: Verse 16.
There is nothing in the Context that I can discover, should limit us to this
Sense, therefore it must not (I think) be understood only of those that Dye for
him, that suffered a Violent Death for him, as many of our Brethren have done,
and now do in the Christian World: The Translation has a plain and sound
Sense, different from that, for though it may be admitted to signify Dying for
him, yet it does not exclude, but take in their Dying in him, that dyed not
thus for him: 1 John 4. 13. Ephesians. 3. 17.
Dying interested in him, United to him, by the Spirit on his part, and by
Faith on ours.

And the Proposition is true of these, and all these; so that in the same Romans
8. 1. Romans 16. 7. Joh. 15. 4.
Sense they are said to be in Christ, to abide in him, and walk in him, they
may be said to dye in him.

Let me add, that Dying in the Lord, thus explained, does suppose Two Things:

First, Their Being in him, by their Coming to him, and Receiving of him, which
are but two different Scripture Joh. 1. 12. Mat. 11. 28.
Expressions for their Believing in him.

Secondly, It is Supposed to Dying in him, they did Abide and Walk in him, from
the time of their Coming to him, and Receiving of him, be it a longer or
shorter time. And pray Sinners, you that make light of Christ, that prefer your
other things before him, or turn your Backs upon him, to serve diverse Lusts and
Pleasures instead of him, that abandon your selves to a Carnal Interest, Know,
that you cannot in this Case dye in him, or be blessed in so doing; and
therefore bethink your selves, how it will be with you, if Death lay its cold
Hands upon you.

O Get into Christ! Get a saving Interest in him, give up your selves to him,
that Death may not find you out of him! for Woe to you if you dye, and not in
Jesus! Blessed are the dead which dye in the Lord.

Let us now briefly see, what we are to understand by the Predicate, Blessed.
And of this give me leave to speak something:

First of the Name, and then of the Thing; for Names are to lead us to Things;
and I would I could tell you more of it.

I am ashamed to think, how little I can tell you of the Blessedness of those
Souls that Live and Dye in Jesus.

That I may borrow some Light from the Old Testament, let me tell you (...)
that the Hebrews have a Word Expressive of this, beyond what our Language can
fully reach; it is often Translated Blessed, and this Word seems to be in that
form which the Masters in Sacred Language call Forma Regiminis, and may be
turned from its concrete, to an abstract Signification; and therefore if I must
render it, I must do it as I can, because I can do it no better: (Viz.) Oh the
Blessednesses of that Man! not Blessed Adjectively, and in the Concrete, but
Blessednesses Substantively, and in the Abstract; not Blessedness in the
Singular Number, but Blessednesses in the Plural; and O the Blessednesses! A
complete Complication of them, in that Soul that lives in Christ, walks in him,
and dies in him; and though Philologers are not certainly agreed, Whether it be
a Noun Substantive or Adjective Plural, containing all kind of Felicity, or an
Adverb, or Interjection; Well is it for that Man, Happily is he Provided for:
Yet they seem agreed, that which soever it be, (and one they generally think it
must be) it has the force Habet affluentiam omnium bonorum, vel omnium bonorum
aggregatione perfectus. Modis omnibus accumulate beatus. (...), multum gaudens.
Others (...), a vehementiore gaudio.
of a Pathetick, Joyful Acclamation, and then they come much to one; as the
Learned Drusius has it, He is abundantly, and every way blessed, beyond
Expression.

I have the rather Noted this, because the Seventy Translate the Hebrew Word,
which we render Blessed, by the very Original Word in my Text, which
Philologers derive from Words importing Great Joy, Joy unspeakable, and (as I
may say) full of Glory: It does denote, that a Soul in Christ, when he dies,
shall have such a Blessedness and Joy, such a fullness of Joy and Pleasure, that
he shall neither want, nor wish for more. But not to stay upon the Name, which
was to lead us into the Thing;

Let us see what we can say of it:

And O! how gladly would I commend the Blessedness of this State to you, that I
might commend this Dear and Blessed Jesus to you: Verily, Sirs, you could never
set so light by this Jesus as you do, if you did but know the Worth of him; if
you knew your Need of him, and what you should have by him.

If I fail in this, I shall avail you little; The dead that dye in the Lord are
blessed: Which does denote,

First, A Separation, a Removal of all that is Evil and Distressing: There
shall (when thou dyest in the Lord) be a Separation from all Evils, Natural and
Moral, that are so great a part of thy Distress here: Every one feels the Evil
of Afflictions, every one can complain of this Plague of the Heart, every one
has his own Body of Sin, and his own Burden: I do not know any is without
one; you do not feel mine, nor I yours; but I feel one, and you another: Oh!
what a Complaining World is this? Sickness, Pain, Calamity, Losses of
Relations, Crosses on the one Hand, and Moral Evil (which is the greater Evil)
on the other Hand; the Evil of Sin, Dwelling and Working in us.

The Tenderhearted Soul, that has a new Nature in it, that is set against
Sin, has a very tender Sense of the Evil of that Sin that dwells in it, and is
an implacable Enemy to it: I am sure it made Paul pour out more Complaints,
than all his Stripes and Stoning, Irons and Imprisonment did: Where do you hear
him complain, (how adverse, how miserable soever his Case was) as he does on
this Occasion; O wretched man that I Romans 7. 24.
am, who shall deliver me from the Body of this Death: Sin fate uneasy upon
his Spirit, though it was not Reigning and Allowed, but Unallowed and Hated.
Well, Soul, bear up, if thou be but heartily come to Jesus, if thou art but one
of those, that are willing to follow this Lamb, whithersoever he goes, I can
tell thee Good Tidings of Great Joy, it cannot be long, e're thy Blessed Jesus
will deliver thee from all this; thy Anguish, Vexation and Miseries, shall all
be done away: All thy Sweat, thy Labors shall cease, all Tears be wiped from
thine Eyes, and all Sorrows done away, with the Causes of them; and though thou
art now conversant with a Sluggish, and Sleepy, and Hypocritical Heart, thou
know not what to do with it; thou bring it to Ordinances, and God in
them, to better it, and this without any great and good Effect hitherto: Bear
up Soul, this Holy Jesus has undertaken for thee, thou art in him, and thou
shall dye in him; from henceforth thou shall not feel the Temptations, the
sinful Workings of a Naughty Heart: Oh! that will be a Joyful Change to a Holy
Soul, that is under the Tender Sense of these things here: This is one part of
the Blessedness, as it denotes an Abolition of, and Separation from the Evils
of this Life, both Natural and Moral; from that of Affliction, and that of Sin,
which though it be rather Negative than Positive, yet it is that without which
positive Blessedness cannot be enjoyed. None can be fully happy with so much
Misery hanging about him, and pressing upon him.

Methinks therefore it should be Joy to Holy Souls, to wait for, and expect
such a day, when Sin and Sorrow shall be fully done away, and shall be known no
more for ever.

Secondly, I must tell you, it does denote A fruition of the most felicitating
Good, the best Good that the Soul is capable of; the Blessed God, that Summum
Bonum that the blind Heathens fought after so long to so little purpose.

Eustachius in his Excellent Ethics, and our other Masters in Ethics, when
they write of this, tell us, that Felicity or Blessedness is either Objective
or Formal. Objective Felicity denotes no more but God the Object, but Formal
Felicity denotes more.

Some kind of Union to, Communion with, and Enjoyment of this Felicitating
Object, and this is as it were to be made one with it.

They commonly place it in two things, give me leave to put it in three or four:

1. It lies in the Contemplation of this delightful Object.

2. In a Delightful Love of it.

3. In a Participation or Enjoyment of it.

4. In a Contentation in it.

When the Soul shall be let into this State, it will be a State of Possession
and Fruition; which, as far as I can understand, is imported in these four
Words:

First, Knowledge or Contemplation: The People of God shall know him, in
another manner than now they do: It is called Seeing of God, and the Beatifick
Vision: What sensible Views God will give them to gratify their Bodily Eyes,
when they are reunited to their Souls, we cannot tell; though it seems rational
to think, all our Powers (even the lowest of them) shall be suitably employed;
but it will be an intelligible or an intellectual Vision, a rational Discovery
of the Excellency of this God and his Christ, which gives Rise to this
Happiness, which the Spirits made perfect, shall be everlastingly employed to
view and contemplate, with intense and pleasurable Applications of Mind. I dare
not herd with those bold Presumers, that dare to determine, whether it be the
Divine Essence that is thus viewed immediately, or some Created Glory flowing
from it, sufficient to fill and satisfy the Soul; much less determine with
them, the way and manner in which either is done; lest by taking upon me to be
wise above what is revealed, I talk as foolishly as they about these Matters,
which are above our Reach. We shall, as the Apostle says, See him as he is; not
in 1 Cor. 13. 14. 1 John 3. 2.
the highest sense of that Phrase; in an adequate, comprehending way, which is
absolutely imcompatible to a Finite, though Glorified Nature. The Creature must
be God, or he cannot so see him; it may be enough or Modest Minds, guided by
the sure Duct of plain Revelation, to say, it shall be a Glory that excels,
as the 2 Cor. 3. 10 (...). 2 Cor. 4. 17. (...)
Apostle assures us, a far more exceeding and eternal weight of Glory: What ^n
Heap of Emphatical and Hyper^olical Words are amast together, to give but an
Umbrage of so great a 1 Pet. 1. 17. (...). 1 Pet. 4. 13. (...).
Blessedness, so bright a Glory! an Excellent Magnificent Glory, but it is yet
to be revealed: It is not, it cannot be fully revealed 'till enjoyed, we know
not yet what it or we shall be; but we shall be like him, have a Blessed
Resemblance of him, share in Joy with him, and who can wish for better than the
Joy of his Lord, which he enjoys, and has prepared for us to enjoy? that we
shall enter into, though 1 John 3. 2.
it cannot fully enter into us. Paul that saw it, could not fully discover it
to such Mortals as our selves.

Christians, you that have had any of the Views, Relishes and Fore-tastes of
Heaven in Ordinances, you can tell, that when your Hearts have been drawing
nigh to God, humbled and debased before him, lifted up to him, drawn out after
him, you have received such Notices of the Goodness, Mercy and Kindness of God
to your Souls, that it has been highly pleasing to you; has it no^ been a
Grief to you, that you have seen no more of it, that you so soo^ lose the the
sight of it, that you cannot keep up this delightful frame from Ordinance to
Ordinance, where you desire and design to converse with God? This that is the
Object of the Beatifick Vision, is that which when displayed upon the Soul,
agreeably to the Excellency of the Object and Subject, renders the Soul happy
that enjoys it.

Secondly, It carries with it a Dilection or Love to so amiable an Object, as
the Blessed God and the Holy Jesus; (not to mention our Holy Friends there)
which cannot but leave delightful Relishes upon the Holy Soul, and the more
thou know of thy God, the more thou love him; and if thou complain of an
Heart straightened in thy Love to God, I will tell thee, that thy Faith does not
deal well with thee, that it does not give thee plainer Views of this God; for
if thou did know him better, thou would love him better: When thou gettest
any of this in his Ordinances, do thou not find thy Heart charmed with him?
To set this in a clearer Light, this Love Amor est ^^mplacentia boni dilectio
addit rationis dilectum.
(as Moralists speak) imports a Complaisance of the Person loving, in the
Beloved; the Genuine Properties and Effects of this Love are reckoned to be,

(1.) Assimulating of the Lover to the Object beloved: Every Lover feels a bent
of Heart, to conform himself to the Mind and Pleasure of his Beloved.

(2.) A Union of the Lover to the beloved Object, be it who or what (...) will.
Love formally taken, is a kin^ of Union of the Lover with the Beloved, and
causes the Lover to desire as much as may be, to be on^ with the Beloved;
which causes (...) perpetual Desire of its presence with it.

(3.) An Inhesion or Adhesion of the Lover in, or to the Beloved: It will not
be parted from it without an uneasy Violence, he thinks of, thirst^ after, and
lays up his Heart with it* so that the Lover's Heart dwells in the Beloved, is
taken up there more than at Home: According to tha^ Saying which derives from
the Wisdom of Plato, That this Soul is as it were dead to its own Body, and
lives in another; agreeable to that other Observation, It Is more where it
loves' than where it lives. And what is true of Love in General, is easily
applicable to this Divine Love, this Love of God: For, where all that is
lovely, is found by the Holy, Prepared Soul, in God, this best Good, it cannot
but love, and take Complacency in him, delight to please him, be most strictly
united to, and be one with him, would not be parted from him; and how great a
Portion of Blessedness does this administer to the Soul, that has in all this
its Heart's Desire? Oh! Fervent Lover! it shall be as thou would have it, in
all this, and more thou can not wish.

Thirdly, There is also resulting from all this, A Participation of this
Felicitating Object: For, Vision is not without this Participation, to use the
Words of an Excellent-Person, He that Mr. How on Blessedness.
beholds, partakes; what is represented, is impressed: Thou do not only see
somewhat of God now, and love him a little now, but in doing so, thou can
find, that there are some abiding Impressions of God upon thy Heart, some of
his Divine Likeness renewed upon thy Soul, and how much better will it be
there, where thou shall see him more clearly, and love him more fervently, and
enjoy him more perfectly. Sin is the Disease of the Soul, and it can never be
recovered to any tolerable degree of Health, Ease or Comfort, 'till the
Likeness of God is recovered upon it: Therefore, this is that which Ordinances
are designed for here; thou should attend Ordinances to this Holy and Divine
End, that thou may carry away Impressions upon thy Heart of a God-like
Temper of Mind, a God-like Disposition, to love as God loves, and hate as God
hates, and be in all things like minded to him.

O this is that! that is the true End of them; but when thou dyest in the Lord,
thou shall have such a Participation of God, such Divine Impresses from God,
that shall clear thee of all those Infirmities and Diseases that Sin has
infected thee with; then thou shall have nothing to do, but to delight thy self
in the Lord thy God, and this shall be thy unwearied, endless Pleasure.

Well, Soul, is it not worth while to part with thy dearest Lusts for this
Christ? seeing if thou will get into, and dye in him, thou shall be admitted to
share with him in a fuller Participation of him, and receive the Benefits
purchased by him: Remember, thou can not be happy without Participation of
this Likeness and Love of God, but in this thou may.

As this Blessedness does import a Separation from Evil, and Knowledge of, Love
to, Participation and Fruition of that which is called the Felicitating Good,
the best Good; I did not say an adequate Good; for that strictly taken, does
sometimes denote, that which does but just correspond to the thing: But O! the
Happiness, the Blessedness of the Soul that is interested in this God, and this
Christ: There shall be more than he can receive, more than enough for him; a
fullness for all the rest of the Heavenly Society.

Fourthly, The last thing I shall mention, as Consequent upon, and perhaps
Constitutive of this Blessedness, is a full Contentation, a Complacential
Repose of Soul in the Delights, which arise from all this to a Holy Soul.

My Friends, when the Soul has a View of God, of his Holiness, Purity and
Goodness, that does enamour it, that does draw out and enlarge the Affections
toward him; when this Soul is grown up hereby unto a resemblance of God, and
perfected Participation of him, can it choose but have Rest and Repose in him.

The Schoolmen are puzzled for a Notion of this Rest; this satisfying Repose
(as I understand it here) they can get no higher than an Acquiescence, or
Resting of the Appetite in the appitible thing, and such a pleasedness in its
Portion, that it will look no where else for another, a better. O my Friends,
the Blessedness of this state which our Lord is gone to prepare for us, and
which they are received into that dye in him, has all this, and a great deal
more than this, that might be expressed; and yet at last our highest
Expressions, nay, our most refined Conceptions are at a loss in this: Paul that
was there, was not able to utter what this Blessedness was, which some
translate not fit, not lawful to be spoken; and 2 Cor. 12. 4.
others not possible to be spoken to us, in our imperfect state; it does not
appear yet what we shall be, (No, not to inspired Men) but we shall be like
him, resembling God and Christ in their imitable Perfections.

Wicked Men are so Foolish, that though they walk after the Inclinations of
their own Hearts, they think they may go well enough to Heaven; but it is far
otherwise: If these Men were not Fools to themselves, they would think it so;
but it is otherwise, Philosophically speaking, since there is no proper
suitableness between the Faculty and Object, which can only yield Pleasure
between God and Men, and so there is no Capacity in them for this Blessedness.

Though I have spoken to the Name and Thing, which we call Blessedness, as it
does cannote an Abolition of all Evil, Natural and Moral, and of that
satisfying Repose or Felicity in its several Ingredients, which either
constitute or (at least) result from the Fruition of this Blessedness.

2. Let us a little consider the Determination or Limitation of it; the Word we
translate From henceforth, from the different Position of it in various Copies,
has caused a considerable Variation in the Sense. Those that make it the last
Word of the first Clause, (with our own Translation) Blessed are the Dead that
dye in the Lord, from henceforth, would have them Blessed from the Time and
Season of their Death.

Others, that make it the first Word of the next Clause, From henceforth that
they may rest from their Labors, and their Works follow them, would have them
blessed from the Sufferings they endured: The Traceing this in all its
Niceties, is not to be entered upon before this Assembly, and it would signify
little, if I may bring it (which way soever taken) to much the same Sense.

The Word Henceforth, may refer to the Calamities and Persecutions under which
they were; or it may relate to the Death of those that dye in the Lord; and why
not to both? and if it were reckoned to the latter, it will still (I conceive)
come to the same thing, That they may cease from their Labors, and their Works
do follow them from henceforth; from the time of their Departure that are in
Jesus, (not to exclude the other) they are blessed in him: Next, that they are
so blessed, the Spirit of God has given two Evidences, which I left for
Reasons of the Proposition; they are blessed, and cannot but be blessed, when
they dye in Jesus. For,

First, They Cease from their Labors: The Translation seems perplexed, That
they may rest from their Labors, and their Works do follow them: It looks not
at first view very like a Reason.

But if we may take the Greek Particle (...)
in the Text, which we Translate, That they may, for a Conjunction Causal, (as
Grammarians and Lexographers allow us to do in other Cases) and Translate it
Because, both Clauses run smooth, as Reasons of the Doctrine; They are blessed,
because they do or may rest, and because their Works do follow them.

Man that is born of a Woman is of Job 14. 1.
very short Continuance, of few days, and full of trouble: They often have
sighing, sobbing Hearts, grieved Souls, this is a sighing, sobbing, troublesome
World, and they have it from within, from rebelling Passions, they feel it is
Labor and Sorrow to grapple with these: What from Afflictions, and what from
Sin, it is all Labor and Sorrow: Now for a Man that is deeply afflicted by
these Calamities, whether of Sin or Afflictions, it is a comfortable thing for
the weary to be at Rest.

Come Souls, take Courage, remember that though you walk with many a sorrowful
Heart after your Lord, groaning under an Evil Nature of your own, and the Evil
Influence it has upon you, your Devotions to God, and Conversation with Men,
yet you shall be blessed; when you dye in the Lord, all this shall be done away
at once.

Secondly, Their Works do follow Acts 10. 4.
them: (Indeed they go also Before them) but I say their Works do follow them;
not barely to be their Continued Employment there, though that may be true; the
Change of their Place will make but a Gradual Change of the most Noble Part of
their Employment here; they shall Love and Praise God there, as they did here,
but at a more Easy, Elevated Rate: They must needs be blessed upon that
account, the Nature of this Blessedness (as far as we can pry into it) tells
you, that they cannot but be happy Men that see, that love, and enjoy God, and
rise to such a satisfaction of Mind therein, that they want no more than what
they have; they drink of such Rivers of Pleasure, that they are satisfied with
them.

There is somewhat Emphatical in the Text, Their Works do follow them; their
Works shall follow with them, as the Original is more strictly rendered. A
Metaphor taken from People that are crouding in at some Narrow Passage, they
that are coming after press and crowd in with them, there is a kind of Struggle
among them.

O the Works of Humanity, Charity and Piety, which they have exercised
themselves in, shall follow them, they shall crowd in with them: Neither bring
I it so low as the Learned Grotius does, that their Good Works; (Nay add the
Influences they shall have on others) shall follow them, be notify'd to them,
with Sweetness and Joy in the Reflection upon them: I say, though this be true,
it is not all, because I find Holy Men shall have a Recompense according to
what they have done: Christ has told us, He that gives a Cup of cold Water in
his Name, shall not lose his Reward: O holy Soul, I tell thee to thy Comfort,
that many of those Works of Piety and Charity that have made thee to abhor thy
self, for the Meanness and Imperfection of them, where the allowed Hypocrisy
of thy Heart spoiled them not, these shall be set in an acceptable View: And
therefore, that Soul must needs be blessed, that has been doing and getting
Good in this imperfect state, and now shall be crowned with a Recompense
according to what it has done, though not for it, in a Meritorious Sense.

And then shall you discern the difference between him that is righteous, and
him that is wicked; him that serves God, and him that serves him not. Man. 3.
^^.


And thus much for Explication: To show what it is to Dye in the Lord, for him,
or interested in him, what you are to understand by Blessed, both as to Name
and Thing; and for Confirmation, showing what Reasons and Evidences there are
in the Text, that such shall be so blessed, and must needs be so, Time calls me
to the Application.

Is it so, my Friends? (Come, St^^ up your Thoughts a little) Is it (...) that
They are blessed, that dye in the Lord? That the dead, that dye in the Lord, as
well as those that dye for the Lord, are blessed from henceforth* Blessed in
the Removal of all Ev^^ in the Enjoyment of all such Good^ Felicitating Good,
such a Good in suc^ a manner that is beyond Expression^ beyond Conception, and
full of Glory* Is this that which belongs to ever^ one that dies in Jesus, that
they re^^ from their Labors, and their Work^ do follow them? How Easy and
Natural would the Application of it b^ to our Deceased Friend; a Person (...)
that Excellent Spirit, one that w^^ so early in Christ, a young Disciple* one
that walked so closely with Christ^ in the Course of a Useful and Well^ ordered
Conversation; one that di^ drive on Designs for, live to him, as well as in and
upon him; and one that took so much care, with so good Effect, to clear up her
Evidences and Title to him, in whom she lived, and in whom she hoped to dye?
But how Natural and Easy soever this might be, I must restrain my self wholly
in it, since if I should speak but what I know, I should militate against the
settled Opinion of the Dead, declared to me, and often to others, against
Elegies and Funeral Encomiums, as things that seldom do good, but often harm;
and against the Desires and especial Directions of the Living, (which I have a
just Deference for) who know her Works praise her in the Gates, and know she is
above our Praises; and also in some Degrees against my own Sentiments and
Ordinary Practice, as you know; and therefore being herein restrained, let us
try if we can make any other Improvement of it; if not to the Honor of the
Dead, yet to the Advantage of the Living.

And pray let not any of you tha^ stand so uneasily here, have cause to say
when you go away, Well, I have got no good by this Providence, by this Sermon:
I have heard the Funeral Sermon of a very Useful Person, a good Woman, who
lived desired, and dyed greatly lamented, but I am never the better for it.

I know here is one thing wanting, that we cannot have in our Assemblies, that
is very affecting to many, the sight of the Deceased's Hearse; and that we do
not follow them to the Grave, and see them laid in the silent Dust, and left
there; which often begets very serious Thoughts, how certainly we must shortly
follow after them, and be used as they are used.

And though these Thoughts wear off too soon with the most, yet they have some
Influence for the time, and give the Word deeper Impressions on the Hearts of
Careless Professors.

However, under all the Disadvantages we labor, let you and I join; let us do
our Parts ot make some good use of this Useful Doctrine, and this Doleful
Providence.

First, By way of Information.

Secondly, By way of Exhortation.

Thirdly, By way of Consolation: As Time will permit.

First, Then is it so, that They who dye in the Lord are blessed, do rest from
their Labors, and have their Works thus following of them?

First, See here a High Demonstration of the Divine Good Will to such Souls: It
was an amazing Kindness, God should employ his infinite Wisdom, in Contriving a
way to raise up fallen Man to himself by Jesus Christ, to fit and succeed Means
of Grace to bring them into Christ, to make them meet for his Blessedness: Oh!
but what was it to admit them into it, fully and satisfyingly to possess them
of it! and that too when Death had done its worst! What, Dye and yet be
blessed! this had need be told from Heaven, that it might gain Credit; What, to
Rest from their Labors, and receive Recompense of their imperfect Works! who
cannot read Matchless Love in all this? and who that lays it to Heart, can
choose but adore it, and study to make. Returns for it? Can thou repent of
any thing thou have done and suffered for him, that has so loved thee? Can
thou think any thing too hard, too Self-denying he puts thee upon, who will
treat thee thus? Some of thy Work is now thy Wages, but who can tell what thy
Reward shall be, when fully possessed? Oh! the Kindness this springs from! Oh
what manner of Love is this! Labor to love as thou art loved.

Secondly, See here a Demonstration of the Wisdom of these Holy Souls that live
in Christ, that live to him, that they may dye in him, and be blessed by him:
Let the foolish World, that makes light of Christ, that prefers present
perishing Trifles to a Saving Union to him, and Interest in him, put the Brand
of Fools and Fanatics upon them, for making so much ado about these Matters,
yet these Men shall shortly see and say, your way was not your Folly, but
Wisdom was with you, though they themselves had played the Fool, and shall have
Cause and Leisure to tear and torment themselves for ever, for this their
Folly; Nay, Madness of Folly, in neglecting this Blessedness, and abandoning
the way to it. Lift up thy Head, O thou Reviled Soul, that which these Men call
thy Folly, shall be found by God and Men, by bad as well as good Men, to be thy
truest Wisdom; that on which thou may justly value thy self, under all the
Contempt they pour upon thee. Abide by thy Wisdom, though Fools call it Folly;
better be called a Fool, than be one, to avoid being so called.

Thirdly, See hence, How little Reason Souls in Christ have to be fond of Life,
or afraid of Death: What, fond of Labor and Sorrow! What, afraid of Rest and
Blessedness! your Case, Christians, is not like that of other Men, whilst you
live and are present in the Body, you are absent from the Lord, from the Joys
of your Lord; when you dye in the Lord, you enter upon this Blessedness: Though
this Portal be dark and uncomfortable, it is an Inlet to this Transcendent
Glory to us, and to our Dear Friends that dye in Jesus.

Fourthly, See hence, What little reason we have to lament immoderately, for
our Deceased Godly Friends that dye before us: What, because they are blessed
before us!

Fifthly, Learn hence, How Holiness becomes so absolutely necessary to this
Blessedness: It Is that without which it cannot be enjoyed. You have heard
wherein this Blessedness lies, what Ingredients it has in it; that it includes
the Perfection of our Natures, and Satisfaction thereof. Blessedness is but
perfected Holiness. Now, how impossible is it, that Holiness should be
perfected in Heaven, that was never begun on Earth? when this is the State we
are to be made meet for: So that a Heart conformed to God, is in the Nature of
the Thing, as well as by the Pleasure of God, absolutely necessary to a
Felicitating Enjoyment of God.

Wicked Men hope God will save them in their Sins, take them to Heaven in their
unsanctified State and Temper of Soul; which is not only repugnant to the
Nature and Word of God, (as it were easy to evidence) but to the Nature of
that Happy, because Holy State; for what Philosophy can show you, true Pleasure
and Blessedness can be obtained without a proper suitableness of the Faculty to
the Object, and Exercise of the Heavenly State. A Holy Nature is necessary to
the Enjoyment of a Holy God. How often have you heard, that if it could be
supposed, that a Carnal Animal, Unsanctify'd Wretch, void of a Divine Nature
and God-like Temper, could enter into Heaven, (where we are as sure as God can
make us, no such Wretch can come) he would find nothing there that would make
him Happy, no Objects would be found there, suitable to his Fleshly Appetites
to feed upon, and no Holy Appetites in him, to relish the pure Pleasures of
that Happy, because Holy State.

Oh! if Sinners could but sense this, that is so true in it self, so evident in
Scripture, and to Reason it self, (as depraved as it is) surely they would
bethink themselves, pray for, and endeavor in the use of all God's appointed
Means, to be partakers of a Divine Nature, qualifying for Glory. Sinner, let me
tell thee, 'till thy Nature and Temper, the Disposition and Constitution of thy
Soul be turned toward God and Holiness, to love and hate as God does, thou
may dream of Heaven as thine, but it will prove but a Dream. If thou live
and dye short of real Holiness in thy Heart and Life, thou must lie down in
Everlasting Sorrow, short of true Happiness.

Well then, Sinner, go home, and take this with thee to thy retiring Place; and
seriously consider, how frivolous all thy Pretensions are for Blessedness,
whilst thou art short of this real Holiness, without which thou art absolutely
incapable of it.

Secondly, For Exhortation: Is it so, that they who dye in the Lord are
Blessed? Oh! secure to your selves a Share in this Blessedness. In Order to
which, ask your own Hearts, whether this be like to be your Case? Let me Beg
of you, to deal Faithfully with your own Souls, in a Matter of this Importance.

There is a Blessedness which Eye has not seen, nor Ear heard, neither has it
entered into the Heart of Man to conceive adequately of. Have I an Interest,
have I a Share in it? Will it be mine at last? The Time will come, will shortly
come, it may suddenly come, that I must Dye: Am I in Jesus? Shall I Dye in
Jesus? Have I that Holiness that is Necessary to render me Meet for this
Blessedness? Oh! Christians, would you put these Question in good Earnest to
your own Consciences, and take a Deliberate Answer, some of you might go home
with other Thoughts than you brought hither. Do we see the Seats of our
deceased Friends emptyed from day to day? Will our Places shortly be Vacant as
theirs are? Must I Dye also? and if I Dye in the Case I am in, shall I Dye in
the Lord? Shall I be Blessed? And give thy Soul no Rest, 'till Conscience well
informed, and well awakened, can furnish thee with a Satisfying Answer, that
when thou dyest (though in the State thou art in) thou dyest in the Lord, and
shall be Blessed in the Eternal Enjoyment of him.

Secondly, As ever thou would be Blessed by Dying in the Lord, Get into him,
United to him, Interested in him, as thy Lord and Savior: This I told you was
supposed; There is a Blessedness belongs to them that Dye in the Lord, but none
can share in it, but such as are in him, United to him. Sinner, art thou
willing to be in the Lord, in order to a Safe and Comfortable Dying in him, and
sharing in in this Blessedness with him? Oh that it were so! Oh that thou were
willing, heartily willing! for then the Hardest of the Work were over. Our
Dearest Lord has done his part, he has satisfied Justice and Merited Mercy,
stands willing to Entertain thee; Nay, Courts and Solicits thy Compliance with
him: I know but three things (and all highly reasonable in themselves) that are
absolutely Necessary to thy being in the Lord, without which thou can not Dye
in him, and be Blessed with him: Let these be done, and this Affair is well
Secured.

First, Give Credit and Assent to all that the Scriptures say of Christ,
Believing Acts 24. 14.
all things that are said in the Law and the Prophets: For these are they that
Testify of him. And as Faith Unites the Soul to Christ, so this is the first
Work of Faith, the Foundation of all the Rest: But this must be an Energetical,
Operative and Influential Assent to all the Discoveries made of Christ.

Here is a Gospel that brings good Tidings of him, and thou say thou
believe it, but I am (notwithstanding all my Charity) verily afraid with very
many that say so, it is not so; for they do not carry it as if they did believe
it: Did they believe it, they would not dare to live so opposite to it, to the
holy Ends of it; therefore rest not in a naked Assent hereto, but bring thy
Heart thereby

Secondly, To give a Cordial Consent to the Terms proposed by him: Thy Assent,
which is an Act of the Intellect, or rather of the Soul, as knowing the Truth
and Goodness of Gospel Proposals, must be accompanied or followed with an
unseigned Consent to the Terms on which he is offered to be thine; this Act of
Faith is called Receiving of Christ; As many Joh. 1. 12.
as received him; that is, believed on his Name: When I receive him as God
offers him, and to the Ends and Purposes for which he offers him, to do that
for me which God has appointed him, and which he has undertaken to do for me
in the Gospel, to be a Prince (and Ruler) as well as a Savior, to give
Repentance, as well as Remission of Sin, to bless me Acts 5. 31.
in turning me from my sins. Is not this a Controversy between thee and thy
Christ? Sinner, it has been a Cause of parting betweeen him and many a Soul,
and is like to be so to many more: Thou have the more Reason to look diligently
to it, that it be not thy Case: It is a common Case, and a dangerous one; see
to it, it be not thine own. If thou name the Name of Christ in reality, art
indeed a Christian, more than in Show or Livery, thou must, thou will depart
from Iniquity, not only leave it in Affection and Conversation, but fight on
Christ's side against it, as 2 Timothy 1^. 16. (...).
that Word signifies.

This will, this must reach to thy Constitution-Sin, thy Calling-Sin, (which
perhaps thou think) thou live by; thy Darling Sin, that is, Peccatum in
delicijs. One Reservation, one Exception from Christ's Terms, will not be born
by him: If thou dispense with thy self in any allowed way of known Iniquity, he
will not dispense with thee, and such one Leak will sink thy Vessel. He will
not, I had almost said he cannot, indulge thee in one of these: He will save
thee from thy sins, not in them, how vainly soever thou flatterest thy self in
the Matter: He is the Author of Eternal Salvation, but Heb. 5. 9.
to none but those that obey him, in whatsoever he Commands: Yea, even when he
Calls them to cut off a right Mat. 5. 30. Chapter 18. 8.
hand, pluck out a right eye; to mortify sins that are as pleasurable, and as
useful as these. I know but one Place in the whole Bible, that seems to give
Countenance to any thing cross to this, and I think (with Submission) it is the
Translation, not 2 King 5. 18.
the Original, which affords the Umbrage to it: Where Naaman (taken to be a
true Convert) seems to ask, and have a Grant, to continue his Honorable and
Gainful Post, Bowing down in the Idolatrous Worship, in the House of Rimmon.
Had it been translated, The Lord pardon thy Servant, when I have bowed down in
the House of Rimmon, as the Rules ^ Conversivum.
about the Conversive Particle in the Original, and the Rules of the Accents
(some say) do warrant, (though not fit matter for such a Discourse as this) he
had been brought in begging Pardon for what he had done, not begging an
Indulgence to go on in his Idolatry, which seems inconsistent with his
Sincerity; and the same would be inconsistent with thine: And when this is
truly done, thou must further add,

Thirdly, A firm Affiance in, and Recumbence on him: Thou must rest upon him,
and him alone, for all he has undertaken to do for thee: This in Scripture
Language is called Staying on him, and trusting in him. Isa. 26. 3.
This is a special Exercise of Faith. Paul trusted him, committed his all 2 Timothy 1. 12.
to him. Trust to him for Grace, all kind of Grace, for Justification,
Sanctification, yea, and Eternal Salvation: 1 Timothy 1^ 16.
Look unto him, and Lean upon him, as one that has satisfied Divine Justice
for thee, merited that Divine Grace that is sufficient for thee: Expect all
from him, and from none but him, who is all to thee: Trust not to thy Duties,
nor thy Graces, for any thing, Christ has undertaken to do for thee: Neither
trust to Christ to repent, believe, and obey the Gospel for thee, because he
requires this of thee; though he affords the help of his Grace to thee, without
which thou can not, thou will not do it.

Well, Sirs, will you see this be done, that you may get into the Lord, in
Order to dying in him, and being blessed with him? Nothing short of this will
do it: Oh! live not short of this. Nay, let me beg of you this further;

4. That you would (when thus got into him) Abide in Jesus, dwell in him,
cleave unalterably to him, never think of quitting him: Whither can thou go?
Is there Salvation in any other? Can thou have Salvation by him, in any other
way? on Col. 2. 6.
any other Terms? As you have received Christ Jesus the Lord, so walk in him.

Let him be the Principle, Pattern, and End of all; when the Flesh and the
World court thee, to turn aside from him, when Satan puts in to offer better
things to thee, (for he will promise thee fair, as he did thy Lord) say, No, I
see my need of him, my lost Estate without him, I cannot be better, I am for my
dear Lord, he has Dominion over me, and he shall have it: I have been, am, and
will be governed by him, that I may be saved by him; I will follow him fully, I
will follow him whithersoever he goes; I will do any thing, suffer any thing,
rather than forsake him; I will never leave him, nor forsake his Ways, nor
reject his Terms, his Righteous, his Reasonable Terms.

Fifthly, Above and besides all this, Pray labor to get Evidence and Assurance
of all this, that you are got into him, that you abide in him, dwell in him,
and walk in him, and so shall dye in him, and be blessed by him.

There is a Blessedness some shall share in, they have a good Title to it now,
and shall shortly have possession of it; Can you produce a good Title to a
share in it? Sirs, Do I speak all this to you, as to Persons unconcerned about
this Matter? What, will you not purchase a Farm or House, without looking into
the Title, to see it be indefeasable? And will you when any Doubts arise,
review and clear up the Title to it? Will you in such a Case sit down, without
searching into the Matter, and say, I hope well? Where is there a Fool of this
Size to be found in City or Country? And is a Title to Blessedness and
Unspeakable Glory, the only thing that is not worth Minding? thy Clearing up?
What, have thou no Evidences for Heaven? no Scripture Grounds for thy Hope of a
Future Blessedness? and will thou be at no Pains to get any, 'till Sickness,
Old Age, and Death overtake thee? Will thou not get them, 'till thou have such
Occasion to use them? Alas! Christians, this is the Common Folly, how many that
hear such Things from us, with little regard in times of Health, cry out to us
on their sick and dying Beds, when indisposed and disabled by Sickness and
Pains of Body, and Anguish of Mind, for such solemn and important Business; Oh!
what shall we do for cleared Evidences for Heaven? and have them to seek when
they should use them. This was not the way of this Holy Woman, our Deceased
Friend: She has, I know, (during my Acquaintance with her) exercised her self
in finding out, and laying up Marks and Evidences of her Holy and Happy State:
I have heard her mention, with a peculiar Thankfulness, the Labors of those
Ministers that have been helpful to her in it; and let me tell you, that you
and I have (to speak modestly) as much need to do it as she had. If thou
think so, it were easy to put thee in a way to do it, whilst thou have
Health and Strength of Body, and Composure of Mind, to attend to it with
Application of Soul, for now is the Time, if indeed thou would have it done,
effectually done; and because the Time will not give me leave to set down such
Marks, as as thou may depend upon in particular, Let me pray thee to reflect
back upon what I have said, by way of Exhortation; and ask thy Conscience, if
thou have thus received Christ Jesus the Lord? art thou united to him? art thou
thus in him? do thou thus walk in him, and live to him? And hear what a
wakeful and well enlightened Conscience will give thee in Answer, and judge of
thy Case accordingly: Or, (because it is so much better done by better Hands)
read over the Marks of Grace and Sincerity, as thou find them set down to
thy Hand in Practical Books, for the Examination of the Truth of Grace, and
mark what falls from the Pulpit on that Design, put them in Writing under Two
Heads.

1. Put down such as Conscience is clearest in, and look often upon them, that
thou may keep them clear, and avoid all that clouds them.

2. In another Place, Put down such Marks as are plain Scripture-Marks, but not
so legible to thee, by reason of some prevailing Disease of Soul that gets
Entertainment there, and so renders thy sincerity in Grace suspected by thee
now, and will do it more in a sick and dying Hour; for Conscience will then
speak out, and will be heard at another rate than now thou hear it: View
these frequently, lay them on thy Table for that purpose, or carry them about
thee, that (at leisure times) thou may be working thy Heart up to them, and
plying the Throne of Grace for ability to do it, and for the Witness of the
Spirit that thou have done it.

Find out what Sin it is thou art most indulgent to, that gives cause of Fear
it is in Dominion, and what Duty and Service thou stickest most at; and daily
urge thy Heart to keep the greatest distance from the one, and to set presently
about the other. But I may not enlarge on Particulars, I must leave that to you.

Well, Friend, go Home then, and say to thine own Soul, this is a Matter of
great Concernment, of Self-concernment; I have bestowed many an Hour on that
which is of lesser Moment, of more remote Concernment, I have left this at
great Uncertainties a great while, but I will now bring it to Issue, that I may
know where Death will land me, in this Happiness or that Misery: And do not
satisfy your selves, with any Evidence of your Grace, or Title to Glory, but
what will abide the Test at Death and Judgment; go by true Measures, rightly
applied, that thou deceive not thy self in this important Affair.

Thirdly, Lastly, This Doctrine would afford abundant Matter of Support, and
Consolation to such as are United to, and Interested in Jesus.

Is it so, That they are Blessed that dye in the Lord, do they rest from their
Labors, and do their Works follow them?

First, Had I time to Open this Fountain of Consolation, I might easily make it
appear, that this might support and comfort all those Souls that are in Jesus,
under all the Miseries and Calamities of this Life.

Secondly, Against the Hurt and Horror of Death.

First, As to, First, The Calamities of Life; it may be they are many, and
great too; Sickness, Pain, Sorrow, Disgrace, Poverty, Loss of Dear R^lations,
and what not. Well, were they worse than they are, they shall all be fully and
finally done away at Death; these are not entailed on the Children of God for
ever. God loves them better, than to permit them to abide in such a boisterous
state of things for ever. I must not Enlarge. Briefly,

Secondly, As to the Second, The Hurt and Fear of Death, which is so terrible
to innocent, much more so to sinful Nature; you had need be well secured
against them: Sin has put such a Venomous Sting into Death, as fills it with
just Horror: But to a Soul in Christ, this hurtful 1 Cor. 15. 55, 56
Sting is taken out, Death is become a Sleeping in Jesus, the Evil of it, which
is destructive, is done away; it is now become the Passage into the Joy of your
Lord, (as I have largely opened to you upon a late Occasion, and may not add
more now:) This well thought of, may support and comfort thy Dejected Soul,
under the Nearest Views of thy Approaching Change.

Well, Sirs, (though I must have done) what once more say you? There is a
Blessedness, is it like to be yours? Will you take Care it may be yours? Will
you get Evidence it is yours in Title now, and shall be yours in Possession
when you dye? that you may have Peace whilst you live, and Comfort when you
dye, and this Blessedness after Death, which all shall have that dye in the
Lord: For it came by a Voice from Heaven to John, he had it in Command to write
for our Support; it is an Indubitable Truth,

Blessed are the Dead, that dye in the Lord, etc.

FINIS.
ERRATA
PAge 3. Line 20. between and and to add should be, page 11. lin. 1. read,
Secondly, It does suppose their Abiding and Walking in him, from, etc. page 47.
lin. 22. put one in the place of such and such in the place of one, page 51. l.
26. dele not.


